Vol. LXXIX.
No. 1142.
50 CENTS
KUCHING, Thursday, 30th April, 1953.
PRICE
Contents.
	Page.
Birth:—	
Lucas	... 59
Healing Thoughts	... 59
Notes and Comments	     ... 61
Comings and Goings	 ... 62
Sibu Letter	... 62
Visit of His Excellency the Governor to Simanggang	
and Lubok Antu Districts	... 63
Death of a Philosopher	 ... 64
Roban Noctural	... 65
Native Court Notes		.	... 65
Notes and Subis 2 and Bulak Setap3	... 66
Semah, 1953		... 66
The Museum	 ... 67
A Bornean Tale	... 73
Kuching Racing	... 76
Turtle Trust Fund Accounts	... 76
Probate and Administration	... 79
Kwong Lee Bank, Limited	... 70
Sale of Wrecked Vessel	... 79
Notices		 ... 79
Kuching Market Price List	... 80
The Sarawak Gazette.
THURSDAY, APRIL 30th, 1953.
Birth.
Lucas.—To Judith. wife of N. A. Lucas, at Miri, on the 1st May—a son, Harvey John.
Healing Thoughts.
The following is an extract from a speech made by the Rt. Hon. Malcolm MacDonald at Kuala Lumpur on 28th January, 1953. We recommend that all our readers study it seriously.
“In Malaya these days we are seeing solid and remarkably encouraging developments towards the creation of a united Malayan nation. We are making steady, constructive progress in that direction at the same time as we make progress in the destruction of Malaya's enemies, the Com-munist terrorists.
Of course. we must still give priority over every-thing else to the restoration of law and order
throughout the land. That is not only the prime necessity inside Malaya; it can also make a great contribution towards peace and progress in the rest of South-East Asia.
Our friends in neighbouring countries have their troubles with Communist forces too; and what happens in Malaya can influence for good or ill events in Indo-China and Burma, in Siam and Indonesia. Malaya is the centre, the capital, so to speak, the heart of South-East Asia. If the heart is weak. that weakness influences unfortunately the situation in surrounding territories: but when the heart beats more strongly, then that growing strength communicates itself throughout the whole area of South-East Asia.
South-East Asia is an area of considerable strategic, economic and political importance. The Communists recognise that, and several years ago they launched an attack upon it. They began a civil war in Indo-China. a violent rebellion in Burma, an insurrection in the Philippines, a terrorist campaign in Malaya and an armed conspiracy in Indonesia; and by these they expected to capture the whole area.
So far they are deeply disappointed with the results. After five years and more of effort they have failed to conquer any one of these countries. In every territory they are held at bay. The struggle is very grim, but I believe that if we and our friends continue to act with strength in the region, the whole of South-East Asia can be pre-served as a home of free peoples.
These events in Malaya and neighbouring countries have to be viewed against the background of events in Southern Asia as a whole. They are parts of the greater drama which is being played on a vast semi-continental scale. I shall speak now only about events in Southern Asia, from Pakistan in the West across India and Ceylon and Burma and down through South-East Asia to the Eastern tip of Indonesia. I shall say nothing directly about the very different, the sombre events occurring in China.
Contemporary events in Southern Asia are very large indeed. They are as important as anything which has happened anywhere in the world at any time in this twentieth century. They belong to the stupendous events of history, which alter many things and leave the world a very different place from what it was before.
The fact is that a major revolution is taking place over the semi-continent of Southern Asia. In the East it will have consequences at least as important as those which in the West followed the French Revolution nearly two centuries ago.
60
THE SARAWAK, GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1953.
The great and good nature of this change is not always appreciated by us in the Western world. Indeed, it is sometimes misunderstood in the West. The revolution in Southern Asia is too frequently represented as an anti-Western movement, and that naturally causes resentment on the other side of the world. It has caused a distinct coolness, a certain strain, even a hostility in relations between the East and the West which is a most unfortunate development.
If friction between the Eastern world of Asia and the Western world of Europe and America were ever to reach the point of a serious breach between their peoples—a division of East and West into two mutually suspicious and potentially hostile camps— that would be a very grave threat to human peace and progress.
One of the most important tasks of statesman-ship today is to avert that threat: to remove mis-understandings between the West and the East: and to promote in its place a cordial understanding and friendship which will enable the nations on both sides of the earth to work together as partners promoting the ever richer expansion of a happy human civilization. I should like to say something about this vital problem of friendly relations between the East and the West.
I speak of it as a Westerner. We Westerners can do a great deal to help to solve the problem. And the first thing that we must do is to under-stand properly, and to sympathise sincerely, with what is happening in much of Asia in these days. We are too apt to look at what is happening in the East through Western eyes, to consider it from a too narrowly Western point of view, to judge it by what we think to be its effects on Western interests. That, of course, is natural for us, and up to a point we are bound to do it. But we must also take a broader view and consider what is happening in Asia from the point of view of the interests of the peoples of Asia.
The first thing that we must understand is that the revolution in Southern Asia is not funda-mentally, but only superficially, an anti-Western development. It is not a negative movement, but a positive one. It is not anti-Western; it is pro-Asian.
Of course, it sometimes appears to take an anti-Western form; and that is where much mis-understanding arises. Eor example, one of its manifestations is the throwing off of foreign rule by many Asian peoples. The Indians. the Pakistanis, the Ceylonese, the Burmese, the Filipinos and the Indonesians have all in the last few years established themselves as independent nations. The Malayans and the Indo-Chinese are progressing along the same road to self-government. The rule which they are discarding happens to be British or American or Dutch or French—rule by Western colonial powers. Some people in the West are therefore inclined to regard this as nothing but a vicious demonstration of anti-Western feeling, and to view the whole movement in Asia as a huge conspiracy to oppose the West.
But the throwing off of Western rule is not the main purpose of the Asian revolution; it is only an incidental consequence of it. The achievement of national political independence itself by the newly free Asian peoples represents only one part of the
revolution. It is its chief political expression; but the revolution is much more than just a political episode. Its aims in the social and economic fields are equally important. What is being overthrown in Asia is the whole economic, social and political system of society called feudalism.
Let us make no mistake about it, it is good thing that feudalism is disappearing. In Europe we got rid of it some centuries ago. For reasons which I need not go into, feudalism survived in the East long after it was dead in the West. But it was in the logic of history that it should go sooner or later, for it is an out-of-date system of society.
The only difficulty is this. In Europe feudalism was changed gradually over a long period of time; by a process of natural evolution it was transformed into something more modern. You in Asia are now trying to do in a few years what we did in a few generations. It is all happening too fast. That is perhaps inevitable; but it creates some appalling difficulties and dislocations.
The problem in relations between East and West is how to remove the misunderstanding which has arisen between them owing to certain circumstances of this Asian crisis, and how to create in its place true understanding and friendship. Some friction at this historic movement was inevitable. The Eastern peoples grew to resent foreign colonial rule, and they associated the Western Powers with that rule. The Western nations became for them synonymous with colonialism; and many Asian leaders expressed their feelings in violent condem-nations of the Western governments and all their works. That in turn naturally produced resentment amongst many peopes in the West.
If I may say so, the attack on colonialism was in principle right. From some important points of view, which I shall mention in a moment, colonialism is a bad system of government. But from some other points of view it was a very helpful system of government in Asia; it was an essential historial step in Asian progress; and it made great contributions to Asia's emancipation. It was in fact a mixture of good and bad. So let us be reasoned in our criticism of colonialism; let us appreciate both its strong points and its weak ones.
A lot of its constructive work in Asia is obvious. It helped to promote the economic development of Asian territories; it introduced modern roads, rail-ways and transport; it opened hospitals and up-to-date medical services; and it built schools, colleges and universities in these Eastern lands. It gave impartial and usually effcient administration. These material gifts were of immense value.
But, above all, colonial government introduced fresh intellectual ideas. The British Government in particular taught to colonial peoples under its charge the same political philosophy it taught to Englishmen, Scotsmen, Welshmen and Irishmen at home. In India and elsewhere it spread Western ideas of liberalism, of political freedom and of democracy. In fact it spread the very doctrines which eventually caused the present revolution against feudalism in Asia, and the extinguishing of foreign colonial rule itself.
Asia would probably never have produced those ideas itself. In fact the colonial masters themselves taught, trained and produced the very Asian forces which are now triumphantly destroying colonialism.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1953.
61
So when present passions die, and when the Asian peoples can look back objectively on this episode in their history, they will have reason to feel grateful to the Western peoples who for a few brief generations were their colonial masters. Let that be a healing thought between the East and the West.
On our side in the West we should appreciate another point. Western rule could never have been permanent in Asia. It could not be anything but a temporary regime; a fleeting, passing phase in Asian history. After all, whether it was good rule or bad rule, it was foreign rule—and no national people worthy of the name could tolerate that indefinitely.
The history of the West in the last few hundred years is full of stories of national peoples rising and throwing off foreign yokes—the Scots resisting English domination, the French freeing themselves from the British, a host of small nations in Europe revolting against alien over-lords, the American Colonists fighting a War of Independence against Britain; and so on.
Why any of us in the West should suppose that human nature would be different in the East, and that the Asians would meekly submit for ever to foreign rule is something that I for one cannot understand. This Asian breaking of bondage was bound to occur sooner or later. It is a most healthy development which we democrats of the West should be the first to welcome. In our passion to be free you in the Orient and we in the Occident are kin. Let that be another healing thought between us.
Then let me come to another point of extreme importance. I have said that Western colonial rule brought some great benefits to Asia; and that is true. But it also had some evil effects. Perhaps its worst feature was a psychological one. It created a superiority complex amongst the white rulers in the colonies and an inferiority complex amongst the dependent coloured peoples, neither of which was justified.
I have never heard of any proper reason why we Europeans should feel superior to you Asians. It is a ludicrous state of affairs. Your Chinese fore-fathers and your Indian forefathers, for example, had created in your countries vigorously flourishing and beautifully flowering civilizations rather earlier than anything of the kind sprang up in Europe. Your ancestors were poets and painters and philo-sophers producing immortal works of art when mine were savages whose only idea of aesthetics was perhaps the painting of a strip of MacDonald tartan on appropriate parts of their bodies.
The truth is, of course, that we Westerners are superior to you in some things, and you Easterners are superior to us in others. We all have our own particular sets of virtues and vices; but by any reasonable human standard we are equals. That equality between us is a fundamental and essential quality. It is the only basis on which cordial relations between the East and the West can be built.
That is why the worst consequences of the old colonial system of government was the breeding of a superiority complex in the governing races and of an inferiority complex in the governed. There can be no natural, unprejudiced and truly friendly relations between the Western peoples and the Asian peoples until both complexes have been destroyed.
One result of the Asian revolution is that the Asians are losing their complex. We Westerners in the East must abandon ours. That is why I for one have tried, during my years in South-East Asia, to help to break down every vestige of the old superiorities and inferiorities which appeared to set the Europeans and the Asians on two different planes in Asia: and to establish a sense of true, equalitarian comradeship between us. I believe profoundly in that equality, and that if it can be universally established, it will do more than any-thing else to create a new era of friendly co-operation in human affairs between the East and the West.
I am not alone amongst Europeans in holding that view. Sometimes I am represented as fighting a more or less lone battle in this cause; but that is all nonsense. Some British individuals criticise me for it, but they are a small, reactionary and unre-presentative minority. The great majority in Malaya, from the High Commissioner of the Federation and the Govenor of Singapore down-wards, agree with me; and we are supported in Britain by 99% of the population. The ordinary British people are the most truly democratic people in the world.
There are some people who feel regretfully that the end of British Imperial rule in Asia means the withdrawal of British influence from Asia. They speak as if the historic role which Britain has played for several centuries on this continent is now finished—as if we Britons have no further Asian tasks to perform. Those people are wrong. It is true that an old phase of Britain’s mission in Asia is ending; but a new phase has begun.
In some ways the new task is even more honour-able than the old one. That is partly because it is more difficult. It is comparatively easy to be a colonial master, to boss dependent peoples and decide of your own sweet, unimpeded will what shall be done in this or that circumstance. It is much more difficult to work with others as equals, to take no decision except after consultation with them, and to endeavour by argument and persua-sion, by reason and agreement, to guide policies along the paths of truth and wisdom.
The East and the West can only co-operate by those means in the future. More than any other people in the world the British are equipped by experience and temperament to help to establish the new relationship of equality between the old nations of the Occident and the new nations of the Orient which will enable them to work as partners in world affairs.
In the British Commonwealth they have already created a practical working model for that political relationship. In the Commonwealth, nations with a western tradition like Britain and Canada and Australia, and nations with an Eastern tradition like India and Pakistan and Ceylon are learning to work in perfect harmony together. As the youug Malayan nation grows up I hope that it too will play a large part in this experiment in international relations, on the success of which may well depend the future peace and prosperity of mankind.”
Notes and Comments.
On 14th April, Dr. O. Hagen, Mrs. Hagen and Miss Friss, of the World Health Organisatian, left for Manila on completion of their tour. They have been engaged on tuberculosis examination and
62
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30. 1953.
vaccination for a period of 9½ months, and, during this time, 106,000 people of all ages were examined in Sarawak and 36,000 were vaccinated with B.C.G. The WHO experts trained a unit in each Division and these units are now carrying on the work at a very satisfactory pace. In addition to B.C.G. vaccination, penicillin injections are being given in the rural areas in an attempt to stamp out yaws.
In order to maintain the closest possible harmony of policy, it has been decided to hold a conference twice every year between the leaders of the Govern-ments of North Borneo, Brunei and Sarawak. The first conference took place at Kuching on 21st April, presided over by the Right Honourable Malcolm MacDonald, Commissioner-General for South East Asia. and attended by His Excellency the Governor of Sarawak (who is also High Commisioner for Brunei), His Excellency the Governor of North Borneo, the Sultan of Brunei and other high rank-ing officials. It has also been decided to have periodic joint meetings of heads of departments of the three territories to promote as far as possible co-ordination of policy and administration.
Work on Kuching’s new hotel, which will be situated at the corner of Rock Road and McDougall Road, is at last getting under way.
A Scotsman in Singapore, infuriated by the din coming from blaring radios nearby, every now and then lets off steam by counter-attacking for half an hour or so with his bagpipes. Kuching not long ago was the scene of a similar episode when a member of the legal fraternity, having plenty of time on his hands in the evenings, turned to learn-ing to play the flute. This went on for some months and some proficiency was obtained but apparently the halting picking out of notes irritated one of the neighbours, also a legal light. He decided to retaliate and did so by investing in a flute (plastic variety) himself. And so on a calm evening one would hear the strains of "The Minstrel Boy” floating on the air and then, a few minutes afterwards, “Buttons and Bows” would start up. This contest was only brought to an end by. one of the participants being transferred to another Division.
Comings and Goings.
During April there was a marked reduction in the comings and goings, and those Government Officers who have left Sarawak on furlough included Mr. P. Ratcliffe, Mr. H. P. K. Jacks, Mr. R. J. Bettison and Mr. G. A. C. Field. Mr. Peter Ratcliffe left early in the month and first of all went to Djakarta where he stayed for a few days aud then went on to Great Britain for his furlough. Mr. Ratcliffe is to be a Gold Staff Officer at the Coronation of Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth the Second and, no doubt suitably attired in satin knee breeches, silk stockings and silver buckled shoes, will act as an Usher in the Abbey on the occasion of the Coronation. Mr. and Mrs. H. P. K. Jacks left direct for Singapore from the Rejang River and are going to the United Kingdom on furlough. Others who are proceeding to the same destination are Messrs. Bettison and Field of the Trade and Customs Department. Mr. Field will be very
much missed not only on account of his able and strenuous efforts in the rather unpopular job of Chairman of the Senior Service Housing Board. but also as co-editor of this paper.
Only one officer returned from furlough in April and that was Mr. T. B. R. Nicholl of the Education Department.
Another arrival whom many of our readers will know well was Mr. E. A. Edmeades, formerly of the Sarawak Constabulary, who left us three years ago and now comes back to join the Constabulary as an officer on contract and is, we understand, to be associated with the new Field Force. Two new-comers to Sarawak were Messrs. S. C. Larkin and K. C. Hennessy, formerly Police Lieutenants in the Federation of Malaya, who have come to Sarawak as Assistant Superintendents in the Sarawak Con-stabulary and both of whom are stationed in Kuching. Mr. Larkin is taking over traffic duties as well as assisting the Officer Superintending Kuching Constabulary sector, and Mr. Hennessy is to be the new Quartermaster. To these new arrivals we offer a hearty welcome and hope that they will be very happy in Sarawak.
Sibu Letter.
Writing the Sibu letter from Baram is rather like attempting to describe a scene observed through the wrong end of a telescope; things seem some-what remote and disproportionate.
April has seen and is still to see such a lot of departures and arrivals that from a surrealist point of view Sibu might be likened unto a gigantic mul-tiple stores revolving door—people going in and out at the snme time—with, of course, just a few of the incorrigibles going round and round without getting anywhere!
Rumah Sesco was the locus of some jollity on the night of the 10th of April when David Simpsom (the originator of the "Satu pintu satu glass” system of long house refreshment), David (“William Bendix”) Henderson and the electrical Lawrie Poole were commiserating their imminent departure from Sibu while Maximilian Martin was felicitat-ing his return. Towkay ("Long Playing") Proctor is another personality who will shortly be sorely missed if he hasn't been missed already. Now we shan‘t know where to look for our shirting inspirat-ions for a long time to come!
"Yam Seng” Dickie is yet another April leave taker. He will be remembered for many things but principally for his breadth of vision in attempt-ing to open up communication by canal between his house and the Sarawak Steamship offices. The project only misaimed on account of the lack of buoyancy of the Dickie bicycle—but still, you can't think of everything even in Sibu!
Jim Bettison has already departed on his leave. It is reported that as he quitted the Sacred Soil of Sibu he became seized with the feeling that he ought to return for one last check up to ensure that all was well, but that he promptly stifled these dutiful inclinations by firmly refusing himself permission to land !
On the 28th the Resident is due to depart. Nothing less than poetry (sic) will do justice to such an occasion, and provided that the muse is in co-operative humour this letter should conclude with an appropriate stanza or two.
63
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1953.
We have made no reference to our new arrivals as yet. but that is where the wrong end of the teles-cope business comes in. It wouldn’t be fair to introduce them under such conditions and we must give them time to settle in first. But we do extend to them, one and all, a most hearty welcome!
There is no sensational news from the Bazaar or the kampongs; the continued unnatural combinat-ion of the low price of rubber and the high cost of living has rather limited entertainment in the town, but Cecil B. De Mille’s spectacular “The Greatest Show on Earth” proved one of the most popular and well attended films ever to visit Sibu. And now for the poetry:—
Ode to a Departing Resident.
Farewell, O noble helmsman! Leave thy wheel; Right well thou steered our Ship, kept even keel, Let now another twirl the charmed spokes. Full long thou cared for all us Sibu folks And for the Third Division Made excellent provision.
Oft through the shrouded gloom we saw thy form Staunch on the bridge alike in calm or storm, From thee no wearied plaint, no cry, no blubber, Despite the fallen price of Rejang's rubber.
All honour to thy high intent, Thou noble, selfless Resident! Take soft thine ease, thy tensed nerves relax (But not too long for fear of Income Tax !). Speed, in thy Sunbeam—Talbot, through the ways
Of simple joys and leisured nights and days; From morning's tea to evening‘s supper Eschew dull care— and just tid’apa!
J.R.B.
Visit of His Excellency the Governor to Simanggang and Lubok Antu Districts.
At 10 p.m. on 9th April His Excellency the Governor, accompanied by the Private Secretary, boarded the "La Follette" at Pending and set sail for Lingga, where His Excellency was met by the Hon'ble the Resident, Mr. A. F. R. Griffin, and by the Native Officer-in-Charge, Abang Karim. After His Excellency had made an informal tour of the Kubu, the bazaar and the Chinese school, the party caught the tide to Simanggang, arriving there at 3 p.m., when His Excellency was met by the Acting District Officer, Abang Mustapha, introduced to the local dignitaries, inspected a Guard of Honour and then walked up to the offices outside which were drawn up Major R. G. Findlay Shirras and 80 stal-wart Ulu Ai recruits for the Sarawak Rangers. His Excellency addressed them and then declared open the fine new extension to the Government offices. His Excellency then heard requests in the Court room and presented Mr. Pancras Eddy with his well merited Royal Humane Society Medal after which he returned to the new offices for tea with the Lands and Survey and Education staffs which are housed therein. That evening His Excellency went to the Club where he met heads of departments and leading citizens and officials.
Next morning His Excellency and party, which now included Datu Abang Zin, m.b.e., left Simang-gang for Engkilili, visiting Penghulu Sigan's house
en route where the visitors all carried out a Bedarah ceremony. The party was joined by the Divisional Education Officer, Mr. Steele.
On arrival at Engkilili His Excellency inspected a Guard of Honour and was introduced to the local headmen and notabilities by Native Officer Wan Sa'di. In the afternoon His Excellency and party visited the reading room, walked round the bazaar and were entertained at the fine new Chinese school, after which most of Engkilili moved up to the Local Authority Dayak School building on its hill from which there is a lovely view in all directions. This school is a fine example of community co-operation, as it was built from funds provided by the Ibans, Chinese and Malays, and is probably the best built Local Authority School in the area. The opening ceremony ended with a Bedarah on the top floor of the school and the slaughtering of a pig so that the school's future could be divined from its liver. The omens were good.
That evening the Native Officer organised a cocktail party on the lawn near his house at which Malay, Chinese and Iban dances were done before a huge crowd.
Engkilili's natural charm was much enhanced by the many decorations by day and the very simple but most effective lighting by night.
Next morning, the 12th, His Excellency and party left Engkilili in three outboards for Lubok Antu visiting Merbong en route, where His Excel-lency walked along the road and through the gardens and was impressed with the large area of healthy pepper he saw. After a short visit to Penghulu Jali's house, where a Bedarah was per-formed, and lunch and a swim at a kerangan. the party arrived at Lubok Antu where Native Officer Percy Majeng introduced leading dignitaries to His Excellency, who then inspected a smart Guard of Honour. Later on His Excellency visited the bazaar, and after a short swim joined the big crowd there to celebrate and to watch Iban dancing.
On the 13th April His Excellency heard requests and then the party set off up the Batang Ai, stop-ping at Rumah Bagi for a short while, where His Excellency was entertained in the traditional manner. After a pleasant spell on a kerangan above Wong Irup where he swam, attempted to fish and had lunch. His Excellency reached Penghulu Ningkan's house where we were all welcomed with plenty of Bedarah ceremonies and the tuak that is de rigueur at these times.
Next day we found the water was still reasonable being neither too high nor too low and we carried on upstream in our outboards. A swift but very entertaining visit was made to Rumah Abang and by 5.30 p.m. our convoy had reached its destination, Penghulu Ngali's house, in good order. Despite the fact the Penghulu was feeling very under the weather due to an attack o. malaria, there was much joy when His Excellency started off festivities by killing a pig and then carried on with Bedarah ceremonies. Later that evening His Excellency gave a talk and heard requests and then announced that he would give a gun to each of eight people who had harboured the late Mr. Arundell and who had supplied him with food, concealed his presence from the Japanese, kept him informed of Japanese activities and who had all suffered hardship and indignities at the hands of the Japanese for this. Ex-T.R. Rantai, T.R. Chaong and Penghulu Ngali
64
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1953.
were present at the time of the announcement and so His Excellency was personally able to hand them their guns. After this there was Iban dancing.
On the morning of the 15th April the party split, His Excellency, the Resident and Native Officer P. Majeng going up the beautiful Delok to fish and the rest going overland to Pengarah Jimbun's house. The Native Officer claims he distinguished himself by catching some fish. His Excellency on arrival was asked to spear a pig at the beginning of the path and to kill another at the steps leading up to the house. In the house he was given the usual great welcome.
Next day we set off early and once again the water was just right and we were able to reach Lubok Antu in time for a late tea.
I believe His Excellency's visit to the Ulu Ai and Delok is the first made to that area by the ruler of Sarawak since the 1914-18 war!
On the evening of the 16th His Excellency and party walked to Penghulu Tembak's house and paid an informal visit there before walking back to the Kubu in the dark.
Next morning His Excellency visited the nearby finished Chinese school building and was gratified to find the Lubok Antu Chinese seemed pleased at his suggestion that it mnight become a combined Chinese Iban School.
The journey back to Simanggang was uneventful. That evening His Excellency visited the hospital and also met Mrs. Hogg and her midwife training class, and then went on and walked round the Agricultural Demonstration Farm which interested him greatly.
On the 18th April His Excellency left Simang-gang and accompanied by Mr. W. Crocker landed at Stumbia, saw the new godown there and then walked to Tawang and also saw the Bijat padi scheme at Tanjong, thus getting a very good impression of what must be the biggest single padi area in the country.
After lunch on the "La Follette" His Excellency paid an informal visit to Sebuyau, being welcomed by Native Officer Abang Suhaimi, and then walked to the site of the future stone quarry and the Chinese school, and then went on to Tebelu which had been gaily decorated when word got round that His Excelleney would step ashore there. After that the "La Follette" anchored off Pulau Burong and set sail early on the 19th for Kuching, which was reached about 9.30a.m. that day.
It should be mentioned that the happy visit to the Batang Lupar and Ulu Ai was rounded off by the Information Office Mobile Cinema Unit, which shewed its films every night and which accompanied the party as far as Penghulu Ngali's house at Nanga Delok. Probably this is the furthest Ulu the cinema unit has been and certainly many of the women and children in these Ulu Ai houses had never seen a film before and they proved to be a thoronghly appreciative audience.
Once again the value of new outboard engines was proved by the way that at no stage of the journey was any one of the three outboards more than five minutes away from the others, though of course the quality of the drivers had a large part to play in this achievement.
Death of a Philosopher
On April 9th 1953 there died in London a man whose name ten years ago was a household word in England, and well-known wherever the BBC’s famous Brains Trust was heard—Dr. Cyril Joad. People clamoured for his autograph; jugs and book-ends were modelled from his face; he brought Plato and philosophy into every house where there was a wireless set; traffic was stopped in the streets by crowds trying to get into halls to hear him speak.
One Sunday afternoon in 1942 Dr. Joad went to Dartmoor Gaol in Devon to address five hundred of the toughest convicts in England. He spoke in the prison chapel. He was supposed to be talking about the moral issues of the war, but at the last moment, as he mounted the lectern, he changed his mind and gave a lecture on philosophy. He talked for an hour, with shining lucidity and wit, about the theory of philosophers called ‘idealism.’ He argued that hard tangible matter does not really  exist: it is no more than an illusion in the mind of man. He finished by saying to those five hundred men, many of them in prison for life: "And so you see, and I’m sure you will all agree  with me, that
'Stone walls do not a prison make Nor iron bars a cage.’ ”
When he sat down it seemed as if the clapping and cheering would never end.
When silence came at last the Prison Chaplain, a quiet, earnest man. proposed a vote of thanks. He doubted, he said, if all his listeners would agree with Professor Joad's conclusion, “and even some of you who do so now may later say, like a cockney I once knew, ‘Blimey, then, I must be 'ypnotised!’" and the clapping began all over again.
The war ended, and later the Brains Trust. By his own fault and folly, life turned sour on Joad. He cheated a railway company. He was convicted and fined. The BBC was closed to him. He was expelled from his London club, a place he greatly loved. Yet it is perhaps wrong to call it folly. It was, rather, a mental quirk,—something related, in a bastard way, to his dislike of bureaucracy and to his passion for the freedom of the human mind and spirit.
He used to illustrate this rebellious force in him by the especial pleasure with which he told of some-thing he had once seen. It was in London, during the General Strike of 1926. The only motor lorries then being driven in the streets bore placards with the words “Driven by permission of the Trades Union Congress.” No others dared go on the roads. But one day, in the Strand, Joad saw a different lorry go by. It was driven, very fast, by a little red-haired man ("he could only be a cockney,.” Joad said) with a bristling red moust-ache, and on the bonnet there was a poster, larger than any of the others, with the words, “Driven by my own bloody permission.”
He enjoyed telling stories against himself. Before the last war, he gave a lecture at a well-known girls’ school. After the lecture the head-mistress offered him a cheque. “Now,” Joad would say, “I’m not in the least averse from being paid for what I do, but on this occasion I had spoken on a subject near my heart and I didn’t
65
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1953.
want any money, so I asked the head-mistress if she would keep the cheque and give it to any charity she might choose." He thought no more of the incident until he was leaving. Then it occurred to him that his fee might be given to some object of which he disapproved, and as he said good-bye he asked the head-mistress what she thought of doing with it. If head-mistresses could hesitate," he said, "she would have hesitated. If head-mistresses could blush, she would have blushed. She did neither. She looked me calmly in the eye and said: 'The money, Dr. Joad, will be paid into a fund for providing the school with better lecturers next year.’ ”
Though he lost much by his strange lapse, he never lost his mental clarity and brilliance, and he never faltered in his allegiance to beauty as he saw it, or in his generosity. Joad had no connection with Sarawak, except for his vivid interest in far places, his curiosity about all that goes on in the world, and his concern for his friends. One of them, about to set out for Kuching, went to say farewell. Joad was already ill, and knew that he was dying. He lay in his garden, a pale semblance of the tubby, vigorous, rosy-faced man he had been. But he was full of curiosity and questions: the climate, the ways of life, the Rajah and his rule, how the different peoples live and work together. Later, still alert and iuterested, he wrote: “I have got steadily worse and weaker. But please keep me on the list of your letter recipients. You may not have to send them for long. Please do that.”
In his latest book, The Recovery of Belief, finished and published during his last illness, Dr. Joad describes his conversion to the Christian faith. For most of his life he could not accept the religious view of the Universe. It seemed to him, he writes, "no more than a pious propensity to believe in propositions which there was no reason to think true.” Through 250 pages closely, sometimes toughly, argued, he moves to his conclusion : "On the whole ... I think I can subscribe to the testi-mony of the innumerable people who have tried to practise Christianity—the thing does, at least sometimes, work.”
Now there is no more argument. He may know the answer. All he learned on earth is ended, and all his skill. Memories will grow dim: they always do. The time comes when even the most sensitive human ear can no longer recapture the tones and colour of an unheard voice; and though there are doubtless many records of Dr. Joad's sometimes almost squeaking lisp and his "It all depends what you mean by . . . ,” they will not often be listened to now.
But his writings remain, high in the long line of English prose, lucid, musical; witness to a hatred of violence in an age of violence and to the lifelong service of truth. It is perhaps not foolish to imagine that service still unended and, not as an incantation of empty words but as a confident prayer for amnesty in a well-fought field, to ask : "Rest eternal grant unto him, O Lord: and let light perpetual shine upon him."
P.S.J.
Roban Noctural.
With little to do this evening at the remote out-station, Roban, having on previous visits read
through all the neatly bound copies of the Sarawak  Gazette here, I take this evening the Station Diary, a formidable tome, entered daily and nightly by Court Peon Batu bin Remat.
It is the night entries which I think are the most interesting, showing as they do the innate faithful-ness by which Batu keeps the night watches. The day entries are in black ink and record among reports from the public briefly entered, the time that each Government Officer came on duty and left after his day's work. There are black ink entries also for his handing-over note to his colleague Court Peon Deikie who unfortunately could not reciprocate being illiterate. Deikie retired this year and his house in the Kampong slowly, ever so-slowly, takes shape.
The night entries are in red ink and I in turn wish to change the ink which I am using to the same medium in honour of these gentle entries. I will give a few typical ones first, translating from the Malay and then try and seek out some of the more unusual ones.
24.4.48 12.30 a.m	I change the day of the month and put the clock right. The moon is bright but it is drizzling slightly. All's well.
1.1.49 12.05 a.m.	I Court Peon Batu change the day of the month and change the year as well but its a dark night. There are lots of stars and for the rest all's well. Nothing to report.
18.5.49 12.5 a.m.	Slight rain. Dark as well. Water on the flood but about to ebb and all's well.
13.2.50 12.5 a.m.	A dark night there are lots of stars nothing more to say.
5.12.49 12.5 a.m.	Bright moonlight many stars. All's well.
4.4.50 12.5 a.m.	The day seems to have come to a standstill because of the rain; for the rest all's well.
The search for out-of-the-ordinary entries has brought to light nothing, so it appears that Roban at midnight is just a quiet place with Batu alone with the river. the moon, the stars and the rain. So to conclude I cite a usual handing over note.
12.2.50 6 a.m.	Court Peon Diekie receives over charge from Court Peon Batu everything in the Fort the same as it ever was. Ada-nya.
Sig. Batu bin Remat.
Deikie by written word is silent. We would have to ask the D.O. whether he is satisfied that Roban Station is the same as it ever was. Being reactionary at times, he is very pleased indeed, I think. For one thing he can here read up quietly the back numbers of the Sarawak Gazette.
(Contributed).
Native Court Notes.
The District Officer Kalaka reports that Sarawak is full of surprises but he was never more surprised when, as magistrate in the District Native Court at Roban, a witness for the Appellant arrived carried in a slabit, the Dayak wicker frame for carrying loads, by a young Iban aged about 25 years. The witness was LEMANTAN of Rumah Usop, Barit, an old lady at least 85 years old. When called
66
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1953.
upon for her evidence it appeared to the Court that she was so weak as to not understand the oath. But having given it, she bucked up no end and gave her evidence exceedingly well and was un-shaken under cross-examination. Yes, she knew that the Appellants’ grand-father had felled the old jungle. Yes, she had seen him do it. Yes, felled it from the upriver side as far as Lupa Tegalam. Her age at the time? She had "baharu angkat ari indu dara". Yes, that's right she'd have been about 16 years old. She remembered the Krakatau eruption in 1883. She was the seventh settler to come to the Seblak. Brushing aside all hope of rebuttal, she asked to go home. The young Iban made ready the slabit, lifted her into it, slung it on his shoulders and wandered out of the Court House. In all courtesy, the Native Court continued to hear the depositions of other more important witnesses. But the case was already proved. The sybil had spoken.
Notes on Subis 2 and Bulak Setap 3.
By Geoffrey Kerr.
The two recently concluded unsuccessful deep test wells. Subis 2 and Bulak Setap 3, drilled by the Sarawak Oilfields Ltd., in the 4th Division of Sarawak, admirably illustrate the risks that an oil company must take, and the huge expenditure necessary in the search for new oilfields.
Subis 2 was commenced in March, 1951, and abandoned in March, 1953, having drilled to a depth of 10,708'. The total cost of this well was $3,200,000.
Bulak Setap 3 was commenced in August, 1951, and abandoned in December, 1952, at a total depth of 11,633' having cost $4,200,000. This sum includes an outlay on road construction of $1,310,000. The approach road to the location. through difficult couutry was commenced in 1949 and finished in 1951 and, during the whole course of operations, constant maintenance was necessary.
The figures given above, however, only represent the cost of road building and drilling of the wells; to give a true picture preparatory exploration by geological and geophysical methods must be taken into account.
In the case of the Subis and Bulak Setap areas exploration has been carried out for the last 40 years—though not without interruption—during which several shallower wells were drilled. The two deep tests were intended to be the concluding phase of this prolonged and costly integrated exploration programme, to test for oil a consider-able thickness of strata in a favourable structural position, It is of interest to note that a geolo-gical, gravity and seismic exploration party cost respectively $10,000, $24,000, and $85,000 per month and the total exploration outlay represented by Subis 2 and Bulak Setap 3 can be conservatively estimated at $15,000.000.
Exploration surveys, even under the most clear cut and favourable conditions, can never give a 100% certainty that oil will be found—they can merely indicate the location where oil is most likely to exist, if present in the subsurface.
The wells Subis 2 and Bulak Setap 3 tested between them a total thickness of 22,341' of strata. There was some overlap between the sections pene-
trated by the two wells (which are 26 miles apart) and the total stratigraphic thickness tested was of the order of 17,000'.
In the whole of this tremendous thickness (over 3 miles) of rocks no oil or even slight indications of liquid oil were found; small amounts of gas were encountered but were of no commercial value. The old saying, "a swallow does not make a summer”, is particularly true of exploration oil wells—even if a well is not completely barren of oil indications, as was the case in Subis 2 aud Bulak Setap 3, oil found is often in quantities too slight. to be of commercial value.
In view of the outlay involved any exploration well is most extensively tested before the final decision to abandon is taken. Subis 2 and Bulak Setap 3 were no exceptions to this rule and even the most doubtful possibilities were thoroughly and conclusively investigated. As all too often in the case of exploration wells the final results have been negative. A large area and an appreciable thick-ness of strata have been expensively and con-clusively tested and the search for oil with its attendant burden of vast capital outlay goes on in other as yet untested parts of the country.
Semah, 1953.
"Semah" is a widely used term for Malay and Melanau ceremonies to open a season or new enter-prise, bring good luck or abundance. Much used in olden times, it has fallen into disuse in many districts now. The last strongly surviving semah on the old traditional scale and style is probably tliat for the turtles, covering the great bay between Santubong and Tanjong Datu.
It takes place in late April or early May each year and is divided into two parts. The first part is conducted on Satang Island by the people of Santubong; the second on the two Talang2 Islands by Selakau (Land) Dayaks from Pueh on the main-land opposite. The two are fundamentally similar in execution and identical in purpose (the invocation of a good "season" for turtles), bnt differ consider-ably in style.
That on Satang has a distinctly Melanau touch and is associated, in the recreational intervals, with Malay dancing and (this year) some very fine singing by three sistere from Santubong. That on Talang2 has a more Dayak flavour, Dayak spirit invocations. Dayak dances—including the curious Selakau "cigarette dance" with a man singing to two women dancing among the principal guests. Above all, there is the riotious egg fight which climaxes the Talang2 ceremony, puts the islands under pantang (tabu) for four days, and symbolically opens the season demonstrated by the elevating of a new turtle flag on the beach, welcoming the turtles ashore. In this fight, the attacking party— representing the new year and eager turtles—land from sampans and storm the beach, defended by the old and supposedly jaded (though they hardly show it at that moment!). Turtle eggs, those soft ping-pong balls which spell felicity to some and sick-feeling to others, are furiously exchanged at close range. The defenders of course must give way gradually, until the attackers hold the whole beach. Old, rotten or bad-quality eggs are used, and the worse the better. The subsequent efforts to get
67
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1953.
bodies clean and nearly approachable for the terminai feast, that immediately follows, is not the least part of the struggle.
This year's Semah, (though marred by wireless news of the sad death of the Hon'ble the Datu Bandar's mother, necessitating him leaving Talang2 for Kuching at a few minutes notice on the Jolly Bachelor) was generally voted the best year. There was no obvious reason for this. But this year there was an atmosphere of energy in the year, a feeling that it would be a good year for turtles even if a late one for fish; already exceptional numbers of turtles had been noted off-shore. Moreover, for the first time, guests were invited to attend both ceremonies; previously the Satang affair has been entirely local, largely by accidental evolution.
The Santubong party, over 100 in number, led by pawang (master of ceremonies) Mail and Tua Kampong Shukri arrived in the early afternoon of Friday, April 25th, when they were welcomed by the Curator (as Executive Officer of the Board). The guests arrived in two vessels. On the La Follete the Hon’ble the Chief Secretary (Mr. R. G. Aikman), the Chairman of the Board (Mr. W. S. B. Buck), and the Chairman of the Turtle Trust (The Datu Bandar) with his co-trustees the Datu Hakim and Tuan Mufti, accompanied by Mr. Arthur Taylor veteran of semah. Gallant little Jennifer brought Mr. H. G. Gray and Mr. John Smith, the latter having kindly offered also to examine the possibility of pumping sea-water and building tanks for turtle-breeding. Mr. Lo Suan Hian, who has developed a system for rearing baby turtles, and Mr. John Ong of the Treasury were among others invited.
Friday night was taken quietly by those who cared to sleep aboard, but was a sleepless night for those who wished to join in the gay dancing and singing, which went on until nearly daylight,—as is traditional. Mail's ritual incintations and offerings being made ashore, his retinue, with much beating of drums and firing of crackers, circled the island putting out offerings to the spirits at points about the coast—much as in English "beating the bounds". Then they returned to plant an impres-sive votive pole on the foreshore, place the flags which screen off any return of evil or ill luck once driven out. All then sat down on mats out-of-doors upon that beautiful beach and ate a hearty Malay makan.
Before noon, the official party and guests moved off for Talang2, the Santubong folk returning thither at their leisure. At Talang2 we were greeted by the Officer-in-charge of the turtle islands, Mr. Junit bin Wahap, who had gone ahead in the Burong Rawa; and by Nimbong, the Selakau sooth-sayer, in yet another of his extraordinary M.C. uniforms, which he designs himself (apparently from pictures in Life).
Here also Mr. P. Smith, as District Officer, Lundu, joined the party. Owing to some misunder-standing he had arrived a day too early and not brought the promised party of dancing Sebuyau Dayaks from Lundu. Instead, however, he brought with him the unexpected pleasure of the company of two mems also carried here by misunderstanding on (they thought) the direct route to Kuching. (We fear Mrs. Zeluetta, her daughter Felicity and Mrs. D. K. Macdonald found what is traditionally a stag-party somewhat disorganised; but if they thought so they graciously managed not to show it!).
A violent westerly came up mid-afternoon and for a while the Jolly Bachelor and Sri Sematan (which had brought the Dayaks) had to up anchor and run to leeward; the La Follette and Burong Rawa rode it out. At last all were ashore.
The limited island accommodation now literally bulged with people, the Selakaus in a specially made lean-to upon the beach. This evening all entered into the party which was notable for a clever and funny Turtle Island pantominette, starring the island Mandor, Nondin and the Juragan of the Burong Rawa (Osman bin Abang Sakawi), with leading vocal by Abang Kushairi and some lovely dancing by young Bujang, son of Sgt. Smail—the boy who made such an impression as the clown in the recent K.D.S. show. Later on, Nondin also did his annual tour de force of pantun singing back to the girl drummers. This is very rarely heard in Sarawak now. though it used to be the done thing. Nondin is a master at it. Laughter echoed and ached far into the night.
In the morning, after the unfortunate departure of the Chairman of the Trust, as mentioned, the egg fight had, of course, nevertheless to go on. Mr. Buck ranked commodore and Mr. Gray vice-commodore of the attacking fleet which first (as on Satang) circled the islands with all craft, placing votives at various points. By the new and masterly strategem of securing two big sampans (loaded to the gunwhales with Dayaks) to the local outboard a landing in force was achieved instead of the usual diffusion. Even the powerful overarm defence work of the Datu Hakim was unable to prevent a particularly rapid retreat by land forces, though not before a powerful museum wing counter-attack had driven the vice-commodore back into the sea for several egg-bound minutes.
Panting and exhausted from rushing about on the glaring hot sand, all then fell a-bathing and a-scrubbing; then a-feeding; then home, having participated in something now probably unique in its kind. Only the Curator stayed behind, to clear up the mess and study turtles, with the wonderfully genuine excuse of a pantang preventing him leaving the islands for days.
In this brief account the secular and lighter side has been stressed. It must equally be emphasised that there is also a deep religious and even under-lying mystical content in Semah. That falls out-side the scope of an account like this. For those who are interested in deeper aspects and fuller analysis a detailed study of Turtle Semah is printed in the Journal, Malayan Branch Royal Asiatic Society, volume XXIII, Part 3, pages 105 to 126.
(Contributed).
The Museum.
When is an Antiquity not?
Ever since James Brooke brought order back to the west coast of Borneo, there has been an unceas-ing drain upon rare and lovely things made or owned by the native peoples. Not that this was entirely a new thing. For many centuries before that, as Santubong excavations are showing, traders from afar took native products. The difference was that they brought back in exchange other lovely things, such as the celadon bowls and dragon pots
68
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1953.
Photograph by Allas & Son.
Constabulary Band at the Passing Out Parade.
Photograph by Allas & Son.
Recruits at the Passing Out Parade.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1953.
69
Photograph by Allas & Son.
Arch of welcome to the Countess of Limerick at the Leper Settlement.
Photograph by Allas & Son.
Dayak inmates of the Leper Settlement dancing before the Countess of Limerick.
70
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1953.
SARAWAK TURF CLUB.
EASTER MEETING, 1953.
Photograph by Allas & Son.
Mr. Ong Hap Leong’s Atlantas (Samsudin) winning the Fort Margherita Handicap from Alton (Matnor).
Photograph by Allas & Son.
Messrs. Ong Eng Hin's & Wee Hian Teck's Atom Boy (Matnor) winning the Diana Handicap run over 6 furlongs for ponies Division II. Both photographs show a refreshing individuality in riding styles.
71
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1953.
of the Sung and Ming dynasties which have become the meligun of the Melanaus or the heirlooms of the Dusuns.
In their wisdom and foresight, the Brookes made a Museum, into which they put much of the best which came their way—or was purchased especially. Otherwise we should be in sad plight to-day and no one out here could any longer see how native pottery was made on the Skrang or what the Serus carved in stone. Even so, much else has been drained away by government officers, Sumatran traders, tourists,—stuff that is now irreplaceable in some cases. Whereas orchids and rare birds, birds’ nests and turtle eggs, have long been protected against uncontrolled export, not so Sarawak's works of art.
It is for this reason that “an ordinance to provide for the coutrol of Antiquities" was passed at the previous Council Negri. The object is not to restrict private possession, nor legitimate trade. It is to give some control, not only over sale and export of special things but over sites of historical value which are in danger of the sort of vandalism which has (unnecessarily) destroyed sites of prehis-toric interest, for instance in the Niah Caves. Such acts of default in the end reflect only shame upon all concerned.
As people in Sarawak seem sometimes to be rather casual about their laws, it may be as well to draw general attention to this, thus avoiding nasty shocks in the future.
For present purposes an antiquity is defined as any monument or object constructed, shaped, inscribed, erected or otherwise modified by human agency earlier than A.D. 1850, but excluding items imported in or after 1850. So no one has to worry about his Queen Anne silver!
Any antiquity, with certain licensed exceptions, found after the coming into force of the Ordinance is government property and shall be notified to the Curator, who must either purchase at its value or renouuce ownership and give a certificate of dis-covery. Thus (previous) finds of historical gold objects at various places, all record of which has now gone, could not now any longer mean that a temporary resident can take all home without further ado. There is an arbitration clause safe-guard and the right of appeal direct to the Governor in Council (unless the matter has been before the District Court, etc.).
Anyone with an antiquity as above defined who is not a native of Sarawak must register it with-in six months, in which case the question of com-pulsory sale does not arise, a certificate being issued,—unless anything improper subsequently emerges in regard to ownership.
Subsequent sale and disposal of antiquities is also subject to supervision. Excavation or other search for antiquities has to be licensed. There are con-siderable prison, fine and forfeiture penalties for breaches of these conditions.
This has been explained here, we emphasise, to avoid future embarrassment. There is no wish whatever to introduce red tape into an area of human interest particularly unsuited to it. There will be no obstruction to owners or collectors with genuine and unselfish interests in Sarawak materials. But it has become essential to have some control to end what has often been an abuse, especially by itinerant traders selliug to the Singa-pore market. Indeed, Sarawak is one of the last countries to pass legislation of this sort.
 The danger is thus passed, too, that recent archaeological work—which has attracted notice in The Times and elsewhere—could bring amateur or collector “diggers" after “finds”, with the appal-ling results so evident in (for instance) the pre-historic cities of Siam.
To shoot or not to shoot?
There are, of course, a lot of laws about. It is not easy to keep up. But some of them, after all, have been with us quite a while.
The other day a friend of ours who has lived many years in Sarawak told us that burong rawa was excellent eating. He went on to describe the meal of same he had enjoyed as the guest of another leading Sarawakian.
Now the burong rawa is, as you probably know, the Nutmeg Imperial Pigeon (Mynisticivora bicolor), handsomest of Borneo pigeons. It is only found on the few sizeable islands—six to be precise —off our coast. The total Sarawak population of this swift-flying striking black and white bird, the size of a Wood Pigeou, would not exceed a few hundred. Most of these are on the three "Turtle Islands”. That is why, on the happy thought of Mr. J. B. C. Spurway, the turtle launch was so named. Our friend’s “feast", presumably not a unique occasion, could—if repeated say once a month for two years—pretty well exterminate the stock of one of our rarest birds.
An equally alarming state of affairs has been recently revealed by the kind services of Mr. C. Blake, who obtained from a Chinese towkay a young Maias (orang-utan) which he has passed to the Museum live animal section. It transpires that in a bazaar which he visited two live Maias have recently been purchased by towkays from Dayaks for a few dollars aud kept as “pets", tethered on the five footway without any attempt (or thought) of concealment. One soon died. No one seems to have taken any notice; the thing has apparently been going on openly for years there, athough to take, kill, keep, buy or sell a Maias is an offence under the Game Ordinance,—and the world stock of this fascinating ape, confined to small areas of lowland Borneo and Sumatra, is now dangerously low.
The time may well be approaching when other animals will have to be scheduled by the Game Warden. The rapid increase in the number of shotguns is having a big effect on animal life in the inhabited areas. The gibbon (wawa) and beautiful Argus Pheasant (ruai or its equivalent iu most dialects) are among the principal sufferers; but almost anything is game to a Balleh Iban or Tinjar Sebop. In the upper Baram most of the deer and monkeys have been blasted out of easy hunting range around the villages in the past three or four years and the only common “game” left are the nocturnal or elusive ground living forms. But such activity is by no means confined to the inland areas. The sale of airguns, which is not so res-tricted, is supplying many youths in the towns (such as Miri and Sibu) with a to them pleasant form of “sport". They shoot every small bird or squirrel they see; some proudly parade their evening’s “bag" suspended from their belts.
One notable achievement in the Kelabit country, is the virtual elimination of the Tigrine Dove (Strepopelia chinensis) around some villages. This bird, the Tekukur in local talk, has lately become much scarcer about Kuching also, but for a rather
72
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1953.
different reason. Two or three years ago you could see it feeding on the dropped grain and grit of roads even in town. Then there were relatively few cars; it flew up and away before the car hit the spot. As traffic increased—and reckless drivers too—it could not adapt itself to make the pace. Now you rarely see one in Kuching at all. But the Kelabit elimination of a bird which was in 1950 a pest to the rice crop—descending in clouds upon the irrigated fields of the upland plain,—was achieved by shotguns. Now they save a deal of padi—but at the cost of a previous protein standby when too busy (e.g. harvest time) to hunt or snare larger game.
When is a pest not a pest?
The case of this dove raises another and con-sequental question. When is a pest not a pest?
On the same occasion as the announcement of the Nutmeg Imperial meal, which started off the pre-vious question—which, by the way, we will try and answer along with this one in an inch or two— another friend dropped a casual remark which, though legally correet and even in some eyes commendable, shocked (we regret to admit) more much than the burong rawa event.
We were talking about Sea Eagles. These are the royalty, the rajahs of Borneo bird-life. Regardless, graceful and handsome, they sail majestical above our boys and estuaries, sometimes even honour places a few miles inland. From time to time one floats over Kuching. There are few of them—roughly a pair for every five to ten miles of coastline. For by their size, they need much nourishment, plenty of territory to hunt over as their own.
Our friend cheerfully mentioned that not long ago he had shot one. We literally—in the apt words of a spectator—“gobbled”. When air and words came, they framed a question: “But why, why in the devil did you shoot it”. This received the affable reply: “Oh, I wanted a fan” “A fan!” We gasped—needing one ourselves. “Well, they're pests anyway", he added as afterthought, “they take the chickens”.
This outlook is not, of course, confined to one person at all and we are not picking on him as other than an example of a responsible, educated person's attitude towards our wild life. Only a few weeks before another older and wiser man told us how he had spent several evenings trying to shoot an eagle in his locality “because they eat the chickens”. This was unselfish of him, as he had none himself. No doubt he is still trying.
It is true that these great birds do take chickens occasionally. But their staple food on these shores is undoubtedly sea snakes, including especially the large, gold banded poisonous species of which local fishermen are much afraid. But even if they did not render this signal service, for which all fisher-men respect them, they are entitled to be let live by virtue of their beauty and their scarcity, and their grace. They are well entitled to an occasional interloping hen if its owner does not know how to feed it and shelter it well enough to keep it close to cover and humanity; this is their prerogative, their native land right.
In this writer’s view—and perhaps no one in Borneo has had to be concerned with killing so much in the past eight years—there are only three answers to the question from which this discourse started out; only three civilised reasons for shooting or killing anything:
(1)For scientific purposes to advance know-ledge.
(2)	For food, if the thing you kill is in reason-able supply. A “sportsman” will there-fore never deliberately shoot a bird that is not in either class (1) or (2).
(3)For self-protection, either when your own species is directly endangered (e.g. a King cobra but not a harmless green tree snake); or when indirectly your health, diet, etc. are seriously threatened.
This last contains the answer to the pest question too. There are border line cases, inevitably. We have to live in the standards of our human society aud if cockroaches are ruining our expensive clothes we must operate against them as pests; anyway, they are in “abundant supply”, as are all such "pests" (by definition). But to shoot a Sea Eagle for a fan or a mother Maias to get its young is against the ethic of the sort of society man has been struggling to build up for centuries. We might as well go back to the rack—or the head-hunting we compelled others to abandon.
"Discriminate Hunting”.
This is not intended as a philosophical exposition in the field of morals, but as a practical proposition. We (everyone in the place) really have got to be careful not to derelict the natural heritage of Borneo's rich, varied and sometimes unique wild life. That would be to the shame of the land’s future, just as would the depreciation of the human past. The rhinoceros was common in Sarawak a few years ago. Nothing was done to protect it until it was suddenly found to be locally extinct. Now there are probably three or four in the colony, which have lately moved across from Indonesian territory—where, in the past, they have been long and rigorously protected. Even at that, and with post-war protection, at least one has been killed by a Dayak since the war. And all over the interior one finds people unaware that they may not bump off this or any other form of wild life. Outsiders taught Borneans not to kill each other indiscriminately. Now surely Borneans are reach-ing a stage further for themselves; the stage, say, of “discriminate hunting”. Outsiders can do a lot more than they are now doing to give very necessary acceleration at this stage.
A Note from Kanowit.
Records of present distribution of Maias (as the above example from Mr. Blake shows) are important and will be welcomed at the Museum. The follow-ing interesting information has been received from Mr. A. R. G. Morrison, until lately D.O. Kanowit (now Baram); the italics are ours.
“I was told by a Dayak from Rumah Penghulu Jarau that there are still Maias existing in the Durin area in the swamp forest which extends from the Durin valley over to the Namam, Assan, Tulai nnd Mador areas. I had no means of verifying or checking on this nor am I aware as to how extensive is the forest in question. But perhaps Native Officers and Forest Guards could obtain some more information.
There appear to be no Maias in Kanowit District but Penghulu Banyang tells me that he remembers Maias being killed and eaten by Dayaks in the Ulu Jikang, Pati Julau about 20 years ayo when Ke was a boy.”
73
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1953.
Labuan Kedayans and I. H. N. Evans.
You can drive over much of Labuan on roads of very varying possability. It is delightful country, often recalling parts of Devonshire or Dorset, except for the little open flat valleys with very tame egrets sitting on muddark acquiescent buffaloes. Much of this cultivation is in the hands of those peaceful, industrious, unpretentious people, the Kedayans, of whom no proper study has yet heen made,—but who clearly have Javanese affinities.
You can see more of the bird, reptile, insect and farm life of Labuan that in most of Borneo, because of this largely felled, slowly undulating open land. It is delightful to drive about in it after the, monotonies of the Bau or Serian roads (if you can bear the pain of driving on these latter at all).
The main object of our drive was to visit the doyen of Asian curators, scholar and friend of native peoples, Mr. I. H. N. Evans, author of several books of anthropology, including one on Dusun folklore due to the published by the Cam-bridge University Press in the next few months. Mr. Evans, who started life as a North Borneo government officer, eventually became Director of the Federated Malay States Museums—a job which on his retirement went to Mr. P. Noone, brother-in-law of Mr. D. Trumble, State Treasurer of Brunei now. But where Mr. Evans, much older, survived the Japanese war as a Kuching internee, Pat Noone nearly survived at large in Malaya until he died under mysterions circumstances among his special friends, the semi-nomadic Sakais. Mr. Peter Williams-Hunt, who is married to a Sakai, is now Director.
Mr. Evans lived at Kota Belud in North Borneo after the Liberation but has now moved to Labuan and is building a house on an enchanting beach some miles out from the main township.
To talk with him and listen to the generously given pieces of his knowledge over a vast field was a pleasure which added to an altogether pleasant day. He is writing various manuscripts for publication by the Sarawak Museum Journal and helping us collect also. He has recently generously donated a set of Bajau pottery, of which we had no example; and as we left this day he kindly gave us a Dusun head-hunting ritual symbol—much to the satisfact-ion of Kelabit Tayun, our companion on this little expedition.
Sarawak Museum Journal.
Delay in producing the number now with the printers is unfortunately due to the general con-gestion in the printing trade and the necessity for having this work done in Singapore, where con-tinuous powercuts—owing to the condition of Singa-pore electricity—greatly handicap the running of the presses.
It is for this reason that some authors have not yet received proofs. We hope, however, that everybody will have proofs by the end of this month and that it will then be possible to get the copy the press without further delay.
(Contributed).
(Note: The material on inland travel and com-munications, promised last month, is not yet ready, pending the receipt of some additional facts from the Baram).
A Bornean Tale
(Retold by W. G. Eber)
Burok and the Fairy Princess.
Once upon a time there lived in a Murut village near Keningau a young man who was called “Burok" (Ugly). Nobody knew why he was called by that name, for far from being ugly, Burok was quite a handsome fellow, who could play his cards well when the occasion arose, and as truly as Borneo is said to be the stealer of hearts, Burok was a woman killer, for many a village maiden fell to his charming ways. He received an elementary education in one of the Mission schools and knew the story of the Lion and the Mouse by heart, and he no longer wore his “chawat” (loin cloth which every Murut wears up to this day). When seen in his “Sunday best" few would believe Burok was a Murut, for he was dressed in long blue pants of Chinese manufacture, a clean singlet and his “sigar” of multi-bright colours wound round his head not unlike a turban, which was the pride of every Murut, and, of course, with his inseparable “parang”.
Now Burok was also fond of hunting. and he was an expert with his blow-pipe, and seldom missed his target. Now it so happened that in one of his wanderings in the jungle looking for "kijang”, Burok heard the giggling of girls, and he approached very cautiously to the spot whence he imagined the sound came. True enough in a pool were five young girls bathing and their con-versation, as usual with youug unmarried women everywhere in the world, turned out on the merits and demerits of having a husband. which made even Burok, a pure blooded Murut, blush for shame. On looking up a tree nearby Burok saw some funny things with wings hanging, and he snatched the one closest to him and hid it by covering it with dry leaves.
Soon the girls, who were fairies, came out of the pool and took the things hanging on the tree (which happened to be their garments) and put them on, but the youngest could not find hers (because Burok hid it) and started crying. The others tried to take her along with them in their flight upward, but failed to do so every time, as she was too heavy. So bidding her good-bye amid tears and much embracing, the rest took their leave.
Now thought Burok was the time to act, so out he came from his hiding place and pretended to ask her why she was crying. Immediately she saw Burok she cast her eyes on the ground. There will be a time when every girl will look in this manner, and woe to the man on whom her glance falls. She ' asked him if he had seen her clothes hanging on the tree, but Burok expressed entire ignorance. “Now look’’, said Burok, "it would do you no good standing there crying your eyes out, let me take you to my house, where I have a mother who will take you as her own daughter”. Upon this the girl said “How do you expect me to go like this’’. “Oh yes”, pretended Burok, as if he for the first time was aware she was in the same state as when she came out of her mother’s womb. “Here take my sigar and use it as a sarong”, said Burok hand-ing her his head dress. Thus clothed the two pro-ceeded in the direction of Burok’s house and were received by Burok’s mother with some misgiving, as is the habit of Muruts when introduced to strangers even today.
74
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1953.
After a few days had passed, the poor girl seemed resigned to her fate, and helped the old woman in looking after the fowls and pigs, as every Murut girl should do. Moreover she had plenty of time to study Burok in the way in which girls see and examine while looking another way, so when the time came for Burok to ask her to be his wife, it was not hard for her to find the answer. There was on that day much merry-making, and many dead pigs fouud their way into Murut stomachs washed down with copious supply of tapai (rice beer).
Things went on well for some time thereafter, till a son was born to Burok and his fairy wife. Now Burok's mother at this time took a dislike on her daughter-in-law, because the latter could not help harvest the padi or gather firewood, as being a princess, she was not accustomed to do such menial tasks. Moreover she was daily taunted by her friends that her daughter-in-law did not bring any dowry with her, as every self-respect-ing Murut bride should do. Burok’s wife, poor girl, was totally ignorant of all this backbiting, till her son, who was by now 4 years old, began to understand what was going on behind his mother’s back, so one day he told his mother all he had heard.
Burok’s wife soon began to get upset and related to her son that she was a princess from Kayangaan (Heaven) who, in company with four others decided one day to pay a visit to this miserable earth to bathe in one of its numerous pools, but somehow she lost her garments, and therefore could not. return to Kayangaan with the others. “Look Ma,” said the child, “could it be the same garment that Pa keeps in the old wooden box underneath the stack of firewood?” “Show me son, quick”, said his mother, and the son soon removed the stack of firewood and opened the lid of the box. “Yes, it is so, my son”, said his mother in great glee. “Now let us leave these wicked human beings and return to Kayangaan’’. She put on her garment, which was none the worse for wear and tear, and tried to take her son, but unfortunately she failed every time.
Amid tears she bade her son good-bye, “But tell papa when he returns home, that if he still cared for Mama, he should go to the jambatan merah (red bridge) before sunset to-morrow where he will find an old man fishing, dive in the water and get hold of the line, with you on his back securely tied, when the old man will jerk the line up to fairy-land. Tell him he will find the house easily when he sees the three plants with red leaves growing nearby. Now good-bye till then, son”. With that she flew away.
When Burok arrived late in the night great was his grief on being told his wife had gone back to Kayangaan, but his son repeated all that his mother had told him early in the morning. Early the next morning he woke up his son and said “Come, son, let us find the old man quick”. With that he securely tied his son on his back and started to leave the house, before the others awake.
He had not gone far when as he was passing by a dam with a fish trap set in it, he heard his name being called; he looked round but could see nobody; on looking into the water he saw the sound came from thc fish trap, where as many as one hundred little fish were caught. “Do release us, Burok, and one day we may be able to repay you
for your kindness”. Remembering the tale of the Lion and the Mouse. which he had learnt when quite a small boy, Burok opened the door of the trap and at once the little scamps jumped about with great glee and thanked Burok. As Burok was hurrying along he came across a column of ants carrying their eggs. travelling from the jungle to the water's edge. where their line was broken and they were running up and down dis-tractedly; again he heard his name being called for assistance. “Cannot you see I am busy?” said Burok. “Oh, do please help us, as we wish to go to the other side of the stream”, pleaded the ants. Burok thereupon found a log and laid it across the stream, and the ants were thus enabled to get to the other side.
Not far away, Burok saw a squirrel caught in a trap. “Oh, Burok,” cried the animal, “do release me, maybe one day I shall assist you, who knows". Again remembering the story of the Lion and the Mouse, Burok drew back the catch of the trap and so set the squirrel free. On going on still further he again heard his name being called, this time it was a deer caught fast by the horns in a rotan noose trap. Immediately Burok drew his parang and cut the rotan knots and the deer once again was free.
By this time Burok was tired of thus being held up in this manner, as aside from this being an ill omen. according to Murut custom, he feared he would miss the old man, so when he again heard his name being called for assistance, he was infuriated. "Oh, Burok, help me for I am caught in this net, quick for I see the wicked spider coming for me”. True enough, Burok saw a huge spider about to attack a little fire-fly. With one wave of his hand, the net was totally destroyed and the little fire-fly was set free.
It was not long afterwards that the pool was reached and true enough Burok saw an old man sitting on the top of a big rock which projected over the water with a rod and line, casting into the deep water above the rock. Quickly he got into the water with his son still securely tied on his back, and caught the line with both hands. Now the old man thinking he had caught a fish, jerked Burok and his son clean out of the water, over the rock, over the trees behind and up through a thick cloud until he landed with a bump in a strange country. “Now this must be Kayangaan” thought Burok, and the next step was to find the house with three plants having red leaves. Soon he located the house, and shouted for his wife to come out. Out she came and welcomed both of them into the house, and introduced Burok to her father, who happened to be the Rajah of Kaya-ngaan. Now this old man was a stern ruler, and a hard nut to crack, as Burok soon learnt to his dismay.
Burok explained the purpose of his visit, which was. in effect, to take his wife back to earth. To this her father flatly refused, saying he was not even invited to the wedding and therefore he could not see how he could give his consent. Moreover, continued the old man, she had a suitor to whom he had promised his daughter in marriage from childhood. “Aside from all this” said the old man, "you are not of royal blood, and would be a dis-grace to the family”. Burok felt very sad on hear-ing this, “But if you could do certain feats. I am willing to look upon you as if you were of high lineage”, said the Rajah.
75
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1953.
Burok agreed to try, so the next morning the Rajah led a large party to a big pool in the river, and taking a large box of beads from one of his attendants, threw them by the handfuls into the deep water. “Now you must bring the whole lot back with not one less”. With that the Rajah and his retinue drew back, leaving Burok alone. Again and again Burok dived in, but he could not find a single bead, though he was a good swimmer and could stay in the water for a good long while. He at once realised the fruitlessness of his attempts and was about to rise up in despair when he heard his name being called out. “Oh, Burok, why are you weeping", on looking into the water he saw a swarm of little fish, “look we are here to help you in return for releasing us from the fishtrap”. “Hold the box under water and we will do the rest”. Soon the box was filled up to the top, and Burok took the stuff triumphantly to the Rajah who had to admit that there was not a bead missing. Burok was about to claim back his wife, but the Rajah said he had other tests to undergo before he considered Burok fit for his daughter's hands.
The next day he led Burok to a field covered with long thick grass and scattered a gantang of rice and said that every grain should be collecetd back into a gantang and brought to him before sundown. Burok at once realised the job was not an easy one, and so he sat down helplessly and started to sob. “Why do you cry, oh Burok”, said a swarm of ants, “look we are here to help you in return for helping us across the river”. Soon the ants formed into a line and off they went to find the rice, and soon the gantang was filled and Burok carried it to the Rajah with a proud gait and demanded that his wife be handed back to him. “Oh not yet", said the wily old Rajah, “tomorrow you must come to my orchard and prove yourself worthy of my daughter". Next day Burok went to the orchard and the Rajah pointed to a large langsat tree laden with fruit to the outermost twigs. Then the Rajah ordered one of his servants to cut through the trunk until the tree was almost falling. “Now you pick every langsat on that tree, but see to it that not a twig is broken or the tree fall”.
Now Burok himself was a good climber, but he could not trust his 8 stones to this frail tree, and realised the hopelessness of the task, and sat down to weep. “Oh Burok, why weep, let me help you for releasing me from the trap”, with that a squirrel jumped up the tree and with his sharp teeth bit through all the fruit stalks, so that the fruit fell to the ground. whilst even the smallest twigs only bent a little beneath the squirrel's weight, and not one was broken. Burok took all the langsat to the Rajah and bravely asked that this time she should be returned to him. “No, no, not so fast, my son, for tomorrow you shall have an opponent to meet, and of course the better man wins”, said the old Rajah.
So the next day the Rajah took Burok and the Fairy Prince (who was the original suitor) to a place from which, across a wide expanse of jungle, could be seen a tree with large red leaves on the spur of a distant hill. “Fetch me some leaves from that yonder tree, and he who first brings me the leaves would be considered the better man”, said the Rajah and after that he left. Now the Fairy Prince despised Burok and thought little of him, because of his lowly birth, so he thought he might as well find a little time to eat some of the fruit that fell on the ground before catching up with Burok. So down he went gathering the fruit and
 munching it. Burok tried hard to find his way, but time and again he fell and hurt himself badly, for thick was the jungle and full of thorns and brambles.
As if from nowhere out dashed a deer “Get on my back, I will help you, oh Burok, for releasing me from the trap”; so up jumped Burok and immediately the deer dashed like the wind and soon reached the tree with red leaves. Burok gathered the leaves and presented them to the Rajah, and by this time the Fairy Prince arrived, but Burok was before him, and the Rajah was forced to admit that Burok was the better man.
“There is still another test” said the Rajah “and this is the final, for how can you prove competent to look after the pusaka (heirloom) that I am going to give to my daughter”. Thereupon he went into a dark room and closed the door and took a small vial from his sarong and placed it amidst other jars and pots. Then out he came from the room and commanded that Burok bring the exact stuff to him. In Burok went, but the room was so dark that Burok was afraid to move very much for fear of hurting himself. He was ready to come out and admit the impossibility of the test, when he heard a small voice calling his name, and on looking round he saw a small fire-fly. “Do not despair, oh Burok, for I am here to help you in repayment for saving me from that ugly spider, do you remember?” With that it settled on the very vial the Rajah had brougtt in earlier. "This is it, for I saw it myself, therefore take it to the Rajah fearlessly and say that this is the very stuff and he cannot deny it”, said the fire-fly. There-upon Burok asked for the door to be opened and went straight to the Rajah’s room snd showed it to the old man. He was surprised but could not deny that it was the right thing.
“You have won your bride, but you are not to take her back to earth”, said the Rajah, “but you are to live here with us.” To this Burok was not ready to agree, for he thought of his poor mother and other friends and relatives down on this earth. No matter now pressing Burok became, the old man was not shaken from his original command, and soon Burok became despondent and unhappy, and nothing could please him. Moreover, he noticed only the coconut tree was seen here and there, with no other fruit trees, like the durian, manga, terap, bakap-bakap, pulusan, or manggis, all of which Burok was fond of. To make matters worse, he overheard the people say that Burok had a peculiar bodily odour, which was quite repulsive. This might in part be true, for Muruts seldom cared to bathe and soap was “taboo” to most of them.
Instead of sleeping in his wife's room, Burok used the long communal verandah as his bedroom, and everytime the people passed by they would say Puey, puey what a disgrace for a Rajah's son-in-law. Moreover to his dismay he had to make use of a coconut as a pillow, instead of the karong guni stuffed with cotton, which he was used to. Poor Burok's wife tried hard to please her husband, but nothing could change his attitude, and it could be said he "went on a sit-down strike”.
The people by this time were fed up with poor Burok for his bodily odour permeated everywhere, and they decided once and for all to get rid of him. “The only way is to cut the bamboo flooring and let the wretch drop back to earth” said one, who appeared the leader. So they cut the bamboo
76
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1953.
flooring, and down dropped poor Burok to mother earth. On waking up he saw his beloved Keningau and not far was his own sweet home and he rushed to meet his mother, who welcomed him like the prodigal son in Holy Scriptures and there was merrymaking in true Murut style.
It will be remembered that Burok used a coconut as a pillow, so when he fell the nut also fell with him. One fine day as Burok was up and about he noticed a coconut tree, and this infuriated Burok for it reminded him of Kayangaan and of the cruel hard-hearted Rajah and the insulting populace. He rushed to his home and took an axe to cut the tree, but the poor tree pleaded for its life saying "Look, if you were in the jungle and thirsty you only need bring down my nut and split it open, and then you will find a most refreshing drink. My flesh is also wholesome eating, and when dried could be expressed into oil for frying your fish. lighting your tiny lamps, my husk you could turn into brooms, my shell into drinking cups, and what is more I could supply you with bahr (toddy) to make you merry during your numerous festivals”. “No, no, you are too dangerous I must do away with you for your nuts might some day fall on our heads and we shall be dead before long” said Burok and was about the use his axe on the tree, but it shouted “Hey, stop, I promise that I shall not drop my nuts when your people are about”.
True enough the coconut tree has kept its promise up to this day, for no nut was known to have fallen on a Murut's pate, and the toddy is universally known as the “drink of the fairies”.
Sarawak Turf Club.
First Day, 4th April, 1953.
EASTER MEETING, 1953.
Race 1. The Easter Scurry.
Ponies Division III. 3 furlongs.
Tickets
Elizabeth’s	Sold
1.	Phoenix	9.6	(9.1)	Bujang	264
2.	Bintang Aru	9.8	Teo Ek	 Pah 511
3.	Kudat Prince	8.5	(7.12)	Mat II	56
4.	Bujang Brunei	8.0	Sebi	66
Also Ran:
Tanjong Hijau	9.8	(9.11)	Mat III	524
Bujang Samsu	9.4	Samsudin	246
Serampang Laut	9.4	(8.11)	Lamat	50
Brisbane River	8.11 (8.6)	Sebli	167
Silver Star	8.1	(7.11)	Sintek	84
Lintang Lad	7.7	Asing	84
2052
Won By: 1 length, 1 length, ½ length.
Time: 47 secs. Tote: $6.20
Race 2. The Kuching Handicap. Ponies Division II. 3 furlongs.
Tickets
Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang's	Sold
1.	Victory	 Parade 9.3 Samsudin	590
2.	Cabaret	7.7	Asing	448
3.	Miss Kudat	8.7	(8.0) Mat II	254
4.	Suiyuan	10.1	(9.10)Eddie	591
Also Ran:
Smoke Screen 8.12 Tan Tau En 746
2629
Scratched : Atom Boy 10.9, Lordship 7.13. Won By: 2 lengths, 1 length, 4 lengths.
Time: 44 secs. (record). Tote: $3.60.
Race 3. The Miri Handicap.
Ponies Division I. 4 furlongs.
Tickets
Mr. R. Kirkwood's	Sold
1.	Snowy River	7.7	(7.10)	Ekom	675
2.	Chienlimah	8.0	Asing	432
3.	Bintang Timor	8.7	(8.2)	Manan	321
4.	Gobi	7.9	(8.0)	Samsudin	219
Also Ran:
Lucky Boy	12.7	(12.2)	Joon Loi	819
Happy Ending	8.6	(8.7)	Tan Tau	En	636
3102
Scratched: Kaswari 7.11.
Won By: Neck, 1 length, 1 length. Time: 59 3/5 secs. Tote: $3.60.
Race 4. The Simanggang Handicap.
Horses Division II. 6 furlongs.
Tickets
Mr. Ong Soo Keng's	Sold
1.	Remember Me	9.2	Tan Tau En	1787
2.	Atlantas	9.4	Matnor	897
3.	Brighstar Minstrel 8.2	Samsudin	274
4.	Kanda	8.12	Teo Ek Pah	472
Also Ran:
Heretic	8.13	Asing	421
Musketeer	8.1 (8.3)	Usop	105
Best Wishes	8.10	(8.3)	Sirat	111
4067
Won By: ½ length, 4 lengths, 2 lengths. 
Time: 1 min. 15 4/5 secs. Tote: $1.80.
Race 5. The Easter Sprint.
Horses Division I. 6 furlongs.
Tickets
Mr. Ong Soo Keng’s	Sold
1.	Blondie	10.2	Tan Tau	En	1510
2.	Rosy Morn	8.4	Matnor	1043
3.	Stars Remember	8.0	Samsudiu	608
4.	Bunga Singapura 8.13 (8.8) Lamat	449
Also Ran:
Cherith	10.10	Asing	286
3896
Scratched: Alton 9.3, Knight Gallant 8.5. 
Won By: 1 length, ½ length, Distance. 
Time: 1 min. 15 2/5 secs. Tote: $2.00.
Race 6, The Limbang Handicap.
Ponies Division III. 6 furlongs.
Tickets
Mr. Phillip Soh Fu's	Sold
1.	Brisbane River	8.2	(7.11)	Sebli	158
2.	Bujang Brunei	7.10	Sebi	224
3.	Silver Star	8.6	(7.13)	Sintek	364
4.	Phoenix	8.4	(8.6)	Bujang	548
Also Ran :
Bujang Samsu	9.3	Samsudin	246
Bintang Aru	9.1	Teo Ek Pah	613
Tanjong Hijau	8.3	(8.2)	Eddie	355
Oriental	8.2	Asing	212
Lintang Lad	7.7	(7.4)	Mat II	83
2803
77
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1953.
Won By: Head, ½ length, Nose. 
Time: 1 min. 38 2/5 secs. Tote: $14.10.
Race 7. The Simunjan Handicap.
Ponies Division II. 9 furlongs.
Tickets
Mr. Yong Chin Hook's	Sold
1.	Cabaret	8.4	(8.1)	Bujang	181
2,	Hot Spur	II	7.7	(7.4)	Mat II	226
3.	Bintang Selatan       8.3	(8.4)	Tan Tau En     439
4.	Mongol	8.1	Manan	433
Also Ran:
Atom Boy               10.9(10.2)    Mat III             283
Lordship	9.5               Joon Loi           681
2243
Scratched: Suiyuan 10.8, Victory Parade 8.7, Bujang Samsu 7.7.
Won By: Distance, 1½ length, ½ length.
Time: 2 mins. 26 secs. Tote: $9.90.
Race 8. The Sibu Handicap.
Ponies Division I. 6 furlongs.
Tickets
The Ong Kongsi's	Sold
1.	Bintang Timor	9.2	Samsudin	521
2.	Lucky Boy	12.2	(11.11)    Joon Loi	  396
3.	Snowy River	            7.10 (8.3)	Ekom	  1001
4.	Chienlimah	 8.7	(8.8)	Matnor	453
Also Ran:
Happy Ending	10.0	(9.9)	Sebli	319
2690
Scratched: Gobi 7.12, Kaswari 7.7.
Won By: ¾ length, 2 lengths, 3 lengths.
Time: 1 min. 34 secs. (record). Tote: $4.10.
Race 9. The Easter Handicap.
Open to All Horses. 1¼ miles.
Tickets
Mr. Ong Hap Leong's	Sold
1.	Alton	9.2	Manan	 1451
2.	First Ra	7.12	(8.2)	Tan Tau En    1409
3.	Craughan	9.8 (9.1)	Lamat	307
4.	Gay Bird	9.13	Asing	357
Also Ran:
Haoma	8.9	Usop	174
3698
Scratched: Bunga Singapura 9.6, Knight Gallant 8.12, Atlantas 8.11, Musketeer 7.8.
Won By: 2 lengths, Distance, 2 lengths.
Time: 2 mins. 10 secs. (record). Tote: $2.00.
Second Day, 11th April, 1953.
Race I. The Simpang Tiga Handicap.
Ponies Division III. 4 furlongs.
Tickets
 Mr. Morgan Chai & Bros’	Sold
1.	Bintang Aru	10.3	Teo Ek Pah	360
2.	Bujang Samsu	9.4	Samsudin	187
3.	Tanjong Hijau	9.8	(9.3)	Eddie	166
4.	Bujang Brunei	8.8	Sebi	219
Also Ran:
Lintang Lad	7.7	(7.4)	Mat II	57
Silver Star	8.4	Tan Tau En	304
Brisbane River	9.5	(9.0)	Sebli	216
Kudat Prince	9.0	(8.9)	Bujang	326
1835
Scratched: Oriental 9.11, Phoenix 10.8. 
Won By: 1 length, ½ length. Short head. 
Time: 1 min. 3 2/5 secs. Tote: $4.10.
Race 2. The Tanjong Po Handicap.
Ponies Division II. 4 furlongs.
Tickets
Mr. Yong Chin Hook's	Sold
1.	Cabaret	8.4	Tan Tau En     641
2.	Lordship	7.7	(7.10)	Asing	111
3.	Suiyuan	9.6	(9.1)	Eddie	152
4.	Hot Spur II	7.12(7.5)	Mat II	393
Also Ran :
Bintang Selatan	7.13	Bujang	107
Atom Boy             10.3(9.10)     Da'an               100
Victory Parade	9.12	Samsudin	1056
Smoke Screen	8.3 (8.2)       Sebli	209
Miss Kudat	8.4	Teo Ek Pah	182
2951
Scratched : Mongol 8.6.
Won By : 1½ lengths, 2 lengths, ½ length.
Time: 1 min. 1 2/5 secs. Tote: $3.60.
Race 3. The Lee Mah Handicap.
Ponies Division I. 5 furlongs. Tickets
The Ong Kongsi’s	Sold
1.	Bintang Timor	9.9	Sanisudiu	448
2.	Lucky Boy 12.0(11.9) Joon Loi 1132
3.	Chienlimah	7.13	(8.0)	Teo Ek Pah	 491
4.	Snowy River	7.12	Ekom	905
2976
Scratched: Happy Ending 9.6, Gobi 7.12, Kaswari 7.7.
Won By: Neck, head, 4 lengths.
Time: 1 min. 16 2/5 secs. Tote: $5.30.
Race 4. Anjong Datu Handicap.
Horses Division II. 1 mile.
Tickets
Mr. Ong Soo Keng’s	Sold
1. Remember Me	9.7	Tan Tau En 1880
2.	Stars Remember	8.2	(7.12)	Bujang	845
3.	Knight Gallant	9.7	Samsudin	570
4.	Kanda	8.6	Teo Ek Pa	259
Also Ran:
Musketeer	8.0	(8.5)	Usop	177
3731
Scratched : Brightstar Minstrel 9.6, Heretic 8.4. 
Won By: 2 lengths, 1 length, neck.
Time: 1 min. 46 secs. Tote: $1.50.
Race 5. The Fort Margherita Handicap.
Horses Division I. 1 mile. Tickets
Mr. Ong Hap Leong's	Sold
1.	Atlantas	8.3	Samsudin        634
2.	Alton	9.9	Matnor	1403
3.	First Ra	8.0 	(7.10)     Keram	315
4.	Blondie	8.13	Tan Tau En   1718
Also Ran :
Gay Bird	8.7	Asing	185
4255
Won By : ½ length, 2 lengths, 1 length. 
Time: 1 min. 43 2/5 secs. (New record). Tote: $5.30.
78
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1953.
Race 6. The Burak Handicap.
Ponies Division III. 5 furlongs.
Tickets Sold
1.	Phoenix	9.1	(8.10)	Bujang	669
2.	Kudat Prince	8.5	(7.12)	Keram	77
3.	Oriental	8.5	(8.6)	Mat I	59
4.	Bujang Samsu	9.3	(8.12)	Eddie	285
Also Ran:
Bintang Aru           9.6 (9.13)      Teo Ek Pah     629
Brisbane River	9.3 (8.12)	Sebli	 240
Silver Star	8.12 (8.5)	Sintek	155
Bujang Brunei	8.6	Sebi	513
Tanjong Hijau	8.3(7.10)	Mat III	325
Lintang Lad	7.7 (7.3)	Mat II	54
3006
Won By: ½ length, neck, ½ length.
Time: 1 min. 20 2/5 secs. Tote: $3.50.
Race 7. The Diana Handicap.
Ponies Division II. 6 furlongs.
Messrs. Ong Eng Hiu &	Tickets
Wee Hian Teck's	Sold
1.	Atom Boy	9.12	Matnor	139
2.	Cabaret	8.9 (9.2)	Tan Tau En	1429
3.	Lordship	8.10	Asing	518
4.	Mongol	8.4	Teo Ek Pah	245
Also Ran :
Victory Parade	9.12 (9.5)	Mat III	276
Suiyuan	9.0 (8.9)	Eddie	220
Bintang Selatan	8.10 (8.5)	Bujang	154
Smoke Screen	8.4 (8.1)	Sebli	163
Hot Spur II	7.10 (7.5)	Mat II	303
3437
Scratched: Miss Kudat 7.7.
Won By: ½ length, 1 length, head.
Time: 1 min. 35 secs. Tote: $19.70.
Race 8. The Serapi Handicap.
Horses Open. 5 furlongs.
Tickets
Mr. Ong Kee Chong's	Sold
1.	Brighstar Minstrel 7.12 (8.3)      Samsudin        699
2.	Heretic	8.3	Teo Ek Pah	307
3.	Craughan	9.3	Tan Tau En	780
4.	Rosy Morn	9.10	Matnor	1340
Also Ran:
The Banker            8.6 (7.13)      Suhaili             149
Mont Blot	8.12 (9.5)      Lamat	139
  Hua Tara	9.8 (9.3)       Eddie	169
3583
Scratched: Cherith 11.7, Alton 11.3, Bunga Singapura 9.10.
Won By : Distance, Distance, 1 length.
Time: 1 min. 3 4/5 secs. Tote: $4.00.
*Did not finish.
Race 9. The Kijang Handicap.
Ponies Division I. 1 mile.
Tickets
Mr. R. Kirkwood’s	Sold
1.	Snowy River           8.8	Ekom	339
2.	Lucky Boy	9.13	(9.8)	Joon Loi	577
3.	Bintang Timor         9.9 (10.2)     Samsudin       713
4.	Chienlimah	8.0	Teo Ek	 Pah	557
Also Ran:
Kaswari	7.10	(7.5)	Manan	422
2608
Scratched : Happy Ending 8.4.
Won By: Neck, head, ½ length. 
Time: 2 mins. 8 2/5 secs. (Record).
Tote: $6.10.
Turtle Trust Fund.
Income and Expenditure Account as at 31st December, 1951.
EXPENDITURE.
To Payment of Charity	...	... 8 1,466.95
Excess of Income over Expenditure for the
year	...	............... 11,382.14
$12.849.09
INCOME.
By July and December sales of Turtle
Eggs credited direct	$560.00
Less April and December expenses on Turtle Eggs debited direct                       210.01 $ 349.99
Balance of Turtle Trust Suspense Account transferred as at 31/12/51	...	...	12.499.10
$12,849.09
Balance Sheet as at 31st December, 1951.
LIABILITIES.
Fund in Trust:—
Balance as at 1st January, 1951	... $ 5,419.62
ADD
Excess of Income over Expenditure for the year	...	...	... 11,382.14
$16,801.78
ASSETS.
Cash in hands of Accountant-General ... $16.801.76
$16,801.76
Examined
ARTHUR G. TAYLOR,
Principal Auditor:
Kuching, 13th March, 1953.
ABANG HAJI MUSTAPHA,
Chairman, 
Turtle Trust Fund.
79
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1953.
Probate and Administration.
Wee Cheng Ewe or Hew (deceased), sole pro-prietor of Chop Chin Chiang, No. 59, Main Bazaar, Kuching, and Chop Chin Aik of Sibu, Sarawak.
All persons having valid claims against the above-named deceased who died at No. 59, Main Bazaar, Kuching, Sarawak, on 15th January, 1940. are required to submit their claims in writing to the undersigned not later than 31st May, 1953, after which date the estate will be distributed among the persons entitled thereto subject only to any valid claims received by that date.
WEE BOON CHIEW, 
CHAN TECK CHENG, 
Executors.
Kuching, Sarawak, 18th April, 1953.
Kwong Lee Bank, Limited.
(Incorporated in Sarawak)
NOTICE OF LOST CERTIFICATE.
Application has been made to the Directors of the above company to issue a duplicate certificate of title to 30 shares of $100 each fully paid, numbered 1329 to 1348 (both inchiahe) and nuuibered 2962 to -2971 (both inclusive) in the above Company and registered in the name of Chan Sze Thim of Sibu, upon a Declaration by the legal representative of the Estate of Chan Sze Thim, deceased, to the effect that the original certificate for the said shares has been lost or destroyed.
Notice is hereby given that if within 30 days from date hereof no claim or representation in respect of such original certificate is made to the Directors, they will proceed to deal with such application for a duplicate certificate and the original certificate will be deemed to have been cancelled.
Dated the 20th day of April, 1953.
By Order of the Board of Directors,
TAN KUI CHOON,
Secretary.
Sale of Wrecked Vessel.
The Commissioner of Trade and Customs, Sarawak, as Receiver of Wrecks, invites tenders for the purchase of the wreck of the steel vessel M.V. Kah Hock, as she lies and where she lies, in the Prima Donna reach of the Sarawak River. The vessel is believed to be approximately 823 tons gross register but the Receiver accepts no responsibility for the correctness of this figure. Intending purchasers should arrange for their own inspection and survey of the vessel as she lies.
2.	The successful tender will be required to obtain the approval of the Shipping Master, Sarawak, for the intended procedure of dealing with the wreck. The wreck must be demolished where she lies and no methods used which may cause a danger to navigation or may cause the wreck to be left in a condition dangerous to navigation.
3.	Tenderer must undertake to demolish and •remove the wreck completely not later than six months from the date of notification of acceptance of the tender.
4.	The full purchase amount must be paid to the Accountant-General, Kuching, Sarawak, by the successful tenderer within fourteen days of notifica-tion of acceptance of the tender.
5.	Tenders should be forwarded in sealed covers marked "Tender for wreck of M.v. Kah Hock" and addressed to the Chairman of the Tenders Board, Treasury, Kuching, Sarawak, and must reach his office not later than noon on the 20th May, 1953.
6.	The Receiver does not bind himself to accept the highest or any tender.
L. D. KENNEDY,
Commissioner of Trade and Customs.
Notice.
In pursuant to section 13 of thc Partnership ordinance, notice is hereby given that I, Chai Tiong Chai (S.N.R.I.C. No. S.210191) of Sibu, owner of one-third share in Hap Hin Company, Sibu, vide Business Registration Certificate No. 3/51 issued on the 2nd day of February, 1951, at Sibu, have sold, transferred and made over all my one-third share with all interests in the said Hap Hin Company to Messrs. Ho Ah Choon (S.N.R.I.C. No. S.207171) and Ling Lieng Ching (S.N.R.I.C. No. S.210553) jointly of Sibu on the 20th day of April, 1953, vide Sibu Deed of Transfer No. 88/1953 dated 20/4/53. All debts due to and owing by the said Hap Hin Company in the pro-portion of one-third will be received and paid by the said transferees, Messrs. Ho Ah Choon and Ling Lieng Ching who will continue to carry on business at No. 1, Market Road, Sibu, after 20/4/53.
Signature of Chai Tiong Chai 
(transferor).
Signatures of Ho Ah Choon and 
Ling Lieng Ching (transferees).
Notice.
Notice is hereby given that I the undersigned, TAN BAK THIAM have retired from the partner-ship business of Chop Chang Heng of No. 17, Market Street, Kuching, as from the 22nd April, 1953, by mutual consent.
Notice is further given that as from the 22nd April, 1953, the undersigned will have no concern whatsoever in respect of the book debts owing by and due to the said Chop Chang Heng, which shall be the responsibility of the remaining partners.
TAN BAK THIAM.
Kuching, 24th April, 1953.
80
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1953.
Kuching Market Price List.
20th March to 20th April, 1953.
RICE—(per gantang)
Local, White milling	...	...	...	$2.67
Govt.	Siam, White	...	...	...	2.52
„	Bangoon	...	...	...	2.52
„	Broken	...	...	...	2.16
„	Pulut	...	...	...	—
Local	Milled Broken    ...              ...	...	—
„            „     Whole     ...	...                ...     2.28
„       Pulut                   ...	...	...       —
Dayak Pounded
SUGAR— (per kati)
Java, White (Govt.) Refined            ...                ...	.36
„ Brown	...	...	...	 —
Nipah Sugar	...	...	...	.20
SALT—(per kati)
Coarse      ...	...                ...	...	.10
Fine          ...	...	...	...        .15
FLOUR AND BREAD—
Wheat Flour. per kati	...	...	.39
Bread per loaf              ...	...	...	.10
MILK—(per tin)
Milkmaid	...	...                 ...        .71
Golden Wheel	...	...	...	.65
EGGS—(each)
Duck, fresh	...	...	...	.19
„ salted	...	...	...	.18
Fowl	...	...	...	.20
EDIBLE FATS—(per kati)
Coconut Oil	...	...	...	.80
Pork Fat No. 1	...	...	...	1.60
„     „     „   2	...	...	...	1.20
PORK—(per kati)
Lean              No. 1	...	...	...	3.30
Lean with fat   „   2	...	...	...	1.60
BEEF AND OTHER MEATS—(per kati)
Mutton (Australian)	...	...	...	2.80
Beef, steak	...	...	...	3.00
Beef, curry meat	...	...	...	1.60
Buffalo No. 1	...	...	...	3.00
„     curry meat	...	...	...	1.60
Kambing (daging)	...	...	...	3.00
POULTRY—(per kati)
Capons	...	...	...	3.28
Duck	...	...	...	2.53
Fowl, Chinese breed	...	...	...	3.26
Fowl, Dayak breed	...	...	...	2.63
FISH—(per kati)
Fresh fish No. 1	  ...	...	...	1.66
„       „     „   2	...               ...                ...         .99
„       „     „   3             ...               ...                ...        .39
Prawns       „   1             ...               ...	...	1.64
„ 2             	...               ...	...	  1.17
Crab           No.l	  ...	...	...	1.20
„	2	...	...	...	.80
Salted	 fish    „	1	...	...	...	2.40
„	„	„	2	...	...	...	1.15
„	„	„	3	...	...	...	.65
„	„	roe	...	...	...	2.20
VEGETABLES-(per kati)		
Bangkuang (Yam beans)		... $     .22
Bayam		.46
Bean Sprouts	...	.30
Cabbage Imported	...	.73
Changkok Manis		.40
Daun Bawang		...	1.20
Ensahi Puteh	...	.73
„ Bunga	...	.63
French beans		.80
Garlic, fresh	...	.56
Kachang panjang	...	.40
Kangkong	...	...	.40
Keladi (China)	...	...	.40
Ketola		.40
Kribang	...	.15
Kundor	...	...	.30
Labu		.16
Ladies Fingers	...	.60
Lettuce (per tie)		.10
Lobak (Chinese radish)		.50
Lobak, salted, imported		.70
Onions, Bombay		.35
Onions, small		.69
Potatoes, Bengal	...	.35
Pria (Bitter Gourd) ...	...	.70
Bamboo shoots, salted	...	.40
Trong (Brinjals)	...	.40
Yams		.20
Cucumber (timun)		.40
Ginger		.58
Chillies (red)		...       1.98
(green)		.90
Sauerkraut, imported		.83
local		.60
Tamarind		.40
Tomatoes, fresh	...	...      1.00
TEA-
Tea. Lipton per lb.	...	...	3.70
„ Chinese per packet	...	...	.80
COFFEE—(per kati)
Raw, Java No. 1	...	...	...	2.60
„   Java  No. 2	...	...	...	2.20
FRUIT—
Pisang Umbun	...	per kati	...	.15
Pisang Tandok	...	each	.10	to .20
Pineapples	...	per kati	...	.12
Papayas	...	„	...	.15
SUNDRIES—
Bean Curd	...	per 6 square piece    ...	.10
„	Cake	(white)	...	per piece	...	.15
„	„	(Yellow)		...	.25
Kerosene Oil	...	per tin	...	5.90
...	per bottle	...	.25
Charcoal	...	per pkl.	...	8.00
„ semi-converted      ...	.,	...	5.00
Sauce (kitchup)	...	bot. (1) $1.00, (2) .70. (3) .50
Blachan	...	per kati	...	.70
Dried prawn                 ...           „                       ...     2.16
Coconut, fresh	...	each	...	.25
Bako Wood	...	per panchang	...	28.00
Gembong, salted, imported per kati	...	 .60
Sepat            „             „	„	...        .80
Cigarettes:
Players ...	... 3 sticks for ...	.12
Craven “A"	...	3	„	...	.12
Capstan ...	...	3	„	...	.11
Rough Rider	...	3	„	...	.10
State Express	      ...	    1 stick for	...	.05