Vol. LXXIX
No. 1149
PRICE
KUCHING, Monday, November 30th, 1953
50 CENTS
Contents
Page
 Marriage:—
Smith—Van Hoven	...	...	...	199
Saying for the Month                         ...	  ...                  ...	199
Next-Door Neighours	...	...	...	199
Notes and Comments	...	...	...	200
Comings and Goings	...	...	...	201
His Excellency the Governor's Address on the Fifth
Graduation Day of the Batu Lintang Training Centre              201
The Real Sarawak	...	...	...	 203
Archdeacon Stonton	...                    ...                  ...	204
An Equestrian Case	...	...	...	205
The Good Old Days	...	...	...	206
Correspondence	...	...	...	 207
Miri Letter	...	...	...	 ...   207
Perlumbaan Murid2 Sekolah Merpati Jepang                          ...  208
Dayang Tri Kalala and the story of Bunga Lawan (Two
tales of native Oya)	...	...	  ...   208
Cross-Word Puzzle	...	...	  ...   210
To Contributors             ...	...	...                   ...   210
Sarawak Club:—
Golf—Ladies Bogey Competition—3.10.53	   ... 211
Golf—Men's Stroke Competition—1.11.53	   ... 211
Golf—The Panaga Club Invasion                      ...                  ...  211
Golf—Ladies' Tombstone Competition—14.11.53.              ... 212
Bowling Averages for October	...	...	212
October Bowling Competition	...	...	212
Sarawak Turf Club—Winter Meeting, 1953	... 213
Kuching Market Price List                ...                   ...	... 216
The Sarawak Gazette
MONDAY, NOVEMBER 30th, 1953
Marriage
Smith—Van Hoven—On October 17, 1953, at Epsom, Sur-rey, Peter Barclay Smith to Constance Van Hoven.
Saying for the Month
We may talk what we please of lilies and lions rampant, and spread eagles in fields d'or or d'argent; but if heraldry were guided by reason, a plough in a field arable would be the most noble and ancient arms.
Abraham Cowley
Next-Door Neighbours
Last month we wrote briefly of the coming to Kuching in October of a party of high officials from Kalimantan Barat—West Borneo—with their collea-gues from Djakarta and Singapore. We make no apo-logy for referring to this again. In whose mind the idea first took shape we do not know, but that the visit, following the earlier journeys by Sarawak offi-cials to Pontianak, has been one of the most important events and one of the most pregnant for good in the recent history of Borneo, we are quite sure; and we warmly congratulate all those on both sides of our common border who conceived the plan and so success-fully carried it out. In these days of almost lightning intercommunication between all nations who will allow it, and in some measure even with those who will not, no community can live to itself, or long endure alone. This is the theme, the whole foundation, of those United Nations whose eighth anniversary we celebrated a few days after our Indonesian visitors returned to their homes.
In some men's minds the United Nations is still a distant organisation, unrealised in their thought, and its Charter a pious platitude. Herein lies our danger, a danger that may be mortal. As long as men treat the Charter as a platitude and brush it aside unserved, they fail in their duty to their heritage and their children, flout the sacrifice of millions who died in war, and deny their faith in God. Direct scope for service to the United Nations, racked by problems not imme-diately ours, may be small in Sarawak, but we have our own field at hand in which the scope is far from small and the duties manifest. In Borneo there are four communities, with differing forms of government springing from their past, and with their own tradi-tions, nurtured by unselfish sacrifice and strongly cherished. It is right that, for the sake of the free growth of the human spirit and of the arts and crafts of men, we should guard these traditions. But we must also remember and cherish the joint heritage of all the four countries, Indonesian Borneo, Brunei, North Borneo and Sarawak, movingly described by His Ex-cellency the Governor of Sarawak in his address of welcome to his guests from Indonesia:
“We share the same climate," said His Excellency, "the same mountains, the same birds and flowers. We are in fact bound by nature to share these things, and we are bound by the similarity of our circumstances and the stage of development we have reached to share many common problems. More important still our objectives are the same: the peaceful progress and orderly development of our country. We both want to make the Island of Borneo which we share pros-perous, healthy and happy, and we are both deter-mined to resist to the utmost of our strength any who plan to disrupt our way of life and undermine the
200
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 30, 1953
authority of lawful government. We have furthermore the great advantage of speaking a common language and in fact we have little excuse for being anything but the best of friends and neighbours... Closer co-operation between the sovereign States of this Island can only strengthen each of us. We can show the world that though we may differ in our forms of government, though we are jealous of our sovereign integrity, though we may differ in our customs, in our religion, in our associations with others, yet we are united in our common purpose to serve the future of this Island and that we can and will help each other on our way.”
The visitors responded with great friendliness and high intelligence to this welcome. That was clear to all who met them. Common problems—the main-tenance of the rule of law and the keeping of good order, and the tasks thereby placed upon the military, the police, and the immigration authorities; the develop-ment of education: the exchange of information—all these and other matters were freely discussed and no secrets were hidden in demonstrating day-to-day work and its purposes. Apart from these talks and the friendly understanding of the visitors, part in them, all those who listened to the leader of the visiting Mission, the Resident Co-ordinator of Kalimantan Barat, Bam-bang Soeparto, will long remember his kindly dignity and his sincerity and skill. In his address at the Kuching Civic Luncheon, the Resident said how deeply he and his colleagues had been moved by their re-ception: "The spirit and intention to improve our mutual relationship is very important to us all, and for all you have so generously given us we thank you very much indeed. May God Almighty bless you all." And in his talk to the representatives of the Kuching press, Mr. Seoparto amplified what was in his mind:
"As soon as the invitation to visit you became known to us." he said, "we felt we should accept the honour of taking this good opportunity of meeting His Excel-lency the Governor and of seeing the administration of our neighbour. I am very happy to say that the few days of our stay has justified all we have heard of His Excellency, and we have seen that the adminis-tration of Sarawak is in the hands of a very kind, wise, and able man. It is not even necessary for us to see everything for ourselves, so well informed have we been by His Excellency and his officers. Courtesy visit though this is, it has given us great pleasure to talk over matters of common interest to us both. This is very important, for we can each of us see, and face, our difficulties and deal with urgent problems immediately. The visit has proved beneficial to us, and the most important thing is that it has given us the chance of acquainting ourselves with conditions in Sarawak and with His Excellency's officers, and of getting to know their views."
There, we repeat, is the essence of the thing: to get acquainted and to know. Intercourse to this end be-tween the three countries of Northern Borneo has in the nature of things been long and close, and we look forward, as the result of this visit and those we hope will follow it, to constantly more cordial and valuable relations with our great Southern neighbour. Holding this purpose and the recent friendly inter-course in mind, we urge today upon all those concerned with these things (and that is every one of us) the lively truth of the old story of Charles Lamb, who told a friend how he hated Mr. X. "But you don't know X," said his friend. "Of course I don't," Lamb re-plied: “if I did, how could I hate him?”
Notes and Comments
At the close of the year's work at Batu Lintang Training Centre, before the graduation ceremonies, there is a competition between the nine huts in which the students live. Each hut displays the work—models, paintings, carvings, musical instruments—its members have made. Within the entrance to one hut, set up before the exhibits, we read a large notice, beautifully written in bold blue letters on a white card.
It ran:
“1953. All these models on display were done by all the members of this hut. They were similar to the real fullsize objects. As decided, the members of this hut made the objects which they know best, and which is to be found in this country in their kampongs or homes where ever they may be.
"It has also been appointed that each member should and indeed has done the objects which be-long to their races either traditional or something quite common but not westernised or of other origin.
“There are about 30 kinds of native art here. By Rumah Basiuni."
The whole spirit of Batu Lintang is summed up in those words: and for sturdiness, truth and charm they are hard to beat.
On November 11th last at eight o'clock the Evening Gun was fired from Fort Margherita in Kuching for the first time for many years, and it will be fired nightly henceforth. This custom was begun by the second Rajah, to give the hour to all men when time-pieces were few, and to announce that the Rajah was at dinner. On the first evening of the revival of the custom the gun was fired by the Resident, First Divi-sion, before a large assembly. A few minutes before eight o'clock there was a rehearsal, and then a short pause for the hour. While he waited, the Resident strolled forward from the breech, stroking the long barrel of the 1874 Hotchkiss. Suddenly a high clear cry came from one of those watching: Oh, do please keep away from the spout."
Those who saw the sports at the Merpati Jepang School in Kuching on Saturday, 14th November, must have left the field—the lake, we almost wrote—with-out fear for the spirit and the humour of the Malay people of Sarawak. The afternoon began with a tor-rential storm, and rain did not stop till prize giving time. In spite of this, forty-nine events were run off in a quagmire of mud and water, without delays and with remarkable precision of organization. The com-petitors, boys and girls of all ages from six or seven to about fourteen, ran, fell, rolled over, splashed, floundered, arose, blinked through the mud in their eyes, ran on, won, lost, grinned, shouted and rejoiced. A large crowd dripping their payongs down each others' necks encouraged them. The teachers stopped work only long enough to run their own races to everybody's shouted delight, and spectators who had promised to attend the Football Cup Final at 5 o'clock the same afternoon stayed on and said, "But we can't leave this."
Speaking of the spirit of the Malay people of Sara-wak reminds us of another event of note showing what the kampong people themselves can do with a little vision. We refer to the excellent efforts of the Dramatic Section under the sponsorship of the MBHT (Persaudara'an Mesjid Bintangor dan Haji Taha) which puts up concerts of from one week to ten days' duration each year after the Hari Raya to raise funds for the Bintangor Village School. Begun in 1946 the yearly plays (bangsawan) have been most successful and have brought in sufficient returns to assist in the cur-rent expenditure of the school and the provision of new
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 30, 1953
201
equipment, etc. Standing as a monument to the success of the scheme is the Village Hall, recently completed, which is being used by the MBHT for meetings, re-ligious instruction classes and as a theatre for the Hari Raya concerts.
The players, we learnt, are students from the Bin-tangor Village School itself who are rehearsed yearly for their roles. During the past year or two the MBHT also ran side-shows to provide additional interest and as an extra means of income. And at the next Hari Raya, as its energetic president, Abang Safuani, con-fidently predicts, there will be the usual bangsawan and the open-to-all Singing and Kronchong Competition which proved very popular in the past.
The Bulletin of the Kuching Rotary Club reports that at a recent meeting Rotarian Padmore proposed the toast of the Rotary Club of Nottingham and “spoke of his home town's industrial activities and of Old Trafford." Without reducing by one iota our esteem for our contemporary, we doubt this and sus-pect one of those editorial slips that plague us all. We believe Rotarian Padmore is too loyal a son thus to betray the Queen of the Midlands. If he did. we are sure he is by now gently haunted by the saddened ghosts of Shrewsbury and Gunn and other tenants of the Elysian Fields who once glorified the name of Trent Bridge. Indeed, we hope nothing worse befalls him, for such heresy might well evoke a fast one, a very fast one, from the fortunately still living and lively Larwood.
We have long found pleasure in a passage from Florence Nightingale's Notes on Nursing wherein the author discusses the effect of music on the sick. It had been well proven, she writes, that while percussive in-struments like the piano definitely disturb patients and retard their recovery, wind instruments "such as the soprano voice" can do much to soothe and benefit them; and she laments the difficulty of making music of this kind available for those who are ill and need it. We can well believe that a hundred years ago, when Miss Nightingale's book was first published, it was not easy to introduce an unlimited number of flutes and sopranos into hospital wards. That lack is now over-come, perhaps more than overcome, some would say, by gramophones and wireless, but we cannot help sometimes respectfully wondering whether, in Kuching at least, the effect on the sick of a little paint, shining paint with the colour of meadows and primroses, has not been left a little too long untried.
Comings and Goings
In the month from the 25th October to the 24th November there have been more arrivals than departures.
On return from leave there came Mr. D.C. White. O.B.E., Resident, Third Division; Mr. G.A.C. Field； Mr. and Mrs. C.E. Sandbach and their family; Mr. and Mrs. Maurice Saul and their daughter, who go soon to Miri; Mr. H.P.K. Jacks; Mr. G.T. Myles, and Mr. M.M. McSporran.
Miss I.A. Hooper arrived, on transfer from the Gold Coast, to do duty in Kuching as Matron (Grade 1), and Mr R.J.G. Collins on appointment as a Travelling Superintendent (Male Nurse). Mr. H.B Rowland also arrived on transfer from North Borneo. Mr. Rowland was interned at Batu Lintang during the Occupation and is well-known to some of us.
Mrs. R.J. Bettison and Mrs. F.J. Harper joined their husbands in Kuching, and Miss H. M. Williams came to stay for some time with her parents, the Honourable the Chief Justice and Mrs. E.H. Williams. Proceeding on transfer to North Borneo on 17th November were Dr. L. J. Clapham with Mrs. Clapham and their daughter. We wish Dr. Clapham every success in his
new appointment as Director of Medical Services, and shall greatly miss him and his family.
To all of these, old friends returning and new comers quickly to become friends, we offer a cordial welcome and every good wish for their happiness.
The Honourable the Chief Secretary, Mr. R.G. Aikman, C.M.G., with Mrs. Aikman and their children, left on leave by air, and Mr. A.R. Snelus, Acting Resident, Third Division, sailed with Mrs. Snelus and their children in Rajah Brooke. Mr. A.R.G. Morrison, District Officer, Baram, and Mrs. Morrison, flew to Australia, and Miss Murdoch, Nursing Sister, sailed in Marudu, also on leave.
Our warmest good wishes follow them all, and with all their friends we look forward with much pleasure to their return.
Finally, a sadder farewell, to Mr & Mrs. George Meikle and their family, who are transferred to Cyprus where we wish them all good fortune. They will be greatly missed.
His Excellency the Governor's Address on the Fifth Graduation Day of the Batu Lintang Training Centre
17 November, 1953
During the course of this year I have travelled very extensively throughout the country. I have visited each Division and most of the principal towns. I have reached the frontiers of Sarawak in the upper reaches of the Ulu Ai in the Second Division and near Tebedu in the First Division. I have travelled to the head waters of the Tinjar, that beautiful tributary of the Baram River in the Fourth Division. I have travelled above the great Pelagus Rapids of the Rejang to Belaga and beyond. I have travelled among those charming Malay and Melanau fishing villages scattered along the shores of the estuary of the Rejang and the Igan. Everywhere I have been accommodated and enter-tained by the people of this country in the generous friendly manner which is so typical of Sarawak. In my travels I have tried to see as many schools as possible. These schools in rural areas are not very grand affairs. In fact people in Kuching would call them inadequate and worse. Some, however, are built substantially with billian posts in the main street of the kampong and others a little away from the centre of the population, be it bazaar, longhouse or kampong. Very many of them are constructed of leaf attap and have an earth floor, but always they are built on the best site available, generally on high ground where there is room for a small playing field and where it is cool and the sun shines clear; and always they are made to look bright and cheerful to match the smiling faces of the children. There is a brave attempt at a flower garden particularly if the teacher in charge comes from Batu Lintang, and nowadays I am glad to say that that is generally the case. It is indeed hearten-ing to see the keenness, the determination in face of difficulties and, above all, the sense of vocation which direct the lives of these young men and women who set out from this establishment to bring enlightenment to a new generation. The communities they serve are very proud of their Batu Lintang teachers, and we can be proud too, because they are doing a grand job of work and are a credit to their teachers and the spirit and traditions of this place.
Some of you in this hall this evening, parents or visitors, and those new teachers who are shortly to join their fellows in the field, do not perhaps realise the magnitude of the task and the difficulties obstruct-ions and disappointment which are a part of everyday life in a rural Local Authority or Mission School. I can assure you it is not an easy life nor a comfortable one. It is sometimes hard, lonely and frustrating but
202
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 30, 1953
always immensely rewarding, never dull or uninterest-ing; and it is of course vital to the life and progress of the country. But let me just warn you of some of the difficulties you may come across. You have probably discussed them with your teachers and your friends in the profession but I want to tell you too, so that you will know that I and my officers in the Adminis-tration and in the Department of Education are aware of these difficulties and sympathize with you. In the first place, you will find when you get to your school that you are in fact far more than a school teacher. You will be a leader of educated opinion and that is a very responsible post. Some will exaggerate your importance whilst others will resent your presence as an upstart who preaches new heresies and the violation of adat. Do not be discouraged. Others before you have faced the same. At some time or other you will find yourself in disagreement with the school committee or the Local Authority. Remember that in most cases they are as keen as you to see the job well done. Treat them with respect, tact and patience and try to see their point of view. You may be kept short of money, the equipment and text books may be in-adequate, the roof may leak and the desks be old or worm-eaten, and, worst of all, your most promising pupil may be spirited away by his parents because they miss his help at home. All these are vexations but They are trivial matters when placed beside the magni-tude and importance of your task. We are all in this job together. The Missions, your teachers at Batu Lintang, the Director, myself and all of us, and we are all trying to achieve the same purpose, to create citizens of Sarawak with a deep loyalty to and faith in their country, who can live a fuller, healthier and more useful life than those who have gone before. We must share all our difficulties, so have no hesitation in seeking the advice and guidance of any one who is available, and may be more experienced than you, whether he is the Local District Officer or the Education Officer. In this regard you are more fortunate than previous batches of new teachers. We now at long last have reached the very satisfactory position of having an Edu-cation Officer in charge of each Division in the country, and the Director hopes to be able to increase the num-ber of Group Supervisors of schools next year and they will provide much needed additional help for those of you in primary school. Let me tell you that I and your teachers have full confidence that you have the strength and determination to carry the burden of your responsibility with honour and pride. I hope you will each be able to look back as each term ends and count the difficulties you have overcome and the progress you have made towards your own personal and private ambition to run the best school in the country.
I was reading sometime ago the Sarawak Gazette of September 1st, 1894. That is nearly 60 years ago and in it was an account of a Speech Day ceremony at one of our large schools in Kuching at which the Rajah—that is of course the Second Rajah, Sir Charles Brooke—presided.
Towards the end of his address the Rajah gave the boys wise advice. He suggested that each day after the work was over it was a good thing to get away to some quiet comer “away from the noise and turmoil of the world and away from the tongues of gossip and society" as he put it, to read a good book and to rest and think. He believed that these quiet moments of reflection strengthened character and developed the frame of mind from which balanced and sane judg-ments come. And he talks of the repose which tends to allay what is the crying evil of the day—namely excitement—that was in 1894. I wonder what would he think of us now with our cinemas and aeroplanes and motor cars. But that advice is even sounder to-day and I commend it to you. It is not easy to follow anywhere and it is certainly extremely difficult as I have found in a longhouse. But if you can think over your problems in peace and quiet it is astonishing how they sometimes shrink in size and importance and how the quiet simple remedy suggests itself.
You cannot expect to hear that quiet voice of com-fort unless you give yourself time to stop and listen. So amid the hurly-burly of your life, the excitement, the new freedom, the anxieties, try to set aside a little time everyday for yourself, for meditation or for reading.
Let me now refer to some matters of interest which have occurred in the course of this last year. First of all on behalf of the Government and all of us here, I would like to welcome your new Principal, Mr. A. Smith. He has come to us on transfer from Mauritius where he greatly distinguished himself in charge of the teacher training centre. I hope he and Mrs. Smith will be happy in Sarawak. We are very glad indeed that he accepted this appointment which is of such importance to us and requires the very best that is available. I would also like to thank Rev. Father Galvin for holding the fort so efficiently at a time when the Education Department was unable to spare a Government Officer to serve as Principal. The new Principal is indeed very fortunate in his staff.
You will be interested and pleased to hear that arrangements have been made to send selected local members of Batu Lintang staff for further academic and professional training at teacher training colleges in the United Kingdom. Mr. Wong Syn Ted recently left Sarawak under this scheme and he is now studying
at a college in Bristol where he appears to have settled down very happily. It is hoped to give a similar opportunity next year to a further member of the staff.
The success being achieved in the outlying primary schools is shown by the fact that it is now possible to recruit for the Primary V Class adequate numbers of promising pupils of satisfactory standard and of correct age. Indications are that there will be keen com-petition for the limited number of places in 1954. These Higher Primary Classes, followed by the pro-motion of deserving pupils to the Secondary Forms, are providing a valuable opportunity for the promising boys in the outlying schools to continue their education. It is pleasing that this scheme, with the subsequent assistance St. Thomas' School, has enabled our first Malay student to qualify for admission to the University of Malaya where he is now studying for a Degree in Science.
The 41 students graduating this year bring the total of students who have qualified for Teacher's Certificates at Batu Lintang since the scheme began to oyer 220. From the number of applications to date it seems certain that it will be easily possible to fill all the vacancies in the Grade IIIA Course next year.
It is also hoped that the numbers admitted to the Grade IIA Course in 1954 will be higher than in previous year.
I would like to say a word about the students qualifying this year for the Grade IIA Teacher's Certificate. They have a very special responsibility placed on them since they constitute the first group of teachers with this qualification who will be taking up appointments in Mission and Chinese Schools throughout the country. Their progress, therefore, will be watched with very great interest by many people and their success will, I am sure, influence Mission authorities and Chinese Boards of Management to sponsor increasing numbers of students to enter this Course. I wish them luck. I am sure they will be a credit to Batu Lintang and worthily uphold the standards they have learnt during their course of study here.
Finally I would like to remind you that this Teacher Training establishment of ours started as a Colonial Development and Welfare Scheme. The mony required for the building and the first five years' running costs being provided from the fund created by the Act of Parliament in Great Britain. During the course of this year the five-year development period had been con-cluded and since the 1st April the full costs of this
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 30, 1953
203
institution falls on the Sarawak Treasury. I would like to remind you that the British Government, that is, the British taxpayers, has paid out the very great sum of $665,559 on this Scheme. Not one dollar has come from our own resources here, and we should express our sincere gratitude for this generous gift, and at the same time I think we can without smugness and with a clear conscience assure the British public that very good use has been made of their money. The Batu Lintang Scheme was made possible by an unsolicited and disinterested act of generosity towards us and we can say truthfully that we have done our best to match that high motive by developing in the students here the virtues of tolerance and mutual understanding which, allied with co-operation and a common purpose, are laying a sure foundation on which we can build the future of Sarawak with con-fidence and vigour.
The Real Sarawak
Little that is serious appears in the press about the country people and the countryside of Sarawak, except in occasional interesting ethnological articles, in legends, and in brief reports. In this peasant country there is little news of the farmers. Their voices are hardly audible yet, and not enough is heard in the councils of the country of farming problems or the welfare of the country people.
Oil may yet be found in quantity but apart from this possibility the only products of any note in Sarawak come from the work of farmers and timber workers. There are no big industrial concerns in any of the towns and the prosperity or otherwise of the bazaars depends on the price of, and the demand for, products of the countryside: timber, rubber, pepper, sago, rice. It is an all-too-common fate for the primary producer to suffer by selling too cheaply and buying too dear. In this country the farmers suffer most from the latter. It may not be reasonable to blame the trader (whose chief aim is to make the biggest profit his ingenuity can conceive) for taking advantage of the not-so-clever pro-ducer, but it may be that the present traders will bring about their own downfall if Sarawak continues as a peasant country.
Education will slowly spread among the farmers and they will learn that by co-operation they can buy in bulk and distribute among themselves, and that they can sell through their own organisations instead of (as now) through innumerable middlemen.
The welfare of Sarawak is synonymous with the welfare of the country people. What are all the chil-dren of Sarawak now growing up going to do? Because of the lack of proper management by their fathers and grandfathers, most of the rubber in the country is either dying or very low yielding. The price of pepper, as indeed of rubber and other tropical products, is quite uncertain. What are their fathers bequeathing them?
The most precious substance in a peasant country is its soil and we have in Sarawak two obvious problems which concern it vitally. One is hill padi planting, now so often cut down to absurdly short fallow cycles which in time can lead only to the devastation of the land, and the other is the pepper planter who so often reduces his garden to an eroded waste in a much shorter period. The second could be the easier prob-lem to solve because among the pepper planting community there are more educated men, and certainly more moneyed men, who could help by setting an example and teaching others not so fortunate as them-selves. Goodwill in this sphere could achieve much.
Longer fallows of not less than fifteen years and the reversion of steeper hills to jungle are obvious pallia-tives for the hill padi problem. The utmost use of all possible swamp padi areas and the teaching of hill padi planters in swamp padi planting are methods of attack-ing the problem.
These problems, not new anywhere, have often been written of before but this is no reason for not re-empha-sizing their importance. The difficulties of solution are obvious. Why should hill padi planters want to move or any farmers alter their ways if they are contented as they are? Though we can see that it is their children and grandchildren who will suffer, they do not see this. They have not had to think of a real shortage of land in Sarawak and their wasteful methods of farming have gone on for generations. In other countries the farmers have learnt loo late: they have learnt by starvation. Sarawak is very thinly populated but there are many square miles which are not, and may never become, agricultural land (we need much timber too). The soil is not rich but there are still many acres which could produce much more than they do. Surely now, while the population is small, is the time to make a real effort to improve the prospects of our children? In this peasant country, subject to slumps and booms of tropical products, these prospects may not be of great riches, but if we are to do the best we can for the future we must safeguard the soil. A change in outlook may be too much to hope for, but unless more of the better educated people of Sarawak, who live chiefly in the towns, use their influence towards impro-ving the welfare of the farmers and their children (as they use it now for the improvement of the towns), Sarawak will certainly learn the hard way and the townspeople will suffer not least. We have seen much needed urban improvement in recent years, but is it not now apparent that the towns and their surroundings have had their fair share of attention, and that a greater share of our resources (inevitably reduced by the falls in price of rubber and pepper) should be devoted to rural improvement? Sarawak's sons and daughters need opportunities for higher education but it is worth remembering that the number of professional jobs in this country may be small for many years. Only a limited number of lawyers, doctors, dentists, and engineers are likely to be able to make a living for a long time to come. Whence will the money come to support more than a few? There is little more depres-sing than the presence (and the frustration) of highly qualified men out of jobs, both for themselves and for the parents who have worked and spent their savings in educating them. These markets soon become satu-rated in a country whose resources are so limited. No one would discourage or hold back the keen young people of to-day and it would be futile to try to do so. but we must learn to see things in their proper pro-portion to guide our children in the right way, and to give them the best opportunities for the future.
There is a Chinese proverb which says—
The well-being of a people is like a tree: agricul-ture is its root, manufacture and commerce are its branches and its leaves. /f the root is injured, the leaves fall, the branches break away, and the tree will die.
This proverb should stand upon the walls of every Chamber of Commerce and meeting place in Sarawak, and be taught in every school.
E. H.
204
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 30, 1953
Archdeacon Stonton
I
Enggau ati ti naka penglantang, kami madah ka nga-gai kitai maioh tu, nya Tuan Archdeacon Arthur William Stonton, O.B.E., Simanggang, deka makai gaga besalamat ngintu dua puloh lima taun, iya udah datai ari England ka Sarawak, lalu gawa ngemansang ka Eklisia Allah Taala di Batang Lupar.
Tuan Archdeacon datai ari England ka Sarawak menya, 12. 11. 28, ti alai iya lalu megai pengawa Padre, ngintu Eklisia enggau ngemansang ka Skula St. Luke di Sabu, Simanggang, ti endor iya begulai enggau Padre William Howell, ti diganti iya endang nyau tuai.
Nyadi pengawa Eklisia ti dipegai Tuan Archdeacon diatu di Batang Lupar, kalia brengkah dalam taun 1862, ko jako tuai, sataun apin ngayau Kayan, dipungkal olih Rev. Crossland ti lalu bekerja dia, ngagai taun 1878. Nyadi Padre kapada nganti Fr. Crossland nya Rev. W. Howell ti bekerja ari Banting ka Sabu 50 taun, ngagai taun 1928, ngagai maia pengawa nya disambut Tuan Archdeacon stonton ti gawa di Sabu, ti lalu mindah ka greja enggau Skula St. Luke ari Sabu ka Munggu Sabun, Simanggang, dalam taun 1931.
Nyadi endang kenyau ari iya datai di Sabu enggau mindah ka greja enggau skula ari nya ka Simanggang. Tuan Archdeacon gawa enggau naka pemendar ngena pemandai, ngiga wang kena ngemansang ka kerja Allah Taala enggau bansa mensia dalam Batang Lupar, datai ka maia menoa kitai kena ambi munsoh dalam taun 1941.
Dalam taun 1941, leboh Jipon ngalah ka menoa kitai, Fr. Stonton kena tangkap sabaka enggau samoa Orang Puteh bukai, lalu ditan ka merinsa dalam Camp, ngagai maia menoa tu olih baru ari Jipon dalam taun 1945.
Nyadi lepas prang tu tadi, kena ngenang enggau masa pemendar, penemu, pengliat enggau pengras iya ngemansang ka kerja Allah Taala enggau ngemansang ka mensia. Tuan Bishop Francis Septimus Hollis ngan-gkat ka pangkat pengawa iya ari Padre ngagai Archdeacon.
Ba bansa kitai Dayak, nyata bendar Tuan Archdea-con megai pengasih deka ngemansang ka bansa kitai, lalu taja iya udah dibri pangkat ti tinggi, “Archdeacon", lalu patut gawa enggau diau di Kuching. Tang iya enda, iya enggai ninggal ka kerja ti dipungkal iya di Simanggang, agi kras ngajar enggau ngasoh bansa kitai mansang nemu jalai Allah Taala ti amai, enggau mri kitai pemansang kena ngidup ka diri berubah lantang agi ari penemu kitai ti kalia.
Penemu Tuan Archdeacon pasal kerja, adat enggau jalai pendiau kitai Dayak, nyau ka jauh nemu ari kitai ti ada ka bansa nya. Penalam penemu iya pasal jerita kitai, nyau ke ngelui ari ti temu orang Puteh bukai, enggau ti temu Dayak ti enda brat deka blajar enggau deka nemu pasal reti bansa diri kenyau ari kalia. Naydi laban penalam penemu iya pasal kitai Dayak. Tuan Archdeacon udah maioh nulis buku ngaum Surat Sambeyang, ngena jako Dayak, ti dibacha enggau di-plajar ka anembiak skula, nyau ka dalam samoa Skula Dayak dalam Colony tu. Ari buku ti ditulis iya, samoa Dayak ti nadai plajar macha jako Orang Puteh, tau bulih penemu ti manah, kena ngintu samengat eng-gau tuboh, ti mri kitai penemu manah agi ari ti endang penemu asal ari tuai kitai empu.
Lalu laban penemu enggau pengrajin iya ti nulis buku ngena jako Dayak, kerja iya dipuji lalu dikelala Prentah ti dikerindu ka Queen mega, ti enda belebu iya, tang mri iya pangkat “O.B.E.”, ti enda mudah olih orang ngapa, enti enda kategal orang udah bebendar
amat ngereja utai ti manah ka guna prentah enggau orang maioh, ka pemansang mensia. Nya-alai laban pemaioh pemanah enggau tulong iya ngagai bansa kitai, aku enda kakang bejako, ngari ka bansa kitai Dayak, mri besai terima kasih ngagai Tuan Archdeacon kategal pemanah nya ti enda olih bayar kitai enggau mas pirak, tang deka nyadi pengingat dalam ati kitai, sa-agi agi kitai ngenang utai ti manah ti di bri orang ngagai kitai ari ati ti bendar.
Nyadi leboh iya ngintu hari chukop ka 25 taun iya udah bekerja ka Eklisia Sarawak, leboh 12. 11. 1953 tu ila, aku arap ka ari sambeyang kitai, Tuan Archd-eacon tau lantang senang ngintu hari ti patut dipebasa ka kitai, ti di-intu iya mega.
Naydi ka pengujong kenang kitai ngenang Tuan Archdeacon ti dikarindu kitai, kitai arap ka iya panjai grai nyamai, gayu guru nguan menoa ngemansang ka kitai lalu diau dalam menoa tu ti manah, chelap embap, diau bebaik enggau diri sama diri.
Lalu ka pemutus jako aku bendar, kitai mri bara maioh terima kasih ngagai Tuan Archdeacon ka pema-ioh pemanah kerja iya ti udah nulong kitai, lalu nga-dang agi maioh utai bukai ila digaga iya ka kitai dime-noa tu. Samoa utai ti udah digaga iya ka kitai, nyadi ka pesaka enggau endang patut dibri kitai besai terima kasih enggau kenang ti naka iya.
B. S. A.
II
Arthur Stonton arrived in Sarawak on I2th Novem-ber, 1928 and on the 21st of the same month went to Sabu as assistant to the aged Padre Howell, from whom he took over the Sea Dayak work in the Undup and Batang Lupar area. Mr. Howell then retired after 15 years' service with the S.P.G. Mission.
In 1930 Father Stonton secured fifteen acres of land at Simanggang, whither it was proposed to move the headquarters of the mission, and early in 1931 this removal took place. A generous grant from the Sarawak Government helped towards moving St. Luke’s school to its new site. The transfer was interrupted by an unfortunate series of accidents to Father Stonton, culminating in a fall by which both bones in one leg were fractured whilst he was miles from anywhere and only accompanied by his boys. He directed the setting of the bones himself, reduction being accomplished by the continued pouring of cold water on the injured limb. He then survived a two days’ journey back to Kuching, part by canoe, and part by being carried.
The erection of a large permanent church at Simang-gang was begun in 1936, and the building was completed and consecrated in 1937. Contributors towards the cost included the King’s Messengers, who gave £550 sterling. The Dayaks of the neighbourhood gave £120 sterling, and Kuching Parish $300.
During the Japanese occupation, Father Stonton was interned at Batu Lintang and after his release he returned to Simanggang and stayed in Sarawak for a year before returning to England on leave.
His leave finished, he was appointcd Archdeacon of Sarawak by Bishop Hollis, and on the retirement of the Bishop he acted as Vicar General until the arrival of the present Bishop. Since 1947 he has directed all his energies to the task of the rehabilitation of his area, and is now preparing a site for a new modern school at Simanggang.
His knowledge of the Sea Dayak language is prodi-gious. The list of books he has translated into that tongue include The Pilgrim's Progress. The New
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 30, 1953
205
Testament and parts of the Old Testament; and he has written in Dayak A Brief History of Sarawak, Hygiene for Use in Sea Dayak Schools, Steps to Heaven and two Sea Dayak school readers and a small book on simple general science. The Archdeacon has also done a great deal of work in revising the Sea Dayak prayer and Hymn Books.
Father Stonton was made an Officer of the Order of the British Empire by Her Majesty the Queen in the New Year Honours, 1953, and invested by His Excel-lency the Governor in Kuching on Coronation Day. But no honour, no lists of buildings erected or of books written and translated, can measure the Archdeacon's resourcefulness and versatility, still less the firmness of his faith and the warmth of his humanity. Upon the Silver Jubilee of his ministry in Sarawak, all the great company of Arthur Stonton's friends give thanks, and wish him well with all their hearts.
A. K. L.
An Equestrian Case
COURT OF CRIMINAL APPEAL
Gigi bin Kuda v. Regina
Vehicles Ordinance—abetting a horse to commit an offence under—whether a horse is a vehicle—whether the Financial Secretary is a native
The appellant by Mr. Oily Gammon, the Crown would have been represented by Mr. Forlorn Hope, D.P.P., but he was unable to find his wig and gown.
The appellant was convicted in the High Court sitting at Kelambu in the Sixth Division of an offence under the Vehicles Ordinance, the facts of the case being set out in the judgment.
Held: A horse is a vehicle within the Vehicles Ordinance： semble, the Financial Secretary is a native of Sarawak.
Before: the Court of Criminal Appeal (Bare Bodkin, C. J., and Boggle. J.)
October 21st, 1953
Bare Bodkin, C. J.: Having had the doubtful pleasure of perusing the judgment of my learned brother, Boggle, J., I must admit that, insofar as I understand it at all, I agree with it. It is so rare that my learned brother indulges in that degree of research and ratiocination necessary to the formulation of an opinion that I am happy to allow him to read any judgment.
Boggle, J.: Dear me, I appear to have mislaid my papers.
Bare Bodkin, C. J.: As I thought. It therefore falls to me to reduce to plain English the judgment of this honourable Court, and, being not altogether un-prepared for the defection of my learned colleague, I have fortified myself with a written judgment, pre-pared before the case was argued and therefore free from all the prejudice and ill-feeling commonly as-sociated with appeals of a criminal nature. I am, however, indebted to Mr. Gammon for his argu-ments, which would have commended themselves to us. I feel sure, had we not already made up our minds beforehand.
Boggle, J.: What about me? Can't I read a judgment, for once?
Bare Bodkin, C. J.: Silence in Court. As I was about to observe, this is a simple case, and the facts have never been, are not, and now never will be in dis-pute.
Under the provisions of section 20 of that sin-gularly interesting product of the draftsman's art, the Vehicles Ordinance, Chapter 113 in the Revised Edition of our Laws, “The Resident of a Division may by notice in the Government Gazette pro-hibit ...the driving of vehicles.....on any speci-
fied road, other than a road within a municipal area, within the Division in any case in which he is satisfied that any such vehicle cannot be used 	
without endangering the safety of ...... other	per-
sons using the road". Acting under this provision of the law, the Honourable the Resident, Sixth Divi-sion, Mr. Hacklethwaite Thrasher, duly issued a notice which appeared in the Government Gazette of July 2nd, 1946, under which the passage of all vehicles over roads in the Kelambu District was prohibited, except under permit from the Resident himself. Mr. Hacklethwaite Thrasher informed the trial Judge, our learned brother Bloomer, that he did this to prevent the total destruction of the only road in the District for, as he himself pointed out, it was and is an excellent road, provided it is never used. Wooden signboards bearing details of the notice ware at the same time erected at each end of the road in question, one of these was produced in Court, when Mr. Justice Bloomer pronounced it to be written in Sanscrit: properly adding, however, that it could have been written equally well in Swa-hili, since the law was silent upon the point.
On April 5th last the appellant, who is employed by a high-ranking official (not, it must in fairness be added, Mr. Hacklethwaite Thrasher) was riding a horse named Baby Powder, in the direction of the prohibited road. The horse, observing the notice and no doubt appreciating its legal consequences, thereupon shied violently, throwing the appellant from its back; the appellant's foot was caught in a stirrup and he was dragged along the prohibited road: on his own admission making no effort what-ever to persuade Baby Powder to alter direction and so avoid committing an offence.
Fortunately for the interests of justice, a zealous police constable, P.C. Mata bin Mata, observed this infraction of the law and, abandoning a chase after two affluent opium smokers, arrested the two offen-ders, and brought them before the Kelambu Petty Court.
The Petty Court Magistrate, on hearing of the exalted rank of the owner of Baby Powder, promptly requested that the case be transferred to the High Court: and, in the fullness of time, Mr. Justice Bloomer arrived by paddle-steamer alongside the Kelambu jetty, to administer that justice for which our colonial administration is (if I may be permitted a gentle pun, not without justice) properly the envy of the civilised world.
With the quick, nay, instant appreciation of the facts that characterises all his actions, our learned brother, after a hearing lasting a mere four days, duly convicted Baby Powder of an offence against the Ordinance, and fined him fifty dollars, or one month's imprisonment. P.C. Mata then pointed out to our somewhat myopic colleague that the first-named defendant was in fact a horse and, whilst he appreciated that Baby Powder was the principal in the case, added that the conviction created some difficulties, especially as the police cells at Kelambu were barely large enough for two male prisoners, let alone one man and a horse.
As we all know, Mr. Justice Bloomer is not a man to be intimidated by difficulties; after deliberat-ing for another three days, he varied the sentence to
206
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 30, 1953
one of incarceration for three months in the Home for Destitute Racehorses, now maintained by the Social Welfare Council in Kuching. He then with singular perspicuity convicted the appellant, as the second-named defendant in the case, on a charge of abetting Baby Powder to commit an offence under the Vehicles Ordinance, and sentenced him to three months' imprisonment: adding that had he been on instead of merely alongside the horse, he would undoubtedly have gone to prison, if not, in-deed, the Boys' Home, for two years. It is against this conviction and sentence that the appellant now appeals.
Boggle, J.: I concur.
Bare Bodkin, C. J.: Quiet. This is your judgment as well as mine. Mr. Gammon made four points of interest. First, he maintained that it was impos-sible for a horse to commit an offence, and a for-tiori for anyone to abet a horse to commit an of-fence :emphasising his argument by reference to some indefinable quality known as mens rea. Well, all I can reply to such a foolish argument is that both I and my learned colleague have from time to time attended meetings of the Sarawak Turf Club, and we take judical notice of the fact that the abet-ment of offences by horses and the commission of offences by horses is a matter of frequent occurrence. I myself lost quite a substantial sum at the Corona-tion Meeting.
Boggle, J.: So did I.
Bare Bodkin, C. J.: Please be quiet when I am de-livering judgment. The next point raised by Mr. Gammon was that the Vehicles Ordinance and, in-deed, Mr. Hacklethwaite Thrasher's notice, is limited in its operation to vehicles. This is an argument I have considered at length, and find that I agree with the observations and finding of the learned trial judge thereon. Pointing out that the Ordinance contains no definition of vehicle, Mr. Justice Bloomer in-vented one for himself; and, while the terms of that definition are not apparent from the record, it is dear that he found that a horse was a vehicle within the terms of the Resident's notice, and the Ordi-nance. I cannot help the fact that this finding means that all horses in Sarawak must in future be equip-ped with two white lights in front and one red light behind, with an adequate braking system, with traf-fic indicators and a rear reflecting mirror to enable the driver to view traffic behind him. Mr. Gam-mon said this appeared to him unreasonable: but I would inform him that I have sat on the Bench for many years, and the ways of legislatures are indeed inscrutable: all that we judges can do is make the law work properly.
The third point raised by Mr. Gammon (whose indefatigability merits some higher remuneration than he seems likely to obtain from the appellant) is that as the Residents notice had prohibited the passage of vehicles generally, then the road qua road had ceased to be a road, and the notice thereby be-came ineffective. This is ingenious, and my learned colleague Mr. Justice Boggle spent several days en-deavouring to dispose of this argument, without success. As the argument is unanswerable, I do not therefore propose to answer it, but merely to say that it follows a line of logic that does not commend itself to this Court, and that it is a pity that Mr. Justice Bloomer cannot be here to dispose of it in terms of sound reasoning.
As a fourth and final point Mr. Gammon argued that the road had been made on land formerly owned by Mr. Chik Kosong but now, owing to the inability
of Mr. Kosong to satisfy a charge in favour of the Government, the land has become vested in the Financial Secretary. Further, argued Mr. Gammon, the Kelambu District consists entirely of Interior Area and Native Area Land, and can only be owned by natives of the Colony: therefore, he concluded, the land cannot be vested in the Crown, and so de-dicated as a road, and is therefore outside the scope of section 20 of the Vehicles Ordinance. Some colour is added to this argument by the fact that a Bill is to be introduced into the Council Negri amending the Financial Secretary (Incorporation) Or-dinance, 1947, by providing that the Financial Sec-retary is to be deemed to be, and to have always been, a native of Sarawak; and I understand that the Financial Secretary in introducing the measure will wear a black loincloth and a head-dress embel-lished with hornbill feathers, presumably in an endea-vour to persuade the Council of the attractiveness of the Bill.
On such matters I am, and must be, judicially ignorant. But even so I would add, in order to avoid any awkward argument upon the subject, that I accept Mr. Justice Bloomer's finding of fact that the road, being a road, was and is a road. Judical certainty, as I am never tired of remarking, can go no further.
Boggle, J.： I concur. All the same, the road was in a municipal area.
Bare Bodkin, C. J.: You can't concur; this is a cri-minal case.
Boggle. J.: As I've lost my own judgment, I suppose I can say no more. But when can I have my horse back—I don't want Baby Powder left to the Social Welfare Council?
Bare Bodkin, C. J.: Don't keep interrupting me. The appeal is therefore dismissed, and the Court has reconsidered the question of the appellant's sentence. On mature deliberation we feel that we ought to discourage appeals for a few months in order to avoid considering any more arguments of Mr. Gam-mon, and accordingly we vary the sentence to one of twelve months' imprisonment: the offence was a serious one, for the horse itself might have been in-jured by the appellant's careless riding.
In conclusion I would add that the Chairman of the Social Welfare Council has informed Mr. Justice Boggle that Baby Powder has much improved as a result of rigorous training in the Home for Destitute Racehorses, and is much fancied for the Bloomer Plate at the next meeting of the Turf Club.
Boggle, J.:...Golliwog.
Bare Bodkin, C.J. Did you say “golliwog”？
Boggle, J. No. golliwig.
Bare Bodkin. CJ. Oh.
Appeal dismissed:
Mr. Justice Boggle sent on leave
——dryad
The Good Old Days
(Extracts from Sarawak Gazette)
September 1, 1905.
In view of the fact that our little company of Euro-pean residents has been diminishing of late through many having gone home recently in search of change and health, we think the following story not at all in-appropriate and feel only sorry it did not come to hand sooner to cheer on their voyage those who have just
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 30, 1953
207
left our shores. Being a very bad sailor ourselves we are perhaps able to appreciate the joke all the more, and hope others will do so also.
A Diminishing Company
As the liner cleared "the Heads" and the heavy swell of the open Atlantic became noticeable, dinner was served. The 26 places at the Captain's table were filled, and as the soup appeared, the Captain addressed his companions, "I trust that all 25 of you will have a pleasant trip," he said, "and that this little assemblage of 24 will reach port much benefited by the voyage. I look upon your—22 smiling faces as a father upon his family, for I am responsible for the lives of this group of—19, I hope all, er—14 of you will enjoy this trip. I believe we—7 fellow passengers are ad-mirably suited to each other, and I applaud the judg-ment which chose from the passenger list you 3 gentle-men for my table. You and I, my dear sir, are— Here, steward, bring on the fish and take these plates away."
NOTICE
December 4, 1905.
Gentlemen are requested to pay all Gazette sub-scriptions and Printing Office bills to the undersigned in future.
For the convenience of those unable to send cheques, Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of sums not over $1.50—but only the 2 and 4 cents values will be accepted.
Foreign subscribers to the Sarawak Gazette are re-quested to send remittances by Post Office Order not by Postal Order as the latter cannot be cashed in Sarawak.
F. G. Day.
November 2, 1907.
The new Fish Market on the river wall is to be opened to the public on Tuesday, November 5th. The new building is entirely built of brick and concrete with a corrugated iron roof and is of very palatial pro-portions. The fish tables are concrete with an arrange-ment of water pipes to enable them to be washed down by simply turning on a tap. The new market should prove as useful an addition to the town buildings as it is handsome in appearance.
September 1, 1908.
As an instance of Baba English, the letter quoted below is amusing in more ways than one. A Chinese clerk (who has now left this country) ordered some goods from the representative of a Singapore firm who occasionally visits Sarawak. He was refused the goods on the grounds that he already owed the firm money, whereupon he gave vent to his wrath in the following effusion:—
Sir,
By the jumping Jupiter that if you don't send me goods I ordered on the 28th here I will not pay you a cent to all my account with you till thy kingdom come because you look me as a mean and impudent rogue like Singaporeans.
Yours faithfully,
The recipient of the letter has also left this part of the world, but subsequent events justified his refusal to give further credit.
March 17, 1916.
Coco-nut
Writing to The Observer on December 29, Mr. Geo. S. Hinds says, “The correspondent who is in doubt as to the correct spelling of coco-nut may be interested to know that the form I give is supported by the Oxford English Dictionary, and has, I believe, the official
countenance of the Royal Geographical Society. The name is said to (have) derive(d) from the Spanish and Portugese coco—a grin or grimace, from the nut's sup-posed resemblance during growth to the face of a mon-key. The origin of the common misspelling cocoanut is to be found in Johnson's Dictionary. The learned doctor is said to have written coco-nut, a careless com-positor to have inserted the superfluous a, and an equally culpable reader to have passed the word thus spelt; the word finally appearing in the dictionary as cocoanut. May I recommend reference to the late Mr. F. H. Collin's Authors and Printers' Dictionary in similar cases of doubt as to alternative spellings?”
CORRESPONDENCE
Song, 26th October, 1953.
The Editor, Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Dear Sir,
The fact offered by Mr. I. A. N. Urquhart in his letter appearing on page 171 of your September issue is no doubt correct.
"Coffin" is also known in Iban as "lungun" (which is perhaps derived from the Malay word “dungun").
It appears, therefore, that "santubong" is an original Iban word as the Malays don't use that word.
It would be interesting if anyone can explain whether the Iban meaning of “santubong" has anything to do with the locality at all.
Yours faithfully,
C. N. Chong
Miri Letter
When things are done in Miri they are usually done by highly capitalized and highly mechanized media; the hole in the road, if repaired at all, is repaired by monsters recalling the megatheria of the past, the changkol and earth basket are replaced by grabs and trucks of fantastic proportions, so that man all but dis-appears from the scene of operations. It is therefore gratifying to find a good example of community effort on a primitive scale, and this is afforded by the work on the new Malay school. The building reached a certain stage and then ceased for lack of funds. It was decided to continue the work by popular effort, and for the last few Sundays the derelict building site has been transformed into a hive of industry from seven to ten in the morning. Not merely the young and the whole have come along to work, but the aged and the infirm also, and much edification has been given by the pre-dominance of the latter. It is hoped that by the end of the year the central block will be ready for use.
Schools are much in the air at the present time. The Resident has just opened the new school which the Temonggong has built for the R.C. Mission at Long San, and this is a whole series of buildings in the grand manner, which lacks only a statue of the founder in the quadrangle to compare with the more ancient institu-tions in Europe.
In Marudi it is merely a question of time before there is a great efflorescence of building, for each member of the Chung Hua School committee now buys a ticket of the Turf Club's Unlimited Sweep on behalf
208
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 30, 1953
of the building fund. Even the fowls of the air are involved, for the swallows of Long Lamah, apart alto-gether from constructing diverse nests for their own accommodation, have built an excellent Chinese school, it is hoped to direct the attention of these industrious birds to the needs of the Local Authority school there also.
The Baram is now entering on its Palladian era. The Temonggong has made Long San the Chatsworth of the Division; his spacious chambers decorated by artists from Indonesia are quite without peer in the country. Elsewhere there has been much building and embellishment; Penghulu Gau has started work on the new structure which will make Long Ikang a house of monumental proportions.
Ever since Mr. Morton of the Borneo Evangelical Mission took to flitting about in his plane the Fourth Division has become very air-conscious. Penghulu Tama Bulan Lian at Lio Matu possesses the best air strip in the country. Penghulu Lawai Besara has at Bario one that can meet all requirements. Penghulu Tama Paya Anyi's at Long Atip has one slight draw-back, a "thus far and no further" hillock at the end of the runway.
At first it was thought that the possession of an air strip carried with it certain theological implications, but when the District Officer at Marudi recently started to construct one, it was apparent that this was not the case. The Temonggong is now surveying one at Long San and the other penghulus are taking similar steps. On the analogy of Long Tebangan even the more thrus-ting Tuah Kampong are developing similar ambitions. Time was when every penghulu must possess a school as part of the insignia of office, but now an air strip is the badge of authority. It is believed that next year it will be necessary to introduce legislation restraining any below the rank of Penghulu from constructing air strips or other aeronautical installations without licence of the Resident.
I recently purchased a very nice perahu from the Ka-yans at Long Panai; this was for use in Miri, as a perahu that works is better than even the most modern ferries which do not. I subsequently towed the perahu down to Long Teru, and that night someone came up to the house at about ten o'clock and reported that the perahu had vanished. Penghulu Lawai thought it had certainly been stolen, for he said that there had been a spate of thefts recently. Several of us therefore set out in pursuit, but no trace of the perahu could we find. The following day I met Penghulu Enteri who related that he had purchased a fine perahu for one hundred dollars, that he had tied it up at Long Teru, and that he had never set eyes on it since. In the bazaar the towkeys sympathized with my loss but related instances to show that Long Teru was a perfect Chicago for crime and violence. It was all very distressing, and I was much relieved to find the perahu down in the Baram trapped under a large floating batang. I doubt whe-ther there has been anything comparable since the Crime Wave at Blandings.
This season promises very well for fruit. The durian trees are groaning under the weight of the crop and report speaks of a profusion of enkabang. In the Ulu Sibuti Penghulu Barat's planting of fruit trees is now bearing fruit a hundredfold. The Sungei Mamut area lacks only a serpent to be a veritable Garden of Eden.
R. N.
Perlumbaan Murid2 Sekolah Merpati Jepang
Pada 14 haribulan November 1953, perlumbaan murid2 telah di-adakan oleh Sekolah Merpati Jepang bagi tahun yang pertama di-padang Sekolah itu dari jam 1 petang. Dari jam 12.30 petang, sama ada ahli-ahli jemputan atau tidak telah berduyun2 dengan pakaian yang bermacham warna menghampiri di-seke-liling padang itu, sa-hingga penoh dan sesak. Pakaian yang berwarna warni itu telah kelihatan menjadi satu perhiasan dan menarek hati bagi pemuda2 dan pemudi2.
Dalam masa Perlumbaan itu di-jalankan, sunggoh pun mata hari tidak tersinar dan hujan turun tidak ber-henti, tetapi Perlumbaan itu ada-lah di-jalankan dengan jaya dan memberi puas hati kapada ahli2 jem-putan dan jua kapada sekalian yang hadzir. Yang Iebeh2 menarek perhatian ramai ia-lah pertunjokan Senaman bagi murid Iaki2 dan perempuan. Semua murid2 itu telah menunjok-kan kechergasan masing2. Sunggoh baik dan chergas. Dalam masa yang sangat sejok itu, satengah murid2 yang mengambil bahagian dalam perlumbaan itu kelihatan mengigir segala badan dan dagu-nya, tetapi masa mereka itu mengambil baha-gian dalam perlumbaan itu sama ada perempuan dan laki2 ada-lah dengan chergas saperti kuda hendak masok gelanggang. Dengan itu kita tidak shak lagi nampak-nya anak2 kita ada-lah di-dalam kabolehan dan akan maju di-hadapan kelak dalam segala langkah ka-hidupan. Sa-belum hadiah2 itu di-sampaikan, Chi bin Omarshidi, Guru Besar Sekolah itu telah melafadz-kan sedikit uchapan terima kaseh kapada Komiti-Komiti sekolah itu di-atas kerjasama dan memberi sukongan yang tidak dapat di-nilaikan herga-nya dan jua kapada Tuan-Tuan yang hadzirin kerana ke-sudian mereka rnenyaksikan perlumbaan itu. Kemudian ha-diah2 itu telah di-sampaikan oleh Yang Mulia Mrs. H. J. Padmore.
D. M.
Dayang Tri Kalala and the Story of Bunga Lawan
(Two tales of native Oya)
I
Long, long ago, when Sarawak was only inhabited by natives, there lived in a small but comfortable house at Sungei Sibu a beautiful Melanau princess called Dayang Tri Kalala or Lazy Princess because laziness was her chief characteristic.
Opposite her house stood an apong palm with its branches spreading out like a huge fan. As the little princess was alone she played each day under the palm.
Time passed and the princess grew into beautiful womanhood. One day as she was playing as usual under the palm, she was surprised to hear her name called. Being trained not to answer calls when alone in the jungle, she did not answer at first but looked this way and that. She could see no one. She grew frightened and would have run away had she not heard her name called a second time. The voice said. “Fear not, young and beautiful lady, for I am your friend the apong palm." On hearing this the
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 30, 1953
209
princess gained courage and said. "Oh, is it you? I am so glad you can talk. From now on I shall have someone to talk to." But the palm said, "Go home and fetch a parang with you. With it you shall cut off some of my branches and leaves and make them into a sibuyong (a huge basket) and a slapau (a broom).'' The princess did not like the idea of hard work and said, "Please do not ask me to do this be-cause I am too lazy." But the palm turned on her in a threatening voice and reluctantly she agreed to start work. It took her more than a week to finish the sibuyong and the slapau. When she had completed her allotted task she found herself strangely energetic, whereupon she used the slapau she had made to clean her house, inside and out.
At that time a very handsome prince lived in Oya. He was unfortunately captured by a tyrant who wanted to marry him to his ugly daughter. This the prince would not do, because he did not love her and, further-more, because he knew that she was very cruel to other girls in the district. He therefore made up his mind to run away, but the tyrant sensed this and placed guards over him, so that it was impossible for him to execute his plan in spite of his loyal friends who tried to help him.
In time the tyrant decided on the marrage feast for his daughter. The Melanau custom requires that a wedding ceremony should take place at twilight, but the tyrant ordered his daughter's wedding to the prince to be performed at night, in order that her ugliness might be concealed. He insisted that before the cere-mony the prince should walk with his bride through the kampong. The prince who was helpless did as he was told. But as soon as they came to the place where the wedding ceremony was to be held the prince suddenly disappeared and every effort to look for him ended in failure.
Dayang Tri Kalala found her sibuyong missing one day and was sad. For a week she searched for it    
in vain. One night while she lay restless in bed, she heard a loud knock at her door, and, on opening it, found her sibuyong standing on the threshold. Great was her joy. As she was wondering how it had come back to her, she heard a whisper from inside it saying, "Please open the sibuyong." No sooner had she done this than out came a handsome young man, dressed like a groom. Both were speechless as each gazed on the other's beauty. The young man at last found his tongue and said, "Well, am I not welcome to your house?" Recovering her poise Dayang Kalala answered, "Yes, indeed, if you despise not my humble abode." When they were inside the house the young man began to tell the princess who he was and unfolded to her what had befallen him, a prince. He said that since the magice sibuyong had brought him to safety and shelter under her roof, it was destined that she should become her protector and would she consent to accept him as her helpmate for life?
Dayang Kalala shyly replied that she would seriously consider the matter, and, in the meantime, invited the prince to stay in her house. He, in turn, informed her that he had hopes that his faithful men who were even then concealed in the forest awaiting an oppor-tunity to overthrow the tyrant, would soon come to his rescue. They waited thus patiently for about a month without fresh developments.
Then one day as the princess was picking flowers in the forest she heard the beating of gongs from a dis-tance. As the sound came nearer she ran to fetch the prince who was fishing in the river. For fear that it might be his enemies descending upon him, the prince armed himself with a supit and hid with the princess behind a huge tree. Soon they were able to espy a group of men and women walking in procession to-wards them and singing out in chorus. "Where is our prince? We are men from Oya. We have come to welcome our prince back as the tyrant and his daughter have both been killed." When the prince heard this
he begged the princess to come out to the open with him and show themselves. As the princess hesitated, the prince leapt forward and declared himself. The men soon recognized him and they knelt, crying," Long live our prince." The prince, however, ordered them to stand up and to go to the princess to kneel before her, for she had saved his life. This they joyfully did for the princess was gracious as she was beautiful. The princess then thanked the prince for the honour he had bestowed on her, and when she was asked again to return with him to Oya as his bride she willingly agreed this time. And as soon as they had arrived home safely they were married and lived happily ever after, ruling both Oya and Sibu.
Whenever she had time Dayang Tri Kalala would teach the young women of her tribe how to make sibu-yongs and slapaus out of the apong palm. And to this days we still find Melanau women fashioning and using the apong slapau.
II
Once upon a time, there lived in Oya a Melanau nobleman with his lovely wife and his sister. This man was Bunga Lawan, "Flower of Strength of Mela-nau Warriors". His wife was the Dayang Tri-Ikat-ku Bunga and his sister was Dayang Salalan.
Dayang Tri was with child. She told her husband that she would like to eat buah pangai which is a fruit that tastes sour when it is unripe, but is still the favourite fruit of Melanau women. The tree that bore the fruit was on the opposite bank of the river, so Bunga Lawan asked his wife to accompany him. Dayang Tri also asked her sister-in-law to join them and together they set off in a boat, bringing some food with them.
On reaching their destination they were surprised to find that the fruit tree was not there. Dayang Tri persuaded her husband to look for another tree, and so Bunga Lawan went deeper into the forest with his sister, leaving Dayang Tri alone in the boat. It was a Melanau custom for women who were with child not to go into the forest.
While Bunga Lawan and his sister were away looking for the fruit. Dayang Tri sat alone in the boat trying to amuse herself by putting her hands into the water. Suddenly she beheld a woman coming towards her from the river bank. This woman was the wicked fairy, the antu sababu, who was out to do her harm. But Dayang Tri did not realize this and invited the woman to sit down in the boat with her. No sooner had the fairy entered the boat than she knocked Dayang Tri unconscious and threw her into the river. Then quickly the cunning fairy changed herself into Dayang Tri.
When Bunga Lawan and his sister returned, the wicked fairy tried to greet them as Dayang Tri had always done, but she was unsuccessful because she was an antu and, tried as she might, she could not keep her voice down. It is said that wicked fairies shouted at people rather than talked to them. Thus it was that Bunga Lawan thought that the atmosphere of the forest had affected his wife's disposition and he hurriedly rowed homeward.
In time the fairy's behaviour became worse. Bunga Lawan left her alone. Soon she gave birth to a son who was as ugly and bad as his mother. As the boy grew his wickedness became more pronounced. He would bully and beat up all his friends. Bunga Lawan was so angry that he ordered his men to kill his wife but he spared the boy as he was of his line, and he was not going to marry again.
Near where Bunga Lawan had gone to look for buah pangai there lived an old couple who had no children. They were Ugul and Mainang. Ugul was a farmer and he fished in the river when not engaged on his land.
210
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 30, 1953
One morning Mainang told her husband that she had had a dream the night before. She dreamt that the moon had fallen to earth and that she had picked it up. To the Melanaus such a dream was protentous of good fortune. Ugul teased his wife about it, however, and this made her angry. She turned away and told her husband not to follow her no matter where she went that day.
Mainang went to the river and looked into the trap that Ugul had set the previous night. What was her surprise when she saw that in it there was the body of a beautiful woman! She shouted for Ugul to come and together, with straining efforts because of their years, they at last dragged the trap onto the bank. They opened it and took the woman out. They found that she was alive but unconscious. They rubbed her with a reviving potion and at long last she opened her eyes and said, "Where am I?" ''You are with us, child," said Mainang. They then brought her back to their house and made her comfortable. She stayed with them and the aged couple treated her as their own. Only when they asked her who she was, did she begin to burst into tears and say that they would find out some day.
The woman was, of course, the lovely Dayang Tri whose place the antu sababu had usurped. In time Dayang Tri gave birth to a fine boy who looked very much like his mother. At the sight of the boy Dayang Tri would often weep as she remembered her husband Bunga Lawan who apparently was unaware of what had befallen her. Her son was called Berdak Mas. When Berdak Mas was three he found his mother weeping one day, and little as he was, he wanted to know why. Dayang Tri then told him who she was and who his father was. On hearing this the boy went away resolving that he would go to look for his father, but whenever he told his mother of his ambition she refused and said he was far too young to think about it. One night while Berdak Mas was asleep he saw an old man coming to him. The old man looked very kind and he told the boy that his father, Bunga Lawan, was very sick, and added, “You are the only person, my child, who could cure your father's illness. But before you go to him, you must be made strong so that no harm will come to you." So saying the old man laid his hands on the boy and disappeared. The little boy woke up feeling exceptionally strong. On the following morning he told his mother what had happened and sought permission to leave her. Reluc-tantly his mother prepared some food for his journey. He bid farewell to her and travelled day and night. At last he came to a place where he saw a number of boys playing marbles. He enquired of Bunga Lawan and one of the boys who was very ugly said to him, "He is my father. Come and play with me. If you beat me in the game I shall lead you to him, but if you lose I shall beat you up." Berdak Mas agreed. No sooner had the ugly boy's marble come into con-tact with his than it broke into hundreds of fragments. Upon seeing this the ugly boy became very angry and he dragged Berdak Mas to his father who was lying on the bed. As soon as Bunga Lawan saw him he bid him come near and asked, "Who are you, child?" The little boy then told his father the story that his mother had told him. On hearing this Bunga Lawan was so delighted that he got well again and followed his son back to his mother. Dayang Tri was waiting for them both at the door and great was their reunion.
The ugly boy, son of the wicked fairy, became their servant while Ugul and Mainang were taken to live with them in Bunga Lawan's home. They all lived happily everafter.
Gertrude Wong
The “Gazette” Crossword No. 1
(New Series)
CLUES
(Some answers are in Malay, some in English)
Across
1. Home.
8.	A beneficent Association (abbr.)
9.	A much criticised problem in Kuching.
12.	Flat-bottomed sailing ves-sel.
13.	Up-country.
14.	A term applied to Euro-peans
15.	A representative.
17.	A Malay preposition.
18.	A vaccination campaign.
20. Not a simple imprison-ment.
22. An exclamation.
23. Order.
26. To carry out.
28. Cupania Pallidula.
30. Spawn of shell-fish.
32.	Smaller but more annoy-ing than mosquitoes.
33.	To advance.
34.	To mitigate.
Down
1.	Where excavations were carried out recently by Museum staff.
2.	A preposition.
3.	A long river.
4.	There was a "ngayaw" against this man.
5.	Clumsy.
6.	A prefix to 17 across.
7.	To purchase.
10.	To change.
11.	A principal.
16. Paid announcement.
19. Country in Asia.
21. To shift.
23.	Level.
24.	To eject.
25.	A doctrine.
27. Brain.
29. Where chemical experi-ments are conducted.
31. Nickname.
Note. This puzzle was devised by Mr. C. N. Chong, of Song, to whom we are greatly indebted for his interest and skill. The solution will appear in next month's issue. We should like (unless our readers object and tell us so) to make a Cross-Word puzzle a regular feature, and shall welcome puzzles made by readers.—Editors
To Contributors
The Editors would be very grateful if all material offered for publication could be typed in double-space.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 30, 1953
211
Golf
Ladies' Bogey Competition
3rd October, 1953
1.	Mrs. R. E. Chater	   (34)     All square
2.	Mrs. W. G. Morison	   (32)	  4 down
3.	Mrs.	F.	C.	Ogden	(35)	6	”
4.	Mrs.	A.	E.	Bulford	(36)	8	”
5.	Mrs.	G.	S.	Wilson	(28)	9	”
Mrs.	B.	T.	Joyce	(34)	9	”
6.	Mrs.	S.	N.	Pamment	(32)	11	”
7.	Mrs. T. V. Courtney	 (36)    13	”
Men's Stroke Competition
1st November, 1953
                       Gross   H'cap   Nett
1.	N. Thomas	80	17	63
2.	J. H. Ellis	86	19	67
3.	C. O. Adams	70	2	68
H. W. Harcus	75	7	68
J. R. Outram	77	9	68
G. Strickland	82	14	68
7.	C. B. Horn	93	24	69
8.	W. L. Whyte	78	7	70
9.I. Gordon	88	14	74
10.	E. Bomphrey	99	24	75
11.	R. L. Milton	96	17	79
No Return:
A. N. Outram
H. Henniker Heaton
Comment:
Trial and error over the new course, un-relieved by Hallowe'en
C. O. ADAMS,
Convenor, Golf Sub-Committee
The Panaga Club Invasion
October 17th saw the Panaga Club “gowfers” des-cend upon Kuching. The “Prince" touched down exactly to the minute and the invaders, spilling out like plumbers without their tools, hurried to the Air-port building for a quick appraisal of the opposition. Reassured that a form of golf was indeed to be played that day and convinced that the more destructive weapons in their armoury would at any rate be needed, they returned to the aircraft, gathered up their clubs, and were promptly shanghaied away for a demoralising view of the links. Strategically the bar had been filled with a swarm of Saturday habitués, aided and abetted by a team of visiting RAF cricketers, plus manager, scorers, umpires, baggage-men, barrack-ers and masseurs. Under cover of the resultant smoke-cloud our guests might be put at ingenuous ease and might tipple to their heart's content without fear of indecent exposure.
After many a ruminative gargle, a weighing of handicaps, and a scrutiny of each individual's mo-mentary physical condition, the captains strawed their way to an irrevocable choice of partners and would-be victims:
Adams and Whyte to barrack Crawford and Wemyss：
Barron and Gordon to scotch Knight and Clough;
Outram and Strickland to prosecute Swann and McEwen.
The first anatagonists came to the first tee only five minutes late—no mean feat considering all that had gone before, and that we had considerately allowed the enemy to partake of at least some solid fare. Con-centration Crawford set a Hoganly example from the start; Willie Whyte in non-committal silence coaxed his ball with admirable precision and generally in the right direction; our old familar Freddie correctly fore-cast where the greens still lay (but not their mutable holes); while Ben Adams could but struggle along cursing the author of "The Golf Secret."
From time to time and from the rough and the smooth came a stream of Barronian barbarisms, some strangely unclerical expressions in Hokkien from Richard Outram, rapid bursts of kookaburran mirth from George Strickland, and so many acquiescent “ayes” from Ian Gordon that one began to wonder whether he was conceding putt after putt or had merely agreed to have another; while, like a praying mantis, Willie stalked the course. From our opponents, busily gauging the distance of the pimples upon which our pocket greens are perched, little intelligible comment could be heard, a few imprecations, a few vague mur-murings—where was the fairway, call that a green, and that sort of thing,—but nothing corrosively noxious. Yet some impish fellow was overheard to say to a foursome in the rear, on seeing a search party hunting for an object discouragingly close to the twelfth tee: "Are you looking for your ball—or your tee?”
In the foursomes the Serians, tanked up on high octane, had the better of their rivals, winning two matches out of three, and it was only a doughty putt for a two by George Strickland on the last green that saved the home team from instant massacre by those who had not been chosen to play.
But we were not dismayed. We could baffy them yet. There were to be no punctual meals (oysters in a secret cache for the S.C. team alone) and indeed no sleep if we could help it. A diet of sundowners was the order of the night, our guests artfully decoyed into games of snooker, bridge, bowls and chance, and, to perpetuate an unsatisfiable thirst, at least one fan was commanded to be shut off (or was SESCO the culprit?).
We had gone into training for this ghastly ordeal. Had they? They had.
After a pause which was scarcely perceptible and a hovering of pallid faces over breakfast, the first couple tottered to the tee, quickly withdrawing for a brandy and ginger. The first drive almost brought back the rain, the second disappeared in the direction of the Chinese cemetery—and the bottle,—er, battle— was rejoined. The third man unfairly drove off when his ball wasn't looking, and the prudent fourth took from his bag a mere apology for a ball and played what in other circumstances would have been a most magnificent poached-egg shot.
Two by two they sallied forth:
Adams and Crawford 
Whyte and Wemyss 
Barron and Knight 
Outram and Clough 
Strickland and Swann 
Gordon and McEwen
(Note how any appearance of competition has been avoided).
With shoulders inevitably bowed and heads miserably unmoving, flags were prematurely yanked from tins, tees mashiely eroded, balls shanked, limes
212
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 30, 1953
sliced, 3-stars holed out in one, clubs flourished in erratic planes, bunkers turned more bunkersome, bird life imperilled and dogs chased away, until the haven where the players would be was reached, and the sodden cards turned in.
Four singles out of six had to be won by the home side if they were not to be stuck with the insulting trophy which had been fashioned. And four singles did they banter the visitors insidiously into losing.
The final result, giving a win to the Sarawakians by five matches to four, is prosaically given at the end of this nonsensical reportage.
We may commiserate with the defeated, not so much because they lost as because their captain, with a hunted look upon his face, was constrained to smuggle into Seria (and worse, into the Panaga Club) a weather-beaten ball, perched upon a rotund slab inscribed with the legend: "The Bitter Pill".
Rumours of vengeance are abroad, and it is perhaps just as well that, with electrifying diplomacy, Willie Whyte allowed himself to be beaten by draughtsman Swann in the final of the Snooker competition on Saturday evening. It was a splendid performance by two golfers against a horde of the enemy which in-cluded a phalanx of the R.A.F. and a resuscitated Ian McDonald.
To the Airport belatedly, where the pilot and his new-found friend, with cockatootal handkerchief for shade, were awaiting us with deceiving placidity. With an approach shot down the runway the plane angled skywards (barely carrying Freddie's special cargo with it); and so, with symphonical snoring, home.
Foursomes:
Adams & Whyte lost to Crawford & Wemyss, 3 & 2
Barron & Gordon lost to Knight & Clough, 4 & 3
Outram & Strickland beat Swann & McEwen by 1 hole
Singles:
Adams beat Crawford, 2 up 
Whyte beat Wemyss, 2 and 1
Barron lost to Knight, 4 and 3 
Outram beat Clough, 5 and 3 
Strickland beat Swann, 3 and 1
Gordon lost to McEwen, 5 and 4
Ladies Tombstone Competition, 14.11.53
1.	Mrs. R.	E.	Chater:	157	yds.	from	10th	 hole
2.	Mrs. F.	C.	Ogden:	28	„	„	9th	 hole
3.	Mrs. A. E. H. Bul-ford :	   37	„	„	9th 	hole
Conditions: Pleasantly damp but hardly productive of a large field.
Match vs. R.A.F. Far East Flying Boat Wing.
Seletar. 21 /22 November, 1953
C. O. Adams & W. L. Whyte beat Wing Commander Moore & Flt. Lient. Gould ......... 6 & 5
R. L. Milton & A. N. Outram lost to Group Captain Seymour & Flying Officer Halliwell..... 5 & 3
J. R. Outram & G. Strickland beat Wing Commander Knyvett & Flt. Lieut. Couchman ................ 9 & 7
E. A. Barron & H. W. Harcus beat Flt. Lieut. Wood-roffe & Flt. Lieut. Salmond .......... 4	& 3
A. M. R. Currie & H. Henniker-Heaton beat Squadron Leader Craig & Wing Comdr. Berry.........5 & 4
I. S. Gordon & N. Thomas beat Squadron-Leader
Edwards and “Sub.” (R. E. Chater) . 8 & 7
2. Singles
Adams beat Moore	7 &	 5
Barron beat Salmond	5 &	 4
Whyte beat Edwards	8 &	 7
Harcus beat Helliwell	5 & 	4
Outram (J. R.) beat Craig	6 & 	5
Strickland beat Mackenzie	4 & 	3
Gordon beat Seymour	5 &	 4
Currie halved with Woodroffe
Thomas beat Knyvett	4 & 3
Milton beat Berry	7 & 5
Outram (A. N.) beat Gould                 4 & 3
H. Heaton beat Couchman                10 & 8
Result: Sarawak Club won by 16 matches to 1, with one halved
Conditions: Reminiscent of Piccadilly Circus during the rush hour
Bowling Averages for October
               No. of rolls Highest roll Average
Ladies
Mrs. F. Clarke-Hunt	23	158	134
S. Kitto	6	150	124
J. Greene	11	160	120
I.	Morrison	11	139	120
F. D. Becket	10	150	113
B. Larkin	6	135	110
Miss J. Daly	15	138	105
Mrs. V. Holloway	8	124	103
E. Whyte	7	148	102
N. Marjoribanks	8	118	98
P. Courtney	18	116	95
R. Outram	10	136	94
J.	E. Ogden	8	110	90
Gentlemen
Mr. T. V. Courtney	9	202	179
R. Klooster	26	201	158
H. Polman	27	196	155
G. D. Becket	13	183	145
O. F. Wright	21	181	137
J. Hekking	7	153	135
F. Ogden	5	134	135
D. Forrer	6	146	133
C. Holloway	9	155	132
S. Larkin	9	159	126
F. Clarke-Hunt	23	178	122
R. Greene	13	140	117
W. L. Morrison	6	132	114
A. N. Outram	5	111	95
O. F. WRIGHT,
for Convenor
October Competition
Ladies
Mrs. P. Courtney	200
I. Morrison	181
Miss J. Daly	169
Mrs. F. A. Clarke-Hunt	165
E. M. Whyte	164
V. Holloway	160
B. Larkin	159
J. Greene	157
F. D. Becket	147
S. Kitto	136
N. Marjoribanks	133
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 30, 1953
213
Gentlemen
Mr. R. Klooster	371
T. V. Courtney	367
O. F. Wright	343
F. C. Ogden	324
H. Polman	320
R. Greene	320
F. C. Clarke-Hunt	300
S. Larkin	300
O. F. WRIGHT,
for Convenor
Sarawak Turf Club
WINTER MEETING, 1953
First Day 30th October, 1953
Race 1. The Landas Scurry
Ponies Division III. 3 Furlongs
Messrs. C. T. Swee & C. K. Huan's
1. Silver Star                7.7 (7.10)     Sintek	270
   { Smoke Screen	9.2	Tan Tau En         308
2. { Phoenix	7.8	Bujang	154
4. Tanjong Hijau	8.5	Samsudin	541
Also ran:
Bintang Aru	9.1	Leben	321
Kudat Prince	9.0	Lohor	486
2087
Scratched: Bujang Samsu 7.7 
Won By: Nose, Dead heat, head 
Time: 48 secs. Tote $6.10
Bintang Aru was left. Smoke Screen led Tanjong Hijau and Phoenix to the 2 furlongs. The field be-came bunched in the last furlong and it was anybody's race till the last stride.
Race 2. The Petanak Handicap
Ponies Division II 3 Furlongs
The Lim Sisters’
1.	Miss Kudat	7.7	(7.5)	Mat II	1134
2.	Dondang Sayang       9.4	Teo Ek	Pah	335
3.	Darling River	8.4 (8.8)	Tan Tau En	724
4.	Suiyuan	8.2	Asing	449
Also ran:
Gobi	10.9	Usop	202
Victory Parade               8.12       Samsudin             426
3270
Scratched: Chienlimah 10.4, Cabaret 8.8 
Won By: 1 length, ¾ length, 1½ lengths 
Time: 46 secs. Tote $2.30
Gobi was left. Miss Kudat got nicely away and es-tablished a head of 4 lengths from Dondang Sayang. Dondang Sayang closed the gap rapidly approaching the winning post but Miss Kudat just hung on to her lead.
Race 3. The Holl Memorial Handicap
Ponies Division I, 4 Furlongs
The Lim Sisters’
1.	Lucky Buy	11.8	(11.3)	 Then Joon Loi	734
2.	Kaswari	7.7	 Ananan	724
3.	Snowy River	8.7	(8.8)	 Tan Tau En	1031
4.	Atom Boy	7.8	(7.9)	 Asing	618
Also ran:
Bingtang Timor           8.13         Samsudin             429
3536
Won By: Distance, 2 lengths, 1 length
Time: 1 min. 1 sec. Tote $3.80
Lucky Boy dashed into a lead of several lengths from Snowy River and went on to win with the greatest of ease. The lightly weighted Kaswari came up into second place on the post. Bintang Timor trailed the field the whole way.
Race 4. The J. B. Archer Memorial Handicap
Horses Division II, 5 Furlongs
"Soo Sam's"
1.	Kanda	8.5	(8.7) Teo Ek	 Pah        1665
2.	Brightstar Minstrel    10.2	Samsudin	793
3.	Rosy Morn	9.4	Matnor	509
4.	The Banker	8.0	Keram	700
3667
Scratched: Rex III 9.13
Won By: 3 lengths, ½ length, ½ length
Time: 1 min. 9 secs. Tote $1.70
This was an armchair ride for jockey Ek Pah as Kanda led from pillar to post. The order to the 3½ furlongs was Kanda, Brightstar Minstrel, the Banker and Rosy Morn. Approaching the straight The Ban-ker struck a muddy patch and dropped back last while the order of the rest remained the same.
Race 5. The Wee Kheng Chiang Cup
Horses Division I, 5 Furlongs
Ong Soo Keng's
1.	Blondie	10.10 (10.5)  Keram                 436
2.	Stars Remember	8.9	 Samsudin	526
3.	Remember Me	       11.6 (10.13) Lamat	483
4.	Cherith	9.4	 Tan Tau En        1193
Also ran:
Hua Tara	8.0	 Asing	703
3341
Scratched: Forget-me-not 9.4, First Ra 8.5 Won By: ½ length, Short head, 2 lengths Time: 1 min. 8 secs. Tote $6.10
Remember Me dwelt at the start. Stars Remember led Blondie and Hua Tara with Cherith and Remem-ber Me tailing off. The field closed up a furlong out and Blondie took the lead. Remember Me finished with a terrific burst of speed but just failed to catch Blondie.
214
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 30, 1953
Race 6. The Malayan Breweries Challenge Cup
Horses Open. I¼ mile
Mr. Ong Soo Keng’s
1.	Gay Bird	10.1	(9.10)  Keram	679
2.	Deep Fields	7.7	(7.8)	Bujang	398
3.	First Ra	92	Tan Tau En         694
4.	Craughan	10.4	Samsudin	743
Also ran:
Capitol	8.9 (8.10)  Teo Ek Pah        1841
4355
Scratched: Forget-me-not 9.0
Won By: 3 lengths, distance, ¾ length
Time: 2 mins. 20 secs. Tote $5.10
First time past the sands, First Ra led from Craug-han. Craughan took the lead at the 7 and kept it until the 4 when Gay Bird and Deep Fields came up level. The field closed up with 1½ furlongs to go but Gay Bird and Deep Fields drew some distance away from the rest in the last furlong.
Race 7. The Pending Handicap
Ponies Division III, 1 mile
Messrs. C. T. Swee & C.K. Huan’s
1.	Silver Star	8.5	Sintek	239
2.	Bujang Samsu	7.13	(8.0)	Asing	109
3.	Bintang Aru	9.7	(9.2)	Leben	790
4.	Phoenix	7.8	(7.9)	Bujang	60
Also ran:
Brisbane River	7.7	(8.0)	Keram	593
Tanjong Hijau	8.1	(8.7)	Eddie	133
Kudat Prince	9.2	(8.9)	Mat II	164
2088
Won By: 1½ lengths, 1 length, neck
Time: 2 mins. 27 secs. Tote $6.90
Silver Star jumped smartly away and was leading the field at the 7 furlongs. At 6½ Bintang Aru drew level and led into the straight with Silver Star lying handy. Silver Star took the lead again in the straight and went on to win. Bujang Samsu came up into second place at the end.
Race 8. The Sekama Handicap
Ponies Division II, 1 mile
Hon’ble Mr. C. C. Leong & Mrs J. Ong’s
1.	Dondang Sayang	9.2 (8.12)	Manan	61
2.	Darling River	8.11	Samsudin	177
3.	Gobi	9.10	Usop	101
4.	Cabaret	10.1 (9.9)   Then Joon Loi       55
Also Ran:
Chienlimah	9.8	Tan Tau En	411
Bintang Selatan	9.8	(9.2)	Da'an	158
Victory Parade	7.11(7.13)	Asing	97
Lordship	7.7	(7.12)	Teo Ek	Pah	218
1278
Scratched: Broneo Boy 10.10, Suiyuan 8.13
Won by: neck, distance, ½ length. Tote $16.70
Visibility was poor owing to a heavy downpour of rain. Dondang Sayang and Darling River raced away to the front to make a big break from the rest of the field and fought out a close finish with the third pony ten lengths behind.
Race 9. The Mallai Stakes
Ponies Division I, 6 Furlongs
Messrs. Ong Eng Hin & Wee Hian Teck’s
1.	Atom Boy	9.11            Matnor	331
2.	Lucy Boy            11.9 (11.11) Then Joon Loi       180
3.	Kaswari	7.7 (7.9)      Manan	1266
Also Ran:
Bintang Timor	11.2	Teo	Ek Pah	86
Snowy River          8.12	Tan	Tau En	307
Happy Ending	8.13 (8.8)	Mat	II	211
2381
Won by: nose, ½ length, neck 
Time: 1 min. 43 secs. Tote $5.70
Snowy River and Happy Ending dashed into the lead but after half a furlong Lucky Boy overtook them on the inside with a terrific burst of speed and put them to a disadvantage with his flying mud. The heavily weighted Lucky Boy hung on to his lead until a few yards from the post where Atom Boy just got his nose in front.
WINTER MEETING, 1953
Second Day, 7th November, 1953
Race 1. The Landas Sprint
Ponies Division III, 4 Furlongs
Mr. Ong Kee Hui’s
1.	Tanjong Hijau	8.5	Samsudin	183
2.	Kudat Prince	8.5 (8.8)	Matnor	215
3.	Bintang Aru	8.9 (8.7)	Liben	560
4.	Lordship	9.7	Teo Ek Pah	64
Also ran:
Smoke Screen	9.5	Tan Tau En          202
Silver Star	7.12(7.11)	Sintek	376
Phoenix	7.10(7.11)	Bujang	210
Brisbane River	7.7 (8.0)	Mat III	97
Bujang Samsu	7.8 (7.11)	Asing	69
Lintang Lad	7.7 (8.4)	Keram	47
2023
Won by: 2 lengths, ½ length, 1½ lengths 
Time: 64 secs. Tote $8.80
Tanjong Hijau led all the way from Phoenix Lord-ship and Kudat Prince in that order. Bintang Aru came up strongly at the end to gain 3rd place.
Race 2. The Lawas Handicap
Ponies Division II, 4 Furlongs
The Lim Sisters’
1.	Miss Kudat             7.13 (7.6) Mat II	769
2.	Gobi	10.0	Usop	118
3.	Dondang Sayang   10.1	Teo Ek Pah           408
4.	Darling River	 8.11	Tan Tau En	669
Also ran:
Cabaret	8.3	Asing	250
Victory Parade	8.1	(8.2)	Samsudin	278
Chienlimah	9.12	(9.8)	Then Joon	Loi	259
Bintang Selatan	8.9	(8.7)	Liben	203
2954
Scratched: Suiyuan 7.7. Happy Ending 10.1 Borneo Boy 9.0
Won by: distance, 1½ lengths, 1 length.
Time: 62⅖ secs. Tote $3.00.
Dondang Sayang jumped into the lead but was soon overtaken by Miss Kudat who went on for an easy win.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 30, 1953
215
Race 3. The Martine Handicap
Ponies Division I, 5 Furlongs
The Triple Kongsi's
1.	Kaswari	7.7	  Manan	472
2.	Lucky Boy                 12.4(11.13) Then Joon Loi  1534
3.	Bintang Timor	10.2	  Samsudin	285
4.	Happy Ending	              8.2 (7.12)  Mat III	193
Also ran:
Atom Boy	9.11	Matnor	803
Snowy River	8.2	Ek Pah	499
3786
Won by: ¾ length, 5 lengths, 1 length 
Time: 1 min. 19⅖ secs. Tote $6.40
Snowy River was first to show up, then it was Lucky Boy from Kaswari and Happy Ending. Kaswari caught the heavily weighted Lucky Boy in the last ½ furlong and Bintang Timor came up from the rear to gain 3rd place.
Race 4. The White Handicap
Horses Division II, 1 Mile
"Soo San's"
1.	Kanda	8.8	(8.5)	Sirat	1125
2.	Capitol	9.13	Teo Ek Pah         658
3.	The Banker	8.0	(8.1)	Keram	479
4.	Deep Fields	10.3	Matnor	859
Also ran:
Bunga Singapura           9.12(9.7) Eddie                 484
3605
Won by: 1¼ length, 3 lengths, 1 length 
Time: 1 min. 52 secs. Tote $2.50
Bunga Singapura led Kanda and Capitol to the 6, then Kanda look the lead and stayed there for the rest of the race. The Banker was trailing several lengths behind the field at the 5 but came up fast in the straight to gain 3rd place.
Race 5. The Grattan-Bellew Handicap
Horses Division I, 1 Mile
Mr. Ong Soo Keng's
1.	Remember Me	9.8	Tan Tau En	1781
2.	Craughan	9.5	(9.7)	Usop	824
3.	Stars Remember	8.0	(8.1)	Samsudin	596
4.	Gay Bird	10.12(10.7) Keram	651
Also ran:
Knight Gallant            8.7             Eddie	207
4059
Scratched: First Ra 8.6
Won by: 3 lengths, 5 lengths, 2 lengths
Time: 1 min. 49⅖ secs. Tote $1.80
Knight Gallant hit the front but Remember Me was in the lead at the 7. Knight Gallant hung on to Re-member Me's heels until the 4 where he was finished and Craughan came up to challenge the leader.
In the straight Remember Me was going easily in front and when the rest were called on to make their effort they could make no impression on her.
Race 6. The Claphams Farewell Handicap
Horses Open 6, Furlongs
Mr. Ong Soo Keng's
1.	Cherith	9.10          Tan Tau En          818
2.	Blondie	12.0	(11.7) Keram	1507
3.	Brightstar Minstrel      8.8	Samsudin	1221
4.	Hua Tara	8.6	Asing	304
Also ran:
 Rosy Morn	7.7	Bujang	296
4146
Scratched: Remember Me 12.4, Kanda 7.9
Won: 2 lengths, 2 lengths, 1 length 
Time: 1 min. 22 secs. Tote $4.00
Hua Tara led a bunched field to the 3 where Cherith took up the running and never looked like getting caught. Blondie came up strongly into second place at the end but had too much ground to make up.
Race 7. The Baram Handicap
Ponies Division III, 6 Furlongs
Mr. Morgan Chai & Bros'
{ Bintang Aru           9.0 (8.9)    Liben	829
1. { Messrs. C. T. Swee & C.
K. Huan's
{ Silver Star	8.7 (8.0)	Sintek	686
3. { Tanjong Hijau	7.12(8.5)	Samsudin	407
{ Phenix	7.10	Bujang	151
Also ran:
Kudat Prince	9.7 (9.2)	Keram	529
Brisbane River	8.5 (7.13)  Mat III	213
Bujang Samsu	8.0	Asing	306
Lintang Lad	7.7 (7.4)	Mat II	54
3169
Won by: dead heat, distance
Time: 1 min. 40 secs. Tote $1.50
Time: 1 min. 40 secs. Tote $1.50 $1.80
Brisbane River jumped smartly away but Phoenix and Bintang Aru were soon in front. Bintang Aru remained there for the rest of the way and Silver Star, who was last at the 4 furlongs, made up ground rapidly in the straight to dead heat.
Race 8. The Bintulu Handicap
Ponies Division II, 6 Furlongs
Mr. Tan Teck Ann's
1.	Cabaret	8.9 (8.4)	Bujang	298
2.	Miss Kudat	7.7 (7.9)	Mat II	482
3.	Lordship	7.7	 Liben	206
4.	Gobi	10.3	 Usop	509
Also ran:
Chienlimah	9.8	(9.7) Joon Loi	208
Darling River	9.13(9.6)	Putit I	621
Bintang Selatan	9.7	(9.1) Da'an	101
Victory Parade               8.2         Asing	119
Borneo Boy	                   9.6         Tan Tau Eng       647
3191
Scratched: Suiyuan 7.10
Won by: ¾ length, 3 lengths, neck
Time: 1 min. 39 secs. Tote $8.50
Off to a good start, it was Cabaret Victory Parade and Miss Kudat from a bunched field with Lordship and Borneo Boy in the rear. Miss Kudat soon took the lead and was ahead until a furlong from home where Cabaret fought back strongly to overtake her. Lordship was a fast finishing third.
216
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 30, 1953
Race 9. The Lo Soo Eng Cup
Ponies Division I, 1¼miles
The Ong Kongsi’s
1.	Bintang Timor	9.0	Samsudin	808
2.	Kaswari	7.12(8.0)	Manan	593
3.	Atom Boy	8.5 (8.6)	Matnor	853
4.	Snowy River	8.12(8.13)	Putit I	189
Also ran:
Dondang Sayang        7.7 (7.11) Teo Ek Pah           535
2978
Won by: 2 lengths, 4 lengths, distance 
Time: 2 mins. 47 secs. Tote $2.90
First Time past the stands Dondang Sayang was showing the way to Snowy River. Then Kaswari drew level with the leader but at 5½ furlongs Bintang Timor also came up and these three ponies raced neck and neck to the 2 where Atom Boy put in a challenge, but Bintang Timor, once under the whip, drew away to win without difficulty.
Kuching Market Price List
20th October to 20th November, 1953.
RICE—(per gantang)
Local, White Milling   ...	...	...	$2.78
Govt. Siam	...	...	...	2.52
„     Rangoon	...	...	...	2.40
„     Broken	...	...	...	2.04
SUGAR—(per kati)
Java, White (Govt.) Refined   ...	...	.34
„     Brown	...	...	...	Nil
Nipah Sugar	...	...	...	.25
SALT—(per kati)
Coarse	...	...	...	...	.10
Fine	...	...	...	...	.15
FLOUR AND BREAD—
Wheat Flour, per kati	...	...	.35
Bread per loaf            ...	...	...	.10
MILK—(per tin) 
Milkmaid	          ...           ...           ...            .70
Golden Wheel            ...           ...           ...             .65
EGGS-(each)	
Duck, fresh	...	...	...             .20
„      salted              ...           ...          ...               .18
Fowl	...          ...           ...              .21
EDIBLE FATS—(per kati)
Coconut Oil	...	...	...	  .70
Pork Fat No. 1	...	...	...	1.80
„      „     „   2           ...            ...          ...              1.40
PORK—(per kati)
Lean	No. 1 ...	...	...	3.40
Lean with fat   „   2 ...	...	...	1.80
BEEF AND OTHER MEATS—(per kati)
Mutton (Australian)	...	...	...	2.80
Beef, steak	...	...	...	3.00
Beef, curry meat	...	...	...	1.60
Buffalo No. 1	...	...	...	3.00
„ curry meat	...	...	...	1.60
Kambing (daging)	...	...	...	3.00
POULTRY—(per kati)
Capons	...	...	...	2.80
Duck	...          ...           ...             2.00
Fowl, Chinese breed ...	...	...	2.70
Fowl, Dayak breed     ...          ...          ...              2.04
FISH—(per kati)
Fresh fish No. 1	...          ...           ...             1.74
„        „     „    2         ...          ...           ...               .76
.	.,	„ 3	...          ...            ...               .45
Prawns       „ 1            ...	...	...	1.61
„ 2            ...          ...            ...            1.14
Crab        No. 1	...          ...            ...            1.20
„ 2            ...          ...            ...              .80
Salted fish	„ 1            ...           ...            ...           2.40
„        „   „ 2              ...          ...            ...         1.00
„        „    „ 3             ...          ...            ...            .60
„	„ roe                ...          ...            ...          2.20
VEGETABLES—(per kati)
Bankuang (yam beans)          ...	...         $ .19
Bayam	...	...	...	.30
Bean Sprouts	...	...	...	.30
Cabbage, imported	...	...	...	.70
Changkok Manis	...	...	...	.30
Daun Bawang	...	...	...	1.20
Ensahi Puteh	...	...	...	.57
„       Bunga	...	...	...	.43
French Beans	...	...	...	.70
Garlic, fresh	...	...	...	.60
Kachang Panjang	...	...	...	.30
Kangkong	...	...	...	.40
Keladi (China)           ...          ...           ...            .40
Ketola	...	...           ...             .40
Kribang	...	...	 ...	.15
Kundor	...	...	...	.20
Labu	...	...	...	.15
Ladies’ Fingers	...	...	...	.60
Lettuce (per tie)	...	...	...	.10
Lobak (Chinese radish)	...	...	.30
Lobak, salted, imported	...	...	.70
Onions, Bombay	...	...	...	.35
Onions, small              ...          ...           ...	  .70
Potatoes, Bengal        ...          ...           ...              .37
Pria (bitter grourd)	...	...	...	.60
Bamboo shoots, salted           ...          ...               .40
Trong (binjals)            ...           ...          ...             .30
Yams	...	...	...	.20
Cucumber (timun)	...	...	...	.30
Ginger	...	...	...	.86
Chillies (red)	...	...	...	1.52
„       (green)	...	...	...	.68
Sauerkraut, imported	...	...	.80
local	...	...	...	.60
Tamarind	...	...	...	.40
Tomatoes, fresh	...	...	...	1.00
TEA—
Tea, Lipton per lb.	...	...	3.70
„  Chinese per packet	...	...	.80
COFFEE—(per kati)
Raw, Java No. 1         ...           ...           ...          2.60
„    Java No. 2         ...           ...            ...         2.17
FRUIT—
Pisang Umbun	...	per kati	...	.15
Pisang Tandok	...	each	...	.10 to .20
Pineapples	...	per	kati	...	.12
Papayas	 ...       „                 ...	.20
SUNDRIES—
Bean Curd	... 6 square pieces	.10
„     Cake (white)      ... per piece       ...	.15
„	 „    (yellow)     ...	„	...	.25
Kerosene Oil	...	pertin ...	5.88
„	...	per bottle ...	.30
Charcoal	...	per pkl. ...	8.07
„ semi-converted    ...	„ ...	5.00
Sauce (kitchup)	...	bol.(1) $1.00, (2) .70,(3) .50
Blachan	...	per kati ...	.70
Dried prawn	...	„ ...	3.17
Coconut, fresh	...	each ...	.20
Bako Wood	...	per panchang...	28.00
Cigarettes:
Players    ...	...	3	sticks for	...	.12
Craven "A"	...	3	„          ...	.12
Capstan    ...	...	3	„	...	.11
Rough Rider	...	3	„	...	.10
State Express	...	1	stick for	...	.05
