presented by The Borneo Company Limited, with $200 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10. RACE No. 5 [4.30 p.m. THE MATANG STAKES. Value $250. Second to receive $100 Third $40. A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10 RACE NO. 6 [5.0 p.m. THE PENDING STAKES. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10. RACE NO. 7 [5.80 p.m. THE RANEE'S CUP. Value $250. A piece of plate of the value of $100 presented by Her Highness the Ranee with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance 1 mile. Entrance fee $10. Post entries allowed at $20 but no refund. $5 refunded to non-acceptors. Handicap published on the Course. SECOND DAY, MONDAY, 4TH MAY, 1936. RACE NO. 1 [2.30 p.m. THE SARAWAK STEAMSHIP CD'S STAKES. Value $250. $100 presented by The Sarawak Steamship Company, Limited, with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10. RACE NO. 2 [3,0 p.m. THE SIME DARBY STAKES Value $250. $50 presented by Messrs. Sime Darby & Co., Ltd., with $200 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10. RACE NO. 3 [3.30 p.m. THE SARAWAK STAKES. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A handicap for Division HI ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10. RACE NO. 4 [4.0 p.m. THE JUBILEE STAKES Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10. RACE NO. 5 [4.30 p.m. THE STATES SPRINT. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 8 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10. RACE NO. 6 [5.0 p.m. THE TURF CLUB STAKES. Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10. . RACE NO. 7 [5.30 p.m. THE RAJAH'S CUP. Value $300. A piece of plate value $150 presented by His Highness the Rajah with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40. A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance round the course (about 1 1/3 miles). Entrance Fee $10. $5 refunded to non-acceptors. Handicap published on the Course. Post Entries allowed at $20 but no refund. REGULATIONS. Entries.—All nominations, accompanied by entrance fees, description of ponies and declaration of colours, are to he made to the Secretaries not later than 4th April. 1936, at noon. Scratchings.—Owners scratching ponies before 5 p.m. on 1st May, 1936, for First Day and 5 p.m on 3rd May, 1936, for Second Day, will receive back half their entrance fees. Handicaps.—For First Day will be posted on the Notice Board at the Sarawak Club at noon on 18th April, 1936, and for the Second Day at noon on 3rd May, 1936. The maximum weight shall he 11 stone 7 lbs. and the minimum 7 stone. Course.—Will he open for training on 21st March. 1936, at 5.30 a.m. Penalties.—Winners of any race at a meeting after publication of weights shall carry a penalty of 7 lbs. for each race with a maximum of 11 stone 7 lbs. Prizes.—20% reduction if under 5 entries. No second prize will he awarded if there are less than 3 runners and no third prize if less than 5. Jockeys.—Professional jockeys who are Sarawak subjects and have not ridden more than t wo winners under Sarawak Turf Club Rules, may claim an allowance of 7 lbs. The maximum fee to a winning Jockey shall be $15 in the absence of any agreement to ride for a lower sum. Whip.—-No whip used in any race shall exceed two feet in length. Spurs.—If spurs be worn these shall not have rowels. Ponies.—Must run on the First Day to be eligible for entry in races on Second Day. Any Borneo pony of not more than 14 hands in height may he imported from B.N.B. and shall be eligible for entry in races open to Sarawak Ponies provided that their sires and dams were foaled in Borneo. All new ponies shall carry top weight on the First Day in the Division in which they are classified, which shall be as follows :— Division I over 13.2 hands to 14 hands. II ,, 13.0 .. 13.2 ., Ill under 13 Totalizator. Cash Sweep & Selling Lotteries.— As usual. Visiting Members.—A visiting member shall pay a subscript ion of $5 per week or portion of a week during which he shall be a member of the Club. A nomination of such gentleman to be a Visiting Member shall be signed by two Ordinary Members as respectively proposing and seconding him. Strangers.—Persons not members of the Club or strangers not introduced by a Member, may be admitted within the enclosure of the Grand Stand or of the Paddock during any Meeting on payment of an entrance fee of $5 for each day’s racing. Owners.—Are requested to see that their syces and jockeys obtain necessary badges for entrance to Paddock. Objections. By owners shall be accompanied by a deposit of $10. Where not otherwise

[NEXT EXCERPT]

paper for absorbing the extra drink. The women join in and neither dislike nor fear too much drink, for at these times the sex question seems for the moment to be shelved in the general cheerful atmosphere, and both men and women may develop a positive rosy glow on their cheeks when they are under the influence. For all this, the Kelabit is not an out-and-out drunkard,—a hard worker as these things go in Borneo, he will entertain visitors up to the limit, and if he hasn't got any visitors handy be will send out and invite his friends from the next house. Without some such incentive many do not drink at all, and those that do only occasionally and to such a small extent that it scarcely matters. Friends and visitors are toasted by the men Kayan and Kenyah fashion, but the women do not per form, the usual song of welcome with, every few lines, a less-deep chorus from the audience, novel together different airs being used. As the wears on the songs are dispensed with, and as far as I ran discern, sleep is banished, everyone talks at full speed and nobody listens at all. the whole ensemble sounding like a flock of immense starlings going to roost. Doubtless demands of hospitality did not origin- ally demand these excessive libations, which reach their heights at, and may have first started with, the wake attendant on the removal of the bones of the dead to their final resting place; among Kelabits and Muruts the dead are kept for a year in their coffins at the back of the house, and the bones then collected to be buried in a jar in the ground. For celebrating such an event the relations kill a buffalo or two, or some of their tame cattle, also various pigs and fowls which seem to be kept for no other particular purpose, prepare the booze, invite all and sundry, and settle down to it for a day or two. Less than a hundred people will finish up 300 gallons or more of rice spirit in two nights and a day, the buffaloes and domestic animals serving as blotting paper frequently resorted to at intervals, being, indeed, the only thing that keeps them going. The scene is almost indescribable. and though once seen is quite enough, it is a pleasing reflection on the Kelabits that though most of them haven't the faintest idea half the time what they are doing or where they are going, and all authority of their Chief has long since faded away for the moment, they do not quarrel unduly or get into trouble, and accidents are surprisingly few, the most serious being the firing of the house, which brings the session to an abrupt end. One therefore sees alcohol carried somewhat to an excess yet without offence among Kelabits, and though their state of inebriation as a rule surpasses that of the others they are far from being habitual or daily drunkards, and there is no sign of their fertility or their considerable ability or energy being seriously impaired. Indeed, it is an open question whether their desire for large crops to provide the surplus for malting borak does not actually cause them to exert themselves to make and maintain their large farms. The final stage is reached among the Muruts of the Limbang and Trusan rivers, who resemble the Muruts of the Padas river in North Borneo and are not to be confused with the Muruts in the rest of that State. In language and customs Muruts and Kelabits are very closely allied but I think it is fair to say the drink has got the former down their hospitality and “wake ceremonies do not indeed, could not—exceed those of the Kelabits. but their drinking is a mighty affair, and it is scarcely an exaggeration to say that many are incapable every other day in the year. One may see a man come home from his farm and after food settle down to his own jar until he falls ever side ways to sleep without going to bed, and wakes where he fell to stagger off to work next morning. They too work hard and maintain large farms to provide the necessary surplus, and are very strong walkers and excellent hunters when they can be lured away to the chase, but the convivial pot claims them too often; their fertility is declining, their physique fails early, and the generally indes- cribably filthy conditions under which they live is telling and has told on them for so long, that the race is declining, and not many generations hence may be little more than a name Many of them still live at heights of two and three thousand feet like the Kelabits, but others are settled down-country and the drink is a serious question with them all. for there is nothing like the conviviality of the Kelabits, Kayans and Kenyahs. In parts, it has even become a com petition ; as elsewhere, a large jar full of drink is tapped at the month by two bamboo tubes, through one of which one must suck the beverage, while in the other is a float attached to a most aggravating little pith-gauge at the top. It is one’s painful duty by sucking the one tube to lower the gauge the necessary half-inch or so prescribed by custom. The competitive

[NEXT EXCERPT]

THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 16, 1919.
The Cost of Living.
A correspondent kindly forwards us the following figures which tend to prove that the cost of
CORRESPONDENCE.
The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of correspondents.
BOSTON, MASS,
24th April, 1919.
DEAR SIR,
I am sending you a copy of the National Geographic Magazine with what remains of an article of mine on Sarawak after the Editor bad arranged it to suit the taste of his readers. I wrote with a great deal of care a short historical sketch for the first part of the article; you can see what the Editor has left of it and he has put it at the end. Of course, this magazine is only a popular publication, but nevertheless it is a pity not to have had a more accurate map, which, by the way, was inserted not only without consulting me, but even without my knowing it was to be in. If the Editor bad consented to my expressed desire to spend a few days in Washington to assist in the preparation of the article and pictures for the press, this map would not have appeared and the first edition of the magazine would not have had the picture on page 166 labelled The native section of Kuching, Sarawak. When I received the first copy of the magazine, while I was in Florida, I telegraphed in distress to the Editor that all the drinks in Sarawak wouldn't enable me to square myself with my friends out there if that edition of the magazine was sent to them. The correct title of the picture is given in the magazine I am sending you, but it was too late to put in the picture of Kuching, which is a pity for it is a good picture.
I am writing you so that you may know that I am, at least, not wholly responsible for all the errors.
Very sincerely yours,
HARRISON W. SMITH.
[The picture to which Professor Smith refers is a view of the town of Brunei. ED. Sar. Gaz.]
DEAR SIR,
In your issue of June 2nd, Melrose, under the title Miri Notes makes a statement to the effect that he never saw the one lady performer in the
last concert, look sweeter than she did in her
widow's weeds.
That may possibly be the private opinion of your
mysterious Miri correspondent.
However, in spite of the fact that chivalry is decidedly unfashionable nowadays, a little forethought
should have led Melrose to the knowledge, that the
publication of this, his possibly private opinion, in
the columns of your paper cannot but cause a good
deal of embarrassment to the lady in question.
It is my personal opinion that Melrose might with
advantage take up a correspondence course in tact
and savoir faire if he has no opportunities in Miri to
acquire these delicate, and for a journalist, most
important attributes.
i Such a course would no doubt teach him to have
a little consideration for other peoples feelings.
I remain, dear Sir,
Faithfully yours,
THE LADY IN QUESTION.
Bowls.
The usual monthly Bowling Handicap took place
at the Sarawak Club on the 1st July and resulted
as follows:
MONTHLY REPORTS.
UPPER SARAWAK.
BAU AND PAKU.
June.
Court.As the pepper crop is still being picked a number of thefts have been reported from outlying gardens. Ng Pok, a Chinaman, caught red-handed stealing pepper at midnight, was sentenced to a years imprisonment. Another, Voon Poh, who was under advances, was convicted of selling his pepper to others ; the receiver was also sentenced. Lee Chook, who had recently taken over his brothers garden, had two bags of pepper stolen, which he vainly tried to trace for several days; the loss so preyed upon bis mind that he committed suicide by drinking tuba. A verdict to this effect was brought in by the jury. Without the co-operation of the planters it is impossible to check this form of theft. No other cases call for comment,
P. W. D.The prisoners have finished their work on the BuanBau road, which now presents a smooth surface suitable for any form of light traffic.
In the course of the mouth the main cross drain in the bazaar, which had silted up, was opened and cleaned. Six large bilian receptacles for refuse were erected at convenient intervals and it is hoped by their means to keep the bazaar in good order.
All roads under contracted labour were examined and found to be in good condition, with the exception of that between Kranji and Batu Kitang. Here the man in charge was dismissed and the whole road put under one contractor, by name Puteh.
One prisoner, who was to be sent to Kuching, escaped at the end of the month, but his early capture is expected.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. JULY 16, 1919.
193
Food Control.Information was received here on the 5th that a system of rationing was to be put in force in this district.
On the following Sunday I went to Kuching to make certain enquiries from the Officer Controlling Food and returned here on the 10th.
The following table will show the numbers already registered.
338 consumers cards have been issued and 58 to employers'. Twenty licenses to deal in rice have been signed.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

We must congratulate Mr. Swayne on his appointment.
A kind of general post is in progress at the moment among officers of the Administrative Service. Mr. Macpherson is temporarily at Mukah, having taken over there from Mr. P.M. Adams. He will in due course hand over the station to Mr. Bruce, as soon as Mr. Bruce is relieved at Limbang by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident, 5th Division, who is due to return from furlough on November 3rd. Mr. Field, of the Customs Department, proceeded to Miri by the Maimuna on October 23rd, and his arrival will release Mr. Aikman, who will revert to the Administrative Service and will go to Kapit as Acting Assistant District Officer in place of Mr. Macpherson. We hear also that Mr. Carpenter, whose leave expires shortly, will, on his return to Sarawak, take over the duties of District Officer, Miri, from Mr. J.G. Anderson, who is due for furlough on December 12th.
Mr. E. Banks, Curator of the Sarawak Museum, left Kuching on October 14th for a collecting expedition in the Batang Lupar and Ulu Ai. Mr. Banks expects to be away for about six weeks and hopes eventually to cross to the Batang Rejang, possibly by way of the Ulu Katibas, which he will reach by an overland walk from the Ulu Ai.
We understand that Mr. Banks' hopes of finding the ruins of any ancient cities during his present trip are not particularly high. However, as we all know, it is possible to see a good many non-existent objects on the morning after a begawai, and if Mr. Banks is lucky enough to strike a good Dyak feast he may yet make a most unexpected contribution to the science of archaeology!
The Administration Report for the State for the year 1929, which was published last month, has now been distributed to all outstations.
The Report makes interesting reading, and records a year of very satisfactory progress in the face of adverse trade conditions.
Mr. A.N. Noble, General Manager of the Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., Mrs. Noble and Miss Jill Noble arrived in Kuching by the Maimuna on October 13th. Mr. and Mrs. Noble, after staying at the Residency and the Astana, left again for Miri by the Maimuna on October 24th.
We understand that this was Mr. Noble's first visit to Kuching; it is seldom enough that we see any members of the staff of the Sarawak Oilfields down here, and we hope, that Mr. and Mrs. Noble may prove to be the first of a long line of visitors from Miri.
Messrs. W. Lowry and B.A. Trechman returned from Home leave by the Vyner Brooke on October 20th. Mr. H. Linton arrived by the same boat to take up an appointment as Quartermaster in the Sarawak Rangers.
Both Mr. Lowry and Mr. Trechman are, we hear, to be stationed in Kuching for the present.
The Beauvais Disaster.
Early on October 5th the news reached us of the appalling disaster to the British Airship R 101. It is not for us to enlarge on this terrible catastrophe, but we are sure that everyone in Sarawak will join with us in paying homage to the many gallant men who met such a tragic death, and in expressing the deepest sympathy with their bereaved relatives.
A tragedy so dreadful and so sudden brings home to each one of us a sense of deep personal loss. Those who died in the R 101 join the countless throng of pioneer Britons whose graves mark the path of progress in every corner of the world. Their liyes were not wasted, and their memory lives for ever.
Obituary.
It is with the greatest regret that we have to record the death of Captain William James Hayes Smith, late of s.s. Kuching which took place on tile night of Sunday, 26th October, in Penang. The news of Captain Smith's death was received as the Gazette was actually going to press, and at the moment, although full, details are not yet available, it is believed that he succumbed to a sudden attack of ptomaine poisoning. Captain Smith's death is the more tragic since he had only recently married and was on his way home on long leave accompanied by Mrs. Smith, who herself has lately been in poor health.
Captain Smith, who was born at Freemantle, Western Australia, on 8th August, 1898, joined the Sarawak Steamship Company Ltd., in April 1926 as Chief Officer of the s.s. Auby. He was promoted to Master of the Auby on 27th March, and was transferred as Master of the Rajah of Sarawak in May of the same year. In March 1928 he was appointed Master of the Kuching, and he remained in that vessel until Captain R.E. Borton took over the command from him on 23rd October, 1930.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

During the period of which we are writing His Highness the Rajah decided to pay a visit to Miri where he had not been for some years. Proper preparations were made in the oilfield for the great occasion, and, as the royal launch came over the
bar, the heads of the Government and Company Departments, the latter including one American, were drawn up on the wharf. The launch tied up and in due course the General Manager escorted His Highness down the line of his subordinates, all standing strictly to attention and staring straight in front of them. The Rajah graciously shook hands with each, but, when he came to the American, there was no hand there. Stricken with amazement its owner had clapped it to his brow and taken one uncertain step backwards. "Gawd Rajah!" he exclaimed, "Gee, I olways thort you were a blaak bairsted."
That America.
We are indebted to a leading firm of Kuching merchants for the opportunity of publishing the following shining example to local traders of hustling “enterprise," emanating from the United States of America. We trust that some of our readers will learn this effusion by heart and recite it on appropriate occasions.
"Gentlemen,
In case you choose send on your account your countrys products I can sell faster and export any american merchandises needed by your people, Since gvnmt. controls eliminated prices advanced considerably, results of highest wages, expenses, strikes, shortages, millions of demands from every country, while productions are not in normal times scales, thousand of buyers ready, cash money at hand often paying in advance are waiting to secure their needs, but against all these odds if your money is here. I can buy and ship after fulfilling legal requirements here within reasonably short time/
My extensive price list 1948 see in the files of your chamber of commerce there, a very handy fa cili ty shortens times of correspondences, inquiries, etc/ UNDER EXISTING SITUATIONS HERE most you need is deal with an extremely honest, efficient, dependable firm, have all these qualifica- tions and more I OFFER MY SERVICES/
Except manufacturers in their only one line exporters does not keep merchandises, when an order is received they get in touch with sources and buy on account of their respective clients EXACTLY SAME WAY I OFFER MY UTMOST EFFICIENT SERVICES,
My terms are : Irrevocable letter credit without recourse, payments in newyork against usual docu- ments, if your orders value is $500-15% $1000- 10% Above $1000-5% commission paid to me, plus consular fees-find cut there from your gvrnmt- packing, deliveries to s/s-always every mer- chandises are not in ncwyork-insurance, shipping etc fees too paid by you, all these expenses on the value of your each order issue 1/e accordingly, giving all these details separately in your instrction to bank all to be paid here to me against demnnts, as explained above/ If you want representation first you must prove your abilities in getting orders place them with me, thus de facto proving your abilities we can arrange this too, merely add your commission on above detailed scales of my com- mission/
My references are: Babayans lmtd, Toronto, Canada/ Chles, Ketchian co, incorporation, Boston Mass/ these firms have entirely different type of large businesses are not interested at all with this my line, but knowing me closely they give refer- ences on me/ Hoping that you consider these a ll important points seriously and havepbactica l business for our mutual interests/
Very truly yours
Messers-----------------, 29 park road, kuching;
calling your attention on my this revised circular wish you kindly read from first to lastword for your advantages keep yourself informed on existing situations here/if you want sell your countrys any products about it please read my this circulars first lines/if you want representation am not manufacturer, exporters here does not keep merchandises, but about it read my practicable offer in detailed way above/on the other hand if you want import there any american merchendises- no matter what it is I can find it for you-and fulfill my above detailed terms conditions than feel assured that I am always at your disposal rendering services which must be beneficial, advantageous, profit- able, practicable to you and to me too/please note that time is dear, short, valuable, expensive here, any step we take means expenses, avoid any un- necessary inquiries, none essential curiouseties etc; these are all my experiences-as neither you nor I can not afford all in loosing our times at the end of it nothing to be gained by you and by me also/place practicable orders/if and when you read these lines surely you find them all practicable and profitable to you and to me/these are essential principles of any business transactions/In case you are not interested please refer or pass these lines to others who are interested in practical business and avoid to loose in van times mtually/”.
This Sarawak.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Well, the Fire Brigade must have moved some, for when they got there the brigade was almost in acton. H . . . . was stamping up and down the verandah shouting ‘This is an outrage. What is the meaning of this’? S . . . . looked at H . . . . blankly and replied ‘Your ’ouse is afire Mr. H . . . ’.
Well, eventually it was all explained the brigade called off and sent home and were later congratu- lated for beng so efficient. These doings echoed round the town for a bit as you may guess and eventually died down.
In due course Mrs. H . . . . presented H . . . . with a firstborn and the District Officer got a very cold stare from H .... in the Club when he asked him if he was going to call it Phoenix.
(Contributed).
Films of the Month.
The month’s films produced the usual bag of American musicals and American victories. It is a far call from the magnificence of the early Broad- way Melody films to the repetitive post war musicals and the change leaves the cinema-goer with the im- pression that fewer films and greater merit might better justify the present enormous expenditure on film production.
In the early part of the month there was an American film of considerable taste and restraint. Darryl Zanuck, who last year won a Hollywood award for the best production of the year, produced the film version of Richard Llewellyn’s novel "How Green was my Valley” and this was shewn twice in two successive weeks. The technical difficulties in the production of the film must have been con- siderable and it came as no surprise to hear Ameri- can accents and Irish brogues tumbling over the true Welsh intonation. Mr. Zanuck had little appreciat- ion of what the interior of a Welsh miner’s cottage is like and even the exterior views were not consistent. But such was the sincerity and worth of the film that incidental inaccuracies did not jar. The script for the film had been written with a clear and sympathetic understanding of the author’s intention; the casting, with the one exception of Bron, had been done with skill and with more attention to the spirit of the book than to the promise of box-office receipts. With unconscious tribute, many of the audience characterised the film as ‘very sad’ but the film purported to portray the lives of people who lived in a Welsh mining village and sadness there, as elsewhere, plays its part.
‘How Green was my Valley’ must be amongst the best films which Hollywood has produced of recent years. Richard Llewellyn’s second novel ‘None but the Lonely Heart’ should be equally interesting as a film.
A film which might be of interest in Sarawak is a short British film "Lily Marlene” which would probably be produced in 1944 or possibly earlier. As the title indicates, it is a history of the one famous march which was written during the recent war. At a time when the best that the English lyric writers and composers could produce were insipid songs like The White Cliffs of Dover and Room 504, a German wrote and a Swedish girl sang "Lily Marlene.” To the words and the music of this, the Africa Korps marched to El Alemein and, with the turn of the tide, the Eighth Army counter-marched to Cap Bon. The peculiar feature is that, during the stress of war when propaganda is a weapon not to be despised, so unprejudiced a version of a German theme should have been produced in an English Studio.
The press advertisement for Rhapsody in Blue induced a better than average audience to attend and most suffered from disappointment and bore- dom. What promised to be a sparkling musical show turned out to be a scrappy, ill-conceived and badly executed record of the life of an American song writer and composer. Not even the intention of paying tribute to the dead composer could reconcile the audience to the film’s painful short- comings.
There was a time, and Rhapsody in Blue served to recall it, when the cinema-goer could be sure of three or four items on the programme and it was a bad business if at least one of the four failed to
entertain. In these enlightened days, however, the film programme tends to be divided into three parts; the first consists of blurred advertising slides which no one minds very much because it gives the opportunity to glance round, talk and, if one is in a strategic position, get a drink. There follows on, a feature ‘Forthcoming Attractions’ which would be better labelled ‘Forthcoming Films'; then the principal film. News reels, which are usually good value for reluctant money, are not frequent and short comedies, which may well provide the consolation prize for the evening, are rare. Sober minded (and, quite by the way, cheaply produced) educational films are unfortun- ately, not quite so rare. Many men spend a not inconsiderable time as the bane of some worthy teacher’s life and it is not expected that a busy film producer should also saddle himself with this educational responsibility.
As regards the other films of the month, we saw but few and so there is little to be said.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

where, as it is some time before they can swim and dive adequately, they form a most, easy prey to small sharks and other predatory fishes,—in fact it has been estimated that only 2—3% survive to grow up. In the circum stances it is astonishing that the stock maintains itself, for though the growth rate has not been accurately determined, the young turtle has a carapace length of about an inch and a half at birth, and judging by the growth rate of the Loggerhead, whose young are a similar size. at birth and whose adults measure much the same, the young turtles have only just doubled their size in six months. A captive Green Turtle at the age of 28 months had a carapace length of 18 inches which gives him about seven years, even then probably an under estimate, before be arrives at the adult size of four feet carapace length. Nowadays turtle meat is only fetching 10-20 cents per kati in Singapore, and there is little likelihood of any local consumption or export trade at this price. Eggs preserved in water- lass mixed with wafer 1 : 30-40 have so far proved satisfactory, but further enquiry is needed. The Honorary Secretary will welcome from Members suggestions made direct in writing or through the Suggestion Book for the purchase of suitable Library Books and will curry out such suggestions as far as funds permit. E. BANKS, Curator, Museum & Library. First Division News. AUGUST. Mr. W. F. Dick, Resident, First Division, reports s follows :— I took over the affairs of the Division from Mr. F. H Pollard on the 5th; the following day proceeded to Serian with Mr. E. H. Elam, District Officer, and Mr. T. A. Reid, Assistant Engineer, Public Works Department. 1 was surprised to notice that practically every pepper garden on the roadside was well cared for, and there were many young gardens which must have been plained within the last six months. The only abandones garden was one which I was informed was 18 years old. I was also interested to see plantations of kapok, bananas, coffee and krebang all flourishing along the roadside. ’ The bazaar at the 32nd mile consisting of three shops appeared to be flourishing, and two more shops were in course of being erected; these and the shops at Serian are all of the new. standard type and are a great improvement on the usual bazaar shophouse. "The new Serian bazaar consists of ten new shops and preparation is being made for the erection of another four. The low ground at the, back of the new shops is in urgent need of being filled before the landas, as otherwise there would be a risk of landslides during the wet season and possible damage to the new shops. A special vote to cover the cost of this work is being applied for. The appearance of the. station has changed considerably since I last saw it twelve months ago; the site of the old leaf-attap bazaar has been cleared and the level raised in readiness for the new Police barracks which are to be erected there. The old jail from Gedong has been re-erected, and. although somewhat small, is a substantial belian building. The Court and Office, which was the old Sadong Mine office, appears to be very satisfactory and part of the first floor makes a very good dispensary. I left al 6.30) a.m. on the 13th on a visit to . Bau and met Mr. L. K. Morse, the Acting District Officer, at Siniawan, where I examined the site of a proposed cinema hall. The erosion of the river bank at the back of the bazaar is serious, and at least one building is in imminent danger of collapse. From Siniawan we proceeded to Baku and discussed the question of rebuilding the bazaar which was burnt down last year. The old bazaar conristed of leaf attap shacks and had outlived its usefulness; it is doubtful whether any of the old shopkeepers would be prepared to put up decent shophouses and it was decided not to plan a layout for a new bazaar, but that one or two shops might be built to the approved standard design. From there we proceeded to Bau where various matters were discussed : the rebuilding of the barracks is very necessary and an extension to the market should be put in hand as soon as possible. “On the 18th 1 proceeded to Lundu with Mr. G. F. J. Pegler, the Acting District Officer, by m.l. Lucile, arriving at 3.30 p.m. The station appeared to be well kept. In the afternoon visited the Malay school at Stunggang which has been built by the local Malays as the old school belonging to Abang Haji Dewa was too small to house all the boys. “The next morning on September 20th we left at 5.15 a.m. for Telok Serabang, where we picked up the Tua Kampong, and then went on to Telok Gadong where Japanese fishing boats arc known to go ashore ; the water is very deep here. We anchored in 37 feet of water about 200 yards from the shore; there were signs on shore of the Japanese having recently been there tanning their nets. Wo left again at 10.30 a.m. and returned to Lundu, arriving at 3.45 p.m. The following day. Friday 21st. we left at 9.15 a.m. and arrived in

[NEXT EXCERPT]

We gather the following facts which arc interesting as shewing to what the evil has grown, from the letter sent to us. While poultry brought from the Sambas or Pontianak trading boats, can be obtained, as was lately the case here, at the rate of 12 capons for 6 dollars; the same capons when transferred to the Bazaar are sold at prices ranging from a dollar and a half to two dollars each. Fowls here in 1869, were sold for 20 cents each, in 1870 they fetched 38 to 40 cents: rice has risen from 10 cents per gantang in 1869 to 16 cents in 1870: cucumbers, formerly obtainable 3 for a cent and a half, are now worth a cent a piece: oysters have risen in price from 6 to 18 cents per katty: pork from 12 to 24 cents per katty: oil from 36 to 65 cents per gantang: fish is at more than double its price a year ago and other things are in proportion.
Sarawak Library.
The following books have been kindly presented by His Highness the Rajah: -
First Division News.
RESIDENT’S OFFICE.
November, 1931.
Extracts from the Divisional Reports for November, 1931. by Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division: -
Resident’s Court. -One criminal appeal and four civil cases came before the Court.
Lim Ho Soo, a Henghua fisherman, appealed against the conviction and sentence passed upon him by the District Court on 3rd when he was fined $150 for Breach of Shipping Regulations. He was, however, unsuccessful in his appeal.
Armistice Day on the 11th was observed as a public holiday and the offices were closed.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
November, 1931.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports: -
District Court. -Twenty-six cases were heard, four of which were criminal and twenty-two civil. Of the four criminal cases, all were convictions. There were two cases of Contempt of Court and two other offences.
Fines imposed amounted to $153 and fees collected $6.59 (Criminal matters).
The civil claims involved amounts totalling $6,206.78 for which fees collected amounted to $184.50.
Magistrate’s Court. -Ninety-four cases were heard, fourteen of which were criminal and eighty civil. Of the fourteen criminal cases, ten convictions and four acquittals were adjudged. There were seven cases of assault, six Contempt of Court and one other offence.
Fines imposed amounted to $62 and fees collected $17.75.
The civil claims involved amounts totalling $2,545.95 for which fees collected amounted to $302.42.
Police Court. -Twenty-seven summary cases were brought before the Court. All were convictions. The principal charges were three of theft, two of assault, two Contempt of Court and twenty other offences.
A total amount of $262.50 was paid in fines.
In addition 109 Judgment summons cases were dealt with during the month.
Court’s General. -Soo Ah See and Chee Ying See alias Chiong Seng Hiong were sentenced to six and four months respectively, for delivering as genuine, counterfeit coin which when first possessed did not know to be counterfeited, under I.P.C. Section 241; Choo Teng Cho to one month, for house-trespass, under I.P.C. Section 448; Tay Ah Hua alias Chung Jin to one month, for disobedience to quarantine rule by entering into the Leper Camp at 13th mile, under I.P.C. Section 271; Goh Hock Guan to one month, for assisting in disposal of stolen property, under I.P.C. Section 414; Jong Joo Siew and Choo Ah Ha to three and one months respectively, for non-payment of fines, under I.P.C. Section 64.
General. -I proceeded to Sadong on the 25th instant having received orders to take over that station from Mr. J. J. Hill. Mr. Hill duly handed over the affairs of the Sadong district to me on the 26th and I returned to Kuching with Mr. Hill on the 27th in order to settle various outstanding affairs in this office and to hand over this office to Captain R. E. Le Sueur who arrived on the 30th.
UPPER SARAWAK, BAU.
November, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports: -
District Court. -Two criminal cases were heard and both resulted in convictions.
Magistrate’s Court. -Fifty-five cases were heard, one of which was a criminal case and fifty-four civil. The one criminal case resulted in conviction.
In addition eight Judgment Summonses were dealt with during the month.
Fines imposed amounted to $1. The civil claims involved amounts totalling $363.21 for which fees collected amounted to $19.50.
Judicial. -The only notable case during the month was Abang Gapar vs. Metalli, who was sentenced to imprisonment under Section 324 I.P.C.
Rainfall. -Highest recorded in 24 hours 1.96 inches; daily average .51 of an inch; total for month 3.92 inches.
General. -Visitors to the station included the Principal Medical Officer, Dr. Marjoribanks, Mr. and Mrs. Pitt-Hardacre, Miss Haywood and Messrs. Trechman, Banks, Dare and Simpson.
Heavy rains have again been experienced resulting in damage to three main roads end one bridge from erosion. All however were in normal condition at the end of the month.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

ia tau bulih untong dalam penemu, pengering enggau akal ari pegai Britis.
Aku udah mrati bendar pengawa dalam taun ke udah lalu aku puas amat
ati ulih ke diator aku nya jalai ke betol. Janji-janji ia ke di semaia leboh
beserah (Cession) baka ia ke enda ngachau adat lama udah mega di pegai rat.
Serta pengawa besai udah di adang awak ka ngemansang enggau ngelantang
ka orang somoa udah mega di perunding lalu di pejalai enggau ari tulong wang
ke kluar ari Prentah King dalam menoa Britis (Britain).
Aku andal ati somoa perunding ke pia nitih ka asal adat ke di pegai tiga
Raja ke udah, baka ke nguntong ka amba rayat di pejalai brat lalu pemansang
pengawa di pejalai amba rayat empu lalu mri untong ka sida ia empu di
Sarawak.
Aku nemu agi bisi skeda dalam Sarawak, di pransang orang bukai ari luar
menoa, sapa ke agi ngidup bantah-bantah ka penyadi ke udah. Sida ia besru
ka kuasa-diri empu (independence) nyau lenyau lalu deka ngambi ia pulai baru.
Nama pemendar ia reti ke pia? Kita udah mindah pengelurus ati ari Raja
sapa ke baka apai kita ngagai apai ke besai agi, ia-nya Raja King, ia ke udah
lama nyadi peninding nyaga kitai. Kaki kita trengkah tegot ba jalai ngiring
kita nuju penguasa diri empu ke bendar. Adat-adat kita udah di pansang
manah, kita be-empu kuasa bejako mandang ka pikir ke dikedeka kita dalam
adat kita empu lalu dalam jalai mrentah pun ditambah mega, lalu beserunyut
mansang nyapai ka peneka kita, baka ke udah di japai maioh mensia mana ke
udah betuah di iring ka Prentah Britis (British guidance), ari ni kita legi tau
mrentah kita empu.
Pengelama ia maia ngelebus apin kita nuntong ka adan ke pia bepanggai
bendar ari bepagut ba jari ke di unjor soh kita ari Prentah Raja King. Tu
meh tuah ke pemadu besai nuju pengelantang ia ke baru ditemu menoa Sarawak.
Enggau ati ke enda berubah kaseh sayang aku ngemata ka pengelantang
enggau pemansang kita lalu aku nelah, “Slamat kekal amba rayat di Sarawak.
Slamat kekal Raja King.”
( ) Notes and Comments.
The birthday of His Majesty the King was celebrated on Thursday, June 12th. In Kuching His Excellency the Governor took the salute from a dais outside the Government office. The cere- mony was attended by a large crowd and by formations of Mosquitos and Beaufighters which flew past three times.
His Excellency the Governor left Kuching for Singapore on June 26th and was still away at the end of the month.
The Sarawak Gazette respectfully congratulates the following recipients of awards in the Birthday Honours List :
Mr. C, W. DAWSON, C.M.G.
Mr. ONG TIANG SWEE, O.B.E Temonggong koh, M.B.E
These honours were announced at the ceremony referred to above. It was also announced that His Excellency the Governor had been pleased to bestow the title of Datu on Abang Yan bin Datu Bandar Haji Yusop and Abang Abu Talip bin Datu Abang Bol Hassan. The Gazette Extraordinary which published these promotions contained as well a notification to the effect that in future the title of Temonggong will rank in status and emoluments in respect of persons of non-Moham- medan native race with the Malay title of Datu. This, of course, is a most interesting and significant decision. The first chief to receive the privilege is Temonggong Koh, M.B.E.
Another event of June 12th was the public sports meeting held in St. Thomas' School grounds. The races produced some exciting finishes but most of the prizes appeared to go to pupils of the School. The Europeans, who did not otherwise distinguish themselves, reached the final of the tug-of-war, but were then defeated by the Constabulary with a celerity which, one hears, brought some members of the former team no little relief. Great credit is due to the organisers for such a successful and entertaining afternoon.
Lady Arden Clarke left Kuching by plane on June 1st. It is understood that she will be away from Sarawak for a few months.
Mr. and Mrs. C. W. Dawson left Kuching on furlough on June 21st. Mr. Dawson played a leading part, first as British Representative, and then as Officer Administering the Government and Chief Secretary, in the events both prior and sub- sequent to the cession of Sarawak. The news that he had been awarded the C.M.G. brought real pleasure to his friends and colleagues. His genial personality will be much missed by many people during the next few months. The Sarawak Gazette respectfully wishes him and Mrs. Dawson a happy and successful leave.
H.M.S. Alert, with the Commander-in-Chief of the British Pacific Fleet. Vice-Admiral Sir Denis Boyd, K.C.B., C.B.E, D.S.O., on board, arrived at Kuching on Monday, June 16th, and remained until the following Thursday. Lady Boyd and Miss Boyd, the Admiral's wife and daughter, were among the visitors together with a number of other ladies. We are too ignorant of naval matters to be able

[NEXT EXCERPT]

High Court in their province they asked whether
it would nut be possible to establish a circuit there.
When the High Court opened its session, the senior
administrative officer attended the court and as a
mark of respect took a seat on the Bench : after a
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1, 1035.
Short time he withdrew,? and proceeded about his business : nor even after that was be found pining and haunting the court of his bygone hope and endeavour. The appointment of a stipendiary magistrate was always urged by senior administrative officers for places where the work of the courts was sufficient to warrant such an appointment. The view of administrative officers is that the administration of justice is a skilled matter which is best performed by a person with legal training.
Conclusion.—There are, therefore, two sharply divided opinions on the main question raised in the Report: (a) That the administration of justice to natives in the courts of law in East Africa is more efficiently curried out by administrative officers without legal training than by judicial officers with legal training. This is the opinion of all Governors, with rare and notable exceptions, (b) That the administration of justice to natives in the courts of law in East Africa is more efficiently carried out by judicial officers with legal training than by administrative officers without legal training. This is the opinion of all administrative officers and unofficial members of executive and legislative councils, with rare exceptions, and of all judicial officers.
The answer to this question given in the report Will, it is thought, be held to be conclusive.
“Nyabor.”
Nyabor, or nyainbor as it is more correctly called, in the Melanau term for a type of line-fishing that is confined to the shallow waters of the river mouths. If one enters any of the kualas along the coast during the fine weather, one can usually he sure of seeing a row of small boats rocking gently on the bar. In each boat squats a fisherman, hunched up under an enormous Urendak, motionless as a wooden image. At first sight these people appear to be merely brooding on the cosmos, so still do they remain; hut as one approaches closer, one sees that their canoes are filled with fishing tackle, —hooks, lines, and floats, and that actually, for Melanaus, they are comparatively busy.
It is n restful scene. The sea, calm as glass and palest blue-green in colour, laps lazily along the glistening beach, and curls into a line of ripples on the bar. On shore, coconut palms and feathery casuannas form a pleasant background to the white strip of sand. The gentle breeze hardly rufties the surface of the water. All is peace,—but not for long.
Suddenly, without warning, one of the fishermen leaps into violent activity. He has had a bite. Something that resembles a bar of gleaming silver is threshing about in the water twenty or thirty yards from his boat, and his line is taut as a piano-wire. He jumps to his feet, maintaining his balance in the swaying canoe by a miracle of adroitness, and for the next few moments it is a case of pull devil, pull linker At last, either the line suddenly slackens, or else a fine Senangin of some seven or eight katis is hauled struggling into the boat, there to be given its quietus with the back of a parang.
Those who are keen on fishing will find nyambor well worth a trial, and I know of few better ways of passing a Sunday morning at any of the coastal stations. All that is required is a stout handline, some enormous hooks, a few wire traces, a float of plai-ee-wood.—and the services of a local fisherman. Senangin, which are the chief prey of the nyambor fishermen, feed only at certain states of the tide, and local knowledge of currents and feeding grounds is essential. The most favourable conditions appear to be a flood tide on a cool morning, and it is then that the best catches are usually made.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Our correspondent gives other statistics of a most interesting nature-but, alas, they are too domestic to admit being published, always supposing we could get away with it through that curb to an unruly wit-the censor.
St. Theresa's Convent.
RESULT OF RAFFLE.
1st prize, No. 2036, Gold Wedding Ring and Keeper, Mr. W. Avery; 2nd prize, No. 1648, Cover with deep Crocket Lace, B. B s.s. Kuching; 3rd prize, No. 529, Hand Painted Cushion. Ed Pawle; 4th prize, No. 1727. Babyfs Knitted Suit, Mr. N. Mace; 5th prize No. 2391, Table Centre, Chan Kui Seng; 6tb prize No.1241,Box of Cigars, Tshook Thlea.
Alas! Fortune is invariably fickle. Many a bachelor might have gained sufficient courage to pop the question if had won the ring - while Mr. Mace toddling down Rock Road in his newly acquired baby's suit- it is not fair!! - Ed. S.G.J
From the Sarawak Gazette 50 Years Ago.
THE
SARAWAK GAZETTE
1879.] TUESDAY, 24th JUNE.1879. [Price 5 Cts,
The 3rd of June opened with a brilliant morning, giving every prospect of a pleasant day; a very unusual amount of interest had been excited by the new racing, which threw open a chance of a Cup to many who did not care to incur the expense of a long boat.
At a little after eleven the majority of the European Community assembled at the residence of our hospitable Resident, at which all were to breakfast, towards the end of the meal the first gun of a salute of 21 guns was fired, and the Resident proposed the heaths of their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee and family.
The price of rice has, we are glad to hear fallen very much. Good Saigon rice being quoted at from $78 upwards. Clean Sambas rice of first quality was lately sold here for $78 per koyan. This is excessively favorable for our Gambier industries.
A Complete Rest.
He felt he needed a change,-a complete rest.
Too many dinner parties and consequently too
many pahits. Too many stengahs. Too much
club life because of too much rain. Too much
bridge, too much pool, too much bowls, too much
poker. Why were they given such names anyway.
Why bridge? One didn't cross anything. And pool?
There was nothing liquid about it but the drinks to
be paid for at the end. And bowls? Bowls were
things to contain flowers or porridge. While poker I
Did some one poke her to give it such a name
originally?
All of which foolishness makes it apparent that
he was really requiring that change, a condition not
unusual during a torrential landas.
The Government didn't take his ailment seriously,
but consented to his going to Santubong for a weekend, going on Friday and returning on Sunday.
Friday was excessively hot. For once in a way
it didn't rain. There was so much to arrange for-
bargaining for a small launch, and then the consultation with Mr. Chong Kim Eng, or the successor
of Chong Kim Eng the 1st, as to provisions.
gHow long was the Tuan to be awayh? g Two days.h
gHow many Tuans in the partyh? gSatuh
The successor of Chong the 1st proceeded to draw
up a list.
Tea, coffee, milk and sugar, etc., etc.
gLimoh? No, Tuans didn't require limo. Only Mems drank ayer limo.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1,1929.
gWhat! All that for two days-and just one Tuanh!
gAt Santubong Tuans always eat and drink more. Besides the Tuan can return to us all that is not consumed and it will be deducted from his bill.h
Aha! One bright spot in an ominous outlook! The joy of having something deducted from expenses. What a rare experience!
Hours spent in preparation, reduce him to exasperation, perspiration and profanation !
However, at three o'clock he boards the miniature launch, and finds that, with his barang, his Boy and his Boyfs barang, there is barely room to sit, but he finally disposes himself on the shady side of the boat, legs stretched over provision boxes, a couple of pillows to ease his discomfort-and a good book.
The launch refuses to move. The jeragan suddenly remembers he has forgotten petrol. Another long wait. A launch in motion is one thing, but at four on a boiling afternoon a launch tied to the pengkalan is very like the lower regions.
But at last, he is off. Good-bye for two whole days to anything like exertion. The town slips past him on the right. Labouring coolies, labouring oxcarts. He is going to rest.
Five minutes pass in comfort and bliss.
What! Getting hot Again. Of course, he has rounded a bend. The sun pours in on him. The other side is shady. He removes himself, his cushions and book with difficulty, and settles on the other side.
Who would stay in Kuching? With such a glorious spot as Santubong so near for a holiday,- he breathes content.
Good gracious, another bend-more sun-more change. This continues every ten minutes or so. A drink would help but it is discovered that the cases of drinks have been put under the numerous other cases, and are impossible to get at in the very limited space.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

We are unfortunately still short of trained agricultural staff, though the Colonial Office is doing its best to find officers for us. Refresher courses for our local technical staff have been started at Batu Lintang, and it is hoped gradually to extend their scope.
In July four students returned from the Rubber Research Institute in Malaya; they are now engaged in advising small-holders in better methods of manufacture, working in conjunction with the staff of the Department of Agriculture. There has been a marked improvement in the quality of sheet rubber sold for export during the past year, but it still leaves much to be desired. There is, I fear, little sign of improvement in the care and main- tenance of small-holders’ rubber gardens : although the Agricultural Department is now in a position to supply small quantities of budwood only from some Dayaks in the Kalaka have any requests for this been received.
To turn now to the Social Services—
One more medical officer has recently arrived, and a local nurse has been promoted to the post of nursing sister. There are now seven medical officers and assistant medical officers, apart from the Director, and two nursing sisters in addition to the Matron, a greater professional strength than has ever been available in Sarawak before and we are hoping that more medical officers will arrive. We are also trying to recruit a Sister Tutor, who will take charge of the training of dressers and nurses; an additional nursing sister, to enable one to be posted to Sibu hospital; a Health Visitor, who will train our girls in the important work of health visiting; and a Sanitary Superintendent for the purpose of training our health inspectors.
One of our locally-recruited senior staff nurses has been sent to London, where, with the help of a scholarship awarded from the Colonial Develop- ment and Welfare Fund, she will attend a full nurse’s training course. A young Chinese from Kuching has been awarded a Government scholar- ship to the King Edward VII College of Medicine in Singapore to attend the course in dentistry.
The second travelling dispensary, which I mentioned at your last meeting, is now operating in the Kuching and Samarahan Rivers as far inland as the Serian road. In Kuching the out- patient department has been centralised in the middle of the town, and the dispensary service has been extented by road to the 34 th Mile on the Serian road. An additional experienced medical officer has been posted to Sibu, and as many additional nurses and dressers as were available have been sent there. In Binatang a new tem- porary dispensary has been opened, and it is hoped to provide a permanent one next year with ten rest beds. A similar ten-bedded dispensary is being built in Sarikei.
The Education Department is still inadequately staffed, and the Colonial Office has been asked to recruit two more Education Officers.
43 schools, including 4 night schools, have been
registered since the beginning of the year, and there has also been a marked increase in enrol- ments in all sections of the school system; the number of pupils in Mission schools has increased by about 20% in recent months, and in Chinese schools by more than 12%. The newly-formed Local Authorities are showing a keen and practical interest in education development and have already undertaken responsibility for 12% vernacular primary schools. Another encouraging development has been the establishment of private schools by groups of the indigenous peoples; there are now 28 schools of this type, and a number of these have already qualified for assistance under the grant-in-aid scheme.
The Batu Lintang Teacher-Training Centre and School was opened on the 1st July and is making very satisfactory progress. The number of student-teachers has now increased to 60. and it is proposed to recruit at least two more teacher- training classes at the beginning of next year. A system of personal and family allowances has been introduced, which will enable promising students to join irrespective of the financial status of them- selves or their parents. A good corporate spirit is being developed amongst the students, who are of many different races, and a sense of Sarawak citizenship is being fostered. It is intended to establish in 1949 post-primary academic classes for younger pupils; it should be possible to form a Malay speaking class next year, but, as a result of the English schools being closed during the enemy occupation, it may be some time before a corres- ponding English-speaking group can be recruited.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

September, 1926.
The Stock balance at beginning of month 174.01 Tons.
Gross output for the month	1,481.11
Total 1,655.19 Shipped	1,236.00 Tons.
Boiler consumption and
Coke conversion	360.14	1,596.14	Stock balance at end of month	59.05	,,
There was a slight improvement in output from No. 8 Mine.
The Upper Seam Mine struck old workings during the month. Conditions in No. 9 and the New Mines, respectively, remained unchanged.
Mr. Banks, Curator, Sarawak Museum, paid a visit to the Collieries during the month.
The rainfall for the month was 12.27 inches.
October, 1926.
Stock balance at beginning of month 59.05 Tons.
Gross output for the month	1,569.00 Total 1,628.05
Shipped	1,009.11 Tons
Boiler consumption and
Coke conversion 378.09	1,388.00	Stock balance at end of month	240.05 Tons.
Underground conditions remained unchanged in all
the mines during the month.
I returned from special Home leave by s.l. LAubaine
on the 12th.
A Committee, appointed by the Board of Trade,
consisting of Messrs. Fenwick, T. Mohri, Tan Ah Boh,
and Low Chin Heng arrived on the 27th, to inquire
into the conditions under which Chinese coolies were
employed at the mines, and left again on the night of
the 29th.
The Assistant Conservator of Forests, First Division,
Mr. D. E. Calver, visited the mines during the month.
The rainfall for the month was 4.84 inches.
J. W. EVANS,
Manager.
SECOND DIVISION.
Simanggang.
September, 1926.
Residents Court. -Uchop, a Dyak, vs. Siak Long.
Uchop appealed against the decision of the Magis-
trates Court. Uchop Was fined for felling a fruit tree
belonging to Siak Long. On examination it was
found that Uchop had felled a fruit tree. Decision
of former Court upheld. Sundai, prisoner who
escaped in August, was arrested by the Dutch
Officials and sent under escort to Lubok Antu, was
sentenced to one year's extra imprisonment and one
dozen strokes with the rattan. To serve his sen-
tence in Kuching jail.
One boundary dispute in the Undup, Entawan vs.
Tansang. Entawan appealed against the decision of
the Magistrate's Court. Case adjourned for exa-
mination and map of land in dispute.
District Court.Tuanku Chabi, of Sebuyow, was
fined $50 and costs for slandering and abusing the
Native Officer, Sebuyow. Abang Su-aut sentenced
to six months R.I. for obtaining goods under false
pretences. Lipa and Entaiang fined two piculs and
one picul respectively for minor incest.
Magistrates Court.Civil and Criminal- Jabau,
of Skrang, was fined 50 for reopening an old land
dispute which has been before the Court several
times.
There were three appeals from the decisions of the
Native Court
General.From the 1st until the 9th I was away
visiting stations in the Kalaka District.
Mr. W. Clark arrived from Pontianak. N.I., via
Lubok Antu. Mr. W. Chirk was on six weeks
tropical leave.
On the 20th Mr. A. L. Honore left for Betong at
12.30 p.m., reaching Belong at about 7 p.m. At 9
p.m. 1 received a telephone message to the effect
that the whole of the Belong bazaar had been des-
troyed by fire. Mr. Honore returned to Simanggang
on the 25th.
M. Roshidi, of the Survey Department, returned
from Lubok Antu, having completed survey of main
river as far as Lubok Antu. The Lemanak, Skrang,
Undup and Lingga Districts have now been sur-
veyed. M. Roshidi left for the Kalaka towards end
of the month.
Clerk Gan Kim Tho was granted his annual leave
dating from the 28th.
His Highnness the Rajah's birthday falling on
Sunday 26th, Monday was observed as a public
holiday.
The engine of m.l. One was out of order for most
part of the month. Two mechanics were sent from
Kuching and the necessary repairs were soon com-
pleted, and the motor is now running as well as
ever.
Abang Abu Talip, Native Officer, Saratok, arrived
here during the latter part of the month. He will
do duty here for the present.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
317
Public Works.Tbe prison gang averaged 50.
Prison carpenters rebuilt the bridge over the Simang-
gang stream, also assisted carpenter Sallih in building
the new clerks quarters. The prison gang under
mandor Kassim was employed on general upkeep of
roads and grounds. One thousand planks were
received from Rejang sawmill. A contract was
signed for the erection of the Native Officers
quarters Sebuyow.
Forest.Mr. P. J. Johnson, Forest Ranger, Special
Class, reports as follows:A rough exploration of
the interior of the area between the Sungei Sebuyow
and Lingga, commenced in the latter part of last
month, was completed by the 12th.
On the 19th I visited Engkilili and returned to
Simanggang on the 26th.
Agriculture.62 permits to plant para rubber and
one to plant pepper were issued during the month.
Medical.A total of 156 persons were treated in
hospital during the month as follows: - Chinese 23,
Dyak 112, Eurasian 1, Javanese 1, Malay 19.
108 cases of N.A.B. injection for yaws, etc., were
given during the month
Cattle.The Simanggang herd number 94 head
and Lubok Antu 48 head.
Shipping.Seven motor launches and ten ban-

[NEXT EXCERPT]

The rainfall for the month was 26’19 inches.
From the Kuching Courts.
In Kuching on 9th April fifty-one vagrants were arrested for sleeping in the Carpenter Street Wayang.
Fifteen of those arrested were charged under the new Vagrancy Order and some of these gave some very ingenuous excuses to account for their presence in the wayang.
One gentleman stated that although he had a house of his own he preferred to sleep in the wayang because it was nice and cool there, and his house was rather crowded, there being in all five inmates: in the wayang he only had fifty bedfellows. -a mere nothing!
Another Chinese said that the colour scheme of the wayang rested his eyes, a tribute to the interior decorations; while a third, who already had ten previous convictions for theft and vagrancy, stated that he was forced to sleep in the wayang because his landlady locked him out of his lodgings in Tabuan Road! Poor chap.
Last January a Chinese named Lai Lui Lee was sentenced to three months’ R.I. for stealing a bicycle, his arrest being brought about by a curious coincidence. He was carrying the bicycle, which had a locked wheel, through the kampong, when he was stopped by a Malay whose suspicions had been aroused by the unusual mode of procedure; after all a bicycle is designed primarily to carry its owner, not to be carried. The Malay, on examining the machine, recognised it as his own brother’s, and after that all Mr. Lai Lui Lee’s explanations of how it came to be in his possession fell a trifle flat Nor did these explanations convince the Magistrate, who decided that the cycle-carrier had better cool his heels in jail for a while.
On his release early this month. Mr. Lai Lui Lee at once proceeded to “lift” another cycle from outside the Chief Secretary’s office and ride off to Bau on it. Unfortunately, though, he omitted to take the simple precaution of removing the owner’s name-card from the tool-bag. and, having been spotted by a smart constable, he was duly arrested. When he came before the Court to tell the Magistrate all about his joy-ride it transpired that the cycle in question belonged to cousin of the man whose bicycle he had stolen three months before!
We fear that Mr. Lai Lui Lee who will not be seen about in society for nine months or so, will never make a master criminal.
Two other cases of interest came before the Courts. In one, an ex-Ranger was convicted of stowing away on board the Kuching; in the other, a Land Dyak was sentenced for manufacturing a gun which he managed to do by using bits of wood, some wire and a length of steel tubing. This was the first conviction under the new Fire Arms Order.
Cambridge Local Examination, 1930.
Of these twenty-five Preliminary Candidates and one Junior Candidate satisfied the Examiner.
St. Mary’s School did especially well. Seven Candidates entered for the Examination. One being ill could not attend, and of the remaining six no less than five passed. It is difficult to appreciate the effort required on the part of the Teachers to obtain such results.
Opening of the Song Kheng Hai Recreation Ground.
This ground, which is situated behind the houses on me south side of Padungan Road, was opened on Saturday 12th April by the Acting Resident, First Division. As the name implies, the scheme originated with the presentation of land to the Government by Mr. Song Kheng Hai for the purpose of a public recreation ground. The lack of such a place has been a great handicap on the development of games and sports in Kuching and the opportunity was taken of extending the area so as to provide sufficient space where recreation of all kinds could be pursued. The children are well provided for with swings, rocking horses, slides and other things for which we can find no name and the plant house is, I am told the coolest place in Kuching.
Two football fields are provided, one for adults and the other for boys, the bigger one having quite a useful stand from which games can be watched in any kind of weather in comfort. It is a trifle unfortunate that the pitches run east and west since at times the sun shines direct on one goal, but there was not sufficient length for a full-sized pitch to be got with any other layout.
Three badminton courts have been constructed, two of which are open for play at the modest charge of four cents per game; the other one can be booked for the whole afternoon for $1 by application to the Clerk-in-Charge, Song Kheng Hai Recreation Ground. The charge for the use of the football fields is $1 per game and anyone wishing to use the stand may do so-at a price.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Shipping.13 bandongs and one motor boat
arrived and 12 bandongs and 1 motor boat cleared
the port during the mouth.
Trade.The principal exports were: Gutta jelutong	300 piculs valued at $4,030
Para rubber	163	do.	9,510
Para scrap	39	do.	1,540
Raw sago	850	do.	2,115
Nipa sugar 400	tins valued at	889
Imports.	Exports.
September, 1926	...	$24,957	$31,131
September, 1925	...	20,466	40,239
October, 1926.
The Court Writer, Pusa, reports:
Agriculture.Two planting permits were issued during the month for planting sago. The natives have finished with their padi planting.
Court.Court work; most cases were heard by the Native Officer and Penghulu. Bines and fees amounted to $316.36
The following fines imposed by the Native Officers call for special mention. Two Dyaks, by name Kana and Tandang, were sent to Kabong on a charge of theft of para rubber, to be dealt with by the Assis* taut District Officer. In connection with this case two others were duly fined by the Native Officer, Debak, $15 each.
Jurai (f.), Kana's wife, for visiting her husband
while on remand without permission, was fined ten
catties.
Guram, of Kampong Beladin, for trespass and for
abuse defendant was fined for the first offence 30
reals and 3 suku, and for the second also 30 reals
and 3 suku. The rest were all minor cases.
General---left for Debak on the 19th, and pro-
ceeded to Ulu Bayor in the Rimbas on the 22nd, in
order to assess five estates. On two occasions the
heirs refused to pay the probate duty, as the former
Court Writer, when assessing the estates, stated
that there was no need for them to pay any such
duty. I explained to them that the orders were still
in force and ordered them to appear when the
Assistant District Officer next visited Debak.
The Superintendent of Surveys. Mr. N. A Middle-
mas, arrived here per s s. Alice Lorraine and pro-
ceeded to Betoug the same afternoon. He returned
from Belong on the 11th, and left for Kuching per
m.s. Lang Endang on the 13th.
Mr. Hurst, Assistant Rubber Supervisor, arrived
at Pusa on the night of the 13th, leaving for Debak
the next morning, and thence overland to Saratok.
Lance-Corporal Sum bang who had been complain-
ing about being ill for some days was ordered logo to
Belong for medical treatment. He was absent from
the 6th to the 16th.
Police Corporal Impang left the squad on the 1st,
his place being taken by Anchah, Undai Dyak.
The survey party is now surveying the Ri in has
River from Debak downwards.
Health.The health of the district during the
month was good.
Births of the month reported ... 11 only
Deaths	do.	...	7 only
Trade.The principal exports were:
Gutta jelutong 257 piculs.valued at $ 3,744
Para rubber	19H	do.	13,525
Para scrap	129	do.	2,675
Raw sago 1.000	do.	2,500
Nips sugar	237 tins valued at	512
Imports. Exports.
October, 1926 ... $30,123	$28,676
October, 1925 ...	34,120	56,661
Kalaka.
September, 1926.
Mr. H. E. Cutfield, A.D.O., reports:
Court.There have been fewer cases before the Court than usual. In the Residents Court there were three cases. His Highness the Rajah vs. Bakar on a charge of murder of five people. The jury were divided but the majority considered Bakar guilty on the evidence produced. The case was referred to the Supreme Court for settlement.
There were two appeals from the Magistrate's Court. Ngelang vs. Unak, a land dispute, the decision of the Magistrate's Court was upheld. One Ong Szee vs. Ganti assault, the decision of the Magistrates Court was altered and plaintiff's fine remaining unchanged but defendants fine increased from $15 to $25.
In the Magistrates Court, Ossen, Malay, was sentenced to three months R.I. for theft. A Dyak was fined one picul for attempted assault with a dangerous weapon. Two Chinese were fined at Debak $ 10 each for contempt of Court. A number of small fines were imposed on people for planting rubber without permits. Adas (f.) was fined $5 for assaulting a small boy. There were also the usual land disputes, etc., at Saratok, although fur fewer than usual, the natives being busy burning and planting their farms.
General.The Resident was here at the beginning of the month and I left with him for Saratok on the 2nd in m.l. One.
320	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
The three cases above mentioned were dealt with and several matters attended to. We left again for ,
Kabong on the 6th The following morning I ac- companied the Resident in m.l. One to Rohan.
The grounds round the fort were overgrown and
in a bad stite. The Native Officer was severely re-
primanded by the Resident and Corporal Remat was
given notice to leave at the end of 1926. There
were no cases outstanding, so a tuba-fishing was
agreed upon for the following morning. We watched
the tuba-fishing for some while but unfortunately it was pouring with rain so the fishing was a failure. We thou came on down to Kabong
The Resident left the following morning at 5.45 for Simanggang.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

All telegrams for transmission other tlmn those brought personally to Ilie Telegraph Office, addressed to The Manager Inmld be marked outside Telegram" otherwise he cannot be responsible for delays in sending.
J. K BARNES, Manager.
Kuching, 27th April, 1920.
106
.THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1920.
It was clearly proved that Ran tai was deliberately attempting to reopen a longstanding decision of the Court, and his deposit was forfeited. In these days of prosperity amongst Saribas Dayaks a severe penalty is necessary to stop such litigation, and it is hoped this will have a salutary effect. As it seemed that Rantai, however, though not only his house did have some cause for complaint of the small amount of farming land belonging to his house, he was granted permission to farm every alternate year on the newly formed Government land at Tanjong Bemban. Ujai of Sempadi was lined a pikul for slander on Isek and Baki in connection with his land dispute with Buaw. On an appeal from Mendong (f), and after examination by Draup, P. Tait's decision was reversed in her case with Nyanggai of Anyot. Nara, Betong Malay, was fined $50 for perjury after having sworn to his evidence in the mosque in a former case. Three Spaoh Malay youths Bukitan, Boto and Koteng were sentenced to terms of imprisonment for house breaking and theft from a Chinaman's shop at Spaoh. A lot of petty thieving has been reported lately from this place. Suleiman of Stambak being reported to have died lately, the property to the value of $500, deposited for his good behaviour after release from imprisonment in connection with Ujeh's affair in 1916, was returned to his relatives. I had another hundred odd applications from Dayaks for permits to plant, the majority being for virgin jungle. Permission was given for two more shops to be erected at Spaoh. There were good reports of the padi harvest throughout the Saribas, especially in the ulu Layer, Padih and Paku, but the Rimbas crop, I fear, is a comparative failure.
Arrangements were made to have all the newly formed lands in the main Saribas river marked off with bilian boundary posts. These will be ready for farming next year, and there were numerous applications for same. They will be given for a year
at a time to those who are really short of farming land.
On the 19th. the Chinese shop-keepers and pepper
gardeners were called up to the fort, and told that they all had to farm this year: they said that they were all willing to do so, and they were then informed that suitable land will be measured out for them by Government.
Choo Hong Tak proceeded to Betong on the 29th. to take over from Court Writer Lagan who has been
granted 6 weeks leave.
Abang Zin, Native Officer, Lubok Antu, reports that Ulu Ai Dayaks are busy harvesting, and that the crop is an exceptionally good one.
Kalaka:The Kabong Malays are obtaining large hauls of prawns, getting as much as three sacks of dry prawns in a day.
The Roban pepper gardeners report, that the new pepper is being destroyed by a certain insect, and in consequence the crop will not he good this year. A Malay farming but was burnt to the ground by
carelessness of the owner; he lost all his property and his padi. A Dayak of Sebetan also had his farm hut burnt to the ground by his own neglect, and lost 50 pasus of padi.
The following are the trade returns for the division, viz:
Imports. Exports.
March, 1920	$103,126.00	$118,213
Total to 31/3/20	314,108.60	367,174
Do. 31/3/19	186,798.00	236,912
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER.
Resident.
On 13th. the m. l. Sri Danuti arrived from Kuching for Sabu with the Right Rev, Bishop Danson and Mrs Danson on board, returning again on the 16th.
Mr. J. A. H. Hardie returned from the Saribas on the 14th. I herewith append his report:
Abang Dal with Abang Embit of Spaoh and P. Luta of ulu Paku examined into the complaint of the Spaoh Malays and lower Paku Dayaks against the ulu Paku Dayaks felling jungle near them for sago gardens. This was mentioned in last month's report. Having gone over all the land concerned, and made sketch maps thereof, Abang Dul returned on the 2nd, and next day Regulations were laid down in Court, the Spaoh Malays being allowed three months time to fell the jungle behind the kampong and Dayaks of Luban and Boleng a similar period to extend their present clearings between these streams. After that time, they cannot restrain others from felling there. The names of all, who wished to restrain the ulu Paku Dayaks from felling this jungle, were taken ; and, should they themselves not have done any clearing in the above period, fines will be imposed.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

The chief event of the month was the visit of His Highness the Tuan Muda, who arrived by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 11th inst., accompanied by the Dayang Anne, the Chief Secretary, and Mrs. Boult. His Highness met all the principal Malays, Dyaks, and Chinese in the Court House and then inspected the offices and bazaar. On the following day a tuba fishing was held, attended by His Highness and party but on this occasion it did not prove to be the success which it usually does. His Highness later proceeded to Kapit where he met the Dyak Penghulus. From Kapit the party went down stream to Sarikei where an inspection of the Repok Road was made, and later, an audience given to the Malays and Chinese. In the evening of the 15th inst., His Highness embarked for Kuching.
Nothing of especial note occurred in the Courts during the month.
The chief event of the month was the visit of His Highness the Tuan Muda, who arrived by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 11th inst., accompanied by the Dayang Anne, the Chief Secretary, and Mrs. Boult. His Highness met all the principal Malays, Dyaks, and Chinese in the Court House and then inspected the offices and bazaar. On the following day a tuba fishing was held, attended by His Highness and party but on this occasion it did not prove to be the success which it usually does. His Highness later proceeded to Kapit where he met the Dyak Penghulus. From Kapit the party went down stream to Sarikei where an inspection of the Repok Road was made, and later, an audience given to the Malays and Chinese. In the evening of the 15th inst., His Highness embarked for Kuching.
Nothing of especial note occurred in the Courts during the month.
The Sibu Bazaar now nears completion. The last of the wooden houses are being evacuated. The new bazaar looks well, and there are only fifty-one alienated lots not yet built on. The remaining ten shophouses of the forty-one undertaken by Messrs. Gammon, Limited, are completed, and work is proceeding on the five brick shops in Channel Road which are being erected by local merchants. The new European Bungalow erected near the Residency is almost completed. New water services have been laid to the bazaar shops as completed.
Dr. A. Hutchison arrived on the 4th inst. to take over as Divisional Medical Officer from Dr. Gauge, who proceeded to Kuching. The Divisional Medical Officer reports 575 out-patients and 111 in-patients treated during the month.
Sarikei.â€”The new bazaar lay-out has now been demarcated. The staging for the new wharf is completed. A Sanitary Inspector is now stationed at this place, and pays a regular week-end visit to Rejang to inspect the incoming steamers from Singapore, and 222 passengers were inspected. There has been a small outbreak of dysentery at Rejang which is being taken in hand.
The wharf at Binatang is nearly completed.
The General Manager. Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, arrived at Mukah from Miri on the 14th inst. on his way to Ulu Kenyana. He recruited thirty-one Melanos and twelve Dyak coolies.
At Matu six towkays are commencing the erection of a block of six bazaar shops on the new site. They are to be built of timber with party walls of galvanized iron.
Visitors to the Division, from outside, comprised amongst others the following during the month. H. H. the Tuan Muda, the Dayang Anne, the Chief Secretary and Mrs. Boult, Mr. Treasurer A. A. Bennie, The Secretary for Chinese Affairs and Mrs. De Gros Clark, the General Manager, Sarawak Oilfields., Limited, and Dr. Braendlin.
Fourth Division News. Divisional Reports. May, 1930. Extracts from the Fourth Division Report for May, 1930, by Mr. Aplin, Resident
General.â€”I held a meeting of the people from the various villages in the district of Miri with the object of explaining the importance of planting padi. The Kadayans on the coast do not need any encouragement, as they never fail to plant padi and as a rule have good crops, but padi planting by those living near Miri town is getting less and less each year, the population preferring to find jobs with the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, and buy their rice in the bazaar.
Those present professed to understand my arguments for the reasons of planting padi, and agreed that they would make fauna this year, and I promised them that the Courts would take into consideration in passing judgment in debt cases on all those who could prove that they were making legitimate attempts at padi farming.
1 left for Baram on 13th, with my wife and child, to wait the arrival of His Highness the Tuan Muda in connection with the regatta, which was to be held at that place. His Highness, accompanied by the Dayang Anne, the Chief Secretary, Mr. F. F. Boult, and Mrs. Boult, arrived on the evening of the J5th.
The regatta must have been one of the most successful ever held at Baram.
On the 17th His Highness sat in Court and interviewed the Penghulus on the Maimunah.
His Highness left for Kuching on the 18th, dropping me at Miri on the way.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Punans here seem to have the equivalent of a "town-house" and a “country-house”. The “town-house” is in the main long-house and a smaller “country-house” maintained up-river where they go for padi planting, collecting fruit, felling belian, or for hunting and fishing.
(b) Rumah Uvang is a 4 door Punan “country-house” on the bank of the Kakus river opposite the mouth of the Mooroojau; it is easily reached by outboard. The headman is Uvang anak Mail, who is a fine jungle man with an extensive know-ledge of the tracks and jungle-lore, and is invaluable for any expedition.
(c) Kuala Mooroojau to Kaki Bukit camp: the route follows the Mooroojau valley, but has to be made on foot. In dry weather with lightly laden carriers, it takes about three hours; the average time for carriers with the usual load is five hours; the journey takes about eight hours with heavy loads, or in wet weather.
(d)	Kaki Bukit camp to Bukit Sulap Batu on the watershed. The route from Kaki Bukit climbs sleeply up the ridges from the Mooroojau valley and, following spurs separating the rivers, switch-backs considerably. With selected Punans carrying no loads it takes 4 hours to reach Bukit Sulap Batu, which is probably about 1,300 feet high; loaded carriers would take about one day to reach this place.
(e)	The Rajang valley watershed. From Bukit Sulap Batu the track drops steeply into the Sematai valley; with unloaded Punans the descent takes 1 hours, but if loads were carried it would take about half a day. It is about 3 hours walk in the waters of the Sematai to the Sungai Bah, and carriers with loads take about half a day. At the mouth of the Sematai, the Borneo Company Limited have a timber station, and in the sur-rounding jungle there are timber cutters’ camps. A track of about 14 miles leads down the Bah valley to the Rajang river.
The Mooroojau valley provides a good example of how the nature of the topography is controlled by the underlying rocks. The lower valley consists mostly of relatively soft shale which has eroded to give a low-lying, muddy, country; occasionally fragments of coal in the river bed indicate seams to occur in the shale. Towards the headwaters of the Mooroojau tough rocks of the Rajang formation give rugged country with steep ridges separating deep valleys. These rocks consist of hard shale, schist, siltstone, feldspathic grit and sandstone, cut by veinlets of white quartz; they dip steeply at. angles varying from 45 to vertical. The valleys in this type of terrain are attractive; clear streams flow between steep hillsides, deep pools and water falls are common, as are stretches of river where sparkling water ripples between banks of gravel and sand. The hard Rajang formation rocks form the watershed, and are well exposed at Bukit Sulap Batu which consists of tough massive sandstone: this rock formation extends into the Sematai valley and Rajang basin.
The Punans in the party included two well-known local characters. Uvang anak Mail is probably the best known jungle-man in the Kakus valley; he is familiar with the different tracks into the Rajang valley, and has been far into the Rajang valley up the Balui. He is an old man, probably over three score years, but is an invaluable guide having a pleasant personality and being
24
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 27, 1953.
strong and resourceful in the jungle. On one occasion when the party was caugbt by darkness on a steep mountain ridge and unable to return to base camp, the lack of water, common on the ridges, resulted in all suffering from thirst. After a rest Uvang, at about ten o’clock that night, using flares made of a special wood he had found, cut, and dried over the fire, climbed down the mountain slope and brought back water for the party; no mean feat on the jungle clad mountain side in a dark night. He also produced edible bark which he claimed to be most nutritious. His son, Kayong anak Uvang, is about 20 years old, has
an exceptionally strong physique, and an excellent knowledge of the local shooting and fishing. Nasal anak Surlong, another member of the party, it was claimed is the best teller of Punan fairy tales in the Tatau valley. On the return journey he entertained a house party one night; the recital started at dusk, and went on until dawn. The party took their ease stretched on mats on the floor, no lights were allowed, and the tale was chanted in the darkness, the assembled company producing the background noises from time to time: these consisted of a series of howls and shrieks, strongly reminiscent of St. Andrew’s Night celebrations.
SARAWAK GEOLOGICAL OFFICE MAP NO.45
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 27, 1953.
25
Notes on the Bintulu valley and the Tubau-Belaga route to the Upper Rajang valley.
By Mr. F. W. Roe.
General.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

between upriver Chiefs. Christmas and Boxing
Days were observed as holidays.
B. J. Nibong, Court Writer at Matu, arrived
unexpectedly in Sibu during the month and reported
that he had handed over his duties to Chin Nyan, a
former Court Writer. Nibong was reprimanded
for leaving his district without orders and ordered
to return for duty there again at once. The follow-
ing Native Officers reported their arrival in Sibu
towards the end of the year: Hadji Yaman of Matu,
Hadji Brahim of Daro,Hadji Bahaudin of Rejang, and
Abang Hadji Metair of Bintang. A number of
sub-station Court Writers were granted short leave
to attend the regatta.
A petition was received from the majority of the
members of the Subordinate Service in Sibu with
regard to the office hours then in vogue. It was
maintained that these caused inconvenience to clerks
and an earlier closing hour was proposed. After
asking for opinions of Heads of Departments the
matter was referred to His Highness the Rajah in Sibu. His Highness instructed me to use my own discretion and, after consideration, I issued instruc-
tions that the Kuching hours should be followed
throughout the whole Division, i.e.,8.30 a.m. to 3.30 p.m. with one hour off for food. A marriage of some
importance took place on 24th when Seripa Aini, daughter of Tuanku Ali, was married to Wan Abdullah, son of Tuanku Sulong of Kuching.
Judicial.Residents Court.The following cases came before the Residents Court during the
month : Monopolies Department vs. Wong Sui Ing
and Kho Ei Tieh, Manager and Clerk respectively
of one of the Government opium divans. The former
was fined $50 and dismissed, and the latter received
three months imprisonment; C. Bee Chiang vs.
Chan Ah Tat, fraud case, referred back to the Lower
Court; Chiang Hin vs. Kong Mau Chiong and
Layam (f.), adultery, both charges dismissed.
Police vs. Ah Kee, harbouring an escaped prisoner.
Section 130. Dismissed.
District Court.Ah Tho was sentenced to six
months imprisonment for theft; prison mandor
Wahap three months for criminal neglect of duty,
and Yeo Leong, Ah Ngo add Ah Hock one month
each for committing an affray, and Teo Ah Eng (f.)
two months for breach of Contagious Diseases Order.
Chan Tat was fined $500 and Chan Wai $250
under sections 423 and 109 ; Tan Seng Hock $150 for
contravention of the Arms Order; Chiew Fun $25
for offering a gratification to a Government servant;
Semada, a Government Dresser, $25 for assault;
Ah Chiew $25 under section 456; and Tang Soon
Chong and Ngoi Chin Pang received two days im-
prisonment each for offences against Police Regula-
tions.
A number of civil claims came before this Court
but none of special importance.
Magistrate's and Police Court.The Police
brought the usual number of prosecutions and
obtained convictions in most cases. The Magistrate's
Court dealt with a number of petty debt cases.
Fines amounted to $953.40 and fees to $761.76
(Sibu only).
149 documents were registered in Sibu.
District Office.From the report of the Acting
District Officer, Mr. W. F. Dick, I extract the follow-
ing details : Penghulu Sureng of B. Igan reports
several cases of unregistered guns in bis district.
Efforts will be made to prosecute these persons. A
Malay named Bet died under very tragic circum-
stances in Sibu owing to the omission on the part of
his friends to call in medical assistance. The jury
brought in a verdict of death by natural causes but
added a rider that the other people in the house
deserve severe censure. The Acting District Officer
banded over charge of the Monopolies Department
to Mr. Horton on the 14ch. A Foochow named
Ting Choon Sang was drowned on the 11th whilst
being towed in his boat by s.l. Ulu of Sarawak
Steamship Co., Ltd. An inquest was held.
The Sibu Municipal Board had several meetings
during the month and discussed many important
matters, including meat tables, latrines, slaughter-
houses and street lighting. It is hoped, now that
there is an Officer-in-Charge of the Department, that
many things which have perforce been put off can
now be put through, although the lack of any other
staff is a drawback.
P. W. D.The erection of a new bungalow and the
re-erecting of bungalow No. IV are progressing well
and both should be finished by the end of next
month. Contracts for two more bungalows have
been signed in Kuching. A contract was made for
cutting 9-incb holes in the walls of the existing bazaar
drains to run off water from under the houses. On
the 16th the boiler from the Selalo-Assan Canal was
put into commission at the waterworks, and on the
21st the new Tangye duplex pump started work.
The increase of water available is noticeable.
The usual routine work was carried on but labour
is short and very expensive. The extension to Sibu
jail was nearly completed at the end of the month
and amongst minor works carried out were cement
drains round bungalow No. 1, repairs to Tamil lines,
bridges, approaches and compound of one of the

[NEXT EXCERPT]

But surely the logical aspect of the question is this. The club has put out money for building, it pays out large sums monthly in lighting, power and wages for service and upkeep.
A. uses that power, lighting and service as a 100% individual case. B. uses the same thing as a 10% or 15% case, yet he pays the same as A. for 90% less usage of charges incurred. Is he not logically entitled to remain on the club membership board, provided he obeys the rules of the club, and yet subscribe to that club in direct proportion to his usage of its
amenities?
Some adjustment of the present system, I venture to think, could be brought about, and thus benefit such cases as B.’s without causing undue dwindling of the club’s revenue. This could be effected by rating subscriptions on a percentage basis, viz., say 12 or 15% of a member’s bill being added as subscription fees (with a minimum of say $3 for single members and $5 for married couples). A. would pay a little more, true, but not much and not too much in proportion to services rendered, and B. would cease to feel he was throwing money away by failing to attend the club as much as A. in order to get his money’s worth.
I am, sir, etc.,
A. WEEKLY-WALLER.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

The rest of the article is so hopelessly illogical and incorrect— and almost as involved as this letter, Ed.' —that it requires no answer except to remark that anyone not knowing it might, by-your corres pondent’s description, imagine Sarawak to be some view species of duck-billed platypus— "tame, innocent, dull, and unenlightened."
Yours faithfully,
BEN.
[This Correspondence may cease. We shall be very pleased, however, to have any letters from the outstations on the habits and life of a rhinoceros with its young, or some such non-controversial. and —possibly—safe subject.—Ed.;
Chinese Education in Sarawak.
UPPER SARAWAK,
The Editor,	29th. December, 1921.
Sarawak Gazette.
DEAR Sir.
Will you please permit me a short space in your valuable paper for an appeal on behalf of the Chinese children for a better Chinese education.
Schools for Chinese education, managed and fully supported by the Government, have been established in Kuching and all districts for several years. Many masters without qualifications were engaged through the recommendation of some pro minent Chinese, and an enormous sum of money was incurred each year "for this purpose. Un fortunately very little progress was made during that period. In Kuching the Government Free Chinese School was abolished two years ago. A wise policy is now taken in granting gratuities to different schools under Chinese direction, and they have made good strides by this system. Should such a policy be extended to outstation schools, the children will owe their life long gratitude to the generous Government.
Yours faithfully,
A SARAWAK-BORN CHINESE.
Answers to Correspondent.
[The Editor is not responsible for anything]
We regret to announce that the Head of Our Correspondence Bureau has failed to return from his holidays. There is an enormous pile of envelopes- on his desk—but we think we know what they mostly contain—and we don’t mean Xmas Cards. We have however just received a caid from him emblazoned with the words "Peace" mid “Good will"— so he must be full to the brim—of plum- pudding and turkey. Really, if things go on like this, we shall have to get someone else to write our snappy pars—Ed.
MONTHLY REPORTS
SADONG.
November.
The Chief Clerk, Lau Loong Quee, returned from Kuching on the 1 th. whither he had been to obtain Medical advice.
Later in the month I received instructions to inform Lau Loong Quee that, in view of the Medi cal report on his health, His Highness the Rajah had decided to place him on the pension list.
I regret to report that Abang Bujang, the Native Officer at Sebangan, was taken seriously ill on the 12th. and was still laid up at the end of the month.
Owing to the mortality among the herd of buffaloes here I decided to turn them over to the Colliery, where there is more suitable pasturage. I also sold a quantity of the Government padi to the Colliery, keeping sufficient in stock for the prisoners, etc., until the harvest is due.
His Highness the Rajah was pleased to exempt ‘the Sebangan and Semrah Malays from paying royalty in future on the fire-wood they use in the manufacture of Nipah Sugar and Salt.
In the Courts a number of cases of criminal breach
of contract were dealt with, the most flagrant
instances. Wan Ahmat bin Kadir and Jenal bin Dris,
being punished with imprisonment. Tamit bin
Salleh was sentenced to imprisonment for assault
and Maharaja Lelah; Sing Hai for assaulting Chong
Sam; Ng Chok and Dulgani bin Haji Masedik for
theft of vegetables and tobacco respectively; Sleh bin
Mumin for cheating Dyaks. Kim Lai was fined for
trespass; Gangul and Tabekang Dyaks fined for
selling boats on which they had not paid royalty;
Teck Liaw fined for using a false daching and the
daching confiscated; and Tebin bin Leman fined for
failing to answer a summons which had been served
on him nine months ago.
Forest Guards Abang Daud, and Mahtar inspected
jelutong tapping and limber working at Sebangan
and Gedong, and reported several cases of royalty
evasion.
P. W. D. - A Contract was signed and work
commenced on the new Government Bungalow and
Court House at Tabekang. A Carpenter repaired
rotten parts of the flooring of the Simunjan Bungalow
and Court House, and the prison gang, averaging
32 men, war employed clearing the Kampong Sageng
road and ditches und the Government plantation.
The s. s. Che Foo, Captain Anderson, arrived from
Triso for coal on the 6th., and sailed for Kuching,
en route for Hong Kong, on the 10th
The s. s. Alice Lorraine called in on the 18th. for
coal with passenger Mr. Stewart, and the s. s. Sara-
wak and Lucile made two trips.
Seven Schooners cleared for Kuching with cargoes
of coal during the month
The trade returns are as follows: -
SADONG COLLIERY.
November.
The gross out-put of coal produced by the mines
during the month was 2,183.08 tons; 450 tons of
this were consumed by our boilers, and the balance
of 1,733.08 tons delivered to the wharf for export.
The shipments for the month were as under :—

[NEXT EXCERPT]

No. 800.
Price KUCHING, WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 1, 1920. 10cents.
CONTENTS.
The Sarawak Gazette
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER I, 1920.
NOTES.
August.
We learn from the B. N. B. Herald, chat the Bishop and Mrs. Danson left Sandakan the 15th. July for the Philippine Islands. We understand that they have recently paid a visit to Limbang and may be expected in Kuching shortly. THE attention of our readers is called to A Notification in this issue of the Government Gazette, from which it will be seen that a Wireless Station is now is operation at Goebilt and is in daily communication with Kuching. The telephone communication between Kuching and Goebilt is discontinued for the present.
WE hear from an authentic source that one of the buffaloes recently brought to Kuching has succeeded in evading slaughter, fora time at any rate by giving birth to a calf. According to the latest reports both are doing well.
SOME further light is now vouchsafed respecting the attack by the German raider Emden on the cable station at Cocos-Keeling in the early days of the war. It is reported a Chinese was directly instrumental in summoning the Sydney. He was a servant of the Cable Company, and the landing party, meeting him, ordered him to lead them to the station. He did so, by a circuitous route, after quickly telling a countryman to hurry there and give the alarm. As a consequence, before the station wus dismantled the fateful message, had already gone. The story goes that tin Chinese responsible now lives in honourable retirement in his native town in China, justly recompensed for the part he
The Sarawak Gazette.
Subscriptions to the Gazette are as follows
The Sarawak Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
Single copy	...	...	.10 cents
Subscription for one your ...	... $2.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations and all other Countries.	$2.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING---
Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 5s. 10d.
The Sarawak Government Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CUBBENCY)
Single copy ...	...	0.5cents
Subscription for one year ...	$1.00
Subscription including postage to Oustations
and all other Counttries	...	1.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING
Subscription for one year (including postage abroad)3s. 6d.
All subscriptions are payable in advance and must commence from the 1st January in each year on which date they are renewable. All broken periods will be considered as full.
Subscriptions will not be renewed unless t i;.e of renewal given.
Changes of Address should be notified to the Office in writing.
VOL. L
Notes . 191
PAGE
The Simanggang Regatta and Sports . 192
The Peace-making at Simanggang . 193
The Vandals ...
. 195
The Rajah Charles Brooke Memorial Fund . 195
Monthly Reports: -Sadong Colliery
. 195
SimanggangSibu
. 196
Oya Bintulu
. 197
BaronBrooketon Colliery
Limbang ...
. 198
Lawas Trusan
. 199
Trade Returns
. 201
Almanac . ...
. 202
Rainfall ...
.202
Passengers . 203
Kuching Shipping Returns . 205
192
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 192(1.
played in the war. Another fact is also now made known. During the fight some of the land- ing party, who had not been able to re-embark, made their escape in Mr ROSSS schooner Ayesha. Last year the German Government punctiliously presented Mr. Koss with a very neat craft in place of the one which was taken.L & C. Express.
THE mosquito plague was so serious in Paris last year that the Pasteur Institute has been devoting special attention to the destruction of the larvae. An old plan was to pour oil on the waters where mosquitoes breed, but this also killed any fish there might be in the water, besides making it unlit for drinking. M. Ronbaud, of the Pasteur Institute, has now discovered a method of destroying the larvae by sprinkling powdered formaline on the surface of the water. This does not injured fish or make water impossible to drink, and it is also said to be much more rapid and effective than oil.(S. T.)
THE following story appeared in the Straits Times one of the new rich, who had made his fortune out of the war by supplying bootlaces to the Army or something of that sort, bought an ancestral mansion in the country- in England and on entering into possession gave a large house-warming party. The pleased owner, besides providing the entertainments customary on such occasions, showed his guests over the house. Arrived in the picture gallery, the proud host stopped in front of two portraits, hanging on either side of a crucifix. Raising his hand, he pointed to the two portraits and said, in a blatant tone: These are the portraits of my ancestors. Thereupon one of the amiable guests was heard to mutter in an audible undertone: How interesting. I never knew before who the two malefactors were!
THE p. s. Adeh left for the North on the 19th. Passengers Father Apping for Mukah and Father Berhovem and Sisters Engeng and Rose for Brooketon.
THE S. s. Kuching arrived from Singapore on the 23rd. Passengers by her were Messrs. J. Holliday and W. Avery, Masters P. Reutens and P. Hock Seng.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Back to the Land!
A remark made by the vice-principal of the Malayan School of Agriculture in an address last Monday deserves to he brought prominently before Malayan parents and their sons. “My advice,” said Mr. Mann, “is to return to the land. Cultivate your own land if you have any. If you haven’t, cultivate somebody else’s,” Unquestionably that is good advice, and any man who owns a hundred acres or so cannot do better than send his son to Serdang for training. Numerous products are being landed at Singapore every day which could be grown in Malaya but which never will be grown until we get an intelligent and instructed class of landed proprietors, interested in something more than rubber and coconuts. But the majority of middle-class parents now looking for employment for their boys do not own land, and the question which they will naturally ask will be: “What are the prospects of agricultural employment?” So far none of the two-year private students have graduated from the school, so that that question cannot be answered positively, but many people believe that later on estates will welcome Serdang-trained boys, just as products of the Farm School at Perademya are largely employed by estates in Ceylon as conductors and in other subordinate capacities. After all Malayan estates must have Asiatic subordinates, and surely they will prefer trained to untrained men. The two-year course at Serdang costs $500 and there is every chance that it will turn out to be a good investment. It is, at any rate, the only investment which offers any hopes at the present time of loading to employment in the future. -Straits Times.
Visit of Agricultural Field Officer, Singapore, to Labuan and Brunei.
Mr. D. G. P. Olds, Agricultural Field Officer, Singapore, visited Labuan and Brunei during the months of November and December for the purpose of inaugurating agricultural services in these two territories in accordance with recommendations made by the Director of Agriculture as a result of his visit in August last. It is proposed to inaugurate small Agricultural Departments in both areas and steps are taken to recruit and train the necessary Malay staff, while proposals are under consideration for the establishment of a number of small demonstration and test stations. -Extract from the Malayan Agricultural Journal, January, 1933, Vol. XXI, No. 1, p. 43.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 62 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 31 FRIDAY, 15TH DEC., 1871. Price 5 cents.
DYAK DANCING.
On the 2nd instant an exhibition of Dyak dancing took place at the Fort. The performers were Dyak fortmen, fifteen in number; the selection was left entirely to themselves. A select company, invited by the Commandant, were present at the performance. First came a solemn dance by two men in native costume, that is to say with a long chawat or waistcloth wrapped round them and hanging down to their feet and a tight jacket, who gyrated round at opposite corners of a square formed by laying down four long planks on the ground, in a shuffling step, keeping time to a monotonous beating of gongs; this was succeeded by a spirited combat with drawn parangs and shields. Whenever they thought they were coming to too close quarters, both combatants rapidly retreated. It was grotesque enough when matters came to such a pass that the dancers, crouched or lying on the ground, took furtive stabs at each other round the edges of their shields. The most characteristic of all the Dyak dances followed. The story is always very much the same. One warrior is engaged in picking a thorn out of his foot, but is ever on the alert for the lurking enemy with his arms ready at hand. This enemy is at length suddenly discovered, and after some rapid attack and defence, a sudden plunge is made at him and he is dead upon the ground. The inking of his head follows in pantomime. The last agonies of the dying man were too painfully and probably too truthfully depicted to be altogether a pleasant sight. The story then concludes with the startling discovery that the slain man is not an enemy at all but the brother of the warrior who has slain him. At this point the dance gives way to what was perhaps the least pleasing part of the performance-a man in a fit, writhing in frightful convulsions, being charmed into life and sanity by a necromantic physician. A few more dances on the advance and retreat principle concluded the entertainment.
We hope our Singapore visitors who witnessed it were pleased, not because it was either elegant or refined, for Dyak dancing can hardly be called either, but because it was thoroughly characteristic, and it is something to have a bit of savage manners brought to one’s door without going further afield to look for it, and no one can see the same who will not honour this country with a visit.
To conclude with that odious thing, a comparison.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

The following is an extract from the November report of the District Officer, Kapit : ‘‘On the night of November 5th an attempt was made to set fire to the dapor of one of the bazaar shophouses, belonging to Tan Sit Pah. Fortunately the out- break was discovered in time, and quickly put out
before any appreciable damage was done. The fort alarm gong was sounded about 12.30 a.m.; but by the time the police, S.N.O., and District Officer arrived on the scene, it was all over bar the shout- ing, of which there was plenty. A quarter-empty bottle of kerosene was found on the spot, and also a piece of cloth on the roof of the dapor. It appeals, however, that the cloth was in a tub of water, which was thrown on the fire, and was not connected with the crime. No evidence has been discovered to throw any light on the perpetrator, and it is feared that the mystery must remain unsolved.”
Believing as we do that the "credit system” is one of the gravest handicaps of the native of Sarawak, we are glad to note that the District Officer. Kapit, reports that, unfortunately owing to the size of debts still unpaid, all business there is now strictly on a cash basis.
The District Officer. Kapit, reports that the news that engkabang will definitely be bought this year has been received with much enthusiasm, and that the good price to be paid is also welcomed.
It is interesting to note that a District Officer's bungalow is being built at Kapit. This is probably the only station where a District Officer is now posted and has to live in the "fort.” Lubok Antu was, until the occupation, another relic of the old days in this respect, but no District Officer has been in charge there since the liberation, and it is under- stood that in any case the “fort” has been razed to the ground.
FOURTH DIVISION.
The Honourable the Resident reports that most of the Javanese had been repatriated by the end of October. There remained a few in the employ- ment of the oil company and others were still trick- ling in from the ulu.
The malaria epidemic in this Division was still the most serious matter on hand at the end of October. It was beginning to make itself felt with regard to padi planting and the Pujut Scheme was suffering in this way.
Kayans in the Ulu Baram reported that they would be harvesting their padi agit by the beginning of December. The Honourable the Resident has been told that the Kayans are the only people who go in for this early variety of padi. The Sarawak Gazette understands that it is also planted by Kayans and others at Beluga and in Kapit District, and by Muruts in Lawas District. The Honour- able the Resident says that Dayaks at Bakong have reported considerable success with what they call "Padi Stengah Tahun.” They planted it imme- diately after the last harvest and reaped it during October. This has caused considerable relief of rice shortage in that area and it is proposed to induce the Malays to follow this example next year.
A Kenyah school has been opened at long Akar in Baram District and a Kayan school is being built at Long Pila.
The first prosecutions in this Division under the Movement Control Rules have been successful and heavy penalties have been inflicted with the result that the price of rice in the rice producing areas has fallen.
The Honourable the Resident reports that the desire of many up-river tribes to be converted to Christianity is amazing. The Muruts were, he says, a dying race fifteen years ago, but they have since changed their religion and have given up their bad habits such as excessive borak drinking and panlangs. There is no doubt that they are now a virile people and on the increase.
The District Officer, Miri, reports that a young Malay from Kululit, Sibuti, was admitted to hospital suffering from seven wounds inflicted by a crocodile. This, is the third case from Sibuti of attacks by crocodiles in the last few months.
The Baram dressers have agreed to give lectures on first aid and elementary medicines and hygiene once a week to the Marudi schools. This should dispel, the District Officer says, any fears the children might have of medical treatment and give them more interest in their own health and hygiene.
Native Officer Galau, who returned from the Tutoh and Apoh during October, recounted an incident which greatly impressed both himself and the Kayans who accompanied him. While eating some fish a bone got stuck in his throat. The Kayans were unable to suggest a means of removing it and so Galau sought help from the Kelabits. They told him to sit with his head bowed and they commenced to pray. To Galau's astonishment, after the prayer was over, he lifted his head to find the bone gone.
Bong Siong, salt manufacturer of Kedurong, was convicted in Bintulu District Court in October of a breach of the Movement Control Rules, and was sentenced to three months’ rigorous imprisonment and a fine of five hundred dollars. This sentence was upheld by the Resident’s Court on appeal.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Too much happened in those eight-day courses to be described here in detail. The question is always whether, in so short a time, to spread the butter thickly over a small piece of bread or thinly over a larger one; that is to say, to try to deal thoroughly with a few topics or briefly with many. At present the former seems desirable for Chinese teachers who are better qualified and can turn for guidance in many matters to tradition, whereas for Native teachers with their many single-handed responsibilities, the latter seems essential. In either case any money spent on running these courses is money very well spent indeed.
It is interesting also to compare the part played by women. In England it is the rule to have women as teachers in primary schools, while there are the exceptions. In Chinese schools in the Third Division it is the other way round, yet the number of women teachers is increasing. In the Chinese teachers’ course the hall was neatly divided by some process of natural selection into two groups—men on the left and women on the right, with the men who arrived too late for a seat in their own camp regretfully finding themselves obliged to join the ladies! The numbers were 111 women and 186 men. In the Native teachers’ course there were only 12 lady teachers altogether, but it is possible that this number will almost double itself each year for some time to come. Nothing could be more important for Native education and I hope that all who can persuade well-qualified girls to take up teaching will do so.
In the long run education in Sarawak will depend on people themselves. The Government, to adapt Sir Winston Churchill’s phrase, can give them the tools, but they must finish the job. In the upper reaches of the Rajang it takes three weeks travelling from Sibu to visit five schools. With such communications there can be no real supervision, only occasional visits to help maintain morale.
The tools of education are the ability to read, write and count. Once children have learnt to apply these three bronze age inventions, nothing can hold them back if they are sufficiently clever, provided they have access to books. The only teacher William Cobbett ever had was an older boy who showed him how to fit the letters together to make sounds. This did not prevent him becoming a Member of Parliament and the author of many books. The Royal Society was founded by a galaxy of scientists who bad emerged from Oxford and Cambridge at a time when the universities were little better than drinking dens for illiterate dons. But without books the strongest intellect will starve. That is why, in the Third Division, we are doing our best to make sure that in every school there is a little library of well illustrated books from which children with fresh and active minds can learn for themselves and teach each other about the world beyond the rivers.
150
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1958
His Excellency the Governor’s visit to Bintulu and Sibuti—August 1958.
His Excellency, accompanied by the Resident, Fourth Division, (Mr. F. B. K. Drake, m.b.e.), the District Officer, Miri, (Mr. P. Scanlon) and the Assistant Private Secretary, (Mr. Ignatius Yong), embarked on the M.Y. Zahora at Sungei Biawak on 1st August at 5.00 p.m. carrying with them four cases of beer and a drum of Kuching water as a gift to the thirsty people of Bintulu and, after a night stop at Kedurong, arrived off Bintulu at 8.00 a.m. on 3rd August.
After bidding au revoir to the District Officer, Miri, who was to rejoin the party at Kuala Sibuti on the 8th August, the rest of the party transferred to the Lorna Doone and entered the Bintulu river. At the wharf to meet His Excellency on his arrival at 9.00 a.m. was the District Officer, (Mr. R. J. Pole-Evans). On landing, His Excellency inspected a Guard of Honour mounted by the Sarawak Constabulary and, after being introduced to the local citizens, proceeded to the line of school children at the other side of the wharf. A little girl, the daughter of the Chief Clerk, Mr. Chin Syn Yu, presented His Excellency with a bouquet.
After changing in the District Officer's house the party, now joined by the District Officer and the Senior Native Officer (Abang Indeh) left by outboards for Rumah Budit in the Tubau river where it was planned to have lunch at 1.00 p.m. Unfortunately the outboard which carried the cook and boys as well as the provisions was so overloaded that it travelled very much slower than the others and did not reach its destination until about 4.00 p.m. It was fortunate, therefore, that owing to the doubtful state of the river the programme for a visit to Rumah Penghulu Deng, four hours further upriver, had been cancelled in time for the people to come downriver. When the party arrived at Tubau bazaar Penghulu Deng himself, several Tuai2 Rumah and others from ten houses and the Tubau citizens including the blind boy, Seleh anak Anyeh, were there to welcome His Excellency.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Malaya-Borneo Exhibition was held in Singapore.
on the 25th., when the Colonial Secretary, the
hon'ble Mr. F S. James, who presided over a large
attendance of members of the sub-committees. re-
ported the progress which had been made in the
arrangements.
The Chairman, having referred to the lay-out
of the Exhibition ground, stated that the Singa-
pore end would be utilised for the erection of
stands, kiosks and shops for commercial exhibits.
Then came the Stadium and beyond this at the
Tanjong Pagar end. behind the Union Jack Club,
were six large godowns, for which they were
allowing the F. M S. Government 840.000 off their
contribution to the cost of the Exhibition, and
which would house the important Agricultural,
Forestry, Mines, Arts and Crafts Section. On the
vacant spaces near these it was hoped to have side
shows rather above the usual circus standard.
There will also be entertainments of local origin
and a cinema in one of the godowns. The main
entrance will be in Robinson road, with another
one for pedestrians from Raffles Quay; and the
main exit would be near the Union Jack Club.
WORK or SUB COMMITTEES.
Reference to the work performed by the various
sub-committees was made. In the Forestry Sec-
tions, of which Dr. Foxworthy has charge, some of
the most striking features will be timber, samples
of rattan and rattan work: exhibit of oils, gums
and resins for commercial use. fibres and pulp.
Malayan Matches Limited are showing two ma-
chines in operation, and the F. M. S. Railways
will display a buffet coach, and a section of a
sleeping coach.
Agricultural and Horticultural exhibits are in-
cluded in the Agricultural section, and the Com-
mittee, under Mr. B. J. Eaton expect to collect
some 10,000 exhibits, of which cereals, food pro-
ducts, fruit and rubber will form the chief bulk.
Sarawak and British North Borneo are sending
sago factories. The Horticultural side will dis-
play amateur and professional exhibits separately.
Special films are being prepared at a cost of $5,060
to illustrate such subjects as Mouldy Rot disease
of rubber; pink disease of rubber; African oil
palm; and Roselle fibre plant; and these films
will be available for propaganda or educational
uses after the Exhibition. There will also be a
poultry’ show, which had designs on the Govern-
ment sheep sheds, and he hoped a suitable ar-
rangement could be arrived at to accommodate
the sheep outside and the poultry inside
The Arts and Crafts Committee under Mr. H. C.
Robinson, has drawn up an extensive schedule in
which weapons, hunting materials, fabrics and jewellery are the prominent features. A Malay and a Dyak house, and it was hoped y Murut
house, will be built in the grounds. A tobacco
leaf wrapper from British North Borneo will make a display of his work
COMMERCIAL SECTION.
The Commercial Section under the Chairman- ship of Mr. W. P. W. Kerr was mainly concerned
with imported articles, and over a hundred plots, kiosks and shops had been taken up. The Singa-
pore Cha uber of Commerce had thowed its sup- port by a handsome donation of 82,000, followed by the Chinese Chamber of Commerce with $1,000 towards the cost of the Commerce Section. He thought the Majority of go-a-head firms realised that the Exhibition would provide rather an ex-
ceptional opportunity for advertisement and
pushing their goods, and he was confident that it
would do much to stimulate trade. He was glad to see that Australia were to take part in the Ex- hibition and he hoped it would be a large part. .
Lord Northcliffe. during his visit here did his ut-
most by cabling home to encourage the people there to take a part
In the Foreign Section, the Japanese were taking the opportunity to make a good display of their
goods and they had taken 50 shops; American,
Dutch, France and Danish friends had shewn con- siderablc interest. Singapore was a great trade
centre and it was only right that in an. Exhibition
of this kind, the cosmopolitan trade of Singapore should be well represented
The Mines Sections of a country like this did not lend itself naturally to a very interesting ex- hibit. but what with models, samples, diagrams and photos, he gathered that quite an attractive show would be made. Mr. Scrivenor of Batu Gajah was in charge of the Section A working
model mine would be erected, and the new industry of the F. M. S., china clay and pottery,
will be shown m this section.
WILD ANIMALS.
These five sections were the mainstay of the
Exhibition. They hoped to have an interesting collection of wild animals, a selection of which His Royal Highness had notified them he would be pleased to accept for presentation to the London Zoo. This section was in charge of Mr.
H. C. Robinson of F. M. S Museums The valu- able specimens included a long-nosed monkey from Brunei. The latter belonged to a species which no-one had yet succeeded in taking alive to England, and if the Prince succeeded in doing so his popularity would be greater even than it was now.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

The Sarawak Gazette.
MONDAY. JULY 1st. 1935.
anchored opposite Astana, she was met by the Acting Government Secretary, the Treasurer of Sarawak, and the Resident, First Division, who escorted His Highness ashore in the Siamese State Barge, which was manned by a crew of Malays dressed in national costume. As soon as the barge left the ship, a royal salute of twenty-one guns was fired from the' Fort.
His Highness landed at Pengkalan Batu, where he was greeted by members of the Supreme Council and the Committee of Administration. After inspecting a Constabulary Guard of Honour, His Highness drove to the Residency, where Government officers and the heads of European business firms were waiting.
Mr. H. B. Crocker, Acting Government Secretary, made a short speech in which he welcomed His Highness back to Sarawak, and concluded by proposing His Highness’ health, which was drunk by all present.
On the afternoon of the 24th, a garden party was given at the Residency, at which members of all communities had an opportunity of meeting His Highness the Tuan Muda. Tables were set out in the Residency grounds, where tea was served to the accompaniment of a programme of music rendered by the Constabulary Band. The guests dispersed at dusk, having spent a most enjoyable afternoon which not even an occasional shower could do anything to mar.
Local and personal.
June.
His Highness the Tuan Muda arrived in Kuching by s.s. Vyner Brooke on Monday, June 24th, having travelled from Amsterdam to Singapore by air. As the Vyner Brooke
His Highness the Tuan Muda is at present in Residence at “The Hill,” pending the completion of certain repairs which are now being carried out at Astana. Mr. H. B. i Crocker has moved temporarily to the Residency.
As a result of the new speed-up in the Far Eastern Service of the K.L.M., letters sent by Dutch Airways reach London five and a half days after being posted in Singapore. S.S. Vyner Brooke, which sailed from Kuching on Monday. May 17th, connected with the Dutch plane that left Singapore on the 19th; this meant that letters posted in Kuching on the 17th reached London exactly one week later.
While on the subject, we are informed
that m.v. Aim Chin Sent?, a Chinese-owned
motor-schooner, left Sadong on the 16th and
reached Singapore on the 19th in time for the
Dutch air mail. In other words, a letter
written in an outstation in Sarawak reached
London just eight days after being posted,
about thi time that it wotdd have taken to
get to Kuching in the ordinary course of
events. This is a record which will probably
stand for some time to come, and one which
certainly makes one think. The time is soon
coming when we shall be able to take Satur-
day morning off and go home to England for
the week-end.—provided, always, that we
can afford the fare, for trips by air are
expensive, and are one of the few things in
the East for which one cannot (as yet) sign ,
a chit!
The home correspondent of the Straits Times, in an article dated May 22nd, writes as follows :—
“Last week-end, I took refuge from a mid-May storm of sleet and snow at“The Angel," Henley-on-Thames. and dis covered that "mine host” was none other than Mr. Flood-Page, formerly one of the most popular planters in Malaya. He told me that he is exceedingly happy, and has no wish to voyage east of Suez again. Mr. Flood-Page has numerous friends in this countrv, having been stationed for several years in Miri and Kuching, where he was employed in the Public Works Depart ment. He left the Government Service to wards the end of 1930
Mr. and Mrs. F. H. Pollard succumbed simultaneously to an attack of malaria on May 11th and were admitted to the General Hospital. Kuching, on the following day. They returned to Bau on the 24th.
We welcome back to Kuching Mr. and Mrs. R. W. Chater and Mr. J. P. Baird, who returned from furlough on June 10th and 24th respectively. Mrs. Baird is remaining at home for the time being
We note from the Kalaka monthly report for May that both participants in a divingeontest held at Saratok to settle a land dispute remained underwater for more than five minutes. The endurance of Dayaks who take part in these contests is phenomenal, and
there can be no question of cheating since
i the contest always takes place in the presence
of the District Officer, and is closely watched
I by a vigilant crowd of natives, many of whom
are interested in the result, and who are there-
fore on the look-out for any foul play.
It has usually been assumed that three
minutes is about the limit of consciousness of
i the average human being under water, in fact-
’ we believe that this period is seldom exceeded
' even by trained pearl-divers. It must be
borne in mind, however, that pearl-divers
' operate at depths where the effects of water-
pressure are necessarily severe, whereas
Dayaks only submerge a foot, or two beneath
I the surface.
We print in another column an account of
a meeting held in Kuching on May 25th to

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Captain Clark served for twenty-one years with the Royal Marine Light Infantry, and had the Long Service Medal. Captain Clark had. therefore served under one Queen, two Kings and' two Rajahs, and earned two Long Service Medals and two pensions,—surely something of a record. He was very popular in Kuching, where he was always to the fore in dub and social life, and he became quite a tradition in the Rangers, where he managed to win the con fidence and affection of the rank and file to a quite exceptional degree. We extend our deepest sympathy to his widow and children in their great loss. MR. E. H. P. BENGTSSON. We deeply regret to learn that Mr. E. H. P. Bengtsson died suddenly in England on August 10th. Mr. Bengtsson brought H.H.M.Y Maimuna out from England in 1926, and joined the Government Service first as Chief Engineer of this vessel, and then as Superintendent Engineer, Government Workshop, in which post he served until his retire ment in July. 1932. Mr. Bengtsson, who had an adventurous life, was a Yorkshireman of the best type, shrewd. kindly and with a great sense of humour, indeed many of his sayings being still current in Sarawak. We are sure that Mr. Bengtsson’s many, friends in this country will join with us in expressing our deepest sympathy to his widow and daughter. Shabby Pilgrimage. Very little will be done to improve the relation ship between Islam and Christendom by the publication of Triumphant Pilgrimage (Harrap, His. 6.), an account by Owen Rutter of an English Moslem's trip to Mecca. Trip is the right word. "David Chale," whose incredibly aquiline profile serves as frontispiece, was a young district officer in Borneo and developed a great liking for the Malays, which raised confused ideas in his mind of "giving them a lead" and in some obscure way promoting world peace by adopting their religion, a resolve bolstered up by a good deal of oblique disparagement of the Sarawak administration. According to Mr. Rutter he then returned to London and spent some years as a financier, amassing enough money to enable him to make the immemorial pilgrimage in company with a Malay wife of wondrous charm and surpassing manners. Mr. Chale" found a good many obstructions placed in the way of his venture, mostly by Moslem officials who unworthily suspected that he lacked sincerity, and seemed to think that he might actually want to write a book about his experiences. This suspicion appears to shock Mr. Rutter pro foundly. to judge by his castigation of other so-called pilgrims who have written up their journey. However, by a shabby, and disingenuous piece of sophistry and—so we were given to under stand—by practically hypnotising the Emir Feisal, "Chale” slipped through the official barriers and offers as the result a decidedly second-rate tourist’s account of the activities at Mecca when the pilgrims arrive. Friend "Chale” seems fairly pleased with himself, to judge by the mood in which his biographer writes, in which he appears to recount his own adventures with bated breath and wondering eye, and by the manner in which the merely difficult is placed before the reader in the guise of the strenuously dangerous. Triumphant Pilgrimage will make Moslems suspect the good faith of con verts more than ever, and is a particularly blatant example of the lengths to which some sensation-hunters will go to get the "inside story.” —(Truth.) India Association of Sarawak. INAUGURAL LUNCHEON. On Sunday, September 19th, the members of the Indian Association of Sarawak gave a luncheon to mark the Association’s inauguration. The Associa tion, which was registered on September 1st. 1937. lias the following objects :— (a) To cultivate friendly feelings among Indians in Sarawak. (b) To render any possible assistance to the poor and the needy members of the Community. (c) To establish among the Indians an organisa tion which may eventually become an efficients representative body to express the opinion of the Community as a whole on questions affecting their general welfare, and also to be of use on any occasion requiring public co-operation. At the end of a. most enjoyable meal the following speech was made by Dr. K. V. Krishna, the President of the Association :— “GENTLEMEN, “We are now here under the auspicies of the Indian Association of Sarawak. Its members are very happy because they have been able to organise themselves into a united body and to get their Association registered to function in this place. “As the first object of their Association is to bring about friendly feelings among all the Indians living in Sarawak, irrespective of denominational differences either of race or religion, they wanted to give a practical expression to this by arranging the function of this afternoon. They wanted others also to participate in their joy; so they extended their invitations to non-members of their own nationality and also to some gentlemen of other nationalities. "As the President of this Association I thank you all

[NEXT EXCERPT]

The Acting Resident gave instructions for certain additions and alterations to be carried out to the European bungalow at present in course of construction.
The Court Writer visited Maludam on the 13th in order to arrange about shop assessment.
Medical: -
During the month 345 out-patients were attended to, 116 N.A.B. injections and 94 vaccinations were given at the Hospital, and during the Dresser’s visits at various substations in the Batang Lupar.
Nine cases were heard in the Magistrate’s Court, five of which were criminal and four civil. Of the five criminal cases there were two convictions.
Three cases were heard in the District Court, two of which were criminal and one civil. Two criminal cases were convictions. Civil claims involved amounts totalling $249.20. Fines imposed $83.40, and fees collected $42.10.
Trade and Customs: -
At the end of the month the Simanggang Police were five men below authorized strength, and as three men had been promised to the Officer-in-Charge of Engkilili it will be necessary to recruit eight constables.
Over eighty per cent of the present Simanggang constables may be graded as recruits.
All ranks are undergoing recruits training, and although the standard of efficiency and general smartness is very low it is thought that constables are making very satisfactory progress.
Prison. -Daily average of prisoners March 45-51.
During the month prisoners were employed mowing and on other routine work.
Prisoner Buan, who escaped from jail on the 29th of February, was re-captured in the Saribas district on 9th instant. Buan has been sent to Kuching Hospital for treatment for gunshot wound on the thigh.
The discipline of the jail during March was anything but satisfactory, there being frequent fights amongst Chinese prisoners.
It is thought advisable to transfer one or two of these prisoners to another station, but as the number of prisoners is inadequate for the present work of this station no transfer can be effected at present.
General health of the jail was good.
ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports: - Nine criminal cases were heard in the Lower Courts convictions being obtained in each case. Hiew Choi was fined $50 or two months’ imprisonment for breach of Forest Regulations. There were no other cases of note Civil suits amounting to a total of $334.02 were heard.
On the 14th instant I went up the Lemanak, as far as Sungei Semanju, accompanied by Abang Sedik, Native Officer, and three Dyak Reservists, for the purpose of posting these men in the Semanju, from whence reports have been received that stone throwing, of a similar nature to the Skrang incidents, has been taking place. I spent two nights in a house in the Semanju, and stones and pieces of wood were certainly thrown into the house during my stay, causing, apparently, great excitement and claim.
It was impossible to catch or see the offenders, who were no doubt hidden in the thick undergrowth surrounding the house On the following day I caused the babas surrounding the house to be cut away in order that it might afford no cover, and there was no recur-rence on the second night. Stone throwing, however, is still reported from this area, from three or four houses.
It is difficult to ascertain the object of these disturbances, which seem to cause considerable perturbation among local Dyaks, and is inclined to make them neglect their padi, as they state they dare not go to their padi fields unless walking in numbers.
Nothing has been reported as stolen, but the local people are convinced that there is a party of Dyaks lurking in the neighbourhood, in the hope of cutting off anyone who is out alone and taking his or her head. Penghulu Suel has been instructed to take charge of the reservists, and to calm down any excitement or alarm that may arise, until steps can be taken to catch the offenders.
I was in Simanggang from the 24th to 28th instant.
On the 19th instant, Dr. G. ter Brugger, Geologist of the Dutch Government, arrived in Engkilili from Marup, where he had been for several days. Dr. Brugger spent the night here and returned up river the following day, via Lubok Antu. Dr. Brugger informs me that his work in the Geologist Survey of these parts is nearly completed, and that he will not be visiting Sarawak Territory again.
Abang Omar, Native Officer, came down from Lubok Antu on the 17th instant, with Antas, who together with Bangkang (f.) had escaped from custody at Song. Bangkang is reported to be on the point of giving birth, and was unable to travel. Antas was sent down to Simanggang from here.
There are various rumours that affairs in the Ulu Ai and Engkari are not as they should be, and the Native Officer at Lubok Antu reports that no Dyaks whatsoever from the districts of Penghulus Kana and Ramba have been down to Lubok Antu for over a month. This is distinctly abnormal, and an early visit up river is important and will be undertaken in a day or so.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

MONDAY, JULY 2, 1928.
Births.
To Mr. and Mrs. P. H. HAYWARD, at the Grange, Kuching, on the 80th May, 1928, a son.
POLLOCK:—On May 10, 1928, at Miri, Sarawak, to IRENE. wife of CHARLES MURRAY POLLOCK—a daughter.
Death.
Beresford STOOKE :—On 22nd May, in a nursing homo at Peterborough, following an operation, Winfred THIRZA, dearly loved wife of G. Beresford Stooke, R. N. (ret.), District Officer, Kenya Colony, and of Tytherton, near Chippenham, Wiltshire.
NOTES.
June,
THE Autumn Meeting of the Sarawak Turf Club has been fixed for the 22nd and 24th September. On another page we pub lish a provisional programme of the Meeting.
IT is satisfactory to learn that since the beginning of this year 29 lepers have been discharged, as recovered, from the Leper Camp and have returned to their homes. This number includes 24 Dayaks, 2 Malays, 2 Chinese and 1 Tamil.
THE Government Gazette for June 16th contains the following appointments. Mr. F. F. Boult to act as Superintendent of Lands, Dr. W. Hutchison to be Acting Principal Medical Officer and Mr. R. A. Miller-Hallett to be an assistant in the Public Works Department. WE understand from the General Post Office that from the 7th April a new printing of postage stamps has been on sale. All stamps (with the exception of the five cents, of which there still remains a large quantity) are issued on paper containing a multiple quatrefoil watermark, similar to that for merly found in the stamps of Johore and Zanzibar.
DURING the next three years the Kuching Municipal Area is to be considerably increased. A notice of the proposed new boundaries will be found in the Government Gazette. A home paper states that a ship arrived in London on May 5th with the world’s record consignment of 46 orang-utan from Borneo, as well as a tiger, an elephant, a wild cat, rare game and other animals. With the beasts was their attendant, a native of Sumatra, speaking only Javanese. The orang-utan consumed 100.000 bananas during the voyage. We are informed that none of the orang utan came from Borneo, but from Sumatra. An adult pair with a little one was being sold for $80 to $110, which in normal times would not be the price of a young one. Elephants were to be had for $60 each. A steel storage reservoir for water, having a capacity of two and a half million gallons (which represents approximately 11,000 tons) is shortly to arrive in sections in Kuching and will be installed upon the top of Datu Muda’s hill. This tank is stated to be the largest of its kind in the world.
Connection with the present system of town mains will be made by a special 16’ steel pipe to be laid from Datu Muda’s hill to the high level tank at the Waterworks, a distance of about one mile. Upon com pletion this substantial reserve of drinking water will be available for emergencies.
OUR readers, says The North Borneo Herald will learn with regret that Mr. Edward Dent has decided to resign his Directorship in the Chartered Company, and thus sever his Official connection with the Territory he has so long assisted to administer. Mr. Dent’s connection with North Borneo dates back to the period prior to the actual incorporation of the Chartered Company in 1881, and he is the last survivor of those responsible for the early adminis tration of the Territory. It will he recalled by many that the Sultans of Brunei and Sulu in 1877 and 1878 trans ferred their sovereign rights over their territories to Mr. Dent’s brother, the late Sir Alfred Dent, who represented a small syndicate of which Mr. Edward Dent is the last survivor, and that as a result of the petition of this syndicate the Charter incor porating the British North Borneo Company was obtained from the Crown. Mr. Dent has therefore been closely con-nected with the acquisition, administration, and development of the country for many years; he has seen North Borneo rescued from what amounted to a state of barbarism and brought to its present state of development; and we are sure that all our readers will join with us in sending him our best wishes, and the hope that he will live to see even greater development in the future.
AMONG the passengers to arrive by S.S. Vyner Brooke on the 18th were Mrs. Reynolds and child. Mrs. Reynolds travelled direct from Kenya Colony and has come to join her husband in Kuching.
WE regret to report that Mr. 0 Lang, Commissioner of Police, has been laid up for a short time and that an operation was found to be necessary. He is at present in hospital where he is making satisfactory progress.
THE engagement is announced of Mr. R. E. Edwards of the Public Works Depart ment to Miss B. Slater, daughter of Mr. G. Slater and the late Mrs. Slater of Hull. The marriage will take place in November.
NEWS was brought by the S.S. Vyner Brooke on the 18th of the successful advance of the Southerns on Pekin and was received with delight by the local Chinese population. In fact the celebrations did not cease until the last cracker in the bazaar had been fired.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

The Council then opened its session and the Presi-dent welcomed the visitors. On behalf of the delega-tion O.K.K. Hasbullah spoke, offering his best wishes to the Council and expressing his appreciation of the hospitality shewn to his party.
After the meeting the party repaired to the bungalow of the District Officer for curry tiffin at which the Pre-sident and the Vice President of the Council were also present.
At 2 p.m. the party under the able direction of the President of the Council and driven by the non-pro-fessional District Officer in a Land Rover toured the new bazaar site, the kampongs, the Malay and Chinese schools, the sawmill, the padi mill and the agricultural station at Penapak, on the first milestone of the Lim-bang-Pandaruan Road, Thereafter the tempo of en-tertainment grew fast and furious. At 4.00 p.m. the party were entertained at the Limbang Recreation Club at which the Resident and Mrs. Fisher were also pre-sent. At 6.15 p.m. the party and members of the Council were treated to drinks at the Residency.
The following morning, August 12th, saw the visitors going off to the ulu with the President of the Council in the M/L Aline. The party called at the following Council schools on the way—
1.	Pendam
2.	Merasam
3.	Bumbun
4.	Bambangan
5.	Batu Danau
6.	Ukong
Before returning to Limbang the party called on Mr. Lim Cheng Kok of Ukong, a Councillor, and had drinks in his shop. A member of the delegation also spent $130 on some rare old silver. They finally reached Limbang after sunset.
Alas, time was running out and regrettably our visitors soon made ready for departure. Early next morning they sailed away carrying, we hope, happy memories of their visit. When the writer went down to bid them farewell he found the Resident already on board before the others.
Abang Haji Abdulrahim
Cherita Sarang Burong Dalam Gua Niah
Menurut cherita yang di-beri oleh sa-orang yang tidak tahu akan rumah surat, ia-itu, buta huruf, dan menurut ingatan-nya maka ada-lah sarang burong di-dalam gua Niah itu pada mula-nya di-jumpai oleh orang pada zaman perentahan Sultan Brunei dahulu.
Sarang itu di-dapati di-dalam gua itu dari bawah hingga ka-tingkap batu yang di-atas, dan pada masa itu ia di-kenalkan oleh orang2 sebagai kulat (sarang burong). Mereka ambilkan sarang itu di-sabelah bawah hingga mana yang dapat di-jangkau dengan tangan dan sarang2 yang ada di-sabelah atas itu semua-nya tertinggal sahaja.
Dari dua hingga tiga tahun kemudian itu, sa-orang telah dapat fikiran membuat penjulok buloh atau kayu, panjang-nya lebeh kurang 10 depa dan pada hujong penjulok itu di-ikatkan sa-puntong besi, dan dengan penjulok ini-lah mereka julokkan sarang itu dari atas dan beransor2 kabawah. Penjulok itu sentiasa-lah di-kerat hingga tinggal panjang 1 depa dan yang demikian maka bekas keratan buloh dan kayu pen-julok itu ada di-dapati di-dalam gua tersebut.
Lebeh kurang pada masa itu juga ada sa-orang yang lain pula telah dapat fikiran membuat tiang buloh panjang-nya dari 7 hingga 8 depa. Di-hujong tiang itu di-buatkan-nya kayu palang untok tempat dudok kutika menjulok sarang dan di-pasang juga temberang rotan di-empat penjuru. Kemudian itu di-dirikan dengan temberang rotan yang di-ikat pada lubang batu atau di-buat akan-nya pantak kayu. Tiang tersebut ada-lah di-namakan tiang kaleh2 kerana ia dapat di-alehkan ka-lain2 tempat. Penjulok buloh pun juga di-ubah dan di-buat bersambong2 dari satu hingga lapan sambong, ia-itu, lapan depa, dan jika menguna-kan penjulok itu pada tempat yang rendah maka sambong-nya di-buka menurut kemahuan kita dan sunggoh pun bagitu chara-nya maka maseh juga ada ketinggalan sarang2 itu pada tingkap atas.
Dari 6 hingga 7 tahun mereka telah pandai pula membuat tiang buloh dan tiang kayu hingga dapat menchapai tingkap atas. Tiang itu di-sambong dan pada satu2 sambong-nya di-ikat dengan rotan serta di-pasangkan temberang. Pekerja’an ini di-jalan pada tiap2 tahun untok mengambil segala ikatan atau tem-berang yang lama dan ini mengunakan banyak rotan yang di-katakan hampir habis di-dapati dari hutan berdekatan dengan gua itu dan yang demikian mereka terpaksa mengambil rotan di-lain2 tempat. Kema-langan pun juga biasa berlaku di-dalam gua itu dan dalam 2 atau 3 tahun maka ada sahaja orang di-jumpai jatoh hingga mati.
Dalam masa perentahan Raja Sarawak, Niah telah di-lawati oleh banyak orang yang datang dari lain2 negeri terutama-nya Brunei dan dari Kuching. Me-nurut cherita-nya maka Ibrahim dan Japar, ia-itu, peranakan Brunei telah membuat perkakas tiang yang di-dapati dalam gua itu sekarang ini.
Chara membuat tiang belian untok mengambil sarang burong dalam gua itu ada-lah separti berikut:—

[NEXT EXCERPT]

The British Government proposes to introduce legislation to establish the Colonial Development Corporation. It is proposed that the same legislat- ion should provide for the establishment of the Corporation which is to take over the Ground Nuts Project established in East Africa by the Minister of Food. This would be a separate body from the main Colonial Development Corporation and provision would be made for it to undertake enter- prises similar to the Ground Nuts Project over a wide field. The two bodies would work in closest liaison with one another.”
Census.
All governments the world over take some kind of census from time to time, the best known being a population census. In 1939 the Sarawak Govern- ment carried out an enumeration which did not amount to a complete population census because of the intervention of war. Nevertheless the information collected was extremely valuable and among other tilings it enabled the Government to obtain food and distribute it equitably.
2.
A new Census Ordinance came into force on 2nd June, 1947. This Ordinance us very little different from the Census Order published before the war.
3.
Also on 2nd June a notice was published to the effect that a census of the population will be token in Sarawak between 27th October and 11th December, 1947, and that the numbering of houses preliminary thereto will commence in August.
4. In the same Gazette appeared the appoint- ment of a Superintendent, Deputy Superintendent and 21 Assistant Superintendents of Census for the purpose of earn ing out the 1917 Census.
5. This forthcoming census will be a lengthy proceeding spread over the next five months until the middle of December. The numbering of houses will commence in August and will take about a month. House Numberers will affix number plates to the houses, or write numbers on them, at the same time enquiring the name of the principal occupier and the number of people living in each house. It will be seen, therefore, that this opera- tion will not inconvenience the people in any way.
6. The next operation will be what is called the Preliminary Enumeration. It will commence about the end of October, when Enumerators will visit all houses throughout the country, asking a number of questions in respect of each individual. These questions will probably be as follows ;—
Name;
Sex:
Conjugal condition (i.e., single, married, widowed or divorced):
Age:
Country of Birth;
Race;
Religion ;
If a woman, the number of children (a) born, and (b) still alive;
Ability to read and write any language;
Occupation :
Industry.
7. The night of the 26th, 27th November, 947, has been fixed for the final date of the Census. Thus, early on 27th November, all Enumerators will visit the houses once again and chock those particulars which have already been recorded by them. This operation will not take very long, and its main purpose is to strike off the lists any names of persons who died before midnight of the 26th and to add to the lists any babies born.
8. When the Final Enumeration has been completed, the information collected will be sum- marised and published. It can be seen from the questions to be asked just bow valuable the published information will be. They will give us information on housing, sex ratios, age groups, vital statistics, fertility, literacy, immigration, occupations, industries, etc. There is no need to enlarge upon the value of this information. One has only to consider how much an Education or a Health Department can benefit, just to touch on two aspects. No person can fail to realise that the Census must be of benefit to every person of every race.
9. There must be many public-spirited men who can see in this Census an opportunity to give their services freely in the interests of the general community. In the schools, too, there are boys
old enough and with sufficient education to be of great assistance. By volunteering they will be per- forming a public service and improving their own education. Offers of assistance will be gratefully accepted by Assistant Superintendents.—(Con- tributed.)
A Visit to the United Kingdom.
I was one of the five Malayan visitors to the United Kingdom under the auspices of the British Council. The other members of the party were Mr. T. R. Abraham, headmaster of Batu Road English School, Kuala Lumpur, Mr. Abdul Aziz bin Yeop, Malay Administrative Officer, Kuantan, Mr. Ng Keam Nyan, Book-stall Manager, Seremban, and Mr. Lim Yew Hock, General Secretary, Clerical and Administrative Union, Singapore.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

hunters, the opium-smokers, the gamblers, the tuba-fishers, and those many others who find their natural instincts thwarted and perverted by an efficient bureaucracy, in the place of these consol- ations? In answering this question the peculiar circumstances of Sarawak should be remembered. Great as the Brooke regime is generally admitted to have been, it is certain that it sadly failed in providing educational and medical facilities for its subjects and in improving and develop- ing the basic industry of the country, which is agriculture. Elsewhere in the colonial Empire these branches of government have met with no such neglect, and consequently criticism, which can properly be directed near at home, has no applica- tion in the wider sphere. But, unfortunately. even where the opportunity exists, the emancipated colonial subject, does not seem to take willingly to the more austere virtues. Progress comes, if progress it can indeed be called, more through the medium of the cinema and the dance-hall. The cheap allegation that the European advent brings dishonesty and venereal disease to innocent primitive peoples can be dismissed for the rubbish that it usually is. While acquitting ourselves of this charge, there can be no such easy refutation of the assertion that, by permitting the intro- duction of the less worthy instruments of western ‘‘culture," we have abolished one social sickness only to replace it by another. The staunchest defender of civil liberties must feel that there is a good deal to be said for a rigid censorship of films which purport io depict to one half of the world how the other half lives, and yet it is surprising that, in places where such censorship is exercised, it often seems to be conducted on erroneous principles. Cinemas are not the only offenders. The same remarks apply in respect of certain types of magazines and other ebullitions of the con- genitally inane. It may be thought that these comments are prudish and puritan. It is believed, however, that similar views are widely held by officers charged with the duty of administering dependent territories, and in any ease it is not right that colonial peoples should be led to think that all the members of the dominant race disport them- selves in the fashion depicted when relieved of the obligations of Government. It is fair to say that a new imperialism, whether it be of the Japanese or American brands, sets about its task in a self-assertive way which reveals a naive con- fidence in the institutions and conventions of the mother-country and their adaptability to a new environment. The British, long schooled in the art of Empire, are guilty of no such mistake, but the fact that our own recreations are now so largely borrowed from the other side of the Atlantic makes it natural that practices and behaviour, which we ridicule amongst ourselves, should predominate in the cultural influences that follow in our wake.
It is difficult to write thus of one of the most pernicious phenomena of the times without sound- ing as if the goal of administration should be to produce as many intellectual highbrows as possible. But it is not maintained that pleasures and entertainments are undesirable merely because they are popular. The public enthusiasm for association football, for example, is an instance of the spread of an influence which does not gratuitously put a stick into the hands of the enemies of British rule. There are also, of course, other interpreters of western life at work besides the ones that have been mentioned, but which penetrate in a less obvious but possibly more
effective way. By now our more intelligent and educated Asiatic friends are probably well aware that life in Europe does not consist entirely of meandering about in the proximity of raucous dance-bands or speculating on the private affairs of persons bewitchingly under-clad.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Vol. LXXVII.
No. 1125.
PRICE
KUCHING, Friday, December 28th, 1951.
50 CENTS
Contents.
Page.
Awang, George Cross	...	...	...	233
Promotion	...	...	...	234
His Excellency Address to Council Negri	... 234
Now and Next Year	...	...	...	239
After the Burial of Y. T. M. Duli Pengiran Bendahara anak Haji Mohamed Yassin, o.b.e. ...	... 240
A Question of Audit	...	...	...	240
The Museum	...	...	...	242
The Rambutan	...	...	243
Correspondence	...	...	...	243
Sarawak Club	...	...	...	244
Island Club	...	...	...	244
The Races	...	...	...	245
Kuching Market	Price List ...	...	...	249
The Sarawak Gazette.
FRIDAY, DEC. 28th, 1951.
Awang, George Cross.
The London Gazette of November the 20th, 1951, announced the award of the George Cross to Awang anak Rawang, a 28 year old Iban from Skrang in the second Division, for the highest gallantry whilst serving as a tracker with the Security Forces in Malaya. We are all very proud of him and very pleased that he has fully recovered from his severe wounds. We congratulate Awang on gaining this tremendous honour and we publish below the official citation followed by the text of the congratulatory telegram sent to him by His Excellency the Governor.
CITATION.
On the morning of the 27th May, 1951, 10 Pl. of “D" Coy 1st Bn. The Worcestershire Regiment were ambushed by opproximately 50 bandits. No. FF/978 Awang anak Rawang (Iban Tracker) was moving behind the Section Commander of the lead-ing section. When the ambush was sprung the leading scout was killed instantly and the Section Commander fatally wounded. Awang anak Rawang was hit through the thigh bone but the bullet passed right through the bone without shattering it. At the same time Pte Hughes, moving behind Awang
anak Rawang, was hit below the knee, the bullet completely shattering the bone. Awang anak Ra-wang though wounded and lying exposed under heavy rifle and automatic fire, collected his own wea-pons and that of Pte Hughes and dragged Pte Hughes into the cover of the jungle. Awang dis-regarding completely his own wound in view of the impending bandit attack took upon fire position to de-fend Hughes. There he remained firing on every attempt made by the bandits to approach, kill him-self and Hughes and secure their arms. Due to this determined and courages conduct he successfully drove off several such attacks. Ultimately Awang was again wounded, the bullet shattering his right arm and rendering further use of his rifle or parang impossible. Despite loss of blood from his undressed wounds, he dragged himself over to Pte Hughes, took a grenade from his pouch and with his teeth pulled out the pin. He resumed his position on guard the grenade in his left arm and defied the bandits to approach. So resolute was his demeanour that the bandits who had maintained their attacks for some forty minutes withdrew leaving Awang in possession of the battle-field.
The coolness, fortitude and offensive spirit display-ed by Awang anak Rawang is of the highest order. Despite being twice severely wounded, he disregard-ed completely his own wounds and his life, showing the utmost self-sacrifice, courage and resolution to continue the fight and protect Pte Hughes to the end.
There can be no question that by his own actions he saved the life of Pte Hughes, who required all his strength to keep a tourniquet on his shattered leg, he saved his own life and he prevented their weapons falling into bandit hands. His conduct is an example of the highest courage. The devotion to duty and disregard of his own life shown will inspire all who hear of it and is most worthy of recognition.
Telegram from His Excellency the Governor to Awang, G.c.
"I congratulate you most sincerely on the high honour which His Majesty the King has seen fit to confer on you. The George Cross is the high-est decoration which is open to civilians and is awarded only in cases of conspicuous courage and gallantry in circumstances of extreme danger. The whole country is proud of you and you have added great distinction and honour to the name of Sarawak and the Iban people."
234
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 28, 1951.
Promotion.
The Secretary of State for the Colonies has approved the promotion of Abang Openg bin Abang Spi’ee to the Sarawak Senior Service as an Adminis-trative Officer with effect from 1st April, 1951, and of Mr. Chin Shin Sen, o.s.s., to the Sarawak Senior Service as a Principal Assistant Secretary in the Secretariat, Kuching, with effect from the same date.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

The prison gang has been employed on the usual routine work during the month, including the gravelling and re-laying of the paths round the Fort.
The substations were visited from 12thâ€”14th and again from 26thâ€”29th. I was away at Simanggang from 19thâ€”21st. On 13th instant an inquiry was held at Debak into the corpse of a male child, aged about fifteen days, found floating in the river at Debak. A verdict of death from natural causes was brought in, the father Kueh Tsing Yong being prosecuted under Registration Order Râ€”1 for not reporting the birth and death of the child, and one Wang Seng being prosecuted for committing a public nuisance, section 290 I.P.O., for throwing the corpse into the river instead of burying it at the Chinese cementry.
On 4th instant at 2 p.m. an exceptionally heavy rain-storm occurred. Pitch darkness developed and work was held up in the office for three quarters of an hour while the rain swept half way across the upper part of the Fort.
Shipping.â€”Eight motor vessels entered and cleared during the month.
KALAKA DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Kalaka, Mr. L. K. Morse.
I proceeded to Kuching via Lingga on short leave on the 20th and was still away at the end of the month.
Abang Bujang, Native Officer, Kabong, also proceeded to Kuching in order to receive a Long Service Decoration on the Birthday of His Highness the Rajah.
A contract for the upkeep of the Saratok-Roban Road was made out and approved and the contractor has started work.
The M.L. One returned from dock on the 19th. She was sent to the Saribas District on duty and was still away at the end of the month.
Abang Zin, Native Officer proceeded on leave on the 21st instant, Abang Bunsu from Simanggang taking his place here.
The cattle at Kabong numbered seventy-nine head at the beginning of the month.
Trade Kalaka. It will be noted that there is a big drop in the export and import figures for the month.
LAND OFFICE.
Extracts from the report of the Land Officer, Second Division, Mr. B. Summers.
On the 8th, the Superintendent of the Lands arrived from Kuching, returning on the 10th instant. The purpose of this visit being the drawing up of Estimates for 1931.
The new S.JP.G. Mission land was also examined; tins comprises an area of twenty-two acres.
Third Division News.
September, 1930.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports for September, 1930, by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident:â€”
Resident's Court.â€”Criminal: one case was heard and resulted in conviction, and in one appeal case the decision was reversed. Civil: one case was heard and two appeal cases, one of which was upheld and the other reversed. Claims amounted to $1,512.33 and fees to $36.25.
General.â€”On the 1st the Director of Public Works and the Divisional Engineer visited Sarikei and Binatang.
On the 4th instant I left for Mukah to meet His Highness the Tuan Muda, who visited Mukah, Oya and Dalat on the 6th and 7th inst., returning to Kuching the next day.
On leaving Oya I visited Matu and from there, accompanied by the District Officer, Lower Rejang, I visited Daro, Paloh, Belawai, Selalang and Rejang, also Sarikei on my way back to Sibu, arriving on the 13th inst.
The Divisional Land Officer was instructed to send a Land Inspector to Rejang, Belawai and Paloh to mark out kampong reserves. These people all live too close to one another at present, and the head or rich men usually use the land in close proximity to plant fruit, coconuts and rubber, so that at a future date there will be no land for extension.
The Chinese at Matu, Belawai and Paloh, who are building a new Bazaar on an approved Government plan, have been ordered to complete building or they must cease trading in the old shops.
Dr. Kroll, Head Geologist, N.E.I., arrived down the Batang Rejang on the 14th inst. and left for Kuching on the 18th inst.
SIBU.
The District Officer, Sibu, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports: â€”
Courts.â€”Lim Beng Tong, a bill collector working for the Sarawak Steamship Co., Ltd., was sentenced to 3 months under section 406 I.P.C. Three Foochows were sentenced to 2 years each under section 414 I.P.C. and one man 6 months under section 379 I.P.C. Fines and fees amounted to $585.
General.â€”There are constant reports of thefts each day but it is seldom possible to get sufficient evidence to charge anyone. The Foochow Schools Committee were told that the grant for the Ensurai School would be renewed on condition that a signed statement was put in, certifying that there were no books to which the Government objected in use in the school; this condition was complied with. Abang Elijah, Native Officer, reported on 18th that a Dyak woman was struck by lightning while on her farm at Kanowit, and killed.
Another deputation of unemployed came to the office asking for food and work and were told that Government bad no work to give out at present.
A party of Japanese engineers and scientists arrived on 10th and left on 11th for Kapit.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

The need is urgentcannot the Government move in the matter?
1 am, Sir,
Yours faithfully.
VISITOR."
MONTHLY REPORTS.
UPPER SARAWAK.
BAU AND PAKU
March.
Court.A number of cases of theft were before the Court amongst others Ng Khiuk was sent to gaol for the theft of several hundred tapping cups. He was smartly caught by L. C. Cham Singh at Siniawan in the act of loading them into a boat at night. Leong Hin, vagrant, was caught opening the ice box at Bau Works at 2.30 a. m. and was sentenced to a term of imprisonment. Low Song swept the gambling tables at 11 p. m. in the bazaar but was caught after a chase and was also sent to gaol. Kuan Chui stole a suit of clothes at Siniawan but was forwarded to Kuching for the state of his mind to be reported on by the Medical Authorities. Hiew Phan, a bad character and vagrant went to gaol for six months.
Two Dyaks were heavily fined for being drunk and assaulting the police in the bazaar. One had a parang at the time and tried to use it.
Sharimon a Dahan Estate coolie, who absconded seven months ago was arrested at Lundu. He returned with the evident intention of crimping Javanese from the estate. He has been in Sambas all the time and many Javanese have absconded recently. He slated that two escaped Bau prisoners Asma and another have joined the police and are in Batavia.
There were the usual number of cases in the Court of Requests.
Public Works.The new police barracks at Tondong have been put in hand and will be finished next month.
The prisoners (av:51) have completed the new section of the Buan road at the 1st mile A short section only remains to be done and when that is finished the track will be of uniform width throughout and gravelled for most of the distance.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1919.
109
Other roads and paths have been kept in order
and the bridge over the Seringgok stream completed
with substantial hand rails.
The ground at one end of the bungalow was found
to be a mass of white antsthis was all cut away and
several of the posts had been attacked by the pests
underground. These have all been supported on
and built round with brick which will effectually
prevent the constant settling of the posts which has
been taking place in the past. Many of them were
found to be only a foot or so in the ground.
General. As the currying of sewage in open tins
was a nuisance in the district this has been forbidden
in future and all such filth must now be carried in
sanitary buckets provided for the purpose by the
Government. Several Chinese were prosecuted for
evading this order and the nuisance has abated in
consequence.
The thefts of tapping cups from the various gar-
dens continues. How they are disposed of remains
a mystery at present but as many thousands are be-
ing stolen I suspect they are being taken to Kuching.
It is not possible to dispose of such a number locally.
So far only one of the thieves has been caught.
I went to Kuching on the 6th, returning on the
8th. A big bandong belonging to Yong Heng which
was hauled up on the bank behind his shop in Sinia-
wan bazaar was sprinkled with kerosene oil and
burnt at midnight on the 30th. The fire was ex-
tinguished but there was serious risk of the flames
spreading to the bazaar. The incendiary was not
seen but Yong Heng has his suspicions as to who
were those responsible for the outbreak. The boat
was partly destroyed.
The month has been unusually dry and hot, the
rainfall being 1039 inches only. The heat on some
days was intense and though storms frequently
threatened they usually passed over leaving the
atmosphere close and hot.
The health of the district has improved.
The out-put from the Cyaniding Works amounted
to gold 2,294.5 ozs. and silver 762.4 ozs.
DONALD A. OWEN,
Resident.
SADONG.
? ?
March.
There have been numerous cases before the
Courts during the mouth. Fines amounting to
nearly 200 were imposed upon Malays for des-
troying gutta rian trees. I hear that owing to the
price these leaves are now fetching thousands of
trees are being partially or totally cut down. I
have sent inspectors out to make further enquiries.
At the request of the Manager, I held Court at
the Colliery on the 12th where I was kept busy the
whole day. An enquiry was held respecting the
fire at the mine and fines imposed upon the guilty
parties. A number of debtors were brought before
me: I warned them to pay regularly seeing that
they earn quite good pay The Malays at the mine
complained about the Chinese pigs which they
asserted wire killed on the live-foot way and also
allowed to roam about under Malay houses.
It seems odd that although a well-built slaughter
house with cement floor and drains, etc., has been
erected the Chinese still prefer to slaughter their
beasts and exhibit the flesh for sale anywhere but
in the right place. The usual warnings were given.
The Manager asked me to see the traders about
the prices of rice and fish, etc., after some discussion
I drew up a provisional price list. I fear that the

[NEXT EXCERPT]

It is said that the Dayaks living on the border near on the Indonesian side never receive medical attention at all. There must therefore be a danger of infection for the Sarawak Dayaks wherever there is contact across the border. It is also reported that a fair amount of the goods imported from Indonesia overland is paid for in kind in the form of drugs.
The 1952 accounts of Co-operative Societies in the district have now been audited and show that the Rural Credit Societies with unlimited liability and the Padi Savings Societies are continuing to make good progress. In this Annual Report the Commissioner for Co-operative Development remarked that "The main strength of the Rural Credit movement lies in the Sadong River”. The Society whose secretary misappropriated its funds last year showed a net loss on the year's working, but it has survived this blow. There have been no liquidations yet in this area and the supervisors responsible are to be congratulated.
The harvest in the Lower Sadong was very good this year, and probably as good in the Upper Sadong as it is ever likely to be until the hill land can be allowed to lie fallow for longer periods.
Some requests have been received for permission to fell jungle for next season's farms and with the co-operation of the Department's staff it has been possible to inspect these areas. In some places there are still patches of swamp jungle which have never been felled and written permission has been given to make use of them. It is reported, however, that in some parts hill jungle has also been felled, and this matter is being investigated.
A plant pathologist from Cambridge has arrived at Tarat to investigate the cause of the pepper disease.
The new cinema at Serian was officially opened on April 19th, and has been doing fairly well. Films shown are mostly Chinese. The seating capacity is 420, Plans have been approved for another cinema at 32nd Mile, which will be slightly bigger than the one at Serian. These two cinemas should do much to provide evening entertainment for the large Chinese population. especially the young people who might otherwise be tempted to indulge in less desirable forms of activity.
From Simunjan 2,807.77 pikuls of padi and 4,497.00 pikuls of rice have been sent to Kuching. About half of the padi was purchased by the Supply Department.
278 tons of sawn timber were exported from Simun-jan Kuching during the quarter. 75 belian piles about 50 feet long were shipped by the contractor from Simunjan to Brunei for use of the P.W.D. The piles consisted of whole trees, from the Gunong Ngili area, and presented a problem in loading owing to their weight. After the Dido had failed to lift them an L.C.T. belonging to the Oil Company was sent down and managed to load them successfully.
Acting District Officer, Lundu
(Abang Indeh)
Satu meshuarat telah di-adakan pada 11 June, 1953, di-ketuaie olih Yang Berhormat Resident bahagian yang pertama Tuan D. J. Chandler, di-mana Tuan Resident telah memberi penejelasan dengan panjang libar nya atas tujuan Local Authority kapada semua ahli2 Local Authority, dan Tuan Resident sangat ber-harap Lundu dalam sedikit masa yang akan datang dapat menjadi Mixed Local Authority.
Pilihan dari Lundu ia-itu Tua Kampong Su'ud, Orang Kaya Pemancha Kalong, Wakil Tua Kampong Kerongkong, Pengiran Haji Deng, Kapitan China Mr. Lau Khiok Choon, Mr. Chin Poh Sen dan Mr. Ang Sze Leng telah ber-tulak dari Lundu ka-Kuching pada 30 June, 1953 bagai melawat Mixed Local Authority di-Sibu dan Mukah untok memperhati kan ka-majuan yang telah di-dapati olih mereka semanjak Mixed Local Authority di-bangun-kan.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 31, 1953
153
Smugglers yang mempuyaie barang2 itu sudah tentu tidak dapat masok olih sebab tidak ada Pass jalan tetapi barang2 itu mereka bawa hingga ka-Sampadan saja. Dari sampadan barang itu di-bawa turun ka-Lundu olih Dayak2 dari Kampong Kandaie dan Biawak siapa yang dalam berhampiran dengan Sam-padan dengan gaji tiap2 satu pikol 50 cents.
SECOND DIVISION
Resident (Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas)
There were several changes of Senior Administrative Officers during the quarter. The District Officer Simanggang, Mr. I. Harper, proceeded to Kuching on 6th April on transfer. Abang Mustapha, B.E.M., was Acting District Officer, Simanggang until 21st May when he proceeded to Saratok to relieve Mr. R. G. Keech who went to Kuching on 24th May.
On 24th June Abang Abdul Karim, Native Officer in charge, Lower Batang Lupar took over as Acting District Officer, Simanggang.
Mr. M. J. Forster took up his duties as District Officer Lubok Antu on 16th May.
It will now be possible to administer the district more closely, as was not possible when this district was included in the Simanggang district, where also were constant changes of District Officers.
Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas arrived in Simanggang on 9th June to take over as Resident from Mr. A. F. R. Griffin on 12th June. Mr. Griffin left for Miri on 15th June.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Subscribers are requested to notify changes of address to the Editor in writing.
SAZS Of AJVffilBIBSB IS 72S "SARAWAK 8AZSTTE'
Panabte in ndrance.
Advertisement of 12 lines and under
First insertion ...	...	... $1.00
Second and third insertion each	... 0.50
Subsequent do do	... 0.25
Advertisement of half a Column and under
First insertion ...	...	... 2.00
Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
Subsequent do	do	... 0.50
... 3.00
... 1.00
... 0.75
standing adver-
Advertisement of a Column and under
First insertion each
Second and third insertion each
Subsequent do	do
Special arrangements may be made for tisements.
All communications intended for insertion I in the tret ft 9*att'99c must be directed to the Editor at the Government Printing Office, Kuching, and sent so as to reach the Office by the 26th of the month at latest or their publication will have to be deferred 1 until the next issue.
Letters and other contributions must be , authenticated by writers name sent privately ? to the Editor.
We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not ? inserting them.
Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early intelligence of all matters of general interest in their respective neighbourhoods.
Notice.
ENTLEMEN are requested to pay all Gazette sub-
' T scriptious and Printing Office Bills to the undersigned
in future.
For the convenience of those unable to send cheques,
Sarawak stamps will be taken' in payment of sums not over
1.50but only the 2 an 4 cent values will.be accepted.
Foreign subscribers to the Sarawak (rosette are requested
to send remittances by Post Office Order " not by Postal
Order as the latter cannot be cashed in Sarawak.
F. G. DAT.
hotter.
?	:
Astana Farm Produce.
Terms Monthly.
W ILL be supplied to customers at the following
Milkper quart bottle	..	... 10 cents
Butterper lb ...	...	... 80 ,,
Eggseach ...	...	... Ij ,,
Orders, which should be addressed to the undersigned, attended to without delay.
J. STAPLES.
THE CHINA MUTUAL LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY LTD.
REGISTERED UNDER HONGKONG ORDINANCE.
CAPITAL, TAELS 500,000.
HEAD OFFICE, SHANGHAI.
Forms of application and all information will be promptly supplied on applying to the Undersigned, who have been appointed Agents for Sarawak.
*1* III X LEOJiG & Co..
Wine, Spirit and General Store Dealers, and Sole Agents
for FRASER & NEAVE S CRATED WATERS.
No. 14, CARPENTER STREET,
KUCHING.
If-
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 4, 190".
NOTICE.
? ? f bt Saratoah (Trailing tfompann.
i SABATO BATH WATER FACTORY.!
.Crated Waters can now be lind Hom the
above factory at the fallowlnglrates:
X? 1
Split*, per dozen
Lemonade
65 cents
45 cents
Ginger Ale	65 ,,
45 Ginger Beer 65 45 ,,
*	Stone	65 45 ..
Tonic (i.i
15 ..
Soda Water 55 40 Sarsaparilla
(l.I
45
Lemon Squash ...
(IO
45 Lemon Soda
6b
45 .,
Champagne Cider	65 43 Cherry Cider 65 ..
45 .,
American Cream Soda ...
45 Lime Juice and Soda	65 A
45 ..
The undermentioned articles can also be obtained at the following rates :
4 lb Three Castles Tobacco 58 cents per tin.
i lb Three Castles Tobacco 80 .,	Cigarettes 50 ..
(or at $5.75 per dozen tin*.!
May Blossom Cigarettes 55 cents per tin.
State Express ..	70	..	Capstan N. C. Cigarettes Med. 87 cents per tin.
(or at $4.20 per dozen tins.)
Capstan N.C. Cigarettes Mild 40 cents per tin.
., Tobacco Med. Mild and Full 45 cents per tin. Borden's Peerless Cream jier case of 48 tius $4.80. Bar Soap (Lockwood August & Co.)
Fine Primrose per case of 20 bare $2.80.
TAN BOON SIEW,
Manager.
Notice.
the undersigned CHOP SENG IIAK (late Tr.o T SIANO Kow) Dealers and Contractors to the Sarawak Government, hereby give notice that, inasmuch as CHIN KKE hits ceased to be in our employ as Manager as from the 26th November 1906, we will not be in any way responsible from the above date for any dealings'which the said CHIN KEF. may have with any persons whatsoever, nor will we lie responsible for any debts contracted by the aforesaid CHIN KEE.
CHOI- SENG HAK.
Kuching,
12th December, 1906.
PA S SE IT GSHS.
ARRIVALS.
PER S. S. Kuching-.From Singapore. 6th December, Messrs. R. Pawle, A. C. Vivian and the Rev. J. Oss.
PER s. s. Sarawak:From Muka, 6th December, Miss Dobson.
PER S. S. Rajah of Sarawak:From Singapore, 13th Decemlier, Mr. G. Malcolm.
PER p. s. Adeh:From Limbang and Brooketon, 22nd December, Mr. and Mrs. T. Nicoll and Mr. G. Dalton.
PER H. s. Rajah of Sarawak: - From Singapore. 28th December, Dr. A. J. G. Barker, Dr. Bruce Low, Dr. Scblecbter, Messrs. J. S. Geikie, J. H. Johnston, H. la Chard and Miss Hastie.
PER p. 8. Adeh:From Sibu, 29th Decemlier, Rev. Father Halder.
PER p. s. Kaka: -From Sadong, 30th December. Mr. P. Stewart.
PER s. s. Kuching: For Singapore, 11th December. Miss* Dobson. Mr. and Mrs. A. G. Butler.
PER p. s. Kaka: For Brooketon. and Limbang. 16th December, Mr. G. Dalton.
PER 8.- 8, Rajah of Sarawak:For Singapore, 18th December, Messrs. Malcolm and J. H.
Johnston.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Do. 2
..	..	HO
Do. 3
. .	* ,	4-1
Pigeons Young perpnir
to
Radish	per catty
..	..	n
Tnniips	,,
* * 4
Tains	..	4
ARRIVALS.
PER S. S. Kuching:20th FebruaryFrom Singapore Mr. Fenwick, Mrs. Seaward, Mrs. Winter and two children, Messrs, Ong Kim Tiow, Cheng Sia Thai and Teo Chai Seng.
DEPARTURES.
PER S. s. Kuching: 18th February--For Singapore Capt. Larmuth, Mrs ONians, Mrs. Parry Davis, Messrs. Ong Tiang Swee, Wee Cheng Ewe, Lati Miang Yang, Ong Eng Hin, Ong Yam Hin, Ong Seng Hin, Teo Chai Seng, Cheng Sia Thai, Lira Swee Kim, Mrs. Pang Chong Seng and Miss Ong Siew Eng.
PER p. s. Adeh: 21st FebruaryFor the NorthMr. and Mrs. Service and Mr. Browing.
PER S. s. Kuching:29th FebruaryFor SingaporeThe Honble. Mr. G. C. Gillan, Capt. G. H. Jennings Bramley, Messrs. Wong Shak Chu, Lan Cheng Puang, Teo Chin Thiam, Lau Chin, Chan Kui Yeow, Mr. and Mrs. Sim Liang Ku, Mrs. Sim Liang Kee and Mr. Liang Chong.
NOTICE.
GOVERNMENT STORE.
MATANG TEA is now obtainable at the
Government Store in 1lb packets.
Price 50 cents.
Carriage to Outstations extra.
[u. c.]
AUCTION SALE
OF
UNREDEEMED PLEDGES from Ex-Pawn Broking Farm YEW CHEE & Co., Chop Wo SANG at No. 18 China Street on the following Saturdays at 9 a. m.
June 1919 pledges on 17 Jan. 1920
July	21	Feb. Aug.	20	Mar. Sept.	17	April Oct	,,	,,	,,	15	May ,,
Nov.	19	June	Dec.	17 July A list of such unredeemed pledges may be inspected at the above address.
SYN HIN LEONG & Co., Authorised Auctioneers.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO.,
22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS.
Beer. Wine. Spirit & General Store Dealers.
?
SOLE AGENTS FOR !
FRASER & NEAVES RATED WATERS
(The best throughout the East.)
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic
Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at
$1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 catties of dry rubber.
ACETIC ACID.
:(o):	Fresh supplies of Stores are received regularly.
PRICES MODERATE.
Free delivery to customers in Kuching. Free packing & shipping for Outstation Orders.
[u.c.]
NOTICE.
ASTANA FARM.
THE Manager of Astana Farm begs to inform the Public that he is unable to attend to Orders for milk after Office hours.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1920.
91
Arrivals.
DATE.
NAME OF VESSEL.
NAKH OF CAPTAIN.
WHERE FROM.
CHINESE. I
A/ . FfMA/rJ 1
N ATIVE8 OF INDIA. Mair. Frmalr
OTHER ASIATICS. Mair. Frmalt.
TOTAL.
1920.
-
Feb.
1
S. 8. Kuching
W. B. Barton
Singapore
76
8
2
8
...
94
1'4
S. 8. Kuching
W. R. Barton
do
HO
13
3
2
20
125
25
Junk Kheng Po On
Sang' Kim
Saigon
55
55
211
21
5
2
28
7
274
Brought forward
192
24
7
1
61
13
298
Total to Date
403
45
12
3
89
20
572
1919
435
45
12
1
100
19
612
Departures.
DATE.
NAME OF VESSEL.
NAME OF CAPTAIN.
WHITHEH
BOUND.
CHINESE.
NATIVES OF INDIA. Mala Ftnol.
OTHEK ASIATICS. Mair, rtnolt
TOTAL.
Muir. 1
frsult.
1920. 1
i
Feb. 5
8. S. Kuching
... \V. R. Barton
Singapore
49
9
6 ...
15
79
..	17 j
S. S. Kuching
... W. R. Barton
do
26 1
4
9 ...
13	3
55
26
?	1
Kim Chin Soon
... Saban
Sambas
3
3
78
13
15 1 ...
28	3
137
Brought forward
124
16
8 ...
35	2
185
Total to date
202
29
23 ...
63	5
322
1919
308
55
13	3
66 10
455
F. G. DAY,
Registrar of Trade.
T
HE GOVERNMENT has for sale
about 200 hand-made sarongs
(RELIEF WORK), $6.50 each.
Applications should be made to The Resident's Office, 1st Division.
NOTICE.
SALE BY AUCTION
of all unredeemed pledges from YEK YEUN & Co., Pawn Farmers, No. 8, Sibu Bazaar, Sibu, will be held on the 15th September 1919 at 10 a.m. and quarterly from that date until further notice.
Lists of all unredeemed pledges are on view at the Farmers' premises.
LAW JEE THAI,
Authorised Auctioneers.
Postal Notice.
THREE French books entitled respectively
Les Petits Amis
Llnitiateur
Chronique du Cadet de Coutras
were found in the mail without wrappers.
Application for same can be made at the General Post Office.
NOTICE.
?
Gazette subscriptions and Printing Office bills.
FOR the convenience of residents at Outstations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums but only the 2 and 4 cent values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that Money Orders be sent if possible.
J. C. SWAYNE,
Manager, Govt. Printing Office.
92
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1920.
THE SARAWAK STUDIO
(REPRESENTATIVES OF MESSRS. KODAK LIMITED.)
THE BEST IN KUCHING
WHERE GOOD PORTRAITS CAN HE TAKEN AND VIEWS OF THE NEIGHBOURHOOD PROCURED.
PHOTOS FOR PASSPORTS
AT SHORT NOTICE.
KODAKS, KODAK FILMS, PLATES, PAPERS, CHEMICALS
PHOTO PASTE AND ALL PHOTOGRAPHIC MATERIALS
SUPPLIED AT SINGAPORE CATALOGUE PRICES.
AMATEURS FILMS & PLATES DEVELOPED, PRINTED &
ENLARGED AT REASONABLE CHARGES.
Free instructions given to Amateurs with pleasure.
C. M. LEE, Manager.
21, COURT HOUSE ROAD, KUCHING.
24-23]
KUCHING:Printed and Published by GHIN HENG SOON. Government Printer, at the Government Printing Office.
Barrack Road.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

gardeners was called on March 27th to discuss methods of improving the yield and eliminating disease. The meeting was adjourned until April 1st. Sarikei Wharf spring fenders were three times damaged by shipping during the month, and duly repaired. Wharfingers were engaged for the wharves at both Sarikei and Binatang. The new godown at Binatang was completed early in the month, but the work was not found completely satisfactory. More earth-filling was added to replace sinking nf the original filling. Roads in Sarikei Municipal Area are in good condition, as is the Repok Road out to the 6th mile, the repairs being satisfactorily completed. Contracts were signed for clearing the Sarikei- Balat road and the Binatang-Kelepu road, both of which arc badly overgrown. Gravel was ordered for delivery at Sarikei bazaar, and at Jakar Police station. The prison vegetable-garden at Sarikei is doing well and is being extended to make room for further varieties. Visitors to Sarikei during the month included the Acting Government Secretary, the Secretary for Internal Affairs, the Acting Superintendent of Lands and Surveys, Messrs. Summers and Farrelly of the Land and Survey Department. Dr. A. D. Hutchison, Mr. Sochon, Mr. Roach of the Island Trading Co., Messrs. Cobbold and Colman of the Borneo Co., Mr. McNeice, and Mr. and Mrs. Merrill, American visitors. Several cases of assault and one of affray came before the Kapit Courts during March; these all occurred in the bazaar, and owing to the increasing frequency of this type of case it will be necessary to inflict severe penalties if any more occur. No serious crime, however, came to light during the month. Penghulus Sibat, Atan, Manok Manchal and Ugak visited Kapit during the month. On March 30th Penghulu Grinang with his bala of fifteen arrived back empty-handed at Kapit from his expedition in search of outlaws in the ulu Gat and Kanyan. Apparently they were captured by a Dutch expedition which had lost its way in Sarawak territory; on production of Grinang's letter of authority, and when the Dutch realized they were in Sarawak, Grinang and his bala were released, and were paid by the Dutch to show them the way- back to Dutch territory. The padi in the Mujong district is on the whole good and harvesting is almost finished. The reports show that padi in other districts is patchy. Very little rattan was exported from Kapil owing to the low price offered. Chop Lee Hua (37 parties) rafted to Sibu 395 logs. 110 logs remaining at Kapil. During the course of a trip to the ulu Mujong the District Officer, Kapit, received complaints from two "Punan Batu" regarding the Oyan Dayaks. Apparently only nine Punan Batu remain, five females and four males, and they are absolutely dependent on the small amount of ui letek in ulii Melinau for a livelihood. Until now Dayaks have only worked damar in the ulu Melinau, and Melinau Dayaks have appreciated that the wi should be left for the Punans, with whom they are friendly. Oyan Dayaks, however, on the pretence of working damar have attacked the wi letek; the District Officer is calling down these Oyan Dayaks, and it is hoped to arrange for the small amount of wi Ictek in ulu Melinau to be reserved for the Punan Batu, sole survivors of the tribe, who appear doomed to extinction. The Revd. Mother Clare of Dalat R.C. Mission was very ill during the mouth. Dresser Ho Ah Kiew went over from Mukah to treat her, and she is now reported to be getting better,—a wonderful recovery for an old lady of her age. Penghulu Ambun of Balingian has asked to be allowed to obtain a schoolmaster for some twenty prospective pupils whose parents wish to start a small school. Abang Mils, Native Officer, went to the S.O.L. camp at Penipah (by arrangement with Dr. Irving) as Penghulu Slan had informed the S.O.L. head Dayaks Unit his coolies (120 or so) would get no redress for butang and other domestic offences, as none of the coolies were properly married to their women. Penghulu Sian stated be was told to adopt this policy by a former District Officer. As I doubt whether this is so, I instructed Abang Mus to inform Penghulu Sian and the said head Dayak (Uchong) that the S.O.L. Dayaks should be treated in exactly the same way as any Dayak house and that they come under Penghulu Sian's jurisdiction. Dr. Irving agrees to this. The monthly meeting of Tua Kampongs was held at Mukah on March 16th. Some 150 Melanaus also attended. They were urged to plant new sago gardens, or to re-stock old existing gardens and were informed that free tenure is conditional on the land being fully planted up. (Very few new gardens have been opened up recently, and many are only sparsely planted). Arrangements have also been made to inform natives of the prices of sago weekly, us at present they are receiving prices very much below the correct market prices. Such prices will (from March 1st) be recorded on a sago graph, so that the Courts will have an indication of the price at any time

[NEXT EXCERPT]

the trees had been most clearly pointed out by Mr.
Crocker. Tuahone of the most objectionable and
litigious Dyaks in the District was fined 20 kts.
for illegally fining Saribas Dyaks who refused to re-
move from their own district to his house. Tuahs
arguments jn his own defenceand they -were
manyavailed him nothing, and he paid the fine and
returned the fine he imposed and collected from the
Dyaks. He threatened to fine them a further 15 if
they reported the matter to me. Bong Chan, a coolie
who has recently been released from Kuching gaol
where he was serving paYt of a sentence of 3 years
for having attacked and severely wounded a mandor
at the Colliery named Kong Yew, again threatened
Kong Yew and is now serving a further sentence in
Sadong gaol at the termination of which he will lie
sent from the District. He is a troublesome man at
all times.
Public JForA-s.The prisoners have been employed
in filling round the coal sheds with stone, cleaning
up roads, ditches etc. and in generai work about the
Station.
one time not less than 12 vessels were sheltering at
the Kuala, being unable to reach Muaratebas. The
jurayan of the schooner Kian Ann reported passing,
the bodies of 3 Chinese floating out at sea.
February.
There was very little Court work during the
month. I went up to Tabekang on the 4th in order
to settle a boundary dispute between the Ris and
Bukar Dyaks. L returned on the 9th on which day
the p. s. Kaka arrived with Mr. May from Brooketon.
Mr. May inspected the Colliery and returned to
Brooketon by p. s. Kaka sailing on the 15th. He
was accompanied by Mr. Naysmith, the Manager of
Sadong Colliery, who has been unwell of late and
goes North for a change of air.
The schooner Banjar Hose, bound for Kuching
with a cargo of 87 tons of coal from Sadong, was
wrecked off Semra on the night of the 12th. The
schooner began to settle down in deep water and the
jurayan, crew and passenger left her in the sampan
losing all their belongings, thinking she was about to
sink, but she eventually drifted ashore on the top of
a high tide and stuck in the mud where she is likely
to remain. The last reports shew her to be breaking
UP-
The Chinese New Year passed off very quietly.
A few coolies tried to rush the gambling tables at
the Colliery and some 50 was lost. Three of the
men were arrested and sentenced to terrtis of impri-
sonment.
Several attempts have Ireen made to wreck the
' engines by wedging the points apart and placing
I wedges and other obstructions on the rails. Once
the engine and trucks left the metals owing to the
points having been meddled with, but in the other
cases the obstructions were observed and removed
Wharf.The new sheds are now completed and in
nse. The extension to the wharf is now in progress.
The German s. s. Flume, Capt. Wegler, arrived on
the 11th and took a cargo of 1,744 tons of coal to
Singapore on the 15th. This vessel remained along-
side the wharf during the bore and strong tides at
new moon and only snapped 2 wires and one large
rope. She dragged both anchors, each of which was
attached to 75 fathoms of cable, some 30 feet up-river
on the 15th. a strong 8 knot tide running at the time.
She left at the top of the flood, there being 40 feet of
water alongside the wharf and all the grounds flooded
by the tide.
tons cwt.
Coal received at Wharf during January. 1,284. 12.
do shipped from .,	,,	,,	2,564.	4.
do in stock at at end of 676.	19.
General.A Chinese coolie was drowned by the
np-setting of a boat at S. Jong on the 19th. The
body was recovered on the 21st.
The s. s. Alice Lorraine took 50 tons coal to Sibu
on the 22nd. I went round Nos. 4 and 5 Mines with
the Manager on the 26th. A fine seam of coal several
feet thick is showing in the face, but owing to one or
two narrow bands of dirt in the seam it is extremely
difficult to keep the coal absolutely clean. However,
very little dirt arrives at the wharf. The ventilation
was fairly good.
A very fine lunar eclipse was visible here on the
night of the 29th, it being full moon. There was a
beautifully clear and cloudless sky and the conditions
were perfect.
The p. s. Adch arrived at 4 p. M. on the 30th with
5.000 for the Treasury. PassengersThe Ven.
Archdeacon Sharp and Mr. H. La Chard for the Ba-
tang Lupar and Simanggang. She left at 5.30 the
same afternoon.
Early in the month the weather was rough and
unsettled. A heavy sea was reported outside and at
; in time to prevent accidents.
The p. s. Adch arrived on the 19th with the Prin-
cipal Medical Officer and Mr. Bradford. Dr. Barker
! inspected the Hospital and then the caolie lines at
the Colliery. He advised the removal of the Hospi-
lal to a site across river on the new Sdiloo Road.
On arrival of the plans from Kuching the erection
of the Hospital will be proceeded with. The present
position of the building is extremely inconvenient in
every way, but the site on the new road will be
isolated and yet within reasonable distance of Bazaar
and railway and close to the water supply.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

But here. as with the whole collection, it would be stupid to be definite in advance. A great deal of work must be done to sort, identify. catalogue; stuff must be sent to other museums, universities and experts for analysis or check. These things take years, not weeks.
I hope, however, that we can put on a small preliminary show .of the past years “bag,” or the best of it, in the near future. And I hope those who favour the Museum by taking an interest in it will appreciate that seventy-six men travelled fourteen days with specially packed loads over the border mountains and across Dutch Borneo to do the long hard trip down the Trusan to Lawas while sixty others walked eleven days and then paddled four big canoes for weeks, manhandling with care at every rapid. to bring the more fragile stuff the safest way down the Baram (via Lio Matu). I felt then the ever present shadow of a previous Curator, Major J. C. Moulton, who lost all his Kelabit collections in the Baram rapids; I had my tin of sociological note books permanently strapped to the canoe and me!
During all the move, done by Kelabits and their Dutch Murut cousins, only one piece was broken (not seriously) and a bit of a bear's skin was chewed by a dog (rats had previously damaged the finest of my four leopards). Anyone who has tried to walk the Tamabo Mountains will realise the astonishing reliability and care that this breakage record shows. And anyone who hasn’t walked them only has to ask my friends (?) how much weight I’ve lost!
During the whole trip Sliman bin Salleh, who has been with the Museum twenty-seven years and was with me on Dulit in 1932, led the bird and mammal collecting,—a wonderful effort for a man of his age in that rough country. The trainee collector, a Lundu Dayak, and the photographer. Johari bin Denoh, stayed up all the time too and got many photographs of value. None of the party had one day's sickness, from start to finish. Alas, for Kuching and jaundice—for I write from hospital!.....................
Tom Harrisson
Agriculture.
[Some time ago, in Notes and Comments, we referred to a series of lectures to be given at thc Sarawak Union Club. The following is the text of a lecture given by Mr. Ong Kee Hui, formerly of the Agricultural Deparhnent, on Agriculture. —Ed.]
When we speak of agriculture in this country we are apt to think of the Dayak cutting down a bit of jungle and dibbling in padi, or of a Chinese, Malay or Dayak small-holder tapping his rubber, or of the Chinese market gardener carefully tilling his small plot of land.
Agriculture means more than all this. It is defined in the “Principles of Agriculture” as “the controlled production from the soil of plant and animal products which are useful to mankind.” Agriculture therefore includes not merely planting generally but also such industries as the breeding of cattle, horses, pigs, goats, sheep, poultry etc., the rearing of fish, bee-keeping and other allied activities of mankind. That section of agriculture which deals with plants is called Field Husbandry or Agronomy. and that which concerns animals is called Animal Husbandry.
These two sections are further sub-divided into branches such as Horticulture which deals with the cultivation of fruits, vegetables and flowers; Dairy Farming, Poultry Husbandry, etc. Forestry which is concerned with the extraction of plant products such as timber, gums, resins, etc., from natural vegetation is usually regarded as a separate subject, although in certain countries, for instance the Philippines, the Government Agriculture and Forest Department are combined.
Agriculture is one of the oldest if not the oldest of human industries. Looking over the distant ages one can only conjecture at the way agriculture first began. Like many other animals on the face of the earth primitive man had two primary needs, namely food and shelter. The food was obtained by picking whatever there was in Nature and man behaved in very much the same way as our distant cousins the monkeys and apes do to-day, wandering about and foraging for food.
Man was however, a more observant and intelli- gent creature and he must have observed that food is abundant in certain areas where the animals or plants on which he depended existed in large numbers. It was convenient for him to confine his wanderings to such areas and to live more or less permanently in some caves close to these-areas.
Man probably took the first step towards agricul- ture when he started to protect animals such as cattle from attack by their enemies. These animals in the course of time got used to man’s presence and became tame. In this humble way Animal Husbandry probably began. Man must also have observed at the satne time how the wild plants which are useful to him reproduce themselves by fruiting and seeding.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Mr. J. G. Anderson, District Officer, Bintulu. arrived on the 9th and took charge of Miri Station during the absence of the District Officer, Miri. and myself in Kuching. He returned to Bintulu at the end of the month.
General. -The total rainfall was 4.44 inches.
BARAM DISTRICT.
March, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard reports: -
General. -Wan Taha, Native Officer, left for up river on 5th and returned on 22nd. Mr. White and Tuanku Mohamat left for Lio Matu on 10th and they were still away at end of month. Mr. C. J. Cook. of Lawas, arrived from Bakong on 27th and left for Long Laput on 28th to await my return.
I was absent up river the whole month.
BINTULU DISTRICT.
March, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports: -
Trade: -
General. -I visited Rumah Brok Sungei Silas on the night of 2nd, 3rd. This house was allowed to settle in Silas about five years ago and now consists of over thirty doors.
Pastor G. B. Youngberg, of 7th Day Adventist Mission, Tatau, returned from Singapore on 30th, en route for Tatau.
Cricket Team Visits Miri.
Owing to the kindness of His Highness the Rajah, who so very generously placed H.H.M.Y. Maimunah at the disposal of the party, an all-European cricket team from Kuching visited Miri over the Easter week-end.
H.H.M.Y. Maimunah left Kuching on the afternoon of Wednesday and proceeded via Sibu, where two members of the party were picked up, arriving in Miri about midday on Friday.
The party was met on board at Miri by Messrs. Carpenter and Clarke and other members of the Miri team, who extended a hearty welcome and arranged for the evening entertainment of everybody according to individual tastes.
At the pangkalan a crowd of smiling hosts and hostesses equipped with a fleet of cars and lorries sought out their respective guests and carried them off to lunch and presumably an afternoon “lie off.”
In the evening some went to the cricket nets for practice whilst others chased a ball from bunker to rough and rough to bunker around the golf course. One of the party, after an inglorious finish in the sand around the 9th green before an admiring crowd, was heard to remark time in the course of his round he had found the mown portion of the course of little use and had scattered more sand than was to be found at Santubong. Later in the evening a visit was paid to the local cinema, where the exploitation of Hollywood’s idea of the perfect leg under the title of “The Golden Calf” provided pleasant entertainment.
Saturday morning wax spent in visiting the oilfields. For most of the party this was their first visit to the “Land of Oil,” and their many thanks are due to those members of the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, who, with untiring patience, answered innumerable questions and gave such interesting explanations of the many workings in the fields.
The cricket match commenced at 3.30 p.m. on the Saturday afternoon. Kuching won the toss and elected to bat first. Elam and Taylor opened the innings to the bowling of Dawson and Lee. Both bowlers bowled remarkably well and runs were difficult to obtain. Taylor succumbed to a ball from Dawson in the fifth over with the score at 8 and Elam was joined at the wicket by Crossley. Elam was run out with the score at 14 and the wickets then fell freely. With 9 wickets down for 46 runs
Crossley was joined by Stirling and the two proceeded to put up an exciting last wicket stand. Stirling treated the bowling with very little respect and scored freely all round the wicket. In a very short time he had made a score of 20 when a ball from Dawson scattered his wickets and the innings closed for Kuching with the score at 78. Crossley batted well throughout the innings and carried his bat for a well-earned 28 runs. The fielding of the Miri team was very good, especially that of Dickenson, Aplin and Carpenter. Dawson took 5 wickets for 29 runs and Lee 4 wickets for 33 runs.
Dickenson and Marriott opened the innings for Miri. With the score at 4 Marriott was out to a splendid catch by Calvert at point off a ball from Hammond. Calvert was responsible shortly afterwards for the dismissal of Dickenson with a catch from Hannigan’s bowling. With the score at 14 Ager was bowled by Hammond. At closed of play Aplin and Clarke were batting and the score stood at 17 for 3 wickets.
Play was resumed at 8.30 a.m. on the Sunday morning and Aplin and Clarke continued their innings. Both batsman batted well and Aplin scoring 22 before being caught by Middleman behind the wicket off Hannigan, and Clarke had made 26 when he was run out from a splendid throw in by Trechman. The score then stood at 56. With 9 wickets down for 70 runs Miri had to close the innings as unfortunately Dawson had sprained his shoulder rather badly whilst bowling the previous day and was unable to bat.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Notes on Tropical Gardening No. 5.
SOILS AND MANURES.
When the world consisted of vast open rocky spaces and oceans, the formation of soil was a gradual thing, brought about by the weathering action of sun, wind, rain, frosts, glaciers, rivers, etc.
In the march of evolution, plant life gradually adapted itself to, this primeval soil; and, in the course of ages, the life and death of the plants, the action of bacteria, mud brought down by rivers, the raising of parts of the ocean bed, as well as many other factors, have contributed to the formation of a comparatively thick covering of non-rocky (or only partially rocky) material over most of the earth’s surface. This covering consists of a top layer varying from a few inches to a few feet in depth—known as the "top-soil;” and a lower layer, often of considerable depth, which we call “subsoil.” The top-soil consists chiefly of two different substances which we know as (1) Leaf-Mould (or humus), and (2) loam. “Leaf-mould” consists of age-long products of decomposing vegetable matter; and can be found as a layer of 6 or more inches in any jungle—or it can be artificially made by any kebun. “Loam” is the name given to top-soil which has been turned over, and cultivated, for a long time; and it consists of humus intimately mixed with various subsoil products such as sand, clay, chalk, etc., subjected to the influence of oxygen from the air, nitrifying bacteria in the loam -itself—all aided by the disintegrating action of earth worms.
The subsoil, in the flatter and alluvial lands of Borneo for instance, consists chiefly of a fairly thick layer of yellow clay mixed to some extent with sand. Below this is a water-bearing layer of blue clay and shaly material containing carbonized relics of older vegetation. Below this again, we often come to a more rocky formation —but the geological outcrops will of course vary in various localities.
When we come to consider the actual growing of the plants in our gardens, almost the first thing that will occur to us is to inquire about the soil.
A plant, it is to be remembered, is a living, creature, having a sort of double life. It has a root, which is its anchor or hold fast and absorbent organ, by which it obtains water and soluble salts necessary to build up the plant body, and to form flowers and fruit—this root is buried in the ground—and a stem with leaves; the latter forms the above-ground portion of the plant. The stem serves to support the leaves, and to conduct the substances absorbed by the root to the leaves; whereas the leaves are the factories, which form the organic matter needed by the plant. The main object of the leaves is to spread out as large an expanse of tissue to the air and light as is convenient, so to obtain as much carbon dioxide from the air as they can deal with and, at the same time, to utilise the daylight as a source of energy.
If we take a little garden soil into our hand, we see it is composed of gritty particles,—small stones, sand and finer stuff, and bits of vegetable matter, roots of plants, etc.
It may be assumed that our problem is to find out:—
1. Whether the soil of our garden, as it is at present, is a good medium in which to grow plants and,
2. Whether it can be improved in any way:— (a) by cultivation, and/or (b) by the addition of substances to it.
The first thing that will occur to us is to get an analysis of the soil, and then to compare the analysis with that of a known good soil. The analysis however will be of little use to us unless we know how to interpret it.
Let us see what information it will give.
A chemical analysis will tell us the total amount of nitrogen, phosphoric acid and potash in the soil; and a citric soluble estimation will inform us, to some extent, as to the amount of potash and phosphoric acid present in the soil, which is “available" for the use of the plant— provided of course the plant can get at it, i.e., that there are no influences preventing the plant’s roots from spreading through the soil.
As a rough guide we may take it that if the soil contains less than 0.1% total nitrogen, 0.2% total phosphoric acid and 0.5% total potash; and, on the other hand, shows less than 0.02% citric soluble phosporic acid and potash respectively—(a fair percentage of organic matter in the soil implies a good nitrogen and potash supply, and probably a fair phosphate content) then it will be advantageous to supply the constituent or constituents in which there is a deficiency.
The percentage of organic matter in the soil, however, besides influencing its water holding capacity, will indicate somewhat the power which the roots of the plants will have in penetrating the soil, since the presence of organic matter not only, like a sponge, increases its water retaining capacity, but also opens up the soil.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

RACE 6. -5 p.m. THE PENDING STAKES.
3 furlongs.
DIVISION III.
Pengarah jumped off in front and made all the running. Mudahan and Gruda had a good fight for second money.
RACE 7. -5.30 p.m. THE RANEE’S CUP.
1 Mile.
OPEN TO ALL DIVISIONS.
Silver Blaze led from September, Flying Fox, and Mickey Mouse, with Akal last. Flying Fox had moved up handy to Silver Blaze who was still leading at the road. In the straight Damit brought Flying Fox up to challenge Silver Blaze and was soon overlapping. Bakar pulled across Flying Fox and bumped him twice badly and got past the Judge half a length to the good. No one was surprised to see the red disc up, but Silver Blaze was permitted to keep the race and the jockey Bakar was suspended for the rest of the meeting.
Second Day.
Monday, 9th October, 1933.
RACE 1. -2.30 p.m. THE SLUMP STAKES.
5 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
Flamingo led from Kim Mah, White Label, and Burong Gruda. Flamingo still showed the way after entering the straight. Kim Mah then came up on the ditch-side with Burong Gruda racing wide under the stand. Weight began to tell on Flamingo in the last furlong and he gave way to Kim Mah who won strongly.
RACE 2. -3 p.m. THE EASTERN RIVER TANNERIES CUP. 6 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
September and Silver Blaze made the running to the road with Mickey Mouse and Casanova lying handy. At the Ara tree Mickey Mouse and Casanova closed up and they were racing in a bunch. Silver Blaze found the pace and the weight too much for him, as did September. Noon took Casanova into the lead just before the post and kept him there to win cleverly. September stopped Silver Blaze from a place by a head.
RACE 3. -3.30 p.m. THE SARAWAK STAKES.
5 furlongs.
DIVISION III.
Pengarah made all the running and won comfortably. Three ran.
RACE 4. -4 p.m. THE TURF CLUB STAKES.
4 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
Flamingo got away at the fall of the flag from White Label, Kim Mah, Burong Gruda. Flying Fox, and Sabar last. This order was maintained into the straight except that Flying Fox had started moving up. At the Ara tree it appeared to be a race between Flamingo and Burong Gruda with the former beginning to feel the weight. Damit then brought Flying Fox through his field in a very well-judged finish and left everything else standing. Kim Mah was fourth. Rhubarb last.
RACE 5. -4.30 p.m. THE STATES SPRINT.
3 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
From an excellent start the field raced in a bunch all the way. In the last few yards Casanova, Silver Blaze. Mickey Mouse, and Radio, were racing neck and neck. Siran forced Silver Blaze into a slight lead, but Damit responded immediately on Mickey Mouse and, coming again in the last strides, these two passed the judge together. Casanova 4th.
RACE 6. -5 p.m. THE GOLD MINERS’ PURSE.
4 furlongs.
DIVISION III.
Pengarah led at first out found the weight too much for him. Mudahan took charge once in the straight and won without trouble.
RACE 7. -5.30 p.m. THE RAJAH’S CUP.
Round the course (1 1/3 Miles.)
A HANDICAP FOR ALL DIVISIONS.
The field appeared at the 5 furlongs with Silver Blaze and Mickey Mouse racing in front, followed by September, Flying Fox, with Akal last. Mickey Mouse and Silver Blaze were done with at the road, and September came on with Flying Fox making up ground steadily. Half-way up the straight Damit took Flying Fox into the lead. Medin shook up September, but there was nothing left in him.
Second Division News.
September, 1933.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident: -
I left Simanggang on the 7th and returned on the 18th, having visited Lingga, Kabong. Saratok, Roban, Pusa, Debak, and Betong. Nothing of much importance was brought before me, and most of the inhabitants were on their farms.
On the 10th Mr. Barcroft and I rode on horseback from Saratok to Hoban, a distance of 12 1/2 miles. This is the first time it has been done.
There was a ceremonial parade on His Highness the Rajah’s Birthday and I took the salute. Later I presented Long Service Decorations. All the European Officers in the Division and many Native Officers and other Government Servants attended.
SIMANGGANG DISTINCT.
September, 1933.
The District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, reports: -
Travelling. -On the 11th instant Mr. Fisher, Cadet, accompanied by P.N.O. Wan Abdulah, left for the Ulu Lingga by the overland route via Melugu and returned again on 16th instant.
General. -The Resident, Second Division, left for a general tour of substations on 7th instant, returning to Simanggang again on 18th instant. I regret to report the death from bronchial pneumonia of the young son of Awang Sipudin, Native Officer, who was the only grandson of the late Data Dulraschid.
BETONG DISTRICT.
September, 1933.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports: -

[NEXT EXCERPT]

PER s.s. Kuching: 19th April From Singapore - Mr. and Mrs. Hollings, Miss Scott, Mrs. Howell. Messrs. Frazer, Stall, Allan, Ang Kim Kok, P'ng Liang Huck. Lint Tee Chew, Tan Ewe Chai. Wee Cheng Yew, Ang Hong Choon. Um Teck Khoon, Song Kheng Hai, Lim Chee Ghiin and C. M Lee.
PER S. S. Rajah of Sarawak:26th AprilFrom SingaporeMessrs. Pang Yam Seng and E. Beng Hian.
DEPARTURES.
PER S. S. Rajah of Sarawak:18th April For Singapore Messrs. Pang Yam Seng and Tan Hok Hin.
PER S. S. Kuching : 23rd April - For SingaporeMr. and Mrs. Hollings, Mrs. Howell, Miss Scott, Mrs. Danson, Mr. and Mrs. Chin Hee, Messrs. Frazer. Sim Why Khu and Ang Kim Kok.
PER p. s Adeh:25th AprilFor Limbang Messrs. J. Mills and D. B. MurrayFor BintuluMessrs. A. E. Lawrence and E. Parnell.
PER s. s. Rajah of Sarawak:29th April For Singapore Messrs. Allan, E. Beng Hian. T. Peng Kuan, Skimasaki and Miss. Howell.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
ALMNAC.
MAY, 1919.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1919.
11.-
PURE FOOD MEANS GOOD HEALTH
ALEXANDRIA CANNED MEATS
Every Tin Guaranteed under the New South Wales Pure Food Act, and packed under the constant and vigilant supervision of a Government Inspector.
ASK FOR. ALEXANDRIA
Roast Beef
Corned Beef
Ox Cheek
Ox Tongues
Luncheon Tongues
Sheep Tongues
Extract of Beef
Roast Mutton Corned Mutton Spiced Mutton Mutton Chops Assorted Meats Minced Scollops Assorted Soups
Beef Sausage Pork Sausage Frankfurt Sausage Beef Dripping Pork and Beans Irish Stew
Ox Tail Soup
As supplied in
Governments
huge quantities to the Imperial and Indian for use by both the Army and Navy.
Sold by all Stores.
R. GOSLING & CO.,
2 Castlereagh Street, SYNDNEY, N.S.W.
ALEXANDRIA MEAT WORKS.
Distributors for the East:
Seremban General Agency, Ltd.
(Incorporated in F. M. S.)
SINGAPORE.
Sub: Agents-'BAK JUI LONG,
14 Carpenter Street, KUCHING, SARAWAK.
and BAN JUI GUAN.
MIRI, SARAWAK.
KUCHING Printed and Published by GHIN HENG SOON, Government Printer, at the Government Printing Office.
Barrack Road.
116	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1919.
Arrivals.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

3
400.00
Wembley
1
3
267.60	'
Aladdiu
1
265.00
Hopeless
1
0
3
287.60
Untong
.0
3
0
41
185.00
Pengarah
0
0
2
100.00
Tolin
..0
2
80.00
Kuching
..0
2
65.00
Sisit
0
51
65 00
Sakbon
..0
0
2
50.00
Lee Mah
Kismet
..0
..- 0
1
0
0
2
50.00
60.00
Adham
..0
0
3
50.00
Sakai
..0
1
0
3
50 00
Akal
..0
0
3
2
40 00
Bagaimana
..0
0
2
30.00
Choba
..0
0
2
16.00
Pegasus
..0
0
15.00
Braver
..0
0
8
16.00
$4,380.00
I
WINNING JOCKEYS.
Jockeys.
First.
Second.
Third.
Unplaced.
Brahim.
5
1
0
5
Assan
*
4
8
0
4
Mr.Spurway
Awang Damit
2
0
3
3
8
Rajak Biloi
1
0
0
8
Mr P.M.Adams
0
3
2
Tuah
0
2
3
Lohor	0
2
5
Bobo
Q
4
Cbem
0
0
2	1
Tembam
0
0
Jaya
0
0
1
1
$2 Unlimited Cash Sweep.
Second Day Race No.7. THE RANE' S PRIZE.
Total number of Tickets sold-2428 at $2 each $4,856.
PARTICULARS OF DRAWING.
$4,856.00
J.A.H.HARDIE,
Honorary Secretary,Sarawak Turf Club.
Board of Trade,Rubber Exports Report.
Limbang.
The work of inspecting and instructing rubber gardens in the Limbang District was started on the 3rd January.Three instructors were brought from Kuching and a local man was also engaged.
On inspecting the rubber dealers and exporters in the bazaar it was found that all these shop- keepers kept proper records of all dealings and purchases they had made.If all dealers elsewhere so kept their books it would make very much easier the tracing of bad rubber.
The quality of the rubber was very fair.It was evident though,that too strong a solution of acid was being used The curing (smoking) however was good.This was a pleasant surprise as in most districts so far visited the inadequate or excessive smoking has been the chief fault in native-made rubber.
The type of smokehouse bring used was good, being very similar to the one advocated by the Rubber Fund as in use in the Saribas.The type is simply a plain house about 12 feet in height,the tipper half being allowed for the rubber,the lower part being for the fire which is sunk in the ground about two feet,over which are hung suitable baffles.As compared with the Chinese-made smokehouses,which have elaborate outside ovens made of brick and cement,the Fund type are simple,cheap and more efficient.
There were quite a number of smokehouses and more being erected.Where smokehouses were built too close to dwelling-houses owners were ordered to rebuild them further remote,being compensated for their trouble.
It was also pleasing to see the freshly-milled sheets were net being dried in the sun.As a rule the lesser faults,viz.,lack of sieving and use of excessive acid,the native producer seems to overcome.
The greater and more vital faults,viz.,
sun-drying and wrong procedure in curing,he does not seem to overcome,but in this district he has to a very great extent succeeded The reason for this must lie in the fact that there are several European estates in the vicinity and that the native has taken the advantage of following the correct methods employed on these estates.This is more than can be said of the Chinese close by Sungei Tengah Estate-this unfortunately to their own loss.
The amount of rubber being produced at present is not great,being about 150 piculs a month.A considerable area,however,is being planted and it is hoped that tapping on the younger areas will be better,the present work being pretty bad and cannot compare with the tapping,say in the Saribas where the Dyaks are most careful of their trees and check the work of their coolies.
On the whole it can be said that the rubber produced is very fair,being considerably better than most produced in Southern Sarawak.
The writer left for Lawas on 10th January taking two of the instructors with him Limbang was again visited from 14th to 17th February.
Lawas,Trusan,Sundar and Merapok.
These districts were visited from 15th January till 14th February.As in the Limbang district it was found that native rubber was very fair,in fact with the exception of Merapok rubber (a very small amount the curing was better than in the Limbang area,the sheets not being so heavily smoked.
These districts in all produce about 150 piculs a month.
Traders' books were properly kept and the system of Government Registration books lent it- self to easy location of gardens,being grouped under headings of roads and rivers etc.
At Trusan there are very few smallholders,most of the gardens being owned by Chinese towkays. The rubber was distinctly good.
The type of smokehouse is as in Limbang,viz., good.
The acid solution used was excessively strong; the correct strength of 1% was given to gardeners.
The Chinese dealers charge an exorbitant price of $1 and over for a quart bottle as compared with 65/75 cents elsewhere.
Acetic acid and sieves are being sent to Limbang and Lawas which will be sold at cost price.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

An outstanding feature of this forest is the richness of the tree flora. The great majority of the plants are woody and of these woody plants the majority are trees of various sizes. Indeed it is estimated that there are not less than 2,500 species of tree in Borneo which reach a girth of twelve inches at breast height. The only herbs are some of the epiphytes and a relatively small proportion of the undergrowth. Though numerous in species the trees of the forest are remarkably uniform in general appearance both in the bole and foliage. The dark green colour and similarity of the leaves of rain forest trees are mainly responsible for the sombre and monotonous appearance of the forest. Many of the trees and shrubs flower for only short periods at irregular intervals and even then most have inconspicuous, greenish or white, flowers. Large and brightly-coloured flowers, contrary to popular imagination, are rare and mainly confined to epiphytes and climbers. The chances are that the observer will be disappointed by the dull appearance of the forest and the absence of flowers, unless he be lucky enough to meet the rare gregarious flowering of the Dipterocarpaceae or other large forest tree families. So dense are the upper canopies of the forest that the flowering of large trees and high climbers is often betrayed only by the presence of fallen flowers on the ground and the wafted scent, which is characteristic of rain forest, since many species are pollinated by insects. The observer, though he will be discouraged by the general absence of flowers, will be impressed by the abundance of flowers produced by any individual, and this is particularly true of those species which flower at occasional intervals. He will also notice the paucity of the herbaceous ground flora, both in species and individuals both of which are generally smaller for a given area than in a temperate forest. The predominance of bare ground or ground covered only by a thin layer of leaves will also be noticed. Though not so readily apparent the abundance of climbers in the upper canopy is shown by their thick stems which cling closely to the boles of supporting trees. One's first impression of sombreness and monotony is increased by the absence of marked seasonal changes in the aspect of the foliage. The majority of the trees are evergreen, the loss of old leaves and production of young leaves being a continuous process which is a consequence of the uniform tropical climate.
In contrast to the abundance of plant life in the Bornean forest animal life is not so evident. Large mammals, other than deer and pig are scarce but one cannot go far without hearing or seeing one or more of the numerous types of monkeys. The chorus of the gibbon apes is one of the most familiar sounds of the jungle, especially in the early morning. Birds are frequent but not abundant, most more highly-coloured than the familiar birds of north temperate regions, but with rather disappointing songs. The most familiar bird-calls are the high-pitched call of the argus pheasant and the demoniacal cackle of the hornbill. Most of the smaller birds make indifferent twitterings or only short passages, some of which become familiar. Insects are omnipresent. One of the most obtrusive are the cicadas whose dawn and dusk chorus is one of the most familiar sounds, which occur with such regularity that one can tell the time within five minutes. These dawn and dusk cicadas are often called "the Iban clock". Ants are not generally obstrusive in the juncle though the large ant if antagonized can give a severe bite; gregarious ants are scarce but are found in certain localities. Of the lesser animals leeches undoubtedly hold pride of place in obnoxiousness. Few localities
are without leeches and in some places they are for no apparent reason exceptionally abundant. Wet weather encourages them to appear in strength and it may be that the places they favour most are the dampest even in dry weather. However they are completely absent from wet places such as swamps and river banks. In the mountains they are to be found up to 6,000 feet above sea level. They are few in species but great in numbers. Contrary to popular imagination butterflies are not conspicuous on the floor of the jungle and are dull in colour. They are much commoner and more brightly coloured in the upper canopy where the observer seldom has a chance of seeing them.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

The Sarawak Association, Singapore, at the annual general meeting held on the 7th April elected the following office-bearers for the ensuing year :
President, Wee Kheng Watt; Vice-Presidents, Song Teck Ghee and Koh Kim Loh; Hon. Secretary and Treasurer, Song Lian Siong; Assistant Hon- Secretary, Lim Teck Seng; Hon. Auditor, Kueh Ah Bee; Committee, A. J. Geikie. Wee Kheng Hong, J. S. Chong and Koh Thye Jin; Employment Committee, Matthew Lim and Koh Ten Shaw; Sports Superintendent, Tommy Tan.
An unfortunate accident occurred at Sadong on the 18th, when Mr. S. W. Harris of the Sadong Government Collieries, was thrown violently from a motor bicycle and sustained injuries to the head.
It appears that Mr. F. G. Carpenter, the District Officer, was taking Mr. Harris back to the Colliery on the pillion, about nine oclock at night. When near the Colliery two buffaloes jumped on to the road. Mr. Carpenter, unable to stop, chose the buffaloes in preference to the railway line, and after hitting one of the animals a glancing blow, the subsequent swerve unseated Mr. Harris.
Medical aid was found at once, and later Mr. Harris was sent to Kuching Hospital, where we learn that he is making good progress.
In the Supreme Court Chong Chee ap pealed against a fine of 81000. inflicted upon him *by the Residents Court for trafficking in opium. After a long hearing the Judicial Commissioner dismissed the appeal
A serious affray happened at No. 64, India Street on the 20th instant when Ycong Eng Seow stabbed Ang Lai Keng with a large knife, inflicting dangerous wounds in the back, side and arm. Ang Lai Keng fled to No. 15, Gambier Road with Yeong Eng Sew at his heels. The assailant was caught there by the Police before he could do more harm. The wounded man is in the hospital, and Yang Lai Seng is detained pending his trial.
Amongst recent Gazettings are the appointment of Mrs. W. G. Tait to act temporarily as Matron of the General Hospital, and the resignation of Miss R. Silcock and Mrs. R. E. Edwards as Matron and Assistant Matron respectively.
Mr. A. C. Street left for home leave on the 27th. We wish him good luck.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1929.
67
Mr. R. L. Daubeny returned to Kuching on 15th after tropical leave. On the 18th he sailed for Lawas to take over the charge of that and the Trusan districts.
The Officer Administering the Government and Mrs. Boult were in Bau from 12th to 15th instant. In spite of the closing down of the goldworks there, Bau is still a charming place in which to spend a few quiet days. About 46 miles of road is available for a Baby Austin, and there are miles of footpaths. The Bidi caves and bathing in the Kajang Lake are other attractions, whilst the journey from Kuching to Bau is under two hours by car
The designs of the shops are simple but on modern lines.
W ith the opening of the new road passing by the Borneo Company offices and the filling up of Sungei Kuching, it is easy to see that the new area is not so ungetatable as many persons prophesied and in years to come Carpenter Street may lose much of its present glory.
His Majesty The King's Gracious
Message to His Subjects.
A party of seaside trippers had some exciting adventures the other day when, avoiding the Easter holiday in Kuching, they journeyed to Santubong.
First of all the launch broke down, and for I two hours they drifted about on a nice hot afternoon. Then, after dark, the mast-head light caught fire. This was quickly lowered ? to the deck where it at once disintegrated, i pouring streams of lighted oil over the decks. The passengers gallantly kicked the remains 1 of the wretched lamp overboard, and trod out the flames. The next day, having got ashore, the party went down to the sea for the usual . bathe. They had barely started to really enjoy themselves when a whale appeared on i the scene and chased the unhappy bathers on to the sands again. Inquiries, however, seem to show that the monster was possibly an ikan empesut, but the attacked say that a mammal by any other name won d look as nasty! !
Mr. J. R. Barnes returned to Kuching by I s.s. Vyner Brooke on the 9th. We understand that Mr. Barnes has arrived to settle
up his affairs in Sarawak preparatory to retiring in England.
By the same ship Mr. Parnell arrived
back from Singapore.
Mr. W. V. Hanson, a.c.a., has been appointed an Assistant Treasurer in the Sarawak Government.
The Jail, once the cynosure of all eyes when approaching Kuching in the steamer, is now being converted into the more kindly home of the Customs whilst the prisoners are tern- j porarily housed in the Old Hospital. We do not know who has got the better of the exchange. Will the Customs searchers be haunted by the shades of gang robbers and murderers or will the present malefactors be , kept awake by the ghosts of past patients , being led into the awful horrors of the operating theatre.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

It may be said that any keen gardener taking up rose culture in this country on whatever scale will get lasting enjoyment from his. hobby and will always want to go “one better” next year. Thera is no end to the fascination to be derived from the cultivation of the Queen of Flowers.
The writer knows of one case where Standard Roses have been grown successfully out here, in one of the coastal districts of Selangor, but has not yet tried them himself. He was assured, when last on leave, that they could be packed satisfactorily for export to the tropics. Standards and half-Standards cost, on an average, four or five shillings per plant, exclusive of packing, etc., and would probably be best brought out m the late autumn on board the ship on which one was travelling.
In conclusion I should like to say that my first easay in growing roses in this “warm clime without variations was with the very old, but none-the-less beautiful, La France. I am sure there is no better trial rose throughout the world. [By the Courtesy of Malayan Agri-Horticultural Association.]
First Division News.
KUCHING METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS FOR MARCH, 1930.
Note.—The Kuching Meteorological Station is situated at Latitude 1.33.29 North; and Longitude 110.90.31 East. The height above Mean Tide Level is 99.5 feet.
RAINFALL AT LEPER CAMP. 13th Mile, Penrissen Road, Kuching.
Divisional Reports.
First Division Report for February, 1930, by Mr. J.C. Swayne, Acting Resident.
There has been an increased activity in the illegal traffic of opium and three persons were convicted and fined. Konsin, a Land Dyak, pleaded guilty to a charge of rape and was sentenced to a term of imprisonment. The Manager of Chop Guan Moh Heng was prosecuted under Order No. E. 2 (Estate Duties). 1929, for failing to report the death of Sim Kay Teng, a partner, and was fined.
I visited Sadong from the 12th-15th. Two appeal cases were heard. In Seniah vs. Cherurai, an Iban inheritance case, the decision of the District Court was upheld.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports:—
General .— There was a slight decrease in the Court work in general during this month, and no cites that call for particular mention. Theft cases have doubled as compared with January.
On the 11th instant Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, Cadet, was appointed to do duty in the District Office.
Batu Kawa was visited on the 5th instant, and appeared to be in a clean and quiet state.
On 21st, I made a trip down to Sambir, in company with the Land Officer Mr. Summers, to settle a land dispute, and after inspecting the kampong there, returned the same day.	Coroner's inquiries were held on the bodies of three persons during the month and a verdict of death from natural causes returned in each case.
The 24th instant, being the birthday of Her Highness the Ranee, offices were closed and the day observed as a public holiday.
LAND OFFICE.
The Land Officer, Mr. B. Summers, reports:—
One new Assistant Land Inspector joined the department in the middle of the month.
One Assistant Laud Inspector having completed his training in the Survey Department was sent to Lundu, he being the first Inspector to be posted there.
One Assistant Land Inspector was dismissed for refusal to obey orders.
The new clerk was posted to Sarikei early in the month.
Three Chinese were fined by the District Court, at the instance of this office, for not evacuating their gardens in a stated time, they having encroached on Dyak land.
There was a large increase in the number of applications over the previous month, and a decrease in the number of titles issued.
Simanggang Road Land Reserves.—The examination of the lands within the Simanggang Road Land Reserves was continued during the month and it is expected that the investigations on both sides of the road will be completed to the 15th Mile by the end of March.
A considerable number of titles have been called in and will be replaced by new titles covering the areas actually under cultivation, the uncultivated portions reverting to Government.
UPPER SARAWAK AND LUNDU.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, reports:—
On the 21st February His Highness the Tuan Muda, the Dayang Anne and party, left for Kuching by way of Seniawan.
For the first few days of the month nothing of importance occurred.
On Thursday the 6th I started for Lundu by the overland way and reached Lundu at about 6 p.m.
At Lundu there were several complaints and requests of various natures and I found 60 outstanding cases awaiting settlement. A large and presumably representative party of Malays complained against the Tua Kampong Abang Merali on various grounds, and further tasked for Government help in building a new mosque and in paying a “Hatib” and "Belal” for it. At present there is only an "Imam” and no other official. I told them that all these matters would be looked into and granted them a site for the new mosque should it be sanctioned.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

won at the Regatta. At 5 p.m, a party of Malay
schoolboys took the field and, with the utmost
indecorum, proceeded to chase one of their revered
schoolmasters (no less a personage than NR. Z
too !!) round and round the quagmire. This
32
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 192G
appeared to be a sort of blind-man's buff the wrong way round, and the shriek of delight when the pedagogue .vas finally caught and rolled in the mud seemed to prove to the rather muddled onlookers that this indeed was the object of the , chase. Following this came other intricate games such as sliding on the stomach and sliding on the . reverse side, but the general impression left on our minds was a howling mob of semi-naked uichins rollicking and galumphing in the mire, oblivious to all and everything except that they I must cover every particle of their body with a t coating of brown moist and evil-smelling mud. The revels were put a stop to by the entry of a company of Chinese boys marching on to the field with hand playing and colours flying. Having escaped the last mad charge of the mudlarks by inches, this company gravely took up their position on the only fairly hard piece of ground left and without a wink proceeded to go through a long and complicated set of military and physical exercises with much precision and endurance. All things come to and end. however, and the party moved off again with the same imperturbable air. their bugles braying lustily and their banners still raised aloft.
have a reputation in Kuching, attempted to stay another round but the referee stopped the fight after a minute, as Taha was obviously too groggy to continue and retired to his corner His second, however, refusing to throw in the towel, and Taha being unable to continue the fight, the referee counted him out It was noticed that a very good spirit was shown in all the fights, there being no case of bad temper or ill feeling between cither principals or their supporters During the intervals those who preferred something rather less bloodthirsty were regaled with dancing in the ring by the star actresses of the local bangsawan. These damsels pivoted and gyrated to the amorous tunes of a Malay band and chorus and to the obvious satisfaction of the local knuts, who at times, unable to hide their feelings, joined in the merry dance. During all these proceedings an excellent band, conducted by Sejili, performed fox-trots and other seductive music, whilst frequent explosions from the neighbourhood of the harbour indicated that Mr. Hiller-Mallett was starting up his nighty barrage again.
Those who were not too weary then went to the
Island Club to see Sim Ah Bee win the billiards
competition from Augustus Mowe; after which
stimulants filled up the gap until 8 oclock. At
this hour a Chinese dinner was served in the Court
House, the curry makers having been replaced by
perspiring celestials who flitted round mysterious
cauldrons like one possessed and broiled and
roasted themselves amongst the leaping flames of
many fires. The result was a dinner a superlative
quality, fully qualified to satisfy the ravenous
guests.
At nine a move was made to the boxing ring which had been erected on the padang and brilliantly illuminated with high power lamps. In spite of the slowly rising floods this ring had been surrounded by enormous expectant crowds since seven o'clock, who every now and again expressed their impatience by a roar. Even the ladies showed their interest in the noble art, as benches and benches surrounding the ring were occupied by squatting Malay girls who, as the water rose over the seats of the benches, preferred to remain where they were rather than miss the opportunity of seeing their loved ones perform indeed a service of love !!
The programme consisted of five contests of four two-minute rounds each. Owing to the excellence of the Chinese dinner the writer (who was, by the way, referee) missed the first three fights, which were between beginners. It is said, however, that the lads put up a good show and showed a considerable amount of promise. Suhai, a diminutive lad from the Resident's Office, beat Duin ; Anthony (known professionally as Young Harry) beat Jaha. and Lamin beat Sirat. After an interval the two big fights of the evening came on. Battling Sabul, a Kuching Star, was matched against Teck Dee, a forcible if not quite orthodox boxer A strenuous four rounds resulted in Teck Dee being awarded the fight. It is possible that Sabul was the better boxer but he lacked his opponent's weight and strength and wascalled upon several times to stand up and fight. The next contest was a rather one-sided affair. Young Hon, alias James Hon, knocking his opponent Taha all over the ring in the first round. Taha, who is said to
And lastly one must not forget to mention the
crowd and such a crowd too !everyone was
there at least throughout the whole day as far
as the eye could reach was a seething mass of
humanity Staid and courteous Hadjis in their

[NEXT EXCERPT]

and quality, until today you will hear from far beyond Sarawak's borders "When you are in Kuching, what-ever you do, don't miss the Museum."
No new building has been done for 25 years, and a large and extremely interesting and valuable part of the collection cannot for lack of space be seen by the people to whom it belongs. The Curator and his staff are submerged beneath a mountain of treasure of which they have seen far too much in too small a space, and they must sometimes find their work almost beyond their power. The reference library, unique in the world for its collection of books on Borneo, and inestimable in value, has long burst from its shelves and cannot be properly housed or used. Many volumes, indeed, are stranded in the Curator's house for lack of space in the library. Valuable natural history specimens collected on arduous journeys throughout the country lie shut in boxes deteriorating because there is nowhere to treat them and no hope of showing them until the new building is done. And now to all these needs is added the most imperative of all: space to examine, collate, and exhibit the Chinese ceramics and the other treasure unearthed in the excavations at Santubong. No one can yet foretell the limit of what this enterprise will produce, or its effect on our whole conception of the history of Borneo; but no one's imagination can be unaffected by the excitement of the discoveries already made and the vision of their significance.
And wherein lies the importance of all this en-deavour, and the succour the new building will bring?
First, in education We must all. even we who were educated in less enlightened days, be able to recall the sudden beam of light that fell upon our books, our memorisings and our practisings, when suddenly we found ourselves face to face with real things. A concert transfigured the dreariness of our piano exercises; the working models at a science museum threw our eyes far beyond the text-book of elementary mechanics; a walk through the Palace of Whitehall somehow made us remember without effort the dates and battles of the Civil War. And so, in the Museum in Kuching, the animals, the pictures, the maps and the weapons must in more than one child's mind have lighted a candle that will not be put out; and that is as important an achievement as any on earth.
The second purpose of the Museum, and the second inviolable reason for cherishing it, is the spreading among the peoples of British Borneo a knowledge of their history, their arts, and their achievements. Thus will be nurtured a proper pride and tolerance, and these are the foundation of prosperity and contentment.
Lastly, the Museum is a centre of research, enthno-logical anthropological, zoological, playing a part, a far from negligible part, in the search for untarnished truth: and in that search, and the zeal of those who carry on, lies the surest hope of the survival of the free spirit of man. "And ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free"
The new building, so much needed, will cost a good deal of money, and there are always conflicting demands on the public funds. Men who strive for a cause with courage and integrity, and see suffering unassuaged and needs unmet, will always feel the paramountcy of their own fight. This must and should be so, or endeavour would cease. When the people of the city of Liverpool watched the spending of millions of pounds on their splendid new Cathedral, there was impatience and anger because of the need of their hospitals. Houses are greatly needed in Sarawak as in many places, and new roads and docks and clinics. But in making their decision to spend money on a new Museum building those responsible for it have shown their faith in the long future, and in the vision of the Rajahs who founded and fostered Sarawak; and they have ensured that, in Kuching at least, the words "museum specimen" shall be words not of dust and decay but of inspiration and delight.
(Contributed).
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 30, 1953.
91
This Sarawak.
Extract from a petition of appeal to the Supreme Court:—
"The humble Appellant has never had the benefit of any sort of education, being a pagan and so poor that he has no friends to help him out with perjury in Court."
Second Division Atmosphere.
One rather feels that given opportunity to visit many different parts of Sarawak one should take the more difficult parts first; as one grows older and enlargingly tired, spend more time in the more accessible places. That is perhaps the reason why the present writer has only in the past month been in the Second Division, —except in quick passing.
Knowledge to date is quite insufficient to say anything worthwhile in detail. But perhaps there are two things worth mentioning which make immediate impression—inter-racial relationships and inter-river communications.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Where the new style kampongs have been con- structed. they are fenced to keep out cattle, the habit of keeping cattle and pigs beneath houses thus gradually being eradicated. In all cases, however, the interior cleanliness of houses leaves much to be desired.
Communications can now be described as the best possible in view of the country, and a laden man can do the journey from Lawas to the Bah Kelalan in ten days, staying at a house each night, with the exception of the stage from Lawas Damit to Fa Tengoa, where he must use the sulap constructed by Government in 1941 at Ruan Sepakoi. The longest distance between houses is about 18 miles, from Long Beluyu to Bah Kelalan, and the whole distance from Lawas to the Bah Kelalan estimated at 90 miles.
The nature of the ground, however, renders the track passable only for men on foot, as in many places there are very steep climbs round or over rocks with roots only as foot or band holds. At these places there are no alternative easier routes. Rivers present impassable obstacles in the event of rain, as unfortunately the Muruts do not build rope bridges after the Kelabit style, and are mostly too wide for batangs. I consider that at present it would be unwise to instruct the Muruts to make rope bridges, as they would not maintain them and thus they would be dangerous.
Crops, etc.
Regarding cattle, kerbau and sapi are kept by every village, but the kerbau are not used for work, nor the sapi milked. Moreover they are now very rarely used for meat, the old habits of feasts having been discarded. These cattle therefore are regarded as a form of wealth only and used for practically no purpose other than currency.
Penghulus and TUa Rumah.
Although these are coveted titles, I found that everywhere there was a tendency to disregard Penghulus’ orders and decisions, whilst Tua Rumah seemed to consider their titles sinecures. This I consider to be all part of an inferiority complex
under which these people distrust the ability of their own race, and want to work to orders from a Government officer or gum only.
I made a particular point of insisting that Tua Rumah arranged such simple matters as coolies, not leaving it to Native Officer Bigar to detail, as previously, while all concerned were informed that any matters of dispute must be reported first to the Penghulus. Several attempts were made by people to get Native Officer Bigar to hear adat cases (mostly brian disputes) which had not pre- viously been referred to the Penghulus.
Of the three Penghulus, Itai Lakai, Ating Mugang, and Panai Abai, I am of the impression that if properly backed up they will assume sufficient authority. They are certainly the ablest men available. None can read or write but except for Panai Abai they are Malay speakers. Ating Mugang impressed me most favourably.
Adat.
There is everywhere confusion regarding the reconciliation of adat and their particular brand of Christianity. I emphasised everywhere that adat. was a matter that only they themselves could change, as they seemed to expect Government to lay down the law on the matter in order to save themselves trouble.
The matter of brian is a particular matter which all concerned agree requires amendment. Peng- hulus have been told to collect ideas from their anak biak, and I consider that in say six months' time a meeting of all Murut Penghulus should take place at Lawas to thrash the matter out.
In spite of the fact that the Muruts generally want to be saved the trouble of thinking out any matters of adat, it is noticeable that, when such matters as District Advisory Councils were mentioned, fears were immediately expressed that adat might be interfered with. 1 found it very difficult to deal with this contradictory state of mind.
Education .
I inspected the school at Long Beluyu, which at the time of its closing owing to the transfer of the teacher, Pantalusang, to Fa Mein had 30 pupils.
It was re-opened on 13th February, 1947, but at the time of my visit only ten pupils were attending. 1 hope that this number will increase, but consider the large attendance previously was due to the per- sonality of Pantalusang, who combined school leaching with preaching. 1 met this man on leave at Long Beluyu, and was greeted by a band of 30 performers on bamboo flutes which played the National Anthem and gave continuous performances during my stay. This band, which was a consider- able attraction to the school, had not performed since Pantalusang’s transfer, as they say they must have a guru to lead them, and the new teacher, Pagag Agong, though keen lacks the ability and personality to run such attractive sidelines. He has, however, been instructed by me to organise games which may only be played by pupils.
District Advisory Council.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Collected by T. Sum Guan as follows:
Chop Soon Tock ...	...	20.00
,, Fook Hin Loong ...	...	10.00
Ho Leong and Kean Ann, $5 each	10.00
,, Chuan Guan and Hock Soon
Hin, $3 each	... 6.00
,, Soon Seng, Choon Mob and Chin Kee. $2 each ...	6.00
,, Seng Seng Hin, Yong Seng,
Hock Seng Kim and Hock
Thai Chiang, $1 each ... 4.00 56.00
Chop Nam Soon and Lan Miang Yang ...	... 2.000.00
15. 3. 20.	$48,724.60
Appeal tor Cemetery.
?
The Christian cemetery in Kuching is managed by a Board, consisting of the Resident of Sarawak Proper, or his nominee, the Vicar of Kuching, the Manager of The Borneo Company, Ltd., Kuching. and the Churchwardens of 8. Thomas' pro-Cathedral.
Its up-keep is paid for by burial fees, and subscriptions.
These latter are at the present considerably reduced through the departure of many former residents of Kuching, and the cemetery funds are in consequence small.
We therefore ask the present residents to come to our aid by putting their names down for annual subscriptions, so that the cemetery may be maintained in its present efficient state.
DALAT, 18th February, 1920.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
Kuching.
SIR,
May I point out that your reference to the Oya crew in the Gazette of 2nd January was not quite accurate. The crew of the Sri Pelandok was composed of two-thirds of Sarawak Malays and one-third Dalat Melanoes. The boat, however, was built by Melanoes, and, as your correspondent Owner" is, I suspect, well aware, has before now proved herself capable of a considerable turn of speed even with a mixed crew of paddlers. Owner was apparently a little upset when he wrote his letter. He seems to be under the impression that in praising the Dalat boat you were depreciating the efforts of the Simanggang men, but I tail to see any suggestion of this in your account of the Regatta.
I am as anxious as Owner" professes to be to see the two peoples meet on equal terms, and in order that this should be possible suggest to the Regatta authorities that the Kuching Boat Races should be held at a time of year when boats from Outstations some distance up the coast can reach Kuching.
Under the present conditions it is only because of the energy and enthusiasm of Owner" that Kuching owners do not pocket all the prize money.
I am a poor man, and my desires outrun my means, but I am prepared to open a subscription list with the sum of $10 in order to bring about a meet THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 16, 1920.	73
ing between the Simanggang and Dalat crews, and trust that Owner" and other boat racing enthusiasts will help me to attain that end.
Yours faithfully,
REV. BERN. MULDER.
OYA,
Chinese New Year, 1920.
TJie Editor,
Sarawak Gazelle.
DEAR SIR,
I agree with Owner" that the statement in the account of the Kuching Regatta with reference to the Dahn Meianaus was rather sweeping and considering that few people in Kuching have seen Melanaus paddling perhaps the opinion expressed was not justified.
As far as I know, anyway in latter years, the only time Melanaus have paddled against other crews was at the Sibu Regatta in 1913 when the crew from Dalat, paddling in a temoi, beat everything else on the river; and later on in the day paddling in a Sibu boat which had come in last in her other races, brought her in first amidst great excitement. Perhaps it is not generally known, however, that the crew of the Dalat boat was not composed entirely of Melanaus; in fact the majority of them were Sarawak Malays. If the Kuching Regatta was held during the fine monsoon it would give other stations n chance of sending boats down to compete against Kuching. In that ease I would lie willing to send a Dalat boat and crew down and race with any Simanggang boat. If Owner" will put in a word perhaps something might be arranged and the argument as to who are the better paddlers could be settled on the river instead of on paper.
I am, dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
J. BEVILLE ARCHER.
Th,- Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
DEAR SIR,
It seems a pity that Owner" should read into your account of the Sarawak Regatta published on January 2nd a depreciation of the Simanggang crews and boats which it surely does not contain. Owner complains of partiality, a quality from which I doubt if his own letter is quite free. You Sir expressed an opinion that the Dalat Milano are the best paddlers and boat builders in the country. Owner" seems to think that the Simanggang people are superior to them in both these accomplishments. Nobody who knows them will deny that the Milano of the upper Oya are unusually handy at either boat building or paddling, and, since seeing the Sri Belalang crew's style on her first visit to Kuching, I have always been of the opinion that, if the Malays of the 1st Division will not learn to paddle in the same way, an upper Oya crew stand more chance of heating one from Simanggang than any other.
The pity is that Kuching regatta is held at a time of year when it is practically impossible to get a

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Sunk
32
All bin Awang
Kuching
2 8. S. Gladyt
do
174
Anis
do
4 S. 8. Ka/a mi
Brit.
1.275
A. Richardnoii
Imbiian
6 S. IJ. LA Fol Mt*
Sunk
40
Ali
Kuching
7 S. S. iSVot 1 Hariri/
Bril.
193
Maddox
Sitignpore
7 M S. Lara
Dutch
399
A. J. SmilSi
P Sainbun
, h B - .1
do
1.3H5
14. W. Boil hr
Shanghai
8 S. 8. Poh A it ti
Brit.
4H5
D. Harvev
Sing more Kuching
10 1'. S. Aileh
SHk
]H9
Awang IhH
12 S. S. Selangor
Bril.
145
J, A. Cnniubell
Labunti
13 S. L Lu lollrUe
S'wak
40
Ali
Bn ram
13 P S. Aileh
do
1H9
Awnng Unis
Li in bung
16 S, S, Sabah
Brit
137
Ajnk
Jl-.M'ItOII
16 S. S. Jieflfrny
do
I.WI
BdlrtOil
P. Btikoin
u; M. s. Saleh
S'unk
21
Urn him
Tuton '17 S. S ?
Brit.
1.79K
ti ri ffi 111 s,
Sit iga pore
lf 8. 8. Kujn"fi
2) P. S Ailrh
do
1.275
A Kir Im rd*oi
S'unk
IN!)
Awg Bala
Knelling
2! M. S. Luca
Dutch
399
A. .1. Smith
P. Snmboe
22 S. L. Lu Follett*
S'wak
40
Ali
Niah
24 S. S. Poll Aim
Brit.
4 So
D. Harvel
1 OlIlllMlI
24 I. S. Atteh
S'wak
1K9
Awnng liiiis
Kuching
24 S. S. Selangor
Brit.
145
J. A. 'ani ibcll
Singapore
24 M. T. Min
Sunk
32
Ali bin Awnng
Hi u 11-In
24 Lighter Thora
lid
49
Dnml
do
$f S. S.	httrlr//
Brit.
391
Maddox
Shi aikon*
26; M. L. Penelope
S'wak
Svrd
Bakoug
T. M. T. Miri
do
32
Ali lii Awnng
Tntonp
29 H. S. lir/iaiif/
Sin tn
29H
MrtZiHk
Singapore
29 S. S. PalrHtbaiH/
1 liltrli
1.119
Van Kregion
do
31 S. 8. Kiijami
31 P. S. Aileh
Brit.
1.275
A. Richardson
LllbllliH
Swnk
189
Awang Hais
Knelling
FLAU
CAPTAINS OB
Vv&tKr/R NAM*.
ASI Kic.
0
NAKHOUAS.
!? irost.
1 Cecile
Snr. str.
16
Must!
llejuug
] Liberty
M	2
Sa tel ii
Kalaka
2 Kuching
oca
Lawrie
Singapore
4 Sri Marion
sch.
80
Drahiuau
Sadong
5 Arieh
,. etr.
18V
Awg. linis
Ltinbang
6 Majinie
sell.
74
IIj. Pul
Matu
6 Gladyt
str.
178
Anis
Sibu
7 Sin Si in Ann
sch.
50
Gani
Matu
f Kim Seng Guan
a
73
Talia
Uy a
5 Bttvoh
Mukah
1 Kim Gee .-Inn
50
Hj. Amit
Matu
8 Siti Jaoyah
69
Assuii
Bintultt
8 Alice Lorraine
str.
140
Jnra.ee
Sibu
10 J. Scotts IU.launch
2
Marsal
Lundu
10 Saraumk
IV	4G
Awg. UlljHIIg
Biuaui
10 Sri Sadong
tv	?
134
Awg. Jin
Sadong
11 Chiu Trek Lee
SA
1(14
Bakar
Sibu
11 Ceeile
vv
16
Maw
Kejaug
114 Kuching
908
Lawrie
Singapore
13 Sri Chtndratcatih
sell.
71
Jobari
Sadong
13 Young Harry
.. str.
5
Bnjang
Lundu
15 Sri Muka
sch.
ill
Bakri
Sadong
15 Chamoit
str.
32
Dnditin
Sibu
16 7'ouwi7 Harry
V	**
0
Bujang
Lingga
16 Heng Foh /Inn
Cli. sch.
BO
S. nl. Fong
Saigon
17 Liberty
Snr. str.
&
Jtmtir
Lundu
17 Giddy*
H	1*
173
Anis
Singapore
IK Sri Mat Igan
sch.
68
Issa
Sadong
20 Alice Lorraine
.. str.
140
Janice
Sibu
20 Cecile
V*	vv
16
Masu
llejang
20 Sri Marion
o sch.
80
Praluiiau
Sadong
21 Sara teak
o str.
46
Awg. Bujang
Sibu
21 Giddy*
173
Anis
Kejang
21 Kim Chin Soon
,, noh.
59
Saban
PttnUHigkai
23 Chin Tcek Lee
n str.
104
Bakar
Mukah
28 fiunga Mai Stcak
sch.
l 6
Boiuleh
Ova
24 Adeh
.. str.
189
Awg. Hais
Ltinbang
24 Kuching
908
Im writ
Singapore
25 Kim Hock Ann
i, sch.
70
Jili
Duro
Kim li'ntl Ann
as	a*
67
Hitssin
Mukah
26 Sri Sadong
str
134
Awg. Jin
Sibil
27 Sri Chindrawatih
sch.
71
Jobari
Sadong
2H Kim Hua Ann
65
Yalna
Ova
28 Ghee Hong Ann
M	V
GO
Jin
28 Kiun Mon
66
A l ion
29 Glady*
str
173
Auis
Singapore
80 Kim Po Heng
sch.
50
Biiyoh
Aftikah
SYN HIN LEONG & CO.,
22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS.
Beer, Wine, Spirit and General Store Desires
: (o):	SOLE AGENTS FOR :
FRASER & NEAVE'S AERATED WATERS
(The Best throughout the East. )
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic
Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at
$1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 cat ties of dry rubber.
ACETIC ACID.
:(o):	Fresh supplies of Stores are received
regularly.
PRICES MODERATE.
Free delivery to customers in Kuching.
Free packing & shipping for Outstation
Orders.
n. c. NOTICE.
e
Gazette Subscriptions and Printing Office Bills.
FOR the convenience of residents at Outstations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums but only the 2 and 4 cent values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that Money Orders be sent if possible.
W. V. D. SKRINE, Acting Manager, Govt. Printing Office.
$500 REWARD.
ILL BE GIVEN to anyone giving information which will lead to the con-
viction of person or persons circulating false
reports concerning LAM CHIN GEES
R E P U T A T 1 O N. Anyone repeating
same after this date will be prosecuted.
[10-4]
WANTED
A RELIABLE CLERK with previous experience and knowledge of book-keeping for PANDAN, BINTULU. Pay in accordance with the Clerical Service regulations at present in force.
Applications to be sent to the Resident, 1st. Division.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 16, 1920.	232
W
MIRI SHIPPING.
Departures.
Departures.
Aug.
VKSMCI.'H NAMK.
Fl .Art.!
I MS H
CAPTAIN OH NAKIIOOA.
FOIL
a
F. 8 A,lek
Swak
189
Awg. Rale
Kuching
:i
S S Gladyl
lt. 1
173
A oia
Bill Bill
4
S. 8. Knjang
Bril I
1.27.7
A Richardson
Singapore
4
S, S. APfiw
do
2.5415
Hav
Calcutta
6
S- L. L Pallrttr
do
40
Ah
Barnin
7
8. h. Kt/r Lrany
do
302
Rogem
D. Harve,
Labnan
8
8 8. Wi Jnn
do
4M5
do
9
M S. Lara
Dutch
;Mi
A. J. Smith
do
IP
F. 8. A M.
S'wak
132
Aug. Rais
Lirn Im ng
11

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Mr. B. J. C. Spurway of the Forestry Department was best man.
His Highness the Tuan Muda and the Dayang Anne were amongst the many guests who attended a reception given by the parents of the bride of “Roseneath,” after the ceremony.
Mr. and Mrs. Corson sailed for Singapore in s.s. Vyner Brooke in the afternoon. The honeymoon is to be spent at Brastagi.
Colonial Service and Matrimony.
The Governor of Uganda may not wholly endorse the famous dictum that wives are an impediment to great enterprises, but he thinks that marriage handicaps junior administrative officers in the performance of their duties, more especially the duty of travelling freely in their districts and acquainting themselves with native languages and customs. His Excellency said so in a speech upon which the Colonial Secretary has now been questioned. The reply was that there are no restrictions on the marriage of colonial officials in general-indeed, Sir P. Cunliffe Lister declared that he certainly did not wish to discourage officials from marrying and having their wives with them in the Colonies “so far as practical considerations allow.” It is to be hoped, however, that the junior administrative officers in Uganda will not interpret this as a direct encouragement of early marriages because what the Governor said appears to be practical common sense. -Truth.
Leeward Islands.
Financial Report. -The Report of Sir Sidney Armitage-Smith on his investigations of the finances of the Leeward Islands and St. Lucia has been submitted to Parliament. He reports that, apart from isolated cases, he does not find any justification for the view that officials are generally too numerous or over-paid, or that the Budget could be balanced by reductions in salaries. He recommends substantial economies in the Judicial and Legal Departments, and a considerable number of minor economies. He proposes to increase the income tax in Antigua, St. Kitts and Dominica; and increases also in motor licences. He strongly recommends the provision forthwith of a uniform Customs tariff on all imports except alcohol. -Crown Colonist.
The Malay’s Coconuts.
Life among the coconut palms of Malaya’s west coast may look idyllic when glimpsed from a speeding car, but actually it has considerable drawbacks. An inquiry which has been made into the conditions prevailing in the Jeram reservation in the Kuala Selangor district shows that out of 1,367 Malay smallholders thirty per cent, are free of debt, forty per cent, are in debt but are free of forward contracts, and thirty per cent, are both in debt and have sold their crop forward at very disadvantageous prices. What these figures mean in terms of domestic comfort we learn from the Malayan Agricultural Journal, which states that a good six-acre holding, the owner of which is free of debt and forward contracts, will yield an income of about $17.50, and a less prolific holding of the same size, the owner of which is in debt and receiving one cent per nut from the person to whom he has sold forward, will yield only about $3.50 a month. And that means living on very short commons! It has been established, thanks to the thorough study which is now being made of the Malayan coconut industry, that if the Malay growers want better prices they must prepare their copra themselves, instead of selling the nuts to middlemen manufacturers. Accordingly, an important experiment has been carried out by officers of the Department of Agriculture and the Co-Operative Department. A Javanese grower, owning twenty acres of coconuts, has been persuaded to build a kiln of approved design and has been taught how to manufacture copra of good quality. As a result, he is not only getting a better price for his own product but is buying his neighbours’ nuts at higher prices than the local middlemen can offer. What is more, this experiment has survived competition and intimidation by the middlemen. -Straits Times.
“Buy Empire Timbers.”
THE REAL REASON WHY THIS PATRIOTIC SLOGAN FAILS TO CATCH ON.
By R. R. RIVERS.
Again the festive season is with us, and once more the Editor, in that “Peace-on-earth. good-will-towards-men” spirit is taking the risk of letting me run loose in his columns.
The outstanding feature of the past year has been the formation of a United Empire Party, with the object of fostering trade between this country and her dominions. But despite the existence of this Home-Groan Party, as it is known in the trade, there are still no signs of feverish activity in the market of Empire timber, and the old inertia remains.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

to take over. The Honourable the Resident (Mr.
Gilbert), commenting upon this, says “Penghulu
Barat is an ex Sergeant-Major from the Rangers
He still runs his house on military lines. This
proves exceedingly successful in respect of his own
house, which is always prosperous and consists
mostly of ex-Rangers, but does not work so well
with the other houses under his control. His padi
reserve, approximately 300 tons, is the result of
the diligence of all concerned.”
Dayaks and Malays in the Niah and Sibuti area
report a poor fruit crop this year. This, they
claim, is responsible for more severe depredations
than usual of padi fields by pigs.
The District Officer, Baram, (Mr. Griffin) reports
that attendance at upriver schools is. not good as,
on account of a shortage of padi, the children are
busy tapping rubber or collecting food.
The District Officer, Bintulu, (Mr. Jacks) reports
that the sudden increase in the price of belian
timbers and attaps provides a satisfactory livelihood
for the natives.
FIFTH DIVISION.
August, 1948.
The Honourable the Resident (Mr. Anderson)
comments that, as a result of a campaign to clean
up Kampong areas in and around Limbang, the
Kampong peoples are taking a new pride in clean
and tidy compounds.
The following is extracted from the monthly
report of the Honourable the Resident, Fifth
Division : “Hari Raya, this year, was back to its
pre-war standard and many visits were exchanged.
In the evening the jollifications were marred by
heavy rain, as they were this time last year, in
spite of which many brightly apparalled Malays circulated
round the Kampongs in a colourful stream
intent on sampling the vast arrays of even more
rnulti-coloured confections. One wonders who,
eventually, finishes off these apparently inexhaustable
supplies of kaleidoscopic cakes.”
The following is an extract from the monthly
report of the Cadet Officer, Limbang, (Mr. Harper) :
"At a series of meetings held during the month by
the Heads of communities it was decided to seek
approval for the establishment of an inter racial
local authority in the lower Limbang area. This
authority would consist of Malays, Kedayans
and Chinese—the three main races—with a few
Muruts and Indians and one European. The total
population in the area concerned, which comprises
the coastal belt and the Limbang and Panderuan
rivers up to Bumbun and Kubong respectively, is
a little over 9,000. Some apprehension was felt by
the Chinese community, who number some 700 persons
only, that they would be heavily exploited by
the majorities, Malays and Kedayans. This fear has
been overcome. Once the native peoples had realised
that it was not a Government scheme to increase
taxation they were, apart from a modest fear of
their own inability to cope with any form of local
Government, fully in favour of the project and on
no occasion was any objection to the inclusion of
the Chinese heard. Both natives and Chinese have
at various times during these discussions spontaneously
suggested an increase in taxation in various
forms. "
The Assistant District Officer, Lawas, (Mr.
Smith) reports that a new Shipping Line is now
running between Singapore and the Fifth Division
and Brunei on a schedule of one trip each three
weeks. He comments that this service will be a
great help and will serve to cut out the excessive
handling charges previously incurred in Labuan.
September, 1948.
The Honourable the Resident (Mr. Anderson)
reports that the first of a series of lectures on
elementary agriculture and health matters, held
each Saturday afternoon, was started at the Agricultural
Station. There were attendances of about
a dozen, consisting of the agricultural trainees and
the more senior boys from the Malay School.
In his September report, the Cadet Officer, Limbang,
(Mr. Harper) writes : “Some upriver people,
including a party of Kelabits from the Medihit came
down during the month, the ulu natives being well
ahead of the lowlanders in their padi planting as
usual. Good burns are reported generally from
upriver and the first of the padi obstacles has therefore
been passed.”
The following is extracted from the monthly
report of the Cadet Officer, Limbang: “The value
of imports has increased slightly but the quantity
imported has probably increased considerably owing
to the new twice monthly direct shipment to
Singapore. The profit to exporters has risen for
the same reason.”
Mention of the new shipping service has been
made in the August report.
The following is an extract from the September
report of the Assistant District Officer, Lawas : “A
fair number of Muruts, some from Dutch Borneo,
visited Lawas during the month. Most of them
sold damar in the bazaar and bought cloth with
their profits. One Murut was seen returning upriver
carrying a decorated and rather flimsy ladies
umbrella."
It is reported that ‘Simah Laut’ (a sea offering
ceremony) was performed by kampong Awat Awat
during the month. This consisted of scattering

[NEXT EXCERPT]

“This dog cannot reasonably be described as a small puppy.” said the dresser, “and if I am to re- move his tail I really must insist on administering an anesthetic,”
At these words, Ben stalked out again and Sam- my was produced and duly docked. We wonder what Ben’s master would have said if he had come out of the hospital to find his ‘‘little lap dog” minus several feet of tail!
However, to return to the dog show. It was hotter than ever, now, on the Club lawn, and the perspiring judges were hard at work with measuring tapes, trying to decide which dogs rejoiced in the shortest noses and the longest tails. Snapped at, alike, by dogs and owners, their lot was not an enviable one, but they stuck grimly to the task, nevertheless. One member was heard to remark, “I have four dogs at home, and meant to bring them today but I couldn’t catch one of them!” He stayed to see the fun, all the same, and refreshed himself with so many glasses of iced beer, while enjoying the antics of the competitors who HAD been caught, that perhaps his pets were wise to choose to remain in obscurity.
Some of the senior dogs arrived at the show already decked out in fancy dress, but as this event was the last one, the puppies were dressed up just beforehand. Very sweet they looked too, albeit a trifle self conscious. Pluto Corbin made a most attractive “Dog Toby” and Rastus Soward, a win- some little girl in party frock and bonnet, but Buster Leach finally walked away with the prize. At that time he was a mere bundle of fluff, and with a neat barrel of brandy affixed to his small person he was a St. Bernard in miniature : only
too willing to go out and save lives or to chew up your shoes, or anything else that came his way.
Before the end of the show several competitors were missing, and it was found that one of the larger dogs had bitten through the strings of those who were tied up in the shade, whereupon they wasted no time in departing for home. In any case, they said to themselves, it was nearly time for dinner.
Ben Sochon came to the show to watch and criticize. When the prize giving was over he was kind enough to show his admirers how a really obedient dog behaves, by carrying out complicated orders given by his master. Finally, he too, decided that it was time for lunch—he always has his bones curried on Sunday—and the party dispers- ed, feeling happy to know that, thanks to their benevolence, a handsome sum had been collected for a deserving cause.
K. S.
The Sibu Annual Regatta 1948.
Sibu was in holiday mood for the first post-war regatta held on May 8th. The meeting was graced by the presence of His Excellency the Governor and party who had arrived in Sibu on 5th May.
There were many events arranged in connection with the Regatta, though the latter itself was the main attraction. The Land Sports, in which the local schools took the leading part, attracted vast crowds to the Finals on the Friday afternoon, when the cups were presented by Miss J. Arden Clarke. The Schools Challenge Cup was won easily by the Sacred Heart School. Mrs. C. B. Murray had the invidious task of handicapping the Penghulus in the 100 yards race. Those that were young and fit she put behind the start line, and those that were of a certain age she advanced accordingly but was unprepared for the resulting tumult as the young Penghulus were annoyed at being handicapped and the old ones were incensed at being given an advantage. The result was that in the Penghulus Handicap all the Penghu- lus started from the starting line at once. The Manager of the Chartered Bank is to be con- gratulated on winning the “Judges Threading the Needle Race” and the “Government Officials and Merchant Princes” race. The Sarawak Consta- bulary, are to be congratulated on winning the Tug- of-War. The Sacred Heart School won the Relay Race. For the first Land Sports held in Sibu for many years, the standard was remarkably high.
The Water Sports consisted of races in the Rejang, ‘catching the duck’ the ‘greasy pole’ and ‘pillow fights,’ which latter caused much amuse- ment to the spectators.
An interesting new departure was the Photo- graphic Exhibition where there was the opportunity of seeing and purchasing copies of the works of Mrs. Hedda Morrison and Mr. K. Wong, apart from the works of some of the ladies of Sibu. Mrs. Morrison was shewing 30 studies of life in China and 30 of Iban and Melanau life in the Rejang river. Mr. Wong exhibited photographs taken both in Malaya and Sarawak. The visitors in Sibu were able to see an exhibition of great interest and very high quality. It is to be hoped that this innovation will become a permanent feature of the events associated with the Sibu Annual Regatta.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

complicated potion is made up of the following in-
gredients :—
Pepper
Cloves
Buah Klat
Chankok
Sedoya
Chabi Dagang
Nutmeg
A small tea-cup-full of this mixture is added to
four pints of-water, and the whole is heated to
boiling point: One pint lasts about a week, and the
medicine is continued until a cure is obtained My
informant, however, did not say how long this
might be.
Land-Dyaks, Dyaks and Melanos seem to use
the Malay medicines, and it would be interesting to
know whether they have their own prescriptions for
treating Yaws.	The Chinese use externally copper sulphate and
also a yellow powder which is said to be composed
of saltpetre and a mercurial salt.
Internally a decoction is used of which the in-
gredients are herbs imported from China. The
prescription for this medicine is as follows : —
Add to 24 OZ. of water and boil down to 8 oz.
Dose. 4 oz. morning and evening.
The Chinese druggists say this will cure yaws,
but, at the same time, they admit it is not so
efficacious as the European method of injecting.
N. A. B.—(Contributed.)
The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
ONLOOKER—I am afraid that you do not know
what you are writing about. What you appear to
have seen “between the lines'' is, I fear, a phantom
of your own imagination.
For these reasons we regret that we see no use
in publishing your letter.— Ed. S. G.]
A suggestion.
KUCHING, SARAWAK.
26th April, 1922-
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
DEAR SIR,
I have read with interest the P. M. O.'s report
on the Medical Department and while it is gratifying
to hear about the improvements with regard to
medical matters which have been and are still to be
made at Outstations, and the new Hospital “for
Europeans only" to which further additions are
contemplated, it seems to me that there is one section
of the community which has been overlooked. I
refer to the many persons who are able arid willing
to pay a fair and reasonable sum for hospital accom-
modation and trained nursing, but who cannot, it
would appear, go to the Hospital “for Europeans
only, " and cannot be expected to go to the General
Hospital which has only rough accommodation for
the coolie class and does not possess any nurses,
trained or otherwise.
The Medical Department might with advantage
extend its sphere of usefulness to this large class by
building on “The Grange" site a hospital with
decent accommodation for 2nd class patients, as is
obtainable in the General Hospital, Singapore, where
the same medical and nursing attention is provided
as for 1st class patients but at a lower cost. Eurasian
nurses should be easily obtainable, or some of the
older girls in our local schools might be trained and
occupation thus found for them.
I commend 'this matter to the earnest attention
of the Government and am sure that such a hospital
as suggested will fill a long felt want.
Yours faithfully.
PROGRESS.
Admiral Sir Charles Dundas, in his breezy book, “An Admiral's Yarns," tells a good story of a Scotch minister. The subject of the sermon was Jouah. An old lady in a front pew was most interested. “Now, what kind of fush do you suppose it was that swallowed Jonah?" he cried. “ Aiblins it was herrin'? Aye. but it was no' a herrin’. Aiblins it was a cod? Aye, but it was no' a cod. Then dearly beloved brethren, what sort o' a fush was it? Was it a shairk."
The old lady could keep silence no longer.
“Maybe it was a whale," she said.
The minister rose in fury and banged her on the head with the "gudebuk.”
“Ye daft bletherin’ bizum,” he roared. “Ye’re takin' the word o’ God oot o' the mooth o’ ane o’ His ministers.
The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
ONLOOKER—I am afraid that you do not know
what you are writing about. What you appear to
have seen “between the lines'' is, I fear, a phantom
of your own imagination.
For these reasons we regret that we see no use
in publishing your letter.— Ed. S. G.]
A suggestion.
KUCHING, SARAWAK.
26th April, 1922-
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
DEAR SIR,
I have read with interest the P. M. O.'s report
on the Medical Department and while it is gratifying
to hear about the improvements with regard to
medical matters which have been and are still to be
made at Outstations, and the new Hospital “for
Europeans only" to which further additions are
contemplated, it seems to me that there is one section
of the community which has been overlooked. I
refer to the many persons who are able arid willing
to pay a fair and reasonable sum for hospital accom-
modation and trained nursing, but who cannot, it
would appear, go to the Hospital “for Europeans
only, " and cannot be expected to go to the General
Hospital which has only rough accommodation for
the coolie class and does not possess any nurses,
trained or otherwise.
The Medical Department might with advantage
extend its sphere of usefulness to this large class by
building on “The Grange" site a hospital with
decent accommodation for 2nd class patients, as is

[NEXT EXCERPT]

“On and after 19th December, 1932, there appears no reason why anyone resident in Sarawak and interested in Broadcasting should not be able to receive programmes of good quality and the latest news of the day direct from London.” -Contributed.
An Impression of 1847.
I think it was in 1929 chat I wrote a short article in the Gazette describing a quaint old book on Sarawak which had come into my hands.
There are many books on Sarawak, perhaps not as many as it deserves, but quite enough to bewilder any inquirer into the life and customs of the inhabitants.
Some appear dull to present day readers, some are frankly Christian propaganda; a few are typical of the flying-visit-must-see-everything-in-a-day author (or generally, may I dare to write, authoress).
One thing one cannot help noticing, however, is the dearth of good illustrations. Most old illustrations were so untrue to life that readers have long given up the search for the delightful cleared spaces and charming vistas depicted in the earlier works on Sarawak.
In the more modern books photographs take the place of engravings and the less said about most of these the better.
Picture my delight, therefore, when a rather tattered, but imposing looking volume came into my possession the other day, which, on being opened, displayed a maximum of delightful engravings and a minimum of tiresome letterpress.
The title is typical of the years that are past; when people had time (and the inclination) to read more leisurely and enjoyed a well-sounding and well set-up title: -
“Views In the Eastern Archipelago, Borneo, Sarawak, Labuan, etc., etc., etc., from drawings made on the spot by Capt. Drinkwater Bethune, R.N. C.B., Commander, L. G. Heath, R.N., and others.”
“The descriptive letterpress by James Augustus St. John, Esq.”
“Author of Manners and Customs of the Ancient Greeks
Drawn on stone by J. W. Giles.”
“Printed by McLean & Co.. 70, St. Martin’s Lane.”
“1847.”
The frontispiece is a carefully thought out and complicated design of native weapons, coconut palms, monkeys, fruit trees and other tropical growths.
On the next page is the dedication to-
“The Right Hon. Lord Viscount Palmerston, H. M. Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, etc., etc.”
The principal contents, however, are twenty-five full page engravings, so intricate and so full of detail that a full description would fill may more pages than the Editor would possibly allow me to use.
To mention a few. There is a charming view of Kuching, which, in spite of the modern bund and imposing block of new offices, was surely a much more picturesque township than at the present day.
Then there is a Dyak suspension bridge which in no way differs from the ones in use to this day in Upper Sarawak.
“Mr. Brooke’s Bungalow” is the picture of a very modest building, much on the same lines as some of the few remaining “old style” outstation bungalows to-day. In this respect one cannot help thinking that perhaps our great-grandfathers had a better idea of a verandah than we have now.
“Brune” is the Brunei of the photographs without the dreadful camera-cannot-lie appearance. Some of the other plates are “Keni Balu” (Kinabalu), “Santubong,” “Singghi Mountain,” “Matang,” “Cutting The Boom at Malludau,” and “Coal Seam at Labuan.”
If I had the same facility of expressing in words the charm of these old engravings, as the authors had in executing their drawings in pen and ink, my task would be easy.
It is impossible for me, therefore, to describe fully the beauty and restfulness of this little collection of illustrations.
No doubt many modern art experts might decry the meticulous attention to detail and the obvious intention of the artist to leave nothing for granted. Persons might say “You would not be able to see the rigging of a ship at that distance, therefore why put it in? It is not correct in nature.” Quite true, perhaps, but then it looks all right, and that after all is what the average man wants to see. “I’ve never seen a sunset like that!” someone told Turner. “Ah! but don’t you wish you had,” Turner replied.
I do not suppose these engravings are of much value purely as works of arts, but they are certainly satisfying to me, and I can turn to them over and over again with fresh enjoyment every time when the most expertly made photo illustrations leave me cold after the first look.
To conclude this short article. I found gummed to the inside of the cover a letter which may interest some readers as an example of the carefully written style which letter writers used in 1847; when telephones, fountain pens and typewriters were not yet invented to spoil the art of letter writing, although I must admit that several of the words defied my ingenuity and I must leave several blank spaces!!
9, North Bank,
Regent’s Park, Wednesday, May 31 (1847?).
My Dear Sir,

[NEXT EXCERPT]

At the mouth of the Tinjar we changed to Lorna Doone and reached Long Teru close on dusk. We were taken to the Local Authority School building where Penghulu Enteri and his Iban girls in traditional dress greeted us with much tuak and a party spirit; speeches of goodwill were made and His Excellency was presented with a Kenyalang. We were next led to the Chinese bazaar and treated to beer and then pro-ceded across river to Penghulu Lawai's house, inhabited by Berawans. Guns were let off and we were all liter-ally swept off our feet by the great welcome. We were escorted into the house, and while some of the gentle sex plied us with borak others brought on dinner and before we knew what had happened a sumptuous meal was laid out on the floor before us. After dinner we had a short respite while the Berawans watched a cine-ma show, and then the party started spontaneously again with Mrs Lawai (Kasi) acting as hostess. The fair sex became less gentle and more boisterous and there was no doubt that they were all thoroughly enjoy-ing the party, with its singing and dancing. One by one we guests excused ourselves in the early hours of the morning, murmuring that we had had a long day and were tired and we retired to bed, but our hostesses refused to be baulked of their determination to enjoy themselves and so would come and haul the slumbering guest out of his mosquito net to carry on with the fun and games. For myself I know that at 3 a.m. I was at last allowed an uneasy sleep to the sound of merry-making on the verandah which lasted until daylight, when I shakily stepped out of my room to find a lady waiting with a morning pick-me-up of rather dirty and vinegary looking borak for me. As His Excellency and party were carrying on their ablutions at the water's edge we were all rather alarmed to find the indefatigable Kasi and a bunch of Amazons coming towards us with their hands covered with mud and pot black, smearing menfolk and their hair and clothes with this mixture and pushing others into the river. Various native officers were vanquished by these ladies while members of the crew of Lorna Doone fled before them. The District Officer was caught unawares by them and overcome and the Resident too had to pretend he enjoyed the hearty party spirit of being dirtied just after he had washed himself. There was no doubt that these people were out to enjoy them-selves in the traditional manner on this, the first visit of the Head of the State to the Tinjar for a very long time indeed.
After this most of His Excellency’s party accom-panied him to Bunut Lake, leaving at 7.30 a.m. while the remainder of the party arranged the switchover from Lorna Doone to three large outboards. Al-together there were 17 outboard engines taken upriver, this large number being necessary to allow for boats of different sizes in all depths of water and for re-placements in case of break-downs. About 11 a.m. the whole party carried on up the Tinjar. We called
on the Penans under Tama Sedut, who entertained us traditionally, and then we had a cold lunch on the grass of the river bank near an empty hut and reached Long Jegan, Tama Arek Subai's Berawan house, at about 5.30 p.m. Our hospitable hosts provided a fish and chicken dinner for us. After the cinema show, the party began in the same mood as that of the previous night, but these Berawans were slightly more restrained and the dancing was more beautiful. Even so the maidens did not wish to appear to be lacking in hos-pitality and plied us with borak with a verve and hied one or two of us out of our beds after we were slum-bering happily, and forced us to rejoin the party. Native Officer Wan Hashim was especially to be con-gratulated and commiserated with in this matter as he had worked hard all day and yet allowed himself to show no signs of fatigue at night despite the fact that he was hauled out of bed 2 or 3 times a night and could get little sleep before 5 a.m. Penghulu Gau too was a tower of strength at party times, but then he is experienced in these matters and took care to sleep as much as he could during the day or during cinema shows.
On the 4th October we were away by 8.30 a.m. and called at the Sebop houses of Aban Matu at Long Sungai and Tama Itang Bit at Long Simiton (where we were given some well-hung pork cooked in bamboo) and reached the Sebop house of Wakil Penghulu Balan Lijau at Long Tejoi at about 5 p.m. U.R.A. Bela-lang (Tama Abit) was also there. After a bathe and dinner we witnessed a drill display by the school children of nearby Leppu Leju and some excellent dancing by both sexes. The party went with a swing and ended with guests and hosts doing a Conga in the early hours of the morning.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

The moral stigma of the debtor being labeled “thief” is all that is missing to make a perfect corollary.
Actually, the trader himself loses by this system, as naturally unless it can be proved that the man is. or was, able to pay at the time of the transaction, very few Magistrates, we think, would commit the debtor to prison; unless of course he deliberately represented himself as a wealthy man, and went out of his way to obtain the credit. This does not happen very often.
You may retort-that is all very well-but in this country any man can get down to it and fish or cut firewood to repay his debt. True, he can within reason but the argument is that if the trader allowed credit only to such an extent as would allow the debtor to work for a few days to repay the debt, all would be well. But they will not do this. Most of the trading Chinese are at the moment very hard up for cash, the result is that sheaves of summonses and Judgment summonses are served on all and sundry. In many cases the defendants are coolies or the poorer natives, some with work on small wages, some with none at all-many of them appear on Judgment summonses for the fourth or fifth time. They have possibly paid all they can afford-what remedy can the Court give the creditor? Put the debtor in jail? Why should it? Surely it is much more reasonable to say to the creditor. “This amount is more than your debtor can be expected to pay in a reasonable time. Can you prove that when you allowed credit, this man was able to pay this sum within a reasonable time? No? Then you have no remedy in this Court.”
Government servants on small pay are protected against extended credit of over $5-why should not this protection be extended to all small wage earners, allowing recovery of debt only up to say one month’s wages?
Such procedure on all occasions would surely put an end to this abuse and eventually would simplify or possible help to abolish altogether the expensive and time wasting mechanism of the Court Deposit system.
Sarawak Association.
His Highness the Tuan Muda of Sarawak was in the chair at the annual dinner of the Sarawak Association, which was held at the Trocadero, London. The following were also present:
Sir Gilbert Grindle, Sir Laurence Guillemard, Mr. C. D. Adams, Mr. R. Y. Ames, Dr. Gilbert E. Brooke, Mr. R. D. Binnie, Mr. F. F. Boult, Mr. T. Stirling Boyd, Mr. Herbert La Chard, Prof. W. E. Le Gros Clark, Capt. W. T. Clark, Mr. D. B. Crane.
Sir Percy Cunynghame, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, Capt. C. W. Daubeny, Mr. H. R. A. Day, Mr. R. S. Douglas, Mr. David Evans, Mr. P. H. Flood-Page, Dr. C. O. Gauge, Mr. Ernest Hose, Lt.-Comdr. A. M. Hughes, Mr. C. Willes Johnson, Mr. H. Wyndham Jones, Dr. W. Kusel.
Capt. A. S. Lowe, Mr. Chas, MacAlpine, Mr. Sydney Malkkin, Mr. S. R. Maw, Mr. J. P. Mead, Mr. H. L. Own, Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner, Mr. R. Pawie, Major F. W. Richards, Eugr. Lt.-Comdr. L. R. Rickinson, Major H. W. V. Scott, Mr. J. A. Smith, Mr. W. H. Smith, Mr. P. J. Stewart, Mr. Kenneth Thorburn, Mr. G. J. D. Walters and Mr. A. B. Ward.
SARAWAK ASSOCIATION OF SINGAPORE.
At the annual general meeting of the Sarawak Association, Singapore, held on the 16th August, 1931, the following gentlemen were elected officer-bearer for the ensuing year: -President, Mr. Wee Kheng Watt; Vice-Presidents. Messrs. Kho Kim Luh and Phang Chiap Song; Hon. Secretary, Mr. Song Lian Siong; Hon. Asst Secretary, Mr. J. S. Chong; Hon. Treasurer, Mr. Kho Thye Jin; Hon. Auditor, Mr. Michael Tai; Hon. Sports Superintendent, Mr. Tommy Tan; Hon. Asst. Sports Superintendent, Mr. Vonn Thiam Joon; Committee, Messrs. Matthew Lim, Charles William, Voon Shak Leong and Yeo Joon Fatt; Employment Committee, Messrs. Kho Ten Shaw and Tan Thian Sang.
Departure of the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

The Tariff of charges which is being pub lished we believe is calculated to give satisfac tion, and the general management of the Hotel will be found to be in efficient hands.
A Truly Marvellous Forest,
From the columns of the S. F. P. we learn that “ Less than three years ago Commander J. E. Capstickdale, a naval reservist, left Sydney to invest his capital in Borneo. lie returned to Sydney (says the Brisbane Courier) in a vessel carrying for him a thousand tons of mahogany, cedar, and other timber. During Iris sojourn in Borneo, according to a statement in the “S. M. Herald," he has more than trebled Iris capital, hi an interview Mr. Capstickdale said he never intended to leave his lotus land of Borneo. As an evidence of the productivity of the soil, Mr. Capstickdale remarked that in a radius of 30ft. he had cut 11 trees from 8 to 14ft. in circumference, and from 120 to 150 ft. high to the first branch. It is a fine class of timber, and the haulage of the huge logs out of the hold of the vessel in Sydney provided an interesting spectacle. The visitor claims chat his country, which is quite mediocre, in his estimation, will yield 1 million tons of commercial timber from 31 square miles."
It would be interesting to know in what part of Borneo Commander Capstickdale found such a valuable area of limber. Being unversed in the mysteries of forestry we asked the opinion of an expert who writes as follows:—
Careful estimates made by the Forest Department of British North Borneo over areas representing about 275 square miles of the best commercial forest in the State show that the average stand of timber is about 2,600 cubic feet or 33,280 tons to the square miles Commander Canstickle’s forest, however, which is "quite mediocre'' is estimated to yield 48,387 tons to the square mile.
The productivity of the soil in his forest must be exceptional. I sing the smaller dimensions of 8 feet in girth and 20 feet in length and making allowance for loss in conversion these 11 trees would yield 5,280 cubic feet on an area of *0*065 acres or 160.5 trees per acre yielding 81,347 cubic feet (1627 toils), a truly marvellous forest.
Enumerations made by the Forest Department in the Federated Malay Slates in various forests have given the following results.
In one of the best, forest reserves in Perak there were found to be only 5.42 trees per acre of over 6 feet in girth.
In two finest reserves in Selangor there were found to be 1*2.5 and 9.5 trees per acre of over 3 feet in girth.
Of these-not more than 25% would be of merchan-table size.
It may be remarked that neither Mahogany nor Cedar occur in Borneo. Various Borneo timbers are sometimes used as substitutes for Mahogany, among them being Nyireh (Xylocatpus sp.). a native of the mangrove swamps. Penaga (Calophyllum inophyllum) is another substitute. It is, how ever, not a Mahogany and possesses neither the colour nor the structure of that wood. This timber is distinctly rare. The red Serayas are also used occasionally as substitutes for Mahogany in panelling. Seraya is a wood produced by the genus Shorea of the Dipterocaipnceae. The wood is light, has a reddish tinge and somewhat cedar-like odour. It is consequently known on London market as "Borneo Cedar."
FIRST Tamil gentleman, on meeting a friend:
“Oh, Mr. Rengan, have you heard about Mr. Sinnatamby? He has lost all his money in rubber, and it is all he can do to keep the cat cut of the bag!” Second Tamil gentleman: “Well, well, too much botheration to be sure! Poor Mr. Sinnatamby, he has buttered his
I bun, and be must He on it.”
A Quiet Rubber.
It was Sunday, a hot still day, the kind you know, when you cannot do anything during the day, and again nothing in the afternoon because it rains like,—well like it does rain after a still, hot day. A perspiring figure appeared coming up the path, leisurely ambling along. It bore a note from the Grundy-Brownes; a polite little note asking me to make a fourth at 6 o’clock, in a quiet rubber, and stay to dinner. It did not mention who the fourth was, but then, I surmised it would be a friend of theirs with a gift for the game. I myself, am not gifted with a love of it, though a “quiet rubber” is an excellent pastime. Yes, pastime, that is the word. Not a business, or a labourious undertaking. So I accepted and duly arrived at the Grundy-Browne’s at 6 p. m.
Mr. Grundy-Browne gave me a whisky and in formed me that his cousin, that charming woman, Miss Lettucia Garr-Browne, having gone to visit an Aunt, he had taken the opportunity of arrang ing “a little four" and John Scott Poaker and Willie Cheter were coming round.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Horses Division II, 1 Mile
"Soo San's"
1.	Kanda	8.8	(8.5)	Sirat	1125
2.	Capitol	9.13	Teo Ek Pah 658
3.	The Banker	8.0	(8.1)	Keram	479
4.	Deep Fields	10.3	Matnor	859
Also ran:
Bunga Singapura 9.12(9.7) Eddie 484
3605
Won by: 1 length, 3 lengths, 1 length Time: 1 min. 52 secs. Tote $2.50
Bunga Singapura led Kanda and Capitol to the 6, then Kanda look the lead and stayed there for the rest of the race. The Banker was trailing several lengths behind the field at the 5 but came up fast in the straight to gain 3rd place.
Race 5. The Grattan-Bellew Handicap
Horses Division I, 1 Mile
Mr. Ong Soo Keng's
1.	Remember Me	9.8	Tan Tau En	1781
2.	Craughan	9.5	(9.7)	Usop	824
3.	Stars Remember	8.0	(8.1)	Samsudin	596
4.	Gay Bird	10.12(10.7) Keram	651
Also ran:
Knight Gallant 8.7 Eddie	207
4059
Scratched: First Ra 8.6
Won by: 3 lengths, 5 lengths, 2 lengths
Time: 1 min. 49 secs. Tote $1.80
Knight Gallant hit the front but Remember Me was in the lead at the 7. Knight Gallant hung on to Re-member Me's heels until the 4 where he was finished and Craughan came up to challenge the leader.
In the straight Remember Me was going easily in front and when the rest were called on to make their effort they could make no impression on her.
Race 6. The Claphams Farewell Handicap
Horses Open 6, Furlongs
Mr. Ong Soo Keng's
1.	Cherith	9.10 Tan Tau En 818
2.	Blondie	12.0	(11.7) Keram	1507
3.	Brightstar Minstrel 8.8	Samsudin	1221
4.	Hua Tara	8.6	Asing	304
Also ran:
Rosy Morn	7.7	Bujang	296
4146
Scratched: Remember Me 12.4, Kanda 7.9
Won: 2 lengths, 2 lengths, 1 length Time: 1 min. 22 secs. Tote $4.00
Hua Tara led a bunched field to the 3 where Cherith took up the running and never looked like getting caught. Blondie came up strongly into second place at the end but had too much ground to make up.
Race 7. The Baram Handicap
Ponies Division III, 6 Furlongs
Mr. Morgan Chai & Bros'
Bintang Aru 9.0 (8.9) Liben	829
1. Messrs. C. T. Swee & C.
K. Huan's
Silver Star	8.7 (8.0)	Sintek	686
3. Tanjong Hijau	7.12(8.5)	Samsudin	407
Phenix	7.10	Bujang	151
Also ran:
Kudat Prince	9.7 (9.2)	Keram	529
Brisbane River	8.5 (7.13) Mat III	213
Bujang Samsu	8.0	Asing	306
Lintang Lad	7.7 (7.4)	Mat II	54
3169
Won by: dead heat, distance
Time: 1 min. 40 secs. Tote $1.50
Time: 1 min. 40 secs. Tote $1.50 $1.80
Brisbane River jumped smartly away but Phoenix and Bintang Aru were soon in front. Bintang Aru remained there for the rest of the way and Silver Star, who was last at the 4 furlongs, made up ground rapidly in the straight to dead heat.
Race 8. The Bintulu Handicap
Ponies Division II, 6 Furlongs
Mr. Tan Teck Ann's
1.	Cabaret	8.9 (8.4)	Bujang	298
2.	Miss Kudat	7.7 (7.9)	Mat II	482
3.	Lordship	7.7	Liben	206
4.	Gobi	10.3	Usop	509
Also ran:
Chienlimah	9.8	(9.7) Joon Loi	208
Darling River	9.13(9.6)	Putit I	621
Bintang Selatan	9.7	(9.1) Da'an	101
Victory Parade 8.2 Asing	119
Borneo Boy	9.6 Tan Tau Eng 647
3191
Scratched: Suiyuan 7.10
Won by: length, 3 lengths, neck
Time: 1 min. 39 secs. Tote $8.50
Off to a good start, it was Cabaret Victory Parade and Miss Kudat from a bunched field with Lordship and Borneo Boy in the rear. Miss Kudat soon took the lead and was ahead until a furlong from home where Cabaret fought back strongly to overtake her. Lordship was a fast finishing third.
216
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 30, 1953
Race 9. The Lo Soo Eng Cup
Ponies Division I, 1 miles
The Ong Kongsi’s
1.	Bintang Timor	9.0	Samsudin	808
2.	Kaswari	7.12(8.0)	Manan	593
3.	Atom Boy	8.5 (8.6)	Matnor	853
4.	Snowy River	8.12(8.13)	Putit I	189
Also ran:
Dondang Sayang 7.7 (7.11) Teo Ek Pah 535
2978
Won by: 2 lengths, 4 lengths, distance Time: 2 mins. 47 secs. Tote $2.90
First Time past the stands Dondang Sayang was showing the way to Snowy River. Then Kaswari drew level with the leader but at 5 furlongs Bintang Timor also came up and these three ponies raced neck and neck to the 2 where Atom Boy put in a challenge, but Bintang Timor, once under the whip, drew away to win without difficulty.
Kuching Market Price List
20th October to 20th November, 1953.
RICE—(per gantang)
Local, White Milling ...	...	...	$2.78
Govt. Siam	...	...	...	2.52
Rangoon	...	...	...	2.40
Broken	...	...	...	2.04
SUGAR—(per kati)
Java, White (Govt.) Refined ...	...	.34
Brown	...	...	...	Nil
Nipah Sugar	...	...	...	.25
SALT—(per kati)
Coarse	...	...	...	...	.10
Fine	...	...	...	...	.15
FLOUR AND BREAD—
Wheat Flour, per kati	...	...	.35
Bread per loaf ...	...	...	.10
MILK—(per tin) Milkmaid	... ... ... .70
Golden Wheel ... ... ... .65
EGGS-(each)	Duck, fresh	...	...	... .20
salted ... ... ... .18
Fowl	... ... ... .21
EDIBLE FATS—(per kati)
Coconut Oil	...	...	...	.70
Pork Fat No. 1	...	...	...	1.80
2 ... ... ... 1.40
PORK—(per kati)
Lean	No. 1 ...	...	...	3.40
Lean with fat 2 ...	...	...	1.80
BEEF AND OTHER MEATS—(per kati)
Mutton (Australian)	...	...	...	2.80
Beef, steak	...	...	...	3.00
Beef, curry meat	...	...	...	1.60
Buffalo No. 1	...	...	...	3.00
curry meat	...	...	...	1.60
Kambing (daging)	...	...	...	3.00

[NEXT EXCERPT]

OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 59 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 78 SATURDAY, MAY 16TH, 1874. Price 5 cents.
The third day of June is the Rajah’s birthday which is a general holiday with us.
It has been arranged that on that day the new Court House as it has been called though more properly named the New Public Offices is to be opened. This is to be done with as much ceremony as possible.
This building has been seven years constructing, and its want has been for all that time daily felt. Now that it is completed, it has been pronounced by all to be a very handsome plain building suitable for the purpose; and if boasting of no great architectural beauties, it is free from blemishes and bad taste and is not an eyesore.
The appearance of the pillars are injured by the long caves of the roof which conceal the capitals-but as this is for comfort, because the eaveless houses of Europe in this country of rain and sun would be very unbearable-we do not condemn.
The court room occupying the middle of the building measures 64 feet by 42 feet, the roof is open not ceilinged, and lined with wood deeply stained, which with the heavy rafters and belian beams showing, all dark stained, gives a handsome grave and heavy appearance suited to a court. Adjoining and behind the dais is the Resident’s office 22 feet by 22 feet; and another room at present to be occupied by the Government Printing Press. We-the “Sarawak Gazette” -feel that we are to be too well-lodged, and will be glad to turn out to make way for the Surveyor when there shall be such a person: the room having been originally intended in plan for the Surveyor’s office. The other end of the building consists of four fine lofty rooms. One corner, the Treasury; the other, the Post Office. adjoining the Treasury the Audit Office: and adjoining the Post Office, the Shipping Office. This constitutes all the Government Offices at Kuching.
We hope the inauguration will be managed becomingly, and we do not think that in the absence of H.H. the Rajah, it could have fallen into better hands than our Senior Officer, the Hon’ble J. B. Cruickshank, who comes from Sibu for the purpose.
Sarawak Library.
Kindly presented by Mr. R. G. Aikman: -
Purchased by the Committee: -
First Division News.
RESIDENT’S OFFICE.
March, 1933.
Extracts front the Divisional Reports by Mr. E. O. Bruce, Acting Resident, First Division: -
In the Resident’s Court Criminal, T.K. Abas of Tambirat was convicted of breach of trust under I.P.C. section 409, and sentenced to six months’ R.I. and a fine of $100.
Mr. H. Jacques, Director of Education, was granted leave prior to retirement, and, as from the 1st April, the duties attaching to the Education office were distributed between the Divisional Resi-dents regarding subsidized mission schools, the Secretary for Native Affairs regarding Government Vernacular Schools, and the Secretary for Chinese Affairs regarding subsidized Chinese Schools.
Total registered applications for land along the Kuching-Simanggang Road total 7,601 acres to date.
A further seven gold Prospecting Licences were issued during the month, making progressive total to date twenty-six for Kuching, and a further forty-one licences were issued at Bau.
UPPER SARAWAK DISTRICT.
March, 1933.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports: -
Agriculture. -The Dahan Rubber Estates harvested 23,000 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
The rainfall at Bau was 11.69 inches. The highest recorded in 24 hours was 2.17 inches. The rainfall for the month at Dahan Rubber Estates was 16.32 inches.
Gold Mining. -Some anxiety was experienced about the middle of the month when the price of gold fell by $6 an ounce, but it soon recovered, and by the end of the month had attained its previous high level. Interest in gold mining throughout the district is as keen as ever, and a considerable increase in the number of establishments operating by the cyanide method may be expected in the course of the next two or three months. Twenty-nine General Prospecting Licences were issued during the month. Fourteen applications for Exclusive Prospecting Licences were received and twelve such licences were issued. The actual gold obtained by the following Companies for the month of February, 1933, was: -
LUNDU DISTRICT.
March, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
Trade: -
General. -I left for Kuching via Stungkor and Bau on 16th. The Jagoi Dyaks have a good padi crop, most of which has been harvested. I noticed that many of them are employing Malays to erect belian houses. These people always seem to have plenty of money.
I returned to Lundu by m.v. La Follette on 24th.
SADONG DISTRICT.
March, 1933.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports: -

[NEXT EXCERPT]

A number of distinguished visitors have been shown round the excavation site during recent months; it is always a pleasure to do this. Among these visitors we have welcomed Mr. R. E. Hales,
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 31, 1953.
51
Managing Director of the B.M.P. Co. Ltd. with Mrs. Hales, and the chief of the Geological Section Dr. C. K. Thiebaud with Mr. W. Milroy and Mr. W. M. Moore. Geological interpretations are very necessary on an excavation site of this sort. And another of Santubong's mysteries is still the origin of the quantities of iron slag which cover many acres between the Sungei Ja'ong and Santubong Village, behind Buntal, and again under Gunong Sejinjang on the opposite side of the river.
Mr. Fortunatus Manis.
A severe setback to archaeological research was the death of Mr. F. Manis on 9th January, 1953. The late Research Assistant was a native of Celebes who took an active part in helping S.R.D. guerilla forces in northern Sarawak during the latter part of the Japanese Occupation. He had previously served as a teacher and then as a Native Officer in the interior of Indonesian Borneo, of which he had an exceptional knowledge. He was a fluent speaker of the Murut, Mil u and Kelabit dialects and on behalf of the missionaries (he was himself a Christian) translated some of the first hymns which have since become the morning and evening pleasure of thousands of converted natives. He was responsible for the initiation of the first of the bamboo-pipe bands which have been widely copied by Government and mission schools in the Fourth and Fifth Divisions. An accomplished musician, he prepared (and nearly completed before his death) a very full monograph on native music of the interior. He joined the musuem staff in 1947 and spent much of his time travelling in almost all the main districts of Sarawak, collecting native folklore on a systematic basis. Of particular interest is his well-arranged material on the vanished Serus of the Kalaka District,—once a great people, but over-run by the Ibans and by their own (Seru) vicious customs.
It is hoped that much of this material can eventually be published. But it is going to be hard to replace the painstaking attention to detail which Manis devoted to collecting and indexing this work during the past four years. But more than this, the death of Manis will be felt as a personal loss to thousands of native people. Wherever he went, his cheerful patient character, his interest in and encouragement of native interests, and his ability to mix,—rapidly to make friends and to learn the ways of any group he was with,—made him one of the best-known and liked of travellers of the more familiar routes. When news of his death was dropped in a note from a Borneo Evangelical Mission Auster into the Kelabit country on January 16th, there was a sense of distress and sadness which would also have been felt elsewhere.
In these days, Government officers at all levels generally have little time to sit and listen; they have many administrative duties which hasten them along. It was Manis's good fortune to have the job of listening, of being expert at it and loving to do it. It is a real misfortune that he should have died at the age of only 37, when the full results of his good work were just beginning to emerge.
Gifts.
Among gifts received recently are a considerable consignment of books and periodicals for the Reference Library from Mr. A. R. Morrison, which are most acceptable. Mr. W. Allen (who has
left the British Aluminium Company) sent in interesting pottery from North Borneo. Mr. I. H. N. Evans a specially made collection of Bajau pottery from Kota Belud which he has generously presented. Mr. I. A. N. Urquhart sent us a picture of an earthenware figure which, judging from the photograph, is almost certainly one of the figures made at Sawankolok in Central Siam and of type not previously recorded in Borneo. Fortunately we now have a specimen collected in Central Siam last year and when Mr. Urquhart has a chance to see it it should be possible to check on this point—the original of the photograph is in Dayak hands.
Mr. J. D. Boles of the North Borneo Government has kindly sent a specimen of Swinhoe's Petrel. This is the first positive record from Sarawak and the first skin in the Museum. The bird flew into a telephone wire halfway up the hill above Jesselton Town, about 300-400 yards from the sea, at about 6.00 a.m. on January 17th. It was taken to the house of Mr. R. H. Hansen who did what he could for if, and tried to feed it on various things includ-ing minute pieces of raw fish. It had an injury to scalp, and kept its head turned half round. (It is, in fact, practically impossible to keep these ocean-going birds alive, as they feed on most delicate sea-food, minute and often microscopic surface organisms which they skim up with their beak.) Mr. Boles kindly put the bird on a plane in time for us to preserve it.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

“In his own country, Sarawak, neither elephants nor tigers are to be found. His first remark on seeing an elephant's footprint was that if they could but secure an animal that size they would have, no need to do anything but eat for weeks. However when they did meet either of these animals they were terrified, and I have never been called a liar so point-blank ns when I explained that the despised Indian coolie of no physique rode on one of these animals in his own country controlling its move ments. in the Dyaks' eyes this was absolutely incomprehensible.” In a dismission which followed, the lecture” Lieut J. C. T. Willis said "It is with some diffidence that I find myself on the platform attempting to add anything to what has been so ably said with regard to Johore but there is one point which I should like to amplify. Cant. Kirby, when speaking of our labour difficulties, mentioned Dyaks, and on the strength of three years rather intimate acquaintance with these folk, in the jungle and more or less under their own conditions, I should like to say a few words to show you what nice people they are to deal with. Short and stocky, clad almost entirely in blue tattoo, they wear their hair right down their backs and appear to have no definite knowledge of the white man beyond what they get from one or two District Officers in the course, of their lifetime. When first they came they were full of unexpected surprises. They were in no sense coolies. ' Genial survey collaborators' was much more their general outlook. A story may enable you to realize how one had to deal with them and what an attractive mentality they had. “I was walking along a very narrow jungle path. A Chinaman coining in the opposite direction re quired a great deal more than his fair share of the path. As we brushed past each other, four of my Dyaks pattered up with very broad smiles on their faces and very large knives in their bands and said, 'Did you see that man ? he did not give you anything like enough room to walk ; may we please cut his head off?’ I had to act quite quickly, for silence is taken as consent, and it is somewhat awkward to explain afterwards that one did not really mean it. “I left these folk with very genuine regret, and I may also add. with a certain amount of subterfuge, because six of them, having saved enough money for a journey to Europe and equipped themselves, with a general view of appearing well in London society, with one Hamburg hat apiece, announced their intention of coining home with me.”
A Literary Competition.
We give below the solution of the Competition in the last number of the Gazette No competitor sent in a completely correct list Mrs Pitt-Hardacre scored twelve out of twenty points and wins the five dollar prize. Quotation number five seems to have caused the greatest difficulty and perhaps would only be familiar to students of late Victorian verse.
Along the cool sequestered vale of life, They kept the noiseless tenour of their way.
Gray’s Elegy
And the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest.
Tennyson. The May Queen, (last line)
The stars threw down their spears, And watered heaven with their tears.
Blake The Tiger.
For Cambridge people rarely smile, Being urban, squat and full of guile. Rupert Brooke. Grantchester.
And if the scheme should possibly seem, a rather absurd pretence,
Think that your chance of promotion lies in a delicate reticence. A.C. Deane. New Rhymes for Old.
Man wants but little here below.
Goldsmith. The Hermit
And two French copper coins, ranged with careful art.
To comfort his sad heart.
Coventry Patmore. The Toys.
Though I be rude in speech.
St. Paul. II. Cor. II. 6.
But when the deep-red eye of day is level with the broad highway.
Elroy Flecker. Yasmin. (Serenade
in Hassan).
Richard's himself again.
Richard The Third. Colley Cibber's version.
Sarawak Library.
The following books have recently been added to the Library.-
guminosae.
GREEN COVER PLANTS AND GREEN MANURE
Professor Dr. Hellrigel discovered in 1888, that all varieties of plants related to the Leguminosae, will grow on soil, which has no chemical com bination of nitrogen in its structure, and on which other kinds of plants would not have any chance at all.
This discovery was supplemented afterwards
by Dr Beverinck of Delft (Holland), who found
out, that the Leguminosae obtained the required
amount of nitrogen for their proper growth, from
the atmosphere, with the assistance of the
Leguniinosae-Bacteria, briefly called: “in
zymbiose ”
Every species of Leguminosae has its own
special bacteria, which serves for the purpose of
extracting nitrogen from the atmosphere.
The botanical group of Leguminosae has for
some years been attracting the attention of all
Experiment Stations, with the result that an
enormous use of these plants for interplanting on
Rubber, Tea. Coffee and Cinchona Estates has
taken place.
In consequence of this the amount of chemically
combined nitrogen in the soil is now increasing,

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Currie halved with Woodroffe
Thomas beat Knyvett	4 & 3
Milton beat Berry	7 & 5
Outram (A. N.) beat Gould 4 & 3
H. Heaton beat Couchman 10 & 8
Result: Sarawak Club won by 16 matches to 1, with one halved
Conditions: Reminiscent of Piccadilly Circus during the rush hour
Bowling Averages for October
No. of rolls Highest roll Average
Ladies
Mrs. F. Clarke-Hunt	23	158	134
S. Kitto	6	150	124
J. Greene	11	160	120
I.	Morrison	11	139	120
F. D. Becket	10	150	113
B. Larkin	6	135	110
Miss J. Daly	15	138	105
Mrs. V. Holloway	8	124	103
E. Whyte	7	148	102
N. Marjoribanks	8	118	98
P. Courtney	18	116	95
R. Outram	10	136	94
J.	E. Ogden	8	110	90
Gentlemen
Mr. T. V. Courtney	9	202	179
R. Klooster	26	201	158
H. Polman	27	196	155
G. D. Becket	13	183	145
O. F. Wright	21	181	137
J. Hekking	7	153	135
F. Ogden	5	134	135
D. Forrer	6	146	133
C. Holloway	9	155	132
S. Larkin	9	159	126
F. Clarke-Hunt	23	178	122
R. Greene	13	140	117
W. L. Morrison	6	132	114
A. N. Outram	5	111	95
O. F. WRIGHT,
for Convenor
October Competition
Ladies
Mrs. P. Courtney	200
I. Morrison	181
Miss J. Daly	169
Mrs. F. A. Clarke-Hunt	165
E. M. Whyte	164
V. Holloway	160
B. Larkin	159
J. Greene	157
F. D. Becket	147
S. Kitto	136
N. Marjoribanks	133
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 30, 1953
213
Gentlemen
Mr. R. Klooster	371
T. V. Courtney	367
O. F. Wright	343
F. C. Ogden	324
H. Polman	320
R. Greene	320
F. C. Clarke-Hunt	300
S. Larkin	300
O. F. WRIGHT,
for Convenor
Sarawak Turf Club
WINTER MEETING, 1953
First Day 30th October, 1953
Race 1. The Landas Scurry
Ponies Division III. 3 Furlongs
Messrs. C. T. Swee & C. K. Huan's
1. Silver Star 7.7 (7.10) Sintek	270
Smoke Screen	9.2	Tan Tau En 308
2. Phoenix	7.8	Bujang	154
4. Tanjong Hijau	8.5	Samsudin	541
Also ran:
Bintang Aru	9.1	Leben	321
Kudat Prince	9.0	Lohor	486
2087
Scratched: Bujang Samsu 7.7 Won By: Nose, Dead heat, head Time: 48 secs. Tote $6.10
Bintang Aru was left. Smoke Screen led Tanjong Hijau and Phoenix to the 2 furlongs. The field be-came bunched in the last furlong and it was anybody's race till the last stride.
Race 2. The Petanak Handicap
Ponies Division II 3 Furlongs
The Lim Sisters’
1.	Miss Kudat	7.7	(7.5)	Mat II	1134
2.	Dondang Sayang 9.4	Teo Ek	Pah	335
3.	Darling River	8.4 (8.8)	Tan Tau En	724
4.	Suiyuan	8.2	Asing	449
Also ran:
Gobi	10.9	Usop	202
Victory Parade 8.12 Samsudin 426
3270
Scratched: Chienlimah 10.4, Cabaret 8.8 Won By: 1 length, length, 1 lengths Time: 46 secs. Tote $2.30
Gobi was left. Miss Kudat got nicely away and es-tablished a head of 4 lengths from Dondang Sayang. Dondang Sayang closed the gap rapidly approaching the winning post but Miss Kudat just hung on to her lead.
Race 3. The Holl Memorial Handicap
Ponies Division I, 4 Furlongs
The Lim Sisters’
1.	Lucky Buy	11.8	(11.3)	Then Joon Loi	734
2.	Kaswari	7.7	Ananan	724
3.	Snowy River	8.7	(8.8)	Tan Tau En	1031
4.	Atom Boy	7.8	(7.9)	Asing	618
Also ran:
Bingtang Timor 8.13 Samsudin 429
3536
Won By: Distance, 2 lengths, 1 length
Time: 1 min. 1 sec. Tote $3.80
Lucky Boy dashed into a lead of several lengths from Snowy River and went on to win with the greatest of ease. The lightly weighted Kaswari came up into second place on the post. Bintang Timor trailed the field the whole way.
Race 4. The J. B. Archer Memorial Handicap
Horses Division II, 5 Furlongs
"Soo Sam's"
1.	Kanda	8.5	(8.7) Teo Ek	Pah 1665
2.	Brightstar Minstrel 10.2	Samsudin	793
3.	Rosy Morn	9.4	Matnor	509
4.	The Banker	8.0	Keram	700
3667
Scratched: Rex III 9.13
Won By: 3 lengths, length, length
Time: 1 min. 9 secs. Tote $1.70
This was an armchair ride for jockey Ek Pah as Kanda led from pillar to post. The order to the 3 furlongs was Kanda, Brightstar Minstrel, the Banker and Rosy Morn. Approaching the straight The Ban-ker struck a muddy patch and dropped back last while the order of the rest remained the same.
Race 5. The Wee Kheng Chiang Cup
Horses Division I, 5 Furlongs
Ong Soo Keng's
1.	Blondie	10.10 (10.5) Keram 436
2.	Stars Remember	8.9	Samsudin	526
3.	Remember Me	11.6 (10.13) Lamat	483
4.	Cherith	9.4	Tan Tau En 1193
Also ran:
Hua Tara	8.0	Asing	703
3341
Scratched: Forget-me-not 9.4, First Ra 8.5 Won By: length, Short head, 2 lengths Time: 1 min. 8 secs. Tote $6.10
Remember Me dwelt at the start. Stars Remember led Blondie and Hua Tara with Cherith and Remem-ber Me tailing off. The field closed up a furlong out and Blondie took the lead. Remember Me finished with a terrific burst of speed but just failed to catch Blondie.
214
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 30, 1953
Race 6. The Malayan Breweries Challenge Cup
Horses Open. I mile
Mr. Ong Soo Keng’s
1.	Gay Bird	10.1	(9.10) Keram	679
2.	Deep Fields	7.7	(7.8)	Bujang	398
3.	First Ra	92	Tan Tau En 694
4.	Craughan	10.4	Samsudin	743
Also ran:
Capitol	8.9 (8.10) Teo Ek Pah 1841
4355
Scratched: Forget-me-not 9.0
Won By: 3 lengths, distance, length
Time: 2 mins. 20 secs. Tote $5.10

[NEXT EXCERPT]

THE STATE SPRINT.
Value $150. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
THE TOWN STAKES.
Value $150. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
THE RAJAH’S CUP.
Value $200. A piece of plate value $150 presented by His Highness the Rajah with $50 added. Second to receive $80. Third $35.
A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance Race-course (about 1.1/3 Miles.) Entrance Fee $10. $5 refunded to non-acceptors. Handicap published on the Course. Post Entries allowed at $20 but no refund.
REGULATIONS.
Penalties. -Winners of any race at this Meeting after publication of weights shall carry a penalty of 7 lbs. for each race with a maximum of 11 stone 7 lbs.
Allowance. -Professional Jockeys who are Sarawak subjects and have never ridden more than two winners at any Meeting under Sarawak Turf Club Rules, may claim an allowance of 5 lbs.
Entries. -All nominations accompanied by Entrance Fees, description of ponies and declaration of colours to be made to the Honorary Secretary not later than noon 7th July, 1931.
Scratchings. -Owners scratching ponies before 5 p.m. on 31st July for first day and 5 p.m. on 2nd August for 2nd day, will receive back half their entrance fees.
Handicaps for the 1st Day will be posted on the Notice Board at the Sarawak Club at noon on 17th July and for the 2nd day at noon on 2nd August.
Course will be open for training on 13th June, at 5.30 a.m.
Ponies must run on the 1st Day to be eligible for entry in Races for 2nd Day.
Owners are requested to see that their syces and jockeys obtain necessary badge for entrance to Paddock.
Totalizators and Cash Sweeps as usual.
Prizes 20% reduction if under 5 entries.
Communications to be made to
P. M. ADAMS.
Honorary Secretary, Sarawak Turf Club.
Cricket.
KUCHING FOOTBALL CLUB
Vs.
H.M.S. “BRIDGEWATER.”
Advantage was taken of the presence of H.M.S. Bridgewater in Sarawak waters to arrange a game of cricket between that ship and the Kuching Football Club and it was played on Sunday 14th June on the Club ground.
Unfortunately, the ship was unable to turn out her best side and the game was rather uneven.
Bridgewater won the toss and put the Club in. Mainly thanks to MacLaine (58) and Moir (27), K.F.C. put together the respectable score of 129, but the ship felt keenly the absence of her two best bowlers and the Club should certainly have scored more.
The Bridgewaters were all out for 58 on the stroke of time and the Club thus won by 71. For the losers, Hoare-Smith played well for 25, and Bower, who had gone in fourth wicket down and was last out, was unfortunate not to carry his bat for a very careful and valuable 13. Scores: -
Second Division News.
May, 1931.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports for May 1931, by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident: -
There were two cases in the Resident’s Court, both of them petitions for divorce. During the month sites were prepared for the new bungalow and new Government school, both in Simanggang.
The Simanggang wireless station broke down during the month and was repaired by mechanics from Kuching.
I left for the Saribas and Kalaka district on the 6th to inquire into the matter of war spears sent to various parts of this Division by the 3rd Division rebel, Asoon. After having made the necessary arrangements I returned to Simanggang on the 12th.
Haji Bol Hassan arrived from Kuching to inspect the
Malay Schools in this Division. As usual, he reports the difficulty of persuading parents to see their children attend school regularly.
Dr. G. ter. Brugger of the Netherland Indies Geological Survey Department paid a short visit, to Simanggang.
There has been, and still is, considerable trouble in Engkilili between the traders and the pepper gardeners. I have received petitions and deputations from both sides, but in spite of all attempts to come to a reasonable understanding, the two parties cannot agree and matters are more or less at a deadlock. It to me that as long as the Chinese continue to employ the present system for financing pepper gardeners, so long then will the parties disagree, unless pepper reaches such a price that the matter of 50% to 100% interest on retail goods is a detail not worth considering
I visited Engkilili for two days. The bazaar seemed flourishing.
Mr. Summers left on local leave, being relieved in the Land Office by Mr. K. E. Parker.
Messrs. Barcroft, Summers and Parker spent part of the month at various times in the coast village of Maludam trying to settle a farming land dispute between Malays and Dyaks.
Mr. G. M. Goodall visited Simanggang several times during the month.
The Government Offices at Simanggang are fast nearing completion.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

supplanting of "village constables" by “court peons." This move was undoubtedly a hit aimed at the administrative service, it being felt by those in power at the time that Residents and District Officers should not have under their control a police force independent of the ordinary constabulary. This was sacrificing practical needs to empty theory with a vengeance. The village con- stables were an ancient and well-tried body of men. generally acknowledged to be seriously underpaid in comparison with the work they were expected to do. In remote places they were often the sole represent- atives of law and order for many miles around their headquarters, and they had all the powers of an ordinary police officer. They were local men with indispensable local knowledge, which was one of the reasons why they were more suitable for the work than members of the constabulary drafted indiscriminately from Kuching depot. The Commissioner of Sarawak Con stabulary made it quite clear that he would not station his men by themselves in any place. A village requiring policing must take at least two constables or go without altogether. This was no doubt sound policy from the Commissioner’s point of view, but the fact remained that places where village constables were stationed did not provide sufficient work for more than one man. It was therefore found impossible to abolish the traditional system. Village constables were retained but were called instead “court peons" although shorn of none of their powers. They were thus reduced to the status of summons-servers, but were still expected to exercise the responsibilities of police officers.
The fact that even under the new dispensation the title “Chief Secretary" is tn he retained is sufficient refutation of the allegation that poor little Sarawak is being forced into the strait-jacket of Colonial dogma, but the point is really not worth arguing. It is possible to take these things too seriously. When Juliet announced her famous theory concerning the effect on the nasal organs of the change of nomenclature of the rose she was naturally bearing in mind this very question. What a man is called does not matter so much as what he is expected and empowered to do. There is always room for at least two opinions on the appropriate designation, and in any case most public functionaries are doubtless endowed in private with many titles which the Government Gazette has so far failed to disclose. The purist might find it hard to explain why the minister responsible for the administration of the British zone in Ger- many is the “Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster" or why the “Lord Privy Seal” is entrusted with the duty of co-ordinating “planning.” It would not be so difficult to defend the transformation, in 1919, of the “President of the Local Government Board”
into the “Minister of Health," because changing circumstances and conditions made the new title more suitable than the old.
Most officers no doubt are quite prepared to—
"..........answer to Hi ! or to any old cry,
Such as Fry me! or Fritter-my-wig !"
The earnest member of the public, however, complete with statutes in one hand and Government Gazette in the other, is not much assisted by this accommodating spirit when he wants to ascertain precisely to what person his application should be made or his remonstrance addressed. In accordance with the directions of the relevant Ordinance he sets out to find a Snark, but. when he comes across a Boojum instead, he must, in the manner of his pre decessors, “softly and silently vanish away.” confused and bewildered by the abrupt disappearance of his quarry. Sympathy must also be extended to the officials who find it difficult to recognise themselves in their new apparel. A man who. for instance, after years of practice, has got used to picking up his telephone and saying “Sanitary Inspector here" is embar- rassed and confused if he suddenly has to add "Sorry. I mean Health Officer.” While sticking rigorously to the proprieties he is naturally fearful that his corres- pondent will consider that he is giving himself airs. However time will rid him of this dilemma, if. that is to say, he is allowed to grow old gracefully in his new guise. If, on the other hand, directly he gets used to it he finds it has got to he changed again, so that he is for ever hopping from one rut into another, his despair may well match the perplexity of a puzzled public. Such a man must regard a new title much in the same way as the author of the old verse, which, as far as we can remember, was published many years ago in Punch, regarded his new bride :
“Her face is fairer far than that Of any other.
The only thing that worries me Is whether she May one day lie
As ugly as her mother.”
The Governor’s Tour of the Third Division.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Rice Control.-The local stock of rice was completely exhausted at the end of the month. A new system of registration has been inaugurated and will be put into effect at the beginning of next mouth. The rice cards have been prepared and we are only waiting for the rice, to begin.
Trade.- Raw sago and jelutong still command very high prices. Money has never been so plentiful amongst the Melanaus as at present and they boast of the exorbitant prices which the Chinese compel them to pay for very inferior goods. They will pay any price for something which takes their fancy and at times Three Castles Tobacco has changed hands at $5.50 a tin. The hardship falls on the pel sons with fixed salaries such as servants and Government employs who cannot hope to keep clear of debt.
Imports.	Exports.
$20,719	$20,190
There was exported during the month : Raw sago	...	...	72 koyans.
Jelutong	...	... 201 piculs.
Three schooners entered the port during the month.
J. BEVILLE ARCHER,
Resident 2nd Class.
MUKAH.
?
January.
I returned from Sibil via Oya on the 4th of the month.
On my return the police reported that the telephone hue near Kampong Petanak had been cut during my absence, and about eight fathoms of copper wire stolen. The Tua Kampong was sent for and informed that, unless the thief was handed over, every man in the kampung would be fined. Eventually three men were found with wire in their possession, in one case the wire having been fashioned into a childs bangle, and in two cases into fishhooks. The three men were sentenced to terms of imprisonment. All kampongs have been informed that the inhabitants will be held responsible in future for thefts of telephone wire near their village
if the thief is not produced.
Proceedings were taken by twelve natives, who had padi farms at or near Tanjong Basong on the main river, against the three owners of buffaloes on the cattle-ground there. The buffaloes had broken down the belian fence and had trampled through the farms, doing considerable damage to the padi then nearly fit for harvesting. The police estimated the damage done at $300, but having myself walked over the farms, I found that this estimate was very excessive and reduced it accordingly. The owners of the padi near the fence were not fully compensated as they were guilty of negligence in not taking any precautions to prevent the fence being smashed.
On the night of the 9th, Friday night, the Government vice store was broken into and two sacks of rice removed in addition to the belian sate kept there. The thieves were evidently under the impression that the money was handed over on Saturday morning us was formerly the case, but this custom having been altered some time ago they
only got some $3 fnr their trouble. The safe was found broken open on the hank of the river the following morning. No trace has been found by which the persons concerned could be recognised, but it is certain that a number of men were in the gang.
The guard of Hangers sent to Balingian in December returned to Mukah on the 25th, there being no necessity for them to remain longer at Balingian.
It has been impossible to help Balingian with rice from here as the sea has been too rough to permit boats leaving the river, but a number of Dayaks and others have arrived at Mukah overland and have been supplied. At the end of the month a boat came over and several bags of rice were sent for the bazaar Chinese. By the end of the month the Dayaks should have started their harvest, and things will be easier.
Reports from all over the district point to an exceptionally good crop this year; in fact Dayaks on the Mukah river say they have never seen such promising nadi since they have lived here. The up-river Milanoes are all busy on their farms and also report good prospects. The padi seems to have been exceptionally free from pests this year.
No schooners have been able to leave the river during the month on account of the heavy seas running on the bar. The wind changed to the west on the 25th and the sea went down, but only 5 to 5 feet of water could be got on the bar, and the schooners, in spite of part of the cargoes having been taken out, were unable to clear. Unless a channel forms later on in the year the sago trade will be very seriously handicapped. For the last two or three years the bar has tended to become shallower, and if this continues it will be necessary to resort to dredging in order to get cargoes out.
Mr. R. D. St. J. Horton arrived from Oya on the 17th instant, having been appointed to do duty in this district.
The sum of $39,000 was paid out to traders during the month principally on wireless advices from the Treasury.
H. L. OWEN,
Resident 2nd Clans.
The Sarawak Gazette.
RATES OF ADVERTISEMENTS IN THE "SARAWAK GAZETTE"
?
Payable in advance.
Quarter of a column and under
First insertion
... $1.00
Second and third insertion each
... 0.50
Subsequent do	do
... 0.25
Half a Column and under
First insertion
... 2.00

[NEXT EXCERPT]

. - . .
. . . . . " " .
.
.
, . . . - . , .

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Travelling. -On the 26th and 27th instants, accompanied by the Assistant Superintendent of Surveys Third Division, Mr. J. L. Noakes, Datu Awang Udin and Assistant Land Inspector Austin Druce, I visited Kampongs Tutus Ulu, Jebungan, Tegah, Sisok, Teh, Tabo, and Siteng. The regulations relating to the survey of gardens and those governing sago lands were explained to the Tua Kampong, who were informed of the approximate date of survey of gardens in their respective districts, and were instructed to try to settle all land disputes, and to see that owners declare their gardens and clear their boundaries before the survey in their districts commences. It was explained that the survey of gardens now being carried out is to the ultimate advantage of owners, and that it would be foolish not to declare their gardens now for fear of being charged quit rent on sago lands at a future date, if and when the price of sago attains a reasonable level, since, it was pointed out, all gardens which have had the opportunity of being surveyed and which, on completion of the survey, are found to be still unsurveyed, will ipso facto revert to the Government who can realienate them, and who will not consider any disputes arising out of such un-surveyed gardens, whilst owners of surveyed gardens, will receive proper titles or possibly grants for their land.
The river was ascended as far as Pedada, and the trip as a whole was most informative, since a good deal was learnt about the location of the various kampongs, and shout the vast quantity of gardens, especially sago, up river. It was ascertained that sago gardens occur in large quantities as far as Sau Bulus, and that from Sau Bulus to Pedada there are quite a number of rubber gardens.
The Marriage and Divorce Receipt books in the possession of Tua Kampong were checked where possible, and one or two apparently clerical errors, which will be investigated, were found.
Prisons. -Prisoners were employed on the general upkeep of the station and on basket work, and their daily number averaged 21.4.
Surveys. -The Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Third Division, Mr. J. L. Noakes, returned from Kuching on the 3rd instant and visited Oya for one night on the 23rd instant.
The survey of gardens situated behind the bazaar and in the vicinity of the Tellian and Misan roads was continued. Approximately 400 gardens had been surveyed in this district by the end of the month. As usual trouble in being experienced in getting owners to clear and point out the boundaries of their gardens to the surveyors, whose work is thus greatly hampered and delayed. It is feared that it will be necessary to make an example of one or two of these offenders, as also of those owners of gardens who interfere with survey marks, by imposing heavy fines or terms of imprisonment on conviction, before the work of the surveyors can be expedited.
During the month Mr. Noakes took observations at Mukah for latitude and longitude and the computations are now being worked out.
Shipping. -During the month the deep water channel on Mukah bar was marked out with new channel marks, the top marks of which shew a red disc on a white ground and are therefore easily visible and recognizable. The channel from seaward now runs approximately in a south-easterly direction towards the mouth of the river, is about 400 yards in length by 100 yards in breadth, and has approximately 3 3/4 feet of water at low tide and 8 1/2 feet of water at high tide.
Rainfall. -Mukah rainfall figures for the mouth were as follows: -
Trade. -The price of raw sago had dropped to 20 cents per pasa by the end of the month, which is making matters worse for all concerned.
Mukah trade returns for the month as compared to those for the corresponding month last year are as follows: -
The principal exports included: -
OYA AND DALAT.
March, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports: -
Court. -No cases call for mention.
Police. -Two recruits were engaged on probation to take the place of those discharged last month. On the 8th cash and jewellery worth $300 was stolen from a shop in the Oya bazaar. On the following day some of the jewellery was recovered from the bottom of a well, but the cash is still missing. A certain Chinese is suspected of having committed the robbery, and is being watched.
Prisons. -Prisoners were employed on the roads and the general upkeep of the station. Discipline was good.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

They broke down again in the Batang Lupar and she drifted into Simanggang on the tide. She is now undergoing repairs in Kuching.
On the 31st one, Anjat, came down and reported a tragedy that had occurred at Bangat, Skrang. A boy of about seventeen was taken out of the back of a boat by a crocodile, whilst carrying wood down river with a Chinese boy as companion. The victim was Luing, the son of Tuai Rumah Munau and Jenat of Isu, Bangat.
SARIBAS.
Court work has been light during the month the following cases only being worthy of mention. Chop Seng Lee fined $10 for contempt of Court and damages totalling roughly $60 to plaintiffs for cutting a ditch through their padi crops. Bujang sentenced to three months for non-payment of fine. Dalang vs. Engkareng appeal against decision of Penghulu Unji in re tuba fishing, decision of Penghulu Unji upheld and appeal fee reverted to Government.
Two contracts were made out for bazaar clearing during the month and work completed by the end of the month. The bazaar ditches were practically finished by the end of the month at a roughly estimated cost of $8,405. During the month Mr. Reid paid this station a visit when various matters in connection with Special Expenditure items for 1930 were discussed, such as roads, lighting and new buildings. Mr. Reid returned to Kuching to draw out plans and contracts for the approval of Resident, Second Division.
The sub-stations wore visited from 21st to 24th. By kind permission of the Officer-in-Charge of Saratok, Mr. L. K. Morse, I was able to make use of the m.l. One for the round trip and thereby made a saving of 48 hours as compared with using the local boats.
The padi harvest has started this month and in most parts the crops appear to be fairly good. From all accounts the Sungei Rimbas Dyaks appear to be the worst off, their padi being very poor.
KALAKA.
On the 4th instant I returned from Kuching. Dr. A. D. Hutchison, Assistant Medical Officer, accompanied me to give medical attention to the natives in the district.
I left for Kabong on the 21st instant in connection with the new shops there.
During my stay the cattle were brought in and inspected. They numbered fifty-four head, and seemed to be in good condition.
I checked the books and cash at Kabong, and left for Roban on 27th instant, checked the books and cash there and returned to Saratok on the 29th March.
The m.l. One was lent to the Acting District Officer, Betong, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, for a few days, I am sorry to have to report that on the way to Debak she struck a sunken log, and sprung a rib and one plank. Repairs have been done and will hold until she next goes to dock.
While in Kuching there were certain small repairs done to the engine of One and I am informed that she was in use in Kuching for a short time.
Tenders were asked for the construction of (1) Newhouse at Kabong for the Native Officer ; (2) The Saratok Bazaar road.	The Malays appear to be in a desperate position for money and very few have as yet paid their tax; a few extra days have been given in the hope that they will be able to pay, but it is extremely doubtful that they will.
The average daily number of prisoners 125.
The gang was employed on the roads around the station, and a new path was made by them from the office to the road leading to the clerks' quarters.
The rifles were sent to Kuching in February for repairs.
Orders were received from Divisional Headquarters to re-number the Police in the Kalaka, and an indent was placed for the new numbers, 63—79 inclusive.
Drahman, Headmaster of Simanggang Government Malay School, visited the schools in the district during the month.
It is surprising to learn that there are only about thirteen boys attending the Kabong School daily.
Abang Zen informs me that the people of Saratok are dissatisfied with the schoolmaster, and that accounts for the bad attendance here.
At Kabong the Pengrih season is in full swing, and about 160 boats were launched for this purpose. On the 14th instant a heavy gale blew from the south-west unexpectedly with the result that about 17 Pengrih boats were capsized. Fortunately no lives were lost, only one boat and some Pengrihs were missing. The crew of the missing boat swam ashore off Paloh.
The following figures show the total imports and exports for the month also comparison as against the same month in 1929.
Divisional Reports.
March, 1930.
Extracts from the Third Division Report for March, 1930, by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident:—
Resident's Court.—One criminal and five civil cases heard.
General.—Mr. L. D. Kennedy, Acting Superintendent of Trade and Customs, Third Division and Superintendent of Shipping, Sibu, arrived here on the 5th instant to take over the duties of Trade, Shipping and Customs from Mr. W. Lowry, who proceeded on home leave on the 13th instant.
Mr. B. A. Trechman, Divisional Treasurer, proceeded on home leave on the 15th instant, his place being taken by Mr. D. O’C. McGinn.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

A standard price, based on Kuching market figures, with an agreed percentage added, has been agreed, for the sale of foodstuffs and commodities to the gardeners, but neither side are able to come to any agreement touching the accumulated debts of past years.
On the 30th instant the Resident, Second Division arrived per m.l. Anne, accompanied by Datu Abang Haji Dulrashid, and a final meeting was called, in which the Resident pointed out to both parties that the Government was unable to help them unless each side was prepared to accept a share of the depression caused by the fall in the price of pepper from previous years.
On the 25th instant Mr. K. E. Parker, Divisional Land Officer came up to Engkilili. Mr. Parker spent a few hours in the office and then returned to Simanggang per m.1. Anne.
The Gold Workers at Marup report that they have not had any striking results to date, but supplies of dynamite, etc., now having been obtained, they intend to commence blasting operations, which they hope will lead to more favourable results.
SARIBAS DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Acting District Officer. Mr. R. L. Daubeny: -
The following cases were heard during the month.
Jon, Jeni and Abang sentenced to two months’ imprisonment each for non-payment of fine $22.14. One assault case dismissed Lai Chuan vs. Ah Thiam, both parties being ordered to place pledges in Court of $50 each for security for six months. One theft case adjourned. A Chinese by name Soon Tak was convicted of being a Vagrant under Order V-I and temporarily detained. Various civil claims were heard.
The substations were visited from 19th to 21st instant.
A squad of Sarawak Rangers under Corporal Jenang arrived here on 24th instant and left for upriver Ulu Layar on 25th and 26th instant in two parties. Pengarah Isek, 2 Policemen and 10 local Dyaks accompanied them. They are to form patrols among houses on the bonier in order to prevent people entering and leaving the district.
New Post Office Savings Bank Accounts for the month amount to approximately $15,000.
KALAKA DISTRICT.
Extracts from the Report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. L. K. Morse: -
The only cases of importance settled in the Criminal Courts during the month were, Seo Fook Yong four months and $50 or three months under Section 323 I.P.C. and Section 8 part II Order No. A-2, 1931, respectively, and Sah, Dyak two months under Section 447 I.P.C.
Litigation in the Civil Courts was small, the only case of interest being the Ming Sin School vs. various subscribers, the claim being for subscriptions due.
During a quarrel about a debt, a Rimbas Dyak Ngindang by name, and a Chinese Seo Fook Yong, had a serious fight in the Ulu Babang. The Dyak got the worst of the argument and was severely hurt. The Chinese escaped taking with him the Dyak’s gun. Some Dyaks aided by Haji Sensussi, Tua Kampong, eventually succeeded in persuading the Chinese to give himself up. He was duly dealt with by the Court.
I visited Kabong and Roban from the 10th to the 12th instant checking the boos and cash at both Stations. Court was held at Kabong. I was pleased to see that the general appearance of the Roban station had improved. A prisoner has been placed there to assist the police in the upkeep of the Station.
Kabong was again visited on the 19th instant, and again on the 23rd.
A detachment of Rangers arrived by the s.1. Lucile, on the 24th instant. They left for the border on the 26th in charge of Awang Sepudin, Native Officer, I have ordered them to proceed to the Budu-Kabo district and attempt to stop all ingress and egress between the Divisions.
Mr. W. G. Tait, Superintendent of Telegraphs and Telephones, visited the station on the 12th instant. During his visit Mr. Tait arranged that Wireless Operators should visit the Offices daily for instructions in postal duties with the view of eventually taking over the work of that Department.
A new Telephone post about seventy feet long was obtained and erected on the true right hand bank of the Krian on the Debak line.
The pupils of the Government Malays School, Saratok at the end of the month numbered sixty-six. The School is to be known in future as Sekolah Abang Abdul Rahman.
The School at Kabong is to be known as Sekolah Abang Leman who of course is very well remembered.
An Inspector from the Education Department visited Saratok to inspect the Chinese School here.
Work on the Kampong roads continued during the month and the conversion of the Fort quarters into Offices was completed. The reconstruction of the No. 1 Police Barracks was still under way at the end of the month.
The m.l. One was out of commission from the 16th to the 29th.
Comparative trade returns for the month are appended: -
LAND OFFICE.
Extracts from the report of the Land Officer, Second Division. Mr. K. E. Parker: -
On the 3rd instant, as stated in my previous report, I returned from Maludam along with Assistant Land Inspector Mohamad Latiff.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Court. -In the Resident's Court, the appeal against the decision of the District Court was heard in the case Liang Chnan vs. Kim (f.) for the custody of the child Swee Nior (f). The decision of the District Court was reversed, the custody of the child being awarded to the appellant, Liang Chuan.
Ex-clerk Upit was sentenced to a further two years' imprisonment under I.P.C. section 408 for misappropriating $44.50 of Government money, this man having previously been sentenced to one year on a similar charge.
Forester Usop was ordered to repay to Government $44.50 for his neglect is not securing a receipt from Upit when be paid money to him.
In the District Court, Amey was fined $25 for cheating, Ado fined $10 for contempt of Court, Tian Hock fined $20 for breach of Farms Order, Kirad and Kalang sentenced to one and two months respectively for contempt of Court. Limah (f.) was sentenced to two months for criminal breach of trust, Awang Gaui sentenced to two months for absconding in debt.
A large number of civil claims and disputes were also settled.
Prisoners. -The daily average number of prisoners was 9.5. The prison gang were employed on the roads and general upkeep of the station.
General. -The Acting Divisional Officer with Mr. G. M. Allman, Superintendent of Rubber Exports, visited Oya on the 3rd in m.l. Para, returning to Mukah on the 5th. On tins visit the two outstanding cases and various other affairs were settled.
On the 10th I proceeded to Mukah by m.l. Leonora in order to sit for the Government Officers Standard II Examination. On this occasion, the Rev. Fathers Bernard Mulder and Epping also visited Mukah in order to meet the Rev. Father Anthony Mulder who recently returned from home leave.
I returned to Oya on the 14th.
On the 17th, Mr. W. Harn ack, Assistant Superin-
tendent of Surveys, arrived at Oya from Sibu in m.l. Ringgit.
Various affairs in connection with the surveys here were discussed, Mr. Harnack returning to Sibu on the 19th.
I visited Dalat from the 21st to the 27th, where a large number of cases were settled and affairs attended to.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 14,27.
259
Daring the month Day's Road was cleared throughout by the kampong people.
The weather during the latter part of the mouth was extremely hot, there being very little rain.
Shipping. -Four motor schooners, six schooners and three motor launches entered, three motor schooners, seven schooners and two motor launches cleared.
Trade -Two hundred and thirty-nine koyans of raw sago, 599 piculs of para rubber and 385 piculs of jelutong were shipped to Kuching.
The trade returns for the month and for comparison with those of the same period last year, are as follows: -
BINTULU.
July, 1927.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, reports: -
P. W.D.-Carpenter Mohamat has cemented the kitchen and drains from the bathroom of the Forest Bungalow, and has also turned the old dispensary quarters into a Forest Office, including the making of three windows, ceiling and extension of trellis work round the inner wall. This will make a very suitable Forest Office, at the same time leaving more room for the Stores Clerk upstairs.
Contractor Mamoh has completed the timber for new clerks' house and had just started electing same by the end of the month.
July, 1927
Imports.
$31,546.13
" 1926 ...	52,368.50
Exports.
$34,925.20
63,221.50
August, 1927.
General.-On Monday the 15th, the body of one. Ah Hee (Hylam) of Dalat bazaar, was found floating in the river below Kampong Tanam. This man had last been seen walking in the direction of the kam- pong the previous Thursday night. As he had not returned to the bazaar the following morning, inquiries were made and the kampongs turned out to search for him, but with no result. The Divisional Officer, Mukah. was informed, and an inquiry was held at Dalat on the 15th and following days. IT was also notified that a reward of $100 would be given to any person who gave information which would disclose the manner in which Ah Hee met his death. At the end of the month inquiries were still being made.
During the month many applications were made for rubber gardens, on the new order being made known that Native Holdings of three acres may now be occupied free of charge for the purpose of planting rubber or whatever is desired.
Travelling.-On 12th instant I left for up river,
accompanied by Datn Haji Abdullah and clerk Mang Fook, arriving at Tuban on 13th. Sebauh, Pandan and Labang were visited and assessment according to Order No. V, 1915, was duly levied on all these
places. I found that the quality of belian attaps exported from Tubau was good, thereby proving that the inferior attaps were obtained from somewhere between Tubau and Bintulu. A strict examination
is now enforced when exporting from Bintulu.
Trade.-The price of jelutong has gone up to $10 per picul. Of tins commodity 2,834.89 piculs has

[NEXT EXCERPT]

14th Race. 4 00p.m.-THE	STAKES.-
Value $. Presented by	A Consolation Race.-For boats which have not finished first in Races Nos. 5, 7, or 10. Limi- ted to crews to 15 paddlers. 2nd prize $. En- trance fee $2. From above Tanjong Patingan to Stone Wharf.
15th Race, 4.30p.m THE	STAKES.-
Value $. Presented by	2nd prize $. A Consolation Race. For boats which have not finished first in Races Nos. 4, 6, or 12. Limited to crews of 30 paddlers. One flag man and one bailer may be carried in addition but these must not use paddles. Entrance fee $3. From above Tanjong Patingan to Stone Wharf.
16th Race,5.00p m.-THE STAKES.-
Value $. Presented by 2nd prize $. A Consolation Race. For boats which have not finished 1st in Races Nos. 2, 3. or 8. Unlimited as to size or number of crew. En- trance fee $4. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
1st Race, S a m. -For boats with crews limited to eight men. 1st prize $ 2nd prized. From Godown Ban Sens to Stone Wharf.
2nd Race, 8 30a.m.-THE STAKES.-
Value $ Presented by	2nd prize $. 1st prize to crew $. 2nd prize to crew $. 3rd prize to crew $. Open to any make of boat, unlimited in size or number of crew, drawn to Class 4. Entrance fee $4 From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf
3rd Race, 9 a.m - THE	STAKES. - Value $ Presented by	2nd prize $. 1st prize to crew $. 2nd prize to crew $. 3rd prize to crew $. Open to any make of boat unlimited as to size or number of crew, drawn in Class B. Entrance fee $4 From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
4th Race, 9.30 a.m.-THE	STAKES.- I
Value $ Presented by... 2nd prize $. 1st prize to crew $. 2nd prize to crew $. 3rd prize to crew $. Open to any boats limited to 30 paddlers drawn in Class A. One flag man and one bailer may be carried in ad- dition, but these must not use paddles. Entrance fee S3. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
5th Race, 10 am. -THE	STAKES.-	!
Value $. Presented by	2nd prize $. 1st prize to crew $ 2nd prize to crew $	. Open to any description of boat
with crews limited to 15 men drawn in Class A. Entrance fee $2. From Batu Bliong Stone to Wharf.
6th Race, 10.30 a.m.-THE	STAKES.-
Value $ Presented by	2nd prize $. 1st prize to crew $. 2nd prize to crew $. 3rd prize to crew $. Open to any boats limited to 30 paddlers drawn in Class B. One flag man and one bailer may be carried in addition, but these must not use paddles. Entrance fee $3. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
7 th Race, 11 a m.- THE	STAKES.-
Value $	. Presented by	2nd prize $. 1st prize to crew $. 2nd prize to crew $. Open to any description of boat with crews limited to 15 men drawn in Class B. Entrance fee $2. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
1.	Any boat not at its post at the time appointed for starling shall be liable to be disqualified by the Umpire.
2.	If the starter considers the start false, he shall at once re-call the boats to their stations, and any boats refusing to start again shall be disqualified.
3.	No fouling whatever shall be allowed, the boat committing a foul shall be dealt with by a Com- mittee appointed for the purpose.
308
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1927.
4. It shall be considered a foul when, after the race has commenced, any competitor by his paddle, boat, or person, comes in contact with the paddle, boat, or person, of another competitor, unless in the opinion of the Umpire such contact is so slight as not to influence the race, or shall be proved to the satisfaction of the Umpire to have been accidental or unintentional.
5.	No boat shall be allowed to take another boat's water until it shall have a clear lead of that boat; a boat shall be held to have a clear lead of another boat when its stem is clearly past the bow of that other boat.
6.	The Umpire shall be the sole judge of a boat's own water and proper course during the race.
7.	In case of a foul, the Umpire shall have the power: -
1st-To place boats (except the boat committing the font, which is disqualified) in the order in which they come in;
2nd-To order the boats (other than the boat committing the foul) to pull over the course again on the same or another day;
8rd-To re-start the qualified boats from the place where the foul was committed.
8.	The Umpire may during a race caution any com-
petition in danger of committing a foul.
9.	Every boat to abide by its own accidents.
10.	Any competitor refusing to abide by the decision of the Umpire or to follow his direction shall be dis-
qualified.
11.	The jurisdiction of the Umpire extends over the race, and ail matters connected with it, from the time the race is specified to start until its final termination and his decision in all cases shall be final and without appeal.
12.	In the event of a dead heat taking place the same crews shall contend again, and any crew or crews refusing shall be adjudged to have lost the winning place.
13.	Stations count from the Town side of the river.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

There are now four shophouses at N. Mrit Pala Wong.
Health.-The Divisional Medical Officer visited
the district during August, going up the Baloi as far as Belaga and Balleh to Dut. Vaccination was started and the vaccinator is still in the district.
Agriculture.-The Skapans were encouraged to
keep cattle and two of the Government herd at Belaga were sold to them as a start. The strength of the herds at Belaga and Kapit amount to 37 and sales of milk averaged $70 per month. Groundnuts are being grown at N. Balleh in considerable quantity and do very well. I still await seeds which were promised for Dyaks who are still planting rubber on land which is obviously made for foodstuffs, tobacco, cattle, fruit, etc.
Land.-Considerable progress has been made in marking out lands already planted.
Trade. -The question of improving and grading rotans was again brought up; this time by the Chinese themselves on the occasion of the Resident's visit.
The Divisional Engineer of Sibu, Mr. Whiteside, reports: -
Power Station.-The erection of the plant and the completion of the building proceeded rapidly during the month and is now almost completed.
The erection of the proposed cooling towers and sumps etc., has not yet been undertaken, the reinforcement for the foundations not yet having arrived. The outside wiring is almost completed and the internal wiring of a few house installations are finished.
The Steamship Company have not facilities for handling heavy gear and it was unfortunate that they could not give the assistance afterwards in the
matter of allowing us the use of the winches of the
s. s. Rajah to transfer the five ton weight from the large lighter to a small one.
The station is expected to be working at the end of September.
Waterworks.-A three-inch main has been laid
from Island Road to the new property in course of
erection abutting on Wharf Road.
The applications for water services in the bazaar' have now ceased. All are supplied except a few applicants in Cross Road who are awaiting the ex-
tension of the three-inch main to their premises.
292
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1927.
No complaints have been received as to the water supply. The supply appears to be ample whilst a great deal of waste occurs. This is probably due to the water supply being cut off at night, which en- courages Consumers to leave the tap always turned on.
The area including the European bungalows and the hospital has a supply laid on all night; the area including the clerks' quarters and all consumers beyond the Mission bridge are supplied until 10 p.m., and the bazaar supply is turned on al 6 p.m.
The question of supplying water to the proposed new jail and clerks' quarters is urgent, and there are no pipes and materials available with which TO carry out the work.
Roads- General inspection and maintenance have been carried on during the month. A few culverts have been made good. The services of the con- tractor in charge of the mowing of the padangs has been dispensed with and his coolies have been taken into the direct employ of the department as formerly. The widening and surfacing of Telephone Road has proceeded as rapidly as circumstances permit, but the lack of plant and handling facilities causes need- less expenditure on these works.
New Administrative Offices.-The work on the above has been delayed by the contractor's attention being diverted by the pressure of work at the Power Station.
New Police Station.-Work has now begun on the windows and doors preparatory to commencing the erection of the building.
Clerk's Quarters- Contracts have been let for the first two blocks.
New Markets.-Foundations are being placed and the contract for the framing has been let.
Bazaar Drains -Drains have been laid in Island Road and Blacksmith Road but no earth filling has been undertaken owing to the lack of a suitable tongkang for transporting the earth economically.
A tongkang has been ordered but will not be in use for four or five months.
The scavenging contractor has undertaken to pro- vide men to work under our instructions. Hitherto the work has not been satisfactory.
Mr. C. E. Pascoe, Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Sibu, reports:-
(1)	Theodolite Survey. Seven hundred and fifteen chains measured at average cost of forty-six cents. (Rentising for the above worked out at fifty-three cents).
(2)	Prismatic Compass demarcations of existing gardens. Three thousand one hundred and twenty- one chains measured at average cost of twenty-on cents.
(3)	Prismatic Compass demarcations in old jungle. Two thousand six hundred and eighty-eight chains' measured at average cost of twenty-five cents.
(4)	Compass Location of proposed roads at Engkilo and Binatang. Five hundred and seven chains measured at average coat of nineteen cents.
(5)	River Surveys (Katibas and tributaries). Sub- tense-about three miles at total cost of $14. Rangefinder-Five thousand nine hundred and forty-six chains at average cost of five cents.
H. L. OWEN,

[NEXT EXCERPT]

that may look like trying to cast a shadow over the
proceedings.
But it surely may be asked whether peace is so
certain, are the delegates of the thing the Germans
call a Government going to take the onus of signing
the Treaty? and if they do, are the people going to
abide by it? and therefore would not a little of the
wait mid see policy be advisable before under-
taking ambitious programmes for Celebrations which
may, I do not say will (and I sincerely hope not),
have to lie indefinitely postponed, causing dis-
appointment and perhaps loss to many natives and
others who have had their hopes raisedand further
avoid getting into the stultified position of those
who count their chickens before they are hatched,
or rather in this case their doves with olive branches
which as far as we know have not even left Ger-
many Surely there is nothing to be lost by waiting
until the horizon is much clearer than it is to-day.
Further there may be two opinions as to whether
we are justified in expending a lot of money for what
seems at least a very problematical peace when there
something like a certain famine in prospect in the
near future ; however this may be, the curious in-
consistency of telling natives one day that they must
all set to work and plant foodstuffs to save themselves
from starvation, and then on another call for sub-
scriptions for jaunts and jollities, is too obvious to
be passed over by them.
Now can anyone really say that the trend of events
in Europe point to anything even approaching peace;
if the Germans refuse to sign the treaty or the people
to abide by it, by no means remote contingencies,
all the Stales that conqiosed the Central Powers will
together adopt a policy of passive resistance nnd
leave the entente to get out of the mess as best it
can.
In these circumstances the blockade will doubt-
less be continued, and there is very serious danger
that if pressed to desperation, the whole of these
Central States will throw everything over to the
Bolshevists, join Russia, then turn round to the
entente and bid them do their worst. Hungary has
already set the example, a most ominous signif such
comes to pass the Allies will be faced with the de-
lightful prospect of having to clean sweep the whole
of Central and Eastern Europe of Bolshevists which
will mean having to fight millions of desperate people
a task about as easy as trying to put out an erupt-
ion of Mr. Etna with a few dozen fire hoses, and
compared to which the late war will have been an
excursion.
Many people seem to imagine that the war is over,
but do things look like it? In my humble opinion
demobilization has been canned out too soon, too
much having been taken for granted, and it is de-
voutly to be hoped that it may not be found imper-
ative to remobilize; but should it so be, how it is
going to be done in the face of the storm of opposi-
tion certain to arise from Labourites, Socialists, and
all that class of people who want to govern England
to suit themselves only ; or how we are going to
get the Americans back again? I leave this to your
readers to work out for themselves, as also what the
result will be should the Bolshevists rise and find
the. entente demobilized and unprepared to meet
them.	In any case even if peace is signed to-day we
should be on firmer ground if the celebrations were
postponed for at least six months to avoid the
possibility of celebrating another Scrap of Paper"
to do so now with Europe a seething cauldron of
every element opposed to peace is rather like follow-
ing the example of Nero.
It is somewhat a dark picture that I have drawn
and doubtless many will disagree with it, but if
time proves the conclusions to be wrong no one will
be better pleased than the writer, and whilst thank-
ing you, Mr. Editor, for giving this letter space I
cannot do better than sign myself
Yours faithfully,
WAIT AND SEE "
May 12th, 1919.
[We would remind Bizarre that correspondent's
letters cannot be accepted for publication unless
accompanied by the name and address of the writer.
We would suggest that the letter be re-written be-
fore being again sent in, as we are sure the writer must
be making a mistake in some of the hours mention-
ed therein. Ed. Sar. Gaz. ]
The Ga'at Expedition.
28th April, 1919.
RAJAH,I have the honour to forward for Your Highness' information the following summary of operations during the recent Ga'at river expedition, which I accompanied: details will reach Your Highness through the usual channels.
The Government force left Kapit on the 5th April, with Mr. G. M. Gifford in charge, assisted by Messrs. H. D. Aplin, P. M. Adams and Lieut. Clark, S. R.
From information received it appeared that the rebels were determined to delay the force as long as possible during its progress up the Gaat river, and had prepared a final place of refuge on Bukit Tunggal. Here they would offer resistance in the (to them) unlikely event of our penetrating thus far.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Prisons.â€”Prisoners averaged 32.3 and were employed on the general upkeep of the station.
Health.â€”Bucket system latrines are now in use in Lundu, removal being carried out by contract as from 8th September.
Rainfall.â€”Highest recorded within 24 hoursâ€” 1.08 inches on 17th September. Total for the monthâ€” 5.86 inches.
Gold Returns.â€”137.34 ounces of actual gold were obtained by The Bidi Gold Mining Company for the month of August, 1930.
SADONG. September, 1930.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports:â€”
Courts.â€”In the Lower Court very few cases were heard during the month and only two call for mention. Bujang bin Tambi was fined $20 under section 352 and Sebli bin Kumbang was sentenced to three months' imprisonment in default of payment of $50 brians as ordered by the Native Court.
P.W.D.â€”The contractors of the Gunong Ngili- Saging Road report that the road is now completed. Owing, however, to my having been away since the 17th of the month a final inspection has not yet been carried out.
Native Officer Abang Samsudin reports that he has found an easier way over Bukit Tenabar on the proposed Tabekang-Simanggang Road. I propose to inspect this part of the road on my next trip up river.
The whole area of the new padang on the down river side has now been tebassed and is now being cleared of logs and stumps.
Medical.â€”At the Government Hospital four patients were admitted and seven discharged.
At the Dispensary 130 out-patients made 250 attendances for treatment.
Twenty-three N.A.B. injections were given of which sixteen were for yaws, six for muli and one for syphilis.
The accounts show revenue $156.50 and expenditure, including salaries mid rations, $212.06.
Travelling.â€” On the 17th, accompanied by Mr. R.D. Binnie, Executive Engineer, P.W.D.; I left by m.l. Vava for Ampungan. I had not returned at the end of the month.
Agriculture â€” Mr. G.St.F. Dare visited the station on the I5th, staying only a few hours.
Prison.â€”The health of the prisoners was good. The prison gang averaging 12.2 was employed on general upkeep.
General.â€”On the 15th Mr. J.C. Swayne, Acting Resident, First Division, accompanied by Mr. R.D. Binnie, arrived from Kuching by the m.1. Lucile. All outstanding matters were given attention and the Acting Resident left for Kuching on the 17th instant.
Sadong Collieries Report.
September, 1930.
The Blacksmith Mine was completely worked out and dismantled on the 2.5th. The Buffalo Mine, which was its return air outlet, is now the sole inlet for. No. 8 Mine, which are ventilated together mechanically, and will both be exhausted of coal towards the end of next year
The rainfall for the month was 2.67 inches.
Cricket.
KUCHING vs. THE OUTSTATIONS.
If the above match, which took place on Sunday, 28th September, proved a trifle one-sided, it was possibly none the less enjoyable on that account. The Kuching side was about the best available, but the absence of several bright particular stars sadly handicapped those stalwarts who represented the hinterland.
His Highness the Tuan Muda, who led the Outstation team, performed a captain's first duty to his side by winning the toss, and elected to bat.
Barcroft and Andreini opened the innings but were both dismissed when the total had reached 11, Andreini being beaten all the way by a fine ball from Banks. P.M. Adams then helped Aplin to add 20 before being caught. Daly failed but Summers stayed with Aplin to raise the score to 65. The "tail" failed to wag, however, and the side was out for a total of 70.
Aplin was by far the highest scorer with 27, and he made his runs in excellent style.
When the Outstations took the field the barrenness of the land speedily became evident, for the side was disastrously short of bowlers.
Bates, who opened the innings with Moir, managed to get himself out to a ball that bounced twice before trickling onto his wicket, but Moir, Mace and Reid soon put the issue beyond doubt and the innings closed for 112.
Mention should be made of Andreini's good fielding and especially of his fine running catch on the boundary, which disposed of Mace; a notable effort.
Mention must also be made of the hero who, standing at point, risked life and limb to stop a particularly hot one which came to him direct from the bowler's hand; nor must we omit all notice of the wily trundler who completely disconcerted the batsman facing him by bowling four consecutive wides. There is no doubt at all that surprise is one of the most valuable weapons in a bowler's armament.
Perhaps the most important result of the game was that everybody had a bang with the bat and more than half the people taking part in the match had a try with the ball, so it is to be hoped that everyone was happy.
Before the game began His Highness the Tuan Muda stated that this was to be his very last appearance on the field of cricket. We can only hope that when the time comes we may be able to persuade His Highness to reverse his decision.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

you will gradually approach that goal, already reached by so many peoples who
have had the privilege of Britain's guidance, where you will be completely
self-governing.
The length of time which must elapse before you arrive at that goal will
depend largely on the willingness with which you grasp the hand of friendship
and support held out to you by His Majesty's Government. This is the greatest
opportunity for progress that Sarawak has ever had. With unaltered devotion
for your interests and well-being I say, “Long Live the people of Sarawak.
Long Live the King.”
SABDA SERI PADUKA DULI YANG MAHA MULIA TUAN
RAJA KAPADA RA'AYAT SARAWAK BAGI
HARI PENYERAHAN.
1 HARIBULAN JULY, 1947.
Pada hari ini ia-itu 1 haribulan July, saya memberi tahnni'ah kapada
sekalian kawan2 saya di-Sarawak. Bahawa genap-lah sa-tahun sudah Negeri
Sarawak ini terserah kapada Seri Baginda King.
Bahawa saya sudah chukup timbangkan dengan halus-nya terhadap
chadangan saya bagi serahan ini tadi, sebelom saya hadapkan ia kapada
Kerajaan British, juga sebelom saya bentangkan ia kapada kedua2 Majlis
Council di-Kuching Saya ketahui bahawa langkahan ini ia-lah berma ana
hapus-nya Pemerintahan Brooke, ia-itu suatu peristewa yang saya telah berbesar
hati mengatahui-nya ada-lah ia menyedehkan hati banyak di-antara kamu.
Sunggoh pun demikian saya juga lansongkan terus kerana saya ketahui adalah
ia untok faedah yang baik ka-atas ra’ayat Sarawak jelata, bahawa dengan
kekusutan dunia di-zaman sekarang, mereka pula akan dapat beberapa faedah
yang baik dari kepandai-an, kekuatan dan kebijaksana-an-nya Keraja an
British.
Saya sudah tatapkan betol2 segala kejadian2 pada tahun yang lalu, dan
saya dapati lebeh dari awal-nya tadi bahawa langkah yang telah di-jalankan
itu ada-lah perkara yang sebaik2-nya. Bahkan saperti yang telah di-janjikan
pada masa awal serahan-nya tadi bahawa segala adat2 lama itu ada-lah maseh
di-jaga dengan chermat-nya. Begitu juga chadangan2 yang mustahak ada diatorkan
dengan perbelanja-an Keraja-an Baginda King dari Negara British
bagi memperbaiki kehidupan dan kemajuan rakyat Sarawak jelata. Saya
bersukachita bahawa segala chadangan2 itu sunggoh bersetuju dengan segala
tujuan muslihat ka-tiga2 Raja yang telah lalu, ya'ni segala keperluan2 bagi
ra’ayat hendak lah di-utamakan, juga segala kemajuan pula mau-lah di-usaha
oleh ra’ayat sendiri untok faedah rakyat Sarawak jua, ada-nya.
Saya juga mengatahui bahawa ada sadikit orang2 dalam Sarawak yang.
suka mengekal bantahan mereka ka-atas apa yang telah di-jalankan, dengan
galakkan orang2 dari luar negeri. Mereka berseru bahawa mereka telah
kehilangan “kemerdeheka-an” mereka, dan bermaksud supaya mendapatkan ia
balek semula. Apa kah sebenar keada-an-nya tentang ini? Kamu sudah
memindahkan ta’at setia kamu terhadap Raja yang sebagai bapa itu kapada
saorang bapa yang lebeh besar lagi tinggi ia-itu Seri Baginda King, siapa yang
telah beberapa lama itu tadi menjadi Penaong kita. Bahkan kaki kamu
sekarang sedang berdiri dengan tegap-nya arah jalan yang menuju kapada
kemerdeheka-an yang sebenar-nya. Bahawa adat lembaga kamu sedang diatorkan,
kebebasan kamu bagi bersuara tentang hal Undang-undang kamu serta
pula tentang chorak perintahan kamu ada-lah di-perlebeh-kan, maka kamu akan
berunsor hampir kapada taraf saperti yang telah di-perolehi oleh beberapa
bangsa yang telah berpeluang mendapat penduan dari Negara British, bahawa
di-sini-lah kamu kelak akan berperintahan sendiri dengan sepenoh-nya.
Bahawa tentang masa yang harus di-gunakan pula, sebelom kamu menchapai
kapada taraf itu, ada-lah bergantong kapada keredza-an bagi kamu sendiri
pada menyambutkan jabatan persehabatan dan sukongan yang di-unjok oleh
Keraja-an Seri Baginda. Ini-lah sabesar2 peluang bagi kemajuan Sarawak
yang belom pernah terbuka. Bahawa dengan hati yang tiada berubah walau
sadikit pun kerana muslihat serta keselamatan kamu sekalian, maka saya berseru
“Berkekalan-lah ra’ayat jelata Sarawak. Berkekalan-lah Seri Baginda King.”
LEKA PESAN TUAN RAJA SOH AMBA
RAYAT DALAM MENOA SARAWAK.
HARI CESSION SARI BULAN JULY, 1947.
Hari tu sari bulan July, aku ngirum tabe ka somoa pangan-pangan aku di
menoa Sarawak. Sa taun udah genap menoa Sarawak di serah ka lya Ke
Mulia Raja King.
Aku udah bepikir enggau pengambis ia apin aku nyerah menoa tu ka
Prentah Britis lalu ngengkah ka pekara nya di moa Konsil Konsil di Kuching.
Aku tau ka reti ia ke pia ngapus ka pegai Raja Brooke, ia ke ni, aku udah tau
mega enggau ati ke sumbong, ngenyinu ka ati kita maioh. Entang aku udah
netap ka ati laban aku nemu ari jalai ke pia tau mri pengelantang ka orang
dalam menoa Sarawak lalu ulih laban penusah dalam dunia ke baru diatu sida
ia tau bulih untong dalam penemu, pengering enggau akal ari pegai Britis.
Aku udah mrati bendar pengawa dalam taun ke udah lalu aku puas amat
ati ulih ke diator aku nya jalai ke betol. Janji-janji ia ke di semaia leboh
beserah (Cession) baka ia ke enda ngachau adat lama udah mega di pegai rat.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Lunggang, ex-prison cook, was sentenced to one dozen with the rotan and an extra six months R. I. for stealing rice from Government and attempting to sell it in the local bazaar, at less than the regulated price.
P. W. D The whitewashing and tarring of all government buildings is now completed, except at Dalat, where the bungalow, police quarters and chief clerks house remain temporarily untouched owing to the supply of whitewash being exhausted, none being procurable in the vicinity. Work on the new telephone wire between Mukah and Dalat has been progressing steadily, but is at present suspended, three miles short of the latter place, the remaining lengths of wire, No. 12 gauge, not being yet forthcoming from Kuching. The bazaar shop owners both at Oya and Dalat have also finished their repainting and hot for a few delapidated buildings, now undergoing either repair or demolition, both localities present a distinctly cleaner appearance.
The gang of ten prisoners front Oya put in a good weeks work cleaning up the Dalat station, which, owing to scarcity of labour there, had naturally become somewhat overgrown. Two prisoners remain to keep in check the undergrowth on the paths, which re-appears everywhere with alarming rapidity. As a result of little over a mouth's growth it took 500 kampong men two days to deal with the babas in the bungalow compound alone.
The sandy roads in Oya, however, are in a very good state.
Prisoners here have also been employed in renovating the Government temui preparatory to my visit to the ulu after Hari Raya. The Government bandong, which has now been generally overhauled, repainted and greatly improved, also the cattle and boat sheds.
Twenty new posts have been placed over the bar marking the channel entrance. Owing to the action of the tides, and nature of the bed. they are difficult to plant securely.
Food Control---200 bags Saigon rice arrived from Kuching on the 16th. On checking over the weights I find that a very appreciable quantity is lost through the evident rough handling received at the hands of coolies armed with iron books. Excluding sweepings recovered, and an allowance for normal wear and tear of gunnies, in this consignment, I cannot account for at least twenty gantangs, practically one sackful, representing $32.
The amount sold totalled 1,375 gantangs. The price of hens eggs is now uniformly fixed at 5 cents each throughout this division.
Trade Returns:
Exports for April
$ 96,611.56
,,	,, May
59,942.00
Total to date
,,	276,609.06
Imports for April
42,105.00
,. May
29,294.75
Total to date ..171,584.95
i L
Mi
E- Z
Z ;
r -
??
z
a?
Z'QQ
b 2
K 5
cu *s
i
i
?S
1
3
S fl
fi
i
II
J 8
i
i III
Ilf
2-J
o
Pit
ii 0 s - -j-.i]
fill
I 5x Z
it s-Oi
sJ JiH
1 ?? go -
?- 2 - S s
f;ii!
H E-2- HI
liPd
p-sjj
2 55-H
l h 1U.E
'l .
Jilli
?3 E s g-.i
2 g lSS
if!?!*
152	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1920.
During the month there were exported :----
Raw sago ...	...	274	koyans
Gutta jelutong ...	...	70	piculs
Para rubber- ...	9 ,,
Ten schooners and four steamers entered, while ten schooners and four steamers cleared.
General.On the 16th. per p. s. Adeh Mr. Whittaker passed through en route for the Wireless Station at Miri.
On the same day, Kitang, daughter of Pangiran Mohamat, Senior N. O., was married amid great festivities, to Awang Skrah, brother of Awang Mohamat of the local Police Force.
The body of a crocodile 12 feet long was found floating a short distance upriver, it was shot while swimming opposite the Oya Court house landing stage, having come from the river bank bordering the cattle ground. During the last week of the month large shoals of bilis were reported off the kuala. Everyone who could procure a boat of any description was out daily and rewarded with huge catches within a few hours. As a result the local neighbourhood is carpeted with drying fish, much to the delight of all, who are packing and stacking as fast as they can.
I visited Dalat with Mr. Archer on the 4th. for one day to take over, and again on the 22nd. remaining until the end of the month. While there I definitely-fixed an area to be used solely as a Milano grave-yard, as hitherto these people have been in the unhappy habit of planting their dead in any spot, even underneath their houses. Three prisoners, temporarily working there, the second night of their arrival successfully levered up a small floor plank in their cell and got out about 8 p. m. However, within two hours they were all recaptured and duly chastised.
E. O. BRUCE,	Officer-in-Charge.
BROOKETON COLLIERY.
May.
The gross out-put of coal from the mines was 2,070 tons, 464 tons of this was consumed by our boilers and the balance 1,606 tons was sent to wharf.
We shipped 943 tons to Labuan and supplied 101 tons to p. s Adeh and local launches.
The balance of coal in stock at the end of the month was 571 tons.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Honble. R. S. Douglas (Personal Memorial) ...	100.00
Mrs. Douglas do	...	25.00
From Miri Shopkeepers per
Honble. R. S. Douglas:
Sang Heng ...	...	...	30.00
Chau Ah Chit. Sani Foil. Seng Bee. Kim
Guan, Kiat Watt, Chui Wah, $10 each 60.00
Ban Joo Guan	...	...	8.00
Hua Heng, Syn Wee Heng, Fonk Foh
Leong. Kwong Lee Guan, Hap Heng,
Chin Hup, $5 each ...	... 30.00
Sin Wa Heng. Thong Woh, $4 each 8.00
Guan Huat, Kwong Chong Wah, Wah
Kee, Jong Juan, Nam Sang. Chin Wah
Heng, Woh Heng, Chareo, $2 each 16.00
Woh Seng, Chui Who, $1 each ...	2.00	154.00
From Government Employees at
Miri per Honble. R. S. Douglas: -
L. Ah Thong	...	...	7.00
R. A. Frois, Y. Soon Siew. Abang bin
Anchey. $5 each ... 15.00
T. Teck Guan, Corpl. Vedawa Singh,
Detective Dol, $2 each ... 6.00
L. C. Basol, C. Thiam Jiew, C. Eng
Soon, $1 each ...	... 3.00
C. P. Hassan, C. P. Dol. C. Eng Wha.
Awg Taha, P. C. Rebi, P. C. Ali,
P. C. Hussein, P. C. Ewit, P. C. Mat.
P. C. Seman, P. C. Sugo, P. C. Mus
tapa, P. C. Dullah, P. Assim.
ASSUN Sais, 50 cents each ... 7.50
38.50
25. 2. 20.	...	$11,663.60
I Wonder Why.
Philosophy is the child of wonder.
Plato.
I wonder why the Ranees Clubs a failure, I wonder why the dances were such fun
I wonder why the men and girls foregathere
I wonder how the Ladies' Club is run?
All mystery I wonder why?
I wonder why the ladies aren't admitted
Into the precincts of the Die-hard's den
And why sometimes they can't play bridge together Or tennis at the Men's Club with the men?
Harmoniously
I wonder why ?
I wonder why the price of rice is rising
And why we can't take steps to plant out more
And why the cost of living is expensive
And why the dollar sticks at two and four?
Unreasonably
I wonder why?
I wonder why the sun shines in the Heavens
I wonder why the moon does funny things
I wonder why some crocodiles are tearful
I wonder why Im partial to Gin Slings?
No reply
I wonder why?
ORANG TUA."
CORRESPONDENCE
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of
correspondents.]
February 24th, 1920.
The Editor,	Sarawak Gazette.
DEAR SIR,
The following is a fair specimen of profiteering in Eastern goods in England.
A lady in Singapore recently purchased a small doll's tea set of Japanese manufacture to send to a child at home for the sum of 40 cents (about lid.). She took it home, and shortly after arrival saw, an absolutely identical set in a London toy shop priced at 5/6d. The small celluloid toys we could purchase in the local shops for a few cents sold at l/6d. each at home. The freight on a case of such toys could not surely account for the rise in price of each article.
The local trader is rapidly raising the prices of home made goods though the home prices may not be rising. Can we blame him when our own people set such a good example?
The Chinese will copy anythingincluding our
methodsHe is doing it.
I am, dear Sir.
Yours faithfully.
CUSTOMER.
A Question of Etiquette?
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
DEAR SIR.
Can you put me right on a matter of etiquette? If I call on people, should they return my call or acknowledge it in any way? If they do not, am I to presume that they do not desire any further acquaintance with me?
Of course it may be that some people are too busy
playing tennis, golf or bridge to take any notice of calls; or it may lie that they consider all calling is tommy-rot", but in this case would it not be better to find means to notify this fact and so save others the pleasure (?) of putting on store clothes" and spending a hot afternoon in calling on those who hold these views.
If the presumption that these people do not want to know me is incorrect perhaps my letter should be headed A Question of Manners".
Yours, etc.,
PERPLEXED.
MONTHLY REPORTS.
UPPER SARAWAK.
BAU AND PAKU.
January.
Court.There has been less Court work during the month than usual; the following being the only cases worthy of mention.
Manau, a Malay trader hawking in the left hand Branch, was fined $100 for selling rice above the controlled rates. Abun was fined $50 for abducting the daughter of Bija.
Kotong a Singghi Dayak set a number of tukaks in a path leading to his fruit trees at Singghi and seriously injured another Dayak by doing so. Complaints of the
60 THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1920.
plaints of the depredations of Javanese coolies from the Sungei Tengah Estate are numerous and Kotong set the tukaks to protect his fruit and sirih from them.
Pu Poi was fined $25 for attempting to bribe the police and the following were sent to gaol for theft Kong Cheong, Jong Mee, Pui Jan and Bong Jit.
Jong Siuk was sentenced to twenty months R. I. for causing grievous hurt to a Javanese named Sengari at Musi with a parang. The affair look place some months ago and the offender escaped but was I smartly captured by P. C. Seman of Buso who recognised him coming off to the launch at Sejijak and arrested him on board.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

The sweet scent of the golden Padouk, and the fascinating fragrance of the early morning in tropical Burma are never to be forgotten, and an elephant-buying expedition is one on which these experiences are intermingled with a feeling of intense excitement, responsibility, and finally relief.
C. E.	P.
Nullah	A	Creek.
Thakin	A	white man or Sahib.
Padouk	A	tree which	flowers	three	times,
in rapid succession immediately before the rains.
Jungle-Wallah Forester or Jungle Man.
S. Thomas School.
Prize giving by H.H. the Ranee.
On December 9th Her Highness the Ranee visited the School, and on arrival was presented with a basket of flowers by Miss Hazel Ellis.
The Rt. Rev. The Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak, in the Chair, welcomed the Ranee on her visit to the School, and mentioned the new Government Educational policy, by which the School benefitted, and that owing to this, new buildings, badly needed, would be proceeded with as soon as labour and materials were available.
The Headmaster, Mr. A. N. Ellis, in the course of his report, mentioned that the number on the registers at the end of November was 482, of which 129 were boarders.
The Chief Secretary emphasised the value of games, and the desire of the Government that the schools of Sarawak should produce good citizens.
Her Highness then presented the prizes given by His Highness the Rajah.
The Archdeacon of Sarawak, having proposed a vote of thanks to Her Highness, the proceedings terminated with three hearty cheers.
The winners of the prizes were :
Standard VII.
First prize.	Second prize.
Miau Foh	... Harry Brodie
Standard VI.
En Hyuk	... Shin Sen
Standard V.
Ah Joon	... On Chin
Standard IV.
Yu Siong	... Eng Hok
Standard III A.
Kia Ek	Bok Hee
Standard III B.
Ngiaw Thian	... Kuak Fah
Standard II A.
Harry Law	... Veng Swee
Standard II B.
Kim Hua	... Kee Hui
Standard I.
Guan Hin	... Kia Tin
Transitions.
Sek Kui
Infant II.
Swee Hiong
Infant I.
Joon Chin
Special prizes presented by Mr. W. Service, Junr., Dr. Krishna and Mr Singaram Pillai awarded to Miau Foh, Harry Law and Guan Hin.
6
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 2, 1926.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]	. .
HEIRANYou still have us guessing !ED.
Kuching Sports.
To
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching
SIR,
As Secretary to the Committee of His Highness the Rajahs Birthday Sports, I wish through the medium of your paper to endeavour to put Inquisitive's doubts at rest.
It appears to be rather obvious that Inquisitive took no further interest in the Sports than consulting the programme, for had he done so he would have realized that the names contained therein were finally arrived at after several heats had been run off.
The heats were drawn up at a meeting of School masters representing each school which was held in Mr. W. T. Kebles house at the S.P.G. on the 20th September. All the entry forms were laid before the meeting and I feel sure that Inquisitive will agree that had any one school exceeded its 2% entry, the representatives of the other schools present would have most certainly had something to say in the matter. As far as possible one competitor from each school was entered in every heat, and these were run off in the usual manner. Thus on the actual day of the Sports only the best athletes in Kuching were competing, which explains why some schools had more finalists than others.
It is usual to award the Victor Ludorum on points gained in flat races and jumps only, therefore no points were given for the potato race which is only a side event and incidently is a race open to any boy whether he be under four feet in height or only eligible to enter for open events.
The suggestion that only ten boys from each School should be entered would make no difference whatever to the final result, for naturally each school would put up their best ten men just as they now enter their best 2% in fact it would only mean a slight reduction in the number of heats to be run off.
In passing I would mention that if Inquisitive is not yet satisfied, at any time he cares to come to my Office I shall be delighted to show him the original entry I forms and results of heats, etc., etc.
Yours faithfully,
S. T. ENNION, Honorary Secretary. Club Notes.
The New Amalgamated Club.
?	The following is a summary of a meeting held in The Sarawak Club by the temporary Committee of the Amalgamated Club, at 6.30 p.m., on 20th November, 1925.
It was decided that Sub-Committees should be appointed to put forward suggestions in connection with the formation of the new Amalgamated Club, and that such Committees will only be temporary, pending the occupation of the Amalgamated Club.
1. (a) Tennis--it was decided that Messrs. H. D. Aplin, J. P. Baird and R. D. Binnie should be asked to supervise the construction of the six new tennis courts, the estimate being $4,800 for surfacing and enclosing these courts.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

One day while standing on the quav.
- In Singapore. I think, was he. Don saw a man who had a flea Upon his whereabout.
The man he fidgeted and fussed
And waved his arms and raved and cussed ;
Our Donald thought that poor flea must Be very hale and stont.
Which thought made Donald fidget too, In spite of all that hed gone through But stout, although a heavy brew. Was not our Donald s drink.
The sun scorched on our hero's back, His throat felt like a carpet tack. Whereat he forthwith wandered back Aperatifs to sink.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
LIMEHOUSE, E. 14,
LONDON, ENGLAND,
3rd February, 1926. To
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
DEAR SIR,
I was reading with my teacher in school last Monday (1.2.26.) the chapter on the Eastern Archepelego. I observe from that that you and your country are delightful with beautiful birds, apes, monkeys, etc., etc. I my sell thought it would be very nice indeed to obtain a small active monkey. So 1 am asking you ns politely as I possibly can whether you would send me a monkey. If you should do so I would be very anxious to show it to all my school-mates.
Yours resptfully,
GEORGE E. T	Pasal Menoa Enggris.
The Europe" portals glittered high. The hour was ten the sun was high, A few more steps and he was by The Sikh in turban red.
A brandy ginger-ale quoth he With ill-concealed cupidity. Then sat to view the scenery And fan his mushy head.
He heard a voice quite close beside; Hello. John Willy" someone cried .
And, turning round, our Donald spied A friend of bygone days. For Dicky Briggs he really knew, Had been his tent companion too. And one amongst a scanty few Who knew our Donald's ways.
What brings you here mv Donny ? " I'll sit me down and have a beer" With you." said Dick, with cheerful leer. And Donald had to pay
Said Briggs Of course you'll have to go With me to the Armistice show" I'm with a bunch of five or so" And Donald answered Yes.
We'll meet to-night at eight old thing" And mingle with this gathering" And Donny, you and I will sing And Donald murmured fine. With song and dance well jog along" To mingle with the merry throng And Donald, who had listened long Said What about the wine?
The dinner starts, the crowd is there. And Dicky Briggs is in the chair Behaving like a millionaire So liberal is he.
And Donald isn't far away ;
He listens to the Chairman's say
And drinks the toasts as best he may With due alacrity.
At twelve the lights were glowing dim. The room began to wave and swim, (Or was it merely Donalds whim ? He sank into repose.
What happened next our Donald knew No more than either I or you In spite of all that he'd gone through So now my song I'll close.
Dinga ka olih kita samoa orang, Dudok tetap dinga ka karang;
Aku dudok lalu ngenang, Leman utai di menoa orang.
Ukai aku tu bejako sabarang, Baka ti nampong ensra orang; Bisi ti dipeda mata aku trang, Bisi mega dibacha dalatn sural ti ngenang.
Adaipen England menoa dikenang, Penyauh iya ukai agi chechamang; Wang pen ka maioh enggau nambang, Sikap tuboh pen enda tau korang.
Menoa orang maioh kena pansa,
Kapal di laut enda olih tesa; Mensia maioh utang enda sa bansa. Lain ga adat enda sida sa basa.
Teruba nuntong menoa Singapura, Mensia maioh enda sa chara;
Kedai China ukai nya sa bengkah, Kedai orang puteh mega ukai nya siti enggau dua. Serta kapal pen belaboh di Singapura.
Datai tamhang ukai nya agi sa buah enggau dua; Ngelingi kapal sida iya baka ti nyembah, Ka ngulih ka wang rerga sewa.
Ukai me aku tu ka ngemanjai ka kenang. Menoa Singapura diau pemadu pemaioh orang; Kapal datai enda kala nernu pemungkang, Ari rerak tawas datai ka hari nyau petang. Pemaioh rumah batu alit ati aku ngenang, Pemaioh jalai alit ati meda ti melintang putang;
Kreta ti ditaban ka kuda munyi pasang nyegang, Sapemanjai hari nadai ngetu nyentok ka petang. Mensia ti charut ukai nya kala belambang, Saja bisi rnata-mata ti nyaga siang enggau petang, Laban pemaioh bansa mensia ukai nya agi kenang, Bebunoh, bechuri, berampas, ukai nya tau pungkang. Orang Tambi ipak pendiau sida rindu beati garang. Nadai agi milih orang datai ka bini sida disrang; Baka sida ti bejako dras lalu melintang putang, Baka nya mega sida ti belaya enda kala pungkang. Orang China ukai nya agi ribu orang.
Maia di kedai maia di wangkang; Sida nya betangkap enda belambang, Diukum. ditutup. baka ti enda dikenang. Belepas ari Singapura lalu bekejang, Bulih satu bulan belayar siang enggau petang, Menoa dipansa ukai nya kabuah dibilang, Ngagai menoa England ti pulai ka kenang.
'I'HE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1926.
89
Glombang di laut ukai nya agi checharnang, Pemesai alun iya nyau ka baka Bukit Kalingkang; Sukat hari jai nyau nurun biobalai ujan, Ati baka dipandam, takut bandar ati enggau penyuan. Ukai nama agi pemaioh penemu mensia, Dalam kapal Samoa utai bla sedia;

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Two huge poles some 30 feet long are pushed
out over a bar which is fixed parellel to, and just
above, the bulwark. These poles are fixed in a V
shape, the point of the V being jammed under a beam
inboard, while the remainder projects over the side.
An enormous net is then stretched over the space
between the poles and the affair is ready for the fish.
The man in the stern passes the lineto which the
leaf is attachedto one of the crew amidships, and
the barong is pulled quickly round until the net is
opposite the floating leaf. The net is then lowered,
the Coot of the V being released from under the beam,
and the huge net turns on its axis on the bar over
the side and is let down into the water till the poles
are nearly up-and-down. The leaf is now drawn
quickly towards the net, the little fish following it in
shoals, and when within a few yards of the side some
of the crew put their weight on the juncture of the
poles, thus raising the net out of the water, while the remainder run up to the opposite side of the boat to balance the weight of the net. The boat heels over and the water pours in but the weight of the
crew prevails and she slowly rights, the net rising
into the air at the same time full of the little silvery
fish that were so stupid as to follow the sago leaf.
The four or five bushels of fish are slid spluttering down the net into the boat and. the leaf having been
thrown overhoard, the boat is pulled a few fathom further on to pick up another of this curious bait and repeat the process.
Some thirty or forty of these leaves are in turn hauled up, some bringing several bushels of fish in their wake while others are thrown overboard again as but few fish are following, till about midday the crew adjourn for lunch consisting of sago and dried fish, which, having been disposed of the masts are stepped and sails hoisted and the barong returns to the river before the sea breeze, the crew for the most part sleeping or smoking in the shade of mats the heat being almost unbearable.
Many jars of salt are brought out in the boat in case the wind should fail and the boat be thereby detained at sea for a night when the salt would lie spread over the pile of fish. But usually the breeze is unfailing and the fish arrive fresh at the native houses, where those that are not sold the same day are put into jars with salt and then taken up-river for sale.
The best of the fish are picked out, split, and cleaned, while the barong is under sail for the river, are rubbed with a little salt and capsicum and eaten raw by the crew as delicacies. Fish prepared in this way are called umi. (Contributed.)
The Kuching Regatta.
The day breaks bright, the morning light shines on a scene so gay,
The cloudless sky gives promise of a simply perfect day.
The rows of ships, their decks a mass of gay humanity, While oer them wave the strings of flags they never take to sea.
The steamers of the Company are all of them on show, And gay with bunting, bright with paint are anchored in a row.
As far as one can see the river simply swarms with boats.
The crews of which have trousers on but never any coats.
In many of the smaller craft sit boys who quite at ease Go paddling about(their trews are minus quantities But no one ever notices mere details such as these) A little launch goes puffing by to open up the course.
And stalwart Europeans there are shouting them-
selves hoarse
Between the whiffs of Londres and the sip of B. & S.
The genial looking natives just look on but dont profess
To understand whats being saidso simply smile
and stay
Bang in the middle of the course, why should they
move away ?
The river just belongs to them, the country is their
own,
They've come from far to see the fun and should be
left alone.
A whiff of durian floats by, some boat has got a stock
Of that grand fruit (so called) by Jove the smell
would split a rock !
But every boat has rambutans and mangosteens galore
The skins float by on every side and thousands line
the shore.
At intervals a gun is fired, a race comes to an end,
While now and then one sees the bouts come racing
round the bend.
The clouds come up, the rain comes down, race after
race goes by.
What cares the native for the rain hes got no clothes
to dry!
The launches have run out of drinks, cigars are get-
ting short,
The final race has taken quite an hour more than it
ought.
But finally the last gun fires, the band gets up to play
'God save the King', and so at last ends such a pleasant
day!"-(Contributed.)
Battle of Marudu Bay 1845.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

The new squad of Rangers arrived on 18th.
14 vessels entered and 14 cleared.
The chief exports were:
1920. 1919.
Haw sago ... 210 koyans 201 koyans
Jelutong 220 piculs 3,445 piculs
W. R. TUDOR CLEMENT,
District Officer.
BARAM.
September.
Many cases came before the Court for settlement but none of any special mention, Aban Ukeng and Tama Lujok of Tutan each fined $50 for refusing to obey Penghulu's orders.
Fines and fees amounted to $738.98.
I returned from doing duty at Miri on the 7th. instant accompanied by Mr. and Mrs. Coley and Mr. Sargent of the Eastern Products Ltd.
They again returned on the 12th. instant having paid a visit up-river as far as Long Palai.
Professor Harrison W. Smith arrived on the 2nd. instant from Kuching.
Messrs. Crocker, Moulton and Gifford arrived on the 16th. instant by s. I. Lu Follette from Miri.
On the 21st. I accompanied Messrs. Crocker, Moulton, Gifford and Professor Harrison W. Smith up-river as far as Long Akar and was still away at end of month.
They are going on an expedition to Kalabit country main object being to climb Mount Murud for collecting and surveying purposes.
During my absence up-river Dr. Hose late Resident of this district, Mrs. Hose, two children and Mr. Sargent paid a visit.
They went up-river as far as Uma Bawang Kayan house calling at most of the other houses on the way up.
On returning to the fort Dr. Hose gave a feast to some 300 natives consisting of all tribes and returned the next day to Miri.
Rainfall was 10'92 inches.
Prisoners finished planting padi in the experimental farm and commenced working bark for walls of new barracks.
Two steamers entered and cleared.
Exports.	Imports.
$33,408	$10,100
C. D. ADAMS,
District Officer.
.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 16, 1920.
230
BROOKETON COLLIERY.
August.
The gross out-put of coal amounted to 2,095 tons, 578.5 tons of this was consumed by our boilers and the balance 1,516.5 tons sent to wharf.
We shipned to Labuan 1,273 tons and supplied to p.s. .Adeh and local launches 142 tons.
We had in stock at the end of the month 118.25 tons.
Everything went smoothly in all departments. The two pumps, mentioned in my July report, as being under water, were recovered and brought to the surface for repairs.
Coal sales at Labuan amounted to 1,608 tons, as follows:
Straits Steamship Co.	1,426	tons
S. S. Scott Harley	150	,,
Local launches, etc.	32	,,
Total 1,608	tons
Repairs was done to the Labuan office wharf and five new piles were put in. There are still a number of piles in this wharf which require changing and this will be done as soon as the necessary timber can be procured.
A fall occurred in the Buang Tawar oil level, but fortunately this bad been anticipated and pipes laid so that the fall has not interfered with the flow of oil.
Mr. Harris who had been previously sanctioned six months leave by His Highness, left for home on the 12th.
The s. 1. Lucile arrived here daylight of the 8th. to replace the s. 1. LAubaine which goes to Kuching for repairs. The latter left for Kuching via Labuan on the 12th.
The rainfall at Brooketon Mines was 693 inches.
J. O. MADDOCKS,
Manager.
LIMBANG.
September.
With the farming season in full swing Court work has been lighter. If one may judge from the burning that has been going on, all over the district, the inhabitants are doing their utmost to ensure a successful padi crop next harvest.
Entinggang, a Dayak, was fined one picul for setting tukak. half the fine going to the injured party.
An application to erect a 16 h.p. motor saw-mill was refused, on the grounds that the site chosen was too near to the Court house, and other Government buildings. The applicant was advised to try and select a site elsewhere.
I was away at Brooketon from the 3rd. to the 7th. Here 1 cautioned those people who have let their gardens encroach onto the cattle ground, without written permission, to remove back to the boundary. The mowers resignation was accepted, as he is very asthmatic and quite unable to fulfil his contract. One Garib has now undertaken to do the work.
The Trusan squad S. R. whilst waiting at Brooketon for the Kuching steamer, cleared the cattle ground and the rentis for re-installing the telephone co His Highness the Rajahs bungalow.
Mr. MacBryan went to Lawas, for a change, from the 9th to the 16th.
Mr. W. F. de V. Skrine, D. O. Lawas came round to talk over official matters on the 10th. and returned at midnight on the 12th.
The British Resident in Brunei spent the day here on the 19th. Miss Swayne arrived that afternoon by the Adeh, from Bintulu.
I left in the Damit for Lawas via Sundar on the 21st. At Sundar I met Mr. Skrine, when the matter of the Awat-Awat Customs farm was discussed. The request of Ba Chee, the present holder, that he should be allowed to retain the same, at an increased rental, until the expiration of the Punang farm, on the 31st. May 1921, was acceded to.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

The recent decline in prices of rubber and pepper brought no apparent changes. There are no signs of shortage of labour in both industries in the 1st,
2nd and 5th Divisions since they are characterized by a large number of small concerns, often based on the family as a unit.
It is important to note that the Public Works Department has contracted work on the Bau and Serian Roads to Messrs. Ewart & Co. and other contractors. These in turn have engaged sub-contractors to such an extent that many claims for wages have been received which have caused great difficulty to investigate and settle. The effect has been a certain amount of unrest and dissatisfaction. This matter is being taken up and arrangements have already been made for principal contractors to employ labour direct. Claims for wages amount-ing to over $4,000.00 have been settled by the Deputy Protector of Labour already.
Women and Girls Protection.
Cases under the Ordinance.
The procedure of interrogation of immigrant women and girls disembarking in Kuching was continued throughout the year. 219 women and 86 girls were interogated. No cases of trafficking were brought to light.
During the year a total of 42 visits were paid to various houses and lodging houses suspected of being used as brothels. Regular visits to girls on bond in institutions were also made by the Lady Assistant Protector of Women and Girls.
58 cases under the Ordinance were investigated in connection with girls who were suspected of being used as mui tsai, girls who were in need of pro-tection or girls who were suspected to be in moral danger.
During the year 36 women, girls and children were admitted to the Salvation Army Girls' Home at Haji Taha Road Kuching.
It is Government's policy in general not to use the place of safety as a place of detention or punish-ment for recalcitrant Daughters or young prosti-tutes, but as a place to which girls may be removed from moral danger and receive a good up-bringing.
A Girls' Home which is run under the Manage-ment of the Salvation Anny was established at Haji Taha Road, Kuching, as from 16th October, 1950, for use as a place of safety under the provisions of the Women and Girls' Protection Ordinance, 1948.
Capt. Joan Sharman, who acted for Capt. Willis whilst she was on furlough, was matron in charge of the Home until 12th July, 1952, when she left the Salvation Army for missionary work with the S.P.G. Mission at St. Mary's Boarding House. She was doing "field work" among Chinese women and young people, Brownies, Guides, Sunday School, etc.
Capt. E. C. Willis (now Major) returned from home leave and resumed matronship of the Home on 9th July, 1952.
The Secretary for Chinese Affairs and the Lady Assistant Protector of Women and Girls visit the Home frequently and give all possible assistance to the staff from time to time.
The public has shown signs of appreciation of the work carried out by the Home during the year under review. The admission of young girls who are in moral danger to the place of safety at the request of their parents tends to increase.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 31, 1953.
53
During the year 13 general and 7 extraordinary meetings were held by the Kuching Chinese Advisory Board.
The Board throughout the year continued to interest itself in various subjects such as, Public Service Corps, Youth Organisation, Traffic Control, Vagrancy, etc.
A "Youth Week" for boys and girls was organised under the auspices of the Rotary Club, Kuching, in May, 1952. It was the first time that the Rotary Club had tried to do anything on this scale. An appeal was made to the whole community of Kuching to show the youth of the town something of the part which youth will later play in community life-religious, governmental, civic and technical public services, and to stimulate the interest of youth and their elders in vigorous, progressive and constructive Youth Movements. 83 Boy and 74, girl students from various schools in Kuching were invited to attend lectures given by Government departments. Officers concerned of this department spoke on the nature of the work and function of Immigration, Protection of Women and Girls, Labour Protection, Registration of Societies and Registration of Trade Unions. It was gratifying to note that the students showed keen interest during their visit. Prizes to the value of $150 were given for the best essays written on a topic arising out of the Youth Week.
Drives for subscriptions in aid of the Public Service Corps were carried out by the Secretary for Chinese Affairs and Committee Members of the Public Service Corps from time to time during the year. It may be noted that approximately $10,000 has been promised by the public in general. No financial assistance has been given by Government.
Report from the Lower Court.
Mr. John Jones of the Sarawak Company Inc. was again the central figure in a prosecution brought by the Kuching Municipal Council before the Lower Court recently.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

to take his place. Towards the end of the month vast quantities of fish of many varieties returned upstream after the end of the high water, and some, excellent hauls with jalas were made up at Nanga Balleh. At Mukah Daud bin Taha was sentenced to three months' rigorous imprisonment, and twelve strokes of the rattan for an unprovoked attack, with a dangerous weapon, on his wife. Apart from this there was no serious crime in the district. On May 22nd a big cock-fighting 'main' was held between Balingian Dayaks and some 120 Sarawak Oilfields' Dayak coolies. On the first day the latter lost $800 in bets and were anxious to borrow more money from the company. It was thought advisable, however, to cancel the second day's proceedings. The prison demonstration vegetable garden at Mukah continues to flourish with very little attention, apart from weeding. The soya bean crop is doing exceptionally well. Reports of Dayak padi crops in the Mukah dis trict are very poor except for a few houses in the ulu Slangau. All crops have now been harvested. As usual, the Dayaks blame rata and other pests, but it is obvious that they themselves are partly responsible for the failure owing to their inherent laziness and lack of the most elementary agricul- tural knowledge. They do not seem to be unduly perturbed by the prospect of a padi shortage, however, and will no doubt subsist, as usual in the circumstances, on wild sago, paku and other jungle products. The price of sago is slightly down at Mukah, the average top price during May being 56 cents per passu. An offer of $47 for the Mukah Government temuai has been accepted. This boat was of little use to Government owing to her weight and the large number of coolies required to paddle her. The District Officer, Oya and Dalat, commends the Constabulary for the amount of evidence colluded in the recent grave robbery case at Kam pong Penat in spite of the resolute silence of the kampong people. It was not possible, however, to obtain a conviction, and the three accused Were discharged. Two inquests were heard during the month. Tn the first, Basi bin Legod of Kampong Sunegi Ud, Dalat, was killed by a falling tree whilst clearing jungle. A verdict of death by misadventure was returned on May 16th. Tn the second, Soh Eng Hock, Hokien. of Dalat. committed suicide by hanging himself in Dalat bazaar on the evening of May 29th. At the inquest held on May Both a verdict of suicide by strangulation was returned; there was no evidence to show the state, of deceased's mind at the time of his death. On May 12th Dresser Mohamed Lazaroo arrived at Oya and proceeded straight to Dalat where he is to be permanently stationed. The work of turning (he old offices into a dispensary and small hospital has been practically completed, and notices have been posted informing the public that a dresser is now stationed at Dalat and that they should, in their own interests, take advantage of this. During the twelve days that the dispensary was open, thirty-three persons were vaccinated, twenty- four N.A.B injections were administered and fifty- nine out-patients were treated. These figures are encouraging. Melanau fishing was in full swing during the month, good catches being obtained. The price of raw sago shows a decrease of 2 cents on the figures for last month, the figures being 62 cents per passu at the Kut, and 56 cents per passu at Dalat. The amount of raw sago exported from the dis trict decreased during the month, the figures being By sea ... ... 205 koyans By Kut ... ... 19 224 This shows a total decrease of 192 1/2 koyans on the total exports for last month. One motor schooner, three motor launches, three schooners and thirty bandongs cleared Oya during the month, the total tonnage being 582 tons, a decrease over the figures for last month of 405 tons. In January last a notice was exhibited at Oya inforining the public that anybody found taking the young bamboo shoots from the Bamboo Avenue between the office and bungalow would be prose cuted in the Police Court, as these bamboos were the property of the State and were to be preserved. This notice undoubtedly had the desired effect and many new shoots appeared. Unfortunately quite a number of these new shoots died when they were only three to four inches in height, presumably because they had insufficient earth to protect them. Owing to the temporary increase in the numbers of prisoners in the Oya jail, it has been found possible to surround each clump of bamboos with a border of belian attaps, and all the clumps have been filled in with earth to a depth of about a foot. It is hoped that the clumps will flourish again now as in former years. Fourth Division News. MAY. Messrs. L. N. Reynolds and R. G. Talbot of the Sarawak Constabulary arrived at Miri on May 19th, the former on a tour of inspection, and the latter to take over the Constabulary sector from Mr. D. V. Murphy. Work on the construction of the three new Government bungalows at Tanjong

[NEXT EXCERPT]

It should be mentioned that the happy visit to the Batang Lupar and Ulu Ai was rounded off by the Information Office Mobile Cinema Unit, which shewed its films every night and which accompanied the party as far as Penghulu Ngali's house at Nanga Delok. Probably this is the furthest Ulu the cinema unit has been and certainly many of the women and children in these Ulu Ai houses had never seen a film before and they proved to be a thoronghly appreciative audience.
Once again the value of new outboard engines was proved by the way that at no stage of the journey was any one of the three outboards more than five minutes away from the others, though of course the quality of the drivers had a large part to play in this achievement.
Death of a Philosopher
On April 9th 1953 there died in London a man whose name ten years ago was a household word in England, and well-known wherever the BBC’s famous Brains Trust was heard—Dr. Cyril Joad. People clamoured for his autograph; jugs and book-ends were modelled from his face; he brought Plato and philosophy into every house where there was a wireless set; traffic was stopped in the streets by crowds trying to get into halls to hear him speak.
One Sunday afternoon in 1942 Dr. Joad went to Dartmoor Gaol in Devon to address five hundred of the toughest convicts in England. He spoke in the prison chapel. He was supposed to be talking about the moral issues of the war, but at the last moment, as he mounted the lectern, he changed his mind and gave a lecture on philosophy. He talked for an hour, with shining lucidity and wit, about the theory of philosophers called ‘idealism.’ He argued that hard tangible matter does not really exist: it is no more than an illusion in the mind of man. He finished by saying to those five hundred men, many of them in prison for life: "And so you see, and I’m sure you will all agree with me, that
'Stone walls do not a prison make Nor iron bars a cage.’ ”
When he sat down it seemed as if the clapping and cheering would never end.
When silence came at last the Prison Chaplain, a quiet, earnest man. proposed a vote of thanks. He doubted, he said, if all his listeners would agree with Professor Joad's conclusion, “and even some of you who do so now may later say, like a cockney I once knew, ‘Blimey, then, I must be 'ypnotised!’" and the clapping began all over again.
The war ended, and later the Brains Trust. By his own fault and folly, life turned sour on Joad. He cheated a railway company. He was convicted and fined. The BBC was closed to him. He was expelled from his London club, a place he greatly loved. Yet it is perhaps wrong to call it folly. It was, rather, a mental quirk,—something related, in a bastard way, to his dislike of bureaucracy and to his passion for the freedom of the human mind and spirit.
He used to illustrate this rebellious force in him by the especial pleasure with which he told of some-thing he had once seen. It was in London, during the General Strike of 1926. The only motor lorries then being driven in the streets bore placards with the words “Driven by permission of the Trades Union Congress.” No others dared go on the roads. But one day, in the Strand, Joad saw a different lorry go by. It was driven, very fast, by a little red-haired man ("he could only be a cockney,.” Joad said) with a bristling red moust-ache, and on the bonnet there was a poster, larger than any of the others, with the words, “Driven by my own bloody permission.”
He enjoyed telling stories against himself. Before the last war, he gave a lecture at a well-known girls’ school. After the lecture the head-mistress offered him a cheque. “Now,” Joad would say, “I’m not in the least averse from being paid for what I do, but on this occasion I had spoken on a subject near my heart and I didn’t
65
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 30, 1953.
want any money, so I asked the head-mistress if she would keep the cheque and give it to any charity she might choose." He thought no more of the incident until he was leaving. Then it occurred to him that his fee might be given to some object of which he disapproved, and as he said good-bye he asked the head-mistress what she thought of doing with it. If head-mistresses could hesitate," he said, "she would have hesitated. If head-mistresses could blush, she would have blushed. She did neither. She looked me calmly in the eye and said: 'The money, Dr. Joad, will be paid into a fund for providing the school with better lecturers next year.’ ”

[NEXT EXCERPT]

General. -Three coroner’s inquests were held during the month.
Bulan Puasa began on the 19th, and was observed by the usual salute.
Batu Kawa was visited on 9th and 23rd, the station being satisfactory on each occasion.
LAND OFFICE.
January, 1931.
The Land Officer, Mr. T. M. Griffiths. reports: -
Japanese Wet Padi Planting, Samarahan. -The application for a large area of land made by the Japanese has been withdrawn, after making extensive investigations for a suitable area of land in the Samarahan district. The area selected by them has now been found unsuitable for padi plaining and they have definitely decided not to proceed with the scheme.
Shop Lots. -Eight blocks of shophouses are now completed in connection with the verification of boundaries of alienated areas of the bazaar property.
Simanggang Road -It has been found necessary to prosecute certain Chinese for ignoring notices to quit lands for which they held no titles. These people have had more than a year’s notice and have proved most intractable.
Lack of control and supervision over a long period has apparently, and perhaps not unnaturally, bred in their minds the idea that they can resist authority successfully. This idea must, of course, be eradicated. Action by this department has been taken very gradually in the hope that each successive step may have cumulative effect, and that eventually they may realize that their attitude is mistaken. It may be added that land has been made available into which they may move it they so desire.
Mr. A. K. Brown reports that thirty gardens in the Government Land Reserve were inspected during the month and that the cutting of the northern boundary of the Dyak Reserve is proceeding.
A number of Chinese have applied for land within the Baroh Kampong Reserve. Their applications were rejected.
General. -I took over the duties of Laud Officer, Kuching, as from 7th January.
Instructions have been given that Land Office routine must be strictly adhered to, as this is essential for the purpose of cross reference and to avoid unnecessary repetition of work.
UPPER SARAWAK, BAU.
January, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. P. Murray-Scott, reports: -
General. -His Highness the Rajah, and Messrs. Crocker, Aplin, and Holl, arrived on January 2nd and stayed at Astana until the following Tuesday.
The Acting Resident visited the station on January 28th, returning on the following day.
His Highness the Rajah’s aged pony Mana Buleh was destroyed on the 31st, having broken down completely.
Courts -Four cases were heard in the Resident’s Court during the Resident’s visit, all being settled. In the District Court there were ten criminal cases -one person being convicted of being in illegal possession of arms and ammunition, one of illegally distilling arrack, one under the Petrol Orders, one for theft, and four of smuggling. A case against Chin Ah Fong, for illegally distilling arrack, was dismissed for lack of evidence, and there was a further small case of theft of Dyak fruit on the part of certain Chinese. There were in addition a number of unimportant civil claims.
Customs. -On January 12th information was at last received concerning the smuggling of tobacco from Dutch Territory, and during the two following days police patrols succeeded in intercepting two parties of Chinese, and confiscating some five piculs of Chinese and Siamese tobacco. Of the two gangs, four in all were arrested.
A body of a male Chinese subsequently found in the Sungei Bau, and unidentified, is probably that of one of those who escaped. The various roads from the border are still being watched as well as is possible with the limited number of police available, but as yet there have been no further arrests.
P.W.D. -The roads have suffered rather badly from the torrential rains during the month, but have never been impassable. Two bridges on the Seniawan Road have been repaired and widened. Both the Astana and the Government Bungalow have been fitted with new blatts.
Prisons. -Prisoners have been employed for the most part on the general upkeep of the station. Discipline, in spite of the inefficiency of the warders, has been somewhat better. Health was again bad. A six-strand barbed-wire fence has been erected at the back of the jail, there having been nothing of the sort before.
Power Plant. -This was overhauled by electricians from Kuching during the course of the month.
Health. -Apart from the jail, health was fair, and there were no further cases of malaria.
Rainfall. -Heaviest recorded in 24 hours-80 inches, daily average-27 inches. Total for the month-8’32 inches.
Bidi Gold Mine. -160.66 ounces of actual gold were obtained for the month of December, 1930.
SADONG.
January 1931.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports: -
Court. -Court work during the month has been very light.
A Coroners inquest was held into the deaths of Dayang Pin and Dayang Suhai. A verdict of death by misadventure was recorded in each case.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

At our last Meeting, in July, you agreed to a considerable improvement in the rates of cost-of-living allowances for all public employees, and also improvements in the salaries of many of the Established ones. The financial effect of these
236
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 28, 1951.
changes will be obvious in the very large increases in the 1952 provisions for Personal Emoluments, enhanced as they are by modest increases of staff and by the expectation that you will accept the principle of automatic increase of the allowances with permanent increases in the food-price index, which is palced before you now in a Sessional Paper. I do not think you will begrudge the cost of paying Civil Servants wages which are still below those which many of them could get outside the public service.
The price of rubber has remained high throughout the year and in consequence Customs and Excise duties have been buoyant and may yield around $36 million, as compared with $9,744,000 in 1949 and $22,764,000 in 1950.
The first substantial crop of white pepper since the war is now coming forward in quantities that suggest that the revenue from this source will exceed expectations. The quality is not yet up to pre-war standards but is nevertheless fairly good, and Sarawak is set fair to gain her pre-war pre-dominance in the pepper markets of the world.
The Departments of Trade & Customs and Agri-culture have and will continue to devote much time and energy, working in close co-operation, to improving and maintaining the standard of our sago flour exports. The sago industry continues to flourish, and it is hoped that the care and attention which the grading of this commodity is receiving will result in Sarawak sago maintaining and, indeed surpassing its pre-war reputation on the world’s markets.
The Excise Ordinance is now in full operation. Revenue from the three distilleries in Sarawak may approach $1,000,000 as compared with the $374,520 collected under the old system of monoplies.
Agricultural development has been limited by a continued shortage of field staff, but existing pro-jects—which now form a sound basis for rural deve-lopment in Sarawak for many years ahead—have made good progress. The mechanised rubber factory and modern smoke house at the 12th Mile, Simang-gang Road, is now in full operation and points the way to what, after padi growing, is the most import-ant need in our rural economy—namely, the improvement in the quality of the rubber produced from our small-holdings to a point where it will be fully competitive in world markets in the event of a fall in prices.
While the Agricultural Department's scheme for intensive wet padi production by irrigation and controlled drainage has been consolidated and ex-panded, the production of padi in Sarawak remains disappointing. We are still dependent upon the import of some 30,000 tons of rice to make up the difference between home production and the 93,000 metric tons which it is estimated are con-sumed in Sarawak every year.
Indeed there is a serious world shortage of rice and the Consultative Committee which includes India and all the great rice consuming and producing countries may well decide that these countries which are physically incapable of producing sufficient rice to feed themselves must first be satisfied before such as Sarawak who could with care produce a far greater tonnage if she tried.
The requirements of rice importing countries are as great as ever and we will still import one-third of our rice. Such a position cannot be viewed with equanimity for, whilst Sarawak may have more money than ever with which to buy rice, it cannot
be guaranteed that rice will continue to be obtain-able.
However, the prospects for Sarawak’s rural industries are bright. Increasing numbers of farmers are following the excellent example of better farming which agricultural stations such as Tarat, Bijat, and Rantau Panjang provide. With the pro-cess of the Niah/Sibuti padi scheme and the Baram Agricultural Station at Tanjong Tahap, this advice and example should spread in the large and import-ant Fourth Division. Farmers to-day have more ready money than ever before, and it is pleasing to see that this wealth is to an increasing extent being expended on agricultural machinery. There is undoubtedly great scope for the development of farm mechanisation in certain directions, and the Department of Agriculture, aided by grants from the Colonial Development and Welfare Fund, is engaged in a long term scheme for testing new machinery and methods. It is to be hoped that farmers will be able to see for themselves this new machinery and adopt it where they judge it suitable to their own farming conditions.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

I hereby append the reports of Mr. L. K Moise and Mr. D. C. Hudden on their visits to the Lingga and Sebuyow and the Ulu Ai respectively.
I proceeded to Lingga on the 6th instant, per Hong Heng Huat, I found the station fairly well kept but the kampong roads were very much overgrown. These were cleared during my stay.
The posts of the wharf had sunk in places; a carpenter and coolies were employed for a few days to repair it.
In the bazaar there has been some work done on the road, and the Chinese shop-owners say that they will finish it soon.
There were no cases in Court of any importance.
Abang Madaut, Native Officer, went up river on the 8th instant, and returned again on the 21st. He was told to send his report to the Resident.
I visited Sebuyow from 19th to the 21st instant. There was no Court work there.
I returned to Simanggang on the 25th January, per m.l. Anne.
Mr. D. C. Hudden reports:—
We left Simanggang in the boat Nam Choi at 9.30 a.m. and on the 7th of January arrived Engkilili 3.50 p.m.	All the books, the opium and the cash, were checked and everything was in order. We reached Lubok Antu on the afternoon of the llth and found the grass on the lawns nearly ankle deep.
The The books and chash were checked and I should like to point out that Lubok Antu still has the old pattern wooded safe.
The billian from the old cow shed and from the fences is rapidly, disappearing. Abang Draup now has orders to pull everything up and store it in the Fort until required elsewhere.
We proceeded up stream on the 14th, taking Abang Draup, and spent that night in Rumah Gani, and the next night in Rumah Timbang, Nanga Telaus. From there we went a short way up the Sungei Meniang by boat and then walked. The night of the 16th was spent in Rumah Sawing, Sungei Betong, the 17th in Rumah Penghulu Sambau, Sungei Jirak, the 18th in Rumah Penghulu Barroh, Sungei Sumpah.
From Rumah Barroh we went down the Delok and spent one night in Rumah Penghulu Kana, and took him on with us to Penghulu Ramba’s house, where we spent two nights. On the morning of the 21st, we continued up stream to Nanga Mujang and, by orders of the Resident, fixed a white board to a tree as a sign that no Dyak is allowed to live or farm above that point.
is Sanggong, substitute of Penghulu Barroh, who very old, deaf, and quite unable to work, reported that a man from his house and Maiah (f.) Rumah Abong wished to dive about a jar. They both said that a Court case would not settle the affair. Penghulu Kana suggested that they should dive there and then, and appeared surprised when he was informed that diving was only permitted at Simanggang and could not take place without permission of the Resident.
The night of the 22nd was spent in Rumah Gelau Nanga Engkari, and that of the 23rd in Rumah Salleh, Nang Tutong. From there, we walked across the watershed between the Batang Ai, and the Lamanak and spent the next night in Rumah Anggi, Sungei Kapu, descending the Kisit and the Lemanak the next morning. That night we stayed in Rumah Penghulu Suel and reached Engkilili about 12 p.m. on the 26th.
Every head of houses we visited were told that all deaths and births must be reported, and that every door must pay the tax of one dollar per annum. All the Penghulus and the Tuai Rumahs agreed that it was perfectly reasonable excepting Penghulu Kana. Not very much notice was taken of this objection as it was anticipated.
I spent one day at Engkilili, checked the opium again and returned to Simanggang on the 28th. Public Works.—The prisoners, averaging 72.22, were employed on the general upkeep of roads, ditches and ornamental grounds. The contractor finished cementing bazaar ditches. A contract was drawn up to raise the level of the bazaar road. The new Recreation Club was completed towards the end of the month.
Medical.—A total of 273 persons were treated in hospital during the month as follows:—Dyaks 201, Chinese 31, Malays 34, Europeans 3, Sikhs 4.
210 cases of N.A.B. injection for yaws, etc., were given; 31 head of pigs were inspected and slaughtered for sale during the month.
Land.—Twenty-three Occupation Tickets were issued at Engkilili during the month.
SARIBAS. January, 1930. Mr. R. L. Daubeny, Assistant District Officer, Saribas, reports :—
Court.—The following cases were held: Godom and Sabai fined $25 each and pledge $15 under section. 160 I.P.C.; Sabai was later sentenced to two months’ S.I. for non-payment of fine; Abang Jamir, sentenced to two months' S.I. for non-payment of fine; Thai Chong fined $15 under section 509 I.P.C.; appeal by Thai Chong against decision of Malay Court, Debak, upheld; Lai Choot sentenced to one year’s R.I. for theft, section 379; Karim one month for contempt of Court. An appeal at Debak against the decision of the Malay Court was also upheld.
Prisons.—The prison gang, averaging 11.6 in number, have been employed on the usual routine work.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

VOL. LIX.
No. 911.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Thursday, August 1st, 1929.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette	THURSDAY. AUGUST 1st. 1929.
Acknowledgement.
Mrs. TAN AH BOH and family thank sincerely one and all for sympathy shown them in their bereavement, also for floral tributes and attendance at the funeral.
RICKSHAWS.
The recent fatal accident in Kuching, when a
Tamil was run over by a motor lorry in Gambier
Road and died of his injuries, brings forward once
again the question of the control of rickshaws in the
town. The driver of the lorry proved to the satisfaction of the coroner that, owing to the congestion
of rickshaws outside the markets, he was unable to
pull over to the left-hand side of the road when
confronted suddenly by the deceased who was
crossing the street.
The advent of the motor vehicle has been a serious
blow to rickshaw pullers, who now realize that it is
hard to find passengers. In consequence they have
adapted the habit of loitering along the main
thoroughfares soliciting custom, or waiting outside
public places in the hope of picking up stray
passengers.
These slow-moving vehicles are a danger at all
times-one never knows when they are about to turn
round suddenly, and they are apt to congregate in
large numbers in a small space.
It is noticeable that the average rickshaw puller
has deteriorated since the motor traffic became large enough to attract many of the old rickshaw users.
The present day puller is in most cases a poor
specimen, and the smart, well-kept rickshaws of a few years ago are now few. We feel sorry for these
men, as do many others, but, to put it plainly, the
unkempt and importunate pullers who plague
persons to ride in their vehicles, do nothing but
annoy the average man in the street, whilst these
wanderers certainly do cause much trouble in the
traffic of the town.
The rickshaw is still the poor man’s carriage, but even the low fares advertised do not compensate for the inevitable argument at the end of the journey, and the generally filthy state of the conveyance. It is obvious that if the streets are to be kept reasonably clear for heavier vehicles, the remaining rickshaws will have to be kept in stands allotted for that purpose, and what is more, kept there until a fare offers. The wandering rickshaw, like the wandering taxi in London, is a nuisance to traffic both vehicular and pedestrian.
Editor's Notes.
Most people picture an Editor as a sort of glorified dictator who sits in a comfortable office and runs his paper by means of a large and efficient staff of sub-editors, reporters and ever-willing critics. There are many Editors of this kind-and many, alas, who are like the immortal sailor-
“1 am the crew, and. the Captain too,
And the Mate of the Nancy brig.
The Boatswain tight, and the Midshipmite.
And the crew of the Captain’s gig.”
It is disheartening to be one’s own reporter. Nobody likes a reporter, and he lays himself' open to dreadful snubs. The lack of enthusiasm shown by supposed readers is disappointing. Witness our chagrin the other day at hearing this conversation in the club.
Member (to Merchant Prince): “I pay K--, did you see that joke about you in the Gazette the other day?
M.P.: “What joke?
Member The one about you making a bad “book” on the races.
M.P.: “Oh, I never read the Gazette, except the advertisements!!”
Then people wonder why Editors take to drink.
Another reader (and a very nice reader she is too) was bewailing the fact that the Pink ‘Un was not available in the ladies’ part of the club. In the midst of our scandalized protests, she said sweetly: “But oh, Mr. A--, why don't you reprint the jokes in your paper? Well Well!
This number includes an assortment of articles to suit all tastes (as the advertisement say). For those who are musically minded there is a description of a musical saw-and flautists will be delighted to know that there is a small treatise on whistles.
The correspondence columns are well filled, but several acrimonious letters have had to be omitted. Those who apparently wish to ventilate their private grievances are advised to purchase a tub and thump on it. The triangular piece of grass near Scott’S Factory would make an ideal site.
There are serious articles, a short story, a questionable joke, some attempts at irony and the usual padding.
Well then, I, readers, why not give us a chance? Don't condemn us unread. It is true that advertisements are of value to Merchant Princes-and sometimes contain unconscious humour. At the same time it is just possible that some little thing in the pages enclosed by the advertisements might take your fancy. Indeed, if one small paragraph engages your attention our labour has not been in vain.
NOTES.
July.
MR. G. Scott, a brother of Mrs. McDonald, has come out as an assistant on Sungei Tengah Estates. Mr. J. S. Findlay has sailed for home having left the Company.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Binatang Chamber of Commerce, with $60 added. Second to receive $30, third $15. Course from Bukit Lima road junction. 2 miles approx. Entries : 73. 1st Singa Melumpat (Shebli). 2nd Bujang Pelandok (Pengarah Ngelambong). 3rd Buying Belalang (Muling). RACE NO. 6. 10.30 a.m. Offices and ’ships’ crews (Government),—paddlers. 8. First to receive a silver cup presented by Haji Sa torn with $12 added. Second to receive $6. no third prize. Course from the Waterworks. 1/2 mile approx. Entries : 12. 1st Barat Daya (Lands & Surveys). 2nd Rejak (P.W.D.). RACE NO. 7. 11 a.m. Tua Kampongs (in the boat),—paddlers, 15. First to receive a silver cup presented by Abang Enjah, with $30 added Second to receive $15, third $10. Course from Pengkalan Haji Anni, 1 1/2 miles approx. Entries : 7. 1st Sri Bulan Perak (T.K. Kirak). 2nd Burak Melayang (T.K. Salleh). 3rd Kilat Manyambar (T.K. Abang Sigu). RACE NO. 8. 11.30 a.m. Long boats,—padd lers unlimited. Open to natives living in the Kanowit river and its tributaries above and includ ing Nanga Machan, and the Batang Rejang, and all its tributaries above Nanga Kanowit. Fust to receive a silver cup presented by Mrs. C. D. Adams, with $100 added. Second to receive $50, third $25. Course from the sawmill, 3 miles apprxo. Entries : 12. 1st Kijang Belaga (Penghulu Paso, Ska’apan). 2nd Bruang Langit. (Penghulu Grinang). 3rd Bujang Entabai (Indu). RACE NO. 9. 1.30 p.m. Long boats—open,— paddlers unlimited. First to receive a silver cup presented by the Distributors of Wills' Embassy Cigarettes, with $100 added. Second to receive $50, third $25. Course from the sawmill, 3 miles approx. Entries : 27. 1st Salawan Nanga Stubah (Penghulu Kana). 2nd Naraya Kilat. (F. L. Crossley, Esq., Abang Openg and Penghulu Giman). 3rd Angin Mela- yang (Renang). RACE NO. 10. 2 p.m. Outboard motors,— Class I. 4/5 h.p., length of boat 5 fathoms and over. First to receive a silver cup presented by Messrs. Kwong Lee Bank, Sibu. with $10 added. Second to receive $5, no third prize. Course from the sawmill, 3 miles approx. Entries : 8. 1st Bujang Kilat (Abang Indeh). 2nd Sri Lela (Abang Enjah). RACE NO. II 2.15 p.m. Outboard motors, Class II, 9/10 h.p. length of boat 6 fathoms and over. First to receive a silver cup presented by Mr. Teo Chong Loh, with $10 added. Second to receive $5, no third prize. Course from the saw- mill. 3 Hides approx. Entries: 9. 1st Tileng (Abang Yan). 2nd Kapit Kongsi (Abang Ahmat). RACE NO. 11B. 2.30 p.m. Outboard motors, Class III. 8/10 h.p., length of the boat 5 fathoms and over. First prize $10. Second to receive $5, no third prize. Course from the sawmill, 8 miles approx. Entries : 4. 1st Serindet Laid (Abang Enjah). 2nd Dayang Helen (Wee Teck Teong). RACE NO. 12. 3 p.m. Temoi only, open,—15 paddlers. First to receive a silver cup presented by Dr. Loh Mung Sung, with $30 added. Second to receive $15. third $10. Course from Bukit Lima road junction, 2 miles approx. Entries: 80. 1st Bujang Belaga (Berendam). 2nd Mas Paun (T.R. Hingkan). 3rd Bujang Gila (Dutoh). RACE NO. 13. 3.30 p.m. Berdayong (one man only. First to receive $4. second $2. Course from the Waterworks, 1/2 mile approx. Entries : 10. 1st Bujang Dua (Duan). 2nd Anjing Laid (Bakei). RACE No. 14. 4 p.m. Long boats—open,— paddlers unlimited. For boats which have been placed in a previous nice only. First to receive a silver cup presented by C. D. Adams, Esq., Resident. Third Division, with $100 added. Second to receive $50, third $25. Course from the saw mill. 3 miles approx. Entries : 14. 1st Singa Melumpat (Shebli). 2nd Naraya Kilat (F. L. Crossley. Esq.. Abang Openg and Penghulu Giman). 3rd Salawan Nanga Stubah (Penghulu Kana). RACE NO. 15. 4.30 p.m. Ships' crews—open, —paddlers 8. First to receive $12, second $6. Course from Pangkalan Haji Anni, 1 1/2 miles approx. Entries : 4. 1st Singa Kala (s.s. Soon Ann). 2nd Swindle (s.s. Katong). RACE NO. 16. 5 p.m. Consolation Race—open, -paddlers 15. First to receive $30, second $15, third $10. Course from Pengkalan Haji Anni, 1 1/2 rules approx 1st Lau Laju (Adis). 2nd Mas Malang. 3rd Bujang Kilat (Renang). RACE NO. 17. 5.30 p.m Consolation—open,— toddlers unlimited. First to receive $100, second $50, third $25. Course from Bukit Lima road unction, 2 miles approx. 1st Tajai Malayang Hitam Manis (Pengarah Lambong). 2nd Lang Malayang (Chat and Guang). 3rd Ular Lidi (Abang Otton). Island Club, Sibu. SWEEPSTAKE ON GRAND NATIONAL STEEPLE-CHASE, 1937 Please note that as the race is held on March 19th and not on March 26th as printed on the tickets he draw will take place on Sunday 14th March. All ticket counterfoils to be returned before noon on Saturday 13th March. For the Island Club: Sibu, R. W. BORMOND, Honorary Secretary Island Club, Sibu. DECEMBER BOWLS AVERAGES. Fourth Division News. DECEMBER. Only one major case came before the Miri Courts during December. Lan Ah Meng was charged under section 411 of the Penal Code with dishonestly receiving stolen property knowing, or having

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Pigs are most often encountered loafing about on river banks up-country, and as the noise of swiftly running water is such that one can approach unheard, they are not usually difficult to shoot. Not unnaturally one aims at the shoulder, but regarding this point as “6 o’clock”, one’s rifle bullet will go trundling over the pig’s back at a range of 80 yards, and to take him in the shoulder it is necessary to aim somewhere down by his ankles. They are not difficult animals to stop with buckshot, being nothing like so hard to bring down as a deer, and if hit at all hard they are fairly easy to secure.
Though natives esteem them highly as food, it must be admitted that they do not as a rule appeal to the European palate. being nothing like toothsome as the kijang or barking deer. One is apt, therefore, to be disappointed by one’s first “wild” pork chop, but should one shoot a pig, one has the satisfaction of knowing that other people appreciate it and that none of it is wasted not even the skin! The Punan is perhaps the greatest devotee of pork: these people follow any migration of pigs which they meet, and, hanging on the flanks kill immense numbers for food, eating themselves into an actual stupor from which they emerge to a further gorge, or hastily to kill another, in fact they almost seem to get drunk on pig, and when in this state of gluttony, they offer altogether a most revolting spectacle. (E.B)
Hari Raya Puasa and Chinese New Year.
Chinese New Year and Hari Raya Puasa were celebrated in Kuching in the customary manner, salutes being fired in honour of both days. On the eve of Hari Raya, the kampongs were beautifully illuminated, and were visited by many Europeans and Chinese.
We take advantage of the unusual proximity of Hari Raya Puasa and Chinese New Year to wish both our Muslim and Chinese friends a simultaneous happy new year. May good fortune and prosperity attend them, and may the slump bogey not cast too black a shallow on the land!
Dangerous Cosmetics.
SERIOUS DISEASES CAUSED BY LEAD POISONING.
Moving that Council approve the Order made by the Governor in Council under the Sale of Food and Drugs Ordinance, prohibiting the sale and importation of cosmetics containing lead or any lead compound, the P.C.M.O., Singapore, (Dr. Hoops) said; During the past two years a number of cases of lead poisoning have occurred in Chinese women in Singapore- mostly young women of fairly good social position. Careful investigations have been made and analyses carried out by the Government Analyst of various medicines, cosmetics and so on that have been used by these ladies and estimates of the lead extracted from them have also been made. The source of this lead poisoning has been finally traced to a type of face powder which is in common use in this Colony.
The position is serious. Amongst several permanent results from the use of this face powder by ladies known to have occurred in Singapore are three cases of total blindness, two cases of advanced paralysis and a number of women are suffering from incurable kidney diseases.
Instances have occurred where infants have been born dead or die shortly after birth, due undoubtedly to lead poisoning from the use of this cosmetic powder.
Similar reports have been received from Penang and there is no doubt that these face powders are largely used throughout the Malay Peninsula.
A physician from Canton recently informed me that similar cases are occurring in that city where, by the way, most of these face powders are manufactured.
Cosmetics containing lead were in common use in Great Britain throughout the reigns of the early Georges and it is on record that so many fatalities occurred therefrom that their use was prohibited.
Samples of various face powder seized in Singapore have been found to contain over 35 per cent of lead carbon-equivalent to 28 per cent, of lead. When these analyses were made I requested Government to make the use of cosmetics containing lead illegal in the Colony and the rule was accordingly made upon January 2, 1931, by publication in the Gazelle of that date. - (Strait Budget.)
Mainly About Nothing.
There has been a good deal of talk just lately about reforming our present Calendar. Many of us who suffered from the close juxtaposition of Chinese New Year and Hari Raya consider that such a reform is long overdue; there can be no excuse for a calendar which produces three Monday mornings in one week.
At about half-past-ten on one of these mornings we took our thoughts off the prevailing aridity by bursting into song, and produced the following dirge: -
Dark brown Monday
Following a fun-day.
How bleak the outlook doth appear
Until we sink our morning beer!
This, on being forwarded to a colleague also in extremis. evoked the following reply:
Pale green Friday
Should be called a die-day
And so it damn’ well is, by Heck!
Before the breakfast horse's neck.
There’s nothing like an early start. Up with the lark and down with the first gin-and-ginger.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Towards the end of the month the preliminary work for the projected census began. It should be explained for the benefit of those who appear to keep this country under close observation from afar, and who are inclined to put their own construction
on every new development here, that it is reliably understood that the decision to take a census has no connection with the current alarming increase in the European birth-rate in Sarawak. Census work in Singapore and the Malayan Union is now in full swing. It is impossible to plan adequately economic and social policies unless figures are available to indicate the numbers and location of the population for whom provision should be made.
No disparagement of the excellent efforts of the new telephone operators is intended, but we cannot forbear from publishing the following story which was told us by way of comment on the leading article which appeared in the last number of the Sarawak Gazette. It seems that in the early days of the new dispensation Mr. Stickle’s telephone rang. "Hullo, Stickle here" responded Mr. Stickle in his well-known musical accents. Then there was a long pause. At last the operator’s voice came through. "Very sorry, sir. Mr. Stickle is engaged."
We have been handed the following, which we have much pleasure in publishing, as it finally and irrefutably establishes the truth of the theory, previously advanced by scientists, that there is human life in "Whitehall" :
"For "Colonel Coots" read "Colonial Govern- ments.” Any confusion which may have resulted from the inadvertent introduction into the despatch, owing to a typing error, of a purely fictitious military figure, is regretted."
Rumour whispers that a recent gambol at a well- known centre of social life in Kuching was stopped in the early hours of the morning by a senior Government official, who invoked the time- honoured authority appertaining to his office on the very reasonable ground that the noise being per- petrated was a nuisance to sleepers in surrounding houses. It is surely our duty to posterity to place on record the picture, drawn by our informant, of startled revellers in this new Sarawak creeping away to their jeeps and murmuring to one another in hushed tones. "My dear, wasn't that ultra vires?"
Land and Custom.
(Continued.)
(The following article is the comment of the Director of Lands and Surveys on the article entitled “Land and Custom" which appeared in the last number of the Sarawak Gazette.—Ed.)
. The article on Land and Custom raises some very important questions in a native agricultural country such as Sarawak where the indigenous population is almost entirely supported by the products of the soil. The main question is : When will we be in a position to know exactly the purpose to which all the occupied land in the Colony is being put and to know that the individual and communal rights of the occupiers are properly recorded and recognised?
In the case of non-natives this is a relatively simple matter beginning as a rule in original application for Crown Land followed by a survey, which is delineated on the cadastral map and then by issue of a lease. When dealing with the lands
occupied by the indigenous people of Borneo the matter is of course fur more complicated as the article pointed out. To begin with let us examine the way in which these lands are protected from embarrassing infiltration by non-natives until such time as the situation can be said to be under full control.
The following are my definitions as I understand them but, for various reasons, there is a measure of confusion in parte of the country regarding category and boundaries of these areas.
Interior Area.—An area which is to all intents and purposes entirely inhabited by natives existing in large racial groups. Owing to the nature of communications and economic factors, it would not be possible at present to inquire into, settle, or recognise in any permanent manner, individual or communal claims to land. It is logical, therefore, in order to avoid confusing the situation, not to issue titles or to permit aliens to take up land in such areas. The Interior Areas are therefore “locked up" for the future. In special cases a title can be issued in an Interior Area. In fact one is being issued in the Lawas District for a mission station. It is not necessary to declare the small piece of land affected a “Mixed Zone."

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Originally these lectures were intended for the top standard boys but the scheme was extended to any person interested.
The supply of electric current was scheduled to start in Bintulu on the 1st June.
FIFTH DIVISION.
The Honourable the Resident. Fifth Division, (Mr. Anderson) comments in his Max report that the ancient local practice of buffalo thieving, which has lain dormant for some years, seems to have been revived by the present heavy demand for buffalo meat. One local Malay was charged with breach of trust of two buffaloes which had possibly been smuggled over the border near Kampong Pandam. He was allowed bail in his own surety to enable him to find the buffaloes but it is strongly suspected that they have long since entered the cooking pot.
The Honourable the Resident adds that it is most urgent that the law regarding export of buffalo, especially females, be rigidly observed for some years until the herds have recovered from enemy depredations during the occupation.
The Honourable the Resident reports that some difficulty was experienced at the Limbang Agricul- tural Station from the homesickness of the Iban and Murut trainees; it is hoped to remedy this before long.
The following is an extract from the monthly report of the Cadet Officer, Limbang, (Mr. Harper) : “Considerable travelling was done during the month by the Hospital Assistant and the Dresser-in-Charge, mainly among the Bisayahs of the Lower Limbang and the Ibans of the Lubai. Over 450 patients were treated aud more than 440 vaccinations performed during travelling.”
The following is an extract from the report of the Cadet Officer, Limbang: "Large numbers of upriver natives have come down to Limbang this month, most of them clamouring for guns. Several parties of Kelabits from the Medit have turned up, and some few UNRRA great coats were handed to them. One small boy received a rather moth- eaten 'lapin-squirrel' fur with great delight. They all state that their health is good and please can they have some medicine.”
The Cadet Officer. Limbang, reports that local prices remain steadily higher than in Brunei and considerably higher than in Kuching. This is largely due to the high handling charges levied in Labuan.
The Death of the late Ex Kapitan China, Dalat, Chua Hoi Tiaw.
Let us publish with regret the death of the late ex-Kapitan China, Chua Hoi Tiaw of Dalat, who died at the age of 72 on the 6th July, 1948, at 3 a.m. in his own residence. His death was caused by a two-day illness which occurred on the night of the 3rd July, 1948. He lost his speech from the moment the sudden high fever attacked him and was throughout in a sleeping condition. He was suspected to be possessed by a devil and the Kev. Father Mak, who happened to be visit- ing Dalat, was sent for on the night of the 4th July to say prayers and to sprinkle Holy Water all over the place to drive the evil spirit away. He could not take any food during his short illness. Chinese and patent medicines in the form of injections did not give the desired effect. Native medicinal charms were applied without good result. On the 6th July, at 3 a.m. he breathed his last by giving up the ghost. All in the house were in deep sorrows and wept hard. The funeral took place on the 8th July, 1948, and was well attended by relatives, friends and school-children. He left behind a widow. 2 sons, 6 daughters, 5 sons-in- law, 24 grand-children and 2 great grand children. He had held the post of Kapitan China, Dalat. for over 26 years and his place was taken over by his second son in 1947.—(Contributed.)
Padungan Incident Inquiry.
(On Saturday, 29th May, 1948, at the end of a game between two football teams at the Song Kheng Hai Recreation Ground, Padungan, a dis- turbance broke out between the rival supporters. Partisanship was strong and garbled versions of the incident were quickly circulating in Kuching.
His Excellency the Governor ordered an inquiry to be held with Mr. J. R. Outram as Commissioner).
Mr. J. R. Outram, the Commissioner appointed by His Excellency the Governor to inquire into the incident whit h occurred at the Padungan Recreat- ion Ground on 30th May 1948, has now submitted his report, which has received the consideration of His Excellency. His Excellency has directed that disciplinary action be taken in the case of two members of the Police, who are alleged to have used unnecessary force in effecting arrests. As the Commissioner’s report deals with incidents which may form the subject of legal proceedings, it is not proposed to publish it. A summary of his conclusions is, however, given below.
Cause of the Disturbance.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

were being devoted wholly to an effort to create a different and more idealistic kind of colonial administration in Sarawak. The form of administration which existed in the Straits Settlements of that day was familiar to the Sarawak natives, and indeed there is reason to suppose that they were much less opposed to its introduction than their British champion, but he remained adamant in his belief that Sarawak should evolve a very simple and inexpensive type of administration, closely connected with traditional native leaders and institutions, and should be developed by an independent and happy peasantry rather than by foreign capital. Without entering into a painful episode in the history of the Brooke family, it may be said that the manner in which the first Rajah re-assumed control of Sarawak after his retirement, shaking himself like an old lion in his retreat in Devonshire, was magnificent, and in this and innumerable other incidents he reveals himself in these letters as one of the finest European figures in the history of Malaysia.—Straits Times.
Rajah Brooke and Baroness Burdett Coutts. Let tore Edited by Owen Rutter. With a Foreword by Her Highness the Ranee Margaret of Sarawak. Hutchison. 18/..
British North Borneo’s Advisory
Council of Native Chiefs.
We note from the British, North Borneo Herald that a meeting of the Native Chiefs’ Advisory Council was held at Sandakan on May 4th, 1935. We print below extracts from the speech made by His Excellency the Governor on opening the Council meeting :—
"1 am very pleased to come here to-day to welcome to Sandakan the chiefs of the State of * North Borneo who are gathered in this room to consult together about many matters connected with their work and the welfare of their people.
"Twenty years ago a Native Chiefs' Advisory Council was set up, composed of Grade I Chiefs who have the title of ‘Orang Kaya-Kaya.' But 1 can find no record of this Council ever having met. It is my intention to enlarge this Council so that each District may be represented by one chief. I also hope to arrange for the Council to meet once a year to advise me about the welfare of the natives and to consult together about matters of common interest.
"You have come to Sandakan at a time of great rejoicing and festivity. All rares here are celebrating the twenty-fifth anniversary of the day on which King George V came to the throne of his fathers; and in all parts of the world this happy event is being celebrated in a similar manner. Here in North Borneo we live under His Majesty’s protection; and the peoples of this country should ever be thankful that under his protection they have lived in safety unmolested by other races from distant countries. You and your people should always be mindful of this, but particularly so when you see—as you see to-day in Sandakan harbour—one of His Majesty’s warships, which are for ever patrolling the seas to protect yourselves and millions of others in many countries all over the world from aggression. As your Governor, I have submitted to His Majesty on your behalf an Address giving suitable expression to these feelings of gratitude.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1, 1935.
89
"The prosperty of the natives of this country 1 is the main object for which this Government is working. This can only be fully achieved when , every able-bodied male native is either producing a crop like rice, rubber, pepper, coffee which he can sell, or working for others on their rubber estates or on their limber concessions, or in some capacity. Then, with the proceeds of bis sales or of his wages, as the case may be, he and his family will he able to live happier and more comfortable lives, having the wherewithal to purchase imported goods and other luxuries. In this way only can your people attain happiness and prosperity ; and it is your primary duty as chiefs to do all you can to sec that the children grow up strong and healthy, and that the adult males work either for themselves or as wage- earners for others.
"I will now leave you to discuss what I have said and to consider the other matters that await your consideration; and I wish you even’ success in your deliberations."
The Administration of Justice in
East Africa.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

piculs
4
585
Patti ...
...
piculs
1,857,%
18.588
Plantation Rubber
...
piculs
308 ft
17.819
Prawn refuse
...
piculs
618)
2,950
Pepper (white)
...
piculs
1,960*
93.172
Do. (black)
...
piculs
207
5,11
Kat tans No. 1. scga. etc.
...
piculs
349ft
4,4o5
Do. No. 2, teinoi. etc.
...
piculs
211,'..
1,086
Rice ...
...
piculs
1,877 J
27.588
bago THU
...
t'pins
71,975
102.520
bnndrio
...
87.247
Treasure
...
19.437
Vegetable seeds ...
...
piculs
6
70
TOTAL VALVE
$ 398,213
Brought forward
...
...
8,984,762
Total Value to Date
...
S 1.882.975
1919
...
$4,746,158
English.
Chinese.
Mo'- cln.ii.
MOON'S PHASES, ETC,
High water at
IU
o
r
c
1 .
3
z
! z
3rd Last quarter ) loth New moon huh First quarter
Kuching.
A. M. IP. M.
i.
o s
-
2ikh Full inooiiO
h.
III.
II.
in.
M
1
9
21
u
IB
" .411 .Sb' Itou. MrJn . lnwlD appidtit*
y
58
8
26
Tn
2
22
19
d	r-tl 1lriitin.il AtD'iii hi BWIMFO, IM 1.
,4W Mud*' Mi*.
8
37
9
17
W
3
23 X
20
9
32 10
19
Th
i
24
21
10
42 11
81
F
5
25
22
-
(
3
S
6
26
23
0
54
1
24
***?
'l
27
24
23rd St NIlAY AFTKK TM1K1TV.
2
8
2
32
M
8
28
9
8
28
Tn
9
29
26
Deepavati (Hindu Fntirah
3
59
1
13
W
10 lo
1
27
1aitiftl telljfer of Sun,
4
40
I
53
Th F
1!
12
2
3
28
29
Germa JI* idgn Arnibtlet!, I1MK ? Sr. Ifartfw.
5
5
20
5
6
30*
S
13
1
J
6
30
6
41
IS
11
5*
pl
S
24tl rxi *v Arran nuxmr.
7
2
II
M
15
6
s
3
?
32
4
57
Tn
16
7
8
4
8
33
W
17
Rabi
8
39
9
14
Th
IB
9
6
9
24 10
1
F
19
10
7
10
14 10
56
S
20
11
8
11
21
S
21
12
9
2Ul Htsnsv AITSK THIS A.
0
10
0
37
M
22
13
10
1
23
I
48
Tn
23
1 1
11
2
45
W
21
15
12
3
IS
3
35
Th
25
26
IC,
13
4
7
4
22
F
17
14
4
48
4
S
27
18
15
Mir Jan. llnmkr appointed Governor
5
31
49
28
19
IG
of	*nd lrjH-intc Hiici., LW7.
Ut HITXDAY IN ADVENT.
6
16
6
37
M
29
20
17
6
56
7'
29
Tn
30
21
18
Sf.4n4wKL
4
4
8
19'
DATE.
Irmin.
I.imhttug.
Inches.
inches.
1
- i
20
2
17
8
4
5
*
6
8
?25
9
24
?45
10
1-20
2tK!
11
2'80
lt S
12
56
04
13
112
14
62
1*84
15
?29
16
1-95
1 65
17
14
18
10
? ?
19
70
20
.
21
1 27
27
-
w
23
85
24
25
26
27
1-28
2H
1-76
29
12
1 80
t
Total
13-18
13 28
EXPORTS.
Articles.
Quantit.v.
Value.
Brass-ware Ironware Jars ...	...	...
Oil kerosine Opium Bice ...	...	...
Sundries Treasure
TOTAL VALLE
Brought forward
Total Value to Date
1919
No.	417
cases	2.268i
piculs	2.0r*0j
S 4.518
S.344 1.828 15.960 58.553 52,312
180.341 79,583
S 1196.429 2,921.728
t8.81B.l07
13.655.121
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1,1920.	246
M
Arrivals.
DATE.
NAME OF VKHSKI.
NAME OF CAPTAIN
WHIRR
FROM.
CHINESE.
NATIVES OF INDU.
Vale. Female
OTHER ASIATICS. Male. female.
TOT A L.
115
10
' 1
5
74
23
1920 Sept.
it ii
19
2
13
17
24
24
29
8. S. Kuchina
P. S. Adch '
8. 8. Kuching
8. 8. Gladys
P. 8. Adch
S. 8. Kuching
8. S. Gladys
A. Lawrie Aug. Rais A. Lawrie A. Anis Awg. Rais A. Lawrie
A. Anis
Singapore Brooketon Singapore do
Brooketon
Singapore do
94 4
II 1
a;
12
ii
...
18
1
3
2
...
o 01 : eo cs gj
2 1
3
i
*
Brought forward
186
1,950
43
334
76
12
58
476
7
75
300
2.923
Total to Date
I
min
2,136
877
82
12
534
82
3,223
1 .MM
243
-2
5
480
128
2.832
Departures.
DAI
K.
NAME OF VESSEL.
NAME OF C
\V HITHER A PTAIN. HOUND.
CHINESE.
NATIVES OF INDIA. Male Femctlt,
OTHER ASIATICS.
TOT A L.
Male.
1920.
Sept.
1
Bdg. Sampan Tints
Haji Kadir
P.Sentssan
1
...
... ...
2
8
It
1
Boat Pa Bavar
Pontianak
...
... ...
3 ..
8
fl
5
S. S. Kuching
A. Lawrie
Singapore
19
2
6 ...
7	4
68
t
8
S. S. Gladys
A. Anis
do
3
... ...
3
It
13
P, S. Ad ch
A wane Hais	Brook ton
9
...
...
2
11
15
Kakap
Joon Siew
Sambas
1
1
... 1 ...
2
st
17
S. S. Kuching	...
A. Lawrie
Singapore
84
14
11...
16 15
130
ft
21
S. S. Gladys
A. Anis
do
2
...
... '
1 ...
3
29
S. S. Kitching
A. Lawrie
do
86
23
3	3
3	3
121
228
40
10	3
32 22
335
Brought forward
1,743
338
112 13
409 124
2.739
Total to date
1.971
378
122 16
441 146
3,074
* -	-w
-
1919
1,739
342
66 14
438 153
2,752
K. H. GILLAN, Actg. Registrar of Trade.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO.,
22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS.
Beer, Wine, Spirit & General Store Dealers.
:( ):	SOLE AGENTS FOR:
FRASER & NEAVE'S AERATED WATERS
(The Best throughout the East.)
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic
Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at
$1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 catties of dry rubber.
ACETIC ACID.
:( ):
Fresh supplies of Stores are received
regularly.
PRICES MODERATE.
Free delivery to customers in Kuching.
Free packing & shipping for Outstation
Orders.
u. c. ARRIVALS,
PER S. S. Alice Lorraine: 20th. OctoberFrom Sadong
Messrs. Kortright and Haldane
From Simanggang Mr. Hardie.
PER S. S. Rajah of Sarawak:23rd. OctoberFrom SingaporeMessrs. E. Parnell, O. F. Picketts, J. R. Barnes,
Matsushita and Khoo Theng
Huang, Mr. and Mrs. Mead, Mr. and Mrs. Ng Bak Cboon, Mr.
and Mrs. Bong Joon Fah, Miss
M. Cooke, Miss D. Ricketts. Mrs. Miru and Abang Haji
Abdillah.
DEPARTURES.
PER S. S. Rajah of Sarawak:- 27th. October For Singapore Messrs. S. V. B. Down and Khoo Theng Guan, Mrs. J. S.
Fenwick. Mrs. Gray and Mrs. Chow Theng Hong.
NOTJCE.
Gazette Subscriptions and Printing Office bills.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

The Kuching party left Miri on Friday 8th, calling at Sibu on Saturday 9th. The Resident, Mr. P. M. Adams, arranged for a Sibu XI to turn out and an exhibition game was played.
Sibu were unfortunately short of their crack centre forward Rayallie, who was ill and unable to turn out.
A very excellent game was witnessed, Kuching played fast and clever football, the forwards on this occasion excelling themselves. Jack was absent through injury, his place being taken by Lim Ewe Soon.
The final score was 8 to 1 in Kuching’s favour, but this by no means represented the run of the play, as Sibu put up a stout and plucky show and at times fully tested the Kuching defence, which played a sterling game.
Mr. Parker was a capable referee. A very enjoyable evening followed the teams being entertained by the Sibu Community. Kuching was reached on Sunday 10th. A thoroughly enjoyable trip in spite of the sea voyage.
On Tuesday evening the “Miri” XI played the “Rest” Kuching on the K.F.C. ground and a very excellent game was witnessed, with a glut of goals. The “Miri” XI took some time to settle down and the Rest were out to show them what they could do, and they certainly put up a very good show.
The result was “Miri” XI 6- “Rest” of Kuching 3. Some very clever forward play on both sides was witnessed. -Contributed.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
CAERAU,
ROSS,
HEREFORDSHIRE,
14th August, 1933.
DEAR SIR,
In your issue for the 1st July a contributor writing on the Bintulu Regatta, 1933. says, that a sailing race held as the last item of the programme was believed to be an innovation for any Sarawak Regatta. At the Sibu Regatta in 1907 a sailing race from the Fort Pangkallan to the opposite side and back was an item of the Regatta. About 15 boats entered, the majority capsized in a sudden squall. The squall was followed by a dead calm, so that the winner with heavy wet sails could not reach the winning post until after dark.
Yours faithfully,
A. J. CUTFIELD.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

us coining even at that distance, but then remem-
bered the floods were on. and the river beyond us
and near them would kick up such a row, that they
would only hear us at 200 or 300 yards off. Sam-
pelayo the clerk, volunteered to go with the Califor-
nian, and suggested he should give ns a signal 3-
kilometres before the Gully, to tell us they had
passed so far along any way, and then join us.
It all seemed good to me. and it came off. They
must have got away at six or so. We got word of
that from a man I posted near the mad under the
bank of the reservoir So we gave 'em until about
a quarter to seven to get right along. We passed
Sampelayo's signal that the. party had gone by, and
he joined soon after.
Arrived at about 1 mile from the Gully and hidden
by a sharp bend, we saw nobody about but made-
sure by looking over the banks each side. Then
one of us went ahead on foot as carefully hidden as
possible by all rocks and ditches. to see whether the
Californian had raised his signal They both of 'em
came back, and the Californian said he watched them
dismount, and tether tin- horses up to the trees
beyond the Gully, and then lake up position behind
the boulder* in the path. We made a detour on
: foot, and by all the great fortune of luck, we
found a place for live of us right above them, and
looking down right on them. The rest you know.”
" So it was a game of chance” said I.
" Not for us or for you. If they hadn't gone,
you'd have been safe, nod if they did go, we should
have certainly been there with you. The chance
was theirs. We shall have.to report this, so I’ll write
the Magistrate now," and he sat down to do so.
"One thing Rill. How did you know who he
was and all about him?" I asked.
He looked at me steadily.
" Did you notice anything queer about bis head.
No? Well, he can’t turn it to the right without
shifting his body and he has a deep scar on the neck.
I gave him that little lol. But I’ve changed a lot—
gone gray—since then, when I was only 21. He
did’nt know me again any way, and he was, to me,
unmistakable. My word, but everyone will be glad
to bear of him—dead.”—(Contributed.)
A Timely Warning.
We prim below an original article sent io us by
one of our readers. As a rule we are chary of pub-
lishing anything connected with the subject of mar-
riage. We are content to leave that to the “Daily
Mirror” Correspondents; but in this case we could
not refrain from giving our readers the benefit of
such sage advice, coupled with delicacy of feeling
and clearness of style.
Revocation.
I imagine that it is advisable to have this Love-
letter mentioned, so as to hint, and draw the atten-
tions of some young educated Sarawak Chinese
bachelors, and girls not to plunge erroneously into
“Love.” a word that often gives union, binds one to
all, and the foundation of marriage and of home.
It is also necessary to state further words, which
1 may count ns good advices because, I had ex-
perienced a romance at the period 1 was entering
manhood.
In addition to the above statement, I would say
and point in this manner. To fall in true love be-
fore marriage is of course a very good and wise
method to act upon for the future happiness of both
sexes, if he or she hunts not n coquette, or a bean.
Fallen in love to a coquettish girl is similar to, “A
rolling stone gathers no moss,” and to a beau, she
is under the same roof
To accomplish all the necessities governing this
matte . I should like to explain for the future good-
ness and remembrance, that both sexes must act
rightly in this affair during their courtship.
The principal motives which are the most essen- ’
tial in connection with the above subject, are called
Investigations: First, second, and third is to find out fourth is the character and
temper, and finally is to ask for the consents of both
parents.
Should one takes the pain to do us above written,
disgrace, dispute, and disgust will be saved, and
also to escape from destiny.— (Contributed.)
The blank is the writer’s.— [Ed. S. G.]
Notes from Miri.
MiRI, SARAWAK, June 12.
The annual meeting of the Gymkhana Club, Miri, was held on May 21, in the Company's Rest House, when three vacancies on the management committee were duly filled. Since the last annual meeting, the dub has proved profitable in every sense of the word.
In the near future it is proposed to hold bridge and tennis tournaments, with sealed handicaps in the case of bridge ; indeed, as I write, the list for in tending competitors is in circulation. New Rules have been drawn up for golf, and the present course is being re-arranged. The library, too, is to be overhauled and increased. We already have a most; catholic selection of books, but there is a certain de ficiency of the works of present-day writers.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

during the operation, indeed be himself was an interested spectator of the proceedings. By the end of the month the wound had completely healed. This maias, together with one other which was confiscated in Engkilili from a Dutch-side Dayak, has heen admitted to the Maias Rest House. This house is now full and no further applicants will be considered, for apart from the lack of space and the complaints of the Agricultural Department about damage to the pineapple garden, no vote exists to defray the cost of board and lodging for this Rest House which is, in many respects, a charitable institution."
The District Officer, Saribas, (Mr. Waine) reports that applications from ten Dayaks from the district have been received to attend the Rural Training Centre at Kanowit. He suggests that the distance of Kanowit from Saribas has discouraged a number of would-be applicants.
The advantages of mechanisation seem to have appealed to the Dayaks at Penyalaneh kiri. The Tuai Rumah there has requested the loan of the Government bulldozer, which was used at Debak, in order to level the site of a new house.
In the course of a tour of Ulu Layar, the District Officer was horrified to find a man, aged about seventy years and who is a lunatic, kept in a cage on the verandah of the house at Raba. The cage was about seven feet long, three feet wide and four feet high. Arrangements were made for the unfortunate man to be sent to Kuching.
The District Officer, Kalaka. (Mr. Wilson) reports that the three Dayak houses planting padi at Lubok Nibang, Kerian returned home without harvesting at all. the entire crop being destroyed by rats. Kabong also suffered from rat infestation. Elsewhere in the Second Division reports of the padi harvest, almost without exception, were good.
The following is an extract from the monthly report of the District Officer, Kalaka: “The Dayak sago factory at Enkudu now employs a hundred persons and a ‘boom town’ of four hundred and fifty persons has sprung up near the factory. Every house in the Sebetan except one is reported to have a financial interest in the venture which, because the shareholders possess extensive gardens, is reasonably well assured of sago logs to work for the next two years.”
THIRD DIVISION.
The District Officer, Sibu, (Mr. Fisher) attributes a sharp decline in Court work during February to the fact that people were too busy to afford the time for litigation and also because of the public of Sibu seldom venture out of doors on rainy days. Sibu had its fair share of wet weather during February, the rainfall being 19.71 inches.
The District Officer, Sibu, reports that the Native Treasury continues to function satisfactorily and the Penghulus are definitely enthusiastic about it.
The District Officer, Lower Rejang, (Mr. Snelus) reports that there was no serious crime throughout the district and, concerning petty theft, adds. "Those involved in thefts were almost all Dayaks.
It has been a noticeable feature of post-war Sarikei that Dayaks have been responsible for many more petty crimes of this nature than the Chinese, whereas pre-war it was the Iban who was the more law-abiding. ”
The Dresser-in-Charge at Sarikei attributes a drop in the number of outpatients to the rest and good fare associated with Chinese New Year. The District Officer, however, suggests that the padi harvest probably kept many would-be patients away.
The following is an extract from the report of the District Officer, Lower Rejang : “Penghulu Giman’s anembiak held a combined tuba fishing in the Sarikei river on the 11th. Had the weather held it should have been a success, but since the landas was still with us the fates, not unnaturally, decided otherwise and heavy rain the night before swelled the river and stirred up mud so that the fish availed themselves of the opportunity not to play. The Penghulu's efforts to persuade his followers to postpone the fun till a more propitious occasion fell on stony ground : a complete and disappointing flop resulted.”
Tidal floods did considerable damage to the bunds on the Sungei Kelili demonstration plot during February. The Agricultural Assistant reports that the Mugu padi reserve is producing disappoint- ing results, the natives getting a particularly poor return owing to their laziness in weeding.
The following is an extract from the report of the District Officer, Lower Rejang : "On the 6th the inaugural meeting of local Chinese Headmen was held at Binatang. Business was this time mainly confined to explanatory remarks and details of organisation; but it was agreed that these meet- ings should be held monthly in future and it is hoped that they will develop on the lines of an Advisory Board for Chinese Affairs. Similar meet- ings are to be started at Sarikei next month.”

[NEXT EXCERPT]

“Is it senseless to ascribe to the durian the fluctuations of, and therefore an influence on, human fecundity? The trend of ideas is evolved on some such lines as; the birth rate varies according to the seasons; climatic conditions in themselves are not sufficient to cause the variations; the other main factor in this country that shows distinct seasonal variations is fruit; the most renowned local fruit likely to be associated with generative powers is the durian. Up to this point the argument is not strictly of scientific value as the word “probably” is implied practically in every sentence, but it is “extremely probably” correct. In order to strengthen its probability one may continue as follows: the durian and the birth-rate fluctuations correspond in “wave length” and also in “intensity”; the more “Malay” a district is, the greater is the similarity of the fluctuations; Malays are the biggest consumers of the durian, and they possess the highest birth rate, therefore their appreciable effect as a factor in the calculation enhances the degree of probability in favour of the contention at issue. The practical value of these observations is very questionable, probably nil, unless an incentive to further scientific investigation of the “magic powers” often attributed to the durian may be regarded as reasonably possible. If no practical value can be claimed perhaps a certain amount of interest in the peculiarity of the births curve may prove justified.” -Straits Times.
[The durian was the subject of a ballad published some years ago. the last verse being as follows: -
“So man whose hair is sparse and gray
Should travel East without delay,
In ships, canoes, or boats-
To eat the fruit that fires the mild-
The fruit that helps the growing child-
The fruit that makes tame women wild,
And old men skip like goats!” -Ed.]
“Flung on the World.”
AND THEN HAD TO TIP THE STEWARD.
A contributor to the “Daily Sketch” tells a pathetic story of the flight from the “axe” in Kenya. Says he:
The Colonial Service has been undergoing some pretty drastic cuts under the economy axe.
I lunched with one of the “axed,” a young man who had only the previous day arrived back from East Africa.
Naturally he was a trifle unset, for be bad given seven valuable years to his work, and had married in the meantime on what he considered a safe salary.
Now he has been suddenly flung on the world, having sold all his effects abroad in a poor market after buying originally at a good price, with little experience beyond a knowledge of East Africa.
He told me that at least 50 other men in the Colonial Service, who travelled back aboard the same boat, had also been “axed.”
During the voyage he made friends with the ship’s steward, who confided to him the amount of income tax he was due to pay.
My friend discovered that the steward received four times as much as he did as a civil servant.
After that it was embarrassing, not to say ironical, to have to give him a up on leaving the vessel. -East African Standard.
“?”
We come from England’s pleasant lands To live like pioneers.
With promises of air-mail
We’ve stilled our mothers’ fears.
We’ve got tubes and tubes of serum To counter snakes which bite. And we’ve quantities of pemmican To ward off cold at night.
We mean to lead the simple life And so we do not wash;
We see no reason why one should Employ a shaving brush,
And we have left our manners
At home across the seas-
We think such things unnecessary Among the jungle trees.
Our feet are very, very big,
Our foreheads are immense, If you can’t recognize our worth You must be very dense.
Our work is simply-vital-
Per-cent-one-hundred stuff.
We do not stop to rest or play, We cannot work enough.
Our brains are fairly chock-a-block
With biologic lore,
You cannot tell us anything We did not know before,
We never, never take advice
Whatever has occurred,
Since as we know we’re always right Your views are just absurd. -Contributed.
Intimation has been received that unless unforeseen circumstances interfere a running commentary on the Final Shoot at Bisley on 22nd July for His Majesty the King’s Prize will be broadcast by the Empire Broadcasting Station to the Indian Zone at 10.0 p.m. Sarawak Standard time, on that date.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 59 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 89 MONDAY, NOV. 2ND, 1874. Price 5 cents.
A VISIT TO THE LINES.
(From an occasional Correspondent.)

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Sarawak,unlike most Eastern places,is es- sentially a man's country,and I am not sure that when this quaint convention is broken,a little in- describable something special to it will not fall away from it and spoil ii.I myself am inclined towards the Die-Hards,in so much that 1 am fond of old-fashioned rules and regulations,and I feel so certain that once we arc let loose we shall exude everywhere.Like honey we may sweeten the lives of men,but like honey we clog and suffocate their taste for us In K.L.it seems to be so different: 1 have only been here a little while but 1 realize that woman is predominant.Of course the town is twice the size,and there are bunches of beautiful girls,and garlands of delightful women.If there are any Die-Hards,they conceal themselves so admirably that they are' unrecognizable as any- thing but lovers of the ladies.To 'Have a Heart"
He would at this juncture study your face and observing it to be meditative,us is only natural after this bit of information,smile knowingly.He is con- fident he has hit upon the truth.Yea,he has his reward; but on a little reflection you will recognize that this is hardly any remarkable feat in fortune- telling.
MAKING HIS MARK.
Every man in his vanity thinks that there is some- one who is just possibly jealous of him and naturally wishes him to the deuce.This is not,of course, uppermost in his mind; but it is nevertheless a dor- mant fact .Our amiable friend is a sufficiently keen student of human nature to realize that he need only voice a warning to confirm your dormant suspicions about that impossible fellow what's-his-name.But stay.He has not finished.
"Yon very good man,not care,nevare wishing anyone harm.You getting no goo-ood friendship, plenty good getting friends from you."
He tickles your vanity and gains his ground.He would now deferentially lay hold of your hands and gaze calmly at you.
"Now for money,you leetle deefil'cty," the man says gravely."But I tell you when you getting money,how much,where from,not long middle 1927."
A SAFE THRUST.
This tribe of Fortune-tellers are remarkable hyp- notists and possessing but a rudimentary sense of morality have no compunction whatever in imposing
A.0.F.B.
By the kindness of Blower H.B.Crocker,there was meeting of Froth Blowers at the Residency at 8 p.m.on Monday the 25th April for the purpose of forming a "Vat," with the support of "Lubrication in Moderation."
It having been ascertained early that there,were no communists,murderers,welshers,conscientious objectors or other vermin present,ejectment orders were unnecessary,and the Acting Deputy Unpaid Sub-Assistant Lance-Gargler's piffle-snonker remained sheathed and unblooded.
Ye Ancient Orders and Rules for the establishment of new Vats were then promulgated by Blaster Theo.E.Walsh,in accordance with the rites and usages of such assemblies,and the 300 odd Blowers present who could show no cause as to why they should not be fined,were duly fined,the remainder signing chits! As a result,the sum of $131 was available for remittance to Headquarters in London.
upon the credulous many.It may be quite correct that your finances are not all that they should be.This truth,however,is no testimony to his abilities
in fortune-telling.No man's finances are too sound these days.It is a universal fact that most people are perennially hard-up.Remember that the man is more or less of an expert in summing up human beings and is able to read character at a complete glance,and it will be a surprise to you no more that he has stated certain truths which may be universally applied.
He would have fixed upon you now the look of the brighteyed mariner who held the wedding guest.You are under his sway.He sees to it that you do not grow sceptical.He produces a bit of paper,writes something and folding it,asks you to hold it tightly in the palm of your right hand.
"I am Yogi-I can tell you everything.You thinking some flower name	think one flower
name-I tell you that name."
112	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE.MAY 2,1927.
is the slogan of K.L.,and as far as I can see they live up to it each one of them: and what Sarawak wants is a ship load of girls then would the Die- Hards waver,and the crashing of their mighty fall would spread throughout the country,leaving per- haps one four at Bridge to say to one another "I am glad it was not like this in our day Fifteen years ago Sarawak was 'some' country" before the femi- nine species became supreme.'' [Straits Produce .]
The Itinerant Fortune-teller

[NEXT EXCERPT]

The number of buffaloes exported to Kuching were 48 head.
LAWAS.
February, 1930.
Extracts from the Lawas Report for February, 1930, by Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe:—
On the 24th, the Birthday of Her Highness the Ranee was observed as a Government Holiday.
Surveys.—The Survey Department this month have measured 2,190 chains of garden boundary at an average cost of 15 cents per chain.
Agriculture.—The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Ltd., exported 24,726 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
LAWAS.
LIMBANG.
March, 1030.
Extracts from Fifth Division Report for March, 1930, by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident: —
Court. —There were a number of Magistrate’s Court cases, principally for the recovery of debt. In the Resident’s Court there were three convictions for buffalo stealing.
General.—Mr. R. D. St. J. Horton, Collector of Customs, came from Miri and inspected the Customs work of the Division, visiting Lawas, Merapok, Trusan and Sundar.
Mr. T. Corson, Deputy Conservator of Forests, also visited the Division on a round of inspection.
Messrs. Combe, A.A.D.O., Lawas, and Harnack, Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Lawas returned from Kuching, where they had been sitting for their examinations, and proceeded direct to Lawas.
The steamer Kwong Yick has been taken off the weekly Labuan-Brunei-Limbang run and has been replaced by a vessel the Eng Guan the property of the Straits Steamship Company, for whom Messrs. Harrisons and Crossfield, Labuan, are Agents.
P.W.D.-The Land Office, having acquired the Recreation Club for their offices, work was commenced in building a new Club House on a site on the river bank. The concrete pillars have been cast by prison labour under the guidance of Carpenter Kow
Nui, and the timber for the building will be supplied by the Vamco Sawmill early next month.
A contract was let for raising the ground above swamp level below and around the Customs Officers’ quarters. This undertaking was very badly required as the houses must be very unhealthy under the present conditions.
The new Brunei road is now through to Kampong Pandan which is the limit of this year's estimate, and work is now in hand on the bridges and culverts.
A very long spell of dry weather, which started in January and is still being experienced, has greatly facilitated the making of this road, which runs through a swamp practically the entire length.
The rainfall for the month amounted to 5.90 inches only.
Medical.—Dr. Veerasingham paid his usual monthly visit of inspection and reported that everything was satisfactory, and very little ordinary sickness prevalent. There were 5 patients admitted into hospital and 87 out-patients treated. Twenty-five injections were given for yaws, etc.
Buffaloes exported to Kuching. 42 head.
LAWAS.
March l930.
Court.—On March, 10th the Resident came over from Limbang.
There were no cases of any importance during the month. On the 23rd I paid a visit to Trusan. On the 26th I left for Sundar.
Prison.—The prison gang, averaging 10, were mainly employed on the upkeep of grounds.
General.—I arrived back from Kuching on the 10th with the Resident, Mr. F. H. Kortright. The Resident returned to Limbang in the s.s. Margaret on the 12th, Mr. R. G. D. St. J. Horton, Collector of Customs, paid a visit to the district at
the beginning of the month, visiting Trusan, Sundar, Awat Awat, Punang and Merapok. He left for Limbang on the 7th. Mr. and Mrs. Clifford, of the Lawas Rubber Estate, left on leave for England on the 10th, where they expect to be away for five months. Mr. Porter acts as manager during the absence of Mr. Clifford. Mr. Strike, of Lumadan, and Mr. Claridge, Acting District Officer of Sipitang, paid a visit to Lawas on the 8th; also Father William. P.W.D.—This month a contract for the Trusan Road has been let out to one, Entong, Javanese, at $450 per mile; the work has already started and, if the weather continues favourable, the first two miles should shortly be completed. The road is being opened to the extent of 16 feet.
Wong Kiaw, Contractor, is making a boat-shed for the Saripah and should be ready by the end of April. The shed is being made across river in order to avoid the heavy timber which comes down during a “fresh"; also the bottom of the river is of firmer soil.
At the end of the month I paid a visit to Trusan and Sundar.
On March 2nd Hari Raya was observed as a holiday.
Surveys.—The Survey Department this month have measured 1,762 chains of garden boundary at an average cost of 23 cents per chain.
Agriculture.—The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Ltd., exported 24,080 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
Rainfall.—The following rainfall was recorded.
ECHOES FROM THE WORLD OUTSIDE.
Channel Tunnel Still an Enigma.
“The project of a Channel tunnel has been before the British Islanders for a good many generations now, but it has never yet succeeded in becoming a popular enthusiasm," says The Times.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

The local management changed hands in Mr. Sage returning to Europe and Mr. Naysmith I put on in his place, after receiving Your Highness sanction.
The mechanical engineer Mr. College resigned on 30th May, Mr. Lange taking his place, being sent by Your Highness from Kuching. J. O. Maddocks, Assistant Manager, arrived on 11th September. Mr. Naysmith is doing well and I hope his health, which is not good, will improve.
There are only two Eurpeans at Sadong and the manager says there is work for three.
In December 18 new coolie houses were ordered to be erected and several others on low ground were 'destroyed; the old lines being full of beri-beri.
I understand that periodical inspection by a medical officer has been arranged for also.
The stores and store books are kept now with a greater degree of system.
I have written Kuching asking for the Sadong store accounts to be sent me every qua ter, this will 'enable me to go through items with the local management on my inspection visits.
Nothing has been written off the coal stocks at the wharf to compensate for the loss by washing and iBcreening etc. since 1903. I think 5,000 should be written off. When the sheds were empty about that ?quantity was shewn as balance at wharf".
A coke oven has been erected during 1906 but is unsuitable for coke making with Sadong coal. Its capacity is about five tons.
The new wharf was commenced almost immediately after being sanctioned by Your Highness. Ah Kam was given the contract and Mr. Owen superintending. It is a strong structure well braced and is not in the vortex7 of the river and therefore the heavy drift timber will pass clear of it for the most part.
T7u li*$ri*oiiu*l 'Wovlci
Your Highness will have a fair idea of the amount of work done during 1906 by the pink colouring m plan, unfortunately the surveys were not marked on at the end of 1905, but previously in June 1905, ana from that date I have tinted pink.
The new work is more systematic and not unlike No. 6 Mine workings which were well laid out. The stall roads are kept at more regular distances and cut off by cross-headings when they attain a length of 200 feet, and the coal is afterwards trammed out of the stalls into the cross-headings and on to the Main Haulage Road and to the rope.
The working faces have better, thicker and cleaner coal than formerly. In No. 4 Mine average sections of working face being:
144
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 5, 1907.
In the extreme advanced work the Main Haulage Road the coal is thicker ns per Sketch
SiWWWSO' I /I
3- Holeing Dirt
This shews 4. 8" of good coal. All sectional sketches are 2 feet to an inch scale. This is an excellent face of coal, the coal thickness out towards No. 5 Mine taking the place of the clod (a mixture of fireclay and shale). Again the few faces working in No. 5 Mine (K. on plan) are al) well over 4. 6" clean, good coal.
Sadong is a very easy mine to work and with good management must nay if we had selling agents working conscientiously in our interests: it is a pity to see excellent coalgoing an bunkers at 5.50, knowing $8 to be considered a fair price by buyers of inferior coal to Sadong.
The ventilative currents coursing through the main workings are fair, my anemometer giving 7,980' cub. feet as entering No. 4 Mine and upcasting through No. 5 shaft. This district should have about 11,000 or 12,000 cub. feet per minute but we have not been able to increase to this yet and the ventilation was greatly improved by Sagefrom about 5,000 to the present quantity.
Nos. 8 and t) Mines advancing to the deep I found also m good working order. The main deep or most advanced winning has been driven on slowly, about 90 feet in 18 months, as shewn in pink, and in No. 9 main deep" 220 feet has been driven during the same time, but was idle from December last to my February 1907 visit waiting for a pump. I have arranged with the manager to get these places driven withgreater rapidity. On the West side of the main deep in No. 8 only two stalls are working at present and on the east side three. As the main winning" is hurried on more room is available for working places.
A new aircourse has also been driven through quite recently taking the ventilative currents nearer and more directly to the working points in both Nos. 8 and 9 (See New aircourse on plan).
In the coal faces on the West side of No. 8 the section at the faces shews as sketch below:
Roof; bastard cliff and fireclay.
Section marked J
on plan
2 ft. one inch.
Floor: impure fireclay and spar.
and on the East side the coal is a few inches less but seems to be getting thicker.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 5, 1907.
14;
Going through the road marked on working plan as New Aircourse I find the coal is better and tlncker except in the Main deep. I was unable to examine this fore-winning owing to water but Mr. Maddocks informed me the coal is 2 feet only. The best coal in No. 9 Mine being on the East :

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Mr. Noakes, Assistant Surveyor has been Surveying at Rejang throughout the month.
MATU AND DARO.
September, 1931.
The Officer-in Charge, Mr. F. L. G. Crossley, reports: -
Court. -Work was very light. An inquiry into allegations of fraud in connection with Government receipts against Haji Kassim, T.R. Sirik, was not concluded at the end of the month.
Public Works. -Prisoners were engaged on the up-keep of the roads and grounds, and on the levelling of the padang at Daro.
Travelling. -On the 1st I visited Paloh, staying one night. On the 21st I paid my usual visit to Daro. On the 26th I proceeded to Sibu for H.H. the Rajah’s birthday celebrations. I was still in Sibu at the end of the month, being retained for special duty in the ulu Pasai.
General. -Haji Yaman, Native Officer returned to Matu from duty in Sibu on the 18th, relieving Haji Gapor. The latter’s investigation into Native Court affairs had discovered everything to be in Order.
There has been some trouble in connection with the Matu pawn-farm, allegations of substituting other property for the pledge having beenn made against the farmer. The matter was settled out of Court, but the farmer was warned that in future he must write a full description of the pledge on the pawn ticket. It was also ordered that all transfer of pawn-tickets must be registered at the pawn-farm.
October, 1931.
General. -I returned to the Station on the 19th after doing special duty in the ulu Pasai, in connection with the affairs of Penghulu Sureng, as reported to the District Officer, Sibu. Court Writer Spencer Cheyne was replaced by Court Writer Wee Tao Ping on 15th.
Court. -The perennial case of Matnor vs. Dagang was up again, this time for revised costs, all appeals having failed. Ah Seng was fined $25 or three months for illicit opium smoking.
In the Bankruptcy Court, the assets of Chop Guan Ha Huat, Daro, were realized, and a first dividend of 30 cents declared. This bankruptcy was caused by failure of Chop Guan Seng Huat of Kuching. The amount realized is insufficient to meet the claims of even the local creditors in Daro. A first charge on the property was Government probate duty of over $300 due since 1929.
Travelling. -I visited Daro from the 26th October to the 1st November.
Land. -Land Inspector Lias arrived at Daro from Sibu on the 25th to mark out the allotments on the new Itol road. Some forty-acre plots were demarcated, and a little of the outstanding work was dealt with, Lias being still in Daro at the end of month.
Methodist Girl’s School, Sibu.
During the hours from 9 a.m. till 4. pm. 1,145 people visited Mrs. Hoover’s inhibition of work which was held in the main hall of the School, on Tuesday, 14th October last. We were welcomed on arrival by Mrs. Hoover and her girls and walked straight into a veritable bower of flowers-all made by hand.
The exhibition comprised examples of the girls work during the summer term-basketry, carried out in cane, bambo, ralha and crepe paper rope. Stenciling, chinese brush work, sealing wax painting and sealing wax beads, plain sewing and embroidery, crochet, plasticine and paper modelling. Table mats made of raffia, cane and raffia and crepe paper rope. Hand painted menu and name cards, passe-par-tout picture framing. Twenty different kinds of flowers. Paper cutting and folding for the little ones. The exhibits were most tastefully set out. each stall in charge of several girls, who were kept busy explaining the work and taking orders for fresh supplies.
The exhibition was largely attended by Malay ladies who were most interested in the flowers and stenciling. Their delightful sarongs of every hue lent colour to an already bright and animated gathering.
There are many aspects of the work all of which I deserve the most careful consideration. I should like to say a word about them all, but I will just I mention one. That is the care taken in instructing the girls in domestic duties and homecraft. This is a science which cannot be exhibited in one day, and Mrs. Hoover is warmly to be congratulated that due to her training, she has enabled her girls to build up so many good and comfortable homes.
Jottings from Sibu.
A month of floods as usual but nothing too high although it is rumoured one fair lady has been recommended for a life saving medal for saving one of our merchant princes from a watery grave.
A large gathering to meet the Sri Mukah on the 11th and welcome the Resident and his bride. Matey was on board and passed one night in Sibu but he was not allowed to sing for more than an hour or so but the last seen of him was somewhere in the forepart of the Gladys singing nautical chanties.
Tom Pascoe won the bowling handicap, perhaps fortune was kind as he is rumoured to be off to Kuching before the next one and only wanted one more to make a set of egg cups for the family.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Someone asked the Post Office what the Franc rate
was, quite recently, and was told that the Post
Office would transact his business at Fr. 25 to the £
sterling. Would that I could have transacted it at
that for him. Of course no Post Office is a medium
for exchange, but then is there a Banker here who
could have given a rate of any value to business?
However, it would be interesting to read “ .A Pen-
sioner’s" views with regard to Finance and financial
relations between Sarawak and her customers abroad,
leaving out Singapore. Are there any Foreign Bills
for collection in Sarawak, or does she always pay
against documents for her purchases at Port of
shipment? Are there any Sarawak Bills for
collection in Foreign countries, against her sales, or
do her customers pay cash against documents in
Sarawak? If neither, then one must conclude that
Singapore makes a very good, if small, Service Debtor out of her. Governments are always criti cised, but it should be the endeavour to assist too in making citizens realise that they too have res ponsibilities, which, if enacted, will make tor the betterment of all and for development, which cannot be accomplished just by Government efforts.
Yours faithfully.
ADVANCEMENT
The Rule of the Road.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
DEAR SIR,
Your correspondent Royston Crow asks whether
there is any rule of the road in Sarawak.
Reference to Ricksha Regulations of 1896 will
show that jinrickshas are ordered.
"(1) To Keep to the left band side of the road.
When passing another vehicle going in the same
direction pass it on the right, hand side.
(*2) When nearing a crossing or going round a
corner the jinricksha must proceed slowly."
Again in the Sarawak Gazette of July 1st 1896 a
note re an accident to Mr. Daubeny's trap says
The P. W. D. carts are at present driven by a
number of Malay youths whose ignorance of the rule of the road and of the difference between right and
left is calculated to cause further damage unless
something is done to remedy the defect.
It is thus clear chat the rule of the road was laid
down in if not la-fore 1896.
The fact that absolutely no attempt is made to
enforce the regulations is as obvious to ethers as it
is to Royston Crow,
Yours faithfully.
ROADSTER.
The Old Cemetery Kuching.
K UCHING, SARAWAK,
11th July, 1922.
To The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
SIR,
Some time ago, with the Editor's kind permis-
sion, an appeal was made in the Gazette, by Rev. F.
S. Hollis, Acting Honorary Secretary of the Cemetery
Board—for funds to restore the Monuments and
Headstones etc. in the Old Cemetery.
In response to that appeal 45 was received. Since
then the Board has had all the headstones reset and
monuments repaired and all re-lettered at a cost
of $110.
The Board has advanced the money, but we should
be graceful for any contributions, especially from
any one who overlooked, or forgot the first appeal.
Now that the work is finished we should like our
subscribers to visit the Cemetery, and we feel confi-
dent they will be pleased with its present condition
and appearance.
Thanking you for allowing us one more space in
your valuable paper.
Yours faithfully,
ROBERT J. SMALL, Honorary Secretary.
Courtesy.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
DEAR SIR,
Referring to the “Curious" letter in your last issue I have not the faintest idea as to whether or not the average European lady is interested in “the art of etiquette”, nor indeed .do I care; in fact I think the letter is a trifle futile.
Of course if poor “Curious” has been “cut many times” he is probably getting sick of it and in that case he might try the following: on seeing a lady in the street emit a loud yell, wave your stick and/or hat (if any) wildly in the air and rush out at her; on reaching her seize both her hands and shake them long and vigorously maintaining a light conversation the while.
Under these circumstances I can assure “Curious” that the lady will find marker! difficulty in administer-ing "the cut"—and if her hands are shaken long enough she cannot even hit the chap
Apropos of a knowledge of etiquette I should like to hear "Curious' " answer to the following question.
My wife and mother-in-law were both staying with me (permanently it seemed ) I had called on a lady whose husband subsequently fell sick and did not return my call. My wife and mother-in-law wished to call hut did not know how many of whose cards to leave, nor indeed did they know which corners of which cards to turn up if any.
Your faithfully.
SNIP.
DEAR “CURIOUS,"
We have, unfortunately, been unable to find a Look on etiquette and so are obliged to trust to our rather rusty memory when we say that the class of book mentioned generally instructs a lady to bow first, whereupon the gentleman raises his hat.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

The rest of the evening was devoted to cards, and those who were invited did not leave until the early hours after a most pleasant and eventful evening due to the kindness of the Resident and Mrs. Boult.
Fatal Motor Accident at 2nd Mile.
On the 4th, at about 5.30 in the afternoon, an
old Chinese named Tan Ah Yik, whilst walking
along the Rock Road near the 2nd mile, was
knocked down by a motor-bus and killed instan-
taneously. It appears that another bus had pulled
up at the side of the road at the signal of deceased,
who wished to go to Kuching. The other bus was
coming up from behind and the driver, apparently
misjudging the distance, attempted to pass the
stationary vehicle and knocked the old man down
with the back mudguard.
An Inquest was held next day by the Coroner,
Mr. J. B. Archer, and, after a lengthy hearing,
a verdict of death by misadventure was brought in.
A rider was added to the effect that the deceased
appeared to have been old and feeble and possibly
deficient in sight and hearing, but that the driver
of the bus was guilty of negligence in a minor
degree for not taking every precaution to see the road was clear.
The driver of the stationary bus was summarily fined $10 by the Coroner for failing to attend the
Inquest, having to be fetched from his house.
The next morning this man. Tan Ah Tee. was
brought before the District Court for giving false evidence at the Inquest, and received a severe
reprimand from the Bench and released.
Spanish Terror for Motorists.
Six YEARS IF PEDESTRIAN IS INJURED.
By a stroke of his pen General Primo de Rivera has apparently solved the problem of how to save the pedestrian from the motor-car. Since 1st January of this year there have been no motor accidents in the Streets of Madrid and, judging from the reports from other districts, Spain has become a paradise for the pedestrian, according to Reuter's Madrid correspondent.
The vexed problem has seemingly been solved by an extremely simple expedient namely, the im mediate arrest of anyone guilty of the crime of knocking down and injuring a pedestrian, without regard to circumstances. If the injured person is certified, after medical examination, to be suffering from hurt of any but the lightest kind, this means the imprisonment of the offending driver for a period of not less than six years. If the injured man dies the crime is homicide, and the punishment, imprison ment for not less than twelve years. It has been made plain, and in the most unmistakable terms, that neither social position nor any other conditions will be taken into, account, and, of course, political influence will not be available. There will be no escape from the new law, and bail is not allowed.
The effect has certainly been electrical. The atmosphere has been charged for some months with dreadful misgivings as to what was Income, and much anxiety has been expressed by the more nervous drivers. Steady practice in the use of the horn, especially among taxi-drivers, leaves no room in the world of sound for further and more effective warn ings to stubborn walkers across crowded streets. In Barcelona the taxi-drivers threw up the sponge by the way of a protest and abandoned work. Whether they have returned to work again is not known in Madrid, no doubt owing to the censorship, for strikes are not allowed, which means that when they occur they are not reported in the capital.
However, drivers and pedestrians now meet on equal and even on friendly terms. Motorist have been seen to stop their cars and invite their old enemies to take the right of way, almost with a bow and a polite "After you." The result is that blocks at nearly every street crossing in central Madrid have become almost permanent, though the police force on duty must have been doubled. Though its many members blow their whistles until one shrill noise seems to catch up with another, they achieve little more than to exhaust their own patience and that of the excited crowd eager to move on. As to the motorist -he offers prayers to his protecting saint that no pedestrian may cross his path or run into him, and secretly asks if the petrol monopoly is not behind it all.-The Malaya Tribune.)
Mainly About Nothing.
The Prince of Optimists is the gentleman who
bravely subscribes his name to the assertion that
"we guarantee our guts to last at least six
months!!"
This may sound rather coarse to some of our
readers-let us assure them, however, that we have
a precedent for mentioning such an essential part
of our anatomy.
That eminently respectable paper "The Gloucester Journal" in its edition of 9th April. 1722, mentions in the London Weekly Bill of Mortality "Griping in the guts, 8 deaths" and "Twisting of the guts, one death."
It is amazing how rash correspondents are in airing their knowledge of Malay. In a contemporary are two letters to the Editor signed by "Sedikil Sakit" and "Tida Boleh Dengah" respectively.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

There are, of course, other wavs of overcoming the difficulty, but these are silvicultural and take a long time tn develop. In the course of years the silvicultural works will show results, but closer milisalion of the existing “jungle” can show them immediately, although naturally the silvicultural method will give the more complete results in the end.
IV.—Utilisation.
The final stage in the forestry cycle is also that which inspired it, namely the use of the produce. To realize the importance of this, it is only necessary to think of the many uses to which timber, not to mention any other forest product, is put.
Your shirt and socks are probably made of wood; your newspaper certainly is. Your household furniture is mostly of wood and the bungalow which contains it is probably also constructed of that material or required a considerable quantity in connexion with its erection. There is wood in your car and your games equipment m fact wherever you turn you see the products of the forest.
Proper utilisation of timber, with its manifold uses is not, therefore, an easy matter. Steel and glass are more or less steel and glass, but timber is anything from material soft as cheese to the hardness of metal. And not only that: its characteristics vary so greatly that only long experience or scientific inquiry can say whether a particular timber is the best for a particular purpose. The result, is that certain timbers have acquired ;i reputation as the best suited to a particular job and have held the fort in face of all comers despite the fact that their price is only commensurate with their reputation. This is doubtless very satisfaction to the producers of the particular timber, but not necessarily so to the community at large. It is therefore very desirable that an examination of the possibilities of other timbers should be made.
The results of such inquiries are of immense importance inasmuch as the may not only reduce the costs of production of the manufacture itself, but—what is very important to forestry here—may enable a letter use to be made of the land by the utilisation of a greater number of species. To clarify this last point: the flora of the Bornean forest consists of several thousand species; of these some hundreds are timber possibilities, but how many are in common use? Ts it too much to say that the timbers in really common use are limited to belian, kapor, meranti, geronggang and medang? We know there are others, but even accepting a further list can we make it exceed a dozen ?
It is here that the utilisation branch must step in. An area of forest in the virgin state may carry 60 to 80 tons of timber, but these figures will account for probably 20 to 30 species of which only 2 or 3 are definitely desirable at the moment. What of the others? At present they are only an encum-
Unfortunately the user of timber, who actually is the man best equipped for discovering the suit- abilities of new species, is hampered in his desire— if such exists by his fear that the new wood may not come up to expectations. We ourselves had an experience which illustrates this. We required a radio cabinet and specified certain local woods but 1 he cabinet-maker demurred. We widened the range and gave the craftsman choice of materials. He refused on the ground that he did not trust the endurance of the local woods and would not risk his reputation on anything but leak. Now, teak has a reputation which it deserves, but it does not now stand alone even in shipbuilding where it was once supreme. Bornean woods have invaded that realm and as their qualities became better known their use will increase.
It will no doubt he urged that it is the place of Forest Research Institutes to do the experimental work. Granted. But it is unfortunately a fact that many of those who most strongly support this plea are the hist to accept the research worker’s findings. Actually the work must be divided, and the final decision on suitability given by the carpenter and the user. For that reason each one of us can do n part by taking a broader view, and taking a chance now and then by using a wood that attracts us even if we know nothing of it otherwise.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Bintulu.
December, 1926.
Mr. H. H. Kortright, District Officer of Bintulu, reports :
Courts. -The following are the principal cases heard here during the month. Swee Ghim, of Pandan. was fined $50 for being in possession of a false passu measure ; one Panyan, $15 for wrongly chinking he owned a certain fruit tree ; Matzin, three months for theft of one piece of jelutong; Seo'k, fined $25 for wrongly claiming a fruit land belonging to Jabai (f.); Ah Yiew, a Chinese of Tubau who had borrowed $100 from Penghulu Jatin's father-in-
law without making a document or giving security, was ordered to repay the money at once. There was a case concerning ownership of a few rubber trees planted a dozen years ago, also a land case between Dyaks and Malays in Sungei Selezu, where both parties claim to have planted identical sago palms and fruit trees ; this case is still unsettled.
General.- I visited Tatau from 1st to 3rd to make the necessary final arrangements and have everything ready for the work party who were due to arrive from Kuching to erect the wireless masts and instal the plant. They required various things to do this, viz., 18 2-inch belian planks to make boxes in which to step the masts, gravel and sand for concrete for bedding same, sheer legs, various sized poles and a great deal of labour to raise the masts. Mr. Tait and-crew arrived by m.s. Chaya Mas de Goebilt on the 9th, and the first message received here from Tatau came through on the afternoon of the 14th.
Mr F. J. Wright, Forest Ranger, Special Class, arrived on the 10th from Sibu by s. s. Sulong to Kedurong. He has been reappointed to do duty in this district. I regret, however, that Mr. Wright, towards the end of the month was far from well, suffering, according to the Dresser, from intermittent fever and anaemia and it was deemed advisable to send him to Kuching for proper medical treatment.
The weather has been very wet and stormy most of the month, the sea has also been very rough and there have been some of the highest tides known for years.
Captain C. P. Lowe and Mr. D. MacLeod arrived here on the 18th on s.s. Auby en route from Limbang to Kuching and Mr. E. Parnell on s.s. Gladys on the 30th.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1927.
Trade and Shipping.-The price of jelutong at the beginning of the month had dropped to $12 per picul, at the middle of the month to $10.50 and towards the end to $9.50 per picul. On account of this, the workers and also the traders did not ship all they had in stock; nevertheless 2,216 piculs were exported. 305,850 pieces of belian attaps and 203 tons of belian timber were also exported.
The s.s. Gladys arrived on the 4th and s.s. Auby on the 18th. The s.s. Sulong dropped mails at Kedurong northbound on the 10th but, did not call on her return. The s.s. Angas made one trip to load Government timber for Kuching.
The value of the exports and imports for the month are as follows:-
1926.	1925.	1924.
Exports	$44,363.89 $73,222.96 $30,449.11
Imports 41,555.44	74,127.79	25,011.50
Six steamers entered and cleared the port daring the month.
W. F. DE V. SKRINE, Acting Divisional Officer.
FIFTH DIVISION.
Limbang.
December, 1926.
District Court Crimnal.-A charge of theft of buffaloes brought by Tujoh against Kudi and Kaduit, known buffalo thieves, had to he dismissed, the evidence being entirely circumstantial.
Bakir and Tua, youthful sons of Haji Taha, were each sentenced to eight months' detention for theft of buffaloes. They will be sent to the Government Malay Vernacular School in the mornings, and found useful occupation of an afternoon. They are too young to associate with the other prisoners.
The case in which one Haji Abdullah summoned Anggang, a Dyak, for cheating with regard to the adulteration of camphor, adjourned last August, was, on the strength of the expert evidence, dismissed. Anggang was simply ordered to refund the price Haji Abdullah had paid him for the camphor.
General.-Dr. Furnivall inspected, the Limbang Hospital during his visit from the 1st to 3rd.
Mr. R. Grant. Acting Resident, Labuan, was here on a visit from the 3rd to 6th and Mr. Venables, British Resident in Brunei, came over for the week end of the 11th to 13th.
The tracing of the southern boundary of His Highness the Rajah's Concession at Muara, Brunei, has been sent to the British Resident, Brunei, for inspection and approval.
Capt. Lowe, Commissioner of Public Works, arrived by H.H.M.Y Maimuna on 13th. He came
up to inspect the new dam at Bukit Hitam and the Limbang water scheme generally. He returned to Kuching by the Auby on the 16th. Mr. A. Macpherson, Cadet, was a passenger by the same vessel and has been appointed to do duty in this Division.
Messrs. McLeod and Anderson sat for their Malay Examination, Standard I, on the 6th and 7th.
Mr. Horton, Superintendent of Customs, returned to Miri by the Auby on the 16th and Mr. McLeod took passage by her to Kuching.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Mass was said for her at Vaughan House on the several days following her death. On Thursday last solemn Requiem Mass was celebrated by Fr. H. Farmer, of St. Peter’s Foreign Missionary College. Freshfield, other priests from the college rendering the music.
Fr. Farmar conducted the service at the graveside assisted by Very Rev. Fr. Rogan, Rector of St. Peter’s College, and Fr. Traynor Others present included Frs. Bartley. Onslek, Kelly and Hart and Fr. J. Gardner. P.P. of Our Lady’s, Formby, together with a number of Missionary Sisters of St. Joseph. Boys from St. Peter’s College sang psalms at the graveside.
Camera Club Lecture.
AMONG THE HEAD HUNTERS.
An extremely interesting lecture was given at the Brighton and Hove Camera Club headquarters, East-street, on Wednesday evening, when Mr. H, Powys Adams gave a talk on “Sarawak, the Land of the While Rajah.”
The talk was illustrated with lantern slides, made from his own negatives, rendered all the more interesting because they were not taken with any idea of exhibition.
Mr. A. C. Vinall (hon. secretary of the Club) writes:
“We were filled with the urge to travel as Mr. Powys Adams took us with him on his journeys through this strange and somewhat unknown land. We felt with him the torrid jungle heat as we watched the sarong-clad Malayans and Chinese about their daily toil. We shivered with apprehension as we learned of the tropical rainfall of fifteen inches in twelve hours, and, listening to the heavy downpour outside the club, we consoled ourselves with the fact that there were only another fourteen inches to come!
“Our realistic impression of a native execution could not have been bettered by Madame Tussand herself as we gingerly handled the kriss, or native sword of death, half expecting to find dried blood on it. As a variation on the mother-in-law joke, we heard the tale of the man who cut his father-in-law up in pieces buried them in a swamp-and escaped the death sentence on a plea of self-defence, his only chance of dodging the same fate at the hand of the said father-in-law being to get there first!
“We listened amazed to the collection of parts of the human body found in an eighteen-foot crocodile that had accounted for a Chinese man, a woman, and a child who had disappeared.
“We took part with Mr. Powys Adams in the joys of angling during the ‘tuber-fishing’ festival, when one dopes one’s victims before spearing the bodies as they rise to the surface.
“Again we froze with horror as we heard tales of visiting the Dyak head-hunters, and of eerie nights spent in the chief’s hut, where thirty-two human heads, in an excellent state of preservation, hang round the walls, the whole scene being rendered more weird and uncanny by the intense brilliance of the tropical moon.
“We thrilled at climbing the highest mountain of the district, crossing ravines by means of bridges consisting of a single tree trunk, and, reaching the peak, to gaze on the other side at five hundred miles of virgin jungle still awaiting exploration.
“We came away from the lecture filled with the desire to see the world as a traveller of Mr. Powys Adams’ calibre sees it, living among its peoples and sharing their life, rather than as a globe-trotter, or a ‘personally-conducted’ tourist,”
A hearty vote of thanks was accorded the lecturer by Mr. R. T. Botting.
Cigarette Raffle.
THIRD DRAWING.
Winning numbers of Cigarette Raffle drawn on 21st April, 1933 (postponed from 15th April, 1933).
Fourth Drawing will take place on the 17th of June, 1933.
Singapore-London in Seven Days.
AIR SPEED-UP.
DUTCH PLANES TO CALL HERE.
It is now officially announced that Singapore is to be a regular port of call on the Holland-Netherlands India air route.
The first homeward aeroplane from Batavia will arrive in Singapore on 3rd May, and is scheduled to arrive in London on 10th May, seven days later.
The time from London to Singapore will be eight days, the aeroplane reaching Singapore every Thursday.
ANOTHER DAY OFF.
Thus in the K.L.M. speeding-up process, which it is hoped will end in an estafette system of day and night flying and a time of three and a half days, another day has been lopped off.
The K.L.M. fleet of aeroplanes has been entirely reorganized and is now composed of ten speedy machines of the latest design.
The machines are of two types, the Fokker F12 and Fokker F18, both equipped with three wasp engines 450 h.p. each.
SPEED OF 200 K.P.H.
The F12 has an average speed of 185 k.p.h. and the F18, with a narrower, longer body and different streamlining of the wings and body, has a speed of 200 k.p.h.
Beginning with the aeroplanes leaving Batavia on 26th April, and Amsterdam on 4th May, the summer route will be followed, by way of Halle, Leipzig, Budapest to Athens instead of Marseilles and Rome. -Straits Budget.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 59 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 78 SATURDAY, MAY 16TH, 1874. Price 5 cents.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

bias— has not been introduced, although I believe the matter is receiving attention. "The note issues of the three Chinese Government Banks which at the moment constitute legal tender, circulate freely in most parts of the country, controlled from Nanking. No doubt the right to issue notes by other banks in certain parts of China will he withdrawn in due course. I have every reason to believe that the Government , reserves of foreign funds, built to a great extent, I should say, from sales of bullion, are intact and have not been depleted in any way by the events of the year, which is all to the advantage of the currency control. According to Customs returns, during 1936, net shipments of silver were $249.6 millions, while gold shipments stood at $40.6 millions “Reverting to financial matters, as might have been expected, the Ministry of Finance, according to the figures of last June, have not been successful in securing a balanced Budget. Every endeavour has been made to increase the National Revenue, but the lack of proper political organisation in the country, and the difficulty of imposing an equitable system of direct taxation present difficulties which only time can overcome. In this regard. I think we can fully sympathise with China when we realise that the Maritime Customs, under a very efficient foreign Administration, have not been able to function as they were entitled in Northern China, with the result that the collection of full Customs duties has been interfered with, and the revenue of China as a whole has been made to suffer. On the expenditure side, the allocation for Army main tenance is still proportionately high, but the Central Government, to ensure the requisite control, have not found it possible to bring about any reduction. Under the able leadership of the Chiang Kai Shek Administration, good progress continues to be made, and the liaison which Nanking has now established with the Provinces of Kwangtung and Kwangsi is a co-ordination in the right direction. adding strength and power to the Nanking Authorities. ’To refer briefly to trade. I am very pleased to note that during and since the last quarter of 1936 a growing demand has arisen for China’s products at enhanced prices, which aided by a steady exchange, has made an encouraging change by the outlook for China generally. With a shortage of crops in other parts of the world, Chins has benefited and we begin to realise her advantage on the estimate that her crops, harvested last year, are worth $3,000 millions more than the crop- of 1935. “The returns of China's foreign trade for the year 1936 show imports valued at $941,000,000 and exports at $706,000,000 compared with $919,000,000 and $595,000,000 respectively in 1935. The excess of imports thus amounted to $235,000,000 in 1936 compared with $324,000,000 in 1935. Making allowances for differences in exchange, etc.. I find an important improvement has taken place in China’s trade position since our last meeting. “Having struck an optimistic vein regarding me . uplift which China is receiving from the makings of more prosperous times, I am drawn naturally in a reference to the potentialities of China as a market for British exports. I have already touched on this subject under the heading of “Overseas Trade.” “It is gratifying to observe that the Export Credits Guarantee Department of the Department of Overseas Trade has recently sent to China representative to explore and report upon commercial opportunities for British manufacturers. “For some time to come. China is likely to be an important market for capital goods, and in parti cular. for machinery, to equip the new industrial plants that are being created under the supervision of the Ministry of Industries. A great deal of Industrial progress is being made under the aedis of nationalised and semi-nationalised corporations. JAPAN. Japan has bad a difficult year. both from the political and economic point of view. The higher prices of the raw materials she imports for her manufacturing industries have recently put a strain on the exchange value of the Yen. There is necessarily a time-lag Before the higher value of her exports adjusts the position. I am glad to see that she is arranging for part of her gold reserves to be shipped abroad to strengthen her exchanges. This is a wise step, as, after all, reserves are of little value unless brought into front line defences when necessity arises. “The Finance Minister stated in Tokyo last month that the value of the gold reserve of the Bank of Japan was 1,700 million Yen (say 100 million pounds) as against a note issue of 1,400 million Yen. “The annual production of gold in the Japanese Empire is stated to be about 100 million Yen.” ,

[NEXT EXCERPT]

warming the-house at night, large logs are always
smouldering here too. There are doors at each end
of the bouse mid there is a raised seat running along
under the window which is covered in with a sloping
trellis work of wood or split rotan or bamboo as a
protection against spears, while inside this is a
wooden flap which can be raised or lowered over the
trellis as a further protection against the iron bullets
of the Muruts and this is always lowered at night.
108	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1919.
Half an hours stop to smoke and enjoy the view in the brightening sunlight and cool air and we trail away down the slope on the other side through the long grass. A few women weeding the fields inn like rabbits at our unexpected appearance hut finding that they cannot reach the houses before us try and take short cuts through the swampy fields their short skirts tucked up round their waists, hut they soon give it up tired out and the Dyaks of course remarked how easy it would be to take their heads if we were on a raid into this country.
(To be continued.)
St. Thomas' School.
The annual prize giving took place on April 29th, the prizes being distributed by the Hon. the Resident. The Bishop, the Right Rev. Logie Danson, having introduced the Resident, the head-master read the report.
At the last examination 225 boys were examined, 72% of the papers passed, 30 boys being kept down in the same class for another year. The prizes this year went to 17 boarders and 6 day-boys, a result undoubtedly due to the rule that boarders may only speak English. There are now 95 boarders and 148 day- boys. The Bishop, who this year set the New Testament paper for the Singapore diocese gave the same paper to the boys at a special examination, in his report he said I have no hesitation in saying that the standard is much higher than that of the Singapore papers." The top marks in Singapore were 72%, 67 % and 64 %. The top boys in St. Thomas' gained 94%, 92%, 89% and 72%, the average mark being 494%. A new box-room has been built. The boys are now beginning to eat a little kribang with their rice and many of them will be employed planting rice substitutes during their manual work hours.
The prizes, given by His Highness the Rajah, were then presented.
The Honble. the Resident in his speech reminded the boys of their duty to God, the Rajah and their country, and, referring to the shortage of food likely to take place during the next few months, said there was one way in which they could help their country now and that was by ensuring a good crop of rice substitutes in the near future for their own consumption.
The Bishop, in proposing a vote of thanks to the Honble. the Resident, said that it was the duty of ail boys, especially those who were Christians, to be good citizens. There was a great difficulty in procuring good teachers, and one of the greatest needs was a school for teachers and catechists where hoys who felt the call to help the Mission might be trained.
The meeting ended with the usual cheers for His Highness the Rajah, the Honble the Resident and the masters.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the. opinions of correspondents.]
KUCHING,
April 20th. 1919. To
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
SIR,
Is it not time Kuching was in possession of a small but modern Hotel? At present the only place where European visitors can stay is the antiquated, ill-situated, badly arranged, unsanitary and in every other way very unsatisfactory Lower Rest House".
Not only are European visitors from Singapore and elsewhere frequently coming to Kuching on business, but Government Officers married and bachelor are constantly down from the outstations.
At one time there was an Outstation Rest House and officers knew where they could find board and lodging, hut now even that has been taken away and officers come down to find the one and only Rest House full.
The only other Rest House is that provided by Messrs, the Borneo Company for the use of then- employees only, and though a mom may be obtained there through the kindness of the Company, the house was not built for the convenience of visitors to Kuching and cannot be looked upon as a Rest I House for the general public.
: What is required is a small, well-equipped, modern Hotel of say ten rooms, so arranged that it can easily be added to at any future date, for which a suitable site can easily be found.
The present situation is exceedingly unsatisfactory and there is no reason why the Capital of such a country as Sarawak should not be able to provide respectable accommodation for European visitors, as is done in every Eastern town of anything approaching its size and importance.
The need is urgentcannot the Government move in the matter?
1 am, Sir,
Yours faithfully.
VISITOR."
MONTHLY REPORTS.
UPPER SARAWAK.
BAU AND PAKU
March.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

took the wrong one. On the 14th I returned to
Tabekang.
On the 23rd Mr. Barnes and Mr. Calvert visited
the station to spend Christmas at the mines, Messrs.
B. D. Binnie and F. H. Pollard passed through on
their way to Limbang. On the 27th I left for Kuch-
ing and was still away at the end of the month.
Rainfall for the month was 1265.
Shipping.Calls were made during the month as follows:
S.S. L'Aubaine	...	4 times
S.S Alice Lorraine	...	once
S.S. Gladys	...	once
S.J. Sri Sadong	...	4 tunes
M.L. Muaratebas	...	twice
Pce. Sri Mas Iqan once
Pce. Sri Mukah	...	once
Trade.The local Trade Returns for comparison
with last year are as follows :
Imports.
December 1925 $41.310
1924	23,770
Exports. $51,433.80
32,813.00
Bau, Upper Sarawak.
December, 1925.
Mr. F. H. Kortright, District Officer, reports as
follows:
The Divisional Officer, accompanied by Inchi
Mohamed Zin, visited the district on his return over-
land from Lundu at the beginning of the month.
On the 7th Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee,
with Dayangs Leonora, Elizabeth and Vava, visited
Upper Sarawak. They received a very hearty wel-
come from a large gathering of Chinese and Natives
and a firework display was given in honour of their
visit.
The Orang Kaya and Pengarah of Jagoi Staas
came to report that their Kampongs had split up
and ten doors had moved to a site nearer the Dutch
border A notice of warning was sent to these
people that if they trespassed over the border they
did so at their own risk.
The Serambu Dyaks cleared the scrub and over-
hanging branches along the telephone line between
Batu Kitang and Bau while the Skiat Dyaks cleared,
that along all the other roads.
Numerous complaints have been made agajnst
Orang Kaya Pa Ngadi of Singghi, and as he now,
seldom lives in the Kampong and has no control,
over bis people it is proposed to ask him to resign,
and to elect a new man early next year.
On the 24th I went to Kuching to spend Christ-
mas week. Owing to very heavy incessant rains the
road was impossible to make the journey by car.
H. D. APLIN, Divisional Officer.
SADONG COLLIERY.
January, 1926.
The output, export, local consumption, conversion to coke and coal stock figures for the month were as follows :
1st January stock balance	...	351.03 tons.
January gross output	...	1,916.19 Total 2,268.02 ,,
Shipped ...	... 1,258.07 tons
Consumed by boilers and	.
conversion into coke 379.07 1,637.14
Stock balance ...	...	630.08 tons
Conditions obtaining below ground were much' the same as those reported for the previous month.
Messi s. J. R. Barnes, Superintendent of Telegraphs, and H. M. Calvert, Government Auditor, returned, to Kuching by the s.l. L'Aubaine on the 4th.
60
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1926.
One, Lam Kam, Chinese miner, employed at No. 8 Mine, received rather a severe injury to his spine at the beginning of his shift on the morning of the 22nd, and was sent for treatment at the General Hospital by s.l. L.Aubaine the same day.
As it has been very difficult to obtain belian attaps locally except in small quantities ar. a ridiculously high price ($ 120 per lakh), I proceeded to the Upper Simunjan district on the 15th to interview the Dyaks residing there about working amps required for Government use. The Dyaks invariably welcomed the idea and promised to deliver the attaps at Towkay Ah Bok's shop on the Lake, at $50 per lakh, as soon as the padi harvest is over, the royally and cost of transit to Simunjan wharf over and above this being paid by Government.
Defaulting Malay timber workers who had taken out advances to work timber a year ago were brought before the Court and kindly warned by the Officer-in-Charge. This has already had the desired effect, and quantities of wood are now arriving almost daily.
The rainfall for the mouth was 20'25 inches.
J. W. EVANS,
Manager.
SECOND DIVISION.
?
Simanggang.
December 1925.
Court.Residents Court.Only one case came before this Court namely Chop Kim Heng vs. Chop Seng Joo claim for $2,000 and interest, the claim was dismissed.
District Court.Ah Leng of Debak was sentenced to one year's R. I. for absconding under advances ; Akul (f), Sarong (f), and Ratek all of Saratok, were before the Court on a charge of procuring abortion and concealing same. Akul (f) was sentenced to one years R. I. and the other two defendants fined ; Baki was sentenced to one year's R. I. for breach of trust; Government vs. Ah Jak, Ah Pat, and Ah Moi, of Betong, charge assault. Ah Jak and Ah Moi were fined $25 each, and Ah Pat second offence sentenced to three months R. I. and loses his pledge of $100. There were numerous other cases and also a great number came before the Magistrates Court, but none of any importance.
General.The weather during the month was extremely wet and stormy.
The fruit season is not a success. A great number of Malays from the coast station arrived and proceeded to the Skrang and Lubok Anta in order to buy durian fruit.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

(1)	I am young, poor, gifted and charming, and in every way eminently suited to spending money.
(2)	I shall not say, gI love my work, etc., etc.
Yours, etc.,
P.S.--Also I am not Scotch and will give away a hundred or two.
gOf course,h says one side of me to myself, gyou must realize that all this scurrying after filthy lucre is highly immoral. Money must be earned by service. This lottery business is all part of the modern scramble to get something for nothing.h (Nothing in this case being seven ill spared dollars, mark you.) To which I reply, gOh, Sir (or Madam), you are forgetting how much glory the lilies of the field got for nothing. Besides you miss the essential romance of this thing. Here, before our very eyes-figuratively speaking, of course-is enacted a magic deed a faery legend, a tale to draw old men from the fire-and dollars from our pockets One turn of the wheel (or shake of the hat, or whatever they do) and lo! a poor man is transformed into a rich one, like a pumpkin turned into a golden coach, or poor beast into a fairy prince.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1,1929.
These competitions might induce our Agricultural Department to consider the matter. As a method of educating Malays in taking a pride in their personal belongings, and at the same time appealing to their sporting instincts, these might be tried in this State.
A useful article on gardening is written by F. S. Benfield. Particularly so as the writer discusses only those plants which can be grown on the plains in this climate, Celosia Coriopsis, Cosmos, Gaillaidia, Petunia and Zinnias are only a few of the numerous plants mentioned. A few paragraphs on native gardeners are useful-and most appropriate is the writerfs conclusion-
gAnd some can pot Begonias, and some can bud a rose,
And some are hardly fit to trust with anything that grows;
But they can roll and trim the lawns and sift the the sand and loam,
For the glory of the garden occupieth all who come.
The Pagans of North Borneo. Owen Rutter, F.R.G.S,, F.R.A.I., with an introduction by C. G. Seligman, F.R.S., with 75 plates printed in two colours.11 diagrams and 2 maps. Hutchison and Company limited-Price 30/--
The author needs no introduction from us, being well-known as the writer of perhaps the best work on B.N.B. and numerous books of poems and learned articles. This book deals entirely with the pagans of British North Borneo, and gives a very comprehensive account of customs, rites, personal characteristics, jungle and river craft, folklore, etc. There is an appendix giving a comparative vocabulary in no less than thirteen pagan dialects.
The book is filled with excellent illustrations, and some good maps, and the inevitable gsamenessh of such a work is avoided by a whimsical sense of humour, which is ever present. A book to buy-and a book to keep.
We have received copies of a new weekly paper called The Eastern Courier, printed and published in Penang for the proprietors, The Kwong Wah Yit Poh Press, Ltd.
The object of this paper is clearly printed on the cover gdevoted to dissemination and elucidation of the Three Principles as enunciated by Dr. Sun Yat Senc to the promotion of trade and industries,
and to the solution of the economic problems of Malaya, China and the Far East.h
If the present standard is maintained, we have no hesitation in foretelling a successful career for our new contemporary. The paper is well got-up, and contains interesting articles on this part of the world, an editorial, telegrams and many other articles of useful information.
The object of this paper is, as we have shown, instructive and informative; and its desire is to encourage the printing of accurate news from China, and to circulate articles and leaders on subjects which must be of interest to all Chinese living in this part of the world.
The price is 20 cents a copy, or $10.40 per annum, post free to Sarawak.
THE SARAWAK. GAZETTE, JUNE 1,1929.
The Calcutta Sweep.
LIST OF SARAWAK NUMBERS.
The Honorary Secretary of the Sarawak Club has asked our assistance in publishing the following list, of tickets which were obtained by mean of the Sarawak Club and the local branch of the Chartered Bank. We print the list as it was sent. In many cases the absence of initials gives the names rather a headless appearance, but if the name draws the favourite, he or she will not mind the unintentional decapitation!
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1,1929.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
Kho Hong Bee, Singapore.-Your letter has been received. It seems to be merely the airing of a private grievance and a self eulogy. We do not think, therefore, that its publication would be of interest to our readers.-Ed. S.G.F
Mr. Rennie drew the winner in the sweepstake but sold his chance for fifty cents to the gowner.h

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Payable in advance.
Quartier of a column and under
First insertion .	... $1.00
Second and third insertion each ... 0.50
Subsequent do	do	0.25
'Hull Column and under
Firm insertion ...	...	2.00
Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
Subsequent do	do	. 0.50
A Column and under
First insertion each	...	... 4.00
Second and third insertion each	... 2.00	Subsequent do	do	... 1.00
'Special arrangements maybe made for standing advertisements.
All communications intended for insertion in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed
to the Editor at the Government Printing Office, Kuching. They should be clearly written and should reach the Office at least two days before the publication of each issue.
Letters and other contributions must be authenticated by writers name sent privately to the Editor.
We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not inserting them.
Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early
intelligence of all matters of general interest
in their respective neighbourhoods.
NOTICE.
ASTANA FARM.
THE Manager of Astana Harm begs to
inform the Public that he is unable to
attend to Orders for milk after Office hours. NOTICE.
?
Gazette subscriptions and Printing
Office Bills.
FOB the convenience of residents at Out-
stations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums but only the l, 2 and 3 cent
values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that. Money Orders be sent if possible.
J. C. SWAYNE,
Manager, Govt. Printing Office.
"GLORIA INCANDESCENT
LANTERNS.
800 Candie Power at Brilliant Light at a cost that is far cheaper than any other known method of producing artificial light.
Suitable for Indoor or Outdoor Illumination.
Will Burn Kerosene or Benzine
With Equal Facility.
Nothing to. wear out. break or get out of
order.
Made of heavy gauge brass, nickel plated, fitted with a reinforced mica chimney.
Price $20(Twenty Dollars) each.,
Complete with all fittings and one
spare Generator.
Spare Mantles $4.80 per dozen. Spare Generators 72 cents each.
Obtainable from
VANSCOLINA & COMPANY.
Sole Agents.
LABUAN, S. S.
NOTICE.
NOTICE is hereby given that the partnership here-tofore existing between, LIM OH LIEW, LIM OH PHIO, LIM THIAN SANG, LIM THIAN LAI, LIM THIAN HO, LIM THIAN KHAY, LIM OH CHAI, LIM THIAN HAI, LIM THIAN LIANG and LIM THIAN TECK, carrying on business, at No. 88 Main Bazaar. Kuching, under the style or firm of ENG WHATT has been dissolved by mutual con sent on the 26th July 1919 and the aforesaid LIM THIAN LIANG and LIM THIAN TECK retire from the partnership and have no further interest in the firm nor will be responsible as from the above date for any debts incurred by the said business.
An agreement to the above effect has duly been registered in the Supreme Court. Kuching, and the under signed, LIM OH LIEW, LIM OH PHIO, LIM THIAN SANG. LIM THIAN LAI, LIM THIAN HO, LIM THIAN KHAY. LIM On CHAI and LIM THIAN HAI are now sole proprietors of Chop ENG WHATT.
(Sgd.) LIM OH LIEW
,. LIM OH PHIO
.. LIM THIAN SANG
LIM THIAN LAI
., LIM THIAN HO (Sgd.) LIM TH IAN LIANG LIM THIAN KHAY LIM THIAN TECK LIM OH CHAI	Retired Partners.
., LIM THIAN HAI
Sole Proprietors.
Kuching, 11th August, 1919.
238	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1919.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1919. 239
Kuching, Coasting Trade Returns for the month of July, 1919.
IMPORTS.
F. G. DAY
Registrar of Trade.
Rainfall, July,
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
ALMANA.
SEPTEMBER, 1919.
ARRIVALS.
PER ", s. Kuching: 21st August- From SingaporeFr. A. Haidegger, Messrs. Holl, C. Kee Ong, Ng Fai Nam, N. SZE Thong and 1 Chinese lady.
PER s. s. Sarawak:- 24th August-From SadongMr. E. H. Haldane.
PER S. S. Rajah of Sarawak:29th AugustFrom Singapore -Mr. and Mis. Philpott, Mrs. L. Miang Yang, Mr. G. Teng Chew and Lim Yit Pho.
DEPARTURES
PER H - Rajah of Sarawak: -19th AugustFor Singapore -Mr. I. Shelton, Revd. A. G. Gamble, Mrs Greene, Mr. and Mrs. Skinner and child. Hon. A. B. and Mrs. Ward and 2 children, Mr. and Mrs Graham-White and 2 children, Mr. Y. Takanobu, Mr and Mrs. Owen and 2 children and Mr. P. E. Cox and child.
PER S.S. Sarawak- 25th August- For SibuMiss Chap-
man and Mrs Zinn.
PER S. S. Kuching26th August -For Singapore Messrs. S. Kia Hok, K. Ah Ee. K. Seiw Kim, Mrs. C. Hong Szo, Miss M. Chan, Miss C H. Yew, Mrs. C. M. Lee, Mrs S. Hoi Jeo. Messrs. T. Joon Teck, Ng Fai Nam, Mr. and Mrs. O. Siaw Sian and Mr. L Shin Fong.
240	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1919.
SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
Departures.
SYN BIN LEONG & CO.,
22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS.
Beer, Wine, Spirit & General Store Dealers.
:(o):	SOLE AGENTS FOR :
FRASER & NEAVES AERATED WATERS
(The Best throughout the East.)
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic
Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at
$1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 catties of dry rubber.
ASAHI BEER.
ACETIC ACID.
: (o):	Fresh supplies of Stores are received
regularly.
PRICES MODERATE.
Free delivery to customers in Kuching.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

Race 2. The J. B. Archer Memorial Handicap.
Ponies Division II. 5 furlongs.
Mr. Phillip Soh Fu’s
1.	Smoke Screen	8.4	Tau En
2.	Suiyuan	8.13	(8.6)	Eddie
3. Victory Parade	8.9	Samsudin
4.	Hot Spur II	8.3	(7.13) Liben
Also ran:—Cabaret 8.8 Ek Pah, Miss Kudat 8,5 (7.12) Mat II.
Distances: 2 lengths, length, 2 lengths.
Time: 1 minute 26 seconds. Tote : $2.50.
Smoke Screen led all the way from Victory Parade and Miss Kudat with Suiyuan lying handy. Suiyuan put in a good late run to gain second place.
Race 3. The Flying Fox Handicap Ponies Division I. 5 furlongs.
Mr. Phillip Soh Fu's
1.	Happy Ending	7.7	Seblie
2.	Lucky Boy	11.5	(10.12)	Joon Loi
3.	Chienlimah	9.1	Matnor
4.	Kaswari	8.1	(7.8)	Manan
5.	Gobi	8.9	Samsudin
Distances: 3 lengths, 2 lengths, 2 lengths.
Time: 1 minute 23 seconds. Tote: $4.90.
Chienlimah got nicely away but was overtaken by Lucky Boy after half a furlong and the rest of the field closed up at the 3 furlongs. Happy Ending took the lead in the straight and went on for an easy win.
Race 4. The Chai Chiang Handicap.
Horses Division II. 5 furlongs.
"Ecko" Stable's
1.	Bunga Singapura 8.4	Tau En
2.	Knight Gallant	9.0	Samsudin
3. Remember Me	8.10	Haie
4.	Atlantas	8.10	Matnor
Also ran: —Kanda 8.12 Ek Pah, Brightstar Minstrel 8.10 (8.5) Mat I, Musketeer 8.4 Wan Nordin.
Distances: 3 lengths, 1 lengths, length.
Time: 1 minute 7 2/5 seconds. Tote : $3.50.
Bunga Singapura led from Knight Gallant all the way. Kanda lay third until the straight where she was overtaken by Atlantas but Remember Me finished strongly to overhaul both of them for third place.
Race 5. The Spring Handicap.
Horses Division I. 5 furlongs.
Mr. Ong Soo Keng's
1.	Blondie	8.2	Tau En
2.	Alton	8.7	Matnor
3.	Craughan	8.0	Lundu
4.	Cherith	11.1	Ek Pah
Also ran:—Rosy Morn 8.9 (8.2) Marup, Gay Bird 8.3 (8.7) Sirat.
Distances: 2 lengths, 2 lengths, Distance. Time: 1 minute 6 seconds. Tote: $2.10,
Blondie led Alton by several lengths all the way. Alton was going well at the end and closed a large gap. Craughan pulled away from the remainder of the field to gain third place.
Race 6. The Sekama Handicap.
Ponies Division III. 5 furlongs.
Mr. Ong Kee Hui's
1.	Tanjong Hijau 8.8	Mat III
2.	Lintang Lad	8.0 (8.7)	Bujang
3.	Phoenix	8.11(9.4)	Mat I
4. Silver Star	8.0 (8.7)	Sintek
Also ran :—Tidak Apa 9.6 (9.13) Seblie, Brisbane River 9.1 (9.8) Omboy, Bintang Aru 8.12 (9.5) Liben, Oriental 8.12 (9.5) Putit, Bujang Samsu 8.10 (9.5) Sahari, Kudat Prince 8.6 (8.13) Mat II.
Distances: 5 lengths, 3 lengths, 1 length.
Time: 1 minute 27 seconds. Tote: $31.10.
This being an apprentices' race there was the usual trouble of riders being unable to control their mounts at the start and the race was, as expected, delayed for some time. When the field finally got away Tanjong Hijau was quickly out by himself and gained such a tremendous lead that it was obvious nothing could catch him. Lintang Lad and Phoenix led the rest of the field and the order remained the same throughout the race.
Race 7. The Brown Jack Stakes Ponies Division II. 1 mile.
Mr. Phillip Soh Fu's
1.	Happy	Ending	9.10	Seblie
2.	Mongol	8.1	Eddie
3.	Cabaret	9.5	Lundu
4.	Hot Spur II	8.6	(7.13) Liben
Also ran:—Bintang Selatan 9.10 (9.3) Joon Loi, Victory Parade 8.3 Samsudin.
Distances: 2 lengths, distance, 1 length.
Time: 2 minutes 23 seconds. Tote: $3.10.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 27, 1953.
37
When the field settled down Mongol was the leader from Cabaret. Hot Spur came up into second plnce at the 5 and Happy Ending started to make up ground. Happy Ending took the lead at the 3 furlongs and went on for an easy win.
Race 8. The Ong Ewe Hai Memorial Trial.
Ponies Division I. 1 mile.
Mr. F. Wee Cho Bian’s
1.	Suiyuan	7.7 (7.1)	Manan
2.	Atom Boy	8.13 (8.6)	Mat III
3.	Lordship	7.7 (7.8)	Liben
4.	Kaswari	9.12 (9.5)	Omboy
5.	Chienlimah	10.7	Matnor
6.	Gobi	9.5 (8.12) Putit
Distances: 4 lengths, length, 3 lengths.
Time: 2 minutes 22 seconds. Tote: $7.80.
Suiyuan led all the way and won without being extended. Lordship lay second until a few yards from the post where he was checked by a muddy patch on the rails and Atom Boy overtook him for second place. The top weight, Chienlimah, had been lying 3rd until the straight but the going was too heavy for him.
Race 9. The Matang Handicap.
Horses Division III. 6 furlongs.
"Sarawak” Stables
1.	Stars Remember 10.0	Matnor
2.	Heretic	9.12	Lundu
3.	First Ra	9.11	Haie
4.	Ramu	9.8	Samsudin
Also ran:—Sunny Valley 10.0 Ek Pah, Aurora 8.7 Usop, Fortune's Favourite 8.0 Wan Noordin.
Distances: 3 lengths, 2 lengths, length.
Time: 1 miuute 24 seconds. Tote: $8.00.
Ramu led First Ra and Stars Remember to the 4 furlongs where Stars Remember took the lead and went on for an easy win without coming uuder the whip. Heretic made up ground in the straight to gain second place.
SECOND DAY.
Race 1. The Padungan Handicap.
Ponies Division III. 3 furlongs.
Mr. Ong Kee Hui’s
1.	Tanjong Hijau	9.2 (8.9)	Mat III
2.	Bintang Aru	9.5	Tau En
3.	Bujang Samsu	9.6	Samsudin

[NEXT EXCERPT]

optimist who sallies forth armed with spear and net; it has in fact been called a vice.
The following arc the results of the principal
races
Long Bongs; 1st. Silver Cup Value $60 and $50,
2nd $30, 3rd $15.
1. Abang Hj. Dulgapar's Sri Pelor.
2. Ajans Sri Beluai.
3. Ugak's Gajah Kampong.
Won by 2 lengths, a fathom separating 2nd and 3rd.
Boats with 15 men, limited to crews and boats from the Saribas and Kalaka. 1st. Silver Cup
Value $50 and $45. 2nd $80. 3rd. $15
1 Abang Lidin's So Lalang.
2 Abang Dulsalam's Sri Kunding.
3 Abang Bujangs Singa Melumpat
A very close race won by feet. First two boats
from the Rimbas and 3rd. from Kabong. First
time this race has been held.
Champion Cup ; for Bedas with no restrictions as to length or crew 1st. prize Cup Value $70 and
$60. 2nd. $30, 3rd. $15.
1. Sim Choon Siang's Sri Naga.
2. Brangking's Sri Minta Nama.
3. F. A. W. Page-Turners Sri Kendacang.
An easy win. with 3rd. coming up fast on 2nd. at the finish.
Beda Race ; crews limited to 40 men. 1st. prize
$40, 2nd $20. 3rd. $10.
1. F. A. W. Page-Turners Sri Kendacang.
J. A. H. Hardies Sri Belalang.
2. Brangking's Sri Minta Nama.
3. Sim Choon Siangs Sri Naga.
Dead heat for first place. Other boats two lengths behind.
Beda Race; crews limited to 30 men 1st. prize
$30. 2nd. $15. 3rd. $7.50.
1. Lingga's Kuching Melumpat.
2. W. F. Dicks Sri Bayan.
3. Jembus Sri Terbang.
A very close race, only feet separating each boat.
Boats with 15 men, open to all comers. 1st. prize
$20, 2nd. $10, 3rd. $5
1. Gelanggangs Tedong Rantar.
2. Jani's Trinta Kasih.
3. Abang Bujang's Singa Melumpat.
Another close finish 1st. a Rimbas boat, and 3rd.
from Kabong. The 2nd. so far unbeaten in this
class here for many years.
Bongs; crews limited to 40 men; 1st. prize $40.
2nd. $20, 3rd. $10
1. Abang Hj. Dulgapar's Sri Pelor.
2. Ajans, Sri Beluai.
3. Lengs Rusa Lalang.
Another easy win for this boat with a very meagre crew for its size.
H. H. the Rajah's Cup, open to all comers, with no restrictions as to the build or length, or the number of crew. 1st. prize Cup Value $100 and $2 to each member of the crew. 2nd $1 to each member of crew, 3rd. 50 cents to each member of crew.
1. F. A. W. Page-Turner's Sri Kendawang.
2. J. A. H. Hardies Sri Belalang.
3. Datu and Abang Dul Sri Belalang Biak.
An easy win after the 2nd. boat bad a good lead, thrown away by bad steering.
Consolation Race-, Winners of 1st. prizes barred. 1st. $40. 2nd. $20, 3rd. $10
1. Datu and Abang Duls Sri Belalang Biak.
2. Brangkings Sri Minta Nama.
3. J. A. H. Hardie's Gayau Beradai.
A good try for this race was made by the Sri Belalang and Sri Kendawang crews exchanging boats, coming in first and second, but being later disqualified for this fruitless effervescence of spirit.
Two races for the Ulu Ai were arranged and both ended with the crews paddling standing up in their boats, us is their custom up the gravel beds and swift flowing reaches up river.
The Peace-making at Simanggang.
The Pence-making between the Ulu Ai Dayaks and the Skrang, Layer and Lemanak Dayaks, which had been agreed upon by their meeting at Krangan Telans in June took place before His Highness the Rajah at Simanggang on the 4th. August.
This tribal feud has been existent for a great many years
and, though the Ulu Ai surrendered to (Government at Lubok Antu in 1909 after a series of expeditions had been lend against them for many years previously, their mutual enmity with these tribes had never been settled, as raids on the Ulu Layer in 1914, and Ulu Skrang in 1915, by the Ulu Ai Dayaks, and on the Delok by the Skrang in 1916 bear witness.
Attempts have been made previously to effect a settlement but have always failed owing to the extravagant demands of the Ulu Ais.
At the meeting at Krangan Telaus on 3rd. June however, after the Mepi. Meniang, Delok and Jingin had been visited by the A. D. O., Mr. J. A. H. Hardie, with a number of Pengulus from down-river, the Saribas and Kaluka, an agreement was reached whereby the Ulu Batang Ais should hand over 20 and the Engkaris 10 benaga jars to the Skrangs, Layers and Lemanaks, which tribes in turn would each give them 10 benaga jars in exchange. Thereby the honour of both sides was very simply satisfied.
This custom amongst Dayaks dates from time immemorial and is known as the palit mata sapu moa literally to dry the eyes and wipe the face, " meaning that, once this exchange has been effected, all grief for those killed in the feud is assuaged. No Dayak peace has ever been lasting without this ceremony, as so many pig-killings bear testimony. The jars exchanged are kept in the houses of the headmen of the respective tribes as tangible tokens ' of the settlement of the feud. At the lime of the ceremony of exchanging these jars, terrible curses are uttered by the chief headman of either side on whoso should at any future date reopen the feud by taking the head of an aforetime enemy.

[NEXT EXCERPT]

