
VOL. LVI.
No. 877.

THE
Sarawak Gazette
PRICE	KUCHING, Friday, October 1st, 1926.	20 CENTS.
Contents.
Agriculture	—	—	•••	••• 251
Birth—Wee Chong Bee	...	...	251
Notes ...	...	•••	•••	••• 253
The Rajah Charles. Brooke Memorial — Leper Settlement... 254
H.H. the Rajah’s Birthday	...	...	...254
A Trip in Dutch Borneo	...	...	...254
Sibu Notes...	...	—	255
Wireless Notes ...	, •••		256
Extracts from ‘‘Popular Science” ...	...	... 257
Club News: —
     Sarawak Club—Bowling Handicap	...	... 257
                      Race Week. Bowls Tournament
(Handicap) ...	... 257
  Race Week, Optional Pool Tourna-
ment {Handicap)	...	...	257
Race Week. Tennis Tournament
(Handicap)	...	...	257
                      Bowling Averages	...	...	258
Mens’ Double open Tennis Cham-
pionship ...	...	... 258
     Sarawak Golf Club—Monthly Competition (bogey)
Result	...	... 258
                                 Optional Sweep on above ... 	258
     Sarawak Turf Club—Autumn Meeting, Handicaps ... 258
Placing Notes	...	•••	••	• ••	252
Ngavan ka Skrang	...	...	•••	•••	259
Monthly Reports:- First Division	...	...	260
                    Second Division	...	...	203
                    Third Division	...	...	206
                    Coast Division	...	...	268
                    Fifth Division	...	...	271
Kuching Trade Returns	...	...	...	272
Passengers	...	...	—	—	278
Miri Trade Returns	...	...	...	...	274
Kuching Market Price List	...	...	...	275
Kuching Shipping	...	...	...	...	276
Miri Shipping	...	...	...	...	277
Kuching Shipping Returns	...	...	...	278
Rainfall ...	...	...	-	...	279
Meteorological Returns	...	...	...	280
FRIDAY, OCTOBER 1. 1926.
Birth.
WEE CHONG BEE.—ON the 11th September, 1926, to Mr. and Mrs. WEE CHONG BEE, a son.
    Mrs. Oban Hoong Sze and family wish to convey their sincere thanks to all relatives and friends who attended the funeral of the late Mr. Chan Hoong Sze, and also all those who sent wreaths, telegrams and letters of condolence.
AGRICULTURE.
RUBBER VERSUS RICE.
   PERUSAL of the interesting Annual Report
of the Department of Trade and Customs for
the year 1925 reveals facts which lead one
furiously to think.
   To quote the Report “rice imports show a
further increase of 50,000 piculs valued at
$440,000. The following figures, showing
the importation of this staple food since 1922,
are significant:—
1922	...	132,291	piculs valued at $ 903,899
1923	...	224,247	„	„	„	1,523,710
1924	...	273,003	„	,,	„	2,179,827
1925	...	323,220	„	„	„	2,620,852
   “	These figures are not wholly attribu-
table to failure of crops or increase of
immigration, but largely due to partial or
complete abandonment of their farming life
by large sections of the natives of the country
in favour of rubber planting. So long as the
price of this latter commodity keeps high
enough to enable them to procure all their
household needs from its sale, there need be
no cause for alarm. But, in the case of any
heavy slump in rubber, and more especially
in the event of the failure of crops in the
countries from which we now look for our
needs, or such a calamity as the possible out-
break of war involving nations with interests
in the Pacific, a very serious position would
have to be faced. It can only be hoped that
the Agricultural Department in time will be
enabled to provide remedies to deal with all
such possible dangers	”
   “	So long as it pays the natives
better to plant rubber and buy their rice, they will naturally prefer to do less hard work on their padi farms than in previous years	”


252
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.
   “	Towards the end of the year, the
export duty on rubber was increased in order
to form the nucleus of a reserve to meet any
such possible difficulties as I have touched on
in the future. This fund might also, I would
suggest, be drawn on for the purpose I have
suggested	”
   It is also interesting to compare remarks
by our Straits and F.M.S. contemporaries
regarding the agricultural question in general
and rubber in particular. The Malaya
Tribune states, “Sarawak shows to a much
more marked extent than even Malaya the
tendency which is manifest throughout this
part of the world to abandon highly profitable
minor agricultural and forest industries in
favour of rubber, which, as we have so often
urged, is and should be a capitalist crop.
The small man cannot afford to depend on the
fortunes of the rubber market, nor can his
country afford to give up economic securities
of no small value to the population in times
of trouble in the major industries	”
   Again, the Straits Times of September
10th, “	there have been times and it
is possible that these times may recur when
rubber prices fall to a figure at which it did
not pay the smallholder to carry on. Rubber
growing is essentially a product to cultivate
on a large scale with ample capital available
not only to fall back upon in lean days but also
to enable growers to keep abreast of the latest
scientific discoveries in the methods of ward-
ing off diseases and to carry on experiments,
the improved method of culture such as
bud-grafting. It must be admitted that
when rubber is at a fair price, a Malay small-
holder makes money but when prices fall to a
figure at which it is no longer economical for
him to tap he finds himself in a very
precarious position, indeed a lamentable
position. Rubber has brought us so much
prosperity that we are, perhaps, apt to think
too much in terms of this valuable product to
the neglect of others which we may properly
say are essential to this country’s welfare; for
example, rice and foodstuff generally, olea-
ginous products, spices and indigenous fruits
all of which are more suitable for the small-
holders than rubber	”
  “	In Gurgalm in India there has
been established a school of Rural Economics
directed for periods by native teachers who
become eventually “village-guides.” They
are sent into the village and there reside and
work among the people acting towards them
as guides, philosophers and friends. The
villages are beginning to appreciate them and
as a consequence heavier crops are resulting
owing to better methods of culture being
adopted	”
   Here then is the crux : we are not convinced, in so far as Sarawak is concerned that I when the price of rubber falls to a figure at I which it is no longer economical for a smallholder to tap, the local inhabitants need find themselves in a very precarious or lamentable position at present, yet, although it cannot l)e anything but a matter for regret that the imports of rice have shown a steady increase from 132,291 piculs in 1922 to 323,220 piculs during 1925, we feel relieved to know that these same smallholders could, and undoubtedly would, with little difficulty resume their prior activities amongst the jungle products, which fortunately still abound in thiscountry.
   This, however, is no remedy for what is obviously an undesirable state of affairs, not  peculiar only to Sarawak, and we are of the  opinion that an early attempt should be made to attack the problem by removing, gradually, one of the main faults, which perhaps is peculiar to Sarawak. We mean the wasteful and destructive methods still employed by the more primitive inhabitants whose chief occupation is the cultivation of padi, especially hill padi.
   Conservative in their customs and as yet unenlightened by modern methods they are content to destroy thousands of acres of timbered land annually in order to plant their crop; seldom, if ever, is the same area planted for two years in succession, often an interval of as much as seven years elapsing during which period the ground is supposed to lie fallow.
   Ploughing or tilling is practically unknown
in Sarawak, even in the plains, and it is this
fact which should be realized from the outset
if Sarawak hopes to become self-supporting
in the matter of her staple foodstuff.
   There is further food for immediate
thought in the fact that padi can be stored
for at least five years, and it would be well
to consider the feasibility of building up a
sufficient reserve to tide over any possible
normal period of crisis.
   A policy for smallholders of “don’t plant
rubber,” but plant other things, is perhaps
hardly justifiable here, yet. Were the
average man, who agrees with that policy,
asked what would he plant himself, if he had
only a small amount of capital, he will answer
rubber, nine times out of ten. It seems to us,
wiser to decide first what should be planted
by Sarawak natives, in addition to rubber,
and then distribute “guides, philosophers and
friends” to advise them how to do it through
the medium of the Agricultural Department,
who could perhaps also improve the shining
hour by periodical lectures in the many
Government Lay Schools.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.
253
NOTES.
(September.)
   His Highness the Rajah sailed from Europe for Sarawak on the 17th September, and is expected in Kuching about 11th October.
   MR. H. L. Owen, Resident, Fourth Division, returned to Miri on the 8th after a short visit to Kuching.
   MR. N. A. Middlemas, Superintendent of Surveys, returned to Kuching on the 11th after a visit of inspection to the Third Division.
   MR. and Mrs. W. Service left Kuching on the 4th by s.s. Soon Ann. A large party of friends were present to bid them bon voyage.
   Mr. Service retires after twenty-four years of Government Service in Sarawak as Superintendent Engineer and Surveyor of Ships.
   Not long before their departure, a very happy celebration took place at their residence on the occasion of their silver wedding, the first in Sarawak, we believe, and many handsome gifts were presented by a large circle of friends.
   We wish them both the best of health and luck for many years to come.
   THE Wireless Station at Matu, Rejang delta is completed, and traffic commenced on the 17th September.
   WE welcome to Sarawak Mrs. A. S. Lowe, wife of Captain A. S. Lowe of the Public Works Department who returned from home furlough on the 16th; also Mr. L. Gregory of the Chartered Bank who arrived on the 6th to relieve Mr. J. A. McCullagh who left on the 11th on home leave.
  MR. G. A. Lefory arrived in Kuching on
the 7th on a visit from Australia and spent
a few days touring the local vicinity.
  MR. F. H. Kortright left Kuching on the
17th by the s.s. Soon Ann on seven months’
furlough.
  THE marriage of Miss Jessie Harvey to Mr.
W. G. Tait took place in Singapore recently.
After a honeymoon in the F.M.S. the happy
couple arrived on the 20th in Kuching where
Mr. Tait has taken up the appointment of
Chief Assistant in the Department of Tele-
graphs. We wish them both the best of luck.
  A very severe storm broke over Kuching
during the night of the 10th, causing a good
deal of damage in the kampongs, where not
a few houses were blown down, fortunately
without any casualties. This appears to have heralded an early “landas” this year as heavy rain has fallen in Kuching with annoying persistency about 4 p.m. every day during the latter half of the month. We can only hope that there will be a respite during the approaching Race Week.
  GOVERNMENT office hours in Kuching are now 8.30 a.m. to 12 noon and 1.30 p.m. to 4 p.m.
  RAPID progress is now being made on the Race Course with the erection of new stables, offices, etc., and paddock, which will cover an area of about an acre in rear of the grand stand, and should be completed in time for the Meeting next month.
  It has recently been decided, we are informed, to do away with all selling lotteries in future, and that totalizators will be increased. There will be a members’ $2 Tote for Place and/or Win, as well as a public $1 Tote for Place and/or Win. There will also be a Cash Sweep on every race, limited to 500 $2 tickets with the exception of the last race of the meeting, round the course, on which there will be an unlimited number of $2 tickets.
  PANGGI, the Dyak Policeman, who com-
mitted the atrocious “amok” in Kuching
bazaar on the 17th September last year, and
who has been under arrest at the General
Hospital ever since, was sentenced to death
on the 20th instant and duly executed.
   
   WE are asked to record that our Note in the
Gazette dated 1st July, to the effect that we
had recently heard the wife of Mr. O. Lang
had presented him with a son is quite true,
but somewhat belated by 5 years! However,
kind friends who really intended to present
Christening Cups are requested to hurry up !
   BETONG bazaar, in the Upper Saribas, was
reported on the 21st to have been completely
destroyed by fire, leaving destitute many
Chinese traders.
   A large consignment of rice and foodstuffs
was despatched by Government for their
relief. No further details have yet been
received by us.
Malay as she is spoke:—
DEAR	.....
   Sorry, saya tidak dapat tulis bagai men-
charitakan yang panjang sama Tuan kerana
ini kapal lekas berlayer.
   Fasal I punya tial belom lagi certain
kerana belom ada saya dapat panggilan
deripada Resident, wasalam.	
Signed		
[Extract from a letter.—Ed.]


254
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.
The Rajah Charles Brooke Memorial.
          LEPER SETTLEMENT.
  The trial period of the Leper Settlement at the 13th Mile is now at an encl, a mi His Highness the. Rajah has definitely sanctioned the erection there of stable and comfortable dwellings for the inmates to gradually take the place of the temporary huts that were built when the abandonment of Satang was decided upon. It may be stated here that the original announcement of the alteration of locality appears to have been misunderstood as casting aspersions upon the Committee that selected Satang. Such an assumption is unwarranted. The gentlemen who composed the Committee took a great deal of trouble and spent much time in an exhaustive inquiry into various localities before their decision (which was approved by Government) was made. The difficulties that subsequently arose in connection with transport and staff were not such as could have been foreseen by them, since the decision was not made hastily, but every aspect, short of actual trial, was considered before the settlement was built. The funds so generously donated to this object cannot be considered spent in vain, as though the site has been shifted, the founders have achieved their object in instituting a Leper Hospital in Sarawak that even now. in its initial stages, probably compares favourably with any similar institution in the tropics.
  It must be borne in mind that the-treatment of leprosy has undergone considerable expansion recently and modern research has opened up vista® of fresh possibilities for sufferers of which there was little indication even a few years ago.
  The settlement at the 13th Mile is developing rapidly on modern lines. There is constant interchange of correspondence with leading settlements in the East, and new methods that have proved successful elsewhere are, whenever practicable, adopted without delay.
  The new buildings are being erected by the lepers themselves under the supervision of Mr. Clunies-Ross. They receive wages for their labour, and every effort is made towards fostering the mental atmosphere that is now realized to play such an important part in the general treatment of this malady.—(Communicated.)
His Highness the Rajah’s Birthday.
MILITARY PARADE AND DISTRIBUTION OF
LONG SERVICE MEDALS.
  Favoured with an interval of perfect weather the Parade, in honour of His Highness the Rajah's birthday, of the Sarawak Rangers under Captain W. T. Clark, Acting Commandant, and a detachment of Sarawak Police under Mr. S T. Ennion. took place at 8 a.in. on the 27th September, at the Parade Ground, Fort Margherita, in the presence of a large gathering of spectators.
  His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by the Acting Chief Secretary, Mr. H. B. Crocker. having inspected the troops on parade, a salute of 21 rounds was fired by a mountain battery of four guns, with feu de joie by the Rangers during the intervals between every seven rounds, the Police presenting arms while the Sarawak Anthem was played by the Rangers’ Bund. The Acting Commandant then called for three cheers for His Highness the Rajah and was lustily responded to by all present.
  The troops, after performing various evolutions, passed the base in close column, where His Highness the Tuan Muda, as representative of His Highness the Rajah, took the salute. The parade then
formed a hollow square from the centre of which His Highness the Tuan Muda, attended by the Acting Chief Secretary and the Datu Bandar, presented long service decorations to recipients who were present in accordance with the list published in the Sarawak Government Gazette dated 16th September”, and who were called forward in the order of their years of service, Mr. H. B. Crocker and Mr. A. E. Lawrence heading the list.
  At the conclusion of these proceedings, which lasted about an hour, the Sarawak Rangers gave a display of physical exercises with arms, the Rangers’ Band rendering a musical accompaniment. The smartness of the whole parade reflects great credit on the officers and men of both forces.
  The parade having been dismissed, a photograph was taken of all medallists who then, together with the Europeans and leading members of various communities present, repaired to the Grand Stand where the health of His Highness the Rajah was proposed by His Highness the Tuan Muda and heartily toasted.
  During the afternoon the Annual Sports took place on the playing field of St. Thomas’ School, results of which will be published in our next issue.
  In the evening His Highness the Tuan Muda kindly extended invitations to an “At Home” at the Astana where a large number of guests enjoyed dancing and cards, to a late hour. Unfortunately the cinematograph machine broke down at the last moment thereby disappointing not a few who would also have been able to enjoy an al fresco programme.
A Trip in Dutch Borneo.
  The following brief account of a journey around the North-West Bornean Coast and the interior of Dutch Borneo, may be of interest to readers of the Gazette.
  Leaving Santubong on Sunday the 22nd August, at 6.0 a.m. in a small thirty-two foot sailing boat, and accompanied by two natives, I set a course for Satang, which was passed at 9.0 a.in. From Satang we continued, passing Sampadi at 2.0 p.m., and continuing with a favourable sea we passed Lundu at 5 30 p.m. During the day we had the good fortune to haul in a young shark on the low line, which provided an addition to the food supply. At 6.30 p.m., a fresh breeze springing up and the sky becoming overcast, we decided to make for Tanjong Batu where we tied up at 8.0 p.m. We were just m time, for the storm broke, amt we could do nothing but wait for a lull; towards midnight, however, the weather improved a little and we put off, intending to head for Tallang Islands.
  At 3.0 a.m. the wind rose and, being obliged to lower the sail, we drifted back on our course and, becoming more and more uncertain as to our position, we waited for dawn. At dawn we found ourselves at a point ten miles north of Sampadi Island, which had been passed at 2.0 p.m. the previous day. Heading again for Talang Islands, with a very favourable wind, we arrived there at 3.0 p.m. ; after being ashore for an hour, during which time, amongst other things, we collected some turtles eggs, then put off for Pirate Bay. We there took the opportunity of taking fresh water aboard and, leaving immediately, it was then 8 0 p.m., we went due north; sailing ail night, we rounded Tanjong Datu at 6.0 a.m. on Tuesday the 24th.
  Hugging the coast we reached Telok Limau Manis at 3.0 p.m. and stayed there the night, enjoying a little shooting before it became dark. On Wednesday the 25th we lifted anchor at 5.0 a.m. and made for Tanjong Api and, with a favourable wind during the whole day, we passed the cape at 10 p.m. the same evening. Continuing all night with a rather heavy sea we arrived at Sungei Paloh


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.	255
on the morning of the 26th, the first Dutch Customs 
station. After inspection we sailed out of the river
for Sambas, arriving there at 6.30 a.m. on the
following day, 27th, the sea throughout the night
having become rather worse. Provisions were 
obtained in the town and taken on board, when we
set out for Singkawang arriving them at 8.0 p.m.
   Here I had the good fortune to meet Mr.
Breekveld, the Controleur, who kindly made him-
self my host. On the following day Saturday, at 8.0
a.m. we put out for Pontianak, but after a three
hours' attempt against the heavy seas we were
compelled to return. Mr. Breekveld, who was about
to leave for Pontianak by road, advised me that as
the rough weather had set in, I should be taking 
unwarranted risks in setting out again by sea, and
invited me to go with him by road. We left
Singkawang at 9 0 a.m. the next morning, and
accomplished the 95 mile journey to Pontianak in
6 hours. At Pontianak the car was ferried across
the river to the town and thus the first half of my
journey was completed.
   After calling on Mr. Meyer, the Resident General, 
I was invited to Witness an interesting Malay and 
Chinese lantern procession, which was a part of the 
festivities then in progress in honour of the birth-
day of H. M. The Queen of the Netherlands. Ata
dance the same evening I had the pleasure of
meeting Mr. Krol who, it will be remembered, was 
in Kuching recently. I stayed in Pontianak until 
the 6th of September. The European community 
showed me almost overwhelming hospitality; the 
time being spent in a series of social events of a
nature in keeping with the happy origin of the 
festivities.
   It was now time to begin my return journey and.
owing to the state of the sea and being advised
that it would be impossible to make the journey
without undue risk, I accepted an invitation to 
travel through the interior along the great Kapuas
River. On the 6th of September we left at 10 a.m.
with a number of outstation controleurs in house-
boats towed by motor launches.
   The next morning we arrived at Tanyan, where
we bid farewell to Mr. and Mrs. Krol. We took in tow
the houseboat of Mr. and Mrs. Eman and, passing
numerous picturesque outstations in charge of Nat-
tive Officers, we arrived at Sanggau on Thursday
the 9th at 10 p.m. Here we stayed the night as the
guests of Mr. and Mrs. Eman whom we left at 9.0
a.m. the following morning. At midnight we arrived 
at Sekadau and the following day at 2.30 p.m. 
reached Sin tang where the Assistant Resident, Mr. 
Radersma, entertained us. Here I was asked to take 
charge of a Sarawak prisoner who bad escaped from
Simanggang.
   Leaving Sintang at 2.0 p.m. on Monday the 13th
we bid good-bye to Mr. C. J. Ysselstyn, the
Controleur of Naga Pinoh. Passing Selat at 4.30
p.m. on the 14th we arrived at Semitau at 2.30 p.m.
on the following day.
   My journey now lay overland, and I left Mr. J. J.
van Kempe Valk, Controleur of Poetoes Sibau, and
stayed with Mr. Werkman of Semitau for two days
in preparation for the journey.
   On the 17th I left by sampan for the lakes of Pulo
Majan with coolies and prisoner, staying there the
night. On the following morning we set out on
foot to Naga Bad an, spending the night there. The
next day, setting out for Luhok Antu, we crossed
the border at 9.0 a m. on the 19th and reached Lubok
Antu three hours later. Two days later on reach-
ing Simanggang I was relieved to hand over the
prisoner to Mr. Page-Turner with whom I stayed
before returning to Kuching.
   I arrived at Kuching on the 22nd of September,
the whole journey having taken five weeks.
W. L. CLARK.
Sibu Notes.
   The recent big arrivals of immigrants into Sibu
have become one of the things to go and see—not
that the conditions are any loo pleasant; in fact,
those who possess over sensitive noses had better
remain in the Club. A long journey from China,
including a stay in Singapore, and much shipping
and transhipping under conditions far from ideal
does not make the weary travellers very presentable,
added to which personal cleanliness has so far
possibly been a very minor detail in the minds of
most of them.
   When possible the Port Health Officer meets the
ship some way down the river and attempts to
examine the majority of the voyagers before Sibu is
reached. To accompany the doctor gives one an
inkling into many things of which, perhaps, we
were ignorant of before and causes the inquiring one
furiously to think. Under supervision of attendant
dressers and the ship's staff the male, immigrants
are lined up in a queue (or the celestial idea of one)
—coats off and trousers pulled up above the knees.
By the doctor’s side stands a vaccinator with lymph
and disinfectant ready. The word is given to start
in—off we go!! One by one the meu and boys
squeeze themselves into position before the doctor.
There is no time for messing about—with anything
from two to four hundred people to examine time is
an object.
   The doctor goes at it in an experienced way—
“heart all right—lungs fairly so—what are those
scars?”—“ had them long? "—“feel his legs—yes,
he’ll do”—"been vaccinated? ”—“No”—“pass him
on to the dresser." “Next one please” ! hurry
up.”—An old man totters along—“what is your
age?’’—forty !!—looks like sixty to me! Indeed
it would appear so to any one—scraggy grey beard
and weak eyes—“good enough, let him through."
Next one—a small boy. “Just walk along the deck
a bit, please.” The child tries to do so but fails
miserably. The doctor turns round and whispers a
certain disease in my ear—“keep him apart, dresser,
until I can see him later.” And so on for over an
hour—some gel through—indeed the majority—but
some are told to stand aside.
   The women and infants come next. Tn my mind
these are the most pathetic of all. Anxious mothers
clinging fondly to wizened little babies whose heads
are covered with sores—little faces covered in boils
—dreadful discharging eyes —little children who are
said to be three years old but who appear to one to
have hardly reached a year. The mothers too are
often weary to breaking point—weak from Crying
to bring up large families on starvation diet. One
by one these women are passed along and most grit
through as it is perfectly obvious that their wretched
appearance is mostly the result of privations and
dirt.
   The ship is now alongside the wharf and the
immigrants are crowding the sides of the vessel
watching the animated scene below. Boatloads
of their fellow countrymen are hovering round the
ship shouting and gesticulating—the barriers behind
the wharf are besieged by a clamouring mob of their
own people, flow sleek and prosperous they look
to the weary voyagers—indeed it would seem that at.
last they had reached the promised land.
   On the wharf the Government officials prod and
push the passengers as they stop ashore in an
attempt to get them moving and on into the examin-
ing sheds. The big Sikh policemen and their shorter
Malay brothers may curse heartily at their apparent
stupidity and emit questionable jokes at their expense
—but who could have the heart to badger such a
crowd. Family parties sit on their luggage and


256
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.
refuse to be moved therefrom until father collects the whole of their belongings—mother shepherds a bevy of daughters along loudly calling for her male relations—little boys stagger in their efforts to help carry things far too heavy for their puny strength. The wharf is littered with a collection of articles which might be from a jumble sale—although what these bundles contain remains a mystery, as all are clothed alike in that particular lightish blue sacking material, a suit of which is said to last two years in Foochow—and there is never any idea of one suit on and one suit off.
  At last order is more or less restored. Towkays are claiming their own people, and the Customs officers are submerged in a stupendous pile of baggage which is in everybody’s’ way and which is the cause of the most raucous din mid uproar you ever heard.
  All things come to an end. however, and the sheds are slowly clearing. The unlucky ones are taken to the hospital—the others sleep where they can.
  To-morrow a new life is opening for these people — a life of surprises Everywhere are to be met their fellow countrymen—well fed, prosperous and contented. The local Government (what terrors have been connected with that name) takes no toll of their meagre belongings—the roads are safe for travel there is land to be obtained—their friends and relations explain that there is nothing more to be feared. Is it a wonder that at the first opportunity they send for their remaining friends in Foochow.
  Watch these people—notice their appearance in another year. Perhaps you think this description is too highly coloured? Well I come and see!
  Just my luck, you hear some unfortunate person say who has been caught, out in a deed which is committed daily by others but who have escaped detection. In this case, however, I don’t mind saying it was darned hard luck.
  The Little-Tin-Gods-On-Wheels of the Municipality decreed that bicyclists must not cany children (or anyone) on their handlebars, and the police were told to act accordingly.
  Think, therefore, of the confoundedly bad luck of a big burly Dyak in chawat and flowing hair who was hustled into my office one afternoon. I immediately had visions of an “amok” or of gory beads and other horrible ideas.
  Do you think it was anything like that? not on your life—the wretched man - the very first pukka- chawat-bicycle-riding-Dyak in Sibu had been collared for bringing his little son in on the handlebars ail the way from his native village, over an atrociously bumpy grass road with potholes at intervals.
  And this was the first (and up to now the only) case brought in ! Luck ! There ain’t no such thing.
* ? • • •
  It’s a poor heart that never rejoices (or, in other words, any old excuse for a binge); but it is not every day we say good-bye to the Air Survey Company who have spent the last six months in Sibu.
  On the 14th of August the Sibuites [“Sibues” would sound more appropriate, or perhaps “ sibutes. ” —Ed.] ? were the guests of the Company, and were welcomed on arrival by a bombardment which nearly blew the hungry revellers off the path altogether; in fact shattered nerves were only mended by a weird and wonderful “cup,” the secret of which I would not divulge for anything, that is to say even if I knew it. After dinner, the usual speeches having been made, and which varied with the individual, a move was made in the direction of the Great Treasure Hunt.
  A description of the Grand National might very well apply to the career of most of the runners. At a steady trot frantic efforts were made to negotiate the dykes and ditches with which Sibu is so well supplied. Panting runners vainly attemped to read the cryptic notices which were to put them on the scent, anti the most wonderful acrobatic feats were performed, albeit the stygian darkness covered these dauntless deeds. As was quite correct the brainiest runner (in spile of being carried most of the way on account of housemaid’s knee and a ruptured suspensory ligament) solved the enigma and Father Halder arrived back panting and proud to be awarded the prize.
  On the J5th a proclamation signed by three gentlemen invited all and sundry to the manor of Bah Maleng where revels lasted far into the night. Supper was laid in the grounds, and appetites were satisfied amidst the flowerbeds and pots.
  Owing to the excitement of the moment many details escaped our notice, but we do remember seeing one gentlemen devouring a plate of ice cream and earth with the greatest gusto, whilst another, mistrusting his fellow men, collected something of everything ai.d carefully withdrew to a distant part of the garden in order to enjoy himself.
  The members of the Company left by detachments within the next few days. Messrs. Vincent and Bishop flying to Singapore on the 17tb, Messrs. Raynham and Andrews on the 24th, whilst Mrs. Raynham and Messrs Durwood and Thorne left by more conservative methods of travel at different times. The sole survivor is now Mr. Parker who is inconsolable for the loss of his machines, and spends most of his time wandering round the deserted hangar like a spirit possessed.
  To all these, and to those who left previously, Captain mid Mr. Gaskell and Mr. Piercy, Sibu can only wish the very best of hick and hope that they will not forget the many friends they left behind.
THE OPTIMISTIC FIDDLER.
Wireless Notes.
  By an arrangement made previously with a shortwave wireless station in Las Cruces, New Mexico, a distance of about 9,000 miles from Sarawak, Kuching station was able to obtain news of the Dempsey-Tunney boxing at 8.40 p.m. on the 24th September, all the particulars available at the time of communication were received although signals through this great distance were weak. Transmission from Kuching, however, was reported as very strong in spile of the small power used here
  Communication was established with another station in England, this time in Wickford, Essex, owned by Mr. Mayer, on the J8th September at 4.55 a.m , signals from Kuching were reported good, this was proved also by conversation of an hour’s duration, no repetition being necessary at either end. A schedule was arranged for bi-weekly working.—(Contributed.)


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.
257
Extracts from “Popular Science.”
  Before an aeroplane is considered perfect it has to undergo 200 tests.
  The chance of one finger-print being exactly like another is one in 64,000,000,000.
  The average marriage age of girls in India is 12 ½  years.
Club News.
       Sarawak ClubBOWLING HANDICAPFOR AUGUST, 1926.           ?Score.H’cap.Total.R. C. Kay (winner) ...21588303J. A. McCullagh25250302G. D. W. Frayling ...27718295W. Cotterill25032282J. P. Baird281281D. Y. Proudfoot25320273A. M. Forrest18778265C. S. Griffiths21954263T. E. Walsh263263C. D. Adams22228250Dr. Marjoribanks ...235—235G. T. Bates1978205     The farthing is really a fourthing, or fourth part, Saxon pennies had grooves cut in them in the form of a cross so that they could be broken at will into four fourthings.
     Fabrics are now waterproofed by plating with a thin coat of rubber, the process much resembling the ordinary electroplating of metals. The process is said to simplify the water-proofing of garments to a great degree.
RACK WEEK BOWLS TOURNAMENT
(HANDICAP.)
  Kuching Entries close Thursday, 7th October, at 7 p.m.
  Kuching Members to roll off on Friday and Saturday, 8th and 9th October, at 6 p in.
  Outstation Entries close Saturday, 9th October, at 7 p.m.
  Outstation Members to roll off on Friday, 15th
October, at 6 p.m. sharp.
  Ballot for handicappers, 16th, 17th and 18th September.
  Entries (from Outstations to be notified to the Honorary Secretary by post, if possible) $1 each.
  The diameter of the sun decreases by five miles in a century. Its present distance across is 860,000 miles.
  Travellers on express trains running between Hamburg and Berlin can now telephone to their friends as easily as if they were at home.
  There are 256 railway stations within a six-mile radius of St. Paul’s Cathedral, London, while there are nearly 400 within a twenty-mile radius.
  The most destructive of all insects is the grasshopper which consumes ten times its own weight of vegetation in a single day.
RACE WEEK OPTIONAL POOL TOURNAMENT.
(Men's Doubles—Draw for Partners.)
(HANDICAP.)
Kuching Entries close Saturday, 18th September.
  Kuching Draw and Handicaps published Monday, 20th September, at noon.
  Kuching Members to play off Monday, 11th October.
  Outstation Entries close Saturday, 9tb October, at 7 p.m.
  Outstation Draw and Handicaps published Sunday, 10th October, at noon.
  Outstation Members to play off by Thursday, 14th October.
  Final between Kuching and Outstation Members on Friday, 15th October.
  Ballot for Handicappers, 16th, 17th, and 18th September.
  Entries (from Outstations to be notified to the Honorary Secretary by post, if possible) $1 each.
  Kuching finalists:—H. H. the Tuan Muda and R. W. Chater.
  Several varieties of fish can stand being frozen in blocks of ice and revive when conditions return to normal.
  A quarter-plate picture can now be transmitted by wireless between England and America from Marconi House, London, or from the Radio Corporation of America, New York, at a cost of £10.
  The big steel masts of the new wireless station near Rugby weigh 300 tons each and are 820 feet in height.
  A law has been passed in Turkey under which all persons contemplating marriage must submit to a medical examination.
RACE WEEK TENNIS TOURNAMENT.
(Doubles—Draw for Partners.)
(Ladies, Members of the New Club, eligible
for entry. After each lady has drawn
a man as partner, men will be
drawn together.)
(HANDICAP.)
  Kuching Entries close Saturday. 18th September, at 7 p.m.
  Kuching Draw and Handicaps published Monday, 20th September, at noon.
  Kuching Members to play off by Monday, 11th October.
  Outstation Entries close Saturday. 9th October, at 7 p.m.
  Outstation Draw and Handicaps published Sunday, 10th October, at noon.
  Outstation Members to play off by Thursday, 14th October.


258
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.
    Final between Kuching and Outstation members on Friday, 15th October.
    Ballot for Handicappers, 16tb, 17tb, and 18th September.
    Entries (from Outstations to lie notified to the Honorary Secretary by post, if possible) $1 each.
BOWLING AVERAGESFOR SEPTEMBER,1926.    Name.No. of GamesAverage.N. A. Middlemas ...         9141'7R. V. Carr       20188'511. H. the Tuan Muda         7137'8G. D. Adams	...       21125'2W. Cotterill	...       171’4'7J. P. Baird       11128’8R. W. Chater         6117'0G. T. Bates         8116’3G. D. W. Frayling ...       141160E. M. Marjjonbanks       14115'8D. Y. Proudfoot        71150T. E. Walsh        8118'5L. D. Kennedy        7111'7E. O. Bruce        7111'8A. M. Forrest         1105’9B. J. C. Spurway ...        5101’4A. E. Lawrence        598’8C. S. Griffiths	...        596.4R. C. Kay        894.1Mens' Doubles Open Tennis Championship
••THE SARAWAK CLUB COMMITTEE CUP”
Tie to be the best of 3 advantage setts, with best of 5 setts in final and challenge round.
    1st Round to be completed by 8th October.
    2nd „	„	„ 15th
      Final	...	18th
      Challenge	...	20th	„
Competitors to arrange for their umpire and linesmen.
Winners of Kuching Final to play 1925 Winners: Messrs. Aplin and Lim Soon.
Sub-Committee,	J. A. H. HARDIE,
    J. P. BAIRD,	Honorary Secretary.
    C. ERMEN.
    A. E. LAWRENCE.
          Sarawak Golf Club.
SEPTEMBER MONTHLY COMPETITION
(BOGEY) RESULT.
R V. Carr (6) 2 down, played off 3 down. (Winner.)
Capt. C. P. Lowe (9) 2 down, played off 0 down.
         OPTIONAL SWEEP ON ABOVE.
R. V. Carr drew the winner.
Sarawak Turf Club.

Autumn Meeting, 1926
FIRST DAY, 16TH OCTOBER.
Race No. 1.— 5 furlongs.
    1 Bagaimana
    2 Pegasus	...
    8 If
    9 Manna Buleh	...
    10 Ajaib
    11 Shotaway	...
Race No. 2.-3 furlongs.
    1 Azab
    2 Aladdin
    3 Mah Jongg
    4 Kuching
    5 Penghulu	—
    6 Ghalib
    7 Tony
    8 Bang
Race No. 3.-5 furlongs.
    2 Sisit
    3 Adham
    4 Sakbon
    6 Penglima
    7 Kilat
    8 Apa Kena
    9 Tolin
    10 Azab
Race No. 4.—6 furlongs.
1 Hopeless
2 Burak
3 Blazes
4 Kismet
5 Untong
6 Pengarah
7 Akal
8 Wembley
9 Azab
Division IV.

Divisions ?, III & IV.

8.12
8.10
8.10
8.7
Divisions II, III & IV.

Divisions I, II, III & IV.
                ...	10 0
                ...	9.10
9.0
                ...	8.12
8.7
8.7
8 7
8.5
7.7
Race No. 5.—4 furlongs. Division IV.
1 Bagaimana
2 Pegasus
3 If
4 Manna Buleh
5 Ajaib
6 Pitak
7 Shotaway
Race No. 6.—6 furlongs.
    1 Azab	...
    2 Mnh Jongg
    3 Aladdin	...
    4 Kuching
    fi Tony
    6 Hakcha
Race No. 7.-4 furlongs.
    1 Beaver	...
    2 Sakbon
    3 8isit
    4 Adham	...
    5 Kilat	...
    6 Apa Kena
    7 White Wings
    8 Tolin
    9 Azab
    10 Penghulu
    11 Bang
9.7
9.7
9.7
8.9
8.3
8.3
8.0
Divisions III & IV.
Divisions II, III d IV



THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.
259
Race No. 8.—3 furlongs. Divisions I, JI, III rf IV.
    1	Uhoba	...	...	...	11.0
    2	Hopeless	...	...	...	10.12
    3	Burak	...	...	...	10.8
    4 Blazes	...	...	...	9.10
    5 Kismet	...	...	...	9.8
    6 Pengarah                      ...	...	...	9.7
    7 Akai	...	...	...	9.7
    8 Untong	...	...	••	9.5
    9 Lee Mah	...	...	...	8.12	.
    10 Wembley	...	...	...	8.10
    11 Beaver	...	...	8.8
    13	Apa Kena	...	...	...	8.0
    18	Azab	...	...	...	7.13
    14	Penghulu	...	...	...	7.9
    15	Ghalib	...	...	...	7.7
    10	Tony	...	...	...	7.7
Race No. 9.-3 furlongs. Divisions I, II, III & IV. Open to ponies which have never won a race at any meeting in Sarawak.
E. S. HOLL, 
Official Handicapper.
            Racing Notes.
  There are two new races on the first day. One
open to all divisions to be decided over three furlongs,
and the other, the last nice of the day, will give
ponies which have never won a race at any meeting
a chance to see what they can do over three furlongs.
  It is pleasing to see new blood in the field, and
also ponies which have been absent from the course
for a considerable time facing the starter once more.
I refer to Choba, Pengarah, Akai, Pegasus, and
Bagaimana. The first three were recently imported
from North Borneo, and Pegasus late Keliling and
Bagaimana late Jalan Rumput have not raced since
1922.
  Untong has galloped back into Division I, and
Apa Kena has been promoted to Division ? from
Division IV direct. The three new ponies from
North Borneo go direct to Division I. Choba gets
maximum weight having raced previously. Pengarah
and Akai, being unraced ponies, come in 21 lbs.
below top weight. Bagaimana and Pegasus get top
weight in Division IV.
  The course was opened for training on 6th Sep-
tember. It is naturally early yet to look for form,
but ponies which appear io have gone on well since
the Spring Meeting are Kismet, Hopeless, Blazes,
Shotaway, Mah Jongg. Aladdin, and Azab. Many
of the outstation ponies have yet to come in, but of
those which have arrived, Untong is very fit and
Beaver has improved a good deal. White Wings
has become much steadier since his trip to Mukah.
It is only possible as usual to predict which way the
races may go on the first day by taking the form
shown last May at the Spring Meeting.
  In the first race for Division IV, these ponies have
never gone five furlongs before. On four furlong
form, however, Manna Buleh (9.0) might show up
here. The distance is probably too far for Shotaway
(7.11). In the second race, three furlongs for Divi-
sions ? and IV, Azab (9.7) and Kuching (8.12)
should catch the judge’s eye first and in that order.
1 hear that Aladdin (9.7) will not fade the starter.
The distance is not far enough for Mah Jongg (9.3).
Ghalib (8.10) might be a good each-way bet in spite
of his recent accident
  In the race over 5 furlongs, open to Division I or
lower. Apa Kena (8.10) should run prominently on
his Sarawak Cup form. In that race he proved
himself a better horse than Beaver (9.7), receiving
14 lbs. from the latter. Beaver has now to concede
11 lbs. Azab (8 2) might have a say in the matter,
he was going very well in the Sarawak Cup up to
the road, and he is at least 7 lbs. better now than he
was then. In the 6 furlong race open to Division
? or lower, Azab (7.7) from Division ? is the only
entrant outside Division I, and as he will in all pro-
bability be pulled out for the race before, be need
not be considered further. Hopeless gets nicely
weighted at 10 st. Burak (9.10) I fear will not
stand training again. Kismet (8.12) and Wembley
(8.5) made a close finish of this race in that order at
the May Meeting. Wembley ran him to a head
receiving 2 lbs. He now gets 7 lbs. from Kismet
which may put the decision the other way provided
Akai (8.7) or Untong (8.7) do not spring a surprise.
Race 5 brings Division IV to the post for 4 furlongs.
Ajaib (8.3), who ran Apa Kena to two lengths for
this race before, giving 1 ½ lbs., should have no diffi-
culty here, unless the new ponies Bagaimana and
Pegasus (9.7) happened to find that the distance
suits them. In the 6 furlongs for Division III last
meeting Mah Jongg (9.7) made a very close finish of
it with Azab (9.7), but Azab got the verdict receiving
19 lbs. It will be interesting to see what they can
do at level weights, but it would not be surprising if
Aladdin (9.4) took this race. Beaver (9.7) tops the
list of eleven entries in Race 7 over 4 furlongs for
Division II or lower, previously he took this race
by two lengths from Untong who was giving him
25 lbs. Sakbon (9.5) was half a length away also
conceding 18 lbs., he was coming well at the finish
but made his effort too late. Adham (9.0) is going
rather short just now. Apa Kena (8.12) will have a
chance of showing what he can do.
   Race 8, 3 furlongs for all Divisions gives the
sprinter in Division I a gallop. Choba (11.0) makes
his first appearance here and heads an entry of six-
teen competitors. So much depends on the start of
this race, especially with a large field. Provided he
jumps off in front and does not get interfered with
Lee Mah (8.12) might do something here, and
Ghalib (7.7) will be a good investment on the place
tote if he goes to the post.
   The handicaps for the last race are published on the
course and by that time some sort of form will perhaps
be known. Provided the weather holds, the course
will be in excellent condition and some excellent
lacing will be witnessed
CENTAUR.
Ngayau Ka Skrang.
Sinu aku niu pasal Batang Empanang,
Meda tembawai nadai agi diani orang;
Ai ambis ditubai Undup enggau Kumpang,
Sayau ka pinang serih enda dipakai orang.
Kantu nemu diri ka disrang Ngumbong,
Sida begaga ka kota buloh lalang;
Sida minta tulong Undup enggau Engkerbang,
Sida lemanak, Bangat, enggau sida anak Skrang.
lya ga menoa pegai Blanda Prentah Sentang,
Kantu ngaga pendiau diri di kampong puang;
Ukai Prentah Simanggang enda sinu ngenang,
Utang dalam adat enda tau ngachau orang.
Menoa kachau ukai agi chechamang,
Ukum Prentah ends diingat ka orang;
Skrang, Balau, Undup, enggau Engkerbang,
Enggau Bangat indah ngentam ka Empanang.
Prentah ngambi pulai enggau jako trang,
Enti samoa enggai pulai adat ninggang:
Aus ka bebunoh mensia bejako garang,
Prentah pen nyau ringat prauh sida pen dililang.


260	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.
Ambis bebadi tuda Lemanak anak Skrang, 
Enggau sa kayu Undup enggau anak Engkerbang; 
Tiap tuboh kena tunggu lima kati siko orang, 
Skrang ngejap enda ngisi ka Prentah Simanggang.

Skrang bechakap enda agi malik blakang, 
"Enggai kami kena ukum Prentah Simanggang;” 
"Iya ga prauh kami dijual lalu diglumbang," 
“Kami pulai marinsa nadai jalai bedarat magang."

"Nama kabuah Skrang bejako enda betagang?”
 Leka jako tuan Resident ti megai Simanggang.
"Enti sida Skrang enggai nitih ka jako lalu betimbang,” 
"Prentah nadai penemu bukai enti enda nyerang.”

Ukai nama agi kachau di Batang Skrang, 
Baka sida Kantu di Batang Empanang;
Adai ti undor ka ili, adai ka kampong puang, 
Adai ti ka betimbang, adai ti ngedar ka brang.

Rita ngayau pen udah tentu nyengala trang, 
Sampal datai samoa Undup enggau Engkerbang;
Ari Balau sampal Batang Ai datai ka Kumpang, 
Ari Saribas sampal Paku datai ka sida di Kedang.

Lang Indang undor nabe Tuan Simanggang, 
Madah kadiri nundok nadai beati timpang; 
Saja ambis bebunoh samoa di Batang Skrang, 
lya enda onggau sida nyadi Sengalang.

Prauh mudik serta pasang baka ditentang, 
Bla rata samoa luan serta mansang;
Tuan dua iko, siko nya Resident Simanggang, 
Ngulu ka bain maioh ngalah ka Batang Skrang.

Sida Saribas ngagai Skrang bedarat mansang. 
Orang Kaya Pemancha ngulu ka beati lantang;
 lya pen di ulu Bunu udah ngejang ka Ngindang, 
Bala kena tegah munsoh di Batang Skrang.

Prauh Tuan ti dua iko ditlu serta mansang, 
Nyambut langgar munsoh di Batang Skrang; 
Serta berpeda meriam pen dituju lalu dipasang, 
Prauh munsoh pen lungkup lalu terpin magang.

Sida Orang Kaya pen nitih semampai bedenjang, 
Enggau bala Resident Tuan Simanggang;
Nulong Prentah bebunoh enda agi kakang, 
Terjun mantap munsoh barang ti ka nyembrang.

Nya ka tungkat tuda Lang Indang, 
Badu agi enggau orang mangkang Skrang; 
Sampal sa bilik lari ka bukit Ulu Sengelang, 
Lalu pulai bebadi pindah ka Batang Rajang.
W. H.
       MONTHLY REPORTS.
FIRST DIVISION.
? -'
Kuching.
July, 1926.
Resident's Court.—Ten cases came before the Court dining the month. Sim Soo Chiak vs. Chop Teck Hong, partnership dispute. Judgment in this ease was given, defendant being ordered to pay $388 50 in full settlement Kueh Siew Kim (f.) was lined $25 for breach of Rent Restriction Order; One Phian Hwe was fined $150 for breach of Order XXXVIII, 1917. importing raw arsenic without a licence. There were three appeal cases, one from the decision of the District Court, Bau, and two from the District Court, Kuching. Ng Ah Siong and Ten Ngan Tijoi accused of gang robbery were handed over to the N.I. Government for trial. No other cases call for special mention. Fines and fees amounted to $293. In the Datu's Court $112.86
  General.—Many Dyaks from Samarahan and neighbourhood were down during the mouth paying in their tax and renewing gun licences.
  The Orang Kaya of Senna reported that some Dyaks from his village proceeding to Kuching in a boat loaded with pigs and. other delicacies were swamped near Satok by the wash from a launch. Considerable property was lost, including the boat, and he was advised to take action against the owner cf the launch.
  Vengatarahmanpoti arrived from India to take the place of Visvavadiya as Priest for the Hindu Temple in Ban Hock Road His salary is paid by Government.
  A copy of Mr. Spurway’s report on his recent exploration of part of the Poi Range was received and read with interest. The forest in this area is largely virgin and it is proposed to constitute it a forest reserve.
  Land Office.—The following leases, squatters’ licences and occupation tickets were issued during the month -
A. R. P.
11 leases for coconuts and rubber 199	 2   3   1
10 squatter’s licences	...	21   1	9
158 occupation tickets for coconuts,
      rubber, pepper and sago                2111    1	18
  Abang Suleiman proceeded to Subi twice during the month in connection with land disputes.
  Abang Haji Drahman, Land Inspector, was compelled to resign the service for medical reasons. He was capable and trustworthy and will be a loss to the department.
  Mr. F. G. Carpenter, Acting District Officer, reports as follows :—
  District Court—52 cases were heard, 37 of which were Criminal and 15 Civil. Of the 37 Criminal eases 32 convictions and five acquittals were adjudged. There were seven cases of assault, one of theft, one of cheating, one for contempt of Court, five for breach of Municipal By-laws, four for breach of Customs and Shipping Regulations and 18 other offences. Fines imposed amounted to $358 and fees collected totalled $38 02. The 15 Civil claims involved amounts totalling $3,789.94, while fees amounted to $121.25.
  Magistrate's Court- —105 Civil suits were brought for hearing for which fees of $171 were collected. The total value of claims was $2,218.54.
  Police Court.—Forty-six summary cases were brought before the Court. 38 convictions and eight acquittals were obtained. The principal charges were assault one, theft nine, cheating one, contempt of Court one and 34 minor cases. A total amount of $341 was imposed in fines and $49.50 was collected in fees.
  Court, General.—Batek, a Mukah Milano, was sentenced to two months for absconding under agreement; Hok Siew to two months for cheating; Haji Budin and Sli to two months each, and Goin- dasami and Matasan to one month each for contempt of Court; Mandor Jamal was fined $50 for allowing a prisoner to escape; Tan Song Lim to four months and six strokes; Chang Moi and Vadivel to six months respectively for theft; Sim Hoot Soo twelve months and six strokes for burglary; Sia Ah See was fined $150 for breach of Opium Regulations and in default was sentenced to six months’ imprisonment; Ong Wang to two weeks in default of fine; Thian Teck and Oo Ah Loo were fined $5 each for brawling.
  On the 8th, I inspected the body of Ah Jee, Hylam, who died of a gunshot wound in the face and an inquest was held on the 9th. A verdict of suicide while of unsound mind was recorded.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.
261
August, 1926.
  Resident’s Court.—Civil and Criminal. Seven eases came before the Court. Haji Omar was fined $100 for breach of Order of 11th June, 1896, "Legacies and Succession.’’ Wee Cheng Soo, charged with criminal breach of trust, section 408 P.C., was handed over to the Singapore authorities under the Fugitive Offenders Order, 1917. Commissioner of Customs vs. Chop Hiap Soon Tiam breach of Order XIII, 1919. Defendant appealed against a fine imposed by the District Court which was allowed. Rayap (Dyak of Sennah) vs. Sze Joon, Jeragan m.l. Kim Chin Hin. Plaintiff claimed compensation in the District Court for damage to perishable goods caused by the wash from defendant’s launch. Plaintiff was on his way to Kuching in a Tegura boat which was swamped. The case was dismissed in the District Court but on appeal defendant was ordered to pay $160, a proportionate amount of the loss incurred.
  A Court of Enquiry was held in the offices of the Board of Trade into the circumstances attending a collision at Kuala Tebas on the 31st July. The motor bandong Hock Ann slipped her moorings and drifted under the bows of the schooner Kim Poh Heng anchored nearby. The bandong sank and the Engineer Ah Tong was drowned. The hull and a portion of the cargo was salved under the direction of Mr. Stewart, Assistant Government Engineer. The Court recommended that out of the proceeds of the salvage a sum be awarded to Mr. Stewart and those connected with him in the salvage operations for their services and also that the jeragan of the bandong be suspended from working as a jeragan for 12 months.
  Native Court fines and fees amounted to $66.53.
  Staff.—Captain Andreini arrived from Sibu on the 2nd to act as District Officer, Kuching, vice Mr. F. G- Carpenter who was appointed to Miri. Captain Andreini left again on the 31st on his being appointed to Kapit and his place as Acting District Officer was taken by Mr. E. 0. Bruce. Mr. C. D. Adams was given the powers of a District Court Magistrate in the Kuching district.
  General.—The offices were closed on the 9th in honour of His Highness the Tuan Muda’s birthday. His Highness and the Acting Chief Secretary visited Sadong on the 27th returning on the 29th.
  A number of Dyaks on their way to Baram reported having lost most of their personal belongings on the m.s. Kim Chin Seng which struck heavy weather off Balangian and had to return to Kuching. The Dyaks were given Government assistance to help them on their way.
, Chinese gardeners between the 18th mile and Quop asked for a grant to enable them to improve the road between the two places. Their request was approved and a grant given.
  Tn accordance with Order XXIT, 1925, unredeemed articles from the Pawnbroking Farms pledged for any sum exceeding $10 are disposed of by Public Auction at the Court House on the first Friday of each month.
  Land Office.—The following grants, leases, squatters’ licences and occupation tickets were issued during the month ;—
Acres. Roods. Poles.
'	2 Grants ...	289	0	26
      6 Leases ...	65	3	04
      7 Squatters’ licences 15	0	07
    146 Occupation tickets for
      rubber, coconut & pepper 943	2	22
  The land at Satok at present used by the Sikh community for cremating purposes not being considered suitable, the area at Padungan, which they formerly used, has been granted to them.
  I append the Acting District Officer Mr. E. V. Andreini's report.
  District and Magistrate’s Court.—Civil cases involved claims amounting to $2,846.59 and $3,058.54 respectively. Fourty-eight Criminal cases with 42 convictions were heard.
  The principal cases were :—Mir, Javanese, three months for assault; Awi, Malay, four months for theft; Lim Hin six months for theft; Ah Mong six; months for assault; Abrar Hussein fined $100 for breach of Arms Regulations; Jee Sam Shong fined $200 for breach of Opium Regulations; Salleh six, months for cheating; Teo Chong Hin one year for cheating; Bong Hin three months voluntarily causing hurt.
  I took over from Mr. F. G. Carpenter on the 2nd.
  General.—On the 26th a Chinese named Chong Kow was found dead in an outbuilding in Carpenter Street. Death was found to be due to natural causes.
  On the 18th, accompanied by Mr. Ennion of the Police Department, I visited the Samarahan Rubber Estate. We returned on the 19th after being hospitably entertained by the Manager who kindly put, us up for the night. This Company is opening up a large new area in the near future.
  Mr. Tai Fook Chong retired from the post of head, clerk District Office after 331 years’ service on a well-earned pension. His post has been taken by Leong Ah Khoi.
Upper Sarawak.
July, 1926.
  The District Officer, Mr. F. H. Kortright, reports as follows:—
  Court cases were numerous, but of no particular importance as they chiefly consisted of land disputes, brought about by the mania for planting rubber in every available acre of land. Until the district has been surveyed it will be impossible to really determine the boundaries of the numerous gardens.
  As Singghi Dyaks were continually coming to Court for settlement of their kampong affairs and land disputes, which should be settled by their Tua Kampongs, they were called to select a new Orang Kaya to replace Pa Ngadi who was asked to resign his position last April. Nyirak Pa Ringin was elected by a large majority of votes, and he was duly appointed and instructed to look into and, if possible, settle these disputes himself before they were brought to the Court.
  The big bridge over the Sungei Siniawan which has been getting in a very rotten state suddenly collapsed whilst attempts were being made to strengthen it. The whole structure was taken down and reconstructed on an improved plan and is now very substantial and quite capable of carrying a three-ton load Much credit, is due to Malay carpenter Gani, kindly lent by Mr. Ong Seng Chai, who showed great skill in carrying out this reconstruction. Permission was granted to take over the lime-burning- operations in Bau and arrangements were made to burn a good stock in readiness to supply all that will be required in the near future.
  A sum of $5,000 was voted for a water supply for Siniawan, and an engine, pump and tank purchased these are already in course of erection and the main pipe line will be laid ns soon as it is delivered, and branches off it taken into the shophouses.


262
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.
  The P.M.O., Dr. Marjoribanks, visited Siniawan and approved of the proposed water source and general arrangements in connection with this water scheme, also certain sanitary arrangements in the new bazaar.
  There have been one or two cases of beriberi among prisoners so, on the P.M.O.’s advice, slight alteration was made in the prison rations.
  The Bungoh and Empro Dyaks have again reopened their old land dispute. The matter will be examined when the left-hand branch is next visited, and if it is found that the Bungoh people have deliberately broken their bounds, which were defined by His Highness the Tuan Muda last year, they will be punished.
  Mr. Middlemas, Superintendent of Surveys, paid a short visit to look into the conditions with regard to starting a new survey of the district.
Rainfall amounted to 23’65 inches.
August, 1926.
  I visited Lundu in the S.S. L'Aubaine on the 1st, accompanied by Mr. D. Calver, Assistant Conservator of Forests, whose object was to demarcate the new reserve on Lundu Mountain.
  The station was very quiet and few Court cases were awaiting. The charge against Ah On, a charcoal burner, section 338 I.P.C., was withdrawn, there being insufficient evidence to convict.
  The demand for gun permits was considered far too great so instructions were given that permits could be issued only up to half the number of taxpayers in each village or kampong. All Dyak tax had been collected and firearms registered.
  The L’Aubaine shipped a certain quantity of timber for Kuching which had been in readiness for some time, and surplus cash amounting to $3,500 was sent to Kuching Treasury.
  In Upper Sarawak there is nothing of importance to report. One, Chin Jan, was found to be dishonestly administering the estate of one, Thian Ho (deceased). The letters of administration were taken from him and handed over to Bong Sin Moi (f), his mother by adoption.
  Land disputes fully occupied the Courts, and the application for gun permits was so great that the same regulations as Lundu were enforced in this district. All the materials for the Seniawan Water Scheme were delivered by lorry and rapid progress has been made with the erection of the tank and engine. A trial run of engine and pump proved very satisfactory indeed and the plant is now in readiness to be connected to the pipes as soon as they are delivered from home.
Rainfall amounted to 12.10 inches.
Sadong.

July, 1926.
  The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. G. J. D. Walters, reports as follows:—
  Court.—In the District Cont, Sam Kui, a colliery coolie, was sentenced to six months’ imprisonment for assaulting Mr. D. Evans. Bipah. Tamil (age about fourteen), was given twelve strokes with the rattan, for stealing cash from a safe at the colliery.
  In the Magistrate’s Court, Baitelingan and Konapakri, colliery coolies, sentenced to one month’s imprisonment each for fighting; Bong Sen and Atim fined $5 and $10 respectively for assault; Bong Shin fined $10 for breach of Land Orders. Fees for breach of Forest Rules amounted to $20.
   Prisoners.—The daily average number of prisoners was 9’7. The prison gang was employed on weeding paths and ditches round the station.
   P.W.D.—The re-roofing of the Court House was completed during the month. The coolie gang cleared ditches to the end of the Sageng Road and towards the end of the month was employed on the annual whitewashing of buildings, assisted by the prisoners. The new Government boat was completed and delivered.
   Marine.—The m.l. Vava was overhauled by a mechanic sent over from Kuching. Various parts were taken away for repairs and in the meantime the hull is being repaired locally.
   Medical.—At the dispensary, a total of 115 patients were treated as follows: — Dyaks 34, Malays 29, Chinese 45. Europeans three, Tamils three, and Sikh one. There were 14 admissions into the hospital, the num her remaining from Inst month being 18, making a total of 27, out of which 19 were discharged as cured and one at bis own request. Seven patients were still in hospital at the end of the month.
   Thirty-five N.A.B. injections were performed in the dispensary for yaws, mull and syphilis.
   Twenty-four pigs were inspected and slaughtered for sale. Two minor operations on abscesses were performed under freezing with ethyl chloride, one skin grafting, ordinary method, was performed on an ulcer with good result. Also several cases of wounds from the colliery, requiring stitches and ligaturing blood vessels, were duly attended to.
   General — The Chinese in the bazaar completed the whitewashing of their shops.
   The registration of the Chinese School in the bazaar has been granted, and the school is to open on the first of next month.
   The surveyors arrived from Kuching to survey the line of the proposed new road to lie constructed between the railway and Sageng Roads. The distance of this road will be about 2,000 yards.
   During the month the survey of the Bogie coconut plantation has been proceeding. The total area of land granted for this plantation is now four thousand acres.
   Mr. Cox arrived to repair the wireless, which broke down during the month.
   1 regret to have to report the death of Penghulu Ketit.
   Tuba fishing was carried out in various rivers during the month.
   Mr. J. W. Evans left here on the 7th to go on home leave.
   The rainfall recorded during the month amounted to 4 98 inches.
   Shipping.—The following vessels entered the port: - S.L. L'Aubaine and s.j. Sri Sadong four times, s.s. Alice Lorraine twice, Sri Mas Igan and m.s. Chaya Mas de Goebilt once.
   Trade.—The local trade returns for comparison with last year are as follows:—
Imports. Exports.
July, 1926 ...	$18,881	$29,396
July, 1925 ...	33,669	27,561
August, 1926.
   Court.—In the Magistrate’s Court, Bong Lee was sentenced to one month for assault; Jura (Dyak) was fined $10 for tuba fishing without asking permission. Fines for breach of Forest Rules amounted to $111.50. No other cases call for special mention.
   Prisoners.—The daily average number of prisoners was 9.7. The prison gang was employed on the upkeep of ornamental grounds and whitewashing of Government buildings.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.
263
  P.W.D.—The coolie gang was employed on trimming the soap palms round the station and on the Sabon road ; also on the whitewashing of Government buildings assisted by the prisoners.
  Marine.—The repairs to m.l. Java’s hull were completed and a mechanic arrived from Kuching to fit the new propeller and shaft. The mechanic pronounced the Vava to be now in sound condition.
  General.—His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by the Acting Chief Secretary, Mr. H. B. Crocker, and Mr. B. J. C. Spurway, visited Sadong on the 27th, arriving at 4.30 p.m. in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna.
  On landing His Highness was met by Mr. S. W. Harris, Acting Manager of the Colliery, Mr. D. Evans, Native Officer Abang Haji Spi-ee. all the principal traders, and a large gathering of Malays and Dyaks. His Highness afterwards walked through the bazaar and inspected the gutta-leaf factory.
  The following morning I accompanied His Highness the Tuan Muda and Mr. H. B. Crocker to the colliery, where His Highness was shown round by the Acting Manager, returning to the station at 11 a.m. His Highness then met a representative gathering of the people in the Court House, and all were invited to speak on any matter they wished. Several matters were brought before His Highness relating to the tapping of jelutong trees, and also with regard to the opening of rubber gardens.
  In the afternoon His Highness walked through the bazaar visiting all the shopkeepers in their shops, and also the new Chinese School which has just been opened. A discharged (long service) mine coolie now living in the bazaar petitioned His Highness for a pension, which His Highness was pleased to consider, concerning which further inquiries are being made with regard to other discharged coolies in similar circumstances living here.
  His Highness the Tuan Muda, with Messrs. H. B. Crocker and B. J. C. Spurway, sailed for Kuching in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna at 10 a.m. on the 29th.
  The new Chinese School opened at the beginning of the month with an attendance of eighteen pupils.
  On the 5th I visited Sebangan and the following day inspected the land taken up by the Bugis at Sungei Pendam. There appeared to be roughly about two hundred acres of land cleared at this place, but only a small part of this land appears to be planted up with coconuts. I was told, however, that more extensive operations in clearing and planting, had been carried out in the Sungei Bilis and other localities. The following day I proceeded up the Sebangan river, visiting various Dyak houses, returning overland to Sadong on the 8th.
  Mr. W. Harnack paid a visit to the Bugis plantation in connection with the survey of this land, and also visited the station on the 13th inspecting the survey of the new road which was then completed. This road will connect the railway road, at the 2nd mile, with the end of the Sageng road, being a distance of about 2,000 yards. Mr. Harnack returned to Kuching in m.l. Ringgit on the 16th.
  Accompanied by Abang Haji Spi-ee, I left for Tabekang on the 20th, staying one night at Gedong, arriving the following evening. On the 23rd I again inspected the Ris Lanchang boundary at what was said by the Ris Dyaks to be G. Menjarot. The Lanchang Dyaks disputed this and said that an adjoining hill was G. Menjarot, wrhich proved to be the case, the surveyor’s peg being found on the forward slope of this hill at the place which was previously pointed out to the surveyor when the boundary was last fixed. Both parties were therefore told that this was the boundary mark they were to follow.
  I then inspected the boundary about halfway
between G. Menjarot and Tapang Dungkang, near
G. Merigan. It was found that at this place the
boundary was only about 100 fathoms from Ris
village, this being apparently the cause of the Orang
Kaya Ris complaint. It was therefore considered
that the boundary should be slightly altered at this
point so as to allow at least 200 fathoms between Ris
village and the Lanchang's land, and that the
boundary should run through the highest point on
G. Merigan, which is over 200 fathoms from Ris
village. Both parties then agreed to this decision.
  The following day I held Court at Tabekang. The
Orang Kaya Tenggah made a complaint that the
Tarads have cut a new rentis, taking in a large piece
of their land, this being the land over which the
Tarads were fined $100 last year for encroaching on
the Tenggah Dyak's land. They were told that
further inquiries will be made.
  The following day I left Tabekang for Sadong,
staying the night at Gedong, arriving back on the
26th.
  On the 28th Mr. B. J. C. Spurway inspected the
sample plot on G. Ngili.
  The rainfall recorded during the month amounted
to 2.86 inches.
  Medical.—At the Dispensary a total of 102
patients were treated as follows:—Malays 26,
Chinese 45, Dyaks 27, Europeans 2 and Tamils 2.
There were 13 admissions into the hospital the
number remaining from last month being 7. making
altogether a total of 20, out of which 9 were discharg-
ed as cured and 1 died. The remaining 10 were
still in hospital at the end of the month. The death
which occurred in the hospital was that of an old
mine coolie from heart failure.
  Thirty-one N.A.B. Injections were performed for
yaws and syphilis. Thirty pigs were inspected and
slaughtered for sale.
  Shipping.—The following vessels entered and
cleared the port :—
  S.S. Alice. Lorraine 4, s.l L’Aubaine 3, s.j. Sri
Sadong 4 times: Sri Mukah. m.s. Chaya Mas de
Goebilt and m.l. Rah mat Scptuyah once each.
  Trade.—The local trade returns for comparison
with last year, are as follows :—
Imports.	Exports.
August 1926.	$32,576.00	$17,066.00
August 1925.	16.179.00	32,599.00
      C. ERMEN, 
Acting Divisional Officer.
SECOND DIVISION.
Simanggang.
August, 1926.
  Resident’s Court.—Sundai, F.G., was sentenced to 5 years’ R.I. for I. Embezzlement of Government monies, 2. Escaping whilst on remand, 3. Imposing fines on Dyaks.
  District Court, Civil and Criminal.—Then Hin, prisoner, for escaping from jail was sentenced to 12 strokes with the rattan and to wear leg irons.
  One appeal against decision of Abang Madaut, Native Officer, Lingga, adjourned for further witnesses. One case under section 323 I.P.C. dismissed.
  Magistrate’s Court, Civil and Criminal.—Fong Long Moi, prisoner, for escaping from Betong Fort and stealing rubber was sentenced to 6 months’ R.I. and 12 strokes of the rattan.


264
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.
   P.C. Leong of Belong was sentenced to 3 months’
R.I. for criminal breach of trust. Lee Yew,
Chinese, was fined $50 for tapping undersized
jelutong trees. There were numerous other petty
cases.
   General.—On the 3rd Mr. K. H. Gillan. P.M.G.,
returned to Kuching in the m.l. Rah mat Septuyah..
   His Highness the Tuan Muda's Birthday falling
on a Sunday, Monday was observed as a Government
Holiday and the flagstaff dressed.
   From the 1st to 12th the weather was very
unsettled, heavy rain and gales of wind, more like
the landas weather.
   On the 11th and 12th Native Officers and Peng-
hulus commenced to arrive from all over the
Division. They came to attend the regatta and
sports. The Dyak Penghulus held a meeting
dealing with certain Dyak customs, and a satisfactory
arrangement was arrived at suitable to all Dyaks in
this Division.
   Mr. H. E. Cutfield arrived from Kabong on the
12th in the m.l. Diieh.
   On the 12th H.H.M.Y. Maimuna arrived at
Lingga with His Highness the Tuan Muda, who
was accompanied by Mr. E. 0. Bruce. Next
morning His Highness and Mr. E. O. Bruce arrived
at Simanggang in the m.l. One. A large and
representative crowd had assembled at the landing
stage in order to welcome His Highness.
   The m.l. Young Harry arrived the same morning
from Kuching having as passengers Messrs. J. A. H.
Hardie, C. D. Adams and G. M. Allman, and the
Data Bandar and Abang Haji Suhai, Tuan Imam.
   During His Highness’ visit to Simanggang nothing
of great importance was brought to the notice of
His Highness.
   On the 14th and 15th the regatta took place. His
Highness kindly gave permission for Saturday to be
observed as a holiday. His Highness attended the
regatta both days.
   His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by
Mr. E. O. Bruce, Mr. C. D. Adams, and the Datu
Bandar, left for Lingga on the morning of the 15th
and on arrival at Lingga boarded H.H.M.Y.
Maimuna which immediately set sail for Kuching.
   On the 17th Mr. J. A. H. Hardie, Commissioner
of Trade and Customs, accompanied by Mr. G. M.
Allman left in the m.l. Young Harry for Engkilili.
Mr. J. A. H. Hardie's visit is in connection with
the improvement of pepper trade and the cultivation
of same. A clerk was installed and all pepper
transactions will go through his hands. Mr. G. M.
Allman’s visit is in connection with the Rubber
Improvement Fund. They returned to Simanggang
next evening.
    On the 18th Mr. R. E. Cutfield returned to
Kabong in the m.l. Nellie.
    Mr. J. A. H. Hardie, Commissioner of Trade and
Customs, left on 19th at 1 p.m. in the m.l. Young
Harry from Kuching.
     During the regatta the m.l. One broke down and
was towed to Kuching by m.l. Hong Soon Huat.
Returning again on the 26th.
     The m.l. Nellie left for Betong on the 23rd taking
round Mr. G. M. Allman’s luggage. Mr. G. M.
Allman went overland to Betong to supervise the
Rubber Improvement.
    On the 30th I left in the m.l. One for Sebuyow
and here I spent the night. Next morning I “left
for Kabong.
     Prisoners.—The behaviour of the prisoners during
the month was very unsatisfactory. Prisoner Sundai,
alias Suleiman, escaped on the 10th although he was
in irons. Blon and Lempok, prisoners, managed to
get out of jail one night and up to date have not
been recaptured. They were traced as far as
Samarang, a small stream at mouth of Saribas, and
there is no doubt they are being sheltered by Dyaks.
   Blon, a Dyak, escaped some years ago and was
recently captured in the Oya district. Lempok is
grandson of Penghulu Buda of Semunjan. Two of
the local rangers have been punished in connection
with the escape of these prisoners.
   Medical.—Dresser Ah Heng arrived on the 3rd
and took over from Dresser Su-oot, who returned
to headquarters.
   A total of 194 persons were treated in hospital
during the month as follows :—Chinese 28, Dyak
133, European 1, Eurasian 2, Javanese 1, Malay 28,
Tamil 1.
   One hundred and twenty-two cases of N.A.B.
injection for yaws, etc., were given during the
month.
   Public Works.—Prisoner gang averaged 53.06
and were employed on opening up ditches, and
general upkeep of the roads and ornamental grounds.
Carpenter Salleh started erecting clerks’ quarters.
   Agriculture.—Most of the Dyaks have not started
felling jungle for their farms, and in consequence
will most probably not get any fine weather in order
to burn off same. I put the delay on felling to the
amount of feasting going on. Every house prac-
tically holding feasts which last two or three days,
instead of the usual one day.
   Permits to plant pepper 5, rubber 73. were issued
during the month.
   Forest.—Mr. P. J. Johnson, Forest Ranger,
Special Class, reports as follows :—A few of the
jelutong roads around Simanggang were inspected by
the Forest Ranger as a result of which two tappers
were sued and convicted for tapping undersized
jelutong trees.
   Towards the latter part of the month the Forest
Ranger left for the Ulu Sebuyow on a rough explor-
ation of the interior of the Sarawak Timber
Company's Concession between Lingga and
Sebuyow.
   Shipping.—Thirteen motor launches and 10 ban-
dongs arrived and 17 motor launches and 10
bandongs cleared during the month.
   Cattle.—The Simanggang herd number 92 head
and Lubok Antu herd number 49 head.
  Trade.— The principal exports were :—
  Gutta Jelutong	1,161 piculs	valued	$21,889
  Pepper White	427	,,	„	19,210
  Pepper Black	79	,,	,,	1,915
  Para Rubber	158	,,	,,	9,511
  Para Scrap	99	,,	„	3’150
  Raw Sago	120	„	,,	*480
Imports.	Exports.
  August, 1926	...	$45,068.00	$65,403.00
     ,, 1925	...	45,627.00	73,738.00
Saribas.
August, 1026.
     The Court Writer, Betong, reports as follows
      Court.—Work has been very light during the month. Nothing of any importance has been brought up before the Native Officer. Some minor cases only were settled, and these were of trifling nature.
     Fines and fees for the month amounted to $137.69.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.
265
    The Native Officer, Court Writer, Penghulus and
others went over to Simanggang to attend the
Simanggang Regatta on the middle of August.
Lance-Corporal Ngelambong was left in charge of
the station during the absence of the Native Officer
and Court Writer.
    I regret to report the death of Abang Amat, Tua
Kampong of Betong, who died on the 11th instant.
He has been suffering from acute consumption for
some time.
    The work on the building of the Government
Vernacular School was temporarily stopped owing
to the contractor having been somewhat indisposed,
but towards end of the month it was again renewed.
    Clerk Gan Kim Tho arrived on the 25th from
Simanggang to take over from Court Writer Law
Ah Nen, who has been granted his yearly leave,
but was compelled to return to Simanggang owing to
the illness of his son, and Clerk Koh See Kong was
sent here in his stead.
    Mr. G. M. Allman arrived here from Simanggang
on the 21st to attend to the work of the rubber
instructors. He was very busy the whole time,
visiting Dyak houses and instructing them in matters
pertaining to the improvement of rubber.
    P.C. Leong was dismissed the force at end of the
month owing to some irregularities and later sent
on to Simanggang where he was sentenced to three
months’ imprisonment.
    Agriculture.—There were only three permits to
plant rubber issued during the month.
    Shipping.—M.S Lang Endang made 4 trips to
and from Kuching, m.s. Bintang Trang and Hap
Soon Ann 3 trips each. Two bandongs entered the
port during the month.
    Trade.—The principal exports were :—
   Gutta Jelutong 33 piculs valued $	453.00
   Para Rubber 521	„	„	27,920.00
   Para Scrap 121	,,	„	4,087.00
August, 1926
   „	1925
Imports.
$39,720.00
27,022.00
Exports.
$36,776.00
34,788.00
   The Court Writer, Pusa, reports as follows :—
    Court.—Court work has been very light during the
month. The Native Officer has been on a visit to
Simanggang attending the regatta.
    Pusa.—Seventy-six summonses were issued for
planting para rubber without permits. It is reported
that the Native Officer is down with fever since his
return from Simanggang.
    Mawan, of Rimbas, was fined 30 catties for making
false accusation, and three others were fined 10
catties each for giving false evidence; Isah (/) was
fined by the Native Court 30 reals and 3 sukus for
divorce; Puasa, of Kampong Beladin, a Malay
shopkeeper, was fined $10 for evading half-yearly
assessment ending June 1925, and also to pay double
with fee; Arip, of Kampong Mangut, was fined 15
reals for attempting to interfere with a married
woman; Tair, was fined 30 reals and 3 sukus for
divorce.
  General.—I arrived at Kabong on the 18th and
was ordered to proceed here on the 20th and take
from Court Writer Julin who is to proceed to Saratok
on the 23rd. having handed over all books, etc.
  P.C. Abang Aron, of Debak, came down here on
the 27th to receive salary for August, returning again
on the 27th.
  Agriculture.—Two permits were issued for plant-
ing para rubber to Abang Sedik, Native Officer,
Debak. Natives are now busy attending to their
farms.
   P.W.D.—Repairs have been done towards the
verandah of the clerks’ quarters. It collapsed owing
to the posts being rotten.
   Although the estimate of $200 for the repairing of
the police barracks has been sanctioned, I am sorry
to say that there is no carpenter to be obtained here.
I am trying to get one from Debak but I am afraid
that they will demand high pay, as they are paid by'
the Chinese there a daily wage of $1.50 up to $3.
  Trade.—The principal exports were :—
Gutta Jelutong Para Rubber Para Scrap Raw Sago Nipa Sugar
425 piculs valued
237	„
50 „
920	„
381 tins
$ 6,595.00
15,176.00
1,562.00
2,345.00
1,199.00
August, 1926
„	1925
Imports.
... $19,572.00
...	26,078.00
Exports. $31,899.00 18,738.00
Kalaka.
August, 1926.
   Mr. H. E. Cutfield, Assistant District Officer,
reports as follows :—
   Court.—Court work though lighter than last
month was rather more than the average although
few cases call for special mention. Ahim and
Mahari were sentenced to 4 months’ R.I. for theft
and Tuah 3 months for the same offence; Chuat,
Dyak, for theft one day after being sentenced to gaol
for that offence received 6 months extra; Esek,
Malay, was fined $5 for contempt of Court. Fifty-
seven people mostly Malays were fined various
amounts for planting para rubber without permits.
Two Chinamen were fined $50 and $25 respectively
for breach of Opium Regulations. During the
month the total fines amounted to $1,952.40 and fees
$547.10.
   General.—Tan Eng Chong, Court Writer, who
was away at the end of the month at Roban, where
he had gone to collect the fines from over 150 Dyaks,
who had been fined for planting rubber without
permits, returned on the night of the 31st. and
reported that the Dyaks all refused to pay their fines.
Steps had to be taken and the fines were all paid in
full by the 12th. On the 4th, I paid a visit to Sama-
ludam but nothing of importance was brought to my
notice.
   Gundi, a Dyak, was taken on as a policeman and P.C. Jamaludin returned to work as mandor. The police force is now complete. The place of P.C. Jemat, who was sentenced to gaol, having been taken by Salau.
   The 8th, Sunday, being the birthday of His Highness the Tuan Muda, the following day was recognised as a holiday and the offices closed.
   On the 12th I left for Simanggang, accompanied by a number of Government servants, by a Chinese launch to attend the regatta.
   Simanggang was reached the same evening. I left Simanggang again on the 18th and arrived here on the 19th.
  On the 22nd the m.l. Ringgit arrived with a survey
party to survey the mouth of this river and having
done this they proceeded to the Saribas in order to
survey the banks of the main river and also branches.
  On the 31st the Resident arrived in m.l. One for
a visit to the district and to hear the murder case
reported formerly, and was consequently still here
at end of the month.
  P. W.D.—The prisoners averaged 18.66 at Kabong
and 1.3 at Saratok have been employed on the new
road from the old road near S. Undut to the water-


266
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.
works and from there to the end of Kampong Ulu. This was completed by end of the month making a complete round from the Fort with the kampong road and bazaar road of about 2½ miles.
  The kampong road was also repaired and work was commenced on continuing the raising of the ground round the Fort. The remainder were employed on the general upkeep of the stations at both Kabong and Saratok.
Trade.—The trade statistics for the month were
as follows :—
August, 1926
          1925
Imports. $25,991.00 38,519.00
Exports. $35,495.00 26,978.00
The principal exports were as under :—
Gutta Jelutong Para Rubber Para Scrap Pepper Black Raw Sago Sugar Nipa Timber
843 piculs	valued $13,131.00
265	„	11,090.00
46	,,	,,	2,516.00
30	..	„	2.000.00
33 kovans	,,	1.200.00
57 tins	.,	112.00
1,261.00
  Shipping.—The statistics for this port were as
follows :—
Entered.	Cleared.
4 Motor Schooners
10 Bandongs
4 Motor Schooners
12 Bandongs
The following are the Trade Returns for the 2nd
Division :—
August, 1926 Total to 31 /8/26
do. 31/8/25
   Imports.
$ 157,771.00
1,054,374.00
   988,527.70
Exports.
$ 199.023.00
1,386,556.50
1,393,866.00
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER, Resident Second Division.
THIRD DIVISION.
Sibu.
July, 1926.
  On the 7th a fairly successful tuba fishing was held at Kanowit. the tuba being put in below N. Malipis. Mr. and Mrs. Raynham of the Aerial Survey Company flew in one of their seaplanes to attend, much to the enjoyment of the crowd collected for the fishing.
  The police force was inspected, the men being very smart on parade.
  Together with Mr. Miller-Hallett I visited Binatang and the Mador and Tulai rivers where the Foochows have opened up. Mr. Miller-Hallett has now completed the survey of this area and demarcated all the boundaries, which has been done with a minimum of dissatisfaction from both the Foochows and Dyaks. These boundaries will be strictly adhered to. Certain areas in the future are bound to link up hut my policy is to go slowly until the Dyaks get used to the Foochows and understand it is no good holding up land that they very seldom use It is true that most of the land taken up by the Foochows was old jerami. but it was a revelation to me to see what they had done in the way of clearing, planting and making of paths. They have been given permission to open up a road from Binatang to their settlements in the ulu.
   I have suggested that P. Kerto would be a better site for a quarantine and immigration station than P. Selalo if the station is to be up river, which I consider under present conditions is the only site which can be controlled efficiently.
  I visited Matu and Daro with the District Officer, Lower Rejang, from 18lh to 22nd. The Court bouse on the new site of the station has been completed and the District Officer was able to charter a schooner to fetch timber from Tatau for the remaining buildings. It is not proposed to move the present bungalow as the station is within easy access by road in the fine weather and by river during the landas. The wireless buildings have been completed and are waiting the installation of the plant which it is hoped that the Superintendent of Telegraphs can arrange to have done very shortly. Then it will be essential that Daro is connected by telephone. The Main Chinese complained of the poor trade in sago. This is accounted for partly by all the raw sago being shipped to Binatang, where the factories give the same price as in Kuching, and partly through the Milanos being so well off.
  The District Officer visited Sarikei on the 15th, thence going on via the ulu to the Julau. He returned again on the 24th, reporting that very few cases were brought before him in the Julau. There was a great deal of work to be got through at Sarikei The time is rapidly approaching when it will be necessary to have an officer stationed at Binatang or Sarikei to look after these two places.
  At the beginning of the mouth the Assistant District Officer visited the Machan and Poi rivers.
  Mr Kidd, of the Rejang Plantations Company, Limited, arrived on the 22nd and left for Kanowit to make preliminary arrangements to take up their concession between the Bawan and Sengaian rivers. In connection with this, Mr. Miller-Hallett and myself also went up to find out what land was available. The land on the left bank of the Bawan to a depth of about a mile is claimed by the Dyaks, but between this and the Sengaian is unoccupied land. The whole river bank between these two rivers is occupied by a very narrow fringe of fruit groves, pepper and rubber gardens. Mr. Kidd was of the opinion that the unoccupied part would be sufficient for his requirements and he agreed to leave the land on the banks of the Bawan alone for the time being. The Dyaks seem only too pleased for the Company to enter into possession of this land and the Kanowits only ask that their fruit and rubber gardens should be alienated from the concession. In regard to fruit groves, I consider that this should be done in any case, but as far as the rubber gardens are concerned, this is a matter of arrangement between the Company and the natives. The Kanowits’ gardens amount to nothing as they are only a few trees planted haphazard on the very edge of the river bank.
  Abang Mustapha bin late Datu Ali, and Haji Gapor tendered their resignations for private reasons, which were accepted subject to confirmation by His Highness the Rajah.
  Mrs. F. G. Carpenter, who had been on a visit, returned to Kuching by the Sulong on the 3rd. Mr. J. A. H. Hardie arrived from Bintulu by the Chamois on 13th, leaving again on the 15th by the Rajah of Sarawak.
  A contract has been signed for the repairs to the Residency and so 1 have moved over temporarily to the house lately occupied by the Medical Officer, whose bungalow near the hospital has been recently completed.
  Within the next month or so, there will he sufficient bungalows for all those permanently stationed at Sibu.
  The Assistant Conservator of Forests reports that he inspected Binatang and Kanowit at the beginning of the month. From the 18th to 23rd be was away to Daro inspecting work at the Tanjong Blatok. He reports that bad tapping of jelutong trees is being done in this area.
  The Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. L. B. Haye, reports:—


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.
267
    During the month 75 in-patients were treated in hospital. Total number of out-patients was 617, there being 283 new out-patients. 120 arsenical injections were given, 29 being repeated injections.
    Two operations were performed under general anaesthetic and 11 under local.
    Sixteen deaths occurred in hospital this month from the following causes:—Beriberi 6, pneumonia 4, typhoid 3, amoebic dysentery I, cerebral malaria 1, and phthisis 1.
    The Foochow charity home, which was closed down the first week in June, was used among other things as a dumping ground for dying Chinese. These are now being transferred to hospital as, of the 16 deaths which occurred, 7 were in a hopeless condition on admission. This I think may lie taken as one of the main causes of the somewhat alarming increase in deaths at hospital during the past two months.
    468 vaccinations were performed this month both at hospital and on ships. Two lepers were sent to Kuching, both voluntarily presenting themselves.
    The health of the European community continues to be good.
July, 1926.
    The District Officer, Mr. J. B. Archer, reports:— District Office.— I left Sibu on 15th and, after having dropped Mr. Hardie at Rejang, returned to Sarikei early on 16th. On the 18th I left Sarikei for Kanowit overland. We made the journey via Pengkallan Grogo, Tunggang Pakan and Julau and reached Kanowit station on 22nd. The water was in flood and made our progress down the Julau very easy. Penghulus Laja and Jantieng were away, the former in Sibu and the latter could not be found. Penghulu Busang of Sugai came to meet me in the B. Julau and reported a few cases. It is noticeable the way in which pulau nyatu cases have stopped since Government started confiscating the disputed land and putting it up to auction between the disputants. Acting on certain information a call was sent to Penghulu Jantieng to appear in Sibu. There were the usual requests for permission to buy firearms, whilst some of the Julau Dyaks want to start a school. I reached Kanowit on the 22nd where I stayed a day arriving in Sibu on 24th having made the journey between Kanowit and Sibu by boat in 7 hours. The Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. V. Andreini, visited the Ngemah and the Bawan, returning to Sibu on the day I left for Sarikei. He reports all quiet there. On the 7th there was a Government tuba fishing in the Kanowit which was attended by the Acting Resident and Mrs. Aplin. Mr. and Mrs. Raynham flew there and moored their seaplane in the Kanowit river near the Mission, returning the same afternoon to Sibu.
  I regret that I was obliged to report Abang Mustapa and Hadji Gapor, Native Officers, to the Acting Resident for refusing to obey orders. Both officers were asked to send in their resignations which, having been received, were accepted as from 31st July. Abang Abu Seman, Native Officer, has been instructed to relieve Hadji Karim at Sarikei whilst the latter is on leave, but owing to domestic affairs this transfer has been postponed. Umpi has relieved Abang Yan as Court Writer at Kanowit. The Acting Resident visited Binatang and Kanowit during the month. Penghulus Again and Laja visited Sibu during the month. On the 19lh a mail was despatched to Kuching by seaplane. Mr. Kidd arrived on the 23rd and proceeded lo Kanowit to open up an estate in that district. Mr. J. C Swayne, District Officer of Lower Rejang, was in Sibu from 3td to 5th.
  Petty thieving and housebreaking has been very common in Sibu Bazaar daring the month and the police are trying to round up a number of Chinese
  who appear to have no means of subsistence and who are a menace to all householders. Two old offenders were caught and received heavy sentences. Much blame attaches to the tenants of lodging-houses who let their rooms to all and sundry without any investigation at all. Many of these houses resemble rabbit warrens, being honeycombed with, cubicles of the filthiest description and inhabited by even filthier persons. The Municipal Board is endeavouring to remedy this state of affairs by refusing to allow repairs or alterations to such houses until the plans have been carefully gone over and passed. The Chinese owners, however, are generally very obstinate and it is difficult to advance much. All the bazaars in the district have been whitewashed and tarred and the work of repairing .shops in the sub-stations hits stinted.. Fifteen shop sites have been marked out in Kanowit and will be auctioned next month. A Foochow woman was drowned at Ensurai.
    District Court.—There were more cases than usual during the month. The following persons were sentenced to terms of imprisonment:—Chew Hu Kiang and Chua Teng Seng 3 years each for housebreaking; Chew Boon Chiong and Ah Sung 2 years each for criminal breach of trust and forgery ; P.C. 11 Abang Mohamat, 1 year for cheating; Chia Hok Wong 3 months for vagrancy; Ling Seng Meaw 3 months for assault; Sergeant Gokal Singh 3 months for assault; Sim Ah Sam 3 months for vagrancy; Tungan 1 month for vagrancy and Wong Huat Chiong 2 weeks for cheating. Sergeant Gokal Singh appealed against his sentence which was reduced to a fine by the Resident’s Court. The other party, however, has asked leave to appeal to the Supreme Court against this. Ong Ah Bah was fined $15 for causing a disturbance; Ngui Nai Shin and Ngui Chew Yong, charged with fraudulent concealment of property under section 421, were ordered to produce the title deeds of four rubber gardens which were seized by the Court and sold for the benefit of the creditors of Estate Tong Hoh in which the defendants were interested. A number of persons were fined for breach of Municipal Regulations especially with regard to bicycles. The usual number of land and debt disputes came before the Court. Fines and fees amounted to $2,033.14 and 116 deeds were registered during the month.
   Police.—P. C. 11 Abang Mohamat and Police Sergeant Gokal Singh were convicted by a Civil Court and sentenced to one year and three months’ imprisonment respectively. The latter appealed against his sentence which was reduced to a fine. One police constable was transferred to the Land Office and one returned to Kuching. Corporal Musafali was promoted co Sergeant. As a result of Gokal Singh’s case eleven of the Indian police caused a disturbance and their conduct became prejudicial to good discipline. A District Court Martial was held and P.C. 63 Kartar Singh, the ringleader, was sentenced to 3 months’ imprisonment mid dismissed the force. Ten other constables were convicted and sentenced to various military punishments. This action has had the desired effect and no further trouble has been experienced. One recruit joined during the month The Acting Resident inspected the force on the 1st.
   Prisons.—Twelve men entered and seven left the jail during the month. Of the. former 5 were Foochows, 2 Henghua, 1 Cantonese. 1 Hokien, I Malay, 1 Melanau, 1 Sikh. At the end of the month 51 men remained in tail.
   Public. Works Department.—In Sibu the following works were in progress:— Bungalow No. V?, completed and occupied. Bungalow No. VII, nearing completion, clerks’ bungalows nearing completion. Residency vacated and work of restoration begun, temporary bungalow for Public Works Department


263
THE SAWARA K GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.
Officer nearly finished, new dressers' quarters begun, survey coolies quarters finished, all Government buildings whitewashed and tarred, Aup Road repaired, bazaar drainage scheme continued, foundations for new water tower started, roads gravelled and the usual upkeep of grounds and roads carried on. In Sarikei the new clerks’ quarters were progressing and the Government wharf completed, whilst a start was made on draining the Government compound. Repok and main roads were kept up by contract. In Binatang the new clerks’ quarters made slow progress owing to lack of timber. A new contractor has been found to take on the upkeep of roads there. At Kanowit all the Government buildings were whitewashed and tarred. The Public Works Department office was transferred to below Fort Brooke.
July, 1926.
  The Court Writer of Kapit reports:—
  Court.—There were few cases and none worthy
of special note. Fines and fees amounted to
$152.26.
  General.—On instructions from the Acting Resi-
dent I took over temporarily from the Monopolies
Clerk, Chua Teck Chiang, who resigned from the 1st
inst. Capt. Macphail of s.s. Rajah of Sarawak paid
a visit to the station on the 11th inst. and left on
the 13th inst. The Officer-in-Charge of Customs,
Third Division, accompanied by Mr. P. C. Adams,
Ali, Chief Supervisor of Customs, Kuching, arrived
by the Chamois on the 20th inst. and returning
again on the 21st. Mr. Horton inspected the site
for the Customs examination shed. Native Officer
Abang Aboi visited the Mujong and Song district
during the month. Chin Tamby, wireless operator,
returned to headquarters on  the 13th by s.s.
Sarawak. The wireless charging engine broke
down during the latter end of the month. Mahali,
mechanic, who arrived from Kuching on the 25th
inst., quickly put it in order and returned the
following day. Later in the month rain was inces-
sant and in consequence heavy floods were ex-
perienced.
  Prisoners.—Who numbered 25 men at the end of
the month were chiefly engaged in upkeep of roads
and ornamental grounds. The prison carpenter was
employed on minor repairs to boats and cattle fence
Dairy Farm.—The herd number 16 head.
  Sarawak Rangers.—The usual drill and fatigues
were carried out.
  Trade and Shipping.—The s.s Sarawak made
3 trips, m. I. Lim Kong Thai 2 trips, m. l. Kong
Hup Foh, Dayang Hassiah, Lee Hua, s.s. Gladys,
m.l. Chamois, Soon Aik, and Kuala one trip each
during the month.
Exports for the month are as follows :—
Plantation Rubber	Piculs	142.71	Values	$10,200.00
Damar Daging	„	104.29	„	2,260.00
Rattan Set a No. 1	.,	109.81	.,	620.00
Rattan Tot No. 2	..	3,546.41	.,	28,980.00
Rejang.
July, 1926.
  The District Officer of Rejang reports :—
  I returned from Miri on the 6th of the month. During my absence a Chinese pepper planter. Loon Kin, reported that be had been severely assaulted by his coolie, Loon Lien. The latter, who had been arrested, appeared to be insane and was sent to Sibu hospital, where he died shortly afterwards from cerebral haemorrhage. While under arrest
he made two attempts to escape, once by jumping from a window in the Fort and once by trying to tear up the floor planking. I have only Loon Kin’s account of the matter, as there were no witnesses of the assault and Loon Lien either would not or could not speak ; the former stated that a dispute erose between them about wages which ended by Loon Lien attacking him with an axe. A charge of breach of trust was brought by the firm of Soon Hock against Soon Mob; as large sums appear to be involved it was necessary to send the books to Kuching for an audit; meanwhile the case is- adjourned. Teck Swee was found guilty of theft in the Selalang bazaar and was sentenced to one year’s imprisonment.
   I was at Matu from the 17th to 22nd ; the Acting Resident and Mrs. Aplin paid a visit to the station. A long standing dispute between Usop and Bun Jang, two old inhabitants who hold land by the Government station, was settled. The main cause of their disagreement was that Bun Jang, a pig breeder, did not prevent bis pigs escaping and damaging Usop's rubber; the latter revenged himself by spearing any pigs he could find. Bun Jang has now been ordered to keep bis fence pig-proof and the boundaries have been re-mapped. At Matu a schooner was chartered to bring some timber already worked at Tatau for the building of the new station. Mr. McLeod of the Forestry Department paid a visit to Tanjong Blatok. where Mr. Gild has a jelutong concession, and returned with me to Rejang.
   During the month I inspected the light at Jerijeh and the site of the proposed new light at Selalang month. At Jerijeh I noticed that the manufacture of blachan was in progress and the season is said to have been a good one. The weather has been unsettled and there have been frequent storms.
   Mr. Jacques paid a visit to Rejang at the beginning of the month and found several minor Treasury matters that called for adjustment. Other visitors were Messrs. Archer, Horton, Slater and Smith.
   The Divisional Land Officer. Mr. Miller-Hallett, reports for the months of June and July.
   “I returned from Matu on the 2nd and was in office until the 10th when I accompanied the District Officer to Kanowit for the purpose of roughly demarcating the proposed 15 new shop sites. This was done and compensation arranged. A notification of sale by auction being published in the Gazette.
   From the 1st until July 2nd I was at Binatang arranging the final boundaries of the new Foochow concession. On the 9th I accompanied the Resident who wished to inspect the concession and who approved, after walking through different sections, of the boundaries as laid down
   On the 13th Lim Teck Dee left for the north on 6 weeks’ leave.
   On the 24th I went to Kanowit with Mr. G. K. Kidd to inspect the concession granted to Rejang (Sarawak) Plantations. Ltd. Everything seems to be quite satisfactory there as far as natives are concerned The land has been farmed as far as the Oya hills and I am informed is no longer of any use for fanning ”
H. D. APLIN.
Acting Resident Third Division.
           COAST DIVISION.
?—
                             Mukah and Balingian.	
July, 1926.
   General.—I returned from tropical leave on 24th and after taking over from H. H. Kortright I resumed my duties as Acting Divisional Officer as from 1st proximo.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.
269
   Mr. H. H. Kortright left for Bintulu in the m.l.
Joan on 27th.
   Mr. R. Amndell sailed for Kuching in the m.s.
Majinis on 29th to obtain dental treatment.
   The Reverend Fathers Bernard Mulder and
Epping paid a visit to the Mukah Mission from. 19th
to 24th.
  Judicial.—In the Courts one Balog was fined for
trespass and felling sago palms the property of 
Reba’a; several persons were fined for bathing at
the water supply standpipes, and a number of 
contract and debt cases were dealt with.
  Health.—At the local dispensary dresser Ho 
Khiaw treated 106 persons whose cases were chiefly 
influenza, yaws and muli; he also performed 37 
N.A.B. injections.
  Public Works.—The prisoners averaging 11.19
men were employed whitewashing the Government
buildings. The Tamil labourers continued to work
on the general upkeep of the roads around the
station. At Balingian, the kampong people repaired
the roads through their respective villages; these
roads have since been surfaced with gravel brought
down by the Dyaks of the interior.
  Telegraph and Telephones.—Tassim a contractor
arrived at Balingian on 13th to commence the
erection of a Wireless Telegraph Station. Un-
fortunately no Officer was available to arrange a
suitable site at the time, but work will be commenced
on this project as soon as possible in the ensuing
month.
  Divisional Treasury.—Having completed the Coast
Division accounts for the year 1925, Divisional 
Treasury Clerk Francis N. Lim left for Kuching on 
29th in order to reconcile these accounts with the 
Sarawak Treasury.
  Trade and Shipping.—The Trade Returns for the 
month are as follows :—
       Coasting Imports. Coasting Exports.
   Mukah value $51,642	...	$71,023
   Balingian value 21,623	...	23,101
  The principal imports and exports are as
follows :—
Coasting Imports.	Coasting Exports.
Mukah Rice	$4,935
    Clothing	8,135
Balingian Rice 327
    Clothing	3,050
Raw Sago 3.701 koyans $41,000
G. Jelutong 1,256 piculs 21,737
G. Para 6 piculs	320
Raw Sago 4 ½  koyans 500
G. Jelutong 1,072 piculs 19,862
G. Jangkar 8 ½  piculs 177
P. Rubber 15 piculs 1,050
   Twenty-two schooners entered and 21 cleared the port during the month.
  The rainfall record shows 3.93 inches.
Oya
July, 1926.
   The District Officer, Mr. P. M. Adams, reports as follows :—
   Court.—The only case worthy of mention is that in which Ulis sued Hj. Bujang concerning ownership of a rubber garden in Sungei Kut Dalat. Plaintiff, on the strength of a letter from the Datu's
Court, claimed the whole of the garden though only
half had been left to him by his late father vide a
registered document. Defendant proved to the
satisfaction of the Court that plaintiff had sold him
his share and the claim was therefore dismissed.
Plaintiff gave notice of appeal.
  General.—His Highness the Tuan Muda, accom-
panied by the Acting Chief Secretary and Mr. H.
H. Kortright, visited Oya on the 16th. His
Highness sat in Court and various matters were
discussed. His Highness, in reply to questions
regarding the Land Order which has recently been
enforced here, informed the people that as the
district was most suited to the cultivation of sago
that three acres of this crop could be planted free
of quit rent by any one person, but that they must
pay rent on all rubber gardens.
  His Highness visited Dalat where he was en-
thusiastically greeted. His Highness visited the
mission where he was entertained by Rev. Father
Mulder. His Highness, accompanied by the Acting
Chief Secretary, sailed for Kuching in H.H.M.Y.
Maimuna at midnight. Mr. Kortright returned to
Mukah on the 18th.
  Land.—The maps made by the Survey Depart-
ment arrived towards the end of the month and
occupation tickets will shortly be ready for issue.
Nearly $4,000 will be collected in rent and map fees
for 1925 and 1926, $1,200 being rent for one year
as compared with $500 under the old scheme. There
are still some rubber lands above Medong to be
demarcated. If the work could be extended to
existing sago plantations future litigation would be
reduced to a minimum, and the local land depart-
ment properly organised.
  Clerical.—Tan Kim Lock was engaged and sent
from Kuching to augment the staff but resigned
after 3 days and returned to Kuching. He has
since reconsidered his resignation and is reported to
be coming back.
  P. W.D.—The new Court House was jodelited and
will be occupied during the first week in August.
Material has been ordered to cement and build
godowns underneath.
             
  Travelling.—Dalat was visited on the 10th when
the Divisional Treasury clerk came from Mukah to
look into and adjust certain entries in the accounts,
and again from 19th to 21st. I rode to Mukah on
the 23rd and returned on 26th.
  Prisoners.—Averaged 17.09 and were employed on usual upkeep of the station.
  Shipping.—Thirteen schooners entered and nine cleared; two motor schooners entered and cleared.
  Principal Exports.—Sago 225 koyans, Jelutong 232 piculs.
  Trade Returns.—Exports $63,221.00; Imports $52,368.00.


270
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.
Bintulu.
July, 1926.
  Mr. H. H. Kortright, District Officer of Bintulu and Tatau, reports as follows:—
  Courts.—Work in the Courts was very light during the month. There were four cases of assault, all from Pandan. Swee Ghim and his son Guan Chuan were concerned in two of these. These two cases were adjourned and the two above-mentioned persons were required to deposit in Court each $100 as a pledge for their good behaviour. Both these men, but more especially the former, have for a long time past been continually giving trouble at Pandan and it will be a good thing when they move down to Sebauh as they have agreed to do in the near future and join on to the bazaar there. Two other Chinese put pledges of $25 in Court and two more were fined $25 each.
  Twenty-four persons were fined in all $395 for ringing jelutong trees. There were a few Magistrate's Court cases of no importance.
  P.W.D.—Good progress has been made on the new wharf, and one wing, with the exception of the sway bracing, is finished. Vessels can now come alongside. A house for an assistant schoolmaster has been completed. The material for a similar house for a clerk has been collected and the work will be started in a few days time.
  The prisoners have widened the road between the up river end of the present bazaar and the site for the new bazaar of six shops which is being erected. They have also been employed in digging shallow ditches and stumping and clearing in a large extension to the cattle ground.
  General.—His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by the Acting Chief Secretary, Mr. H. B. Crocker, was pleased to visit the station, arriving in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna at 8 a.m. on the 15th.
  His Highness, on landing, was met by the Native Officers and all the principal people of the place and shortly afterwards in the Fort all present were invited to speak on any subject they wished. A few people asked to plant rubber, one or two to get off exemption tax, but oddly enough no one asked for a “Surat Snapang.”
  His Highness next visited the bazaars and inspected both the Chinese and Malay Schools. During the afternoon a trip was made to “Sungei Nigo” from whence the drinking water of the station has to be fetched, with the view to ascertain the practicability of piping this water about two miles to the kampongs and bazaars.
  At 7 p.m. His Highness, with the Acting Chief Secretary and myself, boarded the Maimuna and sailed for Oya.
  On the 19th I left Oya for Mukah and was there until the 26th. Mr. Skrine, Acting Divisional Officer, returned from leave on the 24 th and having handed over to him I returned to Bintulu in m.l. Joan, arriving on the morning of the 27th.
  A junk bound from Tatau to China with “belian” timber lost her mainmast in a squall off Balingian on the night of June 30th and put in here on the 4th for repairs. She was still here at the end of the month.
  Mr. J. A. H. Hardie, Commissioner of Trade and Customs, and Mr. E. Parnell, Managing Director, Sarawak Steamship Company, arrived here by s.s. Alice Lorraine on the morning of the 9th, the former came in connection with Customs work in this district and, having much improved the arrangements concerning this, sailed for Sibu by s.s. Chamois on the 12th. Mr. Parnell left for Kuching by s.s. Gladys early morning of the 15th.
  Mr. R. V. Palfreman, Acting District Officer, Tatau, who has been doing duty in this district since last November, arrived from Tatau on the 13th. He sailed by s.s. Auby on the 18th for Kuching and European furlough.
  The machinery for Mohd. Akbar’s sawmill has now arrived and it is hoped that this will be assembled and in working order before very long. The Tatau sawmill should also be operating before the end of the year.
  The weather was very hot and dry throughout the month. The rainfall was 7.26 inches.
  Trade and Shipping.—The trade of the district is distinctly good. Jelutong, of which 4,389 piculs have been exported, still maintained a high price. There has been a great demand for belian attaps and many are going to Labuan and British North Borneo.
  There were 829,910 of these exported during the month, and there are large quantities arriving daily from up river for export. I regret that the quality is again falling off. This is entirely the fault of the Chinese agents up river who are buying from the Kayans without examining before sending down to their towkays. I hope to be able to remedy this to some degree when I visit Tubau in the near future. If the Chinese would only examine the attaps as they were forced to do to Jelutong to prevent its adulteration; but no, they take anything and if the attaps are too obviously below standard they will put first-class attaps on the outside of the bundle, and they get through in most cases and fetch from $100 to $120 per laksa. The Kayans are now well paid for working attaps and make from $60 to $70 per laksa, and there is no excuse for there being more than from 15% to 20% of indifferent attaps put out by them. The remedy lies in the hands of the buyers, but they won’t help unless forced to.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.
271
Trade Returns for the month are as follows :—
1926.	1925.	1924.
Exports $98,881.50 ... $53,480.71 ... $35,288.85
Imports 65,456.51 ... 36,800.00 ... 33,748.35
  The following vessels entered and cleared the port
during the month :—
  Entered :—Four steamers, 2 schooners and 1
junk; Cleared :—4 steamers.
W. F. de V. SERINE, Acting Divisional Officer.
FIFTH DIVISION.
Lawas and Trusan.
   Haji Taip and Batang signed a contract to repair
the Lawas-Trusan Road and Ah Kui undertook to
repair the swampy part of the Gaya Road. Chin
Yun signed a contract to repair the Kebiah bridge
on the Gaya Road and Batang to rebuild the Ulu
Punang bridge on the Trusan Road. Now that the
price of rubber has fallen labour is not so scarce
and about forty coolies are employed on the Trusan
Rond. I hope that Batang will take up the con-
tracts for the Melipat Road and the Gaya Road
extensions
 Agriculture.— The Lawns Sarawak Rubber
Estates. Limited, exported 34,499 lbs. of rubber to
Labuan during the month. The Kadayans have
started clearing for padi; their last crop was a
failure.
   Health.—The health of the community was not
good during the month, influenza being prevalent.
   Rainfall.—The rainfall recorded was as	under:—
Lawns	...	7’01	inches
Lawas Estate	...	13'65
Trusan	...	13’46
June, 1926.
   Court.—Court work was very light during the month. Anyan was sentenced to one month for travelling without a pass. There were the usual number of civil cases.
   Crime.—It was reported to me that Palong Balu, a Tengoa Murut, had spread a rumour in the darat to the effect that most of the people at Trusan were dying from some epidemic. As a result the Bah Muruts who were on their way down sold their damar at ridiculously low prices to the Tengoa people and went home. Several other Muruts in Fa Baung were reported to have left their bouses and taken refuge in the jungle. Jala went up and arrested Palong Balu, but owing to my absence in Kuching the case had not been heard by the end of the month.
   Travelling.—On 5th I left for Kuching to attend the Government examination, returning to Limbang on 20th. The following day I left for Lawas. On 25th Mr. J. A. H. Hardie, Commissioner of Trade and Customs, arrived from Labuan by s s. Sulonq. On 27th we left for Merapok and Kuala Lawas in m.l. Sylvia, calling in at Kayangaran and spending the night at the Kuala. The following day we went to Sundar, stopping at Punang and Awat-Awat Customs Stations on the way. On 29th we went up to Trusan for the day and on 30th Mr. Hardie left for Labuan whilst I staved on at Sundar.
   Prisoners.—The prisoners, averaging nine men, were employed on repairs to bridges and re-roofing the covered way to the dapor.
   Public Works.—The Ulu Siloateng bridge was completed. The carpenter, Kow Nui, although a slow worker, is very thorough and the bridge should last for years. Kow Nui is now engaged in making a table for the use of the clerks. The new Customs Officers’ quarters at Lawas were nearly completed by the end of the month. The contract fur the Customs Officers' quarters at Sundar were signed.
Shipping.—S.S. Sulong called twice to load timber and buffaloes and m.l. Edmee made five trips to Labuan
Trade.—The trade returns are as follows :—
FOREIGN.Lawas:—    Imports.   Exports.June, 1926... $25,567   $45,267   „	1925      14,83559.493Trusan:—June, 1926... $ 5,213   $17,053   „	1925      9,65716,578COASTING.Lawas:—    Imports.Exports.June, 1926... $ 2,283   $ 5,298   „	1925      7.522472Trusan:—June, 1926      3,8762,240„	1925      2,0262,153            F. F. BOULT.
            Resident Fifth Division.


272
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.
1M PORTS—(Continued.)
Kuching, Foreign Trade Returns for the month of Aug., 1926.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.
273
EXPORTS—(Continued.)
EXPORTS.


Kuching, Coasting Trade Returns for the month of August, 1926.
IMPORTS.
PASSENGERS.
Arrivals.
Per s.s. Kuching. 7th September. From Singapore. Messrs. Gregory, G. A. Lefroy, Holl, Soh Koh Siong, Lim Tee Chew, Mr. and Mrs. Ong Chip Yam, Mr. and Mrs. Chang Cheng Fatt, Mrs. Than, Miss Chan Ah Yat, Master Ah Kow, Mr. and Mrs, Koh Boon Toh and Master Ah Jee.
Per s.s. Soon Ann. 13th September. From Singapore. Mr. Lim Ah Bee.
Per s.s. Kuching. 20th September. From Singapore. Mr. and Mrs. W. G. Tait, Messrs. Wright, Hurst, Stirling, A. D. Taylor, E. Parnell, Teo Chai Seng. Mrs. Leo 'Teo Kuan, Messrs. Carrol, E. Joon Kee, Weo Leng Geng and Sim Seng Teck.
Departures.
Per s.s. Kuching. 28th August. For Singapore.. Mrs.             Swindell, Messrs. Skinner, Kenworthy, Wee Cheng Seng, Wee Hong Kee, Mrs. Ong Siow Siang, Mr. Lim  Cheng Hock, Mrs. Proctor, Mr. Kong Sin Foh, Miss Ivy Yap, Masters O. Siow Kee, Chua Ah Kow, Chan Kui Chuan, Ong Siow Giap, A. Bateman, Misses I. and E. Bateman.
Per s.s. Soon Ann. 4th September. For Singapore. Mr. G. Paterson, Miss Harvey, Mr. and Mrs. W. Service, Master E. Reutens.
Per s.s. Kuching. 11th September. For Singapore. Mr. G. A. Lefroy, Mrs. A. I. Dawson, Messrs. McCullagh, W. Attenborough, Tau Chai Seng, Mr. and Mrs. S. Moh Seng, Mr. O-bless Lim, Mrs. Ogawa Tsuua, Madam Ah Kheng, Madam Tien Liaw, Misses Lim Ah Leong, Anderson, Master Pboa Thye Seng, Misses Phoa Ah Tin, Phoa Ah Sioh, Messrs. Lim Seng Teck and Weo Lang Geng.


274                               THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926
   Miri, Foreign Trade Returns for the month of May, 1926.
EXPORTS.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926
275
EXPORTS.
Kuching Market Price List.


276
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.
KUCHING SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
Departures.



THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.
277
MIRI SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
Departures.


278
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.
KUCHING SHIPPING RETURNS.
Arrivals .
Departures.
J. A. H. HARDIE,
Registrar of Shipping,


279                           THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.


280
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1926.
METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS.
GENERAL HOSPITAL

Highest Barometer reading31inches.Lowest	„	„299   „Highest temperature (in shade)98degrees.Lowest	„	„81„Greatest rainfall in 24 hours101inches.Total rainfall (Museum)  3’71Height of Hospital above sea level approximately 75 feet.

