
VOL. LVI.
No. 878.

THE
                Sarawak Gazette.
                                                                      PRICE                                    KUCHING, Monday, November 1st, 1926.              	         20 CENTS.
Contents.
        Arrival of His Highness the Rajah.
Page.
Arrival of His Highness the Rajah	...	... 281
Notes	...	...	...	...	281
Departure of His Highness the Tuan Muda ...	...	282
S.S. "Angby" ...	...	...	...	282
The late Mr. Liew Liong Kong	...	...	...	283
Extracts from Popular Science	...	... 283
Haj Pilgrims	...	...	...	...	283
S. Mary’s School Concert	...	...	...	288
Athletic Sports	...	...	...	...	284
Pasal Aya Tanggi	...	...	...	...	285
Club News:—
Sarawak Golf Club—Monthly and Race Week Competition 
	Results	...	...	286
Sarawak Club—Bowling Handicap	...	...	286
	Mens Doubles Open Tennis Champion- 
ship	... ...	...	280
                  Tennis Doubles Handicap...	...	286
                  Optional Pool Tournament	...	286
                  Bonding Handicap	...	...	286
Sarawak Turf Club—Election of Committee	...	287
Autumn Meeting Results	...	287
Unlimited Cash Sweep—Results of
Draw ...	...	...	289
Results of $2 Cash Sweep	...	289
Dividends for Winning Totalizators 289
Dividends for Place Totalizators... 289
Winning Owners	...	...	290
Winning Ponies	...	...	290
Winning Jockeys	...	...	290
Monthly Reports:—First Division	...	...	290
                    Sadong Colliery	...	...	291
                    Third Division	...	...	292
                    Coast Division	...	...	294
                    Fourth Division	...	...	297
                    Fifth Division	...	...	298
Kuching Trade Returns	...	...	...	800
Passengers	...	...	...	...	801
Miri Trade Returns	...	...	...	...	302
Kuching Market Price List	...	...	...	303
Kuching Shipping	...	...	...	...304
Miri Shipping	...	...	...	...	305
Rainfall  ...	...	...	...	...	306
Kuching Shipping Returns	...	...	...	307
Meteorological Returns	...	...	308
   His Highness the Rajah who travelled out from
Home by the s.s. Mantua. reached Singapore on the
8th and, connecting for Kuching by the s.s. Rajah of
 Sarawak on the 9th, arrived at Goebilt in the early
 morning of the 11th instant and hoarded the H.H.M.Y.
Maimuna, where His Highness the Tuan Muda was
on board to welcome and accompany His Highness
up river.
   A signal of two guns was fired from Fort Marg-
herita at about 7.30 to announce that the H.H.M.Y.
Maimuna had left Pending, and when half an
hour later the yacht came into sight round the bend
of the river, a royal salute of 21 guns was fired from
the Fort Battery.
   After landing from the Siamese barge, accom-
panied by the Acting Chief Secretary, His Highness
the Rajah was met and greeted by the Members of
the Committee of Administration and the Supreme
Council in the portico of the Astana landing place.
Having inspected the Guard of Honour of Sarawak
Rangers, under the command of Captain W. T.
Clark, drawn up on the lawn in front of the Astana,
His Highness was greeted by the Officers of the
Civil Service, in uniform, and the representatives of
the various communities in Kuching—Malays,
Chinese, Indians, Japanese and Europeans.
   A short reception was held in the Astana, and the
Acting Chief Secretary, in an appropriately brief
speech, proposed the health of His Highness the
Rajah and, on behalf of all present, welcomed
His Highness back to Sarawak.
NOTES.
|The Sarawak Gazette.
October.
MR. and Mrs. F. F. Boult, Mr. F. A. W. Page Turner, Mr. and Mrs. H. D. Aplin and Mr. G. J. D. Walters were the guests of His Highness the Rajah at the Astana during Race Week.
MONDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1926.
Mr. Chan Cheng Fatt and brothers wish to convey their sincere thanks to all relatives and friends who attended the funeral of the late Mrs. Chan Hoong Sze, and also all those who sent wreaths and letters of condolence.
  OUTSTATION visitors for Race Week included Messrs. J. B. Archer, P. M. Adams, J. G. Anderson, R. D. Binnie, T. Corson, L. B. Haye, H. H. Kortright, F. H. Pollard, J. C. Swavne, G. J. D. Walters, and E. M. Woodward.


282
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1926.
  THE Revd. Father Oss, formerly of the R.
C. Mission, Dalat, passed through Kuching
on the 2nd from B.N.B. en route to Europe
on leave after an unbroken spell of 20 years
in Borneo.
  MRS. C. P. Lowe and child left Kuching
by the s.s. Angby on the 4th for a spell of
leave in Europe.
  WE understand that the Conservator of Forests. Mr. J. P. Mead, has been allowed to accept a temporary appointment under the Government of Fiji to report on the forests of that Colony, and expects to sail next month. Mrs. J. P. Mead and child sailed for Europe on the 17th instant by the s.s.  Angby.
  MR. and Mrs. J. S. W. Bean, looking very fit after their Home furlough, returned by the s.s. Kuching on the 18th.
  MR. R. Hurst arrived by the s.s. Kuching on the 20th of September, and Mr. Lowrie by s.s Angby on the 25th, to take up appointments in connection with the Board of Trade Rubber Improvement Scheme.
   This latest rebel is a grey and pink Aus-  tralian, with white crest and small beak. Its owner, Captain Barry Gifford, of Portland-place, W., told a Daily Mail reporter that the parrot, which flew through the I window of the house on Friday, is a tame ? bird that could be picked up quite safely. 	__
Departure of His Highness the
Tuan Muda.
      On the morning of Sunday the 17lh instant, at nbout 11 o’clock, the s.s. Angby pulled away from the wharf at Kuching, bearing homeward Uis nigh- ri ess the Tuan Muda.
      His Highness rhe Rajah, all the Europeans and many leading Malays and Chinese were present, On hoard io wish His Highness bon voyage.
      His Highness, who arrived in Sarawak on the 29th of April last to administer the Government of the country outing the absence in Europe t f His Highness the Rajah, will no doubt enjoy a well-earned rest after his arduous duties, and we express our disappointment that His Highness was not able to remain in Kuching for the conclusion of Race Week.
      His Highness was the guest of His Excellency the Governor at Government House, Singapore, prim to the departure of the s.s. Morea, which sailed on the 22nd instant.
S. S. “Angby.”
His Excellency Mr. J. L. Humphreys assumed the Governorship of British North Borneo on 16th October.
  WE are informed that Mr. G. Beresford  Stooke, who left Sarawak to join the Colonial Service in Kenya, has recovered from a bad attack of black water fever. In spite of that, however, we hear that he has passed his Swahili and Law examinations within a year.
  AT a meeting of the Sarawak Club Com- 
mittee held on the 29th October, the Commis-
sioner of Public Works, we are informed,
estimated the Contractor for the new Club
building would finish his work by March, and
the members would be in occupation by June.
  This is considerably in advance of the
previous estimate of sixteen months for
completion, given in September last.
  DRY Rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah Estates during the month of September was approximately 82,000 tbs.
  WE read in a home paper :—
  “In the last few days several parrots in London have played truant from their homes. One that had held up City traffic by its public addresses had scarcely been recaptured before another disappeared from a West End home.”
  The Sarawak Steamship Company’s newly-
purchased vessel, s.s. Angby, arrived from Singapore
on September the 29th.
  We are informed that she was acquired from
French owners in July last, and arrived in Singapore
on the 24th of August after which she was docked,
and considerable alterations were made to provide
suitable passenger accommodation as well as
increased accommodation for the crew.
The following particulars are of interest:—
Length
Breadth
Moulded Depth
Loaded Draught
Net tonnage
Gross tonnage
Dead weight capacity
Speed
200 feet
36 „
11 ,, 6 inches
10 „ 2 „
504
786
954 tons on 9 ½  9" 
8 ½  knots
  Schooner rigged with elliptical stern and engines
aft, the vessel was built at Bowning in 1913 by
Messrs, Scott & Sons, engines by W. D. V. Lidger-
wood, and the boilers by D. Rowan & Co., Glasgow.
  On inspection she appeared to be an excellent
ship for cargo carrying; her batches are large and
derricks of ample length to assure easy handling of
cargo. Her four cabins, of two berths each, are
roomy and of a pleasing appearance. Possibly the
bathrooms, etc., will be found uncomfortably warm.
However, situated as these rooms are, they form
good protection to the after cabins from the heat of
the funnel. Her deck space is ample for the small
number of passengers she is designed to carry.
  Her one fault for the trade in which she is now
employed would appear to be her lack of speed. It
is estimated that she will take 53 hours from
Kuching LO Singapore. We do not think that
this fact will in any way detract from her use-
fulness when employed in the trade for which she
is required, as we understand that she is only
temporarily on the Kuching-Singapore run, pending
the arrival of a new passenger ship.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1926.
283
   The late Mr. Liew Liong Kong.
  We regret to record the death of Mr. Liew Liong Kong which occurred at Bau, Upper Sarawak, on the 22nd October. Deceased, was born in Sambas and came to Sarawak nearly 50 years ago. Ide was connected with the gold mining industry in Upper Sarawak before the advent of the Borneo Company and formerly had a large in terest in the pepper planting industry, and owned extensive rubber gardens. He also acted as Chinese Magistrate in Upper Sarawak and will be greatly missed in this capacity, his advice in connection with Chinese affairs being always sound and valuable.
  Deceased leaves four sons and six daughters to whom we express our sympathy in their bereavement.
   Extracts from Popular Science.
  Twice as much power is required to stop an express train as to start it.
  Shoe strings made of a rubber composition, recently introduced by an English manufacturer, are said to stretch so easily that shoes can be put on or taken off without unlacing.
  The Egyptian Department of Antiquities have discovered a well-preserved specimen of a mummified horse, of over sixteen bands, at the Sakkara Deep Pyramid. It is estimated to belong to the period 1200 B.C., and is said to be the first mummified horse found.
  One of the reasons why the flesh of the salmon is red is that it contains a pigment of that colour found in sea plants.
  Pulp left after extracting oil from olives, is used as fuel in Spain.
  A Canadian Ayrshire cow, owned by Mr. W. C. Wylie, of Quebec, in 306 days has broken the world’s record by producing 21,241 tbs. of milk and 909lb s. of butter fat.
  Within a minute after garlic is eaten by a cow, the flavour can be detected in the milk, says a well- known scientist.
  During the twelve months ended last June, seventy aeroplanes of post-war design and 192 of war design have crashed, the .value of the machines involved amounting to approximately £500,000.
  Platinum, which at one time was cheaper than gold, to-day commands a price of six to seven times that of gold. It is estimated that the world’s supply of platinum is no more than 20,000 lbs.
  Collecting of balata gum, derived from the milky juice of the balata tree and used in making rubber belting, is one of the principal industries of British Guiana.
Haj Pilgrims.
(?????)
   ???? ????? ???? ????? ??????
   ????? ???? ??? ??? ????? ????? ?? ???? ???? ?? ???? ??????? ?????? ?? ???? ??? ?? ??? ???? ?????? ???? ????? ???? ????? ???? ???? ??? ???? ??? ???? ????? (650$) ???? ???? ????? ??? ??????? ? ?? ???????? ????? ???? ???? ?? ??? ???? ????? ????? ??????? ? ???? ???? ??? ???? ???? ??????????? ?????? ????? ??? ??? ?????? ??? ???? ????? ?????? ???? ????? ??????? ?????.
????? ?? ????? ?????? ???? ????? ?? ??? ?????? ????? ?? ???? ?????? ??? ?????? ?? ????? ?? ??? ?? ????? ?? ???? ???? ???? ?? ???? ????????? ?? ????? ??? ?????? ?????? ???? ?? ???? ????? ???? ?? ?? ????? ????? ?? ??? ????? ?????? ??? ??? ??????? ????? ???? ??? ??????? ?? ??? ?? ???? ??? ????? ??? ?????????? ??? ??? ?????? ????? ?????? ????? ????? ?????? ??? ?? ???? ??? ????? ??? ??????? ????? ??? ???? ?? ??? ?????? ??? ?????? ????? ??? ???????? ????? ????????? ????
H. B. CROCKER,
Acting Chief Secretary

??????? ?????? ?????? ? 20 ?????? ???? ? 1926
H. B. CROCKER,
Acting Chief Secretary.
1926. yU yyil 20 - jbb			u~-
  Approximately 6,000 new species of insects are found and classified each year by scientists.
S. Mary’s School Concert.
For more than 2,000 years, it is said, laughter has been unknown to the Veddac, a tribe of aboriginal inhabitants of Ceylon.
Magnetic motor sweepers are largely used in America in order to clear roads of nails and suchlike sharp-pointed objects.
The total shipping tonnage of the Port of London last year reached the remarkable figure of 47,000,000 tons.
      The teachers and scholars of S. Mary’s School gave a concert on October 13th and 14th in the Yong Soon Cinema Hall in Carpenter Street, kindly lent by Mr. Lee Yeng Hoi.
      The presence of His Highness the Tuan Muda on the first evening was very much appreciated.
      The first part of the programme was made up of miscellaneous items from school work. There were songs by the elder girls, action songs by the middle division, and dances and nursery rhymes by the little ones.
       Mr. Pa’ee and Mr. Li Chai kindly gave two songs and dances and Mr. Ong Eng Hin’s Bright Star Minstrels gave incidental music.


284	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1926.
  The last part of the programme was a pantomime, “Cinderella," performed by the teachers and upper form girls, which, to judge by the applause, seemed to be much appreciated, especially the foursome reel at the Palace Ball. The dresses were made and the scenery painted by the performers.
  The Staff of S. Man' s wish to thank all who so’ kindly helped to make the concert a success, and first of al! the Committee, with Mr. Tan Sum Guan as Chairman, who gave advice before the concert, undertook the selling of tickets, and the arrangement of the hall, and assisted as steward on the concert nights.
  The following were kind enough to be patrons Mr. and Mrs. C Fenwick, Dr- and Mrs. Krishna, Lr. Wong Chong Way, Dr. Williams, Messrs. Ong Yiang Swee, Chan Kee Ong, Song Kheng Hai, Wee Khcng Chiang, Tan Ah Kim, Ng Ah Kiong, Law Cheng Hiang, Chua Buk Hin, Yong Kay Cho. Tai Lee, Ho Lee, Wee Sia Gmee, Sim Cheng Liang, Wee Boon Chew, Lim Peng Koon, Tbeng’Keng Nam, Chop Syn Kim Hin, Miss Barbara Bay, Miss Chang Ah Lan.
  Subscriptions were received from: —His Highness the Tuan Muda, Mrs. J. Fenwick. Mr. and Mrs. Howard Smith. Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner, and Mr. Chung Chong Tsau.
  Mr. Tan Sum Guan kindly lent chairs. Chop Ho Chiang Seng gave a crate of mineral waters, anti Chop Ban Jui Long lent glasses.
  The proceeds of the Concert, which were for the furnishing of the new Creche, amounted to nearly $2,500; which splendid result is entirely due to the kind and generous outside help received, which the Staff very gratefully here knowledge.
(Contributed).
Athletic Sports.
  His Highness  the Rajah's birthday falling on a Sunday this year the inter-school and General Sports arranged annually in honour of the occasion were held on the following day 27th September.
  At 1.45 p.m. a very heavy downpour of rain was the cause of much consternation but this stopped at 2.30 p.m. and in spite of much mud the programme was carried through with the greatest success.
  A suggestion was made that the Sports should be held on the Kuching Football Club’s new ground this year but on inquiry it was found that the majority of the community preferred the S.P.G. ground as it is more central, so once again the School playing field was laid out in a business-like fashion and tastefully decorated with a variety of flags and streamers, etc., whilst a very imposing grandstand was erected Much credit is due to Mr. E. Howell, who displayed an untiring energy and great keenness in the laying out of the field and erecting of the grandstand, etc., and also to A bang Suleiman who excelled himself with his decorations this year.
  In spite of the forbidding aspect of the weather, enormous crowds of spectators turned out to wit ness the events.
  The band of the Sarawak Rangers added greatly to the gaiety of proceedings by rendering a large number and variety of excellent selections, whilst the fortunate badge-holders in the grandstand were able to withstand the damping effect of the weather by regaling themselves with the delicious tea and refreshments provided by Mr. E. Howell, to whom all thanks are due
  As regards the Sports, apart from the many exciting races that took place, a special word should be said for the Pole Jump which was a vast improvement on last year. In connection with this we should like to extend our sympathy to Yaw Soon who, whilst jumping, had the misfortune to fall and dislocate his elbow. Yaw Soon is said to be a good jumper and would probably have done very well: we wish him better luck next year The most exciting event of the day was without doubt the first heat of the Tug-of- War, when the Police just managed to beat the Fire brigade after a pull lasting for a good five minutes. Unfortunately the victors were so “cooked" after their strenuous exhibition that the Sarawak Rangers who had had a very easy win in their pull against the “Government Steamers” had no difficulty at all in beating them in the final - w- think, however, that the Rangers would have won in any case as they were a very strong team and combined in their pulling much better than the Police did.
  The Victor Ludorum" Shield was won by St. Joseph's very easily this year. It is a great pity that last year's holders, the Hokkien Chinese Free School, were unable to compete as, owing to a slight misunderstanding regarding their entries, which came to notice at the eleventh hour, they were unable to raise sufficient boys to enter. St. Thomas' have been the runners up for the shield three years’ running, we wish them better hick next year.
  After a very enjoyable afternoon's entertainment His Highness the Tuan Muda presented the prizes The Datu Bandar delivered a short and well-phrased speech, thanking His Highness on behalf of the Malay community for honouring the sports with his presence and also for presenting the prizes.
  Nir Tan Sum Guan also thanked His Highness for presenting the prizes and in his speech made special mention of the late Major J. C. Moulton who, during his office as Chief Secretary of Sarawak, inaugurated the Annual Sports. He concluded by wishing on behalf of all present “Many Happy Returns of the Day" for His Highness the Rajah for whom three hearty cheers were given followed by three more for His Highness the Tuan Muda.
  His Highness the Tuan Muda in replying to the Datu Bandar and Mr. Tan Sum Guan expressed much pleasure in the inauguration of these Annual Sports as it was not only a splendid institution for the schoolboys and other competitors but also it was a fine opportunity for all the various races of people living in Kuching to gather together as one large happy family in order to celebrate their Rajah’s Birthday.
  On the following night, the 28th September, a firework display was given on the Sports ground, which was very prettily lighted by electric lamps The band of the Sarawak Rangers was in attendance and, in spite of the inclemency of the weather, the whole of Kuching appeared to bo present to witness the display and a very enjoyable and entertaining evening was spent.
  Many thanks are due to all the Europeans, Chinese. Malays, and Indians, who subscribed so generously to the Sports Fund and to the Committee responsible for the organization and running of the Sports, to the Judges, Starters and Stewards for the hard work they put in, to Mr. Tan Sum Guan for the valuable time he has spent collecting donations and looking after the accounts and to Mr. T. Matsumoto for letting off and fireworks, whilst a very special word of thanks is due to Mr. Choo Ah Hian who ran the Sideshows and to Messrs. S. Gawing and L. Teck Huat who acted as barkeepers, the three last- named gentlemen not only worked all the afternoon at the Sports, but also on the following night at the Firework Display.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1926.
28o
19. 50 Yards’ Veterans Race.
    1 Sergeant Empam ... Sarawak Rangers.
2 Sergeant Sada in ... Kuching Fire Bri-
gade.
20. Handicap open to European Children.
    1. Nella Baird.
    2. Patsy Mead.
21. Obstacle Race
    1. ,P B. Bujang Sarawak Police.
    2. P.B. Paee ... do.
22. Tug-of-War (Drawn by Mr. S. Gawing)
Won by Sarawak Rangers
  Result of the Victor Ludorum Shield.
  Points given in Inter-School Events, Nos
2, 4, 6, 8,11, and 16. (Two for a first and one for
a second.)
  Won by St. Joseph’s School	... 9 Points
  Second St. Thomas’ School	... 5 . „
  Third Kampong Gersik School ... 4
S. T. ENNION,
Hon. Secretary.
The official results are as follows: —
1. 100 Yards, open to any Government Clerk.
	1.Stephen Harry ... Sarawak Rangers
2. Eddie Lim ... Telegraph & Tele-
phones.
2. 100 Yards Schoolboys, 4 feet 6 inches and under.
   1. John Chen	... St. Joseph's School.
   2. Thos Chai	...	do.
3. Putting the Weight (16 lbs), open to any
Government Servant.
1. P.C. 64, Natah
Singh ... Sarawak Police.
2. P.C. 91, Chanan
Singh ... do.
       Distance 27 feet 1 inch.
4. 50 Yards, Schoolboys 4 feet and under.
1. Hassan Wanni ... Kampong Gerisk 
School.
   2. Ah Siong ... St. Joseph’s School. 
5. Long. Jump, open to any Government Servant. 
   1 P.B. Paee ... Sarawak Police.
2 Stephen Harry Sarawak Rangers.
Distance 15 feet 10 inches.
6. 100 Yards, open to any Schoolboy.
   1. Tek Cheng	... St. Thomas’ School.
   2. Nyan Joon	... St. Joseph’s School.
7. 100 Yards, open to any Mercantile Clerk.
   1. John Chong ... Oriental Dispensary.
   2. Matthew Hon Chartered Bank.
8. 250 Yards, Schoolboys 4 feet 6 inches and under.
   1. Sirat	...	Kampong Gersik
School.
   2. Benjamin	...	St.	Thomas’ School.
9. Egg and Spoon Pace -Girls only.
   1. Shui Tshin	...	St.	Mary's School.
   2. Betty Lim	...	St.	Mary’s School.
10. ½  Mile Relay Race, Government Departments
and Mercantile Firms.
       Telegraph and Telephones (Walkover.)
11. ¼  Mile Race, open to any Schoolboy.
   1  Eskoto	... St. Joseph's School.
   2 Lyan Joon	...	do.
Pasal Aya Tanggi.
12. Cattle, open to Government and Mercantile 
Clerks.
   1. Shak Kim ... Health Office.
   2. Jitam	Public Works De- 
partment.
13. Pole Jump, open to All Comers.
   1. Janting	...Customs Depart-
ment.
   2. E. Bay	... Telegraph and Tele-
phones.
       Height 8 feet.
14. Sack Tournament, open to All Comers.
    1 . Kadir	... Land and Survey
Department.
    2 P C. 198, Bodol ... Sarawak Police.
15. Hurdle Race, open to All Comers.
    1 . P.B. Paee ... Sarawak Police
    2 P.B. Bujang ... do.
16. Hurdle Race, open to any Schoolboy.
    1. Su En	... St. Thomas’School.
    2. Choo Ban	... St. Joseph’s School.
Ukai nama agi pengrami mensia, 
Leboh bulan tu enda ulih charita; 
Tuan Raja begawai ngumpul mensia, 
Di 19 hari bulan November taun 1890 dikira.

Mensia begempuru di menoa Simanggang, 
Sampal bansa Daya datai ka Ngumbang;
Makai di kubau besrak-srak orang, 
Ngirup ka pengrami nadai betagang.

Ukai aku bepanjai ka kenang,
Samoa orang andal meda tuda Ngumbang, 
Adaipen iya truba meda Simanggang, 
Baru meda menoa dipangka ka pasang.
Adaipen pengawa Tuan Raja, 
Main orang ukai sa bengka; 
Adai ti mengap, adai ti berayah, 
Adai ti ninga, adai ti bechakah.

Pengawa pen ambis mensia pen pulai, 
Ngumbang pen ka Balau lain nemuai: 
Ngagai Rawan di tasik besai, 
Diundan Balau bekayoh kesai.

Adaipen leboh mensia betulak pulai, 
Adai ka Undup, adai ka Pusai;
Adai ka Bugau mai pangan nemuai, 
Adai ka Saribas pulai ka Gensurai.

Pengandal Ngumbang ukai chechamang, 
Bulih maioh utai ari samoa orang;
Balau dipupu enggau Undup Engkerbang, 
Saribas Paku baka ti betimbang.

Jako Ngumbang pen pemadu trang, 
Nusi pasal pemarinsa di menoa Kedang; 
Badu agi nyakap Raja beprang, 
Enggai enda bebaik enggau samoa orang.
17. ½  Mile, open to Rangers, Police and Fire Brigade
E Bujang ... Sarawak Police.
    2. P.C. 80, Jaginda
Singh ... do.
Ukai nama agi penyarut mensia, 
Nengah jalai olih nyeliah, 
Bekaban maioh chukup tengkira, Betangkin dua begaya raia.
18. Potato Race, open to any Schoolboy.
    1. Thiam Hee ... St. Thomas'School.
   2. Su En	... do.
Utai enggai enda siti dua, 
Leman utai dalam dunya;
Bisi jai bisi mega kekira.
Bisi badas bisi mega lain chara.


286
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1926.
    Adaipen Tanggi tuai orang,
    Berami pulai ari Simanggang, 
    Ngetu makai ngering ka tulang, 
    Betangkin dun nunda orang.
    
    Julok Tanggi, "Mali Balang,"
    "Enda ngetu kesulai orang,"
    "Brani Mati Enda Malik Blakang." 
    "Dudok Entap Mipi Nyeringgang."
    
    Ukai nama agi penyinu ati, 
    Ngenang leman tuda Tanggi, 
    Lenyau di pedang nyampau penrugi, 
    Ngabang ka Simanggang pulai bebadi.
    
    Pemadu me tu penusah ati,
    Ngenang "Kesulai Enda Ngetu," tuda Tanggi; 
    Belawa ka Sabu madah ka Padri, 
    Minta tolong laban bebadi.
    
Leka jako tuda Aya Tanggi, 
Ngadap siko Tuan Padri;
    "Aku tuan. madah kadiri.”
    "Ngetu makai lalu bebadi.”
Dinga olih kita samoa orang,
Singit ka pending, dinga ka kenang, 
Tu munyi penyai kerja kempang, 
Ngenchuri pedang tangkin dikenang.

Pengawa ngenchuri bisi pemusong, 
Ati seruran tusah enda ngenong;
Allah meda penyai diitong, 
Hari Kiamat bisi pengujong.
W. H.
   MENS DOUBLES OPEN TENNIS CHAMPIONSHIP.
The Sarawak Club Committee Cup.

         Club News.
        Sarawak Golf Club
   The October Monthly Competition and Race Week Competition combined was held during Saturday the 16th, Sunday the 17th, and Monday the 18th, for a Prize kindly presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda, the runner-up receiving the Monthly Silver Spoon.
Of the 17 Entrants only 5 returned cards.
Result.—
Mrs. R. V. Carr (8) 5 down, played off 2 down. Winner. Mr. R. V. Carr (8) 3 down, phi red off 5 down. Runner-up. Optional Sweep ou above, H. E. Outfield drew the Winner.
   November Monthly Competition (Stroke) will take place during Saturday 6th and Sunday 7th November.
E. O. BRUCE,
Hon. Secretary.
           Sarawak Club
BOWLING HANDICAP FOR SEPTEMBER, 1926.
Score.H'cap.Total.R. C. Kay (winner) ...280  96376W. Cotterill335  34369E. O. Bruce295  62357L. D. Kennedy292  60352G. T. Bates290   52342A. M. Forrest254  72326J. P. Brird271  38309G. D. W. Frayling ...242  52294Dr. T. E. Walsh ...232  59291B. J. C. Spurway ...208  82290H.H. the Tuan Muda243  30273C. D. Adams221  34255C. S. Griffiths163  92255R V. Carr2406246  Winners of Kuching Final to play 1925 Winners: Messrs. Aplin and Lim Soon.
  Supervising Sub-Committer for Tennis Competitions J. P. BAIRD, C. ERMEN, A.E. LAWRENCE.
TENNIS DOUBLES HANDICAP.
  H. D. Aplin and G. M. Allman (Outstations) beat R. C. Kay and C. S. Griffiths (Kuching) 6 -8, 7—5, 6—3.
OPTIONAL POOL TOURNAMENT.
  His Highness the Tuan Muda and R. W. Chater (Kuching) beat G. M. Allman and G. J. D. Walters (Outstations) 241—222.
             BOWLINGHANDICAP.    Name.    Score.H'cap.Total.J. B. Archer (Winner)... 27475849H. E. Cutfield... 30415319H. H. Kortright ...... 26255317R. V. Carr... 816scr.316H. D. Aplin... 28185316J. P. Baird... 809    6315G. M. Allman... 23445299F. H. Pollard... 22265287L. B. Haye... 18585270D. Y. Proudfoot ...... 23826264B. J. C. Spurway ...... 20458261W. Cotterill... 24020260B. D. Binnie... 21445259G. T. Bates... 234IB232L. D. Kennedy.. 20444248R. W. Chater ...... 21184245C. D. Adams... 22618244C. S. Griffiths... 18860240H. H. the Tuan Muda... 22514239T. E. Walsh... 209242330. Fenwick... 226    4230G. D. W. Frayling... 20822225A. M. Forrest... 16162223E. M. Marjoribanks... 20214216R. O. Kay... 17234206A. A. Rennie... 18914203E. O. Bruoe... 18510195

THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1926.
287
Sarawak Turf Club-
ELECTION OF COMMITTEE 1926—1927.
               THE CHINA PLATE.
Race No. 2 —3 furlongs. Divisions III & IV.
(Checked by Messrs. C. D. Adams and J. B. Archer.)

   Archer.)
J. A. H. HARDIE,
Honorary Secretary, Sarawak Turf Club.
HORSES.
1 Mah Jongg 
2 Azab 
3 Kuching 
0 Ponghulu 
0 Ghalib 
0 Tony 
0 Bang
        OWNERS.
.. Mr. Hinway
.. Mr. Ed. Hardell 
.. Mr. Ang Ong Chye
.. Mr. F. H. Pollard 
.. Mr. C. D. Adams
.. Mr. V. A. Ebert

Mr. G. T. Bates
H’CAP
9  8
9  7
8 12
8 12
8 10
8 10 ½ 
8  7
JOCKEYS. Lohor 
Damit
Biloi Rajak
Salleh
Chern
  ½  neck ; head. Time 50 1/5 secs.
  An exciting finish, mm a, surprise to spectators including the Stewards, many of whom thought Azab passed the post first.
  The Judges were, at the request of a Steward, asked whether, in view of certain complaints, they wished to reconsider their placings of the first two ponies in this race. The Judges were not disposed to do so and the Stewards ruled that, except in the case of a palpable error in the Judges’ placings, their decision must be final.
THE KEPPEL STAKES.
Race No. 3.—5 furlongs. Divisions II, III & IV.
Sarawak Turf Club.
HORSES.
Beaver
OWNERS.
H'CAP.
Apa Kena Adhams Sisit 
Sakbon Penglima
Kilat Tolin
.. Messrs P.M. Adams & 
    J. B. Archer
.. Mr. J. B. Archer
 .. The Datu Imam Tua 
.. The Datu Bandar
 .. Abang Suleiman
 .. Messrs. Chan Teck
Cheng & W. B.  Chew
.. Mr. W. L. Vanderslott 
.. Haji Hassim
.. 9 7 Brahim 
.. 8 10 Biloi
.. 9 5 Alin
.. 9 5 Timbam 
.. 9 12 Bobo

.. 9 0 ½ Assan
.. 8 12  Bujang
.. 8 4 Jahars



    
A very successful Autumn Meeting was held on
the 16th and 18th of October and was favoured with
perfect weather on the first day. A torrential
downpour, however, threatened to wash out the
second afternoon. Luckily it passed off fairly quickly,
leaving the Course sodden but the temperature
delightfully cool.
  As usual there were one or two surprises, and the 
Division IV pony Pegasus justified expectations. 
Length ; length. Tune 1 min. 23 1/3 secs.
Beaver spurted well—a ding-dong struggle up the
the straight for 2nd.
THE TUAN MUDA’S CUP.
Race No. 4.-6 furlongs. Decisions I, II, III & IV.
HORSES.
Kismet
Akai
Hopeless
Burak
Blazes
Untong
Wembley
OWNERS.
.. Ong Kongsi
.. Mr. Ed. Hardell
.. Mr H. B Crocker 
.. Ali bin Dollah 
.. Mr. J. A. H Hardie 
..  Mr. P. M. Adams
.. His Highness the Rajah

H'CAP.

.. 8 12 Alin
.. 8 7 Damit
.. 10 0 Spurway
.. 9 10 Salleh
.. 9   0 Biloi
..  8	7	 Brahim
.. 8 5 Rajak

   Length ; length. Time 1 min. 37 2/5 secs.
Kismet just managed to win in the last 20 yards.
Winning nil his races in Division IV and another     
Division III, be deservedly secured the Challenge                   Akal caught Hopeless napping at the post.
Trophy for the best performance at the Meeting. 
Untong was Runner-up.
    Mr. P. M. Adams was the most successful jockey, with four winning mounts, one second and one third.
               THE SIBU STAKES.
Race No. 5.—4 furlongs. Division IV.
    The new paddock, stables and offices proved a great convenience, and when finally completed and turfed will undoubtedly attract a larger crowd of I spectators from the Stand.
    We understand the Place Totes were not quite so popular as was expected, owing no doubt to the fact that the form of most of the ponies was well known prior to the Meeting.
Horses. 
1 Pegasus 
2 Shotaway
3 If
0 Manna Buleh 0 Ajaib
        OWNERS.	H'CAP. JOCKEYS
..	Eng Guan Leong Kongsi ..	9	7	Lohor
..	Mr. C. D. Adams	..	8	0	Rajah
..	Ungun	••	9	7	Tabit
..	Mr. E. O. Bruce	..	8	9	Chem
.. Messrs. Abang Mohamad
     Taha & Ang Cheng Khoi           8   8 Timbam
Length ; half length. Time 1 min. 5 1/5 secs.
Pegasus walked in without any effort.
             THE TURF CLUB CUP.
Race No. 6.—6 furlongs. Divisions III & IV.
RESULTS.
HORSES.
Azab 
Aladdin
Mah Jongg
Kuching
Bakcha
        OWNERS.
.. Mr Ed. Hardell
.. The Triple Kongsi
.. Mr. Hinway
.. Mr. Ang Ong Chye
.. Abang Sulaiman
9 7 Damn
9 4 Spnrway
9 7 Lohor
8 11 Assan
8 4 Lim Whatt

First Day: 16th October, 1926. THE KUCHING PLATE.
Race No. 1.—5 furlongs. Division IV.
Length ; 11 lengths. Time 1 min. 38 2/5 secs.
THE LIMBANG STAKES.
Race No. 7.—4 furlongs. Divisions II, III d IV.
HORSES
Pegasus Shotaway Ajaib
OWNERS.
H'cap. Jockeys
.. Eng Guan Leong Kongsi..         9 7 ¾  Spurway .. 
Mr. C. D. Adams ..                        7 11 Rajak .. 
Messrs. Abang Mohamad
HORSES.

Bagaimana
If
Manna Buleh
     Taha & Ang Cheng Koi .. Mr. E. O. Bruce .. 
     Ungun .. 
     Mr. E. O. Bruce
8 6 Tabit
9 9 ½  Bruce
9 7 Salleh
9 0 Chern
Length ; neck. Time 1 min. 25 2/5 sees.
  Pegasus get away well, and had no difficulty in
winning.
Beaver
Adham 
White Wings Sakbon 
Sisit
Kilat 
Apa Kena 
Tolin 
Penghulu 
Bang
.. Messrs P. M. Adams & 
   J.B. Archer
.. The Datu Imam Tua
.. His Highness the Rajah 
.. Abang Suleiman 
.. The Datu Bandar
.. Mr. W. L. Vandcrslott 
.. Mr. J .B. Archer
.. Haji Hassim
.. Mr. F- H. Pollard
.. Mr. G. T. Bates
½  length ; ½ length. Time 1 min. 5 1/5 secs.
H’cap

9 12
9 1
8 7
9 13
9 2
8 12
8 12
8 4
8 0
7 10







Jockeys.
P. M. Adams Alin 
Lachaman 
Bobo 
Timbam 
Buiang 
Biloi 
Drahim 
Rajak
Chem
Adham in spurted well and just failed to win.


288	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1926.
THE PADUNGAN STAKES.
Race No. 8.-3 furlongs. Divisions I, II, ? & IV.
  Head ; head. No time taken.
   A very close finish—Un tong ami Kismet came
up one on either nui, with several ponies close np
between them.
   The owner of Kismet entered an objection against
bis pony being placed second in this race. The
owner and jockey of Untong entered an objection
against the jockey of Kismet for bumping and
boring
   The Stewards ruled that, in accordance with their
decision regarding the second race, the first objection
must he dismissed and the fee forfeited After
hearing the evidence in connection with the second
objection, Lohor. Kismet’s jockey, was severely
warned as to his future riding and his licence
ordered to be endorsed accordingly The placings
as given by the Judges to stand. Objection fee
against Lohor ordered to be returned.
THE INDIA PLATE.
Race No. 9.-3 furlongs Divisions ?, II, ? & ?. Open to ponies which have never won a race at any meeting in Sarawak.
   Neck; length. Time 6 mins. 47 secs., equals
record.
THE RANEE’S PRIZE.
Race No. 3.-6 furlongs. Divisions II, III, & IV.
   3 lengths; head. Tune 1 min. 40 4/5 secs.
   One of the greatest surprises of the meeting.
   Jaya. Tulin’s jockey, was fined $5 for disobeying the Starter’s orders and $10 by the Stewards for bumping and boring, and cautioned as to his future riding.
THE SIMANGGANG STAKES.
Race No. 4.— 3 furlongs. Division IV.
   ½  length ; ½  length Time 50 secs.
   An objection to Brahim, Bagaimana's jockey, by the owner of Shotaway for bumping and boring was withdrawn and the fee estreated. At an inquiry held by the Stewards on the following day. Tabit, Ajaib's jockey, was suspended from riding at the next Meeting for foul riding m this race in the straight.
THE SEKAMA STAKES.
Race No. 6.—4 furlongs. Divisions I, II, ?, & IV.
Second Day: 18th October. 1926.
THE BARAM STAKES.
Head ; ½  length. Time 66 1/5 secs. A very popular and unexpected win.
Race No. 1.—5 furlongs. Divisions I, ?, ?, & I V.
2 lengths; ½ length. Time 1 min. 21 4/5 secs.
THE REJANG PLATE.
THE MUKAH STAKES.
Race No. 6.—5 furlongs. Divisions III and IV.
Race No. 2.—4 furlongs. Divisions III and IV.
   At an inquiry held by the Stewards on the
following day, Salleh, Tony’s jockey, was suspended
from riding at the next Meeting for foul riding in
this race at the road crossing.
THE ROYALIST STAKES.
Race No. 7—3 furlongs. Divisions II, III, & IV.
3 lengths; head. Time 50 2/5 secs.



THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1926.
289
THE B.C.L. CUP.
Race No. 8.—6 furlongs. Division IV.
Dividends for Winning Totalizators.
FIRST DAY.
  1 ½  lengths; ½ length. Time 45 secs.
THE SARAWAK CUP.
Race No. 9.—R C., about I wile 2 furlongs, and 160 yards. Divisions I, II, III, and IV.
  Head ; ½ length. Time 3 mins. 8 4/5 sees.
  Heavy rain had by this time made the course
sodden. Untong got away well, and kept the lead.


290	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1926.
WINNING OWNERS.
WINNING PONIES.
WINNING JOCKEYS .

       MONTHLY REPORTS.
FIRST DIVISION.
Kuching.
September, 1926.
   Supreme Court.- Ho Chut (f.) vs. Chua Tua Hiok (f). Plaintiff appealed against the decision of the Resident’s Conn in regard to the division of her late husband Wee Jew Bee’s estate. The Court ordered the estate to be realized and appellant's legal claim for maintenance paid and the balance held in trust by defendant for her sons, .upholding the lower Court’s decision.
   Resident's Court —Six cases came before the Court of which the following call for mention. His Highness the Rajah vs. Panggi, Dyak, secured of murder.
Accused was sentenced to death, the sentence being confirmed by the Supreme Court. His Highness the Rajah vs. Umut, Sruit Dyak, accused of murder. Accused was sentenced to death which was commuted by the Supreme Court to imprisonment for fifteen years. Government vs. Joon Lian, accused of criminal breach of trust under section 408 P.O, Accused was found guilty and sentenced to three years’ imprisonment. There was one Civil claim of $1,200. Datu's Court fines and fees totalled $90.03
  General-—His Highness the Tuan Muda visited Upper Sarawak on the 8th. returning on the 10th.
  His Highness the Rajah’s birthday falling on Sunday the 26th, the following day, Monday, was observed as a public holiday. A parade of Sarawak Rangers and Police was held on the Fort Parade ground where long service medals and decorations were presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda.
  A violent storm broke over Kuching on the night of the 9th causing considerable damage and inconvenience to people in the kampongs.
  Abu Bakar and Epin of Santubong reported that one, Ah Jew, a Chinese of Santubong returning with them in their boat from Singkawang was washed overboard and drowned during a storm. The matter was reported to the authorities at Pamangkat and every effort made to recover the body but without success.
  Panggi, a Dyak policeman, who was sentenced to death by the Court was responsible for the murder of four Chinese in the bazaar lust September and incidentally the wounding of 27 others by running amok. He had been detained as a criminal lunatic under medical observation since the occurrence. (Vide report for September, 1925.)
  Umut. a Sampun Dyak, was sentenced to death for the murder of Kuchup, Dyak, at Kampong Sruit, Samarahan, during a gawai benis. Umut had stepped accidentally on the deceased's fingers which caused a quarrel. In the early  hours of the morning Umut deliberately shot Kuchup, who was sitting on the verandah, and then gave himself up at Samara- ban police station. The death sentence was commuted to one of imprisonment, solely on account of Umut’s youth.
  Joon Linn, sentenced for criminal breach of trust, was a clerk in the Electrical Department. He absconded to Singapore in 1924 after presenting the electrical fitters’ paysheet at the Treasury and receiving payment. He was extradited from Singapore under the Fugitive Offenders Order, 1917.
  His Highness the Tuan Muda was pleased to pardon Timban, a Quop Dyak, who was sentenced to eighteen months’ imprisonment in June for causing death by a rash act.
  Staff.— Mr. McDougall was appointed Acting Assistant District Officer, Upper Sarawak and Lundu. vice Mr. F. H. Kortright granted seven months' furlough.
  Mr. Kortright left Kuching by s.s. Soon Ann on the 17th. Mr. Waiters, Acting Assistant District Officer, Sadong, Was in Kuching from the 15th to the 20th for medical reasons. Mohamed Wai. D. O. Clerk, who has been stationed at Sadong, returned to headquarters, Mohamed Ebon taking his place.
  Land Office.- The following leases, squatters' licences and occupation tickets were issued during the month:—
A. R. P.
3 Leases for rubber and coconuts 107. J. 27. 
4 Squatters’ licences for rubber 9. 3. 17.
93 Occupation Tickets for rubber 
and coconuts	2,717. 1. 16.
  The latter includes new land taken up by Messrs. 
  Nissa Shokai, Limited, at Samarahan, approximately 1,814 acres.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1926.
291
   The Acting District Officer, Mr. E. 0. Brace, reports:—
   District Court.—Forty-four cases were heard, thirty-seven of which were criminal and seven civil. Of the thirty-seven criminal cases twenty-eight convictions, eight acquittals and one case referred to Native Court were adjudged. There were six cases of assault, two for breach of Customs and Shipping Regulations, five theft, two for breach of Municipal By-laws and twenty-two other offences. Fines Imposed amounted to $197 and fees collected totalled $50.75. The seven civil claims involved amounts totalling $2,125.45 while fees amounted to $148.50.
   Magistrate's Court.—Ninety-nine civil suits were brought for hearing for which fees of $190 were collected. The total of claims was $1,767.13.
   Police Court.—Thirty-six summary cases were brought before the Court. Thirty-three convictions and three acquittals were obtained. The principal charges were assault two. theft three, contempt of Court one, for breach of Municipal By-laws fourteen, and sixteen minor cases. A total amount of $488 was imposed in fines and $58.25 was collected in fees.
   General.—Aroon bin Bakar sentenced to one week’s imprisonment for obtaining advances under false pretences; Ah Oh to one month, Salim to two weeks and Nong (f.) to one week respectively for contempt of Court; Lee Pat fined $25 for breach of Land Regulations ; Juragan Mon fined §5 for breach of Notification No. CXI, 1919; Samarahan Rubber Estate fined $50 under Order XVIII, 1913; Saleh and Salim each to one week for breach of agreement; Amat Jini, Javanese, to one month and Ngdimen (f.), Javanese, to three month s' respectively for absconding tinder agreement; Chong Fook and Lai Kim Siong each to three months. Sariah (f.) to six months and Tan Ah Hok to one month respectively in default of fines ; Kadivel, Tamil, and Lee Pok each to one month ; Chin Foo On (minor) to twelve strokes and Chong En Tan (minor) to six strokes respectively for theft.
Upper Sarawak.
September, 1926.
   The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. S. McDougall, reports:—
   1 arrived at Bau on the 3rd and started taking over from Mr. F. H. Kortright who left to go on furlough on the 16ih His Highness the Tuan Muda arrived here on the 8tb and left on the 10th.
   The Courts were very busy all the month with land cases. Unless some scheme can be evolved for examination of the land before permits to plant are issued there would seem to be no likelihood of any decrease in the number of land disputes; rather, it will get worse and worse as more permits are issued.
   A Dyak, Rimban, was sentenced to one year’s imprisonment for causing the death of another Dyak by a rash act.
   Tongat, a Dyak, was given six months' imprisonment for breach of contract and one month for breach of Forest Regulations in taking timber without a permit.
   The station was quiet all the month. The water pipes, for carrying the water to the bazaar at Siniawan from the tank on the hill, have not yet arrived. So, though the pump and tank are now complete, the bazaar has not yet got the benefit of the water.
   The lorry driver had been sick for some time and since there seemed no sign of any improvement he was released at the end of the month and a new man is now being taught to drive.
  The small annex erected beside the District Officer’s bungalow has been completed but has not yet been pouted.
  The prospect of employment by Mr. V. Kon Siong has attracted many people to Paku and several new shops are being built there. One towkay has moved in there from Siniawan. Some difficulty was experienced at first with the fish traps in the drains. It is essential for the success of Mr. V. Kon Siong’s enterprise that the land be drained free of water and tins could not be done while the fish traps were still there. The owners finally agreed to remove them, however, and work is progressing favourably.
  I visited Lundu at the end of the month and all the waiting cases were settled in three days of my visit. There were no cases of special interest. I promised the Court Writer that I would visit Simatan on my next visit to deal with some small affairs there.
  No gun permits were issued, since the intention is to issue only half as many gun permits as the total number of tax payers in each village, the necessary lists of permit holders and tax payers for the various villages have not yet been made out. In Upper Sarawak this system has worked out well and since every village has taken guns up to the limit further applications are turned down peremptorily.
  The policeman who was sent to Dutch Borneo on the 16th to look for the nine coolies who rim away from Dahan Estate, returned at the end of the month and reported that he had had no success. He brought a letter from the Controleur of Sambas who kindly promises his help in looking for them.
  Rainfall during the month amounted to 19.73 inches.
C. ERMEN,
Acting Divisional Officer.
         SADONG COLLIERY.
—?—
July, 1926-
  The output, export, local consumption, conversion into coke and coal stock figures for the two months were as follows:—
Stock 1st July	..	84.16 tons
Gross output	... 1,690.18 „
1,775.14 „
Shipped ... 1,135.00 tons
Boiler consumption
   and converted into
   coke	...	378.09 „	1,513.09 „
Stock balance 262.05 „
  Conditions below ground in mines eight and nine and new mine were below normal, but the upper seam improved slightly.
  The erection of the new coal chute at the old Blacksmiths' Mine was completed and the coal stocked there is now available for export.
The rainfall for the month was 10 90 inches.
August, 1926.
Stock 1st August	...	262.05 tons
Gross output *	...	1,473.01 „
1,735.06 „
Shipped	... 1,184.00 tons
Boiler consumption
   and converted into
   coke	...	377.05	1,561.05 „
174.01„


292
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1926.
  There was a marked drop in output during the month largely due to a reduction in thickness of the new mine seam. No. 8 mine struck barren ground during the month, but improved slightly later. Conditions at No. 9 mine and upper seam remained unchanged.
  His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by the Acting Chief Secretary and the Assistant District officer, paid a visit to the mines on 27th. They were shown around the surface, and also one of the working laces, underground in No. 9 mine.
  Mr, Harnack of the Survey Department also paid a visit io the mines during the month.
  The rainfall for the month was 7'34 inches.
S. W. HARRIS,
Acting Manager.
THIRD DIVISION.
Sibu.
August, 1926.
  During the month I visited Belaga and was away from the 8lh until 24th. I was held up at Kapit for two days owing to a fresh, but after that there was no more rain, the river in conseqeunce being very low for the return trip. All the upriver people took advantage of the fine weather to burn off their clearings and seem to have had very successful burns.
  A great number of rubber gardens are being planted by the Skapans and Malays. A list of all gardens was made and occupation tickets issued.
  All the people seemed to be very prosperous with the exception of the Chinese. The latter complained that they were not allowed to summon Kayans for debt, though summonses were received against these people from the Bintulu side. I promised them I would look into the matter.
  All the inhabitants were very anxious that the Uma Badangs should be allowed to return to Sarawak territory. This matter has been referred to the Acting Chief Secretary.
  L. Lakoi was fixed as the furthest boundary up the Rejang (Baloi) to which the Kayans can live.
  On my return trip stops were made at the new Dyak colony at N. Pila and at Ansi’s house at the head of the rapids. Manggoi has not yet built his house but hopes to do so this year ar. the mouth of the Pila.
  All the Dyaks had a most successful harvest. Several representations were made to me to be allowed to move into side streams but this was not allowed.
  I have recommended that Ansi should be made Penghulu of the Dyaks living in the Upper Rejang.
  I was accompanied on this trip by Mrs. Aplin.
  On a report received by the District Officer, I sent the Acting Divisional Land Officer to Sarikei to examine the boundaries between the Foochows and Dyaks as the latter had complained that the Foochows were overstepping the boundary. Orders were given that all rubber planted outside the boundaries was to be pulled up immediately but pepper was to remain.
  I made an inspection of the hospital, the Divisional Medical Officer reporting that mosquitoes were very bad. It was thought that if the surrounding land was cleared and stumped it would considerably lessen their breeding spots. The District Officer has been asked to obtain a contract to do this.
   I made a valuation of the land that Government proposes to buy at the conjunction of Race Course and Telephone roads, but the owners all ask for about three times my valuation which, in the case of the Malay gardens, is absurd. The matter has been referred to the Acting Chief Secretary.
   The Air Survey Company completed their contract during the month and both planes have now left, Mr. Raynham Hying to Jesselton on 28th.
   Mr. E. V. Andremi. who has been appointed to Kuching, left on 1st, Mr. A. A. Rennie ai riving the same day en route to Mukah. Whilst here Mr. Rennie inspected the Treasury.
   Mr. Middlemas arrived on the 25th in connection with survey work and has since left for Song and Kapit. Mr. Partridge, Government Dental Surgeon, also arrived the same day.
   The District Officer of Rejang, Mr. J. Swayne, reports;—
   I regret to report a fatal accident which took place at Daro on the 21st. Ing Chong, who was out shooting by moonlight, shot at what he thought was a pig and found he had hit Boh Hong, a coolie from a neighbonring garden ; the unfortunate man died within an hour. Ing Chong was charged under section 304a and fined ; he had, I am glad to say, made satisfactory arrangements to compensate the deceased’s dependents. Pek Moh, who had removed the body to Sibu for burial without permission, was fined.
   I was at Matu from 4th to the 15th. Some belian timber was brought by schooner from Tatau and a start has now been made to build clerks' quarters and police barracks on the new site.
   During a recent visit of a Government vaccinator it was reported that there were four lepers living in Kampong Bawan Ulu. On further investigation I found that there are probably fourteen infected persons in the Matu district. All Tua Kampong have now been informed that this is a notifiable disease and I have asked the assistance of the Divisional Medical Officer in having these people removed to Kuching as soon as possible.
   Prisoners were engaged in the ordinary upkeep of the station
   Among the visitors to Rejang during the month were Messrs. Andreini, Gill, Horton, Jacques, Pascoe, and. Robarts.
   The Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. L. B. Haye, reports:—
   During the month 81 new in-patients were treated in hospital. The iota! number of out-patients was 657, there being 302 new out-patients. 119 arsenical injections were given, 11 operations were performed, 2 being under general anaesthetic.
   Eleven deaths occurred in hospital this month ' due to the following causes :—Three from dysentery, three from typhoid (one cum perforation), two from beriberi, one from phthisis, one from pneumonia, and one from general peritonitis
   345 vaccinations were done this month ; it being reasonably certain that any danger of further smallpox outbreaks are now over. The practice of inspecting every vessel entering Sibu has now been given up and only those coming from outside Sarawak are now examined.
   The health of the European community continues to be excellent.
   The Acting Divisional Land Officer, Mr. Miller- Hallett, reports : —
   On the 3rd I left for Sarikei to look into the question of Foochows planting outside of their boundaries It was obvious that they bad planted outside the boundary quite knowingly.
   I ordered a cessation of planting until I had further orders for the Divisional Resident and returned to Sibu on the 6th.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1926.
293
  On the 11th I returned to Sankei and, in company with Assistant Land Officer, Abang Abdul Hamid, instructed the Chinese to cut remises as laid down previously by preceding District Officers.
  I returned on the 14th, leaving Abdul Hamid to see to the cutting of the two rentises. Land Inspector Amid was sent down on the 17th to relieve Abang Abdul Hamid who, however, owing to the reluctance of both parties to carry out the cutting as they promised, stayed on the spot until completion of the tends on the 25th, when they returned.
  On the 29th, accompanied by Laud Inspector Lias, I went to Kanowit to investigate complaints about felling of Kanowits’ fruit trees by Rejang Plantations Limited. I was away at the end of the month.
  The Court Writer, Kapit, reports:—
  Court.- Courts were held by the Acting Resident, Third Division. Bikap (f.), Tanjong, attempting to commit suicide, case dismissed ; Tan Bong Ann was fined $10 for theft; Tan Bong (f.) vs. Si Hoi Seo for desertion, Court grants the divorce. Fines and fees amounted to $137.25.
  General.—On the 8th instant the Acting Resident, accompanied by Mrs. H. D. Aplin, arrived from Sibu by s.l. Chamois and left for Belaga on the 11th instant. They returned from Belaga on the 22nd instant and left for Sibu on the 24th instant at 1 p.m. Mr. N. A. Middlemas, Superintendent of Survey Department, Kuching, arrived on the 30th instant by ml. Jean in order to carry out surveys. The sum of $7,000 was remitted to Sibu Treasury during the month. Abang Ahmat, Native Officer, Song, arrived at the end of the mouth and ieported everything quiet. Dyaks are busy burning off their farms.
  Sarawak Rangers.—The usual parade and duties were carried out during the month.
  Prisoners.—Averaging 21 in number at the end of the month were employed in weeding the roads and ditches and the general upkeep of the station.
  Dairy Farm—The herd numbered eighteen at the end of the month.
  Trade and Shipping.— During the month the s.s. Sarawak made four trips, m I. Jean one trip, and s.l. Chamois and Soon Aik two trips each.
  Exports for the mouth were as under:—
     Plantation rubber, piculs	113.84 value	...	$8302.58
     Gutta percha	„	25.10	’’	...	4830.50
     Damar daging	„	95.15	„	...	2118.00
     Rattan sega No. 1	„	14.06	„	...	80.00
     Rattan tot No. 2 „	1833.30		 8954.50
  The District Officer, Mr. J. B. Archer, reports:— District Office.—The weather was intensely hot during a great part of the month and much burning of farming bind was effected.
  I visited Binatang and Sarikei several times during the month. Ac the former station sites were chosen for new Customs buildings and compensation was paid to owners of houses on the land taken by Government. At Sarikei a number of Malays were fined for keeping their rubber gardens and ditches on the Repok Road in a very overgrown state and impeding the main run of water from the Chinese gardens. These Malays, although in the minority, refuse to clear their gardens and it is only a matter of time before Government will have to resume the land.
  Mr. R. D. Binnie arrived on the 12th to take over the appointment of Divisional Engineer and the writer handed ever all matters connected with P.W.D. to him. On the 13th Mr. Jacques relinquished the post of Deputy Inspector of Schools, Third Division, which was taken over by the writer.
   The Acting Resident was away in Kapit and Belaga from the 8th to the 25th. Mr. E. M. Woodward arrived on the 15lh for duty in the District Office.
   As usual a number of drowning cases occurred during the month ; a Cantonese male immigrant on the 4lh at Sungei Stabau, a Kheh male immigrant at Sungei Assan on the 6th, another Kheh male immigrant at the same place on the next day and a Foochow at Sungei Dassan on the 27th. These deaths are to be regretted, but until their friends and relations here realize that it is dangerous to allow these immigrants to go near the water alone until they can swim, it is probable that such accidents will continue to take place.
   His Highness the Tuan Muda's birthday was observed on the 9th and a ceremonial parade of the police took place on the padang, the salute being taken by the District Officer.
   On the 8th a case of supposed murder of a child was reported and certain arrests were made. On the 9th a preliminary inquiry was held and the exhumation of the body of a Foochow boy was ordered. An inquest on this body was held on the 10th and five persons were charged with murder and are awaiting trial.
   Both seaplanes of the Air Survey Company were in the air at the same time on the 10th, and on the 16th one of the machines flew to Kuching and returned with a mail. Messrs. Vincent and Bishop left for Singapore in one of the machines on 17th and Messrs. Raynham and Andrews for Jesselton on 28th. The remainder of the party, with the exception of Mr. Parker, left by steamer for Singapore.
   I handed over the supervision of Municipal affairs to Mr. Binnie on the 18th, retaining the position of Chairman of the Board.
   On the 23rd the body of a Foochow man was brought up from Daro, death apparently having been caused by gunshot wounds. As no official communication was received from Daro, the body, after being seen by the Divisional Medical Officer, was buried and the interested parties instructed to report the affair to the District Officer, Lower Rejang.
   Abang Yan returned from Kanowit and resumed duty in the Sibu District Office.
   Three Javanese prisoners escaped on the 18th and ? had not been recaptured by the end of the month.
   Owing to erosion of the river bank I asked the Shipping Officer to prohibit launches passing Sibu at excessive speed.
   Mr. E. V. Andreini, Assistant District Officer, left for Kuching on 1st on transfer to that station and no relief arrived until the 15th.
   Mr. Kidd has started work in Kanowit and has signed a contract for clearing and planting up a large area.
   Mr. N. A. Middlemas was in Sibu for part of the month on survey work.
   Judicial.—District Court.- Ling Nong Nong was sentenced to three years’ imprisonment for robbery under section 393. The following were sentenced to three months each for theft:- Dali bin Prisong, Ling Lik Chews Tan Ewe Siong and Ting Tua ng Chwee; Wong Ing Kui to three months for picking pockets ; Tan Ah Keng three months for vagrancy ; Abang adeh Tong three months for absconding whilst under contract; Buang three months for contempt of Court: Lim Ngiok and Ngui Boon Seng one month each for contempt of Court; Kuan Hee one month for breach of Opium Regulations and Ah Man a whipping for theft. Gasah and Ramai were fined $200 and $100 respectively for incest, whilst a number of Foochows were fined for gambling in their Colony. Three Foochow immigrants who


294
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1926.
arrived without passports were sent back to Singapore but unfortunately escaped in transit at Binatang owing to the gross negligence of the police escort.
   Numerous fines for other offences were imposed but call for no special comment.
   Fines and fees amounted to $2,065.58 and 114 deeds were registered during the month.
   Police.—Strength at the end of the month was 81 of all ranks. The usual parades were given out and the conduct of the men was fair.
   Prisons.—15 persons were admitted and 17 released during the month. The number of Chinese in both cases was 11. Conduct of the prisoners was bad and two men were heavily punished for attacking one of the mandors. The conduct of the mandors, however, is partially responsible for this state of affairs. The men were employed on usual duties. 53 men remained in jail at the end of the month.
H. D. APLIN,
Acting Resident, Third Division.
           COAST DIVISION.
                    Mukah and Balingian.
August, 1926.
   General.—I accompanied Mr. A. A Rennie, the Treasurer of Sarawak, on his official visit to Oya and Dalat from the 4th to 6th, and I walked from Upper Petanak to the source of the Ud stream and from thence down to Dalat on the 23rd in order to study the possibility of making a canal between the Mukah and Oya rivers with a view to facilitating transport during monsoons.
   After dealing with an appeal against a decision of the District Court, Dalat, I returned to Mukah via Oya in the m.l. Leonora on the 25th.
   The Treasurer of Sarawak sailed for Bintulu on the 7th in the m.l. Leonora as far as Balingian, and from thence in the m.l. Joan to Bintulu; I also accompanied the Treasurer on his visit to Balingian and remained there several days attending to arrears of Court Work and arranging a site for the Wireless Telegraph station.
   Penghulu Inting came down to report Dyak affairs during the month. He stated that the Dyaks were now busy burning and preparing their farms for the annual padi planting.
   A number of Dyaks and Melanaus were granted permission to purchase guns but only on recommendation of their Chiefs and on proof of sago and rubber planting interests in their districts.
   The Court Writer Balingian collected the Dyak votes for a new Chief of Sungei Arip in place of Penghulu Mulok deceased. The majority appeared to be in favour of deceased's brother but the final decision has been postponed pending my next visit, when the question of selecting an additional Chief to control the Dyaks of Sungei Bawan. chiefly Seribas, will be gone into.
   Messrs. Wee Timm Chee and Woo Ah Wang were granted permission to open a cinema theatre in Mukah bazaar under the usual censorship conditions.
   Throughout the mouth the weather was extremely hot, but thanks to the ample water supply from Sungei Petanak little or no hot weather epidemics appeared amongst the native population.
   The mosquito plague continued unabated, but much clearing and draining is being carried out in the vicinity of the Government Station in the hope of eradicating these pests.
   The native population was again reminded that the planting of rubber in ancestral sago gardens is strictly prohibited, but that rubber might be planted on land unsuitable for sago cultivation provided occupation tickets were applied for and obtained before any such planting took place.
   Judicial Resident's Court.—The appeal of Ulis Against the judgment of the District Court, Dalat, in his case against Haji Bujang regarding the ownership of a certain rubber garden in the Sungei Kut,. was quashed, but the witnesses on behalf of Haji Bujang were ordered to swear to the truth of their statements in the local mosque. Kulan anak Dewa was sentenced to six mouths' imprisonment for fraudulently attempting to pievent the fair distribution of the estate of one Dawa, deceased. Sim Thong Kheng, a Chinese gardener, was fined for obtaining a marriage certificate under false pretences. His marriage with a local woman has since been annulled by the Supreme Court. Ibrahim bin Nakoda Jam, on production of a letter from His Highness the Tuan Muda, was permitted io institute proceedings in re the estate of Seman bin Nakoda Jam, deceased. This case will be dealt with as soon as the Native Court and probate records can be collected and examined. Yaman bin Gani was sentenced to three months’ imprisonment for nonpayment of dowry (brian) as ordered by .the Native Court. Ibrahim bin Balud was fined $15 for ringing and damaging jelutong trees; and lighter fines were imposed in a number of other breaches of the Forest Regulations.
   At Balingian the majority of cases dealt with were breaches of the Forest Regulations, the fines imposed averaging $10 per conviction. A number of old deeds of mortgage were produced but decisions were reserved pending advice on the interpretation of these documents.
   Magistrate’s Court.—A vast number of debt summons were dealt with, the majority of claims being at once admitted. It was again found necessary to remind traders that Government employees may not lie given credit exceeding $5.
   Native Courts.—Tn the Dam's Court one case was dealt with and $ 10-80 fines imposed. In the Tua Tua Kampong’s Courts, Islam and Pagan, eight cases were dealt with and $120.16 fines imposed. The Native Court Magistrates have been reminded to keep proper records of all their hearings and fines imposed, failing which all cases which cannot be recorded ate to be immediately reported, together with fines imposed, at the Fort, mid duly recorded by the Court Clerk for future reference. The police corporal has also been instructed to keep records of all summons issued for service.	,
   Public Works.— The Divisional Engineer, Mr. R. D. Binnie, visited the district on the 27th to arrange for the construction of a Government Vernacular School Building and Master's house here, to inspect the waterworks system with a view to possible extension, to ascertain whether the installation of an electric plant for Mukah town would be a paying proposition, to work out a bazaar drainage scheme, mid to generally inspect and advise on all local public works.
   At Balingian a site was selected and work commenced on the erection of a wireless telegraph station. The Government grounds at Balingian were enlarged in readiness for the erection of a Native Officer's Quarters and the possible building of a new Court House in the near future.
   The paths around Balingian were considerably lengthened by the kampong people- mid the mam paths were surfaced with gravel brought down by the Dyaks.
   Many of the roads around Mukah were thoroughly repaired by the kampong people, and al Petanak the Tua Kampong has constructed a new road the


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1926.
295
full length of his village; this read will later connect with the Petanak Pumping Station and main pipe-line road to Upper Telian.
   The nipa swamp in front of the Fort, and the jungle between the river and Kampong Haji Husin was cleared during the month.
   The Tamil labourers, averaging 16’42 persons, cleared a site in a Chinese garden on the Perrakub Road which Government has just taken over for the erection of additional Tamil lines. The Tamils were also employed on the upkeep of the roads in the station grounds.
   Several carpenters were employed repairing and rebuilding bridges on the Kuala Road and repairing and painting the interior of the Fort.
   The prison gang, averaging 11’26 persons, whitewashed the Native Officers quarters and other Government buildings; they also cleared the jungle between the Government station and B. C. Mission grounds, and prepared a coal dump at Kuala Telian.
   A number of coolies were employed raising and clearing the Petanak water main preparatory to repainting, and on constructing a path between the pumping station and the engine driver’s quarters.
   Health —The Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. L. B. Haye, visited the district, including Balingian, from 27th to 30th when he left for Bintulu. During his stay here he inspected the Fort dispensary, and bazaar, and helped to select a site for a hospital and new dispensary. At nis request a number of lepers were collected and sent to 8ibu in charge of Dresser Ho Ah Khiaw, who has just been relieved by Dresser Jong Ah Tong
   The Capitan China was asked to notify Government when funerals are about to take place in the cemetery near the Government compound in order that the graves may be dug to a proper depth.
   At the Government Dispensary 92 persons were treated during the month, and there were 160 attendances, the majority of patients being Melanau, Dyak, and Chinese.
   The chief diseases treated were influenza, crab yaws, ulcers, muli, and wounds. 22 N. A. B. injections were given for muli and various kinds of yaws.
   Divisional Treasury.—The Treasurer of Sarawak, Mr. A. A Rennie, arrived from Kuching on s. s. Sulong on 2nd. The Divisional Treasury Clerk was unfortunately absent in Kuching handing in the final 1925 statement of accounts at the time of the Treasurer’s visit. The books were gone into and the accounts and cash checked to date, the Treasurer expressing bis approval at the way in which the books had been kept.	
   The Treasurer also visited Oya and Dalat and later Balingian where he again checked the books and accounts to date, after which he proceeded to Bintulu in the m.l. Juan which had been sent to meet him.
   Forest.—The Assistant Conservator of Forests visited the district as from the 27th, he also went up the Balingian river as far as Sungei Bawan to inspect the timber there with a view to establishing a forest reserve. On his return he proceeded up the Mukah river to Sungei Skei to survey the Skei Forest Reserve and was still away at the end of the month.
   The Acting Divisional Officer viewed the jelutong workings between Petanak and Dalat on his recent journey overland, and found the vast majority of trees either dead or dying owing to the rough manner in winch the natives have, tapped these trees in the past.
   Telegraphs and Telephones:—Contractor Tasun having arrived at Balingian to erect a wireless telegraph station, the site for this station was cleared on the 9th and work of construction commenced the following day. Posts 72 feet long to
carry the aerials will be delivered by the Dyaks as soon as possible. Apprentice Omar relieved apprentice Forester Andrew during the month.
  Education.--A contractor arrived from Kuching on 19th to commence the construction of a Govern- Vernacular School and Master’s house.
  A suitable site in the old Government coconut plantation was selected and cleared by Kampong and Tamil labour and the work of erection commenced a few days later.
  Marine.—The m.l. Leonora was kept on running to Oya, Dalat, and Balingian throughout the month, and was lent out on charter to Balingian once. The hull of the vessel is rotting rapidly and the propeller shaft is considerably worse, it is therefore recommended that she be docked and refitted as soon as possible.
  Trade and Shipping.—The trade returns for the month are as follows :—
             Coasting Imports. Coasting Exports.
Mukah	...	§47,019	$65,522
Balingian ...	28,359	34,468
  The principal imports and exports are as follows:—
Coasting Imports.
    Mukah Rice ...	...	$ 5,518
           Clothing	...	11,240
    Balingian Rice	664
              Clothing	...	7,900
Coasting Exports.
    Raw	Sago 322 koyans	...	$38,380
    G. Jelutong 1,035 piculs	...	18,750
    G. Para 2 piculs 75 catties...	160
    Jelutong 1,862 piculs	31,636
    P. Rubber 20 piculs ...	1,400
  11 schooners entered and 17 cleared the port
during the month.
The rainfall record shows 7’24 inches.
Oya and Dalat.
August, 1926.
Mr. P. M. Adams, District Officer, reports: —
  Court.—The appeal of Ulis vs. Haji Bujang, reported last month, was dismissed on the witnesses swearing to their statement;. No other cases call for comment.
  Land and Survey.—The issue of occupation tickets was completed, 300 being issued at Oya and Igan and 151 at Dalat. Rent collection totalled $2,082 and survey fees $1,194. Surveyors will shortly' be available to demarcate the rubber lands above Medong but unfortunately they cannot yet be spared to survey sago lands. Application has been made to transfer P.C. Awang Annu to the land department after taking a course in surveying.
  General —The m.l. Nellie has been definitely promised to arrive here during September and it is hoped nothing will prevent her arrival as she will be extremely useful here during the landas and essential for transporting the surveyors.
  The Rev. Father B. Mulder celebrated his 25th anniversary as a priest on the 24th and invited the whole district to a regatta and land sports and also hospitably entertained the Europeans and leading natives to luncheon and dinner.
  The Acting Divisional Officer visited Dalat, coming overland from Mukah on the 23rd and returned to Mukah on 25th.
  The Kev. Fathers Halder, Odyk, Quadekker, and Van den Bergh, also visited Dalat.
  Messrs. Binnie. Haye, and McLeod, passed through Oya on their way to Mukah in connection with work concerning their various departments.


296
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1926.
  The district has been slightly perturbed with the annual penyamun scare and permission to hold main has been witbeld until such time as this nonsense ceases to exist.
  The s.l. Chamois arrived here on 80th apparently to fetch Mr. Binnie from Mukah.
  P.W.D.—The work of cementing godowns under the new Com l house was commenced at the end of the month with prison labour and should be completed in a week. The bazaar road at Dalat is being raised but owing to more urgent work had to be stopped temporarily, but it is hoped to finish this before the wet weather sets in.
  Telephones.—A severe thunder-storm badly damaged the Oya instruments on the night of the 24th, but these have been successfully repaired. Spare parts are urgently required.
   Treasury.—The Treasurer, Mr. Rennie, visited Oya and Dalat from 4th to 6tb and inspected the accounts and gave advice for minimising work. The Oya clerk Spurah was ordered to pay in $200, which sum, according to the figures in the books, should have shown as a surplus in the cash. Clerk Munan was on leave the entire month and, but for the assistance of P.C. Awang Annu, the clerical work would have been hopelessly in arrears.
   Travelling.— Dalat was visited on the 5th and again from 11th to 14th and 23rd to 25th.
   Health.—The usual type of Coast “flu” has been prevalent.
   Prisoners averaged 16.
   Shipping.—Entered.	Cleared.
5 Schooners	13
2 Motor Schooners 2 0 Launch	1
     Total ...	8	15
   290 koyans of sago and 887 piculs of jelutong were exported to Kuching.
Trade lie turns.
         Exports.	Imports.
        $61,972.31	$22,389.90 
Bintulu.
August, 1926.
    Mr. H. H. Kortright, District Officer of Bintulu
and Tatau, reports :—
     Courts.—The following are the principal cases
heard during the month and include those settled
in the substations, Sebuah, Labang and Tubau.
    For ringing jelutong trees six Dyaks and one
Malay were fined $15 each. There were also several
rather difficult disputes concerning jelutong roads.
Linggi and Tunguniau, Kayans, were imprisoned
for three months for cheating and Katit three
months for theft; Ah Soon was sentenced to six
mouths for living with the Kayans and Sin Joo six
months, Meng Soon, Ah Beng, and Ching Peng to
three months each for breach of Government Orders
with regard to their living with the Penans in Ulu
Jelalong ; Baring, a Kampar Dyak visiting from the
Batang Rejang, was fined $25 and ordered to pay
$10 compensation for deliberately pulling out Kayan
pinang trees and sticking them in the ground again,
roots upward ! He was also turned out of the district.
Gundang, Dyak, was fined one picul for reopening
a land case which had already been twice settled
against him several years ago. A good many out-
standing debt cases were also settled.
   P. W.D.— Most of the sway bracing on the up-river wing of the new wharf is finished and good progress has been made on the building of the second wing. The scaffolding has been erected and all the piles in the runway have been driven.
   The cattle ground has been enlarged and the new clearing has been stumped and a number of large ditches draining into several tidal inlets have been dug. Another house for a clerk is nearly finished.
   General—On the 4th I went to Tatau to mark out the site for the wireless station. The main site had already been cleared and partially levelled several months ago. A schooner with the contractor and the necessary materials for the buildings had arrived from Kuching the previous evening. Arrangements were made for this schooner to take on her return trip a load of belian planks and paks for the P.W.D. I returned to Bintulu on the 5th.
   At the request of the Acting Divisional Officer the m.l. Jean was sent to Balingian to fetch Mr. A. A. Rennie, the Treasurer of Sarawak, who arrived here on the morning of the 8th. Mr. Rennie examined the accounts of the station, made several suggestions, which are being carried out, and counted the money in the Treasury safes. He also ordered that from September the Bintulu accounts were to be sent to Kuching for reconciliation, instead of to Mukah, this on account of the uncertain communication with the latter place. Mr. Rennie sailed for Kuching by s.s. I.a Follette on the 11th.
   On the 15th I left for upriver to visit the substations and was away until the 25th. Five nights were spent at Sebauh, one at Labang, and four at Tubau.
At Sebauh about a dozen Foochows were busy felling on land allotted to them and had cleared about sixty acres. No more will be coming in this year, however, as it is too late to fell and get a burn. The bazaar Chinese asked for a site for a graveyard ; I examined several, but the matter is not settled yet, as the so-called Malays living there, and very few at that, claim, as usual, the earth and all there is therein.
   At Labang it is the same, some sixty Punan-
Malays are holding up thousands of acres of land.
   I have had applications by Foochows for land on
which to plant sago only; but all the lands seem
to be “Utas Malayu."
   The Dyaks were very busy burning off their farms,
but the Kayans, Punans and Penans are, as usual,
too late, and many of these people have not
even attempted to make farms. The Penans and
Kayans say they have all been ill with fever. The
Punans say the smallpox epidemic is the cause of
their not farming this year.
   At Tubau about a dozen Malays, who at present
live all over the place, were invited to band together
and make a kampong near the mouth.of the Jelalong,
close to the bazaar; and ibis they have agreed to do.
They may of course made their farms wherever is
most convenient to them.
   The question of bandong trading amongst the
Kayans and Penans was gone into and on account
of the class of traders employed and the cut-throat
methods of trading adopted by them, it was decided
to stop it altogether. Most of the Chinese asked
that it be stopped ; the Penghulu and Tuah Kampongs
also were all in favour of this. While this trading
went on, Kayans and others would take advances
from bazaar Chinese and agree to work attaps or
timber for them, but a bandong trader would come
to their house and buy these attaps, etc., for trade
and money. Kayans admitted to me that they
could not resist the temptation of selling attaps, etc.,
even though they were under verbal contract and
had received advances for these, when bandong
traders came to their houses and persuaded them
and had nice things in their boats to exchange for
the attaps, etc. This kind of trading has, however,
nearly ruined the Tubau Bazaar and is now stopped.
All produce must now be brought to the open market,
viz., the bazaar, for sale.
   


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1926,
297
   On the 29th I again went to Sebauh with a surveyor who had arrived from Kuching, to show him the land which he is to demarcate into 20 acre lots for Foochow Colonists.
   On the 30th the m.l. Jean went to Balingian to fetch Dr. Haye, D.M.O.. Third Division, who arrived the same evening. He inspected the Medical Department here. The m.l. Jean took him back to Balingian on September 1st. The weather has been extremely hot all the month. The rainfall was only 4'15 inches.
   Medical.—The dresser-in-charge reports that 136 persons were treated for various ailments during the month, 25 N.A.B. injections were given and 46 vaccinations.
   A small hospital and dispensary are badly needed here. At present all the work is done in a small room in the Fort and very often yells of children being injected for yaws, etc., considerably disturb the Court just above.
   A letter embodying a request for this hospital will be duly forwarded to headquarters together with the Estimates for 1927.
   Trade and Shipping.—Trade remains good, enormous quantities of jelutong are being continually brought in from up river, also from some of the small livers along the coast. A good deal is also coming from Suai now.
   During the month 9.823 piculs of jelutong valued at $53,106.50 and 488.200 belian attaps valued at $4,863 were exported.
   The s.s. Auby called off Kidurong. northbound, on the 1st, and entered the port southward on the 6th.
   The s.s. Sulong called off the quala on the 3rd, northbound, and on the 14th, southbound, and again northbound on the 27th.
  Trade returns for the month are as follows.—
              1926.	1925.	1924.
  Exports $94,745.50 $55,451.10 $24,553.85
  Imports 65,023.38	51,596.50	23,572.74
   Six steamers and one schooner entered and cleared the port during the month.
W. F. de V, SKRINE,  
Acting Divisional Officer.
FOURTH DIVISION.
Miri.
August, 1926.
   Courts.—The usual number of cases came before District Officer's and Magistrate's Courts but Done of any great importance. One Chinese was sentenced to six months’ rigorous imprisonment for theft.
   P.W.D.—A building for crews of launches was completed during the month.
   Minor repairs were effected where necessary on wharves.
   A contract was given for repairs to bazaar drains, also for a concrete base for police station bathing hut.
A fairly long drought in the middle of the month allowed an opportunity of cleaning out the reservoir supplying the bazaar.
General.—Mr. Trechman arrived on the 2nd to take over the duties of Treasurer and Postmaster from Mr. P. H. Hayward who goes on leave in September.
   Mr. Sampson, the Acting District Officer, was found to be suffering froth appendicitis and was operated on in the early hours of the 2nd instant. Although the operation was a severe due, Mr. Sampson was convalescent by the end of the month. 
   Mr. F. G. Carpenter arrived on the 4th instant by H.H.M.Y. Maimunah and took over the duties of Acting District Officer.
   On the 9th, the birthday of His Highness the Tuan Muda, Government Offices Were closed.
   The Resident left for Kuching on the 25th. S.L. La Follette left for Kuching on 10th for docking and overhaul.
   Mr. Woodward sailed for Sibu on 13th instant on transfer from Baram to that station.
   M. L. Helen was slipped for repairs on 15th instant and was again running on 20th.
   Applications were received to put motors on the roads for hire. Permission was given for a limited number of cars to be brought in, the stipulation being made that all cars imported for the purpose of hire must be new.
   The Right Reverend Dr. Roots, Bishop of Hankow, landed at Miri on the 11th from Kuching, sailing for the north the same evening.
   Prison.—Two Chinese prisoners escaped on the 14th and were still uncaptured at the end of the month.
   Obituary.— I regret to report the death from dysentery on the 25th instant of Ah Chit, who served Government for many years in the honorary capacity of Chinese Magistrate at Miri. The services and advice of deceased were on many occasions of very great value and it. will not be easy to replace him.
Baram.
August, 1926.
   Court.—There were several cases of breach of Forest Regulations, mostly ringing of jelutong trees. Ubi was fined for bringing a false charge against a policeman and Aban Lah fined for breach of regulations re meeting Punans. No other cases call for special comment.
   Fines and fees amounted to $1,455 95.
   General.—Visitors to the station during the month were Mr. and Mrs. J. P. Mead, F. Corson and G. Woolley. Mr. E. M. Woodward left the station on the 10th having been appointed to do duty at Sibu, I was away in the Kalabit country the whole month, and arrived back on the 30th. Tuanku Drahman, Native Officer, reported everything all right during my absence. Padi planting has been going on up river and a large number of houses had completed their planting by the end of the month.
   Rainfall 1.55 inches.
   Travelling.—I left on the 21st of last month, accompanied by Wan Mohamat and Galau, on a visit to the Kalabit, country, going via Seredan, thence overland to Kabaan. Baa, Pah Trap, Pah Main, Lemudu and down to Lio Matu. The first part of the overland route was very mountainous and runs very close co the Limbang border, Seridan Kaiabits find it easier to go to Limbang than to come to Baram as the river is not so difficult to negotiate. The Baa country seems to be wonderfully fertile. It is a plain surrounded by hills, the soil being very swampy and the Kalabits at the Baa irrigate their farms very ingeniously. It is very cold in this part of the country, this is no doubt partly responsible for the Kalabits dislike of bathing, and for the lack of ventilation in their houses, with the natural result that they are very unhealthy, the death rate being abnormally high. The route from Pah Trap to Pah Benggar runs parallel to the Dutch border and very close to it.


298	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1926.
  I had to reprimand Penghulu Tong Kah Rini (Pah Main) and Tama Abu Tingang (Lemudu) for their laxity in collecting tax, some eighty odd new taxpayers were found, most of whom ought to have been paying tax for years past.
  After leaving Lemudu the journey to Lio Matu took five and half days, there being only one house of four doors on the way, at Long Keluang. Tama Kuli Arang of Long Moh with thirty-five Kenyahs was waiting for me at Long Keluang having brought rice for the carriers. I arrived at Lio Matu on the 23rd and spent the next day collecting Kenya tax which was very much overdue, due to the smallpox epidemic in the Tinjar earlier in the year. The 27th was spent at Long Akar collecting Kayan tax, also overdue. I arrived at Long Palai on the 29th at midday, collected the remnants of the Kayan tax the same day and left the following morning by Chinese launch for Baram, the s.l. La Follette having gone to Kuching for docking.
  P.W.D.—The framework and part of the roof shingles of the new boatshed bad been done by the end of the month, the new building is far more accessible from the river and the boats will nut be subjected to so much strain in being pulled ashore, as hereto fore. The prisoners did a little work on the Lubok Nibong road, but spent most of the mouth on general work around the station; the gang averaged 22'8 men. It is becoming increasingly difficult to keep up the roads with prison labour only and to start improvements on One road means neglecting all the others. The contractor cutting the Lubok Nibong road ditch has not done the work to specification and has been given ten days to complete the work to specification.
  Medical.—Few people have come for medical attention during the month, mainly due no doubt to their being busy planting padi. Three in-patients were treated during the month, and 37 out-patients. Eighteen N.A.B. injections were given.
  Wireless and Telephone.-The number of messages received was 170 and despatched 87. The installation has given no trouble at all so far and is very much appreciated by the Chinese for trade purposes.
  The telephone line to Bakong has been down several times, but transmission is very clear since the rentis was cleared.
  Trade and Shipping.—There seems to be a rush to buy motor boats before the landas. There are now two rival boats with Evinrude outboard engines carrying passengers to Lubok Nibong. Chui Kang of Bakong has bought an 8 H.P. motor boat secondhand and Ah Liong has bought a second-hand boat with a 30 H P. 6 cylinder motor car engine. The 8.8. Gladys made two trips during the month
Trade returns for the month are as follows:—
Imports.	Exports.
$ 22,429	$ 62,366
      Brought forward 233,495	422,658
      Total to date	$255,924	$485,244
        do. 1925	196,954	545,065
      H. L. OWEN, Resident, Fourth Division.
FIFTH DIVISION.
Limbang.
August, 1926.
  General.—His Highness the Tuan Muda visited the Division from the 5th to the 10th. On his way here His Highness called in at Labuan for a few hours, where he examined the wharves and other of His Highness the Rajab's property there The Maimuna, missing the tide, anchored for the night of the 5th at Kuala Limbang. His Highness spent
two nights at Limbang, During his stay he inspected the work on the new dam at Bukit Hitam, and received a deputation from the local police force regarding the scale of pay for police in outstations, and promised to place their grievances before His Highness the Rajah.
  The favourable conditions of service afforded to the Kuching Police Force, notification of which has been sent round to the Native Officers throughout this Division by the Datu Bandar, has not enhanced the chances of recruits for the local forces in this Division. Already one man is desirous of resigning to join the Kuching Force.
  On the 8th His Highness proceeded to Trusan where he spent one night, going on to Lawas on the 9th, Railing for Lingga the following day. I accompanied His Highness throughout bis visit.
  I returned to the Division on the 5th after six weeks’ tropical leave. The Acting Assistant District Officer of Lawas and Trusan, and the Acting Officer-in-Charge of Limbang, beyond an amok in a Murut house, reported everything had been going on ns usual during my absence.
  I left for Lawas on the 17th but owing to bad weather was obliged to call in at Brooketon, proceeding to Lawas the next day where I remained until the 21st. I again went over to Brooketon on the 27th to 29th.
  The Conservator of Forests arrived in the Division from Labuan on the 12th. going direct to Lawas and coming on to Limbang on the 21st where he still was at the end of the month.
  The Sebukang Kadayans have elected one Jimat bin Bagong as their Katua vice Lampong deceased.
  Court.—In the District Criminal Court, Mita, a Bisayah, was fined $37.50 or in default one month’s R.I. for attempting to bribe Forest Guard Melani. The bribe of $13 was confiscated. One Haji Abdullah, a trader, brought a case against Anggong, a Dyak. for adultering camphor; this case has been adjourned pending the decision of the Board of Trade on the subject. These cases of adulteration are often too difficult for the non-technical man to settle.
  Public Works.—On my return from leave I found great strides had been made in this department. The dam at Bukit Hitam was practically finished. To complete this we are waiting for the fittings which unfortunately have been held up owing, I understand, to industrial troubles at home. The rentis for the pipe line was about three quarters cleared, only the levelling and stumping remains to be done. The new Malay Court and school-house, and teacher's quarters are ready for occupation. The old Malay Court House and Master’s quarters were demolished.
  The drought began to break towards the end of the month. The rainfall recorded was 6'19 inches.
  Trade and Shipping.—Thirty head of buffalo were shipped to Kuching and 24 to Sibu.
  Shipping.—(Inwards.)—S.S. Auby made one trip from Singapore via Kuching and ports ; S.S. Sulong made one trip from Kuching via ports; S.L. Kwong Tick four trips and S.L. Peter Duff one trip from Labuan via Brunei.
The trade returns for the month are :—
Foreign
CoastingExports.
$ 17,270
6,074Imports.
   $ 18,670
6,627B’forward$ 23,344
217,260$ 25,297 223,519   Total to date$240,604   $248,8161925214,562189,331

THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1926.	299
Lawas and Trusan.
July, 1956.
   Court.—Court work at Lawas was very light during the month. Three Javanese were imprisoned for travelling without passes, Ibis sentenced to three months Lr cheating and two Chinese bound over to keep the peace. A case of theft was dismissed.
   At Trusan, Palong Balu was fined $25 under section 505; Awang Chucho $10 for assault and eight Murats $10 each for breach of arms regulations; Imun Choon (f.) and Rigu Ginah (f.) were ordered to deposit $25 each as security for g .od behaviour tor six months and Pasir, husband of Rigu, was ordered to build a house of his own instead of living with his relations who are the cause of the trouble
   Crime.—IL appeals that the amours mentioned in my last report were based oil the fact that at the time of Palong Balu’s visit to Trusan Datu Pengiran Mahomat was seriously ill and several other people had fever. The Tengoa people purchased the damar brought down by the Bah Muruts at about $2 per picul. Arrangements are being made to bring the damar down to Trusan and sell it by auction, the proceeds being kept till the next visit of the Bah people.
   Daring my absence at Limbang it was reported that Pikoh Ginah and Tui Palong had killed each other in Pikoh’s house in Ulu Beriwan Corporal Pengiran Omar immediately left for the darat and on my return the next day I also went up but found that the corporal had gone back by another route. I therefore returned to Lawas the same day arriving just after the other party.
   It appears that heavy drinking had been going on in the house to celebrate the buang tulang of Agong Gukang. The guests had gone home and the inhabitants of the house had retired to bed with the exception of Pikoh and Tui. A man and a woman bearing a scuffling came out and both were slightly wounded. They therefore retired till they heard more noises when they came out and found both men lying dead. The bodies were buried under the house und the matter reported. The corporal exhumed the bodies and it would seem that the men struck at each other simultaneously, death being very rapid. Tui had another wound which appeared to have been delivered from behind and there is reason to believe that Pikoh. an old man, amoked but was fortunately killed before he was able to do much harm.
   Travelling. — I was at Sundar at the beginning of the month and intended to walk up to Trusan on 1st. The river being in flood I was unable to do so and went up by boat at night, taking twelve horn s on the journey. T returned from Trusan overland on 8th. On 12th I went to Limbang returning to Lawas on 15th. On 30th I left for Limbang by boat from Punang arriving at 4 p.m. on 81st having been decayed by the sea running in the bay.
   Prisoners.—The prison gang, averaging 10 men, was engaged in the general upkeep of the station, and in carrying timber for bridges.
   Public Works.— The Customs Quarters at Lawas were completed during the month and the contractor is now engaged on the building at Sundar. The Kebiah bridge was repaired by Chin Yun and eight bridges on the Trusan Road were repaired by Hitam. Three of these were washed away by the heavy rain on the night of the 25th but as they had not been built according to specification the contractor had to make good the damage. Repairs to the Trusan Road progressed satisfactorily. The contractors
Haji Taip and Bata ng wish to separate after they have reached Lumut. Than Ah Kui was engaged to repair the road through Kian Seng’s rubber garden. Pengiran Matsalleh undertook to supply timber for rebuilding the bridge at Ulu Punang, and Hassan signed a contract for two wireless masts; A site was selected and cleared for the wireless station but up to the end of the month the contractor had not arrived. The landslide occurred on the Gaya Road just below the fort on the 25th and the hill appears to be slipping.
  Agriculture.—The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Ltd., exported 43,356 lbs. of dry rubber to Labuan during the month.
  Health - Fever Was prevalent during the month, seven deaths being reported from this cause. I regret to report that P. C. Buntar died of dysentery on 16th.
Rainfall.—The rainfall recorded was as under:—
Lawas	...	23’69 inches
        Lawas Estate ... 14’99	„
        Trusan	...	13'46	„
  9’65 inches were recorded at Lawas on 25th. The Siloateng river was in high flood and the Trusan Road and the padang were about three feet under water, considerable damage being caused.
  Shipping.—S.S. Sulong called once at Kayangaran and s.s. Burong twice to load timber and buffaloes. S.S. Alice Lorraine called twice at Punang to load piles for the Labtian wharf and m.l. Edmce made 10 trips to Labuan.
  Customs.—Assistant Supervisors Bujang and Usop visited all Customs Stations and the Customs Officers from Kuching were relieved during the month.
Trade.— The trade returns are as follows :—
FOREIGN.Lawas:—     Imports.Exports.July, 1926... $11,624$33,796Joly, 1925...	15,212    85,355Trusan:—July, 19269,366    13,878July. 1925...	12,470    17,617COASTING.Lawas: —Imports.Exports.July. 1926... $ 879$ 2,406July, 1925        869261Trusan:—July, 19'26      2,575     1,276July, 1925        7511,718F. F.BOULT,      Resident,Fifth Division.

300
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1926.
Kuching, Foreign Trade Returns for the month of Sept., 1926. 


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. NOVEMBER 1, 1926.
301
EXPORTS— (Cantinued.)
EXPORTS.

J. A. R. HARDIE,
       Registrar of Trade.
PASSENGERS.
Kuching, Coasting Trade Returns for the month of Sept., 1926.
Arrivals
IMPORTS.
PER S.S. Kuching :—4th October—From Singapore— 	Mrs. Parnell and two children, Messrs.
T. A. Robarts, Lim Peng Koon, W. Attenborough, Mr. and Mrs. Lau Cha Hin, and Mrs. Chiong Koon.
PER s.s. Angby.—11th October—From Singapore—Mrs. A. I. Danson, Messrs. H. Straetz, J. C. Smith, Chong Joon Kiew, and Tan Kui Choon.
Departures.
PER s.s. Kuching :—25th September—For Singapore-- Messrs. Wright, Lim Tee Chew, Lim Jit Seng, Lim Song Kee, Lau Yong Chee, Katsu Kurosu, Mr. and Mrs. Lau Chai Lim, Mrs. Chong Poon, Mrs. Lim Song Kee, Mrs. Lim Seng Choon, Mrs. Teo Lam, Madam Lim, Mrs. Parnell and two children.
PER s.s. Angby: -3rd October—For Singapore—Father J. Oss, Mr. and Mrs. J. C. Smith, Captain and Mrs. Lowe and child, Mr. Barton Wright, Mrs. Shaik Salmin, and Mrs. Shaik Abdullah,


302
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1926
Miri, Foreign Trade Returns for the month of June, 1926.
EXPORTS.



THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1926.
303



304	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1926.
KUCHING SHIPPING.



THE SARAWAK. GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1926
305
MIRI SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
Departures.


306
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1926.
Rainfall, September, 1926.
DURING 24 HOURS.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 192G.
307
KUCHING SHIPPING RETURNS.
Arrivals.
Departures.
J. A, D. HARDIE,
Registrar of Shipping.


308
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1926
METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS.
GENERAL HOSPITAL.
Kuching , 30th September,
Highest Barometer reading30'5 inches.Lowest	„	„30’1	„Highest temperature (in shade)94	degrees.Lowest	„	„76	„Greatest rainfall in 24 hours8’06 inches.Total rainfall (Museum)11’49Height of Hospital above sea level approximately 75 feet.

