
VOL. ??.
No. 879.

THE
 Sarawak Gazette.
PRICE	KUCHING, Wednesday, December 1st, 1926.	20 CENTS.
Contents.
NOTES.
Page.
Birth—Proctor	...	...	...	... 309
Notes ...	...	...	...	... 309
Death of His Highness the Tuan Bunsu ...	...	310
Alternative Routes to Bau	...	...	...	311
Simanggang Notes ...	...	...	...	311
Deepavali Appeal ...	...	...	...	311
Christmas Letter Telegrams	...	...	...	312
Club News
       Sarawak Club—Bowling Averages	...	...	312
Bowling Handicap	...	...	312
       Football Club— Results of 1st Round	...	...	312
Draw for 2nd Round ...	...	812
Correspondence ...	...	...	... 312
St. Thomas' School Building Fund	...	...318
Daya Berumah Panjai...	...	...	... 314
Sarawak Regatta—Provisional Programme ...	...	814
Monthly Reports:-First Division	...	...315
                Sadong Colliery	...	...	316
                Second Division	...	...	316
                Third Division	...	...	321
                    Coast Division	...	...	326
                    Fourth Division	...	...	328
                Fifth Division	...	...	329
Kuching Trade Returns	...	...	...	332
Passengers	...	...	...	...	333
Miri Trade Returns	...	...	...	...	384
Kuching Market Price List	...	...	...	385
Kuching Shipping	...	...	...	...	336
Miri Shipping	...	...	...	...	387
Rainfall ...	...	...	...	...	338
Kuching Shipping Returns	...	...	...	389
Meteorological Returns	...	...	...	340
The Sarawak Gazette.
WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
Birth.
PROCTOR.—On the 27th November, at the Residence of Mr. and Mrs. G. C. PROCTOR, Klang, F.M.S., to the Rev. and Mrs. E. G. PROCTOR, the gift of a daughter.
November.
   His Highness the Rajah returned on board H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 24th, after a visit to the Third Division, accompanied by the Acting Resident Mr. H. D. Aplin, Mrs. H. D. Aplin, and Mr. E. S. Holl, Director of Agriculture.
   HER Highness the Ranee and the Dayang Leonora sailed from Europe on board s.s. Malwa on the 11th and are due to arrive in Kuching early in December.
   MR. H. B. Crocker, Acting Chief Secretary, and Mr. A. A. Rennie, Treasurer of Sarawak, left Kuching on the 9th for a short visit to the Second Division.
   MR. H. L. Owen, Resident, Fourth Division, has been transferred to Sibu and gazetted Resident. Third Division.
   MR. H. D. Aplin has been appointed Divisional Officer, First Division, vice Mr. C. E. A. Ermen who takes up the duty of Acting Resident, Fourth Division.
   A holiday was proclaimed on Armistice I Day the 11th of November. A signal of two | guns from the Fort proclaimed the commencement of the two minutes’ silence at 11 a.m. after which the “Last Post” was blown by a squad of buglers posted on the top of the Pavilion.
   It was noticeable this year that few, if any, of the pedestrians in the bazaar area, or native car drivers, appeared to realize the solemnity of the occasion and, although there was little actual noise, we hope that more respectful observance will be insisted upon in future years.


310
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
  In the evening a very cheer v dinner took
place in the Rest House, which was gaily
decorated and illuminated, and the band of
the Sarawak Rangers rendering appropriate
music with great zest.
  His Highness the Rajah kindly consented 
to take the Chair. At the conclusion of the
usual toasts, ex-service men repaired to the
Residency, kindly lent by the Chief Secretary
for the occasion. Dancing and cards were
then enjoyed by the whole European com-
munity up to a late hour.
  MR. 0. Lang, Superintendent of Police,
and Mr. and Mrs. R. E. Le Sueur returned
from Home furlough during the month.
  MR. C. D. Adams sailed from Kuching on
Home furlough by the s.s. Angby on the 12th.
  MR. D. E. Calver has been gazetted Acting
Conservator of Forests with effect from the
20th November, 1926.
  MR. G. R. H. Arundell reported for duty at Simanggang on the 16th of November, having been transferred from the Coast Division.
  WE welcome to Sarawak Mr. A. Macpherson. Cadet, who arrived on 22nd November and has been gazetted for duty at Limbang; also Mr. R. H. P. Langton. Cadet, who arrived in Kuching on the 30th.
  MR. E. H. P. Bengtsson has been gazetted Superintendent Engineer with effect from 1st October, 1926.
  MR. R. V. Palfreman has been permitted to resign his appointment in the Sarawak Service.
  THE Sarawak Regatta will be held on the 1st January next. Entries close on the 20th December, and the Provisional Programme will be found in another column.
  It is hoped that Outstation competitors will turn up in force.
  A seaplane containing Messrs. Vincent and Andrews passed over Kuching on the 25th en route to Pontianak.
  WE understand that the reserved area for new Government bungalows at the mouth of the Miri river has been abandoned owing to erosion of the land, and that fresh sites are being explored.
  IT has been enacted by Order No. 27/1926 in the Sarawak Government Gazette that “no person shall be permitted to register as an opium smoker after the 28th of February,
  It will be interesting to note if this will produce any effect upon Chinese immigration.
   POLICE Constable Jam was sentenced to
death in the Resident’s Court, Sibu, on the
6th of November and executed on the 20th.
   As mentioned in the Third Division
Monthly Report, he committed an atrocious
“amok” in the Sibu bazaar at 10 p.m. on the
night of 29th October.
   A serious fire occurred in Matu on 25th
October, resulting in the total destruction of
the bazaar. This is the second blaze that has
I occurred during the last few weeks, the
former causing the loss of Betong bazaar.
   THE first serious motor car accident result-
ing in the death of Mr. Sim Sui Thong
occurred on the 21st of November just beyond
the 6th mile.
   It appears that Mr. Tan Ah Kim was
returning to Kuching with two friends when
he lost control of his small car on some loose
road metal, as a result of which it overturned.
Luckily a car following not far behind was
able to render assistance by driving the in-
jured passengers to hospital where they were
detained. It was found, however, that Mr.
Sim Sui Thong had already succumbed.
   A verdict of “death by misadventure” was
returned in the Coroner’s Court.
   “IT is recognized that the charge of 52 cents per word to and from Singapore and Sarawak is exorbitant. We have communicated with the Postmaster-General, Straits Settlements, on several occasions suggesting a lower charge, 38 cents being considered sufficient, but the Straits Settlements Administration is against our proposals.
   “It is certain that our revenue, would be greater from the cheaper rate and the convenience to the public would be much appreciated.
   “Further approaches from us will be made to the Straits Settlements Government with a view to lowering the charge from January, 1927.”—[Extract from Annual Report.]
Death of His Highness the
Tuan Bunsu.
   WE were deeply shocked to hear by Notification published in the Government Gazette Extraordinary, dated 12th November, of the sad news of the sudden death of His Highness the Tuan Bunsu, which occurred in England on the 11th of November, following an operation. No further information has yet been received.
   All Law Courts and Government Offices were closed on Saturday the 13th, and all flags displayed on Government flagstaffs and vessels at half mast, mourning being worn by Government Officers until the 20th of November.
   We offer our deepest sympathy to those so suddenly bereaved.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
311
     Alternative Routes to Bau.
    For the benefit of those desirous of spending a week end at Bau, the following information may be of interest.
    Krian bungalow has a Malay caretaker and is provided with all necessary cutlery and crockery, and has two rooms in readiness. At present neither this bungalow (nor the Astana) has a cook, so it is advisable to take one. The Club boy. Medris, will attend on application to Bau Central Exchange.
    All necessary provisions and liquid refreshment are obtainable in the Bau bazaar.
1.—Overland :
    (a) “Beetle" to Batu Kitang and be met by hired car on the Bau side of the river. Telephone to Bau Court the date and approximate hour of departure from Kuching.
    (b) “Beetle" right through via Batu Kitang ferry and Siniawan. Tn the above case, it is advisable to send "barang” and servants by Chinese launch Kim Chin Hin which leaves Kuching Fish Market for Buso daily about two hours before high tide.
    The Government lorry can meet this launch and take baggage, etc., direct to the house.
2.—By River :
    M.L. Young Harry to Siniawan or Kranji, where a car will be waiting if the hour of departure is telephoned previously from Kuching. If the weather permits lorry can collect "barang,” etc., at Siniawan. If not. it is advisable to ship these by Chinese launch to Buso.
Table of Car Hire.
   Car hire from Batu Kitang to Bau and return 	       $12.00
    ,,	,. Siniawan to Bau and return	...	5.40
    ,,	„ ,, Kranji to Bau and return	...	9.00
         Simanggang Notes.
  Seeing how keen people were about the football matches held during the August Regatta, Datu Dulrashid thought it would be a good thing to have another tournament, but not allow entries from other than Dyak teams this time.
  The idea in this limitation was that the Dyaks were seen to have a rather different interpretation of the game from their more sophisticated opponents—one which, though resulting in more energy expended, was also somewhat less trammelled by annoying restrictive rules.
  The games were arranged so as to form part of the celebrations on His Highness the Rajah’s birthday and, as a tribute to His Highness, Datu Dul turned his long service allowance into prizes for the winning team, a medal to each man
  The matches began on Friday 24th, when Skra beat Penghulu Angkun’s team by one nothing, thus eliminating the favourites in the first match of the series. There was no very’’ good reason why the Banting team should have been favourites except that they had been seen in the previous matches when they made good account of themselves. In the second match Tawang beat Bangat by two nil. On Saturday Rawan beat Gran by one nil. Stumbin beat Saduku by two nil and Unggi beat Mong’s team by three nil.
  On Sunday Stumbin won again by beating Tawang one love. Skra beat Unggi two love and Stumbin. playing for the second time that day, drew with Rawan one all.
  This match was replayed on Monday morning when Stumbin easily won by three love. After these matches one after the other Stumbin were expected to be rather exhausted for their match against Skra and it was thought the latter would win easily. However it turned out quite the other way and Stumbin carried off the prize in an easily won game by four love.
  A certain amount of criticism regarding the standard of play could easily be written, though imperfections must be partially blamed against the state of the ground.
  If this was disconcertingly glutinous in August it was for these later matches very like thick potato soup.
  Nevertheless there are great hopes of a complete transfiguration of the field in a very short time and when the Dyaks and Malays, who are going to turn out to lay down a solid layer of sand over the ground, have finished their work, there is no reason why this should not be.
  At anyrate whether the play was first rate or much otherwise it was certainly worth watching, for the keenness of the players.
  There was a second prize for the defeated finalists consisting in a small-sized football.
  This may or may not have been a hint that the losers had better return to little game.
  Personally we prefer to think it was meant as a suggestion to the young that as with all good things the sooner begun the better.
(Contributed.)
Deepavali Appeal.
  On Friday the 22nd October, 1926, a cinema show was given for the benefit of the Southern Indian labourers, followed by advice and appeal by Rau Sahib D. Arulanandam Pillai, Agent to the Government of Madras, and the Hon’ble Mr. K Natesa Aiyer of Ceylon, both of whom visited Kuching during the month.
  The importance of practising thrift, the influence of women in persuading their husbands to give up drink, the necessity to adhere to their own social customs regarding marriage laws, and above all the practice of self-help were all brought home to the minds of the audience.
  Dr Krishna mentioned the loss to the community caused by the death of Mr A. Singaram Pillai, and. as requested, the audience stood up for a’ moment to show its regard for the deceased.
  He said it was a matter for gratification to note that Mr. Pakry Odayar was the first Indian in the Civil Department to get the long service medal, and hoped that others will try to follow his example.
  The Contractors and Mandores were asked to encourage their coolies to take advantage of the Post Office Savings Bank as was being done by Contractors Arunachallam and Kali.
  While thanking the visitors for their kind and valuable advice, he requested that section of the audience to whom their advice referred to remember all that was said and to try their best to act up to it.
  Dr. Chand spoke a few words of advice in Malay. The gathering then dispersed with a vote of thanks to the management of the Globe Cinema.
(Contributed.)


$12
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
Christmas Letter Telegrams.
Kuching Football Club.
  The public are notified that Christmas Letter Telegrams at specially reduced rates will be accepted for transmission from 15th December, 1926, to midnight 30th December, 1926 The rates and countries accepting these telegrams may be obtained on application at the Telegraph Office.
“Black and White” Trophy.
The results of the 1st Round are as follows;—
        Club News.
        Sarawak Club
BOWLING AVERAGES FOR OCTOBER, 1926.
Name.	No. of Games.    dlMTWgS.R. V. Carr7  140.6H. E. Cutfield7  139W- Cotterill24  136.2G. T. Bates6  135.2J. S. W. Bean5  133.8G M. Allman5  133.4C- D. Adams20  132.7C. Fenwick5  132.6H. D. Aplin5  129G. D. W. Fray ling14  125.5H- H- the Tuan Muda13  125.4J P. Baird9  124 1A. E. Lawrence6  123.A. M. Forrest5  119.6L. D. Kennedy  11 <>.2H. H. Kortright6  117.8E. M- Marjoribanks9    117J. B. Archer5  116 6D. Y. Proudfoot12  116.3N. A. Middlemas6  115.3C. S Griffiths6  113.7R. C. Kay7  113.3P. M. Adams8  113.1H. Gild7  107.9 9T. E. Walsh6  105 2L. GregoryII  104.1L. B. Haye6  101.8F. H. Pollard7  100.9B J. C. Spurway7  98.3R. D. Binnie10  96.8   In the 1st Round the following teams drew byes:— European Merchants, Sarawak Police, Darusalwa, Medical Department.
    At a special meeting of the Committee held in , the Club Rouse at 6.30 pan. on 18th November the draw for the 2nd Round of the “Black and White" Trophy took place with the following results:—

BOWLING HANDICAP FOR OCTOBER, 1926.
Name.Score.H’capTotal.R. V. Carr (Winner)351    	351J. P. Baird305   34339E. M. Marjoribanks...290   48338L. D. Kennedy . .275   44319N. A. Middlemas ...261   52313L. Gregory216   74290G. T. Bates25512267C. D. Adams24816264W. Cotterill251   10261T. E. Walsh188   72260G. M. Allman235   16251C. Fenwick234   16250N.B.—The dates on which matches shall take place are drawn for by the Committee.
S. T. ENNION,
Honorary Secretary.
CORRESPONDENCE.
BOWLING AVERAGE FOR NOVEMBER, 1926.
No. of Games.Average.R. V. Carr     15   148J. P. Baird     17   135.6W Cotierill     24   128.8C. D. Adams      6126.3N A. Middlemas     15120.7G. T . B ,tes      9119.8L. Gregory     20   118.2J. S- W Bean     12   114.5C. Fenwick      7   113.4D. Y. Proudfoot      5   111.8A. M. Forrest      5     110. R. C. Kay      6101.3A E Lawrence      898.6A. M. Bathurst     II96.7    G. T. BATES, 
    for Hon. Secretary.
   [The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.,
To
   The Editor,
     Sarawak Gazette,
         Kuching, Sarawak.
SIBU,
26th. October, 1926.
SIR,
     IT may interest your readers to know that the first snipe of the season shot in Sibu was accounted for by Dr Marjoribanks about 11.10.26. The bird though observed, by me, to full dead was not picked up, and so does not appear in the game records.
   Yesterday, the 25th, Mr. Mud ford and myself accounted for a couple and several plover.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
313
Bird seem plentiful, but are very wild. Inferior marksmanship accounts for the pancity of the bag.
The birds are quite plump, which is I believe, unusual.
Yours faithfully, 
R. A. MILLER-HALLETT.
   [Snipe are usually to be found in Sarawak from the end of August till about the end of March.—ED.]
C/o HOUSEBOAT M.G.O., KAPOBAS RIVER,
 23rd October, 1326.
To
The Editor,
    Sarawak Gazette,
        Kuching, Sarawak.
DEAR SIR.
    SINCE I visited Kuching I am very much interested in all Sarawak affairs and so I have read the Gazette attentively.
    In the same paper I find a report of my good friend Mr. F.H. Kortright, in which he mentions‘’that the Bungoh and Empro Dyaks have again reopened their old laud dispute” and that the Bungoh people have a good chance to be punished. Gott strafe the Bungoh people! Hear what happened with my native surveyor when he worked in the. vicinity of the ladangs of those Bungoh people.
    When in May of this year I went up the left-hand branch of the Sarawak River I found a very interesting geological formation which was easy to survey up till Pengkalan Ampat, but rather complicated further up. I found also some specimens of fossils just at the pangkalan of the Dyaks Kampong Bungoh. These fossils were forwarded to my headquarters in Bandoeng (Java) to be determinated by the palaeontological experts of the N.I. Mining and Geological Department. As the specimens had suffered more or less from the long overland transport, some more were wanted and. because I for myself wanted some more topographical details of the mountains and ranges close to the N I. border, I sent out my native surveyor to do some work and to collect more fossils in the places indicated by me.
    He started his work at Kapala Pasang, a Dyak Kampong in the Upper Sekajam river and from there he surveyed till Kampong Tama, a small Dyak village in the Sarawak territory. Here be started a round survey, going up the Sungei Kayan and the Sungei Wauh and returned along a footpath via Semuti back to Tama again.
    From Semuti he continued his survey to Pangkalan Ampat, upstream the Tabia river, from where he had to cross to the Ulu 8cmban and survey downstream until Bungoh from where he should return, closing bis surveys at the Pangkalan Ampat. But his last part of his work could not be done. The Dyaks of the Kampong Kiding had declared their territory “pantang” and he was not allowed to pass unless he paid a fine of three pigs and three fowls. As my native surveyors have no authority to risk such large expenses he was obliged to return and went by prau to Kampong Bungoh to collect his fossils. Fortunately he had already collected a good deal of them when the Orang Kaya came to forbid that work, because it was ‘‘pantang’' again and again he should have to pay the three pigs and three chickens. He returned as soon as possible to Senah- Semuti and I think he was very glad to reach the Dutch border.
    When all the stones and rivers and mountains are declared “pantang" in Sarawak I am afraid that a geological survey would be the same as an epidemical destroying of all pigs and chickens
    After all, the details I got are sufficient for me. I am only sorry that I cannot send a good closing topographical survey of that part of Upper Sarawak to Mr. Middlemas.
I am, dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
L. H. KROL, 
Leader Borneo Geological Survey.
              'I'hou Salt not Stealth:
His EXCELLENCY	
    IT is generally believed among the intellectuals in China, that every races to live under the law ot Great Britain, there will be peace and comfort. In this view. I am boldly solely entered in the colony of Great Britain from the disturb China at this August with a strongly believed, that she shall give me comfort at any place by her good police regulations.
    Unintentionally, last evening two servants, who worked at . . . and . . . shop, secretly entered our school and stealthily opened the key, which locked on the sport-tug.
    When he was unlocking ; the boys who studying at our school refused him; he not only stoped his stealthing by the boys voice, but also strick the boy severely. Of course we have the duty to protect our boys in the school, and am going to asked him the matter, but he also wanted strick me on that time.
Except this an additional clause, I have already told it to . and ... So we beg His Excellency to give us a good justice and protect our school all the time.
I remain, Sir.
Your obedient servant,
Principal of School.
[Docendo discimus ?— ED.]
St. Thomas’ School Building Fund.
              Previowly acknowledged ...	$17,848
$500—Chop Hong Kiat	...	...	500
$300—Mr. Tan Sinn Guan	...	...	300
$200—Mr Chua Bak Hin	...	...		200
$100—Mr. Lim Kim Guan	...	...	100
$50—Datu Abang Haji Abdillah, Ban Chiang
         Bank, Mr. Tan Kui Choon	...	150
$30—Mr. Ang Kian Chiang ...	...	80
$20—Dr. Ujita	...	...	20
$10—Messrs. Yap Ah Jaw. Lim Lai Soon, Ong
         Tiang Siew. Chop Hak Kee	...	40
$5—Chops Swee Sang, Sui Kwee Ann, Mok Sze
         Cheong, Ban Nvan Hin	...	20
$2— Chop Ee Hnat	...	...	2
                Monthly Subscriptions 550
$19,260
A. N. ELLIS, Treasurer.


314
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
Daya Berumah Panjai.
Pasal Daya berumah panjai, 
Siko saja ti nyadi tuai; 
Megai jako ngempong runtai. 
Ngiga nama brita besai.

Samoa macham utai ka jako, 
Ruai tuai alai begempuru: 
Laya ngapa iya ngemadu, 
Bri sa singkap pinggai buku.

Datai kadiri ambis saranta, 
Ambia singkap pinggai plangka;
Ngemadu ka laya anembiak iya, 
Minta puji jauh di rita.

China Laut mansang bedagang, 
Tuai rumah ditepat orang;
Anchau tikai sua ka pinang, 
Jako randau maioh dikenang.

Enda tianti ka rumah jai, 
Maioh ti pindab ari rumah diri;
Tegal laya jako seniri, 
Rumah di babas penti dibri.

Bisi ti pindah ka rumah bukai, 
Ninggal ka kaleka kampong tembawai; 
Bejako mejah besalah tuai, 
Seniri bisi tuai benadai.

Bisi ti pindah berumah kadiri, 
Begulai sama diri menyadi;
Runding besai penemu pen bisi, 
Pendiau berubah nuai kadiri.

Anang rindu berumah panjai, 
Penemu maioh enggai begulai;
Rindu belulu jako betelai. 
Bejako ka pangan bilik bukai.
2nd Race, 8.30 a.m.-- THE	STAKES.—
Value $ Presented by	
2nd prize $           1st prize to crew $                         2nd prize
to crew $               3rd prize to crew $                  Open to any
make of boat unlimited as to size or number of crew, drawn in Class B. Entrance fee $4. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
     3rd Race, 9 a.m.—For bouts with crews limited to eight men. 1st prize $              2nd prize $             From
Godown Bau Seng to Stone Wharf. 
4th Race, 9.30a.m—THU	STAKES.—
Value $           Presented by	
2nd prize $     1st prize to crew $     2nd prize to crew $ 3rd prize to crew $ Open to any boats limited to 30 paddlers drawn in Class A. One flag man and one bailer may be carried in ad- I dilion, but these must not use paddles. Entrance I fee $3. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
      5th Rare, 10 a.m. THE	STAKES.—
Value S Presented by	
2nd prize $     1st prize to crew $     2nd prize  to crew $ 3rd prize to crew $ Open to any boats limited to 30 paddlers drawn in Class B. ' One flag man and one bailer may be carried in addition, but these must not use paddles. Entrance j fee $3. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
      6th Race, 10.30 a.m— THE	...STAKES.—
Value $ Presented by		
2nd prize $ 1st prize to crew $ 2nd prize to crew 5 Open to any description of boat with crews limited to 15 men drawn in Class A. Entrance fee $2. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.

Berumah panjai nadai lama, 
Rindu begauk bejako emplita;
Setan ka masok di ati sida, 
Ka beduan pangan enda gegawa.

Pasal tu ketu ka dulu, 
Enti ditulis enda alah tembu; 
Orang ti ninga samoa ka leju, 
Ditu me umbas alai pemadu.
W. H.
7th Race, 11 a.m.—The.	STAKES.—
Value $ Presented by			
2nd prize $ 1st prize to crew S 2nd prize  to crew $ Open to any description of boat i with crews limited to 15 men drawn in Class B. Entrance fee $2. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
Wharf.

Sarawak Regatta.
SATURDAY, 1ST JANUARY, 1927.
(Entries close 20th December.)
   8th Race, 1130 a.m.—THE CHAMPION CUP.—
Value $ Presented by H. H. the Rajah
2nd prize $ 3rd prize S 1st prize to crew
 $	2nd prize to crew $	3rd prize to crew
 $	Entrance fee $4. Open to boats finishing
1st, 2nd and 3rd in Races Nos. 1 and 2, unlimited
as to size or number of crew. From Batu Bliong
to Stone Wharf.
   A Meeting of the principal boat owners was held on Friday the 19th, and presided over by the Acting Chief Secretary.
   After some discussion the following rules for the forthcoming Regatta were passed :—
(1) Entrants shall not claim or receive free passages on Government vessels for crews or boats from Outstations.
(2) Paddles of the pengayoh Udi shape shall not be used in any race.
INTERVAL.
Curry Tiffin in the Court House.
Racing will be Resumed at 1.30 p.m.

    PROVISIONAL PROGRAMME
    
    1st Race, 8 a.m —THE 	STAKES.—
Value $ Presented by	 	
2nd prize $ 1st prize to crew $ 2nd prize to crew $. 3rd prize to crew $ Open to any make of boat, unlimited in size or number of crew, drawn in Class A. Entrance fee $4. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
    9th Race, 1.30 p.m.—ARMY, CONSTABULARY, AND STEAMERS.— Crews limited to 15 men. Mixed crews from Steamers will not be allowed, each steamer must run a boat containing members of its crew who are signed on before January 1st, 1927. 1st prize § 2nd prize $ . From Godown Ban Seng to Stone Wharf.
    10th Race, 2 00p.m.—THE	STAKES.—
Value $ Presented by			
2nd prize 5 A Consolation Race. For boats which have not finished 1st in Races Nos. 1, 2, or 8. Unlimited as to size or number of crew. Entrance fee $4. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
315
     11th Race, 2.30 p.m.—THE	Cup 
Value $ Presented by	 
2nd prize $ 1st prize to crew $ 2nd prize 
to crew $ 3rd prize to crew $ Open to boats
finishing let, 2nd and 3rd in Races Nos. 6 and 7,
limited to crews of 15 paddlers. Entrance fee $
From above Tanjong Patingan to Stone Wharf
     12th Race, 3.00 pm.—SHIPS’ GIGS.—1st prize
$ . 2nd prize S . Limited to 4 oars and one paddler.
From Godown Ban Seng to Stone Wharf.
     13th Race, 3.30 p.m.—THU	CUP.— 
Value S Presented by	
2nd prize $ 3rd prize $ 1st prize to crew
S 2nd prize to crew $ 3rd prize to crew
S Open to boats finishing 1st, 2nd and 3rd in
Races Nos. 4 and 5. Limited to crews of 30paddlers.
One flag man and one bailer may be carried in ad-
dition but the-e must not use paddles. Entrance
fee $3. From above Tanjong Patingan to Stone
Wharf.
     14th Race, 4.00 p.m. — OFFICES’ RACE.—Limited
to employees in Government and Mercantile Offices 
whose mimes as being in the receipt of monthly 
wages appear on the pay sheet of any such Office
for December 1926. A list of crews to be sent in
before midday December 20th Limited to crews 
of eight paddlers in each boat. 1st prize to crew 
$ 2nd prize $ . From Pengkalan Dayang Atun 
to Stone Wharf.
     15th Race, 4.30p.m —THE	STAKES.—
Presented by	  ...
A Consolation Race.—Yor boats which have not
finished first in any Races NOR. 6, 7, or 11. Limi-
ted to crews of 15 paddlers. 2nd prize $ . En-
trance fee $2. From above Tanjong Patingan to
Stone Wharf.
     16th Race, 5.00 p.m. THE 	STAKES.—
Value S Presented by ... 	
2nfi prize $ A Consolation Race. For boats
which have, not finished first in any Races Nos. 4,
5, or 13. Limited to crews of 30 paddlers. One
flag man and one bailer may be carried in addition
but these must not use paddles. Entrance fee $3.
From above Tanjong Patingan to Stone Wharf.
8. The Umpire may during a race caution any com-
petitor in danger of committing a foul.
9. Every boat to abide by its own accidents.
10. Any competitor refusing to abide by the decision
of the Umpire or to follow his direction shall be dis-
qualified.
11. The jurisdiction of the Umpire extends over the
race, and all matters connected with it, from the time
the race is specified to start until its final termination
and his decision in all cases shall be final and without
appeal.
12. In the event of a dead heat taking place the same
crews shall contend again, and any crew or crews re-
fusing shall be adjudged to have lost the winning place.
13. Stations count from the Town side of the river.
14. Entries for the coming Regatta will close as
before on the 20th December. Any boats entering
between 20th and 28th December will have to pay
double entrance fees. No boats may be entered after
28th December under any pretext whatsoever.
Drawing in Classes .4 and B for the Long Boats, 30
and 15-men Boats, and the draw for places at the Start
in all the races for boats with crews of 15 men and over
will take place on 30th December, at the Assistant
Secretary’s Office, 3.0 p.m.
15. Any boat, after winning His Highness the
Rajah’s Cup (unlimited crew) for the third time, not
necessarily in succession, shall be ineligible for entry in
this Race for the next two regattas following the third
win.
16. Entrants shall not claim or receive free passages
on Government vessels for crews or boats from Out-
stations.
17. Paddles of the ‘‘pengayoh lidi” shape shall not
lie used in any race.
MONTHLY REPORTS.
   1. Any boat not at its post at the time appointed for
starting shall be liable to be disqualified by the Umpire. 
   2. If the starter considers the start false, he shall ,
at once re-call the boats to their stations, and any boats 
refusing to start again shall be disqualified.
   3. No fouling whatever shall be allowed, the 
boat committing a foul shall be dealt with by a Com- 
mittee appointed for the purpose.
   4. It shall be considered a foul when, after the race
has commenced, any competitor by his paddle, boat, or
person, comes in contact with the paddle, boat, or person,
of another competitor, miles* in the opinion of the Um-
pire such contact is so slight as not to influence the
race, or shall be proved to the satisfaction of the Umpire
to have been accidental or unintentional.
   5. No boat shall be allowed to take another boat's
water until it shall have a clear lead of that boat; a
boat shall be held to have a clear lead of another boat
when its stem is clearly past the bow of that other boot.
   6. The Umpire shall be the sole judge of a boat’s
own water and proper course during the race.
   7. In case of a foul, the Umpire shall have the
power
1st—To place boats (except the boat committing
the foul, which is disqualified) in the order in
which they come in ;
2nd—To order the boats, other than the boat com-
mitting the foul, to pull over the course again
on the same or another day ;
3rd — To re-start the qualified boat’ from the place 
where the foul was connrfitted.
FIRST DIVISION.
Sadong.
September, 1926.
    The Acting Assistant District Officer, Sadong,
reports:—
    Court.—In the District Court, Luis (of the local
Bangsawan) was fined $10 for mischief. Three
persons were fined $3 for breach of Arms Order
Fines for breach of Forest Rules amounted to §50.
No other cases call for special mention.
    Prisoners.—The daily average number of prisoners
was 10.4. The prison gang was employed on the
upkeep of ornamental grounds and the whitewash-
ing of Government buildings. The coolie gang
completed the whitewashing of Government build-
ings and on clearing ditches round the station.
     Marine. —Takip. launch mechanic of m.l. Vava,
was discharged on the 15th, Sli bin Sodeng being
engaged to fill the vacancy.
    Medical.—At the dispensary a total of 81
patients were treated as follows: — Malays 30,
Dyaks 31, Tamils 4, Chinese 14, and Europeans 2.
There were seven admissions to the hospital, the
patients remaining from last month being 10,
making altogether a total of 17, out of which 10
were discharged as cured, one at own request, one
died, and one sent to Kuching General Hospital
for further treatment. Four patients were still in
hospital at the end of the month.
    The death which occurred in the hospital was
that of a decrepit mine coolie, who was injured
while working underground.
   39 N.A.B. injections were performed for yaws,
“muli," etc., in the dispensary. 40 pigs were in-
spected and slaughtered for sale. Two minor
operations on abscesses were performed under
freezing with ethyl chloride.


316
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
    General — On the 15th I left the station for Kuching and was still away at the end of the mouth. During the mouth the survey of the Bugis plantation has been proceeding. Haji Abdillah (Bugis Malay) applied for a further fifty acres of land outside the Bugis grant of four thousand acres.
    The 2nd Clerk, Mohamed Wai. was transferred to Kuching for duty, Mohamed Ebon arriving from Kuching to take his place.
     A great many applications to purchase guns continued to be made during the month. Over two hundred new guns have now been applied for and purchased since the beginning of the year.
     Mr. E. Banks, Curator of the Sarawak Museum, arrived by the L’Aubaine on the 7th, trying his new fishing trawl. He returned to Kuching by the same ship on the 9th.
     The rainfall recorded during the month amounted to 12.98 inches.
Shipping.—The following vessels entered the port:—
         S.S. Alice Lorraine 4 times
         S.L. L’Aubaine	... 6 times
         S.J. Sri Sadong	... 3 times
         M.S. Chaya Mas de Goebilt once
Trade.—The local trade returns for comparison with last year are as follows:—
Imports. Exports.
     September 1926	524,658	$ 9,647.00
         „	1925	15,217	26,449.10
C. ERMEN,
Acting Divisional Officer.
SADONG COLLIERY.

September, 1926.
The Stock balance at beginning of month 174.01 Tons.
Gross output for the month	1,481.11
Total 1,655.19 „
Shipped	1,236.00 Tons.
Boiler consumption and
Coke conversion	360.14	„	1,596.14	„
Stock balance at end of month	59.05	,,
   There was a slight improvement in output from No. 8 Mine.
The Upper Seam Mine struck old workings during the month. Conditions in No. 9 and the New Mines, respectively, remained unchanged.
   Mr. Banks, Curator, Sarawak Museum, paid a visit to the Collieries during the month.
   The rainfall for the month was 12.27 inches.
October, 1926.
Stock balance at beginning of month 59.05 Tons.
Gross output for the month	1,569.00 “ „
Total 1,628.05
Shipped	1,009.11 Tons
Boiler consumption and
Coke conversion 378.09	„	1,388.00	„
Stock balance at end of month	240.05 Tons.
   Underground conditions remained unchanged in all
the mines during the month.
   I returned from special Home leave by s.l. L’Aubaine
on the 12th.
   A Committee, appointed by the Board of Trade,
consisting of Messrs. Fenwick, T. Mohri, Tan Ah Boh,
and Low Chin Heng arrived on the 27th, to inquire
into the conditions under which Chinese coolies were
employed at the mines, and left again on the night of
the 29th.
   The Assistant Conservator of Forests, First Division,
Mr. D. E. Calver, visited the mines during the month.
   The rainfall for the month was 4.84 inches.
J. W. EVANS,
Manager.
SECOND DIVISION.

Simanggang.
September, 1926.
   Resident’s Court. -Uchop, a Dyak, vs. Siak Long.
Uchop appealed against the decision of the Magis-
trate’s Court. Uchop Was fined for felling a fruit tree
belonging to Siak Long. On examination it was
found that Uchop had felled a fruit tree. Decision
of former Court upheld. Sundai, prisoner who
escaped in August, was arrested by the Dutch
Officials and sent under escort to Lubok Antu, was
sentenced to one year's extra imprisonment and one
dozen strokes with the rattan. To serve his sen-
tence in Kuching jail.
   One boundary dispute in the Undup, Entawan vs.
Tansang. Entawan appealed against the decision of
the Magistrate's Court. Case adjourned for exa-
mination and map of land in dispute.
   District Court.—Tuanku Chabi, of Sebuyow, was
fined $50 and costs for slandering and abusing the
Native Officer, Sebuyow. Abang Su-aut sentenced
to six months’ R.I. for obtaining goods under false
pretences. Lipa and Entaiang fined two piculs and
one picul respectively for minor incest.
   Magistrate’s Court.—Civil and Criminal- Jabau,
of Skrang, was fined §50 for reopening an old land
dispute which has been before the Court several
times.
   There were three appeals from the decisions of the
Native Court
   General.—From the 1st until the 9th I was away
visiting stations in the Kalaka District.
   Mr. W. Clark arrived from Pontianak. N.I., via
Lubok Antu. Mr. W. Chirk was on six weeks’
tropical leave.
   On the 20th Mr. A. L. Honore left for Betong at
12.30 p.m., reaching Belong at about 7 p.m. At 9
p.m. 1 received a telephone message to the effect
that the whole of the Belong bazaar had been des-
troyed by fire. Mr. Honore returned to Simanggang
on the 25th.
   M. Roshidi, of the Survey Department, returned
from Lubok Antu, having completed survey of main
river as far as Lubok Antu. The Lemanak, Skrang,
Undup and Lingga Districts have now been sur-
veyed. M. Roshidi left for the Kalaka towards end
of the month.
   Clerk Gan Kim Tho was granted his annual leave
dating from the 28th.
   His Highnness the Rajah's birthday falling on
Sunday 26th, Monday was observed as a public
holiday.
   The engine of m.l. One was out of order for most
part of the month. Two mechanics were sent from
Kuching and the necessary repairs were soon com-
pleted, and the motor is now running as well as
ever.
   Abang Abu Talip, Native Officer, Saratok, arrived
here during the latter part of the month. He will
do duty here for the present.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
317
   Public Works.—Tbe prison gang averaged 50.
Prison carpenters rebuilt the bridge over the Simang-
gang stream, also assisted carpenter Sallih in building
the new clerk’s quarters. The prison gang under
mandor Kassim was employed on general upkeep of
roads and grounds. One thousand planks were
received from Rejang sawmill. A contract was
signed for the erection of the Native Officers’
quarters Sebuyow.
   Forest.—Mr. P. J. Johnson, Forest Ranger, Special
Class, reports as follows:—A rough exploration of
the interior of the area between the Sungei Sebuyow
and Lingga, commenced in the latter part of last
month, was completed by the 12th.
   On the 19th I visited Engkilili and returned to
Simanggang on the 26th.
   Agriculture.—62 permits to plant para rubber and
one to plant pepper were issued during the month.
   Medical.—A total of 156 persons were treated in
hospital during the month as follows: - Chinese 23,
Dyak 112, Eurasian 1, Javanese 1, Malay 19.
   108 cases of N.A.B. injection for yaws, etc., were
given during the month
   Cattle.—The Simanggang herd number 94 head
and Lubok Antu 48 head.
   Shipping.—Seven motor launches and ten ban-
dongs arrived and seven motor launches and ten
bandongs cleared during the month.
   Trade.—The principal exports were :—
Gutta jelutong 1,001
Pepper white 912
Pepper black 54
Para rubber 117
Para scrap 48
Raw sago 20
September, 1926 ...
September, 1925 ...
valued at $15,015
do.	41,948
do.	1,623
do.	6,506
do.	2,105
do.	55
Imports.	Exports.
$31,048	$73,271
47,422	80,978
   Mr. A. L. Honore reports as follows on his visit
to Betong.
   I arrived at Belong on Monday 20th at 7 p.m.
At 8 p.m. the alarm was given for fire. I went
down at once to find the Capitan China’s house with
sheets of flame coming from the roof. The adjoining
houses caught almost at once and then the bouses
across the road. There was nothing for anyone to
do but save whatever he could get from his house.
   It could not have been much more than an hour
before the whole bazaar was on fire. Malays and
Dyaks were at once on the scene as onlookers but
in assistance only some Dyaks showed themselves
willing, though all alike, including Chinese, assisted
themselves to whatever of value they could get.
   By 12 p.m. it was seen that the fire would not
spread further. Families were camped wherever they
could find shelter and even some out on the fields.
In view of this it was fortunate at this stage that
there was no rain. The Right Rev. the Bishop,
the Rev. Linton, and Rev. Hollis came down from
the Mission shortly after the outbreak of the fire
with bandages, etc., in case of casualties but for-
tunately there were none.
   The Resident was informed by telephone early in
the night of the disaster and as it was thought there
would be a shortage of food he said he would wire
first thing on Tuesday morning for Kuching for food-
stuffs.
   Early on Tuesday moreover as the m.l. Ringgit
was in she was sent to Spaoh for provisions but
when I went round with the Native Officer it was
found that some 20 or 30 sacks of rice had been saved
besides other provisions. Rantai’s Dyaks turned
out to help their Towkays to put up shanties and
P. Isek sent for his anembiak to do likewise.
I called the Towkays up to inquire about the position
with regard to food but they said they would carry
on selling as usual; all they asked for was kadjangs so that they might put up shelters. Accordingly as tbe Bishop had very kindly said that the m.l. Santosa might Ire used on any relief work she was seat down to Pusa at 3.0 to get these.
   On Wednesday morning the m.s. Hap Soon. Ann returned to Kuching and took on board a mad Dyak woman for treatment in Kuching.
   The m.l. Santosa arrived early in the morning with 1,175 kadjangs and these were at once taken up by the Towkays who yet wanted more. However another trip by the Santosa was not possible as she was leaking badly. So the Tua Kampotig was sent down to stop the Lang Endang before she had come too far with the object of getting her to ship kadjangs from Spaoh to bring up
   This boat arrived at about 7.0 that night but she considered delay in going out of her way to fetch kadjangs from Spaoh not in accordance with her orders.
   A certain amount of argument started after the fire regarding ownership of sites but the Towkays were told that the new bazaar would very probably be in a different place. At anyrate only temporary structures should be put up and where a Towkay before had two or three shophouses the sites he did not want were free to whomsoever had need of a place for his shanty.
   After this work on the shanties continued and was still uncompleted when I left. Inquiry into the origin of the fire revealed, according to other Towkays, that the Capitan China kept a packing case over a second fire-place in his kitchen as a place for drying rubber. Whether or not this was the cause will never be known, and if it were the Capitan must be very foolish not to have taken greater precautions with his drying box considering the wealth he himself had in the bazaar.
   The Dresser left for downriver on Tuesday 21st to investigate the sickness there. Whether this is as serious as has been thought is still to be ascertained. On the 23rd the Rev. Hollis returned to Kuching on the morning tide and in the evening Mr. Allman returned to Betong from downriver.
   1 returned on Saturday morning, reaching Simanggang at 11 a.m.
   In Court a certain number of disputes on account of land boundaries were settled. An appeal against the decision of the Penghulu regarding the bequeathing of property was dismissed.
   A Chinaman was given six months' R.I. for causing hurt at Spaoh.
October. 1926.
   Resident's Court.—Tansang, of Undup, vs. Entawan, land dispute. Entawan being unsatisfied with the decision of the Magistrate's Court, appealed. The land in question was examined and it was proved that Tansang had no rights over it, so decision was reversed.
   One Chang Khan was fined in the District Court $500 for cheating whilst in charge of gambling game called “Chap Jee Kee." Chang Khan appealed against the decision, and the case reheard bus decision of District Court upheld.
   Law Moh Toon, of Sabu, was sentenced to two years' R.I. under Order XXVII, 1911.
   There were numerous cases beard and settled in the Magistrate’s Court, but none call for special mention
   General.—On the 4tb 1 left for Betong to meet Mr. N. A. Middlemas, Superintendent of Surveys, in order to pick out a suitable site for the new Betong bazaar. I returned to Simanggang on the 7th.
   On the 9th I left for Lingga in m.l. One and on arrival boarded the s.l. Lucile and set sail for Kuching.


318
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
   I returned to Simanggang on the 21st and
Mr. A. L. Hot lore reported all well during my
absence.
   Engkilili was visited by me on the 28th when a
land dispute which has been causing a great deal of
trouble was settled.
   Clerks Koh See Kong and Abet both took their
annual leave.
   The weather was very unsettled during the month,
rain falling continually.
   Public Works.—The prison gang averaged 49 03
and were employed on clearing the cattle plain and
upkeep of ornamental grounds Carpenter Salleh is
still erecting the new clerk’s quarters with assistance
of prison labour.
   The contractor is getting on well with the bazaar
cement drains. The new shophouses along the
river bank are nearly completed.
   Forestry.—The Forest Ranger Special Class has
nothing of importance to report this month.
   Medical. —A total of 104 persons were treated in
hospital during the month, as follows:—Chinese 16,
Dyaks 64. Europeans 2, Malays 22. Fifty-three cases
of N.A.B. injections for yaws, etc., were given during
the month.
   Cattle - The Simanggang herd number 89 heads
and Lubok Antu 47 heads
   Agriculture.—31 permits to plant para rubber and
6 to plant pepper were issued during the month.
   Shipping.—Six motor launches and ten bandongs
arrived and nine motor launches and ten bandongs
Cleared during the month.
Trade.—The principal exports were :—
    Gutta jelutong 1,100 piculs valued at $16,174
    Pepper white	1,273	,,	74,755
    Pepper black	47	.,	1,420
    Para rubber	158	„	10,909
    Para scrap	65	,,	2,601
    Raw sago	87	,,	241
Imports.	Exports.
    October, 1926	...	$34,253	$110,863
    October, 1925	...	34,171	137,499
Saribas.
September, 1926.
The Court Writer, Betong, reports:
   Court.—In the Native Court, To Chai was sentenced to six months’ imprisonment for assault; Bandong was sentenced to one month's imprisonment ? for theft; Punai (f.) Jutan, Lindau (f.) and Ngelambong were fined $14.40 each for adultery; Chindan was fined $10.80 for assault; Sadam and Jangkar were fined $22.14 each, and Man $10.80 for contempt of Court; Sabari $22.14, and Insan $7.20 for divorce. Fines and fees for the month amounted to $245.6'2.
   General.—I was granted three weeks’ leave on the 6th, and Koh See Kong was sent from Simanggang to take over the office work.
   Mr. G. M. Allman left for Debak and Kalaka to start the rubber improvement policy. P. C. Rimong went to Kuching on the 10th escorting a mad woman for medical treatment.
   The Land and Survey party have completed the survey of the river as far as Betong, and they are now surveying the Paku river.
   The m.l. Santosa arrived from Kuching on the 20th with the Right Rev. the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak, accompanied by Rev. F. S. Hollis and Rev. Kong Kui Eng. The Rev. W. Howell and Mr. A. L. Honore also arrived from Simanggang on the same day. Mr. Honore, after hearing various cases, returned to Simanggang on the 25th.
   The Rev. Syimot arrived from Kuching on the
24th by m.l. Santosa. Dresser W. Geikie proceeded
to Debak and Lower Saribas on the 21st till end of
the month. He reported that more than 40 people
had died of acute pneumonia.
   Mr. R. W. Hurst arrived from Kuching on the
25th. in connection with the rubber improvement
fund.
   The contractors after stopping work for many days
have again started building the Government Ver-
nacular School. It is of a moderate size, and is a
substantial building.
   On the night of the 20th, Betong town of 65
shophouses was completely destroyed by fire at an
estimated loss of $242,334. No lives were lost.
This is the fourth time that this town has been des-
troyed by fire, at an interval of 12 years each time.
The fire originated from Kong Hua Soon’s kitchen
at 8.10 p.m. No attempts were made to stop the
fire, or prevent it from spreading to the upper
portion of the bazaar. When the first alarm was
given, the inhabitants took to flight, the women and
children crying and screaming. A fair amount of
property was carried away from shophouses and
dumped on the road and river bank. The surround-
ing Malays. Dyaks and Chinese came and pillaged
the shops and carried away the goods dumped on the
road. etc. The explosions of kerosene, spirit, aerated
water and tin provisions were terrific.
   The fort and other Government buildings were in
imminent danger at one time, and sparks fell like
rain on the roof and the heat was intense. In order
to prevent the conflagration from spreading to the
Government buildings, two Government buildings
of leaf attaps were demolished by the aid of some
kampong people. Several boats and bandongs were
burnt.
   The m.l. Santosa and m.l. Ringgit were of great
use, they at once weighed anchor the former to Pusa
for kadjangs for building sheds for the people, and
the latter to Spaoh for rice and provisions.
   The Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak left for
Saratok on the 27th, accompanied by the Revd.
Linton and Synnot.
   Agriculture.—Seven permits to plant sago and 38
permits to plant rubber were issued during the
month
   Shipping. - 13 motor boats and one vessel arrived,
and 11 motor boats and one vessel cleared the port
during the month
Trade.—The principal exports were:—
Gutta jelutong 47 piculs valued at S 836
Para rubber	568	do	40,924
    Para scrap	138	do.	4.435
    Pepper white	32	do.	705
Imports.	Exports.
    September, 1926	... $49,646	$49,638
    September, 1925	... 27,530	59,454
Pusa.
September, 1926.
The Court Writer, Pusa, reports:—
   Court.—There was a slight increase during the month. The Native Court held various cases in which the following people were fined:—Sagas, Malay, was fined for contempt of Court and lying $15 and 10 reals respectively; Gayah and Limbun (f.), Dyak Undai, for adultery fined 20 catties each ; Jemari (f.), Malay, for criminal house trespass 30 reals and 3 suku and her husband Peng for assaulting her fined 15 reals; Anau and Ibas were each fined $5 for bringing loaded guns into Court; Gayah for divorcing his wife was fined 30 catties, the usual divorce fine; Kho Ab Hock, of Pusa, was fined $25


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
319
for destroying Rubber Dealers Licence; Inyau, 
Dyak, Lakis, fined the usual Dyak divorce line, 
Kana and Bayan (f.), Dyak N. Lop, fined 20 catties
each for adultery; Lupa and Cherembang (f.)
“butang mali" fined by P. Mop 10 cattles each;
Saga and Cheng (f.), Dyak Nanga Bayor, fined 10 
catties a side for “jadi mali"; Lana, Dyak Rimbas, 
was fined 30 catlies in re a paternity case; Mawan, 
Dyak, fined 10 catties re "pulau kampong"; Chelni
(f.) for slander 5 catties; Usop, Malay Pusa, fined 
$10 for contempt of Court, and Imot (f.) of Pusa 
re land dispute fined $10.
   Choon Siang’s fine has been outstanding for over a year. Defendant is known at Debak as Chua Yew Kiang. This man was duly dealt with by Mr. H. E. Cutfield, A.D.O.. and in addition to the previous fine I another fine of $10 was imposed and costs. His j Towkay (Chna Pan Jang) also fined $10 as he agreed and failed to settle same.
   General.—I went to Debak on the 14th. Mr. H. E. Cutfield, A D.O., accompanied by Dr. Walsh, M.O., arrived at midday on the 17th overland from Saratok. The latter came round to ascertain the nature of the. epidemic which was said to be cholera. On examination, the patients were found to have been attacked by “acute pneumonia.” The doctor left that night for Pusa by boat, where s.l. Lucile from Saratok came round, conveying him j back to Kuching. Mr. H. E. Cutfield, A D.O., left for Saratok on the early morning of the l9th. I left Debak on the 20th after having made arrangements with P. Mon in re. working timber for the new buildings.
    Mr. G. M Allman, Superintendent of Rubber Improvement Fund, visited Debak on the 6th. He returned on the 10th leaving six rubber instructors there.
    Health.—The health of the district was not good during the month, on account of the epidemic. Dresser W. Geikie came round on the 20th and proceeded to Debak where he visited the kampongs and Dyak houses upriver.
    Pusa births reported ... 47 Deaths ... 29
    Debak ,,	„	... 27	,,	... 31
    Agriculture.—12 permits for planting sago were
issued during the month.
    P.W.D.—The prisoner (ex P.C. Jemat) has been
clearing the compound of the Debak Court House.
He was transferred to Saratok on the 19th.
    Shipping.—13 bandongs and one motor boat
arrived and 12 bandongs and 1 motor boat cleared
the port during the mouth.
   Trade.—The principal exports were: —
      Gutta jelutong	300 piculs valued at $4,030
      Para rubber	163	do.	9,510
      Para scrap	39	do.	1,540
      Raw sago	850	do.	2,115
Nipa sugar 400	tins valued at	889
Imports.	Exports.
September, 1926	...	$24,957	$31,131
September, 1925	...	20,466	40,239
October, 1926.
   The Court Writer, Pusa, reports:—
    Agriculture.—Two planting permits were issued during the month for planting sago. The natives have finished with their padi planting.
    Court.—Court work; most cases were heard by the Native Officer and Penghulu. Bines and fees amounted to $316.36
    The following fines imposed by the Native Officers call for special mention. Two Dyaks, by name Kana and Tandang, were sent to Kabong on a charge of theft of para rubber, to be dealt with by the Assis* taut District Officer. In connection with this case two others were duly fined by the Native Officer, Debak, $15 each.
    Jurai (f.), Kana's wife, for visiting her husband
while on remand without permission, was fined ten
catties.
    Guram, of Kampong Beladin, for trespass and for
abuse defendant was fined for the first offence 30
reals and 3 suku, and for the second also 30 reals
and 3 suku. The rest were all minor cases.
       General---left for Debak on the 19th, and pro-
ceeded to Ulu Bayor in the Rimbas on the 22nd, in
order to assess five estates. On two occasions the
heirs refused to pay the probate duty, as the former
Court Writer, when assessing the estates, stated
that there was no need for them to pay any such
duty. I explained to them that the orders were still
in force and ordered them to appear when the
Assistant District Officer next visited Debak.
   The Superintendent of Surveys. Mr. N. A Middle-
mas, arrived here per s s. Alice Lorraine and pro-
ceeded to Betoug the same afternoon. He returned
from Belong on the 11th, and left for Kuching per
m.s. Lang Endang on the 13th.
   Mr. Hurst, Assistant Rubber Supervisor, arrived
at Pusa on the night of the 13th, leaving for Debak
the next morning, and thence overland to Saratok.
   Lance-Corporal Sum bang who had been complain-
ing about being ill for some days was ordered logo to
Belong for medical treatment. He was absent from
the 6th to the 16th.
   Police Corporal Impang left the squad on the 1st,
his place being taken by Anchah, Undai Dyak.
   The survey party is now surveying the Ri in has
River from Debak downwards.
   Health.—The health of the district during the
month was good.
     Births of the month reported ... 11 only
     Deaths	do.	...	7 only
   Trade.—The principal exports were:—
Gutta jelutong 257 piculs.valued at $ 3,744
Para rubber	19H	do.	13,525
Para scrap	129	do.	2,675
     Raw sago 1.000	do.	2,500
     Nips sugar	237 tins valued at	512
Imports. Exports.
     October, 1926 ... $30,123	$28,676
     October, 1925 ...	34,120	56,661
Kalaka.
September, 1926.
    Mr. H. E. Cutfield, A.D.O., reports:—
    Court.—There have been fewer cases before the Court than usual. In the Resident’s Court there were three cases. His Highness the Rajah vs. Bakar on a charge of murder of five people. The jury were divided but the majority considered Bakar guilty on the evidence produced. The case was referred to the Supreme Court for settlement.
    There were two appeals from the Magistrate's Court. Ngelang vs. Unak, a land dispute, the decision of the Magistrate's Court was upheld. One Ong Szee vs. Ganti assault, the decision of the Magistrate’s Court was altered and plaintiff's fine remaining unchanged but defendant’s fine increased from $15 to $25.
    In the Magistrate’s Court, Ossen, Malay, was sentenced to three months’ R.I. for theft. A Dyak was fined one picul for attempted assault with a dangerous weapon. Two Chinese were fined at Debak $ 10 each for contempt of Court. A number of small fines were imposed on people for planting rubber without permits. Adas (f.) was fined $5 for assaulting a small boy. There were also the usual land disputes, etc., at Saratok, although fur fewer than usual, the natives being busy burning and planting their farms.
    General.—The Resident was here at the beginning of the month and I left with him for Saratok on the 2nd in m.l. One.


320	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
   The three cases above mentioned were dealt with 
and several matters attended to. We left again for ,
Kabong on the 6th The following morning I ac- 
companied the Resident in m.l. One to Rohan.
   The grounds round the fort were overgrown and
in a bad stite. The Native Officer was severely re-
primanded by the Resident and Corporal Remat was
given notice to leave at the end of 1926. There
were no cases outstanding, so a tuba-fishing was
agreed upon for the following morning. We watched
the tuba-fishing for some while but unfortunately it 
was pouring with rain so the fishing was a failure. 
We thou came on down to Kabong
   The Resident left the following morning at 5.45 
for Simanggang.
   On the afternoon of the 15th Mr. Allman arrived 
from Saribas in the m.l. Nellie bringing with him 
eight rubber inspectors to start the rubber improve- 
ment fund work in this district. I accompanied 
Mr. Allman the following morning for Saratok. On 
arrival at Saratok I found a wireless message await- 
ing me stating that the Divisional Medical Officer 
was proceeding that day to Kalaka to investigate the
cholera scare. At 7.30 that evening the Lucile
arrived with Dr. Walsh The epidemic reported to
be worst in the Rimbas. so coolies were called out
that night, and a start was made the following
morning for Debak by the overland route, Debak 
being reached soon after midday. The same evening 
Dr. Walsh examined three people in the kampong 
who were supposed to be suffering from the epidemic
but it was found that they had pneumonia only 
As Dr. Walsh wished to return to Kuching as soon 
as possible a message was sent overland during the
night ordering the Lucile to proceed to Pusa.
   Dr. Walsh left by boat for Pusa at 4 a.m. the next
morning. I held Court that day at Debak, there
being a number of Dyaks down for the visit of the
Court Writer, Pusa, who was visiting there at tbe
time. I left overland for Saratok at 3 a.m. the next
morning and arrived at 8 30 a.m Penghulu Nyalu
and a number of Dyaks had arrived during my
absence. The following day was spent holding
Court.
   The following day I accompanied Mr. Allman on
his return to Kabong. A stop was made at Kaba to
treat a Chinaman who had been stabbed in the neck
with a pair of scissors by his coolie. He was re- 
ported the evening before to be bleeding to death 
but medicine had been sent down and on my arrival 
at Kaba the bleeding had stopped but the man was
weak from loss of blood.
   The coolie had already been put on remand at 
Saratok.
   The following morning as Mr. Allman was leaving 
for Betong news was received that the Belong 
bazaar had been completely destroyed by fire, 
Mr. Allman remained until the following day when 
he returned to the Saribas.
   Acting on instructions by wireless from the
Resident, Abang Abu Talip, Native Officer, Saratok,
was sent to Simanggang for the time being.
   Sunday 26th being His Highness the Rajah’s
birthday the following day was observed as a holiday
and offices closed.
   P. W.D.—The prisoners averaging 15.03 at Kahong
were engaged in the raising of the land round the
fort garden Also the "Rantau” and "Pukat" nets
have been thoroughly repaired and "Samaked.”
   At Saratok tbe prisoners, averaging 3.86, have been
employed in clearing out all Government ditches
and the general upkeep of the station.
   Trade.—The statistics for the month were as
follows:—
Imports.	Exports.
    September, 1926	...	$26,783	$34,232
    September, 1925	...	49,498	41,074
The principal exports being as under: —
    Fish salted 427 jars valued at $	382
    Fish dried	16 piculs valued at 243
    Gutta jelutong	484	do.	6,143
    Para rubber	262	do.	15,010
    Para scrap	42	do.	1,219
    Raw sago 37 koyans valued at 3,770
    Sugar nipa	123 tins valued at 257
    Timber	...	...	631
Shipping.—The statistics for this port were as
follows: —
One steamer entered and one cleared, two motor
schooners entered and five cleared, 10 bandongs
entered and seven cleared.
The following are the trade returns for the Second
Division:—
Imports.
September. 1926 ... S 132,434.00
Total to 30.9.26 ... 1,186,808.00
Total to 30.9.25 ... 1,133,443.70
Exports.
$ 188,272.00 1,574,828.50 1.615.611.00
October, 192G.
   Mr. H. E. Cutfield. Assistant District Officer,
reports: —
   Court. -There was not much before the Courts
during the month chiefly owing to the fact that no
time was found fortravelling. The only cases which
call for special mention are Kho Chioh Kim, of
Kaba, sentenced to 1 ½  years under section No. 324,
Indian Penal Code, and also fined $50 for breach of
Opium Regulations; Chua Ma Theng, of Kaba, fined
for breach of Opium Regulations. $15 for assault and
$10 for contempt of Government Orders; Koh Ah
Inn was also fined $25 for breach of Opium Re-
gulations; Tandang and Kana, Dyaks of Debak,
were each sentenced to four months’ R.I. for theft,
and Kana to a further one month for breach of Prison
Regulations; Bong, a Malay youth, was sentenced
to one month for pilfering; Orek and Yahia were
fined $5 each breach of Forestry Regulations.
   General —On the 1st of the month the s.l. Lucile
arrived with Messrs. Crocker, Hardie, and Middlemas
on board. The Acting Chief Secretary wished to
make further inquiries into the murder of Gan Chee
Peck’s wife and four children which had been re-
ported in former reports. The next day I accom-
panied Messrs. Crocker, Hardie and Middlemas to
Saratok, where a short stay only was made, returning
to Kabong the same evening bringing down Bakar
who has been on remand suspected of the murder
above mentioned. The following morning a start
was made in the Lucile for Roban.
   This is the first time the Lucile has been up this
river and some difficulty was experienced at the
corners near Roban owing to there being a very slack
tide running. The Acting Chief Secretary took
Bakar to the scene of the murder and questioned
him and also brought him face to face with some of
the witnesses. The return to Kabong was com-
pleted tbe same evening.
   Messrs. Crocker and Hardie left in the Lucile at
daylight the next morning for Kuching; Mr. Mid-
dlemas remaining here awaiting the arrival of the
Alice Lorraine which was bringing one of his survey
parties from Lingga for duty in this river. The
Alice Lorraine arrived at midday the same day and
Mi. Middlemas left by her at daylight the next
morning for Pusa.
   On the 7th the Lucile arrived again from Kuching
to fetch me for the Race Week in Kuching. I left
by her at daylight the next morning for Kuching via
Lingga.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1. 1926.
321
   I did not return here from Kuching, until the 21st.
On the 27th 1 left by boat for Kohan which was
reached at 10.30p.m that night.
   As instructed by the Acting Chief Secretary and
Resident Second Division, I made further certain
inquiries into the murder case and Sint, wife of
Bakar, was again put on demand. I left again at
3 a.m. the next morning and arrived at Kabong at
1 p.m. on the 29th.
   Mandor Jamaludin gave notice to leave and
stopped work at the end of the month having com-
pleted his four years, Sait, bin Kassim being engaged
in his place. Abang Bujang, Native Officer, and
Abang Abu Bakar, Second Native Officer, visited
Saratok from 14th to 21st in the absence, at Si- 
manggang, of Abang Abu Talip, Native Officer, 
Saratok.
   P. W.D.—The prisoners at Kabong, averaging
14.54, were employed raising the land round die fort
garden which is very slow work. They also enlarged
and repaired the road from the fence round Govern-
ment compound to the fort. The prisoners at Sa- 
ratok, averaging 3.9, were employed in looking after 
the cattle and the general upkeep of the station.
   Cattie—The Kabong herd numbering 38 head
appear to be improving in health and are increasing.
The Saratok herd of 10 head, although healthy, are
somewhat short of pasture.
   Agriculture. — The Dyaks have ail been busy on
their farms and were only just finishing their
“Nugal" at the end of the month, which seems very
late. They have been held up a lot by bad weather.
   Trade.—The statistics for the month were as 
follows:—
Imports.	Exports.
     October,	1926	...	$29,716	$41,493
     October,	1925	...	44,974	48.749
The chief exports being as under: —
Fish salted 1.247 jars valued at
Gutta jelutong 358 piculs valued at
Para rubber	223	do.
Para scrap	38	do.
Gutta rian leaves 296	do.
Pepper white	11	do.
Pepper black	6.1 do.
Raw sago	1,040	do.
Sugar nipa	124 tins valued at
Timber
$ 3,800 5,120 15,255 1,584 
285 
510 
222 
2,600 
249
3,097
   Shipping.- -The statistics for this port were as
follows :—Five steamers entered and five steamers
cleared, four motor schooners entered and three
motor schooners cleared, six bandongs entered and
ten bandongs cleared.
   The in s. Kim Ching Thong, which has been on
the regular run from Kuching to Saratok for some
considerable time, is apparently past the work and
is always breaking down. On her last trip she broke
down at Saratok and was still there at the end of
the month.
Betong.
October, 1926.
The Court Writer, Belong, reports :—
Court.—Kadir, Piah (J.), and Jamair were fined
$22.14 each for divorce; Sri $10.80 for assault;
Abang Kassim, Man, and Rasit were fined $15 each
overland dispute; Menjah, a Belong Malay, was
sentenced to six months’ imprisonment for theft of
property when the Belong bazaar was burnt; Ha
Tin Chong was sentenced to one month for theft of
rubber. Various other smaller fines were imposed. .
Fines and fees for the month amounted to $387.62.
   General. -The Divisional Resident, accompanied
by Datu Abang Haji Buassan, arrived on Hie 4th
and, after attending to various cases and other
matters, returned to Simanggang on the 7th. The
Superintendent of Surveys. Mr. N. A. Middleman,
arrived from Kuching on the 5th to survey the land
for the site of the new bazaar. He returned to
Kuching on the 11th; Mr. G. M. Allman, the
Superintendent of Rubber Improvement Fund,
returned to Kuching on the 6th by m.l. Lang Indang.
   Dr. W. T. Walsh arrived from Kuching on the
23rd to examine into the epidemic which was re-
ported to be raging in the Paku District. The doctor
selected a site for the new hospital.
   After the destruction of the Belong bazaar by fire
hist month, 97 leaf shophouses were built for trading
purposes and these have nearly been burnt four
times outing the month. On the last occasion the
fire reached the roof but fortunately it was soon
under control.
   The sum of $1,000 was paid out on letters of credit
dining the month.
   Agriculture. -No permit to plant has been issued
during the month.
   Shipping. Nine motor launches arrived and seven
motor launches cleared the port during the month.
Trade. The principal exports were:—
Gutta jelutong20 piculs valued at $ 244White pepper31     do.2,002Black pepper     do.26Para rubber307     do.24,563Para scrap78     do.4,283Imports.Exports.October, 1926$39,262$ 39,535October, 192544,214108,886P. A. W. PAGE-TURNER,
Resident, Second Division.
THIRD DIVISION.
Sibu.
September, 1926.
   His Highness the Rajah's Birthday falling on
Sunday the 26th, the following day was observed as
a public holiday. A ceremonial parade of the police
was held after winch Long Service Decorations
were presented to Haji Sahak, Penghulus Agam,
Dana, and Laja, and Long Service Medals to Police
Corporal Noh (Rejang) and Police Corporal Makam.
Penghulu Oyong Abun did not arrive in time from
Belaga to receive his Long Service Decoration, nor
did Penghulu Matahari, who is too old and infirm
to leave his house.
   I was away at Kapit for two nights when all the
Dyak chiefs had arrived and were informed that no
more passes would be issued to cross the border for
the purpose of working jungle produce in the Batang
Kayan. They were also informed of the investi-
gations made by the N.I. Government of the murder
of Abor and party in the Mekam about 1921. They
insist that pati nyawa should he paid to the relatives
of the deceased. I promised them that I would
again bring the matter before His Highness the
Rajab.
   I also visited Sarikei in connection with Foochow
taking up land outside the boundary laid down by
Mr. Lang and myself some years ago. All rubber
planted outside these boundaries is to be pulled up
at once but pepper gardens may remain.
   I also visited Binatang and Sarikei at a later date
together with the District Officer and Divisional
Engineer to work out a policy as to the future


322
TJIE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
development of both places. Any future extension
of Sarikei bazaar must take place along the Repok
road.
   It was reported that some Heng Whas had put in
some stakes at Rantau Panjang, Igan. on Dyak padi
land preparatory to claiming the land. These men
have been summoned and the case is still under
investigation. In any case, tins land will not be
given to the Heng Whas.
   Within the. last three mouths’ nine chops in the
bazaar have either absconded or gone bankrupt.
   It appears that during the rubber boom several
Foochows (chiefly) rented shops in the bazaar, put
up a chop, with no capital at all, for the real purpose
of gambling in rubber. This was all right during the
boom but when the price of rubber dropped they
found themselves in low water. They also
never take into account the quality of the rubber
they are buying and give the same high pi ice for low
grades with the consequent loss when charged
double duty. Out of the chops, six have absconded
and two have been charged with fraudulent bank-
ruptcy.
   The Divisional Engineer and Divisional Medical
Officer visited Gunong Ayer to examine the place as
a site for a quarantine camp. It would be a very
suitable spot if the idea to open up Stebu was to be
started, otherwise the outlay of building and per-
maiient upkeep would be tremendous, which to my
mind would not be warranted in a place that was so
far away from all communication. Water would
have to be supplied by artificial means
   Mr. Mudford, on appointment as Superintendent
of Customs and Shipping, arrived on 1st to relieve
Mr. R. D. St. J. Horton, who has been appointed to
the 4tb and 5th Divisions. The latter left for Miri
on the 10th.
   The District Officer, Lower Rejang, was here from 
1st to 3rd to consult me on various matters.
   Mr. N. A. Middlemas, who had been on Survey 
work, returned to Kuching on 10th.
   Mr. E. V. Andreini arrived on 11th and proceeded 
next day to Kapit to take up his appointment as 
Acting District Officer.
   Mr. H. L. Owen, Resident 4th Division, passed 
through on the 9th en route for Miri.
   The District Officer of Rejang, Mr. J. C. Swayne, 
reports:—
   I returned from Sibu on the 3rd. Corporal Nob.
who was ill from the. end of last month, returned to
duty on the 10th. During my absence a Javanese
prisoner who had escaped from Sibu was arrested.
   On the 6th two men were seen to row past with- 
out stopping; this aroused the suspicion of the Tua 
Kampong who had been warned to look out for these 
men and he followed them to Barong, where they
proved to be two other escaped Javanese. They 
have since been returned to Sibu. According to 
their story they have been lying up in the houses
of friends they made in Sibu jail. Rahmat and his
father Sut who harboured one of them for two nights 
were fined.
   S.L. Mermaid has been laid up since the 18th, the 
Manager of the Island Trading Company reports
one of the blades of the propeller had broken off and 
that there were minor defects in the engine, the
latter have been adjusted, but it is necessary to get
the spare propeller from Kuching before she can be
used again.
   A number of Dyaks came to the fort during the 
month and have replaced their old land tickets with 
new ones.	
   Owing to heavy rain very little burning has been 
done and the padi crop is expected to be a failure. 
   A light was sent from Kuching and received on
the 20th ; this has been in place at Kuala Selalang 
and should be of assistance to all steamers entering 
the port at night.
   I have to thank Ah Fong of Chop “Tong Lee
Weng” for putting electric light into the Govern-
ment Bungalow. At present he only uses the engine
when loading ships at night, but later, 1 hope, be
will resume the working of gutta leaves and maintain
H night shift. As this does not take the place of oil
lighting it was put in without expense to the
Government
   A public holiday, in honour of His Highness the
Rajah’s birthday, was observed on the 27th. Corporal
Noh, who has served 23 years in the police force,
received a Long Service Medal on this occasion at
Sibu.
   Owing to the breakdown of the s.l. Mermaid I
postponed a visit to Main. The wireless station
there is now working and I am informed progress
has been made on the new police and clerk’s
quarters.
   Mr. H. L. Owen on his way to Miri spent a night
here on the 7th.
   The Acting District Officer of Kapit, Mr. E. V.
Andreini, reports: —
   General - I arrived here to take up my duties on
the 13th bringing up with me the Katibas Penghulus
and found all the upriver Dyak Penghulus already
here awaiting the Resident's arrival. The Resident
arrived on the 15th and the following day a meeting
of Tuais was held in the Fort when amongst other
things the question of Dyaks working jungle produce
in Netherlands Borneo was again brought up, there
being great feeling amongst the Balled Dyaks
against the prohibition of the Dutch Government of
their working in Dutch Territory. The Dyaks
maintain that it was clearly defined at the Peace-
making in 1924 that they should be allowed to work.
It appears to me that it is not the fact that they are
not allowed to work over there that annoys them so
much as that Dutch subjects come over this side
and work here without hindrance, whilst a Dyak is
arrested if he attempts to work the other side. The
Resident promised to lay the matter in front of
His Highness the Rajah as soon as possible.
   There was also a complaint from a Dyak named
Gruna that he was arrested by Dutch Kenyahs in
S. Tassuk (Sarawak Territory) and had a lot of his
property stolen before being handed over to Dutch
Officials who put him in jail. A letter was sent to
the Controlleur, Long Nawang. re this.
   On the 20th. accompanied by the Penghulu
Temmongong and Penghulu Ansi, I left to visit all
the houses in the latter’s district, some 20 longhouses
of Dyaks remaining in the Batang Rejang above
Kapit. Ansi, who has for many years been of great
assistance to Government, has just been made a
Penghuln. I walked from the S. Aya to the 8. Sum
and again from the Pelages to Ansi’s house above
the rapids, the latter journey only taking four hours
and saving two days’ boat trip. Many farmers had
not yet burnt off their clearings and the continued
wet weather will make them later still. I returned
to Kapit at the end of the month.
   P.W.D.— The new clerk’s house was completed
and a start has now been made on extension to the
fortmen’s quarters Prisoners averaged 19 men
were employed on the general upkeep of the
station.
   Trade and Shipping. The s.s. Sarawak made
four trips, s.l. Chamois two trips and the Soon Aik
and Bintang one trip each. 146 piculs of plantation
rubber, 193 piculs damar dagiug, 1.057 piculs rattan
tot No. 2. and 7 piculs gutta-percha were shipped
away during the month.
   Court.—The only case calling for mention is one
of a Dyak named Bankong who was fined for
brawling and wounding his father with a parang
whilst under the influence of drink. Fines and
fees amounted to $356.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER l, 1926.	323
     . 	
   The sum of $8,000 was remitted to Sibu                                      District Office—September has been a particularly
Treasury.	busy time in this Office partly accounted for by the
   Post Office.—The conditions of the Post Office                     failure of several Sibu firms whose books and
Savings Bank were explained to all the Dyak Tuai.	                    general business affairs were in a chaotic state.
So far none has entrusted his savings with the Post	          The District Court has been dealing with these
Office.	firms for fraudulent bankruptcy.
     Dairy Farm. -The herd, which is in good con-
dition, amounts, to 18 head. Sale of milk $37, some
70 gallons being sold.
     The Superintendent of Customs, Mr. J. S.
Mudford, reports :—
     I left for Sarikei on the 11th, visiting Binatang as
well and returning to Sibu on the 15th. Charles
Law has been transferred to Binatang as Court
Writer, replacing Ong Hock Seng, returned to
headquarters. The state of the new Government
buildings in course of erection at Binatang and
Sarikei was the subject of a special report to the
Divisional Enginee.. The new mosque at Binatang
is progressing slowly but, owing to its ambitious
dimensions and the continual absence of the con-
tractor and his men, completion does not appear to
be much nearer than it was three months’ ago.
Complaints were made regarding Tuai Rumah Ambu
in Sarikei and the Native Officer has been instructed
to make inquiries into the matter. Permission to
build four more shops in Binatang was granted.
During the month Abang Latip was transferred
from Kanowit for temporary duty as Native Officer
of Sarikei; Hadji Karim was granted leave and
Abang Abu Seman, Native Officer, transferred to
Kanowit until the return of Abang Latip.
    The Acting Resident, accompanied by the District
Officer of Lower Rejang, left for Rejang on the 3rd,
the Acting Resident returning alone on the 5th.
He reported that he had found it necessary to leave
the lighter Bogside, which he was towing, at Sarikei
as she was in a sinking condition. The Bogside
has since sunk off the Sarikei Government wharf
and in the opinion of the Divisional Engineer she is
not worth salving. On the 7th the Revd. J. M.
Foreign Trade Returns for July, 1926:—   Imports.Exports.   Sibu $289 659$409,799   Kapit10,864    34,654   Kanowit7,77928,902   Binatang23.839    32,038   Sarikei20,80247,332   Rejang6,20549,330   $359,148$602,055Coasting Trade Returns for July,1926 :—Imports.Exports.   Sibu   $ 61,396$ 20,776   Kapit2,2842.170   Kanowit2,689—   Binatang18,1366,615   Sarikei8,2952,187   Rejang35,15110.743   Matu18,02420,959   Daro11,348    11.723   $157,323$ 75,173Weight of Principal Exports for July, 1926 :-
Canes
Damar daging 
Gutta jelutong 
Gutta-percha 
Gutta plantation 
Gutta india-rubber Pepper white 
Pepper black 
Rattan sega 
Rattan tot 
Raw-sago 
Sago flour
no.	8,000
piculs	270.70
,.	886.92
„	29.02
,.	6,023.13
10.32
,.	233.66
,,	53.36
182 62
3.305.10 
koyan 174.1 
piculs 2,480.75
   The Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. L. B. Haye,
reports:—
   During the month 58 new in-patients were treated
in hospital. The total number of out-patients was
687, there being 283 new out-patients. 117 ar-
senical injections were given.
   171 operations were performed, five being under
general anaesthetic.
   Eight deaths occurred in hospital this month, due
to the following cases:—
     2 from Beriberi.
     1 ,, Shock following exposure.
     1 ,, Lobar Pneumonia.
     1 ,, Advanced Phthisis.
     1 ,, Dysentery.
     1 ,, Heart disease cum Cor Bovinum.
     1 ,, General Peritonitis.
   191 vaccinations were performed this month,
the majority being among passengers arriving
on the two Singapore boats, of whom 216 were
examined. One post-mortem was performed on a
male Chinese who died from injuries incurred by
his house collapsing.
   The health of the European community still
remains good.
Hoover and I visited the two biggest schools in the
Foochow Colony--one at Selalo and the other at
Engkilo. Both are in a flourishing condition, new
wings having been added and concrete bathhouses
and latrines for the boys. On the 10th T visited the
   Girls' School in Sibu which is in the charge of
Mrs. Hoover. This is a most up-to-date and ex-
cellent institution with 99 pupils. Extensions to
the dormitories are in progress, f inspected the
Government Malay School at Sibu daring the
month. There were 75 boys present out of a total
of 120. At present school is held in a temporary
shed, a most unsatisfactory arrangement. A con-
tract bad been signed in Kuching for the erection of
a proper school and the contractors had actually
started on the foundations when the Director of
Education issued instructions for the scheme to lie
abandoned and the building erected elsewhere The
contractor is claiming compensation for the work
done and up to the present no alternative site has
been chosen Amongst other schools I visited the
Tiong Hua School. Sibu (about 70 boys), the Sarikei
Bazaar School the Binatang Bazaar School and the
R. C. School at Binatang.
   Three inquests were held in Sibu on the following
persons:—On the 17th on the body of a Foochow
woman drowned by the swamping of a boat in tow of
m.l. Ling Kong Thai near S. Assan ; on the 20th on
the body of a Hokien woman who fell off a jelatong
near Selalo and was drowned, and on the 30th on a
Foochow man who was killed by a falling house.
At Kanowit an inquest was held on a Foochow
drowned in the Bawan.
   On the 30th a Marine inquiry was held into the
swamping of a boat in tow of m.l. Ling Kong Thai
wherein a woman was drowned. The Court was
composed of the Superintendent of Shipping, Sibu,
Captain McPhail of s.s. Rajah of Sarawak and my-
self, The jeragan was found guilty of carelessness
and warped.


324
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
   On the 18th I accompanied the Divisional En-
gineer and Divisional Medical Officer to Gunong
Ayer at which place we landed the next morning.
The object of our trip was to choose a site for a
camp tor immigrants We returned the same day.
On the 29th the Acting Resident, the Divisional
Engineer and myself visited Binatang and Sarikei
in order to discuss various matters in those stations
concerned with town plannings, returning the same
day.
        Mr. J. S Mudford arrived on 1st to relieve
Mr. R. D St. J Horton who left on the 10th, and
Mr. D. S. McLeod, Assistant Conservator of Forests,
left on the 20th on transfer to the Fourth and Fifth
Divisions.
   Mr. H. L. Owen Resident Fourth Division,
passed through Sibu on his way north
   The Divisional Engineer transferred his office
from Fort Brooke to the Land Office during the
month.
   On the 27th a parade of police in honour of His
Highness the Rajah’s Birthday was held and a salute
of 21 guns fired The Acting Resident, after having
taken the salute and inspected the r inks, presented
Long Service Decorations to the following Hadji
Sahak, Penghulu Again, and Orang Kaya Dana, and
the Police Long Service Medal to P. Makam and
Lance-Corporal Noh.
   A number of Chinese who had arrived from
Singapore without passports were returned to that
port at the expense of the Soon Bee Shipping
Company.
   There were continual floods during the month
and all signs point to the possibility of a long lamias.
   Courts — District Court.- The following persons
were imprisoned during the month :—Ho Tian Sin
and Teh King Tong two years each for fraud:
Lee See six months for cutting and wounding and
three months for living in a Dyak house; Suiting,
Forest Guard, six months for cheating under
section 165; Khoo Muk Hiong and Ting Kai Seng
six months each for theft; Chu Leh Seng three
months for fraud; Lam Man one mouth and a
whipping for theft and Hadji Ali Omar two weeks
for contempt of Court and two weeks for breach of
contract; Loh Suang one month and Joo two weeks
for contempt of Court, and P. C. Indih six mouths
for allowing prisoners to escape. Liew Hong (f.)
was fined $50 for putting a used stamp on a letter
and Ling Seng Kuang $50 for bleach of the Opium
Monopolies Order. Tee Ka Khee and Chiew Moi
Wah (f.) were fined $100 and $60 respectively for
adultery.
   A number of Civil cases were heard but none
worthy of mention. In the Magistrates and Police
Courts the usual number of cases were heard.
   Fines and fees amounted to $2,323.24 and 122
deeds were registered in the Court.
   Police.—Abdul Wahid Khan and Wan Seman
joined the force during the month, the latter hoping
eventually to qualify as a bugler.
   P. C. A bang Bena was resigned at his own request
at the end of the month on completion of his agree-
ment, but five men renewed their agreements during
the month and received bonuses.
   The conduct of the force during the month was
satisfactory. I dealt with a few minor offenders
and put a stop to the growing tendency of “sleeping
on guard,” which at one period during the month
was becoming serious P. C. No. 55 Indih was sen-
tenced to six months’ imprisonment by District
Court Martial for allowing three Chinese immigrants
in his charge, who had been ordered to return to
Singapore, to escape at Binatang. This was entirely
due to carelessness and slackness and was Indih’s
third serious offence while he has been in the police
force. He was accordingly dismissed the force and
is now serving his sentence in Sibu gaol.
     The force gave a satisfactory and smart display on His Highness the Rajah’s Birthday Parade and
received the congratulations of the Acting Resident.
P. Makam of Sibu and L.-C. Noh of Rejang both received Long Service Medals at the conclusion of the parade.
          At the beginning of the month smartness and keenness on parade left a great deal to be desired and so I instituted temporarily a series of daily parades and latterly two parades per day which had the effect of making the men a great deal more
proficient.
    Much time was spent in guarding European
bungalows during the absence from the Station of
Government Officers, and also in guarding a number
of shophouses, the owners of which had either gone
bankrupt or absconded.
    Owing to the increasing reckless riding of motor
cyclists and cyclists the Police N.C.O.’s and men
were given a few words regarding traffic control.
    Mr. Woodward, accompanied by the Sub-Inspector
and the Sergeant-Major, inspected the barracks every
Friday. On the whole the state of cleanliness and
repair was good during the mouth, as also was the
health of the force, the average daily sick being less
than one man.
    The total strength at the end of the month
was 79.
    Prisons. -Nineteen men were imprisoned during
the month, and of these five were Foochows, one
Melano, two Dyaks, two Malays, three Javanese,
one Kheh, one Macau, one Teochew, two Hokien,
and one Cantonese.
    Ten men were discharged during the mouth, and
of these four were Foochows. two Cantonese, two
Kheh, one Melano, and one Hokien.
    The conduct of the. prisoners during the month
was fair only. Two Chinese received twelve strokes
with the rattan and were given three months' extra
sentence for fighting with a mandor.
    Three Javanese also received twelve strokes with
the rattan and were imprisoned six months each for
escaping while on remand. They escaped in August
and were arrested at Rejang during September.
        The prisoners were employed on various jobs
during the month—cleaning ditches, looking after
the gardens of Government Officers, as tukang ayers,
coaling launches, repairs to buildings, carrying
furniture to various European bungalows, etc.
   Prison mandor Ganga Singh was dismissed at the
end of the month for inefficiency and neglect of duty
while looking after prisoners’ work.
   Chief Warder Beshin Singh was granted six months Indian leave as from the 18th instant. His place has been taken by Warder Tana Singh,whose efficiency is to be commended.
   During the month the average daily sick was four
and the average daily number in gaol was 56.7.
The total number in gaol and on remand at the end
of the month was 77.
October, 1926.
   There is very little to report on for this month as I
myself and most of the Officers were absent from the
station for the greater part of the month attending the
Race Meeting in Kuching.
   Mr. E. V. Andreini, Acting District Officer, Kapit, was
in charge during my absence.
   I regret to have to report that on the night of the
25th Main bazaar was totally demolished by fire. The
District Officer, Lower Rejang, was immediately in-
formed when information was received on the 27th. He
has since reported that supplies are ample but further
details areas yet not known. I was informed that the
Sarawak Government had despatched the s.s. L’Aubaine
with 50 sacks of rice and certain supplies were sent
down by Chinese firms from here.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
325
   A more terrible affair occurred in Sibu bazaar on the night of the 29th when P Jam, a Dyak, amoked about 9.30 p.m., killing four and wounding 26 others, of whom one has since died in hospital. All the victims were Chinese. He was eventually knocked on the head by gamut, a Court Peon, and arrested. He had only been discharged from hospital that day and before this had shown no signs of insanity. An inquiry is being held at the time of writing. The Principal Medical Officer and Mrs. Marjoribanks arrived on the 3rd.
   During his visit quarantine regulations applying to the Rejang river were drawn up and sent down to the Acting Chief Secretary for approval. It was decided that a quarantine station should be made at Rejang and that the Adeh should be anchored in the middle of the river and used as a quarantine camp.
   Both launches were out of order during the greater part of the month and I obtained permission to charter the s.l. Ilir from the Sarawak Steamship Company. Unfortunately on her arrival at Sibu from Kuching, which voyage had taken her 54 hours, she was found to be not worth the charter fee but arrangements have since been made with the Company to lend us the s.l. Kuala.
   I left for Kuching on 17th with Mrs. Aplin, Dr. and Mrs. Marjoribanks by H.H.M.Y, Maimuna which called in here on her way down from Limbang with Mr. and Mrs. Boult on board. I returned again to the station on the morning of the 27th.
   The Assistant Conservator of Forests. Mr. Thomas Corson, reports:
   I had already handed over my charge in the 4th Division to Mr. D. S. McLeod, but was still in Baram at the beginning of the month, on the 1st continuing the Marudi Survey.
   I sailed by the s.s. Gladys on the 2nd and on the 3rd reported my movements to the Resident, Fourth Division, at Miri, sailing again the sameday for Kuching where I remained over race week I arrived in Sibu on the 21st and reported ray arrival to the Resident and to the Divisional Officer, Coast.
   Mr. Wright, F.B.C.S.. reported that everything was in good order and I commenced taking over from him.
   With regard to the survey of the Bukit Lima Reserve, on the 22ud I sent Rimba to Telok Lubok to fetch the ex-mandor but he was not to be found. I thereupon wired asking Mr. Turner to postpone his visit, but he arrived on the 27th and the following day I accompanied him to the reserve. He has since had the assistance of Forest Guards.
   On the 28th I visited the Chin Aik Sawmill, and regret to say the conversion methods are again very wasteful.
   Estimates of Revenue, Expenditure, and Stores, were completed and forwarded.
   The Acting District Officer, Captain E. V. Andreini, reports:—
   I was awav from the station most of the month doing duty in Sibu.
   Abang Sleh arrived from Belaga on the 2nd and amongst other things reported that a large number of Punans had arrived near S. Linau and were asking permission to move in from Dutch Borneo. I have written you separately re this, also with reference to the Uma Badangs who are waiting here to see His Highness the Rajah. Penghulu Abun arrived later in the month and came down to Sibu where he received his Long Service Decoration and was still at Kapit at the end of the month.
   Land —I am trying to apportion land for planting as distinct from padi land, but without any staff it is difficult to do much in such a large and scattered area.
   P.W.D.—Work was continued on the extension to the Fortmen’s quarters and the Court Writer's old house demolished. Wood for the new Fort up the Balleh was ordered.
   The Acting Divisional Land Officer, Mr. R. A. Miller- Halle t, reports:—
   September.—I was at Kanowit inspecting Rejang Plantations, Ltd.'s, concession at the beginning of the month.
   I also inspected two other plots of land which had been applied for by Chinese.
   During the month I visited the Foochow Concession at Sarikei and found that the Resident’s orders as regards boundaries, etc., were being carried out.
The usual routine work was carried on in the office.
   October.—On the 1st I went to Durin to see some land which a Dyak Catechist wished to give to the owner of the grant surrounding the Mission, but as the land lay at the back of Cantonese gardens and would only lead to trouble later on, I would not allow the man (a Foochow) to use it.
   I was away at Selalang and on the Coast from 8th till 16th and later spent a night at Kanowit. The rest of the month was spent in office.
   The District Officer. Lower Rejang, Mr. J. C. Swayne, reports:—
   I was away from the station from the 7th till 21st at Kuching for the Autumn Race Meeting.
     P. W. D. —The roads behind the bazaar and Court Bouse were cleared with the assistance of labour from Blawei kampong. Au unsatisfactory attempt to paint the Jerijeh Light was made and the contractor has been ordered to complete the work properly.
   Very few cases were before the Courts and none of importance.
   Numerous Dyaks came in to take out new occupation tickets for their rubber gardens— in most cases application for a gun permit was made.
   I regret to report that Matu bazaar was completely destroyed by fire on the 26th. News of this reached me on the 28th and 1 reached there on the following day. I found the bazaar a total loss with the exception of one shop and the Topekong, which stood apart from the main building. An inquiry was held and it was found that the fire started in Thai Joo's shop, this spread so rapidly that the whole bazaar was burnt down in two hours. There were no fire-breaks in the building and no attempt was made to isolate part of it. Thai Joo is being detained while further inquiries are being made about him, I am also looking into the conduct or the Native Officer, the Chinese complaining that he made no attempt, or very little, to stop the fire.
   Thanks to the new wireless station no distress has been fell as supplies were hurried here from Kuching and Sibu on receipt of the news. At present some twenty Chinese families are receiving temporary support from the Government.
   I have to thank the Island Trading Company for assistance in repairing the s.l. Mermaid, which is now running again
   Among visitors to Rejang were Mr. Binnie, and Mr. Gillan, Postmaster-General.
   The Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. L. B. Haye, reports:—
   During the month 80 new in-patients were treated in the hospital. The total number of out-patients was 585, there being 154 new out-patients. 82 arsenical injections were given.
   Nine operations were performed, 3 being under general anaesthetic.
   Nine deaths occurred in hospital during the mouth due to the following causes:—2 from beriberi, 1 from typhoid, 1 from mitral stenosis, 1 from pneumonia, 1 from perforation of bladder followed by extravasation of urine and peritonitis, 1 from ascites, 1 from cirrhosis of liver and mitral stenosis, 1 from abdominal wound and protrusion of viscera.
   99 vaccinations were performed this month, 255 passengers were inspected.
   The increase in the number of in-patients this month is due to the “amok" case which occurred on the night of the 29th, when 26 wounded were admitted.
   There has been some slight fever amongst the European community, but otherwise their health continues to be good.
   District Office.—1 was away in Kuching from the 6th until the 21st. during which time Mr. E. V. Andreini, Acting District Officer, Kapit, was temporarily in charge of the district. Mr. Woodward was also away from the 7th until the 21st. On my return Mr. Andreini reported that nothing of much importance had taken place and left for Kapit again on the 24th.


326	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
     Sim Choo Ghnee started work as a new clerk in the District Office; and A. Mowe took over temporary charge of the Opium Monopolies Office in place of Hai Guan, who was ordered to attend the. Kuching Courts until the 24th, when the latter returned to duty.
     Three inquests were held on Chinese, two of whom were drowned on separate occasions and one found dead in a rubber garden
   The Acting Resident returned to Sibu from Kuching on the 24th.
   Fifteen Foochow immigrants who arrived in s.s. Magnet from Singapore without passports were detained anil returned in the same ship, with the exception of one who escaped.
   Abang Latip, Native Officer, reported his arrival from Sarikei on the 30th having handed over that station again to Hadji Karim, returned from leave.
   A most regrettable incident occurred on the 29th when P.C. 60 Jam ran amok in Sibu Bazaar at night, killing four persons outright and wounding twenty-six others. One of the wounded died on the next day. The assailant was captured mainly owing to the plucky attack made by Process Server Samat with a wooden pole. An inquest was held on the bodies and a verdict of murder returned.
   Mr. J. A. H. Hardie arrived from Kuching on 31st by s.l. Lucite., and the Principal Medical Officer was in Sibu for a few days.
   Ah Chong was drowned at Kanowit.
   During the month Penghulu Langgong laid certain complaints against the conduct of the Native Officer at Kanowit, Abang Abu Seman. The matter is being investigated.
   There was much rain during the month and for some time Sibu Station was Hooded.
   Penghulu Ikau and Tua Rumah Ujang report that the new Dyak School at Baong Assan is ready and I have applied for books, etc., from Kuching. Many of the Foochow Schools are now qualifying for the $1 per capita per mensem for all boys whose attendance is 50% and where Malay is taught regularly. I inspected the Tiong Hua School during the month. The conditions prevailing there are the subject of a separate report to the Director of Education.
   After the amok most of the shops in Sibu closed and the school was nearly empty. There is nothing to report from Kanowit, Sarikei or Binataug.
   District Court. The following persons were sentenced to terms of imprisonment:—Tan Teh Tu two years for housebreaking ; Lim Eng Chong one year for fraudulent removal of property , Eu Ching Sing and Su Seng Kiang nine months each for theft; Sia Ong Ong three months for picking pockets; Yong Chu Tung three months and $100 damages for defamation of character; Nyanta three months in lieu of fine; Tan Ah Hock two weeks for breach of Prison Regulations and Kadas one month for contempt of Court. Ang Seng was ordered to pay $100 damages for libel and Ah Liong fined $100 for fraudulent removel of property. Nine Foochows were mulcted of fines amounting to $210 for illicit gambling, seven Henghuas were fined $10 each for trespass on Dyak land and a number of other persons were fined for various minor offences.
   Fines and fees amounted to $1,686.36 and 139 deeds were registered during the month.
   Police.—During the absence of Mr. Woodward in Kuching for a great part of the month Mr. Andreini took charge and reported no insubordination on the part of the police. The conduct of the men was good and smartness on parade was maintained.
   Puran Singh, Melina, and Banyah, joined the force as recruits, and four men signed new agreements during the month. 1'he total strength at the end of the mouth was 83. L.-C Keshin Singh being still on leave.
   A report from Kanowit to the effect that Corporal Gokal Singh hail disobeyed orders was proved to be absolutely false.
   The usual guards and parades were carried out during the month.
   The outstanding item of interest during the month occurred on the 29th instant when, at about 9.45 p.m., P. C. Jam No. 60 ran amok in the bazaar with a parang ilang, killing four Chinese practically outright and wounding
another so badly that he died the next day in hospital in spite of the Divisional Medical Officer’s efforts to save him. Altogether P.C; Jam wounded 26 Chinese and' killed four on that night, among the wounded lifting two women Further slaughter was prevented by Court Peon Samat who felled P.C. Jam with a wooden pole, P.C. Bujang No. 68 and P.C. Amit No 65 immediately rushing up and arresting the murderer who was sprawling bn the ground.
   Prisons.—Nine men were imprisoned during the month and of these four were Foochows, one Tamil, one Heng- hua, one Hokkien, one Malay, and one Dyak, whilst 15 men were discharged, four being Foochows, two Cantonese, one Dyak, one Tamil, one Macau, two Heng- huas one Sikh, two Melanoes and one Hokkien. The average number of prisoners daily was 56, and 59 still remained in jail at the end of the month. One Dyak prisoner, by name Ujam, died in hospital on the 24th inst.
   The conduct of the prisoners was not good and several men had to be whipped tor gross insubordination. Tan Ah Hock was imprisoned for two weeks for giving prisoners food and tobacco.
   Prisoners were employed on the usual duties, the two prison gangs working chiefly on the gardens of Government Officers.
H. D. APLIN,
Acting Resident, Third Division
           COAST DIVISION,
-—4	
                       Mukah and Balingian.
September, 1926.
   General. 1 proceeded to Tanjong Mas Sekoyan on the 3rd to inspect the Foochow settlement; much jungle, bad been cleared and planted with catch crops preparatory to planting rubber. This settlement should certainly enliven the Mukah river between Teh and Siteng which is at present devoid of human habitation.
   The Very Reverend Father Dunn, Prefect of the R. C. Mission in Borneo, arrived from Dalat on the 14th. and remained in this district until 20th when he sailed in s.s. Sulong for the north.
   The Cadet Officer Mr. R. Arundell reported his return from sick leave on the 20th and resumed his duties from that date.
   Datu Haji Abdullah of Bintulu arrived on 21st in connection with a betrothal ceremony and sailed again at the end of the month.
   The 26th, Sunday, being the anniversary of His Highness the Rajah’s birthday, the following day was observed as a public holiday.
   The majority of interior natives were busily engaged on the planting out of their padi farms.
   Throughout the month the weather was unsettled and towards the end extremely wet and stormy.
   Mr. Arundell. accompanied by Native Officer Abang Haji Mohidin, proceeded to Siteng by launch on 28th to inspect the boundaries of certain gardens in dispute, and to endeavour to purchase supplies of belian timber for the construction of new Native Officer’s and Clerk’s quartets.
   Judicial. — District Court Criminal and Civil.— Merdan, Dyak. was convicted and sentenced to six months’ imprisonment for theft from Dyak Houses at Penipah during the smallpox epidemic when the inmates fled to the jungle ; Tan Ah Ngan was sentenced to three months' imprisonment for breach of contract; Ng Ah Kau was fluid for using a false pass-book and obtaining opium under false pretences ; Buyu anak Gudang and Jaimah (f), alias Margaret, a Christian Melanau woman, were each lined $60 for committing adultery; Kulan (f) was fined $25 for purchasing a sago garden without registering the transaction; Kilai anak Lisun was fined


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
327
for interfering in the lawful disposal of the estate of Mayu deceased ; the old sago boundary dispute between Maun and Sareh (f) was set; led by division of the garden in question; Ugan anak Bukus was fined for trespass when attempting to abduct the daughter of one Labi anak Lulut; Sam bin Teludong, Buyu bin Kudad, Urai bin Dinan, Mat Kaderi. and Tira anak Kok, were fined for damaging jelutong trees, felling ketio trees, and attempting to prevent others tapping jelutong in the Jadan District.
   Magistrate's Court.—A large number of debt claims were dealt with, the majority being at once admitted and judgment given for plaintiffs.
   Cadet Officer Mr. R. Arundell resumed charge of this Court on his return from sick leave.
   Native Courts—In the Datu’s Court two cases were dealt with and $55 80 fines imposed. In the Tua Tua Kampongs Courts Islam mid Pagan seven cases were dealt with and $115.36 fines imposed.
   Health.—The Divisional Medical Officer passed through on his return from Bintulu via Balingian en route for Dalat and Sibu.
   At his request two suspected lepers, Jimbun bin Bujang and Mat hut Haji Daud, were sent to Sibu for medical observation.
   The change in the weather caused much fever, coughs and colds amongst the community, 83 patients were treated and 81 N.A.B. injections were given during the month; the chief cases treated being wounds, diarrhoea, muli, ulcers, and yaws.
   Public Works — The old stables were pulled down and removed to a fresh site, and work was commenced on the construction of additional Tamil lines. Sites down the Ulu Penakub road were acquired from Chiew Ah Lang and Haji Musa for the erection of additional Tamil lines, and for the new hospital, dispensary, and dresser's quarters. A number of coolies were employed clearing jungle around the Station in the hope of reducing the mosquito pests. Carpenters erected several new bridges on the Kuala Road and repaired bridges in Kampong Haji Zahwi and Kampong Datu. A belian fence was erected around the clerk’s quarters, the floor of the covered way to the kitchen of No. 1 European Bungalow was bricked over and the Fort bathroom drains cemented.
   Tamil labourers, averaging 15.16 persons, were employed levelling the new Vernacular School and quarters site, draining swampy parts of the station grounds, and clearing the sites for Tamil lines and hospital
   The prison gang, averaging 11 27 persons, was chiefly engaged on the general upkeep of the station and latterly carrying and storing timber supplies for new buildings.
   Waterworks. The re-painting of the water tanks was completed, and the waler main from Petanak was raised preparatory to re-coating with preservative.
   Forests.—The Assistant Conservator of Forests, having completed the survey of the proposed Forest Reserve at Sungei Sekai, sailed for Dalat by launch on 10th. A number of jelutong paths at Judan which were in dispute were inspected by Mr. R. Arundel), who was accompanied by Forester Abu.
   Marine.. —The m.l. Leonora made three trips to Oya and Dalat during the month. One trip to Balingian, and one trip upriver as far as Siteng, since when she has been prepared for towing to Kuching for docking and refit.
   On the 28th the District Officer, Oya and Dalat, reported that Igan Light had been put out pending reconstruction; all local shipping has been notified accordingly
   Monopolies.—All registered opium smokers at Mukah were photographed during the month. The Balingian smokers will be dealt with as soon as a photographer can be sent there.
   Divisional Treasury. The. Divisional Treasury Clerk visited Oya and Dalat on 26th to make some adjustments in the accounts at these stations; on bis return he brought $5,500 in notes remitted by the District Officer to Divisional Treasury.
   The duplicate keys of the Mukah, Oya and Dalat safes, heretofore kept at Sibu, have now been transferred to Sarawak Treasury, Kuching, for safe keeping.
   Trade and Shipping.—The trade returns for the month are as follows:—
            Coasting Imports.
Mukah	... $43,804
Balingian ...	33,794
Coasting Exports.
$47,231
31,466
The principal imports and exports are as follows:—
Mukah Rice
         Clothing
Balingian—Rice
            Coasting Imports.
Coasting Exports.
38,108
8.804
2,605
Clothing 5,520
Raw Sago       229 koyans          $27,480
G. Jelutong     840 piculs
G. Para 18 pcls. 10 catties
Haw Sago Jelutong 
P. Rubber
 9 ½  koyans
1,468 piculs
48	„
15,110
1,128
1,055
24,068
2.962
   14 schooners entered and 12 cleared the port during the month.
The rainfall recorded shows 11.93 inches.
September, 1926.
   The District Officer, Mr. P. M. Adams, reports;—
    Court.— A charge of incest brought against two Dyaks, brother and sister, was dismissed and the witnesses for the prosecution were fined as their statements were proved to be a tissue of lies. Other cases were of no importance.
   Marine. -The m.l Nellie Arrived from Simanggang via Sibu and Igan on the 30th having left on the 26th. When a crew has been appointed to run her she will be a great acquisition to the district.
   General.—The D.M.O and Assistant Conservator visited Dalat on their return from Mukah. The Very Kev. Father Dunn also passed through Dalat on his Way to Mukah and Miri. The s.l. Chamois called to fetch the Divisional Engineer who was as Mukah. A young rhinoceros was killed up river by Dyaks and the whole carcase brought to Dalat. At the animal was under size it was confiscated in accordance with the Order, and the head, feet and skin sent to the Curator of the Museum.
   P. W. D. The cement flooring for godowns under the new office was completed by prison labour. The road in Dalat bazaar was raised partly by prisoners and kampong people, the shopkeepers supplying blanja to the latter. Unfortunately the stone ran short, but in spite of this the road is greatly improved. The D. 0. Bintulu, kindly sent 50,000 belian attaps for the new Oya bungalow. The rest of the material is being collected and it is hoped to begin the building early next year.
   Clerical. -T. A. Munan having returned from leave there were two clerks in both Oya and Dalat for the first time for many months. J. L. Tam bi k is taking leave during next month. Nothing officially has been heard of clerk Tan Kim Lock who is supposed to be returning here, but it is believed he has filled a vacancy in the Treasury, Kuching.
   Land.—Applications to plant rubber have diminished in favour of sago, which is a healthy sign.
   Telegraphs d Telephones.—A new six-way switchboard arrived from Kuching and has been installed. Communication with Mukah was interrupted on several occasions.


328
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
   Prison.—Prisoners averaged 14.33 and. after completing the cement work, were employed on the roads.
   Shipping.—	Entered.	Cleared.
     Schooners	8	7
     Motor Schooners	2	2
     Sarawak Launch	1	0
                 Total          11	                    9
   Trade.—195 koyans of raw sago and 345 piculs of jelutong were shipped to Kuching.
   Trade Returns were.— 1924.	1925	1926.
         Exports	$286,833    366,099      480,203
         Imports                  174,930    251,262      233,171
     Trade and Shipping.—At the beginning of the month the price of jelutong was slightly down but rose again later on and 2,613 piculs were shipped. There were 511,000 pieces “belian attaps" exported nd 300 bags of sago Hour.
The Trade Returns for the month are as follows :—
           1926	1925.	1924.
Exports     $90,264.85 ... $44,084.20 ...          $38,541.29
Imports     105,266.59 ...    43,226.02 ...           30,686.65
The following vessels entered and cleared the port during September :—
Entered, Steamers                  7 Schooners              1
Cleared, ,,	6	,,	2
The rainfall was 18.21 inches.
W. F. DE V. SKRINE, 
Acting Divisional Officer.
Bintulu.
September, 1926.
   Mr. H. H. Kortright, District Officer of Bintulu and Tatau, reports :—
   Courts.— There has been very little Court work during this month. Jana and Jati (f), Dyaks, were imprisoned for one year and nine months respectively for incest There was the makings of an assault case in the bazaar and Ah Hai was ordered to put a pledge of $100 in Court for his good behaviour for six months. There were the usual number of debt cases, nearly all admitted.
   General.—S.S. Auby arrived on the 4th. sailing again the following day. Mr. and Mrs. J. P. Mead were passengers on her en route to Kuching. She arrived again on the 25th sailing on the 26th with a very large cargo.
   The s.s. Sulong called here on the 7th southbound to load “belian attaps" for Oya and Dalat, she called again northbound on the 21st, dropping material for the Customs shed ; she had not returned from the north at date of writing. Her previous call northbound was on August 27th.
   Dr. Haye, D.M.O.. Third Division, returned to Balingian en route for Mukah and Sibu by m.l. Joan on 1st.
   I visited Tatau on the 16th to inspect, the wireless station buildings which had been lately finished by the contractor, but which had to be passed before final payments could be made in Kuching. The wireless poles are now ready and it only remains for the Telegraph Department to erect these and instal the plant; which I sincerely hope will take place soon.
   Mr. Lau Ah yam, Chief Clerk, returned from leave by the s.s. Sulong on the 21st.
   Datu Haji Abdullah was granted three weeks’ leave and left for Mukah on the 16th.
   His Highness the Rajah's birthday falling on Sunday, the holiday was observed on Monday the 27th.
FOURTH DIVISION
Miri.
September, 1926.
   Court.— More cases than usual, mostly petty offences, came before the Courts for settlement, (hie Chinese was sentenced to three years’ R.I. for theft, this being his third conviction.
   .Military, Police & Prisons — Discipline Las been fairly good throughout the month, only a few minor offences having to be dealt with. The four Sikh police recruits are shaping well. Health amongst the men has been good, the average sick being one per diem amongst Rangers and two per diem amongst Police. Prisoners numbered 34.
   During the month three lunatics were detained in the jail at the request of the Senior Medical Officer. These men are a nuisance and require careful watching. It is suggested that a separate building may by erected for such cases.
   Public Works.—Necessary repairs to buildings were effected. No new construction was in hand. A quantity of timber was received from Niah and Sibuti. Work on roads is at a standstill owing to shortage of metalling.
   General — The Acting District Officer visited Niah and Sibuti from the 21st to the 24th.
   The new buildings at Niah for Police, Court Writer, and Native Officer, are completed, hut the workmanship is of a very rough description. The Conti actor has been lined. The Native Officer at Niah reports that the natives re now more prosperous than they have been for years, and attributes this in part to the restoration of the produce from caves to the proper owners.
A few cases were dealt with at Sibuti.
   Four motor cars started running for hire at Miri early in the month, and appear to be well patronised. H.M Survey Ship Herald arrived at Miri on the 6th. She is detailed for hydrographic survey work between Baram Point and Kidurong.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
329
   Mr. P. H. Hayward, Divisional Treasurer, left for Singapore on furlough on the 10th lust. Mr. J. G. Sampson Railed on the 17th, having been granted four months’ sick leave following a severe operation. I returned from Kuching by s.l. La Follette on the 10th. Mr. R.D.G.H.N. St. J. Horton accompanied me from Sibu and took over charge of Customs and Shipping on arrival.
   On the 29th Mr. McLeod left Miri for Baram to take over charge of the Forests Department from Mr. Corson.
   His Highness the Rajah’s Birthday was celebrated on Monday the 27th. At 9 a.m. a Ceremonial Parade of Sarawak Rangers and Police was held on the padang A feu de joie was fired and cheers given for His Highness. At the conclusion of the parade hollow square was formed and Long Service Decorations and Medals were presented co Alfred Mowe of the Subordinate Service, Pengiran Mahomet Daud of the Prisons Department, Pte. Danak, Sarawak Rangers, and Sergeant Gokal Singh of the Police.
   During the afternoon a most successful [Sports Meeting was held by the Gymkhana Club,] the weather being perfect for the occasion.
properly drained is now much improved. The prison gang, averaging 25 men, was mainly employed in clearing ditches in the kampongs.
   A large number of fruit and rubber trees were felled along the Kampong Narom Road by the Malays, as the road was getting very bad owing to the trees preventing the sun from reaching the path.
   Medical.—Three in-patients and 44 out-patients were treated during the month. 19 injections for yaws were given. Dresser Tuah arrived to do duty in connection with the Harrison-Smith Fund.
   Shipping & Trade.—S.S. Gladys made three trips during the month, m.s. Kim Chin Seng one trip, and m s. Red Leaf one trip from Miri.
Trade Returns for the month are as follows:—
    Imports.Exports.    $104,726$ 93,706Brought forward     255,924   485,244Total     860.650   578,9501925		     379,815659,381Baram.
September, 1926.
The Acting District Officer reports:—
   Court.—Ahmat and Ah Pat were fined $50 each. Three persons were sentenced to terms of imprisonment. There were no cases of any great importance. Fines and fees amounted to $861.10.
   General.—Two Chinese traders were drowned in the Tinjar owing to their boat capsizing. Two crocodiles of 17'6" and 16' respectively were reported to have been taken in the Baram River. The crocodiles were not brought in for reward as is usual.
   The Foochows settled at Poyut have done a good deal of clearing, but owing to the heavy rains during the middle of the month they were unable to burn off their clearings.
   A branch of the Post Office Savings Bank was opened and $1,100 had been deposited by the end of the month Every effort is being made to induce the Malays to utilise the bank.
   Mr. T. Corson, Asst. Conservator of [Forests, arrived on the 16th from Lawas. Mr. D. S. McLeod took over from Mr. Corson on the 29th, the latter proceeding to Sibu.
The rainfall for the month was 7.85 inches.
   Public Works.—The new boat-shed was completed during the month after which the carpenter was engaged on general repair work. The contractor cutting the ditch along the Lubok Nibong Road completed his contract. The road being
H. L. OWEN,
Resident Fourth Division.
FIFTH DIVISION.
Limbang.
September, 1926.
   Court.—There were the usual number of cases in the Magistrate’s Courts, but none call for any special mention.
   General.- Mr. Mead, Conservator of Forests, returned to Kuching by the s.s. Auby on the 1st.
   The survey party from Kuching have finished marking out the bazaar extension, and were away at Brooketon from the 13th to the 30th surveying the south-west boundary of His Highness the Rajah’s Muara Concession. Mr. Anderson accompanied them throughout this work, which is not yet completed but should be shortly.
   Prisoner Mamut, who was sent over to Labuan hospital suffering from scute appendicitis, succumbed under the operation. He was in a very weak state on arrival ; I have to thank Mi. Larkins of Batu Apoi Estate, Brunei, who kindly put bis launch at our disposal, the Sylvia being away at Trusan at the time, but this unfortunately broke down so Mamut had to continue his journey in a bandong from Brooketon which, in his condition, did not tend to make things easier for him.


330	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
   Mr. Cook of Kayangeran who has kindly repaired the Saripah brought her over for a trial run on the 26th. With the new magneto she is now going well, and it is hoped that her engine will give no further trouble for some time to come.
   Dr Furnivall visited the station from the 24th to the 26th, and made his usual inspection of the hospital.
   Amir, a Javanese prisoner, escaped from the gang on Sunday the 5lh whilst out getting firewood. The Brunei Government was warned, and Amir was very quickly captured at Batu Apoi, Temburong. He will be handed over to the Sarawak Government on completion of a term of imprisonment he is now undergoing in Brunei.
   A rough census has been taken of the buffaloes in the Fifth Division, copy of which has been sent to the Director of Agriculture.
   The rainfall recorded was 17.62 inches.
   Travelling.—I was away at Trusan and Sundar from the 8th to the 11th spending two nights at the former place and one at the latter. The A.A.D.O. met me at Sundar and accompanied me throughout the trip.
   At Sundar the question of improving the bazaar was discussed. The Chinese are very anxious to do this; several applications have been made to erect new shops. This will mean the demolishing of the present buildings and the replanning of an entirely new bazaar.
   Public Works.—The prisoners have more or less been employed on the pipe rentis.
   The contractor has started work on the Rangau and Limpaku Pinang Police and Customs quarters.
   The Chinese community have made a concrete well in front of the Chinese temple; this has considerably improved the general appearance of the bazaar.
   Trade & Shipping.—Seventy heads of buffalo were shipped to Kuching.
   Shipping.—(Inwards).—S.S. Auby 2 trips from Singapore via Kuching and ports, s.s. Sulong two trips from Kuching via ports, s.s. Peter Duff two trips from Lauban via, Burnei, s.l. Kwong Yick four trips from Lauban via Brunei.
   The trade returns for the month are:—
Foreign
Coasting   Imports.
.. $ 18,678
..	10,495Exports.
$22,495
13,394Brought forward .    29,173
.. 248,81635,889
    240,604Total to date$277,989$276,4931925.. 236,079254,538October, 1926.
    General.— On the 2nd Messrs. Pollard and1 Anderson left for Kuching by the Sulong to be present at Kuching races. Datu Haji Mossili was granted leave to Kuching for two trips of the steamer, and Abang Haji Mustapha for one.
    Mrs. Boult and myeslf also left for the races by the Maimuna on the 5th, returning with Mr. Anderson on the 28th. Mr. Pollard was detained in the Grange Hospital. Kuching, suffering from an attach of dengue.
    A Chinese boy, aged six, fell into the river unnoticed opposite the main bazaar on the 10th and was drowned. The body was recovered on the 12th at Batu Meris.
    Prisoner Amir, who escaped from the pang last month, has been handed over by the Brunei Government, and received the usual punishment for this offence.
   The rainfall recorded was 13.05 inches.
    Public Works.—Repairs and extensions to the Court House are going ahead, but this and the wharf will, I am afraid, be held up for belian planks, as also is the deep water wharf in Labuan, where planks have been required for nearly two years.
    I find it impossible to get anyone to contract at a reasonable rate for the metalling of the main bazaar road.
    Trade & Shipping.- Thirty-nine head of buffalo were shipped to Kuching
    Shipping.—(Inwards).—S.S. Auby made one trip from Singapore via Kuching and ports, s.s. Sulong one trip from Kuching via ports, H.H.M.Y. Maimuna two trips from Kuching via ports, s.l. Kwong Yick five trips from Lauban via Brunei.
   The trade returns for the month are :—
Exports. Imports.
Foreign$ 22,204$ 19,618Coasting    11,97881,001    34,182    100,619Brought forward... 277,989    276,493Total to date... 312,171    377,1121925... 256,590    297,320

THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
331
Lawas and Trusan.
August, 1926.
   The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
   Court.— No cases worthy of mention came before the Court at Lawas. At Merapok Choo Poi was fined $25 for breach of Customs Regulations and obstructing the police. He appealed against this decision. Jamal Lasong was bound over on a charge of theft and another charge of a similar nature was dismissed. There were several convictions for breach of Customs Regulations but none call for special mention.
   At Trusan there were a number of Civil cases and at Sundar several persons were fined for not keeping their buffalo fences in repair. At an inquest held at Lawas a verdict of suicide was returned in the case of See Ah Kuan who stabbed himself whilst in the estate hospital.
   Travelling. — His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by the Resident, Fifth Division, and Mr. E. 0. Bruce, arrived off Kuala Trusan on the morning of 8th. I went on board to meet His Highness and later accompanied the party up river in m.l. Sylvia. A short time was spent at Sundar where His Highness inspected the Government buildings and bazaar, leaving in the afternoon for Trusan where he was received by Datu Pangeran Mahomat and the leading towkays.
   Public Works.--Chin Yun signed contracts to cement the Rangers' kitchens at Trusan, and rebuild the Seloating bridge at Lawas. Wong Chun was employed on the Customs Quarters at Sundar and the carpenter Kow Nui was engaged on the jail repairs. The repairs to the Trusan Road between Lawas and Lumut were completed and the contractor paid off.
   Hassan delivered two wireless masts and Chin Yun undertook to prepare them. Hassan signed a contract to work timber for Customs examination sheds and bridges. Banging Lallong and Talip are working timber for the same purposes at Trusan and Merapok. Taha agreed to erect a wharf at Punang, Pangeran Matsalleh supplying the timber.
   The Siang Siang bridge is being made at Kayangaran. It will then be taken down, numbered and transported to the site for erection.
   Agriculture.—The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Ltd., exported 27,336 lbs of dry rubber to Labuan during the month.
   Rainfall.—The rainfall recorded was Lawas 11.21 inches, Lawas Estate 12.45 inches, Trusan 12.11 inches.
   Shipping.—S.S. Sulong called once at Kayangaran to load timber, ml. Edmee made six trips to Labuan, and s.l. Peter Duff from Labuan called once at the estate.
Trade.—The trade returns are as follows:—
   The following day we left Trusan at 8.0 a.m. and, joining the Maimuna at Kuala Trusan, reached Lawas at 2.30, where His Highness was met by Datu Pangeran Haji Matusin and a representative assembly, though a large number of people were kept away by the sickness in the kampong.
   His Highness sat in Court and addressed the principal inhabitants and later walked out along the Trusan Road., Next morning His Highness visited the Vamco Timber Company’s sawmill at Kayangaran and from there sailed direct for Lingga, whilst the Resident returned to Limbang in Sylvia and I came back to Lawas by boat.
   On 1st I was at Limbang, but left that night for Sundar, where I held Court and selected the site for the new Customs Station at Kuala Trusan. On 4th I went up to Trusan for the day and in the evening left by boat for Punang, reaching Lawas early on 5th. On the 12th the Conservator of Forests and Mrs. Mead, accompanied by the Assistant Conservator, arrived from Labuan in m.l. Sylvia. On I8th the Resident and Mrs. Boult arrived, returning to Limbang with the Conservator and Mrs. Mead on 21st. From 23rd till 27th I was at Merapok where I settled all outstanding cases and visited the Tagal bouses On 28th I went to Awat Awat to select the site for Customs Station there, returning to Lawas on 29th.
   Prisoners.—The prisoners, averaging eight men, were employed on the general upkeep of the station.
FOREIGN.
Lawas: -Imports.Exports.August, 1926... $15,344$21,495August, 1925      20,27552,112Trusan:—August, 1926       8,66014,882August, 1925      11,59515,617COASTING.Lawas:— .August, 1926         382       1,278August, 1925         776837Trusan:—August, 1926       1,236       1,622August, 1925         803       1,186F. F. BOULT,
Resident, Fifth Division.


332	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
Kuching, Foreign Trade Returns for the month of Oct., 1926.
IMPORTS—(Continued.)



THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
333
EXPORTS-(Continued.)
Kuching, Coasting Trade Returns for the month of Oct., 1926.
IMPORTS.
J. A. H. HARDIE, Registrar of Trade
PASSENGERS.
Arrivals.
PER s.s. Kuching :18th October—From Singapore— Mr. and Mrs. Bean, Captain Lowe, Messrs. Brown, K. Notesa Aiyer, Down, A. E. Wilkins, Sim Siow Thong and Sukura.
PER S.S. Angby:-- 25th October—From Singapore— Messrs. J. P. Mead, Lowrie, Mrs. Forrest, Miss Benham, and Mr. Tan Yat.
PER s.s. Kuching:—1st November—From Singapore— Messrs. A. M. Bathurst, O. Lang, Ong, Boon Pang, Law Leng Theng, Sim Kim Hong, Chan Kui Seng, Joon Cho, Mr. and Mrs. C. C. Ross and two children, Mr. and Mrs. F J. Gron, Mother Peter, Mr. and Mrs. Chan Kui Cho, Mr & Mrs. Chau Kui Chong.
PER S.S. Angby:—8th November—From Singapore — Messrs. C. T. Davies, G. H. Bateman, Sim See Tick, Tan Kho Kee and Mrs. Tan Kak Teng.
PER s.s. Kuching:—16th November—From Singapore— Messrs. Lake, Rowland, D. A. Sherbance and Kho Thai Sin.
PER S.S. Angby:—22nd November—From Singapore - Revd. J. Feldbrugg, Revd. M. Connolly, Misses E. Baily, G. Coonan, Messrs. Andrew Macpherson, Lee Soon Fan, and Yeo Hoon Tiang.
Departures
PER S.S. KUCHING :—9th October—For Singapore—Dr. and Mrs. Coltman, Miss Coltman, Mrs. Forrest, Master Forrest, Mrs. Chua Poh Thak, Mr. and Mrs. Chan Kui Cho, Mr. and Mrs. C. Kui Chong, Messrs. Chan Kui Seng and Sim Why Hong.
PER 8.8. Angby — 17th October—For Singapore - His Highness the Tuan Muda, Messrs. Straetz, J. P. Mead and Mrs. Mead and child.
PER S.S. Kuching :—23rd October—For Singapore— Messrs. Brown, H. Gild, C. C Ross, Down, K. Natesu Aiyer, Lim Eng Thai, Law Theng Kong, Law Ah Lan, Kang Ee Beng, Tan Ko Kee, Sim Kim Hong, Ong Siow Sian, Kho Thai Sin, Sukumai, Miss Aben and Mrs. and Miss Howell.
PER S.S. Angby:—30th October—For Singapore— Messrs. J. W. Whiteside, G. D. W. Frayling and Tan Yat.
PER s.s. Kuching:—6th November—For Singapore— Mr. and Mrs. F. J. Groose, Messrs. Jong Joon Cho, Siow Choon Seng, Lau Leng Theng and Dai Sek Ousu.
PER S.S. Angby :—12th November—For Singapore—Miss Benham, Messrs C. D. Adams, Yeo Hong Tiang, Lim Chian Peng and Mr. and Mrs. Tan Kah Tin.


334	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.

Miri, Coasting Trade Returns for the month of July, 1826.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
335
Kuching Market Price List.


336
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
KUCHING SHIPPING.
Departures.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
337
MIRI SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
Departures.


338
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
Rainfall, October, 1926.
DURING 24 HOURS.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. DECEMBER 1, 1926.
339
KUCHING SHIPPING RETURNS.
Arrivals.
Departures.
J. A. H. HARDIE,
Registrar of Shipping.


340
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1926.
METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS.
GENERAL HOSPITAL.
Kuching, 31st October, 1926.
Highest Barometer reading
Lowest	„	„31’04
29’50inches.Highest temperature (in shade)95’5degrees.Lowest	„	„79’1aGreatest rainfall in 24 hours3’75inches.Total rainfall (Museum)15'36Height of Hospital above sea level approximately 75 feet.

