
VOL. ??.
No. 870.
THE
Sarawak Gazette.
PRICE	KUCHING, Monday, March 1st, 1926.	20 CENTS.
Contents.
Notes ...	...	...	...	... fi8
Arrival of H.H.M.Y. Maimuna ...	...	...	55
Sarawak Standard Time	...	...	...	55
Club Notes	...	...	...	...	56
St. Michael's Catholic Club—Billiard League... ... 56
Correspondence ...	...	...	...	56
Sarawak Turf Club—Spring Meeting 1926	...	.. 56
Monthly Reports: —First Division	...	...	58
                    Sadong Colliery	...	...	59
                    Second Division	...	...	60
                    Third Division	...	...	62
                    Coast Division	...	...	68
                    Fourth Division	...	...	72
                    Fifth Division	...	...	78
Kuching Trade Returns	..	...	...	73
Passengers ...	...	...	...	...	77
Almanac ...	...	...	...	...	77
Miri Trade Returns ...	...	...	...	78
Kuching Shipping	....	...	...	79
Rainfall ...	...	...	...	...	80
Kuching Shipping Returns	...	...	...	80
Miri Shipping	...	...	...	...	81
Meteorological Returns	...	...	...	82
The Sarawak Gazette.
MONDAY, MARCH 1, 1926.
NOTES.
February
  His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by the Dayang Leonora, visited Bau from the 12th to the 16th during the Chinese New Year holidays, and again left Kuching on the 22nd by the s.s. Alice Lorraine for a visit to the Second Division. His Highness was accompanied by Major S. Cunynghame, Commandant, Sarawak Rangers, who is desirous of obtaining more recruits from the Batang Lupar.
   WE understand that His Highness the Rajah intends to leave Sarawak about the 4th May for Europe, immediately after the  Races. Passages for His Highness and  Dayang Leonora have been booked by the  P. & O. Macedonia leaving Singapore on the 7th.
   HER Highness the Ranee’s Birthday was observed on Wednesday, 24th February, when all Government Offices were closed. A salute of 21 guns was fired from Fort Margherita and all ships in port were dressed.
 His Highness the Tuan Muda is expected to arrive at Kuching in time for the Races, being due in Singapore on the 23rd April by the P. & O. s.s Khyber.
   KUCHING was anticipating with pleasure the proposed visit on the 2nd March, for a few days, of H.M.S. Concord (3,750 tons), Capt. C. E. Kennedy-Purvis, from Hongkong. H.M.S. Concord was lent the China Station from the Mediterranean for the last few months, and will be replaced by H.M.S. Vindictive.
The visit has since unfortunately had to be  cancelled.
CHINESE New Year (13th) was celebrated i this year with extra enthusiasm, owing, no I doubt, to the general prosperity prevailing at I present. The bazaar still continues to present a gay and busy scene, and the Wayang (consisting of about forty performers from Singapore) in the Main Bazaar being thronged daily with a seething mass of , cheerful spectators.
   SATURDAY night, the 15th of the first moon, was the occasion of the Chap Goh Meh, festival, when a great discharge of crackers was continued for half an hour without cessation.
   GOVERNMENT Offices were closed on Saturday the 13th and Monday the 15th, and general holidays proclaimed.


54
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1926
  LIMBANG Wireless Station, we hear, com- , menced working on a temporary aerial on the ? 17th. Telegrams are now transmitted via Miri until the main masts are erected, when messages will be sent direct.
  THE new Amalgamated Club house on the Golf Tanks is now assuming the shape of what promises to be a very imposing edifice.
  The building of the new Hospital also is proceeding apace and should prove to be  another substantial, yet artistic, structure.
  RECENT appointments in the Government | Gazette include Mr. C. E. A. Ermen to do duty in Kuching; Mr. .1. C. Swayne to be District Officer, Lower Rejang; Mr. H. E. Cutfield to be Acting Assistant District Officer. Kalaka and Lower Saribas; Mr. G. R. Arundell to do duty at Mukah.
  SEVERAL officers have been on the sick list during the month suffering from indisposition. including Messrs. Aplin, Aldridge, Bean. Carpenter, and Clunies-Ross.
  WE welcome to Sarawak Mrs. E. M. Marjoribanks, wife of the Principal Medical Officer, who returned from home furlough by the s.s. Kuching on the 1st; also Mr. C. Clunies-Ross, who has taken up an appoint ment in charge of the Leper Camp, and Mr. G. D. W. Frayling, who has come to the  Borneo Company, Limited.
  Messrs. H. L. Owen. Resident. Fourth Division. J. C. Swayne and H. E. Cutfield returned from furlough by the same boat.
		
  THE Commissioner of Trade and Customs. Mr. J. A. H. Hardie, returned to Kuching I on the 5th after a visit of inspection to Sibu.
  MR. H. H. Kortright arrived in Kuching from Bintulu for a short visit on the 1st.
  MR. P. L. S. Mathews returned to Kuching per s.s. Auby on the 7th after a short business visit to Singapore.
  MR. R. G. Riviere, who was on a visit to Sarawak, left per s.s. Kuching on the 5th to connect with the s.s. Malwa for Europe.
  IT is reported that Penghulu Mulok, of the Balingian District, has succumbed to smallpox.
  WE have received from the Hon. Secretary, Mr. C. Boden Kloss, a copy of the Journal of the Malayan Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society, Volume III, Part ITT. for December, 1925, which contains many interesting articles including:—A Chinese Wedding in the Reform Style, by W. G. Stirling; Notes on Malay Magic, by R. O. Winstedt; Malay Customs and Beliefs as recorded in Malay Literature and Folklore, by H. Overbeck; Some Malayan Birds and Insects, by A. W.
Hamilton; Some Malay Words, by A. W. Hamilton; A list of Minerals found in British Malaya together with a description of their properties, occurrences and uses, by E. S. Wilbourn; The leading Saints in Rembau, by Dato’ Sedia Raja Abdullah; Early Reference to the suitability of Singapore, by C. E. Wurtzburg; The Incantation and Sacrifice of the Pawang Ma’yang, by W. B. Clarke.
  IN the British North Borneo Herald notes of the 1st February, we read that Mr. Somerset Maugham, the well-known author and playwright, has been paying a visit to North Borneo, “but he was not looking for copy.’’ •
  “He expressed himself as very hurt at the outspoken comments in this connection which appeared in a recent issue of our Sarawak contemporary, and stated indignantly that they were entirely undeserved. The story which aroused local indignation and in which some of his Sarawak hosts saw themselves ‘as in a glass darkly,’ he alleges to have been based on an incident which occurred 30 years ago in Labuan and which was related to him by a very old friend, who left Labuan more than 25 years ago.’’
  This is rather remarkable, as the principal incident referred to was based on Mr. Maugham’s exciting experiences when overturned in a bore in one of the Sarawak rivers. We were unaware that similar phenomena occurred in any of the Labuan waters.
  A coolie working on one of the timber camps died recently from the effects of an overdose of Chinese medicine prescribed for him by a well-meaning friend. A sample was sent to Singapore for analysis and was found to include among its ingredients such things as musk, pearl, amber, frankincense, szechuan musk-deer, scorpion and centipede bodies. We imagine that castor oil would be delicious compared to such a mixture. —(B.N.B Herald).
  WE read that Mr. Owen Rutter has written a new novel entitled “Sepia’’ which is to be published by Messrs. Fisher Unwin in early January, and we are expecting a review copy shortly.
  A pretty wedding was solemnised at the Cathedral of the Good Shepherd Singapore last month by the Rev. Father Ruaudel. The contracting parties were Mr. George Perry, of the Municipal Service, and Miss Josephine Reutens, daughter of Mr. Joseph P. Reutens, retired accountant of the Sarawak Government.—(S.F.P.).
  DRY rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah Estate during the month of January was approximately 78,000lbss.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1926.
55
   Arrival of H.H.M.Y. Maimuna.
   H. H. the Rajah's new motor yacht Maimuna arrived I
at Goebilt on the morning of the 27th February. She
proceeded at once to Lingga to fetch His Highness the ,
Rajah, and arrived in Kuching at 10 pan. the same night.
   We have received from home further interesting 
details regarding the construction of the ship, and 
publish below a few extracts from the Motor Boat.
   In certain respects this craft is a special type of vessel,
as she will be employed on passenger-carrying services,
in addition to serving her owner’s interests as a pleasure 
boat. While this class of boat is not entirely unknown. 
instances of construction on the scale in question are so
limit* d that the craft calls for particular comment,
   There is a roomy hold forward, and this will carry
between 200 tons and 800 tons, depending on the nature
of the cargo. Aft is a large store, intended for miscel
lancous gear and accommodating a pair of fresh-water
tanks, each holding 5 tons.
   The equipment of the vessel is quite distinctive In
the first place it may be remarked that a Star contra
propeller is fitted. This consists of a set of fixed blades,
which enable advantage to be taken of the rotary stream
of water astern of the propeller, converting the action
into additional forward thrust. From the trial results it
was considered that an appreciable improvement in the
speed was attained, comparing the vessel with another
of similar displacement and power. The mean speed of
the craft over a number of runs on the measured mile
worked out at 10.6 knots.
   The 12 h.p. engine runs at 675 r.p.m., and there is a
second auxiliary set comprising a 7 b.h.p. Bolinder
engine coupled to a 4 kw dynamo; the speed in this
case is 800 r.p.m. This outfit supplies electric light
throughout the vessel.
       ACCOMMODATION AND EQUIPMENT ON DECK.
   The owner’s cabin is on deck forward of the funnel |
and entered by a door on the starboard side. It is ,
panelled in teak, the fitments being of Honduras mahog- 
any. There are twin white-enamelled beds in the 
centre, on each side being chests of drawers and mirrors. 
A wardrobe is arranged on the port side aft, amidships 
being a seat with drawers below, while to starboard is I
a washstand, the equipment being completed by writing,
table and arm-chair also arranged on the starboard side-
   An awning entirely covers the deck aft, and an open-
air dining-table is provided. On the starboard side is a
motor lifeboat carried in Sureal davits, a pulling life-
boat, similarly equipped except for the motor, being to port.
The engine for the power boat comprises one of the new 
Beta-type-semi-Diesel units, developing about 6 h.p. at a
speed of approximately 900 r.p.m. Above the engine-
room skylight is fitted a daily service tank for salt water.
   A machine which is not always to be found in craft of
this description is a compressed-air winch, located on
the forecastle and furnished with a messenger-chain
drive to the Clarke Chapman anchor windlass.
PASSENGERS' QUARTERS.
   Cabins for passengers and officers are arranged on the
main deck aft, a further series of cabins being forward
of the companion leading to the upper deck. The after
accommodation comprises three cabins and a lavatory
to port, while there is a similar number on the starboard
side, in place of a lavatory being a store space for stowage
of small gear. These after cabins are enamelled in
white, each having its own electric light and a ventila-
ting fan, while the equipment in every instance includes
a wash basin and fixed seat.
   Port and starboard passage-ways give acct ss to the
remainder of the accommodation, which comprises a
num lie r of single-berth and double-berth cabins finished
in cream enamel. The fittings correspond to those in
the after cabins; at the after end on the starboard side 
are a bathroom and lavatory for the use of the Rajah,
two bathrooms and lavatories being provided for the use 
of passengers.
The main fuel tank holds 22 tons of oil, and is a deep tank forward of the engine-room, extending the width of the ship and occupying two frame spaces. There is also a daily-service tank forward of the main engine and holding one ton, a lubr icating oil tank of the same capacity and located on the port side aft. together with a paraffiin tank carrying 50 gallons The designed radius of action of the vessel is 2,400 miles.
Sarawak Standard Time.
40
20
40
20
30
   A recent Order published in the Government
Gazette lays down that Sarawak Standard Time
shall be reckoned as 7 hrs. 30 min. ahead of Green-
 wich Mean Time.
   The true local time for various outstations in
Sarawak has been worked out by the Superin-
 tendent of Surveys as follows:—
Lundu 7 hrs. 19 min. 20 sec. ahead of Green-
wich Mean Time.
 Kuching 7 hours 21 minutes 20 seconds.
     Sadong	7	„	23
     Simanggang 7	„	26
          Sibu	7	„	27
     Mukah	7	„	28
     Bintulu	7	„	32
     Miri	7	„	36
     Limbang	7	„	40
 The Standard Time of 7 hours 30 minutes now
adopted for the State of Sarawak is thus nearest
to the true local time for the centre of the territory,
and gives Kuching a saving of 9 minutes.
   Standard Time for Malaya is 7 hours ahead of
Greenwich Mean Time; for China, Philippines
and the State of North Borneo it is 8 hours. In
Sarawak thus our Standard Time will be half an
hour ahead of Singapore, but half an hour behind
Hongkong.
   The Kuching Wireless Station receives time
 signals every day, and will give the right time to
 Outstations in Sarawak.
   The effect of the new Order on the amount of
daylight available for us in Kuching has been
studied. It appears that the sun rises at its latest
about mid-February (6.27 a.m) then gradually
rises earlier until it has knocked off some 20 min-
utes slothfulness by rising at 606 am. in May.
A reaction then sets in until the end of July when
it lazily rises at 6.18 a.m. Once more it has a
period of earlier rising, improving through August,
September and October until it rises under Sara-
wak Standard Time at 5.56 a.m the first week in
November. Thereafter it gets rapidly later until
it reaches its latest rising time in mid-February
as recorded above.
   The hour of setting follows fairly closely the
hour of rising. Thus the latest hour of sunset in
the year in Kuching is 6.29 p.m. in mid-February,
shortening to 6.14 p.m. in mid-May; lengthening
again to 6 24 p.m at the end of July ; and reaching
its earliest time in mid-November at 5.58 p.m.
   If we take a quarter of an hour before sunrise and
quarter of an hour after sun set as daylight (of sorts),
we thus have throughout the year about 12 ½ hours
every day. From mid-January to mid-March this
daylight extends from about 606 am. to 6.39 p m.
For the remaining ten months of the year it ex
ten dsfrom about 5.50 a.m. to about 6.30 p m.


56	THE SARAWAK
          Club Notes.
SARAWAK CLUB.
Bowling Average for January, 1926.
Name.No. of Games.Average.    J. P. Baird         10    159.3    N. A. Middleiuas          9    148.4	.    J. S. W. Bean          6    188.8     J. C. Moulton          8    138.0    H. D. Aplin          6    L30.7    F. G. Carpenter         11    129.5    G. R. H. Arundell ..         10    128.6    W. R. B. Gifford          9    123.6    G. J. Reviere          7     122.4    J. L. Farquharson ..          6    121.5    R D. Binnie          6     116.7    J. A. McCullagh           7     118.7    R. W. Chater           8     118.5    A E. Lawrence           6     111.3    A. M. Forrest           5     97.4ST. MICHARL'S CATHOLIC CLUB.
—«—
Billiards League, 250 up. no handicap.
FINAL RESULTS.Games..      Won.   Lost.F. Shui Lian    8        8—Ho Hong Soon    8        71Lim Soon    8        62Stephen Harry    8        44L. K. L. Chan    8        85C. Jee Koo    8        35L. Kon Fah    8        26W. L. Vanderslott             8        26Hon Chon Vong    8        1-F. Shui Lian (champion) beat Ho Hong Soon (runner-up 250 - 240.
Ho HONG SOON. 
Knching, 22nd February, 1926.           Hon. Secretary.
       CORRESPONDENCE.
   [The Editor is not. responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
To
   The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
     Can anybody tell us how we can get a new chimney for our windproof chimneyless lamp—it got broken in the last wind storm. No—the chimney!
OUTSTATION.

Spring Meeting. 10120.
PROVISIONAL PROGRAMME.
          First Day : Saturday. 1st May.
1ST RACK.—2.0 p.m.—	Value
        $200. Presented by
        Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee. A Handicap for Sarawak Division IV Ponies. Top weight may be 11 stone. Entrance fee $10. Distance 3 furlongs.
2ND RACE.—2.25 p.m.—	Value
$200. Presented by Second to receive $50 Third to save entrance fee. A Handicap for Sarawak Division I Ponies. 'Top weight may be 11 stone. Entrance fee $10. Distance 5 furlongs.
I 3RD RACE — 2.50 p.m.—	Value
        $200. Presented by
        Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee. A Handicap for Sarawak Division 11 Pomes. Top weight may be 11 stone. Entrance fee $10. Distance 4 furlongs.
4TH RACE.—3.15 p.m—	Value
$200. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee. A Handicap for Sarawak Division ? Ponies. Top weight may be 11 stone. Entrance fee $10. Distance 6 furlongs.
5TH RACE.—3.40 p.m.	Value
$200. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee. A Handicap for Sarawak Division IV Ponies. Top weight may be 11 stone. Entrance fee $10. Distance 4 furlongs.
6TH RACE.—4.5 p.m.	Value
         $200. Presented by
        Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee. A Handicap for Sarawak Division 11 Ponies. 'Pop weight may be 11 stone. Entrance fee $10. Distance 5 furlongs.
7TH RACE —4.45 p.m.	Value
         $200. Presented by
        Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee. A Handicap for Sarawak Divisions III and IV Pomes. Top weight may be 11 stone. Entrance fee $10. Distance 3 furlongs.
8TH RACE.—5.30 p.m.— The Rance's Cup.—Value $300 A piece of plate value $ 150, presented by Her Highness the Ranee, with $150 added. Second to receive $60. Third to save entrance fee. A Handicap for Sarawak Divisions I. II, III and IV Ponies. Entrance fee $10. Distance R.C. about 1 mile 2 furlongs and 150 yards.
Second Day: Monday, 3rd May.
1ST RACE.—2.0 p.m.-	Value
$200. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee. A Handicap for Sarawak Divisions III and IV Ponies. Top weight may be 11 stone. Entrance fee $10. Distance 4 furlongs.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1926.
57
2ND RACE.—2.25 p.m—The. Tuan Muda’s Cup.—
Value $300. A piece of plate value $150, presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda, with $150 added Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee. A Handicap for
Sarawak Division 1 Ponies. Top weight
may be 11 stone. Entrance fee $10.
Distance 6 furlongs.
3RD RACE.—2.50p.m.—	Value
$200. Second to receive $50. Third to
save entrance fee. A Handicap for Sara-
wak Division II Ponies. Top weight may
be 11 stone. Entrance fee $10. Distance
6 furlongs.
4TH RACK —3.15 p.m.
Value $200. Second to receive $50. Third
to save entrance fee. A Handicap for
Sarawak Division ? Ponies. Top weight
may be 11 stone. Entrance fee $J0. Dis-
tance 5 furlongs.
5TH RACE.—3.40 p.m.—
Value $200. Second to receive $50 Third
to save entrance fee. A Handicap for
Sarawak Division I Ponies. Top weight
may be 11 stone. Entrance fee $10. Dis-
tance 4 furlongs.
6TH RACE.—4.5 p.m.—
    Value $200. Presented by
        Second to receive $50. Third to
save entrance fee. A Handicap for Sara-
wak Division II Ponies. Top weight may
be 11 stone. Entrance fee $10. Distance
3 furlongs.
7TH RACE —4.45 p.m.—
Value $150. (THE CONSOLATION RACE.) Second to save entrance fee. A Handi
cap for all Ponies winch have not. won a race at this Meeting. Top weight may be 11 stone. Post Entries $5. Distance 3 furlongs.
8TH RACE, —5.30 p.m.—T/ie Sarawak Cup.—Value |
$500.	(1’HE WINNERS' HANDICAP) A
piece of plate value $200, presented by His Highness the Rajah, with $300 added. Second to receive $75; Third to receive $25. A Handicap for all horses that have won a race at this Meeting, the winner of the 7th Race Second Day excepted. Top weight may be 11 stone. Post Entries $15. Distance 4½   furlongs.
New Official Classification of Ponies.
Division 1.
Billy Buster Hopeleaa
Burak
Kismet late
   Up Eight Blazes
Lee Mah Wembley
Division II-Division ?.Division IV.White WingsKijangPitakUntongSnapBintang 
        Terpileh
SabekSakbon -Lee PahPenglimaKuchingBacholTolinIf lote Akhtiar‘Manna BulehKilatRusaAnjing LautSisitJinAjaibSarawakDamitBurougKluangThe ScoutShotawayBangMah JonggApa Kena PlandokGundahAdharnGhalibGuntorBeaverPenghulu 
AlladinPan TanAzab                Notice.
1. All nominations, accompanied by Entrance fees, description of pomes, and declaration of colours, to be made to the Honorary Secretary not later than noon of the 13th March.	.
2. (a) Entrance fees for ponies entered previously and scratched before this date will be returned.
(b) Handicaps for the First Day, will be published on 20th March.
(c) In the event of ponies being scratched before 17th April, half the entrance fees will be returned.
(d) Handicap- for the Second Day will be posted on the Notice Board of the Sarawak Club at 12 noon on the 2nd May.
(e) In the event of ponies being scratched before 5 p.m. on that day, half the entrance fees will be returned.
(f) Entrance fees after these dates shall be forfeited in the event of any ponies not running.
3. No second prize will be given if there are less than three runners, and no third prize if less than five.
4. (a) Ponies must have run on the First Day to be eligible for entry in Races on the Second Day.
(b) On the Second Day ponies must have run previously at this Meeting to be eligible for entry in the 7th Race.
5. The owner of any horse entered for a race most run such horse in that race, unless he shall have declared in writing to the Honorary Secretary not later than 5 p.m. On the day before the race that his horse will not run, or unless he shall at any time previous to the starting of the race prove to the satisfaction of the Stewards that the horse is unfit to run. This rule does not apply to handicaps made on the course, scratchings for which must be made in waiting to the Honorary Secretary after the publication of the handicaps.
6. Any Jockey who has not already won two races shall he entitled to an allowance of 5 tbs.
7. No whip used in any race shall exceed two feet in length, and if spurs be worn these shall not have rowels.
8. Any objection shall be accompanied by a deposit of $ 10.
9. The maximum fee to a winning jockey shall be §15 and to a losing jockey $5, in the absence of any agreement to ride for a lower sum.
10. Where not otherwise especially mentioned, the Rules of the Race Course will be the same as those adopted by the Straits Racing Association.
11. All communications and inquiries to be addressed to the Honorary Secretary
12. The course will be open for training on 15th March.
J. A. H. HARDIE, Honorary Secretary, Sarawak Turf Club.
    It has been repeatedly suggested that the next race meeting should consist of three shorter afternoons of say 5 and 6 races commencing at 3.30 p.in. instead of 8 races on each of two days, commencing at 2 p.m. This rearrangement, of course, has its pros and cons, and is certainly worthy of serious consideration by the Turf Club Committee.
    It must be remembered that whereas in most other race meetings as many as 8 races take place in one afternoon, a horse usually only races once. In Kuching, however, owing to feto fewer competitors the same pony is often called upon to rato race as many as 3 events with one afternoon with a two-day meeting.
    There is also the question of the interval (now shortened) between events to, be considered, which affects not only the spectators but our worthy friends the Handicapper and other OffiOfficials.


58
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1926.
      MONTHLY REPORTS.
FIRST DIVISION.
Kuching.
December, 1925.
  Supreme Court.—Criminal.— There was one case
this Court, an appeal by Lim In Lian against the
decision of the Resident’s Court wherein defendant
was sentenced to live years' imprisonment under
L.P.C. 408. The appeal was dismissed.
 In the Civil Court an appeal by Chan Qui Yeo
against Chan Kee Ong, trustee to Chan Kee Soon’s
Estate, was upheld, this Court finding that the life
insurance money should be Counted as part of the
estate, the Resident's Court having taken the view
that the life insurance policy was a will in favour
of deceased’s wife and children and separate from
the estate.
  Resident’s Court.—Criminal.—There were five
cases with four convictions and one acquittal.
Chong Jok See was sentenced to three years' under
I.P.C. section 451.
Civil.—Four cases with claims amounting to
Sentah and Shrak to open up rubber gardens. Each
applicant has been allotted three acres each at a
rental of 50 cents an acre a year, but on the condition
that such lots are not transferable than to others of
the same race.
Mr. F. G. Carpenter, Acting District Officer,
reports as follows:—
   District Court —73 cases were heard of which only
five were civil claims. Of the 68 criminal cages, 51
 convictions were obtained and seventeen acquittals.
There were eight assault cases, three theft, two cheating
and 29 offences against Municipal By-laws.
 Fines amounted to $168, and fees $134.15 Claims
to the value of $1,414.36 were dealt with.
   Magistrates’ Court.—94 cases came forward involv-
ing claims to the value of $1,381.60 and for which
 fees amounted to $218.
   Police Court — A total of 43 cases were brought
for hearing in the Police Court Of these, thirty-
 eight convictions were obtained and five acquittals.
 There were seven cases of theft and only three of
 assault. Fines amounted to $260
 Courts General.—Total cases heard 210, of which
 111 were criminal offences, and 99 civil. Of the
 criminal charges 89 convictions and 22 acquittals
were adjudged. Fines totalling $423 were indicted.
 Fees Collected amounted to $352.15, and value of
$ 1,495.66 settled. Chop Sin Ban Huat claimed a half share in a rubber garden against Chop Tan, Thiam Joo, the amount of claim being $30,900. The case is still sub judice.
  There were two appeals against the decision of the District Court of which one was upheld and the other dismissed.
  Datus' Court -Fines amounted to $28.80 and fees $7.25.
  At the beginning of the month 1 was at Bau, having  arrived there from Lundu by walking overland from Pn. Stungkor and visiting the Dyak villages on the way.
  There were no matters of importance awaiting my attention so the District Officer took me and Inchi Mohamed Zin a tour round the cum try in his “Beetle.” The whole district seemed most prosperous and the Opening up of roads for small motor traffic has benefitted all alike. There are now over forty miles open ? to such traffic.
  The Chinese bazaars in the outlying districts were in a rather dilapidated condition, bin the owners have I now agreed to repair them with belian attap roofs and have already ordered their timber from Lundu.
  Mrs. Aplin and myself returned to Kuching on the 3rd in the Young Harry from Siniawan.
  Pay for the three Mosque Officials at Muara Tuang Samarahan was sanctioned, there being a big Malay population in this part of the river.
  At the end of the year all deposit monies were handed over to the Treasury and a new system of keeping accounts will start from the New Year.
  The Batu Kawa Pork farm was let out for 1926 at a rental of $3,610 for a year, which is double that for this year. On the 16th I accompanied H. H. the Rajah to Sibu and was away until the 22nd.
The. offices were closed on 25th and 26th.
  Mr F. G. Carpenter, Acting District Officer, and Mr. Ennion visited Batu Kawa on the 7th, returning to Kuching again on the 13th.
  This district is generally a centre where bad characters collect, and inland is chiefly populated by Chinese. Mr. Carpenter reports that he visited the whole district and settled several minor disputes. He was told to approach the Chinese with regard to building a more substantial bazaar and he informs me of their willingness to do so. The present bazaar is roofed with leaf attaps and in most cases leaf walls. His report is attached below. This part of the  country will now be visited as often possible. There have been numerous applications by Dyaks from
claims dealt with to $2,795.96.
   Eleven charges of assault, ten of theft, and thirty-
four offences against Municipal Regulations were
disposed of.
   Choo Song, an old offender, was imprisoned nine
months and ordered six strokes for his fourth offence
of picking pockets.
   General.—On the 7th, accompanied by Mr. Ennion,
I left for Batu Kawa district. We proceeded by car
to 7th mile and walked on to Batu Kitang, where
we stayed overnight. On the following morning I
heard a few petty complaints while Mr Ennion
proceeded to Kranji to make certain Police investiga-
tions. In the afternoon we proceeded to Batu Kawa
where Chop Wha Hong kindly placed his estate
bungalow at our disposal. On the night of the 8th
we walked through the bazaar which is in a very
dilapidated condition.
   On the 9th we walked to Sungei Moyan Estate,
owned by Bong Siong Fah of Singapore. This
estate is kept up in perfect condition and should
prove a good incentive to other smaller owners on
nearby estates. I am sorry to say, however, that
the neighbouring owners do not appear to hold the
same point of view. The Sungei Moyan Estate has
applied for an extension of 3,000 acres, which, in
my opinion, should be granted, as it is this type of
plantation which is required in the country, which
also is all too scarcely met.
   The Chinese at Batu Kawa are not well pleased
with the bazaar as they are afraid of fire. The
various walls are fairly rotten and the roofing is of
leaf attap throughout. Further the two sides of the
road are so adjacent as to mike the place extremely
dangerous in the event of fire. The Chinese are
willing to build a new bazaar either on the present
site with some additional land or across river near
the Pengkalan at the end of Batu Kawa road. This
matter is being looked into.
   We visited all the Malay Kampongs in the district
and found the people comfortable and fairly prosper-
ous. Some petty cases were brought forward for
hearing at Batu Kawa and others were reported.
Rajak was kept busy inspecting lands and reporting
on various garden matters.
   On the 12th we walked to Sungei Tengah, inspect-
ing a few places pointed out by Rajak as likely to
come under litigation in the near future en route.
There was one theft case at Sungei Tengah, this
was dismissed. We returned to Kuching on the
13th in m.l. Ranger, accompanied by Mr. Fenwick.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1926.
59
Sadong.
December, 1925.
  Mr. A. L. Honore, Officer-in-Charge, reports as
follows:—
  Court.—In the District Court, Chom was fined
$50 for selling inferior rice as first quality. On
several previous occasions he has been warned for
similar dealing. Manjar having served over four
months on remand in gaol for accidentally wounding
Gower in the knee with a gun was released on the
return of Gower from hospital. There were the
usual number of civil cases and one or two other
small cases in the Magistrate’s Court.
  Prisoners.—The average number for the month
was ten. The gang was employed in the general
upkeep of the roads and ditches.
  P. W.D.—The coolies were also kept at work on
the loads and bridges. The roads are in a very soft
state and the banks under bridges are m many cases 
giving way. Stones were laid down for a small dis- 
tance on one of the kampong roads and has proved 
satisfactory.
  Health.—There is nothing that calls for mention 
under this head.
  Medical.—A total number of ninety-two patients
were treated, some coming two or more times. This
number was made up as follows : —
  European one, Dyaks 28, Chinese 40, Sikhs two,
Malays twenty, and Tamil one.
  There were fourteen admissions into hospital and
the number remaining from last month was twenty-
four thus totalling thirty-eight. Twenty-six were
discharged cured, one died and one was sent to
Kuching, ten therefore remaining.
  The case sent to Kuching was one of simple frac-
ture of the femur and ribs. The patient left for
Kuching the same day.
  The death was due to pulmonary tuberculosis.
  Forty-seven injections for yaws have been given
at the Dispensary.
  Two operations of abscesses were performed under
local anaesthetic and also a few minor operations.
  Education— The Chinese infant school at Sedan
was closed down at the request of the schoolmaster
as attendance there does not justify its continuation.
It appears the school is situated in a place that makes
it very hard for the children to reach. The amalga-
mated Roman Catholic and Chinese school at
Tabekang is on the other hand well attended, both
masters appearing to be very keen.
  General.—I left the station on the 7th to make
further inquiries into and examine other witnesses
with regard to the accusation brought by the Orang
Kaya of Temong against the Native Officer of Tabe-
kang. I held Court at Gedong on the same afternoon
leaving for Tabekang the next day. Not being able,
to arrive at a satisfactory proving of the case, I
decided to proceed to Temong itself. I reached
Tabedoo on the 10th and proceeded to Temong the
next morning and found everything pointing to the
justification of the Dyaks. As for tile escaped
prisoner ex Orang Kaya Layu it is certain lie is in
hiding at Temong and is still really Orang Kaya and
holds the district in fear of him. After returning to
Tabekang I went to examine the new rentis dividing
the Ris and Lanchang districts of which the Ris
complain. The explanation was that the same name
is given to two totally different hills and the surveyors
took the wrong one. On the 14th I returned to
Tabekang.
  On the 23rd Mr. Barnes and Mr. Calvert visited
the station to spend Christmas at the mines, Messrs.
B. D. Binnie and F. H. Pollard passed through on
their way to Limbang. On the 27th I left for Kuch-
ing and was still away at the end of the month.
Rainfall for the month was 12’65.
  Shipping.—Calls were made during the month as follows:—
        S.S. L'Aubaine	...	4 times
        S.S Alice Lorraine	...	once
        S.S. Gladys	...	once
        S.J. Sri Sadong	...	4 tunes
        M.L. Muaratebas	...	twice
Pce. Sri Mas Iqan                   once
Pce. Sri Mukah	...	once
Trade.—The local Trade Returns for comparison
with last year are as follows :—
Imports.
    December 1925 $41.310
             1924	23,770
Exports. $51,433.80
32,813.00
Bau, Upper Sarawak.
December, 1925.
  Mr. F. H. Kortright, District Officer, reports as
follows:—
  The Divisional Officer, accompanied by Inchi
Mohamed Zin, visited the district on his return over-
land from Lundu at the beginning of the month.
  On the 7th Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee,
with Dayangs Leonora, Elizabeth and Vava, visited
Upper Sarawak. They received a very hearty wel-
come from a large gathering of Chinese and Natives
and a firework display was given in honour of their
visit.
  The Orang Kaya and Pengarah of Jagoi Staas
came to report that their Kampongs had split up
and ten doors had moved to a site nearer the Dutch
border A notice of warning was sent to these
people that if they trespassed over the border they
did so at their own risk.
  The Serambu Dyaks cleared the scrub and over-
hanging branches along the telephone line between
Batu Kitang and Bau while the Skiat Dyaks cleared,
that along all the other roads.
  Numerous complaints have been made agajnst
Orang Kaya Pa Ngadi of Singghi, and as he now,
seldom lives in the Kampong and has no control,
over bis people it is proposed to ask him to resign,
and to elect a new man early next year.
  On the 24th I went to Kuching to spend Christ-
mas week. Owing to very heavy incessant rains the
road was impossible to make the journey by car.
H. D. APLIN, Divisional Officer.
SADONG COLLIERY.
January, 1926.
  The output, export, local consumption, conversion to coke and coal stock figures for the month were as follows :—
1st January stock balance	...	351.03 tons.
January gross output	...	1,916.19 „
Total 2,268.02 ,,
Shipped ...	... 1,258.07 tons
Consumed by boilers and		.
    conversion into coke 379.07 „
		1,637.14
Stock balance ...	...	630.08 tons
  Conditions obtaining below ground were much' the same as those reported for the previous month.
  Messi s. J. R. Barnes, Superintendent of Telegraphs, and H. M. Calvert, Government Auditor, returned, to Kuching by the s.l. L'Aubaine on the 4th.


60
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1926.
One, Lam Kam, Chinese miner, employed at No. 8 Mine, received rather a severe injury to his spine at the beginning of his shift on the morning of the 22nd, and was sent for treatment at the General Hospital by s.l. L.’Aubaine the same day.
As it has been very difficult to obtain belian attaps locally except in small quantities ar. a ridiculously high price ($ 120 per lakh), I proceeded to the Upper Simunjan district on the 15th to interview the Dyaks residing there about working amps required for Government use. The Dyaks invariably welcomed the idea and promised to deliver the attaps at Towkay Ah Bok's shop on the Lake, at $50 per lakh, as soon as the padi harvest is over, the royally and cost of transit to Simunjan wharf over and above this being paid by Government.
Defaulting Malay timber workers who had taken out advances to work timber a year ago were brought before the Court and kindly warned by the Officer-in-Charge. This has already had the desired effect, and quantities of wood are now arriving almost daily.
The rainfall for the mouth was 20'25 inches.
J. W. EVANS,
Manager.
SECOND DIVISION.
—?—
Simanggang.
December 1925.
Court.—Resident’s Court.—Only one case came before this Court namely Chop Kim Heng vs. Chop Seng Joo claim for $2,000 and interest, the claim was dismissed.
District Court.—Ah Leng of Debak was sentenced to one year's R. I. for absconding under advances ; Akul (f), Sarong (f), and Ratek all of Saratok, were before the Court on a charge of procuring abortion and concealing same. Akul (f) was sentenced to one year’s R. I. and the other two defendants fined ; Baki was sentenced to one year's R. I. for breach of trust; Government vs. Ah Jak, Ah Pat, and Ah Moi, of Betong, charge assault. Ah Jak and Ah Moi were fined $25 each, and Ah Pat second offence sentenced to three months’ R. I. and loses his pledge of $100. There were numerous other cases and also a great number came before the Magistrate’s Court, but none of any importance.
General.—The weather during the month was extremely wet and stormy.
The fruit season is not a success. A great number of Malays from the coast station arrived and proceeded to the Skrang and Lubok Anta in order to buy durian fruit.
The reports on the hill padi are very promising and natives are still planting out young padi plants on the swamp land. It is very difficult to get Dyak rice or padi as the Dyaks gel a good price for para rubber and in consequence do not bling down rice for sale, as this oommodiiy is difficult to transport, especially from the 
Undup.
On the 7th Mr. R. L. Daubeny and Mr. D. E. Calver, Assistant Conservator of Forests, left for Kalaka and Saribas, accompanied by Datu Haji Dulrasid, the former returning again on the 22nd and latter on the 19th.
Over 100 Dyak coolies from above Lubok Antu arrived during the month, they were signed on as coolies for the Sarawak Oilfields Limited, Miri.
Abang Indut, Native Officer of Betong, Saribas, was dismissed his post and also fined $100 for buying stolen property. This Native Officer's behaviour has been very unsatisfactory for some considerable time.
   On the 28th I left for Lingga in m.l. One and boarded s,s. L’Aubaine, setting sail for Kuching in order to attend the New Year festivities.
   Medical.—A total of 336 people were treated during the month as follows;—Europeans 2, Malays 38, Chinese 24, Dyaks 272.
   202cases of N A.B. Injections for yaws, etc , were given during the mouth, and 7,653 people were vaccinated.
   Public Works. The prisoners average I 58.96 and were employed on deepening the Sembauh road ditches, also digging out the dock of m.l. One and general upkeep of ornamental grounds.
   Cattle.—Simanggang herd number 100 head, and one head killed for sale Lubok Antu herd number 39 head.
   Agriculture.—3 permits to plant pepper and 108 to plant rubber were issued dining the month.
   Forestry—The Assistant Conservator of Forests reports as follows:—
   The Assistant Conservator accompanied the District Magistrate on a round of duty in the Kalaka and Saribas rivers, and visited the whole of the Government Stations in these districts. Preliminary arrangements were made for the extension of Forest Department control in these localities during 1926.
   Towards the end of the month the Assistant Conservator made a detailed inspection of a jelutong working area in the Lingga District. The results indicate that the destruction of the jelutong trees throughout the country may be even more advanced than was feared. Out of 184 trees examined, only 13 were found to be in condition for further tapping (and of these 13, 11 were already badly wounded). The remaining 171 trees were either killed by bad tapping or undersized.
  Trade.—The principal exports were:—
Gutta .Jelutong
Pepper White
Pepper Black
Para Rubber
Para Scrap
Raw Sago
99 picitk valued at            $ 2,582
474	do.
22 ½ 	do.
145.60 do.
42.10 do.
210 do.
do.	86,773
do.	1,861
do.	26.427
do.	7,892
do.	640
Imports. $11,595 44,983
Exports.
$77,728
38,558
December, 1925
„ 1924
   Mr. R. L. Daubeny reports as follows on his
trip to the Kalaka and Saribas: —
   Kalaka Court, Sarawak.—The following cases
were settled: Two cases of theft when Udak and
Jeman were given 6 months and 3 months res-
pectively ; Abang Haji Abdullah vs Haji Amit,
sago dispute, the land in question being divided
into two, between the contestants; Lim Chiew
Hai vs. Lee Pak Soi and Minah (f) adultery,
defendants being fined $60 each; Government
vs. Akul (f) and Ratek, concealment of birth by
secret disposal of dead body, section 318 l.P.C.
This case was referred to Resident's Court, Sim-
anggang, as the mother of the child, Sudan (f),
died at the same time under suspicious circum-
stances. The remains of the child's corpse were
ordered to be exhumed
   Court, Kabong-Liah (f.) vs. Man, use of
criminal force to dishonour plaintiff, section 355
l.P.C. This charge was found to be untrue by the
Court and both parties were fined for adultery 60
real 6 suku, another 30 reals and 3 suku being im-
posed on defendant as he was the instigator of the
deed. Langin (f.), plaintiff’s witness, was also
fined 60 real 6 suku for giving false evidence in the
case. One small debt case settled.
   P.W.D.—The prisoners at Kabong and Saratok
have been engaged on the Ornamental Grounds.
One prisoner at Saratok acting as cowman. The
Chinese at Saratok were given three months' time to
complete the road behind the bazaar, which they


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1926.
61
had not yet started. I inspected the herd at Ka-
bong and Saratok and found same to be in good
order. The wireless station at Saratok is finished
and appears to have been well built, the kitchen
having a cement flooring and being joined to the
main building by a covered way. The wireless
masts are ready but not yet erected Tenders were
invited for the new jail and two rooms for the
barracks, only two being received, Abang Kawi
$1,030, and Jagan $1,035. for both buildings. These
tenders were not accepted as they exceeded the sum
allotted for these buildings. Further tenders were
invited. The well at Kabong was also inspected
and found to be full of water. The tank, however, 
appeared to be slightly eaten by rust.
  General Miscellaneous.—The Chinese at Saraiok 
made  formal complaint with regard to the Sibu 
Chinese (Teo Chiew) when they come over to Sara- 
tok and purchase rubber at a higher price than the 
Saratok Chinese can afford, thus reducing their 
chances of trade. Whereas the Saratok Chinese 
can only afford to give $1.60 for rubber, the Sibu
Chinese will give $1.80 for the same rubber, thus
the Saratok Chinese are losing a great amount of cus- 
tomers. I informed them that the matter would be 
put before the Resident on my return. P.C. Daud, 
Saratok, wishes to retire at the end of the year; 
he was told to find a substitute first. P.C. Sat has 
resigned and P.C. Terungai has taken his place, 
P.C. Usop, Kabong, also wishes to retire at the end 
of the year ; he was told to find a substitute first. 
Owing to a heavy fresh in the river and bad weather 
there were not many Dyaks at Saratok. Penghulus 
Nyalu and Undom only arrived. I visited Roban 
on the 13th, Sunday, and found everything correct 
there. The contract for tapping Government rubber 
trees round the Fort was given to P. Corpl. Remat 
on half shares agreement. The cash at Kabong and 
Saratov was checked and found to be all correct, a
surplus of $6.15 being found however in the Saratok
cash. Left for Pusa from Kabong on 15th Decem-
ber and arrived the same day at 3 p.m.
  Saribas Court, Debak.—The following cases were
settled: Bidah (f.) vs. Makoh and Ayang (f.)
adultery, defendants being fined 20 catties each ;
Timok vs. Gelegar, sago appeal dismissed; Peh
Yong vs. Tassan theft, defendant and Bisai fined
$15 for using plaintiff’s rubber chop; Abang
Tamm vs. Abang Ahir, rubber garden dispute case
dismissed; Government vs. Malina (f.) and
Cherembang, unlawful wedlock, case adjourned for
settlement by Resident Court Simanggang. Engka-
bang vs. Leman, Liah (f.), Beluk, appeal re sago
dispute, dismissed ; P.C. Jemat and Abang Tamin 
fined 15 real for spreading scandal in re Abang 
Sedik Native Officer, Debak.
  Pusa.—There were only two cases here, one of
debt, and one claim for damages against P.C.
Leong by a Chinaman in the bazaar, $4.50 being
the price of a goat. This was allowed as P.C.
Leong had previously agreed to pay.
  Betong.—The following people were summoned
for breach of Quarantine Regulations : Ah Chau
fined $50, Ah La $50, Jabu §50, Chaudu (J.) $50,
Ah Loi $100, Basik costs $1.25, Entri one picul
and costs, Deli 20 catties, Guntor 30 catties,
Chundi 30 catties, Awang Sapong $10. The
following were sentenced to three months’ im-
prisonment, Luta, Braok, Manggas, Chagat Ujai,
and Jamming. The following cases were also
heard : Fah Chin vs. Soo Long, Sook Thai and
Ah Wee, breach of Pork Farm Regulations and
attempted assault, defendants being fined $25 each
and ordered to deposit $500 each as security for
good behaviour for one year from date ; Ah Yew and
Hee Chong vs. Chop Fah Chin, breach of Market
Rate Regulations, case dismissed; Government vs.
Tan Nam Sin, Sim Eng Kee and Ah Nga, breach of
Opium Regulations, case dismissed; Kumi (J.) vs.
P.C. Ugah. trespass, adjourned from N.C., defen-
dant was lined 30 catties and Tambi Bujang prisoner
given one month extra for receiving bribe from P.C.
Ugah ; The Rev. W. Linton vs. Ah Tong, debt and
breach of verbal agreement, defendant being ordered
to pay the debt in full and return to work for one
month or else pay plaintiff $25. Defendant was also
fined $10 for breaking into plaintiff’s kitchen. Tek
Man vs. Ah Lim, assault, defendant being fined $5
and costs; P.C. Entri vs. Sumbang, theft, defen-
dant being imprisoned for 1 ½  years ; Government
vs. Abang Indut, purchasing stolen property section
411, case referred to Resident’s Court Simanggang
for settlement. Inquiry held into letter from Abang
Indut re Ah Nen and Abang Amat. Tong On vs.
Kim Wha Heng, breach of Spirit Farm Regulations,
case adjourned for examination of defendant’s shop
and accounts.
  P.W.D., Betong.—Tambi Bujang (prisoner) has
been engaged in clearing out the drain round the
Court House and improving certain parts of the
road past the Police Barracks. The bazaar was in
good condition. The roads were in a bad state
owing to the heavy rains that bad fallen lately.
  Debak.—Everything was in order on my arrival.
Glangan put forward a request for building two
new shops on the up river end of the bazaar; he was
told to wait approval by Resident. Wood for the
new shops on the down river side are ready for
working. The Kampong road has been well re-
paired, all the muddy parts being replaced by gravel
the path from the Fort to the main road has also
been gravelled.
  General Miscellaneous, Debak.—Penghulu Mun ar-
rived down and received bis certificate and daching,
he was at first unwilling to become a Penghulu but
agreed to after a short while. The Native Officer
Abang Sedik reported P.C. Jemat for causing trouble
by repeatedly interfering with his orders, and
instructing people behind his back.
  Betong.—There seem to be a certain trouble with
regard to the pork farm, which people state has
not been killing pig regularly ; the Chinese in the
bazaar are always wanting to kill pig and the pork
farm will not let them. Vide the above cases the
evidence against the pork farm was insufficient.
On my arrival I heard a report that a fresh outbreak
of smallpox had occurred at Tanjong Pandam.
Dresser Edwards was instructed to proceed there
at once and if the report was true to vaccinate as
many people as possible at Pusa. The dresser had
not returned up to the time of my departure.
Saribas.
December, 1925.
The Court Writers, Betong and Debak, report as follows :—
Court.—There were numerous oases beard by Mr. R. L. Daubeny who visited Pusa, Debak and Betong, otherwise very few cases came before the Native Courts on account of the outbreak of smallpox.
Fines amounted to $977.06.
General.—During the month all Dyaks and Malays were called out to clear and repair the Tisak road as far as Bukit Sangku. Jungle was felled 10 fathoms on each side of the road making it sufficiently wide for the erection of a telephone hne.
The sum of $5,000 was remitted to the Simanggang Treasury and $1,500 paid out on letters of credit.
Agriculture.—60 Permits to plant para rubber were issued during the month.
Medical.—The smallpox epidemic died out towards end of December. The dressers Joo Hin and Attenborough returned to Kuching on the m.l.


62
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1926.
Bintang Trang on the 20th. Dresser Edward Chia
visited Tanjong Pandam also Bladin and found a
few cases of smallpox all of a mild form. Edward
Chia has vaccinated in all 2,440 people, and Dresser
Joon Hin 2,154 people. There are still a great
number of Dyaks who require vaccination and this
will be done as soon as there is sufficient lymph.
Trade.—The principal exports were:—Gutta Jelutong21piculs valued at.. $	210Para Rubber1,160    do.152,291Para Scrap178    do....	10,995Raw sago1,400    do.3,445Pepper (white)    3    do.260Pepper (black)    1    do.50Imports.Exports.December, 1925 ...$93,923$173,286December, 1924  51,560   51,301Kalaka.
                December, 1925.
The Court Writers, Kabong and Saratok, report as
follows :—
  Court.—A great number of cases came before the
Native Courts and fines in all Courts amounted
to $830.10.
  General.—Mr. R. L. Daubeny, accompanied by
Datu Abaug Haji Dulrasid and Mr. D. E. Calver,
Assistant Conservator of Forests, arrived at Kabong
on the 7th. Saratok and Roban were visited and
they returned to Simanggang via the Saribas on the
15th.
  The sum of $5,000 was remitted to the Simang-
gang Treasury.
  Mohamat Ali, teacher in the Government school,
left for Simanggang on the 20th in order to take up
his appointment, as Inspector of Schools, Second
Division. A teacher to take his place will be
appointed in due time.
  The Saratok Roban and Debak roads were cleared
and repaired during the month.
  The Rev. W. Linton arrived at Saratok from
Betong on the 30th in order to visit the S.P.G.
Mission School.
  Agriculture.—88 Permits to plant para rubber were issued and one to plant sago.
  Cattle.—The Kabong herd number 35 head, one was killed for sale; the Saratok herd number eight.
  Shipping.—Eight sailing vessels and three motor schooners entered and cleared during the month.
Trade.—The principal Exports were :—-
Gutta jelutong          311 piculs valued at                       $ 5,195
Pepper, white	38	piculs	do.
    Pepper, black	19	piculs	do.
    Para rubber	319 ½ 	piculs	do.
    Para scrap	59	piculs	do.
    Raw sago	940	piculs	do.
    Sugar nipah	79	tins	do.
   December, 1925
   December, 1924
1,880
640
48,490
5,040
2.420
   169
Exports.
$74,598
Imports. $74,350 26,172
The following are the trade returns for the
Division, viz.:—
Imports.      Exports.
  December, 1925 ... $ 209,868.00    $ 326,612.00 
  Total to 31.12.25 ... 1,687,090.70    2,553,982.00 
  Total to 31.12.24 ... 1.078,633.72    1,257,387.63
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER, Resident Second Division.
          THIRD DIVISION.
Sibu.
December, 1925.
   General.—His Highness the Rajah arrived in the
Rajah of Sarawak on 17th, and was brought ashore
in m.l Jean by the Acting Resident and the Acting
District Officer, Sibu. A Guard of Honour was
furnished by the Police at the Fort landing stage
where the other European and Native Chiefs were
assembled. In accordance with His Highness’
wishes there was no other official ceremony. Ac-
companying His Highness were Mr. H. D. Aplin,
Divisional Officer, First Division, Mr, E. Parnell,
Controller of Government Monopolies, and Captain
C. D. Le Gros Clark. The next morning His High-
 ness met some of the leading Chinese and discussed
 various matters including their petition with regard
to shipping facilities in Sibu.
   On the 19th His Highness gave an audience to the
Malay Headmen who brought up various matters
for His Highness' consideration, and later on the
same morning met a number of Dyak Chiefs who
had several matters to put before His Highness.
Penghulu Dana of Assan, a very old Chief, was
granted the title of Orang Kaya On the 19th,
His Highness visited the Telok Selalo-Assan Canal,
and after inspection, ordered a definite abandonment
of the scheme. The next day His Highness attended
the offices again and settled many outstanding matters.
His Highness finally left for Kuching on the 22nd.
During his stay His Highness inspected many of the
Government buildings in Sibu and visited the bazaars
and kampongs.
   Mr. W. F. Dick, Acting District Officer, Sibu, was
away on duty at Rejang from the 2nd to 5th where,
in the presence of Datu Haji Azahari and local Rejang
Chiefs, he installed Hadji Bahaudin as Chief Native
Officer of the Rejang District vice Penghulu Abang
Adeng, deceased.
 On the 6th I left for Kapit, accompanied by Mr.
Le Sueur, Acting Assistant District Officer. We
 reached Kanowit the same afternoon where I called
the Chinese shopkeepers up about the disgraceful
state of the bazaar. In spite of frequent warnings
the Chinese there are apparently unable to do any-
thing to remedy this state of affairs and a final
warning was given, which, if disregarded, will result
in a Government Order to demolish those buildings
which are unsafe or insanitary. We started the
next day for Kapit calling in at Song. Here the
Chinese agreed to build a new bazaar across river,
which move was sanctioned by His Highness the
Tuan Muda. Lt was pointed out, however, that pro-
per shophouses must be built and plans would have
to have my approval before building operations
 started. The Fort at Song was in a cleaner condition than is usually the case, and houses are being built
in the Malay quarter. A boundary was fixed to demar-
cate the limits of this and the Government compound-
The bazaar was in its usual dirty state which is,
however, not totally unavoidable as persons have
 been allowed to plant rubber gardens right up the
bazaar and there is no possible room for further
extension or for storage room.
   We reached Kapit that day, and on the next day,
 Mr. Le Sueur took over temporary charge of that
 District. Whilst in Kapit many questions cropped
up—especially those concerning the Chinese Ceme-
tery, Chinese School, extension of Malay bazaar and
the reservation of Government land round about the
station. Orders were given that no rubber was
to be planted in certain areas near the station, and
any that had been planted recently was to be pulled
out. I returned to Sibu on the 9th.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1926.
63
  Messrs. R. D. Horton, R. A. Miller-Hallett and
T. Corson arrived in the Namhoi on the 13th. Mr.
Horton to take up his new duties of Officer-in-Charge
Customs, Trade, Shipping. Monopolies and Municipal
Departments, and Mt . Miller-Hallett to resume bis
duties as Land Officer.
  Amongst others passing through Sibu during the
month were Mr. P. M Adams, District Officer Oya,
who accompanied His Highness the Rajab to
Kuching; Mr. P. Down on telegraphic business;
Messrs. Lamplough and Tull of the Island Trading
Company, Limited, Selalang, and Mr. H. Gild of
Tanjong Blatok. Both Mr. Lamplough and Mr.
Gild were in search of labour for their respective
companies and succeeded in obtaining a number of
Dyaks for work in Selalang and Tanjong Blatok
respectively.
  Mr. Le Sueur arrived from Kapit on Christmas
Eve, and towards the end of the month the following
Penghulus were in Sibu :—Rantai, Dana, Koh, Ugak,
Matu. Langgong, Nglambong, Sureng, Ikau, Nibong,
Assan, Laja, Jantieng, Briak, Sirai, and Meringgai.
On the 30th I held meeting of these Chiefs in the
Court House. Others present were the Acting 
District Officer, Sibu, the Acting Assistant 
District Officer, Kapit, Datu Hadji Azahari,
Native Officer, Abang Elijah, Native Officer,
Abang Latip, Native Officer, and Hadji Gapor, Native
Officer. A number of subjects concerning the
Dyaks were discussed, and views were exchanged
between upriver Chiefs. Christmas and Boxing
Days were observed as holidays.
  B. J. Nibong, Court Writer at Matu, arrived
unexpectedly in Sibu during the month and reported
that he had handed over his duties to Chin Nyan, a
former Court Writer. Nibong was reprimanded
for leaving his district without orders and ordered
to return for duty there again at once. The follow-
ing Native Officers reported their arrival in Sibu
towards the end of the year: Hadji Yaman of Matu,
Hadji Brahim of Daro,Hadji Bahaudin of Rejang, and
Abang Hadji Metair of Bintang. A number of
sub-station Court Writers were granted short leave
to attend the regatta.
  A petition was received from the majority of the
members of the Subordinate Service in Sibu with
regard to the office hours then in vogue. It was
maintained that these caused inconvenience to clerks
and an earlier closing hour was proposed. After
asking for opinions of Heads of Departments the
matter was referred to His Highness the Rajah in 
Sibu. His Highness instructed me to use my own 
discretion and, after consideration, I issued instruc-
tions that the Kuching hours should be followed
throughout the whole Division, i.e.,8.30 a.m. to 3.30 
p.m. with one hour off for food. A marriage of some
importance took place on 24th when Seripa Aini, 
daughter of Tuanku Ali, was married to Wan 
Abdullah, son of Tuanku Sulong of Kuching.
  Judicial.—Resident’s Court.—The following cases 
came before the Resident’s Court during the
month : Monopolies Department vs. Wong Sui Ing
and Kho Ei Tieh, Manager and Clerk respectively
of one of the Government opium divans. The former
was fined $50 and dismissed, and the latter received
three months’ imprisonment; C. Bee Chiang vs.
Chan Ah Tat, fraud case, referred back to the Lower
Court; Chiang Hin vs. Kong Mau Chiong and
Layam (f.), adultery, both charges dismissed.
Police vs. Ah Kee, harbouring an escaped prisoner.
Section 130. Dismissed.
  District Court.—Ah Tho was sentenced to six
months’ imprisonment for theft; prison mandor
Wahap three months for criminal neglect of duty,
and Yeo Leong, Ah Ngo add Ah Hock one month
each for committing an affray, and Teo Ah Eng (f.)
two months for breach of Contagious Diseases Order.
  Chan Tat was fined $500 and Chan Wai $250
under sections 423 and 109 ; Tan Seng Hock $150 for
contravention of the Arms Order; Chiew Fun $25
for offering a gratification to a Government servant;
Semada, a Government Dresser, $25 for assault;
Ah Chiew $25 under section 456; and Tang Soon
Chong and Ngoi Chin Pang received two days’ im-
prisonment each for offences against Police Regula-
tions.
  A number of civil claims came before this Court
but none of special importance.
  Magistrate's and Police Court.—The Police
brought the usual number of prosecutions and
obtained convictions in most cases. The Magistrate's
Court dealt with a number of petty debt cases.
  Fines amounted to $953.40 and fees to $761.76
(Sibu only).
149 documents were registered in Sibu.
  District Office.—From the report of the Acting
District Officer, Mr. W. F. Dick, I extract the follow-
ing details : Penghulu Sureng of B. Igan reports
several cases of unregistered guns in bis district.
Efforts will be made to prosecute these persons. A
Malay named Bet died under very tragic circum-
stances in Sibu owing to the omission on the part of
his friends to call in medical assistance. The jury
brought in a verdict of death by natural causes but
added a rider that the other people in the house
deserve severe censure. The Acting District Officer
banded over charge of the Monopolies Department
to Mr. Horton on the 14ch. A Foochow named
Ting Choon Sang was drowned on the 11th whilst
being towed in his boat by s.l. Ulu of Sarawak
Steamship Co., Ltd. An inquest was held.
  The Sibu Municipal Board had several meetings
during the month and discussed many important
matters, including meat tables, latrines, slaughter-
houses and street lighting. It is hoped, now that
there is an Officer-in-Charge of the Department, that
many things which have perforce been put off can
now be put through, although the lack of any other
staff is a drawback.
  P. W. D.—The erection of a new bungalow and the
re-erecting of bungalow No. IV are progressing well
and both should be finished by the end of next
month. Contracts for two more bungalows have
been signed in Kuching. A contract was made for
cutting 9-incb holes in the walls of the existing bazaar
drains to run off water from under the houses. On
the 16th the boiler from the Selalo-Assan Canal was
put into commission at the waterworks, and on the
21st the new Tangye duplex pump started work.
The increase of water available is noticeable.
  The usual routine work was carried on but labour
is short and very expensive. The extension to Sibu
jail was nearly completed at the end of the month
and amongst minor works carried out were cement
drains round bungalow No. 1, repairs to Tamil lines,
bridges, approaches and compound of one of the
new bungalows, moving part of hedge of the Resi-
dency, various outhouses to Government quarters
and a new back entrance to the Rest House.
  Police and Prisons.—The Officer-in-Charge of
Police, Mr. Audreini, Assistant District Officer, in a
report mentions that the conduct and discipline of
the Police Force has been excellent during the month
and shows great improvement. Special attention
was paid to the non-commissioned officers, and
classes were started to teach constables reading and
writing. Two men were recruited. Mr. Andreini
reports that the prison discipline was not good and
two men were whipped for breach of prison regula-
tions. Mandor Wahap was sentenced by the Court
to a term of imprisonment for allowing prisoners to
leave his gang and also leaving it himself. One
prisoner died in hospital. The average number was.


64
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1926.
70’2 and they were mostly employed on ornamental grounds and general public works. One female prisoner was sent to Kuching jail.
  Land. Office.—The Divisional Land Officer reports as under : The exchange of the old Rubber Garden Registration Certificates for regular Occupation Tickets proceeded briskly during the month and the amount of quit rent collected was much in excess of the figure for the previous month.
  Work in connection with this will probably increase very greatly in the New Year and it is hoped to carry out a small series of field collections during the next three months. If such prove popular, as I think they should, they will tend to ease the situation in the Land Office in March when it is liable to become absolutely unmanageable.
  Mr. Miller-Hallett returned from furlough on 13th, and between that date and the end of the year he disposed of several matters which had been hung up owing to pressure of work.
  During his visit to the station towards the end of the month His Highness the Rajah signed a number of grants for building plots in the bazaar, and it is hoped that others will be ready shortly.
  Forest Office.— The Assistant Conservator of Forests, Mr. D. 8. McLeod, has submitted a copy of bis monthly diary. He reports that some Foochows are trespassing on the Bukit Lima Forest Reserve, Mr. F. J. Wright, S. C. Forest Ranger, was away at Tanjong Blatok from 11th to 17th.
  Medical.—Dr. L. B. Haye, Acting for Divisional Medical Officer, reports as under :—
  During the month the total number of patients treated at the Sibu Hospital was 523, being an average of seventeen daily.
  333 new patients were treated of which 73 were admitted.
  There were four deaths in the hospital due to the following causes :—
        1 Uraemia.
        1 Sapraemia.
        1 Dysentery
        1 Septic Broncho-Pneumonia.
  Nine operations were performed, 5 under general anaesthetic.
  There were 142 arsenical injections given this month.
  May I state that the. above is taken from Hospital files. As I was not present during this month, any personal observation on my part is impossible.
January, 1926.
  General.—His Highness the Rajah arrived from Kuching in the s.s. Rajah oj Sarawak on the 19th and proceeded to Kapit on the 21st returning here on the 23rd
  The Acting Assistant District Officer of Kapit was absent from the station visiting the Dyaks in the Balleh. There were but few Dyaks in the bazaar as no notice was given of His Highness' visit. One or two matters of minor importance were, however, settled, and permission was given for the building of a Fort at Nanga Gat, and for the formation of a Missionary Settlement of eighty doors of Dyaks at Nanga Pila.
  Song and Kanowit were visited on the return journey on the 23rd, and it was decided that the proposal to move the Song bazaar need not be adopted as the shopkeepers undertook to put the existing bazaar in good order.
  Between Song and Kanowit, and again just below the latter place there appeared to be suitable land for Foochow settlements, and it was arranged that reserves should be made for this purpose if required. Mr. Wong King Huo, member of the Central Advisory Committee, who had been invited by His
Highness to select land for future settlements, was requested to report on this matter to his Committee.
  Amongst other matters decided by His Highness were the following :—
1. Sanction was given for the payment of monthly salaries to all Dyak Penghulus in lieu of shares of fines.
2. The exemption of all native-born subjects of His Highness from payment of land rents on gardens of three acres or less was approved.
8. The sale by auction of the s.l. Mermaid was decided on, and the purchase of three outboard motors for use in the Division sanctioned.
9. The proposed change of name of the sub-station Binatang was not confirmed by His Highness, who gave directions that the new name Bin- tang should be dropped and the former name reassumed.
  His Highness returned to Kuching in the s.s. Rajah of Sarawak on the 25th.
  Returning from sick leave I arrived here on the 19th and resumed my duties as Resident, taking over from Mr. J. B. Archer, who had been acting me.
  Mr. J. A. H. Hardie, Commissioner of Trade and Customs, and Mr. W. Cotterill arrived here on the 19th, the former to inquire into matters connected with his department and the latter to relieve Mr. H. Jacques, the Divisional Treasurer, to whom a month's special leave had been granted.
  Mr. W. F. Dick, the Acting District Officer, left on the 25th to take up a new appointment, Mr. J. B. Archer resuming his duties as District Officer.
  I was at Binatang from the 26th to the 28th examining the land chimed by Foochows and Dyaks. Finding it impossible to decide on any definite boundaries without a proper survey I telegraphed to Kuching for surveyors and for authority to be given to the Land Officer to settle land disputes in this area This request was approved by His Highness the Rajah and Mr. Miller-Hallett. Mr. Pascoe and one surveyor left here for Binatang on the 30th. Two more surveyors are expected from Kuching and I hope that the demarcation of the Foochow holdings in this district will soon lie completed. From a cursory examination of this area it appears to me unlikely that more land will be available for Foochows in the Binatang streams or between this stream and the Tulai, but it is possible that suitable reserves may be made on the true right bank of the Tulai or on the opposite side of the main river.
  Pending the selection of reserves for Chinese settlers the number of Foochow immigrants has been restricted to one thousand for the year. Most of these have already arrived.
The District Officer, Sibu, reports as follows :—
  Judicial. — Resident's Court.—Ek Chung Lee and Ek Chung Lu were sentenced to three months' imprisonment each, under section 193 of the Penal Code, for giving false evidence. Midong and Ajek were fined $150 and $75 respectively for incest, and F. J. Wright and his servant Pudikadu were fined $50 each, the former for an offence against section 13 of the Malay Undang Undang, and the latter for procuring the girl in question. This case was refer- ed from the Native Court.
  District Court.—The following persons were sentenced to terms of imprisonment: Chiong Boon Tong nine months for theft; Lau Siang Choon six months for abetment of a theft under section 109; Sura, a Dyak girl, two months' for breach of Contagious Diseases Order No. IX, 1924; Wee Kim Hui and Tan Ah Phong one month each for assault, and Man bin Ipi, a Malay lad, to one month for theft. This last sentence to be served in the the s.l. Chamois. Lau Ah Ming was fined $100 for an attempt to commit homicide under section 308; Ah Boon $25 for breach of the Opium Monopolies Order ; Makam,


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1926.
65
Samuning and Sungang $10 each for breach of
firearms Order, No. XVII, 1922; Charles Yap $10
for attempting to seduce another man's wife; Chua
Ah Hok $10 for breach of Currency Order No. XV,
1908; Wong Ing Nguong $10 for felling on a
Government Timber Reserve; Kong Siew Chong
and Ngo Seng Peijg $10 each under section 163, and
Lee Lee $10 under section 426.
   In the case of Agong vs. Ab Bok over land a deci-
sion was arrived at and judgment given. Both
parties have, however, asked leave to appeal. An
appeal from the Sibu Native Court was heard before
the District Officer but had not been settled by the
end of the month.
   There were a number of other cases but none
worthy of special mention.
   Magistrate’s and Police Court. —The usual number
of cases came before these Courts.
  Fines and fees in all Courts amounted to $2,386.90.
  Ninety-four deeds were registered.
   District Office.—The Assistant District Officer,
Mr. Andreini, started on a tour through the Foochow
Colony on the 27th and was still awav at the end of ,         tion of the Sibu Police during the month. The
the month. He is visiting each of the eleven areas,             Assistant District Officer has submitted a report
which have been recently constituted and formally
installing the respective headmen. Earlier in the
month a meeting was called by the Acting Resident
and three Foochow members of the Central Advisory
Committee and eleven headmen appointed. At the
same time their respective duties were explained to
these gentlemen who expressed their satisfaction at
His Highness the Rajah’s decision to start the
scheme.
   On the 25th, the Divisional Resident, Mr. H. B.
Crocker, resumed his duties, and Mr. J. B Archer,
District Officer, who had been Acting Resident,
returned to the District Office taking over from the
Acting District Officer, Mr. W F. Dick, who left
Sibu on the 25th on transfer to Baram.
   A number of drowning cases have occurred lately,
the victims being generally Foochows. One man
was drowned at Sungei Assan by the land on which
he was standing subsiding into the river. On the
13th a little Sikh girl aged three, the daughter of
Police Corporal Besin Singh, was drowned by falling
unnoticed from the barracks into the floods below.
   Many Penghulus visited Sibu during the month.
They had nothing special to report. Ugek was
appointed Penghulu of the Binatang district vice
Lani, dismissed. His Highness the Rajah also
directed that Penghulu Saba and Assan of the Sari-
kei should be dismissed. Penghulu Rantai's resigna-
tion was accepted.
   The eclipse of the sun on the 14th caused some
alarm and many Dyaks returned from their farms
and shut themselves up in their houses.
   P. W.D.—The Department has been kept extremely
busy throughout the whole month. With the assis-
tance of Mr. Pascoe of the Survey Department and
Mr. Bishop of the Aerial Surveys Limited, sites were
chosen for the temporary buildings for the latter’s
Company and erection started. By the end of the
month these had been practically completed. They
ere as follows :—
   European quarters to house five persons ; servants’
quarters; mechanics’ quarters ; hangar to take two
seaplanes and a slipway. The hangar presented
many difficulties as spans of forty-five feet had to be
allowed in order to allow the machines to enter and
this, combined with the the height of the building,
made it necessary to construct rather an elaborate
scheme of guying and strutting. The cost of all
these buildings is not excessive.
   Work was continued with the two new bungalows
and one should be ready for occupation in a few weeks
time. The removal and re-erection of bungalow
No. 4 is making satisfactory progress. Other new
buildings erected were temporary barracks for police
(eight rooms) and temporary barracks for prison
warders (three rooms). Tenders were accepted
and contracts signed for the new District Office
($6,225) and Subordinate Service Rest House
($1,110). The latter will be used as a laboratory
and dark room by the Aerial Surveys Limited until
their contract is completed, after which, with a slight
alteration, it will be used for its original purpose.
Tenders were received for the new Government
Offices in the bazaar and for re-erection of bungalow
No. 2. The prices asked, however, were exorbitant,
the former ranging from $9,500 to $25,000 and the
latter $8,000 to $10,000. In both cases the con-
tractors stipulated for partial Government assistance
in the way of materials.
The usual routine work of upkeep of roads and
grounds was carried on and minor repairs were made
to various Government buildings. The Hoods have
caused much damage to bridges and culverts, whilst
most of the roads are much cut up.
Police.— Many changes were made in the composi-
showing that twenty-five recruits joined during the
month composed of fourteen Sikhs and Sepoys, nine
Dyaks, and two Melanaus. Four men (three Indians
and one Malay) retired on pension. Sergeant Gokal
Singh was in Singapore on recruiting duty. Abang
Adeng bin Datu Usop was appointed Sub-Inspector
of Police and left for Kuching towards the end of
the month for a course of training. He has been
attached to the Police since December last and is
already a valuable and keen Police Officer. Abang
Abu Seman bin Datu Ali, who was a recently ap-
pointed junior Native Officer, has also been attached
to the Police in addition to his other duties, and has
taken Abang Adeng’s place for the meanwhile.
His Highness the Rajah has sanctioned an increase
in the strength of the Force which is now made up
as follows:—One Sub-Inspector, one Sergeant-Maj-
or, two Sergeants, three Corporals, eight Lance-Cor-
porals, sixty-eight Constables, and one Detective—a
total of eighty-four men.
Sergeant Jin was promoted Sergeant-Major and
P.C. Putit Lance-Corporal, and three Constables
were transferred to the Prison Department. There
is one vacancy for Sergeant to be filled up. There
are at present a large number of recruits who are,
however, making good progress.
The usual parades were carried out and additional
beats made in the bazaar. An examination in read-
ing and writing in Malay was held during the month
and a number of men succeeded in qualifying for the
extra allowance. Special attention has been paid to
the Non-Commissioned Officers who show improve-
ment. The Police furnished a guard of honour for
His Highness the Rajah on his departure. The
Acting Resident inspected the whole Force on the
19th when the main company and the recruits squads
were put through various exercises.
Prison.—Three Police Constables were transferred
fr nn the Police to the Prison Department, Lias as
Chief Warder, and Makam and Akim as Warders.
Two new maudors were also appointed. The average
number of prisoners was 62. Discipline was fairly
good.
Kapit.
December, 1925.
The Acting Assistant District Officer reports as follows:—
Court.—There were no cases of importance before the Court during the month. Fines and fees amounted to $480.29.


66
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1926.
  General.—Accompanied by the Acting Resident, I arrived at Kapit on the 7th December and look- over charge of the district. The Acting Resident returned to Sibu on the 9th.
  The s.1. Chamois arrived from Sibu on the 23rd with Mr. Corson, and left on the ‘24th with self to attend Sibu Regatta. 1 was still away at the end of the month
  During the month Penghulus Koh, Ugak, Grinang, Patan and Taman Usun Hang visited this station.
  Abang Sleb, Native Officer, Belaga, arrived on the 21st to report and hand in the Government cash Owing io the river being in flood he was unable to return till the 29th. He reports all well in the Belaga district.
  The Rev. Father Klerk of Kanowit stopped for one night on bis way down river from Nanga Pila. He informs me that the padi there is in excellent condition and that Manggoi and his people are doing well.
  Tuai Rumah Abak of the Pelagus reported that some Dyaks under Dana have moved to Blauit, ulu Anap, and are settling there. These Dyaks were sent for and warned.
  A small party of Siangs who formerly lived with Manggoi at Nanga Pila have moved up to the ulu Sungei Pila. These people will be ordered to return to the main river.
  The sum of $5,000 was remitted to Sibu Treasury during the month.
  Agriculture.—The Penghulus report that the padi is in excellent condition in all parts of the district, with the exception of Penghulu Koh in the ulu Balleh. I hear that a great deal of rubber is being planted in the Balleh and elsewhere. This matter I will go into as soon as I am able to visit the Balleh after the New Year.
  Public Works.—The prison gang were employed on the roads and mowing. One prisoner named Puit has proved himself a rough carpenter. He has been employed on making beds for the jail, fence and dais for the Court room and various repairs. The jail has been whitewashed and tarred throughout and a proper sanitary system instituted. The whole of the interior of the Fort has been repainted and a new drawbridge constructed.
  The prison gang averaged 16 prisoners during the mouth. This number is not adequate to keep this station in good order.
  Timber is being collected for the construction of the clerk's new bouse, extension to barracks, and various repairs in the New Year.
  Foong Ah Chen has undertaken to contract for the new buildings as soon as the timber is collected.
  Land.—I have demarcated Government land reserves at both Kapit and Song. Notices have been issued that any further planting of rubber in these reserves is absolutely prohibited and only such crops as padi, tapicoa, etc., may be planted. The bazaar at Song is hopelessly congested and there is no room for expansion. A good site has been demarcated across river. Eleven applications already have been made to move to this new site. The area and description of these reserves I have forwarded to the Acting Resident.
  Sarawak Rangers. — Parades and duties were carried out as usual during the month.
  Cattle. -The Kapit herd numbered nineteen head and that at Beluga fifteen.
  Shipping.—The usual number of vessels visited this station during the month ; m.s. Namhoi made three trips, 8.1. Ulu one trip, s.l. Chamois and Soon Aik two trips each.
Trade.—Exports for the month were as follows :—
Damar Daging
India Rubber
Plantation Rubber
Rattan Sega No. 1
Rattan Tot No. 2
Piculs	184.91
,,	1.90
„	51.81
„	201.80
„	412.06
Value	$6,500.00
„	160.00
„	9,284.00
1,408.00
„	1,815.00
January, 1926.
  General.- I returned from Sibu on 5th accompanied by Mr. Tull of Selaiang, who returned per s.l. Chamois on 7th. The Court Writer reported all well during my absence. During the early part of the month, owing to heavy rain, the river rose and flooded the road to the bazaar. His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by the Resident and J. A. H. Hardie, visited the station on the 21st, returning per s.l. Chamois on the 23rd instant. I much regret that I was away in the ulu Balleh at the time. The Malays and Chinese have commenced the annual whitewashing of the bazaars. Abang Ahmat, Native Officer, Song, arrived on 29th and reported all well. He returned that same day. On my return from the Balleh a meeting was held of all Penghulus and many of the senior Tuai Rumah; various matters were discussed. They were warned about reporting births and deaths. This has been much neglected last year though I quite appreciate their difficulty as, with one exception, they are none of them able to write and many live a very long way from the fort.
  Court.—There were few cases and none worthy of special note. Fines and fees amounted to $194.74.
  Sarawak Rangers.—The usual drill and fatigues were carried out.
  Prison.—The prison gang was employed on whitewashing the fort and Government buildings as well as on roads and ornamental grounds. The prison carpenter was employed on minor repairs to boats and buildings. The prison gang averaged 19 during the mouth.
  Travelling—1 was away in the ulu Balleh from 11th to 25th. I have forwarded under separate cover the report of my trip.
  Cattle.— The herd numbered 20 head at the end of the month.
  Trade and Shipping.- The s.s. Sarawak and s.l. Chamois made two trips each during the month and s.l. Ulu and Soon Aik one trip each.
Exports for the month are as follows:—
Plantation Rubber
India Rubber
Gutta Percha
Rattan Sega No. 1
Rattan Tot No. 2
Damar Dagiug
Piculs
118.58
   5.65
   1.92
124.14
529.08
819.05
Value
$16,687
    820
    300
    650
2,520
8,620
  The Acting Assistant District Officer reports as follows concerning his trip up the Balleh
  Rivers Balleh. Mujong, Gat and Merirai.—Accompanied by Penghulu Temongong Koh I left Kapit on the 11th January and. in accordance with instructions received from Sibu, returned by the 26 th.
  On the 12th I met Penghulu Griming who accompanied me for the remainder of my trip. I arrived at Penghulu Grinang’s house Sungei Gat on the 15th having spent the previous three nights at Patan’s, Nyareng's and Sambai's houses. Penghulu Patan was away with the Native Officer at Nanga Pila. There are no houses up the side streams in the Gat. all being on the main river. Penghulu Grinang’s house is the furthest of the Dyak bouses iu this river and stands near the junction of the Sungei Puroh and Gat. He has applied to move his house to a new and better site a short way up river. This new site I have inspected and it is a very good one, it is only a few hundred yards from this present bouse. I was informed that the Gat Dyaks who went over to Dutch Territory when the Gat trouble was on, now wish to return. Penghulu Garinang states that he is willing to go security for their good behaviour and would attach them to his own house. The house in question is Rumah Bayak of


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1926.
67
seventeen doors at Kanyau, Kepuas. During my stay in the Gat I went up Sungei Puroh, Sungei Stapang and also some distance up the Gat, past the boundary at Nanga Entibiru, beyond which no Dyak houses may be built Padi is in excellent condition all over this district. This river affords very good fishing mid Dyaks morning and evening bring in large supplies of fish. I left the Gat on the 17th and arrived at Penghulu Koh’s house in the ulu Balleh. During my stay here I proceeded up river as far as the boundary at the Nanga Putai. Padi here is a complete failure this year though padi only a short way down river is in excellent condition as it is all over the Kapit district. I visited Sungei Merirai on the 20th. At present many Dyaks are scattered up this river in small temporary houses. As soon as the harvest is over Tuah Rumab Rabar will collect all these people together and build one large bouse. One, Bareng, has built a very substantial farm hut above Nanga Entuloh, the boundary; he informs me that he intends building a large house there. This will not be allowed as there are plenty of good sites further down river. The Sungei Entuloh is the highway for Dyaks travelling to the ulu Rejang. Fomerly it was arranged that the late Penghulu Melintang should build a house at Nanga Entuloh to guard this highway and to detain undesirables, but unfortunately he died and the house was never built. Padi in this district will be harvested shortly. I left for the Mujong on the 21st but owing to the river being in flood, it was with some difficult}' and not until the evening of the 23rd that we reached Jantieng’s house. The next day I went up river to Penghulu Ugak's house. This house is still in the course of construction and is some way beyond the boundary which is at Nanga Blabangan. Formerly the boundary was at Jantieng’s house where the late Penghulu Ledam lived, but after his death, was moved to Nanga Blabangan. There are sites for several houses at and just below this boundary. Tuah Rumab Milang reported that one Rantai of his house had been wounded by his father-in-law when hunting, he had received a spear thrust clean through his thigh. I bad this man sent to the Fort immediately, and he is now progressing favourably. I much regretted the shortness of time as I would have liked to make a much more thorough inspection of the Mujong district. There are several bouses up the various side streams of the Mujong but I am informed by the Penghulu that all houses in these streams are but a short way from the Mujong. I proceeded down river on 25th ; Dyak houses on the down river reaches of the Balleh are very small, some being of only two or three doors. As is always the case just before the harvest, all houses were very empty, all the younger men having gone off on hunting and jungle produce collecting expeditions.
Rejang.
December, 1925.
  The Court Writer reports as under:—
  Court.—No cases of any importance were brought before the Court during the month. Fines imposed in the Native Court amounted to $69.48.
  General.—On the 1st Captain Andreini left for Sibu via Selalang after his visit to Lower Rejang district.
  On the 2nd Mr. W. F. Dick, Acting District Officer, Sibu, accompanied by Datu Hadji Azahari and Hadji Bahaudin, arrived from Sibu in s.l. Chamois and returned to Sibu again on the 5th after installing Hadji Bahaudin as Native Officer of Rejang. Hadji
Bahaudin proceeded to Paloh on the 20tb in order
to settle Hadji Usop’s (deceased) affairs and returned
on the 24th.
  Christmas Day and the next day were observed as
public holidays.
  Staff.—Sayu bin Talep was enlisted in the Police
Force and P. C. Karia bin Kadir was discharged at
the end of the month. P. C. Johan bin Draman
left the force at the beginning of the month at bis
own request.
  Health.—The health of the district was fairly
good during the month.
  Prisoners.—The prison gang, averaging two, has
been engaged on upkeep of the ornamental grounds.
Rainfall.—The total rainfall was 17'31 inches
  Shipping.—Five steamers, two steam launches
and three motor ships entered while four steamers,
one steam launch and seven motor ships cleared the
port.
  Trade.—The Trade Returns for the month are as
follows:—
1925.	1924.
December Foreign Export $ 35,661
to date ...	...	451,793
December Foreign Import 7,780
to date ...	...	93,405
December Local Export ... 11,178
to date ...	...	29,759
December Local Import ...	19,507
        to date ...	...	274,995
$ 65,145 662,373 7,984
66,747 918 37,377 6,673 155,781
Matu.
December, 1925.
The Court Writer reports as under:—
  Court—A number of civil claims came before the Court for settlement during the month. Two cased were settled in the Native Court, Saripin vs. Kamsiah for divorce, defendant being fined $22.14 and costs, and Rodah vs. Kadir for mungkir berbini, defendant was fined $22.14 and costs and to pay brian $50. As the plaintiff is in a state of pregnancy, defendant was ordered to pay blanja according to the undang undang.
  Fines collected during the month amounted to $110.70.
  Ten summonses were issued by jelutong workers against each other for interfering with each other's paths.
  Rainfall.—Total rainfall was 23.98 inches, and there were constant floods during the month.
  General.—A fire broke out on the night of the 1st in Yasin's lantin, where he had a small shop. The fire originated in a cooking place which bad as usual been left unattended. Damage amounted to about $300 ‘
  The Court Writer of Daro arrived on the 4th with the sum of $911.05.
  On the 12th s.l. Mermaid arrived from Sibu to fetch the lighter which she left here on the 22nd of last month.
  Agriculture.—The farms in the upper reaches of the river have been destroyed by floods and mice.
  Staff.—Sergeant Basah returned to Matu in place of Lance-Corporal Mahrup, who returned to Sibu on the 13th by s.l. Mermaid.
  Shipping.—Four schooners, two motor schooners and one steam launch entered and cleared the port during the month.
Trade :—
Matu Imports December
    Total to date
Matu Exports December
    Total to date
   1925.
$ 9,560
221,725
   20,361
282,793
1924.
$ 8,007
213,346
  16,733
326,810.


68
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1926.
  Average cash market price of:—
     Raw Sago ...
     Pearl Sago ...
     Jelutong
Plantation Rubber
do scrap
$ 1.15 per passu
   1.00 ,, tin
  10.00 „ picul
100.00
  30.00	„
January, 1926.
  The Court Writer, reports as under:—
   Court.—There were no cases in the Court during the month. Pines collected during the month amounted to $‘2'2.14.
   Opium.--The proceeds of opium sold at Matu amounted to $1,300. 4,000 packets were supplied from Kuching, and the balance in hand at the end of the month was 10,343 packets.
   Rainfall.—Total rainfall during the mouth was 23-19 inches; the whole place was flooded during the early part of the month but dried up after the period of about a fortnight.
   General.—The Divisional Treasurer arrived at 9.30 p.m. on the 10th by m.l. Jean and explained the new cash, deposit books, etc. He returned at 8 a.m. the next day. Five thousand dollars in cash was remitted to Sibu Treasury during the month.
   On the 14th the eclipse of the sun, visible at this station, began at 3 p.m. and continued for about three-quarters of an hour.
   Agriculture.—The neighbouring farms were for the most part abandoned as the crops were spoiled by the floods.
   Dairy Farm.—One heifer was slaughtered and sold.
   Shipping.—Four schooners, one motor schooner and one motor launch entered and cleared the port during the month.
  Trade.—
Matu Imports January
Matu Exports January
  1926.
$ 16,935
  16,681
1925.
$ 17.960
  16,332
  Average cash market prices were as follows:—
Raw Sago
Pearl Sago
Gutta Jelutong
Plantation Rubber
do. Scrap
$ 1.25 per passu
1.00 per tin
   10.00 per picul
125.00
35.00
do. do.
Daro.
December, 1925.
  The Court Writer reports as under : -
   Court.—In the Native Court Idoh and Harus were fined $22.14 each for divorce. Fines and fees amounted to $80.53.
   General.—Having obtained leave from the Acting Resident, 1 left for Sibu on 27th and was still away at the end of the month.
   Public Works.—The grass in the Government compound was cleared by kampong labour Considerable damage was done to the roads and bridges by the floods. The bazaar Chinese were called up and warned to get their houses repaired and put on belian attaps as ordered by the Acting Resident on his visit to this station in September, as the time given to this is now up.
   Health.—The health of the district was fairly good.
   Trade and Shipping.—No schooners entered or cleared during the month.
Imports $2,957 Exports $6,420
January, 1926.
  The Court Writer reports as under: —
   Court.—There were no cases heard excepting a few admitted debt cases. Fees amounted to $37.50.
   General.—The Divisional Treasurer arrived on the 9th by m.l. Jean to explain the new system of keeping accounts. On the 9th Mr. H. Gild of Tanjong Blatok asked for two policemen to do duty there for a few nights as there had been trouble with his coolies. I only allowed him one as there are only three men in the station. Matnor was called up to clear up the coconut garden situated behind the Court House, but he said that the garden belonged to a Chinaman who died five years ago. I told Matnor that if the garden is not cleared it will be auctioned when an European Officer visits the station.
   Mr. C. F. Dehan of Tanjong Blatok visited the station once.
   Public Works.—Though Hadji Matlajim, Tua of Nangars, was asked to get his people to clear the Government compound nothing has been done yet.
   Agriculture.—The natives report that the padi is good and well grown.
  Health.—This on the whole has been good.
   Trade and Shipping.—No schooners have entered the port since October last.
       Imports $4,021 Exports $9,646
H. B. CROCKER,
Resident Third Division.
COAST DIVISION.
Mukah and Baligian.
December, 1925.
   General.—On instructions based on a confession made by a Dyak murderer named Nipa, just before his execution at Baram, two Rejang Dyaks of Kaba, named Chandang and Unggat, were arrested and duly reached here on the 12th instant to stand their trial for being concerned in the murder of three Chinese at Balingian in 1922.
   Native Officer Abang Haji Mohidin left for Balingian by the overland route on the 21st to collect data and witnesses, who had been present at the previous hearing of the Balingian murder case of 1922 ; and also to deal with all possible outstanding cases at that Court; he was still away at the end of the month.
   Dresser Ah Heng also visited Balingian during the month to investigate some fresh cases of smallpox recently reported by the Court Writer.
   Datu Awang Udin visited the Dyak settlement at Sebakong in connection with the harbouring of an escaped Dyak prisoner, one Belun alias Umbai, from Simanggang gaol; unfortunately the fugitive had left the District a few months previously and was said to be making for Belait via Baram ; a number of the local chiefs and their followers have since been fined for failing to report the presence of this fugitive.
   Dyak Penghulu Inting of Sikat came down from the interior twice during the month, and assisted Datu Awang Udin in investigating a report from Penipah that several dead bodies minus their heads were lying in the jungle there; these, on inquiry, proved to be the remains of certain Dyaks who had hidden away in the jungle during the last smallpox epidemic, and it transpired that the relatives being


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1926.
69
too scared of contagion to bury the bodies, had decided to hide away the heads for fear these should be taken by other wandering aborigines; all the heads have since been produced and the relatives punished for failing to notify Government of their extraordinary action in the matter.
   The District Officer, Oya and Dalat, came over on horseback on the 17th to take over the books and instructions and go through the revised system of accounting which comes into operation on the 1st January next. Mr. Adams later left via Sibu to spend Christmas and New Year in Kuching.
   Several acres of land in the vicinity of the Fort which contains a plantation belonging to Tan Kim Kee (f.) sister of Tan Ek Goon of  Chop Soon Kiat Seng, and an adjoining smaller plantation belonging to Wee Hong Tee was acquired by the Government, after prolonged negotiations, for extension of the Government grounds and as a new site for the rebuilding of the gaols and wireless telegraph station, which is to be removed from its present site early in the New Year.
   The 25th, Christmas Day, and the following day, were observed as a public holidays, when the local branch of the Roman Catholic Mission gave a very successful interpretation by Native Christian converts of the well-known pantomime "Cinderella."
   Throughout the month the weather remained wet and stormy and the greater part of the district was under water.
   Courts-—An outstanding appeal from a decision of the District Court, Oya, in the case of Tuloi, Dyak, versus Luka, Dyak, in which Luka was convicted and sentenced to three months' imprisonment was finally disposed of, the original decision being upheld.
   Mediang, a Dyak Chief of Sebakong, and his followers were fined for harbouring a runaway Dyak prisoner from Simanggang gaol named Behm, alias Umbai, and a reward was offered for his apprehension.
   Awang Taha bin Awang Matsalleh was convicted of cheating, over a consignment of cloth which he had undertaken to sell on commission, and was sentenced to six months’ imprisonment.
   Dyak prisoners Chandang and Unggat accused of being concerned in the murder of three Chinese at Balingian in 1922 were formally remanded pending the arrival of witnesses from Balingian.
   A Foochow Chinese named Lim Siew Ho alias Lim Pek Pek who had absconded from Balingian was arrested in Sibu, and has since been sentenced to three months' imprisonment.
   Tilat bin Sakah and Tair bin Baling were fined for working timber without a permit.
   Tair and Talim were fined for failing to register a transfer of sago gardens.
   Atan bin Delima was fined for selling timber worked for bis own use and shipping timber not entered in his port clearance.
   A case of attempting to procure an abortion was tried but was dismissed for lack of evidence.
   At Balingian Native Officer Abang Haji Mohidin dealt with a large number of cases and imposed fines for breaches of Forest Regulations. Licensing Regulations, and local Land Regulations; be also passed judgment in a large number of debt cases, and attended to all outstanding Native Court affairs.
   Health.—Fresh cases of smallpox, chiefly amongst the Dyaks, were reported from Balingian on the 8th, and Dresser Ah Heng proceeded to Balingian by the overland route on the 21st to investigate and vaccinate all possible people; be was still away at the end of the month.
   Agriculture. -In view of a strong desire amongst the local population to plant rubber it was deemed advisable to notify them by local order that all para rubber planted should automatically came under the
Land Regulations of 1920, and that they would be
liable to pay annual quit rent on any lands utilized
for this purpose.
  Much time was taken up by the small clerical
staff available with searching the very dilapidated
old land books and making out deeds of sale, trans-
fer, and mortgage of sago gardens.
  To deal satisfactory with the land question here
a survey staff is very necessary as at present the
local public and the Courts have to rely on very
primitive maps, plotted by the police, which on in-
spection are usually found to overlap each other
and cause endless boundary disputes.
  Public Works.—About the middle of the month
the Kuching Public Works representatives reported
that the new waterworks system was in running
order. On instructions from Commissioner Public
Works the plant was accordingly placed in charge
of one Assan, a first-class driver, together with one
fireman and two pipe linesmen as assistants, there-
by enabling all the remaing Kuching employees to
return to headquarters before the end of the year
  The majority of the Tamil gang, nine persons,
signed fresh agreements during the month; the gang
was employed on the general upkeep of the various
paths around the District. A number of carpenters
under the supervision of the Tua Tua Kampong
were engaged on the reconstruction of the Telian
path bridges, many of which have already collapsed ;
the main bridge at the mouth of the Telian had also
to be placed under repair at the end of the month.
  The Government carpenters completed certain
internal alterations to the Government Offices.
  Telegraph and Telephones.—Mr. P. Down,
Accountant, having completed the posting of the
Wireless and Telephone accounts, left for Kuching
via Sibu on the 2nd, accompanied by clerk Bujeng
and mechanic Mahali.
  Prison.—The prisoners, averaging 12'23, were em-
ployed on the general upkeep of the station grounds,
and carrying sand and gravel for the cement workers
concreting the floors of the European Bungalow
bathrooms.
  Trade and Shipping.—The month are as follows
          Coasting Imports.
Mukah	...	$26,456
Balingian ...	22,863
trade returns for the
Coasting Exports,
nil.
       $16,394.
  The main Exports from Balingian for the month
of December are :—
Jelutong ...	815 piculs.
      Para Rubber ...	20.40 ,,
The rainfall recorded shows 20'49 inches.
Oya and Dalat.
December, 1925.
  The District Officer, Mr. P. M. Adams, reports as follows : —
  Court.—There was very little Court work and the only cases of note being those of Adih, a Melanu youth, who was sentenced to 18 months for theft from a trading boat, and Awang Ya fined $50 for selling land for which he had no rights.
  Surveys—-The Surveys Staff completed the survey of all rubber gardens between Kampong Teh and Medong, including those in Sungei Kut, and went to Igan towards the end of the month.
  General.—Mr. P. Down passed through from Mukah en route for Sibu. A tuba fishing was held at Dalat on 7th but few fish were caught.
  Two Dyaks arrived from Sibu under escort and were sent to Mukah in connection with a murder perpetrated at Balingian.


70
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1926.
  Travelling.—I rode over to Mukah on 18th to discuss the new system of accounts with the Acting Divisional Officer and returned to Oya on 20th. 1 wer.t to Kuching via Sibu at the invitation of His Highness the Rajah and was still away at the end of the month.
  P.TF.D.—The verandah of the Dalai bungalow was enlarged and the position of the staircase moved. Certain alterations were made to the small house for clerks.
  Marine.—The m.l. Leonora was in continual use during the month.
  Health.—No epidemics were reported.
  Cultivation-—Several late applications to plant rubber were refused, and another warning has been issued to remove all rubber which has been planted without official sanction. It should be easy to enforce this when the survey maps are available and occupation tickets issued.
  Jungle Produce.—Owing to the rise in price jelutong is again being worked.
  The Trade Returns were :—
  Imports $22,625.80 Exports $39,460.00
  The following schooner entered and cleared :—
  Entered M.S. Majinis; Cleared M.S. Majinis.
Bimulu.
December, 1925
  Mr. H. H. Kortright, District Officer of Bintulu. reports as follows
  Courts.—There has been very little Court work during the month. The Kampongs are still practically empty the inhabitants preferring to live on their padi farms and in jelutong working huts in the jungle.
  Guan Chuan of Pandan was fined $25 for interfering with the Dresser who was vaccinating passengers in defendant’s launch prior to its departure for Pandan. One, Kaili, was also fined $10 in connection with this case.	•
  There were no other cases worthy of mention.
  Medical.—The smallpox epidemic has abated considerably in this neighbourhood. A patient died in the isolation camp on the 28th leaving the camp empty for the first time since August. Deaths are, however, still being reported from houses on padi farms and huts in the jungle swamps. I fear the disease is spreading upriver; the Dresser from Pandan reports a good many cases, also a Dyak house near Sebauh infected. All these upriver people refused vaccination ; even now that vaccination is compulsory they are still refusing and run away and hide for days to evade it. It will be necessary to deal very severely with some of these people in order to stamp out this epidemic. It has been found impossible to isolate Punans, they won’t even isolate themselves but go from place to place carrying the disease.
  Lately several small children have died of pneumonia and many people seem to have bad coughs and colds.
  General.- The weather has been wretched all the month and there were only three days on which rain did not fall. On the 9th in the nine horns the fall was 7'46 inches. The total for the month was 28’85 inches.
  Mr. G. T. Bates of the Borneo Company, and Mr. B. J. C. Spurway, Assistant Conservator of Forests, arrived here by m.s. Eng Hap Leong on the 6th.
  Mr. Bates and Mr. E. Banks, Curator Sarawak Museum, returned to Kuching by same vessel on the 16th, and Mr. Spurway also left that day for Kidurong to catch the s.s. Alice Lorraine en route for Limbang.
  Trade.—The price of jelutong has been very high all the month, as much as $21 per picul has been paid here.
  For reasons best known to the Captain, the s.s. Auby failed to enter this port on the 12th, and after waiting around outside for some time landed the pilot at Kidurong and sailed for Kuching. This was a great blow to the Bintulu Chinese who bad. very large stocks of jelutong to ship, and had the vessel entered they would, I am told, have caught the top market price in Kuching, something like $30 per picul.
  On the 15th the m.s. Eng Hap Leong sailed with 1,134| piculs of jelutong from Sebauh and Pandan alone. The s s. Gladys called here with cargo on the 16th and sailed for Miri on the 17th; rough seas, however, prevented her unloading all her Miri cargo and she came in here again on the 23rd.
  The Manager of the Steamship Company allowed her to discharge the Miri cargo here and by doing this she was able to load practically all the Bintulu jelutong and sailed on the 25th with 1,669 piculs on board. This act was greatly appreciated by the local traders, all of whom got $21 per picul for their jelutong in Kuching. There were still over a thousand piculs at Sebauh and Pandan and the Steamship- Company chartered the m.s. Eng Hap Leong which arrived on the 31st to fetch this cargo.
The Trade Returns for the month are as follows :—
1925.	1924.
Imports	...	$74,127.79	$25,011.50
    Exports	...	73,222.96	30,449.11
  The following vessels entered and cleared the port during the month :—
      Entered 6 steamers 2 schooners
      Cleared 5	„	nil
Tatau.
December, 1925.
  Mr. R. V. Palfreman, Acting Assistant District Officer, reports as follows:—
  On the 7th instant I left by boat in company with Abang Bojeng, Native Officer, and Penghulu Tamboh, for the ulu Kakus in order to settle outstanding bi rds’-nest cave disputes and also look into the matter of the possibility of Dyaks being allowed to work produce in the Kakus River and surrounding district; a full report and also an explanatory map m regard to this matter are being forwarded under separate cover.
  On the 9th instant, in company with Abang Bojeng. the Maieng caves were visited and three caves examined, one night being spent in the caves for this purpose. On my arrival at Penjarai I was held up for three days by high water and was unable to proceed further upriver, a letter, however, arrived from the District Officer, Bintulu, ordering me to arrest a Dyak by name Kalom in the ulu Anap, this man is a considerable source of trouble and disaffection in the ulu Anap and the only’ way to deal with him appears to be to send him back to the Batang Rejang from which place he orginally came ; after receiving this letter I was forced to change my plans for fear that Kalom should get wind that be was going to be arrested and hide in the jungle, should I wait until my return from the ulu Kakus before arresting him.
  In company with Abang Bojeng, Native Officer, and Penghulu Tamboh, I proceeded overland to the mouth of the Tau and thence by boat a short distance to Rumah Banieng, from which house 1 proceeded to Kalom's house to arrest him ; the Dyaks informed


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1926.
71
the crocodile but so far have not succeeded in doing
so. I returned from ulu Kaku on the 31st instant.
    During my stay at Penjarai, as instructed by the
District Officer, Bintulu, I issued a complete set of
birds’-nest cave certificates, and also settled any
litigation with regard to them that cropped up, this
is the first time that a complete set of the Maieng
and Kuyat birds’-nest caves certificates have been
issued, and should put a stop to much of the wrang-
ling as to who are the real owners of caves.
    Four days after leaving Penjarai I arrived at Kuyat
and also visited two caves in the Memenat River;
all the caves are on the true right hand bank of
the Kakus River, and the above-mentioned map.
I trust, will give a good idea of the range of hills
which is honeycombed by these caves.
    Keseng, the head of the Punans by right of ances-
try, although not the Penghulu, states that he intends
to make his new house at Penjarai, since down river
from Penjarai it is impossible to grow padi with any
success owing to the land at the times the river is in
flood being anything from four to six feet under water,
and not only for one or two days at a time, but for
as much as ten to fifteen days at a time, whereas
tip river from Penjarai, the land is under water for
one or two days at a time only. I do not think
Keseng was lying since at the time I went up river
from the mouth of the Kakus to Penjarai the whole
of the land was submerged to a depth of over four
feet. Penghulu Tama Gran, the Punan Penghulu,
also states chat he wishes to move to Penjarai since
he is of the same opinion as Keseng and the rest of
the Punans in regard to farming. The Punan padi
at Penjarai this year appears to be extremely pro-
mising and a rich harvest should be reaped if all goes
well.
    Various Tuai, by name Jamil, Jampong, Jarap,
Kedit, Jelandeng, and Sabar, have appeared before
me and put forward the following complaints in
regard to Penghulu Tamboh :—
1. That Penghulu Tamboh does not settle cases
according to the Dyak customs.
2. That when settling cases he takes care that he
receives considerable profit from the fines he
imposes.
3. That after fining a person he gives him only
seven days in which to pay up in, and
should be not do so, another fine is imposed.
    Referring to paragraphs 1 and 2, I have told the
Tuai to bring any cases they are unsatisfied with
before me and they will be duly looked into.
    Referring to paragraph 3, I have told Pengbulu
Tamboh to allow the Dyaks fifteen days to pay in, and
should they not do so after this time has expired, that
Penghulu Tamboh must report the matter and it
will be dealt with either by myself or the Native
Officer, and the reasons for the nonpayment be duly
looked into.
    Court.—No cases of real importance occurred
during the month, but a woman by name Mumin (f.)
was fined $15 "for attempting a swindle in re birds’-
nest caves, and later she was also fined $10 for
libellous insinuations against Penghulu Tama Gran
which she was unable to prove when called upon to
I do so. One, Haji Ismail, was fined $25 for re-opening
a case already settled by the District Officer, Bintulu.
Defendant could produce no extra evidence as a
reason for his opening the case, and it was a very
evident “try on" on his part.
    P.W.D. -The Chinese made a bridge over a small
river on the upriver side of the bazaar and also cleared
the road above the bazaar.	,
    The Native Officer’s quarters are finished except-
ing the wall planking of the dapor, for which a
hundred extra planks are needed.
    Health.—The health of the district appears to be
good, and a smallpox scare, which was started by the
me that Kalom would resist arrest and I therefore
deemed it necessary to take Dyaks from Banieng’s
house to assist me should there be trouble of any
sort. Fortunately Kalom, seeing that the odds were
against him, did not attempt to resist, but after much
arguing agreed to proceed to Bintulu without further
trouble. He was sent down river in charge of Peng-
hulu Tamboh.
   Kalom is very powerfully built for a Dyak, and it
is interesting to note that he has instilled such fear
into the Dyaks that out of my boat's crew of thirty
paddlers I could only obtain six who would accom-
pany me overland to Banieng’s house, and out of
these only one, exclusive of Penghulu Tamboh, would
follow me to Kalom’s house; also it was only after
threate ling Banieng with a heavy fine should he not
assist me, that he agreed to do so; whether his
reluctance was through fear or sympathy I was not
able to ascertain, but it was probably a mixture of
both. Many ridiculous rumours were about among the
Dyaks with regard to the things that Kalom intended
doing should Government attempt to arrest him.
Kalom, however, appears to have some reason to be
feeling sore, in that the Native Officer some time
previously, fearing that Kalom would not answer any
panggils or tongkats, sent for him, stating that he was
to be made a Pengbulu, also he called down all the
Tuai Rumahs of Anap to witness Kalom’s installation
as Penghulu, but on arrival at Tatau bazaar the
Native Officer sent back up river all the Tuai Rumahs,
and Kalom was sent to Bintulu and eventually to
Mukab, where he was sentenced to three months’
imprisonment ; it was not the fact that he was im-
prisoned that appears to have annoyed him, but the
way in which he was induced to appear at Tatau
Court House supposedly only to become a Penghulu
but in reality to be made a prisoner; he considers
that he has received great “shame" before all the
Tuai Rumahs of Anap. Tuai Rumah Banieng com-
plained to me that Penghulu Bunyah never comes
near the upriver houses to hear cases, and that
when the Dyaks settle them among themselves, he
fines them for doing so, the upriver Dyaks do not
consider this fair and request that either Bunyah be
dismissed or another Penghulu be made to hold
authority over them. Banieng was informed that
this matter would be thoroughly looked into when
next I visit the Anap.
   This is not the first complaint that has been received
in regard to this Penghulu. After arresting Kalom
I visited the Bukitans in the ulu Anap. These
people appear to have no property whatsoever beyond
their “mats" and "cooking utensils" and though they
state that they will pay tax if Government presists
in ordering them to do so, it will only be by selling
their mats, and they ask that Government have pity
on them and wait until they have learned to farm
properly, which they are now learning to do, since
the ulu Anap Dyaks are farming not far from them
and are assisting them with their farms to a certain
extent. These Dyaks and the Bukitans appear to
get on very well together, since the Bukitans give
the Dyaks “rotan mats, etc.," and receive in exchange
“boats,” “farming implements," “parangs," etc.
It appears that the Bukitans cannot make boats
except of “tree bark” and this of course is only able
to float down river and utterly useless to use pro-
ceeding up river against rapids.
   On my return from the Anap, again overland, to
Penjarai, a matter of a day and half. I learned by
letter from the Court Writer that a Dyak by name
Igu, “Apai Begok” of Penghulu Tamboh’s house in
the Sap, had been taken by a crocodile, but his body
was recovered some time later; this man was bath-
ing at the time he was taken, and although other
Dyaks attempted to rescue him, their efforts proved
unavailing; the Dyaks are still attempting to catch


72
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1926.
covered. The Helen, being an old launch, has
reached the stage where fairly heavy Lulls for
repairs appear to be frequently necessary.
  Health.—Suleiman continued vaccination in Miri,
Pujut and Bakong. No further cases of small-
pox are reported from Suai.
Dyaks. I was happily able to refute after examining
the child who was supposed to have the smallpox :
it prove to be nothing more than a disease known by
the Dyaks ns “rambor.” Two Malays who had
previously suffered from smallpox affirmed that the
disease was the above-mentioned “ramhor.”
  Shipping.—The Sarawak Oilfields s.s. Burong
entered the point on the 10th instant and departed
with a cargo of belian for Miri, after staying two
nights at the station. The schooner Intan Terpeleh
Zainudin is still at the mouth of the Tatau, being
unable to get out owing to the very bad state of the
Weather.
Trade.
Imports $7,562 00    Exports 9,944.67
  Items of Interest—A small river called the Buloh
in the ulu Kakus has two hot water streams running
into it. The heat of these streams is sufficient to
cook the “dabai" fruit, also the water leaves a curious
coating of brittle whitish rock on pieces of wood and
leaves, etc., that fall into it. The Buloh River is
about three hours paddling from Kuyat River, and
the small hot water streams originate from a swamp
at the foot of the Kuyat range.
  The caves at Kuyat are formed of exceedingly
sharp rocks which are extremely painful to walk
over, the rocks being in a formation somewhat like
the furrows in a ploughed field. There is, however,
little or no mud in these caves, in striking contrast
to the Maieng caves, and the natives inform
me that not only crocodiles live in these caves
but also pythons, cobras and other snakes ; none of
this reptiles have, however, been known to attach a
human being. During my visit to the Maieng caves
I encountered one crocodile in Lobang Pakan.
W. F. DE V. SKRINE,
Acting Divisional Officer.
FOURTH DIVISION.
Miri.
January, 1926.
  Court.—Three Cantonese coolies working at
Lutong were sentenced to three years’ imprisonment
each under section 457 I.P.C. No other cases call
for special mention.
  General.—Friday 1st being New Years' Day was
observed as a holiday and the flagstaff dressed.
  Mr. P. H. Hayward returned from Singapore on
the 6th and resumed his duties in the Treasury.
Mr. W. Cotterill, who had been acting for him, pro-
ceeded to Kuching by s.s Gladys on the 14th.
  Mr. 0. Lang, Superintendent of Police, arrived
by the s.s. Gladys on the 10th on a visit of
inspection, returning to Kuching by s.s. Auby on
the 24th.
  A fire broke out on the Company's boat Didonta
at 7 p.m. on the 1st but w!as overcome, fortunately
without much damage being done.
  The eclipse of the sun was clearly visible here on
the afternoon of the 14th, and was observed with
much interest.
  An accident occurred to Sundram, an Indian coolie,
on the 15th. He was seriously burnt, apparently
caused by Rising a naked light while working on a
gas line near boiler battery No. 10.
  Launches.—The m.l. Helen has had another
accident. Her rudder plate was torn from the
rudder post when coming in over the bar. On
sending her for repair various defects were dis-
Baram.
January, 1926.
The District Officer, Baram, Mr. C. D. Adams,
reports as follows :—
   Court.—Munbau, Dyak, imprisoned three months,
 disobedience of Government Orders; Sindar and
 Rabong fined $15, breach of Jelutong Regulations;
 Ah Teck imprisoned three years, swindling Dyaks;
 Patong imprisoned nine months and Resat fined $25. swindling upriver people; Ah Chai and Ah
 Thai imprisoned six months each for harbouring an escaped prisoner; John, Dyak, imprisoned six
months, interference in Long Kiput’s house.
 Fines and fees amounted to $585.05.
   General.—I returned from Miri on the 2nd instant.
Tuanku Mohamat. Native Officer, and Dresser
Reggie, returned from visiting Tutau and Apoh.
The Penan tax was collected in full and also many
outstanding fines. Over 1000 people vaccinated.
   The Blahoi Dyak house was burnt to the ground
and all property lost and also one death occurred.
   A woman from another bouse who was cooking
at the time was blamed for this. An inquiry was
held and found no one was to blame. If it had
been anyone belonging to the house and cooking,
 nothing would have been said. The accused woman
coming from another house lost no property.
   As land in Kampong Dagang is becoming very
congested and many are applying to build good
 houses, Chop Kim Watt, who has a small plot of
 land in this kampong, taken over some years ago
 in payment of a debt, which should never have been
 allowed, was given notice to quit and a fair price
will be paid by way of compensation. I also marked
out 12 plots of 15 fathoms frontage in the old
cattle field at the back of this kampong and many
have been taken up.
   I proceeded to Long Lama, accompanied by
Janting. Produce Inspector, on the 28th instant,
returning next day.
 Nine licences were issued to buy birds’ nests
 under new Local Order.
 Mr. Woodward and Dresser Kim Cheng returned
from visiting Baram and Akar Rivers and report
that over 3000 people have been vaccinated, and that
up to the present all people in these rivers are free
from any sickness. Over $200 outstanding fines
were collected.
   Ah Teck, prisoner, escaped but was recaptured
the following day and received usual punishment.
   The new system of accounting was put into
force and was running smoothly at end of month.
   Medical.—Five patients admitted and thirty-five
out-patients treated during the month. Of these
eleven were Chinese, ten Malays, sixteen Dyaks,
one European, and two Kayans.
   The people in this District have now practically
all been vaccinated. Total number 10.201. Dresser
Kim Cheng returned to Kuching.
   Agriculture.—Padi harvest is in full swing and
 reports seem good.
   Rainfall was 5.32 inches.
 P.W.D.—Owing to a heavy flood, the biggest
 for many years, it was impossible for prisoners to
 work on the roads for the first half of the month,
 so they were employed in the ornamental grounds.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1926.
73
For the rest of the month, they were busy repairing damage done to the roads. Prisoners averaged 32.39.
  Forestry :—Many rafts of timber worked by upriver people arrived down and sold to Messrs. Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, Bakong. 86 logs arrived from Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, logging outfit in Tutau. This is the first consignment since commencement of same in September last. Mr. Corson, Assistant Conservator of Forests, Fourth Division, arrived on the 25th instant and was still here at end of month.
  Telegraphs and Telephones.—Erection of Wireless Station commenced and should be near completion in about another month. Telephone to Miri was down me.st of the month owing to heavy floods.
  Trade and Shipping.—S.S. Gladys made an unsuccessful attempt to enter between 22nd and 25th instant there being little water, the tide only beginning to rise.
1925
1926
Imports.
$ 9,453
15,683
Exports. $26,609 35,528
C. E. ERMEN,
Acting Resident Fourth Division.
FIFTH DIVISION.
Limbang.
December, 1925.
  Court.—In the Resident's Court, Lawas, Amat, a Javanese, was sentenced to 18 months’ R.I. under section 506, and Awang, a Dyak, to two years under section 420. Owing to the insecure state of Lawas jail both men were brought to Limbang to serve their sentences. At Limbang, Ah Fatt, alias Foo Tai, an escaped prisoner from Lawas in 1923, was sentenced to four years' R.I., for he had previous convictions. Jn the District Court, Bong Swee was given six months for theft of rubber scrap.
  Travelling.— f was aw»y at Lawas from the 1st to the 4th, and at Brooketon from the 12th to the 14th.
  Staff.—The A. A.DO., Lawas, returned from leave by the Alice Lorraine on the 18th.
  Treasury.—Law Ah Lan, the book-keeper, was sent to Lawas, Trusan and Sundar during the month to look over the accounts at these stations. No sooner had he returned than a long letter was received from the Treasurer on the 18th regarding fresh modifications in the new system, so that Law Ah Lan’s visit was practically wasted.
  The new Treasury books and forms did not arrive until 30th, allowing no time for them to be distributed round the Division and for the clerks to become familiar with them before the New Year.
  Public Works.— Mr. Binnie arrived by the Alice Lorraine on the 18th to look into the proposed new water scheme at Bukit Hitam, and was still engaged on this work at the end of the month. He also advised with regard to other public works for 1926. Periodical visits by a Public Works Officer to this Division are much appreciated.
   The. road coolies have been engaged in remaking the path below the Residency bungalow which runs behind the Bazaar, whilst the prisoners the greater part of this month were employed on improving the rentis to Bukit Hitam and in clearing the bank of the valley above the waterfall.
   Military.—Private Rawing of the Trusan squad died in the Limbang hospital on the 26th from acute peritonitis.
   Marine.—The m.l. Saripah was purchased from Messrs. The Island Trading Co , Brunei. She replaces the N Ute at Lawns. The bitter launch will be sent to Bintulu as soon as a suitable opportunity occurs.
   General.—Visitors to the station during the month were the British Resident and Mr. George from Brunei, Mothers Helen and Stanislaus, and Messrs. Binnie and Spurway from Kuching, and Messrs. Cook and Pollard from Lawas.
   The total rainfall recorded was 9'97 inches.
   Shipping.—The Alice Lorraine arrived on the 18th from Kuching. She was still in this Division at the end of the month. She made two trips from Punang to Labuan conveying 106 logs for repairs tn His Highness the Rajah’s Labuan wharves. She also brought over from Brooketon a quantity of old bricks and corrugated iron, ami about 30 tons of timber from Kaiangiran for Kuching.
   The Auby made two trips to Singapore via Kuching. The Kwong Yick culled in live times from Labuan and the Peter Diff and Adele twice, whilst the Daisy made one trip from Brunei.
   Trade Returns are as under:—
Exports.Imports.   Foreign
   Coasting. $ 37,790 9,098   $ 33,358
19,483   Brought forward .    46,888
.. 336,41252,841
291,690   Total to date.. $383,300   $344 531   1921 ..... $244,093   $253,328     I attach the A.A.D.O.’s reports for November and December.
January, 1926.
   Court.—There were a number of petty cases in both Magistrate’s Civil and Criminal Courts.
   In the District Court Kambar bin Tairudin, a Kadayan, was sentenced to two years under section 380, and Laut was fined $50 or in default three months under section 411.
   General.—The regatta, sports and illuminations held on New Year’s Day, passed off under the most glorious weather conditions. The usual crowds poured in from the surrounding country.
   The eclipse of the sun on the 14th was fairly well observed. The weather at the time was somewhat cloudy.


74
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1926.
  The harvest promises to be up to the average, but
rats are a pest, and there have been many applica-
tions for the rat poison supplied free.
The rainfall recorded amounted to 19.07 inches.
  Travelling.—On the 21st I left intending to visit
Sundar and Trusan, but was obliged to give up the
attempt owing to the unfavourable state of the bar.
and the stiff afternoon breeze, so spent a couple of
nights at Brooketon instead.
  I was away at Lawas from the 27th to 31st; here
there were several cases in the Resident's Court.
  Visitors.—The British Resident and Mr. George
returned to Brunei on the 2nd, Messrs. Binnie and
Spurway left for Kuching in the Alice Lorraine on
the 3rd, and Messrs. Cook and Pollard went back
to Lawas on the 4th.
  Public Works.—The road coolies finished remak-
ing the path behind the bazaar, and cleaning the
roads and ditches through the down river kampongs,
The prisoners averaged 27.25. The gang lopped
and trimmed the trees in the bazaar, cleared a
heavy landslide on the road through the gorge,
they also improved the rain escape trench behind
hospital and repaired wharf.
  The following contracts were signed by Wong
Kiau the Government contractor : Make extensive
repairs and additions to the Limbang Court House,
build a new Malay school and Native Court House
in one, erect two new clerks* quarters, a bouse for
the Malay school teacher and Police quarters with
office attached at Limpaku Penang and Rangau,
and build a large public wharf entirely of belian in
front of the main bazaar. All the above to be
completed before the end of September this year.
    Court.— In the Magistrate’s Court, Maisah (f.)
and Latip were sentenced to six months each on a
charge of theft: Gani fined $10 for assault;
. Bee Seng $25 for breach of Order No. XXUR
1924. and Eng Guan Seng $10 for breach
of Order No. LVI, 1924. Four Kadayans were
fitted $5 each for misbehaviour in Court. Foo
Tai was sentenced to three months and one dozen
strokes with the rotan for escaping from fail in
 1923.
    Crime. --Awang (Dyak) and Ahmat were detained
during the month on charges of cheating and
 criminal intimidation respectively.
    Prisoners.—The average number of prisoners
during the month was six. They were employed on
 the general upkeep of the station and in breaking
 stones for cement work at Trusan.
   Public Works.—The contract for the Police
 Quarters at Trusan was signed by Raman the
 Malay contractor. He agrees to erect the building
for $80, the materials being supplied by Government.
    Owing to the heavy floods, the bridge beyond the
 bazaar collapsed during the month, but for-
 innately most of the timber was saved. It is hoped
 that it will be possible to erect a suspension bridge
 next year as no bridge supported on piles is really
secure against floods.
 Travelling. -On the 3rd 1 visited Merapok where
 held Court, returning the same day. On the 16th
 went over to Limbang to catch s.s. Gladys en
route for Kuching and Singapore for medical treatment. I was still away at the end of the month.
 Health.—Ah Omar, vaccinator, arrived from Limbang on the 15th and visited all substations in
 the Lawas district. At the end of the month he
 left for Sundar and Trusan.
  Shipping and Trade.—Fifty head of buffalo were shipped to Kuching and twenty to Sibu.
  The Auby made two trips to Singapore and the Alice Lorraine one to Kuching. The launches Kwong Yick and Peter Duff made four and two trips respectively and the Adele one.
The Trade Returns are as below :—
Imports.	Exports.
Foreign	...	$21,181	$18,840
Coasting	...	3,547	9,394
$24,728	$28,234
1925	...	$18,485	$23,793

Lawas and Trusan
November, 1935.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports as follows:—
   Staff. Customs Officers Kuan Hin and Tersat returned from training in Kuching and relieved Customs Officers Pidin and Amit who returned to Limbang. Kuan Hin was stationed at Sundar in place of Pidin, and Tersat at Merapok in place of Abang Ali who relieved Amit at the Kuala.
Agriculture.—The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber,  Estates, Ltd , exported 24,131 lbs. of dry rubber  during the month. Most of the people were away on their farms, but it appears that most of the Muruts find clearing rubber gardens more remunerative than padi planting, and they will be hard bit should there be a slump in the rubber market.
   There have been many applications for occupation tickets to plant rubber. These will be issued after the land has been inspected otherwise all the padi land will be planted with rubber.
   General.—As a result of the accident to the Auby the supply of opium ran out, but fortunately 2,000, packets were obtained from Limbang. The Court Writer, Louis Juin, went on leave at the beginning of the month, his place being taken by the second clerk Kong Kian.
   Shipping.—S.S. J lice Lorraine called once to load  timber for Kuching, and s.l. Daisy made one trip.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1926.
75
Rainfall.—The rainfall recorded was as under :—
   Lawas ...	...	30’74	inches
   Lawas Estate	...	29'37 „
   Trusan ...	...	27'22
Trade.—The Trade Returns are as follows : —
FOREIGN.Lawas.—    Imports.Exports.November, 1925... $17,088$80,250      „	1924      11,06121,048Trusan.—November, 1925... $ 7,944$24,878      „	1924      6,36311,040COASTING.Lawas.—November, 1925... $ 1,299$ 1,075Trusan.—November, 1925... $ 2,259$ 2,294December, 1925.
Travelling.—I arrived at Brooketon from Kuching on the 18th proceeding to Sundar in the launch the same day. I went up to Trusan the next day, returning to Lawas on 20th. On 24th, accompanied by Mr. Cook, I left by launch for Limbang where I spent Christmas and New Year.
Agriculture—The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber
Estates, Ltd., exported 48,844 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
General—The Resident visited Lawas from 1st to 4ih and Settled all outstanding cases. Ah Lan, book-keeper Fifth Division, visited Lawas, Trusan and Sundar during the month.
Health.—Ali Omar, vaccinator, returned to Limbang. He reported having vaccinated 1,201 persons in the district.
Military.—I regret to report that Pte. Raweng, Sarawak Rangers, died in the Limbang Hospital of acute peritonitis.
Shipping.—S.S. Alice Lorraine called at Punang to load piles for the Labuan wharf and at Kayangaran to load timber for Kuching. S.L. Daisy made two trips dining the month, and m.l. Nancy and m.l. Adele one each.
The new lannch m.l. Saripah arrived from Limbang on the 9th. She is an excellent sea boat and it will now be possible to go to Trusan at any time of day and in almost any weather. M.L. Nellie went over to Limbang to wait for the Kuching steamer to take her to Bintulu.
Rainfall.—The rainfall recorded was as follows:—
    Lawas ...	...	20’32 inches
    Lawas Estate	...	25'30	,,
    Trusan ...	...	18’84	„
Trade.—The Trade Returns are as follows:—
  Court.—In the Resident's Court, Awang was sentenced to two years' imprisonment for cheating, and Ahmat to eighteen months for criminal intimidation. There were several minor cases, none of which call for special mention.
  Crime.—Ah Soo and Ho Bong were remanded to await trial by the Resident's Court on charges of criminal intimidation.
  Property to the value of about $200 was stolen from Pengiran Jappar's house at Trusan on the night of 14th. In connection with this affair two Javanese named Rabun and Joyo have been detained. They were brought in by Agong Berangat and had some of the stolen property with them. Three Chinese are also being detained-
  Prisoners.—The average number of prisoners during the month was six. They were employed on the general upkeep of the station.
  Public Works.—The cement work under the Trusan Fort was finished and the contractor paid off. The Sloateng bridge at Lawas finally collapsed after a flood. A suspension bridge will now be built.
FOREIGN.
Lawas.—Imports.Exports.December, 1925 ... $40,051$88,046      „	1924 ..    14,92541,542Trusan.—
December, 1925 ..
      „	1924 ... $ 7.733
    7,942$21,281
7,543COASTING.
Lawas.—
December, 1925 ... nil	$ 868
Trusan.—
December, 1925 ... $ 2,540	$ 5,713
F. F. BOULT, Resident Fifth Division.


