
VOL. LVI.

THE
No. 871.
Sarawak Gazette.
KUCHING, Thursday, April 1st, 1926.
20 CENTS.
Contents.

        The Sarawak Gazette
    THURSDAY, APRIL 1, 1926
NOTES.
  H. H. the Rajah and Dayang Leonora left Kuching on the 16th per H.H.M.Y Maimuna to visit Bintulu, Mukah and Oya districts. His Highness again left on the 25th for Kalaka and Lower Saribas, returning on the 30th.
   WE understand that His Highness the
 Rajah proposes to visit the Fifth Division to-
 wards the end of April and intends to return
 with Outstation visitors, in time for such com-
petitions as have been arranged for them
during Race Week, probably on the 27th
or 28th.
   His Highness the Tuan Muda is expected
to arrive in Kuching on the 28th or 29th of
April per s.s. Kuchina.
   WE learn that Owen Rutter's new novel
Senia, the setting of which is Borneo, was
published by Fisher Unwin on 27th January.
A second printing was called for before
publication and the book is being published
separately in U.S.A. The theme of the book
is a delicate one and it is likely to give rise
to some difference of opinion. We are told
that one important Glasgow bookseller says
the book “isn’t fit to stock” and that another
Glasgow bookseller (equally important) says
that it is “really well done” and has increased
his order.

 8.2 inches of rain were registered at
Matang Reservoir during the 24 hours of
28th February.
   MAJOR S. Cunynghame, Commandant,  Sarawak Rangers, accompanied by Mrs. Cunynghame and children, left Kuching for home furlough on the 1st March in order to , connect with the P. & O. Mantua.
   Mr. G. W. Aldridge who recently resigned the Service left by the same boat.
   Mrs. F. H. Kortright, wife of the D.O., Upper Sarawak, also proceeded home on j leave, and will be joined by her husband in I a few months’ time.


84
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. APRIL 1, 1926.
  THERE was a large gathering of Europeans
and others at the residence of the Datu
Imaum Tua at Hadji Taha Road on the
evening of Sunday the 7th instant, invited to
witness the marriage of his granddaughter
to Haji Drahman bin Haji Kassim
  MR. J. S W. Bean. Superintendent of
Government Stores, accompanied by Mrs.
Bean, left for 7 months’ furlough on the 10th
instant per s.s. Kuching.
  THE Revd. Father A. Mulder also sailed
for Europe for a well-earned spell of leave
after a continuous period of 11 years in
Sarawak, mostly in Mukah district.
  THE Revd. F. S. Hollis of Quop returned
from Home leave on the 7th March, and is
at present staying with the Right Revd. the
Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak.
  DR. J. I.. Farquharson, Chief Assistant i
Medical Officer, left Kuching on the 24th I
on a visit of inspection to Miri, Baram, I
Limbang and Labtian outstations.
  MR. H. B. Crocker. Resident Third Divi
sion, visited Kuching from Sibu on the 6th
per s.s. Gladys. There also arrived by the
same boat Mr. C. D. Adams. D.O. Baram.
who has taken up the duties of Acting
Superintendent of Police, and Prisons; and 
Mr. C. S. Griffiths. Third Divisional Land 
Officer, who is assuming the duties of Acting
Superintendent of Government Stores.
  SIEW Soo Ha (f) indignantly refused the offer of a lift to the hospital by a local car owner, after having been accidentally knocked down and run over by him. The only thing that seemed to worry her was the fact that she had lost one of her gold hair pins, fortunately picked up later by a police constable''
  MR. J. P. Mead. Conservator of Forests, returned with Mrs. Mead by the Kuching on the 7th from a visit to a Forest Conference held at Kuala Lumpur 21st to 28th February.
  MR. N. A. Middlemas, Superintendent of Surveys, returned by the Rajah of Sarawak on the 17th after a visit to Sibu.
  MR. F. G. Carpenter, Acting D.O., returned to Kuching with Mrs. Carpenter by s.s. Auby on the 14th after a short convalescent trip up the Coast.
  MR. H. D. Aplin, Divisional Officer, First Division, left Kuching with Mrs. Aplin on the 27th on six weeks’ short leave, having been indisposed with an attack of influenza recently.
  MR. C. E. A. Ermen arrived from Miri on the 22nd, and assumed the duties of Acting Divisional Officer, First Division.
   MR. A. L. Honors arrived per s.s. Sulong
on the 4th and has since been temporarily
appointed to the Government Monopolies
Department.
   THE Rare Course was opened for training
 on the 15th.
   Although it was still fairly dark at 6 a.m.,
standard time having now been adopted,
there were several ponies out and the worms
got a scare'
   A large number of spectators watched the
final of the Elphinstone’s Cup at Jesselton
on the 18th when P. W. Bidmead, playing
for the Jesselton Club, beat Dr. Josselyn,
playing for Beaufort, on the 19th green.
   The game was a strenuous contest. Josse-
lyn was two up at the 5th, Bidmead one up
at the 9th. Josselyn dormy one all square
on the 18th with a nine foot putt ; Bidmead
just winning on the 19th.
   SCOTLAND beat England by seventeen points to nine at Rugger on the 20th at Twickenham.
   WE hear that a suitable light is to be erected at the mouth of the Balingian River.
   MR. G. C. Turner has been transferred to P. W. Department from the Survey Department.
   MR. Lawrence Currey of the S. P. G. Mission. Kuching, has been medically advised to return to Europe for an indefinite period on account of his health, and he left Singapore  for Home the end of last month.
   THE Superintendent of Police. Mr. O. Lang, left for seven months' Home furlough  by the s.s. Kuching on the 21st.
   MR. and Mrs. C. G. Bois returned to  Singapore per s.s. Kuching on the 21st after  a short stay in Sarawak.
   Mr. Bois, inter alia, is Director of the . Dahan Rubber Estates, Ltd., and has been paying a visit of inspection to the properties at Dahan and Puak. He is a nephew of the eminent Rubber Economist, Sir Stanley Bois.
   “Three local Musketeers" had some good sport among the punai during six days ending the 20th. within a 3 mile radius of I Kuching, and accounted for 61 brace, of which 18 brace were picked up.
   BARAM was open to wireless communication. for the first time, on the 23rd.
 WE understand that the question of installing an Electric Power Station in Sibu has again come to the fore; and that there  is a possibility of an F.M.S. firm, who have I shown an interest in such schemes, being asked to consider the proposition.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1926.
85
   DRY rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah Estate during the month of February was approximately 78,000 tbs.
   MRS. Clark, wife of Capt. W. T. Clark, returned to Kuching from Singapore on the 26th, looking very fit.
   MAJOR-GENERAL Sir C. Herbert Powell,  K.C.B., who paid a short visit to Kuching, left J on the 28th per s.s. Sulong for Limhang and Labuan.
   We understand that the General is a great traveller and his walking tours include trips from India through Central Asia to the Caspian Sea, and from the Ruby Mines at Mogok Burma, to the Silver and Lead Mines at Namtu, thence from Mergui across the Malay Peninsula via the Tenasserim River, a seven-day trek along the route linking up the Burma and Siam Railways.
   Being part organizer of the Ulster Division  in 1914, the General has a store of information and numerous anecdotes about the Irish  situation just prior to the Great War.
   CAMBRIDGE won the varsity Boat Race by 5 lengths.
   GRAND National results : “Jack Horner,”
“Old Tay Bridge,” “Brights boy.”
   “KING of Clubs” won the Lincoln at 100
to 1, beating Zionist, the favourite, by a
head.
   TENDERS have been asked for the con-
struction of two squash racquet courts and
a fives court which are intended to be added
to the new small end of the amalgamated club
premises in due course.
   WITNESS (District Court, Texas):—“Now,
I tell ye, jedge, it didn’t amount to nuthin.’
The fust I knowed about it was when Bill
Saunders called Tom Smith a liar, an’ Tom
knocked ’im down.
   “One o’ Bill’s friends then cut Tom with a
knife, slicin’ a big chunk off ’im. Then
Sam Jones, who was a friend o’ Tom’s, shot
the other feller, and natural like, got shot up
himself—and three or four others got cut up
right smart by somebody.
   “That caused some excitement, jedge, an’
then they started fightin’, but it didn’t
amount to nuthin’ much” !
A . It only took me an hour or so to learn, to drive my beetle.
B. You must have taken great pains over it ?
A. Yes, and I’ve still got ’em,—but do you know I never realized profanity was so prevalent till I drove a car.
B. Why ? Do you hear more of it on the road ?
A . Well everyone I have knocked over so far has used dreadful language.
Overheard:—
Club Secretary:. “Have you sorted those drink chits yet for last month?”
Clerk: “Yes, Sir, I have deciphered all except a few signed L. L. & S. Are they for the Land and Survey Department ?” ! ! !
ACCORDING to the Pinang Gazette and Straits Chronicle :—“It was originally intended that H.M.S. Concord should call at Foo Chin, Sarawak. Singapore and then Colombo, on her way home. Penang not being included in the ports of call, but an outbreak of typhoid at Foo Chin prevented her touching there	”
  [We are glad that it was not the outbreak of smallpox at Kuching which prevented her touching here!—ED.]
M.L. “SANTOSA.”
   The Borneo Mission Association is appeal-
ing for an endowment fund of £2,000, to be
invested in Sarawak, to produce an income
large enough to secure the maintenance of the
new mission launch Santosa. The launch
 has accommodation in which the Bishop can
work when held up alongside Dyak villages;
and saves at least two out of every three days
that used to be spent in travelling. Mr.
Currey, in reporting on the launch, says:
“The launch has now done about 800 to
900 miles, and behaves very well. But it is
quite possible that lack of funds for upkeep
may prove the retention of this craft to be
impossible. " This is a disaster that only the
efforts of B.M.A. can avert.—[C. E. & T.]
STRANGE MEETING.
  An estate Manager from Palembang went on a business trip to Cheribon recently and hailed a taxi from the railway station. When the vehicle approached, the two men stood speechless for a while, as it transpired that the chauffeur was none other than the Manager’s own servant who had disappeared three months ago with three hundred guilders.—[Pinang Gazette & Straits Chronicle.]


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1926.
Death of H. E. the Governor of
North Borneo.
  WE learned with deep regret on the 16th of the sudden death of His Excellency A. C. Pearson, C.M.G,, late Governor of British North Borneo.
  In 1922 His Excellency retired from the post of Governor on the expiration of the term of his Governorship which is 6 years, but in his case was extended to 7 years, as a token of the Court of Directors’ appreciation of the valuable services rendered during strenuous times.
  His Excellency was again nominated for the Government Governorship in 1925 to succeed the late Major-General Sir William Ryecroft, K.C.B.. K.C.M.G., and we can only sincerely sympathise with His Excellency’s relatives and with the Government of British North Borneo in their second sad loss.
  His Highness the Rajah despatched the following telegram of condolence—
15/3/26.
  To British North Borneo Co.. London.
  Deepest sympathy in great loss your Government has sustained by Pearson’s death His friendly relations with Sarawak much appreciated for many years Rajah.
  And received in reply the following tele gram-
16 3 26.
  Rajah. Kuching.—Court much appreciate your kind sympathy in the great loss which they sustained in the sudden death of Governor Pearson. President.
A WORD FOR JAWI.
  Whether the Governments of the Straits and F.M.S. have not done more harm than good by their efforts to make the people of this country learn and use romanized Malay, instead of the Arabic script to which they have been accustomed for centuries, is a very moot question. In Kedah, we are glad to see, the authorities continue to make use of Jawi in their official proclamations and notices. It would be a great pity if, in order to make things easier for the European, the Arabic script, which has a great deal to recommend it besides its brevity and elegance, were gradually allowed to fall into disuse in the writing and printing of the Malay language.—[Straits Echo.]
Sibu Notes.
? •
  “Does the native improve?” I don't know. Your readers had better look up that acrimonious correspondence which the Gazette published some years ago when “Pro Bono Publico," “Fair Play,” and “Native” gave vent to their innermost feelings. But what I do know is that the so-called benefits and luxuries of modern civilisation bring forth strange results.
  The other day I was sitting in a Dyak house — a long house at that, not a langko. After talking about toe price of rubber, when the seaplanes were coming, when a school would be built for their children, and the usual catechism, one of the men asked us to go into his room. We crept through a squeaky door -nearly stepped through the floor, and finally lowered ourselves onto a very grimy mat and expected to look round at the usual jumblesale-like contents of the room. It is true that there were the inevitable row of jars tied up against one of the walls, shelves of garish-looking plates and brassware, odds and ends of hunting and fishing tackle and the hundred and one articles—mostly covered in dust and cobweb—which usually find their way into a Dyak room. But there were other things too Firstly a brand new dressing table, complete with Io king-glass and drawers- varnished that particularly obnoxious shade of yellow stain ; item, a marble-topped table on which stood a tin of Double Ace Cigarettes ; item, a large horn gramophone with a box of records nearby, and last but not least, a bicycle!! Goodness only knows what for, as the lust quarter of a mile to the house was over extremely old and rotten logs across a swamp. Anyway we sat down and smoked a cigarette each while some one turned on the gramophone. The record was called “Chuckles ’ by Billy or Willy Somebody or other—I forget the name. You know the sort of thing—the singer shrieks a few inaudible words and the test of the song is a chorus of chuckles or guffaws or whatever kind of noise that particular comedian fancies 1 looked round tin the faces of the Dyaks a proud grin spread across that of the , gramophone's owner and the children took up the cm- When this was finished one of the small boys called out shyly for main ben, and father promptly picked a record out of a whole heap. This proved to be one of these things called a pot-pourri I think, and was concerned with Scotch (or is it Scots?) airs Cock O'the North -The Campbells Are Coming She is My Daisy — Bonnie Dundee—and ending up with w-hat we took to be a skirl on the pipes. I saw that we were in for a regular recital so made my excuses and went outside to the ruai again. There were assembled a lot of old women and small children (and to lie perfectly candid some rather good-looking girls too). We started talking on the usual subjects and somehow or other got onto, childish complaints. “Yes," said one of the old ladies  in Malay. “I always think castor oil is a good medicine, but in English) have you ever used dill water?” Well ! well ! what could one say — I seem to remember hearing that reliable specific was used in my own case when an infant, but the babies 1 have ever had anything to do with seem to have avoided the necessity of calling for it. Anyway I continued the subject and we conversed on the merits of Mellin's Food and Glaxo—wbat was good for thrush—  did I not think—well I won't say any more, the subject began to get too domestic. We switched  off onto the little boys, one of whom told me that  he was the possessor of a reading book. I told him to go and get it, which, when it arrived, proved to lie an elementary English Reader. I asked if any of them could read, on which the book was cast aside and the whole lot chanted the first three


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1926.
87
chapters vocabulary and all ! ! My friend, being of
a musical turn of mind, then sang that well-known I
classic “I'm an Airman” io them and five minutes
later the lot were singing the chorus. Shortly after- ,
wards we gingerly wormed our way down the notched 
ladder and started across those slippery logs.
  "Does the native improve?" I say again, I don’t 
know. But I do wish he would make a decent ladder 
and at anyrate square off some of the notches on I
those slippery logs, as well as buy “Chuckles” and 
indulge in dill water.
  They say that the native seldom indulges in re- 
partee with his so-called elders and betters. It is 
just possible that many repartees do not reach our 
ears, or if they do are not understood. A pert young 
damsel was sued in the local petty-debts Court by 
a Chinese hawker for the price of various articles
alleged to have been supplied to her. The plaintiff 
produced his books which were promptly passed to 
the European Magistrate for inspection. These 
were passed back again with the usual knowing look 
and the Chinaman asked to readout the items. Out 
they came—tornacco sek one put—blachu two depa— 
cash one dollar, and so on. By this time it was quite
evident to everybody else in the Court House, in
fact it was common knowledge beforehand, that the ,
whole of the list was merely an account which rhe
careful celestial had kept of his gifts to the said
damsel for having honoured him with her company
The zealous European Magistrate, however, steadily
wrote it all down until it came to cue silk sarong. 
Ila! thought the Magistrate waking up from his .
partial slumber, I must say something now—“My 
good girl, did you take this silk sarong? ” “Yes,"
answers the girl brightly. “And why?” says the 
wretched Magistrate. “Oh, think for yourself!" 
responds the girl. Collapse of all —stifled laughter— 
judgment for—no ! you're wrong—judgment for 
defendant.
  Most of us receive queerly addressed letters from 
time to time—and especially ones sent to us by those 
who do not use the English language habitually. 
During the last few months the fame of the Sarawak
Government seems to have penetrated even to the
wilds of far Foochow. Indeed its fame would seem
to be growing apace The first letter was addressed
“The Governor of Sibu," a nice sounding title. The
next was to "The President of Sibu.” A title not
difficult to understand when so many of the Chinese
must find it bewildering to know who is entitled to
be called such at the precise time of writing, or even
how many Presidents there are. But the third and
last letter was simply and grandly addressed to “The
King of Sibu” !! Hurrah for the royalists and bad
cess to the roundheads. At the same time we are
rather apprehensive of a fourth effort as there would 
appear to be no alternative.
THE OPTIMISTIC FIDDLER.
Things we want to know :—
  Who hid all those unopened bundles of "La Vie
Pariaienne” on top of the almeirah ?
From an Indian Catalogue:—
  “Gents self-cutting hair clipper," in nickle silver
lardy. With the aid of this cliper one can cut his
hair from the smallest size to any biggest size as
desiring, and absolutely free from getting dranger 
of stroke or wound. Special quality Rs. 4.15 each. 
  Half hour striking with calendar Rs. 40 each, 
“Milk Taster.” By aid of this meter you can ex- 
amine without any calculation or trouble, whether the
milk is pure or mixed with milk, you can easily
measure the extant of water only placing it in the
milk. As. 15 each.
       Marine Motor Craft.
  There is a noticeable increase in the number
of new motor craft on the Kuching "River now,
some of which have extremely pretty lines.
They vary considerably in design and size,
from the ordinary small launch and somewhat
larger Santubong bandong to the full-sized
schooner fitted with internal combustion
engines. The former can now be seen daily
pouring out their cosmopolitan load of
passengers from the many villages up and
down river, especially the Bau district; the
larger craft, which not only continue to han-
dle the raw sago transport from port to the
Coast Division, include a few smart looking
passenger vessels which have greatly im-
proved coastal communication.
  No doubt the full rigged schooner, so
well-known along this Coast, will soon be a
thing of the past.
Last Attack by Pirates.
12th April, 1869.
Where once the daring pirates used to roam, 
And fear and trembling spread around the coast. 
Now peaceful trader breaks the summer foam. Sometimes one seems to see the Ghost 
Of well-rigged boat (and hear the moan 
Of Captives caught and lashed to post), 
Of decks, that, washed with blood and sea. 
Were scenes of many a fierce fought fight.
That memory which makes you think you played 
a part
Will stay your sleeping, tired though you be.
 Is it the Guns of Flanders, that you heard, 
Or of Gallipoli, that wake you with a start?
(Contributed.)
Extracts from Yearly Reports.
  Kuching Police.—Two hundred and forty-three crocodiles, measuring 942 feet 7 inches, were destroyed at the Police Station; rewards paid for these amounting to $340.80
  The capture and rewards for crocodiles have increased as follows:—
  1924, captured 81. measuring 256' ICT; rewards $101.71. 1925, captured 243, measuring 942' 7"; rewards $340.80. Captured have increased by .162, and rewards have increased $239.09.
  These chiefly come from Samaraban and a new method of catching these reptiles by flares has been adopted resulting in the above increase.
  First Division.—Sadong.—Rewards for the capture of crocodiles amounted to $415.56 as compared with $61.71 in 1924. (Number of reptiles not stated.)
  Bau.—Great improvements have been made in all the roads and by the end of 1925 there were forty- two miles of road fit for light car traffic and eight miles lorry traffic.


8H
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1926.
Tropical Happening I.
AFTER SIR W. S. GILBERT.
From West to East that noble clan, 
— Ex-Service men—came to a man 
To Sarawak and Kelantan. 
In flocks and flocks they came. 
Amongst them was a youngster who 
In spite of all that he’d gone through 
Could drink as much as I or you: 
And Donald was his name.
One day while standing on the quav.
- In Singapore. I think, was he.— 
Don saw a man who had a flea 
Upon his whereabout.
The man he fidgeted and fussed
And waved his arms and raved and cussed ;
Our Donald thought that poor flea must 
Be very hale and stont.
Which thought made Donald fidget too, 
In spite of all that he’d gone through — 
But stout, although a heavy brew. 
Was not our Donald s drink.
The sun scorched on our hero's back, 
His throat felt like a carpet tack. 
Whereat he forthwith wandered back 
Aperatifs to sink.
CORRESPONDENCE.
 [The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of  Correspondents.]
LIMEHOUSE, E. 14,
LONDON, ENGLAND,
                            3rd February, 1926. To
    The Editor,

      Sarawak Gazette.
 DEAR SIR,
       I was reading with my teacher in school last Monday (1.2.26.) the chapter on the Eastern Archepelego. I observe from that that you and your country are delightful with beautiful birds, apes, monkeys, etc., etc. I my sell thought it would be  very nice indeed to obtain a small active monkey. So 1 am asking you ns politely as I possibly can whether you would send me a monkey. If you should do so I would be very anxious to show it to all my school-mates.
Yours resptfully,
GEORGE E. T		
Pasal Menoa Enggris.
The “Europe" portals glittered high. 
The hour was ten —the sun was high, 
A few more steps and he was by 
The Sikh in turban red.
“A brandy ginger-ale” quoth he 
With ill-concealed cupidity. 
Then sat to view the scenery 
And fan his mushy head.
He heard a voice quite close beside; 
“Hello. John Willy" someone cried .
And, turning round, our Donald spied 
A friend of bygone days. 
For Dicky Briggs he really knew, 
—Had been his tent companion too. 
And one amongst a scanty few 
Who knew our Donald's ways.
“What brings you here mv Donny ? " 
“I'll sit me down and have a beer" 
“With you." said Dick, with cheerful leer. 
And Donald had to pay
Said Briggs “Of course you'll have to go” 
“With me to the Armistice show" 
“I'm with a bunch of five or so" 
And Donald answered “Yes.”
“We'll meet to-night at eight old thing" 
“And mingle with this gathering" 
“And Donny, you and I will sing” 
And Donald murmured “fine.” 
“With song and dance we’ll jog along" 
“To mingle with the merry throng 
And Donald, who had listened long 
Said “What about the wine?”

The dinner starts, the crowd is there. 
And Dicky Briggs is in the chair 
Behaving like a millionaire 
So liberal is he.
And Donald isn't far away ;
He listens to the Chairman's say
And drinks the toasts as best he may 
With due alacrity.

At twelve the lights were glowing dim. 
The room began to wave and swim, 
(Or was it merely Donald’s whim ? 
He sank into repose.
What happened next our Donald knew 
No more than either I or you 
— In spite of all that he'd gone through — 
So now my song I'll close.
    Dinga ka olih kita samoa orang, 
    Dudok tetap dinga ka karang;
    Aku dudok lalu ngenang, 
    Leman utai di menoa orang.
    
    Ukai aku tu bejako sabarang, 
    Baka ti nampong ensra orang; 
    Bisi ti dipeda mata aku trang, 
    Bisi mega dibacha dalatn sural ti ngenang.
    
    Adaipen England menoa dikenang, 
    Penyauh iya ukai agi chechamang; 
    Wang pen ka maioh enggau nambang, 
    Sikap tuboh pen enda tau korang.
    
    Menoa orang maioh kena pansa,
     Kapal di laut enda olih tesa; 
    Mensia maioh utang enda sa bansa. 
    Lain ga adat enda sida sa basa.
    
Teruba nuntong menoa Singapura, 
Mensia maioh enda sa chara;
Kedai China ukai nya sa bengkah, 
Kedai orang puteh mega ukai nya siti enggau dua. 

Serta kapal pen belaboh di Singapura.
Datai tamhang ukai nya agi sa buah enggau dua; 
Ngelingi kapal sida iya baka ti nyembah, 
Ka ngulih ka wang rerga sewa.

Ukai me aku tu ka ngemanjai ka kenang. 
Menoa Singapura diau pemadu pemaioh orang; 
Kapal datai enda kala nernu pemungkang, 
Ari rerak tawas datai ka hari nyau petang. 

Pemaioh rumah batu alit ati aku ngenang, 
Pemaioh jalai alit ati meda ti melintang putang;
 	Kreta ti ditaban ka kuda munyi pasang nyegang, 
    Sapemanjai hari nadai ngetu nyentok ka petang. 
    
    Mensia ti charut ukai nya kala belambang, 
    Saja bisi rnata-mata ti nyaga siang enggau petang, 
    Laban pemaioh bansa mensia ukai nya agi kenang, 
    Bebunoh, bechuri, berampas, ukai nya tau pungkang. 
    
    Orang Tambi ipak pendiau sida rindu beati garang. 
    Nadai agi milih orang datai ka bini sida disrang; 
    Baka sida ti bejako dras lalu melintang putang, 
    Baka nya mega sida ti belaya enda kala pungkang. 
    
    Orang China ukai nya agi ribu orang.
          Maia di kedai maia di wangkang; 
          Sida nya betangkap enda belambang, 
          Diukum. ditutup. baka ti enda dikenang. 
          
          Belepas ari Singapura lalu bekejang, 
          Bulih satu bulan belayar siang enggau petang, 
          Menoa dipansa ukai nya kabuah dibilang, 
          Ngagai menoa England ti pulai ka kenang.


'I'HE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1926.
89
Glombang di laut ukai nya agi checharnang, 
Pemesai alun iya nyau ka baka Bukit Kalingkang; 
Sukat hari jai nyau nurun biobalai ujan, 
Ati baka dipandam, takut bandar ati enggau penyuan. 
Ukai nama agi pemaioh penemu mensia, 
Dalam kapal Samoa utai bla sedia;
Pemakai pen maioh umbas tengkira, 
Dalam kapal asai ti di menoa raia. 
Badu bekonang maioh ensra, 
Aku tu lalu ngelaboh ka charita; 
Menoa Ribai di tasik raia, 
Menoa ti pemadu iya barn nyata.
 Dibaroh bulan di sarandang tarang, 
Penyelai menoa England ukai chechamang; 
Pemaioh mensia enda ulih bilang, 
Nengri magang nadai kampong pengerang. 
Pemanah menoa enda ulih charita, 
Rumah batu ukai nya agi sa bengka; 
Jalai pen maioh bepanga-panga, 
Nengri pen besai rapas mata meda.
Bisi sa bengka dikumhai kapal darat, 
Penglaju bejalai nyau ka baka kilat; 
Mensia ti nambang datai ka sarat, 
Ditaban ka iya ka samoa tampat.
Semadi me aku tu nyau udah ngarang, 
Manah mega aku bepanjai ka kenang; 
Penyelap menoa England ukai chechamang, 
Leboh musin chelap salju nurun nadai betagang. 
Mata hari pemadu nyelai baka, 
Berandang tampak utang enda bisa;
Ukai nama agi penyamai anak mensia, 
Di England menoa ti dicharita. 
Bisi mega sa bengka kebun dunya, 
Dikumbai Zoo pemadu beguna;
Disimpan dia samoa maeham jelu enggau unta, 
Ari tanaman datai ka ikan enggau naga. 
Orang puteh landik lalu chukup tengkira, 
Adat sida alus pendiau sida pen kekira; 
Orang ti raja enda ulih dikata, 
Manah diau sinu ka orang ti saranta.
Dalam kebun Zoo nadai enda dia ti digaga Allah, 
Remaung dikurong dia datai ka bansa singa. 
Sernoa leman macham ular datai ka sawa, 
Mensia bejual pemakai dia nanya ka nyawa. 
Rumah sambeyang ukai nya sa bengka dua, 
Pemanah digaga orang enda ulih dicharita;
Pendiau chechegit di langit sigat nyata, 
Alai mensia nyembah Allah ti amat Petara.
W. H. H.
           Club Notes.
the interval found the home team one goal to the good, the result of a magnificent shot by Apoh
   At the renewal Kuching played a more forcing game, and after about fifteen minutes play, Mead put in a low daisy cropper which beat Bau's custodian to a frazzle. A few minutes later Ennion put in a humdingger which also found the net. Bau made strenuous efforts to equalise, but by this time the visiting team were getting tough and, retaining their lead, won a most exciting game by two goals to one.
   The following were the teams: Bau—J. C. Smith, Carey, R. E. Edwards, Mah Kiok, Bujang, Mathew Chong, Madris, Palil, Apoh, Hee Leong. Kuching— Down, Turner, Stewart, Mead, Honore, Banks Spurway, Ennion, Calvert, Bates Mudford.
   At the conclusion of the game Mrs. J. C. Smith very graciously presented the Captain of the winning team with a handsome cup.
   After a swim in the lake a very pleasant evening was spent iu music and wit at the D.O.’s bungalow. The end of dinner found everybody a jolly good fellow, and carriages arrived at about 10.15 p.m.
   At Siniawan a search party was formed which was entirely successful in extracting a care-free half dozen or so stragglers from M r. Ong Seng Thai’s house where light refreshment was being served.
   The weary wanderers sought their beds in the early hours of Sunday morning, having had a most perfect and strenuous day.
   Three cheers for Bau and may they soon come down here for a return match. Bau-wan!! —.Jolly Jack.
Sarawak Club,
BOWLING AVERAGES FOR FEBRUARY, 1926.J. P. Baird  No. of
  Games.
... 13Average.
159.0Gr. T. Bates...	5148 4R. W. (’hater...	5123.4B. A. Trechman... 11116.9A. E. Lawrence...	5109.4D. Y. Proudfoot...	8108.1Kuching Footbull Club.
Beating the Bau-nds !”
  The K. F. C. team played its first away match at Bau on Saturday the 27th March, in answer to a kind invitation from Messrs. F. H. Kortright and R. E. Edwards.
  Fourteen members cast off from the Pengkalan at 12.30 pin in the good ship Bradek (kindly lent for the occasion by Messrs. Ong Ewe Hai) and some twenty minutes later six more embarked at Satok.
  Siniawan was reached at 3 p in., the poker “kira” having been made up about half a minute previously. Here the party distributed itself into no less than eight ‘Baby Austins” which, proceeding in fine ahead, faded away over the horizon at about 40 miles per hour. All went well until BeetleNo. 3, freighted with three of the longer and lustier members of the K.F.C.. failed to negotiate a ditch. Fortunately the ambulance following up with the luggage arrived in rime to save the occupants from adding to an already overpowering thirst.
  Punctually to time the opposing forces broke the camera and then facing one another in battle formation proceeded to misskick the spherical, After a strenuous first half, mostly in favour of Bau.
       Race Week Bowls Tournament.
(Men's Doubles-Draw for Partners.)
HANDICAP.
Kuching Entries close Saturday, 24th April, at
7 p.m.
  Kuching Members to roll off on Monday, 26th April, at 6 p.m.
  Outstation Entries close Wednesday, 28tb April, at 7 p.m.
Outstation Members to roll off on Thursday, 29th
April, at 6 p.m. sharp.
Ballot for Handicappers, 1st, 2nd and 3rd April.
  Entries (from Outstations to be notified to the Honorary Secretary by post, if possible) $1 each.
    Race Week Optional Pool Tournament.
(Men’s Doubles-Draw for Partners.)
HANDICAP.
  Kuching Entries close Saturday, 3rd April, at 7 p.m.
  Kuching Draw and Handicaps published Monday, 5th April, at noon.
  Kuching Members to play off by Monday, 26th April.
  Outstation Entries close Wednesday, 28th April, at 7 p.m.


90
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1926.
   Outstation Draw mid Handicaps published Thursday, 29th April, at noon.
   Outstation Members to play off by Monday, 3rd May
   Final between Kuching and Outstation Members on Tuesday, 4th May.
Ballot for Handicappers. 1st, 2nd and 3rd April
   Entries (from outstations to be notified to the Honorary Secretary by post, if possible) $1 each.
         Race Week Tennis Tournament.
(Men’s Doubles-Draw for Partners.)
HANDICAP.
   Kuching Entries dose Saturday. 3rd April, at 7 p.m
   Kuching Draw and Handicaps published Monday, 5th April, at noon.
   Kuching Members to pay off by Monday, 26th April.
   Outstation Entries close Wednesday, 28th April, at 7 p.m.
   Outstation Draw and Handicaps published Thursday, 29th April, at noon.
   Outstation Members to play off by Monday. 3rd May.
   Final between Kuching and Outstation Members on Tuesday, 4th May.
   Ballot for Handicappers, 1st. 2nd and 3rd April.
   Entries (from Outstations to be notified to Hie Honorary Secretary by post, if possible, $1 each.
St. Michael's Catholic Club
Tennis Tournament
Singles Handicap.
FIRST ROUND.
Ah Thiam scratch beat L. Kon Eah scratch, 7 5, 
6—2.
Stephen Harry scratch beat F. Shui Lian plus 15, 
6- 4, 6 3.
L. K. L. Chan owe 15 beat John Tai plus 15. 6,—3, 
6-0.
SECOND ROUND.
Ho Hong Soon (bye) owe 15 beat 8. Mung (bye)  owe 
15, 6 3, 6—3.
Ah Niaw (bye) plus 15 beat Liang Kiang (bye) plus 15.
 6—3 6—0.
Ah Thiam scratch beat Lim Soon (bye) owe 15. 6—3. 
6—3.
L. K. L. Chan owe 15 beat Stephen Harrv scratch. 6—3. 
6—2.

THIRD ROUND.
Ah Niaw plus 15 beat H. Hong Soon owe 15, 13—11. 
6—2.
L. K. L Chan owe 15 beat Ah Thiam scratch, 6—2,
 6—4.
      FINAL ROUND, BEST OF FIVE ADVANTAGE SETS
L. K. L. Chan owe 15 beat Ah Niaw plus 15, 6—2, 
6—8. 6—0.
   Mr. L. K. L. Chau won his Club trophy and Mr. Ah Niaw won Mr. W. L. Vanderslott’s pair of silver cups. The final was played oh on the 20th instant, unfortunately for Ah Niaw he had to wear smoked .glasses owing to sore eyes ; anyhow, the favourite opinion was that even on their ordinary form of rest would not have been otherwise.
Ho HONG SOON, Honarary Secretary.
Sarawak Regatta, 1926.

Notes on the Entries and Weights
for the Spring Meeting 1926.
  It is unfortunate that Division I. decreases in size meeting by meeting. White Wings and Untong have been moved down to Division II. This leaves seven ponies in Division I. of which Billy Buster is not coining under the Starters orders. The only promotion is Azab from Division IV. to Division HI. Kijang, Snap, and Lee Pah have gone to Division III., Sabek. Pitak, and Bintang to Division IV.
  The course opened for training on March 15th. It is too early yet to give any forecast. Lee Mah, Blazes, and Hopeless all caught the eye as being fit. But Burak was out of condition. Still there is plenty of time. The usual rumours of cracked heels and sore backs continue to come in from the outstation stables. Ghalib and Shotaway, however, arrived recently from Baram in excellent condition. Their owner and trainer has some very nice material to work on.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1926.
  Glancing at the weights for the racing on the first day, the first race for Division IV, 3 furlongs. Sabek (10.0) heads the list with top weight being a newcomer from Division UJ. He was dead lame in the Autumn and did not run. Sakai (9.7) gets the same weight as before over this distance. It will be remembered that this pony was fancied for this race last Autumn. He was badly left at the post, but was going very well at the finish in spite of it. Pitak (9.10) catches the eye but the distance is not long enough for him; Apa Kena (8.0) has the same weight after running Azab to a length when receiving 17 tbs. Shotaway (7.11) was two lengths away at the same weight. Both these ponies had only been taken up for three months previous o the races. I do not expect either of them to remain in Division IV. on their present form.
  Top weight for the five furlong race for Division I. has dropped from 11.0 to 10.7. Hopeless again heads the list. Burak (10.3) won the race last year with 10.5. Blazes (9.3) was half a length away with 9.fl. Wembley the same distance away now gets 5 lbs. less. He races at 8.5. Hopeless (10.7) only concedes 4 lbs. to Burak instead of 9 tbs. Wembley (8.5) is receiving 33 lbs. from Burak as against 23 tbs. when he ran him to a length. This 10 lbs. may place Wembley in front of Burak. Hopeless (10.7) can be either first or last whichever pleases him when the flag falls. Lee Mah (9.0) was off colour last meeting and did not run up to his previous form of the Spring. Kismet (8.10) is looking very fit. If his leg stands training he should be somewhere near at the finish, but it would be a popular win if Wembley passed the post first.
  The third race of the day, four furlongs for Division II., has ten entries. The top weights, Untong (10.0) and White Wings (9.10), have come down from the class above. In spite of this, I cannot see the reason why Adham (8.10) should be penalized so heavily for running Sisit (9.4), last meeting's winner, to a short head. Sisit was then carrying 9.6 and Adham 8.8. In 1923 Sisit, as a new pony, won twice over this distance carrying 9.5 and 10.7. He beat Sakbon the then star performer. His time was 1 min. 6 secs. Last Autumn his time was 1 min. 6 4/5 secs. Granted that Untong and White Wings should be able to deal with him, I consider that Sisit has been let in very lightly and Adham unnecessarily penalized. Beaver (8.7) looks quite good. And Lutong (8.12) will make them all gallop if he starts.
  The six furlongs for Division III. is next on the list. Ghalib (8.10) won the race last meeting on the disqualification of Kuching (9.7). Ghalib gets an extra 3 lbs. and Kuching gets off 2 lbs. Ghalib now receives 11 lbs. from Kuching as against 14 lbs. before. Azab (8.4) comes up from Division IV. having won both the 3 and 4 furlong races in that class, carrying 9.3 in both races. He has filled out and improved greatly. Whether the blinkers in which he is being trained will help him to further successes remain to be seen. Bakcha (10.0) comes down from Division II. The distance suits him but the weight is too much. The distance is too far for Damit (9.4). Aladdin (9.0) is going well in his morning gallops.
  Very little comment is needed on the four furlongs for Division TV. On form it is anyone’s race. The weights favour Shotaway (7.12). He made a very good race of it over this distance last meeting.
  Race six is the five furlongs for Division ?. Adham (8.10) again incurs an extra 2 lbs. for being three lengths away from Sisit (9.5) over the same
distance last Autumn. They were then carrying 8.3 and 9.1 ½  respectively. Penglima (9.7) was length away from them carrying 10.0. Untong (10.0) and White Wings (9.7) are newcomers. Bang (8.0) on his last appearance over five furlongs ran Nizam to a head receiving 5 lbs. He was then carrying 9.3. With only 8.0 he may show up here. Beaver (8.7) made the running in the mile up to Padungan gate with 7.11. And then won over six furlongs from Adham (8.10) by half a length carrying 8.6. The extra pound should not worry him if he is up to form. White Wings (9.7) likes a shorter distance.
  The seventh race is the three furlongs for Divisions III. and IV. It has drawn an entry of ten ponies. Ghalib (9.0) won this race last meeting from The Scout who does not go this time. If (9.9) has his right distance provided he starts. Damit (9.7) is nicely weighted. But with ten runners, if they all go to the post, it will be a scramble and the draw will have a lot to do with the result.
  After much discussion it has at last been decided to have one race round the course. The Ranee’s Cup will be run over 1 mile 2 furlongs 150 yards instead of the measured mile. The start will be opposite the Grand Stand. Seventeen ponies are entered but it is doubtful if they will all weigh out. Many must, only have been entered to see how the Handicapper would treat them. The most remarkable weights are Blazes (9.9) and Kismet (8.12). After the Spring Meeting in 1925 Blazes and Kismet (then Up Eight), ran a match round the course at level weights (9.8). Kismet came right away to win by about eight lengths. Blazes (9.9) has now to give Kismet (8.12) weight to the extent of 11 fl)s. Even if Kismet did not put up a creditable performance in the following Autumn, and Blazes gave him three pounds and beat him over the mile, he was never far enough behind to justify such leniency. There will not be sufficient jockeys for the light weights and many will carry extra weight in all probability.
             CENTAUR.
Sarawak Turf Club.

Spring Meeting, 1926.
ENTRIES AND HANDICAPS.
First Day. -1st May.
Race No. 1.—3 furlongs.
1— — Sabek ...	...
2— Pitak
3— Sakai
4—Manna Buleh
5—Guntor
7—Ajaib
8— Apa  Kena	...
9—Shotaway
Race No. 2.—5 furlongs.
1— Hopeless ...
2- Burak
3- Blaze
4—Lee Mah ...
Division IV.
Abang Sahni and Abang
Jadal	...	10.0
Ali bin Dollah	...	9.10
Mr. Astlay	...	9. 7
Mr. E. O. Brace	...	9. 7
Nasrullah	...	8. 0
Mr Ang Cheng Khoi	...	8.0
Mr. J. B. Archer	...	8. 0
Mr. C. D. Adams	...	7.71
Division I.
Mr. H. B. Crocker	... 10.7
Ali bin Dollah	... 10,3
Mr. J. A. H. Hardie ... 9. 8
Mr. Wee Boon Chew
    and Mr. Chan Teck
Cheng ... 9. 0
Mr. J. K. Besslev	... 8.10
II. H. The Rajah ... 8. 5
5—Kismet
6—Wembley ...


GAZETTE. APRIL 1, 1926.
92
THE SARAWAK 
Race No. 3.—4 furlongs.
Division I
I
Second Dny. f*rd
M sty.
1— Untong
2— White Wings 8—Sakbon
4—Penglima ...
6—Sisit
6—Tulin
7—Lntong
8 — Adham 9—Beaver
10—Bang
Mr. P. M. Adams ... 10.0
H. H. The Rajah	... 9.10
Abang Suleiman	... 9. 7
Mr. Chan Teck Cheng and Mr. Wee Boon
Chew ... 9. 7
The Datu Bandar ... 9. 4
Haji Hassim	...	9. 0
Inche Mohd. Ali and
   A bang Mohd. Taha ... 8.12
The Datu Imam Tua ... 8.10 
Mr. P. M. Adams and
   Mr. J. B. Archer ... 8. 7
Messrs. Bates and
   Arundell	... 8. 0
Race No. 4.— 6 furlongs.
Division III.
1—Kijang	..
2—Bakcha    .. Sam Kongsi
    .. Abang Suleiman.. 10.0 .. 10.03—Bintang    .. Gepek     .. 9. 94—Kuching    .. Mr Ang Ong Chye     .. 9 7b—Damit    .. Mr Walters     .. 9. 46—Aladdin	..    .. The Triple Kongsi     .. 9 .0T—Mah Jongg    .. Mr. Hinway     .. 3.129—Ghalib    .. Mr. C- D. Adams     .. 8.109—Gundah    .. The Datu Imam     .. 8. 710—Azab  .. Mr Harchell     .. 8. 4Race No. 5.—4 furlongs.
1—Pitak
2—Sakai
3—Manna Buleh 
4—Guntor 
5—Ajaib
6—Apa Kena 
7—Shotaway
Race No. 6.—5 furlongs.
      Division IV.
Ali bin Dollah	. 	10 0	.
Mr. Astlay	..	9 11
Mr. E. O. Bruce	..	9. 8	
Nasrullah	..	8. 1	
Mr. Ang Cheng Khoi .. 8.1 
Mr. J.B. Archer	..	8.1
Mr. C. D. Adams	.	7 12

Division II.
Race No. 1.—4 furlongs.
1—Apa Kena 
2—Shotaway 
3-Ghalib ..
4 -Azab .. 
5—lf
6—Aladdin ..
7—Pitak
8—Manna Buleh 
9—Guntor ..
10—Kuching
 11—Sakai 
12 -Gundah ..
13—Ajaib ..
Race No. 2.-6 furlongs.
1 —Wembley 
2—Hopeless.. 
3—Blazes ..
4 — Lee Mah
6—Burak .. 
6 -Kismet ..
Race No. 3.—6 furlongs.
1 —White Wings
2—Untong ..
 3—Beaver ..
4— Tolin 
5—Penglima
6—sisit 
7—Lutong
8— Sakbon ..
9—Nizam
10 Hang 
11—Adham ..
Divisions ? & ?.
Mr. J. B. Archer 
Mr. C. D. Adams
     Do.
Mr- Harehell
Mr. E. W. Howell 
The Triple Kongsi 
Ali bin Dollah 
Mr. E. O. Bruce 
Nasrallah
Mr. Ang Ong Chye 
Mr. Astlay 
The Datu Imam 
Mr. Ang Cheng Khoi
Division ?
H. H. the Rajah
Mr. H. B. Crocker
Mr. Hanlie
Mr. Wee Boon Chew and Mr.
Chan Teck Cheng-Ali bin Dollah
Mr. .1 K. Beasley
    Division II.
H. H. the Rajah
Mr. P. M. Adama
Mr. P M. Adams and Mr. J.
B. Archer
Haji Hassim
Mr Chan Teck Cheng and 
Mr. Wee Boon Chiew
The Datu Bandar
Inchi Mohd. Ali and Abang 
Mohd. Taha
Abang Suleiman
Mr. Willy Clark and Mr.
Ang Ong Chye
Messrs. Bates and Arundell
The Datu Imam Tua
1—Untong
2—White Wings .
3—Penglima
4—Sisit
S—Lutong
6—Adham
7—Beaver
8 -Bang
Race No. 7.—3 furlongs.
1—Bintang
2—Kuching
3—If
4—Damit
5—Aladdin	..	..
6—Ghalib	..
7—Gundah	..	..
8—Azab
9—Manna Buleh ..
10—Apa Kena
Mr. P.M Adams	-. 10.0
H H The Rajah	.. 9. 7
Mr. Chan Teck Cheng and
      Mr. Wee Boon Chew	9. 7
The Datu Bandar	9. 5
Inche Mohd Ali and
     Abang Mohd. Taha .. 8.12 
The Datu Imam Tua . . 8.10 
Mr P. .M. Adams and Mr.
     J. B. Archer	.. 8. 7
Messrs- Bates & Arundell 8. 0
Divisions III & IV.
Gepek	..	10.0
Mr. Ang Ong Chye	..	9 12
Mr. E. W. Howell	..	9.9
Mr. G. J. D. Walters	..	9. 7
The Triple Kongsi	..	9. 4
Mr. C. D. Adams	..	9 0
The Datu Imam	..	8.11
Mr. Harchell	..	8. 7
Mr. E. O. Bruce	..	8. 4
Mr. J. B. Archer	..	7. 0
Race No. 4.—5 furlongs.
1—Ghalib ..
2—Azab 
3—If
4—Aladdin ..
5 — Bakeda .,
 6—Mah Jongg
 7—Damit ..
8—Kuching 
9—Kijang ..
10—Gundah
Race No. 5.—4 furlongs.
1—Wembley 
2—Hopeless ..
 3—Blazes
4—lee Mah
5--Burak
6—Kismet ..
   Division III.
Mr. C. D. Adams 
Mr. Harebell 
Mr E. W. Howell 
The Triple Kongsi 
Abang Suleiman
Mr. Hinway 
Mr. Walters 
Mr. Ang Ong Chye 
Sam Kongai 
The Datu Imam
   
   Division I.
H. H. the Rajah 
Mr. H. B. Crocker 
Mr. Hardie
Mr. Wee Boon Chow and Mr.
               Chan Teck Cheng 
Ali bin Dollah
Mr. J. K. Beasley
Race No. 8.—Race Course. Divisions I, II, III & IV.
Race No. 6.—3 furlongs.	Division II.
1—Hopeless    .. Mr. H. B. Crocker.. 11.02—Burak    .. Ali bin Dollah.. 10.93—Blazes    .. Mr. Hardie.. 9 94—Lee Mah    .. Mr. Woe Boon Chiew and           Mr. Chan Teck Cheng.. 9 25—Kismet    .. Mr- J. K. Beasley.. 8.126— Wembley	..    .. H. H The Rajah.. 8. 77—Untong        Mr. P. M. Adams.. 8. 68—Sakbon	..    .. Abang Suleiman.. 8. 89—Adham	..    .. The Datu Imam Tua.. 8. 010—White Wings ..    .. H. H. The Rajah. 8. 011—Tolin    .. Haji Hassim.. 7.1212—Nizam    .. Mr. Willy Clark and Mr.           Ang Ong Chye.. 7.1213—Damit    .. Mr. Walters.. 7. 914—Ghalib    .. Mr. C. D. Adams... 7. 716—Azab    .. Mr. Harchell.. 7. 416—Manna Buleh ..    .. Mr. E. O. Bruce.. 7. 417—Shotaway    .. Mr C. D Adams.. 6 71— White Wings
 2—Untong .. 
3—Beaver ..
4—Penglima
S—Sisit
6—Lutong
7—Bang
8— Adham
H. H. the Rajah
Mr. P. M, Adams
Mr P. M Adams and Mr.
Archer
Mr. Chan Teck Cheng and 
Mr. Wee Boon Chiew
The Datu Bandar
Inche Mohd. Ali and Abang
Mohd. Taha
Messrs. Bates and Arundell
The Datu Imam Tua
Race No. 7—3 furlongs.
    Consolation Race open to all Divisions. Race No. 8—4 ½  furlongs.
    Winners’ Handicap open to all Divisions.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1926.
93
       MONTHLY REPORTS.
FIRST DIVISION.
Kuching
January, 1926.
   Resident's Court.—Nine cases of which three were criminal with two convictions and one acquittal. There were three appeals from the District Court of which one was dismissed, one upheld, and a bigger compensation given in the third One appeal from the District Court, Bau, whose judgment was reversed. Chop Hong Kiat prosecuted Toh Poon and Chua Oh of Chop Soon Kiat, Baram, for embezzlement. The case is still sub judice pending examination of accounts. Amount of bail for defendants was $10,000 each. Ang Boon Tin claimed §17,000 from Chops Bian Mob, Kuching, and Eng Moh, Bintulu. Another claim for S10.000 was entered against these Chops, which have since become bankrupt.
   District Court.— Criminal— Twenty-seven cases with twenty convictions, six acquittals and one case transferred to Simanggang Court. Assault five, cheating four, possession of stolen property one, contempt of Court five, offences against Municipal By-laws one. other offences eleven. Total fines $333 anil fees $30.75.
   District Court. — Civil.—Fourteen cases with fees collected $73.75 and the value of claims dealt with was $4,455.30
   Magistrate's Court.—Civil.—Seventy-five cases with fees $130 and a total value of claims dealt with $ 1,455.96.
   Police Court. -Thirty-nine cases with thirty-three convictions and six acquittals. Total fines $447 Assault four, theft eight, contempt of Court one, offences against Municipal By-laws six, other offences twenty.
   Datu’s Court. — Seventeen summonses were issued and fines amounted to $160 56 and fees $20.50.
   General.—The offices were closed on the 1st for the New Year and again on the 2nd for the annual regatta.
   Her Highness the Ranee, Dayangs Elizabeth and Vava with Captain Barry Gifford, left for Singapore on the 25th.
   An inquiry was held into the collision between s.l. Lucile and an oil-tanker, which was at anchor in the river. The certificate of the juragan of the Lucile was suspended for three months. The Chief Engineer’s promotion was also withheld for three months for disobedience of the Shipping Master's order.
   I visited Sadong on the 18th, accompanied by Mrs. Aplin, to hold an inquiry into complaints by the Temong Dyaks against Abang Samsudin. Native Officer, and Sin Jan of Tabekang. The Dyaks had not arrived and I returned to Kuching on the 20th.
   The case was later settled in Kuching and the Dyaks were unable to prove their accusations, but the property as received by Sin Jan was ordered to be returned to them as unnecessary force had been used by Sin Jan to obtain this property in payment of the Dyaks' debts.
  At the end of the month I was away at Bau.
   Mr. F. G. Carpenter visited Sambier from 26th to the 28th to look into complaints against Abdulrasit, the tua kampong. This tua kampong Was warned by myself about a year ago, and as these complaints have been brought against him he will be dismissed.
Sadong.
January, 1926.
  Court.—In the District Court the charge against Ah Pang of fabricating false evidence was dismissed. In the Magistrate’s Court, Bujang Arang was fined $25 under Pasal 17. Yung Siong find $20 for contempt of Court and non-payment of royalty, and Udin sentenced to one month's imprisonment also for contempt of Court. Several cases of Malays having work at the mines with advances still unpaid were dealt with. Several cases of Malays failing to fulfil contracts to work timber for the colliery also came before the Court.
  Prisoners.—The average numbers for the month was nine. The gang was employed during the greater part of the month on the kampong ditches. They were also employed on clearing the railway road.
  P.W.D. — The coolies also worked on the kampong ditches. The bridge to Kampong Sageng, which is always giving trouble, partially collapsed again and the coolies were turned on to fix it up and try and make it more permanent. Work was begun on the roof of the Court house which is to be replaced entirely.
  Health.— This has been good except for a certain amount of suffering from sores of one sort or another appropriate to the season of year.
  Medical.—A total number of 119 patients were treated during the month as follows:—
European	...	2
Chinese	...	48
Dyaks	...	37
Malays	...	22
Tamils	...	6
Sikhs	...	4
             119
  There were twenty-six admissions during the month, twenty-four were discharged as cured and one died leaving eleven remaining at the end of the month.
  A Dyak patient suffering from traumatic peritonitis was brought in and died two days after admission. He refused to be sent to Kuching for surgical treatment. Two cases of fracture were sent to Kuching and a case of eye trouble for admission to the pauper camp. A total number of 57 N.A.B. injections were given and all proved satisfactory.
  Agriculture.—The rice prospects appear to be good. In some parts, as in the Ulu Simunjan, the Dyaks are already starting to harvest, though in most parts the crop is still unripe.
  Engkabang did not do well though some of the smaller varieties were quite plentiful. Rats are as usual a great scourge in the fields.
  General.—I arrived back from Kuching on the 6th. Many requests to open rubber gardens were made as usual but no more tickets will be issued now until the land has been seen to be unfit for padi first. A local order was made that bicycles must be provided with two efficient brakes and must have a head lamp after sunset.
  The Divisional Officer and Mrs. Aplin visited the Station on the 18th returning to Kuching on the 20th. I went up the right-hand branch of the Simunja at the end of the month and attended at a cock-fighting tourney of the Dyaks. It has been arranged that the Dyaks will work attaps for the Government after the harvest.


94
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1926.
  Mr. H. E. Davidson passed through station
on his way from the ulu Gedong. Mr Arundell
stayed a night on bis way to Mukah.
  Rainfall for the month was 19’22 inches.
  Shipping.—Calls were made during the month as
follows
        S.S. Alice Lorraine
        S.L. L'Aubaine
        S.L. Lucile
        S.J. Sri Sadong
        M.L. Muaratebas
... once
.. 7 times
... once
... 4 times
Trade. The local Trade Returns for comparison
with last year are as follows:—
Imports.	Exports.
    January. 1926	$11,745.00	$27,380.85
            1925	18.481.00	18,096.00
H. D. APLIN.
Divisional Officer.
         SADONG COLLIERY.
February, 1926.
   The output, export, local consumption, conversion to coke, and coal stock figures for the month were as follows
   1st February stock bailee	...	630.08 tons.
   February gross output	...	1,297.05 ..
Total 1,927.13 ,,
   Shipped ...	... 1,183.00 tons
   Consumed by boilers and
    conversion into coke 336.00 ,,
		1,519.00
   Stock balance ...	...	408.13 tons.
   The Chinese employees stopped work for their New Year holidays on the night of the 11th, and resumed again on the auspicious afternoon of the 18th.
   The engine, and boilers were inspected, and overhauled where necessary, during this interval.
   The underground roadways were found to be exceptionally free from heavy roof and side falls on the resumption of work after the stoppage.
   Several visits of inspection were made to the “Lepong" Watershed, and as the virgin jungle approaches are difficult, a narrow bridle-path is being made as far as the falls, where the water- volume gauges will be erected in the streams in order to arrive at the quantity of water available during the dry seasons.
   The rainfall for the month was 13’47 inches.
J. W. EVANS.
Manager.
         SECOND DIVISION.
Simanggang.
January, 1926.
   Mr. R. L. Daubeny, during the absence of the Resident, reports as follows for the month of January, viz.:—
  Court.—District Court. Government vs. Akul (f.) Jagan, Sarang (f.) Ratek, concealment of birth section 318, Akul (f.) being sentenced to one year's imprisonment and the remainder fined one picul each; Irit (f.) vs. Suit and Got (f.) adultery, to await decision of Resident, Second Division, in re diving contest; Sampar vs. Salak, appeal against decision of Penghulu Lain bat, appeal dismissed ; Senkok is. Angieng (f.). appeal against decision of Penghulu Miiniiti, appeal dismissed; Government vs Bajar, causing grevious hurt, etc., section 338, defendant was sentenced to one and a half years’ imprisonment and also must pay hospital expenses for Robert; Robert vs Buja and Rendah (f.) adultery, defendants both were fined 20 catties each ; Government vs. sa’yah (f.), non-payment of fine $44.28, security accepted for full payment in four months; Song vs. Sensem and Jamboh, appeal against decision of Penghulu Linang, case adjourned for defendants; Chambi vs. Barau, appeal against Penghulu Linang. decision of Penghulu Liming reversed and appeal returned to plaintiff; Aleng vs. Bong Phiow, breach of agreement, defendant was sentenced to six months' imprisonment and to repay bis debt to plaintiff within one month from release: Salumbang vs. Baiya, appeal against decision of Penghulus Jaul and Angkon, case adjourned for examination of land ; Mensalleb vs. Juli, causing grevious hurt, section 338, defendant was fined two piculs and to pay hospital expenses $18.75 and damages ten catties. 
  Magistrate's Court. — Ta Kee, Chinese bazaar, was sentenced to three months for assault. Nine persons were fined 85 and costs for planting rubber without a permit There were several other cases, but not of any importance.
  P.W.D.—The prisoners averaging 64'7 in number have been employed on the ditches Sabu Road, ditches on the plains, and general upkeep of the station including repairing of the wharf, bazaar gate, and clearing out of the kampong drains.
  General Mr. McDougall left for Sebuyow for a holiday on 1st January, returning to Simanggang on the 3rd January. Abang Omar proceeded to Betong on the 9th January, to take the place of Abang Indut as Native Officer, Betong.
  Court Writers Choo Lim, Kick Soon, and Entrieng, arrived during the month at Simanggang for instruction in the new accounts and returned to their respective stations after a period of four or five days.
  The Assistant Conservator of Forests again left for Sebuyow on 19th January and returned on the 22nd.
  Penghulus Kana, Linang, Mun, Mekoi and Lambai, arrived during the month.
  The Resident returned from Kuching on the 29th.
  Cattle. -Simanggang herd number 97 head and Lubok Antu herd number 39 head
  Agriculture .— Four permits to plant pepper, two to plant sago, and 86 to plant rubber were issued during the month at Simanggang, Lingga and Sebuyow.
  Forest Department.—The Assistant Conservator of Forests reports as follows:—During tbe month a section of a jelutong tree was set up outside the Forest Office, and tapped according to the new regulations.
  This will be seen by all jelutong workers who take out their permits at simanggang and shows approximately the minimum size of tree which may be tapped, and the correct method of making the cuts.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1926.
95
 The Assistant Conservator visited Lingga and
Sebuyow during the month
Trade.—The principal exports were:—
Gutta Jelutong 1'epper White... 891.70
... 151.75ph. valued at do.	do.$ 6,959 16,786Pepper Black    18.65do.	do.1,867Para Rubber    90.90do.	do.13,845Para Scrap    82.90do.	do.4,160Raw Sago...	49do	do.182Imports.	Exports.
January, 1926	...	$26,663	$50,942
„ J 925	...	31,792	25,121
February, 1926
  Court.—Resident's Court.—An appeal from the
District Court, Debak The case in question deals
with ownership of land ; I was unable to settle same
here, so |.adjonrned same, and case will be heard
when next I visit Debak.
  District Court.—An appeal from decision of Peng-
hulu Ingkas. The case dealt with division of pro-
perty and the decision of the Penghulu was upheld.
An appeal against decision of Penghulu Linang in
re land, the decision of Penghulu was reversed.
  Karrim, Skrang Dyak. fined ten catties for con-
tempt of Penghulu Mumin’s orders re repairing of
Tisak road ; Abang Sedik, Native Officer, Lubok
Anlu, fined $20 for attempting to assault one Lom,
and Lom fined $22.14 for trespass. There were
numerous other cases.
  Magistrate's Court. Lui, Dyak of Betong,
sentenced to six months’ R I. for theft. Daiong
sentenced to three months' R.I for escaping from
custody. Blon, prisoner who escaped in December,
1920, and arrested at Mukah, was sentenced to six
months extra R.I. and received two dozen with
rottan. There were numerous other cases, both
criminal and civil, but none call for special mention.
  General. M.L. One left Lingga on the 3rd, return-
ing again on the 4th with Mr. H. E. Outfield, who
has been appointed to do duty in this Division.
  On the 9th Mr. H. E. Cutfield left in m.l. One for
Kabong, he having been appointed Acting Assistant
District Officer, Kalaka and Lower Saribas. Mr.
D. E. Calver, Assistant Conservator of Forests, also
visited Kabong.
  The Court Writers Lingga, Engkilili, and Lubok
Antti, arrived dining the month in order to have
further training in keeping the new accounts.
  Dyaks started doing up the Tisak Betong road,
also working telephone posts. The road is now in
excellent order.
  The 13th and 15th were observed as Public Holi-
days, it being Chinese New Year.
  On the 18th I left for Engkilili, accompanied by
Draup, Native Officer, Penghulu Renang. On the
way up land unsuitable for padi farms was examined
and same can now be planted up with para rubber.
I returned to Simanggang on the 19th.
  On the 17th Mr. McDougall, accompanied by Datu
Abang Haji Buasan, left for the Saribas via Tisak,
returning again on the 22nd. Mr. McDougall re-
ports as follows on his visit to Betong:—
  Court.—Eighteen cases were heard. Three Dyaks
were fined $25, and nine $15 each, for fighting in
the bazaar.
  One Dyak received three months’ R.I. for breach
of Quarantine Regulations. The other cases were
small debt and land disputes.
  Health.—The Dresser, Edward Chia, was away
down river investigating the report of a serious out-
break of smallpox at Kampong Beladin. The Dis-
pensary is temporarily situated under the Fort
pending ihe erection of a new building.
  Public Works.—The two prisoners were engaged
in clearing the site of the new Government School.
For the past few weeks they have been doing repairs
to the road.
   Whitewashing of the bazaar shops has just been completed and gravel is being laid down on the mam street. The road from Betong to Pengkalan Jungkong is greatly improved by the work done by local Dyaks in grading and repairing it
   Agriculture.—Dyaks in the district report excellent crops of padi. About sixty permits to plant rubber on hill land were issued.
   Miscellaneous -Acting on instructions received from the Resident I made arrangements with Penghulu Unji to have the old cannon called Bujang Sadok brought down from Bukit Sadok to the Fort. The cannon is of historical interest, having been used against His Highness the late Rajah, and is to be placed in the Museum at Kuching.
   Abang Omar, Native Officer at Betong, accompanied me to Simanggang, and also Penghulus Isek and Ijau, who wanted to be at Simanggang for the coming visit of His Highness the Rajah.
   There is nothing of further interest or importance to report.
   On the 23rd His Highness the Rajah, Dayang Leonora, and Major Cunynghame, Commandant Sarawak Rangers, arrived in m.l. One at 3.15 p.m. It poured with rain the whole way up from Lingga, and it was still raining when His Highness lauded, but in spite of the ram a large ami representative crowd was present to welcome His Highness and the Dayang Leonora.
   Major S. Cunynghame's visit was connected with recruiting for the Sarawak Rangers, also Abang Taha, Inspector of Police. Kuching, arrived on a recruiting com paigri.
   The 24th, being Her Highness the Ranee’s birthday, the Offices were closed and flagstaff dressed.
   His Highness the Rajah, during his visit here, held an interview with the Native Officers, and was pleased to raise the pay of the Datus from $100 to $150 per mensem and a yearly increase of $10 up to a limit of $200. A great number of Penghulus visited His Highness and they brought up the question of tapping jelutong. The Towkays of the bazaar visited His Highness in re the building of a new bazaar. His Highness informed them that they could please themselves, but if they did not wish to build a new bazaar they must thoroughly repair the present bazaar; they all agreed to this.
   His Highness, during his stay, visited both kampongs when a great welcome was given him, also the bazaar was visited and same was tastefully decorated.
   His Highness gave a feast to the Dyaks which took place in the Fort and dancing was carried on until 11 p.m.
   On the 27th, His Highness the Rajah, Dayang Leonora, Major S. Cunynghame, and myself, left at 5.30 a.m. for Lingga. Lingga was reached at 9 a.m. and a great crowd of Dyaks, men and women, were present to greet His Highness and Dayang Leonora. His Highness set sail in the s.l. Lucile at 11 a.m. and at 4 p.m. boarded the H.H M.Y. Maimuna at Triso and immediately set sail for Kuching. I accompanied His Highness to Kuching on a short visit.
   Agriculture.—Seven permits to plant pepper, two to plant sago, and 278 to plant rubber, were issued during the month at Simanggang, Lingga, Engkilili, and Lubok Antu.
   Medical.—A total of 191 persons were treated in the hospital during the month, as follows-—Chinese 26. Dyak 133, Malay 28, European four.
   143 cases of N.A.B. injection for yaws, etc., were given during the month.
   1,851 persons were vaccinated during the month.
   Pubhc Works.—Prisoners, averaging 54’89, were employed on the ornamental grounds and general upkeep of the roads.
   Educational.—Mohamad Ali, Inspector of Schools, visited the Government Malay Schools in the Second


96
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1926.
Division during the middle of the month, and re-
turned again at the end of the month. His visit
was in connection with the half-yearly examina-
tion.
. Cattle. — Simanggang herd number 94 head, 1
foiled for sale, and Lubok Antu herd number 43
head.
  Forest Department.—The Assistant Conservator
of Forests reports as follows:—Work during the
month was of a routine nature. The Assistant
Conservator visited Lingga, Sebuyow, and Kabong. 
The boundary survey of the Sabu Road Forest Re- 
serve was completed by running a line along that
portion of the Sabu Road which marches with the
edge of the reserve.
  The following Penghulus visited Simanggang ,
during the month :—Penghulu Ingkas of Entulang,
Penghulu Lambai of Upper Undup, Penghulu Mekoi
of Lower Undup, Penghulu Labang of Upper Skrang,
Penghulu Mumin of Lower Skrang. Penghulu
Renang of Lower Batang Ai, Penghulu Awan of
Upper Batang Ai, Penghulu Jaul of Balau,Penghulu
Unji of Layer Spak, Penghulu Ijau of Paku, and 
Penghulu Isek of Betong
  Trade.—The principal exports were :—
Gutta jelutong 
Pepper, white325 piculs valued at 
187	do.... $6.849
...	8,165Pepper, black63	do.        675Pararubber81	do....	8,890Para scrap62	do....	7.172	Raw sago60	do.        180	.Imports.Exports.February, 1926$16 957$34,690       ' 1925   24,17534,373Saribas.
January, 1926.
  The Court Writers, Betong and Pusa, report as 1
follows for the month of January :—
  Court.—Very few cases came before the Native
Courts, and fines imposed were mostly brought in
by Penghulus. Belong fines amounted to $304.18.
I have no returns from Pusa.
  General.—The Court Writers complain they are ,
finding the work beyond them. They were taught 
one system of keeping accounts and now this has
been altered, also the accounts dealing with Post
Office have been continually changed.
  Penghulus Unji of Spak and Jabieng of Padeh
visited Belong in re cases, also to pay fines.
  Abang Omar, Native Officer, arrived from
Simanggang on the 16th and took over the duties of
Abang Indut, late Native Officer, who has been
dismissed
  Public Works.—Two prisoners at Betong were
employed on felling and clearing away a kayu ara 
tree situated on river bank facing the bazaar. For
many years I have tried to get this tree removed, 
but natives would not, stating there was an hantu in 
same and if they attempted to fell the tree they 
would surely die. The two prisoners were also
employed in deepening ditches round the Govern- 
ment buildings and also repairs to the Tisak road. 
 The Government Dresser who was employed by 
the S.P.G. Mission up to end of December started 
work under Government on January 1st. A
carpenter was employed in erecting a temporary
dispensary on the ground floor of the Fort.
  The Court Writer, Pusa, visited Debak during 
the month to attend to clerical work.
. Medical.—A total of 316 people were treated in 
the hospital during the mouth, as follows:—Malays ,
55, Chinese 20, Dyaks 241.
  191 cases of N.A.B. injection for yaws, etc., were 
given during the month.
Trade.—The principal exports were :—
Gutta Jelutong 120 piculs valued at ..
Para Rubber	616	do.
Para Scrap	111	do.
Raw sago	1,600	do.
Pepper white	5	do.
$ 1,220 60,640 4,340 4,027
300
January, 1926
         1925
Imports.
$87,179.00
      5*2,055.50
Exports. $79,602 86,973
February, 1926.
  The Court Writers, Betong and Pusa, report as
follows : —
  Belong Court. — Jampi was sentenced to three
months' imprisonment at Simanggang for breach of
Smallpox Regulations. Cases heard before Mr. Mc-
Dougall, eleven Dyaks were fined $15 each and three
Dyaks $25 and $100 pledge each with Government
for creating disturbances and assaulting policemen
on duty. Mujang was fined $50.40, and Rena (/.J
$28.80 for incest; Bunyau and Agas were fined $15
each over a land case, and Jamal was fined $25 for
laying claim to fruit trees. Numerous other cases
were "brought up in Court before Mr. McDougall but
none of any special importance. Fines for the
month amounted to $600.20.
  Dresser Edward Chia left for Pusa and Debak on
the 4th, till the 24th, on vaccination duty. He re-
ported that smallpox was still prevalent at Lower
Saribas, with several deaths.
  Mr. D.S. McDougall and Datu Abang Haji Buassan
arrived from Simanggang on the 18th, accompanied
by clerk Gan Kim Tho. who came to teach the
working of the new system of accounts. Clerk
William Hadin also arrived on the same day from
Simanggang, having been appointed as clerk at this
station.
  On the night of the 12th, a great number of Dyaks
created disturbances in the bazaar, which resulted
in a big fight at the spirit farmer's shop. The six
policemen who were on duty in the bazaar at the
time, intervened, but they were seriously beaten and
knocked about by the Dyaks.
  The Native Officer, Abang Omar, and all the Dyak
Penghulus, left for Simanggang on the 22nd to meet
His Highness the Rajah, who was expected to arrive
there the following day.
  Musa, a Malay shopkeeper at Spaoh, reported
that while he was putting up the night at Rumah
Ajah Ulu Paku, his box containing $449 was carried
away by thieves The box was found the next day
hidden in the jungle near the house. It was sus-
pected to he the work of the Chinese rubber tap-
pers.
  The sum of §12,000 was remitted from the
Treasury to Simanggang during the month.
  One, Chai Mui Chen, sent by the Commissioner
of Trade to act as Rubber Instructor, arrived on the
27th.
  Agriculture.-Fifty-two permits to plant rubber
have been issued during the month.
  Medical.—A total of 5b people were treated in the
hospital during the month, as follows :—Malay one,
Chinese one, Dyak 56.
  Eighteen N.A.B. injections for yaws, etc., were
given during the month
  Pusa and Debak.— General.—I did not visit
Debak during the month, because I was ordered to-
proceed to Betong in order to,learn the accounts
from Clerk Gan Kim Tho, who was sent over by the
Resident.
  Mr. H. E. Cutfield, Acting Assistant District
Officer of Kabong, visited Pusa and Debak on the
23rd, staying a night in each place ; the next day Mr.
Cutfield returned to Kabong.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1926.
97
  Health.—The Dresser Edward Chia made a visit
here during the month and vaccinated the Pusa,
Undai and Debak people, and inspected the natives
of Beladin. According to his information, there
were thirteen suffering from smallpox and six
deaths.
  Belong Shipping.—During the month six motor
boats mid one vessel entered, and seven motor boats
and two vessels cleared.
  Pusa.—Eleven, bandongs entered the port during
the month and fourteen cleared.
  Trade— The principal exports were:—
   Gutta Jelutong        101 piculs valued at $ 1,167
    Para Rubber	979	„	„	75.900
        Scrap	270	„	,,	7,362
  Raw Sago	1,480	,,	,,	3,675
  Pepper White	4	„	,,	200
     „ Black	1	,,	„	25
Imports.	Exports.
     February, 1926	$48,217	$94,439
         ,,	1925	45.475	59,609
Kalaka.
January, 1926.
   The Court Writers. Kabong and Saratok, report
as follows:—
   Court.—Court work was very light during the
month and lines imposed amounted to $38.80.
   General.—Rohan is now under the control of
Kabong as from 1st January, 1926, and the Court
Writer, Kabong, has to visit that station once a
month, until a clerk has been appointed to do duty
there.
   On the 25th the Court Writer, Kabong, visited
Rohan and returned on the 31st bringing with him
Rohan cash balance $278.03 to the Kabong Treasury.
   Agriculture. Fifteen rubber garden planting per-
mits have been issued during the month.
   Cattle. Of the 34 head of Kabong herd, one calf
died during the month, leaving 33 head.
   P. W.D.--Prisoners, two in number, have been
employed in weeding the paths around the Fort and
flower-beds during the month.
   Shipping.—Four sailing vessels and two motor
schooners have entered and ten vessels and two
motor schooners cleared the port during the month.
Trade.—The principal exports were :—
? Gutla jelutong           331     piculs valued at
Pepper, white	8	piculs	do.
     Pepper, black	8	piculs	do.
     Para rubber	192	piculs	do.
     Para scrap	42	piculs	do.
     Raw sago	880	piculs	do.
     Sugar nipah	67	tins	do.
Imports.
  January, 1926	...	$32,602
      „	1925	...	32,286
$ 4,271 
180 
380
20,230
2,220
2,010 
184
Exports.
$36,620
25.280
   The following are the Trade Returns for the
Division :—
Imports.	Exports,
  January, 1926	$146,444	$167,164
      „	1925	...	116,133	137,374
February, 1926.
   Mr. H. E. Cutfield, Assistant District Officer, reports as fallows:—
   Court.—Very few cases came up for hearing during the month. In the Kabong Court, Drahman was sentenced to three months' R.I. for theft, and Haji Sanyut to one year for (I) obtaining money under false pretences, and (2) criminal breach of trust.
   In the Saratok Court, Umak (f.), Dyak, was sen-
tenced to three months for theft, and a Malay woman
fined §50 for the same offence. The fine being
allowed in lieu of gaol awing to her having a baby
in arms.
   General.—Accompanied by Mr. D. E. Calver,
Assistant Conservator of Forests, I left for Simang-
gang in m.l. One on Thursday the 9th instant. After
spending the night at Sebuyow we arrived here the
following morning.
   Abang Bujang, Native Officer, was confined to his
house, where he had been for a week on account of
sickness.
   Mr. Calver returned to Simanggang the next
morning.
   The 13th, Saturday, being Chinese New Year, the
offices were closed and the following Monday was
 also observed as a public holiday.
    Wednesday the 24th, being Her Highness the
Ranee's birthday, the office was closed and the flag-
staff dressed.
   On Chinese New Year's Day,  Tan Eng Chong,
Court Writer, reported that he had heard rumours
 that there was a case of smallpox at Kampong
Beladin, below Pusa. in the Saribas. P. Corporal
Anum was immediately sent off with a letter to the
Court Writer, Pusa, asking his assistance to have
everyone in the kampong vaccinated and the case
of smallpox isolated. On his return on the 16th
be reported that everyone in the kampong had
been vaccinated by him and that there were four
cases of smallpox in the kampong.
   All the roads here need a lot of repair but little
can be done yet on account of shortage of prison
labour.
   Travelling. - At 2 a.m. on the 17th, I left by boat
for Saratok, which was reached by 7.40 A few cases
 came up for hearing but none call for special
mention.
   An agreement was made with Tunkang Jagan of
Roban for the building of an extension to the present
police barracks and the building of a gaol for $950.
Th timber is already in the places where the build-
ings are to be erected.
   On Sunday 21st, I left Saratok for Debak by the
overland route , arriving there the same afternoon
to find that Sedik, T. K., had gone to Singapore,
and the Penghulu had taken his cases to Betong for
settlement.
   The Penghulu returned the next morning. I left
Debak by boat early on the 23rd and arrived at Pusa
at midday Abang Dukarim, Native Officer, was
away at Simanggang, and there were no cases for
 settlement.
   What work there was was completed in the after-
noon I was informed that there had been thirteen
 cases of smallpox and six deaths at Beladin.
   The Tua Kampong Haji Matair had not reported
any of these cases or made any attempt to isolate
 them, although be bad been warned that if any further
neglect of this kind was proved he would be severely
dealt with.
   1 left Pusa at 2 a.in. on the morning of the 25th
and called at Beladin where I interviewed the Tua
Kampong, who was duly fined $25 and warned that
for any further neglect or laziness on his part he
would be sentenced to a term of imprisonment. I
arrived at Kabong at 8.30 a.m.
   On the 26th, Court Writer Tan Eng Chong went
up to Roban to settle up the month's accounts there,
and was still away at the end of the month.
   Cattle.—The Kabong herd is not in good con-
dition and the cowman very unsatisfactory. During
the month one calf died from a wound on its leg
going septic, and this was due to neglect on the part
of the cowman after he had been warned and medi-
cine and bandages given him for use on the wound.


98
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1926.
  The Saratok herd is fat and in good condition except for one cow which is very thin and has apparently been ill for some time.
  The trade statistics for the month were as follows:—
Imports.	Exports.
    February	1926	$33,767	$28,860
       „	1925	12,584	23,456
  Entered eight bandongs and two motor schooners. Cleared eight bandongs and two motor schooners.
The principal exports were :—
Gutta Jelutong 624 piculs valued at $7,990
Para Rubber	69	„	„	6,800
    „ Scrap	31.70	„	„	1,322
Gutta Rian 1	„	„	250
Fish salted	68	jars	„	141
Sago Raw	26 ½ koyans	„	2,650
The following are the trade returns of the Second
Division:—
Imports.	Exports.
    February, 1926	$ 98,941.00	$157,989.00
Total to 28/2/26	245,385.00	325,153.00
      Do. do.	198,367.70	254,912.50
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER,
Resident Second Division.
THIRD DIVISION.
Sibu.
February, 1926.
   On the 4th, 5th and 6th I was absent from the  station visiting Rejang, Sankei and Binatang.
   One of the leading merchants at Rejang was j charged with receiving stolen property and this case appeared to be of some interest locally and ' occupied most of my time. The hearing was finally adjourned for witnesses not then available, I and has since been dealt with by the District Officer I of Lower Rejang, Mr. J. C. Swayne, who returned i from furlough on the 9th and resumed his duties at Rejang on the 13th. The new Land Regulations were explained at Rejang, Sarikei and Binatang, and a few matters of minor importance settled.
   The Native Officer at Binatang asked that the  timber for the new mosque should be free of duty, I and this request was subsequently granted. The opening of new gardens by Foochows at Sarikei and Binatang was prohibited pending completion of survey and demarcation of existing holdings. Notices to this effect were published.
  News was received here on the 19th that small
pox had broken out in Kuching which was declared 
an infected port. The Oya District is also infected
but fortunately this Division is free from infection up to the time writing.
  On the 19th a deputation of Malay headmen
asked for instructions in case of an outbreak of
sickness in the kampong. They asked to be allow- 
ed to treat cases in the kampong or alternatively 
to make their own isolation camps. They were 
informed that there was no objection to the latter
suggestion provided that the sites for the proposed
camps were approved by the Divisional Medical
Officer. It is presumed that the rumour that some
headmen in Kuching had been imprisoned for
failing to report the outbreak of smallpox was
responsible for this show of interest by the local
bead men.
  Much satisfaction has been expressed by all affected by the new Land Regulations allowing natives of the country to own three acres of land free of charge for the cultivation of rubber, sago, coconuts, or similar produce, m addition to land used for the cultivation of nee and vegetables. The
registration of these holdings promises to be a
 lengthy business as the Land Office is much under-
staffed and there are many applications for registra-
tion under these regulations
    The surveys of the Binatang areas were not
completed at the end of the month and consequently
no more land in this locality has been given to
Chinese. A commencement was made to provide
reserves for the Foochow immigrants to plant
rubber, and it was decided at a meeting of the
Central Advisory Committee, called to discuss the
report submitted by the Officer in Charge of Foo-
chow immigrants, that the land in these reserves
should be divided into ten acre blocks and that one
of the conditions of tenure should be the planting
of a quarter of an acre in each lot with foodstuffs.
It is hoped that some of these lots will be ready for
occupation in March.
    The Officer in Charge of Foochow immigrants
returned from his tour of the Foochow Concessions
on the 3rd and reported that he had appointed
the following headmen in the different divisions.—
        1st	Area	...	Wong Kah Kiew
        2nd	„	...	Lu King Kee
   3rd	„	...	Ting Ming Kang
   4th	„	...	Tung Nai Trang
   5th	,,	...	Ling Ping Tuong
6th	,,	...	Ha Mee Teck
        7th	,,	...	Lau Tiu Hu
8th	,,	...	Lau Ka Tiew
        9th	,,	...	Wong Tiew Siong
       10th	„	...	Tiong Kong Ping
       Hth	,,	...	Wong Ching Poh
     He reported that be was everywhere well received
and was impressed with the general air of prosperity
and content. He was everywhere met with requests
for more land, and this matter is receiving considera-
tion together with other recommendations made
in the report.
     Dyak Affairs.—At the request of Nyanggai of
Poi and some of his followers I wrote to the Chief
Secretary on the 11th requesting his assistance in
communicating with the Government of the Nether-
lands Indies m the matter of the alleged murder of
six Sarawak Dyaks in Netherlands Indies Territory
some four years ago. Full particulars were given
and it is hoped that this matter, which has been a
cause of considerable dissatisfaction for some time,
will before long be finally settled.
     A telegram from the District Officer of Bintulu
reporting rumours of an intention on the part of
the upriver Dyaks to attack the Punans in the Ulu
Kakus district was received on the 28th and a copy
forwarded to the Assistant District Officer of Kapit
for necessary action.
        Requests from Dyaks to be allowed to purchase
guns have been numerous and, in cases where there
is not already a sufficiency of these in the applicants’
houses, licences have been issued. Many, however,
have been refused, to their great dissatisfaction, as
they declare that their ripening crops of padi are
being destroyed by pigs with which they cannot
cope without firearms.
        The m.l. Jean which had been running badly for some time finally broke down on the 19th and has
been out of action since and will remain so until
fitted with a new clutch.
         Some excitement was caused by repeated attempts
to set file to the bazaar, and a reward of $200 was
offered by the traders for the apprehension of the
offender. This resulted in the arrest of an old man
who was acquitted when it was proved that the
evidence of the police who arrested him was false.
It is thought that there was never any intention to
set fire to the houses but merely desire to frighten
the occupants, as any determined attempt could not
• possibly have failed.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. APRIL 1, 1926.
99
   A petition was received during the month asking
for rent restriction, and it may be that some dis-
contented tenant wished to frighten his landlord
into reducing his rent. Whatever the cause, no
further attempts have been made.
   Two Kheh Chinese, Slow Kow and Ah Kui, were
charged with arson and acquitted. In this case a
house was burnt to the ground and the occupant
narrowly escaped with his life. It appears the wife
of one of the accused found favour in the eyes of
the plaintiff, and there was evidence of a violent
quarrel between the two men the day before the
fire, which occurred at night. Circumstantial evi-
dence was strong against the accused, hut the
assessors did not consider it strong enough for a
conviction.
   Cither cases in the Resident’s Court were :—
   1. Chop Leong Moi v. Law Siew Chung.
   2. Chen Mook v. Agong.
   3 Chop Chua Guan Ann v Customs Department.
   These were appeals against decisions of the
District Court. The first was a claim for damages
for the destruction of rubber during the process
of smoking. Judgment in this case was given for
the appellant. The second was a dispute regarding
the ownership of land and the decision of the Dis-
trict Court was upheld. In the last case a fine of
$150 imposed by the District Court for importing
gold coins under a false description was reduced
to a nominal fine of $10 The coins were imported
as ornaments and not for circulation.
   The weather riming the month was alternately
hot and rainy : Chinese New Year was wet as usual
aim was celebrated in the usual way. The birth-
day of Her Highness the Ranee was also observed
as a holiday.
   Mr. J. B. Archer, District Officer, Sibu, reports
as follows: -
   District Court -The following persons were
sentenced to terms of imprisonment :—Keu Ah
Cheng, Katek, Yeo Peh Tah, six months each for
theft under section 379; Ling Chong big and
Ting Song Hee three months each under the same
section; P. C. 74 Kilau two months for cheating
under section 417 ; and Cheong Ing Pieu and Law
Tiew Seng three days each for contravention of the
Opium Order No. XLV11. 1924.
   Eighteen Foocbows were fined $15 each for illicit
gambling in their Colony. In the appeal case of
Bakar vs. Timah, where Bakar appealed against
the decision of the Sibu Malay Court, the apneal
was dismissed with costs.
   Prison Warder No 2 Bakit was brought before
the Court and dismissed for gross insubordination.
There were a number of land cases.
   The distances of the disputed areas combined
with paucity of Land Office staff causes the cases
to be held up for a considerable time There were
many other cases but none of importance.
   Magistrate's and Police Court -There were no
cases deserving of special mention. Fines and fees,
including substations, amounted to $1,649.27
   Police.—The strength of the force at the end of
the month was one sergeant-major, two sergeants,
three corporals, eight lance-corporals, 66 cons-
tables and one detective. No recruits joined during
the month.
   Sergeant Gokal Singh was brought before a
district court martial and severely reprimanded
for conduct prejudicial to good discipline. P.O.
74 Kilau was dismissed the force, having been con-
victed by a Civil Court.
  Training in simple musketry was started.
  Prison.—The number of prisoners at the end of
the month was 58. 8 men were admitted and 12
discharged
   Discipline was only fair as prisoners cannot be ? looked after properly whilst they are used in small twangs all over the island for various jobs. Prison labour was supplied for waterworks, water carriers, gardeners, Land Office coolies, coolies for loading and unloading ships, carpenters, roads and bridges.  Three men were punished for breach of prison discipline. Five men were in hospital at the end of I the month.
   P.W. D -Contracts were signed for the following new buildings:—
   Eight bungalows for members of the Subordinate Service (four for Sibu and two each for Binatang and Sarikei), two new wards for the Government  Hospital, Sibu, and survey cooly lines, Sibu. The new bungalow behind the Residency was practically completed and a contractor was engaged in laying out the compound. Bungalow No. 4 was half completed and should be ready by the end of next month. The contractor to erect two new bachelor bungalows arrived, but sites had not been settled upon by the end of the month
   A number of bridges were rebuilt in the Sibu kampongs, and temporary repairs made to Telephone Road.
   Floods and rain have caused much damage to roads and culverts, but little can be done at this time of  the year.
   Mechanics from Kuching have been engaged in lagging the two boilers at Sibu waterworks but owing to shortage of asbestos this was not completed. The pumps are doing good service. Two standpipes in Sibu bazaar were removed to other sites.
   On the 18th. by order of His Highness the Rajah, I was instructed to lake over charge of the Sibu Municipal Department again, as it was considered I that Mr. Horton, who had been gazetted recently to that position, could not spare the time to attend to these duties. At the same time Mr. Jacques resumed his seat on the Board. It is possible, therefore, many badly needed reforms will have to be held up in the meanwhile as there is a considerable  amount of work on band A new contract was  for scavenging the bazaar at. a reduced figure. A ' lire engine was ordered from Singapore. The chaotic position of the buildings in Sibu bazaar, combined with the doubtful titles to land, and in many cases the disregard by landlords of the building within their own land, makes the ultimate  administration of the bazaar an undertaking of  some magnitude. A thorough scheme of drainage necessary, and much demolition of present buildings will have to take place. Pending the arrival of an expert the Board can but attempt to keep the bazaar from gel ting any worse than it is at present.
   Abang Latip, Native Officer; returned on the 25th  from a visit to Dyaks in the upper Sarikei and Julau.  He had nothing of importance to report excepting some complaints against Forest Guard Bakri, who has since been found guilty of breach of trust and sentenced to imprisonment.
   Hadji Gapor, Native Officer, was given three weeks' leave to Kuching.
   On the 19th I accompanied tne Resident to Pulo Dudong where we inspected land. The Malays at Pulo Kladi appear to be doing well, and a small k am pong has sprung up there. Accompanied by Abang Enjah, Native Oificer, I left for Sarikei on the 26th and was still away at the end of the month. Whilst in Sarikei I sounded the depth of waler at Muara Nyelong with a view to putting up a small wharf there for Government launches. At dead low tide a 50-feet wharf gives a depth of fathoms. As there is some timber in stock at Sarikei a contractor has offered to erect this wharf for a sum


100
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1926.
between $500 to $600. This wharf would be a great  advantage as launches now lie alongside the bazaar , and prevent Chinese launches and boats from using  their own jelatongs.
  Five inquests were held during the month, four on drowned Foochows, and one on a Malay greaser who died suddenly in s.l. L’Aubaine when that ship was in Sibu.
  The Wireless Stations at Binatang and Kapit have been giving trouble and Ah Jian visited both these places with, however, little result. The telephone across the Nyelong River parted on 29th, having been struck by the foremast of s.l. Chamois. This was repaired the same day.
  Mr. Miller-Hallett, Land Officer, was in the Binatang district until 16th when he returned to Sibu. Since then he has been employed on a rends in the Foochow Colony.
Kapit.
February, 1926.
Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, Acting Assistant District
Officer, reports as follows: —
    General.—I was absent from the station from the
6th to the 18th visiting the Katibas district.
Report of this trip I have forwarded under
separate cover. On the 19th the s.l. Chamois
arrived with Messrs. McLeod and Bishop and
returned to Sibu that same day. Mr. P. Cobbold, of
Borneo Company, Limited, also visited this station
on the 19th and left the next morning per s.s.
Sarawak. The 24th, being Her Highness the
Ranee’s birthday, the offices were closed.
      In spite of the visit of a mechanic of the Wireless
Department the wireless was still out of action at
the end of the month. On the 1st an old Dyak
woman committed suicide in the bazaar, She was
the wife of one of the bazaar Chinese and had been
ill for some time. An inquest was held and found
that deceased had committed suicide while of un-
sound mind.
   Mr. Chua Ah Kee of Kapit bazaar was appointed
Kapitan China for the term of one year.
   Court.—There were few cases before the Court
and none worthy of special note. Fines and fees
amounted to $122.61.
   Treasury.—During the month the station was
visited by Wong Leong Chee, Treasury Clerk, who
assisted the Court Writer in starting the new
accounts. The January accounts have been com-
pleted and forwarded to Sibu and the February
accounts have been brought up to date.
   Military —The usual parades and fatigues were
carried out during the month
   Dairy Farm—The herd numbered fourteen at
the end of the month. Three cows and calves were
sent down to Kuching per s.s. Sarawak.
   Prison.—The prison gang averaged 22 men and
were employed on ornamental grounds and the
bazaar roads. The prison carpenter was employed
on minor repairs to boats and buildings.
   Trade and Shipping. s.s. Sarawak and s.l. Soon
Aik made two trips each during the month, s.l.
Chamois and s.l. Ulu one each.
Exports for the month are as follows: —
Gutta Percha	piculs	50.23	value	$5,470	
Plantation Rubber	„	78.45	„	8,832	
India Rubber	„	3 35	„	281	
Damar Daging	„	130.87	„	4,284	
Rottan Sega No. 1	,,	178.14	,,	965
Rottan Tot No. 2	„	1,096.06	,,	4,705	
—
  Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, Acting Assistant District Officer, reports as follows concerning his visit to the Katibas district:—
   Leaving Kapit on the 7th I arrived at Song where
I spent the night. The following morning I
proceeded up river. Near the mouth of the Katibas
there are three Dyak houses, beyond which there
are no more houses until S. Engkuah is reached. The
land between is all old farming land with here and
there small clumps of fruit and rubber, the sites
of old houses.
   The boundary in this river is at N. Engkuah
where Penghulus Brink and Sirai have their houses.
It usually takes from three to four days from the
mouth to reach this point, but as the river was very
low I managed to do the journey in two days.
This river is very difficult to travel up as it consists
of a series of small rapids with a few larger ones
such as Batu Labang, and Wong Temedu, If this
river is in flood it is not safe to come down river
and impossible to proceed up river.
   I stayed several days at Penghulu Briak and
Sirai’s house and went up river, beyond the boundary,
for some distance. Very fine country but difficult of
access owing to the everlasting series of shallows,
rapids, and small waterfalls.
   On my way down river I first visited Sungei
Bangkit. This river is even more difficult of access
than the Katibas. The boundary is at Nanga Prah,
only a very short distance from the main river.
   At present T. R. Paing lives at this boundary; his
house is newly built and at present consists of only
four doors. Beyond the boundary Ingkok, with five
doors, has farmed and intends building a house there,
and faraway in the ulu some ex-Gat Dyaks (six doors)
who came over from Dutch territory last year and
are living in temporary huts until after the harvest.
These Dvaks have been ordered to move down to the
main river as soon as they have harvested.
   T. R. Unyat, with eighteen doors, has settled in the
ulu Sungei Stibang, a very small stream. He also has
 been ordered to move down river after the harvest. I
next visited Sungei Musa; there are many Dyaks
living on this stream and several large and substan-
tial houses have been built. I have made Nanga
Stapang the boundary and T. R. Dungkong, who
lives there, responsible for reporting to Song Fort
any Dyaks who attempt to settle beyond this point.
In the Sungei Tengagai, a small tributary of the
Musa, there are two houses, one eight and one of ten
doors, very far away up river where no boat can
 reach them. I sent for the Tuai Rumah of these
 two houses, Gaseng and Bruang, and warned them
 that they must move down to the main river.
 In the Sungei Tekalit, a comparatively large
 tributary of the Katibas, there are sixteen Dyak
 houses. I have made the boundary at Nanga Latong, 
One house of six doors has been built above this point
 and orders have been given for its removal down river.
T. R. Ngabong, son of Penghulu Usit (deceased), has
n house of thirty doors at Nanga Latong, and he has
been made responsible to report any Dyaks who try
 to settle further up river.
   I would suggest that a mata (sub-penghulu) be
 appointed to both the streams Tekalit and Musa,
 especially the former.
   The following gives the number of Dyak houses
 and approximate totals of doors in this district:—
   Katibas (main river, including Sungei Bangkit)
thirty-seven houses amounting to four hundred and fifty doors (approximate).
   Sungei Musa ten houses amounting to one hundred
and fortv-three doors.
   Sungei Tekalit sixteen houses amounting to one
hundied and ninety-eight doors.
   Padi is in good condition all over the district but
the harvest will be somewhat later than in the Balleh
and ulu Rejnng.
   I returned to Kapit on the night of the 18th after
having spent a day at Song attending to various
matters there.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1926.
101
Rejang.
January, 1926
   The Court Writer reports as follows:--
   Court— There have been very few cases before the Court daring the month and none of these are worth special mention.
    General. The 1st and 2nd were observed as holidays as directed by His Highness the Rajah.
     On the 11th Mr. H Jacques. Divisional Treasurer, Sibu, arrived from Matu at 4.30 p.m. by m.l. Jean , in order to show me the way to keep the new accounts books. He returned to Sibu the next day at 4.30 p.m.
     On the 13th the eclipse of the sun visible from 2.40 p.m. lasting to 3.45 p.m.
      Health.—The health of the district was fairly good during the month.
      Prisoners.—The prisoners, averaging two, have been engaged on upkeep of the ornamental grounds.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall for the month was 12 21.
     Trade.—The total trade returns for the mouth
January, 1926.
  The total number of patients treated at Sibu hospital was 587, being an average of 19 daily. The total number of in-patients was 78.
  There were six deaths in hospital due to the following causes:—Beriberi, fracture of spine, pyopneumothorax, nephritis, complicating pregnancy, and meningitis.
  Eleven operations were performed under general anaesthetic. 143 arsenical injections were given.
  Sibu is still free from smallpox and no cases have been reported in the Third Division. Several cases of a mild form of para-typhoid have occurred but not in any way approaching an epidemic ; though with the onset of the dry weather and the present insanitary condition existing in the bazaar an epidemic is by no means improbable.
  Several cases of malaria have been treated in hospital, nearly every case being a Foochow immigrant. The state of health among the European population is good.




February, 1926.
were as follows :—
January Foreign Export 1926     $26,720
    ,,	„     Import ,,               9,445
Local   Export
„           Import
   7,687
 19,776
1925  $54,975
,.	5,224
     1,267 
   18,581 
  Shipping.—Five steamers and eight motor ships
entered the port while eight steamers and five motor
    The number of in-patients treated at hospital during the month amounted to 111.
     There were 686 out-patients attendances, being an average of 24.5 daily. Ill arsenical injections were given.
ships cleared.
     Six deaths occurred in the hospital due to the following causes:—Beriberi, maxillary abscess, typhoid, chrome nephritis, chronic dysentery, and moistgangrene.
     Seventeen operations and three post-mortems

    February, 1926.
    Mr. J.C. Swayne, District Officer  reports as follows:-
    General.—I arrived here on the 13th from Sibu. and 15tb, Chinese New Year, and the
24th, Her Highness the Ranee’s birthday, were
were performed this month, one post-mortem on a
patient who died with septic lung ; one on a Malay
who died suddenly on s.s. L’Aubaine, and one on a
Chinese who died suddenly in the bazaar, death
was due in both cases to heart failure.
   911 Foochow immigrants were inspected during
the month ; of these 32 were treated in hospital.
   Influenza and pneumonia have been prevalent
during the month, in most cases, I am pleased to be able
to say, of a mild type.
       Immigration and Emigration:—Mr. R. D. St.
observed as holidays.	
  As no European Officer has been stationed here         
in 1925, the station is not in as good order as I                 
could wish. The roads are in a bad state, part of,              Immigration and Emigration:—Mr R. D. St.
the kampong road has been washed away and will
require to be re-made inland, the road through and the past bazaar is overgrown and the foot-bridges have disappeared. All Government buildings require repair. No quarters are provided for the dresser, who, at present, shares the house of the Native Officer. 1 have asked that allowance may be made for these in the yearly estimates.
  I have to thank His Highness the Rajah for allowing s.l. Mermaid to be stationed here. Visits were paid to Daro and Selalang.
  Court.- Several minor civil cases were settled A case of breach of agreement was tried in which defendent had agreed to tap plaintiff’s rubber trees, the cut not to exceed one-third of the bark , on examination it was found that over one thousand trees had more than half of the bark cut and judgment was given for the plaintiff. Defendant appealed against the decision A case of receiving stolen property was adjourned for further evidence to be collected, and a reward has been offered for sufficient information to lead to a conviction ; as over two thousand dollars worth of cargo was removed from a trading bandong there is no doubt that several persons must have been concerned. The juragan of the boat absconded to Singapore before the theft was discovered.
  Prisoners, numbering six. three of whom come from Sibu, have been at work round the station. Heavy rain has hampered their work.
  Medical.—Dr. L. B. Haye, Divisional Medical Officer, reports as follows :—
J. Horton, Officer-in-Charge of Shipping, reports as  follows:—
	1. Immigration.
Singapore
Via Kuching
           Total
Men.
584
    2
586
Women.
164
3
Children.
257
1
Total
1,005 
6
167
258
1,011
2. Returned on Passport
Singapore
3. Emigrants. Singapore
62
33
93            -

3             1
71
37
H. B. CROCKER,
Resident Third Division.
COAST DIVISION.

             Mukah and Balingian.
                January, 1926.
General.—Native Officer Abang Haji Mohidin returned from Balingian by the overland route on the 1st, accompanied by Penghulu Anding and witnesses for the 1922 murder case; he reports having attended to all available Court work there, but owing to the outbreak of smallpox, especially amongst the Sungei Arip (Saribas) Dyaks, most of of the native population had fled to the jungle.


102
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1926.
  Although Balingian is only about 20 miles from
Mukah as the crow (lies the nearest overland route
takes the best part of three days as against eight 1
hours in the motor launch by sea ; the latter method,
however, only being possible during the fine monsoon.
  An almost total eclispse of the sun took place on
the 14th, causing great consternation amongst local
natives and preventing the sailing of several
schooners; there was a wonderful change in the
weather after the occurrence of this phenomenon.
  The District Officer, Oya and Dalat, Mr. P. M.
Adams, telephoned his return to duty on the Kith.
  A number of Dyaks under one Saka requested
permission to remove from the upper to the lower
Metiling River; this was refused as these men had
been heavily fined for attempting this move in 1922.
  Sabu bin Hassan, a Sarawak Malay, was drowned
on the 6th while boating down from Sisok with his
wife and a large cargo of fruit; a squall upset the 
boat (a hardwood dugout), Sabu sank at once but 
his wife managed to swim ashore. Sabu’s body
was never recovered and, as there was a strong 
current running at the time, it is surmised that he
was carried out to sea.
  All local weights and measures were checked
during the month.
  A Forester, one Abu, was appointed for duty in
this district as from 1st January.
  Courts.—All available witnesses who had appeared 
in the original hearing were collected from Balingian,
but all failed to identify the Dyak prisoners,
Chandang and Unggat, accused on the confession 
of one Nipa, just before his execution, of the mur-
der of three Chinese at Balingian in 1922; as no
fresh evidence was forthcoming Kuching was in-
formed and His Highness the Rajah was pleased to
order their discharge
  Sibar, a Dyak, the Government Wakil in the
Penipah district, was fined $100 for concealing
smallpox cases, and for failing to report Dvak 
affairs.
  Vaccinator Anthony Harry arrived from Sibu on
the 6th and proceeded to Balingian the following
day to continue the vaccination of the interior
Dyaks.
  Dresser Ah Heng’s report on the incidence of
smallpox was telegraphed to the Health Officer,
Kuching, and the Divisional Medical Officer, Sibu,
and this culminated in instructions from head-
quarters to quarantine the whole coast.
  The Acting Resident, Sibu, also requested strict
quarantine between the Oya and Dalat district
and the Third Division; the District Officer, Oya
and Dalat, being on leave at the time, instructions
were given to the Native Officers of Oya and Dalat
to control ail traffic through the Cut or from Igan,
and the Court Writers were authorised to vaccinate
all unvaccinated persons arriving from or leaving
for the Third Division. Some trouble was ex-
perienced by the Native Officers with Haji Urai,
the village Chief of Igan, who endeavoured to
obstruct their orders. Haji Urai’s behaviour has
since been reported to the District Officer, Oya and
Dalat,
  Public Works.—The waterworks plant was in-
spected regularly during the month.
  The carpenter had not completed the required
number of standpipe platforms at the end of the
month, and two men were still employed painting
the water towers.
  Several new belian bridges were erected on the
Tel inn path under the supervision of the village
Chief-:, those under reconstruction include the
budges over the Sungei Ubong and Sungei Misan.
  Heavy floods did a lot of damage to paths and
bridges all over the District. Notices were pre-
paid regarding the control of the water supply,
and forbidding persons to bathe at the standpipes
or to draw water into their houses by means of
chutes; the question of levying suitable water rate
was again discussed, and the proposals forwarded to
Kuching for consideration.
  The Government carpenters completed certain
alterations to the Government Offices in order to
  The disappearence of Sabu, a Sarawak Malay, was
inquired into, the Court being satisfied there was
no suspicion of foul play, a verdict of accidental
drowing was recorded.
  P.C. Morhaban bin Taha was convicted of incest
and sentenced to a term of imprisonment in Kuching
goal.
, A lunatic prisoner, Sa’at bin Kaling, now certified
as sane, who had been detained in Kuching at His
Highness the Rajah’s pleasure in connection with
the death of a woman in 1922. was by order of His
Highness, released on the 18th instant.
  The usual number of sago boundary disputes
and debt cases were dealt with, and many Chinese
traders were reminded of the Debt Pass Book Re-
gulations of 1995, in order to prevent misunder-
standing; a number of Pass Books have since been
registered and a stamp fee of 50 cents charged.
Other Court cases call for no particular comment.
Much petty theft was reported but the local Police
seem either unable or unwilling to make any arrest. 
  Health.—Dresser Ah Heng returned from small-
pox duty at Balingian on the 1st; he reported many
deaths amongst the Dvaks, chiefly Seribas of Sungei
Arip including their Chief Penghulu Mulok, who
recently sent word that his people were prepared
to pay any fine rather than be vaccinated The
Rejang Dvaks under Penghulu Adding were ap-
parently clear of smallpox at the time but the
opportunity was taken of vaccinating as many as 
possible; no further cases were reported amongst
the down river Chinese, Malays, or Melanaus, most of
whom have since been vaccinated by the Court 
Writer.
accommodate the clerical staff.
     The Tamil labourers were employed clearing
the new football ground al the Kuala, and cleaning
the plantations recently acquired by Government
for station extension purposes, they also cleaned the
drains of the Upper Penakub path.
     Divisional Treasury.—After getting the revised
methods of accounting into operation locally, Divi-
sional Treasury Clerk Francis N. Lim left for
Balingian to instruct the Court Writer there.
      A fresh set of books and instructions for the
Divisional Post Office were received and put into
operation during the month. Owing to the shortage
of small change in the various bazaars, thought to
be due to the native tendency to hoard metal coin
by burial, a drum of $900 in nickel was received
from Sibu Treasury and put into circulation both
 here and at Oya.
	Prison.—The prison gang, averaging 10*26 men,
 was employed on the general upkeep of the station
 grounds, and pulling down and removing the old
female gaol for re-erection on the new site.
      Trade and Shipping.—The trade returns for the
 month are as follows : —
          Coasting Imports. Coasting Exports.
Mukah	...	nil	$23,695
Balingian	...	,,	nil
The rainfall recorded shows 20 inches.
Bintulu.
January, 1926.
Mr. H. H. Kortright, District Officer of Bintulu,
reports as follows : —


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. APRIL 1, 1926.
103
   Courts.—Work in all Courts has been fairly light. Tua Kampong Payah of Pandan was fined $100 for deserting his kampong and refusing to return. Tua Kampong Dali was imprisoned for 6 months for not reporting smallpox cases in his kampong. Tins man has been instructed many limes concerning this and has already been fined for the. same offence. Bol, Dyak, one month for refusing vaccination, another named Abang wanted for this also has bolted. There were several eases of minor importance.
   Health.—At the beginning of the month the smallpox isolation camp was empty but on the 10th Awang Jahari, Forest Guard, contracted the disease and was insulated; four other cases occurred here during the month. At Pandan, and in several streams in that neighbourhood, the epidemic has been pretty bad There have been 36 deaths this month. It is quite hopeless to do anything for these people ; Punans are especially bad and deliberately move from place to place with the sickness on them, and it is impossible to prevent this, scattered about as they are.
   Mr. R V. Palfreman, who had come over from Tatau for a few days visit, went up river to Sebauh and Pandan to enforce vaccination amongst the Dyaks and others there. The Dresser was doing his best at this, but all his efforts were being passively’ resisted Mr. Palfreman was away nearly a week and visited several Dyak houses: be seems to have successfully overcome their objections to vaccination by mere persuasion, as. the. Dresser’s last report states that there are hundreds of Dyaks now coming in to be vaccinated. The women held out against it until the bitter end but eventually gave in.
  During the mouth 1,262 vaccinations were given.
   General. -Mr. O. Lang. Superintendent of Police, arrived here on the 5tu on s.s Gladys and left again on the 9th by same vessel for Miri, returning again on the 25th ui. s.s, Auby for Kuching.
   Boon Swee, a clerk to take the place of Ah Chin resigned, arrived from Miri by Alice Lorraine on 25th and took up his duties here the following day
   One Seman has, subject to the approval of His Highness the Rajah, been appointed Tua Kampong to take the place of Salleh imprisoned for concealing smallpox m his own house. 
   M. L. Nellie has been lent to this station until the new launch arrives, and was brought from Limbang by s.s. Auby on the 25th. This launch, although too small to go out co sin, will be must useful for river work running between Bintulu, Sebauh and Tuban
   Trade—Trade has been good all the month and large cargoes of jelutong have been exported, also a great number of belian attaps.
   The s.s. Auby arrived off the port on the 2nd, but for the second time running failed to enter. A pilot was on his way out to the vessel when she up-anchored and steamed away.
   The Managing Director of Sarawak Steamship Co. has now given definite instructions to the Captain of Auby, with the result that on the 25th, although the sea was much rougher than on the two previous occasions, the Auby entered without any difficulty.
  The trade returns for the month are as follows:
1926.	1225.
     Imports ... $41,254,49	$30,431.40
     Exports ....	71,406.32	50,122.23
  The following vessels entered and cleared the port during the month : —
    Entered	4 steamers	schooners nil
    Cleared	5 . „	„	„
The rainfall was 15'44 inches.
Tatau.
January, 1926.
  Mi . R. V. Palfreman. Acting Assistant District Officer, Tatau, reports as follows:—
  In accordance with a written request from the District Officer, Bintulu, I left on the 7th instant for Sparai and Bintulu. After a short stay at Bintulu the District Officer requested me to proceed to Sebauh and Pandan to carry out certain duties mostly concerning the smallpox. I returned to Bintulu and leaving there again on the 19th instant I arrived at Tatau the same evening. Fortunately' the sea was very calm although there was little or no wind to use for sailing, and therefore the boat had to be paddled most of the way.
  Courts—Two Punans, by name Tama Avang and Jok, were each sentenced to 3 months’ R.I. for cheating Many fines were imposed on Dyaks for breach of Forest Regulations. A summons has been issued against a Malay by name Salus, the son of Haji Ismail of Kuala Tatau, for getting Dyaks to work belian fencing for him stating that the Government had authorised him to do this.
  Since the Dyaks under Penghulu Tamboh's authority have been complaining lately against this Penghulu, on my arrival from Bintulu a meeting was called of all the tuai in his district and they were invited to make any complaints they had to make at once, and before Penghulu Tamboh and myself. One or two complaints were then made, but these mostly concerned the Dyak law as interpreted by Penghulu Tamboh and did not in any way show that Penghulu Tamboh is unfit to remain as Penghulu. These complaints and questions having been duly attended to the tuai were told that it would be useless to grumble against the Penghulu in the future, and that if they disagreed with any of his decisions they could always inform him they wished to open an appeal and that he would be the last to attempt to stop them doing so, but that should they attempt to open any appeal that was obviously only a try on that they would be fined for doing so The whole trouble as usual appears to have been caused by one or two disaffected Dyaks who, seeing that a new European had arrived in the station, hoped to incense this European against the Penghulu.
  Health.—The health of the station in still good, but two Malays from Bintulu who developed smallpox, in a “jelutong hut” were at once turned out of the district and sent to Bintulu, they had no contact with Dyaks and the disease should not spread. On my arrival at Bintulu the District Officer, Mr. H. H. Kortright, informed me that the Tatau River was to be quarantined, as regards the Balingian district, where the smallpox is reported to be very rife A letter was at once sent to Penghulu Tamboh ordering him to proceed to all the Dyak houses in the various tributaries of the ’Tatau which are used as roads to and from Balingian, and to inform the Tuai Rumahs of these bouses that should they receive people from Balingian they will be liable to a heavy fine or perhaps imprisonment. On my return I found that Penghulu Tamboh had duly carried out these instructions and a day or two later a report was received from Tuai Rumah Jelai that


104
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1926.
two Dyaks from Balingian who had come overland,
had already been ordered to return at once and had
done so without demur, these Dyaks were not even
allowed by the Jelai Dyaks to come up into the
Jelai houses.
  T.K. Haji Ismail has also been told that he is to
stop any Balingian boats from entering the river.
  PAV'D.—The two Punan prisoners are working
on the ditches round the Fort and along the sides
of the road in front of the Fort.
  The Dyaks have been ordered to clear the site for
the wireless station within ten days from 24th
instant.
  General.—With the sanction of the District
Officer, Bintulu, two Chinese towkays, by name Ah
Keng and Ah Hong, have been allowed to build two
new shops on the down river side of the bazaar.
  Also with the sanction of the District Officer,
Bintulu, the Dyak boundary up river has been ex-
tended as far as the River Tau, since this river forms
a much better boundary than the River Sana, in
that it is a large river and also is only a half a
tanjong above the mouth of the Sana.
  During the month 207 rubber planting permits
were taken out; this rubber all having been planted
by the Dyaks some time ago. The Dyaks have been
informed that should they plant any more rubber
they will be fined and the rubber will be pulled up.
  The Dyaks are continually being told to plant
sago instead of rubber but so far 1 regret to say no
sago has been planted.
  Penghulu Buaya paid a visit to the station on
the 24th instant and requested that he be released
from being a Penghulu, since he states he is be-
coming too old to work any longer and also does not
feel up to continually having to visit various houses
for cases, etc. He was informed that he could not
be released at once but that Government would
consider the matter
  Shipping.—No vessels entered or cleared the port
during the month.
  Trade Returns.—Imports $8,855.00: Exports
$3,774.62.
given authority to chose sites for any new houses
it was proposed to erect, in order to avoid over-
crowding, and to order old disused stacks to be
demolished. I spent from 23rd—29th at Dalat.
     Surveys.- The surveyor finished mapping all
rubber gardens at Igan and has now come to Oya
preparatory to returning to Kuching. The chain-
man was taken ill at Igan and was sent by express
boat to Sibu for medical treatment. These two
men have done excellent work during the time they
have been here and have wasted no time.
     Land.—Quit rent has been collected under the
terms of the new land order and this heading should
show a substantial increase of revenue. It will be
late in being collected as the acreage cannot be
determined until the maps are ready.
   Treasury.—$300 in nickel one cent coins was
sent from Mukah to assist in alleviating the small
coin shortage.
      P.W.D.—I arranged to have Native Officer’s
quarters repaired for $35, the material being avail-
able from old stocks. Tenders were received from
various Sibu contractors for erecting the New Court
House. Oya, but their price and the period for
completion were too long to be accepted. I am
now trying to obtain a contractor locally.
     Health.—As far as is known this has been good.
     General.—I returned from Kuching via Sibu on
the 16th and found everything in order. Owing
 to the increase of smallpox epidemic at Balingian
strict quarantine regulations were enforced by the
Divisional Officer and nobody allowed to travel with-
 out being vaccinated. A police guard was placed at
 the Igan end of Sungei Kut for this purpose.
       The trade returns were:—Imports $1,380.00;
 Exports $2,214.00.
   Shipping. -No boats entered but four cleared
  during the month.
Prisoners —The average of prisoners was 7 29.
W. F. DE V. SKRINE, 
Acting Divisional Officer.
Oya and Dalat.
February, 1926.
   The District Officer, Mr. P. M. Adams, reports as follows:—
   Court.— Two Chinese traders were fined $25 . each for being in possession of false passu measures. 
   A decision made by T.K. of Igan was reversed and one Lai imprisoned to 6 months for theft of a fishing net.
   Clerical.—The shortage of clerks, to which I have | alluded repeatedly, was even more noticeable in dealing with annual reports and statistics. Changing over to the latest system of bookkeeping added to the congestion of work. This, however, has been, it is hoped, successfully accomplished.
   Dyak Affairs.—Ex Penghulu Umpieng claimed he had received no commission on tax for 4 years, ' one year being about 1917. The matter was gone into and he was paid fifty dollars, or one year’s commission, in settlement. As Penghulus do nothing towards collecting the tax, except take the commission, it has been decided to collect through the Tuai Rumah in future, who will be held responsible for the number of doors in their respective houses. If this is a failure poll tax al $2 per bead will be enforced.
   Travelling.—I visited Igan and inspected the lighthouse and keeper’s quarters. These latter were built by the keeper himself for $300. The building has not been completed, and what there is of it is not worth more than $50. He was told to rectify this in the shortest possible time or take the consequences. It was not until lately that I was aware that such a contract had been made. The T.K. Igan complained of people building houses too close to each other in the kampong. He was
FIFTH DIVISION.
Lawas and Trusan.
January, 1926.
   Court.—In the Resident’s Court, Rabun and Joyo were imprisoned four and five years respectively for housebreaking by night. There were three cases of criminal intimidation, but two of them were reduced to a charge of common assault for which Lam Chong and Ho Bong, plaintiff and defendant, were fined $5 or one mouth and ordered to deposit $25 to be of good behaviour for six months, anil Ah Soo, defendant in the second case, was fined $10 or one month and bound over for six months. In the third Sidan Riak was sentenced to six months’ R.l. for threatening with a gun whilst drunk. The charge of procuring an abortion brought against Saran Singa (f.) and her daughter Gadong Buaya was dismissed, as was the charge of attempted murder against Buaya Singa. father of Gadong. Ballang Lagaug, at whose instigation the prosecution was instituted, was fined  $100 or one year’s imprisonment for bringing a false I charge with intent to injure. In the District Court, Nasir was fined S25 or three months for furnishing false information. In the Magistrate’s Court five Javanese were imprisoned for arriving from B.N.B. I without a pass and several Sundar Malays fined for breach of buffalo fence regulations. Dullah bin Senudin was fined for refusing to assist a public servant, and a case of theft dismissed.
	Prisoners.—The average number of prisoners
 during the month was ten They were employed in clearing away a landslide at the buck of the bungalow, renewing some of the tiangs of the stables, and clearing the ditches which were filled in during the I flood.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1926.
105
  Public Works. —Posts and planks have been
ordered from Muruts and Malays but it is doubtful
if they can be delivered until after the harvest- All 
efforts to obtain coolies for road work have proved 
fruitless up to the present. This is particularly 
unfortunate as the weather during the latter part of 
the month was very favourable for this kind of
work.
  Travelling—On 7th I went down to Kayangaran
in the evening where I discussed various matters
with Mr. Cook. I left for Sundar early on 8th and
went up to Trusan next day. I returned to Lawas 
via Awat-Awat on 11th. On 15th I went to Mero- 
pok where I held Court returning the same day. On
22nd I left for Sundar to meet the Resident there.
On arrival I found that he had been forced to turn
back on 21st on account of rough sea. On 25th 
was unable to get back by launch on account of the
sea so went up to Trusan and walked across. The
road was in good order after the dry spell. On 27th 
the Resident arrived, returning to Limbaug on 
31st.
  Agriculture.—The padi crop suffered from the
heavy flood at the beginning of the month and the
drought which followed will have no good effect.
Rainfall. —The rainfall recorded was as follows : —
    Lawas ...	...	13'97 inches
    Lawas Estate	...	25'99 „
    Trusan ...	...	19'62
  The heavy rain on the night of the 9th caused an 
abnormal flood. At Lawas the water was up to the
counters in the shops and at Trusan the road to 
Menggangah was four feet under water. At Sundar 
the torrent rushing under the bungalow was about 
three feet deep and did considerable damage to the
banks. Before long it will become necessary to 
move the bungalow further back. In contrast to 
this heavy rain there was a drought for the last part
of the month, only 11 inch being recorded at 
Lawas between 14th and 31st.
  Shipping. — S.S. Alice Lorraine called at Kayan- 
garan on 20th to load timber for Kuching and s.s.
Auby came in on 21st. She look away some sawn 
timber for Kuching and a sample shipment of logs
for Singapore. ML. Adele made four trips to
Labuan.
  Miscellaneous.- A Tagal murderer named Inchur 
who was aunt to Kuching in 1923 as insane was sent 
back during the month pronounced sane. He has 
gone to live in Panai’s house, having been released .
on condition that he reports once a mouth.
Trade. -Thetrade returns are asfollows :       FOREIGN.Lawas — January,Imports.
1926 ... $22,845
1925 ...	13,586Exports. $47,575 33.412Trusan.—January,1926 ... $13,432
1925 ...	5.088     $14,111
       8,794       COASTING.Lawas.—
January,1926	... $ 619     $ 292Trusan. — January,1926	.. $ 1,455     $ 1,585                                  February, 1926
    
   Court. —In the Resident’s Court, Goh Huan was
sentenced to seven years in Kuching jail under section 307, and Peier Chia, alias Eng Watt, to live years under section 409. which sentence was to dale from 18.8.25. Groh Huan was also sentenced to eighteen months’ R.I in the District Court for voluntarily causing hurt on two counts, and in the Magistrate's Court to three months simple imprion- Dient under section 309. He made a feeble attempt to commit suicide by jumping into the river whilst a number of persons were near-by. Evidently he
wanted to create a sensation. Four local shopkeepers
were fined $25 apiece for breach of the Petroleum
Regulations
  Datu Haji Moasili was sent over to Lawas to
confer with Native Officer there regarding the wind-
ing-up of the estate of Blio Usman, late Tua Kam-
pong of Sluating
  Wireless Department.—Mr. Cox arrived by the
Auby on the 13th with the wireless installation for
this station, which was working by the 17th, the
aerials being temporarily hung from a couple of trees.
The masts, with the aid of some hundred persons,
were got into position by the 22nd. In fact only
one day was spent in actually erecting these.
  Travelling.—I went over to Brunei on the 6th to
pay a farewell visit to the British Resident who is
shortly going on leave, and accompanied him to
Panderuan on the 8th, returning to Limbang the
same day. There was nothing doing at Panderuan,
which is a very dead and alive spot.
     I was at Danau from the 21st to the 23rd.
  General.—The prospects of a good harvest have
been much lessened by the prolonged drought The
hill padi is practically ail spoilt, but there is still
hope that a large portion of the swamp padi will
survive.
  There has been no rain for nearly two months,
and there is every sign of the drought continuing ;
the hillside streams have all dried up and the darn
which feeds the bungalows and bazaar is empty,
thus the water question has become acute. This
more than ever points Co the urgent necessity of
putting in a larger water supply, by pushing for-
ward the work of building a new dam at Bukit
Hitam.
  Four prisoners, Eng Watt alias Peter Chia,
Hokien, Choyo and Amat, Javanese, and Awang,
half Dyak and half Saba, escaped from the gang on
the 21st whilst collecting wood at Sembiling for
erecting the wireless masts. Neighbouring States
were warned by wireless and a message was also
sent to Haram and an express to Lawas. Up to the
end of the month they were still at large, but their
recapture is only a matter of time.
  Public Works. —It has been decided to erect the
new Court and schoolhouse in Kampong Limpaung,
and not on the site of the old building close to the
bazaar. It is thought this latter will serve a more
useful purpose by being split up into building plots
for extension to the bazaar His Highness the
Rajah’s permission will be applied for to be allowed
to dispose of the plots by public auction.
  The road coolies finished cleaning the ditches and
seventh mile round, and started on the third mile
round. They also assisted with hoisting the wire-
less masts, and in dumping sand and stone at the
new site for the Malay School and teacher's bouse.
  The prisoners averaged 27’09. The gang was
employed in weeding ditches on the Sungei Poyan
road, levelling and raising a site for the new boat
shed, cutting timber for erecting wireless masts and
generally assisting Mr. Cox and his men.
  Shipping and Trade.—Forty-six bead of buffalo
were shipped to Kuching and seventeen to Miri.
  The Auby and Sulong each made one trip from
Kuching whilst the local launches called in seven
times.
The trade returns are as under
Exports.	Imports.
        Foreign	$17,282	$16,444
        Coasting	5,972	12,905
$23,254	$29,349
        B’forward	28,234	24,728
        Total to date $51,488	$51,077
        1925	$42,676	$39,019
      F. F. BOULT.
Resident Fifth Division.


