
VOL. ??.
No. 872.

THE
Sarawak Gazette.
PRICE	KUCHING, Saturday, May 1st, 1926.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
P«04’.
Notes	...	...	...	...	... 113
Arrival of His Highness the Tuan Muda ...	... 115
Snipe	...	...	...	...	... 115
Sarawak Library	...	...	... 115
Sleep ...	...	...	...	H5
Mixed Sleepers	...	...	...	115
Theft of Crude Oil	...	...	...
Any old night in Race Week	...	...	...	115
Forged Notes ...	...	...	...	116
Tropical Happening IT	...	...	...	116
S. Thomas’ School Building Fund	...	... 116
Training Notes ...	...	...	...116
Club Notes: —Bowling Averages for March, 1926	... 117
              Snooker Pool Tournament	...	...	117
              Double Tennis Tournament	...	...	117
              Bowling Tournament	...	...	117
St. Michael's Catholic Club—Tennis Tourna-
ment	...	...	... ’.18
Pastil Kuching	...	...	..	...	118
Monthly Reports;—First Division	...	...	119
                    Sadong Colliery	...	...	120
                    Second Division	...	...	120
                    Coast Division	...	...	123
                    Fourth Division	...	...	125
Kuching Trade Returns	...	...	...	127
Passengers ...	...	...	...	...	128
Miri Trade Returns	...	...	...	...	129
Kuching Market Price List	...	...	•••	130
Kuching Shipping	...	...	...	...	181
Miri Shipping	...	...	...	...	132
Kuching Shipping Returns	...	...	...	1158
Rainfall ...	...	...	...	-	188
Meteorological Returns	...	...	...	184
The Sarawak Gazette.
      SATURDAY, MAY 1, 1926
NOTES.
April.
  His Highness the Rajah and Dayang Leonora, accompanied by Mrs. K. H. Gillan, Messrs. F. H. Kortright, and E. O. Bruce, returned per H.H.M.Y. Maimuna to Kuching  on the 7th after a few days’ visit to Lundu and the neighbouring districts. His Highness left again for Sibu and Kapit on the 9th instant, returning on the 14th.
  His Highness the Rajah and Dayang Leonora returned on the 28th to Kuching from Limbang per H.H.M.Y. Maimuna, bringing several visitors from Outstations.
   VISITORS to Kuching for Race Week included Messrs. Anderson, Archer, Mr. and Mrs. Boult, Messrs. Calver, Cutfield, Gild, Haye, F. H. Kortright, H. H Kortright, Pascoe and Page-Turner.
   Mr. and Mrs. Boult, Capt. and Mrs. I-e 1 Gros Clark, Messrs. Cutfield, F. H. Kort- ; right, H. H. Kortright, and F. A. W. Page- Turner were the guests of His Highness the Rajah at the Astana during Race Week.
   MR. H. B. Crocker, Resident, Third Division. arrived in Kuching on the 24th, having been appointed Acting Chief Secretary during the absence on leave of Mr, J. C. Moulton, O.B.E.
   MR. and Mrs. H. D. Aplin returned from local leave on the 29th, looking very fit after their trip. Mr. Aplin has been appointed Acting Resident, Third Division.
   MR. Harvey Firestone, jun., accompanied by Mrs. Firestone, Mr. Myers, Mr. Cheek and Mr. Timlin, passed through Kuching in April on their return to Singapore from Sibu. We understood that Mr. Firestone was much interested in the rubber plantations opened up by the Foochows round Sibu under I the auspices of the American Methodist Mission, and particularly admired the work put in by Mr. J. M. Hoover, who has spent some 20 years at Sibu in charge of the Mission and in organizing this thriving colony of Chinese.
  Mr. Firestone is making a rapid tour of
the rubber-producing countries in the East.
We hope that during the few days he spent
in Sarawak the information he obtained will
show him that planting in Sarawak has some
advantages as compared with neighbouring
countries, and that perhaps it may lead his
Company to open up an estate here at some
future date, if their interests in Liberia are
not too great to permit of planting elsewhere.
  Mr. Firestone’s party left for Singapore by
the s.s Kuching on 22nd April.
  Sarawak has not hitherto attracted outside
capital for opening up rubber estates, which
is possibly due to the difficulties of labour ana


LU	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1926
transport. The only three European estates
here (at Lawas, Dahan, and Sungei Tengah). I
however, have successfully emerged from 
troublous times and are now as prosperous as 
any in Malaya.
  DRY rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah 
Estate during the month of March was 
approximately 85,000 tbs.
  AT. a Meeting of the Committee of the ;
Sarawak Turf Club on the 6th of March,
consideration was given, inter alia, to the
suggestion mentioned in our issue of 1st
March, that the next Race Meeting should I
consist of three shorter afternoons instead of
the present programme. All owners of
ponies entered for the Spring Meeting were 
present, or represented, with the exception of 
two Kuching owners and those resident in the
Outstations. After a lengthy discussion of
the points raised, only one owner was found
to be still in favour of the proposed alteration.
  A fire broke out at 1.30 p.m. on the 15th ,
in the vicinity of the race course near
Padungan River It spread rapidly, but
was checked and finally overcome by the Fire
Brigade after about a dozen of the
Native “Pavilions” along the edge of the
race track had been destroyed.
  We understand that the conflagration
originated through the carelessness of some
coolies burning off undergrowth which they
had cleared from a rubber garden.
  MR. and Mrs. Le Sueur left for 7 months'
Home furlough by the s.s. Kuching on the
22nd April.
  THE Director of Agriculture. Mr. E. S.
Holl, was absent from Kuching on a visit to
the Outstations from 28th March till 15th
April.
  THE Kuching Isolation Camp was closed
down on Wednesday the 14th. there having
been no further cases of smallpox since the
10th of March.
  MR. Clunies-Ross, who is in charge of the
leper Settlement at the 13th mile, after
a visit to Satang remarks “although quite a
beautiful spot, I don’t wonder the patients 
were not happy there—looking always to- 
wards the mainland—‘so near and yet so far.
whereas up here (13th mile) they are very
happy and contented	 I am doing my
best to encourage all to come for treatment.
A lot of the Chinese have done, so where ;
before they refused injections but when they 
understood the reason for treating by in-
jection they turned up. The Dyaks and
Malays are more amenable.''
  DR. M. E. Barnes of the International
Health Board of the Rockefeller Foundation,
arrived in Kuching on the 12th by s.s Rajah
of Sarawak.
  We understand that during 1924 the
International Health Board co-operated with
the Governmental health agencies of ninety,
states and countries in their efforts to
improve the health and thereby the general 
well-being of their populations.
   In each instance, in which the Board lends
its assistance the co-operative programme is
carefully adapted to ‘the actual stage of
development.
   Dr. Barnes and the Principal Medical
Officer had a lengthy interview with His
Highness the Rajah yesterday and it is hoped
that a similar co-operative health programme
for this country may eventuate.
    Miss J. Harvey returned from European
furlough by the s.s. Kuching on the 19th
April, and has taken up a Government
appointment as Matron of the General
Hospital.
     WE learn with regret of the death of Lt.
W. L. Berridge. R.N., who will be remem-
bered by those present in Kuching during his
visit in charge of His Majesty’s Submarine
L.15, in February last year.
   It appears that Lt. Berridge accidentally
met his death while diving at the Swimming
Club. Penang, recently, by striking the
bottom and breaking his neck.
     Things we want to know—
   Who is the economist who wants glass
walls in his bungalow and only one point of
electric light ?
    Answers to correspondents—
   Puasa. Yes, Harry Ryer visited Kuching
a short while ago.
   Angostura. We have been unable to trace
the date when the Title was conferred upon
Sir Rupert Adeh, but believe it was soon
after he was called to the Bar.
   Twofer. We are not certain what brand
they are, probably Rennie Victorias!
   Romantic. No, we have not yet heard of
the publication of the “Memours of his
Amoirs.”
    MONDAY afternoon the 3rd of May will he
observed as a Government Holiday on ac-
 count of the Race Meeting and all Govern -
 went Offices will he closed after 11 30 a.m.
    WE hear that Burak has been scratched
from all his engagements at this Race Meeting.
    THROUGH the generosity of the following
donors, the Indian Community of Kuching
was enabled to offer a prize Cup at the
Regatta and the Spring Race Meeting:—
The Kuching Moslim Merchants ...	... $ 51.50
K. V. K. ...	...	...	...	20.00
Messrs. S. Ratnam, T. M. A. Pillai. A Singaram
   Pillai, Dr. Kurup. Contractors Arunasalam.
   Barnabas. Kali, and Sinnatambi $10 each	80.00
Motiram & Co.	...	...	...	7.50
Rev. Proctor, M. N. Dorasami Naidu. Aripatri.
 Ramasami Devar, Sheik Abdul Halim, Mallayar,
and through Contractor Arunasalam $5 each ...	85.00
Mandore Tillaviran $4. and through M. Tilla-
viran $5.25	'	...	...	0-25
Intija Khan ...	...	...	3.00
B. Motiram, Mhd. Akbar Khan (Bintulu) $2 each 4.00
Muhamad Khan, Kar.im Hussian. Murugeaan,
Govindasami Suppayya, Pavadai, Subratnania
Pillai, Ratnasami Pillai, Sheik Pouzdar, Achayi.
   C. P. Menon, Juala Singh. S. P. Nallatambi
   $1 each ...	...	...	...	1300
Sheik Mhd. Yasin. Mhd. Sayyid, Khaja Mhd..
     Sheik Intija	...	...	...	2.00
Total	..	$225.25


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1926.	115
   Arrival of H. H. the Tuan Muda
   His Highness the Tuan Muda arrived in Kuching ftom Singapore at 4 p.m on Thursday, the 29th April. His Highness travelled out from home on the P. & O. s.s. Khyber and left Singapore on th4 27th in the s.s. Kuching. On arrival here, His Highness the Tuan Muda was received with a salute of 21 guns from the Fort. The Chief Secretary and Mr H. B. Crocker went on board the ship to meet and escort His Highness ashore.
   His Highness the Rajah received the Tuan Muda at the Astana landing stage, where Members of the Supreme Council and the Committee of Administration also awaited his arrival.
   After the inspection of the guard by the Tuan Muda, 
their Highnesses walked up the path through the garden to the Astana where other Government Officers were assembled to greet His Highness, who will remain in Sarawak during the absence of His Highness the Rajah, who proceeds to Europe on the 4th instant.
Snipe.
   There are those who know the small cattle ground at Bintulu and might like to bear that 50 ½  couple of snipe were killed there, during the past season, also one Mallard duck.
   The following, it is reported, were responsible for the bag
    The Complete Sportsman	1
    An Accountant	...	....	2
    The Policeman	...	2
    A Small Merchant Prince	...	1
    The Specimen in the Sarawak Museum 25
    The Gamekeeper ...	... 70
Sarawak Library.
  The following book has been added:—
    Borneo Stealer of Hearts ... By Bruce
F. G. CARPENTER, Honorary Secretary.
Sleep.
   Sir James Crichton-Browne, lecturing on ‘‘Brain Rest,” gave a scale showing how long we ought to sleep at different periods of our lives.
   We notice in that scale that babies aged 6 months ought to sleep for 18 hours daily: We heartily agree-they ought to ; but they don’t. The babies we have known have been much too intent on yelling for 18 hours a day, with especial loudness in the middle of the night, to bother about sleep.
   Again we observe that in adult life 8 hours of sleep is the ideal. But if that is so, why is it that when we go to bed at 10 and sleep soundly ail night we are filled with the strongest desire to fail asleep again as soon as we hear 6 o’clock strike and know that it is time to rise?
   Many books have been written to explain the mystery of sleep, but nobody has yet explained why it plays such impish pranks upon one. When one ought to sleep one often can't; when one ought to be wide awake one is often overwhelmed by sleepiness.
   A correspondent writes to the Malay Mail calling attention to the fact that the P. & O. Co. have raised the fares between Singapore and Marseilles, while leaving, the Hares between Singapore and London unchanged.—[Straits Budget].
   A Bill is to be introduced into the Legislative Council, Singapore, for the purpose of enabling any prisoner undergoing a sentence of imprisonment in the State of Sarawak to be transferred to the Colony for the purpose of undergoing his sentence or the residue thereof.—[Straits Echo].
        “Mixed” Sleepers.
	
  European ladies travelling Home at this time of the year via France would do well  to note that “couchettes,” which are a popular feature of Riviera trains, have caused no little embarrassment to English women visitors unaware that unless the whole compartment is reserved, places are allotted irrespective of sex—and this is expressly stated.
  The “couchette," which is far cheaper thin a sleeping-car berth, accommodates four passengers lying at full length, and in mail week two English women occupying part of the accommodation were most indignant when at a stopping-place a man was admitted.	
  Despite a vigorous protest, however, the newcomer insisted on his right to share the “couchette'’ for which he had paid, and his fellow-passengers spent the remainder of the journey in a state bordering on hysterics I—[Straits Echo],
Theft of Crude Oil.
  The suggestion that there had been a conspiracy directed against the Asiatic - Petroleum Co. was made at the Hongkong Central Magistracy on March 3, when a Chinese was charged with being concerned in an attempt to steal six tons of crude oil. The prosecution stated that other arrests were likely, and further inquiries might reveal the existence of a conspiracy to defraud the company. The defendant was arrested in a boat lying alongside the North Point wharf. A pipe line and tap were connected with a crude oil tank, and oil was being loaded into the boat. The incident occurred at night, and it was significant that the lights failed at that time. The case was adjourned.—[Pinang Gazette d- S. Chronicle].
Any old night in Race Week.
When you're lying awake with dismal headache, and repose is tabooed by anxiety,
I conceive you may use any language you choose’ to indulge in without impropriety.
For your brain is on fire, and mosquitoes conspire from your usual slumber to plunder you
As you scratch at your toes and the end of your nose,
while the sheet slips demurely from under you.
Perspiration soon trickles, you feel like mixed pickles, so terribly bitten by things,
You’re hot and you’re cross and you tumble and toss till there is nothing 'twixt you and the springs.
Then the blanket will creep to the floor in a heap and you pick it all up in a tangle.
While your pillow resigns and politely declines to remain al its usual angle.
Well, you get some, repose in the form of a doze with hot eyeballs and head ever aching.
But your slumbering teems with such horrible dreams that you’d very much better be waking,
First you dream you are crossing the river and tossing about in a steamer from Harwich.
Which is something between a large bathing machine and a very small second-class carriage.
Then you're riding a horse in the Race round the Course 
         (and your limbs are as cold as an icicle),
In your shirt and your socks of black silk with white cloxs, or across Salisbury Plain on a bicycle!
You wake with a start...
You’ve cramp in your toes and a fly up your nose, 
 And a thirst that’s intense, and a general sense  
That you haven't been sleeping in clover.
	


116
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1926
          Forged Notes.
               CLEVER IMITATIONS.
    A good many forged five-dollar Straits currency 
notes are at present in circulation in Penang, and 
the public is warned against receiving these. They 
are clever imitations, and the unwary are liable to 
accept them without strict scrutiny.
   One of our representatives was shown one of these
notes and thought it genuine until shown what was 
actually wrong. It is well-printed on paper similar
to the genuine notes, but, on examining the 
numbers on the notes, they appear to be awkward
and thicker in size and are not in line. They are all 
of the series C upon 8 and C upon 12 and are dated 
20th June. 1921.—[Pinang Gazette 4 S. Chron.].
Tropical Happening II.
TRAINING TIME.
Syces, owners, motor cars ‘ beetling: ' down the road ;
Fretting little ponies by Malays bestrode.
Grim bearded faces, when the day is dawning.
Going to the race course early in the morning.
Not a word is spoken on that lonely road :
Only noise of engines cursing at the lead.
Clicking hoofs of ponies kicking up the stones.
Syces’ even tramping- Europeans' groans.
Onward through Padungan: peeler " shuts the gate.
—Ponies crashing down the Course- just a bit too late !
Onward past the hurdle. turn towards the paddock.
Meeting Mr. So and So looking like a haddock.
“Saddle up old Hopeless, Burak. Blazes too.”
“ Here conies Manna Buleh ! see what he, can do.”
“ Who’s that riding Untong ’.’ ” “ Pim you silly coots.”
    “Watch him at the meeting, get him on the tote”
Pitak, If and Shotaway. funny sort of race.
Beaver catching up behind at a fearful pace.
“ Watch that mottled animal.—couldn't race for toffee.”
“ Doesn’t stand a hope in hell, come and have seine coffee.”
Here a solitary Mem, fair isle' stuff shout ‘er.
Conversation starts to flow. ‘ die hards ' cease to flout ‘er
Early morning badinage, repartee, and after
    Someone's told the latest joke, early morning laughter. 
         Rolling back the same old road, funnily enough.
Scarce an hour later, feeling just the stuff' 
One begins to realize.-- take, tine as n warning.
    —We would all be fitter if we did it every morning.
LITTLE JOE.
  The following extracts from Annual Reports in the Straits Gazette may be of interest to our readers :—
  The nett excess of immigrants over emigrants was 119,791 in 1925 as compared with 84,791 and 67,951 in 1924 and 1923 respectively. The bulk of the I migration is, of course, between Malaya and China I and Malaya and India.
  Seventy-seven thousand Chinese deck passengers left Singapore for China; the excess of immigrants from China over emigrants returning to that country was 136.772 or 63.7 per cent.
  Only 24 licences for short periods were issued in connection with the pilgrimage to Mecca owing to the disturbed political conditions in the Hedjaz.
  In response to representations from a certain section of the Chinese community the Government set up a Committee to consider the questions of ? registration of Chinese marriages and of divorce among the Chinese ; a considerable body of evidence was taken in Singapore and Penang during the year. This is believed to be the first occasion on which Chinese ladies have served on a Government Committee.
S. Thomas* School Building Fund.
The Treasurer begs to acknowledge, with thanks,
the following donation's.
$1,000 Mr. Ong Tiang Swee. Mr. Teo Choon
                    Hian ...... $2,000
   750 Mr. Chan Kee Ong, Ong Ewe Hai A Co. 1,500
   700	Chop Chin Chiang	.	700
   600	Chop Ho Hong	...	...	600
   500	Chop Chin Ann	Bros.	...	...	500
   400	Mr.	Law Chin 	Hiang, Chop Sang
          Cheong ...	...	800
300 Sarawak Chinese Bank, Kwong Lee
Bank	...	...	...	400
   250 Chop Wha Hong	...	...	250
   150 Chop Ban Jui Leong	...	150
100 Chop Sin Seng Hak, Chop Tiang Seng
Chan. Dr. Krishna, Mr. Chan Fook
Mr. Nissa Shokai, Mr. Lim Swee
          Kee, Mr. Lee Yun Thung	...	700
    75 Chop Cheong Kun Eng ...	...	75
    50 Mr. Yeo Kay Cho, Chop Teck Hong.
Mr Gan Swee Cho, Mr. Kho Khai
Kee. Mr. Lai Shak On, Chop Peng
Seng, Chop Chuan Aik Chan, Mr.
          Law Chin Eng ...	...	400
M0 Chop Kong On, Mr. Chin Ah Kee,
ChopThai Fob, Mr. Sob Kok Siong. .	120
25 Mr. Lai Thian Poh ...	...	25
    20 Mr. Thian On. Chop Chuan Hong,
          Chop Joo Choon, Chop Wai Joo ...	80
    15 Chop Eng Hin	...	...	15
10 Mr. Yap Kong Guan, Mr. E. Yaw
Huat, Chop Pug Kwang Seng, Chop
Long Whatt, Chop Kong Joo Seng, 
Mr. Narsaelle, Mr. Siau Choon Sen,
Masts. Song Tiang Siew, Song Tiang
Soon, Song Tiang Siang, Chop Song
Moh, Chop Eng Ho, Chop Chong
Yong Hong, Chop Seng Ann	140
5 Chops Tan Hong Chiang, Thian Jian,
Yong Hong. Seng Thai, Kong Sin
          Loong, Kung Ho, C. Motirain A Co. 35
3 Chops Kui Seng Huat. Youg Seng,
Piak Seng, Nam Seng, Kwong Ngoou
Lee, Nau Heng, Mr. Ninatnsah ...	21
2 Chops Liang Soon, Guan Kee, Seng
Kee, Ban Soon Hong, Kui Joo Huat.
Kui Siang Huat, Hak Soon, Aik
Chiang Lee, Thong Seng, Huat Hin,
Mr. Choo Chong ...	...	22
     I Chop Teck Joo	...	1
$K,934
A. N. ELLIS.
Treasurer.
Training Notes.
    Centaur wrote at some length on the entries and weights in the last Gazette. I have studied his notes and watched most of the ponies mentioned. Yet it seems unfair that I should rise before dawn on the “big" mornings and go to the course while brother punters snatch the last hour which makes so much difference after the extra one at the Club the night before. Why should I tell them what I know (or what I think 1 know)? If they follow my advice and the ponies tipped do not turn up. they will laugh. Well, let them laugh 1 let them jeer!
    Centaur picked the right horses in the Kuching Stakes. Apa Kena (8.0) and Shotaway (7.11). I expect Shotaway to take advantage of the 3 lbs. between them. Hopeless (10.7), if he wants to, will win the Residency Cup. He could carry 11.7 and still be in front. If he declines to start, as he sometimes does, Blazes (9.3) should win. The Bankers' Purse should go either to Untong (10.0) or Beaver (8.0); I like the look of the former. Both these ponies are in excellent condition. Ghalib (8.10) should have no difficulty in winning the Farms' Cup from a moderate field. Azab (8.4)


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1926.
117
the bottom weight will be the danger. Damit is scratched for this race. The Baram Stakes lie between Apa Kena (8.0) and Shotaway (7 12). Punters will be able to decide for themselves by the result of the first race of the day. Untong is not running in the India Plate. This leaves White Wings (9.7) at top weight The distance 5 furlongs is too far for him. The race lies between Beaver (8.7) and Adham (8.10). The latter has been going very well in training and might beat Beaver who will probably start a strong favourite. The B.C.L. Stakes will be an interesting race and also a great deal will depend on the draw as Centaur points out. I agree with him about Ghalib (9.0) winning the race again, but Azab (8.7) will not be far away.
    The Ranee's Cup will provide a certain amount of interest. The field at present has been reduced to fourteen. Bv the time they come to weigh out no doubt the field will be still more reduced. Kismet (8.12) has been kept especially for this race. He is going quite nicely at present and provided his leg does not give him trouble he will stand a good chance Adham (8.0) if he happens to get right away at the start will take a good deal of catching. There is no doubt that some pony will get away with a burst and probably force the pace. This was the case in this race over a mile at the two previous meetings. In the first meeting last year this was especially so. The first two furlongs of the race was a sprint. Hopeless (11.0), however, even with a bad start, should win the race easily.
HARRY HEPATONE.

     A Concert was given by the pupils of St. Teresa’s
Convent, Kuching, on Wednesday, 28th April.
Admission $1, the proceeds for new school furniture.

PROGRAMME.
            "Flower Gathers"
Opening Chorus
"Cock Robin"
The Burlesque Band
Cantata
Closing Chorus
Senior and Junior Girls
Senior Girls
       Infants
       Boys
"The Children’s Queen"

Friendship
Club Notes.
Sarawak Club.
BOWLING AVERAGES FOR MARCH, 1926.
No of Games.Averages.G. T. Bates...	9    158.4J. P. Baird... 17    149.4N. A. Middlemas      5    139.0C. E. A. Ermen...	5    134.2J. C. Moulton      6    133.3J. A. McCullagh...	9    123.0C. D. Adams... 15    122.7J. S. Mudford...	5    116.6D. Y. Proudfoot      7    U4.3B. J. C. Spurway...	8    103.3R. W. Chater      9     97.6C. S. Griffiths... 10     96.6SNOOKER POOL TOURNAMENT.
 1st round.—D . Marjoribanks and A. M. Forrest
 + 20 beat R. W. Chater and N. Middlemas+60.
 H. Calvert and C. D. Adams 4-40 beat J. C. Moulton
 and J. 8. Mudford scratch
   2nd round.— His Highness the Rajah and J. P. Baird + 80 beat Dr. Marjoribanks and A. M. Forrest + 20. H. Calvert and C. D. Adams + 40 beat G. T. Bates and F G. Carpenter scratch.
   Final.—H. Calvert and C. D. Adams beat His Highness the Rajah and J. P. Baird.
   The Kuching finalists now have to meet the Outstations.
          DOUBLES TENNIS TOURNAMENT.
   1st round.—N. Middlemas and Dr. Marjoribanks scratch beat C. Fenwick and Frayling + 15, J. C. Moulton and C. Ermen scratch beat J. McCullagh and E. O. Bruce+|30, B. A. Trecbman and F. G. Carpenter+ 15 beat His Highness the Rajah and A. M. Forrest+ 15.
   2nd round. H. Middlemas and Dr. Marjoribanka scratch beat J. C Moulton and C. Ermen scratch, B. A. Trecbman and F. G Carpenter +15 beat J. P. Baird and C. Griffiths—15
   Final.—B A. Trechman. and F. G. Carpenter beat N. Middlemas aud Dr. Marjoribanks.
   The Kuching finalists now have to meet the Outstations.
H'orling Tuitmaintnl- 26th. 27th and 29th April. 1996.
Srors.Handicap.Total.R. W. Chater ( Winner)311     70    881J. P. Baird355     20    375D. J. Proudfoot311     40    851G. R. H. Arundell ...294     50   344J. S. Mudford294     40    884B. A. Trechman293     40    883G. T. Bates327Scratch    327A, A. Rennie280     40    320N. A. Middlemas278     40    818A. M. Forrest209     100    809H. E Cutfield272     85    807B. J. Spurway215     90    305F. F. Boult254     50    304F. H. Kortright243     60    303H. H. Kortright252     50    302P. M. Adams252     45    297J. E. Pascoe241     50    291A. I. Honors221     70    291C. Fenwick250     40    290F. G. Carpenter254     30    284Dr. Marjoribanks229     60    279C. D. Adams238     40    278J. Frayling226     50    276L. B. Haves214     60    274H. D. Aplin242     80    272J. B. Archer209     60    269F. A. W. Page Tumer199     70    269C. S. Griffiths228     45    268J. McCullagh280     80    260E. O. Bruce200     60    260W. F. Dick189     60    249R. D. Binnie217     30    247

118
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1926.
	
        St. Michael’s Catholic Club.
TENNIS TOURNAMENT
Singles Championship

  The Championship will be contested for once
every four months and the winner of nine contests
consecutively will hold the "Champion Cup" for good.
  L. K. L. Chan won the first contest on the 19th
instant by beating S. Mong in the final with the
scores 6- 4, 6-4. Both players were in splendid
form and many rallies added to the interest of the
match. Along scored many points from his power-
ful service and well-placed lightning drive, and
Chan won many an ace at the net from his volley
and cross-court shot. The match lasted more than
an hour during a fine afternoon
PRELIMINARY AND SEMI-FINALS.
  Hong Soon heat S. Harry, 6—3. 6—.2
  L. K. L. Chan heat Ah Thiam, 3—6. 6—3, 6—0,
  S. Mong beat Hong Soon, 4—6, 6—1. 6—4.
Dalam bansa laut ukai agi utai dikarang,  
Pamaioh sida ukai agi ribu orang;
Samoa kapal maioh datai ka tambang,
Diisi Laut magang ukai agi ulih bilang;
Badu aku tu bejako maioh garna, 
Rumah Tuan Raja nama nya Astana; 
Sigat dipeda baka mandang pernama. 
Pengkalan iya bisi dua iko gambal singa.

Ukai aku tu munyi ti nyau nyemplah, 
Kota Raja nama nya Margarita, 
Soldadu iya maioh sikap tengkira, 
Panglima iya brani dijulok Tuan Mijar.
Pemanah kota ukai nya chechamang, 
Di munggu tinggi nyata dipandang;
Trumpet nya bemunyi siang enggau petang, 
Tambor ditebah enda kala belambang.
Baris meriam alit ati aku ngenang, 
Baris snapang baka ti ditentang;
Soldadu pen landik bejalai serta nyingkang. 
Belajar ka jalai prang ngambika landik magang.
Ho HONG SOON,
Honorary Secretary.
Ukai aku tu ugaga utai maioh dikenang.
Madah ka sikap kota Raja meriam enggau snapang; 
Soldadu iya bejaga enda lambang siang enggau petang, 
Snapang sida berisi tangkin sida pen pedang.
  There was a dramatic moment during service at St. Andrew’s yesterday evening when, in the course of an eloquent sermon the Rev. Archibald Ewing ? rose to the fervent climax of simile.
  Pointing to the electric light he said : “You can put that light out." and out went the light, and Penang was in semi-darkness for half an hour, owing to the mistake of a native operator at the power station to which the Penang electric lighting service is being transferred. -[Straits Budget],
  The deforestation of Penang Hill proceeds apace and there are now great bare patches on nearly all its sides. Curses on the short-sighted C. L. R. who alienated the land and gave some wretched Vandals the right to destroy one of Penang’s most attractive features! Some day soon, when all the roadside trees have been cut down and the Hill has been completely cleared. Penang will have only the road round the Island to save it from the reproach of being as ugly as Singapore.—[Straits Echo].
Pasal Kuching.
-?—
Dinga olih kita menyadi enggau juru pangan, 
Enggau aamoa kita Ayah enggau kaban katuan, 
Aku nusi pasal menoa Kuching ti tau ka chuan, 
Maia di dagang, pengawa, enggau utai dikembuan.
Teruba nuntong rumah Enchi Buyong, 
Alai bangkong betanebang ngetu ngenong; 
Malik ka sebrai meda rumah betampong. 
Lain didinga gu mensia baka auh wong.

Rumah China nyelai baka, 
Adai ti tinggi adai ti bla; 
Pemanah rumah ukai nya kata. 
Batu beleku-leku bla rata.

Utai di kedai pein ad u maioh.
Rindu mata meda Ayah gayu, 
Baka ti diambi mimpi enda aku tetiu. 
Baka ti nusi ensra didinga kita ibu.

Orang China beribu-ribu pc maioh orang, 
Maioh mega bansa sida samoa betuchang;
Adai China Makau, adai China Wangkang, 
Adai China Ke, Hailam, Tuchu, enda ulih bilang.

Orang Tambi bisi mega, amat agi jarang, 
Adai ti bekedai, adai ti bedagang, 
Adai ti ngibun chapi, adai ti nuchi barang. 
Adai ti nyadi klasi, adai ti nyadi srang.
Nengri Kuching pemadu dalam pengrami, 
Bisi sa buah rumah batu gudang Kumpeni;
Nyambut samoa leman dagang datai ka lilin manyi, 
Enggau samoa utai ari mau datai ka batu antimeni.

Adai pen bisi siti ti beguna leman tengkira, 
Digaga Tuan Raja pemadu ati iya kekira, 
Ai betugong datas bukit dua iti telaga raia, 
Jauh ka darat nunga ka rumah skola.

Ukai nama agi pemadu me penemu mensia, 
Ngaga samoa utai nyadi bla sedia, 
Kumpa berintai di jalai pemadu iya tengkira, 
Ai magang ti dalam iya ka diirup Laut China.

Adaipen tu jako samina utai dikenang, 
Ai enti iya kamah pendiau iya rachun magang;
Alai Raja enda ngitong rugi alai ngidup ka orang, 
Ngambika samoa mensia lantang lain senang.

Kamaiatu ai penatai iya ari Bukit Matang, 
Tuchi temuli nadai jako alai ngenang;
Pemadu nyamai orang Kuching, lantang ngarang, 
Pendiau sida pasal ai ngirup udah tentu senang.

Rumah Opis betimbang enggau Astana, 
Alai leman pengawa alai bechara;
Di bilik Kunsil Nengri bisi makota Raja, 
Bejulok. "Salama aku idup andal aku dalam dunya,"

Jauh pen aku tu maioh dikenang,
Bisi rumah jail alai ngurong orang,
Rumah tu diglar alai nampok mekang, 
Misgit datas bukit alai ngajar barang garang.

Adaipen tu semadi udah nyadi kenang, 
Pasal rumah jel alai ngajar barang orang, 
Tu enda tau enda rumah pemadu trang.
Enggai meda olah jai enggau penchuri barang.
Leman utai ti endang bisi dalam dunya, 
Ari sida burong ielu datai ka anak mensia; 
Keba nadai tau korang sikap enggau tengkira. 
Adai enda bisi mega rumah ubat chukup entamba.

Nyau me aku tu baka ti ngelimpang ka kenang, 
Niu ka kita pasal rumah Sembeyang, 
Misgit iya chechegit baka ulih tepas remang. 
Orang besembah dia nadai kala pungkang.

Bejarit ari tu semadi nampjng karang.
Pemanah rumah skola-ukai agi chechamang: 
Gambal iya sigat di munggu lalu dedenjang,
Anembiak belajar bulih tiga ratus orang.
Ukai nama agi dalam pemanaang negri Kuching.
Bisi skola indu di plipir anak tinting; 
Dalam aku ngujong ka leka kenang, 
Prentah menoa Sarawak alus lalu lantang.
W. H. H.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1926.
119
       MONTHLY REPORTS.
FIRST DIVISION.
Kuching.
February, 1926.
  Supreme Court.—There were no cases for bearing
in this Court during the month.
  Resident's Court. —Tang Kam and Chan Nam,
Hylams, were sentenced to three years and a whip-
ping respectively under section 377, I.P.C.
  Tio Hin Guan and See Moi (f). Cantonese, were
sentenced to five years mid six months respectively
for theft under section 381, I. P. C.
  Sixteen Malays of Kampong Lintang were sen-
tenced to fourteen days' imprisonment each for
refusing to remove or assisting to remove those
infected with smallpox in the Kampong.
  Abdulrasit, Tua Kampong of Sambir. was sum-
moned to produce accounts showing the disposal of
money entrusted to him for the repair of Sambir
Mosque. Being unable to produce satisfactory
accounts he was relieved of bis post as Tua Kampong.
  District Court.—Forty-nine cases were heard of
which eight were Civil claims. 0f 41 Criminal cases,
34 convictions were obtained and seven acquittals.
  There were eight assault cases and 16 offences
against Municipal By-laws.
Fines and fees amounted to $336.75.
  Civil claims to the value of $2,301.39 were dealt
with.
  Magistrate's Court .—Fifty cases were heard involv-
ing claims to the value of $1,057.96.
     Police Court.—Thirty cases were brought for
hearing in this Court. Fines amounted to $151 50.
  Datus' Court.—Fines amounted to $66.42 and
fees $17.50.
  General.—Mr. H. D. Aplin was granted six weeks
leave and handed over the Divisional Office and Land
Office to me on the 25th.
  Mr. Aplin left for the north by s.a. Gladys on the
28th, also Mr. F. G. Carpenter, Acting District
Officer, who had been granted 14 days’ leave.
  Mr. Carpenter was unable to attend office
throughout the mouth owing to illness.
  Mr. Aplin returned from a visit to Upper Sarawak-
on the 2nd.
  Mr. Walters reported his return from Eastern
leave on the 11th and remained in Kuching till the
22nd when he returned to Sadong via Samarahan
to take over from Mr. Honore.
  Health.—Smallpox broke out in Kampong Lin-
tang during the month and a fresh case was reported
in kampong No. 4. T.K. Sudin reports cases in
Samarahan.
  A meeting of Tua Kampongs was called to explain
the necessity for compulsory vaccination. 
  Land Office.—Three grants were issued during the
month for an area of 614 acres approximately; 7
leases for coconuts, rubber and pottery covering
an area of 126 acres approximately; also 106 occupa-
tion tickets, 100 for rubber and 6  for coconuts
covering an area of 646 and 71 acres respectively.
  Revenue from Quit Rents, (etc., amounted to
$3,260.05 for the month.
to $161. Ho Shin was sentenced to three months
imprisonment for theft, and three months for breach
of Opium Monopoly orders. Lam Tack a colliery
coolie, was sentenced to one month for absconding.
Ah Khog, the third Clerk, was fined'$30 for assault.
Shen bin Kemat was sentenced to four months for
breach of agreement, and Liew Pang, a colliery’
coolie, was sentenced to one month for refusing to
work.
   Prisoners.—The daily average number of prisoners’
during the month was nine. The gang: was em-
ployed on the kampong roads and ditches.
   P.W.D.—The coolie gang was employed on re- 
pairs to the Sageng bridge and clearing the kam-
pong ditches.
   The re-roofing of the Court House had been com-
pleted on two sides at the end of the month.
   The repairs- to the Sageng bridge were completed.
   Medical.—At the Dispensary a total of 77 patients
were treated as follows: -Europeans 2, Dyaks 19,
Chinese 33, Tamils 2, Sikhs 3, Malays 18, total 77.
   The. number of admissions in the local hospital
during the month were 24 (including the 11 patients
that had not been discharged from last month), out
of which 21 were discharged as cured the remaining
14 still under treatment.
   27 N.A.B. Injections proved successful.
   General.—I arrived at Tabekang on 23rd, having
walked overland via the ulu Samarahan. The Ris-
Lanchang boundary was again inspected and it was
found that the surveyor bad been misinformed con-
cerning the boundary owing to some confusion over
the names of certain landmarks. The correct
boundary was then pointed out as being from the
spur or Mnuggu Menjarot in a straight line to
Tapang Dungkan, thence to G. Bandok. Both
parties were informed accordingly, and the surveyor
proceeded to demarcate the correct boundary and
demolish the old marks he had previously put in.
    Mr. Honore arrived at Tabekang on 25th and we
returned to Sadong on the 17th.
    From the 13th to the 20th Mr. Honore visited
Gedong and the Milikin. It has been suggested
that an area be reserved at Gedong for Malays
wishing to open gardens there. It has since been
decided that this area will be from the S. Stabor,
up river to T. Brok on the main river and S. Matan
up the S. Gedong. In future permits to open gar-
dens at; Gedong will only he granted inside this
area, the land outside this area being for the cul-
tivation of padi only.
  The rainfall recorded during the month amounted
to 11’95 inches.
  Shipping.—Calls were made during the month as
follows :—
                S.L. L 'Aubaine
M.S. Muaratebas                   3
S.J. Sri Sadong
M.L. Nam Hoi
S.S. Sulong
  Trade.—The local trade returns
with last year are as follows :—
Imports.
February, 1926 $18,129.00
„	1925 25,681.00
... 4 times
... twice
... once
 for comparison
Exports.
$18,312.50
18,552.00
Sadong.
  Court.—At Tabekang the Sibinting Dyaks were fined $15 for interfering with land prepared by the Smabangs preparatory to farming. The Bugu Dyaks were also fined $25 for tuba, fishing in the ulu Milikin.	
  In the Magistrate's; Court. — Ten persons were fined for breach of Forest Regulations the fines amounting
Ban, 1’pprr Sarawak.
February, 1926.
The District Officer, Mr. F. H. Kortright, reports as follows:-
Court.—The Divisional Officer attended Court on the 1st when case Government v. Nyap On was


120
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1926.
commenced. Many complaints having been made
against the general behaviour of O.K. Pa Ngadi, of
Singghi, his affairs were inquired into and he was
ordered to relinquish his title as Orang Kaya.
   Ng Ah Chim of Chop Yong Heng, Seniawan, was
sentenced to 9 months' imprisonment under section
182, I.P.C. He was later pardoned by the kindness of
H. H. the Rajah and the sentence reduced to one
month.
   General.—Mr. K. H. Gillan, P.M.G., visited Bau
to inquire into the general postal arrangements.
   His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by the
Dayang Leonora, Mr. and Mrs. Aplin and Mr
Spurway, spent three days here during the Chinese
New’ Year holiday.
   Dresser Ali Omar came up from Kuching and
did 1,440 vaccinations in and around the principal
villages.
   Mr. R. D. Binnie visited Bau to look at some B.
C. L. machinery and to discuss some proposed im-
provements in working the Batu Kitang Ferry.
   Rainfall, which was exceedingly heavy, amounting
to 46’39 inches, did much damage in causing land-
slides which blocked the roads m several places, and
floods which completely carried away some of the
bridges
C. E. ERMEN,
Acting Divisional Officer.
SADONG COLLIERY.
March, 1926
   The output, export, local consumption, conversion
to coke, and coal stock figure? for the month were
as follows :—
  1st March stock balance	...	408.13 tons.
  March gross output	...	1,828.00 ,,
Total 2,236.13 „
  Shipped ...	... 1,665.00 tons
  Consumed by boilers and
     converted into coke 377.00
		2,042.00
Stock balance
194.13 tons.
   Conditions below ground were fairly normal at the Upper Seam and No. 8 and 9 mines respectively, but very disturbed at the New Mines throughout the month.
   The Lepong watershed bridle-paths, total length miles, of an average width of 3 feet, were completed. The water volume gauges will be erected in the streams during the coming dry season.
   There was a good deal of absenteeism, due to the prevalence of influenza during the month.
   Dolpbo, of the Medical Department, Kuching, arrived for the annual hookworm examination on the 29th
   Visitors to the Collieries during the month were Messrs. W. F de V. Skrine, Divisional Officer, Coast Division, 1£. 8. Holl, Director of Agriculture, and Major-General Sir C. Herbert Powell, K.C.B.
  The rainfall for the month was 16’21 inches.
J. W EVANS,
Manager
 SECOND DIVISION.
Simanggang.
March, 1926.
   Resident’s Court.—There was one appeal from the District Court Civil, namely Chop “ Thai Huat" vs. Chop “Chiap Joo.” The appeal was upheld and defendant ordered to pay as claimed plus costs.
   Government vs. Sundai, Forest Guard, Sebuyow, criminal breach of trust, section 508, case adjourned for various witnesses to be called.
       District Court, Civil and Criminal.— Usman was sentenced to two years’ R.I. for incest w’ith his sister-in-law, Undang Undang, section No. 50. An appeal against decision of Penghulu Ingkas. Riang vs. Sudeh (f.) in re divorce decision of the Penghulu reversed. There were other cases hut none of  special note.
   Magistrate's Court, Civil and Criminal.—Bong Ah Pan was sentenced to nine months' R.I. for theft; Banseng, Dyak, was fined $20 and compensation for doing an act which endangers human life Three natives were sentenced to terms of imprisonment for non-payment of fines. A number of Dyaks were before the Court for non-payment of rubber tax and firearms tax. 1925.
   Several other small cases were dealt with.
   General.— Mr. B. A. Trechman, Assistant  Treasurer, arrived from Kuching on the 1st. His visit was in connection with the new accounting system. Mr. B. A. Trechman, accompanied by the Head Treasury Clerk Mr. Tehee Fong Hee, left  for the Kalaka in m.l. One on the 3rd to instruct the
 various Court Writers in the new system of ac-
 counting. Saribas was also visited.
 Mr. B. A Trechman returned to Simanggang on
 the 20th.
	I returned from Kuching on the 9th.
    Mr. R. L. Danbeny reports chat on opening the
copper godown in order to get money to send up to
 Lubok Antu, he found one box empty. On further
 examination he discovered another box with only
 $2.50 in it. On examining the walls a plank leading
 from the oil godown was found to be loose.
       The thief of thieves had evidently got in through
 the oil godown window, pushed a plank away, and
 so managed to force open two boxes containing in
 all $100.
    There is no doubt that the local Rangers are res-
ponsible for the theft, but up to date there is no
evidence to convict.
  Clerk Julin was granted six weeks’ leave, having
completed five years’ service.
  On the 24th, accompanied by Mr. B. A. Trechman,
I left in the m l. One fur Sebuyow. The s.s.
L’Aubaine anchored off Sebuyow mouth at 11 p.m.
and Mr. B. A. Trechman went on board. The s.s.
L’Aubaine sailed for Kuching.
  On the morning of the 26th I left Sebuyow and
anchored off Meranti at 9 a.m. At 2.30 p.m. H.H.
M.Y Maimuna arrived with His Highness the
Rajah. Dayang Leonora, and Mr. J. A. H. Hardie
on board. I went on hoard with a pilot and the
H.H.M.Y Maimuna sailed for Pusa.
  I was still away at the end of the month.
  Abang Zin, Native Officer, Sebuyow, visited
Simanggang during; the month to hear some ad-
journed cases. 
  Mohamat Seblee of the Land and Survey Depart-
ment, arrived on the 18th and next day started
surveying the river’ banks of main river.
  Forest Guard Sundai. of Sebuyow, absconded on
31st.
  The following  Pengbulus visited this station
during the month, viz., Ingkas of Entulang, Renang
of Sada, Mumin of Skrang, Nyalom of Sebuyow.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1926.
121
  Public Works.—The prisoners averaged 54'71 and
were employed on upkeep of roads and ornamental
grounds.
  Carpenter Salleh started work on clerks' quarters,
Engkilili.
    Shipping.—During the month three motor
schooners, one motor boat and ten bandongs entered
and three motor schooners and one motor boat and
ten bandongs cleared from this port.
  Cattle.—Simanggang herd number 94 bead and
Lubok Antu herd number 43 head.
  Medical.—A total of 213 persons were treated in
the Hospital during the month, as follows:—
European three, Eurasian two, Malays 24, Chinese
22, Dyaks 161, Javanese one.	
  114 cases of N.A.B. injection for yaws, etc., were
given during the month.
      234 persons were vaccinated during the month.
  Agriculture.—120 permits to plant rubber, three
to plant pepper, and two to plant sago were issued
during the month at Simanggang, Lingga, Sebuyow,
and Engkilili.
Trade.—The principal exports were :—
Gutta jelutong Pepper, white Pepper, black 
Para rubber 
Para scrap 
Raw sago
583 piculs valued at ... $ 9,891
55	do.	...	2,930
13	do.	...	641
228	do.	...	28,780
77.60	do.	...	6,179
72	do.	...	210
Imports.
$20,583
31,982
March, 1926
„	1925
Exports.
$44,570
36,176
  Forest Department.—The Assistant Conservator
of Forests reports as follows.—Nothing of parti-
cular note occurred this month.
  On the 29th the Assistant Conservator left to
carry out an examination of the Sarawak Timber
Company’s Concession area between Lingga and
Sebuyow.
Saribas.
March, 1926.
The Court Writer, Pusa, reports as follows
  Court.—Litigation was light during the month and no cases call for special mention. Fines and fees amounted to $205.98.
  General.—The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. H. E. Outfield, accompanied by Mr. B. A. Trechman and Mr. Tchee Fong Hee, arrived on the 14th from Kabong. Mr. H. E. Cutfield returned next day.
  Mr. B. A. Trechman came to give instructions in the new accounting system. Having completed the work left on the 18th for Betong.
  I visited Debak twice during the month to attend to clerical work.
  On the 25th, at 5.30 p.m., H H.M.Y Maimuna arrived, having on board His Highness the Rajah, Dayang Leonora, Mr. J. A. 11. Hardie, and the Resident Second Division. His Highness was visited by the Native Officers and Penghulu Mun and various Tuai. Next morning a gaily-decorated raft come alongside. On board were the Native Officers and other Tuai, also a Malay band complete. His Highness and party went ashore in this. The Court House was visited but nothing of importance was brought to the notice of His Highness. His Highness and party visited the Bazaar and Malay Kampong. The whole way along guns and fireworks were let off and the Kampong was most tastefully decorated. An address of welcome was read out by the Tua Kampong from a gaily-decorated baiting place.
  His Highness and party were escorted on board
at 11 a.m. and H.H.M.Y. Maimuna set sail for
Sabuloh at 12.30 p.m.	<
  Agriculture.—No permits to plant were issued
during the mouth. The padi crop is reported to be
exceptionally good.
  Shipping.—Sixteen bandongs cleared and seven-
teen entered the port.
Trade.— The principal exports were :—
Gutta jelutong	80
Para rubber	616
Padi	37
Raw sago	30
piculs valued at ...	$ 891
piculs	do.	...	30,802
piculs	do.	...	111
koyans	do.	..	2,585
    March, 1926 ...
    March, 1925 ...
Imports.
$25,980
31,082
Exports.
$40,741
40,131
  The Court Writer, Belong, reports as follows:— Court.—In the Native Court Chandai was fined $25 for gross carelessness in destroying engkabang trees by fire; One Samat was fined $21.60 in re a land dispute; Jampi and Chandu (f.) were fined $14.40 each for adultery. There were numerous other cases, but none call for special mention. Fines and fees amounted to $230.94.
  General.—H. H. M. Y. Maimuna anchored at. S’buloh and His Highness and party boarded the m.l. One and set sail for Betong. On nearing Permintas Spaoh a great crowd of Malays from neighbouring villages had collected, also the Malays had built a landing stage, His Highness and party went ashore, and on landing a salute was fired from a number of brass cannon. After a walk of about two miles through the Kampong the bazaar was reached, and the Chinese gave His Highness a hearty welcome.
  At 2.30 p.m. His Highness and party boarded the m.l. One and set sail for Betong. It is twenty-seven years ago since His Highness visited the Saribas.
  His Highness the Rajah, Dayang Leonora, accompanied by the Divisional Resident, Mr. J. A. H. Hardie, Commissioner of Trade and Customs, and Datu Abang Haji Buassan, arrived in the m.l. One at 4 p.m. on the 26th. Unfortunately it was pouring with rain, but in spite of this a great reception was given to His Highness by all communities. The grounds were tastefully decorated.
  Next morning His Highness and party left Fort Lili at 9 a.m. and on the way to the bazaar stopped at a gaily-decorated halting place when an address of welcome was read out by a Dyak.
  Next morning His Highness and party left Fort Lili at 9a.m. and on the way to the bazaar stopped at a gaily-decorated halting place when an address of welcome was read out by a Dyak. His Highness then proceeded to the bazaar, which was wonderfully decorated. The fusillade of fireworks was unceasing. Having visited the bazaar His Highness proceeded to Rantai’s house at Lampaong. After a short rest His Highness returned to the Fort, and from there visited the S.P.G. Mission Station at Bukit Lalaug. On His Highness' return to the Fort, the principal Chinese met His Highness. Nothing of great importance was brought to the notice of His Highness.
  At 2 p.m. His Highness and party left in m.l. One and boarded H.H.M.Y. Maimuna at 5.30 p.m. and immediately set sail for the Kalaka.
  On the 8th, Penghulu Unji’s men brought down from Sadok mountain and placed in the Fort the famous Timpang Brang, a 3-inch M.L. Gun, used by the enemy for defending their stronghold in Sadok mountain during the Sadok war in 1857 and 1858. The enemy left this guu on the summit of the mountain during their retreat, and it has remained there for seventy years. The gun is still in a very good condition.


122
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1926.
  Mr. B. A. Trechman and the Divisional Clerk,
Mr. Tchee Fong Hee, arrived from Pusa on the 18th,
to show another new system of account keeping,
and they left for Simanggang on the 20th.
  The m.l. Santosa arrived from Kuching on the
27th, with the Rev. W. G. Illingworth and Miss
Andrews as passangers. And they left again for
Kuching on the 30th The Rev. W. G. Illingworth’s
health has not been satisfactory lately, and he has
now left the Saribas for good.
  The sum of $1,000 has been paid out on letters
of credit from Kuching during the month.
  Agriculture.—Five permits to plant rubber were
issued during the month.
  Shipping —During the month nine motor boats
and one vessel entered and seven motor boats and
two vessels cleared.
  Trade.—The principal exports were :—
    Fish salted 90 jars valued at                    $270
    Para Rubber	694 piculs	,,	55,490
      ,, Scrap	230	„	5,750
Imports.	Exports.
    March, 1926	$48,217	§62,379
      „	1925	22,082	46,605

.
Kalaka.

March, 1926.
  Mr. H. E. Cutfield, Acting District Officer, reports
as follows:—
  Court work at Kabong was again very light,
although several cases came up for hearing at Saratok
during my visit there. Of these Ah Chiaw was
sentenced to six months' R.I. for falsifying weights
with fraudulent intent. One Malay to three months
for theft and another Malay fined $10 for assault.
The most important case being a Dyak land dispute
Saga vs. Udeng. Cases about the land in question
have been going on at intervals since 1891, the
boundaries fixed by three consecutive Penghulus and
fines imposed. The last case was heard by the Re-
sident, Saga vs. Entaban, when defendant was fined
$50 and warned that anyone in future opening a case
about this land should be sentenced to six months'
R.I. Udeng, of Entaban’s house, after being warned
by his Tuai Ramah again opened the case and was
consequently sentenced to six months' R.I., being
obviously in the wrong. No other cases call fur
special mention.
  General.—After being postponed from the 17th to
the 28th a visit was paid to the district by His
Highness the Rajah and Dayang Leonora. His
Highness was accompanied by the Resident Second
Division and Mr. J. A. H. Hardie. His Highness
arrived at about 9.30 a.m. on Sunday 28th in
H.H.M.Y. Maimuna.
  Unfortunately just on his arrival very heavy rain
commenced so that when she dropped anchor in
midstream she was invisible from the Fort. His
Highness therefore decided to go on to Saratok with
the tide and to call at Kabong on his return the
following evening.
  The Resident came ashore and informed the people
of His Highness the Rajah’s intention. I ac-
companied the Resident on his return to the
Maimuna The start was made at 1.30 p.m. and
Saratok reached at 4 p.m.
  This is the largest vessel that has ever been to
Saratok and certainly the distance has never been
covered in so short a time before. The usual time
boating is from seven to eight hours. Numbers of
Dyaks were down to welcome His Highness the Rajah
and a salute of crackers and bombs was fired from
the bazaar. His Highness went to the Fort, which
was crowded, and an address of welcome was read.
His Highness then went down the bazaar and the
length of the Kampongs, after which he returned to
the Maimuna In the morning His Highness the Rajah again went ashore, accompanied by the Dayang Leonora and the Resident. Numbers of Dyaks came up to interview His Highness but nothing much of importance was suggested except one, Jeti, who declared that three Dyaks, whose names he gave, had declared that two or three thousand Dyaks from Sarikei were coining on the warpath against the Ulu Krian and his house in particular.
  His Highness assured Jeti that there was no truth in the rumour, but he would further investigate the matter on his visit to Sibu. He also suggested that action should be taken against the three originators of the story.
  His Highness the Rajah left Saratok at about 2 p.m., going against a very strong tide. Kabong was reached at about 5.30 p.m.
  His Highness, Dayang Leonora and party, went- ashore and after interviewing the people gathered in the Fort went the length of the Kampong and back, a whole-hearted welcome being accorded His Highness and Dayang Leonora by the Malays here. His Highness then returned to the Maimuna. The Dyaks celebrated the occasion in the usual manner in the Fort that, night. His Highness and Dayang Leonora came ashore again in the morning where he remained until nearly midday, but very little of importance was brought to his notice. 11 is Highness the Rajah sailed again fur Kuching at about 2 p.in.
  The Resident remained here to return via Sama- ludam and Sebuyow in m.l. One.
  On Wednesday the 3rd the m.l. One arrived from Simanggang with Mr. B. A. Trechman, Assistant Treasurer, on board, also Fong Hee, Treasury clerk at Simanggang. Mr. B. A. Trechman came to instruct the clerks of this district in the new form of accounts.
  At 3 a.m. on the 8th I accompanied Mr. B. A. Trechman to Saratok which was reached at 10.30. While here 18 cases came up for hearing iu the two days. Numbers of Dyaks were up asking for permits to buy guns, and the local carpenter was instructed to add on the pangkalan, and to repair the steps of same, preparatory to the arrival of His Highness the Rajah. The first morning after my arrival Penghulu Nyalu came up to the Fort, early in the morning, and reported that Tuai Rumah Andam had fallen off the first storey of a house in the bazaar and was in a bad condition,. I went down and examined him but could find no actual damage done although he was unconscious. Apparently Minggat of the S.P.G. Mission had been there before me and given him a dose of chlorodyne and he never regained consciousness, dying the following afternoon.
  Accompanied by Mr B. A. Trechman I left Saratok, by the overland route, for Roban on the 11th. A very large number of Dyaks were down but no cases of importance came up for hearing, I left Roban the following evening and reached Kabong the next morning, which was Saturday.
  Accompanied by Mr. B. A. Trecbman I again left Kabong the next morning for Pusa, which was reached at midday. Here a number of Dyaks were down waiting for the arrival of His Highness the Rajah, but his visit was postponed. I received news of this while at Pusa. I left Pusa the following evening and reached Kabong nt midnight. Mr. B. A. Trechman remained at Pusa from where he proceeded to Betong and Simanggang.
  On Wednesday the 24th I left here at night at 10.30 p.m. walking along the sands to Nyabor which was reached at 6 a.m.. after an hour's break at Alit. Work was completed by midday, and I left for Kabong, arriving here at 6 p.m. Unfortunately it rained considerably both ways on the journey which made the walking uncomfortable


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1926.
123
   Abang Bujang, Native Officer, was sick a large
part of the month, suffering from eye trouble. He
went to Kuching, at the kind invitation of His High-
ness the Rajah, in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna, for medical
treatment.
   P. W. D.—The prisoners, amounting to 4 6, were
employed from the 22nd, with the police, white-
-washing the Government buildings, which were
nearly completed by the end of the month. They
were also employed on the road towards the cow-
shed and sands and the general upkeep of the
'Station.
Trade. —The principal exports were:—
Gutta jelutong Pepper white Pepper black 
Para rubber 
Para scrap 
Raw sago
March, 1926
1925
788 piculs
6 ½  piculs
10 bags
265 piculs
84 piculs
10 koyans
Imports.
 $60,004
36.403
.valued at
do.
do.
do.
do.
do.
$13,780 400 
800
24,800
3,500
4,710
Exports.
$58,169
33,782
Shipping.—During the month three motor
schooners and 13 bandongs entered and three motor
schooners and 12 bandongs cleared, from this pun. The following are the trade returns for the Second
Division :—
    March. 1926
    Total to 31.3.26
    Total to 31.8.25
Imports.
$154,784.00
400,169.00
319,916.70
Exports.
$207,879.00
383,082.00
111,606.50
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER,
Resident Second Division.
COAST DIVISION.
—?—
Mukah and Balingian.
February, 1926.
   General. - Mv. R. E. Arundel! reached here on the
20th on appointment to this District as Cadet
Officer, and has since been placed in charge of the
Magistrate’s Court affairs, and of the local Public
Works, Police, and Prison.
   Mr. P. M. Adams also came over on horseback
from Oya on the 20th to bring over Mr. Arundel,
and to discuss matters regarding the new system of
accounts.
   The 24th, being the anniversary of Her Highness
the Ranee's birthday, was observed as a Public
Holiday and the offices closed.
   Nine boats full of Bajau Natives from British
North Borneo under one Penglima Kernain bin
Pamaidun were driven in here owing to stress of
weather on the 26tb, and were still here at the end
of the month ; these men are making their arrival
voyage to Bunguran and Sirhassan Islands, and
from thence via Banjermassin back to British North
Borneo.
   The Rev. Father Anthony Mulder, head of the
local branch of the R.C. Mission, left for Kuching
en route for Europe on furlough on the 11th.
   A Japanese subject named Matsukuma died at
Balingian on the 12th after a fortnight's illness.
   Penghulu Sana, now in his dotage, has again been
reported for interfering with the jurisdiction of the
Balingian Penghulu Anding. Penghulu Sana will
be replaced as soon as a suitable man can be found
to relieve him.
   Courts.—The usual number of sago plantation
ownership disputes came up for hearing and much
time was taken in discovering the rightful owners.
   Several Tua Tua Kampong were again cautioned
for failing to report the division of the estates of
certain deceased property holders, and the estates
of Raman (f.) and Matahari (f.), deceased, have
since been gone into and amicably divided.
   The escaped Dyak prisoner from Simanggang,
Belun alias Umbai, was at last brought in by Tua
Ramah Medieng, and the promised reward paid.
Belun has since been sent under escort via Kuching
to Simanggang gaol.
Several persons were cautioned against bathing
 at. the water standpipes
   Rutu was fined for refusing to carry a mail to Oya ;
Sehli, Sini (f.), and Mungoh (f.), were fined for
 brawling in the jungle when away working sago;
Nun bin Malik was fined for working and endeavour-
ing to dispose of a very coarse variety of raw sago ;
Benal and Imong (f.) were fined for breach of
agreements ; Sayun bin Pudan was fined for letting
his cattle stray and damage neighbouring planta-
tions ; Tuanku Hussin was fined aud ordered to leave
the district for having returned from deportation, as
ordered by the Court in 1924.
   A few cases were held by the Tua Kampong's
Court al Balingian but none call for mention.
   All possible debt cases were dealt with by the
Cadet Officer, who, also with the assistance of the
 Native Officer, inspected certain disputed sago
 plantation boundaries.
       Health. -Dresser Ahmat Chee arrived from
Kuching on the 3rd to relieve Dresser Liong Ah
 Heng who has completed ten months' able service
in this district. Vaccinator Cheng Geek Cheng,
also from Kuching, accompanied by Datu Awang
Udin, went on a visit to all the upriver Kampongs and
Dyaks with a view to enforcing vaccination among
these people ; they were still away at the end of the
month. Dresser Anthony Harry returned from
Balingian on the 12th having vaccinated 810 persons ;
he also reported many deaths from smallpox among
the Dyaks the majority of whom still refuse
vaccination.
   Public Works.—The Petanak Kampong people
turned out and cleared the path to their village.
Carpenters continued work on the construction of
the bridges on the Telian paths.
   Haji Jamaludin contracted to remove 150 tons of
coal from the Fort lauding place to the pumping
station at Upper Petanak.
   One Govindasami, Tamil, was engaged to act as
mandor of the local Tamil labour gang in the place
of Vadivel, who was deported recently. The Tamil
gang was chiefly employed clearing and filling in
swampy parts of the new Government grounds
extension behind the Police Barracks.
   The prisoners, averaging 10'6 men, were employed
in the general upkeep of the station grounds.
   Work was commenced on the repair of the paths
around the Government-Station at Balingian.
   Divisional Treasury.—One Piew Seng Chee was
engaged as an apprentice clerk on twelve months'
probation as from 1st instant. The Divisional
Clerk left for Kuching on the 18th. taking with him
the Divisional accounts for the first half of the year
1925, for reconciliation with the Sarawak Treasury
accounts; he also took the Divisional accounts for
January. 1926, in older to ascertain the correct
method of entry under the improved accounting
scheme; he was still away at the end of the month,
his duties being carried out by Clerk Joseph Chong
during his absence.
   Trade and Shipping.—The trade returns for the
month are as follows:—
          Coasting Imports. Coasting Exports.
Mukah	... $15,548	nil
Balingian	...	483	$39,154
The principal Imports and Exports are as
follows:—
          Coasting Imports. Coasting Exports.
Mukah ... Cloths $4,800
           Rice 2,496
           Cigarettes 1,900
Balingian ... G. Jelutong 2,868 piculs $38,777.
The rainfall records shows 6’58 inches.


124	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1926.
Oya and Dalat.
  The District Officer, Mr. P. M. Adams, reports as follows:—
  Court. — Four Dyaks were imprisoned for one month each for travelling without passes from Ulu Mukah. Fines amounting to $375 were imposed on people who refused to be vaccinated. Nor was imprisoned to nine months H.L. for falsifying an entry in his pass book and thereby swindling his towkay. Tuanku Husin, a returned deportee, was sent to Mukah to be tried by a Resident’s Court. Saman and Dura were sentenced to six months each for trespass by night.
  Health.—Three cases of smallpox were discovered at Dalat on the 17th. The dresser came from Mukah on the following day and found two more cases. No further, cases were reported in Dalat, but the vaccinator in the interior found five amongst the Dyaks. The Dalat cases have been isolated and a police guard established. The Dyak Tuai Ramah have been ordered to isolate their own cases. There is no doubt that the disease has been spread by Dyaks wandering about in the interior between Bintulu. Mukah and Oya. It is quite impossible to prevent them unless the interior is patrolled by a military force. Several people were fined for refusing to be vaccinated, since when the keenness to be vaccinated has been remarkable. Actual figures are not yet to hand, but well over 1,000 people were vaccinated since the outbreak of the epidemic The shortage of lymph is a great drawback.
  Surveys.—Abang Spuan, the surveyor from Kuching, completed bis work and returned to Kuching.
  Telephone.—The repairer reports that the line along the shore to Mukah has been entirely replaced by copper wire.
  Public Works.—Medani, a Mukah contractor, signed a contract to erect the New Court House at Oya for $1,900 and commenced work on the 20th.
  The Mukah Chinese with whom Medani has a prior contract, which is temporarily held up on account of the shortage of material, kindly released him until the completion of the building.
  The gardener was dismissed al the end of last month as he never did any work. A substitute has not yet been found.
  Travelling.—Two short visits were made to Dalat but no Court has been held there since the outbreak of smallpox.
  1 rode over to Mukah with Mr. Arundell to discuss various matters with the Acting Divisional Officer on the 6th and returned on the 8th.
  General.—Mr. Arundell passed through on his way to Mukah to take up his appointment there. I inspected the back premises in the Oya bazaar and ordered some of the shopkeepers to build proper kitchens to replace leaf attap shanties which are dangerous.
  I attended New Year’s celebration at the invitation of the Dalat Chinese. Holidays were observed on the 15th and 24lh and the flagstaff dressed.
  Prisoners.—Averaged 8‘6. They were all vaccinated and as a result unable to work for a few days.
  Shipping.—The m.s. Kim Chin Seng was the only vessel which called during the month.
  Trade Returns were :—
Exports	... $17,562
Imports	... $19,987
  Thirty-four koyans of raw sago were exported, and 514’pi<;uls and 78 catties of jelutong.
Bintulu.
February, 1926.
  Mr. H. H. Kortright, District Officer, Bintulu, reports as follows :—
  Courts'.—There has been very little work in any of the Courts. Five people were fined $25 each for planting rubber on sago lands, and of these three were ordered to pull up the rubber planted. One Bujang,
already imprisoned several times for non-payment of blanja anqk, was imprisoned again for one year for gross contempt of Court, and the balance of bis payments due were written off. The few other cases gall for no mention.
   Health.—The smallpox epidemic is gradually dying out. We have only record of twenty-five deaths this month, there are more of course,' who have died in farming and jelutong working huts in the jungle, but which have not yet been reported.
   Dresser Senada arrived here by s.s. Gladys on the 6tb and has taken over from Augustus Chai, the latter, who had become rather “bolshevistic" and subsequently tendered his resignation, was sent upriver to assist Dresser Benjamin and to travel about from, house to house vaccinating until the time when his notice shall have expired and he resigns.
   During the month 660 persons were vaccinated, this brings the number of vaccinations since August, 1925, up to 8,638. Only the Kayans at Tubau in this river have so far not been vaccinated ; as when Dresser Senada went there in August they absolutely refused vaccination to a man. Although the disease has not reached Tubau yet, it is certainly going upriver gradually and will eventually get there, and so I am sending Dresser Benjamin up now to have another try with the Kayans.
   Public Works.—Work on three of the enterprises sanctioned for 1926 has been started. A contract to erected a forest bungalow was let for $850, the work is already well advanced and the building should be ready for occupation in two months’ time. A site for a house to be occupied by a Customs Officer has been cleared, and il has been agreed that the building shall be finished by Hari Raya.
   A pengkalen at District Officer’s bungalow is nearly completed.
   Blue prints of Customs Examination Shed and enclosure have been received and material for constructing is expected shortly.
   Plans for new wharf not yet received, but material for same is being gradually assembled.
   Trade.—S.S. Gladys arrived from Kuching on 7th with a full cargo of general supplies for the Bintulu and Sebauh merchants and sailed again on the 10th, also presumably fully loaded with jelutong and belian attaps. The, juragan, however, refused to load several persons attaps, at which there was some slight indignation. Perhaps there was no swap forthcoming.
   S.S. Auby arrived on the 17th and left again on 21st with 141.150 belian attaps, 132 piculs of jelutong, and several consignments for Singapore, including 498 bags of refined sago.
   On the 22nd s.s. Gladys again entered the port and sailed on the 24th with a fair cargo, consisting of 45,000 belian attaps and 477 piculs of jelutong.
   The standard of belian attaps exported from here has been greatly improved, but there are, I think, still certain traders who are still buying and selling an inferior article. It may be necessary to stop a consignment or two of these, as good and bad all go out at the same high price.
   His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to grant Government protection for three years ending 31st December, 1928, to Mohamad Akbar Khan in which time to build and operate a sawmill in this river. I understand that there are already on the ground enough belian logs available, apart from any other timber that may come in, to keep his sawmill working for at least a year.
   General.—The District Officer returned from Kuching by s.s. Gladys on the 6th.
   The 13th being Chinese New Year the usual salute of seven guns was fired from the Fort and a holiday was observed. His Highness the Rajah kindly directed that Monday the 15th should also be a holiday.
   Mr. 0. Ermen, returning to Kuching from Miri, arrived here by s.s. Auby on the 17th, leaving again the 21st.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1926.
125
   On the 8 8. Gladys which arrived on the 22nd was the Very Revd. Father Dunn, who was returning to Kuching from B.N.B. where he had Been visiting. He left on the 24th.
   The 24th was the birthday of Her Highness the Ranee, the flagstaff was dressed and a holiday observed.
   The mouth has been very dry, only 3’33 inches of rain having fallen.
  The trade returns for the month are as follows :—
inquiries concerning Dyaks there who are reported to be farming in Anap territory without permission, and who will soon be encroaching upon Bukitan land. I expect to be away until some time in March.
W. F. DK V. 8KRINE, Acting Divisional Officer.
1926.	1925.
      Exports	...$ 46,978.00	$23,326.35
      Imports	...	64,299 99	13,911.70
  The following vessels entered and cleared the port
during the month : —
  Entered schooners nil, steamers three.
  Cleared    „          three    ,,          three.
Tatau.
February. 1926.
   Mr. R. V. Palfreman, Acting Assistant District Officer, reports as follows :—
   Courts.—There were very few cases before the Court. One, Seine of Kuala Tatau, was fined $50 for an offence committed under Forest Rules Part II, par. 2, clause (c), and was sentenced under Part IV. par. 18, clause (1). All the belian fencing worked was also confiscated by Government. Two Dyaks, Anggok and Ngumbang, were sentenced to two months each for breach of agreement. In order to settle a case involving property to the value of about $4,000 it was necessary to go to Manang Akoo’s house and to make boundaries in a rubber garden also in sago land. The case was eventually settled to the mutual satisfaction of the litigants.
   P.W.D.—The straightening of the road in front of the Native Officer's house was completed. The prisoners, three in number, filled in some swampy places in the padanq near the Fort, they also worked on the Wireless Station site, clearing, stumping and levelling. Dyaks are bringing in as much of the material from the old Bintulu-Tatau telephone line as they can recover.
   Health.--The health of the district still appeals to be good, but it is necessary to keep a strict guard on the ulu Sidang where Dyaks who have run away from Pandan in the Bintulu are constantly trying to persuade the Sidang Dyaks to take them in, also to sell them rice, etc.
   General.—On 16th Keseng, the second chief of the Punans at Penjarai, arrived with a story of a spear thrust through the floor of their house during the night and the fear that a raid might shortly be made on them. I shall therefore go up river at once and investigate this matter. If all is well I shall then go on to the Anap, and to the Pelagus.
   The District Officer has obtained sanction from the Resident Third Division for me to visit the Pelagus, which is in the Third Division, to make
FOURTH DIVISION.
Miri.
February, 1926.
  Court. The usual number of petty cases came before the Miri Courts, but none of any special importance. In consequence of the new system of bonuses initiated by Messrs. Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., the work of the Courts at Miri is now lighter than before. I understand that this system has also resulted in a considerable increase of working days, cases of deliberate malingering being now comparatively rare.
  General. — Chinese New Year passed off quietly on the whole. On the 14th there was a slight disturbance in the bazaar, which might have become more serious had not the police taken immediate steps to deal with the situation. The trouble started with the appearance of a dragon in the bazaar streets. Ou the following evening the dragon was allowed to appear under a guarantee, when everything passed off quietly.
  I returned from home leave on the 11th instant and took over from the Acting Resident, Mr. C. E. Ermen, on the following day. On the same day the District Officer of Baram arrived at Miri at my request to discuss Baram affairs. The District Officer returned to Baram on the 14th instant, accompanied by Mr. Dick, who has been appointed to that district. Mr. Adams handed over charge to Mr. Dick and left for Kuching on the 28th instant to take up another appointment.
  Mr. Ermen sailed for Kuching by s.s. Auby on the 16th.
  I regret to report the death of a Government Dresser, Kim Cheng, at Miri on the 10th instant following an operation for acute appendicitis.
  The Acting Assistant District Officer visited Niah and Sibuti from the 19th to the 25tb instant and reported all quiet there. A cargo of belian was sent back from the former place by lighter. Inquiries were made concerning the failure of several persons to pay up instalments of birds’-nests due early in the mouth under the new scheme for the abolition of mortgages. Apparently the smallpox epidemic is advanced as an excuse, but 1 am not satisfied that this excuse is a legitimate one, seeing that to date Niah has not been affected although there have been a number of deaths at Suai in the next river.


126
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. MAY 1, 1926.
   Mr. Sampson reports favourably on the new Sibuti Bazaar. A large consignment of opium arrived at Miri on 20th, and on the following night an attempt WHS made to break into the store where it had been placed. The opium was moved to another store but yet another attempt was made to get it.. In consequence it was found necessary to place a guard- ever the building. There is no provision made at Miri by the Monopolies Department for the transport or reception of opium, and the books are kept by one of the administration clerks, who already has more work than he can do satisfactorily.
   Her Highness the Ranee’s birthday was observed as a holiday. Mr. Corson, Assistant Conservator of Forests, arrived at Miri from Baram on the 2nd.
   Work on the aerial survey of Messrs. Sarawak Oifields, Ltd., concession was completed during the month and a quantity of material was moved to Sibu.
                 h".
     P.W.D.—Arrangements have been made to start walk on the Niah buildings, which have for sometime been in need of repair.
   Barracks and new clerks' quarters at Miri are still in course of construction, the work having been delayed by lack of timber.
   Various repairs to bridges, etc., have been dealt with and work on roads continues as stone can be procured.
   Attached is Baram report forwarded to me by the Acting District Officer.
Baram
February, 1936.
   The Acting District Officer, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports as follows: —
   Court.—Guan Kit was fined $25 and Chai Nam $15 for breach of Opium Regulations ; a Dyak fined $15 for ringing jelutong trees ; Tuai Rumah Tama Paya Ani fined $100 for refusing vaccination and holding a pantang, having previously been warned not to do so; Matusin two years for breach of Malay Custom, Undang Undang No 50; Tapah fined $58 for attempting to assault with a weapon.
   General.— The District Officer, Mr. C. D. Adams, visited Bakong, accompanied by Tuanku Mobamat, Native Officer, and went to Malang and Entulang.
   The Assistant Conservator of Forests. Mr. Corson, left on the 2nd.
   Dr. Elber, Geologist of Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., arrived and-’proceeded to the district between Dabai and Ridan.
Mr. Adams left on the 12th for Miri to meet the Resident, Fourth Division, on his return from leave and while at Miri news was telephoned through
that Tiri (f) had been murdered by John, a prisoner, and Badindang severely wounded. Mr. Adams and I left Miri on the 14th, arriving here at midday on the 15th when. we were informed that John had been shot by Mamut, while trying to amok in a padi field, The Offices were close on the 13th and 15th for being Chinese New Year which passed off quietly. I took over the station from Mr. Adams on the 20th and left for upriver on the 22nd, I was still away at the end of the month. Mr. C. D. Adams left on the 27th for Miri per s.l. La toilette. This has been an exceptionally dry month, only 0’5 inches of rain having been recorded.
Medical and Health.—No further deaths have been reported from the Tinjar for over a mouth and it is hoped that the smallpox epidemic has subsided. The estimated deaths from smallpox in Tinjar is 100 souls. Mr. Woodward was laid up with fever twice during the month, but was well again by the end of the mouth. I regret to have to report the death of Dresser Kim Cheng, who succumbed after an operation at Miri.
Patients treated during the mouth were in-patients three, out-patients 64, there were also 21 injections' of N.A.B. given for yaws.
   P. W.D.—The prisoners have been widening the ditches on the Ridan Road and also raising the level of the bazaar road which had been partly washed away by the present floods. The new Wireless station was not completed by the end of the month.
   Trade and Shipping.—With the exception of Government and Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., launches, no ships called in during the month. Trade returns are as follows :—
Imports.    Exports.$ 348$ 280Brought forward... 15,68335,528Total to date... $16,031      $35,8081925	...... $14,511      $36,473'H. L. OWEN, Resident Fourth Dioisidn.




