
VOL. LVI.
No. 875.

THE
Sarawak Gazette
PRICE
KUCHING, Monday, August 2nd, 1926.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
Notes ...	...	...	...	... 1H9
Bowling	...	...	... 190
Sarawak Association ...	...	...	190
Blank Ruminations...	...	...	...	191
Extracts from "Popular Science" ...	...	...	191
Hiri Hati	...	...	...	...	192
Curious Building Materials	...	...	...	192
Borneo Mission Association	...	...	...	192
Club News :—
     Sarawak Club—Bowling Handicap	...	... 193
Bowling Averages	...	... 193
Sarawak Golf Club—Monthly Competition (Bogey) 
                                     Result	...	...	193
           Optional Sweep on above ... 193
                 Handicaps...	...	193
                 New Direction of Course	...	193
     Rajah’s Birthday—Sports Fund	...	...	198
     Kuching Football Club The 2nd Annual General
Meeting	...	...	194
Simanggang Regatta	...	...	...	...	193
Pasal Bumai	...	...	..	...	195
Correspondence	...	...	...	...	193
Monthly Reports First Division	...	...	197
                      Sadong Colliery	...	...	199
                      Third Division	...	...	199
                      Fourth Division	...	...	202
                      Fifth Division	...	...	205
Kuching Trade Returns	...	...	... 208
Passengers	...	...	...	...	209
Miri Trade Returns	...	...	...	...	210
Kuching Market Price List	...	...	... 211
Kuching Shipping	...	...	...	...	212
Miri Shipping	...	...	...	...	213
Kuching Shipping Returns	...	...	... 214
Rainfall ...	...	...	...	215,216
Meteorological Returns	...	...	... 216
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE.
MONDAY. AUGUST 2. 1926.
NOTES.
July.
  His HIGHNESS the Rajah, we are informed, is due in Singapore on or about the 8th October next, and Her Highness the Ranee probably in November.
   His HIGHNESS the Tuan Muda, accompanied by Mr. H. B. Crocker, Acting Chief Secretary, and Mr. E. Parnell, Controller of Government Monopolies, sailed on board H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 5th returning on the 17th, after visiting Miri, Baram and Bintulu.
   WE are sorry to read in the May monthly report for Miri that Major E. V. Benjamin, General Manager of Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., left Miri on the 28th, as the state of his health unfortunately does not permit his remaining longer in the tropics and, acting under I medical advice, he has returned to England  to take up another appointment .
   CAPTAIN F. P. Raynham and Mr. Andrews flew from Sibu to Kuching on the 19th in connection with aerial survey of the Sarawak Mangrove Forest Reserve between Kuching and Santubong. Their return journey was delayed a few days at Goebilt owing to engine trouble.
   MR. J. W. Evans, Manager of Sadong  Collieries, left Kuching on the 10th for Europe on three months’ special leave.
   MUNICIPAL By-laws now stipulate I a maximum speed of 20 miles per hour for private motor cars, except within the bazaar  and kampong areas (marked out by sign posts) where the maximum speed allowed will I be 8 m.p.h.
   MR. R. V. Palfreman left Kuching on the 24th, having been granted seven months’ furlough.
   MR. J. A. H. Hardie, Commissioner of Trade and Customs, returned to Kuching on the 26th instant, after a tour of inspection to various outstations.


190
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 2, 1926.
  UPON the invitation of the Kwang Tung Chinese Community a large number of Europeans, including His Highness the Tuan Muda, were privileged to enjoy a very pleasant evening on Thursday, the 22nd, at the Yong Soon Theatre Hall, where Mr. Ong Phian Hwe’s troupe of acrobats “Tai Lit Su Thuan,” Mr. Thang Wan Thian, the strong man, and Mr. Chong Ming Sang, conjuror, delighted a large audience with exhibitions of their skill.
  The entertainment was organized by Messrs. Lau Cheng Hiang, Lim Chee Chiew, Jong Pun Chong, Lim Song Khee, Tan Siang Kim, Ng Siak Kiong, Chong Joon Kiew and Chin Ten Khoy on behalf of the Kwang Tung Community.
  The proceeds will be devoted to the following Kuching schools :—Min Tek, Yik Khuan, Thai Thong, Kung Min. Kheng Khiaw.
  THE Government Dental Surgeon, Mr. A. T. Partridge, accompanied by his family, arrived in Kuching on the 26th and expects to be resident here for about a month.
  EVERYONE in Borneo who is interested in big game should read “The Book of the Red Deer and Empire Big Game,” by John Ross and Hugh Gunn. Besides the subject of the red deer, which is treated from every angle, it contains many interesting and valuable articles of big game shooting in all parts of the world, including the Canadian Rockies, India, Australia and New Zealand.
  WE extend a welcome to Mr. L. D. Kennedy, who arrived in Kuching from Shanghai on the 26th to take up an appointment in the Customs Department.
  S.S. Sulong  returned from the north on the 26th with three new ponies on board. They are described as :—
    Strawberry-roan, horse. 7 years, from Melalap,
12.OJ hands (Melengkap Thamis, B.N.B., Division ?). Owner Mr. C. Fenwick.
Steel-grey, horse. 4 years, from Kaningau, 12.1 ½  hands, unnamed and unraced. Owner Mr. Hardie.
Iron-grey, horse. 3 ½  years, from Tuaran, 12.2 ¾  hands, unnamed and unraced. Owner Mr “Harnell.”
  THE following books can be obtained on loan from the Education Office, Kuching, by candidates for the examinations for Government Officers :—
   Expedition to Borneo of H.M.S. Dido, H. Keppel, ? & II; Life in the Forests of the Far East. S. St. John. ? & II; Low’s Notes on Sarawak. H. Low, I; Life of Sir James Brooke, S. St. John, I; Letters and Journals of Sir J. Brooke, Templer, I, II & III; Natives of Sarawak and B.N.B., H. Ling Roth, I & II; Pagan Tribes of Borneo, Hose and McDougall, I & II: Private letters of the Rajah Sir J. Brooke, Templer, I, IT, & III; Rajah of Sarawak. Gertrude L. Jacob, ?  & II; Sarawak, Its inhabitants and Productions, Hugh Low, I; Ten Years in Sarawak. Charles Brooke, ?  & II.
  DRY Rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah Estates during the month of June was approximately 88.500 tbs.
  A famous firm of New York typewriter manufacturers claims to have invented a Chinese typewriter, the first to be equipped with Chinese characters. The characters have been arranged phonetically, and number several hundred. This has naturally necessitated a rather clumsy and unwieldy keyboard. But it is hoped to decrease the size by a decrease in the number of characters.
    B iff big Bertha down the the alley.
    O rder “gantongs, dua kali." 
    W ith each other feeling pallv, 
    L ots of fellows, splendid rally, 
    I t’s your shot Bill, do not daily. 
    N ot a “face," this ain't Aunt Sally, 
    G o to blazes !—score don’t tally !
ANONYMOUS.
      Sarawak Association.
    The Third Annual Dinner took place at the Trocadero Restaurant on the 6th July. 1926.
    The following are extracts from the Second Annual Report 1925/1926:—
    "The Association now numbers 118 ordinary members, of whom over 60 are resident in Sarawak or elsewhere abroad.
     "Mr. Quintus Alfred Buck, who became a Member of the Association on its formation, died at his home in Newton Abbot on 21st November, 1925.
    “Mr. George Ernest Llewelyn died suddenly on 6th May, 1926, at his residence in South Wales.
    “Major John Coney Moulton, late Chief Secretary, on his arrival in England on furlough was taken suddenly ill with appendicitis and underwent an operation on 30th May. The first reports of his condition were not unsatisfactory but towards the end of the week complications set in and be passed away early on the morning of the 6th June, 1926’’


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. AUGUST 2, 1926.
191
     Blank Ruminations.
     (In the accepted Modern Style.)
1 am in the Club.
The Club ?
Ah ! that reminds me
My subscription;
And my bills are overdue.
Boy ! minta Stengah.
To-morrow and to-morrow and to-morrow ! 
Oh well! I’ll pay some day.

Have a drink!
No? Well, I never do myself
Until tis pukol anam 
But this is an exception 
And my nerves demand it.

God ! how hot it is!!!
Last night we sat, five chaps, 
Around a table, and played poker 
With chips.
I lost twelve ringgits.
Boy ! minta stengah !

How I hate the man, 
No ! it could scarce 
Have been a man— 
More like some demon – 
Who invented poker.

Boy ! trima kaseh, 
Minta stengah lagi.

Methought some fiend incarnate 
Did control the cards.
I only saw the Joker once 
And that when dealing. 
Ah well! perhaps 'tis fate 
And luck will smile on me 
Some other time.

No! I will not bowl to-night.

What’s in the papers? 
Let me see 
“The Sporting and Dramatic."

Advertisements and still advertisements. 
Hullo! what’s this?
By heck it’s Flossie Footlights !
She’s got the bone and hank 
Of hair 
But where’s the rag ?

Oh boys 1 just gaze on this. 
If they're the types 
Who’re knocking round at Home 
What are we doing here ? 
Boy! stengah lagi 
Lekas ! Lekas !!

No! I will nut play pool.
I want to sit round and think. 
And when I am not thinking 
I’ll just sit 
And perhaps I’ll drink a whisky pahit 
Black Label.
     Ah ! there’s the breeze at last. 
     I think it’s going to rain 
     Like Hell.
     
     No! 1 am no good at bridge.
     Have one for the road !
     No ?
       Well, I never do myself 
       But this is an occasion.
     I played poker
     Last night and lost; and my bills are overdue.
     But never mind.
     To-morrow I will pay.
     Yea verily!
     Besok
     What boots it if I don’t ?
DON WYPIP.
   [Someone may boot him if he don’t?—ED]
   Extracts from “Popular Science.”
   The light of a firefly is declared to be 11-400 of a candle-power.
   It is also estimated that firefly light is 200 times as cheap as that of an incandescent electric lamp, reckoning its cost on the basis of energy expended in its production.
   Cells in the rear end of the abdomen appear to secrete a chemical substance which, when oxygen comes in contact with it, gives out the light.

        The average age to which an ant lives is 10 years, although in some cases this is extended to 15 years.
   Indian ink is made from burnt camphor. The Chinese held the secret of the process for many years.
   Each stem of the wild poppy has from 10,000 to 60,000 seeds.
   The ears of a grasshopper are situated on their front legs. The great green grasshopper has its ears under its knees.
   In addition to their beneficial physical effects, the rays of natural or artificial sunlight are declared to serve the purpose of a brain food. Proper exposure to sunshine increases the intellectual output.
        [Also the muscle of the right arm ! — Ed.}


192
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 2, 192G.
Hiri Hati.
   (With apologies to the Author of “Hiawatha.")
    Very pretty is the “Kuching"
And the ‘Auby" is much like her 
While the “Sulong'' and the “Adeh" 
These are ships one does not mention 
But the coming of the oil ship, 
Named “Maimuna," famed in story, 
Took away their former prestige
 And destroyed their ancient glory.
    While she lay there in the river ;
Muddy, rushing tidal river 
Flowing through the town of Kuching. 
She looked as though some hand had 
        spanked her.
    Spanked her stem with blow gigantic 
    Driving it half way amidships
    
    Possibly this is the reason
    Why a Tuan reading backwards 
    Through the epic sheets of Kuching 
    (One Gazette by name Sarawak) 
    Saw with proud, keen, admiration, 
    That her “height” was one and forty.
    
    One hundred feet of steel and timber 
    With forty added —Gee! that's something  
    Beats the leaning tower of Pisa 
    Beats the piles of ancient Thebes, 
    But does not heat the estimation 
    With which all Tuans do regard her

ANONYMOUS.
Curious Building Materials.
      We read, in an article by Henry J. Russell:-
      The constructive instinct has been inherent in the human race since prehistoric man contrived his dwelling in rocks and holes in the earth. To-day, the science of building has become something in the nature of a fine art, and we are apt to catalogue all building materials under the general term “bricks and mortar."
      There are. however, quite a number of unusual materials used in the construction of houses often overlooked by the layman and quite unknown to those not engaged in the building industry.
      Comparatively few people realise that chemicals play an important part in the manufacture of building commodities. Who. for instance, would imagine that magnesia and Epsom salts were contained in bricks, or that pumice stone is used as a paving material ? Yet, when the latter is added to cement, it forms a suitable combination for laving jointless floors Metal filings are often used for this purpose also.
      Sawdust and ground cork take their place in providing a filling for cavity walls of wooden erections such as bungalows and motor houses. Shredded wool is often employed as a sound deadener when placed between flooring. Rubber is well known as a roof covering, but it is often used in powdered form in the capacity of a cement water-proofer.
      It may seem contradictory, but iron rust in the form of oxide is considered an efficient preventative of corrosion of metals, while in the north of Scotland, a lucrative business is carried on in extracting oil from fish for use in making cheap ready mixed paints.
      Gypsum provides a deterrent to Portland cement setting too rapidly, and mica is not onlv used for flaps of fresh air inlets, but serves in the manufacture of metallic wallpaper.
 Paper plays a large part in the form of a non-
 conductor of heat and cold in the construction of
wooden erections, and when compressed, takes the
form of wallboards for interior linings
   Beer is used by the grainer to obtain correct
shading when imitating the grain of wood and
ammonia darkens timber to be reproduced in old
oak. Mud and straw have been employed for
years in building cattle sheds, and many instances
of wattle buildings are to be seen in Northern
France.
   Grasses provide roof covering in some country
districts and animal skins are boiled down to
make size for porous walls. Ox hair is not
usually associated with construction, yet when
combined with lime it forms the basis of plastered
walls.
   Animal fat used to be combined with lime for
laying bricks; cart grease sea s manhole covers,
and chalk forms the body of many distempers.
   Hemp and jute are made into sash-lines, and
felspar is employed in the formation of concrete
to which it gives a mother-of pearl effect.
Borneo Mission Association.
   At the annual meeting of the Borneo Mission Association, held in the Mary Summer House on June 2, the Chairman was Mr. Edward Hose, c. M. G. , late Colonial Secretary in Singapore, and son of the late Bishop of Singapore, Labuan and Sarawak
   Mr Hose drew an interesting comparison between the conditions of missionary work in Sarawak in his father’s day and those which prevail to-day, thanks to the partition of the diocese brought about by Bishop Hose's action, and to the help afforded through the formation of the B M.A by Bishop Mounsey in 1908. to which the Mission was indebted for its admirable launch.
   Archdeacon Champion, of Sarawak, paid a tribute to the generosity of the Governments in Borneo and their help in the building and support of the Mission Schools The most pressing need to-day, he asserted, was represented by the Dyak Missions. There were but two priests amongst the Sea Dyak tribes, one nearly 70. who could not long be expected to endure the long journeys, the other young, but strained to the uttermost of his powers by the varied demands of his work. Mr. Linton was working from six in the morning until ten at night—teaching in the schools, superintending the erection of new buildings, training Dyak candidates for ordination, tending the sick, and taking long journeys through jungle and by river throughout his immense district. Mr. Linton's great desire, shared by the Bishop, was for a community of priests vowed to a life of celibacy’, poverty and obedience. Such a community would ensure continuity of the work and a sufficient staff to itinerate, and would be a witness among the Dyaks of self-sacrifice and devotion.
   Rev. C. J. Collis, of Jesselton in British North Borneo, described the life of a chaplain-missionary with long distances to travel by sea, rail and horseback Missionary work amongst the Chinese held great prospects and was achieving most encouraging results. Already the Chinese congregation at festivals so largely exceeded the accommodation of the Church that large numbers had to join in the worship as best they could in the verandahs outside. There was urgent need to raise funds to rebuild the Boy' School, which was in a tottering condition and crowded with twice the number of scholars it was built for. Bolshevist propaganda was. he said, busy amongst the Chinese, a gainst which Christianity was the best safeguard. He explored the absence of missionary work amongst the native tribes, to which the Government of British North Borneo was ready to give generous support if workers could be found.
(The C. E. & T.)


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. AUGUST 2, 1926.
193
Club News.
Sarawak Club.
BOWLING HANDICAP FOR JUNE, 1926.
Score.H'cap.Total.C. D. Adams319  34353F. G. Carpenter312  10322Dr. Marjoribanks ...252  38290W. Harnack222-  66288H. H. the Tuan Muda276  —276D. Y. Proudfoot216  58274G. D. W. Frayling ...211  54265R. V. Carr192  70262W. Cotterill203  56259       BOWLING AVERAGES FOR JUNE, 1926.
     J. P. Baird
     H. E. Outfield
     H. H. the Tuan Muda
     F. G. Carpenter
     B. A. Trechman
     A. A. Rennie
     G. T. Bates
     J. A. McCullagh
     0. D. Adams
     E. M. Marjoribanks
     B. J. C. Spurway
     C. S. Griffiths
     G. D. W. Frayling ...
     W. Cotterill
     D. Y. Proudfoot
     R. W. Chater
     W. Harnack
     R. V. Carr
No- of Garnet.
      13
       8
17
      18
      16
12
       5
      18
20
      12
10
      12
      15
14
       8
       6
       6
      12
Average.
154-0
151-6
148-4
137-8
135-8
134-5
129-6
126-9
125-6
124-5
120-0
118-5
116-0
114-7
114-5
110-8
109-8
108-2
Sarawak Golf Club.
JULY MONTHLY COMPETITION (BOGEY) RESULT.
F. G. Carpenter (6) 3 down, played off “all square.” ' R. V. Carr         (4) 3 „	„ „ 4 down.
      Nine entrants.
OPTIONAL SWEEP ON ABOVE.
C. D. Adams drew F. G. Carpenter. 
Eight entrants.
HANDICAPS.
  Revised handicaps (9 holes) for members resident in Kuching, for the period 1st July, 1926/30th June, 1927, have been posted in the Golf Club House.
  It is again notified that members resident in Kuching, who have no handicap against their names, are not eligible to enter for any competition until they have submitted three cards for revision of handicap.
NEW DIRECTION OF COURSE.
At a meeting of the Committee held on the 1st July. 1926, alteration of the present course, necessitated by impending work of reclamation, was approved with amended bogey, as follows :—
1st hole will be the same.
2nd		 „ „
3rd ,.	„ „ „	„
4th	old	4th tee to old 5th green.
5th „	„ „ ,, 6th„ ,, ,, 6th6th ,.	„ „ ,, 7th„ „ .» 8th7th 		9th	1st8th „	„ „ new tee   „ „ 9th9th „	„ , Grange„	„ 7th..Approximate distancesand relativebogey willbe:—DistanceBogey.    Yards-    1st hole   2684    2nd „   300     5    3rd „   132     3    4th   392     5    5th ,,   200     4    6th „   392    7th „   300     4    8th „   381     5    9th „   132     42,49739   The above alteration will take effect from 1st August, 1926.
   The August Monthly Competition will be played during Saturday 7th or Sunday 8th of August.
E. O. BRUCE, Hon. Secretary.
Rajah’s Birthday Sports Fund.
RECEIPTS.
31st Oct. 1924.
Balance brought forward 9208.47
31st Oct. 1925.
Sundry Subscriptions collected ..	.. 1,264.40
Collection a/c Houpla ..	67.73
$1,540.60
H. BATEMAN, Hon. Auditor.
EXPENDITURE.
31st Oct. 1926.
Value of prizes ..                       $298.62
Cost of building sheds	100.00
Decorating sheds and field	41.58
Arranging seats ..	20.00
Materials and transport
      a/c field section ..	88.67
Stores and transport
       a/c Tea and Refresh-
       ment Sections ..	243.03
                                                              Stores and transport a/c
    Houpla Section ..	44.24
Printing Programmes,
    Circulars and Cards..	37.75
Sarawak Rangers’ Band	40.00
St. Thomas’ School for
             use of ground ..	25.09
Balance carried forward	601.71
81.54060
.
TAN SUM GUAN,
Hon. Treasurer.


194
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 2, 1926.
Kuching Football Club.
  The Second Annual General Meeting of the
Kuching Football Club held in the Club Pavilion on
12th June, 1926, at 6.30 p.m
  Present.—The Rt. Rev. the Bishop of Labuan
and Sarawak (in the Chair), Messrs. J. P. Mead, J.
S. Mudford, P. Stewart, S. T. Ennion, P. Cobbold,
E.H.P. Bengtsson, W. Clark. Harneck, J. S. Finlay,
J. G. Barraclough, J. C. Smith, G. T. Bates, B. J. C.
Spurway, J. B. Simpson, C. Fenwick, E. O. Bruce,
B. A. Trechmann, G. M. Allman, F. H. Kortright,
C. D. Adams, A. A. Rennie, E. Banks, G. C Turner,
Edwards, D. Y. Proudfoot, Carrie.
  Minutes —The minutes of the previous General
Meeting, held in the Government Rest House on
1st June, 1925, were read and confirmed.
  Accounts.—Mr. J. G. Barraclough proposed that
the accounts for the year ending 30th April, 1926,
should he adopted. Seconded by Mr. 8. T. Ennion
and carried nem con.
  Addition of Changing Room, Bath-room, and
Latrine.—Mr. J. P. Mead proceed plans and esti-
mate kindly drawn up by Mr. J. W. Whiteside for
the additions named, the whole to cost $220, and
proposed that they should be passed and the work
to proceed at that figure. Seconded by Mr. G. T.
Bates and carried nem con.
  Subscriptions.—The Chairman suggested that as
the Club financial year ended on 30tb April it would
make the Treasurer’s work much easier if annual
subscriptions should run from 1st May to 30th April
instead of from the month in which a man joined
to the corresponding month of the following year
as is done at present; and further that should this
suggestion be adopted members joining after the 30th
October should only pay a half year’s subscription
for the year in which they joined.
  Mr. D. Y. Proudfoot proposed that both the above
suggestions should lie passed. Seconded by Mr S.
T. Ennion and carried with only two votes against.
  Proposed alterations and additions to existing
Rules.—The Honorary Secretary read out a list of
proposed alterations and additions to existing rules.
Mr. G. T. Bates proposed an amendment that such
alterations and additions could not be passed at the
meeting in progress but should be circularized among
all members and the proposal put before an Extra-
ordinary General Meeting in three months’ lime.
Seconded by Mr. C. Fenwick and carried with only
four votes against.
  Club opening daily.—The Chairman notified the meeting that it was suggested that owing to various members of the Club not being members of the Sarawak Club, Ship’s Officers in particular, the Club Pavilion should be opened every evening from 4 p.m. to 9 p.m.
  Mr. Proudfoot proposed that this should be given a trial for three months, at the end of which time an Extraordinary General Meeting should be held to discuss whether it was worth carrying on or not.
  Seconded by Mr. Ennion.
   Mr. Middlemas proposed an amendment that the , three mouths' trial should be given but that it should be left entirely to the discretion of the Committee to cancel the arrangement before the time was up if they think that it does not pay and further that  should the full three months' trial be given, at the end of that time there should be an ordinary Committee meeting to discuss the question and not an I Extraordinary General Meeting  Seconded by Mr. Barraclough.
    The three months' trial was put to the vote and  carried with only three votes against.
   Mr. Middleman' amendment was carried with  eleven votes against
 Committee.—On retirement of the old Committee:—
President
Captain 
Vice-Captain Hon Treasurer Hon. Secretary
The Rt. Kev. the Bishop
of Labuan and Sarawak
J. P. Mead
P. Stewart
J. S. Mudford
8. T. Ennion
   The following were elected for the new year:—
President
Captain 
Vice-Captain Hon. Treasurer Hon. Secretary
The Rt. Rev. the Bishop
of Labuan and Sarawak
J. P. Mead
G. T. Bates
P. Cobbold
S. T. Ennion
   Provision of Cricket d Hockey. —Mr. Barraclough spoke at some length on the subject of cricket, pointing out that there was no need to start on matches, etc., right away, but rather to fix up “nets" in order to instruct people especially the natives so that when the time came there would be plenty of people to make tip sides. He raised the question of equipment suggesting that there was some at the fort but it was thought that this was probably very old and not of much use.
   Mr. Middlemas proposed that the Committee
should look into the expenditure regarding cricket
and put the result before the next Extraordinary
General Meeting. Seconded by Mr. C. D. Adams
and carried nem con.
   Mr. Proudfoot suggested that members should be
approached regarding any old cricket equipment
they might have and asked to present it to the Club
to help matters.
      Suggestion noted by Honorary Secretary.
   General.—The Chairman proposed a vote of
thanks should be given to Messrs. Rennie and Cobbold
for their excellent work in connection with the
accounts.
   The Honorary Secretary pointed out that Messrs. J. P. Mead and P. Down had kindly returned their debenture shares making a present of them to the Club and proposed a vote of thanks should be given accordingly.
   Mr. Barraclough proposed a vote of thanks to the retiring President and Committee, especially mentioning Mr. J. P. Mead, who had done splendid work for the Club.
   The three above proposals were carried with acclamation.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 2, 1926.
195
  Mr. Kortright proposed that the death of Mr. J. C. Moulton who was the original President of the Club should be recorded. Seconded by Mr. E. 0 Bruce and carried nem con.
  Mr. Bruce asked that all members should be supplied with a. copy of the rules of the Club.
  Mr. Spurway asked that a Visitors’ Book should be provided at the Club.
  These two requests are noted by the Honorary Secretary.
  The meeting then closed with a vote of thanks to the Chair.
            S. T. ENNION,
Honorary Secretary.
Simanggang Regatta.
14TH & 15TH AUGUST, 1926.
Programme.
13TH FRIDAY.
4 to 6 p.m. Preliminary Rounds of Football Matches.
6.30 to 8 p.m. Drawing of Lottery Tickets in Beda and Bong races for to-morrow.
14TH SATURDAY.
1.8 a.m.Boats with crews limited to three in number, starting from Mosque Hill. 1st prize $3. 2nd prize $1.50.2.8.30 a.m.Bong Race, no restrictions us to length of boat or number of crew, starting from Tanjong Sebubok. 1st prize Cup value $60 and $50. 2nd $30. 3rd $15.3.9 a.m.Boats with crews 15 men, limited to crews and bouts from the Saribas and Kalaka, 1st prize Silver Cup value $50 and $45 2nd $30. 3rd $15.49.15 a.m.Mr. J. A. H. Hardie’s Cup, open to Bedas with no restrictions as to length or number of crew, starting from Tanjong Sebubok. 1st prize Cup value $70 and $60. 2nd $30. 3rd $15.5.9.30 a.m.Boats with crews of 25 Chinese, starting from Tanjong Engkabang. 1st prize $50 2nd $25. (2nd only awarded if three or more entrants.)6.10 a.m.Beda Race, crews limited to 40 men, starting from Tanjong Payan. 1st prize $40. 2nd $20. 3rd $10.7.10.30 a.m.Bandong Ikan crews limited to one man, rowing standing up. From Tanjong Engkabang. 1st prize $2. 2nd $1.8.10.45 a.m.Boats with 30 men, no restriction as to build, starting from Datu’s Cattleshed. 1st prize $30. 2nd-t$15. 3rd $7.50.      12 Noon.—Malay Luncheon in Fort.
      5 to 6 p.m. Final of Football Matches.
6.30 to 8 p.m. Drawing of Lottery Tickets for Beda and Bong Races for tomorrow.
15TH SUNDAY.
1. 8 a.m. Boats with crews limited to 15 men, starting from Datu’s shed. 1st prize $20. 2nd $10. 3rd $5.
2. 8.30 a.m.
3. 9 a.m.
4. 9.15 a.m.
5. 9 30 a.m.
6. 10 a. m.
Bongs with crews limited to 40
men, starting from Tanjong Payan.
1st prize $40. 2nd $20. 3rd $10.
Boats with crews limited to 5 men,
starting from Sungei Stawang.
1st prize $4. 2nd $2.
His Highness the Tuan Muda’s
Cup, open' to all comers, with no
restrictions as to build or length
of boat or number of crew. Start-
ing from Tanjong Sebubok. 1st
prize Cup value $100 and $2 to
each member of the crew. 2nd
prize $1 to each member of crew.
3rd prize 50 cents to each member
of crew.
Women’s Race, boats crews
limited to 25 women, starting
from Tanjong Engkabang. 1st
prize $25. 2nd $15.
Consolation Race, for boats of any
length or build winner of 1st prizes
only barred Starting from Sinjor,
1st prize $40. 2nd $20. 3rd $15.
   12 Noon.—Chinese Luncheon in Fort.
   6.30 p.m.—Feast for the Dyak Chiefs.
   10 p.m. to 12 midnight.—Main in Fort.
         Pasal Bumai.
Tu bejako pasal bumai, 
Bulih padi bebrita besai; 
Ngegap pangan enggau gawai, 
Enggau ngering ka adat tuai.
Maioh ti rlndu minta puji, 
Meda diri tau bulih padi; 
Bangat udu ka ngemesai kadiri, 
Samoa orang enda dipeduli.
Ngegap pangan bejako tangka, 
Madah kadiri Pulang Gana; 
Meda diri bisi tengkira, 
Jako rangkai enda bebasa.
Meda diri bulih utai, 
Enda nyidi penemu bukai; 
Tusi Padri enda dipakai, 
Enda mikir jalai pemulai.
Pengraja nyempal jalai pengarap, 
Ti ngasoh ati tekalalu tesat;
Ngidup ka tuboh munoh samengat, 
Nadai qgeruuding hari Kiamat.

Patut anang ngemesai kidiri, 
Samoa pengraja Allah ti mri; 
Maehani pemakai anang ngenchadi, 
Orang saranta patut dibri.
Pemanah kitai bisi balas, 
Dibri Allah ti ari atas; 
Baik laun baik lengkas, 
Samoa ti megai jalai badas.
Jako tu dulu dikenong, 
Enti ditulis enda alah itong; 
Orang ti ninga samoa nguchong, 
Ditu umbas alai pengujong.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 2, 1926.
196
        CORRESPONDENCE.
   [The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of
Correspondents.]
Kuala Lumpur, F.M.S
To
   The Editor,
     Sarawak Gazette,
         Kuching, Sarawak.
SIR,
     An apathetic spirit apparently still pervades the
it and on this plea I feel emboldened to wield my
pen to write yon on a subject which, having regard
to its vital import as affecting the welfare of
educated Sarawakians. deserves to be openly dis-
cussed.
   With all deference to the authorities, I venture
to suggest that the policy, which I am assured has
been in vogue for some time, whereby certain ap-
pointments in the subordinate branch of the Govern-
ment Service are being filled by persons of alien
domicile, IB neither warranted nor is its continuance
to be recommended. The glaring upshot of such
a policy is that it tends to breed discontent amongst
those whose rightful claims for consideration have
been ignored.
   We have specimens to-day of those born and
educated in Sarawak whose faithful and stainless
record of service with the Government is worthy
of some measure of recognition. I say, therefore,
with all emphasis that the adoption of the policy
outlined above, when there is just as capable if not
better material available on the spot, is more likely
to impede than to promote the interests of Sara-
wakians. The need for this “ recruiting ” policy
may possibly give rise to misinterpretation as
testifying that Sarawak-born clerks' are either
inexperienced or unqualified To the studied obser-
ver, however, this slur will not stand the test of
even the barest examination and is easily dispelled
by a reference to the creditable achievements of the
past, achievements which have been traditionally
maintained to this day.
  Sarawak is and will be, for many more years to
come, dependent on outside sources for its supply
of technical officers, but to think that n is also
necessary to resort to the expedient of drifting else- 
where for recruits to fill such appointments as 
ordinary clerkships is really incomprehensible.
  Another important bearing lo the question is that 
these “recruited” clerks are paid comparatively
handsome salaries, notwithstanding which they are
given other privileges in the way of leave and pas-
sage expenses. I am sure that there are many
Sarawakians, not a whit behind in efficiency and
keenness, who would have gladly welcomed the
opportunity to earn the dollars which now swell the
pockets of outsiders.
  It may not be out of place perhaps to mention
here the regulation governing the selection of can-
didates for subordinate appointments in the Ma-
layan Government Service. If I recollect aright, the
guiding policy has always been that “preference will
be given to Malays and to those, irrespective of race,
born and educated in Malaya.” The far-sightedness
and wisdom of such a policy will be quite apparent,
and one which might well be emulated in Sarawak
  Where all things are equal, it would only be fair
and proper that preferential treatment should be
accorded to sons of tbe soil who, by reason of their 
ancestral link with the land, have every legitimate 
claim to be given the first refusal of any appoint- 
merit that may be offering. 
   With apologies for the intrusion on the hospitality of your columns.
I remain,
Yours faithfully,
“ A SARAWAKIAN.”
   The "apathetic spirit pervading the air” emanates from the "sons of the soil” who prefer tapping their rubber in spite of the "apparently handsome salaries" offered through clerical vacancies, which scale of salaries, by the way, is the same for local as for “alien” recruits.
   "Where ail things are equal,” and often whore they are not, preference and a period of probation has always been given to applicants “ born and educated” in Sarawak.—Ed.]
                             Kuching, Sarawak.  To
   The Editor,
     Sarawak Gazette.
SIR.
     From time to time the almost human actions of my “orang hutan,” Bill, have held me amazed, but having witnessed the following incident I am more than ever inclined towards the Darwinian theory.
   A little Kra monkey, my other pet, named Jimmy, had slipped his moorings and gone aloft to quarters more suitable, to bis idea of existence, than his usual soapbox. Knowing that my chances of catching him were equal with the celluloid dog which chased the asbestos cat through a hotter place even than Kuching. I gave up the chase and retired.
   During ray absence apparently Jimmy had stray ed too near the habitation of "Bill the Maias,” because on my return some time later I beheld the truant firmly held by Bill. There was Jimmy wearing a rather scared expression clutched by the tail and scruff of his neck while Bill gazed at him with a mild paternal look as if to say “ah you yoong laads ”!
   On my arrival. Bill, having solemnly delivered up the prisoner, ambled into his favourite corner, squatted with arms akimbo in deep meditation, obviously anticipating a clear view of the chastisement about to be meted out to the delinquent, from a safe distance.
   It was not until Jimmy was back in his soapbox Quarters that he seemed to recover bis nerve, for le next hour he made the welkin ring with the most “'orrible monkey cuss words as ever was.”
Yours faithfully,
J. S. M.
Kuching, Sarawak,
21st July, 1926.
To
   The Editor.
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
DEAR SIR,
     I was much interested with the article written
by Dodo in your last publication.
   I cannot agree with your correspondent that there
had been any indiscriminate slaughter of our
feathered friends. In my humble opinion the kill-
ing of birds of the bulbul variety is fully justified,
as these birds are in the habit of destroying fruits,
both ripe and unripe.
   If Dodo had a fruit garden, I feel sure that he
would not have so much sympathy for the bulbuls.
I am, dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
A SHOOTER.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 2, 1926.
197
      MONTHLY REPORTS.
FIRST DIVISION.
Kuching.
June, 1926.
   Resident's Court.—Civil and criminal, seven cases came before the Court.
   Ho Chui (f.) petitioned to have the terms of the will of her late husband, Wee Bee Ah, declared illegal, which was not granted.
   Hiap Heng was lined $10 for breach of Rent Restriction Order.
   Commissioner of Customs appealed against a decision of District Court in which two Chinese firms were fined $25 each for breach of Order No. 23 of 1924. Court ordered the goods concerned to be confiscated in addition to the fines imposed.
   There was one other appeal against a fine imposed by the District Court winch was reduced.
   Other cases before the Court call for no special mention.
     General.—The 3rd, being birthday of H.M. King George V., was observed as a public holiday and the Offices closed.
   Mr. J. G. Walters, Acting Assistant District Officer, Sadong, and Mr. Honore, Officer-in-Charge, Lundu, visited Kuching during .the mouth to sit for the Examinations of Government Officers, Standard I.
   A letter was received from the Court Writer, Lundu, on the 29th reporting the disappearance of one Ah Choon between Sampadi and Lundu river. It is probable that he was taken by a crocodile and inquiries are still being made.
   Many Bakar Dyaks were down during the month paying their taxes and gun licences. Orang Kayas of Ris, Lanchang and Tarad, brought up again the question of the boundaries of their farming lands, which have been definitely fixed and demarcated.
   Land Office.—The Liewchiew community applied for anew cemetery. A plot has been chosen between the 4th and 5th mile Penrissen Road and a grant will be issued in due course.
   The following grants, leases and squatters’ licences Wore issued during the mouth -
A. R. P.
          2 grants ...	...      3   2 32
     6 grants (shophouses)   15,000 square feet
    15 leases coconut and rubber       263   2 28
     3 squatters’ licences ...                   8   1 33
274 occupation tickets, rubber, 
       coconut, pepper and 
       sago ...	  1,294   2 37
   The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, Reports as follows
   District Court. — 61 cases were heard, 50 of which were criminal and 11 civil. Of the 50 criminal cases 38 convictions and 12 acquittals were adjudged. There were 18 cases of assault, four of theft, two for contempt of Court, three for breach of Municipal By-laws, three for breach of Customs and Shipping Regulations and 20 other offences. Fines imposed amounted to $115 and fees collected totalled $44.75.
   The 11 Civil claims involved amounts totalling $2,591 61, while fees amounted to $46 25.
   Magistrate’s Court —88 Civil suits were brought for hearing, for which fees of $156 were collected. The total value of claims was $1,900.44.
   Police Court.—33 summary cases were brought before the Court and 27 convictions and six acquittals were obtained. The principal charges were assault one, theft four, housebreaking one, absconding under bail one, accidental shooting one and 19 minor cases. A total amount of $219 was imposed in fines and $34.75 was collected in fees.
   Courts General.—Timban, Dyak, was sentenced to 18 months’ imprisonment for causing death by a rash act ; Haji Abdul Rahman to six months absconding miner bail ; Pardie to one year and 13 strokes for burglary ; Foong Wai Kam, Teo Thian Leong and Abas to six. four and two months respectively for theft; Krishnasami and his mother were fined $20 each for collusion in obtaining passports; Lee Yung Sang and Giji, Dyak, to two and three months respectively in default of fines; Kromokario and Sidoel four months and one month for absconding under agreement.
Upper Sarawak.
June, 1926.
   The District Officer, Mr. F. H Kortright, reports as follows:—
   Court and Office work was exceptionally heavy throughout the month, but no offences of any magnitude were recorded.
   Prisoners Sairoen and Abdulrani were sent to Kuching to serve their lime as they were too difficult to handle here. Both these men managed a wholesale pilfering in the District Officer’s bungalow during the process of his moving out to allow carpenters in to make some extensive repairs. The mandor in charge showed great lack of supervision as also did the police in charge of the jail. Abdulrani was later found to be in possession of the hypodermic syringe which was stolen from the dispensary last month. Another accidental shooting affair was reported at Kampong Saban, two brothers out after the same pig, one fired with a mixed charge of slugs and shot, the slugs killed the pig whilst the shot appear to have ricochetted, wounding the other in the face and knee. In consequence of these frequent cases of careless handling of firearms the purchase of new guns has been temporarily restricted in the district
   The rubber garden planting craze is still as strong as over, some 51 permits were issued, these mostly for planting in very poor and exhausted soil, which fact does not appear in any way to be a deterrent.
   The laying of Bau Bazaar new water main was completed and the supply of water to all the shophouses is now ample and much appreciated by the occupants.
   Mr. Voon Kon Siong of Paku obtained permission to run a Trojan lorry for the purpose of collecting scrap rubber from outlying gardens and bringing to his new power-mill for treatment.
   Dr. K. B. Edwards, B.Sc. Ph. D, a director of the Oriental Prospecting Syndicate, came from home to inquire into the affairs of the Syndicate, which is operating here, and I regret to report that he has had to advise a cessation of their operations on account of the refractory nature of the ore, and particularly the presence of antimony combined with the extreme patchiness rtf the deposits. The Syndicate has made a very plucky effort to establish itself here and deserves much sympathy in its failure.
      Rainfall amounted to 14’5 inches.
Sadong.
April, 1926.
   The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. G. J. D. Walters, reports as follows:—
   Court.—In the District Court, Sedin was fined $30 for misappropriation of property. Lai Chiung and Tang Yip, Colliery coolies, were sentenced to three and six months respectively under section 335.
   In the Magistrate’s Court, two Dyaks were, fined $5 each for breach of Arms Order; Meteh was fined $5 for assault. Fines for breach of Weights and Measures Order amounted to $31. Fines for breach of Forests Rules amounted to $120.


198
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 2, 1926.
  Prisoners.—The daily average number of prisoners was 96. The prison gang were employed weeding the Railway Road and clearing ditches round the station. I ne co. me gang were employed clearing ditches on the Sageng Road.
  Medical.—132 out-patients were treated in the Dispensary Dyaks 11, Chinese 64, Europeans 4, Sikus 2. Malays 29, Tamils 22. Total 132
  There were 28 admissions to the local hospital, making a total of 41 patients, 13 patients being in hospital at the beginning of the month. 32 were discharged as cured, one died three hours after admission, leaving 16 still under treatment.
  The death which occurred in the hospital was an advanced ease of beriberi.
  Mr. P. Uzaraga; the Assistant Pathologist, arrived
during the month for the hookworm inspection of
die Colliery employees.
  515 specimens of faeces were examined, out of 
which 76 were positive.
  Seventeen arsenical injections were performed for 
yaws. Two aspirations of abcesses were performed
Under local anaesthetic.
  A few cases of wounds, the result of accidents in 
the mine were attended to.
  General.—At the beginning of the month I paid
a visit to the Bugis Malay coconut plantation.
Considerable progress has been made and a great
many local Malays are now living close by. The
padi land has been well drained and good paths
nave been made under the Bugis superintendence.
  The rainfall recorded during the month amounted
to 8'73 inches.
  Visitors to the station during the month were
Mr. N. A. Middleman, Dr. Barnes of the Rockefeller
Foundation, and Mr. W. Cotterill.
  Shipping.—The following vessels entered the
port:—S.S. Sulong three times, s.l. L'Aubaine six
times, m.l Muaratebas three times, s.j. Sri Sadong
four times, m.l. Chaya Mas de Goebilt once, Sri Mas
Igan once.
  Trade.—The owner of the gutta leaf factory has
applied for permission to open a sawmill to be
worked in conjunction with the factory.
  The local trade returns for comparison with last
year are as follows :—
Exports. $44,233 27.108
Imports. $20,590 30,435
April, 1926
„	1925 ...
May, 1926.
  Court.—In the District Court the Orang Kaya and Pengarah of Payu were fined $50 each for attempting to bribe a public servant. The O.K., Bedup, was fined $25 for breach of the Pig Trap Order. The Maringgu Dvnks were fined $25 for tuba fishing in the Ulu Milikin. The Smabang and Sebinting Dyaks were ordered to deposit $50 each with the Government for the spare of one year, over the land under dispute on G. Slingking. They were told to come to a mutual agreement over this land, and the side that causes further trouble will forfeit the $50.
  J. B. Mowe was fined $20 for receiving and converting Government property to his own use.
  In the Magistrate's Court, fines for breach pf Weights and Measures Order amounted to $25; Jin Chong was fined $10 for trailing without a licence; Awang Pun was fined $5 for not turning out to work as a coolie for the Government when ordered.
  Prisoners.—The daily average number of prisoners was 9’23. The prison gang were employed on clearing ditches and weeding paths round the station.
  The coolie gang cleared the ditches to the end of the road in Kampong Kalaka, and started on the Sageng Road.
  Staff.—The mechanic of the m.l. Vava, Takip bin Taha, will lie discharged when a relief can be obtained for overstaying his leave three days, knowing the launch was particularly required at the time, and also for disposing of Government property to his own advantage.
  General. On the 6th, I left the station for the annual collection of taxes, etc , at Tabekang, arriving the following day. Various affairs were attended to. and settled. Accompanied by all concerned, I inspected the land dispute on G. Slingking, between the Smabangs and Sbintings. I also visited a number of Dyak villages up to the source of the righthand branch, returning to Tabekang down the left-hand branch. No further news was obtained of the
escaped prisoner (ex O.K, Temong), but it seems
certain th it he is hiding in the vicinity of Temong
village. On the 22nd I left for Gedong, holding
Court the following day, arriving back at Sadong on
the 24th.
  Haji Rio (Bugis Malay), arrived from Singapore
at the end of the month. He has now applied for
a further 2,000 acres of land at the kuala, making
5,000 acres in all for the coconut plantation. It is
hoped that the surveyors may start on demarcating
the area next month.
  Visitors to the station during the month were
Mrs. Aplin, Captain and Mrs. C. P. Lowe and child,
Messrs P. M. Adams, J. B Archer, W. Cotterill,
C. E. Pascoe and Dr. L. B. Haye
  The rainfall recorded during the month amounted
to 8’01 inches.
  Shipping. The following vessels entered and
cleared the port:—S.L. L'Aubaine four times, s.j.
Sri Sadong three times, s.s. Sulong twice, s.s. Alice
Lorraine twice, Sri Mas Igan twice, m.s. Muara-
tebas once, m.s. Chaya Mas de Goebilt once.
  Trade.—The local trade returns for comparison
with lust year are as follows:—
Imports. Exports.
May, 1926 ...	$36,459	$20,949
          1925 ...	23,274	21,393
June, 1926..
  Court.—In the Magistrate's Court sixteen
Malays were fined $5 each for planting rubber with-
out permits; Ah Pot was fined $15 for breach of
Land Orders ; two Malays, Arip and Godang, were
fined $10.80 for assault. Fines for breach of Forests
Regulations amounted to $25.
  Prisoners.—The daily average number of prisoners
was 8 73. The prison gang was employed on
clearing ditches and weeding paths around the
station.
  The coolie gang cleared ditches on the Lintang
and Sageng Roads.
  Medical.—At the beginning of month Dresser W.
Geikie was relieved by Dresser Jun Hin.
  At the dispensary a total of 92 patients were
treated as follows: — Dyaks 26, Chinese 30, Malays
32, Tamils 3, Ceylonese 1.
  There were 17 admissions to the local hospital,
13 being in the hospital at the beginning of the
month, a total of 30 patients being treated. 13 dis-
charged as cured, two at their own request, one
sent to General Hospital, Kuching, and one died,
13 being in the hospital at the end of the month.
  The death which occurred in the hospital was
that of an old mine coolie from chronic pulmonary
tuberculosis.
  Twenty-nine N.A.B. injections were performed,
for yaws and muli in the dispensary.
  Twenty-three pigs were examined and slaughtered
for sale. A minor operation on an abcess was per-
formed -under freezing with Ethyl, chloide, and
several cases of wounds from the Colliery were
attended to.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. AUGUST 2, 1926.
199
  General.—I was away in Kuching from the 4th 
to 2 st. An application was made by the Captain
China, Peng Swee, to open a Chinese School in the
bazaar.
  At the end of the month the survey of the eastern
boundary of the area occupied by the Bugis Malays
was continued. Mr. Cox arrived to carry out repairs
to the wireless, which broke down during the month.
  The weather during the mouth was extremely
hot, the rainfall recorded being 5'45 inches. Visitors
to the station were Messrs. W. F. de V. Skrine,
E. V. Andreini, J. G. Sampson and C. E. Pascoe.
  Shipping. —The following vessels filtered and
cleared the port:—S.S. Alice Lorraine 5 times, s.l.
L'Aubaine 5 times, s.j. Sri Sadong 3 times, s.s.
Sulong once, Sri Mas Igan once.
  Trade.—The local trade returns, for comparison
with last year, are as follows:—
Imports.	Exports.
      June, 1926	$16,146	$31,536
      June, 1925	13,462	23,505
C. ERMEN,
Acting Divisional Officer.
SADONG COLLIERY.
June, 1926.
  The output, export, local consumption, conversion to coke and coal stock figures for the month were as follows:—
1st June stock balance 
June gross output   nil
1,886.02 tons                                                 Total1,886.02 .,Shipped	... 1,433.10 tons
Consumed by boilers 
   and converted into
   Coke	...	367.16 „1,801.06 „Stock balance   84.16 „  The improved conditions prevailing during the month below ground at the upper seam and No. 9 mines, produced a marked beneficial effect on output.
  No. 8 and the new mines maintained a good average production, and local conditions below ground remained unchanged.
  The erection of a coal chute at the entrance of the old Blacksmiths’ Mine was commenced early in the month. When this is completed a quantity of accumulated coal stock obtained as the result of prospecting the old Buffalo and Blacksmiths’ Mine pillars will be released for export.
  Building sites were marked out in the vicinity of these mines for the early erection of a shop and two coolie lines.
  Mr. S. W. Harris was away on a visit of inspection io Buang Tauar between the 12tb and the 26th.
The rainfall for the mouth was 9'05 inches,
J. W. EVANS,
5o ’ I ’ * *-	Manager.
THIRD DIVISION.
Sibu.
May, 1926.
    Having been appointed as Acting Resident, I
arrived at Sibu on the 8th. Messrs. Archer, Pascoe,
and Dr. Haye returning to the station on the same
day after the races.
    The Acting Divisional Land Officer was busy the
greater part of the month in demarcating the land,
which it has been decided to give to the Foochows
in the ulu Binatang. When this has been completed
there should be no more trouble in this district.
It will cost the Government about $1,300 in
compensation.
     It has been decided to mark out the land in the
Foochow colony behind the existing gardens into
10-acre lots. When the Survey Department can get
ahead in rentising these lots, I see no reason why
the present restriction on Foochow immigrants
should not be withdrawn.
      It was considered that the restriction on all
Chinese immigrants entering the Rejang was not
necessary, so by authority from the Acting Chief
Secretary this was withdrawn with the exception
of Foochow immigrants.
    News was received here that there had been a
"began” in the ulu Entabai and all the Dyaks from
the Julau and Assan were streaking across to that
river. It was said that P. Kana, Jugu and Ujan
were preparing to attack Rimau. I immediately
sent Mr. E. V. Andreini and Abang Enjah, N.O.,
to the Kanowit to investigate and they reported that
the rumour was started hy one Abut of the Second
Division. Then one Saga from this side concocted
a yarn and so two rumours, one coming from up river
and one from down river, made the Dyaks very
jumpy, the actual "began” starting by the inmates
of Jenapi's house in the Entabai seeing smoke in
the jungle which they took for a party of the enemy,
beat a "began" on their tawaks which was taken
up from house to house as far as the Julau. The
smoke seen turned out to be from a party of
pig-hunters. Saga has since been imprisoned for
6 months and some Tunis fined for starting the
scare. P. Ason was fined 2 piculs, though he could
not have prevented the "began,” he took no steps
whatsoever in the matter. He has appealed against
the fine and the matter will be brought before
His Highness the Tuan Muda.
    Abang Sleh, N.O., Belaga, Penghulu Oyong Abun
and other Kayans visited the station. P. Oyong
Abun tendered his resignation. I prevailed on him
to think it over in the meanwhile. He has worked
for 30 years or more and only draws $10 p.m. I
am considering the advisability of applying for an
increase of salary for him and for a Long Service
Decoration.
    Abang Sleh reported that all the tax for 1925 and
1926 had been collected with the exception of the
Punan Busang, which he was going to collect on bis
return.
    I accompanied Mrs. Aplin to Kuching on the 16th
who went down for medical attention for strained
tendons to her arm, the result of a fall, returning
again on the 20th, stopping at Rejang, Sarikei and
Binatang on the way.
    Di. E. F. Lee, D.D., of the Methodist Mission
in Singapore, was on a visit here for a few days.
    There was only one case in the Resident’s Court,
an appeal from the District Court, the appeal being
dismissed.


200
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 2, 1926.
      The District Officer, Mr. J. B. Archer, reports as follows :—
     District Office.—T returned from Kuching on the 8th when the Assistant District Officer reported that nothing of much importance had occurred. On the 12th. owing to rumours concerning the Entabai Dyaks. the Assistant District Officer, accompanied bv Abang Enjah. Native Officer, left for the Kanowit district on the 12th, and did not return until the 31st. He visited the affected areas and came down Ngemah. A report on his trip is submitted under separate cover.
     During the month the prohibition on Kheh and Cantonese immigrants was taken off and permits were given to trustworthy towkays to import a limited number of men for work on their gardens. A number of Henghuas, who had actually arrived I in Singapore, were allowed to enter the State. Large numbers of Foochow Chinese are leaving Sibu by every Singapore steamer mostly bound for China. Many of these are expected to return again. On the last few trips the average number returning was 300 per ship. On the 16th the Acting Resident accompanied Mrs. Aplin to Kuching in s.l. Chamois and returned on 21st. The body of an unknown Chinese male was found floating in the river near Bukit Lima on 14th. An inquest was held and a verdict of found drowning was returned; all efforts to identify the man have so far failed. On the 18th the Court Writer of Sarikei, Kim Chai, was relieved by Ah Khoon. the former returning to Sibu for duty in the District Office. Mr. J. C. Swayne, District Officer of Lower Rejang, arrived on 16th in s.l. Mermaid and returned to Rejang on the 19th. Acting on instructions from Kuching, and by the courtesy of Mr. Raynham of Air Survey Company, I was flown over part of the Kanowit district with the object of reassuring the Dyaks there. We flew over Nanga Julau and on to the Entabai, returning via the main Kanowit river. The flight, in which T was accompanied by E. de Rozario of Public Works Department, was most interesting and sketches were made of certain parts of the country indicating the courses of the stream.
   Abang Sleh, Native Officer of Belaga, arrived during the month with three Javanese who had arrived in Belaga in an exhausted state. They were in possession of an automatic pistol but their ammunition had been exhausted shooting animals for food. They gave unsatisfactory replies to questions and later a letter was received from the Controleur of Long Nawang N.I. reporting the escape of three Javanese prisoners from that station. These proved to be the wanted men and they will he sent back after serving a sentence of 3 months each in Sibu for crossing the frontier without a passport and carrying firearms without a licence.
   Proclamation Day was observed as a holiday and police sports were held in the afternoon. The Sibu Municipal Board held two meetings and matters concerning new buildings were discussed. Temporary resolutions were passed with regard to rent restriction and it has been decided to build two slaughter-houses. Six new telephones were installed in Sibu and the numbers rearranged. Captain C. P. Lowe arrived on 29th and inquired into a few Public Works Department matters. The Customs Department wish to extend their buildings at Binatang but cannot do so until the Forest Department remove their temporary checking station there. A new site has been allotted to the Forest Department who have got sanction for the construction of a permanent station. It is to be
hoped that the Forest Department will start moving soon as not only does the delay impede the Customs Department but the present appearance of the checking station is deplorable.
  Abang Aboi, Native Officer of Kapit, arrived in Sibu on 29th with some Chinese who had been fighting in Kapit bazaar. Abang Latip, Native Officer, was granted leave and until he returns Hadji Gapor, Native Officer, is doing duty in Kanowit. Hadji Ahmat is Acting Tua Kampong of Kampong Tengah Sibu vice Hadji Gapor.
  Judicial—District Court.—The following persons were sentenced to terms of imprisonment :—Lau Ngai Tong 1 ½ years for theft; Ungka alias Naga one year for cheating under section 417; Tiang Kuang Kung six months for theft; Lim Pong Fu six months for theft; Ting Hing Ing three months for theft; Lau Tong Hing three months for theft; Ali alias Bedjo, Serali alias Saliman and Mejair alias Sarudin three months each for being in possession of an automatic pistol without a licence and entering Sarawak territory without a passport; Narudin three months for receiving stolen property under section 411; P.C. Kho Jah Lee one month for committing an affray under section 160; Ngui Chui Tieh two weeks for the same offence; Hadji Sleh one week for receiving stolen property and Tang King Tieh one week for abusing the police.
  Police.—A number of Civil cases came before the Court and several persons were fined for contravention of Government Orders. A lengthy land case between Lai Smail and Hadji Bugam resulted in the latter gaining the verdict. As usual applications to eject tenants occupied a considerable amount of the Court’s time. Hwong Shing, a Kheh, was fined $25 for breach of the passport regulations. The Sibu Municipal Board prosecuted in a number of cases mostly against occupiers of insanitary houses within the Municipal area.
  Magistrate’s and Police Court.—The usual number of cases were brought up.
  Fines and fees (excluding sub-stations) amounted to $862.41, and 92 deeds were registered in the Sibu Court.
  Public Works Department.—Work was continued on the following :—(1) Clerks' quarters (4) Sibu, (ii) Clerks’ quarters (2) Binatang, (iii) Clerks’ quarters (2) Sarikei, (iv) Forest rangers’ bungalow, Sibu, (v) Survey coolies quarters, Sibu, (vi) Two new European bungalows, Sibu, (vii) Two hospital wards, Sibu, (viii) Sibu bazaar drains, and (ix) New District Office. Sibu. Sibu bungalow No. IV. was completed and is ready for occupation unfurnished. Contracts were signed for (i) Upkeep of Lanang Road, (ii) Upkeep of Binatang Road, (iii) Upkeep of Sarikei Road. Coolies and prison labour was employed as usual. Carpenters were employed on the usual repairs and alterations to Government buildings and also in fashioning two masts for s.l. Chamois. E. de Rozario visited Binatang and Sarikei to inspect work there.
  Police.—The usual parades were carried out during the month. Four recruits joined as constables and one ex Ranger joined as bugler corporal. Two men were sentenced to terms of imprisonment by a Civil Court and were dismissed the service. Sergeant- Major Salleh returned after 28 days' training in Kuching. The strength of the force at the end of the month was 84.
  Prison.—15 men were admitted and 9 discharged. Of these Foochows numbered 6 and 5 respectively. At the end of the month 57 men remained in the prison. Four men were punished for breach of prison discipline.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 2, 1926.	201 
"The Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. V. Andreini, reports ns follows :—
  I left Sibu on the 12th, accompanied by Abang Enjah, Native Officer, arriving at Kanowit at 6.30 p.m. where I spent the night.
  I left Kanowit at 10 a.m. on the 13th and spent the night of 13th at Sandom's house.
  The 14th and 15th were spent travelling and I arrived at Bunya’s house on the 16th where Bunya totally denied that he had told anyone that Penghulu Kana was on the warpath. I then proceeded to Penghulu Assun's house where I spent two nights collecting the Tuai and investigated the source of the rumours and their consequences. It appears that one Abut of S. Langit in the Second Division arrived at Empili’s house also Second Division with 14 followers armed with spears and shields and told Empili that Penghulu Kana had asked to go on the warpath; the rumour spread round and three days later one Jenapi who lives in a small house in S. Metan in Third Division saw smoke which he thought was that of a "bala” and ran with his family in panic to Empili’s house the people of whom bent the “tawaks” and started “tawaks” going in Ulu Julau and surrounding country. Scouting parties then went out including one of 41 men under Garen and thoroughly searched the surrounding country and returned thoroughly disappointed. I sent Empili’s son Banyoi overland with a letter to the Resident Second Division concerning those in the Second Division and have brought those concerned on this side down to be dealt with here.
  I spent the 19th and 20th visiting houses up the Entabai as far as Endu's house in the Klentong and went up the Klentong as far as Bukit Balking.
  On the 21st I returned down river spending the night at Mnagi's house and following day proceeding up the Kanowit to Juing's house where several cases up for hearing including one of incest which has been outstanding since 1923. Witnesses were not available and it had to be again postponed but all people concerned will be brought down by Juing within one month.
  Scouting parties had also been out in this river on hearing news from Entabai.
  On the 23rd I visited the Panchu and on the 24th I walked across country to the Mujok sending Abang Enjah back by boat to Sibu. I spent the night at Asseng’s house which is one of the few really longhouses remaining in the district. Most them being from 2—5 doors only.
  On the 25th I proceeded up the Mujok by boat visiting Metai, Igol, and Banat's houses en route and spent the night at the mouth of the Sugai.
  The 26th was spent in boating up the Mujok and walking when the boat would get no farther, the night being spent in a shelter in Ulu Mujok.
  On the 27th I walked across hills to the source of the Ngemah, spending the night in a shelter at junction of S. Engkabang and Ngemah.
  The next morning I got boats and went down river visiting all the houses en route and arrived at Penghulu Merenggai's house the same evening. The people here are all split up in small houses and there are seven houses above Penghulu Merenggai on the main stream and many in small side streams. I have brought Penghulu Merenggai down with me to consult with you on the distribution of these houses and other matters concerning the Ngemah.
  I fined several tuai for disobedience of penghulu’s orders and held several minor cases, staying two days at Penghulu Merenggai’s house where I collected after some difficulty most of the tuai.
  I came down the Ngemah visiting all the houses on the main stream and arrived at the mouth on the 31st where s.l. Chamois met me.
  I have brought Penghulu Assun as well Merenggai to talk over with you the various points: arising out of my visit.
  The padi crop has varied, most of the up-river' padi being very good.
  There is very little rubber planted as yet in th1 ulus and that planted down river is not registered. 
  Health appears to have been good and no trace of any smallpox.
  The Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. L. B. Haye, reports as follows :—
  The number of in-patients treated at hospital- during May was 78.
  There were 806 out-patient attendances, being an| average of 26.00 daily, 129 arsenical injections were: given. Seven deaths occurred at hospital during, the month :—One from extreme debility following two years' dysentery, two from amoebic dysentery, three from typhoid, one from pneumonia. Sixteen, operations were performed, four requiring a general anaesthetic. One inquest was held on a Dyak who died suddenly from acute appendicitis on s.s.. Sarawak.	;
  During the month 2 lepers were sent down to Kuching leper camp. 514 persons were vaccinated, mainly off ships.
  During the month the number of cases of typhoid have appreciably increased. 10 having occurred with 3 deaths; all steps are being taken to prevent any spread, but with the primitive sanitary conditions, any prophylactic measures must of necessity be of an extremely simple nature.
  The European population continues to maintain their past standard of good health.
  The Acting Divisional Land Officer, Mr. R. H. Miller-Hallett, reports as follows :—
  I was still in Ulu Mador at commencement of the month, returning to Sibu on the 4th. I remained in Sibu until the 14th when I left in the Jean visiting Sarikei where I rectified some slight clerical errors, and then returned to Ulu Mador where I issued occupation tickets to the Chinese gardeners and laid down definite boundaries between Chinese and Dyaks.
  The Tulai Dyaks expressed themselves ns dissatisfied but I considered that there is no real hardship. They complain that they have no land left to grow padi, but are rapidly planting their padi fields up with rubber.
  The boundary rentises were completed during the, month, and I gave permission to the Chinese to extend their clearings up to them and on my return on the 27th 1 left Abang Ismawi to complete the survey of the whole area.
  I found the Chinese very willing to help in furnishing coolies for cutting the various rentises, which work I found them to do very efficiently. 
  On the 30th I left for Matu in the m.l. Jean and was away at the end of the month.
  There is nothing of interest to report on in. connection with the office work, except that, with the aid of Mr. Hoover. T arranged with the Chinese headmen to provide coolies for rentis cutting behind Engkilo. Work was held up pending examination, of the mosaic made by the Air Survey Company, to, determine the best position for this rentis.
  The District Officer of Lower Rejang, Mr. J. C. Swayne, reports as follows :—	
  Proclamation Day, the 26th, was observed as a public holiday.


202
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 2, 1926.
      Court — The Island Trading Company brought proceedings against one of their employees for a criminal breach of trust and against another for theft and absconding under advances; both were sentenced to terms of imprisonment. The latter, Badas, a Mukah man, escaped a few days later and was re-arrested the same night at Jerijeh; he received the usual addition to his sentence. At Matu Hadji Yahya, who for some years has defied the orders of the Native Court, was sent to prison. At Daro, with the assistance of Mr. McLeod of the Forestry Department, 1 was able to settle a number of summonses which had been outstanding for some thne for non-payment of forestry dues.
  I returned from Matu to Rejang on the 5th and was again there on the 28th. The Matu bazaar road has now been cleared and is being repaired by kampong labour. This road, a straight line of nearly two miles through sago swamp, has been in existence for a great number of years and if it is allowed to disappear one of the few amenities of the station will be lost. The Government buildings have now been whitewashed and all grass in the compound cut. I hope to receive a consignment of timber from Tatau next month, when work will be started on new police and clerks’ quarters at the new station. In the meanwhile preparations are being made to move into the new Court House. A certain number of books, damaged by white ants and damp, have been burnt, but all books of record, some of which date back to 1861, have as far as possible been preserved.
     The Acting Resident of the Third Division on bis way back from Kuching spent a day here and discussed various matters.
  At Bruit I noticed the "semangka” crop was doing well and a large export trade was being done, an average wholesale price at the beginning of the month was $18 a hundred.
  The Right Reverend Bishop and Mrs. Danson on their way to Kuching landed for a few hours while S.S. Sulong was in port.
  Prisoners for the month averaged four and have been employed on the upkeep of the station.
    The Court Writer of Kapit reports as follows :—
  General.—Mr. H. Jacques, Divisional Treasurer, arrived by s.l. Chamois on the 11th instant to audit the station accounts. He returned to Sibu on the 18th instant. The sum of $10,000 was remitted to Sibu Treasury. Abang Aboi, NO., visited the river Sut from 11th instant to 15th instant in order to hear sundry outstanding cases. Abang Sleh, N.O., Belaga. arrived on the 10th instant and handed in the Government cash, also brought down three escaped prisoners from Long Nawang. These prisoners were sent down to Sibu. On the 20th instant a youth named Chua Teck Swee, who was bathing in the S. Kapit, was taken by a crocodile; the reptile was caught 11 feet long and duly destroyed. The Rev. Father of Kanowit visited the Nanga Pila during the month. Awi. apprentice operator, returned to headquarters on the 28th instant owing to ill-health. During the month Penghulu Ovong Abun from Belaga visited the station. A Chinese theatre arrived from Singapore on the 11th having been engaged by the local Chinese here to give performances for a month.
  Court.— There were very few cases brought before the Court during the month. Fines and fees Amounted to $481.72.
  Public Works.—The contractor has completed the frame of the clerk s quarters and is now preparing the planks for the walls and floor.
  Prison.—The prison gang averaged 30 during the month, was employed on the upkeep of the roads, levelling the site for the new clerk’s quarters and clearing the cattle ground.
  Dairy Farm.—The herd numbered sixteen head and Belaga fifteen.
  Sarawak Rangers.—The usual drill and fatigues were carried out.
  Trade and Shipping.—During the month the s.s. Sarawak, m.l. Chantak made three trips each, m.l. Tama two trips, and s.l. Chamois, m.l. Jean, Dayanq Hasiah, Kong Hao Foh, Lim Kong Thai one trip each.
Exports for the month
Plantation rubber 
India rubber 
Gutta percha 
Illipe nuts 
Damar daging
Rottan Sega No. 1 ...
Rottan Tot ,, 2 
Rottan Letek
                            were as follows :—
                                  Piculs.              $
132.03	10,010.25
3.33	100.00
     7.94	1,326.80
4.03	50.00
164.12	3,995.00
131.69	915.00
1,034.93	6,236.00
14.00	142.00
  Total Foreign Import and Export Trade Returns
for May :—
Imports. Exports.
Sibu
Kapit
Kanowit
Binatang
Sarikei
Rejang
$449,378 10,365
3,010 44.562 19.026
9,896
$542,124 58.537 26.238 48.762 56.915 42.014
$536,237	$774,590
  Total Coasting Import and Export Trade Returns
for May :—
Imports.   Exports.Sibu$ 51.467$28,391Kapit3.1522,552Kanowit2.47030Binatang13,38610,016Sarikei5,1511,905Rejang9,240     9,552Matu21,09223,158Daro4.671     8,299$110,629   $83,903Weight of Export for May, 1926 :—
Damar daging	piculs 164.22
     Gutta jelutong	...	„	] ,728.41
     Plantation rubber	...	6,576.19
     Illipe nuts	...	,,	17.62
     Pepper ...	...	88.45
     Rottan sega	...	,,	200.59
     Rottan tot		 1,097.02
     Raw sago	... koyans 242J
     Sago flour	... piculs 4,089.40
H. D. APLIN.
Acting Resident Third Division.
FOURTH DIVISION.
Miri.
May, 1926.
  Court.—With the exception of one case of theft, in which the accused was sentenced to two years* rigorous imprisonment, there were only the usual number of petty cases for hearing. A Singapore Chinese who had landed here under a landing


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 2, 192(5.
203
       General.—Following Court proceedings between
a European and a Hylam servant, all the Hylams
came out on strike on the 12th. Every effort was
made to induce them to return to work and I believe
the great majority were anxious to do so but were
prevented by a few agitators. On the 14th I heard
that efforts were being made to stir up the coolies
and was compelled to take steps to put an end to
the strike.
      At noon on the 15th all Hylam servants found in
the bazaar area were arrested and transferred to
s.s. Min in the roads. In all about 100 were taken.
      On the following morning I boarded the Min and
interviewed the men under arrest. Eventually 58
men were sent to Singapore, the balance returning
to their employers’ bungalows. No resistance was
offered to the Police.
     Accompanied by Messrs. Swayne and Woodward
I left for Baram on the 27th and was still away at
the end of the month. "
     The Pawn Farmer, who holds the Monopolv up to
the end of 1926, informed me that he found his
capital insufficient and was unable to carry on the
business. Permission was obtained for him to sub-
let the farm, he remaining responsible for all pay-
ments to Government.
      Public Works.—The rebuilding of Police Barracks,
Clerks’ and Native Officers’ bungalows at Niah is
proceeding satisfactorily, the former building being
completed.
     The Commissioner of Public Works inspected the
Reservoir at Miri and recommended the erection of
two small subsidiary dams further upstream. This
work has been taken in hand.
      A contract was given for another block of clerks’
quarters, and these are in course of const) iiction.
The preparation of limber for the new Residency
was started during the. mm lb. The timber con-
tractors having brought their prices down to a more
 reasonable level, a huge contract for planks, etc.,
was placed.
       The bazaar street-lighting contract was renewed
 at a lower rate for the following six months.
      One hundred thousand belian attaps were
received from Bintulu.
      Medical.—A vaccinator was sent np from Kuching,
and left lor Niah. Suai and Sibuti on the 3rd. At
Sibuti 121 persons were vaccinated and 222 at Niah
and Suai.
      On the 17th instant Suai and Niah rivers were
opened to traders and others as there had been no
fresh cases of smallpox for a month.
   Sibuti was still infected and a strict quarantine
was maintained.
permit belonging to another man was given the 
option of returning by the next boat or of serving
a term of imprisonment. As he failed to leave he is
serving his term in jail.
   In the Resident’s Court an appeal from the
District Court was upheld.
   Medical.—On the 13th of the month a case of
smallpox was reported from Sibuti and on the 22nd
the dresser returned from there reporting several
cases. There are still 9 cases isolated at the mouth
of the Suai River, but no fresh cases have been
reported to date. Niah is still uninfected. Pre-
cautions have been taken to prevent communication
by land between Sibuti and Miri or the adjoining 
villages.
   Public Works.—A quantity of belian has been
brought from both Niah and Sibuti during the month
and more is being brought. An order has been
placed at Bintulu for a quantity of belian attaps.
   The pork market was completed and is now in
use, the old building having been demolished. The
last block of barracks was also completed. The
reservoir was again in use early in the month after
cleaning. Work was started on new quarters for
wireless operators.
   The site for the new residency was partially
cleared. The Company is undertaking work to
prevent further erosion of the river bank.
   General.—Accompanied by The Bishop of Labium
and Sarawak and Mrs. Danson 1 paid a flying visit
to Niah for three days from the 13th to the 15th.
The caves were visited on the 14th. The Acting
District Officer visited Niah and Sibuti on the 18th
taking down the dresser. During his visit it was
arranged that Haji Dulgapar should retire and that
his place should be taken by bis son, who has assisted
him for some time.
   Two new clerks arrived from Kuching during the
month, one of them announcing his intention
of returning to Singapore the day he arrived.
   Mr. Woodward returned to Baram on the 1st |
instant. Mr. Dick returned from Kuching on the
12th and left for Baram on the 16th.
   The Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak and Mrs.
Danson arrived from the north by s.s. Deli on the 
7th and left for Kuching on the 19th.
   Major E. V. Benjamin, General Manager of
Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, left Miri on the 28th.
   The state of Major Benjamin’s health unfor-
tunately does not permit his remaining longer in the
tropics and, acting under medical advice, he has
returned to England to take up another appointment.
June, 1926.
   Court.—The Acting District Officer, left for
Kuching on 1st instant, and I took over his Court
work until the 8th, when Mr. Woodwar I arrived
from Baram and continued to carry out the duties
of the Acting District Officer until the 21st.
   There were no cases of any great importance
An inquest was held on the 9th instant, a verdict of
suicide being brought in.
Baram,
May, 1926.
The Acting District Officer of Baram, reports as
follows.—
    Court.—Not manv cases came up during the
month and none call for special comment. Fines
and fees amounted to $1,030.43.


204
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 2, 1926.
  General.—Mr. Woodward returned from Miri on
the 1st. A prisoner by name Ab Thai tried to
commit suicide on the 2nd by inflicting 3 knife
wounds in the chest. These were not serious
wounds, nevertheless he died on the 15th.
  Badindang, Dyak, who was wounded by John in
the amok case reported in February, died at Miri
Hospital from the effects of his wounds. 1 returned
front Kuching on the 16th instant. Galati, upriver
agent, came down during the month consequence
of having cut his foot rather badly while examining
some birdsnest caves at Long Palai.
  Travelling.—Mr. Woodward left on the 19th,
accompanied by Tuanku Drahman, for the Tinjar
and returned on the 28th.
  Mr. Woodward reports that there were 50 deaths
front smallpox in the Tinjar during the second
epidemic. All the victims were people who had
previously refused vaccination, while people who
had been vaccinated only caught the disease in a
mild form. The death roll is to be regretted but
it has proved to the Kayans the efficacy of vac-
cination.
  I left on the 31st for Long Palai. accompanied by
Wan Mohamat, Native Office, and Galau, whose
foot was cured.
   Medical and Health.—Patients treated during the
month were, in-patient one. out-patients 86. and
38 N.A.B. injections were given. It is difficult to
get the Chinese to keep their bazaar clean in spile
of regular inspections, nevertheless there is a slight
improvement which it is hoped will continue.
   Rainfall during the month was 4.08 inches.
   P.W.D.—The prison gang, averaging 26.9 men
per day. were employed mainly on the Lubok
Nibong Road, as it has not been possible to get any-
one to put in reasonable tenders for this work.
   TVtrefcM and Telegraphs.—The telephone line
between here and Bakong has been down most of
the month, as has the Bakong-Miri line. The
wireless station has been kept busy, 176 messages
were received and 100 despatched.
   Trade and Shipping.—The Sarawak Steamship
Company have now come to an arrangement with
the local Chinese and the Gladys made three trips
during the month, and Kim Chin Seng one, they
both left fully loaded every time, the main exports
being para rubber and jelutong. The Trade figures
are as follows :—
June, 1926.
Court—Not very many cases in Court during the
month. Mandor S. Mahmoud was sentenced Hi four
months for criminal bieach of trust. No other cases
called fur comment.
General.—I was at Long Palai at the beginning
of the month. New birds’-nest cave permits were
issued to replace out-of-date ones and a proper re-,
gister of caves made. There me well over two
hundred caves registered but quite a number are
actually only part of bigger caves. The caves were
opened on the 6lh for fifteen days, but it is hoped
that in future it will not be necessary to open the
caves for more than five or six days. I returned to.
Baram on the 7th. Mr. Woodward left for Miri on
the 8th where he has been doing duty for most of
the month. News was received on the 10th of the
death of the Chief Secretary, Mr. J. C. Moulton,
and the flag was flown at half mast for the rest of
the day. I went to Bakong on the 17th and to
Kuala Nyabor the following day where Dyaks paid
in their tax. I returned here on the 20th. Alfred
Mowe, ex Government Clerk on pension, launched
his motor bandong on the 24th and it left for Miri
on the 29th. A local Chinaman has put an Evint tide
outboard motor in a boat and plys between Baram
and Lubok Nibong. His venture seems to be a
success, so far. The Resident, accompanied by Mr.
J. C Swayne and Mr. E. M. Woodward, arrived on
the 28th.
   Medical and Health.— Patients treated during the
month were in-patients two. out-patients seventy-
four, and there were thirteen N.A.B. injections given.
There has been a great improvement in the general
cleanliness of the bazaar.
   The rainfall recorded for the 'month was 3’06
inches.
   P.W.D.—The prison gang have been employed on
general clearing around the station. A contract
was made for deepening part of the Lubok Nibong
ditch.
- Wireless and Telephones—One hundred and sixty-
five messages were received and eighty-eight messages
despatched by the wireless station. The Baram-
Bakong line has given a lot of trouble but the Dyaks
started clearing the line at the end of the month
and, when done, communication should be very
much better.
    Trade and Shipping.—The s.s. Gladys made one
trip only during the month. Trade returns are as
follows:—
Imports.	Exports.
$ 28,940	$ 46,069
Imports.
$112,624Exports.
$168,687Brought forward...	56,535  138,675Total to date... $169,159   $307,362 Total, 1925...	137,439  305,199Brought forward162,159307,360'Total to date198,099353,429  ,, „ 1925192,461378,159        H. L. OWEN.
Resident Fourth Division.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 2, 1926.
205
FIFTH DIVISION.
Limbang.
June, 1926.
   Court. There are no Resident's Court cases during the month.
   In the District Court Panjang (prisoner) was sentenced to one year’s further R.I. and eighteen cuts with the rottan for escaping from custody.
   Hong Seng Chan entered a successful claim for $460.40 and costs against Ang Kun Tai. A case of alleged buffalo theft was dismissed.
   Magistrate’s Court.—Mohamat was fined $5 or in default ten days’ R.I. for travelling from Brunei territory without a pass. Several shopkeepers were summoned under section 290 I.P.C. for not keeping their premises reasonably clean. One, Ah Guan, was fined $5, and others were cautioned as first offenders. Sulan (Dyak, f.) summoned Jambin (Dyak) for desertion. The latter was ordered to return to his wife or to pay her $5 per month.
   Nine Civil claims amounting to a total of $239 were dealt with. A case of merchandise was reported stolen from the Auby, and it is suspected that it was unloaded here, in error, and taken from the wharf. Inquiries are being made, but nothing has as yet transpired as to its whereabouts.
   Public Works.—The Commissioner of Public Works arrived on the 3rd in connection with the installation of the new water supply, and inspected the reservoir site and the area where the pipe is to belaid.
   On Captain Lowe's advice two contracts were drawn up and completed by the Resident. One for the erection of a dam at Bukit Hitam. and another for the unloading and distribution of the piping and material when they arrive.
   Prisoners. —Averaged 2204 during the month, and were employed on the pipe-line rentis, making temporary bridges, etc., clearing the reservoir area and grading the track for the pipe. They also carried materials for the school-house and Residency contracts and cleaned out the bazaar drains which had got foul.
   The road coolies were also employed on the pipeline rentis, grading the track, and clearing the reservoir area.
   The contractor started work on the dam on the 25th. Having satisfactorily put in the foundations, he is about to put in the outlet pipe and the penstock, but owing to heavy rain each night since the 26th he is at present held up.
   The other Government contracts, school-house, clerks’ quarters, etc., appear to be progressing.
   Treasury.—Mr. Cotterill, who arrived on 13th May to inspect the working of the new system, returned to Kuching on the 7th.
   Prison.—Panjang escaped from custody on 12th  while working on Sungei Poyan Road, but was recaptured at Gantang’s house Lubok on 15th. He was sent to Kuching on the 27th to complete his  sentence there, as this is not the first time he has run away.
   Rations.—Since orders for increased prison rations came into force all prison supplies and tobacco have been obtained on contract, and the 21 cents fish money previously supplied to each man per week has been stopped. A vegetable garden is worked by  the prisoners to supplement rations.
   The following figures show the expenditure under the old and new system :—
     Old rations $4.08 per man per month
     New rations ...	6.19	„	„
   Travelling.—I accompanied the Resident and Mrs. Boult to Brooketon on the 12th, returning to Limbang in the Sylvia on the 14th.
   Health.—There were 25 cases of fever treated at the hospital during the month and several rangers, policemen and prisoners were admitted. Two rangers’ children died of fever. There was a great hick of drinking water, the rainfall recorded being 6'11 inches.
   The total number of patients treated during the month was 92. One died (from the effects of opium) in hospital, ten were admitted to hospital, twelve discharged from hospital.
   Monopolies.--About the 23rd opium stocks got  very low, and it was necessary to wire for replenishment.
   General.—Captain and Mrs. C. P. Low arrived on the 3rd and stayed till the 10th when they returned to Kuching via Labuan and Miri.
   Mr. Pollard spent the night of the 6th hereon his way down to Kuching.
   H.H.M.Y. Maimuna entered the river on the20th with Mr. J. A. H. Hardie, Commissioner of Trade and Customs. Mr. Pollard, on his way back to Lawas, and Mr. Harris, of Sadong mine, on board.
   Mr. Harris paid a visit of inspection to the Buang Tawar oil depot in the Sylvia, and returned to Sadong in the Maimuna the following day.
  I have since heard from the mandor at Buang Tawar that there has been a further fall owing to rain, and that no oil is forthcoming at present.
   Mr. Pollard also returned to Lawas the next morning in the Sylvia, and Mr. Hardie stayed here until the 24th when he proceeded to Lawas in the Sulong on a tour of inspection.
   The Resident and Mrs. Boult left for Labuan on short leave. It is understood that the Resident intends to return on or about August 5tb.
   Shipping and Trade.—Seventy-seven buffaloes were shipped to Kuching and nine to Sibu during the month.


206
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 2, 1926.
  Shipping:—(Inward), S.S. Auby mode two trips from Singapore via Kuching; S.S. Sulong made two trips from Kuching via various Sarawak Ports ; S.S. Kwong Yick made four trips from Labuan via Brunei; S.S. Peter Duff made two trips from Labuan via Brunei.  Below are the Trade Returns:—   ExportsImports.    Foreign$ 24,599$ 21,980    Coasting    14,855   14,481    39,454   36,461    B’forward    150,815  157,096    Total to date ...    190,269  193,557    1925    152,363  123,793    	Lawas and Trusan.April, 1926.   Mr. E. S. Holl, Director of Agriculture, and
Mr. J. G. Andersen from Limbang visited Lawas on
6th. The following day we visited Si Koh’s planta-
tion at Bukit Bambangan Si Koh s ems to have
good ideas but is at present handicapped by lack of
capital.
   Messrs. Holl and Anderson sailed again in the
Sulung on 8th.
   On 18th I walked to Trusan where I held Court,
going down to Sundar on 19th. Here I received a
letter from the Resident telling me of His Highness
visit so I left for Lawas via Sualai the same night.
   Mr. Anderson came over again in Sylvia on the28th
to accompany me to Labuan. We left on the evening
of 29th doing the journey by moonlight. I was still
away at the end of the month.
   During the month I received a message from
Limbang informing me of a reported murder in the
 ulu Padas and instructing me to render what assis-
tance I could. Jala. Second Native Officer, and two
 Rangers accordingly left for the ulu Trusan to make
inquiries and to bring dawn any new arrivals from
 B.N.B.
	Prisoners—The prison gang, averaging ten men,
was employed clearing the engkudok on the padang
 and in the general upkeep of the station.
   Public Works.—The contract for the Customs
Officers Quarters at Lawas was signed by Wong
Chun and the work put in hand at once. Wong
Chun is willing to take up the contracts for the
buildings at Sundar and Awat-Awat but as he has
not sufficient men to work on more than one building
at a time I am trying to find someone else.
   Agriculture.—The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Es-
tates, Ltd., exported 29,695 lbs. of dry rubber to
Labuan during the month.
   Rainfall.—The drought has broken, the rainfall
recorded being as under :—
         Lawas	...	14’74	inches
         Lawas Estate ... 17'60	,,
         Trusan ... 18’35	„
  Court-—There was very little Court work at
Lawas during the month. A Chinese coolie named
Chaw See was sentenced to six months’ R.I. under
section 428 for beating a dog with a changkol. The
dog had to be destroyed. Ah Shoon and Liow Sin
were sentenced to six months and three months
respectively for theft of fowls. A large number of
Kadayans from the Merapok district were summon-
ed and warned for going over the border without
passes. At Trusan Lun Sakai received three
months for contempt of Court and Badus six
months for theft.
  Travelling.—His Highness the Rajah, accompani-
ed by Dayang Leonora, the Resident Fifth Division
and Mrs. Boult, visited Lawas on 24th, arriving at
5 p.m. in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna. AU the principal
inhabitants were assembled to greet His Highness,
among those present being Datu Pengiran Haji
Matusin, Native Officer, Lawas, Datu Pengiran
Mahomat, Native Officer, Trusan, Abang Hamdan,
Native Officer, Sundar, Haji Samat, Tua Kampong
Melipat, and Maripah Tai and Lakai Ballang,
Muruts.
  The following day His Highness and party, accompanied by the Native Officers, visited the estate, being shown round by the Manager, Mr. G. F. W. Gifford. His Highness returned to Lawas in the afternoon. On 26th His Highness the Rajah and party sailed at 9 a.m. direct for Bintulu.
  I visited Merapok from 1st to 3rd. Whilst there I held Court and checked the books. Mr. Cook came up on 2nd to show me the land be is thinking of applying for in the ulu Merapok.
Shipping.—S.S. Sulong called once for timber; s.l. Peter Duff called once at the Kuala and s.l. Kwong Yick made one trip; the estate's new motor launch Edmee arrived on the 12th and made four trips to Labuan during the month; m.l. Sylvia broke down at the Kuala on her way back to Limbang on 11th. She remained here until spare parts arrived, returning to Limbang on 27th. On 20th the Saripah broke down off Tanjong Sapu on her way to Limbang, but was sailed in to Awat-Awat.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 2, 1926.
207 ?
She left again on the 23rd but again broke down. Having drifted to Punang before repairs could be effected she came back to Lawas. A new magneto bus been ordered and when this arrives I hope that there will be no more engine trouble.
   General.— Mr. S, L. Strike of the Lawes (Sarawak) Rubber Estates. Ltd., left for Labuan on 8th. having been transferred to the estate recently acquired by the Company in B.N.B. Mr. Bruce-Porter, assistant, arrived at La was on 30th.
   Trade.—The trade returns for the month are as follows:—
FOREIGN.
Lawas:—   Imports.   Exports.April, 1926.. $20,780$28,300April, 1925     9,85039,194TrusanApril, 1926.. $ 7,929   $13,447April, 1925     4,1505,924COASTING.
Lawas:—Imports.Exports.April, 1926.. $ 1,632$ 4,029April, 1925       284849     Trusan:—
    April, 1926	... $ 1,046	$ 1,225
    April, 1925	...	313	688
May, 1926.
   Court.—In the District Court a case of cheating was dismissed. In the Magistrate's Court three men were fined for working jelutong in the Belansat Forest Reserve and Chin Ah Chong was sentenced to fourteen days for travelling without a pass. At Sundar a number of persons were hued for not keeping the fences round their buffalo alaman in proper repair.
   Travelling.—Accompanied by Lieutenant T. E. Halsey, R.N., of H.M.S. Hawkins. I returned from Labuan on the morning of 2nd, Lieutenant Halsey going back again late the same night. On the 4th I accompanied Mr. Anderson to Limbang to go through the opium books with the book-keeper. I returned the following day. On 10th I again went over to Limbang for one night. On 18th I walked over to Trusan to meet Mr. Cotterill. On 20th we went down to Sundar and on 21st came on to Lawns by launch. Mr. Cotterill returned to Limbang on 22tid.
   Jala returned from ulu Trusan on 12th and reported that he could obtain no news of the reported murder and that he could find no trace of Musig, wanted by the B.N.B Government.
   Prisoners.—The average number of prisoners during the month was ten. They were occupied in repairing the bridge at the first mile and on the new ulu Siloateng biidge.
    Public Works.—The contractor, Wong Chun, signed contracts for the Customs at Awat-Awat and Kuala Trusan. Carpenter Kow Nui came over during the month for work in this district. He will repair the jail and clerk’s quarters as soon as the necessary materials can be got together. Meanwhile he is working on the Siloateng bridge. During the month the Muruts delivered hard wood posts and planks for repairing bridges. Hitam has undertaken to repair eight bridges on the Trusan road. Hassan signed a contract to deliver seventy Ipil logs at the Vamco Timber Company's mill at Kayangaran. These will be sawn into planks and used for repairing the jail.
    Agriculture.—Haji Taip has applied for sixty acres of land at Ingretin for planting coconuts. He tells me that five other Banjars wish to come in to take up land there. The new Melipat road will render this district easily accessible from Lawas.
    The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Ltd., exported $28,823 tbs. of dry rubber to Labuan.
Rainfall.—The rainfall recorded	was	as under:—
      Lawas	...	19‘23	inches
      Lawas Estate	...	11’57	„
      Trusan	...	18'37	,,
    Shipping.—S.S. Sulong called once at Kayangaran to load timber for Kuching; m.l. Edmee made five trips to Labuan. and m.l. Adele, s.l. Peter Duff and s.l. Kwong Yick one trip each.
    Trade.—The trade returns are as under:—
FOREIGN.
Lawas:—    Imports.   Exports.May, 1926... $25,052   $39,052May, 1925...	14,45539,738Trusan:—May, 1926... $ 6,404      8,471May, 1925      7,983      8,124   COASTING.Lawas:—    Imports.Exports.May, 1926$ 2,236   $ 2,791May, 1925       152212Trusan:—May, 1926... $ 2,719   $ 4,099May, 1925       694      1,013F. F. BOULT.
Resident Fifth Division.


208
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 2, 1926.
Kuching, Foreign Trade Returns for the month June, 1926
IMPORTS—< Continued.)


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 2, 1926.
209
                   EXPORTS—(Continued.)
EXPORTS.
J. A. H. HARDIE,
         Registrar of Trade.
PASSENGERS,
Arrivals
Kuching, Coasting Trade Returns for the month of June, 1926.
IMPORTS.
PER s.s. Kuching :—30th June—From Singapore—Mr.
Sidney Morgan, Mr. and Mrs. Kidd
and child, Mr. Tan Siah Kim, Miss
M. Brodie, Messrs. Lee Teo Kwan,
Chua Bak Hin, Tan Kui Lok and
Lee Kui Lim.
PER s.s. Kuching. —12th July—From Singapore—Messrs.
R. W. Chater, P. J. Johnson, Matthews,
Mr. and Mrs. Teo Whee Eng, Mr.
Lee Kui Hian, Mr. and Mrs. Chan
Teck Cheng and son.
PER s.s Kuching: — 26th July - From Singapore—Messrs.
J. A. H. Hardie, C. Fenwick, Harrison,
L. D. Kennedy, Finney, See Say Tee,
Ngoh Yiew Tiaw. Lim Wah Seng,
Lim Goh Wah, Sim Ooi Liang, Mrs.
and Miss Tan. Mr. and Mrs. Voon Kong Siong.
Departures
PER s.s Kuching .—22nd June—For Singapore—Mrs.
Tan and child and Mrs. Ong Wee Hian.
PER s.s. Kuching—3rd July—For Singapore—Messrs.
E. Howell, Sidney Morgan, Mr. and
Mra. Baxter and children, Mr. C. Joon
Keo and son, Mrs. Soh Koh Siong and
children, Mr. and Mrs. Voon Kong
Siong, Messrs. Sim Ooi Leong, Soh
Koh Siong, B. Chan, De Souza, Kang
Guan Kong.
PER s.s. Kuching 18th July—For Singapore—Messrs.
Fenwick, Matthews, Joseph, Tan Kim
Poh, Chan Kim Chuan, Mr. and Mrs.
Samija. Mr. Jee Koo.


210	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 3, 1926.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 2, 1926
211 •
Vegetables-


212
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 2, 1926.
KUCHING SHIPPING.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 2, 1926.
213
MIRI SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
Departures.


214
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 2, 1926.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 2, 1926.
Rainfall, April, 1926.
215 
DURING 24 HOURS.
Rainfall, May, 1926.
   DURING 24 HOURS.




216
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 2, 1926.
Rainfall, June, 1926.
DURING 24 HOURS.
METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS.
GENERAL HOSPITAL.
Kuching, 30th June,
1926.
HighestBarometerreading81’01inches.Lowest29’09   ..Highesttemperature(in shade)96degrees.Lowest24 hours83   .Greatestrainfall in2-76inches.Total rainfall (Museum)	8'67	„
Haight of Hospital above sea level approximately 75 feet.

