
VOL. LVI.
No. 876.

THE
Sarawak Gazette.
PRICE	KUCHING, Wednesday, September 1st, 1926.	20 CENTS.
Contents.
Page.
Death—Singaram Pillai	...	...	... 217
Notes ...	...	. ...	...	... 217
Telok Serabang Exploration and Demarcation	... 219
Extracts from “Popular Science"	...	...	222
Rust: The Demon of Destruction	...	...	222
Ancient Barbers	...	...	...	..	22.4
Collision at Kuala Tebas	...	...	...	223
The Oil Palm	...	...	...	...	228
A Trip to Bungor Mountains ...	...	...	228 1
Chinese Marriages	...	...	...	...	224
Wireless in Sarawak	...	...	...	...	224
Simanggang Regatta—Results ...	...	...	225
St. Joseph's School, Kuching—Sports	...	...228
Club News:—
    Sarawak Club—Bowling Averages.	...	...	227
                    Bowling Handicap	...	...	227
    Sarawak Golf Club—Monthly Competition (Stroke) ...	227
Optional Sweep on above ... 227
Monthly Competition (Bogey) ... 227
    Sarawak Turf Club—Autumn Meeting	...	... 227
New Official Reclassification of
Ponies ... .	...	... 228
St. Michael’s Catholic Club—Tennis Singles Cham-
pionship	... 229
Extension of St. Joseph's School	.„	... 229
St. Thomas' School Building Fund	...	... 229
Pasal Anak Bulan ...	...	...	...	230
The late Mr. A. Singaram Pillai	...	...	...	230
Correspondence ...	...	...	...	230
Monthly Reports:—Second Division	...	...	230
               Third Division	...	...	285
                    Coast Division	...	...	238
                    Fourth Division	...	...	240
              Fifth Division	...	... 241
Kuching Trade Returns	...	...	...	242
Passengers	...	...	...	...	243
Miri Trade Returns	...	...	...	...	244
Kuching Market Price List	...	...	...	215
Kuching Shipping	...	...	...	...	246
Miri Shipping	...	...	...	...	247
Rainfall ...	...	...	...	...	248
Kuching Shipping Returns	...	...	...249
Meteorological Returns	...	...	...	250
The Sarawak Gazette.
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926.
Death.
SINGARAM PILLAI.—On Saturday, 31st July, 1926, in his own
village Abarani near Negapatam, South India, A. SINGARAM
PILLAI of Kuching, aged 54.
NOTES.
August,
  His Highness the Tuan Muda, left Kuching on the 3rd by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna accompanied by Mr. E. O. Bruce, on a visit to the Fifth Division, returning via Simanggang on the 16th.
  Mr. J. P. Mead, Conservator of Forests and Mrs. Mead, together with Mr. and Mrs. F. G. Carpenter, accompanied His Highness as far as Miri, Mr. Mead on a visit of inspection and Mr. Carpenter to take up the duties of Acting District Officer, Miri.
  His Highness the Tuan Muda’s birthday on Sunday the 8th was observed on the following Monday, which was proclaimed a public holiday. A salute of twenty-one guns was fired from Fort Margherita and all ships in port were dressed. The Acting Chief Secretary, Mr. H. B. Crocker, invited a large number of guests to dinner at the Residency, where dancing was enjoyed up to a late hour. Many house owners in the kampong also celebrated the occasion with illuminations and discharges of crackers.
   His Excellency the Governor of the Straits
Settlements, Sir Laurence Guillemard, under-
 went an operation for appendicitis at the
European Hospital, Kuala Lumpur, on the
15th.
   We are very pleased to hear that His Ex-
cellency continues to progress satisfactorily,
and trust that he will make a speedy recovery.
   WE understand that the Court of Directors
of the Chartered Company have appointed as
Governor Mr. J. L. Humphreys, C.B.E., of
the Malayan Civil Service and it is expected
that he will sail from England on September
10th. Mr. Humphreys, who was born in
1881, was a senior classical scholar of Brase-
nose College, Oxford, and was appointed to
a Straits Settlements Cadetship in 1905.


218	THE SAWARAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926.
Among other appointments he has been a
magistrate in Singapore and Penang. In 
1919 Mr. Humphreys was appointed British 
Adviser to Trengganu and had recently been 
made British Adviser, Kedah. We under-
stand that the new Governor is a well-known
golfer.—[British North Borneo Herald.] 
  THE Rt. Rev. the Bishop of Hankow arrived on the 2nd and spent a few days in Kuching as the guest of the Rt. Rev. the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak before proceeding north via Miri and Labuan.
  Mr. E. Lamplough of the Island Trading Company, Selalang, returned from Singapore by the same boat.
      CAPTAIN E. V. Andreini, we understand, is
being appointed Acting District Officer,
Kapit, and will proceed there direct from
Singapore after a short period of local leave.
     MR. J. S. Mudford left Kuching for Sibu
on the 31st, having been gazetted Superin-
tendent of Trade and Customs, Third
Division, and Superintendent of Shipping,
Sibu, vice Mr. R. D. St. J. Horton who has
been gazetted Superintendent of Trade and
Customs, Fourth and Fifth Divisions, and
Superintendent of Shipping, Miri.
   Mr. L. D. Kennedy is gazetted Superin-
tendent of Customs, First Division, and
Superintendent of Shipping, Kuching.
  CAPT. E. V. Andreini arrived from Sibu 		
on the 2nd to take up the duties of Acting
District Officer, Kuching, vice Mr. F. G.                      MR. G. R. H. Arundell returned by the s.s.
Carpenter transferred to Miri.	    Kuching on the 23rd after a visit to Singapore
  Mr. E. M. Woodward has left Baram for              for X-ray examination.
duty at Sibu.
  MR. B. A. Trechman left for Miri on the 1st
to take charge of the Treasury Department, 
vice Mr. W. Cotterill who has been trans-
ferred to Kuching.
  WE welcome to Kuching Mr. R. C. Kay. of Sarawak Trading Company, and Mr. H. Smith, of Messrs. McDougall & Robertson, and Mrs. Smith, who arrived from home by the s.s. Kuching on the 9th; also Dr. T. E. Walsh, who arrived by s.s. Soon Ann on the 30th August to take up his appointment as Assistant Medical Officer.
  PASSENGERS from Singapore by the s.s. Soon Ann on the 16th included Mrs. Swindell and Mr. and Mrs. W. H. Avery.
  WE are glad to hear that Mr. J. G. Sampson has recovered from a severe operation for appendicitis at Miri on the 1st. A trip home during convalescence has been advised by the medical authorities.
  MR. C. D. Adams, Acting Superintendent of Police, left Kuching on the 12th on a short visit to Simanggang in connection with a recruiting scheme.
  By the same boat Mr. J. A. H. Hardie, Commissioner of Trade and Customs, and Mr. G. M. Allman left for the Second Division in connection with the Board of Trade Pepper Improvement Scheme.
   RAPID progress has been made at Limbang
with a substantial concrete dam in connection
with the water supply scheme there.
   MR. F. A. W. Page-Turner’s racing boat Sri Kendawang, although about nine years old, made a remarkable performance at the Simanggang Regatta, winning four events, “unlimited,” 40 and 30 paddlers, as well as His Highness the Tuan Muda’s Cup.
   MR. R. D. Binnie left for Sibu on the 11th to take charge of the Public Works Department, Third Division.
   ON the 2nd August the Kuching Wireless Station was in communication with an operator in England, for the first time.
   THE Air Survey Company of Rangoon recently completed their contracts with the Government which included 1,750 square miles approximately in the Rejang Delta, bounded by the River Igan, sea coast, and a line running from a point approximately six miles south of Rejang to a point approximately six miles south of Sibu; also a strip varying from three to five miles in width,' fifty to sixty miles along the Rejang river from Sibu to Song; as well as the whole of the Sarawak Mangrove Forest Reserve between  Kuching and Santubong.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926.
219
  THERE seems to have been an epidemic of dengue fever in Kuching recently, and the Acting Matron of the Grange Hospital, Mrs. J. S. Fenwick, has had a busy month with patients, including Mr. and Mrs. Baird, Mrs. Forrest, Miss Harkness, Mrs. Kidd, Messrs. Mudford, McDougall, Whiteside and Rev. Father Morris.
  THE Kuching Race Course will be open for training on the 6th September.
  A provisional programme for the Autumn Meeting appears in another column. The last race on the first day is a welcome innovation, being a “Maiden Plate’’ instead of the usual Consolation Race.
  We understand that there will be no selling lotteries this Meeting except for the last race on the second day, distance Round the Course, open to ponies of all divisions.
  IT is also interesting to note that an owner
recently sued his syce and was awarded $10
damages, the syce through disobedience and
negligence having brought down the pony on
a metalled road.
  It is no uncommon sight to see ponies,
ordered out for walking exercise, being
bucketed along the main roads by some in-
competent stable boy with little or no sense
of responsibility.
   On the following day H. H. the Ranee  Margaret gave a Garden Party at her house in Ascot, when most of those who attended the dinner were present and in addition the following ladies :—H. H. the Ranee, the Dayangs Leonora and Valerie, Dayang Jean and two sisters, Mrs. W. E. Le Gros Clark, Lady Cunynghame, Mrs. S. Cunynghame, Mrs. Douglas, Mrs. Charles Hose, Mrs.  Ernest Hose, Mrs. D. S. E. McDougall, Mrs. Rowlatt, Mrs. H. W. V. Scott, Mrs. Sharp, Mrs. Slade, Mrs. H. S. B. Johnson, Mrs. Ward and Mrs. Deshon. Miss Dora Labbette and Mr. Stewart Robinson sang during the afternoon.
   ON the 17th August opportunity was taken
 by the General Post Office, Sarawak, to
despatch a letter mail for the first time by a
seaplane proceeding to Singapore.
   This event was marked by the use of a
special Post Office cancelling stamp inscribed
with the words “Kuching, Air Mail” and the
date, in a circle. The eighty odd envelopes
so treated will probably be of interest to
philatelists.
 	
      THE Municipal Department wish to in-
form the public that it is in no way responsible
for the supply of foodstuffs to the markets
and cannot entertain complaints unless a
breach of Market Regulations has taken
place.
   DRY Rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah
Estates during the month of July was ap-
proximately 90,000 lbs.
  THE Third Annual Dinner of Sarawak  Association was held at the Trocadero Res- taurant on the 6th instant, when the following  were present:—The Rajah, the Tuan Bunsu, I the Dayang Leonora, A. M. Pountney, late Treasurer and Financial Adviser, Singapore, E. E. F. Pretty, British Resident, Brunei (the two latter having been appointed Honorary Members), Sir Percy Cunynghame, F. G. Day, II. R. A. Day, A. B. Ward, G. C. Gillan, C. Willes Johnson, R. S. Douglas, Charles Hose, Rev. A. F. Sharp, Major S. Cunynghame, Professor W. E. Le Gros Clark, Major E. V. Benjamin, H. Wyndham Jones, Hon. T. G. Cochrane, H. S. B. Johnson, J. M. Bryan, O. Lang, Major White Hopkins, Captain A. S. Lowe, E. Hose, J. S. W. Bean, K. Thorburn, D. S. E. McDougall, Major H. W. V. Scott, L. E.- Slade, Dr. J. G. Reed, S. R. Maw, D. B. Crane, H. La Chard, J. A. Smith. J. K. Beasley and Captain Barry Gifford, A.D.C.
Telok Serabang Exploration
and Demarcation.
     After a short stay at Lundu to collect the necessary coolies, I proceeded to Telok Serabang in the s s "Lucile" on 20th June arriving there at 4.30 p.m. the same day. Quarters were taken up for the time being in a small "kajane" hut formerly used by the Timber Company exploiting the Telok Serabang district. The next day was spent in procuring more coolies and boats The collector and three coolies were sent to Tanjong Serabang (Pirate Point) to procure if possible specimens of Caesalpinia Sappan reported to be growing there. Later in the day I ascended one of the hills at the back of Serabang to ascertain the constitution and quality of the forest. North of the mouth of the Semunsam river to Tanjong Datu the hills are covered with excellent old jungle stretching in some cases to the seashore. The district is very thinly populated, and the few inhabitants there are occupying themselves almost entirely with fishing


220	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926.
   On making inquiries as to the existence of any artificial boundary between Sarawak and Dutch Borneo, I was informed that there was a “rentis" as far as was known. No one had ever seen it, which was extraordinary as this “rentis” can be not less than a mile and a half from the sea coast at this point. The Tua Kampong was away and a Malay by name Udin acting for him was absolutely useless as regards local information
   The collector returned in the evening from Tanjong Serabang with specimens of C. Sappan. He informed me that there were quantities of this species but in all cases it was not wild but planted by the Tua Kampong. Hearing there was more C. Sappan in the next bay. known as Telok Milano, I proceeded there by boat next day and although I found many trees, they were in all cases in proximity to houses. I obtained mature seeds and further specimens and having explored along the coast towards Tanjong Datu and discovered no more, I walked back to Telok Serabang along the shore.
   Early next morning I set out along the coast by boat to the Semunsam river to make a preliminary inspection of the locality, to ascertain the best point to commence a cut line from the true left bank of the Semunsam to the Dutch boundary and also to find a suitable site for a temporary camp whilst cutting this “rentis." The Semunsam river is the main source of drainage of the area between the Poe Range and Gunong Pangi, a spur of G. Malaka behind Telok Serabang. The actual source is in the gorge between G. Poe and G. Kanji two of the main peaks in the Poe Range. Soon afterwards it is joined by a fairly large stream from S. Poe known as Sungei Panti. From this junction it is known by the ulu Dyaks as the Bekumpai. The river is tidal for the last five miles of its course: Above this point except in the “landas" it is not navigable even in a small boat. I proceeded up this stream as far as the S. Temaka about four miles from the mouth. The river became extremely narrow here and blocked with large “batangs.” Beyond the tidal rise it is a small stream with a very broad gravel bed, composed of round granite pebbles. The main course of the river is north but it turns almost due east before reaching the coast. Descending from the S. Temaka, I commenced a cut line on a bearing of 325° from a point on the true left bank of the Semunsam river to obtain some idea of the quality of jungle in the interior. Later, if suitable, this rentis could be converted into a cut boundary of the proposed reserve
   Owing to the difficulty of procuring water I found it more convenient to continue headquarters at Telok Serabang After two days cutting on the bearing mentioned previously and having crossed an unknown stream several times, I met with a path about three yards wide This I took to be the Dutch boundary None of my coolies could give information, being all from Lundu, and those recruited from Telok Serabang were also utterly ignorant. Through lack of information I assumed this, therefore, to be the Dutch boundary. Next day a “rentis" was commenced from the mouth of the Semunsam south-eastwards parallel with the coast towards the Poe Range. During the day a Chinaman was met with who proved a great source of information. The path, which had been mistaken for the Dutch boundary the day before, was only a path cut by one of the Dutch officers some two years' ago when inspecting the boundary. The officer got lost for two days and was finally shown the way back to this boundary by this same Chinaman's brother. The stream crossed by the "rentis" was the right-hand branch of the Semunsam Buta, a tributary of the Semunsam proper. The Dutch boundary “rentis" was apparently another half mile beyond this point. Next day a very early start was made with the Chinaman's brother as guide. The “rentis" was continued and after half a mile connected up with the boundary, which is a “rentis" about six yards broad running from G- Pangi to G. Puting. The forest met with on this side of Semunsam river is not nearly as good as that further westward- The soil is very shallow and is not capable of carrying heavy timber.
   On June 28th camp was moved to the Sungei Bedaun, a small river further along the coast towards the Poe Range. Between the Sungei Semunsam and the Sungei Simatan to the west, there are six small streams, which are little more than salt-water creeks with fresh-water streams running in at their heads. These creeks are anything up to a quarter of a mile in breadth and are stocked with excellent mangrove forest. These streams are known as S Limo, S- Bedaun, S. Belinsah, S. Bekuching, S. Poe, and S. Siruk. The S. Bedaun and S. Belinsah, are the largest and penetrate inland farther than the rest The Belinsah has its source, in the lower slopes of the Poe Range. The best forest is met with between the Semunsam and the Bedaun. The soil is a rich sandy loarp carrying fine timber. The chief species represented being Penyiau, Camphor, Meraka. all the better class Meranti and Resak, Engkabang Pinang and Keruing. In the neighbourhood of the Bedaun and the Belinsah there are large areas which have been completely denuded by fire. This occurred during the drought of 1915, when the natives informed me there was no rain for six months. These areas, however, do not extend far inland and are for the most part outside the proposed reserve. The country between the Bedaun and the Bekuching is a series of


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926.
221
ridges leading up to the Toot-hills of the Poe Range. The forest here is thinner owing to the shallow soil, and there is a great deal of Ru Bukit (Casuarina Suma rana) and a fair quantity of mature Sempilor (Dacrydiumelatum) was met with. Regeneration of both species was good, but that of Ru Bukit was far more predominating. East of the Bekuching from the coast to the foot of the Poe Range, the old jungle has disappeared almost completely as a result of farming by the Poe Dyaks.
  On July 3rd the “rentis" had reached the ulu Belinsah and camp was moved to Sungei Poe. I found the Poe Dyaks to be just as ignorant of their district as the natives of Telok Serabang Even the peaks in the Poe range received a new name every day and it was most confusing. They knew nothing about the range, and said there were no paths by which the summit could be reached. They seem to have no occupation at all. As far as 1 can ascertain they are merely people who have found life in the Sambas district too strenuous and have moved over the border to vegetate. After two days the “rentis" had reached the lower slopes of G. Poe and I was still unable to get any reliable information as to the easiest means of reaching the summit. The only thing left to do was to take a bearing on Poe itself and cut the “rentis" direct to it. This was done and on the second day after commencement an altitude of 2000 feet was reached. Up to 1000 feet the going was quite fair but from here onwards it was exceedingly difficult, not to say dangerous, in places, owing to quantities of loose granite screes.
  On July 8th I walked from the ulu Sungei Poe over the watershed into the ulu Semunsam. Skirting the northern slopes of the Poe Range I crossed the ulu Belinsah and one or two smaller streams which feed the Sungei Bekuching On the ridges the forest is good but nothing compared to the heavily timbered area of the true Semunsam basin. From the Kuala Semunsam to the Kuala Bedaun the country is flat and carries excellent timber as mentioned previously. From the Sungei Bedaun to the Sungei Bekuching to the eastwards the country rises westwards in a series of ridges and then falls away to the Semunsam itself. These ridges are of a sandstone formation. A break in this high ground allows the Sungei Belinsah to reach the coast. After crossing the ulu Bekuching the ground rises sharply and then descends to the Sungei Panti. a tributary of the Semunsam proper. After another hour’s walking and crossing another ridge, the Semunsam itself was met with. At this point there is an area, some hundred acres in extent, which was farmed about seven years ago by Sambas Dyaks. This area is now in “belukar,” but a quantity of large trees were left after the burn unharmed, and these are acting as seed-bearers and slowly regenerating the area.
  The bed of the Semunsam is filled with large belian logs There is quite a good stand of belian growing along the banks but it is impossible to work it except in the “Landas" and even then conditions are very difficult. The path followed was a track used by the natives crossing into Sambas territory. On one of the ridges of Poe I noticed two species of Sindora, one with the smooth pod a d one with the armed pod; both were growing at an altitude between 200 and 500 feet. Except for a little belukar in the uiu Bekuching and in addition to that met with on the Semunsam I walked through good forest all day. Camp w'as reached at 4.30 p.m. Next day, leaving camp at 6 a m . the ascent of Poe commenced. After an easy climb to 500 feet the contour was followed for about three quarters of a mile westward H-re the "rentis" was met with, and I followed this. climbing to 2000 feet in 45 chains. From the head
 of the “rentis" the peak known locally as Gunong Poe was visible through the trees. The bearing was altered to facilitate work on the “rentis” and the coolies were left to continue, whilst pushed ahead with the collector, one coolie and a so-called  guide sent up at the last moment by the Orang Kaya. After a stiff climb of an hour the summit of Gunong Poe was reached and the aneroid registered 3355 feet, including 10% correction for temperature This is the extreme right-hand peak of the range looking west. The summit was reached at 11.30 a.m. I ascended a tree but visibility was not good owing to banks of mist which were rising from the Sebaat and Sebaku valleys on the Simatan side. An excellent view, however, was obtained over the Sambas country into Dutch territory
   After half an hour the mist lifted and the whole of the country westwards towards Tanjong Datu and the coast became visible A good view was also obtained over the area of the proposed reserve and the different types of forest were distinguishable through glasses.
   To the eastwards another higher peak was now visible, and on inquiring the name I was told by the guide that it was Gunong Kanji. Hoping for a better view as the mist had now lifted, started along the ridge toward this peak, much to the disgust of the guide, who affirmed it would take until dark to reach it. Following a game-track which was overgrown in places, the summit of Kanji (4.125 feet) was reached in just over one hour’s walking! Unfortunately, however, the mist v as down again and it was impossible to see more than a few yards. The jungle along the top of the ridge is very dwarfed and hung with moss.
   Rattans and thorn-bearing palms are abundant. After waiting over an hour on Gunong Kanji the mist showed no signs of lifting, so I returned to G. Poe. The return distance was covered in fifty minutes Here I found all the the coolies waiting me and the “rentis" cut to the summt. The length of the cut line from 2200 feet to 3055 feet was 33 chains.
   It is disappointing to have to record that no specimen of Aga this alba was met with on this side of the range. This tree produces a high-class “damar" known as Damar Minyak or Bindang, and is a true conifer closely related to Agathis australis, the Kauri Pine. During the day the guide showed me three different species of the Dipterocarp family, which he said produced Damar Mata Kuching. One of these trees was exactly like Mangbesi and was a Balanocarpus. The other two were obviously Selangan Batu. I was told that Damar Bindang is only found in the ulu Sebaku on the slopes of Gunong Berumput, the highest peak in the Poe Range.
   When the time came to make the descent, knowing no other way down I proposed following the “rentis," but the guide said he knew of a path which would offer much better going and enable the descent to be made in better time. This path was followed down one of the spurs. The descent was made in two hours and a half. It was annoying, however, to learn that such a path was in existence after all the denials of an easy access to the top of the range. Next day I moved on to Simatan and spent the night there. On the following morning I set out for Lundu in a large sailing boat, and landing at Pasir Pelandok I walked overland and sent the boat round, which arrived at 6.45 p m
      B. J. C. SPURWAY, Assistant Conservator of Forests, First Division and Bintulu.


222
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926.
Extracts from “Popular Science.”
  Men buried in an avalanche of snow hear every
word uttered by those seeking them, while their own
shouts fail to penetrate even a few feet.
  In North China it is not uncommon for new-born
Chinese babies to have blue or green eyes and light
red hair.
  The smallest dictionary in the world, containing
15,000 definitions, is one and one-eighth inches
long, three-quarters of an inch wide and three-
sixteenths of an inch thick.
  A glass substitute has recently been invented that
can be bent but does not break.
  On certain American railways steam is now being
used to kill the weeds alongside the rails.
  Codfish in Iceland are dried and ground into a flour
for use in bread.
  Fish which are found at a greater depth of sea than  600 feet are not fit for eating.
  The heaviest bunch of bananas ever seen in 
London bore 360 bananas. The stalk alone weighed 
138 fts.
  Eighty-six barrels of oil, weighing about 14$ tons, is the average yield from an adult whale.
  A monoplane has been constructed in Germany with a motor developing ½  h.p. and weighing 125 lbs.
  A needle passes through the hands of 70 different workmen and through over 20 processes before it is parked for the market.
  Horseshoes junked in many countries are being shipped half-way around the globe to China, where mechanics utilise the chilled iron for knives.
Rust: The Demon of Destruction.
BY ELAINE BICKERSTAFFE, M.A., B.Sc., A.I.C.
	   Most people are familiar with rust and aware of
the considerable damage caused by the decav of iron
and steel structures all over the world. But it is
only when a devastating accident like the one that
took place at Charing Cross Station some time ago
brings the facts vividly before them that it is fully 
realised what a constant and perpetual source of 
danger this very harmless-looking brownish powder 
can really be.	
The majority of metals, with the exception of the 
“noble” ones, such as gold and platinum and many
alloys, undergo a process of decay by natural agencies
similar to rusting. But it is more generally known
in these instances as corrosion, and the amount of
loss sustained annually by the process is incredibly
great.
Rain, moist air, winds laden with salt water and
the sea itself all combine to bring about corrosion,
and nature is constantly at work damaging and
destroying the structures that man has taken such
pains to erect. Particularly is this the case with the
iron and steel that play such an important part in the
civilisation of to-day. For, if they were allowed to,
they would decay far more quickly than wood,
concrete and other materials of construction, and the
result would be not only great financial loss, but
appalling damage to human life.
   It is, therefore, not suprising that for many years
metallurgists, manufacturers and engineers all over
the world have been engaged in seeking to find the
real causes of ferrous corrosion, or the rusting of
iron, and to devise suitable methods for preventing it.
It is now generally believed that rusting takes
place in the presence of water and oxygen, and that
both these are essential, and that certain acids and
salts may hasten the action. Certainly dry iron in
dry air does not rust, nor does iron immersed in air-
free water, but there is no doubt that the process is
very complex and even now workers are by no means
agreed on the simple facts.
     Rust itself is a mixture of oxides of iron, usually
brown, but varying with conditions. The rust
formed by the rapid evaporation of water on the
surface of the iron is of a deep red colour, has
a shiny appearance, and contains a good deal of
combined water. And beneath this layer of red rust
there is frequently a black powder which is found to
be magnetic. Chemically, rust contains ferrous
oxide, ferric oxide, ferroso-ferric oxide, and often
carbon dioxide and water in varying amounts.
       Under ordinary conditions rusting never seems to
take place evenly. It commences to form at distinct
spots which are for some reason peculiarly liable to
attack, and it spreads from the original point like a
disease. One theory is that it begins at a point
where there is a speck of impurity such as a particle
of slag or scale, or a segregated constituent of the
metal, which gives rise to galvanic action. Some-
times the pit first formed becomes extremely deep
at such a rate, that a hole may reach right through
a plate before the greater part of the surrounding
surface is much affected. This is most dangerous
from the point of view of wear.
   Or the pits may spread outwards so that when the
rust is cleaned off the metal is roughened all over,
and large shallow chunks have been removed, making
the surface look as though it had been gnawed by
sharp-pointed teeth. The word corrode, which is
derived from the Latin rodere. rosum, to gnaw, eat
away by degrees, seems very apt for this kind of
attack.
   The pits produced vary under different condition's
and with different types of iron and steel. For
although liquid water and oxygen are the essential
factors causing corrosion, there are many other
influences at work retarding or accelerating the
action.
     Fortunately, man has. by the manufacture of
special steels and irons that are highly resistant to
rusting, and by the invention of protective coatings
suitable for ordinary corrodible metal, found a means
of checking the ravages of rust upon the products of
modern civilisation, and on a structure like the
famous Forth Bridge a number of men are kept
continually at work cleaning rust spots and
repainting.
     This wise course, which is the only method of
preserving such structures for the use of future
generations, and for rendering them safe for
our own times, is unfortunately not always carefully
carried out in practice. And one writer, referring
to the roof of a gasworks in New York City which
collapsed for lack of attention, predicted a similar
fate for the viaduct of the elevated railway of the
same city, which almost casual observation would
show is repainted over the rust without any
preliminary cleaning.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1. 1926.
223
         Ancient Barbers.
The Oil Palm.
   We read that “recently discovered sculptures in Egypt prove that there were professional barbers at least 2,000 years B.C., and that the women of nearly forty centuries ago bobbed their hair. The barbers operated out of doors, under the trees, just as they still do in the Orient to-day. The patrons— including women as well as men—who were waiting sat around on stools. Women had their hair bobbed then very much as in the year 1926 A.D. They also had their hair done in a sort of permanent wave. Transformations consisting of a bunch of false hair were likewise in vogue.’’
   “Only the king in those times had the privilege of wearing a long, full beard. The common people had their hair cut fairly short and their necks shaved. Steel was unknown at that early date, but razors made of bronze were used.’’
   “Bobbed hair for women has been a fad at different periods in the world’s history, but as a rule long hair has been favoured. Short hair has always been considered a badge of servitude. Under religious regulations women have been compelled to shear off their long hair to keep them from being too vain. At other times a ban has been issued against short hair."
   “An old record in London dated January 25th, 1680, relates that the women had become so “insolent" and had been imitating the men so much by cropping their hair, wearing broad-brimmed hats and carrying weapons, that the king ordered the clergy to preach against these dangerous innovations. He warned them that if good advice did not correct the evil he would use more drastic measures. The historian who recorded this episode makes a comment which agrees with much that is heard to-day. He said : “There is great neede of reforme among our womenkind. The truth is the wirld is very much out of order, but whether preaching will mend it God knowes."
   “The Bible has very little to say about barbering. as the ancient Israelites let their hair and beards grow almost as. nature decreed. Still, in the sixth chapter of Numbers, it is decreed that when “either man or woman" makes certain vows “he shall separate himself from strong drink and there shall no razor come upon his head." In Psalms is found the statement; “Thy tongue deviseth mischief, like a sharp razor, working deceitfully."
   “There were barbers in those days who worked for hire, for in Isaiah it says; “Tn the same day shall the Lord shave with a razor that is hired, namely by them beyond the river, the head and the hair of the feet, and it shall also consume the beard." And in Ezekiel, the prophet was thus instructed : “Take thee a barber’s razor and cause it to pass upon thine head and upon thy beard.”
Collision at Kuala Tebas.
   About io p.m. on the 31st July the motor bandong Hock slipped her moorings at Kuala Tebas and drifted under the bows of the schooner Kim Po!i Heng anchored nearby. The bandong heeled over on the starboard side and sank in the fairway with a crew of seven and twenty-five passengers. Unfortunately, the engineer Ah Pong was drowned.
   A few days later, after considerable trouble, a party under the direction of Mr. P. Stewart, Assistant Government Engineer, succeeded in salving the hull together with a portion of the cargo.
   The development in British Malaya of the African oil palm as a new industry is being closely studied by commercial interests. The most recent statistics available show that about 10,000 acres in British Malaya have now been planted up, and of this area over 7,500 acres are in the State of Selangor. Only three estates have, as yet, reached the production stage. On two of these up-to date expressing machinery has been installed and is working efficiently. Production for the year 1925 amounted to 536 tons of palm oil and no tons of palm kernels. There are still large areas suitable for this form of cultivation  available. Considerable interest is being displayed in the industry, and it is estimated that by the end of the year about 20,000 acres will have been planted up. In most cases the seed is being obtained from specially selected palms in Sumatra, in which island it is estimated that there are now 50,000 acres planted with oil palms. —“C.E. and T.”
A Trip to Bungor Mountains.
   A short account of a recent tour round about that part of Sarawak to the west of Kuching may be of interest to someone visiting that area at some future time.
   On this occasion a few days were first spent at Telok Serabang, a place about half way between Simatan and Tanjong Datu, with large quantities of timber lying on the beach, awaiting shipment.
   The small bills to the back and to the west were clothed in fine timber, whilst to the east, towards Mt- Poi, the land was flatter though equally well provided. Here a large female python some twenty feet long and weighing about one hundred and seventy pounds was secured and a few days later its mate—a little longer but not so robust —was taken.
   Tanjong Datu was reached in a few hours by boat and turned out to be a delightful spot, with a fine beach, excellent bathing and fishing, together with some sandflies that didn't bite I Behind, the jungle on the hills was fine and open, larger game like pigs, deer, rhinoceros, and hornbills, was quite numerous, though small animals were not plentiful; in fact a specimen of the clawless otter and a solid casqued hornbill were the only things of interest
   Touching again at Serabang and Simatan, a Dyak house near the foot of Mt Berumput was reached in a day from the latter place This particular house, S’bakau, has served as a starting place for a number of trips from time to time up the Mt-Poi range. The Dyaks here, and apparently round about, were not a very bright crowd and a couple of days had to be spent whilst they bewailed with song, dance and pig-sticking, the prevalent sickness of their younger children, who may have been suffering from dysentery, general lassitude and disinclination to get up in the morning might reasonably be ascribed to a very slight accentuation of the outstanding parental characteristic. These parents, with an eye on the pigs trotters and a general good time, hid behind this sickness of their children in their reluctance to go up the mountain. A few at last consented to go and the rest of the carriers consisted of a swarm of small but very active Dyak boys. Arriving at the usual camping place about a thousand feet up these small boys in a few days cornered everything that crept or crawled for some distance around—one lizard, whose feet had degenerated and were too small to be of any use to it, was easily captured; unfortunately someone bringing up the


224	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926.
jar containing spirit for preserving specimens hit it against a rock, leaving nothing for it but to use one's gin— not undiluted with his tears.
     Mt. Berumput was at this time very dry and water scarce but by spending a night among some rocks the Batu Penseong, another favourite stopping place the top. covered in sort of yellow rhododendron bushes, was easily reached only to be clothed in thick clouds on this particular day. Lack of water and the difficulty of getting about on the steep hill sides once the path was left did not encourage a long halt, and shortly after a return was made to Simatan without any especially interesting captures.
     A short stay was made in Lundu, mainly taken up with strenuous efforts to obtain a specimen of the hard-headed hornbill, which lived up to its name on most occasions. Having at last overcome one of them, a day’s paddling up river and a short walk brought one to a point where instead of going to Bau, a more inland path could be taken, reaching in a day a small conical hill named Jagoi. The top provided an extensive view around and held a Dyak house tucked away out of sight. A few hours’ march to Krokong (again with a Dyak house perched on top of a hill) and another day brought one to Tegora, at the foot of the Bungor Mountains. Tegora itself was a good deal overgrow but the paths formerly used for bringing in firewood from the neighbouring jungle were still well marked. The path up the mountain though steep was not very difficult though after a little way up it became too steep to do anything but stick to the path ; the general difficulty of collecting animals, heavy rain and lots of leeches all hastened a return to the fleshpots of Krokong and so to Bau.
Chinese Marriages.
THE QUESTION OF LEGALITY
    The question has often arisen in our Courts as to what constitutes a legal Chinese marriage and the opinion expressed by our Judges seems to be that it is extremely difficult, if not impossible, to determine with any degree of accuracy when a Chinese marriage is a legitimate or valid one from legal aspect, writes the Chinese correspondent of the Times of Malaya. The vagueness of the Chinese marriage laws is due to the custom of having one wife in China and one in Malaya. In such a case it is often very difficult to say which one is the legal wife as, should the man die in circumstances of affluence, both wives will probably claim to be first wives, that their children are legitimate issues, and that, therefore, they are entitled to full rights under the estate of the deceased. It is worthy of notice, however, that in China there can be no possibility of dispute as to who is the first, and, therefore, legal wife. Briefly, the custom of marriage amongst the Chinese in China is as follows: When a youth reaches the marriageable age, his parents choose for him a bride through a go-between. At the marriage ceremonies the bridegroom and bride worship the ancestral tablets, after which they go through the ceremony of kneeling down before the parents of the bridegroom and other
elders of the family. The bride then becomes the first, or legal, wife and all wives married subsequently are concubines or secondary wives- The concubines often live together in the same house and are subject to the control of the first wife who is always recognised to be the real mistress of the. household.
It is a very grave offence for a man to take unto himself a concubine before his parents find a wife for him. If he does, he will, in the first place, be guilty of an act amounting to lack of filial piety towards his parents and public opinion turns against him. If he should have been an official under the Celestial Throne, he would probably have rui\the risk of degradation in rank and even the death penalty, according to the circumstances of his case.
Consideration is always shown to a woman whether she is a first wife or a concubine, should she have children, and each child is entitled to a fair share of the estate of the deceased according to his or her needs- In China there is no such thing as “illegitimate children," and in this respect the Chinese are far more humane than most Western nations. [Straits Echo.]
Wireless in Sarawak.
      The Wireless Department is keeping well to the fore in the latest methods of communication. A short record of events will perhaps be of interest.
      In January experiments were commenced at Simpang Tiga in the short wave transmission, but there being no data or references to start with, it was necessary to commence with various circuits.
      On 26th April, 1926, after many nights of experiment the first signals were heard in Singapore by Paya Lebar, being reported readable on 45 metres. From this beginning a circuit has been developed which in June had reached its maximum efficiency.
       On 6th May, 1926, the first long distance station was communicated with, this being ANDIR-Military Aeroplane Station, Java, signals being reported quite readable on 38 metres. After this encouraging result and when other adjustments had been made the Philippines and Hongkong were reached and signals were reported good.
      On 16th June, 1926, another transmitter, modelled after the original, was made and set up in Kuching Station for experiments and the same evening signals were heard in California and were, reported of readable strength.
     On 2nd August, 1926, at 6.00 a.m., Mr. Gray, skilfully operating the Station set, succeeded in raising the well-known experimenter Mr. Partridge of Wimbledon, London, and was congratulated on having covered the distance on the small amount of power used, viz , 110 watts input-
Signals were faint, however, and arrangements were made to work the following morning at 5.30 am. Connection was accomplished at the time arranged and two telegrams, kindly sanctioned by His Highness the Tuan Muda, were despatched. One was to His Highness the Rajah and the other to the Government Offices, Millbank, conveying greetings to His Majesty's Government on first direct connection between England and Sarawak.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926.
225
    No satisfactory result was obtained again due to bad weather conditions, but since this date further progress has been made; the farthest European station to be spoken to is in Norway, besides the following: -Saigon, India, Shanghai, Japan, Australia, Honolulu, parts of United States of America. South Africa. New Zealand, Tasmania, Alaska. Italy. Sweden, and Germany.
    The receiving as well as transmitting gear has been made locally, the total cost for these and the transmitters is a small item, the only commercial parts employed were condensers, etc.
[Contributed.]
  H. H. the Tuan Muda’s Cup, open to all comers, with no restrictions as to build or length of boat or number of crew, starting from Tanjong Sebubok: —1st prize Cup value $100 and $2 to each member of crew, 2nd $1 to each member of crew, 3rd 50 cents to each member of crew.
1 Mr. F.A W. Page-Turner’s Sri Kindawang 
2 Jana's Sri Naga
      3 Grugu's Sri Kubong
  Consolation Race, for boats of any length or build, winner of ist prize only barred. Starting from Sinjor: -1st prize $40. 2nd $20, 3rd $15.
      1 Jana’s Sri Naga
      2 Mr. J. A. H. Hardie's Sapu Rantau
      3 Andam’s Sri Kilat
       Simanggang Regatta.
14th and 15th August, 1926.
RESULTS.
  Long Bongs : —1st Silver Cup Value $60 and $50, 2nd $30, 3rd $15.
      1 Grugu's Sri Kubong
      2 Tansang's Singa Kala Sri Kandawang
      3 Andam’s Sri Kilat
  Boats with 15 men: —1st Silver Cup Value $50 and $45, 2nd $30, 3rd $15.
      1 Mohamad Jawa’s Ular Lidi
      2 Abang Dulkarrim’s Sri Kunding
      3 Gelanggang’s Sri Debak
  Mr. J. A. H. Hardie's Cup, open to Bedas with no restrictions as to length or number of crew, starting from Tanjong Sebubok : -1st prize Cup Value $70 and $60, 2nd $30, 3rd $15.
1 Mr. F A-W. Page-Turner's Sri Kindawang 
2 Jana’s Sri Naga
      3 Mr. J.A H- Hardie s Bujang Kilat
  Beda Race, crews limited to 40 men: — 1st prize $40, 2nd $20, 3rd $10.
1 Mr. F.A.W. Page-Turner's Sri Kindawang 
2 Mr. J. A. H. Hardie’s Sapu Rantau
      3 Jana's Sri Naga
  Boats with 30 men, no restrictions as to build, starting from Datu's Cattleshed: — 1st prize Silver Cup and $30, 2nd $15, 3rd $750-
1 Mr. F-A.W. Page-Turner’s Sri Kindawang 
2 Sait Jerapang's Sri Melawan
      3 Ingai's Kapal Belon
15th. Sunday.
  Boats with 15 men, starting from Datu’s Cattle- shed 1st prize $20, 2nd $10, 3rd $5.
      1 Mohamad Jawa's Ular Lidi
      2 Srgt. Slapok's Sri Bangsawan
      3 Ingai's Sri Kapal Terbang
  Bongs with crews limited to 40 men, starting from Datu’s Shed: — 1st prize $40, 2nd $20, 3rd $10.
1 Gambang’s, Singa Kala
2 Datu Buassan's Sri Santana
3               …   …
SIMANGGANG FOOTBALL CUP.
  Not the least interesting feature during the Simanggang Regatta was the Football com- petition, for which six teams entered, and which resulted in a win for Simanggang United, after a determined stand by the Betong team.
First Round, 13th August, 1926
  In this round. Betong easily eliminated Kampong Ulu by 5 goals to nil ; Kampong Hilir beat Banting by 2 goals to nil, while the last tie brought together Sadong and Simanggang United. 
  This was by far the best game of the competition, there being a marked absence of rough play, so characteristic of local soccer. From the kick off Sadong transferred play into Simanggang territory, when Johnson was called upon to save twice in succession. The home forwards next got going when Sadong were penalized for handling, Milan however kicked the penalty wide.
  The second half saw a change in Simanggang team, Johnson going up as centre forward, and Milan falling back to goal. Play now went with a swing, when the home defence was troubled, bujang clearing for the ball to be sent back again when Ginger Ho tested Milan with a first-timer. The ball was then worked into Sadong area along the right, when Johnson taking a pass from Gan Kim Tho drew first blood. The kick off saw a determined attempt by Sadong to equalize, but Seman checked the movement, the ball returning again, Fam Tain Min, the Sadong skipper, equalizing with a shot that gave Milan no chance. The forwards then worked the ball up when Pozy lifted a sitter over the bar. Play still continued in the Sadong area, when Johnson taking a pass fiom Gan Kim Tho worked through and scored, the whistle leaving Simanggang winners by two goals to one-
Second Round, 14th August. 1926
  Betong s. Kampong Hilir. The kampong made a brilliant start and within a few minutes Mohamad scored amid applause. Betong though a bit dazed. soon worked the ball up and signified their presence by equalizing within 10 minutes. Play was then of a ding dong nature, till the Betong skipper scored with a ball that bounced inside the goal after hitting the bottom of the cross-bar.


226	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE SEPTEMBER 1, 1926.
   After the interval, the kampong. who up to this
were holding their own very well, fell off badly
and Betong romped home victors by 5 goals to 2
St. Joseph’s School, Kuching.
Sports.
   The Annual Sports were held on the 9th instant,
the day being a holiday in honour of His Highness
the Tuan Muda’s birthday. The weather was
delightfully clear, reminding one of a Hawaian day
although unfortunately without the music. The
school was not sufficiently represented amongst the
competitors but those who took part showed a fine
sporting spirit, the honour of the day going to Nyan
Joon who had 7 firsts and 1 second to his credit.
   Messrs. William Tan and S.M. Mong have to be
congratulated for organising and carrying out a
rather lengthy programme of 25 events, starting at
1.30 p.m. and closing at 5.30 p m., without the
    slightest hitch.
   Below is given the results of the various events.
   1—75 yards (a). — 1 John Chong, 2 Ah Sing.
   2— 100 yards (c).—1 Joseph Chai, 2 Ah Ten.
   3—100 yards (d) —1 Nyan Joon, 2 Chee Loo.
   4—Inter-class Relay. 17th Std., 2 6th Std.
5— Wheelbarrow Race (open).—1 Nyan Joon and
Chee Loo, 2 Choo Ban and Joseph Chai.
   6—Long Jump (open)—1 Nyan Joon, 2 Choo Ban.
7—100 yards (old boys).—1 Stephen Harry, 2
Edmund Reutens.
8—250 yards Boarders’ Race (open). — 1 Nyan Joon,
2 Chee Loo.
9—250 yards Day Scholars’ Race (open).—1
Zainie, 2 Amid.
10—100 yards (b). — 1 John Chen, 2 Thomas Chai.
11—50 yards Veterans’ Race.—1 L. K. L. Chan, 2
L. Teck Soon.
12—Pole Jump (open).—1 Choo Ban, 2 Ah Shong.
13—1/4 mile open. -1 Nyan Joon, 2 Choo Ban.
14—1/4 mile (old boys). -1 Shack Kim, 2 Edmund
Reutens.
15—Three-legged Race (open).—1 Ah Ten and
John Goh, 2 Joseph Chai and Ah Shong.
16—Hurdle Race (open).—1 F. Eskoto,2Nyau Joon
17—250 yards (b);—1 John Chen, 2 Ah Tin.
18—High Jump (open).—1 Nyan Joon, 2 F. Eskoto.
19—Obstacle Race —1 Anthony Sulong, 2 Ah Boon.
20—Sack Race (open).—1 Choo Ban, 2 Ah Ten.
21—Blindfolded Jockey Race (open).—1 Nyan Joon
and Baba, 2 Choo Ban and Bachi.
22—250 yards (c).—1 Ah Shong, 2 Domingo.
23—75 yards (a).—1 Soong Fook, 2 Ben Wee.
24—3/4 mile.—1 Shack Kim, 2 Thai Too, 3 Kong
Yong.
25—Tug-of-War.—Boarders versus Day Scholars.
Winners- -Day Scholars --(Contributed-)
   Final 15th August, 1926
   Betong vs Simanggang United. The former
team on the merits of their previous victories were
expected to carry all before them, but the home
team proved to be quite a match for their op-
ponents. The first half saw Milan save brilliantly
while the home forwards gave the Betong defence
many anxious moments, play being mostly of
a ding-dong nature.
   The change over sent the Betong men in with a
determination to score, but the Simanggang
defence held out, till a misskick gave Nungkang
the chance to draw first blood for his side from
close quarters From the kick off the home team
got going and with four minutes to go, Johnson
taking a pass from Kadri worked through and
equalized- Soon after, a combined movement by
the home forwards gave Pozy a chance to centre,
for Johnson to skim the cross-bar with a first-
timer. the whistle leaving both teams with 
goal each. An extra 20 minutes was then allowed,
Simanggang missing a chance when Pozy placed
a high ball for Johnson to head over the bar.
Scores remained Betong 1, Simanggang 1.
   Re-play 16th August, 1926
   The two teams took the field before a record
Simanggang crowd, with a few changes on each
side. From the kick-off Simanggang took the
ball up when Seblie sent a hot shot which missed
the goal by inches. Betong then worked up, but
their forwards never proved formidable due to the
excellent play of Yap Ah Jiaw, Bujang, Seman
John Muda, Mood and Ahet in the home defence,
and Milan was never in difficulties. Play was for
the most part in Betong territory but in spite of
repeated attacks no score was registered.
   The change over saw both teams playing as
well as ever, the Betong team testing Milan thrice
during the half. A passing movement amongst
the home forwards then brought the ball into
Betong territory, when Pozy centred and Kadri
netted with ease- A little later Johnson taking
possession transferred to Seblie who returned for
Pozy to test the goalie with a hot shot, which
was turned away for a corner Soon after this,
Betong were penalized for handling Johnson, the
home skipper scoring from the free kick. Play
was now always round the Betong goal, and the
Simanggang team might have scored again as the
ball penetrated to the net; but the goal was dis-
allowed for a foul with the hands. The attack
on the Betong goal still continued Kadri missing
by inches with a sitter, while Johnson turned a
centre from Seblie over the bar. the final whistle
leaving Simanggang victors by 2 goals to nil.
The whistle was in the capable hands of Mr. A.L.
Honore for all the games.
   After the game Mr. F. A. W- Page-Turner, Re-
sident, Second Division, in the absence of H. H.
the Tuan Muda who unfortunately left for Ku-
ching that morning, distributed the medals to the
successful team and handed the cup to Mr. Tchee
Foong Hee, the President of the winning team,
intimating that he hoped to make this com-
petition an annual affair and that the cup offered
would also grow in size annually —[Contributed ] 


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1926.	227
         Club News.
Sarawak Club
BOWLING AVERAGES FOR JULY, 1926.
G.T. Bates
F. G. Carpenter 
J. P.Baird
G. D. W. Frayling ...
B. A. Trechman
H. H. the.Tuan Muda
C. D. Adams	...
W. Cotterill
R. V. Carr
J. S. Mudford
A. A. Rennie
J. A. McCullagh
N. A. Middlemas, ...
E. M. Marjoribanks
D. Y. Proudfoot
W. Harnack
B. J. C. Spurway ...
A. E. LawrenceNo. of Games.	Average.
        8	144-5
      72	141-6
       8	140-0
       28	133-4
      16	128-8
      10	127-7
      28	127-1
      25	127-1
      14	121-7
       9	120-1
       5	119-0
       6	117-0
      12	116-5
      12	114-9
      14	114-4
      10	118-1
       6	108-7
       5	90-2   BOWLING HANDICAP FOR JULY, 1926.
Score. H'cap. Total.
R. V. Carr (Winner) .	313	44	357
N. A. Middlemas	...	284	56	340
C. D. Adams	...	288	34	322
D. Y. Proudfoot	...	261	60	321
Dr. Marjoribanks	...	253	58	311
J. S. Mudford	233	48	281
G. D. W. Fravling	...	256	22	278
G T. Bates	...	272	scr.	272
W. Cotterill	...	226	34	260   BOWLING AVERAGES FOR AUGUST, 1926.
    Name.	No. of Games.	Averages.
J. P. Baird	6	139.3
E. M Marjoribanks	18	139.2
R. V. Carr	19	136.6
G. T. Bates	9	134.8G. D. W. Frayling 
D. Y. Proudfoot 
N. A. Middlemas 
C. D. Adams 
J. S. Mudford 
W. Cotterill 
J. A. McCullagh 
C. S. Griffiths 
W. Harnack 
A. M. Forrest 
R.C. Kay   24
     9
   15
   22
   10
23
   12
   10
7
6
 13 
        130.4
       128.6
       127.7
       124.8
       123.8
       122.8
       114.1
       112 4
       100.4
       100.1
94.9
J. A. H. HARDIE, Hon. Secretary.        SarawakGolf ClubSarawak Turf Club.

           Autumn Meeting, 1926
.
     
     
     
     
     
     Saturday 16th and Monday 18th October.

PROGRAMME.
First Day: Saturday, 16th October.
1ST RACE.—2.0 p.m.—A handicap—Distance 5 furlongs—Open to Sarawak Division IV ponies. Entrance fee $10.
2ND RACE.—2.25 p.m.—A handicap—Distance 8 furlongs—Open to Sarawak Divisions III and IV ponies. Entrance fee $10.
3RD RACE.—2.50 p.m.—A handicap—Distance 5 furlongs—Open to Sarawak Divisions II, ?, and IV ponies. Entrance fee $10.
4TH RACE.—3.15 p.m.—A handicap—Distance 6 furlongs—Open to Sarawak Divisions I, II, III, IV, and B. N.B. Division ?, ponies. Entrance fee $10.
5TH RACE.—3.40 p.m.—A handicap—Distance 4 furlongs—Open to Sarawak Division IV ponies. Entrance fee $10.
6TH RACE.—4.5 p.m.—A handicap—Distance 6 furlongs—Open to Sarawak Divisions ? and IV ponies. Entrance fee $10.
7TH RACE.—4.30 p.m.—A handicap—Distance 4 fur- longs—Open to Sarawak Divisions ?, ?, and IV ponies. Entrance fee $10.
AUGUST MONTHLY COMPETITION (STROKE).
      Mrs. R. V. Carr (winner) 47—9	... 38
OPTIONAL SWEEP ON ABOVE.
    Mrs. R. V. Carr drew the winner.
  The September Monthly Competition (Bogey) will be played during Saturday 4th or Sunday 5th of September.
  Owing to certain unforeseen circumstances, the scheme, under the direction of Mr. R. D. Binnie, for the reclamation of the swampy ground between the first and second greens has bad to be postponed.
  The intended alteration of the direction of the course as from the 1st August will therefore not yet take effect.
E. O. BRUCE,
Hon, Secretary.
8TH RACE.—5.0 p.m.—A handicap—Distance 3 furlongs—Open to Sarawak Divisions I, II, III, and IV, and B. N. B. Division III ponies. Entrance fee $10.
9TH RACE.—5.30 p.m.—A handicap—Distance 3 furlongs—Open to ponies in Sarawak Divisions I, II, III, and IV, which have never won a race at any meeting in Sarawak. Entrance fee $10.
Second Day: Monday, 18th October.
1ST RACE.—2.0 pm.—A handicap— Distance 5 fin- longs—Open to Sarawak Divisions ?, ?, III, and IV, and B. N. B. Division ? ponies. Entrance fee $10.


228
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926.
2ND 2ND RACE —2.25 p.m.—A handicap— Distance 4 furlongs—Open to Sarawak Divisions III and IV ponies. Entrance fee $10.
3rd RACE.—2.50 p.m.—A handicap—Distance 6 furlongs—Open to Sarawak Divisions II, III, and IV ponies. Entrance fee $10.
4TH RACE.—3.15 p.m.- -A handicap—-Distance 3 furlongs- Open to Sarawak Division IV ponies. Entrance fee $10.
5TH RACE.—3.40 p.m.- A handicap- Distance 4 fur-  longs—Open to Sarawak Divisions I, II. HI, and IV. and B.N.B. Division III ponies. Entrance fee $10.
6TH RACE.—4.5 p.m.—A handicap--Distance 5 fur- . longs-- Open to Sarawak Divisions III and  IV ponies. Entrance fee $10.
7TH RACE.—4 30 p.m.—A handicap—Distance 3 fur-  longs—Open to Sarawak Divisions II, III, and IV ponies. Entrance fee $10.
8TH RACE.—4.55 p.m.—A handicap—Distance 6 fur- longs Open to Sarawak Division IV ponies. Entrance fee $10.
9TH RACE.—5.30 p.m. — A handicap Distance Race 
Course, about one mile, two furlongs, and 
150 yards. Open to Sarawak Divisions ?, 
                        ?, ?, and ?. ponies. Entrance fee $15.


    Prizes amounting to approximately $5,120 will
be awarded to winning and placed ponies at this 
Meeting.
         Regulations.
1. All nominations, accompanied by entrance fees, description of ponies, and declaration of colours, to be made to the Honorary Secretary not later than noon of the 4th September
g. (a) Entrance fees for ponies entered previously and scratched before that date will be returned.
(b) Handicaps for the First Day will be published on 13th September.
(c) In the event of ponies being scratched  before 2nd October, half the entrance fees will be returned.
(d) Handicaps for the Second Day will be
posted on the Notice Board of the Sarawak
Club at 12 noon on the 17th October.
(t) In the event of ponies being scratched
before 5 p.m. on that day, half the entrance
fees will be returned.
(u) Entrance fees after these dates and times
shall be forfeited in the event of any
ponies not running.
3. The penalty for a win. after publication of
the handicaps, shall be 5th.
4. The maximum weight shall be 11 stone
and the minimum 7 stone.
5. Registered Racing Ponies in B.N.B. Divi-
sion III shall be eligible for entry in Races
open to Sarawak Division 1 ponies, and
shall he handicapped for the first day’s
racing in which they participate at not less
than 11 stone.
6. Ponies from British North Borneo which
have not been raced at any meetings of the
British North Borneo Turf Club, other
than Subscription Griffins imported by
the Sarawak Turf Club, shall lie classified
in Sarawak Division ?, and shall carry not
more than 21 lbs. below the top weight in
in the first day’s races in which they parti-
cipate. subject to the provisions of Regula-
tion No. 3 above.
7. Registered Racing Pomes in B.N.B. Divisions I and II are ineligible for entry in Races at Meetings of the Sarawak Turf Club.
8. All ponies in Sarawak Divisions II, III, and IV shall be eligible for entry in any race for ponies of any division higher than their own particular division.
9. No second prize will be awarded if there are less than three runners, and no third prize if less than five.
10. Ponies must have run on the First Day to be eligible for entry in Races on the Second Day.
11. The owner of any pony entered for the last race on the second day must run such pony in that race, unless he shall have declared in writing to the Honorary Secretary not later than 5 pm. on the day before the race that his pony will not run, or unless he shall at any time previous to the starting of the race prove to the satisfaction of the Stewards that the pony is unfit to run.
12. Any Jockey who has not already won two races shall lie entitled to an allowance of 5 tbs.
13. No whip used in any race shall exceed two feet in length.
14. If spurs be worn these shall not have rowels.
15. Any objection shall be accompanied by a deposit of $10.
16. The maximum fee to a winning jockey shall lie $15 and to a losing jockey $5, in the absence of any agreement to ride for a lower sum.
17. Where not otherwise especially mentioned, the Rules of the Race Course will be the same as those adopted by the Straits Racing Association.
18. The Race Course will be open for training on Monday 6th September.
19. All communications and inquiries to be addressed to the Honorary Secretary.
By Order of the Committee,
NEW OFFICIAL RECLASSIFICATION OF PONIES FOR AUTUMN
MEETING, 1926.
I6th and 18th October.
Division I.Division II-Division ?.    Division IV-Billy BusterWhite Wings      NizamBagaimana late    Jalan RnmputHopelessSakbon      BangPegasus late
          KelilitirBurakPenglima      KijangThe RatKismetTolin      BakcbaIfBlazesLutong      BintangPitakLee MahSisit      KuchingBintang
     TerpilehWembleySarawak      RusaSabekUntongAdham      JinSakaiChobaBeaver      Damit.Manna BulehAkaiApa Kena      The ScoutAnjing lautPengarah      Mah Jong.AjaibTony, late GundahBnrong      GhalibShotaway      PenghulrPlandok      AladdinGuntor      AzabFan TanJ. A. H. HARDIE, 
Hon Secretary.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1920.
229
St Michael’s Catholic Club, Kuching  
TENNIS SINGLES CHAMPIONSHIP. 
August, 1926.
RESULT		
Stephen Hurry beat N. Ah Thiam,-5—7,6—0,6—2 Ho Hong Soon bent S. M. Mong, 6—2, 5—7, 6—4 Ho Hong Soon bent S. Harry, 6—0, 4—6, 6—2 Ho Hong Soon (Challenger) met L. K. L. Chan (holder) on 24th instant. Weather was fine and play commenced at 4.30 p.m. resulting in a win for Chan who retains his title by healing his opponent 6—2, 6—2.
            L. K. L. CHAN,
Honorary Secretary.
  Extension of St. Joseph’s School.
     Father Haidegger begs to acknowledge with
hearty thanks the following donations :—
$200—Mr. Law Chen Hiang and Chop Sang
       Cheong	...	..	... $ 400
$150—Mr. Ong Tiang Swee	...	••• 150
$100—Chop Chin Chiang, Ong Ewe Hai, Chan
Kee Ong, Chin Ann Brothers, Kwong
Lee Bank, Sarawak Chinese Bank, Lim
Tee Chew, Ho Hong, Wee Kheng Chiang,
Song Kheng Hai, Nissa Shokai, Pin
Kee, Tan Chin Hee, Siang Hak
      Whatt ...	...	... 1,400
$50—Mr. Tan Sum Guan, Tiang Seng Chan, Bian Chiang Bank, Sin Seng Hak, Kueh Ah Jee, Hiap Soon Hin, Sam Yik, Wo Song Tong, Dr. Krishna. Eng Hin, Hock Guan Ann, Thiam Joo	600
$30—Chop Hong Kiat, Chin Thong, Eng Whatt, Wha Heng, Soon Guan Ann, Wing Hin Loong	...	180
$25—Chop Wha Hong, Mr. Lim Swee Kee,
      Kong On ...	...		75
$15—Hiap Chin, Seng Chan, Chin Kiat, Cheong
Kim Eng, Sim Cheng Liang, Khye Kee, Soon Guan ...	...		90
$10—Chuan Hong, Guan Ho Leong, Guan
Whatt, Nasorollah, Chuan Aik Hin,
Hap Leong Seng, Kong Chan, Kong Eng
Hin, Wat Thong, Eng Moh, Liin Bah
Too, Boon Ton Siong, Hong Long, Long
Guan, Choo Chuan Whatt, Sabandi, Eng
Ann, Lee Yenk Tak, Hack Anu, Thai
Seng, Thai Foh, Yong Soon. Tan Bak
Lim, Ho Lee, Syn Kim Eng, Long
Whatt, Peng Seng, Chin Hin	... 280
$5—Hiap Huat, Eng Ho, Siang Choon, Sin
Kiat Ann, Siu Kwee Ann, Joo Huat, Siu
Chiang Joo, Bian Hin, Sin Seng Whatt,
Hock Soon, Tiang Siew Tong, Chin
Hong, Chay Seng Tong. Tan Kah Kee,
S. M. Tan E. G. Tan. Hee Fong, Chuan
Chiang, Kim Eng Guan, Ho Leong,
Nyuk Foh, Kheng Seng, Chua Lee, Tan
Hua Chiang, Chuan Keng, Fook Hin
Loong, Kwang Seng. Joo Say, Pug Kong
Seng, Hong Joo, Khoon Hong, Chuan
Seng, Sin Hap Seng, Eng Guan, Kee
Chong, Whai Joo, Joo Hong Long, Yong
Hong, Hak Kee, Joo Choon, Whatt Seng,
Hong Whatt, Bian Hin, Seng Ann              220
   $4—Long Heng, Chin Kong, Ng Sin Fook,
       Seng Kee ...	...	16
   $3—Sin Hiap Soon, Mui Kee ...	6
   $2—Bian Ann, Heng Hak, Hak Joo, Chong
Yong Hong, Kwi Joo Whatt, Seng Thai,
Swee Seng, Hock Joo, Kueh Swee Hak,
Hak Soon, Nam Heng, Wha Onn, Jong
Koon Foh, Ho Jin Tong, Wah Yeng,
Meow Fatt, Ek Chiang Hee, Chiap
Soon	...	...	...	36
   $1—Teck Joo, Kim Fong Eng, Mook Gee
       Chong, Kong Sin Loong	...	4
   $10—Bian Kheng, Tong Hin, Ban Joo Long,
Ka Foong, A. F. Law, Dr. Ujita, Heng
Ann, Teck Hong, Yeo Kay Cho, Ong
Khoon ...	...	100
Total $3,557
St. Thomas’ School Building Fund.
Previously acknowledged	...	$12,116
$400—Mr. Ng Bak Choon	...	...	400
$350 -Per Mr. Lee Ah Bee	...	...	350
$300—Mr. Voon Thian Soo	...	...	300
$250—Messrs. Ong Kwan Hin, Robert de
      Rozario, Chop Lim See Lam ...	750
$225—Mr. Chan Qui Cho	...	...	225
$200- -Messrs. Yap Ghee Heng, Lee Qui Lim 400 $150—Mr. C. Teck Cheng	...	...	150
$100—Messrs, Lim Swee Kee, Ee Tiang Lok,
Ho Buey Hon, Lim Tee Chew, Lim Siong Kee, Chan Qui Yaw, Chan Qui Chong, Law Chin Swee, Lim Tiang Teck, Ng Ah Kiong, The Sarawak Milling Co.                     1,100 
$50—Dr. Wong Chong Way	...              50
$30—Messrs. John Muda, Yap Ghee Hock 60 
$25—Messrs. C. Jin Kwi, Teo Bok Cheng	50
$20—Messrs. Law Ah Lan, A. Mohd. Shariff,
      Chop Soon Guan, The Kuching Drug
      Store	...	...                80
$15—Messrs. S. Gawing, Chops Tan Ho Chiang,
      Choo Chuan Huat	...	...               45
$10—Messrs. Wee Peng Swee. Abdul Karim,
      Tati Kim Seng, Chong Jun Jaw, Chops
      Siang Choon. Sin Seng Huat, Sin Chuan
      Ho, Chuan Seng ...	...                 80
$5—Mr., Lim Ah Kow, Chops Ho Leong,
      Chuan Chiang, Seng Teck, Swee Huat
      Seng, Bian Ann, Hong Huat ...                     35
            Monthly subscriptions to date 1,157
$17,348
A. N. ELLIS, Hon. Treasurer.
Pasal Anak Bugau.
Adai pen Batang Ketungau, 
Ikan maioh datai ari Danau; 
Bepati ka ai Batang Skalan, 
Demara enggau Lempa Semindau.

Kumpang betimbang enggau Batang Karau, 
Batang Sedangu lalu ka Bugau;
Idai berimbai enggau Batang Keburau, 
Melugu numpu ka Batang Slau.

Aku tu nulis lalu ngenang, 
Dri rita ditusi olih orang; 
Laban jako tau ka kenang. 
Pasal olah sida Laut Sentang.

Adaipen Bugau di Batang Ketungau, 
Maioh penusah maioh pengachau;
Tuai dua iko Gani enggau Bimau, 
Takut ka pupu wang enggau brau.

Megai prentah Laut Sentang,
Mupu Bugau tikai nya lambang;
Nyambut wang, nyambut ga barang, 
Peneka milih samoa kersa orang.

Numbas pengraja sida magang, 
Kena keduan sida Laut Sentang; 
Utai ti mauah enggau samoa barang, 
Kena ambi sida Pengeran enggau Abang.

Udah puas dikeduan Laut Sentang, 
Gani bejako enda agi malik blakang;
Ngosong prentah Raja Simanggang, 
Nusi samoa leman penusah orang.

“Pupu Pemyembah enda aku timbang,” 
Jako Gani anembiak sida Sentang;
“Aku ka bepegai di Prentah Simanggang," 
“Enda aku matak jako enda aku balang."


230
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926.
   Ukai nama agi penusah samoa orang,
   Kalam di jari enda tau ngarang;
   Indu anembiak baka ti digitang, 
   Diau di babas di kampong puang.
   
   Datai Tuan Raja mudik Simanggang,
   Puiai an nengri Trusan enggau Limbang;
   Bunyi meriam ukai agi chechamang, 
   Didinga jauh datai ka di Kalingkang.
   
   Undor mensia nadai agi betagang,
   Indu, anembiak, datai ka indai orang;
   Adai ti besangking, adai ti gegelang,
   Adai ti bechara adai ti betrang.
   Ukai aku bepanjai ka kenang,
   Utai maioh enda aku bilang;
   Semadi aku mintas ka karang.
   Niu pasal sida anembiak Sentang.
   Angkat Bugau melunggang Kalingkang,
   Ngosong Tuan Raja datai di Simanggang;
   "Ampun Raja amba nuan bekenang,"
   “ Minta pegai Prentah Simanggang.’’
   Tuan Raja ati nya pemadu lantang,
   Nyaut Bugau jako iya pen trang;
   “Deka ga megai Prentah Simanggang,"
   “Utang kite ka melunggang Kalingkang."
   Adaipen sida Bugau agi beati kakang, 
   Bedampa di langgai Sungai Trentang;
   Nya sigi kampong gun menoa puang, 
   Pati ai pegai Blanda enggau Laut Sentang.
   
   Sida Bugau dua ati tiga beserpang,
   Laban sida nyau teleba diau di menoa puang;
   Tambah mega sida sayau ka tembawai pinang, 
   Takut ka buah tanah kena ambi orang.
   
   Adaipen Penyembah ti megai menoa Sentang,
   Ingat ka lilih ai Bukit Kalinkang;
   Mudik Ketungau ka mupu samoa orang, 
   Begaut Begau lari ngagai kampong puang.
   
Sekut ati aku penyuan enda tentu lantang, 
Ingat ka sida Bugau lalu diau kekitang;
Sida diau di antara menoa di kampong puang,
   Baka Punan, Beketan, nunda jelu enggau benatang.
   Dalam aku tu dudok megai kalam ngenang,
   Tu bulan May 1890 Tuan dibilang;
   Ukai nama agi penusah di menoa orang,
   Pechara apin putus ati semampai enda lantang.
   Orang betitah pasal sida anak Bugau,
   “Lari ka panas nadai bekamarau,’’
   “Lari ka ujan apin ngaga langkau,"
   “Lari ka glombang teparok ka di rasau."
W. H.
   The late Mr. A. Singaram Pillai.
40 YEARS IN KUCHING.
—?—
  In the death of Mr. Singaram Pillai the Southern Indians, in general, of Kuching, and the Hindus in particular lose a very valuable friend, who passed away in his own village near Negapatam on 31st July last.
  The deceased came out from India with his uncle when only 12 years old, and apprenticed with him in different things, and finally became a contractor. During his long stay of 42 years in Kuching he earned the goodwill of the whole community. Among his own people he was known as the “vahdyar” (teacher).
  In all social and religious functions of any Hindu household he had an important share of work which was honorary. Even ill health did not generally prevent him from the discharge of these duties. Domestic and martrimonial differences in Hindu families were often referred to him, and he was always patient and willing to settle their difficulties He was partly instrumental in building the Hindu temple of Kuching.
  His demise at a premature age of 54 is greatly regretted, and sympathy is extended to the bereaved family both here and in India.
( Contributed.)
       CORRESPONDENCE.
   [The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
SINGAPORE.
23rd August. 1926.
   The Editor,
     Sarawak Gazette.	
        Kuching, Sarawak.
SIR,	
     I have read, with much interest, “A Sarawakian's" letter and the remarks made in your issue of the 2nd of August, 1926.
   In view of the numerous letters received by the Sarawak Association in Singapore from educated Sarawakians asking for information re clerical vacancies, I cannot agree with the remarks that “the sons of the soil" prefer tapping their rubber in spite of the “apparently handsome salaries" offered through clerical vacancies.
    It may be true that a few of the Sarawakians who own rubber lands prefer to be “masters of ‘ their own," bur it seems that those who were not born with “golden spoons in their mouths" were
overlooked.
       The statement that “preference has always been given to applicants “born and educated in Sarawak" is also not quite correct. I presume you are quite aware that many Sarawakians who were not able to obtain clerical work in the Sarawak Government or commercial offices have left the , colony to seek employment elsewhere.
       There are hundreds of them resident in the S. S. and F. M. S., as recorded by the Sarawak Association here. If given a chance, I dare say, many of I these people will be quite willing to return to their native land and the homes of their fond parents. But, alas ! many of these chances were given to outsiders most of whom, I presume, possess no better experience than a school boy fresh from one of the local schools in Sarawak
Yours etc.,
S. L. S.
   [Our statement is misquoted, it was: “Where all things are equal, and often where they are not, preference and a period of probation has always been given to applicants born and educated in Sarawak." No government, or mercantile firm, can afford to engage employees who are obviously unsuited to fill certain vacancies.—Ed.]
       MONTHLY REPORTS.
        SECOND DIVISION.
Simanggang.
June, 1926.
   General.—Mr. R L. Daubeny and Mr. D. E. Calver, Assistant Conservator of Forests, returned from Lubok Antu on the 2nd, Mr. R. L. Daubeny reported that Abang Sedik, Native Officer, was away up river visiting Dyak villages and investigating the rumour of a fresh outbreak of smallpox.
   The 3rd being the anniversary of His Majesty King George's birthday the offices were closed and the day observed as a holiday.
   Abang Omar, Native Officer, Belong, arrived, on the 4th. His visit was in connection with various cases he bad adjourned for an opinion. He returned to Belong again on the 6th.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926.
231
   Mr. N. A. Middlemas, Superintendent of Surveys, arrived from Lingga on the 6th. The banks of the Batang Lupar have now been surveyed from the mouth right up to Simanggang. Mr. N. A. Middle- mas returned to Kuching on the 7th in the m.l. Rahmat Septuyah.
   Mohamad Seblee of the Survey Department continued the survey of this river from Simanggang up to Engkilili.
   Clerk Gek Cheng proceeded to Engkilili on the 9th and took over from clerk Chew Lim who will do duty at Simanggang.
   Abang Sedik, Native Officer, Lubok Antu, reports he has visited Dyak villages in the ulu and found Penghulu Kama at home. Penghulu Kama has been accused by certain Dyaks of going on the warpath. He was very annoyed at these false statements.
   The new telephone line from Simanggang to Betong was opened to the public on the 14th and mandor Abas returned to Kuching on the 21st.
   Three Fortmen arrived from Lubok Antu on the 14th to do duty here, and three from Simanggang were transferred to Lubok Antu.
   Dresser Attenborough of Betong arrived on 17th. He reported theft of $109 from the Betong Dispensary. On the 18th he and Penghulu Satieng proceeded to Lubok Antu in order to investigate the outbreak of smallpox and to enforce vaccination, which the Ulu Ai Dyaks have refused so far.
   Mr. R. L. Daubeny, who has been granted seven months’ leave, proceeded to Kuching on the 22nd in m.l. One. By this opportunity I sent $31,000 to the Kuching Treasury.
   On the 22nd Mr. E. Cox of the Wireless Department arrived from Sadong in m.l. Vava. Next day he put the wireless in order and communication was established again. He returned to Kuching on the 25th.
   On the 25th the m.l. One arrived from Kuching via Lingga, Mr. A. L. M. Honore was on board. He arrived at Lingga direct from Lundu and has been appointed to do duty in this Division.
   An unfortunate accident occurred on the 29th. Whilst a party of Dyaks from Penghulu Renang's bouse were in the jungle felling a tree, a branch of a dead tree near by fell and struck one of the party on the head and he was killed instantaneously.
   Resident's Court.—Bong Choon Tet VS. Phang Sim, Bong Kim Lian (f.), and Liew Myeo Hin, breach of Chinese Betrothals and Main age, also paternity. Case referred co Kuching Court.
   Ikom and Dimong, Saribas Dyaks, for spreading false reports, this case was adjourned until the Resident visits Saribas.
         District Court Civil and Criminal.— Mujah VS. Jimbat, Dyak ulu Lingga, land dispute. Land to be redivided in presence of Native Officer, Lingga, and P. Linang.
   Six;cases from Saribas re burning engkabang trees—cases settled, and compensation to be arranged by Native Officer, Betong.
   Prisoner Then Chai Hin three months’ extra and six strokes with rottan for theft; P. C. Andam sentenced to three months’ R.I. for allowing prisoner Bak Kee to escape.
   One Civil claim of $654 48 settled in which defendant is ordered to pay within one week.
   Abang Ali vs. Udin, bind dispute, land reverts to defendant, and plaintiff loses appeal fee and is fined $25.
   Tambi Bujang appeal against decision of Native Officer, Betong. Decision of Native Officer upheld. and appellant sentenced to three months’ R.I. for-thteft.
   Kumbot (f.) fined two piculs section 324 I.P.C for wounding Ungok (f.) and Bara fined one picul for not stopping bis wife from wounding Ungok (f.).
also Kumbot (f) and Bara fined 20 catties each for
adultery ; Joo Khoi, an old offender, sentenced to one
year’s R.I. for theft of fowls ; Surieng, Dyak Saribas,
one year’s R.L for theft of Government money at
Betong Dispensary; Ujai, Dyak Bangat, charge of
theft, case dismissed ; Daiau and Ensulit (f.) sen-
tenced to one year and six months' R.I. respectively
for incest; Ng Yew vs. Ah Moi (f.), Court orders
Ah Moi (f.) to return to her husband Ng Yew.
   Magistrate’s Court Civil and Criminal.—Ujah (J.)
vs. Ungoh (f) property dispute. They are ordered
to make a proper arrangement themselves. Juten
vs. Gamang, jelutong path dispute. Path reverts to
plaintiff. Sumbang and Lui, prisoners, sentenced to
three months and two months respectively for fight-
ing in jail; Kuan, prisoner, two months’ extra for
theft of vegetables; 19 shopkeepers were prosecuted
for breach of Bazaar Regulations and were fined $2
each and costs; Leong Fook Hong vs. Bong Kin,
land dispute, land reverts to defendant; Mayan,
Dyak Trusan, one month for theft of jelutong;
Mandor Gapor dismissed for unnecessarily striking
a prisoner; Melin, Dyak, fined $2 and costs for
planting rubber without a permit; Ta rip fined $10
for obtaining money under false pretences; Jee
Phin fined $10 for planting rubber without a
permit; Resa vs. Muling, appeal against P. Ang-
kon's decision re jelutong path dispute. Decision
of Penghulu upheld and road reverts to Resa.
   There were numerous other cases which call for
no mention.
   Forest.—Mr. D. E. Calver, Assistant Conservator
of Forests, reports as follows;—During the month
a detailed examination was undertaken of the grow-
ing stock in the Sarawak Timber Company con-
cession area between Lingga and Sebuyow. Sample
strips were selected at eleven different points
throughout the area, and all trees over one foot-
diameter were counted, measured, and classified.'
When these figures have been worked up, it will be
possible to give a reasonably accurate estimate of
the kinds and qualities of timber available in the
area.
   Agriculture. 89 permits to plant para rubber
were issued and 18 to plant pepper.
   Cattle.—The Simanggang herd number 93 head
and Lubok Antu herd number 44 head.
   Public Works.—The prison gang averaged o.
The prison gang completed the whitewashing and
tarring of all Government buildings, they also wore
employed on weeding roads and ditches and started
levelling sites for two clerks’ quarters. Carpenter
Matsalleh was busily employed preparing timber for
clerks’ quarters and repairing boats.
   Medical.—A total of 343 persons were treated in
hospital during the month as follows;—Europeans 4,
Eurasians 2, Malays 39, Chinese 18, Javanese 1,
Tamil 1, Dvaks 278.
   185 cases of N.A B injection for yaws, etc., were
given during the month.
   Shipping.—10 motor launches and 10 bandongs
arrived and 11 motor launches and 10 bandongs
cleared during the month.
  Trade,.—The principal exports were:—
Gutta jelutong 1.046 piculs valued at
Pepper, white	43	do.
Pepper, black	105	do.
Para rubber	163	do.
Para scrap	53	do.
Imports.
June, 1926	...	... $41,346
June, 1925	...	...	37,761
... $18 833
2,169
2.156
9.250
1,073 Exports. $44,752
31.982
July, 1926.
   Court.—The were numerous cases heard in the Magistrate’s Court- both Civil and Criminal A number of Dyaks and Chinese were fined for plaining rubber without taking out a permit Nanang of



232                                  THE SARAWAK GAZETTE SEPTEMBER 1, 1926
Serinat was fined one picul for laving claim to land
belonging to Jangan ; Renggi of Skrang fined one
picul for same offence; Sarang, a youth, sentenced
to one month's R.I. for theft; Sumbut and Omar,
Malays, were sentenced to three months’ R.I for
theft of latex cups. There were numerous other
cases. Fines and fees amounted to $811.68.
   General.—On the 5th, accompanied by Datu
Abang Haji Dulrasid, I left in the m.l. One for the
Kalaka and Saribas via Sebuyow, returning again on
the 16th. I visited the fishing village of Samaludam.
The Malays here have made a fairly good road
through the kampong and bazaar. There are now
eight shops, all doing good trade.
   On the 26tb Mr. P. J. Johnson, Special Forest
Ranger, arrived in the m.l. Rahmat Septuyah. He
has coma to take over from Mr. D. E. Calver,
Assistant Conservator of Forests, who has been
appointed to do duty in Kuching. Mr. D. E. Calver
left for Kuching on the 21st.
   On the 29th I visited Engkilili and found the
grounds kept in good order. Next morning I held
Court and Phang Sin was sentenced to two years’
R.I. under Order No. XX VII, clause 4. Bong
Kim Lian and his wife Liew Myeo Hin were ordered
to refund “brian" and to pay damages to Bong
Choon Tet. I left Engkilili at 1 p.m. and reached
Simanggang at 4 30 p.m.
   The m.l. Rahmat Septuyah. arrived on the 30th
with Mr. K. H. Gillan, P.M.G., on board. Became
here to put the Post Office in thorough working
order, and also to open up a Post Office Savings
Bank.
   Forest.—During the middle of the month Mr. P. J.
Johnson, Forest Ranger, 8.C . took over charge of
the Division from Mr. D. F. Calver, Assistant Con-
servator of Forests. Work all through was of a rou-
tine nature, the only point worthy of note being the
permanent appointment of a forest clerk and forest
guard at Kabong from the beginning of the month
under review.
   Shipping.—Two motor launches and ten bandongs
arrived and eight motor launches and ten bandongs
cleared during the month.
   Cattle -The Simanggang herd number 94 head
and Lubok Antu herd number 50 head.
   Public Works.—The prison gang average 55.03
and were employed on levelling two sites for clerks’
quarters and general upkeep of ornamental grounds
and roads.
   Medical.—Dresser Attenborough visited Dyaks as
far us Nanga Telains above Lubok Antu and vac-
cinated 3,200 Dyaks. Penghulus Kana, Barroh and
Mandau refused to allow their people to be vaccina-
ted. Total amount of deaths from smallpox during
the year is 134.
   A total of 248 persons were treated in hospital
during the month as follows:—Europeans 2, Malays
24, Chinese 17, Tamil 1, Javanese 1, Dyaks 203.
   127 cases of N.A.B. injection for yaws, etc., were
given, and 134 persons were vaccinated during the
month.
   Trade.—The principal exports were : —
Gutta jelutong	     1,012 piculs valued at
Pepper, white	136	do.
Pepper, black	82	do.
Para rubber	204	do.
Para scrap	59	do.
Sago raw	20	do.
Imports.
July, 1926	.„	... $34,094
July. 1925 . ...	...	27,129
$16,656
8,195
3,975
14,145
2,254 60
Exports.
$56,545
82,088
Saribas.
June, 1926	
        The Court Writer, Belong, reports as follows for the month of June.
   Court.— In the Native Court. Tan Song Ngee was fined $25 for Breach of Opium Regulations; Nyaiom and Brenggang (f.) were lined 20 catties each for adultery ; Nyaiom was further fined 30 catties for divorcing his former wife, and Nyampah, father of Nyaiom was fined 10 catties for giving false evidence, re above case. Jangan and Beti (f.) were both, fined 20 catties each for adultery, while Bong Kui, a Betong Chinese, was fined 10 catties for defamation of character. There were numerous other minor cases. Fines and fees for the month amounted to $333.08.
   General.—Policemen finished whitewashing and tarring the Government buildings towards end of the month, and they have also been kept on their  usual routine work, clearing roads and ditches and mowing the surrounding compound as well. Lance-Corporal Lani was recalled back to Simanggang, and Lance-Corporal Ngelambong was ordered to return here and resume charge of the police of this station.
    Contractor Jee Ah Khoon commenced work on the new Government Vernacular School at the I beginning of the month, and I am glad to state that towards end of mouth all posts, beams and other important framework for the building are ready and will soon be erected. The levelling of the ground for this building has been done by Malays.
    The construction of the telephone between Simanggang and this place was completed about the  middle of the month, and since then communication has been continuous and much appreciated by the Chinese.
   Dresser T. Attenborough was ordered to go over to Simanggang for duty and proceeded there on the morning of the 17th, together with Lance-Corporal , Lani. Previous to bis going he reported that Government medical money amounting to $109.50 had been stolen from the Dispensary, and one, Surieng, an outside Dyak, was found to be the culprit.
   Shipping.—M.S. Lang Endang and Hock Ann each made four tripe to and from Belong and Bintang Trang one. Three sailing vessels entered and three cleared the port during the month.
   Agriculture.—Five permits to plant rubber were issued during the month.
   Trade.—The principal exports were: —
Gutta jelutong	19	piculs	valued at ...	$302	302
Para rubber	710	do.	...	49,724
Para scrap	244	do.	...	7,311
Padi	50	pasus	do.	...	50
Imports.	Exports.
June,	1926	...	...	$34,739	$58,669
June,	1925	...	...	42,614	77,082
  The Court Writer, Pusa, reports as follows for
the month of June.
  Court.—Very few cases came up before the Native
Court during the month. Fines and fee» for the
month amounted to $171.36.
  General.—On the 3rd instant I left for Belong,
accompanied by Lance-Corporal Sumbang, taking up
May cash accounts, etc., I returned to Pusa again
on the 7th.
  On the 17th instant Abang Dulkarrim, Native
Officer, went up to Debak to interview Sedik, Native
Officer, in re the removing of driftwood from the
river.
  On the 19th instant, accompanied by P.C. Bungin,
I left for Debak on clerical duty. I returned to
Pusa on the 24th instant.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER. 1, 1926.                            233
   Assessment on shophouses was collected and fees
paid as per Order No. ?, 1915, No European
Officer visited the station during the month.
   Health. -The health of the district has been fairly
good.
   Public Works.— The. policemen were kept busy
during the month in general upkeep of the Govern-
ment compound.
   Shipping.—16 sailing vessels entered, and 18 sail-
ing vessels cleared the por( during the month.
  Trade.—The principal exports were :—
Para rubber	274	piculs valued	at	...	$16,300
Para scrap	61	do.	...	1.820
Gutta jelutong	418	do.	...	5,020
Raw sago	24	koyans valued	at	...	2,415
Imports.	Exports
June, 1926	...	...	$22,084	$36,159
June, 1925	...	...	34,780	55,110
July, 1926.
   The Court Writers, Belong and Pusa, report as follows for the month of July :—
   Court.—Before Resident and Native Court, Edward, of Skuyat, was lined ten catties for interfering with work of rubber instructor; Thiam Jew, a Spaoh Chinese, was fined $200 for illicit importation of spirits: Ginchang and Krandan (f.) were fined two and one picul respectively for incest and berangkat; Undi and his sister Ramunai (f.) were fined two and one picul also for minor incest; Leman of Buai was also fined on two separate charges one picul and 15 catties for destroying and damaging engkabang belonging to others, he was further ordered to pay compensation to owners; Four Dyaks were fined $25 and $35 each for creating disturbances which led to fighting in Salang's house during a feast. There are numerous other fines, mostly for adultery, and other minor ones were imposed. Gringas, an Ulu Layer Dyak, was imprisoned for three months for abusing and refusing to obey order of Government Officials. Mot to six months' R.I. for breach of trust, and Long Moi. a Chinese, to nine months’ R.I. for stealing rubber from the smokehouse at Pasar Ulu. Fines and fees for the month amounted to $1,302.34.
   General.—Sanggat Broke joined the clerical service on the 1st of the month in place of William Hadin who resigned the service at end of the month.
   Penghniu Isek and Lance-Corporal Ngelambong left for the Ulu Layer on the 3rd till 8th to mark out and set boundaries to certain farming land which has been litigated in Court.
   The Superintendent of Rubber Export, Mr. G. M Allman, arrived from Sibu on the beginning of the month in m.l. Scud and remained here the whole month through, visiting all the neighbouring villages of this district. The Divisional Resident, accompanied by Datu Abang Haji Dulrasid, arrived here on the 10th by the m.l. One and remained here till the 15th.
   Numerous cases were brought up before the Resident for settlement. The Resident visited the bazaar and warned the Chinese about the dirtiness of same, and ordered them to keep it tidy by draining the front and back throughout the whole length of the bazaar.
   Dresser T. Attenborough returned to duty here on the 23rd, having been away for 42 days to the Ulu Batang Ai vaccinating. During his absence the Government Dispensary here was closed.
   An epidemic somewhat resembling influenza and mostly accompanied by vomiting was very prevalent among the Malays and down-river villages, and I hear has resulted in many deaths. In most cases the victim could not survive for more than 24 hours.
  On the 30th a boat with three Foochow Chinese
was on its way to Betong from Seruai, whilst off
Muara Paku the boat capsized and one of the crew
named La Siew Ten was drowned, the other two
men were picked up by a passing boat. The body,
of the drowned man was found the same day.
  Message was received from Kuching on the 31st
reporting the sinking of m.s. Hock Ann off Muara-
tebas. She was on her way back to Betong and
news of this has caused grave anxiety amongst
relatives of crew and passengers about the safety of
those on board.
  The sum of $18,000 in notes was transmitted to
the Divisional Treasury, Simanggang.
  Agriculture.—26 planting permits for rubber and
sago were issued during the month.
  Shipping. — M.S. Bintang Trang entered four and
cleared four, m.l. Lang Endang entered four and
cleared three, m.s. Hock Ann entered two and cleared
two while m.l. Dueh, on coasting trip from Kalaka,
called and cleared twice out of this port. Two
bandongs cleared and three entered this port during
the mouth.
Trade.—The principal exports were:—
Gutta jelutong 202 piculs valued at ... $2,706
Para rubber1,266   do....	78,990Para scrap   124   do.6,805Raw sago480   do.       1,140Imports. $84,183 74,520
Exports. $ 98,697 189,510
July, 1926
July, 1925
Kalaka.
June, 1926
  Mr. H. E. Outfield, Acting Assistant District Officer, reports as follows:—
  Court.—Court work was very light during the month.
  One, Saat, was sentenced to three months’ R.I. for contempt of Court; Kali to six months’ for theft and one month for travelling without a pass and breach of verbal agreement; Aboi was sentenced to 3$ months for non-payment of fines but was later released on payment in full.
  General.—On the 8th T left by the Lucile f u? Kuching to attend the Government Examination there, and did not return until the 17th.
  On my return Abang Mohamat, Native Officer, was down from Roban and reported a murder that had taken place during my absence.
  Jerah, Court Writer, had been up to investigate the matter, and one Bakar, a Malay, is on remand on strong circumstantial evidence.
  It appears that a Chinaman living on his pepper and sireh garden near Rohan, who had been away for some time at Saratok, left his wife and four, children behind, two boys and two girls. These were all murdered with robbery as the object. The boxes, etc., being backed and smashed open with a parang.
  The murder was discovered about two days later by a Dyak on his way to fish passing the house and. discovering the body of one of the children. The case is adjourned pending the arrival of the Resident.'
  P.W.D—The prisoners were employed finishing off the tebassing of Government compound and- building a new road from end of kampong to waterworks. This was completed by the end of the month and repairs to the Hilir road to the coast: commenced. The object of the new road was to continue it from the waterworks to join up with the Hilir road near the bridge over the S. Undut, but this cannot be done at present. The well near the cowshed was cleared out and a roof pat over it.


234
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926.
The average number of prisoners for the month
amounted to 15 at Kabong and one at Saratok.
Progress has been made with the waterworks and
water was laid on to the kampongs before the end
of the month.
The trade statistics for the month were as
follows:—
                       Imports. Exports,
June, 1926		$35,489	$36,163
June, 1925	...	...	46,709	45,542
Shipping.—Two steamers, four motor schooners 
and 16 schooners entered and two steamers, five 
motor schooners and 14 schooners cleared during 
the month.
  The principal exports were:—
Gutta jelutong
Para rubber	212
Para scrap	101
Raw sago	1,240
Dried prawns	6
Fish (salted)
Timber
625 piculs valued at
do.
      „	do.
      ,,	do.
      “	do.
do.
do.
      the trade
Imports.
$133,658.00
789,656.00
713,791.70
July, 192a.
  The following are
Second Division :—
$ 9,305
11,725
892
3.150
180
376 
844 
returns for the
June, 1926
Total to 30.6.26
Total to 30.6.25
Exports. 
$ 175.743.00 
1,016,911.50 
915,314.00 
  Court.—An average number of cases came before the Courts during the month. Jahari was sentenced to three months' R.I. for theft; Jemat, ex-P.C., sentenced to six months' R.I. for obtaining money under false pretences; Ramunai (f.) six months for non-payment of fine $50 ; Chaut Dyak sentenced to six months for theft and absconding; Tutong and Umbong (f.) were fined two piculs and one picul respectively for incest; One Chinaman and one old Dyak woman were fined $50 each for smoking opium without being registered ; Penghulu Engkamat fined 30 catties for land dispute; One, Bujang Angeh. was fined $20 and $30 compensation for disposing of plaintiff’s property; P. C. Munji and Lena (f.) were fined for adultery; An Ulu Krian Dyak was fined $50 for attempting to commit suicide and a woman fined 20 catties for encouraging him ; Dang, Dyak. fined $10 and costs for breach of Weights and Measures Order; Two Chinese were fined $50 and $_5 respectively at Debak for breach of Weights amt Measures Order; Four Malaya were fined for felling wild engkabang trees without permission.
  At Kabong 69 and at Roban 153 people were fined various small sums from $2 to $5 for planting para rubber without permits. The Kabong people have paid their fines but the Dyaks at Kohan at present refuse to pay and the Penghulus have sided with them.
  General—On the 6th the Resident Second Division arrived in the m.l. One. I accompanied the Resident the next morning to Pusa where one night was spent and the following morning left with the Resident for Debak, which was reached at about 2.30 p.m.
  The new Penghulu Mon is young and inexperienced and appears to have little control over his people. Abang Dulkarrim of Pusa is either exceedingly lazy or incompetent. He was severely reprimanded by the Resident. In the morning of Saturday the 10th the Resident left Debak by the m.l. One for Betong. I remained at Debak until the following Monday morning when I went overland to Saratok. A number of cases came up for hearing during my stay at Debak.
  On the 13th, the morning after my arrival at
Saratok, the s.s. L'Aubaine arrived with Mr. Cox and
staff on board to erect the new wireless installation
there. With the assistance of local carpenters and
coolies the work was completed and the station in
communication by 8 a.m. on the 22ud.
  I remained at Saratok five days during which time-
an average number of cases came up for hearing.
On Sunday the 18th I left for Roban by the overland
route and returned again to Saratok on the morning
of Wednesday the 21st. My time at Roban was
fully occupied A few more cases settled at Saratok
and I left at 1 a.m. on the 23rd for Kabong which
was reached at 1 p m.
  Jerah, Court Writer, Saratok, took his annual
leave, returning on Saturday the 31st. Tan Eng
Chong went up to Roban from the 20th to 31st to
collect fines, door-tax, and register weights and mea-
sures, etc.
  The Forest clerk, who has long been promised,
arrived here with the Resident on the 6th, also a
Forest guard.
  An aeroplane passed over near Kabong but out
to sea during the afternoon of the 23rd, probably re-
turning to Sibu. This caused a certain amount of
excitement.
  P. W. D.—The Kabong waterworks were com-
pleted during the month. On the 26th the Alice
Lorraine arrived with Messrs. C. P. Lowe, Binnie,
and Middlemas on board, they examined the water-
works in the evening and left at 3 a.m. in the morn-
ing taking the P.W.D. squad, that has been work-
ing here, with them back to Kuching. The
L’Aubaine left the same morning for Sadong and
Kuching with the wireless staff on board. At Kabong
the prisoners averaging 1 and Saratok 2 have been
employed in again repairing the Hilir road to the
sands, raising the bridges and laying down sand as
a surface. Also they have been making a new road
from the Hilir road near Sungei Indut through the
padi fields which will eventually join up with the
new ulu road at the waterworks and so on to the ulu
end of the kampong,
  This work is slow on account of the swampy state-
of the ground but should be very useful when com-
pleted
  At Saratok the gaol and extension to police bar-
racks were both completed and the contractor en-
tered into agreement to wall in the top floor or
quarters of the fort in place of the kajangs for $45,
the superfluous belian planks being used for this.
  Agriculture.—The Dyaks are all busy now with
their new farms and have in some places started
burning off. The last crop, taken as a whole, was
quite up to expectations.
  Trade.—The trade statistics for the month were-
as follows:—
July, 1926
July, 1925
Imports.
$37,090
35,841
 Exports.
$44,830
51,712.
The chief exports 
Salt fish (wet) 388
Salt fish (dried) 25
Gutta jelutong 588
Para rubber 300
Para scrap 68
Prawn refuse 85
Raw sago 32
Timber
  

were as under: —
jars valued at ...
piculs	do.
do.	do.	...
do.	do.
do.	do.
do.	do.
koyans	do.
         do.
$ 812
    489
9,538
17,175 1,512
260 
3,175 1,235
      Shipping.—The statistics for this port were as
follow: —
  Two steamers, five motor schooners and seven-
bandongs entered and two steamers, four motor
schooners and eight handlings cleared during the.
mouth.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926.
235
   Trade.—The following are the trade returns for the Second Division :—
July, 1926
Total to 31.7.26
Total to 31.7.25
   Imports. $106,947.00 896,603.0? 851,281.70
Exports.
$ 170,622.00
1,187,533.50
1,239,624.00
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER, Resident Second Division.
THIRD DIVISION.
Sibu
June, 1926.
The District Officer and Acting Divisional Land
Officer visited Kanowit and settled a few outstand-
ing affairs.
   Messrs. Mead, Binnie and Allman visited the
station in connection with work of their departments.
   Mr. E. V. Audreini was granted leave to visit
Kuching on the 15th, returning again on the 24th.
At the beginning of the month I visited Kapit when
I met all the Penghulus. The Netherland Indies
Government have prohibited Dyaks from crossing
the border in order to work jungle produce in the
Batang Kayan. Several parties who obtained pass-
ports to go across, on reporting themselves at Long
Nawang, were ordered to return to Kapit. This is
causing a considerable amount of talk amongst the
Dyaks as they consider that this is breaking the
agreement made at the peace-making at Kapit.
Unless some satisfactory agreement can be made, a
fort will have to be built in the Balleh with an
officer in charge to control the Dyaks. Inquiries
were again made as to whether anything had been
heard about the reported death of Abor and his
party in the Mekam. I have written and forwarded
the letter to the Resident, Second Division, asking
if he would kindly send on the letter to Putus Sibu
via Lubok Antu.
   All Dyaks from up-river districts report an ex-
ceptionally good harvest.
   I again visited Kapit at the end of the month to
make new arrangements for my trip to Belaga in
August.
   Mr. F. P. Raynham of the Aerial Survey Com-
pany very kindly gave me a flight and the opportunity
was taken to examine Rejang Plantations Limited’s
proposed concession of laud between S. Bawan and
S. Sengaian. This appeared from the air to be all
Dyak clearings with several Dyak houses on the
Bawan side. All the river frontage between these
two streams is under cultivation. From inquiries I
have since made from Penghulu Nglambong I do
not think that there will be much difficulty with the
Dyaks if the company confine themselves to the
S. Bubong and S. Sengaian.
   The Kanowit Chinese petitioned for land for new
shop sites. This has been agreed to by apportion-
ing to them the laud on the left-hand bank of the
Kanowit between the old bazaar and the back road.
There is sufficient land for 15 sites and arrangements
are now being made to allot them either by auction
or purchase.
   A considerable amount of trade is carried on at
Kanowit and a wireless plant would be a great boon
to the traders.
   On the 15th I spent the whole day with the Rev.
J. M. Hoover in inspecting the Foochow colony
between Sibu and Bukit Lan. The colony seems to
be in a very flourishing state al the present moment.
There are schools in all the areas, the children
working on the gardens in the mornings and attend-
ing school for the rest of the day. They appear
very keen to comply with Government regulations
with regard to the teaching of Malay, but the
difficulty is to obtain teachers. Malay travelling
teachers have been tried but not with much success,
Mrs. Hoover is teaching Malays in her Girls' School,
so if the women have a knowledge of Malay the men
and children will soon pick it up.
  I have been able to obtain some Dyaks and so a
start has been made on rentising the 10-acre lots,
which it is proposed to give out to Foochow
applicants of land in the future. As these plots are
situated behind existing gardens, roads will have to
be made for an access to the river. This is being
allowed for. When this work is completed it is
hoped to be able to take off the restriction on Foo-
chow immigrants. This then raises the question of
a suitable site for immigration and quarantine camps.
After consultation with the Divisional Medical
Officer, P. Selah seems to be the best site at present,
but to make this effective all boats entering the
Rejang river must not be allowed to stop at any of
the places below this spot.
  I consider that a survey of the laud at Stebu
Sankei should be commenced as soon as possible
with a view for a town at this site in the future. If
this matter could lie settled it would decide the
difficult matter of finding land at Sibu for extension.
Sibu would always remain the centre distributing
area for the Upper Rejang, but with the land taken
up and a town near the mouth of the Rejang, there
would be no need for further expansion. This would
take a number of years to develop and in the mean-
while some laud is required for essential buildings.
I have had authority to take up land contained in
the conjunction of the Telephone and Racecourse
roads, and I have suggested that this could be used
for the building of a gaol, police barracks, clerk’s
quarters and a school. The present gaol site could
then be taken over for a new club building.
  Court.—Saga imprisoned for six months, Gara
fined one picul, Jenapi and Bigol half picul each
and Penghulu Ason two piculs for the recent began
in the Entabai.
  An appeal against the District Court in which
Nyulang and Jepun were fined for incest w is
dismissed.
  The District Officer, Mr. J. B. Archer, reports as
follows : —
  District Office.—On the 1st I left for Binatang,
accompanied by Abang Mus, Native Officer. There
were the usual number of requests and complaints.
Building operations on the new Mosque have been
suspended for the while as Abang Hadji Metair, on
behalf of the Malay Community, unfortunately paid
out the whole of the contract price to the contractor
before the building was a third completed. The
contractor, a Malay, has ceased work, and as Abang
Hadji Metair seems loth to sue him. the Mosque
remains a skeleton frame only. The owner of two
shops on the river front was ordered to demolish,
these within two months as they are a danger to
the public. A deputation of Foochows asked for a
site for a hospital, and eleven shop-owners asked
permission to build a wharf of their own. Both
these requests were noted.
  Abang Hadji Metair referred a Native Court case
to me concerning the divorce of a so-called Arab
named Sheik Ali. I referred the matter to Data
Hadji Azahari.
  We left for Sarikei on the 3rd. Foochows, led by
their headman, asked for sites for 42 shophouses in
the bazaar. In view of the Binatang fiasco, how-
ever, I told the deputation to send in written
application stating the number of sites required, the


236	               THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926.

nature of the building they wished to erect and the 
time they promised to build in. As I expected no 
applications have been received to date. They also
Asked for a school Site And were told to apply to the
Education Department in Sibu. I returned to Sibu
on the 5th.
   I left for Kanowit. accompanied by the Acting 
Divisional Land Officer, on the. 10th. Hadji Gapor
was away up the J ulau and only one or two minor 
doses came up for hearing. A party of Kanowits 
Came before me and asked Government to allow 
them to pay exemption tax in lieu of forced paid 
labour as heretofore. The matter has been referred
to the Acting Resident. I inspected the Kanowit 
works, a big undertaking. Father Van den Bergh
Expressed his inability to manage the business in the
absence of Father Klerk in Europe The Acting 
Divisional Land officer made a rough survey of land 
required for new shop sites and on the 12th we
Called the Ideal Chinese and arranged to make it out
into 15 lots to be auctioned biter. Compensation
for rubber trees was assessed. We returned io Sibu 
on the 13th.
   The Assistant District Officer, Mr. E V. Andreini, 
was away on leave in Kuching from the 15th to 24th. 
He accompanied the Acting Resident to Kapit on the 
25th, returning to Sibu on the 27th.
   Deaths of two persons caused by falling trees were 
reported. One. a Dyak, was killed at Bukit Lima 
on the 26th and the other, a Foochow Chinese, was
killed oil the 28th in Sarikei.
   All the Tua Tua Kampong in Sibu were called on
the 22nd with regard to the state of the Malay ceme-
tery on Sibu Island, a grant for which, under certain
conditions, has recently been given by His Highness
the Rajah. The conditions on the giant were read
out and explained and the people warned that failure
on their part to keep to the conditions laid down
might result in cancellation of the grant.
   The rest house and hospital for Foochows in Sibu
bazaar was closed under orders owing to the Health
Officer’s report. The body of a Chinese woman was
found floating in the river near Menyan. The jury
brought in a verdict of death by drowning the result
of an accident. The 14 Sjbu bazaar sites sold for
$44,600 last year remain as they were bought, none
of the buyers having fulfilled the conditions as laid
down in the Gazette Notification. Having received
letters of excuse from all the owners, the Acting Re-
sident instructed me to give a further extension of 
three months after which, if no bona fide attempt is
made to start building, the matter will have to be se-
riously reviewed. On the 28th Messrs. E. Parnell
and P. Cobbold, representing respectively the Sara-
wak Steamship Co.. Ltd., and Borneo Company. Ltd., 
attended at my office, where also was Mr. Binnie, 
Public Works Department. Plans of buildings
drawn up in Singapore were submitted. Owing to 
various reasons, however, tl ese plans proved unsuit-
able and both firms are asking for fresh designs.
They are also acting for the four Kuching Chinese
who bought sites too.
   Abang Latip, Native Officer, reported his return
from leave. Penghulu Entili of the Machan visited
Sibu during the month and was unfortunate enough
to have his uniform coat (amongst other things)
Stolen.
   Mr. R.D. Binnie was in Sibu on Public Works
Department work and Mr. G. M. Allman on Rubber
Improvement Fund business
   In the Municipal Department the sum of $4,000
was sanctioned for the erection of two slaughter,
bouses in Sibu, one for cattle and the other for pigs.
So far, however, all lenders received have been too
high Eng Soon was engaged on three months’ pro-
bation as building inspect nr and for general work.
The permanent staff now numbers two. Mr. Middle-
mas, Superintendent, of Surveys, is kindly drawing
up a Town Planning Scheme which will be consider-
ed by the Board. A number of persons were sum-
morn d for keeping their houses in an unsanitary
condition. There were floods in Sibu during the
month. A sight which has not been seen in Sibu for
many years was that of a schooner which sailed up
the river as fur as Sibu with a cargo of belian attaps.
      A great improvement is noticed in the Sibu Kam-
pongs. Many new houses are being built and most are
either painted or whitewashed. Hedges are being
planted and in many instances attempts are made to
start a flower garden.
     The bazaars at Kanowit, Sarikei and Binatang are
being whitewashed.
      The great increase in the number of bicycles in
Sibu has necessitated more stringent regulations
being applied both within and outside the Municipal
A rea.
       Small parties of selected immigrants are coming in
by every steamer and are finding employment at once.
The Acting Divisional Land Officer has been in the
Binatang district in connection with the Foochow
land there. At the request of the Divisional Medical
Officer a temporary isolation hut was built on Sibu
Island behind the hospital.
       Judicial.— District  Court.—The following persons
were sentenced to terms of imprisonment:—
       Lau Nai Hunt six months for attempting to bribe
a Government servant; Lumit six months for at-
tempting to impersonate a Government servant;
Marsano six months for gross contempt of Court;
Tan Yong Lin three months for contravention of the
Opium Monopoly Order; Lau Kieh Lang three
months for theft; Wong Ka Meaw, a Foochow lad,
three months’ detention in s.l. Chamois for theft;
Chow Ah Thing one month for theft; Bakar one
month for vagrancy ; and police constables Banyeng
and Kudi one month each for military offences.
The owners and juragan of m.l. Ling Kong Thai
were lined $10 each for breach of Order No. VII,
1903 ; Ting Nguong Chieh was fined $25 and ordered
to pay damages for a cowardly assault on a woman;
Hock Choon Ling $30 for committing a public nui-
sance (second conviction) and Tang Chong Siok $25
for deliberate lying in Court. Mat Laws, a Sibu Ma-
lay, was prosecuted by Jantai, a Dyak woman, with
having caused the death of her two children by ad-
ministering native medicine. Plaintiff did not prove
her case but Mat Lawa was ordered to stop practising
medicine in the future under pam of a Government
prosecution.
       There were the usual number of Civil cases, but
except for the fact that they took a considerable time
of the Court to settle call for no other mention.
       Magistrate of Police Courts.—The police obtained
the usual number of convictions in minor cases.
 Petty debt cases were not numerous.
       Fines and fees, excluding sub-stations, amounted to
$2,588.94, which is, I think, a record figure. 111 deeds
were registered in the Sibu Court.
       Public Works Department.—Mr. R. D. Binnie was
in Sibu during part of the month and arrangements
have been made to form a separate departmental
 staff. A temporary office was made below Fort Brooke and a clerk from Kuching installed there,
 leaving E de Rozario free for outside work. At pre-
 sent and until the arrival of a permanent Public
 Works Department Officer I am acting in charge in Sibu under orders from Kuching. In Sibu the fol-
lowing works were continued:—Four clerks' quar-
ters Forest Hanger’s bungalow. Survey coolies quar-
ters. two Hospital Wards, District Office, repairs to Aup Road and two new bungalows for European
 Officers. Repairs were started on the road through
 Kampong Nangka and the usual upkeep of roads and
 grounds was carried out. Most of the Government
buildings were whitewashed during the month.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926.
237
  Ting Huang Huang, the contractor for the District Office, absconded during the month having only partly completed the brick pillars. His guarantor is completing the pillars and attempting to eluc date the chaotic stale in which Ting Huang Huang left his affairs. The Public Works Department are making arrangements to complete the building. In Sarikei the new Government wharf was started and the two clerks' quarters were on a fair way incompletion. The road contractor has made a start. In Binatang the two clerks' quarters are nearly finished but the road contractor unfortunately contravened the Opium Monopoly Regulations and is now in jail. Arrangements are being made with his wife to carry on the contract. A contract was signed for whitewashing all the Government buildings at Kanowit, Sarikei and Binatang. Kanowit roads are in better order than usual but the drainage system in the bazaar needs revision.
   Police.—Strength at the end of the month was 83 of all ranks. Two constables were imprisoned for breach of discipline. Much time was spent in whitewashing the barracks and parades were curtailed in consequence. The whole force is equipped with .303 rifles but the supply of accoutrements is still insufficient. Shoes are being issued to the men.
   Prison. — Fourteen men were sentenced to terms of imprisonment and 15 were discharged ; 49 men remaining in the jail at the end of the month. One man was whipped for breach of prison discipline.
   The Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. L. B. Haye, reports as follows:—
   The number of new in-patients treated at hospital was 88, the total number lifting 131.
   There were 614 out-patient attendances, lifting an average of 20'5 daily. One prostitute was examined and two other women suspected of illicit prostitution.
   I regret to state that 18 deaths occurred in hospital during the month, eleven of these, however, were in a dying condition when admitted and died within a few hours.
   Eleven operations were performed during the mouth, two under general anaesthesia.
   Two inquests were held, one on a. Foochow girl who died from drowning, and one on a Dyak killed by a falling tree.
   Seven more cases with all the symptoms of typhoid occurred: at present, however, they are merely sporadic aim no danger of an epidemic is likely. The health of the European population still remains good.
   The Court Writer of Kapit reports as follows :— General—The Acting Resident, Third Division, accompanied by Mrs. H. D. Aplin, visited the station twice during the month. Certain affairs were settled by him. Other visitors to the station during the month were Captain E. V. Audreini, Assistant District Officer, and Mrs. F. G. Carpenter. The sum of $8,000 was transferred to the Sibu Treasury. On the22nd instant Abang Aboi, Native Officer, left for the Mujong, being still away at the end of the month. Abaug Ahmat, Native Officer of Song, visited the Katibas during the month in order to collect Dyak door lax. During the month Penghulus Temonggong, Ugak, Grinang, Alan, Semada, Briak, Serai and Mutu visited this station.
  Court.—The usual number of cases came before the Court. Fines and fees amounted to $325.94.
  Prisoners.—The prison gang, averaging 24 men, was employed on the general upkeep of the station.
  Public Works.—Good progress was made by the contractor with the clerk’s new quarters.
  Dairy Farm.—The herd number sixteen at the end of the month.
  Sarawak Rangers.— Parades and duties were carried out ns usual during the month.
   Trade and Shipping—The following vessels arrived and clearing during the month:—S.S. Sarawak three times, s.l. Soon Aik twice, s.l. Chamois, s.l. Jean and Chantek once each.
   Exports for the month are as under :—
Plantation rubber piculs 130.63 valued	...	$ 9,185
Damar daging	„	59.89	„	...	1.510
Rattan sega. No. 1 	,,	25.35	,,	...	150
Rattan tot, No. 2	„ 1,928.04		 11,704
   The District Officer of Lower Rejang, Mr. J. C. Swayne, reports as follows:—
   I was still at Matu at the beginning of the month and returned io Rejang on the 8tb. Mr. Miller Hallett visited the former place and gave instructions to the Court Writer concerning the issue of occupation tickets. Land books that had been formerly kept at Sibu were brought back to Matu. Au area that had been reserved for a possible site for a new station some years ago was allowed to lie taken up as gardens.
   I was at Daro from the 5th to the 8th and examined land for rubber. A small reserve has be. n made for Foochows who have asked to come in.
   Prisoners at Matu averaged five men and were employed on whitewashing and tarring Government buildings and on the general upkeep of the station. The Court Writer was away on leave from the 11th to. the 21st. A vaccinator who has been touring het district reported that large numbers had been treated. The average price for sago during the month was $1.20 a passu.
   At Rejang very few cases were heard and none of any importance. The gang of prisoners, which has been augmented by six men from Sibu gaol, was employed on whitewashing Government buildings and on the ornamental grounds.
   Owing to the continued inquiries by Dyaks for permits to buy guns I found that 172 guns were licenced amongst the 241 doors that pay tax at Rejang; unfortunately these are not evenly distributed, some houses own none at all.
   Passengers who visited this station during the month were Messrs. Audreini, Cotterill and Pollard.
   Forests.—Mr. D. S. McLeod. Assistant Conservator of Forests, reports that he was away in Kuching from the 5th until the 25ih attending the examination and doing certain duties in the Kuching district. He returned accompanied by the Conservator.
   The rest of the month he was employed in the Office.
Foreign trade returns for June: —
Imports.Exports.Sibu$237,219$528,918Kapit    7,695   24,985Kanowit    6,65717,275Binatang ...   24,040   32,203Sarikei   24,192   45,091Rejang    3,960   25,933         Total$303,763$674,405- ——?. —? . ?Coasting trade returns for June:—Imparts.Exports.Sibu$ 59,698$ 36,787Kapit    4,359500Kanowit    1,541——Binatang   11,5386,035Sarikei    4,6212,186Rejang   35.636   13,053Matu   14,985   20,904Daro    7,609   14,774         Total$139,987$ 94,239

238	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926
  Trade and Shipping—The Trade Returns for the month are as follows ;—
Imports. Mukah value ...	... $36,975
Exports. Raw Sago 466 Koyans value         55,760
    do. Jelutong 1,193 Pikuls                     18,900
  Twenty-one Schooners entered and twenty-three cleared the Port during the month.
The Rainfall was 10.10 inches.
                H. D. APLIN.
     Acting Resident, Third Division.
COAST DIVISION.
                          Mukah and Balingian
June. 1926.
  Courts.—There was not a great deal of Court work during this month. Jin and Ukal were each fined $50 for working jelutong trees in roads in which they had no permits to work-and for ringing some of the trees. Muhim, Mumin and Johini were also fined for breach of Forest Regulations concerning jelutong trees and Majid was fined $25 for the same offence. There were several land cases and one Light was fined $50 for re-opening a case settled in 1916. Drahman three months for non-payment of Native Court fine. A Chinese was fined $10 for taking the law into his own hands and searching another’s house for lost property. Maiming got 9 months under Section 417, I.P.C. A Dyak Meroom 3 months for assaulting his wife and causing her to have a miscarriage. One Ah Lee who bought land at Judan some years ago was fined $25 for not registering the transaction.
  P.W.D.—The Government carpenters have completed the rebuilding of the jail and kitchen. These buildings had recently been removed to a new site. Prisoners and coolies have whitewashed and tarred the Fort, also the jail and kitchen. As there were only two prisoners it was necessary to hire extra labour every day in order to carry on the necessary work of the Station. The Government bandong, bought only two years ago but nearly ruined by the carrying about of pipes and coal for waterworks, has been repaired. The Tamil gang were employed cleaning ditches and weeding paths, etc. An extension to the suction pipe at the intake of the waterworks was made. A house for the man in charge of the pumping station was also completed.
   General.—The 3rd being the birthday of His Majesty King George V the usual holiday was observed.
   I returned from Bintulu by m.l. Joan on the morning of the 10th.
   Mr. P. M. Adams, District Officer. Oya, arrived on the 12th returning again on the 16th.
   The launch Leonora was hired out on two occasions by Chinese wishing to visit Balingian.
   The s.s. Sulong called off the “kuala” on the 19th north bound and dropped a small mail and a few passengers.
   At midnight on the 25th I sailed in m.l. Joan for Bintulu and was still away at the end of the month.
Oya
July, 1926.
   The District Officer, Mr. P. M. Adams, reports as follows :—
   Court.—Fines amounting to $110 were imposed on Jelutong workers for breaches of the regulations.
   All fines imposed for refusing vaccination have been paid and the various Tuai Rumah released.
   Two Melanos were sentenced to terms of imprisonment for theft of jelutong.
   An inquiry was held concerning the death of a Dyak named Entamang which was caused by a pig-trap set by Nyuleng. The inquiry was adjourned for further evidence.
   General.—The Rev. Fr. Van den Bergh left this district on June 1st having been transferred to Kanowit.
   The Rev. Fr. B. Mulder returned from leave on the 26th. Several Dyaks were down paying in tax and some old disputes were disposed of.
   Clerical.—Spurah returned from leave on 26th, Tambik resuming his duties at Dalat and Munan at Oya.
   The clerical shortage so often complained of is still as acute as ever.
   An analysis of all payments and receipts has been started which will greatly assist in estimating Revenue and Expenditure for 1927 and should also be appreciated by the ledger clerk in Divisional Treasury.
   Land and Survey.—The new land registers have been brought up to date as far as this is possible, but the maps of rubber gardens surveyed have not yet arrived from Kuching. A great deal of clerical work will be entailed when these maps are forthcoming.
   Many applications to plant rubber on sago land were refused. Through the medium of fines people are at last beginning to realise it is worth their while to obtain permission before opening sago or rubber gardens.
   P. IF.D.—The ceiling of the New Court House has been painted and when the building has been jodilited it will be ready for occupation, which should be by the end of July.
   All Government buildings at Dalat were whitewashed by contract.
   The Dalat ornamental grounds are now in fair order.
   With the assistance of Moi Tian, Kapitan China, several tons of stone have been brought from Kuching and will be used to improve the bazaar road at Dalat.
   Prison.—Prisoners averaged 16.06 and were employed weeding the Mukah Road, clearing the cattle ground and towards the end of the month on Day's Road, which has been reopened.
   Obituary.—The news of the Chief Secretary's death was received on the 10th and the flag flown at half mast.
   Penghulu Takin who has been ill for some time died on the 26th.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926.	289
   Travelling.-I cycled to Igan on the 6th and inspected some gardens said to have been damaged by buffaloes.
     The Lighthouse was also inspected and a report on its condition and suggested removal to another site sept to the. Shipping Master.
   I went to Mukah by m.l. Joan on the 12th, returning on the 16th by m.l. Leonora. Dalat was visited from 16th to 19th and again from 28th to 30th, when all outstanding affairs were settled.
   Cattle.—Numbered 11 head but no cows are giving milk at present.
   Trade Returns.—Two hundred and sixty koyans of Raw Sago and 423 piculs of Gutta Jelutong were exported during the month.
Exports	...	...	$48,585.50
Imports	...	...	28,806.10
   Shipping.—Entered :—8 Schooners, 2 Motor schooners and 1 Bandong. Cleared :—9 Schooners and 3 Motor schooners.
Bintulu.
July. 1926.
   Mr. H. H. Kortright, District Officer of Bintulu and Tatau, reports us follows :—
   Courts.—In the Resident’s Court one Awang Assim brought a case against Sedok for the abduction and rape of his daughter Penipa. Defendant was found guilty and sentenced to three years and three months on each charge. Mera and her husband Tunyeng were also sentenced to eighteen months and one year respectively for aiding and abetting and Suai was fined $100. Sedok and Mera (f) were ordered to serve their sentences in the Kuching jail.
   In the District and Magistrate’s Courts very few cases were heard and none of importance, as the District Officer was away at Mukah most of the month.
   P.W.D.—Work has now been started on the new wharf. A mandor for the pile-driving crew and the pile-driver winch arrived by s.s. Sulong on the 1st but the pile-driver frame was apparently shut out of the Sulong at the last moment, and only arrived by s.s. Auby on the 9th. The work is progressing fairly well, the piles in one runway and some of those in the main wharf have been driven.
   A contract has been let to build a house for an Assistant Schoolmaster and this house should be finished by the end of July.
   The prisoners have widened the road at the upriver end of the bazaar between that and the new bazaar of six shops which is now being built.
   General.—Captain and Mrs. Lowe and child arrived by s.s. Sulong on the 31st of May en route for Limbang. The following morning Captain Lowe kindly consented to go with me to Sungei Nigo—a stream about three miles away and from whence all the drinking water for Bintulu is fetched—to see whether it would be possible to bring this water by pipes to the kampongs and bazaar. He said that it would be an easy matter to do this and that the cost would not be great, that there would be very little expense incurred at the intake as no dam or pumping station would be required. The cost would mainly lie in the pipes.
   The s.s. Sulong sailed at noon the same day for Limbang, she arrived here again on the 20th, also north hound. Passengers, Messrs. Swayne and Sampson for Miri.
   On the 5th Mr. R. V. Palfreman, Acting District Officer, who had been doing temporary duty here during my absence at Mukah, returned to his station.
   The s.s. Auby arrived on the 7th and again on the 27th, the s.s. Gladys and s.s. Burong also arrived here on the 27th.
   On the 9th I left in m.l. Joan for Tatau and having settled a few matters there left again the following morning for Mukah and was away until the 26th.
   The s,s. La Follette arrived from Miri on the 24th and sailed the following day with six “laksa” belian attaps for Public Works Department, Fourth Division,
   Health.—I am glad to record that there have been no known cases of smallpox for over a month now and that the health of the District is again normal.
   Trade and Shipping.—Trade has been good. On the 27th both the s.s. Auby and s.s. Gladys arrived and both left with large cargoes, the Auby taking the Bintulu exports and the Gladys those from Sebauh and Pandan.
   The following are the principal exports for this 
month : —
   Belian attaps 941,050 pieces; Belian 400 tons; Jelutong 2,534 piculs; Raw Sago 8 koyans.
  The Trade	Returns	for the month are as
follows :—
                1926.	1925.	1924.
  Exports	        $87,926.47	$54,303.03	$50,678.25
  Imports	52,899.12	38,748.83	32,202.25
   The following vessels entered and cleared the Port during the month :—
   Entered :—9 Steamers and 4 Schooners; Cleared :—12 Steamers and 5 Schooners.
  The rainfall was 6.44 inches.
   Mr. R. V, Palfreman, the Acting District Officer, Tatau, reports as follows:—
   Court.—During the month no cases of importance were brought before the Court; a case brought by Government against the Native Officer Abang Bojeng for breach of Government Orders was adjourned for settlement by the District Officer, Bintulu.
   General.—I returned from Bintulu on the 5th and on the 9th the District Officer, Bintulu, Mr. H. H. Kortright, arrived and various matters concerning the station were brought before him, also Penghulu.. Tamboh. Tama Gran and Bunya were present.
   The District Officer stayed the night and left the next morning for Mukah.
   On the 14th, accompanied by Pu. Tamboh, I left on a visit to the ulu Anap and after hearing many cases on the way up river arrived at Brahim’s house in the ulu Anap on the 20th. These people are Bukitans and the house in question is the first real house ever built by the Anap Bukitans. It is considerably better than many Dyak houses and should other Bukitans join into it, the house should eventually become anything from 20 to 30 doors long. Leaving T. R. Brahim’s house on the 22nd. I walked overland to the ulu Penjarai and the next day proceeded down the Penjarai to the Punan house at the mouth of same.
   The District Officer, Bintulu, having sanctioned the Puna ns building their house at Penjarai, a site was settled on, during my presence there, exactly opposite the present house.
   On the 25th a successful “tuba” fishing took place in the Kakus both Dyaks and Punans being present. This had been previously sanctioned by the District Officer, Bintulu. I arrived back at Tatau Court House on the 26th.


240
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE SEPTEMBER 1, 1926.
   During my presence in the ulu Anap further
inquiries were made in re the appointment of a new
Penghulu to take place of Pu. Bunya; all the Dyaks 
below Muput excepting T. R. Naong wish Pu. 
Bunya to still remain a Penghulu, but all the Tuai 
Rumahs above Muput wish a Dyak by name
Ngumbang to be penghulu; it certainly seems only
right that should Pu. Bunya himself still remain a
penghulu, that the Dyaks above Muput be allowed
some Government representative to hear and settle
their cases, since Pu. Bunya seldom ever attempts
to settle the cases of the ulu Anap Dyaks, since he
states (1) It is too far for him to go, and (2) that they
will never abide by anything he says.
   Many Dyaks at present living by themselves were
told to either return to their own long houses or else 
to join on to other houses. T. R. Banyieng informs
me that his people are now not any longer willing to
all join on to his house at the mouth of the Tau river,
but wish to live by themselves, he has been told they 
may not do this but must join their rooms to his house
or else join on to houses further down river; should
any one attempt to make a house on his own above
the mouth of the Tau river T. R. Banyieng must
report the matter at once to Government.
   Health.— The health of the Station has not been 
good owing to a peculiar illness which seems to be a 
type of influenza first commencing with a stomach- 
ache, cold in the head and cough, and sometimes 
in the later stages with earache. There have been 
many deaths among children through this illness and
practically all children had it, so that it seems to be
very catching, many grown-up people caught it but
no deaths occurred amongst them as far sis I have
been able to ascertain.
   Shipping.—During the month one junk entered
and cleared the port with a cargo of belian for China 
seven other junks also entered the port but as yet 
have not cleared.
   M.S. Hap Hong Ann entered and cleared during
the mouth with a cargo of jelutong for Kuching.
   The Miri Oildfields s.s. Burong entered the port
on the 24th and cleared the port again for Miri on
the 27th with a cargo of belian.
Imports.	Exports.
         $8,024.60	$4,858.95
            H. H. KORTRIGHT,
Acting Divisional Officer.
FOURTH DIVISION.
Miri.
July, 1926.
  Court.—No cases of serious crime came before the Courts. Two Chinese were fined for offering bribes to a Government Official and a Government Clerk was dismissed in connection with the same case. There was one case of suicide reported timing the month.
  Medical.—A large number of cases of dysentery occurred in the month and there were several deaths in the kampongs. After a few days’ rain fewer cases were reported. Sibuti was declined free of smallpox.
  Public Works —The additional subsidiary dams recommended by the Commissioner of Public Works were built during the month and a great increase in the available water supply is assured. New quarters for crews of launches are completed. Work was started on a new building for the use of telephone operators. The new block o f clerks’ quarters is still in course of erection. A small contract was given for clearing site of new Government building.
  General.—His Highness the Tuan Muda arrived
at Miri on the 7th, accompanied by the Acting Chief
Secretary and Mr. Edward Parnell. I accompanied
His Highness to Baram on the 9th returning to Miri
on 14th. His Highness sailed for Bintulu the same
afternoon.
  A batch of coolies arrived by s.s. Kajang from the
north on the 17th and the police were warned from
Labuan that they had been giving trouble on the
way down. An escort of police boarded the Kajang
on arrival but found everything quiet and it was
unnecessary to make any arrests.
  I returned from Baram on the 2nd instant ac-
companied by Mr. J. C. Swayne who left for Rejang
the following day by s.l. La Follette.
  The Officer Commanding Rangers and Police was
absent at Baram from 10th to 27th.
The Acting District Officer was off duty on account
of illness from the 24th to the end of the month.
Baram.
July, 1926.
   In the absence of the Acting District Officer, Mr.
E. M. Woodward reports as follows:—
   Court. — Kheh Bee fined $25, causing disturbance ;
Batok imprisoned three mouths, theft and escaping
from custody; Jampi imprisoned three months,
harbouring an escaped prisoner; Manggi Buuyau
fined $15 for assault; Ujoh fined $25, ringing
jelutong trees, second offence. Fines and fees
amounted to $645 50.
   General— His Highness the Tuan Muda arrived
here on the 9th instant per K.H.M.T. Mainuna with
the Acting Chief Secretary and the Resident Fourth
Division. His Highness was pleased to sanction a
loan of $50 to every Foochow at present in the
district who wished to open up a rubber garden.
This loan is being given to the Foochows in small
quantities and thirty-nine of them signed agreements
with the Government during the month. Land has
been selected and inspected at Poyut and each man
is allowed to plant 1000 trees.
   On the 11th instant His Highness went upriver
to Long Palai with the Acting Chief Secretary, the
 Resident, the Acting District Officer and Tuanku
Drahman. and paid a visit to the Token birds’-nest
cave in the Kejin Tugang river. Unfortunately there
were not many nests to be seen, since the old nests
were collected last month and the new nests had not
yet formed. His Highness returned here on the
morning of the 13th instant and left for Bakong the
same afternoon, sleeping there that night and pro-
ceeding to Bintulu the next morning.
    S.L. La Follette successfully negotiated the “Tri-
kan Cut” on three occasions during the month.
The "Cut” saves half hour's steaming on the down-
river trip and three-quarters of an hour on the journey
up stream but is only negotiable when the river is
high The entrance to the "Cut” has been improved
and it is hoped-that the whole "Cut” can be widened
in the near future.
    The Resident and Mr. J. C. Swayne were here on
the 1st instant and left for Miri on the 2nd. Mr.
Weigall returned from up river on the 14th instant, 
and spent the night here, proceeding to Bakong the
 next day. Captain and Mrs. Dunlop, Miss Dunlop
 mid Miss Ridley arrived here on the 19th instant
 and returned to Miri on the 27th instant. Mr. J.
 B. Wooley arrived on 21st instant and left next day
for Sgi Logan to carry out geological investigations
 Messrs Sarawak Oilfields, Limited. The Acting
 District Officer, Tuanku Mohamat and up-river agent
left hereon the 21st instant for the Kalabit country
mid were still away at the end of the month. Rain-
fall during the month was 2.80 inches.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926.
241
    P.W.D.—Work on the Lobok Nibong Road has
been delayed during the month owing to the
necessity of deepening and widening-the road ditch.
This latter has been done under contract by Kheh
labour and is very nearly completed. The prisoners
have decreased in number from 32 on the 1st instant
to 22 on the 31st instant, and the comparatively
small prison gang has been employed chiefly on the
ornamental grounds and on levelling the new site
of the boat-shed. The old boat-shed was pulled
down on the 31st instant by the Kampong Un gang
Malays.
   Telegraphs and Telephones.—The Bakong Dyaks
have cleared the telephone rentis between here and
Bakong, and as a result the line has been in good
condition most of the mouth. The line from Bakong
to Miri has been out of order the whole month.
The number of telegrams transmitted during the
month by wireless was 107 and the number received
125.
   Medical.—Three patients admitted to hospital and
sixty-four out-patients treated during the month.
Of these latter thirty-five were Dyaks, sixteen
Malays, and thirteen Chinese. Eleven N.A.B. in-
jections were given during the month.
   Forestry.—Two hundred and forty-one logs were
brought down river from the Tutau during the
month and were sold to Messrs. Sarawak Oilfields,
Limited, Bakong.
   Trade and Shipping.—During the month s.l. La
Follette made two trips to Miri, two as far as Kuala
Baram, and two upriver; m b. Red Leaf made three
trips to the station and s.l. Baby two; s.l. St. Helens
arrived here on the 21st and m.t. Melor on the 22nd
instant; s.s. Gladys arrived here on the 10th instant
with a full cargo and left for Kuching on the
instant.
12th
     1925
     1926
   Total value to date :
     1925
     1926
Exports. $124,920 69,429
Imports. $26,027 35,396
$118,480
233,495
$503,079
422,858
H. L. OWEN,
Resident Fourth Division.
FIFTH DIVISION.
Limbang.
July, 1926.
   Magistrate's Court.— Menggong Sriah and Mita were each fined $50, Usin $20, Pudah and Tayun $10, for breach of Jelutong Regulations (Forest Rules, 1921); Sanggow was fined $10 under section 426 ; Magun and Rasman were each sentenced to two weeks’ R.I. for travelling from Lawns without passes; Matussin and Kubar were fined $5 each for contempt of Court; There were seven cases of breach of Firearms Order and five persons were convicted and lined $5. There were also several cases of non-payment of tax. Three cases of assault and two cases of buffalo theft were dismissed. Thirteen civil claims amounting to a total value of $265.01 were disposed of.
   Crime.—On the 9th William Wong reported that his contractor Chong Sang's place was burnt down and damage was estimated at about $100. So far there is no suspicion of deliberate arson.
   Health.—This has not improved during the month. There were 75 cases treated at the hospital of which 22 were for fever
   Dr. Furnivall, of Labuan, visited the station and inspected the hospital on the 314t, leaving again the following day.
   A lunatic named Hassan of Sembiling has been detained under observation. His relations state he is homicidally inclined. Dr. Furnivall examined him and reported that he should be sent to Kuching as a case of recurrent mania and that although sane at times, he would have regular lapses of dangerous madness.
      The new dispensary and office at the hospital was finished on the 13th and has been in use since the 15th.
      Public Works.—The dam at Bukit Hitam was completed up to the 10-feet level at the end of the month and seems satisfactory.
   The new dispensary at the hospital has been in use since the 15th and the two clerks’ houses were also finished.
         The new school-house is nearing completion and the schoolmaster’s quarters are progressing.
         Sites were chosen upon which to erect police quarters at Rangau and Limpaku Pinang, and the contractor is about to start work there.
        Prisoners.—The prisoners, who averaged 20’5, were employed on clearing the reservoir area at the dam ; this is now almost ready for flooding. They were also engaged in levelling the pipe track and improving the rentis, carrying planks for the schoolhouse contract and re-arranging the Government godown.
        Coolies.—The coolies worked on the pipe rentis, levelling and straightening, and also weeded ditches on the Bengkita road.
         There is a good deal more work to be done on the pipe track, which should be ready at the end of August.
          Owing to the scarcity of the local labour the contractor has imported thirteen Chinese coolies from Sandakan.
          Travelling.—I visited Danau on the 19th and disposed of all cases presented for hearing. These were not numerous owing to the proximity of the padi planting season, but a good deal of out landing tax was collected. 1 returned to Limbang on the 22nd.
         Marine.—The Sylvia's boatshed was blown over by a strong gust of wind on the 29th; luckily the damage was slight. A brass stanchion was bent and the roof of the engine cabin split open. These have now been satisfactorily repaired.
          General.—Mr. Pollard, Acting Assistant District Officer, Lawas, visited the station on the 12th and left on the 15th, and again on the 31st, returning to Sundar by boat the next day.
           Mr. Corson, A.C.F., Fifth Division, passed through hereon the 12th on his way to the Luhai, and returned to Lawas by the Sylvia on the 20th.
   Dr. Furnivall of Labuan paid a visit to the station on the 30th and, having inspected the hospital ai d patients, returned to Labuan on the 31st.
           On the 17th Mothers Mary Peter and Mary Sebastian passed through here en route for B.N.B.
          A tuba fishing was held in the Lubai on the 25th, hut without success.
   The rainfall recorded during the month was 5'45 inches.
        Shipping and Trade.—The Alice Lorraine was sent up here on the 11th for carrying wood from Punang for Brooketon and Labuan wharves. This was successfully accomplished and she returned to Kuching on the 18th.
         Shipping .—(Inwards).—S.S. Auby made one trip from Singapore via Kuching and ports; S.S. Sulong and s.s. Alice Lorraine made one trip each from Kuching via various ports; S.L. Kwong Yik made four trips and s.l. Peter Duff three trips from Labuan and Brunei; M.L. Edme made one trip from Lawas.
       Twenty buffaloes were exported to Kuching.
        Below are the trade returns:—
Foreign CoastingExports.
. $21,518
     5,473Imports. $19,771 10,191Brought forward ..     2,991
.. 190.26929,962
193,557Total to date 1925.. $217,260
.. 192,612$223,519 160,582F. F.BOULT,Resident Fifth, Division.


242
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926.
Kuching, Foreign Trade Returns for the month of July, 1926.	IMPORTS-(Continued.)


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926
243
EXPORTS— (Continued.)
    Kuching, Coasting Trade Returns for the month of July, 1926
IMPORTS.
EXPORTS.
J. A. H. HARDIE,
Registrar of Trade.
PASSENGERS.
Arrivals.
PER S.S. Soon Ann:—2nd August—From Singapore—
The Right Rev. Bishop Roots, Mr.
Orientee Yang and Mr. Lamplough.
PER s.s. Kuching:—9th August—From Singapore—Mr.
                                and Mrs. H. Smith, Mr. W. M. Ken-
                                worthy, MissG. Davidson, Miss Lim
                                Ah Leong, Miss Andeison, Miss lery
                                Yap, Miss Lewis, Mrs. Wright, Mr.
                                Ong Siow Kee, Miss Phoa Ah Sioh,
                                Miss Phoa Ah Tin, Mr. Ong Siow
                                Giap, Mr. Chua Ah Kow, Master
                                Phoa Thai Seng, Miss I. Bateman,
                                Miss E. Bateman, Master A. Bateman,
                                Mr. Yap Thian Soo, Mr. Skinner and
                                Mr. R. C. Kay.
PEB s.s. Soon Ann:—16th August—From Singapore—
Mr. and Mrs. W. II. Avery, Mr. Holl,
Mrs. Swindell and Mr. Loo Chay Jui.
PER s.s. Kuching: —23rd August—From Singapore—Mr.
Arundell, Mr. K. Sim Fob, Mr. Tin
Tien, Mr. Teo Wee Eng, Mr. C. Kia
Chuan, Mr. Wong Pin Yin, Mr. Kang
Wan, Master K. Kui Seng and Master
Ko Choon Seng.
PER S.S. Ston Ann:—30th Autist—From Singapore—
Dr. T. Walsh, Rev. Mother Stanislaus.
Departures.
  PER S.S. Soon Ann:—24th July—For Singapore—
                                    Messrs E. S. Holl, R. V. Palfreman,
                                    Lamplough, Mr. and Mrs. W. II. Smith
?	and 2 children, Dr. Edwards.
  PER S.S. Kuching —31st July—For Singapore—Miss
Shoebridge. Messrs. A. L. Harrsion,
A. C. Fenney, J. I. Davison, Lea
Kim Hian, Sim Swee Kee. Law Ging
Che g, Mr. and Mrs. Lim Khay Leong,
Mr. Yap Thian Soo and Mr. Lim Tea
Chew.
PEB s.s. Soon Ann:—7th August—For Singapore—
Messrs. W. H. Avery, H. Gild, G. R.
Arundell and Miss Olver.
PER S.S. Kuching:—14th August—For Singapore—Miss
Lewis, Mrs. Wright, Mrs. Pako, Mrs.
Lee Teo Kuan, Mr. Tan Kui Choon,
Master Leo Swee Ling and Mr. Toi
Hoi Yen.
PER s.s. Soon Ann:—21st August—For Singapore—
Messrs. E. S. Holl, T. A. Roberts and
Cheng Tiang.	 _ 	


244
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926
   Miri, Foreign Trade Returns for the month of April, 1926.
EXPORTS.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926
245
EXPORTS.	


246
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926.
KUCHING SHIPPING.
Departures.
Arrivals.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926.
247
MIRI SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
Departures.


248	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926.
Rainfall, June, 1926.
DURING 24 HOURS.
Rainfall, July, 1926.
DURING 24 HOURS.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926.	249
KUCHING SHIPPING RETURNS.
Arrivals .
Departures.
J. A. H. HARDIE,
Registrar of Shipping.


250
THE SARAWAK GAZE1TE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1926.
METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS.
•»
GENERAL HOSPITAL.
Kuching, 31 s I July, 1926.

HighestBarometer reading32inches.Lowest     29’5   Highesttemperature (in shade)94degrees.Lowest     	77   Greatestrainfall in 24 hours2’47inches.Total rainfall (Museum)	13'99	„
Height of Hospital above sea level approximately 75 feet.

