VoL. LIX. No. 907.
THE Sarwak Gazette
PRICE	   KUCHING, Tuesday, April 2nd, 1929.	20 cents.
The Sarawak Gazette
TUESDAY, APRIL 2nd, 1929.
DEATH.
Ho.—On Thursday morning, 7th February 1929, at her residence, Palm Road, Mrs. Ho BENG SWKK, better known as Mrs. BENG, aged 80years. Deceased leaves surviving her four sons, five daughters, 67 grandchildren, 85 great-grandchildren and great-great-grandchildren to mourn for her loss.

Acknowledgement. 
Mr. Ho ENG SENG and family beg to thank all friends and relatives who had so kindly sent wreaths and letters of condolence and also those who attended the funeral of his mother the late Mrs. Ho BENG SWER.

THE ANNEXATION OF LIMBANG.
Sunday, the 17th of March, was the thirty-ninth anniversary of the annexation of Limbang by Sarawak
The Sarawak Gazette of 1st April 1890, has a two column leader on the subject. The writer says” . . . The annexation was brought about by the constant appeal of an oppressed race to His Highness the Rajah’s keen sense of fairness and to the philanthropic nature which has descended to him from his distinguished relation Sir James Brooke. . .”
   From the very first it was obvious that the act was not a mercenary one. The writer continues “. as it is, from the wording of the Proclamation issued by His Highness the Rajah, Brunei is to be the gainer, receiving cession money for a district which for five years has thrown off  its allegiance and from which not a cent has passed into the Brunei territory. . .”
  This is as true to-day as it was in 1890. That is to say from a purely mercenary, point of view Limbang (or we should say now the Fifth Division) cannot be regarded as a Province which contributes much to the common revenues of Sarawak. At the same time the decision of His Highness the late Rajah (which was approved fully by Her Britannic Majesty’s Government) has clearly and definitely been proved to have been a wise one—and it has stood a trial of thirty-nine years. Peace and contentedness reign in the Limbang, where before I rapine and lawlessness prevailed.
The good relations between Brunei and Sarawak continue. That small State, under the guidance I and protection of the British Government, continues to make steady progress. Although shorn of much of her territory she has, as it were, been relieved of much that must have been before, nothing but encumbrance.
The present state of Limbang is a remarkable proof of the wise hut firm administration of Sarawak Government officers, past and present— European and Native.
We can but conclude with an extract from His Highness the late Rajah's Diary ", . . March 17th, St. Patrick’s Day. His Highness was up early to fix upon a suitable place for building a wharf, etc. The Datu Klassi and his party arranged to hoist the Sarawak flag, and choosing a tall young tree stripped of its branches they forthwith made it fast at the top where it still remains.. .” 

48  THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 2, 1929.

NOTES.

(March)

Four of His Highness the Rajah's ponies
have been given away. “Adham” and 
“Wembley’’ have gone to Mr. Arundell at
Saratok, Mr. P Murray-Scott has taken 
“Hopeless,” and “White Wings” goes to a 
native in Kuching. “Jorrocks” has gone 
back to Simanggang to his owner there. 
What might- be called a “ship warming” took place on Wednesday the 13th, when Captain Benfield had the honour of entertaining Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee, and the Dayang Leonora, to dinner on hoard the Vyner Brooke. The guests numbered twenty-seven and the only word with which. we can describe the dinner is the journalistic one of “sumptuous. A most enjoyable evening was spent, and the affair was one of a series of entertainments to mark the departure of Her Highness the Rance and the Dayang Leonora.
Mr. C. Willes Johnson, Government Agent, Loudon, retires on pension on 1st January 1929; and Mr. H. B. Crocker, Chief Secretary, Sarawak, and Mr. J. R. Barnes, Superintendent of Telegraphs, retire on pension on 5th May and 5th April respectively.
On the 23rd instant, Mr. F. F. Boult, Resident of the First Division, assumed the duties of Officer Administering the Government during the absence of His Highness the Rajah. G.C.M.G.
In another column will be found an announcement that the next Spring Meeting of the Sarawak Turf Club will not take place.
We interviewed the Honorary Secretary who informs us that owing to various urgent reasons the meeting in May had to be cancelled. He says that this is not taken in the sense that there will be no more race meetings. It is hoped, he says, to have a meeting later in the year, possibly about August, but the owners’ views will be invited first before any definite decision is made.
It is just possible, says the Honorary Secretary, that an “unofficial” one day meeting may be held on one of the public holidays, when no elaborate arrangements will be made and ponies will run for stakes provided for by modest entrance fees, plus perhaps a share of the tote profits.
' This, in our opinion, sounds feasible, and might result in a. social and sporting event. If it does not stop raining, however, the ponies will have to grow fins!

Recent Gazettings are Mr. J. B. Archer
to be Chairman of the Board of Examiners;
Mr. J. J. Hill to act as Curator, Sarawak
Museum; Captain R. E. Le Sueur to act as
Commandant, Sarawak Rangers, and Su-
perintendent of Prisions; Mr. G. J. D.
Walters to be Assistant District Officer,
Upper Sarawak and Lundu; Mr. B- J. C.
Spurway to be Deputy Conservator of
Forests, Mr. E. O. Bruce to be District
Officer, Miri, and Chairman of the Miri
Sanitary and Municipal Advisory Board.
Mr. C. D. Adams, Acting Resident of the Third Division, paid a flying visit to Kuching, arriving by s.l. Chamois on 21st and leaving in the same launch the next afternoon.
We congratulate Mr. W. Harnack, of the Survey Department, in passing Standard I of the Government examinations with honours.
Mr. N. Hughes arrived on the 26th from Singapore as a Cadet in the Sarawak Civil Service, and Mr. McLaine to join the Treasury Department.
A smart reminder to would-be opium traffickers was administered in the Resident’s Court on the 26th, when Chong Chee was fined $1,000 for dealing in opium. A raid was made on his lodgings, and packets of opium dross, neatly marked $1 each, were found, as well as a far greater amount of opium to which he was entitled.
The poetical lime-juicer of last month has performed one good deed; he has fired other rhymsters to entrust us with their efforts :—
What do you think of £his one, for instance ?
“The Medical set
Are caught in a net
Without any nurses to mind 'em;
What will they do
To get out of the stew
And the tales they’ve left behind 'em?” 
or this?
“Clem and Phil
Went up the hill
To make a tank for water.
The very idea
Made the die-hards queer
And exclaim: 'They didn’t oughter’ I”

THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 2, 1929.	49

March the 1st was Saint David’s day, the
Patron Saint of Wales.
This little Principality shares with
England the curious outlook with which
they regard their own peculiar saint.
The Scots, most of all, honour Saint
Andrew (who, by the way, probably never put |
a foot on Scots soil). The Irish, in rather a
lesser degree, have high jinks on Saint
Patrick’s Day. The English and the Welsh, 
however, appear to look with amazement 
upon those persons who suggest that the 
names of Saints George and David should be
kept green by public display and toasting.
Nine out of ten Englishmen cannot tell you ।
when Saint George’s day is; and we only
admit to examining our own almanac for
inspiration and lighting on Saint David’s
day. It is true that there are Saint George’s
Societies, but they are frequently kept alive
by a few persevering spirits. In fact the
average Englishman thinks it rather “bad ।
form’’ to talk about it.
In one thing, however, we dare to say that
the less enthusiastic nations have the Scots
and the Irish beat to a frazzle when it comes
to the national emblems. With every wish to
be charitable, can the thistle compare with
the fragrant rose ?—or the shamrock with the
divine daffodil?
The Port, Shipping, Trade and Customs 
Regulations have been brought up-to-date in ,
a handbook recently issued by the Depart-
ment of Trade, Shipping and Customs. 
Mr. E. Banks left on home furlough on the j
2nd instant. We wish him a pleasant leave. 
Flight Lieutenant D. V. Carnegie of the I
Far Eastern Flight, who, it will be remem-
bered was with the Flight when it visited
Kuching a few months ago, made another
short trip here, being the guest of Mr.
Flood-Page. He left for Singapore again
on the 2nd. Mr. Butterfield was a passenger
by the same steamer. He had been visiting
Sarawak in connection with the Rejang
An ultra fashionable pair of beige flannel
unmentionables were produced in the Police
Court on the 20th, when a Hylam named
Kie Sam was charged with stealing these
garments to the prejudice of the Right
Reverend The Bishop of Labuan and Sara-
The culprit was foolish enough to attempt
to pawn these, but their bizarre colour
and ample proportions attracted the eye of an
intelligent Police Constable.
The Hylam insisted on telling the pawn-
shop assistant that they were his own. A
try-on in the Court, however, banished all
doubts, and Kie Sam will not be in society for
the next three months.
The total eclipse on May 9th this year will
last for nearly five minutes—a longer eclipse
than the last, seen at Giggleswick—and so
should give excellent time for telescopic
photographs.
The path of the total eclipse will lie across
the Indian Ocean, touching land at Sumatra,
the Malay Peninsula, the southern tip of
Indo-China, and the Philippine Islands.
The British delegation will settle in two
camps on either side of the Malay Peninsula,
at Alor Star, on the west coast, in the State
of Kedah, and in Patani, Siam.
It is with great regret, says the B.N.B-
Herald, that we have to publish in this issue
the news under Club Notes, that it has not
been possible to raise enough entries for the
Gymkhana Meeting provisionally fixed for
the 23rd of this month. It really looks as
though the irresistible tide of mechanics and
petrol is beginning to submerge even Borneo,
where the pony has had a much longer
innings than in most countries. As our
correspondent remarks, the modern young
man who comes out to the East to-day prefers
the less wayward and safer mechanical mount
on two wheels to the four-legged one. It will lie a thousand pities if this is to sound
the death knell of racing in N. Borneo, and
we are no longer to see our little ponies
stretched out at full gallop round our race
course. Let us hope that with improved
conditions in the rubber market (that baro-
meter to all happenings in Borneo) we may
yet see an Autumn Meeting and again witness
the gathering of the clans from Estate and
outstations which has always made our Race
Meetings such an outstanding social function.
Mr. J. C. Swayne was a passenger by the
Vyner Brooke on the 16th instant on his way
home on leave via America,
Various suggestions were made to him
by frivolous friends with regard to devices
to cheat the. pussyfoots. Some of these had
a “Heath Robinsonion” touch ; but whether
Mr. Swayne adopts them or not, he has our
best wishes for a pleasant leave.
The body of a Chinese was found floating
in the river on the 15th and has been identi-
fied as that of Peh Ah Pau. The circum-
stances attending his death are suspicious and
the Police have made two arrests in connection
with the matter.
Confusion worse confounded was our
involuntary remark when, taking up our
invaluable almanac again, we saw that the
17th of March is shared by the 5th Sunday
in Lent, the annexation of Limbang in 1890,
and St. Patrick’s Day.

 THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 2, 1929.

Having written so disparagingly of the loyal enthusiasm shown by our Celtic friends for their respective Saints, the fact that in all fairness we must comment on Saint Patrick, if we comment on Saint David fills us with dismay.
  Let it be said, however, that Home Rule never has, and never will, affect the Irish temperament one “jit or tottle” (as Mr. Spooner said). A land full of witty and kindly people is not easily affected by the snares and delusions of political philanderings. The Irsih are “argin the Government” in just the same way that the law-abiding suburban delights in bicycling on a fothpath and getting away with it, or the Chanel Islander contriving to smuggle a bottle of inferior scent into England, which he could purchase at his local co-operative store at a much less price. Here’s then to good Saint Patrick!
 ABSENT-MINDED car drivers (and there are one or two) should bear in mind the epitaph in a village churchyard: ---
 	“Here lies little Nelly,
	 Poor little mite,
	 Who put out her left hand
	 Instead of her sight.”
  A Chevrolet lorry was driven into the river on the 15th, the driver having only had experience of a Ford. The driver, after being fined in the Police Court, went away to meet his employer – possibly a much more trying ordeal!
  It is reported from Batu Kawa that a small Malay boy of six years, named Suhai, is supposed to have been taken by a crocodile whilst bathing with his sister on the 8th.
  On the 11th the body was found floating near Segidup in an advanced state of decomposition. The Corporal of Police there said that he noticed that the childe bore the marks of crocodile teeth on an arm and round the abdomen.
His Highness the Rajah Leaves the State
APPOINTMENT OF AN OFFICER TO ADMINISTER THE GOVERNMENT.
 His highness the Rajah, G.C.M.G., accompanied by Mr. G. T. M. MacBryan, Private Secretary, Mr. J. S. W. Bean, Director of Agriculture, and Mrs. Bean, sailed for Singapore by the s.s Kucing on the 23rd, en route for a visit to Saigon, Hongkong and China. His Highness expects to be away for about six weeks.
   A Gazette Extraordinary, of the 22nd instant, contains a Proclamation by His Highness appointing Mr. Francis Farrington Boult to administer the Government during his absence.
  Other appointments in the same Gazette are Mr. J. B. Archer to act as Resident, First Division ; Mr. G. J. D. Walters to act as District Officer, Kuching; and Mr. J. J. Hill to act as Assistant District Officer, Upper Sarawak and Lundu.
Her Highness the Ranee and the Dayang Leonora Leave for England
	
There was a big dinner and dance at the Astana on the 9th in honour of the approaching departure for Europe of Her Highness the Ranee and the Dayang Leonora.
  On the 15th the members of the Sarawak Club assembled in the Club House in the evening, when Her Highness and the Dayang Leonora said goodbye personally to their many friends.
Their Highnesses left at seven o’clock the next morning by s.s vyner Brooke, many Europeans and Natives being on the wharf to see them off.
We wish Their Highnesses  a safe passage to Europe, and that we may see them again in Sarak before the end of the year.
His Highness the Tuan Muda’s New Appointment.
   His Highness the Tuan Muda has been gazette Special Commissioner for Sarawak in England, as from 1st January, 1929.
  This is a new appointment, and we take it that it replaces that of Government Agent, lately vacated by Mr. C. Willes Johnson.
  We wish to convey to His Highness, with all due respect, our congratulations on this appointment
Retirement of the Government Agent in England, Mr. Charles Willes Johnson.
  The Government Gazette announces the retirement on pension of Mr. Charles Willes Johnson as Government Agent at the Sarawak Government Offices in London.
  Mr. Johnson was appointed to that position in 1912, when the Agency was transferred from the Borneo Company, Limited, and new offices opened at Millbank House, Westminster.
  The many Officers who have joined the Government Service since that date, and those who have been continually arriving on leave, and those who have been continually arriving on leave, and returning to Sarawak again, will not forget easily Mr, Johnsou’s ready assistance and courtesy.
  To seniors and juniors alike he was always willing to smooth over the worrying little obstacles which beset the Easterner at home, and we have no hesitation in saying that we join them in wishing Mr. Johnson many happy days in his retirement.

THE SARAWAK GAZETfE, APRIL 2, 1929.
51
Retirement of Mr. H. B. Crocker
and Mr. J. R. Barnes on Pension.
Retirement of Major Cunynghame.
Yet two more retirements are notified in the I
Government Gazette of the 16th, when Mr.H.B. 
Crocker, Chief Secretary, and Mr. J. R. Barnes, Superintendent of Telegraphs and Telephones, are due to retire on expiration of their leave in England. 
Mr. Crocker was appointed a Cadet in August
1900, and in his long service of nearly 29 years held ।
many and varied official positions. From 1900 to
1910 he did duty in the First Division at Kuching.
Upper Sarawak and Sadong, including a spell of
survey work, and temporary duty in the P.W.D.
In 1910 he was Acting Resident, First Division;
acting again in that position in 1914.
He was Director of Agriculture in 1915 and 
Superintendent of Lands and Surveys in 1918. In 
1919 he was Chairman of the Food and Supply ,
Control Committee, Acting Resident again in 1920. 
and resumed charge, of the Lands and Surveys
Department the same year. He was Acting Resi-
dent again in 1923 and Acting Chief Secretary in
1924, Resident, Third Division, in 1925, Acting Chief
Secretary in 1926. being confirmed in that position
in 1928.
Member of the Council Negri in 1909, Member
of the Committee of Administration in 1915,
Member of the Supreme Council and Judge of the
Supreme Court in 1923 and Long Service Decoration
in 1926.
Mr. Crocker, it will be seen, has held many high
offices in Sarawak, where the best part of his life
has been spent in loyal and energetic service to the
Raj. Both as an administrator and as a surveyor,
Mr. Crocker has performed invaluable work. He
was always considered the best Malay scholar in
the Service, while much of the present survey of
the State is based on his laborious and zealous work
in that direction.
  Socially Mr. Crocker was well-known as an all-
round sportsman. As a golfer, as a tennis player
and as a shot, Mr. Crocker excelled, whilst he took a keen interest in local racing, having acted as Hon. Secretary several times.
  Mr. Barnes came out to Sarawak in February
1907 to join the P.W.D. He was Acting Com-
missioner in 1911 and again in 1916. In 1918 he
was appointed Superintendent of the Department of
Telegraphs and Telephones, which position he held
until his retirement. He was promoted to Class IB
in 1924, and received the Long Service Decoration
in 1927.
  Apart from his engineering work with the
P.W.D., Mr. Barnes will be remembered chiefly for
his organization of the Wireless Telegraph Depart-
ment. It is entirely due to Mr. Barnes that neighbouring States with regard to this means of
communication. Many improvements in standard
sets were invented by Mr. Barnes, who was able
to equip Sarawak with wireless stations at a much
lower cost than that of sets purchased in the
ordinary way.
  Mr. Barnes was of a retiring disposition, and did
not take an active part in social life. He was
a keen gardener, and a musician of ability.
  We only echo the sentiments of all in Sarawak when we say that these two gentlemen have our very best wishes, and we express a hope that they will not forget the many friends they made in this State.
  The departure of Major and Mrs. Cunynghame on the 2nd March leaves a large gap in Sarawak society, and their places will be difficult to fill.
  Major Cunynghame joined the Service in December 1904, as a Cadet, and was stationed in Limbang until June,1906, when he was appointed Acting Commandant, Sarawak Rangers. In June, 1907, he was confirmed in that rank; and until his retirement the other day, with the exception of the period May, 1913, to December, 1917, when he was attached to the Administrative side again; Major Cunynghame served with the Rangers. He was promoted Captain in 1909, Major in 1923, a Member of the General Council of Sarawak in 1924, and received the Long Service Decoration in 1925.  Major Cunynghame was on several expeditions against rebel tribes with his men.
  In the social side of Kuchjng, Major and Mrs. Cunynghame took a prominent part. Major Cunynghame had much to do with the inauguration of the new Club, and was a stout supporter of the races and later the Turf Club.
  Most of the Europeans in Kuching were on board the Vyner Brooke on the 2nd, and as the steamer the hills and cheered lustily when the ship passed the Fort, whilst the band played “Auld Lang Syne” and the Regimental March.
  The evening before Her Highness the Ranee gave a dinner at the Astana, on the conclusion of which Mr. F. F. Boult, on behalf of His Highness the Rajah, who was unavoidably absent, proposed the health of Major and Mrs. Cunynghame and spoke of their great asset in Kuching Society. Major Cunynghame returned thanks, and the rest of the evening was spent in dancing and cards.
Motor Bus Kills Valuable
Government Cattle.
  A case (we think the first of its kind) was heard in Kuching during the month, when the Agricultural Department charged a Chinese bus driver with having collided with and caused the death of a beast broke her off foreleg in two places—and in spite of treatment by a vet, died a few days later.
  Mr. Pillai of the Agricultural Department giving evidence said that this heifer was a valuable animal having been sired by one of Lord Willingdon’s famous bulls, which had been imported into Sarawak. The bus driver attempted to prove that his vehicle was stationary at the time, and that the heifer ran into him. It was proved, however, that the bus, although moving slowly, did not stop at seeing a large herd of cattle approaching, and. the driver was condemned to pay $ 100 damages and costs.
  Once more we would emphasize the importance of drivers having a thorough knowledge of the rules of the road. This applies especially to bus drivers who have scant regard for pedestrians. Where pavements or footpaths are not existent it must be realized that the road is free to all, and not a race course for a number of selfish and boorish drivers to propel their noisome machines along to the detriment and danger of that large class of road users who still have to use their legs.
THE SARAWAk GAZETTE, APRIL 2, 1929.
52
Hari Raya Puasa.
  The great Mohammedan fasting month culminated at six o'clock in the evening of the 12th March, when long fusillades of bombs and crackers proclaimed the fact that Hamadan was at an end.
  Later on in the evening Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee, the Dayang Leonora, the Resident and Mrs. Boult and others made a tour of the Kam- pongs by car in order to see the illuminations. These were carried out on a most elaborate scale, electric light and the more conservative “pelita” being combined in many clever and well thought-out schemes. Arches at various places were inscribed with eulogistic texts. A pile driver was converted into a veritable pillar of light, whilst there was what appeared to us to be a model of the tower of the fire-station ablaze with light.
  The streets were full of Chinese eager to see the sights; whilst droves of Malay ladies in fascinating colours were escorted round the roads by their men-folk.
  It was noticeable each year that the habit of firing crackers is increasing amongst Malays all over the State. Not so many years ago they confined themselves to “bedils” fired with gunpowder, or skilfully made bamboo “cannon with kerosene oil ammunition. This year there was almost a continual bombardment from six in the evening until the next morning.
  At eight o'clock on the 13th a salute of fourteen guns was fired from Fort Margherita. Later in the day ceremonial visits were paid at the Astana and were returned in the afternoon.
  We take this opportunity of wishing all our Mohammedan friends “Salamat Hari Raya” and health and prosperity in 1929.
final, but we hope that disappointed competitors
will not resort to personal violence.
  Thank goodness we do not all agree. What a deadly dull life it would be if no one argued, no one bickered, and we all liked and disliked the same things.
  The teetotal tub-thumpers of Hyde Park give the lie direct to the immortal writers of the old hunting, military and sea songs of England. The adherents of Eustace Miles, with their lentil chops and nut sausages, make us feel ashamed to sing “The Boast Beef of Old England.” Barrie's praises of the delights of Craven Mixture sound barren when we listen to the exhortations of the anti-nicotine brigade. Those hardy people who believe that life is prolonged by walking through dewy grass with very little on, are in direct contradiction to “family doctor,” and others of that ilk, who bewail the dainty gossamer “unies” of to-day, and insist on “Wolsey” underwear and a red flannel chest protector.
  There are the orange juice faddists, the Kalzana faddists, the swallowers of aspirin, of decomposed cheese (or, at least, it looks like it) and the large army who appear to live on that very uninspiring beverage, hot, water.
  Our well-intended article in our last issue “Cock-
tails and their Effect” produced the following cutting from The Weekly Mirror sent us by an indignant 
reader: --
  “Sir Gilbert Barling, in his denunciation of cocktail drinking to the National Commercial Temperance League, made no distinction between moderate use and excess.
  “Most of the things we eat and drink are harmful in excess, but like the cocktail, beneficial in moderation.
Mainly About Nothing.
  Overheard in the Club. Smith: "What do you think of that new soft drink?” Brown: "Grade?” Smith: “Yes, I think so too, perfectly 'orrid !”
  They say that wireless is one of The Wonders of the World. We are rather inclined to back up that statement in view of the three riddles below, which were broadcasted to some four millions of perfectly sane and respectable members of the P.B.P. (Poor British Public).
  “A peacock belonging to a man lays an egg in a neighbour's garden. To whom does the egg belong?"
  "A man goes to Paris for a holiday and tells his secretary to forward letters. The secretary writes and tells him that he has taken away the key of the letter-box with him so he cannot do it. The man puts the key in a letter and sends it to the secretary, and still does not get his letters. Why is this?"
  "Five women are sent to sell oranges. One has 10 to sell, another 20, another 30, another 40 and the last 50. They all sell their oranges at the same price. and they all bring back the same sum of money. How was it done?"
  The Editor offers a prize of $5 to the sender of the first envelope opened containing the three correct answers. The Editor’s decision shall be
 "The experiments of Mendel. Chittenden, Binz and others prove that a small amount of alcohol is an aid to digestion, especially in the case of the middle-aged, the sedentary* and the ailing, and if a cocktail increases the appetite for food and assists the digestive process it cannot be called
  "Whisky and rum cocktails contain rather less alcohol than an ordinary drink of either of these spirits, and the cocktail that really harms is compounded of absinthe, which is not drunk in this country.”

  The trouble is. however, not so much the quantity in one drink, but the quantity in several drinks on the "just one more for the road" system. Where one might swallow two iced “stengahs," the third begins to have a chilling and inflating effect on the drinker—whereas the third cocktail is just the one that decides the tippler to topple over the edge of discretion and enter the realms of inebriety.
  The Straits Echo says that the "Book of the Week," in their opinion, is Er Tales From Malaya. Bush Whacking And Oth. by Sir Hugh Clifford (Heinemann 10/6).

  We knew that Sir Hugh was a Malav scholar of note, and that his English has delighted,many thousands of readers. We did not know, however, that during his recent furlough Sir Hugh had picked up a new dialect.

THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 2, 1929.
  Humour is not usually considered to be a distinguishing characteristic of Government documents, says The China Express and Telegraph, but just occasionally it does emerge, generally in an unconscious form.
The Municipal by-laws of Penang say:—
"Separate and distinctive badges shall be provided for male and for female dogs. For the purposes of these by-laws a female dog wearing the badge, of a male dog shall be deemed to be without a badge.” As The China Express and Telegraph says, this is a clear warning to canine 'arries and ‘arriets!!
The other gem is a list of languages spoken in the Colony: --
Cantonese, Kheh, Hokkien, Tiew Chiew, Hakka, Hokchia, Hylam, Mandarin, Tamil, Singhalese, Malayalam, Telugu, Hindustani, Sikh, Pathan, Malay, Javanese, Siamese, English, Dutch', Portuguese, French and—American !
53
Matters Municipal.
  Municipal troubles are not modem innovations, as many people think. It is true, perhaps, that the methods of our ancestors were more direct than the “red-tape’ism” of the present day municipal enthusiast. In days that are past the personal factor predominated—and Kings and Princes practised that very sensible 'idea that, if you wanted a thing done, you must do it yourself! Take, for instant, Edward The First’s Charter to Oxford: —
  Charter, 1305: "Edward I. to his Mayor and Bailiffs of Oxford, Greeting. Whereas on the part of our beloved masters and scholars of the University of Oxford it has been shown to us that destroyed and broken that therefrom all and every passing through the same town suffer no slight losses and damages : And also that that by the dung and dungheaps which are placed and collected in the streets and lanes of the same town, the air there scholars aforesaid and others sojourning there suffer abominable horror, the boon of wholesome air is lost, the health of men is grievously harmed, and other intolerable inconveniences and very many annoyances are known to arise to the injury and scholars and of others sojourning and passing through : We. wishing to deal fittingly in this matter, command you that you cause the pavement of the aforesaid town in the streets and lanes there to be repaired and amended under the supervision of any person or persons whom the Chancellor and Proctors of the University aforesaid shall think to depute for this purpose, and that you shall induce your fellow burgesses by all means which seem most expedient to you, and, if necessary, that you compel them in due manner, so that each man shall pave in front of his tenements and holdings, shall cleanse the streets and lanes from dung and dunheaps, and when they have been so cleansed shall keep them clean for the future, and that you cause the pigstyes in the streets and lanes to be removed, through which impurities of this kind arc especially- collected and accumulated, so that the aforesaid town may be kept so clean of such impurities that no repeated complaint shall reach us in this behalf, by reason of which we ought to apply a heavier hand.”
  It will be seen that Edward called a spade a spade. He, probably “suffered abominable horror” on a personal visit, and wisely saw about the matter himself. Moreover he made no bones over the fact he meant “to apply a heavier hand” if these “intolerable inconveniences" continued. Hats off to Wise King Edward, one of the first Municipal Commissioners !
Mother M. Stanislaus.
  On February 21st at St. Francis' Convent Mother M. Stanislaus, Mother Superior, peacefully passed away, surrounded by her beloved Sisters, after a fruitful life of 48 years spent in Borneo.
  Mother Stanislaus was born in Bolton, Lancashire, 65 years ago, and came to Borneo in’1885.
  She was one of the first Sisters who offered their life and work for the conversion of the pagan tribes oi Borneo. She began her work in Kanowit, the Interior of Sarawak, among the Dyaks, the wild children of the forest. In those early days her life was often in danger from the headhunters.
  She worked more than 20 years among them ; they were her first love and, to the end of her life, she could not bear anybody speaking ill of them.
  Her second station was Penampang, among the Dusuns of North Borneo, where she worked for about 12 years, endearing herself to the Natives. She had a way of settling their quarrels and gaining their confidence. Up to the end she used to be called the "Dusun Mother.”
From the Sarawak Gazette 50 Years Ago.

THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 2, 1929.
54
For about three years she was Mother Superior at St. Mary’s Convent., Sandakan, and during this period a new wing was added to the Convent, for nursing abandoned babies.
  The last two years of her life her services were claimed as Superior of the Sisterhood of North Borneo, at St. Francis Convent, Jesselion. She was now in failing health, and did not feel in her element. The Chinese language was too difficult for her to learn at her advanced age ; she could give the children only a kind smile, and they understood. If she had had her wish, she would have remained among her Dyak children, whom she understood so well, to the end.
  The funeral was conducted by the Rt. Rev. Mgr. Wachter, assisted by Fathers Weber, Reich and Sint and two lay brothers. The children of both schools followed the Cross, and all the Sisters, who wore able to come, followed the hearse. —B.N.B. Herald.
The Drug Evil.
One sensation after another marked the public proceedings of the League Advisory Committee on the Opium traffic. Certainly the disclosures of huge dealings in narcotic drugs create a most painful impression and demonstrate once again that the measures for coping with this great evil arc totally ineffective. Thus, the contention of the Italian member of the Committee, Senator Cavazzbni, who has maintained all along that the manufacture of such drugs should be controlled, and quantities produced for medical and scientific purposes only, has been clearly shown to be necessary if au effective curb is io be placed on the traffic. Briefly- put, the Committee was stirred to its depths and the report to be made to the Council which assembles in March next will doubtless be a strong one. Tt appears to have been necessary to hold some of the meetings of the Committee in camera, but the public sittings, of which there -were twelve, produced surprises and liveliness enough. The decision hot to discuss or bring to the notice of the Council the Chinese delegates' statement of Jan. 25 because of its political bearing is regretted in some quarter's as tending to render the relations between the Chinese Government and the League of Nations more difficult than thev are. It is hoped, however, that Mr. Avenal, Deputy Secretary- General of the League, who is at present on a visit to Nanking, will be able to convince the Government that no animus against, it exists at Geneva. Tt will be remembered that the feeling of distrust among the authorities of Nanking arose at the failure of China, last September, to secure re-eligibility on the Council of the League of Nations. Of Mr. Wang King-ky, the Chinese delegate on the Committee, it can be said that he took as prominent a part in the discussions as his worthy predecessor, Mr. Chao, who is now conducting foreign affairs nt Canton. Not satisfied with the report because the wishes of Chinn, the country principally interested in the suppression of the traffic, were not reproduced, and because, as he alleged, no concrete results had been obtained regarding the control of the manufacture of drugs, he abstained from voting on it sind reserved the right to submit to the League the wishes of his Government whenever the occasion demands. —The China Express and Telegraph.
The Companionable Cocktail
Phenomenal Floods in the Rejang.
  A correspondent from Sibu tells us that the floods there lately have been phenomenal, and the highest known in the memoryof all but the very aged in the neighbourhood.
  The dining-room floor of “Bah Maleng,” which was specially raised to be out of all floods, was two feet under water, whilst the table in the Resident's private office under the Residency was floating. The small postern door in Fort Brooke was entirely covered, whilst some.of the bamboo hedges bordering the roads could not be seen.
  Kanowit traders had to remove entirely from the lower storeys of their shops in the Bazaar.
For three days the ponies in the Sibu stables stood in water up to their knees, whilst boats could pass freely all over the Island.
  It is said that much damage has been caused to tile padi which had been stored in farm huts. In large areas all rubber tapping was impossible and the Singapore steamers are leaving nearly empty.
  From other parts of the State we are receiving tales of flood, which is not surprising in view of the constant and heavy rain which we have been experiencing during March. The landas seems late in breaking this year, but it may comfort some to know that, according to many natives, a late landas foretells a dry and long kemarau.
  The mention of this insidious drink seems to incite the public to rush for pen and paper in order to praise or condemn cocktails and their com-potators. There is the expert who says that two “dry martinis” are less harmful than a couple of whiskies; and the other side who assert that one “side-car” is the first nail in the coffin of the inebriate.
  The ladies (God bless ’em) are now in the limelight—and Sir W. Arbuthnot Lane, Bart, in a ■ Home paper savs :—
Women Inclined to Excess.

  While I consider that alcohol in its various combinations and forms is one of the most valuable and powerful foods we possess, writes Sir W. Arbuthnot Lane, Bart, in a Home paper, I realize that, though its capacity for good in moderation is great, its use in excess is far more deleterious and dangerous than that of almost any other article of diet.
  Quite a considerable proportion of the public like cocktails and find them an agreeable institution in the interval that invariably precedes a large dinner, but there are many people who attack the custom with great bitterness and fanatically—naturally most of them are teetotallers. A small amount of alcohol taken before a meal often serves as a stimulant to the functioning of the stomach, increasing gastric secretion, especially in those whose jaded brains are overtaxed by important problems up till the advent of the meal. A small amount of alcohol in such circumstances is very desirable and beneficial, a fact familiar to most

THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 2, 1929.

  To the epicure, who appreciates good wines, any spirit drunk at this period preceding the meal is fatal to the thorough enjoyment of their flavour. For this we have the great authority of M. Andre L. Simon and other experts, who regard dry sherry as the only possible cocktail and who consider'the compounds usually supplied for this purpose as pernicious in the extreme.
Forming a Habit.
  Why many reasonable people object to cocktails is that they are too frequently drunk at irregular intervals between meals, and although each cocktail may contain only a small quantity of spirit, if taken frequently they establish a habit which requires an increasing amount of alcohol as time goes on to satisfy the taste of the individual.
  Criticising the indiscriminate and frequent recourse to alcohol in this form between meals it is obvious that while the cocktail stimulates the stomach unnaturally when not accompanied by food, this frequent stimulation very readily upsets digestion.
Unfortunately, women who incline to excess in any new habit which has been initiated by men too often indulge in cocktails to an unreasonable degree.
Hay Fever.
If Rudyard Kipling Had It
If you can face a ragweed without sneezing
And walk undaunted past a stack of
  hay ;
If you can find a field of daisies pleasing,
And not require ten handkerchiefs a day ;
If you can stroll in meadowland and orchard

And greet the goldenrod with gay surprise,

And not be most abominably tortured By swollen nose arid bloodshot, flaming eyes;

If you can go on sneezing like a geyser And never utter one unmeasured
If you can squeeze the useless atomiser Nor look with envy on each passing hearse;
If you can still be merry in September,
And not lay plans to drown yourself
in drink,
Then your career is something to remember,
And you deserve an lion Cross, I think.'
(Christopher Morley.)
Sarawak Government Air Service.
Height Tests by H.II. Seaplane ‘'Venus.”
  Flight-Lieut. Phillips, of the Government Air Service, has kindly sent us a few notes on the tests he carried out the other day. In view of the little flying which has taken place in these parts, such tests are of the utmost importance. The writer says: --
  '"On Friday the 8th instant, the seaplane Venus was flown on a height test, and the temperatures recorded may be of interest.
  "The height reached was just under 12,000 feet. The surface temperature was 86°F, and the seaplane left the water at 3.44 p.m. The following times heights and temperatures were recorded :—
The machine landed at 4.45.
  Cumulus cloud was encountered at 2,000 feet and extended to a mean height of 6,000 feet. Above this were large patches of alto-cumulus at a height of about 15,000 feet, and above this again at about 20,000 feet were layers of cirro-stratus with blue sky showing between. The atmosphere was ‘‘bumpy" up to 4,000 feet, but became calm after passing this height. The visibility was extremely good, and it was possible between cloud patches, to see the coast at the mouth of the Rejang and in the neighbourhood of Lundu. It was impossible to see inland because of dense cloud.”
  Incidentally, Flight-Lieut. Phillips adds that the new water tank (the pride of the P.W.D.) looked just about big enough for one "stengah.”
Some Legal Abuses.
Surely there is food for deep thought on the part of the layman in the fact that in the very columns of the Law Journal itself we find the admission that legal abuses and legal anomalies exist to-day as they have existed for centuries past. It is possible, says the writer, that we are living in the midst of abuses which in fifty years' time will seem as monstrous as those depicted by Charles Dickens in his case of Jarndyce v. Jamdyce appear to us. Here are some which he suggests off-hand:—1. Costs, whereby a plaintiff may obtain judgment for £1,000 and costs, of which £1,000, after it is paid, he receives nothing, the whole being absorbed by the additional fees and expenses of his own legal advisers. 2. The costs, delay and uncertainty caused by the appellate system; a case may go from the court of first instance to the House of Lords, swinging from side to side at each successive stage, and, in the end, the final loser may have a majority of judges (and those the better) in his favour. 3. The flitting leader and his immense unearned emoluments.

56	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 2, 1929.
4. The legal fictions in favour of wives. 5. The Rent Acts, whereby he who builds and owns a bouse is forbidden to dwell therein. 6. Divorce law. where a man must become either a perjurer or a cad. 7. The hanging of women. 8. The ageless efficiency of the Lords of Appeal. 9. Police moralists and Civil Service judges. . .. From the list it would seem that there are instances where the laws of the Straits Settlements are better. —Straits Times.
Etoiles Filantes
[From the French oj Francois Coppee]
Of old, they used to say :
You should 'wish' whilst a star is falling
—I always do—
And the wish, if you really meant it, 
Would then come true !
The dream of my desire
Is immutable as destiny :
And that will be That you, dear heart, will love me well; Will think of me.
I often wandered out
When autumn nights were crisp and chill.
And searched the sky
For shooting stars, to which I could
My wish apply.
And this chimera was
My lonely consolation I
But now, my dear—
The winter nights grow dark and drear—
No stars appear, No stars appear I
Anak Sungei, 1929.
The Care of Books.
  The binding of a new leather or cloth-bound book
takes a little time to season. When not in use. keep it wedged between other books for a few weeks.
Do not violently wrench open a new book—it may break the back or loosen its leaves. Stand the book on its back and, without opening, press down the covers firmly several times until they touch the table.
This will make the back more flexible.
When leather bindings show a tendency to crack or become rusty, soak with “3 in 1" oil applied with a rag. On the next day, apply a beaten yolk of egg with a sponge, press with a warm iron and rub gently with a cloth.
Books have many enemies in the-tropics. The worst are the larvae and adults of the small Anobium beetle which tunnel holes through covers and pages (like their cousins do in cigars!). Infected volumes should be promptly isolated, and specially treated with benzene.
Cockroaches and Silver-fish (Lepismidae) eat the glade off cloth-bound books, especially when new. To prevent this, books should be coated with clear copal varnish ; and borax should be sprinkled on the shelves.
To prevent this, books should be coated with clear copal varnish ; and borax should be sprinkled on the (shelves.
To prevent Mildew, and the attacks of White-ants, rub the bindings occasionally with some olive oil to which has been added a few drops of birch-oil. Teak bookshelves are not attacked by white ants
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of
Correspondents. ]
Old Salts.
Kuching, 5th March, 1929.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
Dear Sir,
I beg to point out an error in your issue of 1st March, 1929.
On page 36 you mention that "Nandah” was lately in command of H.H.M.Y. Maimuna. Jeragan Nandah has never at any time been in command of the above yacht,
This correction should be made in view of your Editorial Note that states that readers rely on the Gazette as a record of doings in Sarawak.
Yours faithfully,
E. H. P. Bengtsson.
[On making further inquiries we’ find that our correspondent is correct, and we thank him for putting us right. Indeed, this rather bears out our statement that "to readers our paper must be a disappointment nine times out of ten! !”—Ed. S.O.]

THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 2, 1929                                         57
”To Crookshank Road.”
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Dear Sir,

Please give me a little space in your column for this writing, that I have marked many a time the change that a girl can make in her promise to a marriage. .1 refer well to some girls living in Sarawak.
  Yes I know, though girls are educated and taught and neighbours I don't criticize, but point the parts that they neglect when within a right are rights.
  Most damsels when out from the custody of their parents or guardians make mistakes by not apparently recollecting in which positions they stand. Are the • words of the parents relaxed because their daughters expel? I will say “yes."
  Many parents, of course Mr. Editor, will not agree
to my words and much more they will suggest not
opinion compels enough my pen.
  Damsels when live with strange charactors
ones who will echo the effects to the memories and
ones too who live like landslides will often concur to
will note the reflection quiet abrupt they almost
forget.
  I will be much enlightened by any girl in school or out of, of her idea as to why should girls go beyond gross negligence when instructions they already had. 
  Parents and neighbours who are sulky enough by : this writing will please remember that they are not the only ones who have maintained the positions.
Thanking you again Mr. Editor for taking this up.
[Not Cut-Throat.—You are not very gallant, you know, Not Cut-Throat, and most of the girls we know are very nice little girls too !. Yet even nice little girls “make mistakes" but that they “go beyond gross negligence” is, we think, a trifle hard on the damsels.
You hint, Not Cut-Throat, that parents and neighbours may be sulky at your letter. Indeed, Not
the “damsels who live like landslides" and those naughty ones who “live with strange charactors'' marely cause the readers to smile ; in which case you are conferring a benefit on us , Not Cut Throat, in these dark and dismal days, always supposing you are not writing with your tongue in your chekk!! – Ed. S.G.]
C. D. Le Gros Clark.—We have received your letter which, however, you tell us is not for publication. As a method of filling our columns, you will admit, this is rather Gilbertian ! ! —[Ed. S.C.]
Club News.
Sarawak Club-
Sarawak Turf Club.
  Owing to unforeseen circumstances, the Committee of The Sarawak Turf Club have decided that the Spring Meeting, which was advertised for the 18th, 20th and 24th of May next, shall not take place.
  Will all those who have any claims against the Sarawak Turf Club please submit them to the undersigned before the 1st of June next; and all those indebted to the Club are requested to settle without delay.
J. B. ARCHER,
Hon. Secretary, Sarawak Turf Club.
 Kuching, 15th March, 1929.

THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 2, 1929.
Extracts from Monthly Reports.
First Division.
Kuching.
February, 1929.
Mr. F. F. Boult, the Resident, reports:—
Orang Kaya Bah, of Munggu Babi, died early

 in the month. When a new Orang Kaya has been selected his name will be submitted to His Highness the Rajah for approval.
  A Dyak house of eight doors was completely destroyed at Kampong Tebuan on the 10th.

  A meeting was held in the Municipal Offices on the 15th, at which the heads of the various communities were present, to discuss the increase in rentals in the bazaar area due to the lapsing of the Rent Restriction Order. The Resident informed the meeting that His Highness desired the landlords should be informed that he wished them to exercise moderation, otherwise it might be necessary for the Government to again step in and institute some form of control.



District Office.
February, 1929.
The District Officer, Mr. J. B. Archer, reports
1 took over charge of the District from Mr. J. 0. Swayne on the 1st instant, and was in addition appointed Coroner for Kuching and Editor of the Sarawak Gazette.
Chinese New Year was noticeable for the very few eases of rowdyism which occurred amongst Chinese in the town. A number of Chinese were caught running gaining tables without licences and were fined. .
During the month the Police and Municipal Departments prosecuted a number of persons for motor vehicle offences.
A small Tamil boy was accidentally drowned near Mr. Ong Tiang Swee’s cattle ground on the 10th, and a Chinese was drowned in the Ulu Samarahan on the 9th. There were two motor fatalities. On the 4th an old Chinaman was knocked down by a motor bus at the 2nd mile and killed instantaneously; and on the 19th another Chinaman. in attempting to alight from a motor bus in motion near the General Hospital, fell to the ground and died the same, night. On the 24th instant a man named Francis Escoto died in the General Hospital after an alleged assault. The matter is still sub judice.
Mr. P. Murray-Scott, who arrived from Singapore on the 12th, has been attached to this office for duty.
From the 18th to 21st inclusive I was absent from office part of the time examining Government Officers. Mr. Swayne kindly did duty for me dining my absence.
, Land Office.
February, 1929.
Tlie Superintendent of Lands, Mr. C. 8. Griffiths, reports:—
Following the settlement of Malay gardens between Rubber and Nanas Road mentioned in my report for last month, it appears that certain Malays in Tanjong Patingan are desirous of a similar arrangement in respect of their holdings. This will be undertaken when opportunity permits.
  The transcription of Land Office Routine Instructions into Jawi was completed during the month and sent to the Government Printing Office.
  The subject of excessive rubber planting, more particularly in the First and Third Divisions, was- taken up during the month and discussions are now proceeding with the object of discovering a method of checking this evil.
Upper Sarawak.
January, 1929.
The District Officer, Mr. E. O. Bruce, reports :—
  I took over charge of this district from Mr. J. B. Archer, District Officer, who left on the 15th to take up his appointment in Kuching.
  The appointment last year of Abang Zamhari as Senior Native Officer at Lundu has had a noticeably stimulative effect at the station. In endeavouring to evade the Order restricting credit to be allowed by shopkeepers to certain Government servants I found that here also it was becoming the practice for them to prevail upon the Court Writer to go security for them. This was definitely stopped. It was also noticed that for some years no proportion of registered Mohammedan marriage fees had been paid into Court. Abang Merali claimed that it had not been the custom. Receipts, how- over, had been issued correctly. He was ordered to pay in arrears at once. The Register books are now kept by the Senior Native Officer, Abang Zamhari. Abang Haji Zulaihi arrived from Kuching on 24th, having instructions from the Resident, First Division, to examine and report upon all Mohammedan mosques. He was requested to inquire into the present controveray between the Kainpongs Siling and Stunggang, and a certain section of the latter headed by Abang Merali, who appears to be unable to decide which of the two mosques should be used. The old one at Siling or the newer one at Stunggang, few, if any, apparently desiring to use the latter.
  Mohamed Htisien was voted and appointed Tua Kampong. of Rambungan and Stoh.
  On the 31st, the Seaplane “Venus” circled above the station for the first time, much to the edification of the local worthies.
  The Malay Teacher of the Government Lay School at Bau, Johari bin Anang, will retire on pension next month after 21 years’ service. His successor has not yet been appointed.
 At Lundu the Kheh community applied for permission to open a school, and the formal application papers have been given to the proposed founders to fill up and submit to the Director of Education.
  About 100 piculs of tuba was exported to Kuching. It appeared to be of excellent quality. There have been quite a number of applications for new gardens, details have been taken and applicants told to cut their boundary rentises, when demarcations will be effected as soon as possible. The Forest Guards at Bau and Lundu have helped with demarcation in some instances. Official Land Inspectors are expected from Kuching as soon as their training is completed. Cases of Chinese extending gardens by ditching the outskirts, draining, and then encroaching into adjacent Dyak padi land, and other unsurveyed gardens is not uncommon. The Survey Department parties are continuing steadily with demarcation of cultivated land bordering the main river.

THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 2, 1929.
59
In the Lundu Station I noticed a small temporary Chinese temple of sorts in which I learned that many opium smokers have been attempting, by spiritual invocation and moral determination, to cure themselves of the habit. In many cases apparently with success.
February, 1929.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. G. J. D. Walters, reports: --

  Her Highness the Ranee, the Dayang Leonora, Mrs. Gillan, Mr. and Mrs. F. O. Blagg and Mr. J. J. Hill visited Bau from the 8th to the 12th. Her Highness was welcomed by the Chinese firing crackers at Seniawan and Buso. During their stay, the party visited the Bidi Caves.
  The District Officer, Mr. E. 0. Brace, returned to Bau from Lundu on the 3rd. On the 23rd he left for Kuching and 1 returned with him to Bau on the 26th, taking over charge of the district on the 28th.
  Dahan Rubber Estate was visited to sign on Javanese labourers. There were no complaints.
  Two new Chinese schools were registered and opened at Tundong and Sebuku, and registration certificates were received for a new Chinese school at Lundu.
  The rainfall recorded during the month was—Bau 24.71 inches; Lundu 14.63 inches.
Sadong.

February, 1929.
  The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports: —
I accompanied Dr. Gange on a visit to the Pichin Dyaks on the 23rd. There were very few sick here and notes of the illnesses were made and medicines forwarded from Simunjan. One man was taken to hospital in Kuching.
  In spite of the recent experience of the price of rubber, applications are still being received for land for planting this. Every effort is being made to discourage the planting of rubber; but attempts to dissuade such applicants have been fruitless.
  Little was possible in the way of inspections, owing to the extreme inclemency of the weather.
  Mr. Dare visited the station from the 1st to 4th instant.
I proceeded to Tabekang to meet Mr. Binnie on the 7th and we went over to Balai Krangan at Mr. Krol’s invitation. I returned to the station on the 15th while Mr. Binnie returned to Ulu Samarahan on the 14th across country.
  Mr. Goodall arrived from Ulu Simunjan on the 20th and proceeded to Kuching on the following day.
  On the 19th Dr. and Mrs. C. O. Gange arrived to look into the medical affairs, and were still here at the end of the month.
  The Datu Shahbandar, Abang Haji Abdillah, arrived in his launch Pasir Mas on the 15th and returned to Kuching on the 17th.
A number of damar samples were requested and received from the Commissioner of Trade. These are on view at the District Office together with their relative values which are also shown. It is hoped that this will have its effect on the general propaganda exhorting people to work this commodity. Inquiries have even been received from Malays concerning its working.
A letter has been forwarded to the Resident relative to Chinese traders near the Dutch Border.
  The following are the comparative Trade Returns: —
Sadong Colliery

February, 1929.
Mr. D. Evans, Acting Manager, reports:— The output, export, local consumption, conversion into coke and coal stock figures for the mounth were as follows:--
The Chinese New Year holiday commenced on the 9th. and work was not resumed again until the 15th. This is the main cause of the abnormally low output.

  Surface employees, other than Chinese, were engaged during the stoppage at the Mines in relaying the railway track with heavier section rails from the western end of the Padang to a distance from the wharf of a little over a mile.
The total rainfall for the month was 18.36 inches.
Second Division

SlMANGGANG.
February, 1929.

  The Resident, Second Division, Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner, reports: —
  On the 8th R H.M.Y. Maimuna arrived at Lingga with Mr. C. Willes Johnson and Mr. J, A. H. Hailie on board. They arrived at Simanggang in ml. Anne at 5.30 p.m. on a visit. On the 10th, accompanied by Mr. C. Willes Johnson, we left in m.l. Anne  at 6 a.m. for Engkilli, which place was  reached at 11 a m. There was a very heavy fresh iu the river.
  On the way back Penghulu Renang's house was visited. Next morning Mr. C. Willes Johnson and Mr. J. A. H. Hardie left for Kuching via Lingga.
  His Highness the Rajah was pleased to appoint Goiang. of.Entiilang, Penghulu of Entulang in place of Ingkas resigned, and Sambau Penghulu Meniang district in place of his father Satieng, deceased.
  I regret to report death of Pengbulu Munan of Engkari, fathei of Pengbulu Karua.
  Mr. R. W. Hurst, of Agricultural Improvement Fund, visited the Skrang pepper gardens during the month, and planted out seventy-six young pepper plants which were obtained from seeds.

THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 2, 1929. 60
 A small regatta took place at Lingga on the 24th in honour of Her Highness the Ranee’s birthday.
  On the 26th, H.H.M.Y. Maimuna arrived at Lingga with His Highness the Rajah, Mr. G. T. M. MacBryan. Private Secretary, and Mr. J. A. H. Hardie. Next morning His Highness and party arrived at Simanggang in m.l. Betty al 8.10 a.m. A representative crowd was present to greet His Highness. During His Highness’ stay an interview to the Native Officers and Penghulus and various other subjects of His Highness.
Ou 28th, His Highness and party visited Engkilili when the new Bazaar was examined by His Highness. The party returned to Simanggang the same day in in m.l. Betty. His Highness was still at Simanggang at end of the month
Shipping.—Nineteen motor schooners arrived and sixteen cleared the port daring the month.
Trade.—The principal exports were:—
Saribas.
The Court Writer, Betong, reports:—
Mr. R. W. Hurst and Ibrahim, of Agricultural Improvement Fund, arrived from Kalaka on 2nd instant and inspected ihe soap palm nursery which is doing very well. The young plants are almost ready for planting out.
Peiigbulus Unji and Jabieng brought in fines during the month
The building of the ten new bazaar shophouses was completed during the month and will be examined when the Acting District Officer visits Betong next to see if they conform to the plans laid down by the Public Works Department.
Seven motor vessels entered and cleared the port during the month.
Kalaka.
Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, Acting District Officer. Kalaka, reports: —
The Sebetan-Roban road is getting on well and is now near the steep hills of the “Antara Menoa,” and the work is made slower by the big growth.
The bill padi is all ripe now and every one is busy harvesting. The crop is a good one.
During the month Dyaks and one or two of the more energetic Malays have been collecting eng- kabang This crop, while being very good in the Padeh and in parts of the Layar, is on the whole a failure—very disappointing after the exceptional promise of the blossom.
Third Division.
February, 1929.
 The Acting Resident, Mr. C. D. Adams, reports: —
Mr. Bengtsson arrived on the 6th instant to survey launches and left again on the 21st instant.:
A salute of seven guns fired at 8 a.m. and 6 p.m. on the 10th instant to announce Chinese New Year and the commencement of Bulan Puasa.
  As some of the new shops were nearing completion the Chinese were ordered to have a meeting in order to bring forward a proposition as to payment. After several of these a decision was arrived at, and same was held up until the arrival of His Highness the Rajah.
A buoy was moored in the Igan for the use of seaplan.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Sibu, reports: -- 
  Five suspected members of the secret society were detained and released on bail of $100 pending the arrival of Capt. Le Gros Clark, Secretary, Chinese Affairs.
  Mr. W. F. Dick arrived from home leave on the 22nd and took up his appointment of District Officer, Sibu.

THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 2, 1929. 61
Mr. Phillips, the Government Air Pilot, made
two landings here on the 13th and 22nd in the
Moth seaplane. On the first occasion he proceeded
to Limbang, and on the second returned to Kuching,
only staying a short time to collect fuel.
  The Acting Assistant District Officer, Kapit,
reports :—
  Penghulus Semada, Melinau, Jugah, Merirai,
Atan'Sut, and M. M. Jantieng, Tiau, were down
during the month.
  Abang Ahmat left for the Balleh on 18th to keep an eye on the Dyaks during the gathering of engkabang, and was still away at the end of the month.
  Abang Indih left for the Mujong with F.G.
Pindek to collect engkabang for the Board of Trade.
He experienced great difficulty iu getting fruit
from the trees and returned on the 20th short of
the amount required. Three Rangers accompanied
him owing to the impossibility of obtaining coolies.
  I left for Song on the 12th intending to visit the
Tekalit but had to abandon the trip as no Dyaks
were available, returning to Kapit on the 14th. I
went to the Ulu Among on foot on 8th returning
the same day.
  A new mast was erected on the 4th. Thanks
are due to Penghulus Jingga and Atan for their
help in collecting sufficient Dyaks. Were it not
for a number of Dyaks from Kanowit on their way
up river shortage of. labour would have made the
task impossible. The telephones were put in
order during the month.
  The crop of padi is good this year, though at one
time there was danger of some of it being allowed
to rot, the Dyaks being engkabang mad.
  Engkabang, from all reports, is not a great
success. Some of the downriver Dyaks returned
empty handed. Fair quantities can be expected
from Gat and Sut. The Menyong crop did not
come up to expectation.
  Rumours, mostly proving false, of large crops in
remote streams caused the men to leave small
amounts untouched. However, the women have
collected most of it and harvested as well. Eng-
kabang collected round about. Kapit fetched 40 cents
a gantang. A padi sack full varies from 109 to 132
catties in weight, and holds about 30 gantangs.
  The Acting Divisional Medical Officer, Sibu,
reports: —
  The health of the above stations and Sibu
remains good.
  The Divisional Engineer, Sibu, reports —
  The framework, brickwork and roofing to the
forty-one houses erected by Government is nearly
complete. Fifteen houses are almost ready for
occupation and concrete floors are laid to the
remainder. Three shops erected by Chin Nang
in Blacksmith Road are occupied. A new shop
adjacent to the cinema in Blacksmith Road is now-
occupied.
   Negotiations are proceeding for the erection of
nine houses in Blacksmith Road and a further nine
houses in Old Street.
The vacant land in front of Messrs. Sarawak
Steamship Company's godowns has been cleared, levelled and drained.
  The new jail is now ready for occupation. Four
quarters for the use of the Customs Department are
being erected near the power station. The pump
house at the waterworks has been re-roofed with
corrugated iron.

 We have been unable to put the new filter plant into operation on account of the difficulty of procuring suitable sand. A number of new water services have been laid. Sundry repairs to buildings, roads and bridges have been made as usual during the month.
Mukah and Baltngian.
The District Officer reports :—
General.—Accompanied by Abang Haji Mohidin, Native Officer, and Dresser Reggie, I visited Balingian from 21st to 23rd. This was the first time the sea was sufficiently calm to allow a visit to this station.
S.S. Sulong called at Mukah mouth twice during the month, once on her way north and again on her return. The channel marks were replaced during the month.
  Two motor schooners and two motor launches entered with tonnage of 102, and two motor schooners, two sailing schooners and three motor launches cleared the port of Mukah with total tonnage of 109.
Rainfall for the month was 26.06.
Lower Rejang.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Lower Rejang, reports: —
  During the month instructions were received from the Divisional Land Officer, Third Division, Sibu, that no Occupation Tickets are to be issued in future until the land applied for has been inspected by a Sibu Land Inspector and approved by Government. By adopting this procedure, Government will be able to dispense with the services of the local land inspector, Tua Kampong Resol, and will obtain a more satisfactory record of the sitpation and delineation of the various pieces of land occupied for planting in the future. 
  S.S. Kuranda arrived here from Singapore on the 20th instant. Owing to heavy seas she was said to have lost her way from Singapore on this trip, and to have arrived off Bintulu before being able to find the mouth of the Rejang river.
  At 10 a.m. on the 13th instant, the Government seaplane PentM passed near the station, flying on her way to Miri and Limbang via Sibu.
  The engkabang crop in this district this year is. said to be small and unsatisfactory owing to rains, and the quantity of this commodity collected in this consumption only, leaving none for sale to the local Chinese traders.
  During the month I spent one night at this station, where I met the Acting D.M.O., Dr. Chandv who inspected the bazaar and kainpong here, and Mr. Tiedeman of Messrs. Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, Miri. who informed me that a few sepnges of oil had been found on Bruit Island where Mr. Fraser, also of Messrs. Sarawak Oilfields Limited, was surveying.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 2, 1929.  62
The Officer-in-Charge of Lands, Sibu, reports: — - Bugis Colony. —This area is reserved for coconut  planting by the Bugis and is divided into two sections known as the Hulu and Hilir.
The Hulu is headed by an Orang Bugis by the name of Dayeng Blebau, the Hilir by Dayeng Haji Pasandeh, both sections carrying out the same methods of cultivation. Running up the centre of each section at right angles to the river is a large drain with an average width and depth 6 feet by 8 feet, which is a main drain to a series of cross draining and is also used as a waterway at high tide. The cross draining in the Hulu is 3 feet by 3 feet drain at regular intervals of 25 fathoms, in the Hilir is a 3 feet by 3 feet drain at distances of 20 fathoms apart.
   The length of the main drain Hulu section is 1250 fathoms and the Hilir 1800 fathoms.
On the true left bank of the main drain a road reserve with a width of 5 fathoms has been arranged,  the Bugis planters have, promised to transplant all  coconut palms that are now growing in the proposed road reserve. The reason for my making a road I reserve is that the road at present is running on the brink of the drain, which accounts for bulging in the walls of the drain, which will lead eventually to the falling away of the banks.
In the Hulu section the area brought under cultivation and planted with coconuts is 86 acres being 12 independently-owned gardens.
In the Hilir section the area brought under cultivation and planted is 130 acres, being 31 hide- . pendently-owncd gardens, the area,felled,and burnt ready for planting is far in excess of the area planted. , At present they are awaiting the arrival of some new seeds.
In both sections interplanting with coffee, bananas, pineapples pinang, and other fruits and vegetables is practised, and I gather from this source Sarikei and Binatang depend on their fruit and vegetable supplies, and the Bugis together with the coconut planting.
No titles are issued covering these gardens, the planted area being so small compared to the area that is expected to be taken up by the Bugis planters and, in connection with this. I notice that a letter No. 21 in R.O. IIID 46/1925 received from the Resident. Third Division, reads as follows: —
“Please note that these gardens will be exempt from tax for seven (7) years from date of issue of title, unless this title is issued a considered time after planting. If such is the case the period of exemption should date from approximate date of planting."
So I gather that no immediate action is necessary as regards the issuing of Titles, and it is thought that every encouragement should be given the Bugis to recruit newcomers as undoubtedly this is a cultivation to be extended on the Knee at present employed.
Ova and Dalat.

March, 1929.

The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. W. Buck, reports: --

The progress on the new cutting of the Mukah road has not been very satisfactory this month owing to shortage of labour, and the fact that the ground nearby has been flooded.
A contract was made to demolish the main bridge over Sungei Madong and re-erect it again on the new Mukah road over the same stream, but further inland.
His Highness' seaplane Venus passed Oya from Kuching at 7.24 a.m. on the 14th, and returned from the north on the 16th passing over at 9.10 a.m.
  Two mooring buoys have been received and one fixed at Dalat in front of the Court house. The other is being held nt Oya pending further instructions.
  Two schooners entered this month and two cleared.
  The glass of the lamp on the light mast is cracked owing to the heat of the lamp, but can still be used.
1,141 piculs of gutta jelutong, 44 koyans raw sago, 94 piculs para rubber and 3 piculs gutta jangkar were shipped to Kuching.
The trade returns for the month and for comparison with those of the same period last year are as follows:—
Fourth Division
February, 1929.
  The Resident, Mr. H. D. Aplin, reports; —
  An inquest was held on the body of Jan Fook, contractor of tbe Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, who was found bunging on 17th. A verdict of suicide owing to difficulties over financial matters was returned. Deceased was well known in Miri and was reported to be a wealthy man, but an examination of his assets showed these to be practically nil whilst he was heavily in debt in the bazaar. What he did with liie money is still a mystery as his affairs are still being looked into.
  I found that no assessment was being paid by Chinese living in their portion of Kampong Dagang. This mutter will be brought to the notice of the Advisory Board at their next meeting with u suggestion that bazaar assessment should be revised from year to year.
  A large number of Indian coolies, employed by the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, refused to turn out to work as they claimed that their pay had been cut without their notice. An inquiry was held into the matter, when it transpired that they had been cut cei tain bonuses of which they had been notified. The majority were quite willing to work but were prevented from doing so by five men.
  I called up before me all Dyak mandors employed by the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, who were unanimous in their opinion that Dyaks should be stopped from gambling in the Miri bazaar.
  Your Highness seaplane “Venus," Flight-Lt. Phillips, arrived on the 14tb at 1 p.m. with mail and left for Limbang the same afternoon. The following day I was informed by wireless that she had left Limbing at 10.20 a.m. on her return trip. The morning was quite fine at Miri but at 11 a.m. a dark heavy rainstorm appeared from the direction of the north east. As at 1p.m. the seaplane had not arrived 1 was getting very anxious n 'id began to make preparations for a search along the coast. However, at 2.30 p.m. the seaplane appeared over Miri. Flight-Lieutenant Phillips reported that he had run into this storm and was completely lost when he suddenly saw Baram river on which he alighted and sheltered until the storm passed. He stayed the night here and left for Kuching the following day with mails.

THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, 'APRIL 2, 1929. 63
A Chinese fishing boat, whilst leaving Kuala Sibuti on 23rd, was upset by heavy seas and three Chinese are reported drowned. Their bodies have not yet been recovered.
A 60-feet whale in a decomposed state was washed up on the beach at Kuala Suai.
Bakam.
February, 1929.
The Officer-in-Cbarge, Haram, Mr. L. K. Morse, reports: —
  On the 6th instant I returned from L. Malinau having attended the Punan Meeting there. The greater part of the taxes were paid in. A number of Punans did not appear owing to sickness. The travelling dresser, Mohamad Lazaroo, gave eighteen injections to those present who required it, and seven to the L. Para people. The Dyaks of the Linai were visited and several small matters discussed. Wan Taba, N.O., went to Long Lama from the 1st to 4th instant, Tuanku Mohamat, N.O., visited the Tinjar from 1st to 5th. I visited Bakong and Bluru from the 9th to 12th. Datu T. Drahman arrived at Bakong on 12th and went into the Bakong Dyak affairs with me. Wan Surer, N.O., returned from Lio Matu via Tinjar on the 13th. As the result of a disturbance in the clerks’ quarters on the 17th instant, Cheow Kim was detained pending the arrival of the Resident. I visited Long Lama fiom 22nd to 24th instant. On the 26th instant it was reported that Ajtin, Dyak. of Bakong. had been accidentally shot in the back by Seleban, Dyak, while bunting in the jungle. The Land Inspectors were kept busy in the S. Tinjar, S. Tutoh and locally.
Bintulu.
February, 1929.
The Acting District Officer, Bintulu. Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports
  On the 12th and 13th Sebauh was visited and a large number of minor cases heard and settled.
  The Government seaplane “Venus” passed over Bintulu at 11.20 a.m. on the 14th flying north and again at 8.20 a.m. on 16th flying towards Kuching.
Shipping..—The following vessels entered and cleared the port during the mouth.
M.S. Lang Nyambar on the 3rd, 15th, 22nd and 28th.
M.L. Sri Maharani on the 4th, 23rd, and 28th.
S.S. Auby on the 6th and 23rd.
M.L. Bintulu on the 13tb, 14th and 21st.
S.S. Sulong on the 15th calling st Kuala.
M.T. Chin on the 16th and 27th.
S.S. Angas on the 16th.
Trade. —Trade is still slack. Jelutong averaged $11.37 per picul during the month and of this commodity 790.02 piculs were exported. Of billian attaps 30,000 pieces were exported this month, the price being $110 per laksa f.o.b- Bintulu.
  Below are the value of exports and imports local and foreign for the month.
Fifth Division.
Limbang.
February, 1929.
The Resident, Mr. F. H. Kortright, reports: —
  The Resident, Mr. F. H. Kortright, reports:--At Trusan a Murut named Sarak, charged with attempted murder and abetting suicide, was found
guilty on both charges and sentenced to fifteen years’ imprisonment
The first visit of the seaplane Venus on the 14th
caused much interest, and people crowded in fromoff on her return to Kuching the next day.
I visited Sundar and Trusan on the 12th, and from there went to Labuan to go into the Agency affairs.
Three bridges and 26 culverts were built on the new Panderuan road, which enables it to be open to traffic for five miles.
  The Bazaar road was completed, including the two 
approaches to the Customs wharf, for the estimated figure of $3,000, with the lorry in perfect condition remaining as an asset. The services of the lorry will now be put to the upkeep and improvement of