VOL. LIX.
No. 911.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Thursday, August 1st, 1929.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette		 			
THURSDAY. AUGUST 1st. 1929.
Acknowledgement.
Mrs. TAN AH BOH and family thank sincerely one and all for sympathy shown them in their bereavement, also for floral tributes and attendance at the funeral.
RICKSHAWS.
The recent fatal accident in Kuching, when a
Tamil was run over by a motor lorry in Gambier
Road and died of his injuries, brings forward once
again the question of the control of rickshaws in the
town. The driver of the lorry proved to the satisfaction of the coroner that, owing to the congestion
of rickshaws outside the markets, he was unable to
pull over to the left-hand side of the road when
confronted suddenly by the deceased who was
crossing the street.
The advent of the motor vehicle has been a serious
blow to rickshaw pullers, who now realize that it is
hard to find passengers. In consequence they have
adapted the habit of loitering along the main
thoroughfares soliciting custom, or waiting outside
public places in the hope of picking up stray
passengers.
These slow-moving vehicles are a danger at all
times-one never knows when they are about to turn
round suddenly, and they are apt to congregate in
large numbers in a small space.
It is noticeable that the average rickshaw puller
has deteriorated since the motor traffic became large enough to attract many of the old rickshaw users.
The present day puller is in most cases a poor
specimen, and the smart, well-kept rickshaws of a few years ago are now few. We feel sorry for these
men, as do many others, but, to put it plainly, the
unkempt and importunate pullers who plague
persons to ride in their vehicles, do nothing but
annoy the average man in the street, whilst these
wanderers certainly do cause much trouble in the
traffic of the town.
The rickshaw is still the poor man’s carriage, but even the low fares advertised do not compensate for the inevitable argument at the end of the journey, and the generally filthy state of the conveyance. It is obvious that if the streets are to be kept reasonably clear for heavier vehicles, the remaining rickshaws will have to be kept in stands allotted for that purpose, and what is more, kept there until a fare offers. The wandering rickshaw, like the wandering taxi in London, is a nuisance to traffic both vehicular and pedestrian.
Editor's Notes.
Most people picture an Editor as a sort of glorified dictator who sits in a comfortable office and runs his paper by means of a large and efficient staff of sub-editors, reporters and ever-willing critics. There are many Editors of this kind-and many, alas, who are like the immortal sailor-
“1 am the crew, and. the Captain too,
And the Mate of the Nancy brig.
The Boatswain tight, and the Midshipmite.
And the crew of the Captain’s gig.”
It is disheartening to be one’s own reporter. Nobody likes a reporter, and he lays himself' open to dreadful snubs. The lack of enthusiasm shown by supposed readers is disappointing. Witness our chagrin the other day at hearing this conversation in the club.
Member (to Merchant Prince): “I pay K--, did you see that joke about you in the Gazette the other day?
M.P.:  “What joke?
Member： The one about you making a bad “book” on the races.
M.P.: “Oh, I never read the Gazette, except the advertisements!!”
Then people wonder why Editors take to drink.
Another reader (and a very nice reader she is too) was bewailing the fact that the Pink ‘Un was not available in the ladies’ part of the club. In the midst of our scandalized protests, she said sweetly: “But oh, Mr. A--, why don't you reprint the jokes in your paper? Well Well!
This number includes an assortment of articles to suit all tastes (as the advertisement say). For those who are musically minded there is a description of a musical saw-and flautists will be delighted to know that there is a small treatise on whistles.
The correspondence columns are well filled, but several acrimonious letters have had to be omitted. Those who apparently wish to ventilate their private grievances are advised to purchase a tub and thump on it. The triangular piece of grass near Scott’S Factory would make an ideal site.
There are serious articles, a short story, a questionable joke, some attempts at irony and the usual padding.
Well then, I, readers, why not give us a chance? Don't condemn us unread. It is true that advertisements are of value to Merchant Princes-and sometimes contain unconscious humour. At the same time it is just possible that some little thing in the pages enclosed by the advertisements might take your fancy. Indeed, if one small paragraph engages your attention our labour has not been in vain.
NOTES.
July.
MR. G. Scott, a brother of Mrs. McDonald, has come out as an assistant on Sungei Tengah Estates. Mr. J. S. Findlay has sailed for home having left the Company.
We regret to say that Mr. G. Paterson, who has been on the estate about twenty years, is obliged to retire and return to England owing to constant bad health. He is in Kuching, having handed over the managership to Mr. McDonald, waiting for a berth.
Mr. J. B. Simpson of the same estate has recently returned from leave.
MR. F. H. Pollard has returned from leave and has been appointed to act as District Officer, Baram.
AN underground river has been discovered in Kuching which flows under the new Treasury Offices, the Police Barracks in Barrack Road and runs in the direction of the Sarawak Studio. Experiments are being made to find out to what extent this will endanger the buildings underneath which it is situated.
THE Government Examinations for Officers which were held on the 13th. 14th, 15th and 16th. were the cause of a number of Outstation Officers arriving in Kuching between the 11th and the 12th.
Messrs. W. S. B. Buck, D. S. McLeod, L. K. Morse, J. R. Combe, D. Murphy and N. Mace came from the north and coast; Messrs. J. G. Anderson, J.J. Hill, J. O. Gilbert and R. N. Baron from the Rejang； and Messrs. G. R. H. Arundell and R. H. P. Langton from the Second Division.
In addition there were five Kuching candidates.
THE sale of Mr. J. A. H. Hardie’s property in Sarawak, with the exception of some firearms, furniture, and a small collection of stamps of little value, realized $3,388. Marsden's Grammar fetched $33 and the Dictionary $39. Wilkinson's Dictionary was sold for $31, but old books on Sarawak, now out of print, fetched comparatively poor prices.
Experts bid keenly for silver and plated spoons and forks in the hope of dropping on a bargain in the way of Georgian ware.
PROFESSOR Taylor, F.R.S., and Mrs. Taylor have been recent visitors to Kuching, having travelled overland from Dutch Borneo via the Kapuas and Simanggang.
Professor Taylor, who is a Cambridge man, was chosen as the British delegate at the Pan Pacific Scientific Conference which has recently assembled at Batavia. He is a Professor of Mathematics and is one of the
world's expert authorities on tides. He proposes returning via Japan and America, in the latter country of which he intends to lecture on the peculiar phenomenon whereby the modern seaplane does, and the racing car soon will, travel faster than sound. This opens up vast matter for theory and discussion -in fact； we seem to be now fast approaching the times when whilst one is being taken to the hospital with both legs broken, a bashed-in head and a few parts missing, one will be just able to hear the ear-splitting din of the sports model which hit you five minutes before.
Mrs. Taylor accompanied her husband.
THE Government Gazette of 16th July includes the following:-2nd Lieutenant T. W. Goodban to be Quartermaster, Sarawak Rangers； Mr. J. O. Gilbert to be Officer-in-Charge, Sarikei and Binatang; Mr. F. H. Pollard to act as District Officer. Baram ； and Dr. C. O. Gange to be Divisional Medical Officer, Third Division.
The following Officers cease to be as follows:-Mr. T. W. Goodban, Leading Aircraftman and Ground Engineer; Dr. N. Chand, Divisional Medical Officer, Third Division; Mr. H. M. Calvert. Director, Government Air Service; and Mr. W H. Phillips, Flight-Lieutenant, Government Air Service.
A report has reached us from Labuan to the effect that Major Bullen, who has large interests in mines in the Straits Settlements and F.M.S., is contemplating floating a company in Singapore, with a capital of $1,500000, to mine coal in Labuan. The intention is to start operations on a seam near the Town. This enterprise should bring new life and prosperity to the old- established Colony of Labuan, and we wish it every success. - (B.N.B. Herald.)
THE ex-Government Seaplane Venus, piloted by Mr. R. K. Phillips (with Mrs. Phillips as a passenger), left Kuching at 7 a.m. on Sunday 14th, on her way to Singapore via Sambas. A wireless from the Pontianak Government was received saying that the machine had arrived there on 15th, but was being shipped on board the steamer Boelongan bound for Singapore, owing to the strong winds prevailing.
H.M.S. Herald is expected to call in at Po Point on the 8th of August, and will sail the next day for Singapore. Lieutenant Stokes, R.N., will replace Lieutenant Welby, who is rejoining his ship.
GOVERNMENT is proceeding with the scheme of housing the Kuching European Staff across river. The bungalow destined for the Treasurer is nearly completed, and the road connecting with the Matang Road will be ready soon.
We understand that five more bungalows are to be started almost immediately, and that the idea is to build more, year by year.
The new type of bungalow is a palace compared with some of the older wooden buildings in Kuching and the outstations. At the same time many still prefer the old type of bungalow with an open verandah and less nooks and corners.
AMONGST visitors to Kuching during the month was Mr. A. B. Layton of the well-known firm of Donaldson and Burkinshaw, Solicitors, of Singapore.
MR. G. A. Yeatts arrived by s.s. Kuching on 22nd and is, we understand, receiving a commission in the Sarawak Rangers.
THE local agents for the Blue Funnel Line inform us that “A” class steamers will call at Marseilles outward bound.
THE Editor of The Mirage has kindly sent us a copy of their latest issue.
There are some excellent photographs and the usual number of articles, both grave and gay.
THE Government Gazette of the 1st August contains the following appointments :-Mr. R. G. Aikman to act as Superintendent of Customs, First Division, and Mr. A. W. G. Gibson to be Harbour-Master.
Mr. L. D. Kennedy of the Customs Department has been granted seven months’ leave. Mr. Kennedy sailed on the 20th and we wish him a good furlough in Caithness, from which benighted part of Caledonia he hails.
MR. R. Bowen Summers has been engaged in London and is sailing on the 9th August per s.s. Mantua to take up an appointment as Land Officer here.
Service of Thanksgiving for the
Recovery of His Majesty
The King.
Services of thanksgiving for the recovery to health of His Majesty The King were held at the Cathedral of Saint Thomas on Sunday, the 7th, when at the morning and evening services the Venerable The Archdeacon of Sarawak preached appropriate sermons, and special prayers were offered up to thank Almighty God for preserving His Majesty’s life.
The preacher took for his text the VIII chapter of the Book of Proverbs, the 8th to the 14th verses. He reminded his bearers that although the Book of Proverbs was not to be compared with many other inspired books of the Bible, yet as a homily and as a most valuable book of instruction, it deserved a very high place.
The Bible was a much neglected book, but of all the books perhaps Proverbs was one of the most neglected. Proverbs contained humour, common sense and practical advice. In the beautiful verses he quoted was shown the value of wisdom. Wisdom is the Art of Living. Wisdom is far greater than riches, than rubies, than more silver and gold. The wise man realized the foolishness of arrogance and a froward tongue. Without religion man missed the wisdom and sound understanding and fear of the Lord.
This service, continued the preacher, was a thanksgiving for the great mercies shown by Almighty God for watching over the life of our Gracious King-a King who possessed the very qualities he had shown were the fruits of wisdom-the Art of Living. Amidst all the pomp and pageantry-the arduous and varied duties, which were required of a great sovereign, he displayed the diligence, understanding and sympathy which were the evidences of a deeply religion mind. He had the difficult task of succeeding his popular father Edward VII, who in turn had succeeded the great Queen Victoria, whose long reign had been unprecedented in the annals or our Royal House. On the death of Edward VII, the prestige of the Crown had never been higher. King George was faced with the work of maintaining that great prestige. Not only had he maintained this, but he had enhanced it. To-day the Crown possesses the love and loyalty of the whole of that vast population of peoples which make up the British Empire.
During His Majesty’s illness not only were messages of love, loyalty and sympathy received from all parts of the Empire, but also from all parts of the world. The King has become a world-wide figure, standing for justice, peace and international understanding and friendship. In short, His Majesty has learnt the Art of Living.
At the conclusion of the service the National Anthem was sung, and a collection taken up on behalf of the Lord Roberts’ Memorial Homes for Disabled Soldiers and Sailors.
His Excellency The Governor of
British North Borneo Visits
Kuching.
On the return of H.M.S. Herald to Pending on the 9th, she brought as a passenger His Excellency Mr. J. L. Humpherys, C.M.G., O.B.E., Governor of British North Borneo, who was paying an unofficial visit to His Highness the Rajah. His Excellency, who was accompanied by Mr. J. S. Kirkman, A.D.C., stayed at the Astana as a guest of His Highness, and left again on the morning of the 12th, when H.M.S. Herald sailed again for Miri.
During his visit His Excellency was shown round the Government buildings in Kuching and in the evenings showed us some good golf.
His Highness the Rajah gave a ball at the Astana on the 9th, and the Resident and Mrs. Boult entertained a large party to dinner on the 11th.
We understand that His Excellency has invited a team from the Sarawak Rangers to shoot against the British North Borneo Constabulary in that State, a sporting event which should appeal to Sarawak marksmen.
H.M.S. Herald is expected in these waters again some time in August. Lieut-Commander A. H. Hughes, R.N., has rejoined his ship, being replaced by Lieut. Baker, R.N., as Officer Commanding the shore party in Kuching. The ratings have also been changed.
Accident to H.H.Y. “Maimuna.”
We have received reports that the Maimuna, in which His Highness the Rajah sailed for a visit to outstations on the 18th, dropped or lost a propeller on the 20th when off Mukah.
It is believed that His Highness was on board, but was apparently able to reach Mukah by some other craft.
The s.s. Margaret was despatched to Mukah in the early morning of the 22nd, in which ship His Highness embarked for Miri. The Margaret appears to have been able to tow the Maimuna into Mukah where she now lies. It is anticipated that the Margaret will tow the Maimuna to Kuching early in August. As yet we have no particulars, but it is gratifying to know that what might have been a serious disaster has been avoided, and that His Highness, although inconvenienced, has been able to continue his tour of inspection.
Nationality in Sarawak.
DAYANG MUDA WINS HER CLAIM.
London, July 4.
The Dayang Muda of Sarawak has succeeded in her claim before the Special Income-Tax Commission, and the tax will be rebated 1,000 pounds sterling a year for six years.
The claim was for repayment of 10,000 pounds sterling income-tax and super-tax on the Dayang Muda’s private fortune, on the ground that Sarawak is an independent sovereign State and the Dayang Muda, not being a British subject, is not liable to pay the tax. -Straits Times Copyright.
Death of a Well-known Chinese.
At the General Hospital on the 6th instant, Mr. Tan Ah Boh, a well-known and respected Chinese gentleman, died from an internal complaint.
Mr. Tan Ah Boh was born on 10th February, 1868, in Swatow and came to Sarawak at the age of nineteen. He settled down in the Semungo district where he became an energetic planter. Eleven years later he was selected by His Highness the late Rajah as Kang Choo of the district in the place of Mr. Sung Keng who left Sarawak for Singapore. This important position he held until the day of his death, having at all times been a valuable assistant to Government, where his peculiar local knowledge and common sense, combined with an inborn sense of justice, were appreciated by all with whom he came in touch. The funeral took place on the 8th, and large numbers of his friends followed his body to the cemetery.
We are indebted to a gentleman who was an intimate friend of the deceased for the following notes :-
“On July 8th, at 5 p.m., the grave closed upon Mr. Tan Ah Boh, the Kang Chu of Semungo District. The large gathering at his funeral attested to his popularity and esteem he was held amongst the people.
This Chinese gentleman (and he was a gentleman, every inch of him) came to Sarawak some 40 years ago.
At that time Mr. Sung Keng was Kang Chu (of Semungo); at the latter’s removing to Singapore Tan Ah Boh, though a young man, was appointed first acting, and very soon Kang Chu (at the time of Bampfylde or Deshon?).
Tan Ah Boh was twice married, eleven children surviving him.
The office of Kang Chu is really that of a Justice of the Peace. He did his duty well both to the satisfaction of Government and his people. The art both of attracting people and at the same time keeping them at a respectful distance was quite natural to him. Some of the outstanding characteristic traits were his personal knowledge of the people. He was an early riser； before daybreak he was on his legs making his round through the pepper gardens of the Semungo District; himself being an enthusiastic planter he took a lively interest in all sorts of agriculture. His advice was constantly sought for.
His outward appearance was rather below middle size, but in his body was powerful intellect, he could summon up an intricate case in a few sentences.
He loved his country of adoption, Sarawak; especially he loved the late Rajah with whom he was personally acquainted; at the latter’s demise he would say “if this just man would have died in China, he would have been given the funeral rites of Confucius- (vide now Sun Yat Sen). They would have made a public Hero of him.”
He was on a good footing with all the D. O’s of Kuching District except with one (Sir P. Cunyng-hame); he accused the latter gentleman of being too mild and of spoiling the people. “Tuan,” he would say, “the only ubat against thieves is the rottan and not a fine.”
Of his own countrymen he used to say : the Chinaman will thrive anywhere under a decent Government except in China where they are simply robbed by the Government.
All the same he himself was a thoroughbred Chinaman, one of the old brigade.
He was a laudator tempons acti, perhaps a little too strict on the younger generation; but in an obituary notice this likewise should be mentioned according to the adage : ‘Paint me as I am; wart and all.’”
The Winning Trousers.
A few weeks ago, a picture appeared in one of the best known periodicals-was it Sketch or Tatler-of a man boasting that he was not superstitious in the least, adding almost in the same breath, “touch wood” There may be many who make that assertion but when one comes down to real facts, there are very few of us who are not superstitious in one way or another. Your man who stalks boldly under a ladder won't sit down thirteen at table, whilst- another who avoids starting any enterprise on a Friday, will laugh at his dinner partner who throws a bit of spilt salt over her shoulder. Perhaps the wearing of some trinket or colour is almost the most popular superstition, -at least among ladies, and one often hears the remark “1 shall wear this or that frock to-night-I always have a good time in it?”
Although this latter form is more a feminine one, the story I am about to relate reveals how just that particular superstition was the undoing of a young cadet.
Young Reeves was the possessor of a lucky pair of white flannel trousers. They had won that designation by repeated wins on the tennis courts. You will wonder how he came to know it was
always the same pair that, literally, carried him to success, as a man’s wardrobe usually consists of more than one pair. Reeves certainly had the required number but these particular ones on the occasion of their first wearing, had unfortunately caught on a protruding nail as their wearer leaned over the bungalow verandah one evening, thereby causing a jagged rent across the front,
The life of a pair of white flannel trousers in Kuching, is short at the best of times,-your dhoby sees to that. Note the condition of the ones you see around you when you go for your game today! There are the ones speckled with mildew; some with yellow patches at the knees, while others are painfully short and tight-looking from many shrinkings. Each washing adds another tinge of grey. And, a propos of this, one of the charming things about Kuching, a man is not judged by the white flannel trousers he wears!
This is just to explain that because Reeves’ new ones had been badly torn they could not be dispensed with. Such a waste was unthinkable, and his Boy saw to their being neatly, but I cannot say unnoticeably, mended. The white cotton stitches had quickly mildewed, giving the peculiar effect of an outlined mountain range across the front of the trousers.
It was this particular pair then that Reeves had discovered brought him luck when worn in tennis matches. Call it coincidence if you like, but the fact remained, when he wore them he won, and in any others he was completely off his game.
Young Reeves had fought his way by dint of some excellent playing, plus the luck of the trousers, to the first rank of Kuching tennis stars, and when a Chinese Club challenged the Sarawak Club, it was Reeves who was chosen to represent the latter.
A few days before the date set for the match, Reeves had called up his Boy and, giving him the “lucky trouser” told him to have them sent to the dhoby, ,with strict instructions that they were to be back not later than the morning of the great encounter. He was so emphatic upon the point, that the Boy, rather puzzled as to why this particular pair should be required when the almirah contained at least four others in much better condition, felt called upon to remind his master of the fact.
“Tuan has plenty other tennis trousers,” and spreading out the ones just handed to him he pointed to the darkened mending on them. “Others much better than these.”
Now Reeves was just back from the Club and feeling unusually cheerful and expansive, partly due to his having been elected to represent the Club in the forthcoming contest, and perhaps also to having responded with many drinks to his success therein, and in this mood he gave away his cherished pet superstition.
"Suppose I put on these trousers, I play tennie ‘banyak bagus’-have ‘banyak slamat,’ can win match,” he explained. “Other trousers no can. Mesti ini trousers, tahu”?
The Boy's expression recorded surprise and incredulity and be moved slowly out of the room holding the trousers before him at arms’ length and gazing at them intently.	.、…
On the afternoon of the inter-club match when Reeves repaired to his room to don tennis kit, he found his clothes laid out as usual upon the bed, but a newer and whiter pair of flannels had taken the place of the ones he had ordered to be in readiness.
"Boy," he shouted, “where are those other trousers I said I must have to-day”?
"Dhoby no have bring,” replied the Boy, shifting uneasily from one foot to the other.
“Well you can jolly well go and fetch them,” stormed his master. “Here, I’ll phone for a taxi,一 a rickshaw will take too long.
“Fortunately I started to change early,” he grumbled as he saw his Boy depart in a rattling taxi. “I suppose I'm a fool to worry about those trousers, but I can't help it. I simply can't manage to play my best in any others.''
Half an hour later, when Reeves was beginning to despair of his return in time, and had dressed in the other garments, his Boy turned up.
“Very sorry, Tuan” but trousers in wash tub, all wet. No can put to-day.”
Reeves glared at the speaker but as the man appeared to be really dejected over his failure to produce the trousers, he swallowed the abusive epithets he intended hurling at him, caught up his racquet and hurried out to the waiting rickshaw.
All the way along the Rock Road to the Club his superstition sapped his self-confidence and by the time he reached the courts where quite a crowd had gathered to witness the match; he would have given a month’s salary to draw out of it.
“Hurry up, Reeves,” the Secretary of the Tennis Section greeted him. “You’re late. Your opponent has been waiting some time. Its after five.”
“Sorry,” Reeves growled out, removing his blazer as he spoke, but avoiding any explanation of his tardiness.
The Secretary introduced a young Chinaman. “This is Mr. Jim Lee, Beeves, who is representing the Chinese Club against us.”
They shook hands. He was a nice-looking lad and Reeves had a momentary feeling that he had seen him before, perhaps a Government clerk who had been into his office or something of the sort.
Most of the Kuching community, certainly all those interested in this particular sport, were spec-tators, in rows of chairs along the side of the court, or on benches placed on the grassy slope just above, while crowds of Chinese sat a little further up on the hillside, or stood on the road behind the back nets.
Reeves and Jim Lee tossed for service, and a few minutes later the match was started.
By the time the first game had fallen to his credit after several long and hard rallies, Reeves was delighted to find he was on his game, although he had also come to the conclusion that his adversary was a player of no mean ability, and would require him to use every ounce of strength and tactics he could command.
The first sett had reached the exciting score of five games to three in Reeves’ favour, and the game at 40-30, when Lee returning a ball, placed a sharp screw on it. Reeves sprang to the net to meet it, saving the second bounce by half an inch, and dropping the ball just over the net, but Lee had also run forward to recover the short stroke. The player’s were not two feet apart when Reeves made the discovery that across the front of Lee's flannel trouser ran a dark zig-zag pattern in mildewed stitches.
Wrapped in the excitement of the game, his eyes on the ball, he had not noticed the mark before. Now he stood spell-bound, his eyes glued to the unmistakable blemish before him. The ball passed him unheeded, and Reeves still stared. The umpire's voice calling “deuce” brought him back to
the game but his mind was in a whirl. How did
Lee get his-Reeves’―trousers? There was no
doubt in his mind that they were his. He had not
noted that particular dark design all these months
without being able to spot it at once. He turned
mechanically to catch the balls thrown by the “buda.”
“Fault,”came from the umpire, followed by “double,” “Advantage striker.”
Reeves set his teeth. He must not let himself
go to pieces over his discovery. He served again,
a feeble first which Lee was quick to take advantage
of. returning a terrific drive across the court.
“Game to Lee,” announced the umpire. “Game are five to four, Reeves leading.”
Of course it was treachery on the part of the Boy.
It could be nothing else. As Reeves retired to the
back line for Lee’s service, his mind recalled the
burst of confidence in regard to his superstition.
The Boy had doubtless hired out his “lucky
trousers,” trust a Chinaman to make a deal.
Or possibly he was backing them.
Jove! Another point lost. He simply must
concentrate on his game.
He would rather feel it was a question of betting.
The young player across from him looked such a nice
clean lad, he hated to feel Lee might have stooped
to such a meanness.
“Game to Lee. The games are five all in the
first sett.”
Hard as he tried Reeves was unable to cope with
his sudden loss of confidence. Furious at the Boy,
his anger unsteadied his arm and played havoc with
his judgment, and once when between play his eyes
happened to stray to the road where a large native
contingent were lined up watching the game, he
thought he caught a glimpse of his Boy, but as
the man dodged almost at once behind the row of
waiting cars, he could’'t be certain. It all, however,
completely upset his game and Lee took the first
sett at 7-5 and the second 6-2.
For half a moment Reeves felt be couldn’t shake
Hands with a man who had adopted such an underhand method of winning a game, but again the
frank pleasant face of his vanquisher convinced him
that Jim Lee was not aware of the situation, and
he hastened to comply with the usual formality.
“Off your game, old chap,” he was greeted with,
or “Bad luck, Reeves,” as he left the court.
But our young cadet turned a deaf ear to the
expressions of consolation. He yearned for that
encounter with his Boy and hastened from the courts.
His action was put down to chagrin over losing his
match but there was positive murder in Reeves’s heart
as he hurried along to his Mess.,
Just before reaching his place, he heard his name
called, and Gaynes, a young and enthusiastic teacher,
got off his bicycle and fell in step beside him.
“It was too bad you were off your game this
afternoon,” he commented, “Jim Lee was one of
our school boys not long ago and even then played
a good game, but nothing like the brilliance of his
exhibition to-day. He has improved enormously.”
“Thanks to my trousers,” Reeves thought
grimly, and aloud he asked “Who is this Jim Lee”?
Gaynes was just remounting his bicycle as they
had reached Reeves entrance, “Oh! didn't you
know,” he exclaimed, in surprise. “Its quite a
coincidence. He is the son of your Boy.”
Musings Without Method.
In perusing the files of old periodicals, one cannot help noticing that in the past, medical and pseudo medical articles were then as rare as they are now common. The hirsute, frock-coated and silk-hatted grandfathers of the present generation of medicos, confided their ponderous periods to the sanctity of austere professional tomes, but now the pages of even the more lurid Sunday journals rarely fail to contain medical views on subjects ranging from ultra-violet window-glass to wholemeal bread.
There are many grains of wheat among the chaff, but a singular myopia seems to affect many of the authors-not an altogether uncommon symptom. Take the much discussed question of white bread v. brown bread. From elaborate articles giving analyses and pictures of rats fed on one or other of these varieties, we are led to believe that, owing to the vitamin deficiency of the former, a man who deliberately elects to eat white bread is following a policy which, if not tantamount to suicide, will at least, bring him to a premature grave. There would be some truth in such a belief if one lived exclusively on white bread, but mankind as a whole, lives on a mixed diet, and vitamin deficiencies on the white bread roundabouts are made up on the swings of the other comestibles included in an average dietary.
An intimate acquaintance of mine, who happens to be a doctor, has often said that, within limits, the zest with which one approaches a meal is of as much importance from the point of view of health, as the actual constituents of the fare provided. There must be some truth in his assertion, for, as a rule, one finds that the average healthy man cares little for calories and vitamins (although he may take a deep interest in his Sole Caprice, and strong objection to the presence of cork in his bottle of Bass) while the food-faddist has only too often a C3 constitution in spite of his researches into food values.
It is only reasonable to support the dissemination of knowledge, but with reason it may be asked whether any useful purpose is achieved by medical articles in the public press. I feel sure that the number of people who have been rendered hypochondriacs by such effusion far exceeds those who have received any real benefit from them. If the bulk of such articles were carried to their logical conclusion, they would only bring us a step nearer to the awful times ironically portrayed by Bernard Shaw in his introduction to Saint Joan-“A modern person . . . desires by a nicely calculated diet of Thyroid extract. Adrenalin, Thymin, Pituitrin and Insulin, with pick-me-ups of hormone stimulants- the blood having first been carefully fortified with antibodies against all possible infections, by inoculation of bacteria and sera from infected animals, and against old age by. . . weekly doses of monkey gland-to achieve a healthy old age.”
O Tempora ! O Mores!
Tamil Killed by a Motor Lorry.
On the 8th an unfortunate accident occurred in Gambier Road when a motor lorry, driven by a Chinese named Bong Shoon On, ran over an elderly Tamil named Kulakovindar and broke both his legs. The victim was taken to the General Hospital where he died two days later from shock.
An inquest was held on the 10th when a verdict of death from accidental causes was returned, the driver being exonerated from all blame.
Mainly About Nothing.
The wife of a friend of the accused said that he went to bed at 10 a.m. She did not know what he did after that. (Singapore Free Press).
Some women seem to know everything, don't they?
We have all heard about the men of curious trades-the men who make bungs for beer barrels,- the men who make spots for rocking horses-and so on-but the most objectionable trade is that of the gentleman from China (no, not Chinaman this time!) who makes whistles for little boys. He camouflages his barrow with the implements of ice cream sellers, but his real design is concealed in a small drawer, where he keeps his foul instruments.
What a variety-whistles that blow shrilly, whistles that groan, whistles that squeak, whistles of the dying-pig-variety, whistles that twitter, wail, shriek, and blast. How the little celestial flautists love this kindly man-at a cent a whistle-and how the harassed magistrate abhors him with a deadly loathing；-for the vicinity of the Courts is the whistle-maker’s pitch.
We live in the age of weird musical instruments. The saxophone and its offspring are bad enough; tbe ukelele is really nothing but a bad mandoline, the musical-box tinkle of the dulcetone, the violin- trumpet (which has the faults of both but none of the good qualities of its progenitors)—the customary additions to a jazz band, where revolvers, old tin cans, combs, whittles and such like are considered necessary in order to revive jaded dancers and appetites. The delicate harpsichord would not suit the modern day audience who want noise, plenty of it, and the more it resembles a band composed obviously of homicidal lunatics and persons of feeble intellect the better pleased are the youthful listeners.
The other day one of the guests at a tiffin party produced a saw and a small mallet and proceeded to play an obligato to “The Rosary” (which our hostess played on the piano) whilst we all sat round swallowing P.G.M.’s or D.O’s. The saw artist held the handle between his knees and frantically agitated it-with one hand he tapped the blade with the other he bent it. The result was a mournful sound, something between the wail of a banshee and the gurgle of the last half pint of water escaping down the pipe when you pull the plug out of the wash basin.
One sceptical guest suggested that the saw wan not a genuine one. The player quietly began to saw through the verandah rail.
Take it from me that modem musicians are not bound down by the instruments of their fathers.
From the Sarawak Gazette 50 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
1879.] MONDAY, 11th AUGUST, 1879. [Price 5 Cts.
THE new road from the Rock to the Quop
road has at length been completed, and forms
a very welcome addition to our somewhat limited rides and drives in the neighbourhood of Kuching. It is a pity that the jungle has
been so much felled at the sides, and we
think some control should be exercised on
the wholesale destruction of the jungle, at all
events in the vicinity of Kuching.
A party of men are at work on the Penrissen road, making a riding track nine feet wide. The roads near the town are being
gradually put in repair, not before it was
wanted.
A LETTRR has appeared in the Strait Times regarding the Geology of Sarawak. signed A. H. Everett. It does not present a
very encouraging view of our hill soils, but
fortunately the cultures which we chiefly
trust to see introduced into Sarawak are
those which can be grown on either Swamp
or the undulating ground which spreads over
so many hundreds of miles of our territory.
Neither Sago, rice, tapiocas, gambier or pepper
require great elevation, and we are disposed
to think that if Liberian Coffee is ever to
have a fair trial here, it will be on ground not 100 feet above the sea-level.
A Java “Problem.”
That the half-caste of the Dutch East Indies
is not such a problem as some people imagine, is
the opinion of Mr. Henry Cabot Lodge, a staff
correspondent of the Herald Tribune (New York)
who, in a recent issue of his paper, gives an
interesting study of the subject from the point of
view of American interests established in that part
of the world. There are, he estimates, 144,000
Eurtisians in the Dutch East Indies as compared
with the 60,000 Dutch who reside there. Regarded
by the natives, the Dutch themselves, and by the
law as a race apart they are always poor, he says,
because- they cannot own land, are without the
ability of the Chinese for shop-keeping, and are only
able to hold Government jobs, clerical positions in
business houses, or places in the army. “There
seems,” in Mr. Lodge’s opinion, “to be nothing
dangerous about the half-caste, just as there certainly is nothing strong or reassuring about him.；
He in simply a pathetic creature whose lot is failure
and futility. It is hard to see how the half-caste
constitutes an active source of weakness to the
Dutch, as some have maintained. He may be a
Source of weakness in the army, but,” asks Mr.
Lodge, “have not all native armies, whether in
British India or elsewhere, been a similar source of
danger? And as a government clerk is there anything dangerous about him, given the fact that his
one hope of livelihood is the continuance of the Dutch regime which gives him his job?” Mr. Lodge concludes that neither the half-caste on the inside, nor threat of aggression from without is any more dangerous for the Dutch than scores of problems which the United States and the British have to face in their possessions, and he makes the guess
that when the D.E.I. crack up everything else in
that part of the world will be falling to pieces. Mr. Lodge gives the interesting information that many
millions in Netherland Indian Government bonds
are held in the United States; an American oil company is developing concessions in Sumatra, Java and Madura ; another oil company is marketing
gasoline and oil throughout the islands; American
rubber interests have large plantations in Sumatra,
and an American motor company has an assembling plant in Batavia; American banking, insurance and
manufacturing concerns are also represented, and,
moreover, he adds, the magnitude of these activities
is (constantly increasing.-(China Express and
Telegraph.)
Calcutta Sweep Secrecy.
METHODS THAT LEAD TO FRAUD.
Why not Revert to Tickets!
In view of the immense size now reached by
the Calcutta Derby sweepstake there is general
discussion whether the time is not ripe to alter the system under which it is now conducted by the Royal Calcutta. Turf Club.
 A world-wide public which this year subscribed 1,162,000 pounds sterling is in the view of many people entitled to more publicity of results and better guarantee against fraud than is now afforded.
No one, of course, doubts the integrity of the
promoters; but everyone is talking about the contrast
between their system and that of the promoters of
the London Stock Exchange Sweepstake, which
amounted this year to 1,000,000 pounds sterling. 
The Stock Exchange issues numbered tickets
with safeguards against forgery; the Calcutta Club
does not. The Stock Exchange publishes freely to
the Press of the world the results of the draw; the
Calcutta Club does not.
The Stock Exchange method is to sell 1 pounds sterling tickets through members of the Stock Exchange. Those
who buy them subsequently through these members
receive actual tickets which must be produced to
prove the title to a prize.
HAWKED ROUND THE WORLD.
The Calcutta Club does not issue tickets. It
abandoned that practice some years ago as a check
to profiteers. Now it allots numbers to members
of the club, which are registered under pseudonyms.
All that buyers receive is a typewritten letter which
says that members so and so and so and so have
been allotted to such and such a name.
This system would be all right if the numbers
were confined to members of the club, as the
promoters of the sweepstake in theory suppose. But
they are not, and the promoters must recognize the
fact that they are not.
The numbers at second, third, fourth, or for that
matter 24th hand are hawked round the world with
no sort of club guarantee behind them.
The buyer must rely upon the vendor, who may
himself have bought the number from someone else,
or may, in fact, never have had a number at all
allotted to him.
TRANSACTION DENIED.
On the other hand, the vendor may repudiate the transaction if the number proves to be a winning one. A case of this kind actually happened last year where the holder of a winning number repudiated the sale of a share to another man.
In this case the claim was investigated by the officials of the club, who eventually proclaimed the right of the purchaser of a share in the number to a share of the prize.
Fortunately the disputants both lived in Bombay, and the necessary evidence could therefore be obtained with little difficulty. Had the disputants been in another part of the world a settlement would certainly have been difficult, if not impossible.
The case clearly proved that a Calcutta sweep number is an intangible thing.-(Daily Mail.)
The Goddess of Mercy.
At a recent auction, a certain item in the catalogue was listed as a “Many-armed God.” During the sale, and afterwards, the writer heard this bronze figure described by many names even more incorrect than the catalogue description. Since, in fact, the effigy represents one of the three principal deities that form the Trinity of the Buddhist faith, and since this particular deity- KUAN-YIN-is a vital factor in current Chinese religious thought and worship, it may not be uninteresting to some of your readers to learn the manner in which Kuan-Yin originally came to China, Her significance as a Deity, and Her apparent relationship with the Deities of other religions in the world of yesterday and to-day.
KUAN-YIN (literally “regard sound”) may be interpreted as “She who attends to the cries of men,” “The All-Pitying one, the Lord of Mercy.”
Her origin may be traced directly to the Mahayanist God of Mercy, AVALOKITA, or AVALO- KITESVARA (“The Lord looking down”), who was one of the great Dhyani-Bodhisattvas associated with Amitabha, the God of Boundless light and life of Northern Indian Buddhism. Thus, we find that before the establishment of Buddhism in China, a Trinity had been formed in Central Asia consisting of Amitabha (Buddha) as the central figure, with Avalokitesvara and Mahasthamaprapta, the two Bodhisattvas, on the left and right respectively. The two latter representing the active qualities of Amitabha, namely Infinite Compassion and Infinite Strength or power.
After arrival in China, these figures became O-mi-t’o, Kuan-Yin, and Ta-Shih-Chih. The last named, however, has been entirely eclipsed by the other two.
It is of interest to note that Avalokitesvara was originally a God, and was only transformed into the Goddess Kuan-Yin when Buddhism was introduced into China. There have been various reasons assigned for this metamorphosis, one being that a worship of the “Sakti” or female counterpart of Avalokita in Central Asia may have been the origin. Another, that it may have been the advent of Hariti. the Indian ogress, into Buddhist thought which affected in Rome way the conception of Kuan-Yin; “under the influence of Gantama, she is said to have been transformed from a devourer of children into a giver of sons.” Possibly, too, certain features of the Taoist “Holy Mother Queen of Heaven” may have been borrowed by the Buddhist religion, for both were regarded as the patrons or protectors of mothers, and as the bringers of children.
Be that as it may, Kuan-Yin is now universally regarded by Chinese as a world saviour, as being closer to the hearts of men and more accessible
than an impassive Buddha, for it is said that out of compassion for struggling mortals, She refuses to enter the bliss of Nirvana, but offers, to save all who call upon Her in faith.
“Salvation, then, is by the, Grace of the Compassionate Avalokita, and consists of rebirth in the Buddha’s ‘Pure Land.’”
In Buddhist scriptures, Kuan-Yin has a place second only to Amitabha or Buddha. The latter continually extols the divine powers of the former, and describes Her as able to appear in all manner of forms and in all lands in order to save mankind.
We find her worshipped in homes as well as temples throughout China, and her effigy in painting or stone, porcelain or lacquer, wherever we go. Often, she is represented carrying a small child in her arms, and the interested traveller is at once struck with the extraordinary resemblance between the Kuan-Yin of the East and the Madonna of the West. This is so striking, in fact, that many of the Roman Catholic Missions in China have wisely refrained from undue interference in the accepted representations of Kuan-Yin, even to using this. identical portraiture to represent the Madonna of the Christian Faith.   The idea of the Trinity, it is recalled, permeates many ancient religions, and we find this Triple Godhead appearing from a number of religious sources, suggesting perhaps a common origin for them all. It is, at least, a most interesting theory.
One last word. The many arms are explained as representing the unlimited directions and forms of the working of Kuan-Yin's mercy. The number of arms vary, as do also the number of beads and eyes, but the ultimate meaning of this plurality of members always conveys the thought of the “essential outgoing love of motherliness.”
Agricultural Notes.
A gentleman named Lee Sin Hock writes to the North Borneo Herald bewailing the fact that pepper cuttings are not now obtainable in that State.
Says the writer “… Before the Sarawak Government imposes its prohibitive measure against the export of these cuttings to places except those in its own jurisdiction, one will know to get them from either Limbang, Trusan, or Lawas. However, let us hope that, the Sarawak Government may yet in due course be good enough to amend its attitude in such a matter, trifling as it is to ourselves (sic) and allow us the advantages of free export of pepper cuttings.
We think Lee Sin Hock must have been misinformed. There is at present no Order forbidding the export of pepper cuttings from Sarawak. It is likely that the British North Borneo pepper planters may find it difficult to buy cuttings in the Fifth Division, in fact, the shortage of cuttings is being felt all through Sarawak. The Agricultural Department have put planters on to selected seed which takes a long time to mature but produces better vines in the end.
It is satisfactory to learn from the Administration Report of Mr. J. L. Humphreys, the Governor of British North Borneo, that the past year has been one of quiet progress. It is more gratifying, however, to knew that the general trade of the territory, which has an area equal to that of Scotland, tends yearly to be less and less dependent on the production of estate rubber. There are 96,000 acres under rubber and from this there were exported last year upwards of fifteen million pounds as against ten and a half millions five years ago. No complications arose through unemployment following the slump in the
price of rubber, crime is tending to decrease, and satisfactory results are attending the policy of the gradual suppression of gaming. It was altogether a satisfactory year and, as His Excellency says, one of quiet progress.- 
(Straits Times.)	
His Highness the Sultan of Perak’s devotion to the interests of his State and the people living in it was exemplified when the news of the recent floods in the rice districts of Burma reached him. His Highness at once sent for his Chiefs and told them that they must take every possible step to encourage the Malay peasants of Perak to grow more padi.- (Straits Times.)
It is curious how some things will only grow just where they are not supposed to grow. Take for instance the buah beteh (papaya). Planted carefully on a suitably prepared bed it springs up in a very short while and just as the grower really thinks that he is in for a good crop of fruit he gets up one morning-and lo-the tree is not-or rather it has withered completely away, and the green succulent leaves hang down in melancholy clusters. Eat a buah beteh and spit the pips out on the ground. Some fall on stony ground it is true, but wonderful to relate one pip always takes root either on a bed of cement (it finds a crack) or between two bricks. The result is a strong, healthy papaya tree bearing much fruit, and a joy to the proud owner, always provided that it does not grow almost completely over the house!
Entertainment at the Convent of
the Sacred Heart, Sibu.

A very successful entertainment was given by the children of “The Convent of the Sacred Heart” to celebrate the opening of their new school.
The concert was held in the school-house and great trouble was taken in the artistic decoration and general stage management.
The first half was variety and was contributed by boys and girls from the ages of four upwards, each child being especially well trained.
The success of the evening was scored by the little boys who sang their song with great confidence.
Nothing but English was spoken the whole way through, and the Sisters are to be congratulated on wonderful pronunciation of their pupils.
The second half they performed the ever popular fairy tale “Cinderella,” each individual part being remarkably good. The fact that the children were able to entertain an audience for two hours in such an efficient manner and in a foreign language was a great credit to Mother Mary Peter and her Sisters.
Exemplary Punishment for
Reckless Driving.

The District Court was crowded on the 10th when Chan Ban Hock, driver of motor bus No..K. 132, was charged with knocking down a little crippled Chinese boy near the Borneo Company’s offices and neglecting to stop.
The charge was proved and the driver was fined $100 or 3 months’ imprisonment, whilst a fellow driver who gave false evidence in support of Chan Ban Hock was find a similar sum or the alternative sentence. In addition, Ban Hock's licence was suspended for three months.
It is high time drivers should realize their great responsibility when driving a motor vehicle, and it is to be hoped that these convictims will be borne in mind by other bus drivers who, as a whole, are a reckless and foolhardy lot.
Black and White Trophy Football
Competition 1929.
In the only tie in the first round, the first encounter ended in no scoring, the Police team lacking an opportunist to take advantage of the work of the wing men. The ball was directed only once between the posts in the first half, whereas it was banged over the bar and round the posts at least a dozen times. The Police made sure of entering the next round by winning the replay by 3-0. The shooting of the forwards was, on this occasion, very much improved and notwithstanding the strenous endeavours of the Survey Blue no impression was made on the defence.
The meeting of the Medical and Health and the New World produced a good fast game and it was only by superior combination that the Medical won, although the result of 2-0 rather flatters them. There were good individualists amongst their opponents but not sufficiently good to make way through the Medical defence.
The standard of football seems to increase aa the tournament progresses and the match between the Merchant Princes and the P.W.D. was really a good game with more football on both sides than is generally seen here. The P.W.D. defence was very good and if their forwards had not dallied with the ball so long the result of 3-0 against them would not have been registered. This, of course, does not detract from the merits of the “Sahibs” who are an all round team and it will take a good deal to stop them, especially when they are able to turn out a full team.
The Police in the second round tie against the Steamship Company were a greatly improved team and the game was well contested throughout and the pace very fast. The Police got a very easy goal shortly after the start. A soft lob by Anis over the defenders’ heads rolled feebly into the net after the goalkeeper, who seemed to be suffering from nerves, had missed it badly. The Steamship Company worked hard to draw level but owing to bad finishing on the part of their forwards and the good display given by the Police goalkeeper their efforts came to nothing in the first half. The second half saw the Steamship Company pressing most of the time but that did not stop the Police from being dangerous when they broke away and they had one or two good tries to increase their lead. Bad shooting was again the main cause of the equaliser being deferred until five minutes from time when Yaw Joo broke through the defence and banged the ball into the net just before he was
somersaulted. The game continued to be fast and strenuous with both teams doing their utmost to get the lead but the defences withstood all the calls on them and the game ended in a draw.
This game was probably one of the most exciting
and best games witnessed for some considerable time
and both teams deserve praise for the way in which
they played, although we gathered the impression
that some of the Steamship team were inclined to
take things a bit easily at times. There was certainly too much playing about with the ball when it ought to have been sent ahead. The Police team includes four Sikhs which is their first appearance in “first-class” football here and all of acquitted themselves well, especially the goalie.
St. Thomas’ School.
ANNUAL SPORTS.
This event took place on the 27th, when a programme of 26 events was keenly contested. The school playing field was crowded with friends and relations of the boys, and in spite of the intensely hot afternoon the programme was kept well up to time.
Mrs. Boult kindly presented the prizes, which had been presented by supporters of the school. The Jolly Band from Kampong Sourabaya performed gratuitously, and refreshments were given by Messrs. Chong Kim Eng, Syn Kim Eng and Ho Siang Teng.
We hear that the 100 yards was done in 10 3/5 seconds, and there was some good high jumping. Amidst many helpers the figure of the Revd. F. S. Hollis was everywhere. As a performer on the megaphone, he has no equal!
Just as we go to Press, we have received a list of official times. These are remarkably good con-sidering the age and height of the competitors, and compare very favourably with English public school times. The best are :-
High Jump. Bong Eng, Ah Hiong and Sek Kui all cleared 4’11”, whilst a junior, Boonchol, cleared 4'6”. In the Long Jump, Teck Guan did 19’4”. Chin Ee put the weight 26’, whilst Tung Seng kicked a stationary football 140’.
The 100 yards was won by Chin Fah in 10 3/5 seconds, and the 440 yards by Sze Luk in 1 minute 11 seconds.
The Victor Ludorum was won by Teck Guan with 3 firsts and 2 seconds.
A Race Meeting in September.
We hear on good authority that the Sarawak Turf Club are arranging a meeting on 23rd and 25th September. As tickets for an unlimited sweep on the last race of the second day are already on sale the meeting seems to be a certainty.
The proposed programme provides for fourteen races, and includes an R.C. race and a mile.
On going through the present classification, Division III will not provide many ponies, and a suggestion has been made that Divisions II and III should run together. In fact Division III has almost ceased to exist.
The Turf Club is still in a position where the strictest economy must be observed, and the prizes will be reduced accordingly.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
The Realms of Sport. 
The Editor,	
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
KUCHING,	
4th July,1929.
DEAR SIR,
I have read with much, gratification the para-graph under your Notes Columns, in which you strongly appeal to the Kuching Football Club for some accounts of the matches played on their field, because of the fact that sporting news are always lacking in the Sarawak Gazette.
Indeed, I have every sympathy with you, Mr. Editor, for having failed to meet their prompt response. in spite of your untiring efforts to persuade those who have a concern in the Club, to supply you with many interesting news of Football. Cricket or Rugby. May 1 attribute the cause of this, is chiefly due to want of initiative and keen interest on the part of the members, and not as you presume that the Club wishes to hide its light under a bushel. The Black and White Cup Competition is near approaching and I sincerely trust the members of the Kuching Football Club will not overlook this matter again after all your kind request plainly stated in the last issue of the Gazette.
It is well known the realm of Sports in Kuching is dull and unlively, and is far behind, our kindred town. Miri as opportunities are very little afforded for the public to have an evening’s game of recreation, owing to the lack of playgrounds. It is time that Government may find a way to turn the race-course marshy ground into a decent playing-field besides the piece of land so generously presented by Mr. Song Kheng Hai to Government in order to champion the cause of public health.
Yours truly,
“A SPORTSMAN."
An Appreciation.
Sibu, July, 1929. 
DEAR MR EDITOR,
1 hope you will not refuse to accept these few lines in your esteemed paper.
The girls of the Sacred Heart Convent at Sibu gave a performance at the opening of the new school building, which is worthy of appreciation.
The great help and kind benevolence of Government has enabled Mother Peter to erect the fine building which is now standing next to the Convent, and which is to serve as a school and dormitory. It will hold 100 boarders, and underneath are 5 large class rooms.
It was Mr. Archer, three years ago, who started the stone rolling, and now this stone has grown up into a substantial building of concrete and hard wood. True, Mother Peter is still in debt, but she never loses heart.
Anyhow, to show the appreciation of all the benefactors at Sibu, the Sisters have been teaching the children a play, which the Rector thought much above the children’s abilities. The result showed that he was mistaken.
Besides different songs-and gymnastics-the play Cinderella gave the audience the idea that real hard work (mostly it must have been the patience of the Sisters) had been done and the children knew their parts well.
The first performance was played to an audience of Europeans and clerks, and on all sides appreciative remarks were heard.
The second evening the same play, with addition of “Joseph of Egypt” in Chinese, was performed for a Chinese audience-mostly towkays and their wives. Naturally for them the play in Chinese had more attraction, and roars of laughter greeted the donkey’s appearance.
I need hardly say how pleased the Sisters were at the success of their enterprise, and it consoled them for much hard work.
Take courage-Sisters and children- and give us a performance another time. This, the first attempt, was a great success-and let us hope that it will bring you help and assistance.
Yours faithfully,
AN ADMIRER.
A Reply to “Salah Paham.”
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
DEAR SIR,
The 7th paragraph in the somewhat verbose and platitudinous though otherwise thought provoking contribution, in your last issue under the pseudonym of “Salah Paham” calls for some slight correction and comment.
Your correspondent writes of “the one available club situated at the junction of MacDougall Road.” The designation is somewhat vague as MacDougall Road has no junction but runes direct from the corner of Reservoir Road to the Rock Road. However, as “Salah Paham” refers later on to the younger past members of St. Thomas’ School, one is led to suppose he refers to the Sarawak Union.
Is your correspondent aware that this is not a public club, but one erected and run for the benefit of past members of St. Thomas’ School, who only are eligible for membership? Gentlemen Visitors to the town may be introduced as “Visiting Members,” but as a privilege only, not as a right! Again, does your wordy correspondent realize that the subscription to the Club is only 50 cents a month, not a very large sum with which to provide a free library as well as the other amenities of the Club? If he be a member of the Sarawak Union, he should know that any suggestion he wishes to bring to the notice of the committee may be put forward in writing and this would be considered at their next meeting. This seems a more satisfactory method than to rush anonymously into print.
Your correspondent writes as though he were present at the last general meeting. The question of “Periodicals” was mentioned, but as this was not a matter for a general meeting it was referred to the Committee which, not having received any notice in writing, has not further considered the matter.
If “Salah Paham” be a man of substance and is in a philanthropical frame of mind, I feel sure I speak for the members of the club, when I say, we should be only too pleased to open a library connected with the Union and provide a much larger selection of periodicals and papers than are at present to be found there thereby enabling members of the Club to obtain “mental recreation” to their hearts content,-If he will foot the bill,- The nucleus of a good library together with the necessary additional accommodation could be obtained I should think for $1,000.
YOURS faithfully,
F. SEPTIMUS HOLLIS, Honorary Secretary.
P. S.-The obvious alternative for your correspondent and his friends would be to become members of the Library which faces the Police Parade Ground and football field in Rock Road. This is open to all nationalities and a very low subscription, which works out at about seventy-five cents a month. The privileges of the Library, where a considerable number of periodicals are available, include the use of the building for the purposes of reading and each member is entitled to take two books out at a time.
Should he leave Kuching for an outstation, he may have six books out at the same time.
Self-Culture.
The Editor,	
Sarawak Gazette,	
Kuching.
KUCHING,
15th July,1929.
SIR,
The letter contributed by “Salah Paham” is in the right direction and he is to be congratulated on his contribution on the above subject, which, but for some rather misleading statements, is an excellent one.
His assertion that the average schoolboy thinks that his education ends with his passing the seventh standard, and that he is eager and anxious to leave school even before reaching such a standard, is not true and will lead one to believe that the boys of this country do not know or appreciate the value of higher education. The parents of the majority of the boys of the local schools are none too well off, the reason for the boys leaving school as soon they pass the seventh standard and seek employment is obvious.
Whilst appreciating the opinion expressed by
your correspondent as to the usefulness of and the
pressing need for such an institution as outlined by
him and the vast amount of good it will do, I feel
impelled to say something behalf of the boys
who have left school. They certainly did not consider their education finished when they left, school,
and they are taking every opportunity to further
their studies, fully realizing; that their education is
inadequate for the battle of life, and, in fact, a good
number of them are actually devoting their spare
time to studying for self-improvement.
Your correspondent’s reference to the management of the Club in question is uncalled for and
rather unfair to the members of the Committee, as he must be fully aware of the fact that the Club
was constituted with the main object of providing a
place where past pupils of the school can meet
socially and where they can go for recreation. His
assertion that the Committee take no interest in the
welfare of the Club, but glue their eyes on the credit
balance at the annual meeting, rejecting any suggestion put forward, leads one to that he is
airing a personal grievance which will do nobody
any good and will avail him nothing.
If your correspondent really has the intellectual
welfare of the younger generation at heart, he
should take the initiative by devising ways and
means designed to arouse the interests of the community, from whom, I am sure, he will find ample support, in order to achieve his object instead of making unpleasant references and incurring the risk of treading on somebody’s toes.
Yours faithfully,
JANGAN SALAH PAHAM.
Salah Paham. -We have received your lengthy letter headed “The Comic-Dramatic Club.” We thought, however, that correspondent understood that our columns are not intended for the airing of private grievances nor (and this most emphatically) ； for criticism of private individuals or institutions. - [Ed. S. G,]
A Reply to “Incommodious.”
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
DEAR SIR,
I would point out to INCOMMODIOUS that “ang-mo” (redhair) and often '”ang-mo-kui” (red-haired devil) are contemptuous terms used by Chinese for Europeans. Their name for the C. P. O. is “toa kan”  - “bigdog.”
Disrespectful names are also used by Chinese in referring to other people, e.g., Malays are called “hoan lang” or “hoan kia” (little foreigners!). The Chinese dictionary says that this is a name of reproach mingled with disdain. In China it is the common name for all Europeans. Dyaks are called “lak kia” (little hunters) and Tamils “ki-ling-kia.” The term kia does not really mean “little,” but has the force of the diminutive “et.”
Salmon is called “ang-mo-hu,” and cement is “ang-mo-hui,” etc., etc. No doubt INCOMMODIOUS is using these terms every day, for the Chinese have no other names for the above-mentioned articles, or if they have they never use them.
I am in favour of calling people from China Chinese, but at the same time would suggest that the Chinese think up a few respectful names for other people and use them.
Yours,
ONEASNOS.
Extracts from Monthly Reports.
First Division.
KUCHING.
June, 1929.
The Resident, Mr. F. F. Boult, reports :-
There was one appeal to the Supreme Court and one from the District Court to the Resident’s Court.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to confirm the appointments of Haji Salleh bin Amat as Katuah of Boyan and Taha bin Brahim as Katuah of Gersik, who had been elected by their respective kampongs.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
June,1929.
The District Officer, Mr. J. B. Archer, reports:-
Mr. E. M. Woodward arrived from Sibu on the 14th, having been appointed to act as Assistant District Officer, Kuching. He took over his duties from Mr. J. J. Hill on the next day, the latter having been transferred to Sibu.
Court work was heavy during the month, and the want of another Court Room is felt. The District Court is now held separately by me, whilst the Assistant District Officer takes magistrate’s Court and Police cases.
The matter of Court deposits has again been mentioned, and it is obvious that in the near future some different procedure will have to be observed if these deposits are to be controlled properly. The Civil Courts are still used improperly by many traders, large and small, who look upon the Court in the light of a debt collecting agency. The payment of extremely small sums into Court, and the large number of these payments, entails a vast amount of work and considerable expense to Government. As long as traders continue to use the Courts as a cheap way of collecting their debts it is difficult to recommend an alternative system of receiving and paying out these troublesome deposits.
Thefts by Chinese boys are becoming too common, and circumstances seem to point to the fact that there are many lads in Kuching, either without parents or guardians or entirely out of their control, who live in the streets and exist on sneak thieving and other devilry. It is difficult, to know what to do with these young malefactors, and same sort of reformatory is needed.
LAND OFFICE.
June, 1929,
The Superintendent of Lands, Mr. C. S. Griffiths, reports:-
Mr. N. E. Hughes, who was touring the Second Division at the beginning of the month, returned on 16th. He left again for Engkilili on 18th.
Mr. T. M. Griffiths arrived from the Third Division on 7th for duty in this Division.
I paid a flying visit to Sibu for the purpose of discussing with the Resident, Third Division, means of carrying out the instruction of His Highness in connection with the new station at Sarikei. I left on 11th and returned on 14th.
SADONG.
June, 1929.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports:-
The preliminary inquiries into one murder case and one charge of attempted murder were heard and the minutes forwarded to the Resident.
A Supplementary Estimate for roads having been passed, compensation was fixed for the removal of all trees within two fathoms of existing drains. The people of Kampong Nanas have agreed to remake their road on the same terms as was done by the other kampongs last year. They will receive sixty cents per fathom for their work.
On the 22nd the first motor-car in the district arrived. This is an Austin 7 and has been in big demand as a taxi ever since. It has so far been confned to running up and down the road to the Colliery; but later it is hoped that it will run to Saging.
The month was marked by two unusual foreign exports. These were 29 ½ tons of billian timber and 100 snake skins.
Nineteen ships entered and twenty-two ships cleared.
Sadong Colliery.
June, 1929.
The Acting Manager, Mr. D. Evans, reports :-
The output, export, local consumption, conversion into coke and coal stock figures for the month were as follows:-
About 7 p.m. on the 2nd instant Top Mine cooly Chee Quee Ting was brutally murdered outside Low Lee Ngee and Jong Chit’s house, just below the Buffalo Mine. At first we had to work on meagre information owing to all those involved having disappeared from the scene, but before noon on the following day the chief suspects, namely, Jong Hock, Chong Hin, Jong Chai and Jong Chit, were placed under arrest, followed by others who were found to be in the immediate vicinity, but failed to give a satisfactory account of what happened.
Chong Hin had received head injuries and a broken collar bone in this affray, and one Ng Chee Teng while still under detention died of natural causes on the night of the 26th.
Second Division.
BATANG LUPAR.
June, 1929,
The Resident, Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner,
reports:-
The m.l. Para arrived on the 13th with
Mr. R. W. Hurst and Mr. H. Smith, both of the
Agriculture Department. After a short stay they
proceeded to Engkilih, the visit being a thorough
examination of pepper vine diseases.
The Chinese community at Engkilili started
erecting a school on a large scale, but unfortunately
when half the roofing was completed the building
was razed to the ground by a severe gale of wind.
The Chinese at Betong are getting on very well
with the new shophouses, but no one has moved in
yet, the excuse being they do not wish to move from
old bazaar until new bazaar is completed.
A reward of $500 was offered by Government for
any information that will lead to the arrest of the
murderer of Ah Seng which took place in Telok
Tusor, Betong Saribas, on the 19th April, 1929.
KALAKA.
June, 1929.
Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, Acting District Officer, Kalaka, reports :-
The Dyaks almost without exception asked that there shall be no regatta this year as they are hard up, and as this event is solely for their edification and pleasure there will be none this year.
On the 20th I walked to Debak by way of Nanga Pasa, Sekundong, Plawa and Semambu. Leaving Betong at about 8.30 a.m. we reached Debak, after several stops, at about 4 30 p.m. The Rev. W. Ljnton arrived the next day and a meeting was held with Penghulu Sujang and various of the Rimbas Dyaks about a school for which these people have been pressing for some time. After hearing that a certain amount of time and trouble would be required of them to erect the school house their enthusiasm seemed to cool considerably.
Third Division.
SIBU.
May, 1929.
The Resident, Mr. C. D. Adams, reports:-
The Government Attorney arrived during the
month in connection with the necessary deeds
required before occupying the new shops in the Sibu
bazaar. At end of the month out of the thirty-one
shops completed twenty-seven were occupied.
The Assistant District Officer, Kapit, informs me
that the Dyaks are complaining about what they
call the new regulations. These are really the
same as before namely (1) Registration of births and deaths; (2) Tax $1 for every door irrespective of
occupants; (3) Felling engkabang and langgai, etc.;
(4) Death duties; (5) Retaining fruit, etc., on moving. In fact, they wish apparently to adhere to
nothing, and are hoping that His Highness the Rajah
will have compassion upon them. They are all
trying to move into the head-water of the stream
they inhabit, and in my opinion it is useless to argue
with them but allow this in certain rivers.
Many Kajumans and Kayans were down selling
engkabang and report a fair harvest, especially the former.
The District Officer, Sibu, reports :-
The Resident, accompanied by the Divisional Treasurer, left on the 3rd for Kapit and returned on the 6th.
The river was again in flood during the month
and all the road in Sibu were under water. The level was not, however, as high as that reached in March last.
Mr. J. W. Whiteside left by the S.S. Rajah of
Sarawak at daylight on the 6th, on home furlough.
Mr. and Mrs. Pascoe arrived by the Sulong on the 9th.
Mr. B. A. Trechman arrived on the 15th to
relieve Mr. Cotterill who proceeds home an furlough.
Mr. J. G. Anderson left on the 24th on transfer to Lower Rejang vice Mr. E. M. Woodward who
is transferred to Sibu. Mr. Woodward took up his duties here on the 29th.
The seaplane Venus arrived on the 3rd and went
on to Kanowit with mails for the Resident. Mr.
Phillips left again at midday to return to Kuching
but was forced to descend at Sarikei owing to storm.
He managed to leave Sarikei at 4 p.m. and arrived
back in Kuching the same day.
The Divisional Engineer, Third Division, reports:-
Bazaar Rebuilding, Government Scheme 41 Shop- houses.-Good progress has been maintained throughout the month. Block No. 5 was completed and taken over on May 3rd. Two other blocks are practically ready for taking over. As previously reported, it is confidently anticipated that completion of these 41 shophouses will be effected by 30th June, 1929.
Nine houses in Bank Road.-Reinforced concrete framework is complete to roof and work on the roofs proceeding. These houses should be completed by 31st July, 1929.
Building by private enterprise.-Reconstruction of 7 shophouses is in progress on the site of the old brick shophouses.
New Market.-Piling, construction of columns and roof are in progress.	,
New Police Station.-Tenders have been invited and the contract let to the lowest tenderer—Messrs. Gammon, Limited-preliminary work is in hand.
Repairs, alterations, etc., to Goveniment Buildings.-Survey Office extension-completed. Old Jail-demolition completed. Repairs to old jail, kitchen, for use as a store are in hand. Sundry repairs to Government buildings as required have been carried out, and a tender for whitewashing, distempering, etc.
The Divisional Land Officer, Sibu, reports :-
Mr. C. E. Pascoe returned from furlough and
resumed charge on the 9th instant, taking over from Mr. T. M. Griffiths who remained on in the capacity of Land Officer.
The re-demarcation of lots into 2 ½ acre squares has now ceased, and a commencement made to survey in the gardens they stand. Land Inspectors have been deputed to assist the surveyors and headmen of areas warned to advise individual
gardeners that their co-operation will be required
in pointing out their boundaries.
Temporary titles to all new allocations in Sibu Town have been prepared, and are being issued.
LOWER REJANG.
May, 1929.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Lower
Rejang, reports:-
The Resident, Second Division, Mr. F. A. W.
Page-Turner, visited the station from the 17th
to 19th accompanied by Datu Haji Abdul Rasid
and Abang Bujany, and the boundary between
the Second and Third Divisions was arranged as
under:-
From Coast.-From Tanjong Lusam up Sungei Nyabor to Batang Lobah, Batang Baliengkin Lobah Badek. thence along watershed of Bukit Katti to Muugo Tiga.
I arrived at Rejang on the 23rd, accompanied by the new Court Writer, Ngui Ah Thiam to take over duties of the Acting Assistant District Officer in place of Mr. Woodward, who is appointed for duty at Sibu.
Having checked stocks and books, I finally took over from Mr. Woodward on the 28th.
Mr. Woodward left for Sibu on the 29th, accompanied by clerks Charles Law and Peter Ng, transferred to Dalat and Kapit respectively.
KAPIT.
May, 1929.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Kapit, reports:-
The harvest was all in at the end of the month. There is still some engkabang to come down from the Rejang.
I left for the Mujong on the 14th with Abang Indih, returning on the 23rd. Abang Aboi left for the Balleh on the 14th returning on the 29th. I left for the Oyan Rejang, etc., on the 30th and was still away at the end of the month. Abang Ahmat left for Menuan on the 19th returning on the 22nd.
MUKAH AND OYA.
May, 1929.
The District Officer, Mukah and Oya, reports:-
I arrived at Mukah at daybreak on the 10th. Mr. Cutfield left by the same steamer for Bintulu, having left notes concerning affairs of the district. I took over the cash next day from the Cadet Officer. The Director of Public Works Department, accompanied by Mrs. Lowe, visited Mukah from 17th -22nd, also the Divisional Electrical Engineer to supervise the unloading of the electric light plant. This was eventually unloaded and stored by the end of the month after great difficulty. I left for Kuching on 29th to attend the races.
OYA AND DALAT.
Trade.—385 koyans raw sago, 418 piculs gutta jelutong and 131 piculs gutta para were shipped to Kuching.
The trade returns for the month and for comparison with those of the same period last year are as follows:-
Rainfall.-The total rainfall recorded during the month was 8’75 inches ; the greatest maximum for any one day being 2’25 inches. Ten days showed no rain, and eight days less than 0’10 of an inch.
June, 1929.
Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident, reports:-
His Highness the Rajah arrived at Binatang on the evening of the 19th instant and paid a visit ashore on the 20th, meeting the different communities in the Court House. Nothing of importance was brought before His Highness.
We arrived at Sibu midday 20th instant and all the upriver Penghulus were interviewed in the afternoon. They were ordered to give a trial to what they call the new regulations. On the 21st instant, His Highness met all the principal Chinese, and the matter of a further loan for building another sixty-seven shops was discussed. It was decided that owing to the large sum involved the matter should be left in the hands of the Treasurer of Sarawak for his opinion.
The Government offices and bazaar were then visited, and His Highness left at midday for Oya and Mukah. We arrived at Oya on the 22nd instant, and visited Dalat, returning to Oya in the evening. We arrived at Mukah the next day, sailing for Kuching on the 25th instant. I accompanied His Highness as far as Mukah.
The District Officer, Sibu, reports:-
At 7.30 p.m. on the 12th there was an alarm of fire and the general assembly blown, fortunately the fire was quickly under control and no damage done. It originated by a coolie setting fire to some refuse between Attap Kheh and the incinerator, the idea apparently being that it would take too long to burn the rubbish in the incinerator. The man was suitably dealt with. This is the second alarm in a short period and it is worthy of note that if a fire did break out the waterworks would very quickly be put out of action, as the power cables to the waterworks run through the bazaar and would be quickly melted.
Mr. MacPherson arrived from Kapit on the 17th with some upriver Penghulus to meet His Highhess the Rajah who arrived at 1 p.m. on the 19th. His Highness met the Dyak Penghulus on board H.H.M.Y. Maimuna in the afternoon. His Highness left at 1 p.m. on the 20th for Mukah, accompanied by the Resident, Third Division.
Mr. E. M. Woodward left on the 13th for Kuching to do duty there. Mr. D. C. Hudden arrived on the 12th, having been appointed to do duty here, and took over the Police and Prisons from Mr. J. O. Gilbert who proceeds to Sarikei in charge of Sarikei and Binatang. Mr. J. J. Hill arrived on the 19th vice Mr. E. M. Woodward.
The Divisional Engineer, Third Division reports:-
Buildings in Progress. - Forty-one shophouses (original contract) Blocks Nos 4, 6, and 7 have been taken over and this contract for forty-one houses now completed. Nine shophouses in Bank Road are proceeding towards completion. Seven brick shophouses, which are being built by private enterprise, are progressing.
The construction of these houses, in ferro-concrete, is proceeding by “rule of thumb” methods, no detailed plans of reinforcement or calculations having been prepared. The foundation, columns, and beams already constructed have been examined by me from time to time and, while they appear to be of adequate strength, the dangers of faulty design and workmanship in this of construction has been pointed out to the several owners. Attention has also been drawn to the fact that this Department can accept no responsibility in case of failure.
In future it is considered desirable to prohibit ferro-concrete construction unless proper plans and calculations have been submitted to this Department and a written guarantee provided that the work will be directly supervised by a competent person.
Mukah.-I proceeded to Mukah by s.s. Sulong, leaving Sibu on 12th June and arriving Mukah on 13th.
Electric Station. -Work upon new Electric Station was commenced forthwith, the engine and dynamo foundations being completed by 23rd June. Footings for building retaining wall, floor and sumps, etc., are in progress. The whole of this work is being carried out by prison labour. The valuable assistance afforded by the District Officer has been much appreciated.
The Divisional Medical Officer reports:-
On the 19th instant Senior Dresser L. Ah Heng arrived Sibu to relieve Assistant Surgeon Charles Masom. The latter was transferred to Kuching for duty on the 22nd instant.
The Acting District Officer, Lower Rejang, reports:-
I visited the lighthouse at Tanjong Sirik on the 25th. The light is not functioning very well owing to minor repairs to the burner being necessary. This has been reported to the Superintendent of Shipping, Sibu.
A new mechanic, Lemas, has been engaged as from the 23rd in place of Rajah Alang mentioned under Court.
Trade.-The trade and shipping figures are as. follows:-
MUKAH AND OYA.
June, 1929.
The District Officer, Mukah and Oya, reports :-
General.- The outstanding event of the month was the visit of His Highness the Rajah. His Hi« Highness arrived from Oyu accompanied by the Resident, Third Division, on the 22nd, on which day he interviewed all Chiefs. Nothing of importance was brought to His Highness’s notice.
His Highness inspected the bazaar and Chinese
school and promised a grant in aid to the school provided English was taught. His Highness attended
the first day of the local regatta, on 24th sailing for
Kuching early on 25th. Other visitors to the station
during the month were Messrs, Trechman, Flood-Page, Buck, Cutfield, Calver, Mr. and Mrs. Spurway.
Reports have been received that the Oil Company
shortly intend to start boring for oil in Balingian.
Up to the present only survey work has been done.
Many Dyaks come down for the regatta. Apparently these people recognise no authority and ignore all Government Orders. It will be necessary to visit all districts and lay down fixed rules to be followed and impress on them that these must be obeyed. For years they appear to have done exactly
as they like and there is an entire lack of organization. I have written about this under separate cover.
Abang Haji Mohidin was promoted to Datu and is being transferred to Bintulu. His appointment was read out in open Court in the presence of all Tua Kampong.
The chief event of the month was the visit of His Highness the Rajah, who entered the Oya river early on the 21st, and was accompanied by the Resident, Third Division, The District Officer, Mukah and Oya, Mr. P. M. Adams and myself went on board and His Highness elected to proceed straight to Dalat, where he sat in Court, afterwards inspecting the bazaar where an enthusiastic welcome was given. The return to Oya was made in the afternoon. The Divisional Treasurer, Mr. Trechman, coming down with the Rajah.
His Highness made an official landing at 4.30, and
went straight to the Court House where a number
of requests were made by local people, notably a
petition for a Government school in the district.
The weather which up to this point had been
very bad now cleared, and His Highness was enabled
to inspect the bazaar and walk out to the sea,
returning later to the bungalow.
Trade —210 koyans raw sago, 65 piculs gutta
para and 333 piculs jelutong were shipped to
Kuching.
The Divisional Land Officer, reports: -
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by the
Resident, visited this office on the 20th instant, and
inquired into the General state of affairs.
Fifth Division.
LIMBANG.
June, 1929.
The Resident, Mr. F. H. Kortright, reports :-
A dispute as to the fishing rights at Kuala Panderuan arose between the Rangau and Pulo Siaran Kampongs. I interviewed the British Resident of Brunei about the matter, and it was agreed to accept the channel as found by H.M.S. Herald in 1927 as the boundary at this point.
Representatives of a number of Chinese from Upper Sarawak who wish to open up pepper gardens here came under the guidance of The Reverend Father Hupfgartner, and a very suitable parcel of land situated between the 7th and 8th mile on the new Panderuan road was found for them. This land, sufficient for about 50 gardens, has now been reserved for this Chinese settlement and the representatives have returned to Kuching to collect their friends and property.
The Panderuan Road, ten and a quarter miles long, was finally opened for traffic.
The rainfall amounted to 10’16 inches.
LAWAS.
June, 1929.	.
The Assistant District Officer reports :-
General.-Abang Kiprawi, Native Officer, Trusan, arrived at Trusan on 20th and took up his duties there.
The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Ltd., exported 23,064 lbs. of dry rubber to Labuan during the month.





