VOL. LIX.
No. 912.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Monday, September 2nd, 1929.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette		 			
MONDAY. SEPTEMBER 2nd. 1929.
NOTES.
August.
ON the 26th, thirty-two years ago, His Highness the Rajah joined the Sarawak Civil Service as a Cadet.
Until May, 1904, His Highness was almost continually on duty in the outstations.
ON the occasion of the birthday of His Highness the Rajah, a review of the Sarawak Rangers and Police will be held on Fort Margherita Parade Ground at eight o’clock in the morning.
His Highness will review the troops and afterwards present Long Service Decorations and medals to Government servants.
The general public are invited to attend, and boats will be available at Pengkallan Batu from 7 a.m. onwards.
His Highness the Tuan Muda’s birthday on the 8th was celebrated by a public holiday, and ships in the port were dressed.
In the evening His Highness the Rajah entertained a large party to dinner, when His Highness the Tuan Muda’s health was proposed by the Resident. After dinner there was a ball to which all the Europeans in Kuching were invited.
MR. J. C. Smith has left the employ of the Dahan Rubber Estates, Ltd., and Mr. J. B. Simpson of Sungei Tengah Estate becomes manager there.
MR. N. Hughes has proceeded to Sarikei and Mr. L. K. Morse to Simanggang, both on transfer.
BY the Singapore steamer on the 5th, Miss I. C. Wallace arrived to take over the duties of Matron of the General Hospital.
DR. E. M. Marjoribanks sailed from Marseilles on 2nd August by s.s. Comorin, connecting with the Karmala at Aden.
MR. J. W. Evans leaves Marseilles on the 9th August by the Mantua and Mr. E. Banks from Marseilles by the Kashima Maru on 14th September.
Mr. E. V. Andreini is making his own arrangements, and was due to leave for Sarawak on 30th July.
MR. F. A. W. Page-Turner, Resident of the Second Division, has been in Kuching twice during the month.
TT is rumoured that in the last football match between the Police and the Sarawak Steamship Co., the goal posts at both ends had been surreptitiously smeared with pig fat before the game. If there is any truth in this story, circumstances point to the commission of a very low-down and unsportsmanlike act. For the sake of local football it is to be hoped that (as usual) rumour is a lying jade.

ON the 6th the trial of Eo Geok Meng alias Ah Moi was concluded. The Court found that the accused was guilty of attempted murder and imposed a sentence of 7 years’ rigorous imprisonment.

MR. and Mrs. F. F. Boult left Kuching on 17th en route for Singapore and Fraser’s Hill、where they intend to spend a month’s holiday.
THE Government Gazette of 16th includes the following:- Mr. G. A. Yeatts to be a 2nd Lieutenant, and Instructor, in the Sarawak Rangers； Mr. L. K. Morse to do duty at Simanggang: Mr. W. L. Clark to be Assistant Electrical Engineer, Sibu； Mr. W. S. B. Buck to act as Assistant District Officer, Oya and Dalat: Mr. J. J. Hill to do duty at Sibu and Miss I. C. Wallace to be Matron, General Hospital. Mrs. W. G. Tait ceases to act as Matron, General Hospital and Mr. G. Poushkine, Electrical Engineer, Sibu, resigns his appointment.
MAJOR C. E. Hudson, D.S.O., M.C., King’s Own Scottish Borderers, Staff Officer to Local Forces (Malaya) and Major I. S. 0. Playfair, D.S.O., M.C., Royal Engineers, were in Kuching for a few days, having arrived here from Miri, where they had been on official business.
A notification in the Government Gazette of the 16th forbids persons from entering the area which comprises Fort Margherita, the barracks and their environs, unless on duty.
Notices have been posted at all approaches to the military area. The same Gazette notifies that on and after 1st September, the Main Bazaar will be open to traffic in either directions.
TICKET No. 358 in the name of Chin Chiang, Main Bazaar, Kuching, won Mr. Reynolds’ motor car which was raffled at the Police Station on the 18th at 10 a.m.
WE regret to announce the death of Abang Bujang, Native Officer of Gedong, which occurred suddenly on the 19th at Gedong.
AMONGST the passengers from Singapore by s.s. Kuching on 19th were the Revd. and Mrs. G. T. Pykett. They proceeded to Sibu the next day to visit their daughter, Mrs. Hoover, there.
MR. C. D. Adams, Resident of the Third Division, arrived from Sibu on the 17th, having been taken rather seriously ill. He made an excellent recovery in Kuching and returned to Sibu in H.H.Y. Maimuna on the 24th.
MR. G. T. Bates arrived back from leave on the 19th, and resumes work with the B. C. L., in Kuching.
Mr. Bates tells us that the stories regarding the very strict motor regulations at home are much exaggerated. He had no difficulty in escaping the law.
TEO SOO Neo, the Sarawak wife of the late Mr. Ong Ewe Hai, and the mother of Mr. Ong Tiang Swee, C.S.S., died at her residence in Ewe Hai Street on 15th August, 1929. She was born in Lundu, Sarawak, and came to settle down with her parents in Kuching in her childhood. She died at the ripe age of eighty-nine. She leaves behind her one son, three daughters, thirty-three grandchildren and forty-five great-grand-children to mourn her loss.
The funeral took place on Monday, the 19th August, when her remains were interred in a private cemetery at the Batu Kinyang Rubber Estate, Rock Road. The funeral procession, which was well attended, was performed on the reformed style.
To Mr. Ong Tiang Swee, C.S.S., and other relations, we express our sympathy.
Mr. Ong Tiang Swee, C.S.S., has requested us to express his sincere thanks to all those friends and relatives who forwarded him wreaths and Chinese scrolls for his late mother and who attended her funeral.
He also thanks all those who sent him letters of condolence in his bereavement.
MR. F. O. Blagg has been appointed a Commissioner for Oaths in Sarawak, and Mr. P. H. Hayward a Magistrate for the purpose of administering Oaths and attesting documents.
ON the 28th the Judicial Commissioner, sitting in the Supreme Court, administered affirmations to fifteen, and the Datu Imam to three, interpreters and translators employed in the Kuching Courts, Chinese Secretariat and Registration Office of the Supreme Court.
On the Bench were also the Acting Resident. First Division; the District Officer, Kuching; the Acting Assistant District Officer, Kuching: Datu Imam: Datu Hakim; Datu Mentri ； Datu Amar and Haji Hassim, N.O.
DR. E・ M. Marjoribanks, P.M.0., returned from leave on the 26th. In spite of doleful rumours to the contrary, he is by no means merely a shadow of his former self.
THE Revd. J. L. L. M. Feldbrugge, of the Catholic Mission, Kuching, is being transferred to Miri.
Father Feldbrugge has experienced indifferent health lately, and we understand that the more bracing air of Miri was thought more suitable for him.
We wish Father Feldbrugge the best of luck and health in his new work.
CHAPLAIN and Mrs. J. Clemens were in Kuching during the month, having arrived from the Rejang where they have been for some time collecting botanical specimens.
Mrs. Clemens is an expert botanist, and her husband, who is a Chaplain in the American Army, assists her.
Mr. Clemens reports that 1,500 specimens were obtained near the Gat in the Third Division, and he is enthusiastic over the magnificent flora of Sarawak. He hopes to train local men to assist him in recognizing and preparing specimens, and he has offered, under certain conditions, to supply the Sarawak Museum with a complete set of his Sarawak collections.
MR. J. B. Archer has been Gazetted to act as Resident, First Division; and Mr. F. G. Carpenter to act as District Officer, Kuching.	.
IT is rumoured that Government is sending up experts in the near future to investigate the prospects of gold in the Engkilili and Marup districts. We hear that recent prospecting in the Sadong district was not successful.
THE Municipal Authorities inform us that a recreation ground near Kuching, 2.5 acres in area, will be ready by the end of the year. This wille extended later on.
Writing of the Municipality, we must compliment them on the little ornamental gardens which they are making in various places in Kuching town. Where before was a general rubbish heap and long grass, is now planted with gay flowers and restful shrubs. The grass is mown short and rustic seats complete pleasant places wherein the townspeople may rest.
His Highness the Rajah in Miri.
A corresponding write that the Chinese reception given to His Highness the Rajah, on the occasion of his visit Miri in July, was very warm and spontaneous. The celebrations included a public welcome by the entire Chinese community at the Chuang Hua School, at which it was estimated that more than a thousand were present. After the singing of the Sarawak and Chinese National Anthems by Chinese students, a short address was read to His Highness by Mr. C. H. Sung, Headmaster of the Chinese School, at the request of Mr. Chuang Yon Ch’eng, “Capitan China,” in which the loyal welcome of the Chinese was extended, and terminating with a toast to his health. This was followed by a lantern parade, which His Highness viewed from the verandah of the Government Offices. Altogether, a very enjoyable evening for nil concerned.
Accident to H.H.M.Y. “Maimuna”
The Shipping Master asks us to publish the following: -
H. H. M. Y. Maimuna returned to Kuching on the 6th August, having been towed from Mukah by s.l. L’Aubnine. Immediately after her arrival she was placed in Brooke Dock for examination and repairs. Inspection showed that the tail shaft had snapped close to the propeller, fortunately no other damage resulting than the loss of the propeller. It has been concluded that the propeller turning at speed and striking a submerged object, probably drawn in by the action of the propeller, the propeller being of steel without a brass liner and most likely weakened through corrosion, to fracture. No blame can therefore attach to the Workshop on account of any fault or error in fitting the propeller.
Round the Kuching Streets.
There flashed past me the other day a motorbike ridden by a Chinese youth. On pillion sat sideways a young Chinese girl. Her slim silk-clad legs ending in dainty white shoes were swung out in front; her attenuated skirts bellied to the breeze and showed a considerable amount of knee. Both her arms clung to the waist of her cavalier, and her jet black bobbed hair blew this way and that.
Barely another hundred yards a Baby Austin, driven by a charmingly dressed native lady, overtook me.
Having nothing much to do and, being of a speculative nature, I made a note of passers-by for the next five minutes. A Morris lorry driven by a Tamil-a European in a small Fiat-five Chinese bicyclist in line ahead-a squeaky taxi (naturally a Chevrolet)-a high European official in a blue Morris Oxford-two Malay grooms on their masters’ ponies, both wearing Tom Mix hats and coloured handkerchiefs round their necks (the riders I mean, of course)-a young Chinese lady cyclist-three little boys on wobbly bikes-another high official in a yellow Morris Oxford-a peculiar car driven by a European (it looked like a Jowett)-two motor busses racing, with about four true wheels between the pair of them-a motor lorry full of rails-a Police Officer in rather a noisy car-a Sikh trying to ride a bicycle (he fell off opposite me)-a sort of big packing case (I think they call it a gharry) drawn by a pony about the size of a big collie dog-twenty-four bicyclist-five more motor busses-another Baby Austin-a led pony-one more high official in a yellow Standard-a merchant prince in an Austin 12-a lorry carrying something which is not usually mentioned in polite society-two more cyclists-a bullock cart-a Morgan-two more busses-and as the five minutes finished- a motor ambulance.
Mazed, I stood there watching this internal-combustion-velocipedical-equine procession, and thought to myself of the Kuching of not so many years ago—say somewhere round the year 1912.
I remember but two cars in the town-and then they did not always go.
There was a motor bike and sidecar-a most dashing affair, and one solo. The first motor bus appeared in 1912 and used to run to the 7th mile—at least it was so advertised to run. Actually it was about even money on it reaching the 2nd mile, 3-1 against to the 5th mile and 10-1 the 7th mile. I remember one day joining a picnic out to Quop. We boarded the vehicle which ran all right until the first hill was reached. There it stopped half way up and started to run backwards. We all jumped out and clung on to the vehicle. This occurred at every subsequent hill, the driver admitting that he never could remember which was the clutch and which was the brake. We used the bus once again to go to the races-but having unfortunately gone through one of the pet P.W.D. culverts, it mysteriously disappeared for ever.
Those were the days of horse-flesh, when people kept ponies for use—and not merely for pot-hunting. Any morning you could meet half a dozen owners out on the Green Road, and a favourite gallop was down the Datus Road, now, alas, covered with stone.
There was no railway, a cinema only at intervals, and perhaps a couple of hundred push bikes. The Inspector of roads used a bullock cart to take him to the end, and slept the night there. Young Chinese ladies had not yet taken to bicycling (in fact, their costumes forbade such a pastime) nor did they do pillion riding. Saises had never heard of Tom Mix and Baby Austins were still unborn.
What a change! In those days there was an air of dignified repose about the streets and roads surrounding the bazaar. One heard but the patter-patter of the ricksha men or the tinkle of a bullock cart. The raucous horn-the bang and clatter of the motor lorries-the groans of the taxis-the rumble of the busses-the piercing shriek of the train-the abominable din of the motor tractor. There were yet to come.
People lived a less hurried life. A newly-joined Cadet’s calling list meant a formidable campaign of rickshaw riding for several afternoons-nowadays $4.50 for an hour and a half of a battered Chevrolet suffices. A trip to Bau or Matang was a lengthy business-now it is merely a one day picnic. Europeans took a pride in their private rickshaws, and even the public ones were frequently raced by rostering outstationers.
There is no end to this grousing. Why, even the whisky tastes different (and is too, as a matter of fact) and the liquid which admits on its own label to have merely “the properties of real gin” has not the real knock-em-over effect of square face. Anyway the little Chinese pillion rider looked very nice-and that’s something anyhow!
The Autumn Race Meeting.
In another column will be found the programme for the coming meeting.
There will be the usual $2 and $1 Totalisators. Cash Sweeps on each race and an Unlimited Sweep on the last race of the second day. The bar will be run by the Sarawak Club and there will be a tea-room.
Training has started in earnest, but many well-known ponies are apparently being kept dark.
01' Man River has come on amazingly, and with his long stride should win. Palawan is a particularly attractive with a bit of blood in him. Kim Mah is going better than usual and Happy Boy will probably win again. The old veteran Kismet has not gone off. and Sisit is galloping well. Popacatepetl (who has changed hands) is as sluggish as ever, and Apa Kena will not try. Pengarah should pick up a race in Division II. Mudahan and Almas do not impress us at present and old Burak seems to have seen his best days.
One side of the Paddock buildings is being roofed entirely with billian sttaps
It is noticed that many gentlemen now residing in Kuching are not yet members of the Turf Club.
Members are reminded that they cannot introduce permanent residents in Kuching as visiting members. Non-members are charge $5 per day admission to the enclosure.
The Honorary Secretary asks us to inform our readers that he will be only too happy to propose intending members and find them seconders. Entrance fee is $10 with $10 annual subscription for Kuching members and $5 for outstation members.
From the Sarawak Gazette 50 Years Ago.
The Sarawak Gazette
1879.] W'DAY, 3rd SEPT.,  1879. [Price 5 Cts.
A somewhat absurd illustration of the difficulties that await incautious jungle travelers occurred lately at one of the gambier gardens. A Chinese coolie was missed, and a vigorous search was made for him in the vicinity, but without success. On the fifth day the man was accidentally come upon within a few hundred yards of the house, and it appears doubtful whether during the whole time he had been mueh farther.
IN view of the great extent to which petroleum or parafliu has taken the place of Cocoanut Oil throughout the Sarawak Territory, we think that is high time that some precautions be taken with regard to the storage of this dangerous commodity.
The Singapore Government is becoming alive to the necessity of this measure, and as we have got over more than 1,000 cases lately, we hope our Government will turn its attention to some regulation of this branch of trade. A serious fire in our bazaar would be a heavy disaster.

NOTICE.
IT is hereby notified for general information that from this date a gun will be fired from the Fort Hill on the arrival of the Mail steamer from Singapore.
W. H. RODWAY,
Commandant.
Kuching, Augt, 22nd, 1879.
Sarawak Association.
His Highness the Tuan Muda was in the Chair at tbe Sixth Annual Dinner held at the Trocadero Restauranton the 10th instant.
Forty-three members were present.
At the last moment Professor Le Gros Clark, Captain Barry Gifford, Captain Carstares Dunlop and Mr. S. T. Enuion were unavoidably prevented from being present.
After the toasts of the King and the Rajah, the Chairman proposed the health of the Honorary Members. which was responded to by the two Honorary Members present, Sir Laurence Guilleniard and Sir Gilbert Grindle, Dr. Charles Hose proposed the health of the Chairman, which was suitable acknowledged.
The Dinner was very much enjoyed and, judging from the time the guests departed, all seemed to have spent a very pleasant evening. At 12 o’clock more than half of them were still present.
Examinations for Government Officers.
The Sarawak Government Gazette publishes the names of the following Officers who have passed the Government Examinations recently.
Cadet Service, Standard II.-Messrs. J. G. Anderson, G. R. H. Arundell, W.S.B. Buck, R. G. Aikman, R. H. P. Langton. Standard I.-L. K. Morse and J. O. Gilbert.
Technical and Miscellaneous Service. Standard I.-Messrs. N. Mace and W. J. Chater.
We have been privileged to see a copy of the Examiners Report.
Seventeen candidates (a record number) sat; seven for Standard II and ten for Standard I.
In Standard II five passed, one is doubtful and one failed.
Mr. J. G. Anderson came out first on the list and very nearly achieved honours. His papers, said the Examiners, showed evidence of careful study and in one paper, History of Sarawak, he gained full marks. Mr. W. S. B. Buck shares with Mr. Macpherson, a candidate in a previous examination, the distinction of passing Standard II in the record time of a year and seven months. Messrs. R. H. P. Langton and G. R. H. Arundell, as well as passing Standard II, also passed in Sea Dyak, both being reported upon as fluent in that language. Mr. R. G. Aikman, who also passed, took Melanau as a voluntary subject. He is the first candidate to attempt this difficult language, was commended for his effort.
Mr. D. S. McLeod, the only Technical Officer, has one more subject in which to pass.
In Standard I two Cadet Officers, Messrs. L. K. Morse and J. O. Gilbert and two Technical Officers, Messrs. N. Mace and W. J. Chater passed-the other six failed. All four successful candidates are well up to time. Mr. J. R. Coombe, after only eight months service, actually passed in every subject, but failed in the aggregate.
The Examiners write that in Standard II the papers were uniformly good, especially History, Adat and the paper on Natives of Sarawak. The proceedings took four days and were held in the Lay School at Kampong Java No. 1.
The candidates had only one complaint: and that was the size of the seats and desks provided. These being built to suit small Malay boys were in the nature of a trial to most of the young Cadets who in these days are a remarkably long-legged lot.
Mr. L. D. Kennedy is Gazetted as having passed Standard I at a previous examination.
Mainly About Nothing.
From New York-indicating how widely this column is read-comes the following flattering letter:-“I notice that, with the utmost courage, you have tackled the pronunciation, of ‘Marseilles’ and ‘Port Said.’ Would it be asking too much to suggest that you include in your pronunciation agenda the names Senang and Penang, which caused great concern to me on my recent visit to the Straits Settlements?” It is not asking too much, for this is so easy. The accent is on the last syllable. Americans, it is true, have a tendency to put in on the first. In early days Penang was spelt “Pinang” a form which is still maintained in the title of a contemporary. But Pee-nang, with the accent on the first syllable, is not usual!-Straits Times.
It is not quite so easy as you think, my correspondent from New York! Indeed, for the first and only time the Americans seem actually to pronounce a word correctly! In early days Penang was spelt “Pinang”-and queer to relate-it is still spelt so-that is to say by the Malays themselves who, it is just possible, may be in a better position to give a decision in the matter, than the erudite New Yorker. “Pee-nang, with the accent on the first syllable, is not usual!” No, perhaps not in the E. & O., but in the kampongs, natives still persist (most obstinately) in pronouncing their island home as
For some evenings lately the bar of the Sarawak Club has reminded one of a morgue, and the sight of the persistent four who sit despondently round a cold slippery table in the deserted wilderness is depressing.
Various reasons have been given for this state of affairs-but we cannot really accept another of the Aberdonian species of story-which says that the Scotsmen (who make up such a large proportion of the bar profits) cannot withstand the attraction of the recently started free ferry!
One in the know informs us that it is quite untrue that the large rooms over the present jail are to be converted into a Court Room; and that a trap-door worked by a button on the magistrate’s table will shoot malefactors straight into their cells without any unnecessary cost of transport.
Charms and magic are (like the poor) ever with us. Respectable middle-class business men with a semi-detached villa at Norwood obtain their subsistence from the sale of “charms” to pretty ladies and imaginative men. “Fumbs Up” “Billikins,” small pigs, and so on are manufactured by ruthless machinery and sold in thousands to those possessed of a sentimental turn of mind and a tendency to waster their money.
The world-renowned talisman “Sarvavijaya Kavacha” is widely advertised, and scores of testimonials speak of its wonderful efficacy. One gentleman writes “…I derived much benefit from your talisman which cured insanity of my wife who was suffering for the last 15 years. Send another…” Whether the husband means another wife or another talisman is not quite clear.
A proud father says that after purchase his son “look now in colours like lotus flower.” After all, looks are but skin deep! Mr. H. C. Chatterjee, M.A., LL.B., however, does nothing by halves and purchased no less than three talismans and handed them to his relatives. “Strange to say,” writes Chatterjee, “they reported RAPID PROGRESSIN BUSINESS.”
These Talismans cure “chronic disease,” “dislocated heart,” “hysteric fits,” and “hooping cough.”
To our mind, however, Mr. Joseph Lall-Brindaban pays the nicest compliment: “Thanks for the previous Talisman,” he writes briefly, “I got a male child on the 30th December, 1925.”
A tremendous sensation was caused the other day by the receipt of a telegram from a keen A.D.O. “Selalang Bazaar destroyed by fire including the pawnshop.” We hear that the other shop is deeply offended at having escaped mention in this deplorable affair.
A Plea for the Horse.
In Malaya -except at Race meetings-we seldom see horses, and that, is one reason why all of us who know something about horses and care for them should be glad that we can still see superb horseflesh at our races. This afternoon will be no exception, and we should be very sorry to see racing abolished for it would tend to do away with the horse altogether.
But what does the modern person know about horses unless perchance he or she rides? The horse has long been banished from our streets-or nearly, and there are many youths today who have never travelled in a vehicle drawn by a horse.
To those of us who were brought up among horses, whose joy it was to see daily our favourite ponies and to chat with grooms and stable boys,-the past seems like a vanished age. In those days without a horse, it was simply impossible to get about. The roads were not very good, and pneumatic tyres for bicycles had only just been invented, and to ride or drive a horse was the best way of getting from one place to another.
But to-day? To-day we either fly above the earth, or drive swiftly over roads which are quite unfit for horse. And do we get the same thrills that we used to? We were discussing this very question with one who has recently made a very long flight, and who sampled all the amazing sensatinous that it is possible to experience in the course of flight, and he admitted that nothing took- the place of a canter across country, of a game of polo, of contact with the living personality of the horse. The plane may swoop and zoom, may turn somersaults and break records： the motor-car may travel at a speed which the fleetest horse could not compass in his wildest dreams -and yet there is really no thrill compared to that experience by the expert rider.
It is a good thing that, this opinion is still held or else there would be a possibility of horses dying out of our modern world. But this afternoon may we ask the spectator to think somewhat of the superb horses that they will see, and not only of the big sweeps? Surely it will be worth while.-
(Straits Echo.)
Sibu Notes.
Apropos the remarks in your issue of 1st July, about the Sibu bowling alley, no faces were made during the first two months that the alley was used. Since then, however, there have been several faces made. While the Sibu alley appears to be easier than the Kuching one, the higher averages from Sibu are not solely due to this. The average number of rolls each month is considerably higher than in Kuching which no doubt effects the averages.
The Sibu alley is five feet shorter than the Kuching alley, and Sibu bowlers who have been to Kuching have remarked on the fact that the Kuching alley is wider with the result that the pins are set farther apart. The alley was tested recently, and was found to be surprisingly accurate, the “difficult” side was the most accurate.
One of the difficulties that we have had here has been to get balls. The ones at present in use are on loan from Kuching, by courtesy of the Kuching club and an ex-Sibuite who kindly arranged for the loan. Naturally enough the balls lent are the ones least used in Kuching and consequently duds, nevertheless we are very pleased to have them. Apparently suitable balls are unobtainable in England, and the difficulty of getting local woods well seasoned has been our stumbling block to date.
Nevertheless we live in hopes. Perhaps if some progressive member of the Forestry Department reads this, he may be farseeing enough to plant the necessary timber for the use of our great grandchildren!
The old grass tennis court at Sibu has been dug up, and a concrete court laid in its place. This was done free of cost by Messrs. Gammon, Limited. The usual objections to a concrete court have been overcome to a great extent. Instead of the cracks occurring all over the court without rhyme or reason, their positions were predetermined by laying the concrete in rectangular blocks with the result that the cracks have all occurred along the joins of the blocks and are quite unnoticeable when playing.
While one regrets the passing of the old Club, could not have coped with the increased population of Sibu. The new Club is ideally adapted to present requirements and likely to be for years to come. The only objection that one hears is that ladies are excluded from two-thirds of the main building, and the whole of the bowling alley.
FACE.
The Tamil Cooly.
In Kuching we see him every day,-clinging precariously to the back of a P.W.D. lorry, spilling hot tar on the. street, sweeping a pathway or else just sitting on his hocks, jaws rhythmically moving, eyes fixed on the distance in a pensive and slightly melancholy stare. This, incidentally, is the attitude he usually effects when a benevolent Government confronts him with a patch of grass to trim or a ditch to weed. Perhaps-who knows?-his mind is wandering over the dusty plains of his beloved India, mediating on her past glories and present decay; more probably, however, it is concerned with the much more mundane question of how long the Mandor’s back will remain turned, for the Tamil cooly is as much a human being as any of us and enjoys a “spell” with the best.
To the average European who does not come into close contact with him the Tamil cooly remains an enigma Lean, of a poor physique, his black oil- smeared skin covered with an unsavoury assortment of rags, he certainly does not strike one as being a particularly promising subject. Yet he represents a civilisation that was on the wane before Mahajapahit was born a civilisation that glittered in gorgeous palaces when the Malays as a race had not yet emerged from the primeval jungle, a civilisation that reached its zenith when the Britons had only just left off painting their bodies with woad. And his customs present as interesting a study as those of any race in the East.
The average Tamil labourer that one sees here has escaped from a life of grinding poverty somewhere in the Madras Presidency. He is usually illiterate and quite probably belongs to the “Pariah”caste, which makes him an outcast in his own country, in sober truth less than the dust beneath the Brahmin’s chariot wheels. Actually the “Pariah” has no caste at all, yet even among Pariahs there are degrees of eminence； for instance, a man belonging to the lowest stratum of the “Sakalis” must only walk abroad at night and must ring a bell so that all Brahmins may hear of his approach and be warned in time. It must be a great relief to such a man to escape to the F. M. S. or Borneo where caste distinction hardly exist and where, to his astonishment, he is actually treated as a human being.
Though the Tamil is an orthodox Hindu by religion, he is bound down by a whole network of ancient superstitions and is more ghost-ridden than any Dyak. Ghosts and demons play an important part in his life, waking or sleeping; the air is filled with fiends who may appear at any moment and vent their malice upon him. For instance, it is by no means uncommon for a Tamil rubber-tapper to refuse to continue in a certain field because there is a ghost there who beats him.-the truth being that a small dead branch has fallen on him as he worked. Again, a Tamil lady once came to the writer and solemnly stated that a demon twenty feet high had leapt from the jungle and with horrid screams chased her round and round her lot, finally ending up by kicking her into a ditch where she lay trembling for two hours, not daring to move. No amount of reasoning or ridicule could shake the woman's faith in her unpleasant experience, and it was obvious that her belief was shared by the rest of the labour force. So much so, in fact, that Chinese had to be imported to work that particular section, since no Tamil could be induce to go near the spot.
The Tamil is a simple soul, his chief vice being an occasional over-indulgence in alcohol, and even this is usually confined to religious or semi-religious festivals at stated times of the year. Then the whole Hindu population congregates at the temple and holds high revelry.-the night is made hideous by the roar and rumble of tom-tom and the scream of wired instruments, and under blazing torches groups of garlanded figures execute a monotonous stamping dance, keeping it up literally until they drop. Their place is immediately taken by other enthusiasts, and so it goes on until the dawn. Various idols, wonderfully ornamented, are dragged from their shrines to watch the rites in their honour, and at intervals coolies requiring divine favours arrive bearing offerings of meat, fruit and money and prostrate themselves before their special deity. The priest-an acquisitive eye resting on the offering-splits a coconut and recite a prayer, and the applicant goes away confident that his request has received attention.
Successfully to deal with Tamils one must first learn to speak their language, by no means an easy one,--indeed, to the uninitiated it resemble； nothing so much as bath-water running down a waste-pipe. However, the European who has taken the trouble thoroughly to learn the language and who is respected by his labour force usually enjoys their confidence to an almost embarrassing degree. He is the one sure authority on every conceivable subject, and it is to him that all the troubles of the cooly-lines are brought. Debt cases, matrimonial differences, cases of assault and battery, all are brought to him for settlement, and most evenings see him holding an informal court under the porch of his bungalow. Patience, firmness, occasional-very occasional-applications of “rotan sauce” and a good leaven of wit, the more Rabelaisan the better—these are the essentials for ruling a contented labour force. The Tamil enjoys a joke and values justice and fair dealing; properly treated he is a good workman and a very decent fellow.
Kuching Isolation Camp.
On the 20th, together with several Chinese Members of the Municipal Board, we were shown over the new Isolation Camp by the Chief Health Officer, Dr. Gilbert Brooke.
The site at Padungan is an excellent one, the settlement being built on the slopes of a small well wooded hill amidst picturesque surroundings.
The buildings comprise two big wards to hold 15 or 20 persons apiece, one to hold about ]0, and two small wards to hold 2 each. Thera are also a Dresser’s quarters, Jagas’ quarters, Disinfector house, up-to-date latrines, incinerator and a garage.
Nc effort has been spared to make the camp attractive (an important item in such institution) and carefully selected trees, shrubs and flowers have been planted, whilst even seats have been placed in shady corners for the comfort of the in-mates.
The camp has been made, the Chief Health Officer informs us, entirely by permanent Departmental labour, and the cost defrayed by current expenditure. Where possible local materials have been used, and the result is a convenient, suitable and picturesque camp at a very small cost.
It is hardly polite to say that we hope the camp will be well patronized!! But should necessity arise, no person should have any mis feeling in having to live for a while in such a charming spot.
Sad Drowning Case in Kuching.
A distressing affair happened on the 23rd when a young Chinese bicyclist Chan Seo Seug, in attempting to pass a bullock cart on the old wooden bridge near the late Customs Offices, fell off the bridge machine and all, into the river and was drowned.
The bullock-cart driver drove on and none of the Chinese who saw the affair made any attempt at a rescue. About half an hour later an Indian named Makbul Khan, employed at the Government Monopolies Offices, attracted by the crowd, appeared on the scene and pluckily dived in. He managed to locate both the body and the bicycle.
This bridge is in a most dilapidated condition, and for some time has been unsafe for the amount of traffic it takes every day. The rails have disappeared and at one place part of the deck has partially blocked the passage.
A pathetic episode occurred a short while after the affair when deceased’s grandmother visited the spot and threw herself into the river, from which she was rescued with difficulty.
Deceased, who was only 18 years old, was the sole support of his mother and grandmother.
Sarawak and the Navy.
With the recent visit of H.M.S. Herald to the Kuching district, it is thought that readers of the Sarawak Gazette might be interested in a brief survey of the warships which have visited this district during the last sixty years.
The earlier visitation of warships are too well known to need any repetition here; accounts of their visits may be found in any history of Sarawak or in any Life of Sir James Brooke
My object, is to bring to light the numerous vessels, comparatively unknown, which have made calls here during the times of the late and present Rajahs.
This note does not profess to be absolutely accurate, and lack of adequate reference books makes comment on the earlier vessels rather difficult.
The list is divided into two parts, British and Foreign.
“Black and White” Football
Trophy 1929.
The first replay between the Police and Steamship Company, took place on the 30th July and
ended in another draw, no goals being scored, but in the next replay the Steamship Company made
no mistake about it. winning by four goals to nil.
in a team which twice held its own against the
superior combination of the Steamship Company,
and kept pegging at it when down a goal or two
in the last game, it is invidious to single out
individual players for praise but we cannot pass
on without commenting on the display given by
the Police goalkeeper. It was due in a great
measure to him that the team got through the
first two games and he had bad luck in being
beaten four times in the third one Their Captain Anis deserves praise for the way he handled
his team and all who saw these games remarked
on the difference in “tactics” from previous years.
The Police should persevere with the team they
have and improve their combination and they
will be a difficult nut to crack when the next
competition comes along
The Municipal and Treasury Rangers game was hardly up to the standard of the previous
matches. None the less the Municipal and Treasury deserve credit for the stand they put up
against the fast and skillful team the Rangers
had out, and one goal for them would not have
been out of running with the play. However, a
goal never came their way and they had to retire
with a score of 4-0 against them.
The first semi-final between the Medical and
Health and European Merchants resulted in a win
for the Medical and Health by one goal to nil The
shot which counted was a long dropping one from
the wing which the goalkeeper misjudged slightly
and allowed to glance off his hands into the net
(a question mark after the last word Mr. Printer
please). This game, although some good football
was played, was not so exciting as most of the
others, due probably to the slower movements of
the Merchants. Their forwards seldom got a chance of getting properly away and got no
support from the wing halves who were the
weak spots in a fairly good team, and were never
up to take a clearance when the forwards were
pressing. The Medical and Health were an improved combination and the bustling work done
by their right half had a lot to do with their victory. The spectators showed their appreciation of the good-natured way he took hefty thuds and gave them.
The other semi-final between the Rangers and
Steamship Company was a ding-dong game all
the way through. Right from the start the teams
went at it for all they were worth and both
keepers were tested various times. The Rangers,
by passing high, managed to get in touch with
their opponents goalkeeper oftener than the Steamship, whose ground passing nearly always got
trapped by an opponent, and the lusty kicking
of the Rangers defence soon cleared their lines.
The game continued to be evenly contested and
both keepers were kept on the go and it was not
until almost half time that Corporal Ismail slipped
past three of his opponents to score, what turned
out to be the only goal of the match, after he had
missed the ball on his first attempt to shoot.
Half-time was called, greatly to the relief of most
of the players on whom the strenuous nature of
the game was beginning to tell. The Rangers
attempt to break through direct from the kick off was easily frustrated but their defence, which had been strengthened by the addition of two of their forwards, held the opposing forwards well. The Steamship Company have themselves to blame for not being able to penetrate the Rangers defence, as time and again attempts were made to give their “star” forward the ball but he seldom got it. The wing men were laying absolutely unwatched and many times could at least have tested the keeper if the ball had came their way. The forwards cannot blame the defence for lack of support as they pulled their weight all the way and towards the end almost squared the match by weight and bustle. A draw would really have been a more appropriate result as, with the slightest bit of luck, one of the well taken corners in the last five minutes might have counted. All these kicks swerved into the goal, two of them had the misfortune to land on the bar and another was curling under it when the keeper got his fist on it and punted clear. This was a remarkably fine save as it was a difficult ball to judge and to get at. There are “might have beens” in every game of course and the fact that the Rangers did score a goal and a good one at that, entitled them to the win. It was a good, clean well-contested game and enjoyed by everyone who saw it.
A big crowd turned out to see the final, in which the Medical and Health team created a surprise by withstanding the onslaughts of the Rangers until the last hour’s play was finished-On starting the extra time it was evident that the Medical and Health were a bit winded and their brisker opponents had them hemmed in nearly all the time. Not many minutes elapsed before a pass went to Stephen Harry who was laying unmarked on the penalty line from where he sent the ball in. well out of reach of the goalkeeper. A second goal was scored by Ali in the last minute or two with an oblique shot which the goalkeeper missed. The M. and H team did well to run their more fancied opponents to a goalless draw after an hour’s play. It seems a pity that a team like this should practically have to be disbanded and its members scattered throughout the country, but the calls of the departments do not allow of the keeping of the team intact. This game produced many thrills, but the Rangers spoilt many chances by shooting from too far out. If the ground and ball had been wet that game would probably have paid them, but their efforts were futile against an energetic goalkeeper who knew enough to get down to ground shots and grip others. Both sides claimed a goal in the second half. Rangers in fact had the ball in the net but, unfortunately for them, the whistle had blown for an infringement and the goal was not allowed. A well-placed shot from the Medical right was the cause of the next claim, the ball partially slipped through the keeper’s hands but not enough to carry it over the line.
Well, the competition is over for another year. Congratulations to the winners, they are a good all round team and showed that they can play real football. Previous competitions have often been marred by rough play, but this one has been remarkably free from such incidents and it is hoped that players have at last learned that, besides being against the rules, rough play results in loosing matches and discrediting teams.
The improved football served up in this competition is due mainly to the better understanding of the rules of the game, but there are still one or two of the finer points in the rules that are difficult for players here to grasp. Captains of teams should explain these points to their players and we will be able to look forward to even better displays than were witnessed this year.
At the conclusion of the game His Highness the Rajah presented the trophy and medals to the winners and runners up.
Cricket in Kuching.
The revival of cricket in Kuching last year was no mere flash in the pan. Nearly every Sunday morning sees a game between the Kuching Football Club and the Nondescripts； and very enjoyable games, too.
The standard of achievement leaves something to be desired, perhaps, but that is a point of little moment. The wicket is not all it might be, but that cannot be helped either. After all, the game’s the thing, both for players and spectators.
It must be confessed, however, that the spectators are too few. It is true that one fairly regular attendant does his best, by his portly and dignified presence, to invest the proceedings with the stately aura of the ‘Varsity match at Lord’s, but he is almost alone. And yet the hours between 9 a.m. and noon on Sunday might be much worse spent than in watching the earnest efforts of our “flannelled fools.” It may be added that the bar is open between those hours.
Perhaps it is not generally realized that the present revival of the game in Kuching is due very largely to the generosity of His Highness the Tuan Muda, who very kindly’ presented all the implements used in the game. It is hoped that when next His Highness visits Sarawak he may himself participate in the pleasure he has rendered it possible for others to enjoy.
The following are the details of the last two games played:-
Played on 18th August, 1929
The Nondescripts batted first and began in good
style, Krian and Pereira hitting up 32 before the
former was caught. Phillip Soo Foo then helped
Pereira to carry the score to 95, at which total both batsmen left. The rest of the side only, added twenty, and the innings closed for 115.
Pereira’s inning of 50 was marred by only one mistake, when an easy catch offered to the bowler was dropped. Phillip Soo Foo played a vigorous and useful innings, but he was somewhat lucky in that several balls missed his wicket by but a hair’s breadth.
Little can be said of the innings of the Kuching
Football Club. De Silva dismissed Moir by bolding a very hot return for the best catch of the day. Of the rest, Baughan and Barraclough alone offered any opposition to the bowling and the side was out for 58. Carrol came out with the remarkable analysis of 4 wickets for 2 runs.
This was a series of disasters for the K.F.C. who were beaten by seven wickets by the Nondescripts, a superior side in every point
K. F. C. started badly, Bates being cut the first ball of the match, and the next two wickets added nothing to the score. Banghan and McLaine attempted to pull the side together, the former hitting out well for a gallant 31 whilst McLaine kept his end up for a useful 14. The rest helped little and the whole side was out for 59. The Nondescripts fielding was excellent.
The Nondescripts had no difficulty in passing their opponents score with 7 wickets in hand. K. F. C. fielding was poor.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
Hospital for Tropical Diseases.
OUR READERS.
We are taking the unusual course of writing in
our own correspondence columns.
There seems to be no rule against it such procedure, and our other columns do not seem to be appropriate.
Our object is to bring to the notice of our readers
the advantages to be gained by the knowledge that there is a hospital for tropical diseases at 25, Gordou Street, Eudsleigh Gardens, London, W.C.I.
It is realized that tropical diseases require highly
specialized treatment which cannot readily be
obtained elsewhere than at such a centre, at which
are available the skill of experts in this branch of medical science, the care of specially trained nurses, and the equipment necessary for the proper carrying out of the appropriate treatment.
Certain diseases peculiar to the cronies in their
incidence are not as yet amendable to treatment in a
tropical climate.
Within the limits of existing accommodation, treatment is afforded to all sufferers from a tropical disease.
The Hospital contains general wards, wards for officers and paying patients, rooms with two beds and private rooms with one bed only. Suitable accommodation is available for women and children.
It is thanks to voluntary subscriptions and donations that the hospital is enabled to provide the special tropical treatment at a moderate charge.
IN his letter the Resident Secretary will be glad to discuss the matter. Perhaps this is rather a mournful subject. -but we, in the tropics, cannot expect to evade all diseases common to these parts-and our readers may be interested to know a little about their highly organized and deserving institution.
Yours faithfully.
THE EDITOR.
The “Black and White” Cup.
The Editor t
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
DEAR SIR,
KUCHING,
20th August, 1929.
Will you kindly allow me a little space in your valuable columns to voice my opinion in the name of Fairplay, regarding the Football Competition that has been going on at present?
I have thoroughly read with great interest your report of the matches played during the last few weeks, and of course, I am more than satisfied and very pleased with the accounts of the play.
Everything would have run on smoothly, if it is not for the unfair decision, which has been creating an air of grievance and dissatisfaction among certain teams and also football fans in regard to the third round of the competition, which was carried out in a surprising manner. It leaves me to wonder why have the committee exerted their power, without being the least conscious or perhaps quite oblivious of a
strong criticism which they would be sure to meet. Usually in this particular round of a cup-tie, as practised in Football Associations at Home and in all parts of the world, another draw is absolutely necessary, so that there are equal chances for any teams meeting either a strong or a weak opponent. Instead, here the competition as run only this year is exceptional to the above rule observed everywhere, for I can vividly recollect last year’s competition had bad draw taken place in every round till the final, while none this time for the third round.
May you, Sir, enlighten me on this point why such a rule is adopted? The only explanation I gather from a rumour is that the committee have decided perhaps at the eleventh hour (don’t know on what motives) not to have another draw in the third round, and rather preferred the competition be run like a tennis tie. I certainly do not know whether this talk is true, but nevertheless, I shall be extremely pleased if one of the committee should step out and make known candidly to the public the reason for taking such a final decision of not having another draw in the said round of the cup-tie, which was only known at the last moment.
I fear I have encroached too much space already, so before concluding, let me thank you, Sir, for your kindness in publishing this letter, and at the same time I shall have much pleasure to hear from any of your interested readers who are ever ready to pass some comments on this matter, which I have written and appealed to you in the name of Fairplay.
Yours, etc..
WINNING KNICKERS.
A Reply to “Oneasnos.”
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Dear Mr. Editor.
KUCHING,
August,1929.
The letter contributed by Oneasnos in your past issue calls for some explanation and comment.
Most of the terms referred to by you correspondent are only used in speaking and, I may say, by the more illiterate class. In formal writing, almost every one of these terms has a respectable Chinese equivalent. Some of these terms are not so contemptuous as he seems to make out.
“Ang Mo” (Red Hair) is used to refer to Europeans to distinguish them from Asiatics who have black hair. Other familiar terms are “Pek Jin” meaning white people and “Europa Jin” meaning people of Europe.
“Ang Mo Kui” is a description of a red hair devil which I think is used in dairy tales and devil stories rather than applied to Europeans. The same terms in “Ang Mo Hu” and “Ang Mo Hui” are used adjectively to denote that the so-called fish and cement are made or imported from the people of that country. In Chinese, the adjectival and nominal forms are the same. Surely, these are no more contemptuous than your saying “Chinese Silk,” “Chinese Tea,” etc.
“Hoan Lang,” meaning foreigners or foreign people, is applied to all nationalities of people that are not Chinese, including Malays, Dyaks and Europeans, etc. The end word “Kia” merely means descendant, although, in other forms of usage, it may mean little. Hence, the name “Hoan Kia” means descendants of foreign people. The C.P.O. has the proper title in “Keng Chak Tiong.”
Obviously, your correspondent's knowledge of Chinese characters is too limited to understand all these forms and their various usage.
Furthermore, I hope that if our editor wishes to maintain the high standard of the Sarawak Gazette, he will not fail to co-operate with Incommodious’ suggestion and use the more agreeable form “Chinese” in future and, I am sure, Chinese will do their part to substitute alternatives for names that may seem disrespectable.
Excuse me. Mr. Editor, for intruding upon your valuable space.
Yours faithfully, 
A CHINESE.
Red Haired Devils.
The Editor,	
KUCHING,
Sarawak Gazette	
23rd August,1929.
DEAR SIR,
I agree with Oneasnos when he suggests that many Chinese might put their own houses in order before they reproach contributors to the Gazette discourtesy.
Why, I remember walking down my first outstation bazaar with my D.O. The little Chinese children ran along the five-foot-way chanting over and over again something in a strange language. I inquired what they said. “Oh, that’s nothing,” said the D.O. “They are only saying the red-headed devils are coming!” Proud fathers watched their offspring thus amusing themselves.
Only the other day 1 called my Chinese “boy” and told him to order me a hot bath. Away he went as far as the verandah rail and called out to the tukang ayer “Hai! the red headed-devil wants some hot water!”
Yours faithfully,
EQUIPONDERATE.
Pigtails.
The Editor,	
KUCHING,
Sarawak Gazette,	
24th August, 1929.
SIR,
May I beg the favour of a small space in your valuable paper in which to express my heartiest appreciation of the efforts of Commondious to banish once and for all that objectionable term “Chinaman.” But even more objection able is that disgusting term “pigtail” by which queues are known amongst Europeans. It is true that nowadays most of us are queue-less, but the term still stinks in our nostrils.
Thanking you for publishing this letter.
Yours faithfully,
ASTONISHED.
Incommodious. Oneasnos, Equiponderate, Astonished and A Chinese.
It is possible that there has been misunderstanding on both sides. We shall be only too pleased to see that “Chinese” is substituted for “China man” in all future issues of the Gazette.
At the same time it is to be hoped that Chinese will use the respectable terms in speaking as well as in writing.
Just one thing. In the letter signed by “A Chinese,” he says that “Hoan Lang” mean foreigner. The generally accepted translation of “Hoan Lang” is savage, aboriginee or barbarian-anyway, a word indicating the very lowest of the low. “Kia” might be translated better as children.
However, there has been quite enough said, and this correspondence must now cease.- [Ed. S.G.]
Salah Paham-Again we regret that it is impossible for us to publish your letter. Did you not see our remarks to you in the last issue? The management (or rather mismanagement which you allege) does not interest the majority of our readers. Such a club is a private institution, self-controlled and the business of nobody else except the members thereof. Why do you not use your undoubted command of language and simile to sway the rest of the members at the Club Meetings?
One thing, however, you must guard against-and that is even mild abuse in public statements. “…Some blinking highbrows would think…” is not polite, whilst it is rather crude to compare your fellow correspondent with “…a pugilist puffing up with self-confidence.-[Ed. S.G.]
By the way “a couple of fivers” is ten pounds sterling. Do you not mean ten dollars Straits?
Extracts from Monthly Reports.
First Division.
July, 1929.
The Resident, Mr. F. F. Boult, reports:-
At Sadong, Jong Hok, Jong Chai, Jong Chit and Chong Hin were all charged with the murder of Chee Quee Teug on the night of the 2nd June last. After a trial lasting three days the case was not proved and prisoner were discharged. They were, however, brought up again for fabricating false evidence, when three of them were sentenced to 10 years and one to 7 years’ imprisonment. The minutes of these two cases are now in the hands of the Judicial Commissioner.
I visited Sadong from the 3rd to the 7th, Bau from 19th to 22nd, and went out to Batu Kawa with the District Officer on Sunday the 28th.
The Board of Visitors inspected the General Hospital and Asylum on the morning of the 29th. and in the afternoon the Leper Camp. Owing to the inclemency of the weather they were prevented from visiting the Pauper Camp.
KUCHING.
July,1929.
The District Officer, Mr. J. B. Archer, reports:-
There have been the usual land disputes amongst Land Dyaks of Baru and Lanchang. The Chief and elders of the latter tribe have been warned about their conduct, but in view of the fact that the District Officer of Sadong had recently fined the Lanchangs $500 for a similar offence, no further fine was imposed.
An inquest was held on the 10th on the body of a Tamil who had been run over and killed by a motor lorry in Gambier Road. The verdict was death by accidental causes.
From the 13th to 16th inclusive I was partly employed in superintending the examinations for Government Officers.
The only case which calls for special mention is one in which a driver and a passenger of a motor bus were fined $100 each for knocking down a little crippled boy with their vehicle and neglecting to stop.
LAND OFFICE.
July,1929.
The Superintendent of Lands, Mr. C. S. Griffiths, reports:-
I was absent from Kuching from 30th June until 26th July. Mr. N. E. Hughes returned to Kuching from the Second Division on 5th July and took charge of affairs here during my absence.
Mr. T. M. Griffiths was employed all the month in investigating the lands within the Land Reserves on each side of the Simanggang Road. He has nearly completed this work to the 15th mile.
UPPER SARAWAK.
June,1929.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. G. J. D. Walters, reports:-
During the month many Dyaks were down paying tax. The Pengarah and other Dyaks of Sennah made several complaints about the behaviour of their Orang Kaya, and accused him of demanding and taking bribes in settling cases. They were informed that I would be visiting Sennah shortly and would then go into all their complaints.
The Bidi Gold Mining Kongsi have continued to do well, and obtained 138.17 oz. of pure gold during the month.
The Upper Sarawak Gold Mining Syndicate are also making steady progress and during the month obtained 22.4 oz. of pure gold.
July,1929.
On the 3rd, I left Lunda with Dr. A. D. Hutchison to return to Bau overland. We arrived back on the evening of the 4th, Dr. Hutchison returning to Kuching the following day.
On my return from Lundu, it was reported that the body of a Dyak woman had been found in a very decomposed state, in an isolated house on a rubber garden.
The body had first been discovered by her husband who had the same day been released from jail, after serving a term of imprisonment. In my absence, the body had been inspected by the Native Officer, Police and Dresser, who reported the details of the case to me. A Coroner’s inquiry was held on the 16th and a verdict of death due to natural causes consequent upon diseased state of deceased, was returned.
A preliminary inquiry was held into a case in which a Chinese was charged with rape. After a long hearing the District Court considered that there was insufficient evidence against the accused to warrant the case being brought before the Resident’s Court for trial.
Musan was appointed Tua Kampong of Singghi vice Boon Pedoyan (deceased).
The contract for maintenance of the Upper Sarawak roads was tendered for. Fourteen tenders were received and the matter was still under consideration at the end of the month.
The Resident, accompanied by Mrs. Boult, visited the Station for the week-end from the 19th to the 22nd.
LUNDU.
June,1929.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. G. J. D. Walters, reports :-
I visited the station on the 26th and was accompanied by Dr. A. D. Hutchison, Assistant Medical Officer. Various matters were attended to and all outstanding cases dealt with.
It was arranged to have the Siling road made up as far as the Dyak village, the kampong people agreeing to do the work.
The two professional crocodile catchers, Amin and Drahman, again visited the district for a few days and during their stay caught forty-nine crocodiles, their total length measuring 236 feet 9 inches.
SADONG.
July, 1929.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports:-
In the Resident's Court four Chinese were sentenced to ten years’ imprisonment and another to seven years in connection with the murder of Chee Quee Teng.
On the 27th the Coroner viewed the body of Sitam bin Lias, aged about four years, who died suddenly during an attack of fever.
On the 8th a Javanese named Haji Resat inspected the proposed Javanese padi planting settlement at Tanjong Bluku. He expressed satisfaction with what he saw.
A report of the murder of a Chinaman, by name Fong Ng, was received on the 30th. The deceased had had his head cut off, and the head was not found. It is very doubtful whether this was done by Dyaks as the head had apparently been hacked off by someone not used to a parang. Two Chinese were arrested on suspicion on the following day and careful inquiries are being made.
The Divisional Engineer reports:-
Buildings in Progress.-Nine shophouses should be completed by middle of August. New Market is progressing satisfactorily. Seven brick shophouses are proceeding under private enterprise. Police barracks foundation completed ; columns and roof members erected. Filling of site in hand. New Government Store completed and handed over for occupation.
The Divisional Land Officer reports :-
Sibu Town.--The issue of new titles to shop lots and the payments and receipts of excess area fees neared completion by the end of the month and the work of demolishing the remaining temporary wooden houses was taken up seriously. There are, undoubtedly, far too many shops and hawkers on the island, and the present demolition campaign will cause the evacuation of a number of new traders, and so afford some measure of protection to the older generation.
Burning Cleared Land.-In order to try and avoid a repetition of the devastating effect of fires on existing gardens during 1927 and 1928, a circular was distributed throughout the various areas warning gardeners that they must obtain permission from the Land Office to burn, and that all headman of areas and neighbours concerned must be duly warned. This circular, it is thought, has bad the effect of rendering burners more cautious than they have hitherto been in the matter of burning, and up to date only one case of damage has come to light.
The Officer-in-Charge, Sarikei and Binatang, reports:-
On the 5th the Resident, Third Division, Divisional Engineer and Land Officer, visited Sarikei in order to choose a site for the two Government Bungalows, at the same time they also inspected the site for the new Chinese School. The site chosen for the two bungalows is on the Nyelong side on the Repok road, just past Mr. Hoover’s hill.
LOWER. REJANG.
July, 1929.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Lower Rejang, reports:-
Numerous thefts have recently been perpetrated at Selalang owing to heavy gambling, chiefly amongst Malays employed by the Company. Notices have been posted at Selalang warning these people that, those caught gambling will be severely dealt with.
MUKAH AND OYA.
July,1929.
The District Officer, Mukah and Oya, reports:-
During the night of the 21st sailors from H. H. M. Y. Maimuna reported that she had lost her propeller off Penipah. The next morning His Highness, accompanied by Mrs. Gillan and Mr. Rennie, came ashore in the m.l. Leonora The s.s. Margaret arrived from Kuching and towed the Maimuna into Mukah on the morning of the 23rd. His Highness continued his journey to Bintulu and Miri on the 24th in the Margaret.
What appears to have been severe type of gastric influenza broke out amongst the prisoners, six of whom died, also one policeman. On the advice of the Divisional Medical Officer the prisoner were isolated in so far as this is possible and fortunately the disease did not spread beyond the jail.
I visited Balingian from 25th to 30th and found the station in good order. I inspected the drilling operations by the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, at Tubu and, from what I gather, there are no immediate prospects of oil being found in that district. A survey party is working further inland on the Mukah-Balingian boundary.
Trade.-Remains stagnant. Even the rise in price of jelutong does not appear to be reflected in the local price for this commodity. The monthly returns were： —
KAPIT.
July, 1929.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Kapit, reports:-
The situation at Belaga is desperate. Trade is at a standstill. I hope, however, that some progress will be made following my visit. The traders have signed a petition asking for the veto on summoning Kayans, etc., to be cancelled. I am holding this up until I get orders. My own opinion is that in view of the fact that no such veto exists in any other Division and that traders would be forced to prove that Kayans, etc., owed them the money by the pass book system before the Court took action, I can see no reason for the continuance of the order, which only came into force after 1926. It cannot honestly be stated that the people of Belaga are less mentally capable that the inhabitants of the Baram, Limbang and Trusan, in fact 1 consider that they are more capable of looking after themselves than, for example, Muruts.
Fourth Division.
July, 1929.
The Resident, Mr. H. D. Aplin. reports:-
The principal event of the month was the visit of His Highness the Rajah to this Division.
I proceeded to Bintulu by La Follette, accompanied by Mr. and Mrs. Griffiths, to await His Highness’ arrival oo the 15th.
Datu Haji Mohedin arrived an 16th to take up his appointment as Senior Native Officers, Bintulu, vice Datu Haji Abdullah, who is retiring on pension.
Abang Naga has also retired on pension at the end of last month.
His Highness arrived at Bintulu on 24th, accompanied by Mr. A. A. Rennie and Mr. and Mrs. Gillan, in s.s. Margaret and was received officially.
Very few Dyaks were present as they were busy on their farms, but His Highness met all who were in the Court next day.
His Highness visited the bazaar and inspected the Chinese School and also Akbar Khan’s sawmill and Mr. Avery’s jelutong factory.
On the 26th His Highness proceeded to Miri in s.s. Auby, doing the trip in record time, 9.75 hours.
The s.s. Margaret, on which Mr. Rennie, Mr. and Mrs. Gillan and myself travelled, arriving one hour after, although we started 0.75 hour before.
His Highness made an official landing the following morning and inspected the Guard of Honour of Sarawak Rangers and Police under the command of Mr. D. V. Murphy.
The Honourable Mr. T. G. Cochrane then took His Highness for a trip round the Oilfields, accompanied by Dr. Schider.
The following day was spent; discussing various matters and inspecting the different Public Works.
During His Highness’ visit the Chinese Towkays organized a lantern procession. His Highness was received in the Chinese School by the principal Towkays, where an address of welcome was read. His Highness then drove through the bazaar and kampong, which were illuminated and returned to the “Kubu” to watch the lantern procession pass.
On the 29th His Highness, Mr. Rennie and myself, proceeded to Baram. The trip was made by car along the beach to Kuala Baram, accompanied by the Honourable Mr. T. G. Cochrane, who came up river with us as far as the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, location at Assam Paya (Rasan No. 2) Baram was reached early that afternoon.
The next day His Highness interviewed all the upriver chiefs and held a Kayan “main” in the Fort at night.
Unfortunately Tama Wan Bayer was “pantang” over a new house and was not present.
His Highness returned to Miri on the 31st by La Foliette to Kuala Baram and into Miri by car, stopping for a short while to be shown over the refinery by the Manager, Mr. Chulow.
On arrival at Miri His Highness at once proceeded on board the s.s. Auby, accompanied by Dr. Hutchison and Mr. and Mrs. Gillian, to return to Kuching.
His Excellency the Governor of British North Borneo arrived on board H. M. S. Herald en route for Kuching and spent a few days at Miri.
BARAM.
June, 1929.
The Officer-in-charge, Mr. L. K. Morse, reports :-
A great number of Kayans, Kenyahs and Kelabits were down during the month, as His Highness the Rajah was expected.
The Acting District Officer, Baram, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports :-
General.--His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by the Resident, Fourth Division, and the Treasurer of Sarawak, visited the Station on 29th. On 30th His Highness met all the Penghulus and spoke to them about the new Slavery Order. The towkays were algo interviewed and the shipping problem was gone into. His Highness was pleased to appoint Oyong Jok to be Penghulu in place of Abun Wan who was dismissed for trading with Punans. In the evening “main” took place in the fort. The following morning His Highness, accompanied by the Resident and Treasurer, left for Miri. The following Penghulus were present to meet His Highness:-
Penghulus Tingan Malang, Tingan Saong, Rhu, Apai Uban and Aban Tingang and Tama Kulih Arang.
BINTULU.
June, 1929.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports:-
A slight rise has taken place in regard to jelutong, the highest price being $9.25 and lowest $8.50, and of this commodity 1,887.86 piculs were exported. 384,800 pieces bilian attaps and 160 piculs of raw sago were also exported during the month.
Below are the value of exports and imports, local and foreign, for the month.
Rainfall.-Rainfall for the month was 8’43 inches.
July,1929.
The Resident came to meet His Highness the Rajah who was expected here on the 18th. His Highness had, however, to deviate to Sibu with the result that his arrival was postponed until 21st. On that day, however, news was received that H.H.M.Y. Maimuna had lost her propeller between Mukah and Balingian and that His Highness had proceeded to Mukah.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by the Treasurer, Mr. A.A. Rennie, Mr. K. H. Gillan and Mrs. Gillan, eventually arrived by s.l Margaret on Wednesday 24th. His Highness and party landed the same evening. His Highness interviewed everyone who wished to see him in the Court House next morning, and sailed for Miri on s.s. Auby on Friday 26th. His Highness’ party and the Resident sailed the same time for Miri in s.l. Margaret.
The price of jelutong hag again gone up to $9.50 per picul. Of this commodity 1,466.47 piculs were exported. 176,550 pieces billian attaps and 25.70 piculs of raw sago were also exported during the month.
Below are the value of exports and imports, local and foreign, for the month.
Rainfall. -Rainfall for the month was 3’28 inches.
Fifth Division.
LIMBANG.
July, 1929.
The Resident, Mr. F. H. Kortright. reports:-
At 3 a.m. on the 3rd instant a fire broke out at the Vamco Sawmill at Tagai and completely destroyed the whole buildings. Fortunately the machinery was not very much damage and by the end of the month the mill was again working at full pressure. The office safe, containing several thousand dollars in notes was saved just in time to preserver the contents.
In readiness for the Chinese settlers who have come to open up pepper gardens a kongsi house to accommodate twenty persons was built and the land on the west side of the Panderuan road between the 7th and 8th mile alienated for their use.
A pepper seed nursery was prepared, under the direction of Mr. William Wong, in readiness for some specially selected seeds which are been sent by the Director of Agriculture.
Trade and shipping returns show as follows:-
LAWAS.
July, 1929.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. L. Danbeny, reports:-
The substations were visited from 23rd to 28th, when various outstanding matters were settled.
The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Limited, exported 812 lbs. of dry rubber to Labuan during the month.
Rainfall.-The following rainfall was recorded:-












