The Sarawak Gazette
FRIDAY. FEBRUARY 1st. 1935.
Birth.
Rbed.—On 1st January, 1936. at London, to Penelope, wife
of Dr. J. G. Reed, a daughter.
1934.
Thirteen months ago we were able to say that the depression appeared at last to be coming to an end, and that a fair measure of prosperity was again in sight. We were accused by some of our readers of an undue optimism, but the past year has fully justified our prophecies. Some, if not all, of the prosperity formerly enjoyed by Sarawak has returned; how
long it will remain with uh, no one can tell, in view i of present unsettled world conditions, but at all events we can now (ace with greater confidence whatever the future may bring. The financial position of the State has been considerably i strengthened during 193-1, and the lessons of the slump have been taken to heart. For the first time since 1929 it is possible to review the old year with real satisfaction, and to look forward to the coming year with hope and assurance.
1934 was in many ways an eventful year for Sarawak. The improvement in trade which we were able to note during 1933 continued steadily, and the benefits that followed in its train were everywhere apparent. Rubber, which towards the end of 1933 began to rise in price as a result of rumours of restriction, rose still further when restriction was actually brought into force, and has since maintained a profitable level. Since Sarawak
is essentially a country of small producers, the bene-
fit of any rise in the price of rubber is distributed
over a large proportion of the population, and is not
confined only to a few European-owned estates.
The consequent effect on the general prosperity of
the people therefore becomes noticeable at once.
This is what occurred during the later part of 1934;
, trade in the outstation bazaars grew brisk, and the
I increased purchasing-power of the people was re-
flected in a considerable increase in imports. In the
Third Division, of which Sibu is the centre of an
' important robber-producing area, the exports in-
I creased in value by 116 per cent, and imports by
66 per cent.
It would be a great mistake, however, to assume
that the State’s recovery is entirely due to rubber
restriction. While this, no doubt, has played an
i important part, the increase in prices of other com-
modities, notably pepper, has also contributed
greatly to the general improvement. Pepper, which
fast year we reported to he "in the doldrums,”
experienced a minor boom during the year, the price
I of white pepper touching $66 a picul, as against
$32 in 1933. Sago, too, maintained a reasonable
price, and showed a slight increase over 1933 levels.
This product, which comes second only to rubber in
the list of our agricultural exports, is the staple
industry of the coast, and although there was a slight
decrease in exports, the prevailing prices enabled
both producers and manufacturers to show a profit,
which, if small, was at least steady.

Exports of, gold, shewed an increase of nearly 12,000. ounces Over the 1933 figure, the total exports being 29,380'omices valued at $1,668,441. The value of this indiistrv to' Sarawak has been considerable, for during the last two years of the slump it was the , gold-mihes of Upper Sarawak which absorbed the labour released from the rubber estates, and which therefore saved us from having to face the problem of unemployment. How long the mines will continue to be’ profitably worked remains to be seen, | but it is certain that the re-discovery of gold-bearing I ores in the Bau and Bidi districts could not have come at a more timely moment.
Jungle-produce, unfortunately, showed little improvement, the position remaining almost the same as for 1933. But in the timber trade the progress made during 1932 and 1933 was consolidated, direct shipments to Europe remaining at a steady—and satisfactory—level. The end of the year saw the establishment of two saw-mills under Euro|ieaii management, one at Bintulu and one in the. Hejang. A new feature of the timber trade , was Ilie shipment to Singapore during the last few j months of 1931 of 25.000 cubic feet of unsawn logs. | This is a branch of the trade in which development i .may be exjiected in the near future, provided that ’ shipping difficulties can be overcome.
’ To turn to administrative matters, the twenty- fourth triennial assembly of the General Council was held in Kuching on April ‘21st. His Highness 'the Rajah's speech on this occasion has already ' been published elsewhere.
' The peace of the country was marred only by •one or two sporadic outbreaks of head-hunting I amongst the Dayaks. The anthers of these ' cowardly outrages at once took refuge with the few ’outlaws remaining at large, and had not been brought to book at the end of the year. In ’October, a deputation of Dayak chiefs approached His Highness the Rajah with the request that these men. if apprehended, should bo punished ' with a fine only, and made to hand over pledges as security for their future good behaviour. They suggested that if a "peace-making" were to be held
, with these conditions in view, most of the outlaws , 1 would surrender. Bis Highness, however, refused absolutely to consider these suggestions, and informed the assembled chiefs that he would have no dealings of any sort with common murderers, whom he was determined to hunt down and punish । . at all costs. His Highness further pointed out ‘ that in almost every case these crimes had been
. committed in cold blood, and not in pursuance of 1 any long-standing feud; there were therefore no circumstances which could mitigate the guilt of the | perpetrators.
Shortly after His Highness the Rajah’s speech, . a ring of blockhouses was erected round the I Katibas-Ngemah area, which had become a sort of | "alsatia" for the outlaws. These blockhouses were ' manned by Second Division levies with a stiffening i of regular police; in addition to this, large rewards were offered for the apprehension ci the murderers, ■ and there is little doubt that their capture will soon . he effected.
. Legislation enacted during the year included the Rubber Restriction Order, and the Fishing Conser- 1 vancy and Immigration Orders. The last-named consolidated all existing Orders and Regulations .governing immigration, and was based on the • practical experience of the past five years. In ! passing, it may safely he said that Sarawak's remarkable freedom from the political disturbances sometimes experienced in other Eastern territories । is in a large measure due to Government's vigilant , control of immigration, and in particular to the I "guarantee" system, which has proved itself an j unqualified success.
Another important event was the enactment of the Sarawak Penal Code to take the place of the Indian Penal Code, upon which the Criminal' Law of the country had previously been based.
Notable retirements during the year were tlrose of Mr. C. F. C. Macaskie, Government Secretary, who returned to Sandakan on November 10th on the termination of his period of secondment from the British North Borneo Government; Mr. A. A. Rennie, Treasurer of Sarawak, who retired on 21st April, 1934, and who on August 1st took over the duties of Government Agent, London, from Mr. F. F. Boult; Mr. D. E. Calver, Conservator of Forests; and Mr. H. D. Aplin, an Officer of Class IA of the Civil Service, who retired on pension after more than 25 years' service, the last six years of which had been spent as Resident, Fourth Division.	.
Promotions in the Government Service included those of Mr. .1. B. Archer, Resident. Fourth Division, to Class IA, and Mr. W. F. Dick, Resident, First, Division, to Class IB; On 21st April, 1934, Mr. E. Purnell was gazetted Treasurer of Sarawak.
On July 9th a deputation consisting of all the Kuching Datus met s.s. Darvel at Pending and presented wedding presents from His Highness the Rajah to His Highness the Sultan of Brunei.
During the year we had to mourn the deaths of Mr. Charles Willes Johnson and the Right Rev. Monseigneur Dunn. Mr. Willes Johnson, who died suddenly in England on 18th September, had for many years been actively associated with Sarawak. A relation of His Highness the Rajah, he gave up his partnership in the legal firm of Torr & Co. to become Government Agent in London in 1912, continuing to hold that appointment until his retirement on pension in 1929.
Monseigneur Dunn, who was a familiar figure to several generations of Sarawak officers, died at sea while on his way home on furlough. He was a real pioneer missionary, who spent the first years of his apostolate working under conditions which we who now live in Sarawak find it difficult to visualize. He arrived in Kuching as long ago as 1882, and had therefore spent nearly 52 years in the country. He chanced to be in Europe on the outbreak of war in 1914. and immediately went to the front as a military chaplain, at the age of fifty-seven I In him Sarawak lost a loyal and devoted friend, and the Roman Catholic Mission a great leader.
His Highness the Rajah administered the State until June 18tb. when be left for Europe. Between January and June His Highness visited niuner- uos outstations throughout all four Divisions.
His Highness the Tuan Muda arrived in Sarawak on J une 12th, accompanied by Mr. A. W. D. Brooke, who was appointed a cadet in the Civil Service on 1st June. After making an extensive tour of the outstations. Mr. Brooke left for Singapore on August 8th. having been seconded for duty with the Malayan Civil Service.
His Highness the Rajah returned to Sarawak on October 1st, accompanied by Her Highness the Ranee, Da-yang Elizabeth, and Davang Valerie, and resumed the administration of the State on that date.
On May 30th news was received that a son had been bom to the Earl and Countess of Inchcape. A public holiday was declared to celebrate the occasion, and all communities joined in congratulating Dayang Leonora and her husband on their good fortune.
Among the visitors welcomed during the year were M. P. A. Ballereau. French Consul-General. Singapore. and Lady Louis Mountbatten, who arrived in Kuching in August. We were also glnd to welcome H.M.8. Acquarius and two R.A.F. flying boats, which made a tour of Sarawak during the same month.In conclusion, we may sum up 1934 as a year of recovery and progress. Let us all hope that 1935 will prove as satisfactory.

January.
On three consecutive Tuesdays, 15th, 22nd ; and 29th January, Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee entertained at Astana over 1 seven hundred Malay children, who were 1 representative of every Kampong in the I Kuching district. The bright colours of the | sarongs presented a gay spectacle in the Astana grounds, where the Kuching Military Band rendered a lively programme of music. On each occasion, after refreshments had been served, Her Highness the Ranee very kindly I presented toys to her young guests. The ' exclamations of delight and children’s happy I faces as they streamed down the Astana paths, hugging their presents, was more than ample proof of their gratitude and appreciation.	,
Kuching was honoured by visits from two of the services during the month.
On the 15th two R.A.F. Flying Boats under the command of Wing-Commander Scott landed at Pending. They were received by Air Commodore S. W. Smith, who had arrived here the previous day by s.S. Darrel. A number of short flights were carried out in the vicinity of Kuching, the Flying Boats returning to Singapore, one on 18th. and one on 19th. The following telegram was received by His Highness the Rajah from Flying Boat S. 1161) on the 19th '
“All on board wish to thank you the Ranee and family and all our friends at Kuching for the marvellous time we all had during our visit clouds too low to wave you all farewell weather now perfect Sarawak almost out of sight but not out of mind.”
On 18th H. M. S. Bridgewater, a sloop of 1,015 tons, Commander J. S. M. Mackenzic- Grieve, arrived on her way to South Africa via. Singapore. A number of Officers were the guests of Kuching residents. All ratings who could be allowed ashore were the guests of Government, and after an early supper at the Rest House attended a performance at the Sylvia Cinema. We include elsewhere in our columns an account of the football match which took place on the 19th between H.M.S. Bridgewater and a local team, resulting in a win for the home side.
On the 20th, by kind invitation of the Commander, a reception was held on board, after which H.M.S. Bridgewater left for Singapore. The following telegram was received the same day from H.M.S. Bridgewater :—
“Will you please convey to the Rajah Ranee and residents of Kuching the warmest thanks of the Captain Officers and Ships Company for the hospitality which has lieen so much enjoyed by all our only regret is that our visit, has been so short good-bye and good hick.”
A most enjoyable dance was given at Astana on Friday, 18th January, in honour of the visit of H.M.S. Bridgewater.
Among visitors to Kuching during the month were Mrs. M. Pretty, who was the Siest of Their Highnesses the Rajah and anee, at Astana, and Air Commodore S. W. Smith and Mrs. Smith, who were the guests of the Resident, Mr. W. F. Dick, and Mrs. Dick, at the Residency.
We welcome back to Kuching Mr. T. A: Reid, accompanied by Mrs, Reid, who arrived by t.s.s. Vyner Brooke on the 21st January, Mr. Reid is rejoining the Public Works Department.
Mr. F. Harding, accompanied by Mrs. Harding, returned from home leave by M.v. Marudu on the 17th January,
We are informed that, by kind permission of His Highness the Rajah, the Spring Meeting of the Sarawak Turf Club will take place on the 27th and 29t.h April, 1935 We publish elsewhere in our columns a Provisional Programme, rules and new classifications.
More “Higher Education.”
Tlie letter "Higher Education” quoted in our December issue is capped by the following Japanese circular addressed to foreign motorists and published in the Daily Express recently.
"When a passenger of the foot hove in sight, tootle the horn-trumpet to him melodiously at first.
If be still obstacles your passage, tootle him with vigour and express by word of mouth the warning,
Beware of the wandering horse that he shall not take fright as you pass him. Do not explode the exhaust box at him. Go soothingly by, or stop by the road-side till he pass away.
(rive big space to the festive dog that make sport in the road-way. Avoid entanglement of dog with your wheel-spokes.
Go soothingly on the grease-mud, as there lurk the. skid demon. Press the brake of the foot as you roll round corners to save the collapse and tie-up.”

Marriage by the Glove
Not until 1 reached Java did 1 realize what
‘‘marriage by the glove" meant, although I have
knocked about in many odd corners of the world.
At the time it struck me as comical.
"Marriage by the glove" is, however, necessary
in a place like Java, for the simple reason that
many of the eligible young white men come out
from Holland directly they have finished their
education in a public school or otherwise. That
th?y do not marry before is due to the fact that
they then have their careers before them; they
accept posts in the Colonial service or take up the
role of planter, intending to marry when their
positions are assured.
The Obliging Friend.
Unfortunately in the Dutch Indies there are few
white women and since the white men have neither
the time nor the inclination to go back to Holland
for wives, many a would-be husband simply writes
to a friend or relative in the home country, saying
that he wants a wife and setting out various details
for the friend's guidance. Afterwards he goes back
to his work, content to leave matters in the other's
hands.
The friend or relative in Holland then sets out
to find a suitable wife, young and willing, and, if
possible, with a substantial "dot.” at the same
time bearing in mind all the points raised by the
would-be husband. A photograph of the favoured
one is then enclosed in a letter and, after a lapse of
several months, a soiled left-hand glove, with a
power of attorney, is received from the far-away
bachelor.
The friend in Holland now finds himself in the
role of bridegroom in place of hie friend. He it is
who marries the selected bride in precisely the
same way as if he were the actual groom, and the
young wife then departs in the next India mail
steamer to bring happiness to the lonely one in the
Far East.
Mostly Happy.
According to Dutch law, a marriage of this des-
cription is regarded as legally binding as if the
bridegroom were present, and is seldom, if ever,
repudiated. If either party to the glove marriage
should die before meeting in India, the Dutch law
lays down that the survivor shall share the property
of the deceased in accordance with the laws of that
country.
Curious as it may sound, marriages by proxy
seldom turn out a failure. Providing the wife can
bear the new climate well—and, as a rule, she is
medically advised as to this beforehand—both she
and her husband may look forward to enjoying
longevity comparable with our own.
Some of the white planters in Java avow that
this is the ideal way to choose a wife, because both
parties have everything in common.—(Sunday
Mercury.)

Weekly Fairs in Kedah.
By
I H.H. Tunku Yacob bin Sultan Abdul Hamid,
Assistant Principal Agricultural Officer, Kedah.
It is only logical that in any country the
I indigenous population should have some interest in
i the business which goes on in it; yet in Malaya an
l outsider on his first arrival would be greatly struck
I by the peculiar conditions which he meets. Almost
all branches of business in the towns, from the
management of the firms down to the insignificant
I odd jobs, are in the hands of people not of Malay
। blood. In short, there are indeed very few local
। business undertakings in which the Malays have
any share.
The Malays and Commercial. Development.
The process of dispersion of Malays from the
settlement begins when it is still a village. As
soon as a village attains sufficient importance to
• attract people of other races to start business, the
Malays, instead of assisting in the work of better-
i ment and uplift of local conditions, withdraw to
, quieter places where they can settle. In doing so
they have often to start afresh by reclaiming or
bringing under cultivation new areas of swamp or
jungle.
It would be reasonable to suppose that the Malays
would have been the first to profit by the rise of a
village and the increased value of the land which
they owned, and to have taken advantage of the
situation by building a shop, or two, on their land
and setting up their own business. The reason
why they do not do this is obvious; they have no
business training and cannot hope to compete with
the new-comers, many of whom already possess
j commercial experience.
Many of these immigrants have business con-
nexions elsewhere in Malaya as well as in their own
1 countries, so that they arc better able to arrange for
I the importation of foreign articles which are in
local demand. Further, many of these people have
experienced hardship and poverty in their own
countries and have been trained to run their
business along economical and profitable lines.
In their gradual retreat from the towns the
Malays have brought under cultivation more and
more areas of jungle and swamp. They have
planted fruit and other useful trees in the’former
and wet-rice in the latter. On their return to the
land they can find sufficient means to support
themselves and their families; it is only when they
have surplus quantities of produce that they find
j themselves faced with a problem.
It is erident that home industries are threatened
with total extinction unless means can be found to
I stimulate production. At one time even the clothes
I which a Malay wore and several other articles
which he carried about with him were manu-
factured locally. To-day many of the former home-
made goods are not to be found, or are difficult to
obtain.
As in many other countries, it would be almost
। a practical impossibility to try and revive home
industries on a commercial scale against such heavy
I odds as the Malays are now facing in the shape of
I cheap machine-made articles.

With limited markets and in isolated units, |
Maloy commercial enterprise is liable to fall. an
easy prey to other business bodies. In addition,
the Malave have a curious desultory and spasmodic
habit of conducting their businesses compared with
the more tenacious and laborious methods of
immigrant races. They may also change from one
business to another, when they observe, or even
imagine, that there is appreciably more profit Io be
gained by the latter and they seldom if ever stop
to think of the consequences of over-production. ।
An example of this was found at one fair, when on
one occasion fourteen animals were killed for sale,
where the average demand was six animals per
week.
There is still a great deal to be done to avoid
undue local competition and uneven distribution of
produce, as the law of supply and demand is not
properly understood by the people. At the same
time, it would be against all the principles of tl o
present movement to discourage local production
where it is possible to arrange for supplies to be
distributed evenly over a wider field.
Tub Work of thr Weekly Fairs Committee।
The marketing of surplus production is one of
the problems wliich is engaging the attention of
the Weekly Fairs Committee appointed in 1932.
This is a small official committee wliose duties are
to organize, manage and supervise weekly fairs
throughout the State of Kedah.
Weekly fairs were started about ten yearn ago
but, mainly through lack of organization, they
enjoyed no long success. The three fairs which
survived were taken over by the Committee many
old fairs were revived and now ones opened. All
are conducted on a uniform system.
Although the power vested in the Committee is
as stated above, it is chiefly concerned with general
organization and management. It fixes rules and
regulations in regard to locality and sites, days on
which fairs are to be held, conditions of sale,
slaughter of animals for meat, designs of the
buildings, charges for stalls, the allotment of the
reserve funds, auditing of accounts kept at each
centre, and the organization of animal shows and
the weekly fair at Alor Star.
ORGANIZATION OF THE FAIR.
The cost of the building of each of tho fairs in Kedah, except tho main central fair at Alor Star, is financed by one or more persons who reside in the locality in which the fair is situated. If the construction is undertaken by one man he is free to run the fair in any way he prefers as regards the funds alloted to him, but he is still bound by the rules which apply to weekly collections from persons using the fair.
The sites generally approved for the fairs arc accessible by road, river, or by sew. Where possible, Government land is selected, but often in important localities. Government land is unobtainable, so that privately-owned land is rented on agreement for as long a term of years as possible.
Sometimes the fairs are located in the interior mukims approachable only by footpaths. In these coses, the sites chosen arc the first points touched by tho peasants on reaching a main road, or cross- i roads, for if the peasants have to pass a way side j shop, or shops, before reaching a fair, the articles ! they bring may be sold en route.
Near a big town the site chosen is often between
the village with the biggest agricultural population
and the town. This is essential to prevent the
peasants from being intercepted by tradesmen and
the produce sold at a smaller price than would have
been obtained at the fair.
The days on which the fairs are to be held are
fixed by the Committee and are arranged so that
any two fairs taking place ou the same day are far
enough apart to avoid clashing. The shortest dis-
tance apart at which two fairs could be economically
held on the same days is 10 to 12 miles.
Au interval of two or more days is considered
necessary (or the holding of two closely connected
fairs in order to give time to the sellers to collect
materials for each.
It has been found necessary to regulate the sale
of produce in the fairs in order to eliminate unduo
competition. This may appear to bo an unpro-
gressive course. At the present stage of development
the whole organisation depends for its success on a
certain amount of protection. The Malays, as has
already been shewn, are still in the transition stage
of business training and any discouragement due to
unregulated competition would completely upset the
objects of the scheme which the Committee has set
itself to work out.
Among the articles for sale at most fairs are rice,
cakes, ghee, wild honey, fruits and vegetables in
season, agricultural implements, domestic goods and
Wild animals. There are about fifteen different
articles of which the Malays have an absolute mono-
poly of sale at the fairs.
Owing to the excessive number of animals
slaughtered and the consequent lowering of prices
of meat, it has been found necessary to regulate the
number of animals Io he slaughtered at each fair.
In this connexion the Committee has laid down
regulations regarding slaughtering, which include
supervision of slaughter, number of cattle to be
slaughtered—decided by priority of applications—
and inspection of animals before slaughter. Only
Persons residing in the vicinity of a fair are allowed
to slaughter animals for sale at that fair.
Designs of li e buildings vary slightly in different
places according to the amount of capital and
materials available, but on the whole the main build-
ins are constructed in very much the same manner.
| They are long and spacious sheds having double-span
, roofs, with a wide space between the first and the
second roof to provide ventilation, and supported on
high posts
The stalls within are in rows, one along each side and one through the middle, and extend from end to end of the building. The gangways are sufficiently wide to enable a fairly large number of people to transact their business comfortably, or take shelter in rainy weather.
Other buildings consist of one large shed for women-sellers of vegetables, fruits, cakes, etc., and several small separate sheds and stalls, where ice, sherbert, coffee and food of the usual kinds common to the Peninsula are sold.
Charges up to thirty cents per person are imposed at each fair on all those who come to sell. Articles valued at less than 50 cents are allowed to be sold free of charge by both sexes, and articles up to $1 are allowed to be sold free of charge if they are brought for sale by women.
Capital—The share-capital for the erection of tire buildings at the fairs is collected among the local Malays. These people often supply all the building materials, such as timber and attnps, and construct the buildings themselves. The buildings are then assessed according to the value of the various materials used and the amount of labour employer!.

Reservve funds,—Out of the total weekly col- |
lection, the Committee insults on a certain ;
percentage being aet aside u a reserve fund for
the purpose of meeting possible liabilities. The
remainder, after deducting all expenses, is declared
as a dividend and paid to the shareholder*.
Accounts and Audit.—The account Ixnks of the
fairs, which are m the Arabic character, are kept
on a uniform system as approved by the Registrar
of Co-operative Societies, who is for the time being,
the auditor.
Oroanization or Annual Shows and the
Weekly Fair in Alor Star.
The first annual show was held in Alor Star in
April 1933 and was considered a great success.
Owing to financial considerations no show was held
in 1934 though it is hoped to arrange for another
show to take place at Sungei Patani m the near
future.
The Weekly Fair at Tanjong Charlie,
Alob Star.
The Tanjong Charlie Fair is maintained by the
Government and is under the direct supervision of
the Committee.
The fair is assisted by the Penghulu of Kota Star, I
a care-taker and four assistants who ire engaged for
the number of days the fair is held in each month.
The primary object was to ascertain how a fair
consisting mostly of Malay business men and
women would succeed in the town and bow they
would succeed in competition with the business
population.
The Committee held out so little hope of success
that it would not even countenance the idea of
spending any money on the construction of a shed.
What little shelter was available was supplied by an
abandoned cattle quarantine shed which was barely
sufficient to give protection fol more than three
lorry-loads of vegetables and fruits.
After two or three weeks’ trial, the Committee
felt convinced that the fair would succeed and a
temporary attap roof was hurriedly .instructed to
cover the open quarantine yard.
From this time onwards the fair gradually
increased in size and importance till it reached its ‘
present magnitude. Now, more than seventy bos- j
loads of fruit, vegetables and other produce come to 
the fair every Wednesday. In addition, there are •
a number of sellers who come on bicycles. in motor- ‘
cars, or boats and on foot. The turnover, per week,
averages about $1,800.	i
The weekly attendance, at a moderate estimate. ,
is between 2,000 and 2.500. and the number of i
people who come to sell is about 400.
At this fair, only Malays are allowed to sell and,
even with this strict condition, the buildings are
not large enough for the requirements.
The Tanjong Charlie Fair, or Pekan Babu, as it
i- generally known, is intended to lie a training
centre for other weekly fairs. The Malays there are
taught the nee of scales, the use of weights and
measures, proper arrangement and display of their
merchandise in a manner attractive to the customer.
Strict rules are enforced to ensure cleanliness of the
buildings and of the articles brought for sale. There
is also ample opportunity for new arrivals to learn
to sell things at a profit and in a business-like
manner.
It may be added that the chief business deficiency
among the Malay peasants is their inability to make
simple mental calculations and to determine the
face-values of most articles they sell; in very many
cases the articles are undervalued

Permanent Stall-holders nt this fair include sellers
of spires, fruits and vegetables, cigarettes and to-
bacco, Malay medicine, carpentry, pottery, preserves
and padi-planting implements. Other stall-holders
include a watch repairer, a bookseller, in addition
to several eating shops.
General Work or the Committee.
Additional activitites of the Committee are mainly
concerned with propaganda, with the object of
increasing the popularity of the fairs, by lectures,
erection of sign posts, advertising fairs by posters
and pamphlets and demonstration of methods of
cultivation of vegetables.
In lecturing to the people the Chairman often
speaks on suitable agricultural subjects with special
reference to the work of the weekly fairs; the
Registrar of Co-operative Societies lectures chiefly
on economic subjects.	"
Signboard- are placed at all suitable places, such
as the junctions of roads and at the central weekly
fair at Tanjong Charlie; at this fair a large board
over 20 fairs high hears a complete list of the
weekly fairs establisbed in the State. Signboards
giving the namesof the fairs, and the days of the
week oil which they are held, are placed at the sides
of the roads a few hundred feet from all approaches
to the fairs. The descriptions given are in three
languages, namely, Malay, Chinese and Hindustani.
On the top of each board is mounted a traffic
danger signal.
Advertisement posters are circulated to all the
fairs when there is any occasion for doing no.
Circulars, with an up-to-date list of all the fairs,
are printed and distributed free to the people from
time to time.
Owing to general illiteracy, especially among the
female peasant population, the Committee considers
it advisable to use a distinguishing sign by which
the fairs can he easily recognized. The design
adopted is in the form of a crest, which liears a
"tajak’ and a “changkol," surrounded by a wreath
representing "sirch" leaves. The weekly fair sign
is mounted over all flag-posts and signboards.
Demonstration [dots are attached to the big fairs
where possible: the idea is to demonstrate to the
people the best methods of cultivating different
useful vegetables and money-crops.
By means of the weekly fairs the produce of the
soil can be evenly and profitably spread over all parts
of the State and sold either directly by the owners
themselves nt the fairs or indirectly through the
Malav middlemen.
It n greatlv to lie hoped that when the fact in
fully realized’by the Malays that they are much
behind other races in commerce and industry, it
may lead them to the revival of these important
branches of occupation in which they once took a
prominent part. The number of fairs in the State,
tire attendance and the business turnover, give a
clear indication of the business instinct awakening
among them.
Extent of Progress.
The fact that there are now forty-two fairs in
operation is an indication that they have become
verv much part of the life of the jieoplo. Ihc
average turnover per week is about $12,000. During
the fruit season the turnover is larger, but this only
lasts for about threeor four months in the year.
The total number of people who come to sell is
about 3,000 per week. A fair percentage of these
have taken up the business permanently, others are
part-time sellers and those who wish to make tlio
best use of their time between padi seasons.
It may be that on some routes, when n higher frequency of service is established, it will be necessary to operate some services to a faster schedule, or perhaps even at a higher air speed, than others, but, without in any way losing sight of this all-important question, the Board regards it of the utmost importance to provide the highest possible standards of regularity and service generally and to keep the fares and rates as low as possible hoping that in due course we can look to freedom from subsidy; a goal only obtainable if all countries try to attain the same goal and refrain from a mad 1 race in subsidised travel by air.
When our present fleet is replaced, the public । may expect a substantial increase in speed as well ; as frequency. It would be idle, however, to hope i that the speeds achieved in the recent Australia race can lie reproduced in a normal commercial service, as was pointed out by Lord Londonderry, the Secretary of State for Air, in a message to Australia at the start of the race. We load to carry, long non-stop stages cannot be undertaken, in fact, as loads increase, long stages become less possible from an economic point of view. Services that pick up । and set down mails and passengers all along the line , cannot avoid a certain amount of formality on the ground and consequent loss of time. In fact, it is unfortunate that the success of a service, measured in terms of the traffic it attracts, tends automatically to restrict its speed. A service carrying nothing has very few people to consider.

OLD SARAWAK.
First Division News.
From the Sarawak Gazette
48 Years Ago,
THE
SARAWAK GAZETTE
Price THURSDAY. DECEMBER 1,18S7.	10 cents.
NOTES FROM S1BU.
On October 29th ultimo, a sea gull wo» wen flying about the bay in front of Fort Brooke, Sibu. This is a very unusual eight and. betokens heavy weather at sea.
Early in 1SIS2 a curlew was seen flying about at Kapit. • Which for the benefit of your untravelled readers, I will ' state is one hundred and twenty live miles from the sea: and shortly afterwards news was received that s.s Rajah Brooke, had been some three or four days making the passage from Singapore to Kuching.
A few davs ago a very curious thing happened. A Chinaman arrived from down river and tied up his boat to the wharf of Fort Brooke. His boat was ao tied that it lay between the wharf and the shore. The customs collector went down to inspect Hie boat and was accompanied by a few larrikins of Malay blood. Hanging over the stem of Iha bout waa a cage containing fourteen ducks. The collector was meditating and sucking a piece of gruss, the larrikins were lounging in angular attitutes. when suddenly a crocodile rushed from the vasty deep, and seizing the cage containing the unfortunate ducks, made his exit from Hie scene ns rapidly us he had made his entry. Only one of the unfortunate ducks escaped. This duck was last seen swimming away uttering quacks of rejoicing, whilst bitter tears bedimmed his eyes as ho thought over tile fate of his late companions, the air meanwhile being rent with the various Hei Taha! and Allahs! which the onlookers thought fit to indulge in.
November, 1934.
The Resident, First Division, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports:—
On the 21st 1 proceeded to Serian to meet the Assistant District Officer, Sadong, and discuss various I matters in connection with the proposed move of Sadoug Station to Serian. The amount of traffic on this road has increased very noticeably, a bazaar is being erected at the 24 1/2 mile, and applications tor sites at the 32 mile are coming in.
December, 1934.
Exceptionally high water was experienced during the month and both Gambier and India Streets wore flooded. There was a bad landslide in Thomson Road which took several days to clear away, there was also a landslide al the new cutting on the Pending Road.
Upper Sarawak District.
November, 1934.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports:—
Agriculture—The Dahan Rubber Estates, Limited, harvested 211,500 lbs. of dry rubber during the month. The rainfall at Bau was 1018 inches. The highest recorded in 24 hours was 206 inches and the daily average was 33 of an inch. The rainfall at Dahlin Rubber Estates was 12'98 inches.
Gold Mining.—The Kirn Seng Gold Mining Syndicate at Jugan commenced leaching for gold on the 24tb.

December, 1934.
Agriculture.—The Dahan Rubber Estates, Ltd , harvested 17,500 lbs. of dry rubber during the month. The rainfall at Ban was 1410 inches. The highest recorded in 24 hours was 2 68 inches and the daily average was 45 of an inch. The rainfall at Dahan
Rubber Estates amounted to 19'34 inches.
Gold Mining.—The very unpleasant weather at the beginning of the month seriously affected gold mining operations ami the December output will, undoubtedly, show a decrease in consequence.
The actual production of gold for Upper Sarawak for the month of November. 1934, amounted to 2,269 ounces.
Three General Prospecting Licences, one Exclusive Prospecting Licence and one Mining Lease were issued during the month.


Sadong District.
November, 1934.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. F. L. G. Crossley, reports:—
Agriculture.—Both Malays anil Dyaks seem to be late in planting their padi this year, the work having been delayed by heavy rains, and on the coast by serious floods. Ln the Saiuaraban area the work is further advanced and the young padi looks vigorous and healthy.
Public Works.—In connection with the proposed new station nt Serini), traces were cut and preliminary clearing commenced at Bukit Liman, on the Simanggang Road. Under the present scheme, this hill is reserved for Government buildings, awaiting final sanction by the Resident As far as can be ascertained at present, the site is well chosen, and offers ample accommodation for the proposed buildings. Concerning the bazaar, terms of alienation of lots have been provisionally approved by the Resident, and have been explained to prospective applicants from the Sadong river stations, but it is expected that tire Chinese will ask for a different site, as they wish the bazaar to border the main road.
General and Miscellaneous.— A large man-eating crocodile has appeared in the ulu Simunjan, and so far all attempts to shoot or capture the brute have been unsuccessful, in spite of the employment of a professional crocodile catcher. On the 2nd it overturned a Dyak boat containing six people and carried off a youth of 18 years who was sitting in the stern. It is now reported to chase all boats that come anywhere near its pool. Eye-witnesses state that it is nearly four fathoms in length.


Seventh Day Adventist Mission.
15th January, 1935.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Sir,
The Seventh-Day Adventist Mission desires to express its appreciation for the generous response to its recent appeal for funds for its welfare work in Sarawak.
The following is a list of those whose contributions made thia year’s campaign a success
Mr. Wee Klwng Chiang	...	$200.00
Dr. Wong Cheong Way	...	...	100.00
Messrs. Kwong Leo Banking, Ltd.	...	100.00
Messrs. Sarawak Gold Mining Syndicate, Ltd. 100.00 Contributions of $25.00 each—
Messrs. Ong Ewe Hei A Co.. Messrs. Bau
Gold Mining Syndicate	...	...	50.00
$20.00 each—
Messrs. A. Hannigan. G. T. Bates. Ong Keo Hin, Heng Long Gambling Farm. Kuching Gold Mining Co., Ltd., Hiap Soon Hin, Kim Leo Gold Mining Syndicate, Nam Hang Gold Mining Company, Nam Loong Gold Mining Company, Chop Chin Chiang ...	200.00
$15.00 each—
Mr. K. N. Black. A. Friend, Messrs. Kuching
Steam Sawmills ...	...	—	-15.00
$10.00 each—
Messrs. E. Parnell, Phillip Soh Fu, Umpang, T. Arunasalam, Kwong Lee Gold Mining Syndicate, Kim Loong Gold Mining Syndicate, Thye Vick Gold Mining Syndicate, Chops Ho Lee, Tiang Seng Chan, Tiang Guan Choon, Chin Chon. Ho Hong, Chuan
Yik Chan	...	...	...	130.00
$5.00 each—
Messrs. Tan Boon Siew, Summers, Ong Ah Hunt, L. N. Reynolds, Mohd. Shariff, Yong Swoe Song, N. Chand & Sous, Chops Hak Soon, Lob Mui Keo, Seng Kee, Thye Fob, Woh Sang, Hap Hunt Hin, Hin Ann, Chin Wan Hin, Peng Seng, Hak Ann, Chiang Wah Onn, Chong Kim Eng, Siu Song Hak 100.00

By way of passing on information to our many friends here, may we be permitted to state that tho funds no generously contributed last year enabled this organization to establish a school at the 37th Mile on the Simanggang Road for the Dyaks. Tho boys are now occupying the dormitory. The school programme includes work in the garden and field as well as in books. The students devote the forenoon to their books and recitations, and the afternoons to field work with hoes and parangs.
Besides the education work carried on in and about Kuching in behalf of the Chinese as well as the Dyaks, our society is carrying on medical work in North Sarawak, with Dr. R. T. Morrow in charge. Dr. Morrow has already been a Godsend to countless numbers suffering with divers diseases and ailments. Uis influence and helpfulness is increasing steadily there. He operates a small imwer launch from which he and his helpers treat hundreds of souls who have no means of getting to Hie small clinic already established on the Tatau River. The clinic itself is full to over-flowing and is altogether inadequate to meet the demands now being made upon it. It is planned to erect a hospital ihere early this year, suitable for the many Dyaks and others who seek health and happiness at the hands of the doctor and his helpers.
Thanking you for your valuable space, we remain.
Yours faithfully,
The Seventh-Day Adventist Mission,
Kuching.
(Signed} V. E. Hendershot, M.A.
(Resident Pastor.)


Soccer.
Kuching 3. H.M.S. Bridgewater 1.
On Saturday, the 19th January, a selected Kuching side opposed a team representing the crew of the H.M.S. Bridgewater in a friendly game of soccer on the ground of the Medical F. C.

Kuching:—
Chiang Khoon
Deli W. J. Chater
(Copt.)
Taba Francis Tan	Yahya
Pa ce Yaw Joo A.deVoa Michael Tuan Weng Sheng.
	:0 :	
H.M.S. Bridgewater:—
E. Branch J. Hooper A. Jenkins J. Prichard J. Milla
G. Jones D. McKinnon A. Spence
B. Cook	W. Connabeare
(Capt.)
S. Ash.
Referee :—D. McDonald.
A slight drizzle of rain fell during the greater part of the game making the pitch treacherous and the ball greasy and difficult to control.
The Bridgewater team were the first to kick off and immediately bore down on the Kuching goal. A long clearance, however, put the Kuching forwards in possession and they dribbled the ball into the Bridgewater half, where, following a melee in the ship’s goal mouth, Michael Juan tapped the ball into the net to give Kuching the lead in the first minute.
The Bridgewater team seemed Io take some time
to nettle down and appeared to find great difficulty
tn keeping their feet on the slippery turf. This, we
understand, was due to the fact that the majority
of their players had not, prior to this, had the
opportunity of playing on a grass covered pitch since
leaving England and were still wearing bars beneath
their boots as is customary when playing on the
hard grounds in China.
After play had been in progress for about a
further ten minutes Weng Sheng received the ball
on the wing and centred high across the Bridge-
water goal mouth. The Bridgewater goal-keeper
rushed out in a desperate attempt to clear but
mistimed his effort and the ball rolled on to Yaw
Joo, who. left with an open goal, found no
difficulty in scoring from what appeared to be an
awkward angle.
From now on the Bridgewater team redoubled
their efforts and after several dangerous raids were
rewarded with a free kick in the Kuching goal area
following an infringement on the part of the
Kuching goal-keeper. This resulted in an excel-
lently placed shot by Prichard who received the ball
whilst unmarked and drove it into the far corner of
the net. This goal put new life into the Bridge-
water team and from now on Kuching did not have
matters all their own way. A few minutes later
Jenkins narrowly missed scoring for the Bridge-
water with a header that almost skimmed the
cross-bar while at the other end de Vos placed the
ball just wide of the upright after breaking through
the ship's defence.
Half-time arrived with the score still 2—1 in
favour of Kuching.
On the resumption of play a ding-dong battle
ensued. The Bridgewater team were now playing
every bit as well as the Kuching side and looked
as though they would force a draw at any moment. ' With only a quarter of an hour to go Kuching broke , through again and the ball was centred across the J goal mouth to Weng Sheng who was waiting to | score from an unmarked position. Ilia effort was ruled offside, however, but nevertheless had the effect of livening up the Kuching forwards who from now on took the game completely in baud. Following several more narrow misses on the part of the Kuching forwards de Vos made no mistake I with a hard drive, from a few yards out and brought. ! Kuching's total to three.
Play deteriorated from this stage and full time arrived without any further scoring.
On the Bridgewater side special mention must be made of the outside right, J. Mills, and the goalkeeper, 8. Ash. The former seemed to find no ■ difficulty in giving his opposing half the slip and ' making himself a source of worry to the. Kuching defence, while the latter was greatly responsible for keeping the Kuching score down to such a low figure. Many of his timely saves, two or three of which were superb, drew round upon round of . applause from the small batch of spectators who had braved the weather to witness the game.
The Kuching forwards did not play quite as well ns expected, Pa-ee, perhaps, being the pick of the line, although the remainder played well in patches. The high "perfect” centring of the Kuching wing 1 men proved a most ineffective form of attack against the tall Bridgewater defenders who merely jiositioned themselves in their own goal mouth and headed the ball out ns it came over. The Kuching half-backs dominated the play more or less but were inclined to hold on to the ball too long and gave the opposing defence ample time to i cover up the movements of the Kuching forwards. 
The game might be summed up as one in which the defences outshone the attacks.
Both teams were obviously suffering from lack of practice this being considered the close season in Kuching and the ship’s team only having played about two games since Christmas. Nevertheless, the players of both sides are to be congratulated on giving us an entertaining performance under very trying conditions.
Mr. D. McDonald refereed in his usual able manner.
Kuching Football Association.
"At the Sixth Animal General Meeting of The Kuching Football Association held in the offices of Messrs. Tan Sum Guan .t Son, on Saturday, 12th January, 1935, the election of Council for the ensuing year resulted as followsPresident: Dr. E. M. Marjoribaults; Joint Hon. Secretary-Treasurer: Mr. Tan Kui Choon and Mr. W. J. Chater; European Representative: Mr. C. Pitt-Hardacre; Chinese Representative: Dr. Wong Cheong Way; Malay Representative: Datu Amar; Other Representatives: Messrs Chan Weng Sheng. Harry Brodie and John Lini."

Applications are invited from Clubs and Associa-
tions for affiliation to The Kuching Football
Association for season 1935.
Full particulars may be obtained from the Joint | Honorary Secretary-Treasurer.
Affiliation is for one year only: Fee $10 vide I Rule No. 6.

Sarawak Chinese Football
Association.
"At the Third Annual General Meeting of the Sarawak Chinese Football Association held in the offices of Messrs. Tan Sum Guan & Son, on Saturday, 12th January, 1935, the following gentlemen were elected office-bearers for the year 1935:— Patrons: Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang and Mr. Dau Chen Hiaug; President: Dr. Wong Cheong Way; Vice-President: Mr. Lau Ah Yam ; Hon. Secretary: Mr. Tan Kui Choon: Asst. Hon. Secretary: Mr. Chan Weng Shorm; Hon. Treasurer: Mr. Eng Yaw Joo: Hon. Auditor: Mr. John Lim; Committee: Messrs Choo Ah Hinn, Phillip Soh Fu, Chan Kui Seng ; Captain : Mr. Chan Weng Sheng.”
Sarawak Turf Club.
M1NUTES OF  A COMMITTEE MERTING OF THB
Sarawak Turf Club held at Bckit Mata
Kuching at 6.15 p.m., on WEDNESDday,
9th January, 1935.
Present:—Mr. Tan Sum Guan (in the Chair), The Data Shahbandar, Mr. Chan Qui Chong, Mr. E. 8. Holl, Capt. K. E. Le Sueur and Mr. G. T. Bates.
1.The Minutes of the previous meeting were read and approved.
2.A letter from Mr. Li Soo Yin of Kudat regarding entering his pony for the next meeting was read. The Secretaries were instructed to send a copy of the regulations to Mr. Li.
3.A letter from Mr. Chan Qni Chong regarding the proposed spectators platform and the new stalls was read.
4.The plan and estimates for the proposed spectators platform were considered The Committee are of the opinion that the estimated cost of $1,379 is prohibitive and it is decided not to carry on with the scheme.
5.Stalls.—The erection of six new stalls was approved. The contract is awarded to Mr. Lim Peng Mah at a cost of §60 per stall.
6.Gymkhana Meeting.—To celebrate the visit of Lord and Lady Inchcape it was decided to hold a one day Gymkhana Meeting subject to the approval of His Highness the Rajah. A Sub-Committee consisting of Mr. Tan Sum Guan. Mr. Chan Qui Chong, the Datil Sbahbandar and Capt. It. IC. Le Sneur was formed to draw up a programme.
7.Car Park.— It was decided"that the Committee should consider the possibility of making a car park or road to facilitate the arrival and departure of oars and buses on race days.
Championship' Cup.—The purchase of six replicas at £4.4.0. each plus cost of engraving was approved

Sarawak Turf Club.
Provisional Programme for the Spring
Meeting, 1935.
First Day, Saturday, 27th Aran., 1935.
Race No. 1	[2.30 p.m.
THE TUAN MUDA’S CUP.
Value §250. A piece of plato of the vahie of
$100 presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda
with §150 added. Second to receive $100. Third
§40.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 6
furlongs. Entrance Fee §10.
Race No. 2	[3.0 p.m.
THE SATOK STAKES.
Value §250. Second to receive §100. Third
§40.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 5
furlongs. Entrance Fee §10.
Race No. 3	[3.30 p.m.
THE B.C.L. STAKES.
Value §250. §50 presented by The Borneo
Company, Limited, with §200 added. Second to
receive §100. Third §40.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 6
furlongs. Entrance Fee §10.
Race No. 4	[4.0 p.m.
SIMPANG TIGA STAKES.
Value §250. Second to receive §100 Third I
§40.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 3
furlongs. Entrance Fee §10.
Race No. 5	[4.30 p.m.
THE MATANG STAKES.
Value §250. Second to receive §100. Third I
§40.
A handicap for Division H ponies. Distance 4
furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
Race No. 6	[5.0 p.m.
THE PENDING STAKES.
Value §250. Second to receive $100. Third §40.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee §10.
Race No. 7	[5.30 p.m.
THE RANEE'S CUP.
Value §250. A piece of plate of the value of §100 presented by Her Highness the Ranee with §150 added Second Io receive §100. Third §40.
A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance 1 mile. Entrance Fee §10. §5 refunded to non- acccptors. Handicap published on the Course. Post Entries allowed at §20 but no refund.
Second Day, Monday, 20th Aran., 1935.
Race No. 1	[2.30 p.m.
THE SLUMP STAKES.
Value §250. Second to receive $100. Third
$40.
I A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 5
’ furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
Race No. 2	[3.0 p.m.
THE COUNTRY STAKES.
Value §250 presented by the Turf Club. Second
to receive §100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division IT ponies. Distance 6
furlongs. Entrance Fee §10.
Race No. 3	[3.30 p.m.
THE SARAWAK STAKES.
Value §250. Second to receive $100. Third
§10.
A handicap for Division HI ponies. Distance 5
furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
Rack No. 4	[4.0 p.m.
THE TURF CLUB STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third
| $40.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 4
furlongs. Entrance Fee §10.
Rack No. 5	[4.30 p.m.
THE STATES SPRINT.
Value $250. Second to receive §100. Third
§40.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 3
furlongs. Entrance Fee §10.
Rack. No. 6	[5.0 p.m.
THE GOLD-MINERS’ PURSE.
Value §250. §100 presented by the Gold Mining
Community. Second to receive §100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 4
furlongs. Entrance Fee §10.

REGULATIONS.
Penalties.—Winners of any race at this Meeting after publication of weights shall carry a penalty of 7 lbs. for each race with a maximum of 11 stone 7 lbs.
Allowance.—Professional Jockeys who are Sarawak subjects and have not ridden more than two winners under Sarawak Turf Club Rules, may claim i an allowance of 7 lbs.
Entries.—All nominations, accompanied by Entrance Fees, description of ponies, and declaration of colours, to be made to the Secretaries not later than noon, 6th April, 1935.
Scratchings.—Owners scratching ponies before 5 p.m. on 26th April, 1935 for first day and 5 p.m. on 28th April, 1935 for second day. will receive back half their entrance fees.
Handicaps.—For First Day will be posted on the Notice Board at the Sarawak Club at noon on 13th April, 1935. and for the Second Dav at noon on 28th April. 1935.
Course.—•'Will be open for training on 16th March. 1935, at 5.30 a.m.
Ponies.—Must run on the First Day to he eligible for entry in Races on Second Day.
Any Borneo Pony of not more than 14 hands in height may be imported from B.N.B. and shall be eligible for entry in Races open to Sarawak Ponies provided that their sires and dams were foaled in Borneo.
All new ponies shall carry top weight on the first day in the division in which they are classified, which shall be as follows :—
Division	I over 13.2 hands to 14 hands
,,	II	13.0 hands to 13.2 „
,, III under 13 hands
Owners.—Arc requested to see that their syces and jockeys obtain necessary badge for entrance to Paddock.
Totalizators and Cash Sweeps as usual.
Prizes 20% reduction if under 5 entries.
No second prize will be awarded if there are less
than 3 runners and no third prize if less than 5.
No whip used in any Race shall exceed two feet
in length.
If spurs be worn these shall not have rowels.
The Maximum weight shall be 11 stone 7 fts and
the minimum 7 stone.
The maximum fee to a winning Jockey shall be
$15 in the absence of any agreement to ride for a
lower sum.
Communications to be made to
The Borneo Company Limited,
Secretaries, Sarawak Turf Club

Fourth Division News.
December, 1934.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident :—
Practically the whole of Bintulu Town was flooded, and heavy seas and gales did much damage.
Reports eame through from Barain that Long Lobang and Long Ayer Bazaars had been swept away by the floods, and that much other damage bad been done including the destruction of several long Kayan houses.
Throughout the whole Division stories arrived of floods, gales and damage. For five days Miri Port was closed to all vessels and much damage was done to the Town.
Two well-known persons died during the month. Datu Haji Abdullah died in Bintulu on the 8th. He had been a Native Officer at Bintulu for a great number of years, and was promoted Data in 1917. He retired on pension in 1929. David James died in Miri Hospital on 4th December, 1934, after a short illness. He had been Government Agent at Labuan for over 20 years, and was known to all the older generation of Sarawak Officers.
The. had weather during the month has no doubt done extensive damage to the padi crops. It is early days to forecast, but a serious shortage of padi next year amongst up-river natives is likely. On the other hand crops which have escaped the flood are said to be good.


