The Sarawak Gazette.
MONDAY. JULY 1st. 1935.
anchored opposite Astana, she was met by the Acting Government Secretary, the Treasurer of Sarawak, and the Resident, First Division, who escorted His Highness ashore in the Siamese State Barge, which was manned by a crew of Malays dressed in national costume. As soon as the barge left the ship, a royal salute of twenty-one guns was fired from the' Fort.
His Highness landed at Pengkalan Batu, where he was greeted by members of the Supreme Council and the Committee of Administration. After inspecting a Constabulary Guard of Honour, His Highness drove to the Residency, where Government officers and the heads of European business firms were waiting.
Mr. H. B. Crocker, Acting Government Secretary, made a short speech in which he welcomed His Highness back to Sarawak, and concluded by proposing His Highness’ health, which was drunk by all present.
On the afternoon of the 24th, a garden party was given at the Residency, at which members of all communities had an opportunity of meeting His Highness the Tuan Muda. Tables were set out in the Residency grounds, where tea was served to the accompaniment of a programme of music rendered by the Constabulary Band. The guests dispersed at dusk, having spent a most enjoyable afternoon which not even an occasional shower could do anything to mar.
Local and personal.
June.
His Highness the Tuan Muda arrived in Kuching by s.s. Vyner Brooke on Monday, June 24th, having travelled from Amsterdam to Singapore by air. As the Vyner Brooke
His Highness the Tuan Muda is at present in Residence at “The Hill,” pending the । completion of certain repairs which are now being carried out at Astana. Mr. H. B. i Crocker has moved temporarily to the | Residency.

As a result of the new speed-up in the Far Eastern Service of the K.L.M., letters sent by Dutch Airways reach London five and a half days after being posted in Singapore. S.S. Vyner Brooke, which sailed from Kuching on Monday. May 17th, connected with the Dutch plane that left Singapore on the 19th; this meant that letters posted in Kuching on the 17th reached London exactly one week later.
While on the subject, we are informed
that m.v. Aim Chin Sent?, a Chinese-owned
motor-schooner, left Sadong on the 16th and
reached Singapore on the 19th in time for the
Dutch air mail. In other words, a letter
written in an outstation in Sarawak reached
London just eight days after being posted,
about thi time that it wotdd have taken to
get to Kuching in the ordinary course of
events. This is a record which will probably
stand for some time to come, and one which
certainly makes one think. The time is soon
coming when we shall be able to take Satur-
day morning off and go home to England for
the week-end.—provided, always, that we
can afford the fare, for trips by air are
expensive, and are one of the few things in
the East for which one cannot (as yet) sign ,
a chit!
The home correspondent of the Straits Times, in an article dated May 22nd, writes as follows :—
“Last week-end, I took refuge from a mid-May storm of sleet and snow at“The Angel," Henley-on-Thames. and dis covered that "mine host” was none other than Mr. Flood-Page, formerly one of the most popular planters in Malaya. He told me that he is exceedingly happy, and has no wish to voyage east of Suez again. Mr. Flood-Page has numerous friends in this countrv, having been stationed for several years in Miri and Kuching, where he was employed in the Public Works Depart ment. He left the Government Service to wards the end of 1930
Mr. and Mrs. F. H. Pollard succumbed simultaneously to an attack of malaria on May 11th and were admitted to the General Hospital. Kuching, on the following day. They returned to Bau on the 24th.
We welcome back to Kuching Mr. and Mrs. R. W. Chater and Mr. J. P. Baird, who returned from furlough on June 10th and 24th respectively. Mrs. Baird is remaining at home for the time being
We note from the Kalaka monthly report for May that both participants in a divingeontest held at Saratok to settle a land dispute remained underwater for more than five minutes. The endurance of Dayaks who take part in these contests is phenomenal, and
there can be no question of cheating since
i the contest always takes place in the presence
■ of the District Officer, and is closely watched
I by a vigilant crowd of natives, many of whom
are interested in the result, and who are there-
fore on the look-out for any foul play.
It has usually been assumed that three
। minutes is about the limit of consciousness of
i the average human being under water, in fact-
’ we believe that this period is seldom exceeded
' even by trained pearl-divers. It must be
borne in mind, however, that pearl-divers
' operate at depths where the effects of water-
pressure are necessarily severe, whereas
Dayaks only submerge a foot, or two beneath
I the surface.
We print in another column an account of
a meeting held in Kuching on May 25th to
consider the question o'f raising a fund for
the development of the race-course area in
Kuching, and for the construction of playing
1 fields on this site. It was not possible to in-
clude an account of the proceedings in the last
number of the Gazette.
The British North Borneo Herald mentions
that the Straits Budget, by presenting Miri
to North Borneo in a recent issue, has made
graceful amends for allotting Sandakan to
Sarawak some time ago. Ignorance of the
geography (and even, sometimes, of the exis-
tence') of Borneo is the rule rather than the
exception in Malaya : the writer was once in-
formed by an olil Singapore resident that
Sarawak was a Dutch possession, and on an
other occasion he was told, a trifle vaguely,
that it was an A.P.C. concession somewhere
, in the Netherlands Indies. And an official in
। the Singapore Consulate of a great and
friendly power once asked the memorable
1 question—“Where is Sarawak?"—when one
I of his nationals mentioned that he was
domiciled there. It’s all very salutary, and
prevents us growing conceited.
At the request of the Secretary of State for the Colonies, an expression of His Majesty's appreciation of the loyal message sent to him bv telegram on the twenty-fifth Anniversary of his Accession to the Throne by the British community, Miri. has been conveyed to representatives of this community through the Acting Resident, Fourth Division.
The telegram reads as follows:—
“British community Miri Sarawak send loyal and respectful congratulations on occasion Your Majesty's Silver Jubilee and earnestly hope Your Majesty may be spared for many more years peaceful and prosperous reign."

We print below, for the information of any of our readers who may be interested, an extract from a letter dated 27th March, 1935, from the Director of the British Museum (Natural History) to the Under-Secretary of i State. Colonial Office.
‘‘The Trustees would further be grateful to Secretary Sir Philip Cunliffe Lister if he amid see his way to bringing more prominently to the notice of Colonial officials the fact that this museum is anxious to receive collections, especially from little known areas, and is always ready to advise and assist any who would be interested to make such collections.’
The Court Writer, Kapit, reports that
Jubilee Day was celebrated in Kapit by one
gun being fired from the fort. This does not.
perhaps, come up to the standard of the
celebrations in Singapore and elsewhere, but
it was certainly a loyal gesture; and there
is a certain grandeur in the thought of the
reverberations of this solitary report dying
gradually away among the Kapit hills, and [
thereby bringing home to the Dayaks in the ;
Ulu Rejang the meaning of Empire.
i
Mr. C. E. Pascoe s many friends in this |
country will doubtless be interested to hear
that he will shortly he returning to Sarawak,
having accepted an appointment with the
Rubber Restriction Committee. Mr Pascoe
is due to sail from London on  July 20th
We understand that His Excellency the British Agent for Sarawak intends to visit Kuching on August 8th and Mi ri on the 10 th. His Excellency will probablv be accompanied by Lndv Thomas and Miss Thomas, and Mr E. E E Pretty, Secretary to the High Commissioner.

The Taman Setia Opera Company, which has been performing at the Lilian Theatre, Kuching, for the past month, gave a social performance on June 27th for the benefit of the Race-Course Development fund. This performance was under the patronage of His Highness the Tuan Muda, who was present. Every seat in the theatre was sold out before middav on the day of the performance.
New Light on Sarawak History.
LETTERS FROM THE FIRST RAJAH.
Rajah Biooke and Baroness BURDETT CouTTs.
CORRESPONDENCE.. Edited by OWNER HITTER—
Hulchimon and Co. 18/- net.
Sir James Brooke appears to have met Miss
Angela Burdett Coutts when he returned to
England for the first time in 1847. It was not
until 1858, however, that they again met and these
letters rover the period from January 14. 1858.
until the Rajah’s death in June 1868.
The letters and certain other documents were
found in a deed box in the possession of Mr. Sea-
bury Ashmi-a l-Bartlett , the nephew of Lady Burdett
Coutts' husband; Mr. Ashmead-Bartlett. Many of
them are undmibtedly important original documenta
which disclose for the first time important facts and
episodes in the history of Sarawak.
The Chinese rebellion was in 1857 and when the
Rajah returned to England at the end of the year
he found himself m grave financial difficulties. Ho
had been compelled to borrow £5.000 from the
Borneo Co., and when the Company pressed for
repayment the Rajah was indignant, though no
doubt he was unreasonable to expect that a purely
commercial concern should assume the functions of
philanthropists. Miss Burdett Coutts came to his
rescue with a loan of .£5,009. Tn the absence of
Miss Burdett Coutts' letter the exact terms of the
arrangement are not clear, but it seems that they
were extremely generous as Hie loan was to be
temporarily free of interest until 1864 when repay-
ment by instalments was to begin. On many other
occasions Miss Burdett Coutts lent or gave sub-
stantial sums of money to Sarawak and in 1860 she
presented a steamer, the "Rainbow” which the
Rajah had long wanted. It is clear that without
the help of Miss Burdett Coutts the history of
Sarawak might have been very different.
In addition to financial help Miss Burdett Coutts
was able to use her influence in high circles Io
further the Rajab’s plana. There is. for instance,
a letter from Lord Elgin in 1859 which shews that
Miss Burdett Coutts had written to him when ill
China on a special diplomatic mission asking for his
assistance in the negotiations which were then in
progress with Her Majesty’s Government for the
recognition of Sarawak as a British Protectorate.
A letter from Miss Burdett Coutts to Lord Elgin
in I860 on the same subject is also included. The
Bishop of Oxford on Miss Burdett Coutts’ request
also undertook to put the case of Sarawak to Lord
Palmerston and on one occasion she sent one of the
Rajah’s letters to the Editor of ’’The Times" with
the suggestion that it should be published. The
reply is worth quoting :
16  Serjeant's lnn.
June 12th [18B11.
My Dear Miss Coutts,
1 think you will find 'hat I shall do justice to the
Rajah though I do not think him so great or so good
a man as you do.
Believe me. Yours faithfully.
John T. Delane.
As we go to press we learn of the marriage, in Singapore, of Mr. R. L. Moir, of Messrs. The Borneo Co., Ltd., to Miss June Braddell, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs. R.L. L. Braddell, of Singapore. Mr G. Chaplin was beet man. Both Mr. Moir and Mr. Chaplin, are of course, well-known tn Sarawak. each having served one agreement in this country.
Among other matters which emerge from these letters is the fact that at various times the Rajah, despairing of his efforts to induce the British Government to extend its protection to Sarawak actually opened negotiations with Belgium and France'. At a later date (1863) it was suggested by Miss Burdett Coutts that Greece might. be approached and there was also a proposal in 1864 that a "Governing Company" should be formed to govern the country "the government to consist of the Rajah, the Council and the Company." Subsequently (1867) it was suggested that Italy might be interested and proposals were made that “a company might be formed composed either | wholly or partly of Italian Capitalist* or Italian and English combined which would develop the produce ' of the country. " The idea of an Italian Protectorate "as suggested at the same time, as it appeared that Italian opinion did not favour the formation of a company unless preceded by a Protectorate. The Rajah opened negotiations with both ends in view, ( but they were, of course, unsuccessful. How far they proceeded is not stated.
A number of letters deal with the dispute in 186'2 I and 1863 between the Rajah and his nephew Mr I Brooke Brooke in which Mr. Brooke opposed the ( Rajah's policy as regards the proposed new relationship between Sarawak and Great Britain which the Rajah was then negotiating. But thank God." Mr. Brooke Brooke wrote to be the Rajah in November, 1862. "it is I think not too lair yet to save • Sarawak from becoming a fifth rate British Settlement taken over unwilling (sic) with the vague purpose of keeping other nation* out of it rather than to foster and develop its resources. You have the opportunity now of doing Sarawak the greatest benefit or the greatest injury. Gel her British protection and you earn the gratitude of all. native and European. Sacrifice her independence by handing over to England presently or prospectively and you ruin your reputation for ever, and undo all the great work of your life '
What the Rajah’s proposals were and whether they amounted to a "sale" of Sarawak does not ' appear, but it seem* probable from the accounts of the negotiations given by Sir Spenser St. John and Miss Gertrude Jacob that the position was overstated by Mr. Brooke Brooke. It will be remembered that the question was temporarily scaled in August 1863 when Her Majesty’s Government agreed to appoint a consul in Sarawak “as the moat direct and least formal method of recognising it as a independent State."
It is impossible to judge of the merits of the dispute from the material available in the book. The Rajah's own opinion is. however, unmistakeable, and on his arrival in Singapore from England ; in February 1863 he wrote, in the best manner of the old tradition, the following letter to his nephew, who had come from Sarawak
My Nephew.
I disinherit you and banish you From territory at Sarawak for the crimes you have Commited against the State and myself: but in three years at
your brother's request. I have consented to reconsider your case with a view tn die interests of Sarawak.
Your Uncle and Rajah.
J. R.
Mr. Brooke was apparently to lie asked whether lie submitted and if he did not "the letter was to be handed to him. the contents to be made known to him beforehand." "u pon this." writes the Rajah. "Mr. Brooke gave in Ins submission. and intimated his wish to leave Sarawak to Travel! He declared at die samp time that he alone was res- ponsible for what had been done. He had addressed Ix.rd Russell and the Duke of Brabant, protesting against the transfer of Sarawak to England or Belgium. He had not consulted the Council or mentioned the Object to a single person in Sarawak. He had acted solely on his own judgment and responsibility!!" The Rajah and Mr. Brooke met the same day and there follows a detailed account of the meeting.
As u direct result of Mr. Brooke Brooke s conduct the Rajah reconsidered the question of the succession and it is of great interest to learn that in 1868 he made a will disinheriting Mr. Brooke Brooke I whom he had invested as Rajah Muda in 1861) nnd leaving the "succession to the Raj of Sarawak" to Miss Burdett Coutts. This will was made in England niter the Rajah had received Mr. Brooke Brooke’s letter but before the interview in Singapore. In a confidential memorandum from Mr. John Abel Smith. M.P. dated January 1'2, 1863, it is stated that the Rajah "has been so much distressed and disappointed by the recent letters of his nephew Mr. Brooke and by the line of conduct which he has declared it bis intention to adopt that Sir James Brooke has thought it right and necessary to change the disposition of his Will." This grave step was taken with the consent of Miss Burdett Coutts and it appears that the Prime Minister, Lord Russell, was also informed. It seems, how ever, that the Rajah did not contemplate that Miss Burdett Coutts should actually exercise the sovereignty. as writing from Marseilles on January 19. 1868. be said
My dear Lady.
It is an inexpressible solace to have placed the lulu re in .our band-. My advice is. in case of my death. to offer it for one month to the British and falling a settlement place it in the hands of the Emperor [Louis Napoleon]. A middle course would disturb your peace and end badly.
Ever and ever thine.
J. Brooke.
It will be seen from this short outline that this book, making public us it does for the first time many original documents, is a book of importance. Nevertheless, as it stands it is little more than a ropy of those documents, for though Mr. Rutter has contributed a preface and a running commentary" he has made little or no attempt to correlate or classify the letters. It would have been much better. one venture® to suggest, if instead of quoting the letters practically verbatim he had used them as the basis, together with the information already available from other sources, for an authoritative history of the matters with which they deal. The letters taken by themselves are often incomplete and cannot be read intelligently without a knowledge of Sarawak history . though they undoubtedly throw considerable additional light on that history. What, however. Mr. Rutter set out to do he has performed admirably, and his book will be invaluable to the future historian of Sarawak.
T.8.B.
Good Going.
LONDON TO AFRICA AND
BACK IN A DAY.
We print below an extract from the wire1 less Press News for .June 17th —
Captain Percival, aircraft designer, flew his Percival Gull light aeroplane early thin morning from Gravesend to Oran on the North African coast. 1400 miles in 7 hours 10 minutes. He hopes to be back in London after the return flight to-night.
Add African flight. Percival reached London on the return flight from Oran before 7 o'clock this evening."

Soil Erosion on Cleared Land.
A good deal has been raid at one time or another about the effects of removing natural covers from the soil, but in the absence of figures to indicate the real extent of the damage it is unlikely that much impression is made on the average man. The following extract which appeared in the American Forestry News Digest shows the enormous wash that takes place in a temperate country where rainfall and other climatic conditions are less severe than in this part of the world. No doubt it will be read with interest by those who assure as that the Bejang floods grow worse, and that the destruction of forest in its catchment area is the cause.—Constributed
Cover tarts soil. Rain washes bare and cultivated land 4,300 times faster than forest areas.—Rainfall washes the soil from bare and cultivated lauds in the loessial upland belt of northern Mississippi 4,300 times as fast .as front forest covered lands in the same section, according to U.S. Forest Service investigations.
A two-year series of tests conducted at Holly Springs, Miss., also show that the total run-off of water from grass or forest-covered slopes was only a fraction of that from barren or cultivated lands. It was found that soils having a vegetative cover absorb practically all the rainfall, and the soils of the region possess great water storage capacity. A tree or plant cover, therefore, in addition to preventing abnormal erosion, is shown to he of tremendous value in flood control and st ream flow regulation.
Tests were made on u series of plots having several different types of rover, the areas all having a uniform ten per cent slope. For a plot in a cultivated cotton field in which the rows paralleled the slope, surface run-off of water averaged 58 per cent, of the total precipitation, and in heavy rains amounted to as much as 96 per cent. The rate of soil erosion on this plot for two years exceeded 195 tons per acre.
Fur a cultivated cotton field with contour plowing, run-off totalled 47 per cent, of the precipitation, and soil erosion amounted to 69 tons per acre. Run-off from barren plots in an old field amounted to 46 per cent, of the rainfall, and erosion totalled nearly 160 tons per acre.
Tn contrast, the run-off from plots in an oak forest was less than one per cent, of the total rainfall. Erosion from these plots was negligible, the quantity of soil washed from the forest-covered Kioto being only one forty-three hundredths of that st from the plot under cullivation.
A black locust and osage orange plantation and scrub oak woodlands showed almost as effective protection as the older forest stands.
On comparative plots, it was calculated that it would take 1,785 inches of rainfall to wash a pound of soil from the forest-covered land, compared with only one-half inch of rain to erode a pound of soil from a cultivated field. To erode the top six inches of soil from land cultivated on the slope would require only ten years. From contour plowed land and from barren, idle land, it would take 28 and 12 years respectively. The six-inch layer of top soil protected by the oak forest, on the other hand, was figured to be good for at least 40,000 years.
The Administration of Justice
Among Primitive Tribes.
A correspondent, who wishes to remain anonymous, but who has a first-hand knowledge of the subject, has sent us the following article dealing with the questions raised in last month’s Notes and Comments :—
The articles in the last issue of the Gazette, together with the article in a previous number, give a good deal of the arguments for and against "Common Sense” and “Rough Justice” versus n I trained judiciary.
I think the points Hint have not been made on i behalf of the "Rough Justice” school are these : । The untrained magistrate who is truly fluent in the language used in a trial by the parties concerned is unable to record the evidence given sufficiently quickly in order to produce the same impression on the judicial mind revising the case or considering it on appeal, as that which was produced on his own; or if he has in a measure succeeded, it is probable that he has himself failed to get the best out of the witnesses who gave evidence.
On the other hand, the trained magistrate who hears a case in a language which lie doe- not understand. is giving a judgment on what the interpreter has said, and not necessarily on the evidence given.
A case held by a magistrate without legal training, but with knowledge of the language and the tribe concerned, is at its heat when no evidence, but only a record of the judgment, is recorded in writing, and the case should be heard in the litigants' own surroundings, say in a Dayak house, or on the spot where the crime was committed^ brazen lies and exaggerations (before an audience, it should he remembered, who know the truth) are then by no means easy. Each witness should be allowed to give his story in his own way, with only sufficient cross-examination to elicit the full story, and with recall for further cross-examination when a general idea of the point at issue is arrived at. This is not far removed from the procedure adopted by solicitors in preparing a case for the Courts at home.
The magistrate, with his knowledge of the people concerned, and since he hears the evidence in tho I proper atmosphere, is able to refine the evidence given to its true value and to come to a conclusion as to what actually took place and give judgment on that. (’uses heard in Court, where, as st present, proper facilities are often enough lacking, and where interpreters are used, are easier to deni with than cases in which interpreters are not necessary because the process of interpreting gives the magistrate time to write and think; but, unfortunately, long pauses to record evidence confuse a shy wit new, and give an untruthful witness time to pick his words.
Every Resident is jealous of his juniors’ possible tyrannies, and is on the look-out for ill-founded presumption of “knowledge of natives,” and a tight hold on magistrates is, and has always been, kept in this way. The abuse of power by more senior officers is theoretically impossible owing to the accessibility of His Highness the Rajah/ and the certainty that any complaint, no matter how trivial, will always be fully investigated. An unlimited right of appeal is unquestionably desirable, and the old practice of re-hearing a case instead of merelyexamining records was invaluable. I am, therefore, definitely of the opinion that the old ill-recorded eases were more efficient in meting out justice in up-river districts than the laboriously (may I say painfully?) recorded cases of the present day, but •'only because there is still the lack of a complete record of the proceedings such as could be taken ;by a shorthand writer. It should be remembered ■that the whole of the foregoing applies only to magistrates who are truly fluent in the language in which the case is heard.
Trained magistrates are the ideal, and a circuit -of such’ officers is the most satisfactory solution -(incidentally, surely there is no objection to the 'local training of the “salt horse’" Administrative Officer, who might well be encouraged to qualify by ‘examination in Sarawak?). But the usual lack of
circumstantial evidence, and the utter unreliability
•of Asiatic witnesses makes cumbrous machinery
•essential to the success of such a system.
Firstly, there must be a skilled prosecution.
"This is woefully lacking at the present time, though
manful efforts are being made by the Police to attain
it.
Secondly, there must be highly-trained inter-
preters. The evidence should be translated into the
language best suited to the purpose. which is in-
dubitably English. Interpretation into Malay,
which is then hurriedly, and usually inadequately,
rendered into English, must surely be unsatisfactory.
Thirdly, there must be efficient short hand-writers |
in Court. as it is only by making a complete record
of evidence that a considered judgment in a long
.drawn out case can be given, and in all cases that
a fair revision can be made.
Fourthly, there must be funds available
adequately to re-imburse witnesses for the days
they have to spend in making their depositions at
enquiries, and for their attendance during the
hearing of the actual case itself.
Fifthly, a trained prosecution demands a trained defence, and therefore it follows that professional pleaders should be permitted who can understand •and check the interpretation of evidence given. This.would involve u scale of fees for legal advice, which in turn would doubtless in all too many cases entail assistance from the Treasury to pity for it.
Because of these attendant expenses, the circuit system obviously cannot be carried out throughout the State at present.
Sarawak is simultaneously in all three of the stages of development mentioned in last month's Notes and Com ments
Our municipalities and permanently cultivated areas (which contain practically all the Chinese population) are sufficiently developed to give such a A,stein a trial, and such areas should be made to pay for its cost. but outside these surely the late Rajah’s system, which included specialization in languages and close contact with the native, should be allowed to go on . This outside area will shrink as settlement spreads and revenue increases.
,1 The British Colonial Government is no new-comer to- the problem of administration of primitive peoples, and 1 think enquiry will prove that the hill tribe? of Burma or the upland savages of New Quines, for example, are not tried by purely legal men but by their own chiefs and Political Officers, for all except very serious offences.
\' For native likes to be tried and punished by a man who speaks to him in his own language, and whom he knows will make allowances for his weak-
nesses, and, it may seem unnecessary to add. whom lie knows to be incorruptible. lie accepts philosophically occasional petty miscarriages of justice, 1 which I think may lie said to be rare in Sarawak.
though he will bitterly resent spiteful punishment or tyranny. Rarely will he, or in any event his relations, accept ill-treat inent without suprisingly stiff-necked appeal to a higher authority.
1 think the illiterate native prefers such methods to long drawn-out and expensive lawsuits which would inevitably force him to take his troubles to others than his own officers, and which would surely result in the endless graft and oppression of the poor which I suspect occurs in more highly organised Services than ours.
There is a great deal of truth in out correspon-
dent's arguments, and from one point of view,
there is much to he said for his proposal to
establish zones” within which the legal system,
as understood elsewhere in the State, shall not
apply. So long as adequate machinery for appeals
is provided within these zones, the objection that
the administration of justice is apt to depend too
much on the character of the individual officer
would certainly be lessened, although it would not
disappear altogether.
The ' zone” idea, however, is all very well in
theory, but a little reflection will show that it
might not be so satisfactory in practice. For one
thing, there is the difficulty of demarcating these
areas and of adhering to them once they are
defined. For instance, a Dayak might find that
,• because he happened to live on one side of an
I arbitrary line he was subject to the ordinary court
procedure, whereas his relation, whose house was
just on the other side of the line, was not. This
would result in discrepancies in treatment which
would lead not only to dissatisfaction among the
Dayaks themselves, but also to serious adminis-
trative difficulties. And again, each zone would
tend to become more and more a water-tight com-
mitment. and the interior of the country would
eventually come to be split up into a series of
.-cpaiate administrative units, each of which would
be governed largely in accordance with the persona!
! idiosyncrasies of the officer in charge, and with
J little reference to (he needs of the country as a
whole. This would surely be an unsatisfactory
. state of affairs. Moreover, in a small country such
as Sarawak, it is obviously undesirable in the
highest degree to have two separate and distinct
judicial systems operating simultaneously; in the
long run. the result can only be chaos and con-
fusion. Eventual uniformity must he aimed at,
even if at present, owing to varying conditions in
different parts of the country, it is difficult to
achieve.
In our opinion, a uniform code of laws to cover
all races and communities in the State is a
fundamental necessity, without which the adminis-
trative machine must break down. Where we
agree with our correspondent, however, is that
complicated rules of procedure are not essential,
since if they are rigidly enforced, they may not only
prove irksome, but may actually obstruct the course
of justice. There seems, therefore, no reason why
legal procedure should not be considerably modi-
fied in the interior areas, although in actual
practice magistrates already possess wide dis-
cretionary powers regarding the application of the
Criminal Procedure Code : it is fully realised that
adherence to all of its provisions is impracticable in
certain circumstances. But then again, there must


THE SARAWAK. GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1935.
Ill
be some form of court procedure, if only of the simplest nature. We agree that a case concerning primitive natives can best be beard in the litigants' own surroundings, and by a magistrate who is | fluent in their language', but if no record at all of , the evidence is kept, what guidance is there for ! the magistrate's successor? As soon as he takes ; over the district, he will be flooded with natives trying to open up old cases which have already been settled, and owing to his complete ignorance 1 of the circumstances, and in view of the lack of any records, he will be obliged to re-hear most of them. And. knowing the Dayak mind, there seems no reason why this process should not continue ad infinitum. Most administrative officers are familiar with the Dayak sea-lawyer who re-opens cases decided twenty years ago as soon as he sees a strange European face, and the only check on this is the compilation and careful preservation of court records.
As mentioned in the last paragraph of our : correspondent's: article, there can be no doubt that the average up-river native prefers the old methods, by which is meant simplicity and direct contact with the officer who is judging his case, to the tortuous maze that British jurisprudence has succeeded in placing between the seat of justice and the common man. There is little doubt that any attempt to introduce this system into Sarawak would be a major calamity, since it would mean the intervention of the lawyer between the litigant and the magistrate, which in effect would mean the erection of a financial barrier between an aggrieved person and justice. It is generally agreed that the admission of professional lawyers to practise in primitive communities is an unmixed evil, and it is hoped that we may long be spared the activities of the 'shyster' lawyer, who makes a living by stirring up discord in order that he may profit from the resulting laW-suits. Those of us who have lived in other dependencies are only too familiar with the activities of this type of nuisance.
Simplicity in the administration of justice in Sarawak is' not only desirable, but essential; but is there any reason why the simplicity and contact which have always prevailed should be lost under the new system? When one comes down to brass tacks, law and commonsense are synonymous. What, for instance, could be more the quintessence of plain commonsense than the Penal Code? All that the new system means is that this code will be administered more methodically and more uniformly than in the past, and that there shall be even fewer loop-holes through which injustices ran creep in. The elasticity of this system is its great advantage, since it renders it adaptable to any changes that development of the country may bring about: and it is, we consider, a system which is admirably suited to the needs of Sarawak.
No true comparison can be drawn between Sarawak and New Guinea as regards the administration of justice, since there are vast areas in the latter country which have not yet been brought under Government influence, and where the natives must consequently be left to the tender mercies of then- own chiefs; or to the "rough and ready” justice of an occasional visiting Patrol Officer, who. incidentally, can almost never speak the natives' own language, owing to the variety of dialects encountered. It is obvious that where no administrative control has been attempted, and where the activities of the Government have been confined to a few exploratory expeditions, there can be no introduction of even the simplest system of law.
Moreover, the tribes in New Guinea are very much more backward than even the most primitive, natives in Sarawak, who are civilised in comparison with the average naked Papuan head-hunter and cannibal. Sarawak, also, is a much more compact country, where communications, although not yet good, are rapidly improving, and where it is becoming impossible to isolate any section of the inhabitants in reserves or zones as is suggested.
I
A “Golden Thread” in English Law.
It is a well-known and established principle of English law that it is the duty of the prosecution to satisfy a jury beyond reasonable doubt that an act used person is guilty of the crime for which he. is indicted. The exact extent to which this' doctrine applies, however, and in particular how- far the onus of proof may shift, have been a matter of some doubt, and an important decision on the i point has recently been given by the House of
I.ords in the case of R. v. Woolmington.
Reginald Woolmington, a farmer labourer, aged ‘21, was indicted at Bristol Assizes for the murder of his wife by shooting her. His defence was that be was not guilty because the gun went off accidentally.
Mr. Justice Swift directed the jury at the trial as follows :
Once it is shown to » jury that somebody has died through the act of another, that ia presumed to be murder, unless the person who has been guilty of the act which causes the death call satisfy a jury that what happened was something less, something which might be alleviated, something which might be reduced to a charge of manslaughter, or was something which was accidental, or was something which could be justified.
The Crown has got to satisfy you that this woman. Violet Woolmington. died at the prisoner's hands. They must satisfy you of that beyond any reasonable doubt. If they satisfy you of that, then he has to show that there are circumstances to be found in the evidence will.-It has been given from the witness-box in this case which alleviate the crime so that it is only manslaughter . or which excuse the homicide altogether by showing that it was a pure accident.	.	;
The jury brought in a verdict of guilty and Woolmington appealed to the Court of Criminal Appeal. In the course of the judgment, the Court, said “it may be that it would have been better” had- the Judge,who tried the case said to the jury that if they entertained reasonable doubt whether they could accept the prisoner's explanation they should either acquit him altogether or convict him of manslaughter only : but, relying on section 4 (1) of the, Criminal Appeal Act. 1907, which provides "that the Court may, notwithstanding that they are of opinion that the point raised in the appeal might, he decided in favour of the appellant, dismiss the appeal if they consider that no substantial miscarriage of justice has actually occurred,” they dismissed the appeal.
No further appeal lies without the certificate of the Attorney-General that the appeal involves a point of law of exceptional public importance and this certificate having been given, the House of Lords. consisting of the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Chief Justice. Lord Atkin, Lord Tomlin and fjord Wright, allowed the appeal. Tn giving judgment,. . with which the other noble and learned fjords' concurred, the Lord Chancellor said that Woolmington appealed to the Court of Criminal Appeal, substantially on the ground that the Judge had
misdirected the jury by telling them that in the • circumstances of the ease he was presumed in law : to be* guilty of the murder unless he could satisfy ' the jury that his wife’s death was due to an I accident.
The Lord Chancellor definitely rejected Mr. | Justice Swift's view of the law as stated in his  charge to the jury, though he remarked that there was some apparent authority for it. Having discussed the authorities, he continued as follows :
Through the web of the English criminal law one golden thread was always to be seen, that it was the duty of the prosecution to prove the prisoner's guilt subject to matters as to the defence of insanity and subject also to any statutory exception. If. at the end of, and on the whole of, the case there was a reasonable doubt, created by the evidence given by either the prosecution or the prisoner, whether the prisoner killed the deceased with a malicious intention the prosecution had not made out the case, and the prisoner was entitled to an acquittal.
No matter what the charge, or where the trial, the principle that the prosecution must prove the guilt of the prisoner was part of the common law of England, and no attempt to whittle it down could be entertained.
When dealing with a murder case the Crown must prove (a) death as the result of a voluntary act of the accused, and (b) malice of the accused. It might prove malice either expressly or by implication. For malice ' might be implied where death occurred as the result of | a voluntary act of the accused which wax (i) intentional and (ii) unprovoked. When evidence of death and malice had been given (that was a question for the jury) the accused was entitled to show by evidence, or by examination of the circumstances adduced by the Crown, that the act on his part which caused death wax either unintentional or provoked.
If the jury were either satisfied with his explanation or. on a review of all the evidence, were left in reasonable doubt whether, even if his explanation were not. accepted, the act was unintentional or provoked, the prisoner wax entitled to lie acquitted. It was not the lav of England to say, as was said in the summing up in the present case, "if the Crown satisfy you that this woman died at the prisoner's hands then he haw to show that thorn are circumstances to be found in the evidence which has been given from the witness-box in this case which alleviate the crime so that it is only manslaughter, or which excuse the homicide altogether by showing it was a pure accident."
The Lord Chancellor added that the House was asked to follow the Court of Criminal Appeal and to apply the proviso of section 4 of the Criminal Appeal Act, 1907. They thought it impossible to apply it in the present case. They could not say that if the jury had been properly directed they would have inevitably come to the same conclusion. In the result they declined to apply the proviso and they ordered that the appeal should he allowed and tl • conviction quashed.
It will be seen therefore that this is a case of great interest and importance. The effect of the lord Chancellor's judgment is that the rule that the onus of proving the guilt of an accused person lies on the prosecution has been approved. In substance., the rule as now established is that in a case of murder the Crown must prove—
(1)that the accused person committed the act. and
(2)that he did it with malice.
That malice can. of course, be implied by the evidence, including the evidence of the circumstances of the killing and it is a question for the jury to say whether the evidence is sufficient. The mere fact, however, that a person has been killed by another is not in itself sufficient to prove malice on the part of the killer so as to put upon him the burden of proving the contrary.
T. S. B.
“Into The Unknown,”
A SAGA OF THE BORNEO BUSH.
Readers of the Sarawak Gazette may be interested to hear that in 1927 a young Englishman named Mr. Herbert Mather, now resident in Singapore, made his way alone through “four hundred miles of unexplored wilderness" from a station on the Barito river, in Dutch Borneo, to Sarawak, where, after months of wandering, he was fortunate enough to find shelter and assistance in the house of the manager of the “celebrated McLaughlin plantations," near Balingian. Mr. Mather was a fugitive from justice, having got on the wrong side of the Dutch authorities as a result of a boating accident in which several of his coolies were drowned, and he was therefore eager to reach the protection of the British flag: since he was only under open arrest, the Resident at Poeroektjahaoe having declared that escape from the district was impossible, it was an easy matter for him to disguise himself as a Malay and vanish into die blue, taking with liim a rifle, a blanket, some trade goods and a knapsack filled chiefly with nuggets of gold and diamonds. The ston of his remarkable exploits has been admirably told in two successive issues of the  Wide World magazine. These issues appeared in October and November. 1933.
Mr. Mather's story is worth reprinting, for oddly enough, few of us here have heard it : it's astonishing what we miss in Sarawak. We therefore give below a brief resume of his experiences, but no mere summary can really do justice to his tale, and we advise anyone interested to get hold of back numbers of the Wide World magazine and read the full account for themselves.
Mr. Mather was sent by his firm to a station with the formidable name of Poeroektjahaoe to buy “Borneo beeswax,’’ in which commodity there was at that time (1927) a minor boom. Finding that beeswax-buying was not a whole-time job, he spent his spare moments acquiring gold and diamonds, which he obtained by diving into the whirlpools of the Barito river and picking them out of the sand at the bottom. Needless to say. he had many hairbreadth escapee from crocodiles, but the crocodiles were nothing to the perils of the jungle, for, as he remarks on the subject of conditions in the Borneo wilds.' Apart from the prevalence of leprosy, dengue fever, malaria, typhoid, elephantiasis, dysentery. influenza, loathsome skin-diseases, and sundry eye-troubles, it's really quite a healthy country ' If germs or poisonous insects don’t settle one's hash, almost any of the natives are liable to.”
Of course. And then there are “the open savannah#” which “abound in East Indian tapirs, and that fierce ancestor of the domestic ox known as the bantang-. Monkeys by the million	literally
festoon the jungles. I lords of small elephants	
are a pest to the primitive agriculture of the Dayaks."
Exactly. And even diving for treasure is not all gold and diamonds, for every time Mr. Mather emerged from one of his whirlpools, he was liable to be greeted with “a shower of poisoned arrows from hostile natives lurking in the bush." And this, mark you, within a few miles of a Dutch Government station. It just shews you.
But according to Mr. Mather, under Dutch law no one is allowed to prospect for gold in Borneo, nor, strangely enough, for diamonds. So what with one thing and another, he thought that it would be as well to beat it with his illicit gains while the going was good: and when he was charged with manslaughter because a “proa” containing some of his coolies had capsized in a rapid with some loss of life,
he made up Ins mind that the time had come to head for British territory, there being, of course, no such thing as extradition between the Netherlands East Indies and Sarawak.
The first step was to disguise himself as a Malay. This he accomplished by coating his entire body with brown grease-paint and putting on "a sarong, a turban, a false moustache, a pair of screw-on earrings, and the usual array of brass and copper arm-bands and anklets.” He was wise not to forget these ornaments, since it is common knowledge that the average Malay would sooner leave behind his tobacco than his callings and anklets when venturing into the jungle. After successfully tricking a Dutch military patrol, Mr. Mather paddled single-handed some two hundred miles or so up the Barilo river, encountering numerous rapids on his way, and at last. doffing his Malay disguise (since the I.cad-hunters regarded any wandering -Malay as their legitimate prey, but might hesitate before decapitating a white man), he set off across country. It is here that the really heroic part of his saga beings.
It is a saga of ferocious head-hunters of unusual stature ("the average male Dayak” says Mr. Mather, "is seldom under six feet tall”); of man- traps set with sharpened bamboos tipped with snake-venom, a scratch from which meant certain death (a hundred of these death-dealing stakes were encountered and up-rooted on one half-mile stage of his journey); of capture by Dayaks, whose "stockade” was surrounded with "the usual grisly assembly of embalmed human heads set on top of ten-foot poles” ; of escape by the desperate expedient of setting fire to the long- house in which he was imprisoned; of fever and starvation, of weeks of tramping, during which his sole nourishment, apart from roots, consisted of wild bananas, coconuts, and other “common jungle fruits"; of escapes from wild beasts; of heroic endurance, and incredible hardships.
But grit will tell, and Mr. Mather won through in the end. Early one morning he heard voices in the bush, and was delighted to find that, they belonged to a gang of Malays who were engaged in planting rubber-trees under the direction of an unmistakable Englishman. It was Mr. Oliver Rigdon, "manager of the vast Mcliaiiglin Estate,' and after live and a half months of wandering, the saga was ended, and he was saved! He had reached Journey's End. According to Mr. Mother's map. the McLauglin plantations are situated about twenty miles up the Balingian river: be that as it may, Mr. Rigdon was a perfect host, since he clothed him, barbered him. and entertained him until he had completely recovered his strength. Dear Mr. Rigdon ’
Mr. Mather was now able to continue his journey to Kuching, which he reached “by cart and motor-car” ; in Kuching he disposed of some of his nuggets, but his diamonds he kept to sell later on in Amsterdam. Unfortunately. they proved to be only third-grade stones, but all the same they netted him the comfortable sum of £10,000. which enabled him to set up in Singapore as an exporter and importer, a business in which he is still engaged. Well done. Mr. Mather!
There you have the saga. Knowing human nature, it is not at all surprising that such a farrago of lies and rubbish should come to be written. What is amazing is that it should ever be published, and. presumably, paid for. Truth may remain obstinately bidden at the bottom of her well, but Mr. Mather has found out that gold does not lie only at the bottom of whirlpools, and has made good use of his discovery : as the old saving has it, there’s a sucker born every minute.
Films of the Month.
The films exhibited at the Sylvia Cinema during i he month were a definite improvement on those shown in May, but the quality of the "aborts" still leaves a great deal to be desired; it seems a pity dial we cannot have more news-reels and "Mickey Mouse" cartoons, and fewer "comedies” of the type that we have recently had to sit through.
The outstanding popular success of the month was Chit Chin Chute, which played to packed houses and then had to be put on for an extra night, so great was the demand. This was a spectacular British film of the musical comedy which ran for four years in London during the war, and the sound of old favourite- such as "Any Time’s Kissing Time," and "The Cobbler's Song,” aroused sentimental memories in more than one of the audience. George Bobey and Anna May Wong gave admirable performances as Ali Baba and the slave girl respectively, (Anna May Wong looking distractingly lovely, too much so, in fact, for the feelings of a susceptible critic), and Fritz Kortner played Abu Hassan in the best Oscar Asche vein. The film made up in spectacular photography for any defieiences in plot and construction, and proved a I great attraction.
Blonde Venus was a disappointing picture starring Marlene Dietrich and Herbert Marshall, and consisting chiefly of sugary false sentiment on the । 'mother love” theme. There are those who hold that Americans should not be allowed to have । children in view of their incurable penchant for ' sentimentalising over them, and there is much to be said for this point of view. The flood-gates of Hollywood's treacle seem to be released every time a little "chee-ild" appears on the screen, and the result-; are apt to be just a little nauseating.
Belote the Sea was an ordinarily good film with , some startling underwater effects and some good । acting on the port of Fredrik Vogeding as Karl , Schlemmer : incidentally, the shots of the interior of a 1 -Boat in action were excellent, si durable v. is an amusing Ruritanian comedy with Janet Gaynor in the chief role, looking very peaked and windswept. Her accent, too, hardly fitted the part she was playing of a central European princess, and it was an experience to hear her ejaculate “What !	are ya gonna foice me ta mairry um?”
when the Prime Minister pressed his suggestion ' that •*!«* should make a match of it with the Prince of a neighbouring Slate. Operator 13, a tale of spying and intrigue in the American Civil War, would have been a sound melodrama if the scenario-writers had not insisted in introducing the inevitable theme-song, which reduced the picture to absurdity. Gary Cooper acted well, and should have been treated with more consideration.
Far and away the best picture of the month was The Thin Man, starring William Powell and Myrna Loy. This was just the kind of quick-fire, wise-cracking crook play that the Americans do so supremely well, ami every moment of it was entertaining. William Powell was ideally cast as the 1 detective who was never drunk, yet never quite sober, and Myrna Loy played up admirably as his ' puzzled but patient wife. The final dinner-party, the guests at which were mostly crooks, and the waiters plain-clothes men, was splendidly done, and the film retained our interest up to the very last moment. A great picture, head and shoulders above any American film we have yet seen in Kuching.


114
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1935.
Brighter Outlook for Copra.
MB. ERIC MACFADYEN’S VIEWS
EXPRESSED.
Mr. Eric Macfadyen, presiding to-day at the annual general meeting of the Straits Plantations. Ltd., suggested that copra prices had now touched bottom levels.
He thought that an improvement could be : expected in view of the United States Government's curtailment of the cotton crop, with a consequent shortage of cotton seed oil.
There were, also, he said, many signs that "certain European markets” had overdone tin; exclusion of tropical produce, while a limit had been sat on the production of whale oil which in recent years had seriously disturbed the vegetable oil market.—.Straits Budget.
Miri Idyll.
I had always imagined that when the young men of the A.P.C. were transferred to Miri they were headed for a lazy tropical paradise spoilt only by the smell of oil.
But it appears that Miri is really a strenuous place, even worse than Singapore, if a writer in The Mirage is to be believed.
They actually begin work at seven a.m. To make sure that everyone docs so. a whistle goes at that hour. At nine a.m. coffee is served in the office. At eleven a.m. the whistle goes for tiffin. At four p.m. work is over.
I don't quite see where breakfast comes in. unless- one cats it at an hour at which very few people c.in eat it. hut otherwise there is much to he said for the Miri regime.—Straits’ Times.
Ode To a Cinema Organ.
Not you. O .Music, shall attend my lyre, When Vomit and her All Electric Choir Can belch for ninepence all your poet needs To be as sick as Vox Humana reeds.
Come Retch ! Come Puke! Come creeping organ slops.
And drench the world in half melodic slops: Discharge your stomachs, let the senses swim And splash their way through Bilge’s latest hymn. Force fifty lingers down the public throat And press all pedals if we dare to float ! Make every manual hold us gasping under Till even Thought takes on the voice of thunder. Till earth and sky and laughter all appear Like ghosts of memory, wailing in the ear; Struggling to pierce the dense inanity And bring their owners back to sanity.
Nay, cease not, Vomit I shall your belching* flag When half-chewed Beauty's in your windy bag? When at a signal Brahms and Mozart come Hot from your throat , a mass of sticky scum, Followed without a moment's pause for tears By Tin Pan Alley's raucous chanticleers— Who sometimes tiring of erotic whine Beg you, Circe, to make them grunt like swine; Or, if it please your ether-roaming fancy. Treble their voice to emulate the Nancy; Sinking from that to tearful ululations Bevond the scope of all of God's creations; Unheard by Dante, though he roamed through hell And made immortal every tortured yell.
W. A. Rathkey
—Review of Reviews.
Pereunt Et Imputantur.
Expectation of life is ft paradox quite For the older one grows, I am told.
The more yearn one will live to absorb "one more pahit”
Which is comfort indeed to the old
Oh. yes,
It is comfort, indeed to the old.
MALE.
If you've reached three score ten and are strongly alive. The figures reveal that you must
Live another eight years point seventy-five
Before you are due to be Dust.
Quite so, Before you are due to be Dust.
But when you attain to this age, you will find
That for once you have "bought” a good laugh, For statistics will prove that you still have to grind Out another five year* and a half.
Dear, dear,	•
Another five year^ and a half.
But when you at last roach one hundred and five, Then you stand at the threshold nf—Heaven?
For though you may feel that on age you do thrive.
.Your Lin* Expectation’s point seven.
That's all, That mis'rable fraction, point seven.
EEM ALE.
Bitt Taubes, quite wisely. I'm bounden to say.
Ignoring all facts culled from books,
Undoubtedly seem to grow younger each day, For a woman's as old us shu looks—
Oh yeah?
A woman’s as old as she looks.
Indeed. by their inverted reasoning, they
Are proving statistics correct.
For the younger one is, then the nearer the way
To the Laud of the Heav’nly Elect
Yes. yes,
To the land of the heav'nly Elect.
If you cannot believe that I’ve told you the truth
Read Whitaker, page five five one.
And Elizabeth Arden on "How to keep Youth.”
Or Our friend Maria Stoptw about "Fun” (Note: Ed.
Thank Heavens—this nonsense is done.)
The Butler.
Mainly About Nothing.
EMPIRE STORY FOR MAY.
	On 6th, Silver Jubilee Day, one gun was fired.
	Extract from Kapit monthly report.
MAN’GGl, a handsome Dayak youth, is reclining gracefully on the. Ruai  of  a Dayak long-house near Kapit. His- father squats beside him, thoughtfully rolling a cigarette. His mother and both his sisters are working in the blazing sun some distance from the house: they are not expected home until lunchtime. when they will hare to cook the. mid-day meal for their menfolk.
Suddenly the silence is shattered by the boom of ■i gnu. .1 flying-fox, startled from its resting-place, in a temedak tree, flics past the house with an eldritch scream. The reverberations of the report die slowly away among the surrounding hills in a  scries of diminishing echoes. After a few moments, silence reigns again, broken only by the gentle grunting of pigs from beneath the house, and the occasional crow of a fighting-cock.
MANGGI (languidly) : What was that, father?
APAI  Mangci (a trifle smugly) : That, my son, was the Jubilee Gun.
Mancgi : And what the devil is a ‘‘Jubilee Gun," if it's all the same to you?


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1935.
115
Aral Manggi (scratching his backside, and choosing his words with care) : A Jubilee Gun, my boy, is primarily	well, it is primarily a
symbol. Yes, I think that on the whole we should be justified in describing it as a symbol.
ManGgi (raising himself on one elbow): What of?
Apai Manggi : Of Empire.
Manggi : I see.
Apai Manggi : That gun that you have just heard
is aai outward and visible	sorry, 1 mean
audible	sign that we, who live one hun-
dred and sixty miles up a river in Borneo,
and whom a superficial observer might
consider a trifle backward in some respects,
are none the less members of the greatest
Empire that I he world has ever seen; we
are members of a commonwealth which is
united to the mother country by bonds, not
of subjection, but of equality and understand-
ing, of common faith, and common purpose;
and we share with her one common herit-
age—
As he speaks, the ruai is illuminated by an
unearthly light emanating from a ball of fire which
has quietly appeared from nowhere, and which
flits like a will-of the-wisp from pillar to post.
After an erratic course, the fire-ball lights on the
head of APAI MANGGI. and cloaks him with a
mantle of flame. The voice goes on speaking out
of the dazzling brightness, but it becomes curiously
tinged with a soft Scottish burr. From the glowing
heart of the flame appears A HEAD : it is the head,
not of APAI MANGGI. but of Mr. RAMSAY
MACDONALD.)
The Head : 	the glorious heritage of B-r-ritish
Civilisation. In every cor-mer of the Mirth
where B-r-ritish foot hits trod, there has been
planted the standard of progress and advance-
ment; there have been given to other races
the priceless benefits of just and enlightened
Gover-rnment, of guidance, of selfless sacri-
fice in Hie interests of humanity	
A Voice, (insinuatingly} ; And vat about the pro-
fits. eh?	Vas there no dividends,
ain't it?
The Head : There, I say	
Another VOICE (Mumbling rapidly): Ashanti'
Goldfields .if)'9 Kuala Pahang Preferred
2.Gil De Beers Consolidated Mines 13 3 •'1 •>
Burniah Ordinary 80/71 Hudson Bay Co. 104
Kalahari Development Trust I00J- Assam
Trading Co. Cum. Preference 8g Ceylon
(Para) Rubber Co. 4/1J Tanganyika Con-
cessions "B " Preference W/3 Bulau Karnin
0.21 Bengal United Tea i| Uganda Ordinary
3/16	
The Head (Serenely) : There, I say-
(His speech is drowned by the sound of a vast
mob cheering and shouting to the strains of the
National Anthem. The roar of the crowd swells
rapidly until it merges into the rumble of a thunder-
storm that is breaking over the house. There is a
flash of lightning and a sudden black-out. A
moment later APAI MANGGI is again revealed,
and everything is as it teas before, i
Apai Manogi : And that you see. is the meaning
of the Jubilee Gun. As T so appositely
remarked  just now, it is a symbol of Empire.
M.anggi (lying down again) : Uh-huh.
THE PROFESSOR IN THE STRATOSPHERE.
Good afternoon, everybody; this is the Regional
programme from London. We have interrupted
the recital of chamber music by the Schweinkopf
string quartet since exceptionally favourable con-
ditions have enabled its to relay to you the running
commentary on the ascent of Professor Dingle-
berry into the stratosphere. This ascent, as you
are probably aware, is taking place at Higgins-
ville, Missouri. We shall now switch over to the
. commentary.
	There's the balloon lying right in the
middle of the field. The envelope is nearly full
now, and it's tugging at the mooring-ropes. Hear
that cheering? That's the crowd tellin’ the Pro-
fessor what they think about him : they sure are
giving him a break I Here he comes, here’s the
Professor himself and his assistant. He’s waving
his hand to the crowd; he’s flung his spectacles
into the air; now he's jumped on 'em,—hear that
laugh go up? Say, there's been trouble some-
1 where, the police are here—a patrol car has just
drawn up beside the gondola ; the Professor’s fixed
it, though, he's laughing with the cops and
slapping ‘cm on the buck; he's slipped one of ’em
ten bucks, and everything’s Okay, no it isn't—say,
that wasn't just a cop, it was a police lootenant,
and the Professor slipped him a hundred bucks;
he ain't laughing any more no sir. He's fiddling
with the gondola now,—he's trying the valve
mechanism, listen hard, folks and you'll hear the
gas escaping -no. sorry, that was just the baked
beans the professor had for breakfast. Say, 1 wish
you could take a look at this crowd, it sure must be
a record ; there's exactly two million seven hundred
and eighty-two thousand six hundred mid forty-three
people on this ground. Did I say forty-three?
Sorry. I meant two million seven hundred and
eighty-two thousand six hundred and forty-four. I
forgot the Professor,—it's funny how a guv can
make mistakes sometimes. Here's this enormous
crowd key ed up to fever pitch to witness this epoch-
making attempt on regions no human being has
' ever penetrated. If the Professor pulls it off, his
name will go down to posterity with those of Al
•alone. Jo-Jo the Dog-Paced Boy, Huey Long
uni other celebrated pioneer-heroes of science.
Just you think what it means, folks; if all goes
we I that aluminium gondola will soon be twelve
miles high with the Professor inside it. Twelve
miles! Just try to pull yourself in the Professor's
place, now. at this eventful moment! He's only
a little guy with grey hair and an in-growing chin,
but he sure has grit, yes sir, we must hand it to
him there, Now lie's getting ready to enter the
gondola; he's shakin' hands with the newspaper
boys and giving 'em a story. Now he's insulted
one of 'em, I couldn’t hear what he said, hut it
must have been something pretty bad, they
i certainly are sore at him. Now he’s hit one of
'em,—now he’s fighting his assistant,—he's caught
him a  poke on the nose and blacked his eye; the
police lootenant has fetched him a kick' in the
pants, good, and hard: SAY	! the Professor's
socked the lootenant. ain't that a winner?—What
d'you know about that? This is getting exciting.
T can’t see just what's happening, they're all so
mad lit the Professor,—the loot’s socked him with
a black-jack—no he hasn't, lie's missed him and
, smashed the gondola's window .... the Professor
has crowned him from behind with a cylinder full
of helium .... now they're nil fighting like a
pack of coyotes .... I can't see ... . the
Professor .... he’s down .... now he’s up
again .... he's bleeding at the mouth ....
he's .... he's .... that Goddam loot ....
he's .... he's ... he ... .

Good afternoon, everybody. This the Regional programme from london. We shall now resume the recital of chamber music by the Schweinkopf string quartet since it is growing increasingly apparent that there will be no ascent into the stratosphere, and hence no running commentary. Good afternoon.

First Division News
May.
An application to open mi amusement park in Kuching on the lines of the "New World in Singapore was received at the Resident’s Office. After full investigation, the application was refused, since all the proposed side-shows appeared to consist of gambling games.
On May 23rd. part of the land enclosed by the ' race-course which had been cleared by the Municipal Department was burnt off. The fire-engine stood by as a precaution, but no difficulty was experienced in controlling the fire.
One hundred and twenty-four civil and forty-five criminal eases came before the Kuching Courts during May. Of the latter, fifteen were for 1 breaches of Municipal By-laws.
T.K. Mohidi reported a recurrence of trouble between rival "gangs” at Santubong. As a preventive measure, a squad of Constabulary was sent to the kampong for temporary duty.
Dahan Rubber Estates, Ltd., harvested 20.000 lbs. of dry rublier during May. •
The District. Officer, Bau. reports that consider-
able interest in antimony has been shown in Upper
Sarawak lately, numerous applications for licences
to prospect for this metal having been received.
The production of gold in Upper Sarawak con-
tinues to remain at a steady level, the total
production for April amounting to 2,205 ozs. The
following table shows the gold obtained by the
various companies :



Mi R. G. Aikman, Acting District Officer, Bau, left Bun on transfer on May 12th, having handed over the affairs of the station temporarily to Mr. J. R. Ou tram. Tic returned on the 26th, accompanied by Dr Marjoribanks and Mr. I'-. H. Pollard, who took over of District Officer as from June 1st.
In pursuance of a suggestion made by Mr. G F J. Pegler, kampong signboards have hbeen made and have now been distributed to the various tuu-tna in the Lundu district.
The Court Writer, Lundu. reports that during the month .nt old kiqair post (tiamj pala) was taken out of the Lundu fort and replaced with belian. This post is believed to have been part of the original fort building, and has therefore stood for some 65 years
The Assistant District Officer. Sadong. reports
that 1.251 people were vaccinated by the Dresser
during a tour of inspection along the coast; a
Dresser from Kuching vaccinated over 1,500 people
in the Samarahan area.
Reports slate that the engkabang crap in the Ulu Melikin. Kedup. and Kayan districts is going to be exceptionally good.
Mi Wright, of the Forest Department, spent part of the month in the Ulu Melikin demarcating a protected forest" between Sungei Eugkabaug Baharu and Sungei Krangan. This area contains some excellent timber, and is traversed by the Kuching-simanggang Road rentis.
The Race-Course Development
Fund.
MEETING TO CONSIDER PROPOSALS.
On May 25th. 1935, a meeting was held in the District Court, Kuching, to consider the question of raising a fund to develop the area inside the Race-Course, which is at present waste land. The Acting Government Secretary, after opening the meeting, invited the Resident. First Division, to give his views. The Resident spoke as follows :—

GENTLEMEN,
It has been suggested that we should raise a fund in Kuching and devote the proceeds to developing i the land inside the Race-Course which has given to the Government for public use in 1891 by the heirs of the late Mr. Ong Ewe Hai.
Before putting various motions to you. I wish to explain the outline of a scheme and then ask for comments and criticisms thereon. The cost of I developing such a large area a? the Race-Course I must necessarily be heavy, but if this scheme is passed, T think you will agree that we should aim I at developing the whole area.

There are eleven schools in Kuching with an average daily attendance of about 2,600 pupils, and it is much to be regretted that with one or two notable exceptions, these schools have no playing fields. A large number of these boys after leaving school would like to be able to play games such as football, but unless a young man is an exceptional footballer, he cannot get a game because he cannot get into one of the teams in the league. There is, admittedly, a football league in Kuching, but it has only one fairly good field to play on. and there are practically no tennis courts for those who would like to play tennis. There are also a number of other games which would no doubt be played if grounds were available,—push-ball, for instance, and net-ball, both popular games amongst the Chinese, and badminton, which is popular with the Malays.
Plenty of land is available at the race-course to develop fields for the use of enthusiasts of all those games, and in addition it is proposed that part of the area be planted with shade-trees and walks constructed for the benefit of those members of the public who prefer less energetic forms of recreation.
It is now generally recognised throughout the world that when you employ people, you have not discharged the whole of your duty towards them when you pay them their wages at the end of the month ; you must help them to look after themselves during their leisure hours and the accepted way of doing this is to give them facilities for games. Individual sports grounds are not possible here, and for that reason 1 look to the whole of the commercial community to answer this appeal by giving generous contributions and looking upon it as a form of insurance for the health of their staffs.
I will now give you a brief outline of the scheme :—
(1)We must aim at raising $50,000 so that all the fields can be properly made up with subsoil drainage for the football fields, and hard surfaces for the tennis courts.
(2)A management committee of seven persons is to be elected, of which three will be Government nominees; two will be nominated by the Chinese Chamber of Commerce; and two by the elected representatives of the Malays (Datos).
(3)The Chartered Bank have kindly agreed to act as Honorary Treasurers.
(4)The management committee will appoint a collection committee to arrange for the collection of subscriptions, and will publish lists of names of subscribers daily or weekly as advisable. It should be specially noted'that as the scheme is for the benefit of -everyone, rich or poor, the smallest subscriptions from poor people are just as welcome as the larger ones from big merchants and bankers. _ .	.
(5)With regard to the maintenance of the grounds, you have two choices :
(i)to have this in the hands of the management committee, and to have a paid secretary in addition to the necessary staff of groundsmen, etc., to keep the fields in order, or
(ii)to have this in the hands of the Municipal Department.
The Resident's speech was translated into Chinese by Mr. Tan Sum Guan, and into Malay by the Datu Amar. The Resident then asked if anyone present had any criticisms to make or alternative suggestions to offer, but his proposals were carried on a show of hands.
The Government Secretary moved that the Resident, in consultation with the representatives of the various communities, should appoint an organizing committee consisting of seven persons three Government nominees, two Chinese, and two Malays) and that subscription lists should be published periodically. He said that if theft were no amendments to his motion, the whole matter could he left in the hands of this committee.
This was carried unanimously. Mr. Dickson, Manager. Messrs. Sime, Darby & Co., Ltd., asked whether any definite time limit was to be fixed for the collection of subscriptions, and the Government Secretary suggested that at least a year should be allowed. Mr. Allan, the Agent. Chartered Bank, proposed, however, that the fund should be closed before the current year ended, and that work should be started with whatever funds were in hand
The Resident explained that sufficient funds timid not be obtained within six months to enable the committee to proceed with the great amount of work that hail to be accomplished. Nothing substantial could be done with anything less than half the sum of money which it was hoped eventually to collect. He did not consider that there was an appreciable chance of collecting this sum before the end of the year, and he was therefore in favour of having no time limit. If it became obvious that the fund would prove a failure, a general meeting of subscribers would be culled, and donations would be refunded.
The meeting expressed itself in favour of no time limit.
The Resident then asked whether anyone had any suggestions to put forward with regard to the manner in which the fund should be started. Mr. T. V Tan said Hint in his opinion the total aimed at was too ambitions if it was expected to realise this sum in voluntary contributions, and inquired whether the money might be raised by some such means as a lottery. The Resident replied that it was advisable first of all to see what the result of the appeal would be; if the response did not come up to expectations, the organizing committee could then devise other means of raising money.
The meeting then terminated.
Football.
SIX-A-SIDE SOCCER TOURNAMENT.
Winners.	Runner up.
Municipal (One goal). Perhimpunan (Two corners).
The final of the six-a-side soccer tournament was played off between the Municipal and Perhimpunan teams on the evening of Monday, June 3rd.
Perhimpunan set the pace from the beginning, and were the more impressive side until midway through the second half. By the interval they held a slight advantage of one corner to nil, and on the resumption of play went further ahead with another corner.

It was at this stage, however, that a transformation took place. 1'he Perhimpunan team, presumably thinking their lead sufficient, concentrated on defence. The mistake was early apparent, since the Municipal forwards now took up the attacking and pressed hard until the end of the game.
During the final minutes the Perhimpunan defence was completely overrun, and the Municipal forwards appeared likely to score at any moment.
Nevertheless, it remained for Buang, the Municipal full-back, to score the winning goal for his side; the result of a good individual effort, in which he dribbled the ball the whole length of the field, and practically walked it into the net.
MrsTL. N. Reynolds kindly presented the medals to the winning team.—W.J.C.
Sylvia Cinema.
Provisional Schedule of Programme.
July, 193;».
Date.	Day.
1935.
1st & 2nd Monday & Tuesday
3rd Wednesday
4th to 8th Thursday to Monday
9th & 10th Tuesday 4 Wednesday
Uth & 12th Thursday * Friday
13th & 14th Saturday A Sunday
15th & 16th Monday & Tuesday
Film Title.
Murder at the Vanities
Fugitive Lover*
Tarzan and His Mate
Emperor .Jones
Yam Seng
Stambcral Quart
Reserved for Chinese
Film
17th & 18th Wednesday A Thursday We're not Dressing
19th to 21st Friday to Sunday Kid Millinns
22nd A 23rd Monday & Tuesday Reserved for Chines©
Film
21th & 25th Wednesday & Thursday Black Magic
26th & 27th Friday A Saturday Bird of Paradise
28th & 29th Sunday A Monday Stand Up and Cheer
80th A 31et Tuesday to Wednesday Reserved for Chinese Film
Sarawak Turf Club.
Rack No. 3	[3.30 p.m.
THE SLUMP STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
Race No. 4	[4.0 p.m.
THE B.C.L. STAKES.
Value $250. $50 presented by The Borneo Company Limited, with $200 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
Race No. 5	["4.30 p.m.
THE MATANG STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division H ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
Rack No. 6	[5.0 p.m.
THE PENDING STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
Rack No. 7	[5.30 p.m.
THE RANEE’S CUP.
Value $250. A piece of plate of the value of $100 presented by Her Highness the Ranee with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance 1 mile. Entrance Fee $10. $5 refunded to nonacceptors. Handicap published on the Course. Post Entries allowed at $20 but no refund.
Provisional Programme for the Autumn
Meeting, 1935.
First Day, Saturday, 21st September, 1935.
Rack No. 1	[2 30 p.m.
THE TUAN MUDA’S CUP.
Value $250. A piece of plate of the value of $100 presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
Rack No. 2	[3.0 p.m.
THE DATUS’ STAKES.
Value $250. $50 presented by the Datus with $200 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
Second Day, Monday, 23rd September, 1935.
Race No. 1	[2.30 p.m.
THE SARAWAK STEAMSHIP COMPANY’S
STAKES.
Value $250. $150 presented by The Sarawak Steamship Company, Limited, with $100 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
Race No. 2	[3.0 p.m.
MESSRS. SIME DARBY & COMPANY’S
STAKES.
Value $250. $50 presented by Messrs. Sime Darby & Co., Ltd., with $200 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.

Rack No. 3	[3.30 p.m.
THE SARAWAK STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division 111 ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
Rack No. 4	[4.0 p.m.
THE JUBILEE STAKES.
Value $250- Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division 1 ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
Rack No. 5	[4.30 p.m.
THE STATES SPRINT.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
Race No. 6	[5.0 p.m.
THE. TURF CLUB STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third . $40.
A handicap for Division 111 ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
Race No. 7	[5.30 p.m.
THE RAJAH’S CUP.
Value $300. A piece of plate value $150 presented by His Highness the Rajah with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $40.
A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance round the course (about 1J miles). Entrance Fee $10. $5 refunded to non-acceptore. Handicap published on the Course. Post Entries allowed at $20 but no refund.

Dahan Rubber Estates (1933) Limited.
Toe Directors a submit their Report and Statement of Accounts for the twelve months ended the 31st December, 1934, duly audited.
The Working Profit for the year amounted to £1,998 4s. lid. to which has to be added Profit from the sale of Investments and Interest and Dividends received, making a total of £2,354 12 s. lOd. Debentuie Interest and London Expenses amounted to £1,640 15s. 10d. leaving a Net Profit for the year of 1'713 17s. 0d. which is deducted from the Loss brought forward of 1'1,038 17s. lid. leaving a Debit Balance of 1'325 0s. lid. carried to the Balance Sheet.
The Crop of Rubber for the twelve months am muted to 272,850 lbs., as against 311,600 tbs. for the preceding eleven months. The shorter Crop being largely due to the measures taken to restrict Crop in accordance with the International Restriction Scheme which came into operation during the Season under review.
The average net sale price was 5d. per lb. the f.o.b. cost being 3.24d. per lb.
The retiring Director is Mr ChaRLEH BuLKBLBY SuttOn, who, being eligible, offers himself for re-election.
The Auditors Messrs. Peat, Marwick, Mitchell & Co., offer themselves for re-election.
13, Rood Lane,
London, E.C.3.
16th May, 1935.
By Order of the Board,
ROBERTSON, BOI'S A CO.,
Agents and Secretaries.

Second Division News.
May.
Mr. II. E. Cutfield, Acting Resident. Second Division, visited Bantu, Ulu Lingga. on May 22nd, and reports that the new bazaar is nearing completion. and that the pepper in this district looks particularly healthy.
The Assistant District Officer, Simanggang, visited the Skrang from May 7th to 27th No signs indicating the presence of outlaws were encountered, although rumours were current that some of them were continually passing backwards and forwards between R. Kemnt. Ulu Menjuau. and R. Manchu, Ulu Lemanak. Some of the people in R. Kemal are related to the outlaw Jeluing.
On May 12th. a case of arson was reported at Engkilili. which resulted in the arrest of a Chinese named Lai Fah. Tie was Inter convicted in the Resident's Court under section 43S of the Penal Code, but judgment was reserved since it appeared that he was insane and not responsible for his actions.
The Pusa Malays report a disappointing fishing season.
The padi-harvest in the Saribas district is said io he the worst for many years, and there is little doubt that there will soon be a shortage. Already large quantities of rice have been purchased in the bazaar, and as a result the price has risen sharply.
The Acting District Officer, Saribas. reports that the road between Belong and Simanggang is in ven bad condition after the first five miles, am! after Pengkalan Jongkong becomes practically impassable for anyone carrying a load.
On May 26th, St. Augustine's Day. the S.P.G. Mission at Belong held a land sports meeting. The entries were numerous, and several local records were broken. Both the competitors and a large crowd of spectators spent a most enjoyable afternoon, at the conclusion of which the Acting District Officer presented the prizes. In the evening. Form prizes were presented, and the proceedings were wound up by exhibitions of various types of dances in which both parents and boys took part.
Three Foochows were arrested at Saratok on suspicion of being members of the Sarikei secret society which was recently broken up.
A diving contest was held at Saratok on May 27th to settle a land dispute. Both the contestants remained under water for more than five minutes.
Mr. G. R. U. Arundell. Travelling Assistant District Officer. Lubok Antu, reports with great regret the death, on May 24th, after a lingering illness. of ex-Penghulu Baro of the Lower Delok. Ex-Penghulu Baro served the Government faithfully for sixteen years and retired on pension on account of old age in November. 1932. his place being taken by his son Jimbun.
Ex-Penghulu Baro s death was followed by some most interesting ceremonial rites, which are only performed on the death of a celebrated warrior such as Baro. The body remained in the king-house for three days, during which time a ‘wake" was held, relatives and friends watching and wailing over it, and numerous firearms being discharged and votive offering displayed. The body was then placed in a coffin and taken about 100 yards from the house, where it remained for a further period of four days, after which it was earned to its final resting-place on a certain hill which had been chosen by the ex-Penghulu during his lifetime. Henceforth this hill will be declared mail, and will remain a Di’saka ulit.
On May 30th, Mr. Arundell, accompanied by twelve police and eleven levies, left on a surprise trip to Ulu Batang Ai with the intention of arresting any outlaws who might be found hiding in the uninhabited stretches of this area.
SIMANGGANG NEWS REEL.
The King’s Birthday week-end was enlivened by the very welcome visit of Mr. Calvert from Kuching, and Messrs. Barcroft and White from Belong and Saratok respectively.
The main object of the visit was. to discuss the Tapping Holiday and the Rubber Census, but advantage was taken of the opportunity for holding a football competition at the same time, seven teams being entered.
The weather, which had held splendidly until Friday evening, suddenly broke down, and the pitch, never very dry at the best of limes, unfortunately became, a morass. This reacted unfavourably on the outstation teams, for Betong, who met the Clerks in the first round, showed us in the first half wane of the prettiest football seen in Simanggang for a long time. In the second half, however, the ground proved too much for them and the Clerks picking up a two goal deficit forced a draw. The replay on the Sunday morning saw Betong defeated by the odd goal in three—two very interesting games.
The police disposed of the Saratok and Ulu Ai sides quite comfortably, but the Clerks, a very leg- weary team after having had two barn games against Betong. found the kick and rush methods of Juragan Jais team rather strenuous, and only just got home by one goal to nil.
The Police and Clerks met in the final on Monday evening, and a rather "towsy” game resulted in a draw of two goals each on replay the following Saturday the Clerks won by two goals to one.
in addition to the football, a Bangsawan had also been arranged for the Saturday and Sunday evenings by the members of the Recreation Club. Reinforcements in the form of an actress imported from Kuching and one or two amateurs of some experience from the Kampong. helped to produce what proved to he an excellent show.
The palms must be handed to Taram of the Police, and Wit of the Rent in—the first for his inimitable clowning, and the second for living up to his reputation as 8 "light comedian.'*

The laughter provoked by these two was so infectious that the writer, though unable to understand half of what was going on, could with but difficulty retain his seat (let the uncharitable think what they may). The jokes were not, so the writer is informed, of the “humorous but not vulgar” type, but they evidently struck the correct note.
The band must be congratulated on their performance.—for amateurs to play practically without cease for three and a half hours. and as well as they did. is an action which deserves high commendation.
Altogether a most enjoyable but decidedly strenuous week-end.
The draw and results of the football competition are set out below.

Third Division News.
May.
The Acting District Officer. Sibu, reports that there were three deaths from drowning in the Sibu district during the month. Wong Eee Nong. a Foochow, was drowned in Telok Assail, when his boat was caught in the whirlpool that sometimes occurs there: his three companions could swim, however, and managed Io reach the bank. J ing Choo Kiat, also a Foochow, had just landed from a launch, and was about to mount the steps of a wharf when he slipped and fell into the water. As usual with FoOchows unable to swim, he did not come up again. A Malay woman from Daro named Sagil was drowned whilst crossing the Leba'an. She and three others, all women, were in a small boat with apparently very little free-board. The boat swamped by a wave, and sank near the middle of the river. Three of the women were rescued by Dayaks, and the body of Sagit was recovered at Binatang.
Twenty-four Simanggang levies, forming the garrisons of the blockhouses at Meluan and Entabai, returned to Lingga in s.l. Chamois during the month. One levy, Ugil, from Menyarin, in the Katibas, was reported lo have been lost whilst on patrol duty. Re started off alone from the last camp before reaching the blockhouse, without wailing for his companions, and arrived three days later. Explanations have not yet been received.
Zainudin, a surveyor who is working at present in the headwaters of the Katibas, reported that one of his camps had been disturbed and several small things of no value stolen. The camp was empty at the time, as the whole party was on Bukit Lumut. Outlaws were, of course, suspected, and were probably responsible, since, so far. they have always made a point of investigating all patrols from a safe distance.

Abang Abu Seman, Native Officer, visited the Poi to arrange farming land for this year. The Dayaks in this river are living in a very restricted area, and owing to present regulations are not allowed to farm far from the main stream. They have sufficient land for I his year, but other arrangements will have to be made after next harvest.
Wan Bujang, Native Officer, visited the Kanowit, Entabai. and Julau, and reported that the engkabang crop, as far as these rivers are concerned, will not come up to expectations. Much of the fruit has died owing to the hot weather.
Land Revenue for May amounted to $5,529.89 bringing I he total for the year to $22,460.85. One hundred and seventy-two deeds were registered, and notices for the auction of fifteen lots were issued, including four sago-factory lots at Sungei Kut.
The raising and reconditioning of Laming Road as far as the junction with Bukit Lima Road was finished by the end of May. The Chinese living beyond then petitioned for the whole road to be done as far as the Tai Khwaii School opposite Sungs. This is in fairly good repair as far ns the Sawmill, and will only necessitate a little filling and regravelling. Beyond the Sawmill the bank of the river has eroded badly in one place, and the road may have to be diverted. Apart from that, it is in good condition, the bridges alone needing repairs, but the rubber bordering it will have to be cut back and felled extensively to allow the sun to penetrate.
The Acting District Officer, Lower Rejang. reports that there was little crime in his district during the month. Twenty-two criminal and six civil cases were heard in the Courts, and there was one appeal to the Resident's Court which was allowed, the conviction and sentence of the Lower Court being quashed.
Harvests throughout the Sarikei and Binatang districts have, generally speaking, been bad, but some Binatang Dayaks who farmed on the const near Belawai harvested bumper crops. An attempt to assess Dayak crops is being made in view of the probability that relief will later have to be granted.
Engkabung promises to be a failure in the Sarikei and Binatang area, prolonged drought and weevils having caused the fruit to fail prematurely.
70 piculs F.A.Q. pepper and 1,455 piculs of rubber were exported from Sarikei during May.
The clearing of the Bulat and Jakar roads at Sarikei was completed during the month, but the bridges on the former have still to be repaired. Repairs to the Jakar road are proceeding, and culverts were laid at the 11 mile.

Mr. J. C. B. Fisher left Sarikei on transfer to Baram on May 2nd.
As from May 1st, lighting at Sarikei was provided by the Sarawak Electricity Supply Company. This is n notable improvement, since there is now an all-night service.
There was an epidemic of influenza at Sarikei during the month, and a number of cases of dysentery were reported at Matu.
A shortage of fresh-water occurred al Sarikei, but fortunately this did not become really serious.
The Dayaks in the Balingian district were visited during the month by the District Officer, Mukah, and by Native Officers. The people under Peng- hulus Unchi and Arnbun appear reasonably contented, since these two penghiilns visit their anak biak frequently and settle cases promptly. Penghuhi Arnbun has not yet recovered from an illness caused by drinking a cup of acetic acid, and he still lives on a diet, of condensed milk and biscuits.
Engkabung fruit in the Balingian district is falling before it has properly formed, and it appears that the crop will not he such a success as was anticipated. In any case, the Dayaks all slate that unless an exceptionally good price is offered the} will not trouble to collect the fruit, since to do so would mean putting off their farming.
The electrical pumps were put into action at Mukah during the month. The pressure is good, and there, should be no cause for com plaints regarding the water supply in future.
The reconstruction of the Balingian Fort should
be finished early in July. The new roof and floor
and the old framework should last for al least
twenty years, but the softwood walls will probably
have to be replaced in seven or eight years’ time.
The Officer-in-Charge, Oya and Dalat, reports
that on March 28th a kaul ceremony took place in
Sungei Hud to hasten the arrival of general good
luck. Many elaborately decorated boats proceeded
slowly to the ulu Hud to the accompaniment of
much music. The usual feasting and main took
place in the ulu, and the procession then returned
to the mouth of the river, where proceedings closed
with still more feasting.
A sudden craze for kite-flying on the part of the
younger generation in Kampongs Hud and Dalat
aroused such a storm of indignation among the
older Melanaus that the sport had to be suppressed. I
Apparently kite-flying is definitely pantang, since !
the Likos consider that it brings sickness and bad
luck.
Reports are coming in that the engkabang is very patchy in the Oya district, and there are several areas in the ulu Oya where for some unknown reasons the flowers, though present in great abundance, all died before the fruit had set. The usual requests from Dayaks for permission to climb engkabang trees for the fruit were refused, despite their fervid promises only to shake the branches.
Only one motor-schooner, M.v. Kim Chin Seng,
entered the Oya river during the month. It is
understood that a regular service of Chinese
launches is to be maintained between Sibu and
the Kut. The launches are expected to run twice
a week, and if this service materialises, it will bo
a great improvement on the hopelessly vague com-
munications of the past.
On May 5th, a serious fire occurred at Oya on
the cattle-ground on the seaward side of the Mukah
road. It originated near the beach, and, fanned
by a strong breeze from the sea, it soon threatened
the kampong. The kampong people turned out to
fight the fire, but since the grass was about three
feet high and as dry as tinder, there seemed to be
no hope for the Mukah end of the kampong.
Fortunately the wind changed at the critical
moment, and the fire turned in the direction of
Mukah and ran parallel to the beach, but not
before it had reached to within about ten yards of
the nearest house. The road acted as a fire-gap,
and where the fire crossed the road it was success-
fully beaten out. The kampong people can
consider themselves lucky to have escaped with tho
। loss of much garden produce and a number of
• young coconut trees. So far there is no clue as to
the jierson responsible for the fire, although there
; Are several suspects.
Notices of auction of the land at the end of
Sungei Kut were received and published during the
month, but the rumour is stronger than ever that
the scheme for building sago-factories in this area
has fallen through.
Two more houses have been completed behind
the Dalat bazaar, and the residential area is
gradually growing more orderly.
On May 17th, the Rev. Father C. Epping
relumed to Dalat from Sibu after a lengthly
absence caused by serious illness.
102 patient- were treated in Kapit hospital during
the month.
Mr. B. .J. C. Spurway, Divisional Forest Officer,
nixed al Kapit on May 9th and left for the Pala
Wong and Punan Bah districts on the 12th. He
was still away at I he end of the month.
The Rev. Father L Van Den Bergh arrived at
Kapit on May 9th to take the place of Father
L. J. Van Odijk, who left for Europe on furlough
in April.
Fourth Division News
April.
On April 23rd a Chinese named Woo Chew was
convicted at Miri of culpable homicide not amount-
ing to murder, and was sentenced to five years
rigorous imprisonment. He had stabbed and killed
another Sarawak Oilfields coolie.
His Excellency Mr. D. J. Jardine, c.m.g.,
O.B.E., Governor of British North Borneo, made an
unofficial landing at Miri on April 12th.

H.I.J.M.S. Tatsuta with Rear-Admiral Shimomura on board. visited Miri from  the I5th to 17th.
Miri foreign follows :—
trade returns for April were as
April, 1935
April, 1934
Total to April. 1935
Total to April. 1934
Imports.
$ 450,950
347,839
1,773,254
1,258,356
Exports.
$ 823,890
679,299
2,563,881
2,236,853
During April timber was shipped from Bintulu to China, the United Kingdom, and South Africa.
Mr P. M. Scott arrived at Limbang on April 28th in order to take over the district during the absence on casual leave of Mr. J. B. Combe, the Acting District Officer.
Tire Lawas (Sarawak) Huhbci Estates, Ltd., exported 33,679 lbs. of dry rubber during April.
May.
The civil case Gulumall vs. Chalmers was settled in the Resident's Court. Miri. plaintiff obtaining judgment for $1,000 damages.
Yong Chee Chin, of Chop Yau Shing, Singapore, obtained judgment against Chop Kim Wo Guan, Miri, for the sum of $3,256 and costs.
The teaching staff of the Miri vernacular school is being re-organised, and a new teacher from Kuching is to take over at the beginning of June. The two former masters are being retrenched.
Work has started on the lay-out of the new kampong site at S. Merbau, Miri. and Municipal coolies have been employed on the demolition of dangerous buildings in Kanqxing China where no owners could lie found.
The Acting District Officer, Bintulu. repons that the present satisfactory price of damar is attracting large numbers of Dayaks in the Ulu Tubau and 3. Anap to collect this product, and large shipments destined for Singapore are arriving at Bintulu from Talau.
The directors of the Chung Hua School, Bintulu, have asked that the Government grant-in-aid should cease as from the end of April. It is thought that this rather unusual request, which has been granted, was made with the object of releasing the school from its commitments with regard to the teaching of Malay.
On May 2nd, a small fishing-boat was blown ashore at Tanjong Kedurong during a bad gale. Its sole occupant, Haji Johari. had left Darn four days previously on a fishing-trip; his sail had been destroyed in a storm, and after an exciting journey of a hundred miles or so, he managed to reach Kedurong. He was none the worse for his experience.

On May 19th. Mr. G. 11. Daly, of Messrs. The Sarawak Steamship Co., Ltd., visited Bintulu in connection with the charter to his company of M.v. Doggersbank. It is understood that this charter was successfully negotiated.
Bintulu now has a scheduled service with Singapore of four ships a month, running at intervals of approximately one week.
Mr. J. C. B. Fisher. Officer-in-Charge. Baram. arrived at Baram. accompanied by Mr. F. H. Pollard, on May 6th, and look over the station on the following day. Mr. Pollard left on transfer to Bau on May 22nd.
The Acting District Officer. Limbang, records with regret the death, on May 3rd, of Mr. Chin Jin Kwi. who retired from the Government Service in 1924 after serving for over thirty-two years.
Work on the re-grading of the Panderuan Road  was continued during the month.
On May 4th, an Indian trader from Limbang bazaar was found hanging in his cell in Limbang jail. A verdict of suicide while of unsound mind was returned at the subsequent inquest.
Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Limited, exported 12.453 tbs. of dry rubber during the month.
The following table gives the trade figures for Lawas district during May :—

Miri Regatta, 1935.
We print, below a preliminary notice regarding a regatta that will be held at Miri on September 23rd. 1935 :—
A Regatta will be held on Monday, 23rd September.
There will be races for :—
30 Men Boats. Local, Visitors and Champion.
15 Men Boats. Local, Visitors and Champion.
8 Men Boats. Open, Inter-Departmental and Boys.
3 Men Boats, Open.
Single Men Boats Open and Local.
Chinese Bandongs and Kotaks.
Swimming races. Open and Boys.

There will be no consolation races but fourth prizes will be given in the 30 Men and 15 Men Local and Visitors races.
It will help the committee if all owners of boats will let one of the Hon. Secretaries know as soon as possible what boats they are provisionally intending to enter. This applies particularly to visitors who will require transport for boats and crews and accommodation for crews in Miri.
Totalizators will be run as usual, selling $1 tickets.
A $1 sweepstake will he held on the 30 men boat Champion Bace.
A list of rules governing the Regatta will be circulated to all competitors. It is hoped that they will observe the rules and treat the racing as a sport. The Committee does not appreciate having continually to settle quarrels arising out of evasion of the rules.
There will be an entertainment with fireworks and dancing after the Regatta. Anyone who can collect a team of dancers, musicians or buffoons is asked to organize a turn to amuse the audience for 10 minutes.
Tile Hon. Secretaries will be glad to receive any helpful suggestions concerning the running of the regatta.
Subscriptions lists will be circulated and the committee hope to receive the same generous support as in previous years.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinion* of Correspondents.)
The Administration of Justice in
East Africa.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Mini,
17th June, 1935.
Sir,
Reference the “Conclusion” on page 92 of your issue dated 1st June, would it not appear that the ideal remedy lies in the adoption of a compromise, viz.:—
“That the administration of justice tn natives would be more efficiently carried out by all Administrative Officers in Lower Criminal Courts possessing a modicum of legal training, but in Appeal Courts by Judicial Officers with full legal training, especially if in all cases Magistrates were assisted by one or more Native Assessors of the same nationality as the Accused ?"
Yours faithfully.
Committee.
E.O.B.
E. 0. Bruce, Esqr.,
The Capitan China
Mr. E. Yuen Kee
Captain J. Muir Haji Serat Mohd. Pawn.
HON. Treasurer.
W. Summer, Esqr..
Joint Hon. Secretaries.
K. H. Digby, Esqr., W. B. A. Hankey, Esqr.

Miri Jubilee Celebrations.
The Miri Jubilee celebrations extended over the whole week-end. On the Saturday afternoon an American tennis tournament was held, for which there were a large number of entries, and in the evening there was a late dance. On Sunday and Monday mornings a cricket match was played between the Gymkhana Chib Miri ami the Miri Recreation Club which the former won by an innings mid fifty runs. Monday was observed as a general holiday, and in the afternoon a popular and successful swimming gala was held in the G C.M. open-air bath. At 7.30 p.m. the Acting Resident proposed the King's health in the Chib, and after that a flannel dance lasted into the early hours of Tuesday morning.
The Capitol Cinema Theatre was reserved on Monday night, and an arrangement effected whereby free tickets were issued to school children and Asiatic employees of Government and Sarawak Oilfields, Limited.au. ( Contributed.)
Menchari Nasihat.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
Dear Sir,
Kampong Patingan,
Kuching,
22nd June, 1935.
May I be allowed a small apace in the column of your paper in order to get in touch with an unknown person from whom I have recently received two letters. The contents of the letters are so very interesting that I feel like to meet the writer in person to express to him my gratitude for the trouble he has taken in giving me such a valuable fatherly advice,
I tried to make out his signature which was very confusedly written but, after a tiresome effort, I managed to decipher only part of it, i.e., “Haji Abdul Ka .... " which.’if I may be permitted to surmise, might read “Haji Abdul Kadir, Haji Abdul Karim, Haji Abdul Kachaw or Haji Abdul Karoot.” Whoever "Mr. Haji Abdul Ka .... " may be. will he kindly make bis name known either through the medium of vour paper or by direct communication to me.
Thanking you. Mr. Editor, for giving me the opportunity to publish this letter.
Yours faithfully,
Bakal Penganten.

