The Sarawak Gazette
WEDNESDAY. MAY 1st. 1935.
Birth.
—*—
At Sankei, on 27U March. 1985. Dayang Masniuh. wife of N. 0. Abang Openg. Sarikei. 3rd Division. Sarawak, a daughter^
Local and personal.
April.
His Highness the Rajah left Kuching on a tour of the Third Division on April 4th, returning on April 11th. His Highness, who travelled in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna, visited all the chief Government stations in the Rejang, and also t he coast st ations of Mnkah and Oya. At Sarikei, His Highness was present at a regatta which had been organized in honour of His Highness’ visit.
Mr. T. Stirling Boyd, Chief Justice, returned from furlough on April 1st. Mr. and Mrs. F. H. Pollard arrived in Kuching on the 15th April. Mr. Pollard left for Baram on May 1st, but we understand that he will soon return to the First Division to take up the appointment of District Officer, | Ban, Mr. R. G. Aikman, the present bolder of that post, having been seconded for special duty with the Rubber Restriction Committee. Mr. Pollard was accompanied by Mr. J. C. B. Fisher, who will be temporarily in charge of Ba ram.
Messrs. R. E Le Sueur and W. Harnack left by the Vyner Hrooke on their way home on 8th April. They were joined in Singapore by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident, Fourth Division, who had sailed direct from Miri. We wish them all a pleasant journey and an enjoyable furlough.
Cricket is steadily gaining adherents in Kuching. It is gratifying to note the increasing interest displayed by Asiatics in this most English of games; let us hope, though, that it will remain a game, and that it, will never be taken sufficiently seriously to produce the friction and heart-burnings that now seem so permanent a feature of the higher circles of the sport. Long may we be spared the sinister sound of those all too familiar words “body-line.”

Mr. and Mrs. W. G. Tait left on furlough by the Marudu on April 13th. Both will be missed in Kuching, and they take with them our best wishes for a pleasant leave. Mr. C, Pitt-Hardacre has been appointed to act as Postmaster-General during Mr. Tait’s absence.
Several transfers in the Administrative Service took place during the month. Mr. J. O. Gilbert took over Bintulu from Mr. .1. G. Anderson on April 20th, and Mr. W. S. B. Buck taking Mr. Gilbert's place as Acting District Officer, Miri. Mr. E. II. Elam relieved Mr. F. L. Crossley as Assistant District Officer, Sadong, on the 13th. and Mr. Crossley and Mr. G. F. J. Pegler both left for home on furlough on the 20th April. Mr. Pegler has not yet been replaced at Lundu.
The news of the sudden death on April 17th of Mr. J. .1. Hill, Acting District Officer, Betong, came as a great shock to his many friends in Kuching. Mr. Hill's death was due to heart-failure following over-exhaustion and exposure to heat; he was on his way from Debak to Saratok, and stopped at a Dayak house for a short rest. Tie complained of the heat and drank a large quantity of water, then, saying that he felt slightly unwell, he lay down on the rudi. Within a few minutes lie was dead
News was at once despatched to Saratok, where the body was brought after an arduous journey over a most difficult track, nearly a hundred Dayaks being called out to help. On arrival early the following morning it was at once placed on board m.l. Rentis, which left for Kuching immediately with Mr. II. E. Cutfield, Acting Resident, Second Division. The funeral took place at the S.P.G. cemetery, Kuching, the same evening, the Rev. Father W. Shelley officiating.
An obituary’ notice appears elsewhere in this issue.
Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft took over the affairs of the Betong on the death of Mr. Hill, and has since been confirmed as Acting District I Officer, Saribas.
Two members of the Roman Catholic । Mission, the Rev. Fathers William van Odijk and T. Delaney, went home on leave during  the month. We understand that both will be away’ for about a year.
The films shown at. the Sylvia Cinema I during the month maintained a high standard | of quality. Among the best were “Bitter Sweet,” a quite exceptional film hased on Noel Coward's successful light opera, and “I was a Spy,” an English success featuring Conrad Veidt, Herbert Marshall, and Madeleine Carroll. Others worthy of mention were “Movie Crazy” with Harold Lloyd; “The Bowery” with Wallace Beery and
' George Raft (will someone kindly drown , Jackie Cooper;); "Palooka” with Jimmy I (Schnozzle) Durante and Lupe Velez; "King ' of the Ritz” with Stanley Lupino; and last । hut by no means least, "Fra Diavolo,” which | brought to Kuching that inimitable pair, ; Laurel and Hardy.
The best individual performance of the month was that of Marjorie Rambeau as the । prize-fighter's mother in "Palooka.”
The Spring Meeting of the Sarawak Turf Club was held on April the 27th and 29th. and provided two most enjoyable days’ racing, a full account of which will be found under ‘First Division News.' Outstation visitors for Race Week arrived • by the Waimuna on the 26th and left on May 1st after brightening up Kuching considerably. Festivities included a performance by the Kuching Amateur Dramatic Society, a dance at Astana, and one at Bukit Mata Kuching. The dance at Astana was the success that these ' functions always are. and our thanks are due to His Highness the Rajah for a most enjoyable evening. Mr. Bates' party was in the best traditions of B.M.K., and did not break up until the small hours, most of the guests arriving full of the party spirit, and all combining under Mr. Bates’ genial and inspiring ‘hostmanship,’ if we may coin a word, to make the dance go with a real'swing.
Altogether, the general verdict was that tins Race Week was the most cheery of recent years, possibly because of the passing of the dismal clouds of the Great Depression. Certainly, all our visitors were out to enjoy themselves, and judging by results it looked as though most of them succeeded.
Outstation visitors to Kuching for the races included : from the First Division. Messrs. R. G. Aikman and J. R. Outram : from the Second Division. Messrs. H. E. Cutfield and D. C. White: from the Third Division, Messrs. P. M. Adams, A. L. McLaine, F. A. Moore, G. Farrelly, J. C. B. Fisher, D. R. Lascelles, A. R. Snelus, A. Macpherson, Mr. and Mrs. B. I. C. Spurway and Miss Ennion, Datu Abang Haji Mohidin and Mr. Ling Sui Ing: and from the Fourth Division, Mr. E. O. Bruce. Mr. and Mrs. W. L. P. Sochon. Mrs. Trechman, Mrs. W. S. B. Buck. Mr. and Mrs. Hope, and Mr. and Mrs. J. G. Anderson. Mr. and Mrs. Anderson are in Kuching on their way on furlough.
We regret to have to record the death on 8th April, after a lingering illness, of Abang Osman bin Mat, formerly a Forest Ranger stationed in the Kuching district. Forest Ranger Osman, as a reward for his zealous services, had the distinction of being promoted to that rank at the early age of 29.

The Rev. A. B. Champion, ma., lately [
Archdeacon of Sarawak, has been appointed
Rector of High Hidden, Kent, the patron
being the Archbishop of Canterbury.
Last month we reported that Mr. W. H.
Potter, of the Sarawak Timber and Trading
Co., had resumed the management of the
Company’s interests at Bintulu. It has been
pointed out to us that this is an error, Mr.
F. E. Spooner being the General Manager of
the Company.
Obituary.
It is with the deepest regret that we have to
record the death, at the early age of 29, of Mr. J.
J. Hill, Acting District Officer, Saribas River.
Mr. Hill died suddenly on April 17th in a Dayak
house between Debak and Saratok, death being
due to heart-failure following over-exhaustion and
exposure to heat.
Mr. Hill joined the Sarawak Civil Service towards
the end of 1926, and during his first torn of service
he did duty at a number of stations including
Barnin, Bau, Miri and Sibu; on his return from
furlough he was placed in charge of Mukah for
about a year, after which he took up the appoint-
ment in which he was serving at the time of his
death. He was a keen and capable officer who
secured everywhere the respect of those with whom
he came in contact. His generous and warm-
hearted nature made him popular with all who
knew him, and we can safely say that there was no
one who knew him who did not feel his death as
a personal loss.
Death is always tragic, but its tragedy is enhanced
when it robs us with complete unexpectedness of
one so young and promising. Mr. Hill will live
long in our memory and affection, and we extend
our most sincere condolences to his parents and
relatives in their great loss.
We very much regret to have to record the death
in London, on March 20th, of Mr. E. V. Andreini,
late of the Sarawak Civil Service.
Mr. Andreini joined the Service in September,
1919, being one of the first group of cadets to be
engaged after the war. Apart from a short spell
in Kuching, all bis service was spent in outstations,
and he had a wide knowledge of the natives of the
country, their languages and customs. He was
invalided from the Service in 1932, and married
shortly afterwards.
No details of Mr. Andreini’s death are available,
but we tender our deepest sympathy to his widow
in her great loss.
Police Cause Riots.
According to the Birmingham Mail the Dyuk police employed to direct the traffic in Sandakan, North Borneo, were the cause of so much fighting among Dyaks of other tribes, who resented their position, that they were relieved of duty and replaced by imported Indians.—The Autocar.
Silver Jubilee Medals.
A supply of Silver Jubilee Commemoration
Medals has been received through the Secretary to
to His Excellency the British Agent for Sarawak,
Singapore, for sale to British subjects as souvenirs
of the twenty-fifth anniversary of His Majesty’s
accession to the throne. These medals, or rather
medallions, are of two sizes, the larger being enclosed
in a red Morocco case stamped with a crown and
the dates 1910-1935, the smaller size being supplied
in a card-board case similarly marked. The prices
are $9.00 and $1.00 respectively.
The medallions are of a most handsome design.
I bearing on the obverse the profiles of Their Majesties
। the King and Queen, and on the reverse a representation of Windsor Castle. Specimens may be
inspected on application to the Assistant Government
| Secretary, Kuching, to whom intending purchasers
should send their orders.
I
Tuba Root is Booming.
Rejoicing Among Chinese Squatters
Chinese squatters at Changi and Paya Debar,
Singapore, are rejoicing.
The reason is that business is booming. Their
business is the cultivation of tuba root and this
promising new Malayan crop is fetching between $60
and $70 per picul.
There is a premium on Changi tuba root for this
is the finest in the country.
After years of experimentation to prove its many
insecticide uses, European and American importers
are now buying tuba root as fast as they can.
Malaya benefits for Malaya Is the only coun-
try in the East where tuba root is grown on a large
scale. Last year 12,050 cwt. were exported, of
a-value of $333,520. The export for January was
1,268 cwts., valued at $35,088.
The market price of the root has risen steadily
over the past year.
There is a tuba root estate in Johore and another
in Pahang but most cultivation is seen in Singapore
which has 500 acres planted—under the management
of Chinese squatters.
The root at Changi is said to possess the highest
percentage of rotenone anil is therefore most in
demand.—Straits Times.
Tuba root has for a long time been produced on
a limited scale in Sarawak, but chiefly for local con-
sumption. Only 57 tons were exported during 1934,
and it seems that this is a crop to which agricul-
turalists might, well turn their attention.
We are informed by the Senior Agricultural
Officer that American buyers require a guarantee of
the rotenone content of the root before purchasing,
and that in Sarawak this content is by no means
i uniform Of two samples sent to America by the
■ late Mr. J. M. Hoover, one was found to contain
5.75% of rotenone, the other none at all; a sample
' sent to the Department of Agriculture, Kuala
Lumpur, during March this year contained only
, 1.37%.
Enquiries and experiments regarding the most
| suitable soil conditions for this crop are now being
made with a view to ascertaining whether it is possible to raise the rotenone content of the local root.

The Administration of Justice
Among Primitive Tribes.
We print below two letters which appeared
in The Times dealing with the above subject,
which is one that concerns Sarawak very
closely. Conditions in parts of Africa are
no doubt analogous to those prevailing in
the interior of this country, and the argu
meats on both sides might well be applied
to Sarawak.
Sir Hesketh Bell is, of course, the author
of Foreign Colonial Administration in the
Far East, and is a well known authority on
the administration of primitive races. We
propose to print next month extracts from
the article in the Journal of Comparative
Legislation referred to in the second letter.
BRITISH JUSTICE IN
AFRICA.
DIFFICULTIES IN
PRACTICE.
NATIVE PREFERENCES.
To The Editor of The Times.
Sir,—The report of the East African Legal
Commission, which was recently presented by the
legal adviser to the Secretary of State for the
Colonies, continues to be a matter of grave concern
to most of those who are, or have been, connected
with our African tropical territories. It is felt that
hasty and undue interference with the procedure of
the native tribunals and with the 'common-sense
methods” of the district officers' courts would
injuriously affect the true interests of those for
whose benefit the proposals are being made, and
that the happy relations which at present exist
between the protectors and the protected may
thereby be diminished.
I believe that I am right in saying that the great
majority of natives all over Africa prefer some-
times to suffer wrongfully at the hands of their
own tribal judges rather than to receive an
apparently higher form of justice from an alien j
magistrate who may be ignorant of their customs,
language, and traditions. Most of them are quite
incapable of appreciating the complicated niceties
of European law practice, and consider it absurd
that an offender, about whose guilt there can be no
doubt, should escape just punishment through some
legal informality or error of procedure. They
ascribe such miscarriages of justice to that strange
form of lunacy which frequently appears to afflict
white men who otherwise seem Io be paragons of
wisdom.
Though some of our lawyers, who have been
trained to think that the "majesty of the law” is
everything, wish to insist that even the most
primitive of Africans should be made to realize the
beauties of British legal systems, it seems to me, i
however, essential that the sense of proportion ■
should be duly observed.
It is of course most important that real justice
should, so far as possible, be assured to natives who
| are under our protection, but it is even more
important that they should be made to feel that
such justice is (casonable and appropriate to their
stage of development. Administrative officers who
have had long experience in tropical Africa are
unanimous in deprecating excessive interference
with the native courts, and they wish to postpone,
so long as possible, the introduction of the intricate
forms of our British jurisprudence.
The great thing in this, as in so many other
directions connected with African administration,
is to observe strictly the adage festina lente. Pro-
gress must be made to keep pace with the mental
and moral development of the people, while the
complex refinements of European systems should be
avoided until the African native, through the right
kind of education and industry, shall have become
fit to assimilate them.
I am. Sir, your obedient servant,
HESKETH BELL. Cannes, March II.
NATIVES’ PROTECTION BY
THE LAW.
To The Editor of The Times.
Sir,—1 have read with interest the letter on "British Justice in Africa" from Sir Hesketh Bell in The Times of March 16. The letter in question is written from the [mint of view of a Governor; and it seems desirable that these matters should be submitted for the consideration of your readers from the point of view of a Judge who has served in East Africa.
Sir Hesketh Bell writes :—
The report [of the East Africa Legal Commission! . . . sometimes to be a matter of grave concern to most of those who arc, or have been, connected with our African tropical territories. It is felt that hasty and undue inkrfen u. u with the procedure of Um native tribunals would injuriously affect the true interests of those for whose benefits the proposals aro being made. . . .
Sir Hesketh Bell is under a misapprehension. It is expressly stated on the first page of the report that native -courts were excluded from the terms of reference of the Commission, and they are not dealt with in the whole course of the report.
Turning now to the report itself. The principal questions which arise thereunder are :—
(u) What kind of justice should be administered to the African native; and (b) whether that justice is best administered (within the financial resources of the territory) by trained judicial officers or by administrative officers without judicial training.
As regards the first question. British justice, which throughout the world is so grealty admired and respected, is based on the principle that no man is to be held guilty unless he is proved guilty according to the law. And yet there is a tendency on the part of some Europeans to wish to exclude the African native from the protection of the law if, though not guilty of an offence under the law, he is, in their opinion, nevertheless guilty of an offence.

Sir Hesketh Bell refers to the ' common-sense
methods" of the district officers' courts, and implies
that those methods are different from and more,
admirable than the methods of the judiciary. But
he knows that all the decisions of the district
officers' courts are subject to inspection and revision
by the judiciary; and that any case tried by ।
methods which constitute a substantial breach of
the law would unfailingly be corrected.
It is, however, alleged that guilty Africans some-
times escape on what is vaguely referred to as :
a mere technicality. The Committee carefully ■
inquired into this question, and found no case in ■
which a conviction had been quashed on what was
Six
Aerodromes for Sarawak
and Borneo.
MINISTRY OFFICIAL'S TOUR
ENDS.
“MOST SATISFIED"
WITH SITES.
LINKING UP WITH PACIFIC
ROUTES,
Col. J. F. Turner, Director of Works and Build-
ings at I be Air Ministry, has returned from his
flying-boat tour of Sarawak and British North
aerodromes and landing grounds between Singapore
only a technicality.
Sir Hesketh Bell joins in the protest against . 
technicalities: and he may lie invited to state what Borneo 
and left on a flying-boat inspection of
"legal informality or error of procedure" he has in
mind, and from his unequalled experience of
Africa, to communicate, for the information of your
readers, those specific instances in which techni-
calities have, to his knowledge, led to "an offender,
about whose guilt there can be no doubt,” escaping
"the just punishment” of his crime.
and Calcutta lust Thursday.
He will not come back to Singapore as originally planned. Instead, he leaves Calcutta by Imperial Airways on April 6 for London inspecting on the way the new R.A.F. Cantonment in process of constriction in Iraq.
Col. Turner is said to be most satisfied with sites lor new landing grounds selected in Sarawak and
B.N.B. These are at Kuching, Bintulu, Min,
Labuan, Jesselton and Kudat. They will connect up with the chain of aerodromes already established from Palawan up to Lauag (Philippine Islands) providing a new air route to Hong Kong.
The first question, therefore, comes to this :
(a) Whether the African subject (equally with the
European subject is to have justice administered to him
according to the law. or
 (b) whether the  African subject
(differently Iran the European subject) It to have  justice•
administered to him according  to the law. •	,
cases as the court thinks it advisable not to apply
law but to punish him on general grounds.
As regards the second question	.The report »» .
unanimous. But attached ....	rel>°rt	I
patches from Governors 111 ■ '	, re„orl 'pfie ; Governments are readv. Tn view of the expansion
patches are far from agreeing ..	...u n>„ . of eivil aviation in the South Pacific by American
To Begin Soon.
Work on these landing grounds will begin as
soon as the Sarawak and British North Borneo


notches are far from agreeing wi... ..
age-long debate between the executive »IW
judieiarv emerges. In the East African possessions
subject to the general control of the secretarv ■'
stale, the executive authority is the Governor
Rarely does an official venture to differ from the ;
Governor. In Executive Conned the Ooveinoi
follows his own opinion. In Legislative I om iI
the official majority vote as the Governor instructs ,
them The judiciary. alone, are not side to -hare ’
in this universal ‘assent. They serve another
master: the law. Hence it comes about that
Governors, with rare and notable exceptions, are , _
inclined to desire to diminish the prestige and |
authority of the judiciary; they desire that jus».
should be administered by administrative officers and ]
not by judicial officers; and they write will, vague- •
ness and without referring to particular cases   about .
and Dutch, as well as British interests, this should
he soon.
Col. Turner l as bad an immense amount of
work to do planning R.A.F. expansion in the Far
East since he arrived at Singapore nearly six weeks
ago. Air Commodore W. L. Welsh, Air Ministry
Director of Organisation with whom he had been
in constant consultation and with whom he went to
I long Kong left for London on Sunday.—(Straits
Times.)
.Japanese Competition.
Piror Goods and Bicycle
"technicalities" and "common-s
These matters are. of the first importance. but 1
letter must be brought to a elose. I will only si
therefore, that the view of administrative •
ny say,

administrative officers '
should of justice is a
performed by judicial
The Beira News states that at South African ports
certain Native cotton goods of Japanese menu
Factur are being retailed at the exact price at which the themselves is that the 

administration of justice is a i cotton yarn which is in. them can be purchased in

skilled matter which is best performed by judicial the world's markets. Our contemporary asks, reasonably
officers.	 enough, who finances the. weaving, dyeing,

For the information of readers interested in these ■ finishing, packing, exporting charges, freights, duties
Mrs, may I venture to add that the submissions
contained in this letter are dealt with at greater
length in the February number of the Journal of
Comparative Legislation '


and commissions. Modern machinery, high labour efficiency and low standards of living do not explain tins.—“East Africa”
There is a story of Japanese competition. A
I am. Sir, your obedient servant,
ALISON RUSSELL, formerly Chief
Justice, Tanganyika Territory.
9. King’s Bench Walk, Temple.
pawn-broker in Batavia in the Dutch East Indies
accepted a new bicycle an a pledge and then found
himself besieged with young men bringing him new
bicycles to pawn. Inquiry showed that the price
he was giving for bicycles in pawn was 10 per cent,
higher than the price charged by the Japanese for
selling them new.—New Statesman and Nation.

Notes and Comments.
The English are a curious race. They are continually being accused, and with sonic justice, of a hide-bound conservatism, not necessarily in politics, but in their customs and little daily usages. For instance, we all know the Englishman who shouts for eggs and bacon at eight o'clock in the morning in a small French hotel, and who flies into a rage when he finds that he cannot get them : he may equally well be a Duke or a Labour leader.—what matters is that he is English. He has had eggs and bacon every morning of his life, and be cannot understand why everyone else in the world should not do the same as he does. He can no more change Ins habits than a leopard can change its spots, and he cannot and will not make any attempt to adapt himself to unfamiliar surroundings.
When an Englishman travels, he takes with him as a rule all bis prejudices, one of the strongest of these being an instinctive dislike and distrust of anything foreign. He will have no truck with any of this foreign nonsense. By the grace of God he is English, and English he intends to remain; and if the foreigners don't like it. well, that's just too bad. for the foreigners But in any case, they are only a bunch of dagoes who don't mailer. This is an attitude which, not unnaturally, is widely resented, and which is responsible for much of our unpopularity abroad. It is an attitude which we shall have to change, for if it is good to be an Englishman, it is better still to be an Englishman who tries to get a line on the points of view of other races. In this complex modem world such an understanding is becoming more vitally necessary every day, and nowhere is this more apparent than in the East.
Unfortunately, the insularity of the average Englishman seems to become accentuated in the Far East. Probably this is due to the fact that the. English administrators, merchants, and technical men who go East are recruited almost exclusively from the middle classes, which are notoriously more tenacious of their prejudices than any other. The Englishman of this class has the knack of making a little corner of England,—a little comer of suburbia, says Mr. Somerset Maugham, rather unkindly.—in every foreign country which he inhabits. No matter where he is, it is the same,—he imports bodily his own culture, (such as it is,) cookery. and customs, and he refuses to alter or modify them for any reason whatever. As far as is possible, he eats exactly the same food on the equator as he does in London or Manchester. In Pekin or Paris. Tahiti or Toledo, he reads the same books and thinks the the same thoughts as his brother in Birmingham, and lives the same life. too. quite oblivious to the fact that conditions may be entirely different from those obtaining in his home-town. If he can so manage it, he even speaks the same language, and takes a kind of perverted pride in the fact that he resolutely refuses to learn any other. The writer has heard Englishmen boast that they have lived twenty years in Singapore or Amoy or Yokohama and have never troubled to acquire even the rudiments of the language of the country. "Never learnt a word of Malay, (or Chinese, or Japanese,)' they say triumphantly. "Never had to. thank heaven.' English is good enough for me, and I make it do for these damned natives". Most of us who have travelled P. & O. have come across people of
this sort, and have laughed at them in secret. But it is really not quite so funny as it sounds, for Ilie appalling short-sightedness that such an attitude implies is nothing less than tragic. The immemorial East is changing, and the day of the omnipotent white man—the little tin god that figures so prominently in Kipling's romances—has vanished for ever. And the sooner we realise this fact, the better. We must sacrifice our exclusiveness if we are to survive.
The future of the Eastern territories now under European control depends more and more upon cooperation between Europeans and Asiatics, and to achieve this end the existing barriers between the various races must gradually be broken down. This, in turn, can only be brought about by increasing tho contact between Europeans and all other sections of the Asiatic community, which will necessitate a greater knowledge of their languages and customs than prevails at present. We must time in, so to speak, on their philosophy of life. We must see what they have to teach us. And it is possible that they bare a good deal to teach us, if we are prepared to learn. But before we even start, we must drop om e and for all our irritating superiority complex. We must realize that our ideas of life in general, because they happen to be Western ideas, are not necessarily the only ones worth considering: they may mil even be the right ones, at any rate when applied to Eastern conditions. We should remember that several of the Eastern races, notably the'Chinese and the Indians, have achieved a degree of civilisation which, in their opinion, is far in advariG) of our own. Yes, they genuinely believe this, and have what they consider to be excellent grounds for their belief. It is a disturbing thought. Is it possible that they are right, and that we. in spite of everything arc wrong? It does not do for us to be too cocksure, not yet, nt all events; not until we have taken the trouble to learn a great deal more about their civilisation than we know at present,
Civilisation, like happiness, need not be in the least dependent on material things; nor is it an automatic result of "progress", as we understand the word, as a glance at Chicago will abundantly prove. It is a state of mind. No greater mistake can bo made than to imagine that civilisation is synonymous with a profusion of water-closets, aeroplanes, tele- plumes, and electric washing-machines. It is not- It is a slow and almost imperceptible growth, something evolved in the course of centuries and shaped, by a number of factors such as race, climate, and environment. In a way, it is a scale of values, and one which naturally varies from country to country. For instance, the Chinese concept of civilisation differs radically from our own. They (the Chinese) franklv regard the English and Americans as barbarians. They despise us for our inferior manners, for our aggressive materialism, for our fundamental contempt, for culture, for our lack of dignity and repose,—the great God "hustle" has no place in their pantheon. We. in turn, look down upon the Chinese because their ideas on such things as sanitation do not happen to coincide with our own. It is simply a point of view, since each race has presumably evolved the type of civilisation best suited to it. But it is a sympathetic understanding of these widely divergent view-points, nowadays, that makes the wheels go round, and that keeps them running without unnecessary friction once they have started to revolve. And the sooner such an understanding is acquired, the better.

Making A Start.
On going through some old papers recently, •
we discovered the following notes, which I
formed part of a diary kept during an up- i
river trip some years ago. On re-reading I
them, we decided to publish them, partly ;
because the Gazette happened to be very short
of copy, and any rubbish is better than none
at all; and partly in the hope that they might
prove instructive to any newcomer who might
happen to be contemplating a journey into
the interior of Sarawak.
SUN DA Y.
Yesterday afternoon, we arrived at penghulu
Chendang'a house. We,—myself, that is, a Native
Officer, two policemen, and two Melanau coolies,—
had left the coast a week previously. and were
bound on a trip that was designed Io take us into the
headwaters of the largest tributary of the main
river. As the journey was more one of exploration
than anything else, we would have to spend four or
five nights in the jungle far from any Dayak house,
and in an area with which the Dayaks themselves
were not very familiar. As a result, the trip took
rather more organising than is usually necessary, hut
now at last everything was settled. We were
lucky enough to meet penghulu Chendang, the head
man of the tributary in question, at Headquarters,
where he had come on a shopping trip, and he
accompanied us up-river. So we had a full week in
which to discuss travelling arrangements, and, thunk
goodness, everything is now fixed up.
We arrived, as I have already remarked, early
yesterday afternoon. Since penghulu Chendang’s
house is our jumping-off place, I assumed as a matter
of course that we would start tomorrow morning.
As usual, T was wrong. On my suggesting this, I
was greeted with a roar of dismay from the penghulu
and his friends. It was impossible, ridiculous, out
of the question. The trip had first to be discussed,
—there wore a hundred and one details to be decided
before we could even think of setting out. There
had been no aum yet; none of the penghulu's anak
biak had yet expressed their views on the matter,
which would naturally have to be talked over with
them before anything could be done. That was
only reasonable.
T bowed to the inevitable.
"Very well, then," I said. "When do you think
we shall be able to start?”
"The day after tomorrow. Tuan. Not before."
I shrugged my shoulders.
“Please yourselves. But it mustn't be any later."
During the evening, we discussed the arrange-
ments for the trip. When I at last went to bed,
penghulu Chendang and his people were still discuss-
ing them. Their women-folk were helping.
MONDAY.
The discussion of travelling arrangements con-
tinues. I believe that there is some difficulty about
boats, but I know better than to interfere.
The weather is perfect, and conditions generally
could not be more favourable. The river is just
right,—there is enough water to float us over the
shallows, yet not enough to hinder our progress.
Tn this particular river two or three hours of heavy
rain can produce a nasty fresh, so it is a good job
that we arc starting tomorrow, while the fine weather
holds.
Early this morning, I convened a council consisting
of myself, the Native Officer, the penghulu, and the
police. We were to discuss travelling arrangements.
After an hour, I summed up our decisions.
"You, penghulu, will provide two boats, and will
see that they are in good condition.
"You, Wan, (to the N.O.) will fix up about
paddlcrs; it is agreed that we shall need nt least ten
men, and we had better have another couple in
reserve. The police will look after the baggage and
the food-stuffs, and will borrow as many kajang and
tamif as they can find."
It was now only nine o'clock, so, unable to stay
idly in the house all day, I took a gun and went off
 up-river with two Dayak youths. I shot a couple of
 pergam, the Dayaks caught some fish with a jala,
| we all bathed on the slightest provocation, and
। generally behaved like schoolboys on a spree.
I Luncheon was served on the krangan, and consisted
of freshly-caught fish grilled over an open fire, and
then pounded up with the heart of a jungle sago-
palm. There was also some cold rice in a banana-
leaf. and a piece of venison.
We returned to the house at tea-time, and later on
I again sat in conference with the N.O., the peng-
hulu. and the police. Travelling arrangements
were now to be discussed hi detail.
"Then everything is ready?" I asked, after twenty
minutes.
"Everything. Tuan."
"Splendid. We start at seven tomorrow
morning."
The meeting broke up, but before very long the
Native Officer sought me out, and it was clear from
his troubled expression that something was on his
mind. The penghulu, it appeared, had prepared a
long-boat for us. It was a very long boat, too long,
several people maintained, to be of any use in the
Eln. It was so long (said its detractors)'that it could
not possibly negotiate the curves of the upper reaches
of the river, and it was so heavy that no amount of
pulling and hauling would get it up the rapids.
I called the penghulu, and questioned him. He
replied by asking mo indignantly who had disparaged
his fine boat. The Native Officer told him, and he
darted oil immediately to trounce the luckless
fellows. A violent altercation ensued, which lusted
for about an hour. At the end of it, the penghulu
returned, flushed but triumphant.
"Those people," he said scornfully, referring to
the opposition, "arc talking nonsense. They don’t
know the far Ulu,—they have never been there.
The long-boat will suit us admirably.”
"Then you are quite sure that it will lake us to
our destination?"
The penghulu thought for a moment.
"No." he said brightly, as though this was the
happiest reply we could have expected from him.
"1 am not at all sure, Tuan. But at any rate it
will take us half-way. And that, after all, is
something.”
With that I begun to lose patience.
"What the devil is the good of half-way?” I
snapped. "Boats do not grow on trees, and what
ari' we going to do if we find ourselves stuck in the
middle of the jungle, miles from anywhere?"
This was a point which had not occurred to the
penghulu. He scratched his head in a meditative
manner, and rolled himself a fresh chew of sirch.
"I will talk the matter over with my anak biak.”
ho murmured, after considerable thought.
A few minutes later, a group of Dayaks assembled
on the ruai. They started to discuss travelling
arrangements.
*A kind of light kejang. most useful for roofing tem-
porary shelters in tho jungle.

LATER.
It is all settled, and finally settled, this time. We are to take the long boat. Everyone is agreed that it. is the very boat for our purpose. We are to leave tomorrow morning on the stroke of seven.
WEDNESDAY.
I rose at dawn, since I had quite made up my mind that we really would start sharp at seven, and I knew well enough that Dayaks sometimes need a little prodding before they will consent to get a move on. So I intended to set them a good example, and I did. By six o'clock I had shaved, bathed, and breakfasted, and was ready for the road. The police had parcelled my light travelling mattress in a pandun mat, and my other belongings were neatly packed in a converted kerosene-oil tin. by far the most practical suit-case for the ulu. The police stood by expectantly, carrying an assortment of selabit in which were food and cooking-Pots. We were all of us eager to be off.
By eight o'clock I begun to grow restive. The Dayaks had not made a move, nor had they shewn any noticeable signs of making one. They were still packing, the penghulu explained. 1 pointed out that since the greater part of each man's luggage could easily be carried in the fold of a loin-r loth, that could not take very long. Well, it wasn't so much the packing, the penghulu then admitted, as their provision of rice for the day. which was still being cooked. I hinted that most’ of the Dayaks had lieen up since before daylight, and so had had nearly four hours in which to cook it. This was time, agreed the penghulu. but of course there were other things; a trip like this timid not be fixed up in five minutes. I would understand, no doubt, that his people bail to discuss travelling arrangements. This was only natural.
By nine o'clock, though, the boats were loaded and everything was at last ready. The loading of the boats had taken time, but it bad been worth it. The work had been carried out systematically, and with care. The heavier and more bulky- articles had been stowed at the bottom, those to which we might wish to have immediate access hail been placed neatly on top. and everything liable to damage by water had been carefully shrouded with samit. A place for me had been reserved amidships by wedging my rolled-up mattress on top of floor-boards of split bamboo. One sat on the bamboos, which were springy and comfortable, and was supported in the rear by one's bedding. It was quite simple.
Beside my mattress lay a Winchester rifle, oiled and ready for instant use should a deer swim across the stream, or rashly show itself on the river-bank. | I contemplated it with pride; it looked so business like. This, I reflected, was the real thing. This, | at last. was honest-to-goodness bush-whacking. It , was not until a few days later, when an enormous , pig sauntered thoughtfully down a stretch of krangan within easy range, that I discovered that all the ammunition had been left at headquarters.
However, the main thing was that we were ready. At last, I thought, we were off. The expedition had about it the right air of preparedness. The police stood about in the shallows, paddles in their hands, hideous felt hats on their heads. The Native Officer was already ensconced in the smaller boat. —by far the more comfortable, of the two, as 1 was later to find out,—and rolled a cigarette with an air of determination. Our Dayaks (yes, all of them, even including the two who had made five successive visits to the house to collect forgotten articles of gear or clothing! were waiting, their poles poised in readiness to send the boats swinging into midstream. Only the penghulu was missing, and he, I knew, would appear in a moment. He was probably say
ing good-bye to his wife, not having had time to do this, of course, during the past three days. He would we along any time now, and then we would start, Yes, we would start. T repeated the words to myself in joyful anticipation. At last, at last, we were oil.
Suddenly the penghulu appeared on the scene. He broke into my musings rather abruptly by missing his footing on a batang and sliding rapidly down about fifteen feet of bank, to the accompaniment of an avalanche of clay and rubble. When he had picked himself up again and dusted his behind, he came towards me, and his face was troubled. My heart sank at the sight of it. There had been a hitch, somewhere,—I felt it in my bones. Something. I guessed, must be amiss.
for once, I was right.
"Tuan," said the penghulu mournfully. "A man from Manggis house has just arrived, an old man. Tuan, a very old man, who knows the ulu much belter than I do; he went up there once in Tuan Panjang’s time, nearly forty years ago. He says that my boat is far too long, that we shall not be able to take it further than Lobok Bays, which is only two days' journey from here : to take it up into the ulu is out of the question. Tuan, lie is a very old man, and what he says must be right."
There was ;• slight hush, then a dozen voices burst silmutaneouly into speech. The old man was quite right. they averred, the boat would never reach the headwaters of the river, they had known it all along. It would be madness even to try. They leapt out onto the bank with alacrity.
I did not attempt any reproaches; I was beyond that. 1 did not point out, for instance, that two days ago, after a prolonged debate, and after consulting the most expert opinion in the river, they had decided unanimously that the penghulu’s boat was the most suitable craft in the district for the job on hand ; in fact, if they had had to design and build a boat for this very purpose, it would have been just such another; I did not remind them that after having reached this conclusion, they subsequently had twenty-four hours in which to re-consider it: I merely asked, quite quietly, what they Proposed to do now?
The answer eamc at once. They would unload the. barang, said the penghulu, and take it up to the house. We could then talk the matter over in comfort. After all. arrangements for a trip of this nature could not be made as easily as all that, and it was stupid to think that they could. They had first to be thoroughly discussed.
Twenty minutes later, we started to discuss them.
THURSDAY.
During the night it started to rain. It rained, and rained, and rained. This morning the river was just a yellow torrent. We could never have set out, even had we succeeded in finding another boot, which was not the case. Boats are apparently rather a difficulty in this [articular area.
SATURDAY.
To-day, between nine and ten o'clock, we really did start . We used the long-boat, which took us. to our destination without the slightest trouble. On arrival, the penghulu remarked that he had always known that it would. The old man from Manggi’s house was just an old fool, a dotard who didn't know what he was talking about.
The other Dayaks echoed him. Everyone, they said, who had any sense at all, knew that the boat was ideally suited for our journey.
I agreed with them. It seemed the only thing to do.

Chinese Pottery in Sarawak.
Sooner or later everyone who comes to Sarawak encounters the local pottery, either hawked around by Malays or, if more fortunate, exhibited by Melanaus or others; at first in his wisdom he buys a few pieces he likes; beating the man down from $50 to $5 it) the usual way, but later he hears that his purchases may be Ming or Ping or Sting and worth untold wealth at home, so he begins to buy with a more, greedy eye. It is often quite true that his purchases may be Ming or occasionally Sung (more often, of course, “Siting”!) but old as these, undoubtedly are, they are of real value only among their native owners as a medium of barter, no connoisseur here or at home would grant them more than a casual glance but as export-ware, made, it is true, in China long ago, but for foreign and not for home use; like modem export-wares such as cigarettes, whisky, globe trotters, etc., they are not seen or appreciated in that form at home, and command small value.
For example. the many 2 and 3-foot high jars one sees in Dayak and other houses, brown earthenware affairs with a dragon (Naga) or a couple of. phoenixes galloping round the bulge, are real products of the Ming dynasty, having been made and sent specially to Borneo and the Philippines as an export ware about the time of Henry V and the battle of Agincourt. There are none in China to-day nor were there indeed at any other time since they were made, for in spite of their bold and characteristic shape, they are so crude and coarse as to make no appeal to the fastidious ancients; indeed, save for Japanese imitations, the only clue to the date of the jars is the coarse red earthenware of which they are made, this being a ware at the time prized by Chinese in making teapots and dishes, for it is said to have favoured the retention of the tea's aroma and was never used by the Chinese themselves for aught save making teadrinking utensils. Portuguese, and later. Dutch, traders bringing home tea from China also brought home these utensils, giving them the name "bucarro ware." and valuing them but slightly in the presence of more ornate Chinese efforts. So though Dayak jars are often Ming products, nobody is going to make money by buying up a few score in the hopes of selling them to connoisseurs.
It is more than probable that a few Sung bow’s and dishes occur as green glazed celadon pieces, usually crackled, and certainly a number of Ming celadon plates, mostly uncrackled, turn up, but to tell the genuine ones is beyond most people : the colour of the glaze, the feel of it to the fingers, the ring when it is lapped, the reddish brown colour of the “biscuit" on the foot—all these and other factors must be. considered. Most difficult of all. Chinese veneration for their ancestors led later workmen to copy the old models—at first quite without any fraudulent design, and between 1700 and 1800 there existed some wizard tukangs. who. if they were not inventive, could copy the old stuff so successfully that it is open to question whether more than half the so called Sung and Ming pieces in European collections are not the product of this age. Glaze, crackling, marks, shape, all were copied with great exactitude, and he who shall say that Sarawak pieces are not of a similar acre is taking on more than many a connoisseur. There is, however, a certain amount of hope, for later imitations and those of Japan can be more readily detected, and after all if the older imitations were as pleasing as the originals, there is not much to choose.
69
Doubtless much of the Sarawak ware is of this later imitation period and is not, as was once thought. Swankaloe work from Siam, for it is now- clear that in about 1400 the King of Siam imported some Chinese workmen, who, though remarkable in other respects, produced no pottery as we understand it here.
Crackling was a very common feature in olden times, and of the fine, medium and coarse series the first two at least never at all indulged in any continued straight lines, the presence of which in such cases inevitably points to much later work.
Much of the Sarawak Jar ware is of the blue and white type, and the very common white crackled jars about. 1 foot to 18 inches high with a pale blue dragon or phoenix on the bulge is now well known to he late Ming of the Kang Hsi period about 1700, A little Inter come the many jars about the same size with red, yellow and green designs often with further enamel additions over the glaze, the prin- cipal designs being at first Chinese and later succumbing to European influence. They also are numerous in Sarawak, and are much prized on account of their gaudiness but their age is small, and value slight.
Of pottery in Sarawak it may be said that a few specimens arc very old. and quite a number go back three and four hundred years. Neither on account of age or looks are they of the slightest value to connoisseurs elsewhere, and it but remains for an impending collector to purchase what pleases him at, a price that as far as possible suits his pocket, and then forget his hopes of subsequent colossal sales to eager purchasers at home.—E.B.
Mainly About Nothing.
WELCOME TO THE PROFESSOR.
At this time I knew that I was going to have a baby. My loving husband was always up to some prank or other.—Sunday Express.
"Well, well, well," chuckled Professor Dingleberry, to whom I showed this news item. “B—."
"If you dare to say Boys will be boys',” I interrupted fiercely, “I shall crown you with this beer- mug in my hand.”
The Professor took my warning in good part, like the fine sportsman he is, for he only giggled, and hid his face coyly behind a length of sail-cloth. Yachting has always been one of his favourite pastimes, his interest in this health-giving hobby dating from the time when he was first taken for a cruise on the Wannsee by his friend Otto Von Worms. Professor Dingleberry tells me that Frieherr Von Worms, formerly of Wilhelmstrasse 61. Berlin, is now one of Hitler's foremost S.A.- men, and has become a prominent Storm Troop leader. He is at present stationed in Stuttgart, and during the first week in May the Nazi Government proposes to arrange special cheap excursions to that city from all parts of the world by rail, sea, and air. Any ladies who may be interested can obtain full particulars from all reputable tourist offices, or from Box 302. Sarawak Gazette.

COMMON MISAPPREHENSIONS
Mr. Wyndham Lewis has pointed out that Chartered Accountants are not necessarily trolls, as is widely held, and has confirmed this by a quotation from the Year Book of the Institute of Accountants and Actuaries, (Glasgow), which deals a crushing blow at this old-established belief. He has also pointed out that, contrary to accepted ideas, bowler I hats do not invariably confer invisibility on detectives; nor is morris-dancing always the favourite recreation of smash-and-grab men. And to contend that Lord Passfield is one and the same person as ‘Ethel M. Dell' after the former's Survey of the Origins of Trade Unionism : With Some Comments on Poor Law Administration in Industrial Areas, is ’ patently absurd.
In this'age of1 progress and enlightenment, it is time that a few more of these misapprehensions were finally eradicated from the public mind. For instance :—
Newts are riot polyandrous. nor in the ordinary way do they change their skins at two o’clock in the afternoon on Derby Day.
Wellington did not say "Eton should be moved to the battle-fields of Waterloo." What he actually said was—"These damned playing-fields are quite unsuitable for my General staff : the walls aren't high Stough." This remark was made when he had. to confine most of Ids senior officers in the (then) celebrated lunatic asylum nt Harrow, the village where blazing Byron loved and sang. It will be remembered that Keats. On seeing him drinking and dicing with the assembled officers, eyed him with a wild siinriise, since he imagined that he was away in Darien floating the famous Panama Development Company, in which most of his savings were invested. The’object of this company was to supply members of the Cortez in Madrid with straw hats for use on state occasions. As we all know, the project came to nothing as a result of the Greek declaration of independence. But to continue.
Sharks do not have to turn over on their backs before they can bite, except in Throgmorton Street, where it is by no means unCommon to see a stockbroker wriggle over sideways on the pavement before nobbling a country parson, or snapping up a widowed lady up for the day from Meddlehain Parva.
Half-commission men are not referred to in the city as 'Hairy's Hundreds'; they are known as pilot-fish.' Apart from their main job of guiding their principals to their prey, their chief function in life is to turn them right side up again when they have gorged themselves to repletion on bulls and bears. (C.F. Bagshot: The Theory of .Money. and J.K. Ingle: -in Introduction to Corporation Finance). As recently as March 11th last, no less than eighteen stock-brokers we(e discovered by P. C. Higginbotham lying prone at the corner of Thread needle Street, at three o'clock in the morning —'like so many turtles,' as the zealous young officer wrote in his report. It appeared that all the half- commission men in London had dashed off in a shoal to Wimbledon Park, where it was rumoured that a retired member of the Sarawak Civil Service with a thousand or two to invest had been seen wandering about the roads. Not one remained in the city, so the stock-brokers were helpless; the authorized clerks refused to turn their employers over on the grounds that this was against Stock Exchange rules, so tliere the eighteen unfortunate financiers had to remain until the shoal returned to duty the following morning, having, it is said, been pretty badly bitten overnight. Apparently they caught a tartar, for the Hon. Alan Almanac is credibly reported as haying said that if lie had ever for one moment imagined that the Stock Exchange was so terribly, terribly, exhausting, he would never have thrown up his career as a gigolo, in spite of the fact that the platinum cigarette case given him by the Countess of Melton Mowbray (nee Erztbaum) turned out to lie only stainless steel, after all. So now you know, children.

First Division News.
March.
Two inquests were held in Kuching during March, verdicts of death from misadventure and death from natural causes being returned.
The Acting District Officer; Bau. reports that much dissatisfaction has been caused among Land Dayaks of the Left Hand Branch by the recent reduction in head-tax. There is a general outcry against interference in what these people have come to regard as one of their traditions, and it seems that the Islet way to appease them would be to re-impose the old tax immediately, though this, of course, is not contemplated.
The Land Dayaks as a whole have always been regarded as among the most loyal of His Highness the Rajah’s subjects, but this astonishing reception of what was intended to be a measure of relief looks rather like carrying loyalty to extremes.
Mr. J. K. Outram and Abang Haji Adenan, Native Officer, spent two days walking along the T.and Dayak-Chinese Imtindary from the Selalang River to Sungei Pinang, their object being to check the course of the boundary in the presence of Dayak representatives from Singghi, and to rectify several minor errors which occurred during the original rough survey in 1982: The boundary will shortly be re-surveyed in the light of the knowledge gained during this investigation.
The Dahan Rubber Estates. Ltd., harvested 22,609 tbs of dry rubber during March.
Bad weather during part of the month caused some damage to the Siniawan-Batu Kitang section of the Kuching road, and to the Bubo road. As a result of this, a certain amount of restriction of traffic became necessary.
The new by-pass at Hie l.J mile, Kuching Road, was opened to traffic on March 27th and should be of considerable benefit to traffic generally. The motor-roller is now active in Bali Bazaar, and an attempt is being made to get the baZaar road’ into really good order once and for all.
On March 3rd a well-attended tuba-fishing was held at Buso, hilt unfortunately high water and an insufficient supply of tuba prevented the occasion from turning out it success. Incidentally, the all- too-frequent failures of tuba-fishings are almost invariably traceable to. lack of tuba, or, if there is sufficient tuba in the first place, to the native propensity for storing it in their boats instead of throwing it overboard, and then using it subsequently to tuba small side-streams.
The total production of gold for Upper Sarawak for the month of February amounted to 2,075 ounces, Messrs. The Sarawak (Sold Mining Syndicate, Ltd., topping the list with an output of 569.86 ounces.
Incidentally, it is interesting to note that the value of gold' exported from Sarawak during 1934 approached the value of the oil exports, the figures being : gold, 28,842 line ounces, valued at $1,660,722: petroleum, 278,037 tons, valued’ at $1,779,486.
The Acting Assistant District Officer. Lundu. reports that there was a good deal of sickness in the district during March, the visiting Dresser being kepi exceedingly busy attending to large numbers of patients. He also visited a few outlying villages, where a number of vaccinations and N.A.B. injections were given.
A Selakan Dayak named Badok, who escaped from Lundti prison in February. 1930, after having served precisely three days of a sentence of three months' rigorous imprisonment, was re-arrested on March 31 st.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Sadong. reports that the losing side in the Tobekang birds' nest case flouted the order made by the Court and raided the caves of the Lobang Batu people, taking all the nests they could find. For tltii offence the ringleader was fined $150 and imprisoned for three months, but feeling in the matter still runs high. An order has been issued closing all the caves entirely pending the hearing of an appeal.
l’adi harvesting is now general throughout the Sadong district. Swamp padi is very good, but the hill crops are poor. The engkabang in the Melikin. Kedup and Kayan rivers is flowering profusely.
The remains of the Sadong railway system were sold by auction on March 15th, a total of $770 being realised.
The sites for the office and bungalow at the proposed new station at Serian were levelled, and the work of construction was well advanced at the end of the month.
During the course of a tour of the Land Dayak villages in the Sadong district, the Acting Assistant District Officer found that the village of Mentong was closed to him by a pantang The Orang Kaya was subsequently fined for instituting a pantang; when he was aware of the Acting Assistant District Officer's impending visit.
Football.
The Kuching soccer season opened on Saturday, April 13th, with a match between the Municipal F.C. and the Perhimpunan Sells Chib, resulting in a win for the former by two goals to nil.
The popularity of soccer in Kuching is as noticeable as ever, and large crowds of spectators gathered to witness the four league matches played during the month.
The first appearance of the Medical eleven, last season’s league champions and cup winners, proved, a,special attraction, and their meeting with the Constabulary A. team provided the spectators with a.most exciting second half. The Medical team after loading by three goals to nil at the interval failed to Cope with the pressure exerted by a reorganized Constabulary forward line, and after only a few minutes of the second half had elapsed, the latter had succeeded in snoring three well deserved goals. The remainder of the game was played in a Cup-Tie atmosphere with each side striving to gain the lead. A few minutes before the end the Medical team succeeded in gaining the deciding goal and thus retain their unbeaten record in league and cup competitions since October, 1933.
The number of ennie* for this year’s league competitions amounted to five teams in the first division and five teams in the second division, as compared with five and seven teams respectively fur last season.
This falling off in the number of entries is disappointing but there is some consolation in the fact that the general standard of play is likely to lie improved, as it is observed that the majority of the better players from disbanded teams have gone, to strengthen last season's weaker teams, and thereby helped tn produce sides that will now* no doubt, present more formidable opposition for the Medical, Constabulary and Chinese teams, who have, until this season, always stood in a class of their own.
The results of matches played during the month were as follows : —
Division I.
Municipal F.C. 2 Perhimpunan Setia Club 0 Constabulary J. 3 Medical A. 4
Division II.
H.N.A. 1 St Timinas' 6
Medical b. 6 Constabulary B. 3
A soccer match against a Constabulary eleven was arranged fur the benefit of Outstation visitors during Race-Week, and was played on the Padungan ground on Sunday. April 28th.
The European side lined up as follows:—
T. A. Reul ; G. J Chater, W. J. Chater; A. L. McLame, E. M. Selous, F. A. Mome ; A. R. Snelus, T. E. Parker, D. C. Waite, D. It. Lascelles, F. Harding.
After a brilliant start, cricket in the morning and curry tiffin at mid-day took their toll, and a gallant hand of leg-weary heroes straggled off the field after losing by five goals to nil.
White and Snelus proved the most- dangerous of the Europeans’ forwards, while Lascelles, in spite of being dogged by a towering Sikh gentleman, made some plucky rugby-cum-soccer runs that were deserving of better results.
The honours of the day go to the Europeans’ defenders, however, since following every clearance from their goal-mouth the ball found its way back again with most monotonous regularity, scarcely giving them time to breathe.
Reid, in goal, brought off some spectacular faves towards the end, and the whole team found some consolation in the knowledge that although badly beaten, they had given a record crowd of European spectators a little "light” entertainment.—W.J.C.


Kuching Amateur Dramatic Society.
We print below extracts from the programme:—
FOUR SHORT SKETCHES.
The hall of Race Week festivities was set rolling very effectively by the K.A.D.S. presentation of four short sketches on Friday 26th. This production was on a less ambitious scale than their recent effort, but was equally successful in its own way, and afforded a very pleasant evening's entertainment.
Al! the sketches were humorous—a wise choice for Race Week. The first, however,—"The Crystal Gazer"—was not well chosen. The theme—the clairvoyant's mistaken notion that her client is looking for a lost dog when she is really looking for her sweetheart—was quite funny, but it smacked too strongly of the Village Hall in 1880. This was particularly unfortunate since the two actresses. Mrs. Gibson as the slairvoyont ami Mrs. Hutchison as the girl, were very good indeed, and in spite of this handicap managed to carry the thing off very well. Mrs. Hutchison is to be congratulated on the possession of a really charming voice.
"Waiting" depicts the predicament of a man (Dr. Hutchison) who, while in the doctor's waiting room, is confronted with a charming but apparently demented Indy (Mrs. Daubeny). Her startling remarks and gestures, anil the implication that her mind is made up to suicide keep the wretched m in on tenderhooks until it is revealed that she is the doctor's wife, and that her agitation is due to the fact that she has backed a horse called "Suicide." Dr. Hutchison was thrown into a very proper and amusing confusion, and Mrs. Daubeny had a part which suited her well, and proved herself, as usual, the star tuai of the Society. The little, part of Jenner was very well acted by Mr. Harding.
"The Man Who Thought of Everything" wan a very successful little sketch. Ernest (Mr. Whole! has planned his elopement with Irene (Mrs. Pitt- Hardacre) with such detailed perfection that she loses patience with bun and refuses to go. Ernest is equal to this emergency and produces another girl (Mrs. Black) at the critical moment. Irene, in f a fury, threatens to elope with another man. but Ernest, still unabashed, has thought of this too. . and has arranged for Irene’s second fiddle to be awaiting her. Told thus, the story sounds rather flat, but actually the little play ran very slickly and held the audience m suspense until Ernest's parting shot. Mrs. Pitt-Hardacre made a charming Irene, and Mrs. Black an excellent rival. Mr. Whale's performance was exceptionally good, since he was smug and self-satisfied enough to rouse the ire of any young woman of spirit. He should prove a very- valuable acquisition of the K.A.D.S.
"The Miracle." that well-known playlet portraying the sufferings of an invalid al the hands of a dour and terrifying nurse, raised the most laughs of the evening. Mr. Pitt-Hardacre has already proved bis worth as a comedian, and the mere sight of him in bed (a rather robust patient I) convulsed the audience. Mr. Daubeny was a delightful doctor with a most expressive laugh. Mrs. Middlemas made a quite incredibly unprepossessing nurse, and definitely established her position in low comedy roles. Her facial expressions and comic intonations carried home every point.
There was some uneveness in the producing, and parts of the performance were marred by small defects of technique that could easily be pm right. This is a pity, as there is clearly a surprising amount of talent amongst the players, and this slight hut excellent performance proved that with good handling the K.A.D.S. could give us a first class entertainment on a larger scale.


Cricket.
.
Outstations w. Kuching.
At Padungan, Sunday, 23lh April, 1935.
The less said about this game, the better for all concerned. There was some good bowling and some bowling that was not so good, but equally effective. Let us blame the pitch and leave it at that.
This match was played at Padungau on Sunday. 14th April, 1935. It was mainly notable for the large number of Asiatics who turned out. This is a very encouraging sign, and it is hoped their enthusiasm will not wane during the season, as a number of them showed most promising form, and all showed keeness.
Proficiency at cricket has long ceased to be a monopoly of those from England only, and keeping this in view, there is no reason why some day the Europeans and Asiatics should not play each other on level terms The thanks of all cricketers in Kuching are due to those who have thus given them a lead in what is after nil the "King of Games.”

This meeting was held on April 27th and 29th, and can be well described as a "record" meeting. Racing mi the first day was spoilt by a deluge during the. fifth race The second day was fine, but very hot. Tim course was in fine'. class condition, and lull ,less than film new records were put up ; Flying For won the Rajab's Cup for the seventh time, and in doing so equalled record time. The outstanding pony of the meeting was Happy Boy II, a recent importation. Racing in Division II, he made new records for five and three furlongs Bintang (late Casanova) won the Tuan Muda's prize in record limo, ami Silver Blase, who has been off colour tor the last Iwo meetings, cut down the four furlong record by a substantial margin when winning the Jubilee Stakes over four furlongs. His Highness the Rajah was present during both days’ racing, and very kindly presented the prizes to the successful owners at the conclusion of the meeting.
Silver Blaze was champion pony, and Asing won the jockeys' prize for most winning mounts


Sarawak Turf Club.
MlNUTES OF ANNUAL GENERAL MeeTInG OF THE
Members of the Sarawak Turf CLUB
HELD AT THE SARAWAK CLUB AT
11 A.M. ON THE 28th APRIL. 1935.
Present.—The Datu Amar, Messrs. N. E. Hughes,
W. Park, J. ('. B. Fisher, E. O. Bruce,
A. W. Gibson, Chan Qui Seng, F. A.
Moore., H. E. Cntfield, P. M. Adams,
H. B. Crocker, G. T. Bates, B. .1. C. |
Spurway and Chan Qui Chong.
/» the Chair.—Mr. B. .1. C. Spurway.
(1)Minutes of the last Annual General Meeting
were read and confirmed.
(2)Accounts.—Mr. Cutfield proposed and Mr.
Moore seconded that the accounts be approved.
Passed unanimously.
(3)Auditor.—Mr. Park was proposed by Mr.
Spurway and seconded by Mr. Bates as Auditor for
the year 1935. A vote of thanks to Mr. Park was ;
passed unanimously for his services in auditing the i
accounts for 1933 and 1931.
(4)Subscriptions.—The Secretary explained that
several members had raised the question of paying ;
subscriptions while on leave and therefore being
unable to attend meetings.
Captain C. D. Le Gros Clark proposed and Mr.
Bates seconded the following resolution
"That if a member is absent from Sarawak for .
more than Ci consecutive months half the annual
subscription shall be refunded."
Mr. Hughes pointed out that the subscription is
mi annual subscription payable at the beginning of
the year and that there is no valid reason why it
should be waived for members who are temporarily
out of the country.
Mr. Hughes proposed and Mr. Cutfield seconded
that subscriptions remain payable1 annually in full.
This was passed. The following members abstained
from voting :—Messrs. Park, Bruce, Gibson and
Bates.
(5)Club Rules and RegulationsAir. Spurway
pointed out that the last book of Rules was published
in 1924 and was now out of date. He proposed that
the present Rules be revised and a new book issued
showing Chib Rules. Racing Regulations and Totali-
zator Regulations separately.
It is decided that this should be put in baud
immediately and a new book of Rules issued as soon
as possible.
(6)Mr. Chan Qui Seng pointed out that Mr.
Combe’s pony was wrongly classified and was eligible
to race in the class governed by the height of the
pony as Regulation 7 as printed for this meeting
supersedes Regulation No. 14 of 1933.
Arising out of this. Mr. Spurway proposed that
Racing Regulations are published annually in the
Sarawak Gazette and that all additions and amend-
ments are notified in the Gazette as they occur.
Passed unanimously.
(7)Selling Lotteries.—The Chairman explained
that a number of members were in favour of re-intro-
ducing selling lotteries as were held prior to their
abolition in 1928. He pointed out that selling
lotteries had been abolished in the Straits Settle-
ments and Federated Malay States as it was found
they were not beneficial to Racing and he did not
consider, that, in view of the fact that the Sarawak
Turf Club already had the Unlimited Sweep. Cash
Sweeps and Totalizator, there was any necessity to
re-introduce Selling Lotteries.
Mr. Park proposed and Mr. Spurway seconded
that selling lotteries are not re-introduced. Mr.
Chan Qui Seng proposed and Mr. Cutfield
seconded that selling lotteries are introduced. The
following voted in favour of Mr. Chan Qui Seng’s
amendment The Datu Amar, Messrs. Cutfield,
Moore, Chan Qui Chong, Chan Qui Seng, IT. B.
Crocker.
।	Against.—Messrs. Park, Fisher, Spurway,-P. M.
; Adams, and Bales.
Abstained..—Messrs. Bruce and Hughes.
Mr. Spurway proposed and Mr. Cutfield
I seconded the following resolution :—
"That all arrangements re selling lotteries and
the number of races on which selling lotteries
are held be left entirely to the Committee."
Mr. Moore voted against and the rest of the
members present voted in favour.
I (8) Vice-President.—Mr. Bates proposed that
'	Crocker be asked to accept the position
i of Vice-President. Passed unanimously.
(H) Committee for Year 1935.—The following
| were elected
Kuching Members Mr. H. B. Crocker, Mr.
G. T Bates, Mr. E S. Holl, Datu Shahbandar.
Mr. Tin Sum Gunn Mr. Chan Qui Chong, Mr.
Khetig Chiang.
Outstation Members -.—Mr. P. M. Adams,
Mr. B. J. C. Rpurway.
His Highness the Rajah's Permanent Repre-
sentatives :—
Mr. ('. D. Adama and Mr. J. B. Archer.
Election Committee :—
Datu Amar. Mr. Ong Kwan Hin, Haji Bol
Hassan.
Mixi tes of Committee Meeting op the Sarawak Turf Clot held at the Sarawak Club ox 30th April, 1935, at 5.45 p.m.
Present—IT. B. Crocker, Esq. (in the Chair) Messrs. E. S. Holl, B. J. G. Spur- wav. Chan Qui Chong, G. T. Bates, and I’. M. Adams.
Absent. Datu Shahbandar, Messrs. Tan Sum Guan, Wee Klieng Chiang, C. D. Adams, and J. B. Archer.
(1) Minutes of last meeting read and approved.
(2). Decided that Rules and Regulations to be typed out as at present in force and circulated to members of Committee for suggestions and to be revised in Book form before the Autumn Meeting.
(3)Badges.—Mr. Spurway proposed that Mem- . bership badge be obtained and issued each year on payment of subscription. Transferable each meeting if member is absent. Badges to be numbered.
' Particulars to be obtained from Singapore Turf Club.
(4)Members enclosure to be. properly fenced so that unauthorized persons cannot get in.
(5)Passage way to I oldies Cloak Room to lie l planked.
(6)Decided to obtain seats to he placed under Grandstand and in members enclosure.
(7)Next Race Meeting.—Permission to be obtained from Government Secretary to hold the next meeting on the 21st and 23rd September.
(8)Mr. Combe's pony.—Write to Mr. Combe  and explain the present position.
(9)Clock.—Decided to obtain a clock for Grandstand .
(10)Car Park.—Present area to be doubled. This matter is to be arranged with the Municipal Department.
(11)Classification.—
Happy Boy fl to Division I.
Sintak Bulan from Division III to II. Gruda from Division II to III.


Second Division News.
March.
Two Dayak women working on their padi farm opposite Lubok Antu were surprised by two strange Dayaks, who, on being addressed, refused to come out into the farm but remained on its edge. The police were informed and a patrol, which set out at once, discovered the tracks of four or live people near the farm and maintained that they had also found traces of a cooking fire far from any path. It appeared that a meal had been cooked at this spot about two days previously.
It is uncertain whether this affair has any beat mg on the movements of the outlaws; the whole affair is rather vague, but an investigation was proceeding at the end of the month.
The Acting District Officer, Simanggang, reports that (our Dayaks and one Chinese received sentences of three months’ imprisonment for breaches of the Rubber Restriction Order. All five admitted having planted now rubber during the last month.
An inquest was held at Simanggang on the body of Liew Khee Min, who was found dead in the Chinese cemetery at Munggu Lalang. A verdict of suicide was returned, death being due to poisoning by cyanide of potassium.
Mr H. E. Cutfield arrived at Simanggang from Sibn by s.l. Chamois on Mandi 24th in order to take over as Acting Resident from Mr. E. O. Bnice. Mr. Bruce left for Miri on the 28th, picking up H.H.M.Y. Maimuna at Lingga.
The Assistant District Officer, Engkilili, reports that numerous f.emanak Dayaks visited the station during the month to ask for’work, and returned to their homes disappointed.
Owing to the prolonged drought, it is anticipated that padi-crop will be poor in the Engkilili district, at any rate in the ulu areas. The pepper crop promises well, however, and should be harvested about the end of June.
Dayaks in the Belong district were busy harvesting during March, but numbers of them came down to inert His Highness the Rajah when His Highness visited the station on the 20th. After granting many interviews in the fort on the morning of the 21st. His Highness paid visits to the Government Malay School, the Tong San Chinese School, and the S.P.G. Mission.
On the instructions of His Highness the Rajah, an num was held at Saratok to discuss and draw up a list of Sea Dayak lines in the Kalaka district.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Kalaka, re- ports that padi prospects are by no means bright in the district, and there is little doubt that there will be a shortage this year.
During the afternoon of March 19th His Highness the Rajah arrived at Kabong in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna. His Highness landed on the following morning, and was welcomed by a large crowd, the road to the office being lined with kampong people and boys from the Malay school. His Highness spent some time in the fort attending to requests and other business, and then visited the Malay school, where an address of welcome was sung by the pupils. The Maimuna then left for Saratok, arriving in the afternoon, His
Highness therefore Postponing his official landing
until the following morning. His Highness was i
greeted by members of all communities, and visited
the Chinese and Malay schools and the bazaar. In
the evening His Highness entertained the Dayak
chiefs who were present on board the Maimuna.
kindly allowing them to explore the vessel and sight-
see to their hearts' content.

Third Division News.
March.
Bilong, Mandin, and Libau, alias Nyambong, all
three of whom were members of the party which
ambushed a Kayan boat in the Pelagus Rapids last
year and murdered a Kayan and a Malay, were
sentenced to death in the Resident's Court at Sibu.
The sentence was subsequently confirmed, and they
were executed on March 28th.
The same day, Igoh, one of their companions,
was killed near the Meluan in the Kanowit by
Constabulary and levies. He had been wounded
two nights before, and was probably on his way to
give himself up. This leaves seven of that parti-
cular baud of outlaws still at large.
An outbreak of dysentery occurred in the Poi
resulting in fifty-two deaths within three months.
Unfortunately the epidemic was not reported in the
early stages, but as soon as the matter became
known, a Dresser was sent up-river and remained
there until conditions returned to normal.
Owing to rumours of outlaws on the true right
bank of the Rejang, a small party was sent off from
Song to search the hills between the Rejang tribu-
taries and the headwaters of the Oya. Mukah, and
Auap. including gimong Lila Biilu. No news has
arrived, as yet.
The removal of the blockhouse at the. month of
the Lakah, Ngemah, was completed. This was
built in the wrong place and had to he moved above
the last houses so that the river could bo adequately
controlled. All the remaining relations of outlaws
are now living below Kanowit Fort.
The reports of engkabang are very definite, and
a bumper crop is confidently expected. 'This is
fortunate, and will serve to allay the distress liable
to be caused by the very bad rice harvest. This
has been practically universal, and in many dis-
tricts Government assistance will be needed before
many months are over. Certain chiefs are asking
even now for stocks of sago to be laid up against
emergency.
The following table shows the Sibu trade figures
for the month, the 1934 figures being given for
comparison ■
Sibu.
Foreign Imports
Foreign Exports
1935.
... $172,029
... 234,651
Foreign Imports total to date 570,107
Foreign Exports total to date 638,139
2934.
$106,028 165,371 333.643 363,956 I
During the month, work was started on
the new
Residency at Sibu. The contractor. Song Ah See,
arrived on the 13th, constructed workmen's sheds
and then proceeded with excavations for the
foundations and pile driving.
The Travelling District Officer and Assistant
Superintendent, Lands and Surveys, went to Bina-
tang for a meeting with the District Officer, Lower
Rejang, to discuss the advisability of a definite
boundary as regards Dayaks between Sibu and
Binatang. It was decided to leave things as they
are.
Some wrecked Japanese fishermen picked up on
the coast passed through Sibu during the month
on their way to Singapore.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Kapit,
reports that a boat belonging to two Chinese cap-
sized in the Pelagus rapids, goods to the value of
about §180 being lost.
224 patients were treated at Kapit hospital
during the month.
Kapit must be added to the ever-lengthening list
of districts which expect poor padi crops and con-
sequent shortage. A good crop was obtained in the
Mirnrai as the Dayaks in this river, having planted
a month ahead of the others, harvested during the
long drought, which has had such a disastrous
effect on the padi elsewhere. In most other areas
the padi is alleged to have withered.
It's an ill wind, however, that blows nobody any
[ good, ami if the drought has largely destroyed the
padi. it has caused the fruit and engkabang trees
to flower profusely, 'there should, in fact be two
i fruit seasons this year.
I 71 sub-licences to work timber were issued at
Kapit by the end of March, and 1,115 logs were
sent down-river, mostly to sawmills nt Sibu. This
is the first time the thousand mark has heen
exceeded in any one month, this being chiefly due
to continued high water.
A ten-fathom long boat (femruri) was delivered
at Sibu from Kapit for a price of $95. this sum
including paint and 'tajok.
On March 27Hi the principal shop keepers at
Kapil attended a meeting convened by the Acting
Assistant District Officer and decided that the
travelling cinemas were a danger to the bazaar, and
should not be allowed to show there again.
Visitors to Kapit during March included the Rev.
Fathers A. Hopfgartner and V. Halder, and Mr.
Daly. The Rev. Father W. Odyk left the station
en route for Europe and well-earned furlough.
The Acting District Officer. Lower Rejang, reports that apart Worn one attempt to break up Penghulu Nyambar's house, all Dayaks in the district were quiet. They are showing great interest in the engkabang. .which they hope will compensate them for-their lack of padi.
Messrs. Gammons Limited were occupied with reconditioning the Sarikei wharf throughout the month. The channel irons were concreted, and the shutterings for the concrete pillars for the new godowns were completed, as were the concrete pillars for the new offices. The block of five new shop-houses at the Repok road were completed and occupied during the month.

Tlie last two wooden bridges in the first four miles of the Repok road were removed and culverts installed in their place, the work being carried out by prison labour.
Inspector Abang Adeng returned to Sarikei from Rejang to report that his investigation into the J.nan murder had proved fruitless. There was no serious crime in the Lower Rejang district during March.
A prisoner named Kadir escaped while at work at Sarikei on the 16th, but was re-captured on the 19th.
Mr. A. Macpherson, the Acting District Officer, spent two nights in the Ulu Fault prospecting for a route over Sebankoi for the Rohan road. He reports that it will be difficult to find a suitable route on the Saratok side. In the course of this trip, he met Mr. 1). C. White, Acting Assistant District Officer. Kalaka. with whom the matter was discussed.
Sarikei suffered from floods at the beginning of the month, and a drought at the end. This station is particularly vulnerable to either of these conditions. both of which have unpleasant results; floods render the old bazaar impassable except by boat, and a drought accentuates the fresh-water shortage, which is always present to a greater or less degree during the fine season.
The Acting District Officer, Mukah, reports that several stand-pipes were wantonly damaged during the month, the offenders having escaped detection. This seems a particularly pointless form of mischief, and no doubt those responsible will be taught a sharp lesson if and when they are apprehended.
The Officer-in-Charge, Oya, reports that the annual haul ceremony was held on March 24th, the gaily-decorated boats forming a colourful scene. At the close of the proceedings, a flying-boat was observed heading in the direction of Kuala Igan; needless to say, this was taken as a favourable omen by several of the more fervent participants in this ceremony of blessing the fishing-fleet. It is to be hoped that they will be proved right.
Trade in the Dalat district has been brisk with sago standing at a steady 54 cents per passu in the Kot. Rumours are now being circulated that the scheme for .erecting sago factories at the Igan end of the Kut has fallen through, though nothing definite has been heard.
There is at present a slight shortage of shop hAises in Dalat Bazaar, but no new houses are being built [rending possible development of the Kut.
Medong was visited by the Officer-in-Charge on the 28th Io solve a probate dispute and also to obtain the signatures of T.K. Tirah and his old wife Peni to their will. The presence of this ■'will" will undoubtedly save the Government much trouble when their estates eventually come up for probate, as they are about the wealthiest couple on the river, owning many sago gardens and other property.
On the 10th the Pengiran Haji Mohamat, Senior Native Officer, Dalat, was transferred to Mukah leaving his son Awang Bnnyok as sole Native Officer, Dalat. The Pongiran joined as Junior Native Officer, Dalat, in 1912 and there was very little about Dalat affairs and Dalat History that he did not know His place will be hard to fill.
Land settlement had commenced in the Mukah area by the end of March, and the Acting District Officer, having watched the effect of settlement in the Oya district, states that ho is confident that at long last the end of local land difficulties is in sight, (furthermore, the native population will now for the first time be fully protected against land grabbers and swindlers of various nationalities. Formerly, to deprive a I.iko Melanau of his ancestral sago garden was usually as simple as separating a child from its toffee; in fact, this was one of the chief sports of certain people, the Brunei Malays having long regarded their pagan neighbours as their natural and proper prey. With the best will in the world, it was often almost impossible for Government to protect the natives from the machinations of these accomplished and plausible tricksters, bnt with the. advent of settlement their activities in this direction will be finally curtailed.
Early in the month a party of shipwrecked Japanese sailors were found on the beach and given assistance. Owing to the lack of a reliable interpreter it was difficult to obtain their full story, but there is no doubt that they had suffered considerable hardships.
On the 27th a travelling cinema arrived to open for one week in Dalat; - needless to say, the films were very ancient and patched.
Mr. and Mrs. 1. S. Hammond left Dalat on transfer to Mukah on March 6th.

Fourth Division News.
March.
A Constabulary Club was founded at Miri, and registered on March 18th. The club is housed for the lime being in one of the blocks of police barracks.
Towards the end of the month sixteen of the crew of a Japanese trawler landed in two small boats at Kuala Baram and reported that their vessel, the Yamafuku Maru, was lying some ninety miles off the coast with a broken main shaft. H.H.M.Y. Maimuna, which happened to be at Miri, went out to look for her aud towed her to Kuching, together with the remaining seven members of the crew who had been left on board. The Yamafuku Maru is at present undergoing repairs in Brooke Dock. According to her log, she left Formosa on February 10th on a pearl-fishing cruise.
Mr. J. G. Anderson, District Officer, Bintnln, paid a short visit to Miri on March 21st, taking a passage in R.A.F. flying boat SUGI by permission of the Resident and of the officers concerned. He returned to Bintulu by the same flying-boat on the 24th.
The District Officer. Biutulu, reports that the draft code of Kayau, Punan and Penan adat was completed during the month, and received the approval of the headmen of all three tribes at a meeting held at Tubau on March 13tb. After a few additions and corrections had been made, the code was snbmitted to the proper authorities for consideration and enactment.
Complaints wore received from Tatau Dayaks that empanggau viets doing serious damage to their ripening padi. Advice "was requested by telegraph from the Agricultural Department, which recommended hanging pieces of cloth soaked in Jeyes' fluid among the padi A supply of this disinfectant was sent to the Seventh-Day Adventist Mission at Tatau, tbe Missionary in charge having kindly offered to assist the Dayaks in fighting this pest.
Dayaks in the Bintulu district report that engkabang is in full flower in certain rivers. The prospects of a crop appear to be bright.
First Prize
Second Prize
Third Prize
Starters
Promotion Expenses
81,086.00 ,643.00
271.50 543.00 271.50
$2,715.00
Bintulu trade figures for February are given below
1935.	1984.
Imports	... $ 7.236	$8,096
Exports	...	25.880	9,473
Trade increased in volume owing to the additional shipping facilities offered by m.v Doggersbank, which called in on the 10th, 19th, and 29th. A minor trade boom has been created locally as a result of the simultaneous rise in the prices of damar and rattans, and the continued fair price-level of such products as sawn timber.
The Tanjong Batu road has been completed, and it is now possible to motor to a point on the beach some seven or eight miles distant from the town.
• * = Starters.
Fourth Division News.
March.
A Constabulary Club was founded at Miri, and registered on March 18th. The club is housed for the lime being in one of the blocks of police barracks.
Towards the end of the month sixteen of the crew of a Japanese trawler landed in two small boats at Kuala Baram and reported that their vessel, the Yamafuku Maru, was lying some ninety miles off the coast with a broken main shaft. H.H.M.Y. Maimuna, which happened to be at Miri, went out to look for her aud towed her to Kuching, together with the remaining seven members of the crew who had been left on board. The Yamafuku Maru is at present undergoing repairs in Brooke Dock. According to her log, she left Formosa on February 10th on a pearl-fishing cruise.
The Acting District Officer, Limbang, reports that the sudden drop in the price of pepper has caused a certain amount of anxiety among the subsidised pepper planters along the Panderuan Road, and at Kubong.
Reports from up-river state that there has been an exceptionally good crop of bill padi in the Limbang district this year, especially in the areas inhabited by Dayaks who have recently moved in from the Second Division.
The following table gives the trade figures for Limbang for tbe month :—
1935.	1934.
Imports	... $13,726	$12,818
Exports	...	13.649	11,719
Visitors to Limbang during the month included Mr. B. E Turnbull, British Resident, Brunei, Dr. W. G. Evans, Medical Officer, Brunei, and Messrs. Thomson, Bomphrey. Kay and Coghill.




