MOndaY DECEMBER 2nd. 1935.
Kuching is suffering from an epidemic of diphtheria, which broke early in October. Diphtheria, fortunately, is a disease from which Sarawak has hitherto been singularly free. 80 the stock of antitoxin available proved quite inadequate, and gave out almost at once. Since the need was urgent, and since there was no steamer due from Singapore for some days, a wire was sent to AirCommodore S. W. Smith asking him if he could send over a supply of antitoxin by flying-boat. He agreed immediately to do this, and a special flying-boat was despatched at dawn on November 1st.
His Highness the Rajah has written to Air-Commodore Smith expressing the thanks of all Communities for this very timely assistance.
Marriage.
Kenedy Scott.—On 30th November. 1985. at St. Thomas' Pro-Cathedral, Kuching, by the Venerable Archdeacon F. S. Hollis. Lewis Dunbar, son of Dr. J. R. Kennedy, of Dunbeath, Caithness, to Margaret Phyllis Brough, only daughter of Mr. and Mrs. J. Scott, of Kuching. Sarawak.

His Highness the Rajah returned from the

North on November 3rd. and left again for
	-	...
the Second Division on the 12th, travelling
in H. H. M. Y. .Maimuna. His Highness, who
was accompanied by Mr. R. L. Daubeny,
Acting Resident. First Division, visited the
Kalaka and Saribas districts and returned to

Kuching on November 16th.
Mr. H. B. Crocker, Acting Government Secretary, paid a visit to Singapore during the month, leaving Kuching by the Vyner Brooks on November 12th. and returning on the 29 th.
The Sarawak Gazette
MOndaY DECEMBER 2nd. 1935.
Kuching is suffering from an epidemic of diphtheria, which broke early in October. Diphtheria, fortunately, is a disease from which Sarawak has hitherto been singularly free. 80 the stock of antitoxin available proved quite inadequate, and gave out almost at once. Since the need was urgent, and since there was no steamer due from Singapore for some days, a wire was sent to AirCommodore S. W. Smith asking him if he could send over a supply of antitoxin by flying-boat. He agreed immediately to do this, and a special flying-boat was despatched at dawn on November 1st.
His Highness the Rajah has written to Air-Commodore Smith expressing the thanks of all Communities for this very timely assistance.

Owing to the epidemic, all schools in the Kuching Municipal area were closed on October 29th. The Sylvia Cinema was closed two days later, but re opened on November 9th.

There have been sixty-nine posit ive cases of
diphtheria since the disease first manifested
itself on October 4th. and seven deaths. Of
these, five were children, one of whom was
suffering from broncho pneumonia, and the
remaining two were adults, who were both
invalids before the epidemic began. The
position is therefore satisfactory, since more ;
serious fatalities might well have been
expected.
On November 13th the motor yacht Rosaura,
owned by Lord Moyne, arrived unexpectedly
at Pending. A party consisting of Lord
Moyne, Lady Broughton and Miss Rosamund
Broughton, the Hon. Anthony and Mrs.
Chaplin, and Lord Elveden. proceeded to
Knotting in the yacht’s speed-boat and called
on Her Highness the Ranee at Astana. They
were subsequently entertained to luncheon
and dinner by Her Highness, and after
dinner witnessed a display of Sea Dayak
dancing given by the Sarawak Constabulary.
The request for’the display caused some con-
sternation at Fort Margherita, since almost
all the Dayak constables at the depot had
recently been drafted to outstations; the few
raw recruits who remained, however, rose
nobly to the occasion in spite of an unfor-
tunate lack of Dayak costume. But all went
with a swing, since in the uncertain light of
the torches it was not easy to sec that the
dancers’ chawats consisted of regulation put-
tees, or that the hornbill feathers adorning
their improvised war-coats were made of
paper!
On the following day Her Highness the
Ranee, Dayang Valerie, and the Private
Secretary and A.D.C. to His Highness the
Rajah lunched on board the yacht, which
then left for Miri.
The anniversary of the Sylvia Cinema
occurred on November 24th. Souvenir pro-
grammes containing a message of greeting
signed by Her Highness the Rance were
distributed to mark the occasion. Large
audiences were present at each house to see
(lay Divorcee, starring Fred Astaire and
(linger Rogers,—the best musical picture
that has yet come to Kuching.
Incidentally, the temporary closing of the
Sylvia Cinema emphasised the extent to
which it has now become part of the social
life in Kuching. One heard on all sides the
question—“What on earth did we do in the
evenings before the cinema opened?” One
felt quite lost without it, and the news of its
re-opening was hailed with real relief. The
Sylvia Cinema has certainly proved its worth,
and can safely claim to be one of Kuching’s
most valuable amenities.
We regret to have to record the death, on November 19th, of the Rev. Father A,Hai- deggar, of the Roman Catholic Mission. An obituary notice appears in another column.

H.M.S. Herald anchored at Muaratebas on Friday. October 18th, and a party of officers and men paid a very welcome visit to Kuching, coming up river the same evening in the ship's motor-boat.
H.M.S. Herald has been surveying the approaches to the mouth of the Rejang River during the past three months, and is expected to continue this work next season. She left for Singapore and Hong Kong on the 20th.
Mr. F. L. Crossley and Mr. G. F. J. Pegler reported their return from furlough on November 26th. Mr. Pegler remains in Kuching, having been appointed Assistant District Officer; Mr. Crossley left for Sarikei the same day by the Rejanq to .take up his appointment as Acting District Officer, Lower Rejang. Mr. Crossley relieves Mr. A. Macpherson, who will act as Travelling District Officer, Sibu, until the new Government station at Nanga Meluan is ready for occupation.
We hear that Mr. R. D. Lascelles. who is at present officiating as Officer-in-Charge, Oya and Dalat, will go to Kapit when Mr. F. A. Moore leaves that station to go on furlough early in January. Mr. Lascelles’ Elace at Oya will be taken by Mr. J. C. B. Fisher.
Mr. K. H. Digby, Cadet, arrived at Kuching from Miri on November 23rd to do duty in the First Division. Mr. Digby is at present engaged in taking a census of gardens and population in the Simanggang Road area.
Mr. G. T. M. MacBryan's many friends
in Sarawak will no doubt he interested to
learn that his conversion to the Muslim faith
[ was completed on October 24th. since on that
date he was given the name of Abdul Rahman
by the All-Malaya Muslim Society of
I Singapore.
Mr. Mac Bryan left Singapore for Europe
a few days later. He intends to proceed on
the Haj early in March, in order to be in
Mecca during the month of Dhulhijjah. He
I bears a letter from the Arabic Imam of
1 Singapore to the Sheriff of Mecca.
The tandem bicycle has made its appearance
in Kuching, at least two specimens having
been seen on the roads recently. So far,
though, no young couples have used this
strange conveyance to take them off on their
honeymoon.
We welcome to Kuching the Venerable
Archdeacon F. S. Hollis, who arrived from
Europe on November 26th.
Once a week for the past month or so wild melodies and barbaric cries have floated through to the bar of the Sarawak Club from the mixed side. These phenomena, which have occurred every Friday night, are supposed to have been due to practices for the । St. Andrew's night dance.

Two new priests arrived by the Darcel on
November 26th to join the Roman Catholic
Mission. They are the Rev. Fathers W. J.
M. Boon and W. J. J. Wheenear.
We are asked to advise all concerned that
no candidates will be admitted to the forth-
coming Cambridge Local Examinations in
Kuching unless they have been inoculated
against diphtheria. This also applies to
Supervisors.
The examinations commence on Monday,
December 9th.
The announcement in last month’s Gazette regarding the flat rate for Xmas Greeting Telegrams to the British Empire should be amended to read $1.75 for 10 words, and 20 cents for each extra word.

Obituary.
It is with deep regret that we have to record the death, on November 19th, of the Rev. Father A. Haideggar, of the Roman Catholic Mission.
Father Haideggar, who was born at Storzing in the Tyrol as long ago as 1855, came of a very old family, and was able to trace back his descent for more than 1,300 years. He was ordained priest at Mill Hill in 1883, and came out to Sarawak the same year. Soon after his arrival he started St. Joseph’s School in Kuching, and in 1885 he built St. Theresa's Convent. This building, which was of wood, is still standing.
At the end of 1885 he was made Rector of Kuching; from 1895 to 1897 he was Pro-Prefect Apostolic, and in 1895 he was appointed Procurator to the Mission in Sarawak and British North Borneo. In the same year he was appointed Vicar by Monseigneur Dunn. He remained in Kuching until his retirement in 1931.
Father Haideggar, who was a true servant of Christ, devoted all his energies and his considerable private fortune to the Mission in a long life of service and sacrifice. During all the 52 years that he worked in Sarawak he only returned to Europe once, and then only for six months; he was a fine pioneer missionary, and played a great part in establishing and spreading the Catholic Mission in Borneo. He leaves a noble monument to his memory in the present Kuching church, school, convent, and Procurate, all of which he built; and he will also live long in the memories of the hundreds of friends whom he helped in their distress, for he was known as “the father of the poor,” and deserved the title.
On his retirement in 1931 Father Haideggar
settled in Labuan, but after little more than a year
he returned to his beloved Kuching; his death,
though sudden, was not unexpected, since for the
| past few years he had been in failing health.
The funeral, which took place on November 20th,
1 was attended by a large congregation drawn from
I all classes, who listened to a short but impressive
| memorial sermon preached by the Very Rev. Mon-
। seigneur Hopfgartner.
Sarawak, as well as the Mission, owes a great
debt to Father Haideggar. Of him it can truly be
said—'Well done, good and faithful servant.”
Roman Catholic Mission.
APPOINTMENT OE A SUCCESSOR TO
MONSEIGNEUR DUNN.
On November 14th advice was received by telegram to say that the Rev. Father A. Hopfgartner had been appointed Prefect Apostolic of the Roman Catholic Mission in Sarawak.
Monseiguenr Hopfgartner, as he now becomes, was born at Muhlwald in the Tyrol in 1874. He was ordained priest at Mill Hill on April 28th, 1901, and came to Sarawak the following August.
He was first stationed in the Rejang, where he remained for about 8 years; he spent the next 4.J 1 years at Bandakan as Rector, then came to Kuching”. , where be was given charge of all the Mission outstations in the First Division. Most of these outstations, in fact, were started by him. Since 1931 he has been Rector of St. Joseph’s Mission. Kuching, and Principal of St. Joseph's School.
Monseigneur Hopfgartner, who is a Chinese and Dayak scholar, has a fine record of service to his credit, and is deservedly popular with all races and classes. He has for several years been a prominent member of the Agricultural Improvement Board. ■ and has done much to further agricultural development in Sarawak.
The following personal letter has been addressed to him by His Highness the Rajah :—
“Astana,
Kuching.
20th November, 1935.
‘ My. Dear Father Hopfgartner.
I have just jieard that you have been appointed Prefect Apostolic of the Roman Catholic Mission in Sarawak, and must write and congratulate you upon receiving an honour which you have richly deserved. I am sure that this appointment will be as popular in the Mission as it will be among all the Government officers who know' you.
'I myself was not suprised to hear the news, and although I see from your letter to the Government Secretary that you do not exactly welcome the added responsibility of your new poet, I am sure that it is one which you will fill worthily. I am also sure that as long as you direct the affairs of the Mission you will maintain the tradition of friendship and co-operation which has always existed between the Mission and the Government, and which has done so much to promote the friendly relations which exist to-day.
Yours very sincerely,
(Sgd.) Vyner Brooke.”
We are sure that Monseigneur Hopfgartner's many friends in Borneo will join with us in congratulating him on the honour that has been done him.

Notes on Some Birds in Sarawak.
By E. BANKS.
Lophura nobilis.
Crested Fireback Pheasant.—Malay Sumpidan.
This is our commonest pheasant, a bird of the secondary growth and jungle, though of course more occasionally to lie found in old jungle. In the thick undergrowth abounding near Kapil station these birds were at one time sufficiently numerous to supply the table; they are mostly excellent eating, particularly the breast, the legs being tough after so much running, but old birds, it is true, are almost entirely uneatable.
These pheasants are ground birds.—I have only twice seen them take short and very noisy, fussy flights across streams—but they are very swift runners, and move with head and tail outstretched 
while giving vent to an occasional croak; the cock
seldom makes attempt to conceal himself. They are
most frequently caught in snares, and though mine
never got more than very doubtfully tame and took
fright easily at small happenings, they lived for
many months. Padi, cooked rice and fruits were
their main food, but they would take a limited
number of cockroaches, of which they were soon apt
to tire ; a quite harmless green tree snake (Dryophis
prasinus) was received without fear, indeed the cock
once jumped on it with sixth feet quite without
effect and then took no further notice of the reptile.
The appearance of a Civet Cat terrified the birds;
doubtless this animal is one of their greatest natural
enemies.
The note is an enquiring croak followed by a shrill
short whistle or chirp quite unlike that of any home
bird, but it is a sound not infrequently heard when
the bird is disturbed by the passage of a party through
the jungle; although I have looked for the bird on
these occasions, they were probably more than
usually on the alert and quickly made off: if one Sarawak, advertise themselves by the noise they is more fortunate, one sees the bird first and hears make. Tu the male, this is a single plaintive cry it chirp afterwards.	i or a number of cries becoming shorter and shorter
Domestic fowls do not get a very good time in as they work up to a climax; the single cry, indeed, native long-houses, and cockerels, either alone or is not at all unlike those set up by someone who is with a hen or two. are apt to move oil into the » lost in the jungle trying to get an answer from his jungle and fend for themselves. At one lime a ; friends, in these circumstances I have myself been party of three could be seen on the river bank below answered by Argus pheasants. The hen makes a Belaga in the very early morning, equally surely a shorter and less plaintive cry than the cock, and is large cock Fireback Pheasant would turn up and easily distinguishable.
with head held low and neck outstretched would
chase away the cockerel and return to find the hens had also vanished. The trio would then re-appear a little further up river and the performance would be repeated,—even shooting at them two mornings running did not deter them, and there can be little doubt that in this case in particular and also in more general cases the wild Cock Pheasants occasionally cross with domestic hens.
Lobiophasis butweri.
Bulwers Pheasant—Iban Bckia : Kayan Bangui.
■ This is a bird of the hills and old jungle. It shuns cultivation and clearings, and though common enough in favoured parts it has now disappeared altogether or else is very rare in the populated Kuching and Upper Sarawak Districts. I have seen them in the Ulu Akah and Tinjar in the Baram District, and they are numerous in parts of
the Balleh and Baloi branches of the Rejang River,
but nowhere have I seen so many as in the Ulu
Batang Lupar on the watershed before one descends
into the Katibas basin; the average view one gets
is a stern one of them disappearing, but I have seen
them feeding quietly; in the half light of the jungle
the large white tail of the cock is certainly con-
spicuous, but the body so harmonizes with the
background and the transition to the tail is so
sharp that it is really hard to say which is the sharp
end of the bird.—an excellent example of disruptive
colouration and camouflage.
Bulwer's pheasant is a very shy and wary bird,
and I have never heard more than just a croak from
either cocks or hens, though captives used to lower
their heads, fluff out their neck feathers, and emit
a sort of hiss. Like other pheasants they feed on
grain and fallen fruits, also cockroaches, and I once
saw a hen catch a frog and make many Unsuccessful
efforts to eat it, only ended by the escape of the
frog.
The Wattles in the cock are of course inflatable,
| though I have seldom seen this done. They proved
most troublesome things to prepare in skinning
; specimens.
1.f k *	'.
| Argnsianus gravi.
 Argus Pheasant. Malay Ruai.
 These are usually very common and may some-
times be heard at the 10th mile or on Matang close
to Kuching, being particularly numerous near the
sea coast from Simatan to Tanjong Data. Their
 well-known dancing-clearings may also be found in
many places, hut neither I nor any other European
appears to have seen a wild one here: one actually
I functioning I have been very close, within five yards
I and less when the bird, presumably a female, was
making a clucking noise like a domestic fowl but
I never saw it. They are, of course, easily taken
in snares, and they are occasionally shot running by
natives, but they are wary, adepts at concealment, swift runners and unlike most Pheasants in
Bulreron capelli.
Large Thick-Billed Green Pigeon.—Malay Bedidi.
This medium-sized pigeon flits about in ones or twos, and though a flock may feed together, individuals seem to come and go independently, and the massed flights characteristic of some other species are rare here. They are certainly very common in some parts and seem to replace the Pergam (Carpophaya aenea); on the whole they are perhaps the hardest to hit of all the pigeons, their flight being straight and direct, and their crisp wings- beats an embodiment of flying-power. This is unfortunate, for they are the best eating of all, combining the pleasant flavour of the smallest pigeons with reasonable size. Their gurgling note when feeding and calling to their mates is certainly reminiscent of the Punai (Osmotreron vernans).

Treron nipalensis.
Small Thick-Billed Green Pigeon.—Malay Punai Tunggal.
I have never seen this Pigeon in flocks or flighting, and they appear to go about in pairs. Two found on Pulau Satang would appear to indicate a wandering if not migntory spirit.
Osmotreron fulvicollis.
Rufous Necked Pigeon.
These pigeons frequent mangrove swamps. In the Lundu and Lawas Districts, where I have seen them, they fly in the evening in ones and twos along the same line of flight, but do not offer great or prolonged sport.
Osmotreron olax.
Rosy Necked Pigeon.—Malay Punai.
In one or two places I have found this smallest of pigeons—notably at Balai Ringin in the Ulu Sadong and Long Akah in the Barain—predominating to the complete and partial exclusion of 0. vernans, normally much commoner. They flight in much the same way as the common punai, but are naturally not so numerous, and the individuals are more spread out in the flocks; I have not shot a great many, but on three occasions have always noted that the last one of the pair was the cock bird.
Osmotreron vernans.
Common Green Pigeon—Malay Punai.
These little Green Pigeons are small birds weighing only some four ounces, but they are excellent eating, and owing to the sport they offer.—comparable, indeed, to driven game, they provide a class of shooting not ordinarily obtained in Sarawak.
In the evenings between about quarter past five and a quarter to six, or as late as six o'clock, these little birds flight in enormous numbers towards certain trees mainly for the purpose of roosting, but occasionally for feeding; on the latter occasion the gains may stand somewhere near the fruiting trees, usually’ "Kayu Ara” (Ficus up.) and obtain excellent sport, but the best birds are shot in the evening with full crops as they are proceeding to a roosting place, either in jungle or among the mangrove swamps. There are thus two kinds of flights, and the difference between them is well seen in the early morning when birds that have roosted proceed to flight to their feeding ground in the opposite direction to their evening flight, whereas birds which in the evening have been flighting to feed have retired to roost elsewhere at dusk, and may be seen following much the same route in the morning as they did in the evening.
It is not quite universal (but usually so) that the evening flight is roughly towards the setting sun, or within a few points of this direction, and but rarely in the opposite direction save to a favourite roosting site in the mangrove swamps.
The flight begins by the approach of a few very high birds, singly, or in twos and threes, offering most difficult overhead shots, for like most pigeons t heir speed is very considerable; later on the birds come with a rush, in dozens and twenties, or even in flocks of seventy or eighty, and often in more than one flock at a time; sometimes they come to the
 right, sometimes to the left, sometimes straight at you, and now they fly very much lower than the first ! few birds; they are on you and gone in a flash, nearly taking your hat with them, and necessitating quick work if both barrels are to be fired ; few can resist the usually ineffectual browning of the flock, and it must be admitted that attempts to shoot
1 approaching birds or those on top of you are often a ; waste of cartridges, the gun getting the best chance to pick his birds with a quartering shot after they have passed him. There are many finer points to note : this ineffectual browning of the flocks, though it may bring an occasional bird or two, must lead to a good deal of wounding; a sportsman should  endeavour to stand behind the brow of a hill, or behind a young rubber tree op high tuft of grass, leaving behind him a fairly opeu path, road or grass
I clearing in which .to drop his birds, for a punai dropped in the Unfair is a punai lost, and apart from one’s wasted effort it is a shame to destroy so sporting a bird without the hope of picking it up afterwards.
As I have said. some cover is advisable in Punai shooting. for if a few birds or even a flock see you from afar, they will swerve off; if. on the other I hand, they see you too late and at fairly close quarters, then? is no more sporting bird, for they put on pace and trust to this to escape. It is just as much a mistake to stand right under one's cover as it is to stand right out in the open with no cover at all; provided the birds see you when just in range they will carry straight on, and if you do not l happen to have observed their approach at the same , time, by reason of being too near your cover, they are on you unexpectedly and are gone before yon can ] be ready to do your best.
No. 6 shot is probably the best for punai. for these | birds, like all pigeons, are well feathered, and approaching birds take a lot of killing; there is also less chance of only pricking birds in a flock, into which the coolest of allots inevitably sometimes fires. The gun who kills one in three is doing excellently, and may get through a couple of boxes of cartridges in an evening, so that small as the birds are, their  numbers and the sport they offer are not to be  despised.
The appearance of a punai flight anywhere near a town is a sign for all and sundry to repair to the spot with guns arid nets; the former do not do much . execution, but the continual firing soon disintegrates a flight. The nets are a nuisance, for. they sometimes like a flock of 30 or 40 birds which are sold for a few cents each; and although this does not often happen, for the punai soon get to know where the ; nets are placed and rise above them, netting undoubtedly helps to break the flights up.
The regularity of the flighting is astonishing, for it occurs at the same time evening after evening, and may last as much as a couple of months if feeding is good. In spite of being shot and netted, the birds continue to flight year after year in undiminished numbers over the same line, or within perhaps a quarter of a mile of it, and one can time the flights almost to a month. I have more than once had qualms about punai flighting, for sometimes one may have a run or preponderance of either males or females,—sometimes, too. the bag arc all adult, sometimes with young ones mixed; much remains ; to be found out about the ethics of punai shooting. On the whole, though, more cock birds are killed than hens, for of a pair, it is the cock who leads— as with ducks—and he is also to the front in the flocks, thus receiving one's first discharge.

Leucotreron jambu.
Jambu Pigeon.—Malay Punai Jambu.
This pigeon goes in pairs, and never to my know- । ledge in flocks; besides being taken in old jungle, it also hangs around the outskirts of cultivation and it is not unusual to see a pair craning their necka in all directions in some rubber tree, for they are on the whole reluctant to fly. They appear to wander rather aimlessly, and one at least drifted into nay house one night attracted by the light.
Carpophuga aenea.
Imperial Green Pigeon.—Malay Pergam.
This big fruit pigeon is a bird of the old jungle and mangrove i.nd nipah swamps having little to do with cultivation; it appears to be a bird of solitary habits except when pairing, or travelling in : family parties, and vary rarely flights in flocks as other pigeons do. Tn the early morning as the mist rises they may be seen making their way in a leisurely manner across rivers with a slow-flapping, round-winged, almost owl-like flight, but when disturbed or in a hurry they have a more typical | wood-pigeon flight; the wings do not look at all | round, and the beats are clear-cut with a barely j»erceptible pause at the conclusion of the down 1 stroke. In the evenings, the flight is of this more direct type, and the birds move to their feeding or I roosting grounds—or at any rate, make a start,— before the smaller punai, nor do they seem to have any particular course, often moving in the opposite direction to their smaller brethren.
The breeding season varies both on the coast and inland, but there is a sort of nuptial flight that takes place which one may see perhaps anywhere but which I noted particularly at Belaga one July. I A single bird flying along normally would give two or three vigorous beats and shoot as much as two yards vertically up into the air, then hang poised for an appreciable and ecstatic moment with flexed wings, neck stretched upwards and tail to earth as though it might fall over backwards; a sharp horizontal turn and a swift downward rush completed the movement, normal flight being then resumed. Solitary birds and one of a pair usually perform but not both, and I have seen the Tiong or Mynah (Eulabes javensis) earn out a similar but less well-marked performance.
The Melanaus of Mukah and Oya catch Pergam with bird lime, and the birds become quite lame in time; the elongated feathers on the nape of the neck can be erected in the form of a crest by both sexes, though neither the Melanaus nor I can distinguish cocks from hens. Occasionally captives will perform, cooing deeply and moving the head up and down like a domestic pigeon, the beak laid flat against the crop and the head drawn hack. They feed easily on bananas and fruits, and live for a long time but are quarrelsome among themselves and fight by giving a sharp blow from the “wrist” of the upraised wing.
Pergam are surprising birds to shoot, sometimes coming down quite easily, at other times seemingly invulnerable even to No. 4 shot, for it is little use trying anything smaller. Very old birds are no good even for stewing purposes, being just about uneatable, but in their prime they are an excellent table bird; it is hard to say which are young and which old,- the former lack much of the green gloss on the back and the purple wash on the front, the crest, in particular, and the red rim to the eyelid, but unless young and old are together it is hard
to say which is which, the best characteristic being perhaps the under wing coverts, which in the young are a dull drab grey much the same colour as the quills instead of clear french-grey as in old birds.
Myristicicora bicolor.
The Nutmeg Pigeon.—Malay Rawa.
In October this is a common but wary bird on Pulo Burong, to a less extent on Satang Kechil, where they nest and seem Io depart by April. They stick to the islands, but have been occasionally seen in several coastal districts; some are dead white, and some more creamy-coloured, but the difference is slight, and not apparently due to age or sex.
They are on the whole rather wary, and can fly very fast when disturbed, offering, it must be admitted excellent sport; but they are now protected as they visit the island for breeding. The note is like that of the “Bedidi,” a glorified chuckle.
[These notes are reprinted, by courtesy of the Author, from Vol. XIV of the Sarawak Museum Journal, which ’s at present in the press.—Ed.]

Racecourse Development Fund.
LIST OF SUBSCRIBERS.
Kuching,
•28th November, 1935. The Editor,
Sara wak Gazette,
Kuching.
Sir,
I enclose herewith further lists showing actual collections towards the Racecourse Development Fund, and shall be obliged if you will publish same in the next issue of the Sarawak Gazette.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
R. L. Daubeny, Acting Resident, First Division.

Lord Moyne’s Yacht in Sarawak.
VISIT OF M.Y. "ROSAURA.”
The yacht Rosaura arrived unexpectedly at
Pending on November 13tb with a party conflicting
of lord Moyne and Ave others. The Rosaura
’ which flies the white ensign of the Royal Yackt
' Squadron, is a large and luxurious vessel some 280
| foil in length, equipped with every modern device
' designed to facilitate navigation I art. of the
yacht’s equipment consists of two 36-foot launches,
each provided with electric kitchens and sleeping
quarters for passengers and crew; it is in these
‘ launches that Lord Moyne proposes to travel when
lie explores the New Guinea rivers which he intends
to visit. In addition to these hunches, the
super speed-boat which is used
Rosaura possesses a
as a tender.The yacht is manned by a crew of 26 Europeans,
and carries a keeper from the London Zoological
Society, since one of Lord Moyne s objects on his
present voyage is to collect certain rare animals in
the countries visited.
The Rosaura left on the 14th for Min where she
refuelled. It is understood that Lord Moyne
intends to spend some months in New Guinea, and
then down to the Barrier Reef.
It will be remembered that Lord Moyne, who
an enthusiastic yachtsman, visited the Dutch East
Indies mat year and succeeded in capturing two
the celebrated "dragon. from the Island of
Komodo, permission to do this having been granted
by the Government of the Netherlands Indies.

(Concluded).
V.—Seasoning and Preservation.
In the better developed countries the forester con-
siders his work accomplished when he has handed i
over the mature tree to the timber merchant. The
latter transports it to a sawmill, converts it. seasons ।
it and possibly treats it with preservatives, being ;
dependent upon his own training and experience for
his skill in these operations supplemented perhaps I
in these latter days by advice from specialist Timber
Laboratories. Fierce trade competition forces him |
to keep up to date and to sec that the lumber he •
presents to the public is as nearly perfect as possi-
ble; and the trade as a whole is kept up to scratch
by a discriminating public.
In this country the public would not appear to be
very discriminating; the only factor having any
weight with it seems to be one of price; and if the
only timber which can be bought in the market is
unseasoned and possibly poorly sawn the public |
must shoulder much of the blame since only by j
insistence upon quality will quality be produced. I
So long as the purchaser of any wooden construction
—be it house or furniture—continues to accept '
articles erected in unseasoned timber, the sale of
such timber will go on—it saves both the carpenter
and the miller so much trouble and capital outlay.
But with so many substitutes for limber in these
days, it is pertinent to ask how long the more
discriminating members of the public will continue
to buy this unseasoned timber, It  is not rather
foolish to assume that the present demand will con-
tinue and is it not quite probable that the public
will turn to substitutes unless provided with the
best timber?
We must therefore put our timber house in order.
Although lack of public demand for letter stuff may-
have perpetuated the slipshod methods of the past
the miller and the builder must now get together
and do something to improve their material.
In England the tendency to adopt substitutes has
been quite marked despite the availability of really
good timber stocks, largely as a result of propaganda
by other interests who not only claim merits for
steel, concrete and plaster-board which these pro-
ducts possess in no marked degree but also disparage
timber in a manner which can only be due In a
lack of knowledge or to sheer misrepresentation.
Unfortunately publicity of this kind does not remain
in its country of origin and it is possible that it has
fallen on good ground here, where the quality of
prepared timber certainly leaves something to be
desired. If, therefore, the process is to be stopped
we must see to it that our timber gets the treatment
it deserves both as regards preparation and propa-
ganda. The timber resources of Sarawak are second
to none and it is only n question of employing
proper extraction methods followed by proper con-
version and seasoning. Extraction has already been
dealt with, and conversion is usually good or easily
capable of improvement.
But seasoning is a question which has largely been
shelved until now. Two major difficulties' have
loomed large Wore the vision of those who have
given it any consideration. The first is the fear
that during the process of seasoning the timber will
deteriorate; the second is the capital outlay which I
is inactive during the period of seasoning. It is difficult to see why either of these should have weight since it can not be denied that unseasoned timber is unsatisfactory and wasteful. Seasoning is a necessity—not a luxury—and the costs of seasoning must he met if the price of using unseasoned timber is not to be a recurrent charge for upkeep. As regards deterioration during the process of seasoning, this need cause no anxiety if the work is properly carried out, the necessary distinction being made between seasoning and mere storage.
Fresh limber, by reason of the moisture it contains is liable to attack by certain insects and fungi: theta? is also an inevitable shrinkage, especially across the grain, but both dangers can be largely eliminated by seasoning which is the process of drying to a point where equilibrium has been reached between the moisture content of the timber and that of the surrounding atmosphere. When this point is reached ‘ working'' of the timber should cease, and at the same time those pests which require a high moisture content in their hosts will no longer function.
In practice it is possible to produce conditions which make deterioration very improbable. The conditions required are that the timber should be so stored as to expose a maximum surface to the atmosphere while at the same time regulating the rate, of evaporation to the extent necessary to prevent the setting up of undue strains within the wood fibres. Proper stacking' methods cover both points, but protection from the direct rays of the sun is an added precaution which is important 'enough to render it most advisable.
which are
arc wpara
Vertical stacking such as is often seen in this
country is better than nothing, but it does not have
Hie many advantages of the well-built horizontal
stack, which, in addition to drying the timber, also
tends to eliminate twist and "cupping” (i.e. the
formation where a plank begins to look like a
i gutter). It is difficult to describe the construction
of a seasoning stock in the space at our disposal,
। and attention is therefore drawn to the scale models
। which may be seen in the Forestry Museum in
Kuching. The stacks are erected on permanent or
semi-permanent foundations of such a nature that
n be given to the planks at intervals
usually about 3 feet. Succeeding layers
cd by battens or "stickers” at similar
intervals, care being taken that the slickers are in
i vertical raws, this precaution living necessary to pre-
vent uneven strains in the planks. If the'stickers
are 1 inch thick and 1 to 11/2 inches wide the
vertical spacing will be about right for boards and
normal planks while a similar horizontal spacing
should be maintained. Two important points should
he observed as regards the ends of the planks—they
must be supported as overhang will cause distortion,
and they should be painted to prevent end-splits due
to too rapid drying out. The. stacks may he built
in the open, but we strongly advise storage under
cover in an open-sided shed.
It is not possible to give definite times for the
adequate seasoning of timber as they vary with the
species and the dimensions, but it will be helpful
to give general indications. Boards of the the
lighter meranti types, geronggang, medang and
nyatoh will be reasonably "dry" in six months but
should be given as much longer as possible—say a
year: kapor and keruing should be given at least a
year and meraka still longer; furniture woods of
whatever type want at least a couple of years to en-
sure freedom from ‘‘working.’’ As regards the larger dimensions the period of seasoning must be regulated by the size—obviously a larger cross-section will not dry to the centre as quickly as a smaller one. And in this connexion it is important to note . that it is no use getting a plank "skin-dry”—if it is not seasoned equally throughout it will behave in every way except the way it is wanted, warping, splitting and surface-checking.
We assume that- timber will not bo stored for seasoning under dirty conditions such as will ] encourage fungi and insects and that it will be under reasonably careful observation, but after erection it ; may not be possible to avoid altogether conditions suitable for the existence of pests, and precautions may therefore be advisable in the direction of preservative treatment. The attacks of fungi may generally be inhibited by careful attention to ventilation and avoidance of permanently damp conditions, but insects can only be repulsed by using immune species or by chemical treatment. We have already pleaded for the use of the less naturally durable timbers where absolute durability is not an essential factor, but here we would emphasise the practicability of employing them even under severe conditions after treatment with a suitable preservative.
Coal-tar creosote is one of the best preservatives and forms the base of several proprietary dopes. Where creosote, alone or in mixture with Diesel oil, is not offensive by reason of its oiliness and smell, it should be given preference if only on account of its cheapness, but for interior work the established preparations based on it will be found more pleasing in use. There are also several solutions based on copper and arsenic salts which are harmless—except to the pests and which are suitable for use in any situation. All preservatives of this nature are best applied by immersing the timber in them, but where this is not practicable they can be painted on. Tn either case the application should be done after the pieces have been cut to size and if any cuts have to be made later they should be treated, this precaution being very important as ends and joints are vulnerable points.
An objection which is often made to the use of preservatives is that the timber cannot afterwards be painted. This is true in the case of creosote and 'some of the preservatives based upon it, but there is a number of kinds which do not creep through a subsequent coat of paint, particularly those based on metallic salts. Others, again, can be obtained in various colours and are claimed to lie fully efficient.
All the more reputable preservatives, properly applied, are capable of greatly increasing the life of our softer timbers and as a result they may be used with confidence in permanent structures to replace the more expensive hardwoods. And in the case of roof timbers which are normally of softwood treatment becomes a duty, since these members are more inaccessible for inspection and apt to be neglected once they are in position.
Much can also be done by regular inspections of buildings as it is usually possible to control the attacks of pests without much bother if observed in time. In particular, attacks by termites can be got under control by simple means and it is usually because of neglect that the ravages of these insects have become so serious an to have caused the "white ant” to be regarded as an unavoidable nuisance. Of the two common classes of termite, the ground termite is easily detected by the galleries it constructs from the soil, up posts and into the house. If the galleries are destroyed, the attack
will cease as the insect cannot live out of communication with the ground. The other, the dry-wood class, makes no galleries but enters the timber through a crack or other convenient hiding place; but, as it confines its operations to a limited area, removal of the infected piece (traced by the extruded pellets of frass) will effect a cure.
It is hoped that these brief notes on a subject that might fill a library, have at least awakened a renewed interest in timber. We have dwelt a good deal upon the short-comings of timber producers and users, but that is because their good points need no emphasis. If we have seemed harsh in places, it was in an excess of zeal for the advancement of a valuable industry.—T.C.
IS “GENDANG TANDA” AN
ENTERTAINMENT?
Through the medium of this journal, I take the privilege of expressing my humble opinion of the Malay dance called gendang tanda among the natives. This particular dance was preferred, ever since it originated, and is said to be interesting, amusing and entertaining. Those who object to this are “Ulama,” "Kathi,” or "Lebai.” Whenever a gendang tanda is in progress, youngsters on hearing the first sound of the drum will at once locate the dance-hall. Curiously enough on their arrival, the peeping through the doors and windows is habitual; in so doing, they will be greatly benefited by the sight of those young lady singers behind the curtains. For various reasons, this type of dancing is popular and common,—the paying for extravagant music is not necessary, for instance, since two or three drums, with violins or harmoniums for accompaniment, will suit the purpose. With those drums, the lady singers strike behind the curtains, singing beautiful songs; in front, the youngsters will jump and stepdance in any direction they desire, and the change of the two dancers is simultaneous, i.e., on completion of a lengthy ‘song. This dance, though very different to that of the Westerner’s, is in every sense modest, for it begins at home, and provides great amusement.
Gendang tanda certificates are generally issued freely by the Tua Kampong to the villagers. When there is no ’'Tuan” in the neighbourhood, the performance will last the whole night through, and will only cease at day-break. It will be a blessing should • the Tua Kampongs or Orang Kayas restrict the time I limit, say from 7 p.m. to 1‘2 p.m., for allowance should he made for a good night's rest. To be continually sleepless at night through the noise of those drums, etc., soon leads us to become physical wrecks, and by morning the sight of weary men is no pleasure to the villagers. Then who are to be blamed, f suppose the gendang tanda makers.
You will agree with me that to hear Jeanette Macdonald ringing all her songs repeatedly the whole night through would be a stale entertainment; it is better for her to render carefully her selected few.
In conclusion, I ask in earnest that home folks should take steps to limit these dances, as they lead to ruination, and whosoever craves for their continuation only invites more practical troubles and nuisances.
—Mohamed Nor-Hel.
 
European Wedding in Kuching.

Marriage OF MR. L. D. KENNEDY  TO
MISS PHYLLIS SCOTT

On Saturdav. November 30th, at 11.30 a.m., Mr.
L. D. Kennedy, Superintendent of Customs, First
Division, was married at St. Thomas’ Pro-
Cathedral lo Miss Phyllis Scott, the Ven. Arch-
deacon F. S. Hollis officiating.
The bride looked charming in a dress of ivory
diced satin, which was cut on Tudor lines; tho
yoke on the bodice and the long tight sleeves were
trimmed with tiny seed pearls. The wedding veil
was of fine ivory net embroidered with lovers*
knots on the ،joints, and held in place by a halo
head-dress of orange blossom buds and pearls.
Her only ornament was a jade, diamond and
platinum* pendant, the gift of Their Highnesses’
the Rajab and Ranee. She carried a bouquet of
pale pink loses, white Honolulu creeper, and white
Heater.
The bride was given away by her father. Mr.
J. Scott. Mr R. F. Sinclair acted as best man,
having come down from Miri for the purpose, and
Mrs. F. Harding was Matron of Honour. Miss
Priscilla Gibson, Master Peter Reynolds and
Mister John Edwards made three very decorative
I After the ceremony at the Cathedral, the happy
couple drove to the White House, where the bride's
م rents held a reception, the house having been
kindly lent for this purpose by Mr. and Mrs. H. M.
Calvert. Almost the whole European population
of Kuching was present, including Their High-
nees the Rajah and Ranee, and Dayang Valerie.
The toast of the bride and bridegroom was pro-
posed by His Highness the Rajah, and was replied
to by the bridegroom in a short speech of thanks.
after the reception, which lasted until nearly one
o’clock, the bride and brillegroom left for the 21st
mile. They sailed by the Vyner Brook on
December 2nd on a trip to China.
We take this opportunity of wishing Mr. and
Mrs. Kennedy all good luck and success in the
future.

St. Andrew’s Night, 1935٠
DINNER AND DANCE IN KUCHING.
The Scots, as a nice, have one praiseworthy characteristic: not only do they enjoy good fare to the full •(particularly, of course, when someone else is paying for it!) but they also like to share it with other people. one night in the year, therefore, every good Scot becomes imbued with the missionary spirit, and burns with a fierce desire to inculcate in poor Sassenachs a taste for the good things on which he was brought up. That many Sassenachs have already acquired a confirmed taste for the most important of these (the one that comes out of a bottle, that is), does not matter: there are other and less popular products of Scot- land such as oat-cakes and the haggis to which the benighted Englishman can only do justice on st. Andrew's night. To be quite honest, it is only on this night that he would trouble to do so, for although the Englishman is not as hard-headed as :his Scotch brother, he at least is not such a foot as to’spend' good money on haggis.that sinister
and terrifying compound—though he will eat it
readily’ enough if it is given to him, thereby taking
a leaf out of’ his hosts’ book;.. But -haggis has at
last one good’point, for many -people* argue that
whisky would never have been invented without it;
the idea being, of course, that the taste of the
former is so appalling that copious draughts of the
latter have to be taken before it can be swallowed
at all.
Be that as it may (and it must be admitted that
haggis finds its admirers even among the English)
St. Andrew's night affords conclusive annual proof
of the falsity of the tradition of Scottish meanness,
and of the truth of the tradition of Scottish
hospitality. Those of us who have lived in Scot-
land or among Scots in other parts of the world
are well aware of this, but it is just as well that the
others should experience this salutary corrective to
the prevailing influence of the comic papers and
halls.
The dinner given in Kuching on St. Andrew’s
night by the Chieftain and Members of St. Andrew’s
Society was true to form in this respect, for of the
72 persons who sat down to dinner at Bukit Mata
Kuching, which had been kindly lent by Mr. Peter
Cobbold for the occasion, the majority must have
been guests; and they will, we are sure, join with I
us in saying that the evening will stand out in their
memories as one of the best that they ever passed in (
Sarawak.—or anywhere else, for that matter. The
-dinner consisted of seven courses, among which were j
scotch broth, fresh salmon, roast turkey, rum sorbet, |
and, of course, the inevitable haggis; this was
followed by trifle (to take the taste away), and a
most delicious Kintyre cheese. It will be seen that
the meal was entirely’ Scottish in character, and each
item on the menu was accompanied by a suitable
quotation from one of the national poets. It is no
light task to provide an elaborate dinner for 72
people, and the Ladies’ Committee responsible for
the arrangements deserve, our highest praise. The
food was perfectly cooked, and the service could not
have been better.
After dinner the health of His Highness the Rajah
was proprosed by the Chief Justice, and that of the
King by Mr. D. MacDonald; ‘The Pious Memory
of St. Andrew' was then proposed by Dr. W.
Hutchison, the Chieftain, after which Mr. Dickson,
in a very neat speech, gave us ‘The Lasses.' Mr. ।
A. W. G. Gibson then proposed ‘The Guests,’ to i
which Her Highness the Ranee replied. One of the j
most popular speeches of the evening, incidentally. |
was that made by Mr. Cobhold in reply to a vote of j
thanks for the use of B.M.K.; it consisted of five. -
(or was it six?l words, which were admirably to the I
point, and the applause with which it was followed j
made the. rafters ring.
After dinner, the assembled company adjourned i
to the Sarawak Club for dancing. Reels, lancers,
and petronellas were carried on into the small
hours of the morning, and those who, either from
lack of skill or sheer laziness, preferred to give these
strenuous dances a miss, could sit nut beneath a
St. Andrew’s Shield built up of coloured lights.
This shield, which had been kindly presented by
the Chieftain, was most effective.
Although it was a most successful evening, and
the only grumble one heard from the guests was
that they had to wait a whole year before St.
Andrew’s night came round again. The Chieftain
and Members of the St. Andrew’s Society deserve
our heartiest thanks, and should be congratulated
on an entertainment which does much annually to
brighten up the social life of Kuching.

Sylvia Cinema. 

Provisional Schedule.of Programme.
"’December, 1935!
Date.
1935.
1st & 2ud
3rd & 4th
5th & 6th
7th & 8th
9th
10th
11th A 12th
13th
14th & 16th
I6th & 17th
18th
19th & 20th
21st &22nd
23rd&24th
25th&26 th
27th&28th
29th & 30th
Day.
Sunday & Monday
Tuesday & Wednesday
Thursday & Friday
Saturday & Sunday
Monday
Tuesday
Wednesday & Thursday
Friday
Saturday & Sunday
Monday & Tuesday
Wednesday
Thursday & Friday
Saturday & Sunday
Monday & Tuesday
Wednesday & Thursday
Friday & Saturday
Sunday & Monday
Film Title.
Hips Hips Hooray
Tarzan And His Mate
Marie Galante
Legong
Cuckoo Jn The Neel
Famous Ferguson Case
1002nd Night
Grand Slam
Brewsters Millions
Lost In The Legion
The Last Geulluman
She Learned About
Sailors
Charlie Chan In london
In Town Tonight
Alice In Wonderland
The Painted Veil
Student Tour

First Division News.
October.
Ninety-nine civil and fifty criminal cases came before the Kuching Courts during October. Of the latter, seventeen were for breaches of Municipal Bylaws.
On October 2nd a particularly brutal murder was committed at Sungei Tengah estate, the victim being a Javanese coolie named Sakijo. Duria, another member of the estate labour force, was tried for the crime and sentenced to death in the Resident’s Court on the 15th. He was executed on November 7th.
Two inquiries into deaths were held in Kuching during the month, ono on the body of a Chinese ' named Wee Siew Chin, and the other on the body of an unknown Chinese. Verdicts of death by misadventure and death from natural causes were recorded respectively.

On October 25th the District Officer, Kuching, left for a tour of the down-river kampongs, returning on the 27th. lie reports that he was surprised to find ho many Chinese planting pepper and coconuts in this area.
The Officer-in-Charge, Bau, is again able to report that there was no serious crime in his district during October. This continued freedom from crime is rather remarkable when one takes into account the comparatively large and mixed mining population.
393 persons were treated at the Bau dispensary and hospital during the month and 97 N.A.B. injections were given. The general health of the district was good, though several more deaths were reported from Singghi due to acute influenza and pneumonia.
On Friday, 18th October, the death occurred of Mandor Serip bin Haji Hassan, probably the most popular and highly respected Malay in Bau. The road contract which he held has been passed on to his son-in-law for completion
Dahan Rubber Estate harvested 18,534 lbs, of dry rubber during the mouth.
The rainfall at Bau was 12.86 inches and at Dahan 18.60 inches.
In addition to the usual Constabulary duties and patrols, special patrols were sent out in Upper Sarawak on the commencement of the tapping holiday in order to ensure that planters are adhering to the regulations. There have so far been four convictions for illicit tapping.
The Tai Ton bridge on the Bidi Road was reconstructed during the month, and the drain which was threatening to undermine the pork market at Sini- awan was enlarged and its bank properly buttressed.
Accompanied by the Native Officer, the Officer-in- Charge left Bau on October 14th and walked straight to Pengkallan Tebang, where he inspected all the Chinese gardens and the settlement generally with a view to the demarcation of a definite Chinese reserve there. On the following days he visited Kampongs Gumbang, Serabak, Sebubok, Kgelonas, Serasot and Suba Bunn and returned to Bau on the 19th.

The Dayaks in the Jagoi area appear to have taken rather more trouble with their farming this year than formerly, but to the west of Jagoi farming land is scarce, and the inhabitants have been compelled to plant their padi over the border; several families have for this reason moved to Kampong Babang in Dutch territory.The Acting Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Mr. E. M. Selous, paid a visit to the district at the beginning of the month; he inspected the Chinese school and several of the gold mines One general prospecting licence was issued during the month of October. The new Boring Syndicate has now formally applied for a mining lease, and The Kim Hin lease has been transferred to The Bau Lee Gold Mining Company.On October 4th twelve long service decorations were presented at Srian to various Land Dayak Orang Kaya and Pengarahs from the Sadong district by the Acting Resident, First Division.
An inquiry into the running of the Sadong pawn farm was started on 28th and a summons was issued against the farmer on 80th, the case being still adjourned at the end of the month.
A comparatively large quantity of timber was shipped from Simunjan during the month, nearly all of it in small sailing boats. It is rumoured that a small sawmill may be started in the Sebangan.
In the course of a tour of the ulu Simunjan, the District Officer, Sadong, explained the necessity for tapping holidays to the Land Dayaks at all villages visited. Although naturally they considered the holidays a trifle irksome, they appeared to realize that restriction and a fair price for rubber was better than no restriction and no price at all.
The Court Writer, Lundu, reports that the health of the district was satisfactory during October.
Motor vessels made a total of twelve trips between Lundu and Kuching during the month. 209 logs of kruin wood were shipped to Kuching

Armistice Day in Kuching.
As is usual in Kuching, Armistice Day was observed as a Public Holiday and the "two minutes’ Silence" at 11 a.m. was marked by guns fired from the Fort. At the end of the silence the Last Post was sounded by buglers of the Sarawak Constabulary. It is permissible, I feel, to comment here on the efficiency of these buglers. Most of us have had a surfeit of bugle calls in our lives, but rarely, I am sure, have we heard them so well and impressively played as in Sarawak. The Constabulary deserve our congratulations.
Poppies were Hold on November 9th, by Mesdames Danbeny, Black, Pollard and Harding, to whom thanks are due for carrying out a hot and tiring task. Thanks are also due to Messrs. Allan and Dickson for lending their earn for the use of the sellers. The Kuching collection amounted to $317, which is very good indeed for so small a community. Sibu’s response was even more remarkable and totalled $295, a noble effort considering the few Europeans stationed there. Sibu’s collections for Poppy Day over the past few years probably creates a per-head contribution record that would be hard to rival anywhere else in the Empire.
There are still a few sums to come in from the outstations, and it is estimated that the total for Sarawak (exclusive of Miri) will be in the neigh- neighbourhood of .£77. The actual figures will be announced later. Very sincere thanks arc expressed on behalf of the Earl Haig Fund Organizers to all who subscribed so generously to this very worthy cause.—(Contributed.)

Second Division News.
OCTOBER.
A Simanggang Malay, named Mudin, was sentenced in the Resident's Court to three years’ R.I. for theft. This man is a notorious character, who has been continually in and out of prison; it is said that he started his career of crime by removing a tin of sardines from beneath the Capitan China’s nose. Since then he has never looked back.
Apart from Dayaks concerned in land disputes there have not been many Dayak visitors to Simanggang. since most of them are busy fanning.
On October 10th, a survey party left for the Ulu Skrang, accompanied by two police from Lubok ( Antu.
159 outpatients were treated at Betong dispensary during October, and 96 N.A.B. injections were administered. The general health of the district was good.
The District Officer, Saribas, was away for a large portion of the month, and in consequence visitors to the station were comparatively few. At the end of October, however, numerous Layar and Spak Dayaks visited Betong to report a food shortage, and to request Government assistance. Work at a daily rate of pay was offered to all these applicants but very few took advantage of the offer, the majority insisting that at this season they were unable to , leave their farms. The position in the extreme Ulu causes some anxiety.
Reports of burning and planting in the Saribas district have been generally good, and all farms examined by the District Officer appeared particularly healthy.
A meeting of all tuai rumah from the Paku was held at Penghulu Ijau’s house to discuss the present incest tines. The assembled elders expressed dissatisfaction with the system whereby the entire fine for this offence reverts to Government. After a long discussion, the District Officer agreed that many of the suggestions appeared reasonable, and promised to lay tile matter before His Highness the Rajah when His Highness visited Betong.
The District Officer, Kalaka, reports that most Dayaks in the district have finished padi planting. The prospects of the crop are good.
Exceptionally high tides were experienced at Kabong during the month. The Rubber Census Officers and their staff arrived at Saratok by m.l. Betty on October 5th, and left for Kuching on the 9th.
The Native Officer, Engkilili, reports that owing to the present shortage of padi, Dayaks in the district are subsisting on ubi .bandong and other kinds of sweet potatoes. The arrival of the forthcoming harvest will be hailed with relief.
On October 15th. all penghulus, tuai rumah, and Chinese headmen were called to the Fort at Engkilili to be informed about the tapping holiday. They appear to understand the position and the need for the holiday, and no trouble is expected.

Third Division News.
October.
On Wednesday, October 2nd. a Foochow workman employed at the new Residency fell from a ladder and sustained a fracture of the skull and cerebral haemorrhage. He died shortly after being admitted to hospital.
The District Officer reports that there were four drowning cases at Sibu during October,—a Foochow girl aged two years at Sungei Merah, a Foochow boy aged ten years at Sungei Sadit, a Dayak girl ■ aged nine months at Ranto Dilang, Kanowit, and a Foochow male adult at Tanjong Gentin who fell off a raft while the river was in flood. A Foochow male child aged three years died at the Government hospital, Sibu, from burns. The parents had left the child in their house while they were tapping 1 rubber, the mosquito net caught fire and the child was badly burnt before they could come to the rescue.
A Chinese girl aged sixteen committed suicide by taking tuba at Leba’an. Evidence produced before the Coroner showed that the girl had been very distressed about her fiance, who is a leper.
The Assistant District Officer returned on October 20th from S. Ga'at. where he had supervised the erection’ and garrisoning of the two new blockhouses at N. Ramong and N. Stapang.
During the month no information was received with regard to the whereabouts of the rebels.

Large numbers of Dayaks proceeded to Kapit to
shoot pig, which were in the course of one of their
periodical migrations. Some large bags have been
recorded.
Land revenue at Sibu amounted to $7,225.40 in
October, a welcome increase over the previous
month. $3,000.00 was collected during the last
three days of the month.
A big increase of revenue is reported from Bina- 
tang, where two notice-servers were employed.
Mr. T. E. Parker, Settlement Officer, arrived at Sibu on October 4th, and proceeded to Mukah on the 8th. He returned on the 11th, and left for Sarikei on 16th. His visits were in connection with settlement operations which are about to commence at Sarikei.

The new Sibu Residency was completed and occupied on 28th. This work was held up owing to floods, when final work on the septic tank could not be carried out.
During the floods labour normally employed on trimming hedges and mowing was occupied resurfacing the Island, Bridge, and Court Roads with graveli Work continued on the two groynes near the waterworks.
Construction of the new floating wharf near the Steamship Company’s wharf is nearly completed.

Penghulu Ansi visited Sibu during the month in
connection with the Pelagus Protected Forest. The
boundaries of this protected area are now settled and
only remain to be surveyed. On the Penghulu’s
suggestion it is proposed to use the 8. Termulan
Badgom and S. Datong (pati Pelagus) instead of
the 8. Termulan Nitih and 8. Arak (pati Pelagus),
to compensate for a large tanjong excised on the
eastern boundary.
—
The District Officer, Lower Rejang, reported that
there were two areas of old jungle in the ulus Bina-
tang and Sarikei respectively that he would like
examined with a view to constituting them pro-
tected areas for political reasons. This is in hand;
the Forest Guard at Sarikei will carry out a
1 preliminary examination of the areas on his return
from leave.
The Divisional Forest Officer visited the experi-
mental jelutong plantation at Bukit Lan with Mr.
Ci. V. Summers of the American Methodist Mission.
Mr. Summers is obtaining figures for planting up
an additional 20 acres in the jerami adjoining,
these figures will be submitted to Messrs. Dreyfus,
Singapore, who have asked for them. The success
of the experiment as far as it has gone justifies
expenditure on enlarging the plot.
The Lee Hua Sawmill at 8. Verdoni was inspected. The mill has about ten tons of Seng- kajang seasoning, and the management is again considering the possibility of an export business to the United Kingdom.
The Hua Seng Sawmill at Rantau Panjang, Igan, was also inspected. This is a small outfit consisting of two small benches driven by a 35-h.p. Krombout oil engine. The larger logs are first broken down with handsaws. There is a most ingenious hand winch for hauling logs out of a small stream which has been converted into a log pond. Supplies are cut in the Igan and rafted up, but a small tramway has also been constructed from the back of the mill to the forest behind. The quality of the sawing is good.

A total of one hundred and six patients underwent treatment in the Sibu hospital. This number included seventy-four cases admitted during the month. Discharges were fifty-four, and four patients were transferred to Kuching. At the end of the month there were forty-one patients in the hospital. There were seven deaths.
Outpatients numbered five hundred and ninety- two. Two hundred and forty-six of these were new cases.
Sixty-four N;A.B. injections were given during the month.
The District Officer, Lower Rejang, reports that the tapping holiday has been received with general equanimity in his district.
One Kena has been made Penghulu of the Dayaks in the lower reaches of the Rejang delta, under the control of Binatang, the Resident having decided that Penghulu Ikau’s district was too large for him to handle satisfactorily.
The Resident. Third Division, and Mi's. Adams, accompanied by the Acting District Officer and party, returned from Kuching on October 1st.
The survey of pepper gardens in the Sarikei area was continued. This commodity still fetches poor prices, but the price of sago rose sharply to 70 cents per pnsu, dropping to 50 cents after a few days.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Mr. Macpherson, Acting District Officer, Lower Rejang, arrived at Sibu in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on Friday the 11th at 7 p.m. The next morning His Highness made an official landing, and after inspecting the guard of honour furnished by the Sarawak Constabulary under the command of Mr. R. G. Talbot, Officer Superintending Sibu Constabulary Sector, gave audience to all who wished to interview him in the Court House. This was followed by a visit to the Government offices. On Sunday the 13th His Highness, accompanied by the Resident. Mr. C. D. Adams. Mrs. Adams and the District Officer, Lower Rejang. left for Kanowit  and Kapit returning to Sibu the following Wednesday. His Highness left for Kuching on Thursday 17th, accompanied by Mrs. Adams, Mr. D. C. Hudden and Mr. A. Macpherson.
Mr. R. E. Le Sueur arrived at Sibu on 'Tuesday 15th and took over the duties of District Officer, Sibu. from Mr. D. C. Hudden who had been appointed Acting District Officer, Baram.
A boat, Juragan Baki, was wrecked at the mouth of the Igan on the 18th. The Tua Kam- pong reported that the vessel was a total loss, but part of the cargo was salvaged and no lives were lost.
A large raft of logs, the property of J. Reid & Company, broke from its moorings at Kanowit owing to exceptionally high water and strong current. Efforts made to recover the logs were of no avail.
Patrols were sent out at the commencement of the Tapping Holiday, but so far no infringement of the regulations has been reported.
15 civil and 26 criminal cases came before the Sarikei Courts during October. One of the latter was a case of smuggling tobacco, in which penalties totalling $900 were imposed, and the confiscation of $800 worth of tobacco was ordered.

The District Officer, Lower Rejang, reports that the tapping holiday has been received with general equanimity in his district.
One Kena has been made Penghulu of the Dayaks in the lower reaches of the Rejang delta, under the control of Binatang, the Resident having decided that Penghulu Ikau’s district was too large for him to handle satisfactorily.
The survey of pepper gardens in the Sarikei area was continued. This commodity still fetches poor prices, but the price of sago rose sharply to 70 cents per pnsu, dropping to 50 cents after a few days.

Earth filling in front of the new Government offices at Sarikei was completed during the month, and 200 feet of concrete drains were laid round the new shophouses in Repok Road. Repairs to this road were carried out by prisoners, about 25 tons of grave] being used to repair a distance of one mile The road from the bazaar to the foot of the first hill (about two miles) is now in good condition. A new contract for repairing Jakar Road for a distance of three miles is in progress

Mr. T. E. Parker arrived at Sarikei on October 1st to take up his appointment as Settlement Officer.
The District Officer, Lower Rejang, visited Daro, Palo, Belawai, and Rejang from October 5th to the 6th. On the 9th he met His Highness the Rajah at Rejang; His Highness later sat in court to hear requests, and inspected the kampong and bazaar.
On the following morning His Highness visited Belawai, and proceeded to Sarikei, but no official landing was made until the next day, when His Highness sat in Court, and then inspected the schools and station generally. After luncheon, His Highness left for Sibu, stopping at Binatang on the way.
The Rubber Census Officers arrived at Rejang on the 22nd, and proceeded to Sarikei two days later. They reached Binatang on the 29th.
All Dayak penghulus visited Kapit and Song stations during the month. Over 800 Dayaks arrived from down river for a mass assault on the pigs which are migrating across the Batang Rejang below the Pelagus rapids. The District Officer understands that fc'ell over 1,500 have been killed.
155 logs were rafted to Sibu during October. 20 logs were still at Kapit at the end of the month. Although the river was in flood, very few logs drifted down, since Dayaks have heen busy with farming and engkabang during the past three months. Four parties of local Dayaks, however, have left to work timber in the Ulu Balleb.

His Highness the Rajah arrived at Kapit in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on October 15th, accompanied by the Resident and Mrs. C. D. Adams and Mr. A. Macpherson. The official landing took place on the following day when His Highness met representatives of all communities in the Court House, and later visited the Hock Lam School, bazaar, dressing station, and jail. A display of Dayak dancing was given in the evening.
There was consistent high water at Kapit during the month, and on tht 23rd the wireless quarters and the Court Writer's house were flooded, the water at its highest point reaching 10 inches up the wall of the Fort. The bazaar was flooded to a depth of a foot or so. as was the smoke-house. This high water affected the cargo of s.s. Kampar adversely, since neither wet engkabang nor rattan could he shipped, nor could any rubber be smoked.
The cause of the rise in price is unknown, hut rumour has it that it was a mere ruse to get the natives to work more sago, the price falling as soon as they had cut a large number of batangs; these they must naturally work, as the tree once cut down will not last long before becoming useless.
The temporary boom has certainly put some money into the pockets of the natives, and the activity in Dalat bazaar shows the usual reaction. $10,730 was paid out in Dalat in Telegraphic Transfers during the month.
A large amount of engkabang was brought down during the month, but the price was poor.
Steps were taken to advertise the coming of the rubber tapping holiday throughout the Oya district, and police visited the whole of the Ulu. As during the former holiday, village, constables will be stationed in the Kut and at Klid, and patrols will be sent out in other parts of the district during the holiday.
The Officer-in-Charge, Oya and Dalat, reports that the only criminal cases in his district calling for comment were three cases of assault, the accused being all Foochows. The offences took place at Tanjong Prig, which is on the edge of the Dayak interior area. There is a small Foochow colony here which is difficult to control adequately, since it is so far up river

There were a comparatively large number of deaths in the Oya district during October, but these were due apparently to no particular cause other than the advent of the landas. which invariably seems to kill off all the old people who have just managed to keep alive during the summer. Strangely enough, however, the health of many of the younger people also appears to be adversely affected by the arrival of the landas.
Tuai Rumah Ubong from the Ulu S. Tamin is reported to have obtained four buffaloes, which he has brought overland from Kanowit; it is hoped that his perseverance and energy will result in good crops of swamp padi, for the planting of which he bus invested in the animals. Several other him rumah have expressed their intention of following Ubong example, if his efforts prove a success. Ubong has been told that he must make a definite effort to clear the land thoroughly, but there is a chance that the stumps will not he properly removed, and too much faith will he placed in the powers of the buffaloes.
Dayak padi is reported to be doing well with the exception of one or two houses which delayed burning and therefore had poor burns as a result of wet weather

This month saw a period of great activity in the sago trade. The price in S. Kut soared steadily upwards and for one brief moment reached 85 cents per pasu. after winch it dropped slowly and was fairly stable at 60 cents at the end of the month.

A large amount of engkabang was brought down during the month, but the price was poor.
Steps were taken to advertise the coming of the rubber tapping holiday throughout the Oya district, and police visited the whole of the Ulu. As during the former holiday, village, constables will be stationed in the Kut and at Klid, and patrols will be sent out in other parts of the district during the holiday.

214 piculs of rubber, 296 koyans of sago and 459 piculs of engkabang left the Oya district by sea. Owing to rains and consequent high water in S. Kut, much sago went out through that channel, amounting to 94 koyans in all.
Telegraphic Transfers for the Oya and Dalat district during the first 10 months of the year total $81,851.75. The following table shows the corresponding figures for the previous three years :—
1932	...	...	$88,980.
1933	...	...	51,708.
1934	...	...	67,324.
The bridge at S. Penat is being altered to permit bandongs to proceed up to Penat without lowering their masts. The Chinese are paying all expenses of the alteration.
Heavy seas were running off Oya during the middle of October, but calm weather set in again towards the end of the month.
39 vessels cleared from Oya, totalling 739 tons, including m.v. Kim Chin'Seng, m.l. Hea Hong and m.I. Helen.
Fourth Division News.
October.
His Highness the Rajah visited Miri on October 26th. His Highness was accompanied by Dr. E. M. Marjoribanks, Principal Medical Officer, and by Mr. D. C. Hudden, who was on transfer to Baram. While in Miri His Highness paid a visit to the oil drilling site at Tudan on the invitation of the General Manager, Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd.
His Highness sat in open Court at Miri on the morning of October 25th and granted a hearing to all who wished to approach him. On the following day His Highness proceeded to Baram, returning to Miri on the 30th after a short visit to Bakong.

Penghulu Kalop of Sungei Linai received his formal surat kuasa from Kuching during the month. It is understood that be is the first Penan chief to gain this distinction.
At the request of the Officer-in-Charge, Baram, several truculent immigrant Dayaks were dealt with by the Resident for breaches of the conditions under which they were allowed to move into the Baram District. They were ordered to abide by their promises and the instructions of the Officer-in- Charge or else return to their original homes.
Kayan owners of birds-nest caves in the vicinity of Long Lama asked for the close season period to be reduced. They were persuaded,, however, that the good harvest of birds-nests that they obtain at present and the continued satisfactory market price were due to Government control, and were the result of regulations which had only been adopted after careful consideration and advice.

A dry spit has recently formed between the two । outermost channel marks approaching the Miri । “bar,” thus causing a variation in the channel. 1 This is apparently due to the landas.
The engkabang crop materialized practically throughout the whole of Fourth Division, but in most places natives were not attracted by the ruling market prices, and would not neglect their padi planting in order to harvest the nuts.
The District Officer, Limbang and Lawas, reports that the down-river Malays and Bisayahs were still planting their padi at the end of the month. Dayaks and Muruts up-river, however, had completed their nugal.

During the latter part of the month the Limbang roads were in bad condition owing to unusuallv wet weather.
Four more Dayaks from Kanowit arrived at Limbang to buy buffaloes for farming purposes. They left again on the 29th with six animals.
The District Officer. Limbang, states that an extraordinary number of Dayaks came down during October after- finishing their padi-planting asking to go here, there, and everywhere to look for work. Actually, of course, they merely intended to wander about. The majority of these people only moved into the district last year, and some only during

1935; having only just settled in an entirely new district one would have thought that, they would have been content to remain quiet for a year or two in order to improve their houses, build boats, explore their new country, bunt, plant permanent crops and generally consolidate their position, but it appears that they still have the roaming spirit and can think of nothing but the search for adventure in places other than where they are settled.
The District Officer, Miri, reports that apart from a few cases of theft and affray there was little crime worth noticing in the district, with the exception of one case of indecent assault and one case of attempted suicide.

1,275 persons were vaccinated at Baram during October, and 119 out-patients were treated at the Government dispensary. The latter figure includes 57 patients treated under the Professor Harrison  Smith Fund.

The rubber census for the whole of Baram district was completed by the end of October.
Some Dayaks reported that a rhinoceros had been found dead in the ulu Tru, Sungei Tinjar, during the month, and since this is exceptionally far down river for a rhinoceros to be found, the Curator, Sarawak Museum, was informed and the horns, which were too small for sale, were forwarded to him.
On October 26th, His Highness the Rajah arrived at Baram, accompanied by the Acting Resident, Fourth Division, and Mr. D. C. Hudden. Peng- huhis, Government servants, and representatives of all communities were gathered at. the wharf to greet His Highness.
On the 28th His Highness sat in Court, and later inspected the station. Unfortunately, the bazaar and kampongs were under water owing to the Baram being in flood. During the evening His Highness entertained all natives who had come to see him in the fort. Dancing displays were given.
His Highness left for Miri via Bakong on October 30th.

Contracts were, signed during October for the- construction of diagonal, cross, and perimeter drains in the Bintulu Landing Ground.
Two appeal cases came before the Resident's Court at Bintulu during the month. In each case the finding of the lower Court was upheld.
On October 11th, Mr. P. Scott arrived at Bintulu on temporary transfer. Mr. Scott relieved Mr. J. O. Gilbert, who proceeded on casual leave on the 18th.
Lawas (Sarawak) Estates, Ltd., exported 33,600 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.



