The Sarawak Gazette.
MONDAY. SEPTEMBER 2nd. 1935.
Mr. Lau Suyon and brothers and their families beg to tender their thanks to all friends and relatives who sent wreaths, scrolls and letters of condolence during their recent bereavement. and also those who attended their father's funeral on 17th August. 1935.

Local And Personal.
His Highness the Rajah arrived at Kuching on August 4th by flying-boat, having accepted Air-Commodore Smith's offer to fly him over from Singapore. His Highness was accompanied by Air-Commodore Smith him self and Mr. C. D. Adams, the plane being piloted by Flight Lieutenant P. P. S Rickard. Mrs. Adams and Mr. F. A. W. Page Turner, the other members of His Highness’ party, travelled by S.S. Vyner Brooke, which arrived on the following morning.
 Leaving Selctar at about 7 a.m., the flying- ... boat circled above  Kuching some four hours - 161 | later, and then landed at Pending. His   Highness the Rajah was met at Pending by His Highness the Tuan Muda, the Government Secretary, and the Resident, First Division, and came in to Kuching by road.
... 165
being welcomed at Astana by the Datus and
by a representative gathering of Europeans.

Air-Commodore Smith, Flight Lieutenant Rickard, and Flying Officer M. D. Thunder spent the day at Astana, and after dinner attended a display of Dayak dancing at Fort Margherita. They left for Singapore early on the morning of August 5th. We understand that Her Highness the Ranee will fly out from England by Imperial Airways and will arrive in Singapore about September 22nd.
On August 6th Dayang Elizabeth was
married at Caxton Hall Register Office to Mr.
Harry Roy. Full accounts of the wedding,
which excited great popular interest, have
appeared in the Singapore press; according
to the London correspondent of the Straits
Times, a huge crowd mobbed the office several
hours before the ceremony was due to begin,
and several times broke through the police
cordon. Eventually mounted police were
called in, but even they were unable to make
a clear way for the bride when she arrived,
accompanied by Her Highness the Ranee,
Eleanor Lady Esher, and the Countess of
Inchcape.
After the ceremony, a reception was held at.
the May Fair Hotel at which about 320
guests were present. Subsequently the
couple left for their honeymoon, which was
spent at Le Touquet and Juan-les-Pins.
On the day of the marriage the Government
Secretary despatched the following telegram
to the Government Agent in London :—
"Please inform Her Highness Daya ng
Elizabeth that His Highness the Tuan
Muda Datus officers of the. Service and all
communities unite in wishing her all happi-
ness.”
On August 9th His Highness the 1'iiaii
Muda received a telegram reading as
follows :—
‘‘Very delighted with telegram from
Government Secretary will you kindly
express my thanks to officers Datus and all
communities.”
We join with all communities in wishing
Mr. and Mrs. Roy every success and happi-
ness.
His Excellency the British Agent lor
Sarawak arrived at Kuching in S.Y. Sea
Belle II on the morning of August 8th, and
left for Miri the same night. A full account
of His Excellency’s visit- appears in another
column.
We hear that Mr- JL E Cutfield, who has
been acting as Resident. Second Division,
is to be appointed District Officer, Limbang
and La was, with the powers of a Resident’s
Court Magistrate, vice Mr. J. R. Comix?, who
has resigned the Service. Mr. Cutfield is
expected to arrive at Limbang early in
September.
Mr. C. D. Adams left Kuching by the
Rejang on August 12th in order to resume his
appointment as Resident. Third Division.
Mr. P. M. Adams. who has been acting for
him during his absence on furlough, arrived
in Kuching on August 23rd, and left for
Simanggang on the 28th.
Visitors to Kuching during the month in-
cluded the Rev. Father (“Apai”) Halder,
who, in spite of every appearance of robust
health, arrived down from Sibil for medical
treatment on August 16th. Father Halder,
who was in his usual excellent spirits, left for
Singapore by the Darrel on August 24th.
The Rev. Father A. Klerk, of Kanowit Mission, left for Europe on furlough by the s.s. Vyner Brooke on August 19th.
Mr. C. E. Pascoe and Mr. J. A. G. Benson, who has taken up an appointment in the I Trade and Customs Department, arrived in Kuching by m.v. Marudu on August 19th. Mr. Pascoe has been appointed Superintendent of Rubber Restriction, Sarawak.
Visit to Sarawak of His Excellency
the British Agent.
A PICTURESQUE WELCOME.
His Excellency Sir Shenton Thomas, k.c.m.g:,
o.b.b., British Agent for Sarawak, visited Kuching
on August 8th, arriving at 9 a.m. and sailing from
I Tending at midnight. His Excellency, who was
| accompanied by Lady Thomas and Miss Thomas,
travelled from Singapore by the yacht Sea Belle II,
which was last seen in Sarawak waters when Sir
Cecil Clementi visited this country almost exactly
five years ago. The other members of His Excel-
lency’s parly were Mr. E. E. F. Pretty, Secretary .
to the High Commissioner, Mr. H. G. Beverley,
Aide-de-Camp, and Mr. G. A. G. Walker, Private
Secretary.
The morning of August 8th opened unpropitiously,
the sky being dark and overcast, but fortunately
the rain held off until after the official landing. The
I rather gloomy weather, though, was more than
offset by I he colourful scene all along the river, the
banks of which, from Tanah Puteh onwards, were
bright with bunting and all kinds of improvised
decorations, and noisy with the continuous reports
of bedil and crackers. For the last part, of her
| stalely progress up-river, the Sea Belle II was
I escorted by brilliantly decorated launches carrying
! Malay orchestras; the Datus responsible for the
emlx-dlishmenl of these launches are. to he congra-
tulated on the success of their efforts, which greatly
intrigued His Excellency, who took a number of
moving pictures of them as they pursued a some-
what erratic course alongside his yacht.
The Astana basin presented a delightful spectacle,
being Crowded with boats of every description, all
of them guy with coloured silks and sarongs. The
i embankment bet ween Pengkalan Batu and the new
; market , too. had been dressed for the occasion by
the Datu Amar, who had also designed and erected
a most effective ornamental arch on the pengkalan
itself.
As the Sea Belle II passed Fort Margherita, a
salute of twenty-one guns was tired from the Fort
buttery in accordance with established custom,
His Excellency, when visiting Sarawak territory,
being regarded not as a Governor on an official visit,
but as the personal representative of His Majesty
the King. As soon as the Sea Belle II had anchored
off Astana, the Siamese State Barge, manned by a
crew of Malays in national costume, came alongside
with Mr. H. B. Crocker. Acting Government
Secretary, on board. His Excellency and party J
were then rowed to the Astana pengkalan, where
they were greeted by His Highness the Tuan Muda,
Dayang Valerie, and the Resident. First Division.
A Constabulary guard of honour, under the com-
mand of the Adjutant, was drawn up on the Astana
lawn, and on the opposite side of the path an exotic
splash of colour was provided by a party of Sea
Dayaks in full war kit. As His Excellency reached
the top of the steps the general salute was sounded,
and the guard presented arms; after being intro-
duced to Pongarah Nglainbong, the leader of the
Dayaks, His Excellency inspected the guard, the
smartness of which was remarked on all sides, and
then walked to the porch, where His Highness |
the Rajah and the remaining members of His i
Excellency’s party were waiting. His Excellency
then went upstairs to the verandah, where he and
Lady Thomas were introduced to the Datus and
certain Senior Government Officers, representa-
tives of the European mercantile communities, and
to their wives
After the introductions were complete, the Datu
Shahbandar read an address of which the following |
is a rendering in Romanized Malay :
“Sahaya Datu Shiihbandar bagi fihak puter ■-
putera bumi Sarawak, beraaa sangut-sangat girang
dan geuiar hati menyambnt selamat kedatangun ,
yang terutama. Tuan Governor Sir Thom is |
a Shenton Whitelegge Thomas, k.c.m.u., o.b.f...
laki Istri dan anak-nya, yang pertamn men-
jejok kedua kaki-nya ku-negri Sarawak. Maka ।
dengan kajejakan yang maha berkat itu scrasa
rasa suatu sulohan yang maha berchahaya pada
bandar yang terms'a lom ini.
“Sahaya perlawatan Tuan yang terutama itu
Hungat singkat masa-nya, maka sahaya don
putera-putera bumi Sarawak semua-nya berharap
mudah-mudahan kira-nya dapat in ber-ulang-ulang
lagi menjejak telapak kaki-nya ka-bandar im.
“Sahaya dan putera-putera bumi ber-mohon
kehedzerat Tuhan rabul-'alamin-
“Hei Tuhanku kekalkan oleh-mu akan ke-
mugahan dan ketetapan bagi bimba-uiu. Sir
Thomas Shenton Whitelegge Thomas. K.C.M.G,
o.b.e., yang telah Tubanku pileh akan-dia
bagi memerintah negri Singapura (negri ornng
ber-iman). Hei Tuhanku per-st ujui akan-dia
dengan ka-adillan dan berbuat baik di-antara
manusia sekalian, dan Tuhanku liputi akan-dia
dengan ka-untongan dunia. Hei Tuhanku yang
ter-lehih-lebih kasih sayang dan-pada segala
orang yang kaseh sayang. Hei Tuhanku sam-
pai-kan-lah segala chita-chita-uya dan Tuhanku
beri pakai akandia mahkot dengan malikota
kemulia’an selama-lama ia memelihara bagi
negri-negri orang Islam, amin.”
The Datu Sbahbandar was followed by Mr. Ong
Tiang Swee, C.8.8., who, as head of the Sarawak
Chinese, welcomed His Excellency on behalf of
the Chinese community, and asked Mr. Tan Sum
Guan to rend for him the following address
“Your Excellency.
“On behalf of the Chinese community of
Sarawak I have great pleasure in extending to
Your Excellency our hearty welcome on this the
first occasion of Your Excellency’s visit to this
country.
“The interest that Your Excellency is taking
in this little Protectorate of the British Empire is
a matter of immense gratification to us, and we do
hope that Your Excellency will be pleased to
honour us with more visits in the future.
“We wish every success to Your Excellency
in your administration of the government of the
Strait* Settlements, and hr British Agent for
Sarawak we have every confidence that Your
Excellency will continue to bestow on us all the
benefits we have hitherto enjoyed through the
benign protection of the British Government.
“We take this opportunity in wishing the
best of health and happiness to Your Excellency,
Lady Thomas and Miss Thomas.”
His Highness the Tuan Muda then spoke as
follows :—
“It is my privilege to be authorized by His
Highness the Rajah to add a few words of wel-
come to those expressed by the Datu Shahbandar
and by Mr. Ong Tiang Swee. I shall not take
long, since unknown to Sir Shenton and Lady
Thomas and their staff, we have received a hint
from friends in Singapore that on the completion
of such ceremonial on arrival as should fittingly
mark Sarawak's regard for His Excellency’s
high office, it was probable that both Sir Shenton
and Lady Thomas would prefer to regard the
remainder of their stay in Kuching as one of their
rare and hardly-earned holidays, rather than as
another day which must be employed in the fulfil-
ment of a pre-arranged list of official engagements.
“As a matter of interest, I would like to
mention that the fact that the salute fired when
the Sea Belle II passed Fort Margherita just now
consisted of twenty-one guns was not due to a
miscalculation the part of the officer-in-charge
of the saluting battery, as might perhaps be
imagined. This salute was fired in accordance
with a precedent which dates from the time of
Queen Victoria's reign, and it is a custom which
had its origin on the morning that a Governor
of the Straits Settlements was first welcomed in
the Sarawak River.
“Ah has been the case with former Governors,
the salute was fired in this form, not as a signal
that a Governor was visiting Kuching in the
course of an official tour, but as His Highness
the Rajah's welcome to Your Excellency as the
personal representative throughout Maloyan ter-
ritories of the King Emperor, and therefore as the
living link between Sarawak and the protecting
power.
"As a personal, or rather, I should say, a
communal matter, for in this I know that 1 speak
for the whole community, our pleasure in having
Sir Shenton and Lady Thomas and Mias Thomas
here to-day in mitigated by the fact that the
duration of their visit must necessarily be
restricted to a few hours. We gratefully realize,
though, that these hours have been spared to us
out of time which would otherwise have been
spent in Um enjoyment of a abort, but, I am sure,
a much-needed respite from the labours involved
in carrying out an arduous official programme. I
now have great pleasure, therefore, in proposing
the health of Sir Shenton and Lady Thomas, and
in expressing on behalf of His Highness the
Rajah and the people of Sarawak our appreciation
’ of His Excellency’s visit.”
This toast was drunk by all present, and His
Excellency then replied to the addresses in a short
speech in which he stressed the fellowship that
united all countries and races that enjoyed the
protection of the British ling, and spoke of the
benefits enjoyed by all who belonged to the British
Commonwealth of Nations. On the conclusion of
His Excellency's speech, the visitors took their
leave.
The rest of the morning was unfortunately marred
by heavy rain, but in the afternoon the weather
cleared, and His Excellency and Lady Thomas were
able to see something of Kuching and its environs.
In the evening His Excellency and party put in an
informal appearance at the Sarawak Club. After
dinner, a display of Dayak dancing was given at
Astana by the Dayaks who had welcomed His
Excellency on arrival, and who had been brought
down from the Rejang in order to give His Ex-
cellency a glimpse of one Ride of the native life of
Sarawak which he would not otherwise have seen.

On the conclusion of this entertainment, His
Excellency and party embarked in m.l. Betty and
left for Pending, where the Sea Belle II was
waiting: as the launch left the Astana pengkalan,
a chain of fire broke out along the hills below the
fort, where members of the Constabulary were
stationed with torches. At the same time the
Constabulary band struck up “Auld Lang Syne.”
and the Betty proceeded slowly down-stremn to the
accompaniment of this most effective farewell.
The Sea Belle II left for Miri shortly after mid-
night.
The White Rajah.
If all has gone according to schedule, the yacht ;
Scabelle arrived at Kuching early this morning and I
Sir Shenton Thomas now finds himself upon Borneo I
soil for the first lime. His Excellency, in his !
capacity of British agent to Sarawak, is visiting one i
of the most remarkable countries in the world.
There is nothing quite like Sarawak inside the
British Empire and nothing in the least like it
outside the Empire. Of all the independent states
which are linked to Great Britain by treaties of
protection, Sarawak is the only one which does not .
provide for even a supervisory regulation of its 1
internal affairs. The treaty signed by Sir Charles
Brooke, the second rajah, in 1888 provides only
for protection by Great Britain, on the one hand,
and for cession by Sarawak of the right to conduct
its own relations with foreign states, cm the other I
hand. In its internal affairs, therefore, Sarawak
enjoys complete independence, and its status is very I
different from that of any Malay State or even of
any Indian State, since the latter invariably ha.* a
British political officer attached to us government.
Sarawak has none and needs none, for its adminis-
tration is conducted in accordance with traditions
handed down from generation to generation in the
Brooke family and second to none—indeed, equal to
none—in the colonial regions of the world.
Whether it really is wise to exclude foreign
capital, and whether on balance the native does not
lose much more than he gains by such a policy,
is open to argument. As the Straits Times
pointed out recently in discussing the Terengganu
administrative report, those Malay States which J
pride themselves on relative freedom from foreign ,
elements are also those which give the least satis- |
factory service to their own people. The penalty
of racial purity is economic- and therefore, social— I
backwardness. The same is obviously true of Sara- |
wak, and if the report for the year 198-1, signed j
by the acting Chief Secretary to the Sarawak
Government, be compared with a corresponding
report for Perak or Selangor, some astonishing
differences will appear. But the fact remains that
the administration of Sarawak is conducted quite |
genuinely in the interests of the people of the
country and none other. In that respect Sarawak is
unique among all tropical countries under European
administration. The Malay States, for example,
provide as excellent an example of fair and pro-
gressive imperialism as can be found, but their
governments have accepted quite frankly the fact
that unless shareholders and immigrants are bene-
fited. the Malay cannot benefit. Consequently the
fruits of exploitation of the country's natural wealth
are divided between the foreign and the indigenous
elements. No one can say that that policy has not
wrought a vast improvement, from the viewpoint
of the Malay as well as that of the investor and
immigrant, but the contrary policy may yield good
results too, and we may be thankful that in the
laboratory of modern imperialism experiments with
both policies are going on simultaneously.
With an area of 50,000 square miles, and a
revenue of under five millions, it cannot be expected
that the Sarawak Government can do very much
in the provision of public services other than
necessities, hut that money goes farther than might
be supposed. There is no need to spend money on
roads, the river system of the country being suitable
for Transport; there is no enormous pensions burden
; such as the Straits Settlements and Federated
Malay States have accumulated; and there is as yet
no general demand for an extensive and expensive
system of education in English. For various rea-
sons. therefore, Sarawak can afford to keep its
administration on an extremely modest basis without
arousing the discontent that would occur in more
advanced territories. His Highness the. Rajah, Sir
Charles Vyner Brooke, is the only white ruler of
an Asiatic or tropical race in the world, and he is
the third of a line which is destined to occupy a
permanent place in colonial history. The destiny
of Sarawak, as a country in which a unique attempt
is being made to maintain a native civilisation in
an industrialised and mechanised world, commands
the sympathy of all who believe that mankind is
happier as a peasant and a countryman than as a
Coolie or a clerk.—Straits Times.
Amsterdam to Singapore in
Five Days.
HIS HIGHNESS THE TUAN MUDA’S
EXPERIENCES.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been kind enough to supply us with the following notes on his recent trip out from Europe to Singapore by the Dutch Airways. These notes arc of great interest, particularly in view of Her Highness the Ranee’s account of her flight home which we were privileged to publish last month :
"The Sand-Martin was the first plane of the K.L.M. fleet to reach Medan in the five days scheduled for the Amsterdam-Singapore run in the new accelerated service. The plane that actually inaugurated the service left Amsterdam the previous Wednesday, but unfortunately the engineer was taken suddenly and seriously ill at Baghdad, so that it had Io wail there until we arrived with a substitute.
"We left Amsterdam aerodrome at 6 a.m. on Saturday, June 15th, and stayed that night at Athens after halts at Leipsig and Bratislava. At the latter place we received a most enthusiastic^ national welcome to celebrate the first occasion that a Czecho-Slovakian aerodrome had been used by the K.L.M. as a halt during the eastern flight; so enthusiastic was our reception, indeed, that Captain Te Roller bad great difficulty in assembling his passengers and officers and persuading our hosts to allow us to depart on the next stage of the journey.

"The second day took us from Athens to Baghdad
(halting at Mersah Matruh and Cairo), the third
from Baghdad to Jodhpur (halting at Bushire and
Jask), and the fourth from Jodhpur to Akyab in
Burma, although according to schedule we should
have spent this night at Rangoon,—about two hours
further on.
"Circumstances resulted in our failing to recover
sufficient of the time we had lost to make Singapore
on the fifth evening, though had we been able to
get away from Medan after half an hour’s halt as
was hoped, we should have managed it after having
completed some 2,200 miles in about thirteen flying
hours on that day. Consequently we spent the
night at Medan, having halted at Rangoon,
Bangkok, and Alor Star, and arrived in Singapore
on the morning of June 20th, just five days after
leaving Amsterdam.
"The Douglas machines in the K.L.M. eastern
service are equipped with two engines, each of
'750 h.p. They run very smoothly and there is little
noise, and practically no vibration in the saloon.
"The personnel consists of the Captain, Assistant
Pilot, Wireless Officer and Engineer, the latter also
having the job of attending to the comfort of the
passengers, since no steward is carried. Certainly
in our case none was needed, as this duty was
carried out with remarkable cheerfulness and
efficiency.
"The average cruising speed was probably in the
vicinity of 160 miles an hour, but it seems that a
speed of 200 miles per hour could be exceeded, if
necessary.
"I think that we must have been remarkably
lucky in the weather, since the illuminated sign
instructing passengers to strap themselves in was
very seldom brought into use, but I think, also,
that these particular machines must be exceptionally
steady, though I have little experience that will
afford a basis for comparison. We had ten minutes
mild bumping over Athens aerodrome, but I believe
that this is the usual thing there. Across the Sinai
desert it was ‘not so good’ for a couple of hours or
so, though what we felt in the plane seemed mild
when one looked out of the window at the columns
of dust, which were whipped up and contorted by
a gale which appeared to be of sufficient strength
to cause a certain amount, of apprehension. This,
though, was not justified by results.
"The monsoon was late, as it had not yet broken
in India. While crossing the Bay of Bengal, how-
ever, there was a lot of bad weather about. We
flew low over the sea, and constantly Raw scurries
of wind and rain ahead, but the pilot always seemed
to find some passage through them, which enabled
us to get by without discomfort. I fancy that he
had to zig-zag a good deal in order to achieve this,
which, added to the fact that there were two
machines taking off from every stop (the delayed
one being ahead of us), more than accounted for our
getting behind our schedule. In the circumstances,
it was surprising that we lost so little time.’’
The Wedding of Dayang Elizabeth
to Mr. Harry Roy.
The marriage of Dayang Elizabeth to Mr. Harry Roy took place on the 6th August, 1935, at the Caxton Hall, Westminster, Registry Office.
Those present at the ceremony were :—
Her Highness The Ranee, The Right Honour- ( able the Countess of Inchcape, The Right Honourable Eleanor Viscountess Esher, Mrs. Roy (Mother of bridegroom), Mr. Sydney Roy (brother), Mr. and Mrs. Joseph Moore (brother-in-law and sister of the bridegroom), Miss Grossmith (Mr. Harry Roy's Secretary), Mr. Stanley Quirk (Secretary to the late Lord Esher), and Mr. J. A. Smith.
A reception was held afterwards at the May Fair । Hotel when 319 guests were present, among those I present being :—
The Right Honourable the Countess of Inchcape. The Right Honourable Eleanor Viscountess Esher, The Dayang Anne, Mrs. H. D. Aplin, Mr. and Mrs. II. A. Adams, Mr. J. Beville Archer, Mr. and Mrs. J. G. Anderson, Mr. and Mrs. R. D. Binnie, Mr. and Mrs. F. F. Boult, Mr. James Brooke, Captain Benfield, Mrs. W. F. Dick, Mr. and Mrs. K. H. Gillan, Mr. and Mrs. C. P. Lowe, Mr. G. T. M. MacBryan, Mr. Owen Rutter, Mr. A. A. Rennie, Mr. and Mrs. J. A. Smith, Mr. and Mrs. J. C. Swayne, Mr. and Mrs. W. G. Tait.
Big “Districts.”
The film "Sanders Of The River” which is now showing at the Capitol has caused me to look up statistics of areas administered by British officers in this part of the world.
The biggest districts are in Borneo, where Sarawak covers 50,000 square miles (more or less) and British North Borneo 29,500 square miles. For purposes of comparison it may be stated that the area of Malaya is 52,300 i square miles—the size of England and Scotland.
Sarawak has an administrative service of . 39 officers, and as some of them are employed in secretariats, treasuries. Residencies and ' the like, the areas under the district officers must be very large indeed.
British North Borneo has what is officially termed a "civil service” of about 60 British officers, but if we are to judge by the establishment in Sarawak this number must include technical as well as administrative officers. —Straits Timcs.
As a matter of interest, it may be noted that of the 38 officers who at present make up the Administrative Branch of the Sarawak Civil Service, one is of "Staff" class; 4 are Divisional Residents; 3 are employed in Secretariats; 3 are cadets attached to District Offices; 7 are on leave' one has been seconded for special duty as Rubber Census Officer; and one has been seconded for duty with the Government of the Federated Malay States. This leaves an effective total of 18 officers for duty in charge of Districts.

’’The area of Sarawak is roughly 50,000 square milesthe estimated i population is about 44ft,$00, according to the rough census carried out recently. On these figures each-District Officer would. if we take an average, find himself with about 2,780 square miles and 24,610 persons to administer. Actually, of course, districts vary a great deal in size and density of population, the largest districts often being the most sparsely populated, and vice versa.
The two largest districts in Sarawak administered by a single European Officer (with, of course, the advice and assistance of Native Officers and Chiefs) are Kapit and Baram. The former has an area of 16,800 square miles, and a population of about 17,133, while the figures for the latter are 7,900 and 43.490 respectively.
A vast area of the Kapit District is uninhabited except possibly by bands of wandering Punans. The population of both Kapit and Baram consists almost entirely of natives of the country, whose administration is considerably facilitated by the custom of most of them (Dayaks, Kuyans, Kenyahs, Kelabits, etc.) of living in communal houses. A Kayan long-house may accommodate anything up to 600 people, and a Dayak house up to 250 or 300. It is a great convenience to a District Officer, when on his rounds, to be able to find so many of his people in one place. Kayan ■villages, indeed, consisting of a series of splendidly- built long-houses, sometimes have as many as 2.500 inhabitants.—Ed.
High On The Mountain —
Everyone knows that it gets colder and colder on climbing up a mountain, but the actual rate and manner of change has so far been to some extent a matter of guess-work. As far as temperature in the shade is concerned, the minimum falls lower and lower the higher one goes; from round about 70° at sea level it is seldom above 05° at about 3,000 feet, is down below 60" at 5,000 feel, and I have seen it as low as 50" at over 7,000 feet on top of Mulu, but that may have been due to the local surveyor being immersed in his copy of Capt. Scott's Antartic Journal. At similar heights on Kinabalu a reading of 43’ has been recorded, and ice has actually been observed near the summit.
The minimum temperature occurs at night but the maximum temperature and the mean daily temperature are quite a different story; with a maximum of round about 90" at yea level, there is a rapid drop to 75° or so between 2 and 3,000 feet, after which the change is comparatively slight, being only down to 70° or so at 5,000 feel, and another 5’ drop at 7,000 feet, the same being true of the mean daily temperature.—a sharp drop as far as about 3,000 feet, and then not much change, at least for the next 3.000 feet. Tn fact, during the day, when the sun is shining, a mountain top is as warm a spot as you could expect to find so far away from the nether regions, for it should be realized that whilst a thermometer is taking the shade temperature of the air in which it lies, the actual sun's rays—measured in terms of solar radiation—are very much warmer on the summit than down below, for they have not yet lost their energy through piercing the intervening and comparatively dense layer of atmosphere. As a solarium, go to the mountain tops and you will soon be nicely sunburnt,—until you begin to peel.
The rain, however, is a snag, although nobody ever believes much ,in rain-gauges, because, j for example, the two or three in and around Kuching never read tho same. What .leadings there are, however, show that on high mountains, more or less facing the sen as ours do, rainfall increases from sea 'level, where it is sometimes as much as 150 inches on a yearly average, to 180 inches or so at 1,000 feet, and may knock up as much as 200 inches at 3,000 feet, dropping again very sharply at 4,000 feet and not changing very much from there up to 6 and 7,000 feet. Moisture-laden winds coming in from the sea and encountering a mountain-side are forced to rise, depositing their i rain on the foot, lower and mid slopes, whereby Sungei Tengah and Making come to have some of the highest rainfalls in Borneo. It would likewise seem that once above 3,000 feet, things could be taken easy and the rain laughed to scorn, for as will be easily realized, once a sufficiently constant low temperature is obtained, the cold air can hold so little water vapour that there is nothing left to fall in the shape of rain; doubtless much bad language has been expended on this frustrated hope, for though the rainfall above 3 and 4,000 feet really does diminish in quantity, it only does so in intensity at the expense of duration, and the short, sharp, and these days, sweet, tropical downpour is replaced by prolonged drizzle and mist much more like an English summer than a tropical entertainment. At any rate, whether you live at or beyond 3,000 feet, the conditions are much the same everywhere, save that the nights arc a bit colder at the higher points, and much more difference would be found, say, between living at sea level and one or two thousand feet than at four and five thousand feet.	-ja
Such, at least, is mildly true of Mului a large mountain lying in the Tutoh, a tributary of the Baram river, from which it helps to separate the , waters of the Lirnbang river. The local natives do | not like the mountain and seem to jack it up and down at will, since it seldom measures more than 7,200 or 7,300 feet in height by Aneroid, yet rushes up to 7,800 and 8,000 feet when measured by other । means. A little over 7,000 feet seems nearest the mark, and with Mt. Murud and Mt. Tibang both about the same height as Mulu, they must be the three highest Sarawak mountains; Kinabalu, some 60 or UM) miles to the north and 13,500 feet high. is just visible in the morning, and there are a few mountains higher than Mulu in between.
When Kinabalu was first ascended by a collector in 1887 and 1888, about sixty new mammals and birds were described, being found nowhere else in Borneo and sometimes not even found in the rest of the Archipelago: Kinabalu was claimed as the remnant of a lost continent, the only part of Borneo not submerged after the Ice Age, and so on, causing quite a stir. Since then there have been in Sarawak many explorers, intrepid or otherwise; gradually it became clear that many of these peculiar Kinabalu species were found on Sarawak mountain tops, and also in North Borneo, though never below 3,000 feet, or on the top of mountains only just 3,000 feet high; collecting on Mulu has added another half dozen kinds only hitherto known from Kinabalu, of whose sixty once-peculiar species only four are now left, and it is quite clear that .: what once applied to that mountain must apply also to many Sarawak mountain-tops, and indeed to those of Sumatra and Malaya.—E.B.

Racecourse Development Fund.
- OVER $5,000 ALREADY COLLECTED.
* •	j
LIST OF SUBSCRIPTIONS.
Kuching, 21st August, 1935.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,	I
Kuching.
SIR,
I enclose lists showing actual collections towards the Fund being raised to develop the area inside the racecourse into playing-fields for the benefit of all communities, and shall be very much obliged if you will kindly publish the lists in the next issue of the Gazette. I would draw your attention to the most generous contribution of $1,500 by Messrs. The Sarawak Steamship Co., Ltd., who have offered a further contribution of $1,000 if public subscriptions amount to, or exceed, $15,000 in 12 months’ time. I need hardly say that my Committee will endeavour to exceed this figure within the stated period.
While the development of this area will primarily benefit people living in or near Kuching, I and with provide playing-fields for the children attending' ail the schools in Kuching, might I suggest that, since many of the scholars at the 1 different schools come from other parts of the ; country, the appeal for funds might be extended to the outstations, contributions from which, however small, will be gratefully received. I might add that many meinbers of the Junior Service, Constabulary and other Government Departments and offices are contributing by instalments.
I trust that you will publish the lists of subscriptions each month, so that progress towards the $15,000 mark can be gauged by all contributors.
For the benefit of outstation subscribers, I enclose the names of the collection Committee, to any of the members of which contributions may be forwarded.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
W. F. Dick.
Resident, First Division,
Sarawak.

First Division News.
July.
Great inconvenience was caused to the public in the First Division during the month by a rumour that all rubber garden owners were required to obtain new stencils from the Agricultural Office at the 12th mile. The origin of this rumour, which, of course, is quite untrue, has not been traced.
In Kuching a fire occurred on July 10th in the
। old kitchen of the Pavilion, which is at present used
I for storing demonetized coins. Little damage was
• done.
On July 1st an inquiry was held into the death of Law Chin Hoi, a child aged 7, who died as a result of cyanide poisoning. A Chinese named Liew Ah Jun was subsequently tried for murder and sentenced to death in the Resident's Court, but on appeal to the Supreme Court the conviction was quashed, and he was sentenced to seven years’ rigorous imprisonment under section 326 of the Penal Code.
Four hundred and thirty persons were treated at ! the Ban dispensary and hospital during July. The i general health of the district was good.
Both the Principal Medical Officer and the 1 Resident, First Division, addressed meetings of managers of gold-mining companies on the importance of anti-malarial work, and were promised the full co -operation of all concerned.
Dahan Rubber Estates, Ltd.. harvested 3,400 lbs. of dry rubber during July.
The rainfall fit Ban was 5.80 inches.
The tapping holiday passed oil without incident I in the Bau district. There were no prosecutions (or illegal tapping nor was any unemployment i noticeable.

The District Officer, Bau, reports that the antimony craze in Upper Sarawak is dying a natural death, as was exported. Many of those interested seemed to be under the impression that this metal
was of immense value, and in spite of warnings to the contrary it is believed that some prospectors have lost money.
Gold production was well up to the average, four general prospecting licences and one panning licence , being issued during the month. The total production of gold for Upper Sarawak during July amounted to 2.565.69 ozm

The Court Writer, Lundu, reports that the health ' of the district has been bad, coughs and fever being 1 rife. Eight deaths occurred at Kampong Poi between July 1st and 19th. six of these being due to 1 pneumonia.
The great majority of Lundu natives stopped working timber during July and started to clear their padi farms. Good bums are expected.
Five fossicking licences for antimony were issued at Lundu during the month.

The Assistant District Officer, Sadong, reports that Penghulu Ringkai, of ulu Simunjan, has applied to open a school at Sungei Pinang. It appears that there are forty boys ready to enter the school as soon as it is ready, and each pupil will pay 50 cents per month and provide his own food. The Penghulu has asked Government to find a master for this new school, but if this is not possible the help of the S.l’.G. Mission will be requested.
On July 25th a Land Dayak house of 12 doors at Rasau was completely destroyed by fire, all household goods being destroyed. The Land Dayak custom of building separate padi barns at some distance from the long house saved the padi, however, none of which was damaged.

Apart from fever at Tebekang, there were no reports of any illness anywhere in the Sadong district during July.
M.V. Kim Chin Seng cleared direct from Simunjan to Singapore on July 11th with the last consignment of scrap iron from Sadong Colliery.
Very heavy rain fell in the ulu Simunjan from • July 3rd to 6th, and Pengkalan Serian was under 1 water until the 9th. After this, however, there was , practically no rainfall at all in the district.
The Penglimas of Kampongs Semabnng and Lobang Batu were each handed a copy of the Supreme Court decree concerning the dispute about • the birds'-nests caves, and the Orang Kaya of i Daha was appointed Government Agent to look | after the caves.
The Assistant District Officer, Sadong, mentions that while travelling along the coast he noticed that Malays had made r very good attempt to copy Bugis methods of coconut planting, and that in consequence the land looked as though real efforts • had been made to cultivate it. In the ulu gambir and Moynn the number of nuts per tree is greatly in excess of those obtained in other areas, and this satisfactory state of affairs is doubt less due to the vigilance of the Agricultural Department in seeing that the Government drains are properly kept open.
Mr. R. G. Aikman and Mr. C. 8. Sergei, Rubber Census Officers, visited the Sadong district from July 1st to 12th.

SARAWAK TURF CLUB.
Unlimited Cash Sweep.
2—2
S.N.A.
The dates originally fixed for this Autumn- Meeting were 21st and 23rd September, 1935, and all Unlimited Cash Sweep Tickets were printed accordingly.
The above dates have now been altered to 26th and 28th September, 1935, respectively, and this sweep will, therefore, be drawn on the Round- Course Race, September 28th, 1935.
Notice is hereby given that no alteration baa been made to the Unlimited Cash Sweep Tickets,, which bear the original date, viz., 23rd September, 1935.
Cash Sweep.
The dates originally fixed for this Autumn Meeting were 21 at and 23rd September, 1935, and all Cash Sweep Tickets were printed accordingly.
The above dates have now been altered to 26tb and 28th September, 1935, respectively.
Notice is hereby given that no alteration baa been made to the Cash Sweep Tickets, which bear the original dates.
Selling Lotteries.
At a meeting of the Committee of the Sarawak Turf Club held on the 9th July, 1935, it was proposed and passed that Selling Lotteries be re-introduced.
1.Selling Lotteries to be held on the first three races of the First Day only and limited to 200 tickets of $1.
2.10% of the proceeds goes to the Club and of the balance 80% to the winner and 20% to the second horse.
3.The lotteries will be held in the Sarawak Club the day before the race day, the draw taking place at 5.30 p.m. and the auction commencing at 6.30 p.m.
4.If the bidder for a horse makes a bid of, say, $20 he has to pay $20 to the Pool and $20 to the drawer. The owner has the right to take a half claim by paying half the amount bid.
5.List of numbers has been circulated and any members who have not already bought any tickets and are desirous of buying same are requested to kindly apply to the Secretaries.
For The Borneo Company Limited, P. C. V. COBBOLD, Acting Manager, Secretaries, Sarawak Turf Club~ Kuching, 1st September, 1935.

Traffic Regulations.
Autumn Race Meeting, 1935.
1.After the hour of 11 a.m. on the 26th and 28th September. 1935, all motor vehicles must proceed to the race-course via Padungan Road or Ban Hok Road only, and up to the hour of 7 p.m. on these days, must return by the Sekama Road only.
Exceptions:— ''V.t ;	• .
1.His Highness the Rajah's Cars. :	J
2.The Government Secretary. •
3.The Resident, First Division, Kuching.
4.The principal Medical Officer.
.5. The Secretary, Sarawak Turf Club..
6. In cases of extreme urgency permissidh may be obtained on the course for other cars to return via Ban Hok Road.
2.After depositing passengers at the grandstand, vehicles will line up on the extreme left-hand side of the grandstand road, one behind the other, and within three yards of each other, facing away from the grandstand.
3.Rickshaws and bicycles may proceed to the race-course at any time, and by any road, and must park on the bandstand plot. They will not be allowed to remain on any part of the road leading to the grandstand or roads leading to the race-course.
4.All vehicles must move to their parking grounds without delay, as directed by the Constabulary.
WARNING
5.The driver of any vehicle :—
(a)endeavouring to turn in grandstand road or,
(b)stopping to pick up passengers in grandstand road,
। will be prosecuted for causing obstruction.

Second Division News.
July.
The Resident, Second Division, records with deep regret the death, at Simanggang, on July 15th, of Haji Karim, who hail been a schoolmaster and Tua Kampong at Simanggang for twenty-one years. Haji Karim was a well-known and respected member of the Malay community, and his place will be difficult to fill.
Both Mr. W. T. N. L. Ditmas, Assistant District Officer, Simanggang, and Mr. N. Mace, Assistant Superintendent of Laud and Surveys, Second Division, were admitted to the Kuching hospital during July and were still away at the end of the month.
On July 19th twenty-four doors from the Skrang left the Division to move to Rum ah Sanggol,
Ou July 8th a number of Malays from Lingga, Kabong and the Saribas arrived at Simanggang and asked permission to fetch fruit from the Bataug Ai. Permission was refused on the grounds that the Dayaks in this area were very short of rice, and should themselves be given the chance of bringing down and selling the fruit.
During the tapping holiday police patrols were sent to all areas, but only at Seboyow was an infringement of the holiday detected, eight Dayaks being caught tapping on the first day and convicted. This was the only instance of any breach of the regulations in the Simanggang district, and, indeed, reports from all over the Second Division state that illicit tapping during the holiday was negligible, ln many cases the Dayaks had slopped tapping a week or ten days before the holiday commenced.
The work of the Rubber Census Officers, which appears to be satisfactory, should be finished in the Simanggang district within a month. Their results should be reasonably accurate.
A storm of some magnitude occurred at Simanggang on the 10th and did considerable damage to the various telephone lines. No serious damage was inflicted on any Government buildings, but the carpenter was kept busy with minor repairs.
Two Dayaks from the Ngemah named Bala and Bidat, who had been arrested at Lobang Baya, were sent down from Lubok Antu and despatched to Lingga, where s.l. Chamois was waiting to take them back to Sibu. It is understood that these Dayaks were the perpetrators of the murder at Song.
At Brayun, a Chinese named Chong Jen has mysteriously disappeared, and cannot be traced.
Mr. A. F. R. Griffin, cadet, left for the Undup and Lingga on July 8th in connection with the rubber census and tapping holiday, and returned on the 17th.
On July 4th the Government ’“Austin 7” suddenly ran over the bank near the Government offices of its own accord, smashing most of the spokes in its front wheel. This adventure has in no way impaired its capabilities however, since it is now running as well as ever.
The Rev. A. Stonton of the S.P.G. Mission left on a short holiday, at the conclusion of which he proceeds to Miri on transfer. He does not expect to return to Simanggang before November.
The Native Officer, Engkilili, reports that on July 7th the Government landing stage was washed away by floods. A new one has since been erected.
■■
A fierce storm accompanied by slight rainfall was experienced at Engkilili on the night of the 9th and caused serious damage to pepper vines and fruit trees.
In the District Court, Lubok Antu, Chandu (f) and her family were charged by Penghulu Ramba with the offence of insulting him and his family by calling him an ulun (slave) by descent. This case caused a considerable stir in the neighbourhood p especially since it had been complicated early in the year by Penghulu Ramba and his brother seizing a largo amount of Chandu’s property.
It was round that the insult had been made on two definite occasions, for one of which Chandu and Luang, her brother, had been fined some seven or eight years ago. The fine, though, was never paid. Chandu. who admitted the two offences on behalf of herself and her family, was mulcted in the usual fine of twenty catties for each offence.
The Assistant District Officer, Lubok Antu, states that cases of besangka ulun and besangka tau tepang are fortunately comparatively rare, although they are far more common in the ulu than down-river. When they do occur, however, feeling runs very high.
In the Ulu Ai the clearing of land for the coming year's padi is now nearly finished, and the Dayaks are only waiting for the felled jungle to become dry enough for burning.
Mi. G. R. H. Arundell, Assistant District Officerr Lubok Antu, left the station on July 8th and patrolled the Ulu Lobang Baya and Ulu Batang Air having received a report of the Song murder in which four Chinese were killed and their heads taken. Although no traces of them could be found in the jungle, the two murderers, Bala and Bidat, .(alias Bajit). were eventually produced by Bung- kong and Ngali. and sent down to Simanggang under arrest.
The “cause celebre” of the month in the Betong ‘ District Court was the case of Sanggat Broke vs. Mira Broke, which included prosecutions and counter-prosec utions under the Matrimonial Causes Order. The damages claimed against the various co-respondents totalled $4,500, probably a record for an outstation. The final settlement of this case awaits the judgment of the Supreme Court.
Very little crime was reported in the Saribas district during the month.
One hundred and seventy-six out-patients were treated at Betong hospital during July, three in-patients being admitted, all of whom were discharged before the end of the month. Eighty N.A.B. injections were administered.
The general health of the district was satisfactory.
The District Officer, Saribas, reports that although police patrols visited most parts of the district during the tapping holiday, only one case of illicit tapping wax detected.

The Rubber census made very satisfactory progress during the month, and it is hoped that the entire Saribas district will be completed by the end of August. It is interesting to note that any delays that have been experienced have invariably been caused by Malays and not by Dayaks. The District Officer paid short visits to Spak, Padeh and Layar in order to superintend the work of the census.
The clearing and burning of hill padi-land in the Saribas district is now in full swing, and Malays have also started on their farms in the Debak and Pusa districts, although the Betong Malays have so far made no move.
Engkabang should fall next month, but it is not anticipated that there will be much for sale.
Malays on contract were employed to clear the Pengkalan Jongkong road, and by the end of the month the entire road was in fair condition. The Debak-Saratok telephone rentis was also cleared.
The Assistant District Officer, Kalaka. reports that the health of the district was not good during July, many cases of colic being reported, for which, probably. the opening of the fruit season was largely responsible.
Nearly all the Dayaks in the Kalaka district are now buying imported rice, their own Mocks being already exhausted. The price of rice in the bazaars i remains steady at the moment.
The old Malay school at Saratok was dismantled during the month, the pupils being temporarily . accommodated in the Dayak rest-house.
On July 23rd the gardens of Malay scbool-boys at Kabong were judged, and small prizes awarded. Nearly all the boys had constructed gardens, and very creditable results were obtained considering the sandy nature of the soil and the youth of some of the gardeners.
Simanggang Notes.
I recollect reading in a previous issue of the Sara teak Gazette of an Editor who, when hard up for copy, jabbed a dictionary with a pin and wrote about any subject that might arise from the word so discovered. Feeling that perhaps some small contribution from a none too fluent pen might not come amiss, I ventured to follow his example.
To add a bit of novelty to the choice, I chose (vain youth!) a Romanised copy of Wilkinson's Malay Dictionary.
If my memory served me correctly, three jabs are. permitted (as practised by ladies when choosing 1. 2. 3 for the newspaper Derby placing* competitions).
ft should be explained that it is not intended to give all details as set down in the dictionary; firstly it would take too long, secondly this article might not be printed and this would .be an additional waste of time, and thirdly it would give a captious critic the opportunity of pointing out the omission if T did not refer to it. This may seem rather paradoxical in the light of the previous statement, but it all goes to fill up space— and that, after all (as the Actress said to the Bishop) is. with certain limitations, what is wanted.
The first word, curiously enough was Wardun - Jav. =a woman.
I've often wondered why it is that ladies (women) so much dislike to hear themselves referred to as women (ladies).
If one were to remark, and alas, one often does— "I took a woman out to dinner last night," the horrified expressions on the faces of Victorian aged, and minded! women (ladies) is almost worth perpetuating in paint (I know that cynics will say that they are already, but that, as Mr. Gilbert would have said, has nothing to do with the case.
But if one were to say “I took Miss or Mistress X. out to dinner last night" the reply would be "Oh how nice," or else (not quite so nice)	"That
woman !"
And yet if a woman (lady) were to say primly ”1 was taken out to dinner by a gentleman last night“—well—that raises several possible questions. One being—Was the lady disappointed with her cavalier's behaviour?
And again, why do we refer to one member of the community as a "Charlady"—and another as a "'washer woman"?
C'orrespondence on this subject is invited by the Editor—Isn’t, it? (No! Ed.)r but T feel this subject has, for I he time being, been pursued far enough (I also. Ed.).
Next jab gave Chongak—i.e. turned upwards, (of the face). Which for some reason reminds me of Tennyson’s poem "Oriana," the first line of which runs, f believe,—
"The cock crowed from the castle wall,
Oriana"
Some wit at school—of whom I've long lost trace,—suggested that the substitution of "Bottom Upwards" for Oriana would immensely increase the enjoyment of reading this poem. He was quite right—it did. The acrobatics performed by the characters is well worth reading.
The last word appropriately turned out to lie Hanlu—Evil spirit, Ghost or Goblin—I say, appropriately because the 13th August was “Sembahyang Ifaiilu" a Chinese feast of the 7 1/2moon.
The underlying idea. I'm informed, is to exorcise devils, and to pray for rain or any other worthy eventuality.
Each shop places on the five-foot way fruit, vegetables and meal of every description, lit up by candles. joysticks and lamps. The food is collected at midnight and such of it as is not desired by the torkays themselves is offered to bystanders.
In Kuching, so report hath it, the custom used to he that a midnight gong was beaten and those present helped themselves—rather after the style of the Westminster pancake—and the Devil took the hindmost.
The best show of the lot so far as Simanggang is concerned was that for those poor ghosts that had no relations to provide for them. Here we found a couple of enormous pigs.—which, having been eviscerated, were balanced on long poles, in such a position that, had they been alive, they would have considered it most uncomfortable. They practically obliterated from view an expanse of green stuffs and fruits that rather reminded one of Covent Garden at three in the morning: precariously placed in the mouth of each pig was a small orange decorated sumptuously with joss-sticks, which smoked and smelt until the unfortunate beast resembled Spencer's Faery Queen Dragon.

Early in the evening groups of kampong Malays
invaded the bazaar,—the girls and elder ladies, as
usual, moving around like grey-sheeted ghosts. The
colours of their sarongs and selindang were indis-
tinguishable, for they kept well away from the
lights, and prying eyes (to the disappointment of
your commentor, who would have been delighted to
have been able to expatiate on their charms, had
they not been so very well concealed), the tinkling
of their anklets joining time with a string band
which was emitting extraordinary sounds of pain
from a shophouse balcony.
1 also noticed one old reprobate playing vingt-
et-un. with a series of lads whose ages probably
ranged from 9 to 1-1. Altercations appeared to be
frequent, though no one came to blows, so, for a
minute I watched.
A small youth after some trouble in adding a ten
and a nine together to make nineteen, startled me
and the other onlookers by asking for another
card—which the old man produced from the bottom
of the very dirty pack in use.
A triumphant cry from the youngster showed
a 2—gently wiping my brow. I and my companion
moved on to try our own fortune at the fan-tan
tables. These were being very badly patronised,
but the sight of a couple of Tuans risking such
insignificant sums as twenty and fifty cents soon
drew a curious crowd.
Advice was offered freely, though none of the
onlookers seemed to be prepared to back their own !
judgment. When just about to decide whether to ।
risk a further dollar, my companion uttered a noise '
that sounded rather like beer, so off we strolled to j
the arrack shop. Here we were accosted by mi
inebriated Chinese gentleman who endeavoured to ।
make us free of the place, offering bottle after
bottle of various alcoholic liquids, ranging from
Chinese port wine to arrack. Fortunately his
hospitality was not accepted, for he turned out to |
have nothing to do with the shop at all.
By the time we had finished our lukewarm beer,
the streets had almost emptied, a few peripatetic
Dayaks, one or two ladies of doubtful age and even
more doubtful character, and a few of the younger
Chinese making up the total visible population, and
so. having seen all that was to be seen, we went
back home.
Hitler will be jealous.
—The Butler.
Third Division News.
July.
Bidat and Bala, the two murderers of the Chinese family near Song, were arrested in the Second Division, primarily, it is understood, for travelling without passes. Three of the heads were discovered below their house in the Ngemah, where they had been buried by their friends and relations, and were brought down by Native Officer Wan Bujang. They say that the fourth head, that of the child of four, was lost soon after the murder. Their boat was small and unsteady, and, as they were crossing the Rejang, the head fell into the river. This may or may not be true; it sounds doubtful, and the explanation probably is that the head has either been given to their relations, or sent to Kendawang as proof that the deed was done. The reason given for the murder is that Bidat’s wife had ordered him to kill, saying that he was of no further use as a husband, and comparing unfavourably his capabilities with those of the outlaws.
One inquest was held at Sibu on a young Foochow named Ting Kah Ling, who was drowned in Sungei Merah while on his way to Sibu. The river was in flood at the time, and his boat, striking a drifting log, was overturned. His three companions managed to hang on to the log until saved, but the deceased, having lost the fingers of his right hand owing to an accident when a baby, was unable to obtain a grip, and was drawn under by the current.
Pengarah Nglambong and eleven Dayaks went to Kuching to meet His Excellency the British Agent for Sarawak. They looked very picturesque, but were certainly not expert dancers, since these, nowadays. can only be found in the more populated Dayak areas further upstream, and, unfortunately, the lime was insufficient to call these people down.
Four outlaws are reported to have been seen in
I the Bangkit, Katibas, by a party of local Dayaks
working jungle sago. The party was under the
' charge of a tonstable and two levies from the block-
house at the mouth of the Minoh, but, for some
extraordinary reason, the news was suppressed, and
has only com? to light through the gossip of other
Dayaks with the garrison of another blockhouse.
Those concerned have been sent for, so that an
inquiry may be held.
In the Sibu district, most Dayaks with any sense have started on their farms, so that, with the’felling done, they can go to collect the engkabang fruit, leaving the women to arrange the burns. Many, however, are proposing to collect the fruit first and farm afterwards, and, unless they return early, it is probable they will miss their burns, and in consequence again have no crop to harvest. It is unfortunate that the engkabang should ripen just at this particular time.
The Superintendent, Lands and Survey Department, visited the Division from the 16th to the 18th. He came from, and returned to, Kuching as one of the passengers in an R.A.F flying boat. The Assistant Superintendent visited Binatang, Sankei, mid Rejang, from the 9th to the 15th.
Land revenue for the month amounted to $7,413.75. Three hundred and forty-three deeds were registered.

The Acting Director of Public Works visited Sibu tor a few days, arriving on the 16th by flying boat and returning to Kuching on the 18th. The Clerk of Works visited Sarikei on the 6th and returned the next day.
The work on one of the wings of the prison is progressing satisfactorily and will be completed next month. The piling and cementing of the floor are finished, and the cell walls are in course of construction.
The contractor for the new Residency at Sibu has found if necessary to ask for an extension of time, since certain timbers have not been delivered as stipulated and others have been rejected as of inferior quality. The framework of the kitchen and passage-way was finished, as well as that of the roof of the main building, and the fixing of belian shingles was started towards the end of the month.
A certain amount of damage was done to the Aup road by domestic pigs, which, in that particular area, have been allowed for some time to roam at will.
Lighter Big Bill was sent up from Sarikei for repairs to the hull. The Wullie, on arrival from Kuching, was sent down instead, for the use of the Sarawak Steamship Co., Ltd. She returned on the 18th to lie fitted with tanks for carrying fresh water to assist Sarikei during the drought.
No. 219 Constable Digoon, who was accidentally shot below the knee in the Uka blockhouse, was discharged from hospital and sent down to Kuching preparatory to retirement.
Eighty-seven persons were treated in Sibu hospital’during July. Of this number forty-eight were new .patients. There were four deaths, three transfers to Kuching, and fifty-eight discharges.
Out-patients numbered four hundred and eighty. Two hundred and thirty-two of these were new cases. Seventy-eight N'.A.B. injections were administered.
Haji Gapor, Native Officer, returned from duty- in Kanowit, and, later, went to Daro on temporary transfer. Abang Indih went to Song to take over Abang Enjah’s duties whilst the latter is in the Katibas. On his return, Abang Indih will proceed to the headwaters of the Katibas to arrange matters concerning the engkabang harvesting
F. Ansin arrived to take up his appointment of Davak Native Officer.
The site for the new station at Mehian. where work is in progress under the supervision of Abang Abu Seman, Native Officer, was visited during the month by Mr. D. C. Hudden, Acting District Officer, Sibu.
The tapping holiday in the Sibu district was, as far as can be seen, a success. There were, at any rate, no reports of illicit tapping.
On the night of the 18th there was a miniature gale, and damage was done to the Island Club, and certain Government boats.
Ou the 16th, one of the new flying boats from Singapore arrived with Air-Commodore Smith, the Superintendent of Lands and Surveys and the Acting Director of Public Works being passengers. On the 17th she went to Bintulu, returning the same day, and on the 18th returned to Kuching.
For the Bintulu journey, by leaving two of the crew behind, they were able to take three more passengers, namely the Resident, the Divisional Medical Officer, and the Acting District Officer, Sibu.
The Assistant District Officer; Kapit, reports that there was a great deal of sickness during July in the Song district, a number of Dayaks having died.
A total of 594 logs were drifted down to Sibu during the month, 263 still remaining at Kapit. A number of logs drilled downriver at the beginning of the month owing to the high water.
On July 10th another woman was taken by a crocodile at Rumah Blikan. The house has been given a Snider rifle and five rounds of ammunition in order lo deal with the beast, if possible.
Rubber Census officers were despatched to all rivers in both the Kapit and Song districts during the month. Ninety rubber stencils were issued to applicants.
Exceptional high water was experienced in Kapit on July 6th and 7tb. the water reaching to within a few inches of the floor of the Fort and flooding the second clerk’s quarters. The water stood Io a depth of three feet in the shophouses at either end of the old bazaar.
Sixty-six Punan mats were received for tax at Kapit, and were sold by public auction, realising the sum of $237.11).
The total stock of plantation rubber was cleared from Belaga during the month, about 90 piculs of sheet rubber being sent down to Kapit to be smoked and shipped.
The Assistant District Officer, Lower Rejang, reports that there was very little crime in his district during the month. Three appeals from the District Point were heard in the Resident's Court; in one case the appeal was allowed and the conviction quashed, in another the conviction on one of the charges only was quashed, and in the third the appeal was dismissed.
All Penghulus visited Sarikei during July and reported all well. No complaints of famine have yet been received from the Dayaks, and although, there is undoubtedly a shortage of rice, they appear to be managing fairly 'veil so far.
T.R. Giman was appointed Mandal for the Lemanak Dayaks in the Sarikei river.
The picking of pepper in the Sarikei district is in full swing, although much anxiety is felt owing to the low price of this product. Towkays and Chinese headmen are urging gardeners to plant catch crop of sweet potatoes and other vegetables to tide themselves over what promises to be a bad time.
1,705.58 piculs of plantation rubber and 127.40 piculs F.A.Q. pepper were exported from Sarikei during July. The tapping holiday in the district has been a complete success.
New Native Officer’s quarters at Sarikei were completed and occupied during the month.
At Binatang a bungalow for the Assistant Superintendent of Lands and Surveys was completed. and good progress was made with the Native Officer’s quarters.

Mr. A. R. Snelus, Cadet, and Abang Openg, Native Officer, made a tour of the Julau and Sarikei Dayaks in the course of which a census was taken of both Dayaks and padi. Propaganda with regard to the rubber census was carried on as widely as possible, and Census officers began to fill I in forms for the Dayaks.
The wireless station at Sarikei was completed early in the month, as also were the telephone lines to Police sub-stations. A site was chosen at Binatang for the proposed electrical power station.
The District Officer. Mukah. reports that there was considerable activity in the Probate Court during the month, and remarks that there is no doubt that the system of settling all estates in Court is going to benefit both heirs and creditors, and, it is hoped, will eventually put a stop to the wild credits obtained for blanja mati; these have for long been a curse on the coast, since they usually result in a mortgage which can never he paid off. and which keeps the native in debt for the rest of his existence.
Penghulu Sian reported on the last day of the month that a Dayak, by  name Bunsu. had accidentally shot his father. Tuai Rumah Tudong, while out pig hunting, death being almost instantaneous. On finding that his father was dead, Bunsu reloaded his gun and attempted to commit suicide. At the time of the report Bnnsu was not expected to live for more than a few days. The matter is being investigated, and it will be interesting to know where the cartridges came from.
Few Dayaks were seen at Mukah during the month, this being due partly to the fact that Native Officers wore amongst them most of the time, and partly to the fact that they are in a panic lest they should have missed the correct burning and planting period, owing to the early drought. Nobody appears to be taking the slightest interest in the engkabang crop.
The tapping holiday appears to have been a success in the Mukah district, as, indeed, it has been everywhere in the Third Division. Although patrols were maintained, there seemed to be no desire to tap, and credit is due to the traders, the majority of whom co-operated admirably.
The pumping station at Mukah appears to be operating successfully. There has been some trouble in maintaining the water supply during the hours when the pumps are at rest, but this has been overcome. Owing to the drought there was a heavy demand for water, and the plentiful supply has been a great boon.
The Assistant District Officer, Oya and Dalat, reports that there have been several cases of theft in his district, one of these including the removal of the rope from the Government flag-staff at Dalat. There is as yet no clue to the perpetrators of these offences.
Several caws of chicken-pox appeared in Dalat and Tanam. The Mukah Dresser came over and many vaccinations in Tanam, Dalat, and Kekan were performed. There have been no further eases and it is hoped the disease has died away, since it is almost hopeless to isolate bouses in crowded kampongs. The general health of the district has been good.
T. K. Tawan reports that more and more Dayaks
are opening up sago gardens near Bungan.' As
these Dayaks are bound to include some of the people
from Upper Rejang settled in the Igan it is to be
hoped they will not come in conflict with the
Melanaus, who are also opening, up more gardens in
the Igan.
There has been an exceptionally plentiful fruit . season in the Oya district, accompanied, naturally, by a fair number of disputes as to ownership of trees.
The price of raw sago showed a tendency to rise, and stood at 54 cents per passu in Sungei Kut at the end of July.
Most of the new Dalat road has been edged and is being surfaced with sand. Work on the section behind the Chinese school is held up pending the removal of that building.
The contract for the new kubu at Dalat was signed, and timbers are being collected by the contractor.
Two bandongs went aground in the koala during the month, but were successfully refloated without .serious damage.
The land on the West of the Boom Road is being developed as vegetable gardens by the people in | Kampong Oya and Kampong Barit. The people fully understand that never at any time will they obtain titles, and they have been told that on the slightest trouble regarding lots they will he cleared off. This has been done with the approval of the Land Officer, and serves a very useful purpose in helping to make the fishermen a little less dependent on the sea for their livelihood, and also saves Government the expense of clearing the land, which rapidly becomes overgrown.
Local Fleet Sold.
TEO HOO LYE’S STEAMERS.
(From Our Shipping Correspondent.)
Rumours that the Teo Hoo Lye Steamship Company, of Singapore, were selling their whole fleet of inter-island traders were confirmed on Friday morning.
An official of the Heap Eng Moh Steamship Co., Ltd., informed me that they have just bought over | tie goodwill of the Teo Hoo Lye Steamship Co.
(also known as the Soon Bee Steamship Co.) and also the major part of their fleet.
He stated that the 12 ships acquired by them will be operated on the same services as before, which include Sungei Liat, Batavia, Anambas and Natuna Islands, the Rhio Archipelago and Indragiri. The vessels are being taken over as they arrive in port and it is hoped to complete the whole transaction before the holidays.
The two remaining vessels of the fleet, the Rwanda and the Ban Siong Bee, have been acquired by the Straits Steamship Co., who will operate them on the Sarawak Service.
The name of Teo Hoo Lye (or Soon Bee) will, I understand, continue to be at the head of the fleet, and the house colours of the old company will also be retained.—Straits Budget.
The above cutting will no doubt be of interest to our readers in the Rejang River ports, where s.s. Rwanda has operated a regular service for a number of years. We understand, however, that she will now be replaced on the run by b.b Angby, also a familiar vessel in the Rejang.—Ed.

