
VOL. XXXVII.
No. 499.

Sarawak gazette
Price
MONDAY, AUGUST 5, 1907.
10 cents
CONTENTS.
-—?—
ORDF.RU:—Ban Hok Road- Police pen Bions.
NOTIFICATIONS :—Counterfeit Stamps—In«nre<l’Ptucels Post— Rates for Insurance of Parcels.
NOTICES Bankrupt Estates (Bau)—Bankruptcy Court, Kuching—Sole of timber iH. H. Everett's house).
LEAVE—APPOINTMENTS -APPOINTMENT OF NATIVE OFFICERS ' THE LATE DATU BANDAI:— H. H. THE RAJAH 'S VISIT TO SIMANG- I GANO AND SADONO—DKPAKTCHE OF Mu. AND MRS. ELI.I* -MA . TANG WATERWORKS—CRICKET MATCH—CROQUET TOURNAMENT , —-GOLF COMPETITION- MB. BRYAN’S DANCE—SARAWAK RAN , GKRS ANNUAL SPORTS—CONCERT AND DANCE AT ASTANA—“AT ! HOME” AT THE ESPLANADE -TENNIS TOURNAMENT —SARAWAK j RACES—“Mi HY SHOULD THE NATIVE IMPROVE’’—CORRESPONDENCE (•DOES THE NATIVE IMPROVE')—MONTHLY NOTES.
REPORTS:—Medical Report, Mailing—Antimony at Barain.
HALF YEARLY REPORTS:—Police and Prison Dept.—Military.
MONTHLY REPORTS: Palm —Kalake—Knpit- Simauggaug— Sudong—Oya- Malta—Hint til n—Matnng Estate—-Hau Lundu— Baram—Lunbang.
ADVERTISEMENTS -RAINFALL AT SANTUBONG 1907-—TRADE RETURNS—PASSENGERS—ALMANAC—SHIPPING- METEOROLOGICAL READINGS.
The Sarawak gazette.
Monday. AUGUST 5, 1907.
Order-
No. V. 1907.
   FROM this date it is hereby ordered that the road lying in Section 15, of the Town of Kuching, commencing at the Tabnan Road and proceeding Easterly to the Central Road East shall be known as “BAN HOK ROAD’’ and such name shall be used in all Government grants or leases.
C. BROOKE.
Rajah. Kuching,
June 19th, 1907.
Order.
No. VI, 1907.
   IN regard to a discrepancy which has been followed without orders in the Police Regulations of pay, I now set the matter right by in
forming the Inspector and his successors that those who have served their full time for pension will have to retire should they receive their pension.
The question of commuting or not will remain with the Treasurer. If they remain physically fit for work, they need not receive their pension till the Government requires them to do so and then they will retire for good.
Under my hand and Seal) C. BROOKE,
this 13th day of July. 1907J	Rajah.
Notice.
No. XX, 1907.
Re Chew Boon San, chop Kong Tsze Thong.
   ALL creditors and other persons having any i claim whatsoever against the Estate of the ' above named are hereby requested to send . particulars thereof to the undersigned within three (3) months from date, after which date the assets of the above named will be divided amongst the parties entitled thereto, regard being had only to those claims of which notice shall have been given and all monies owing to the said Estate shall be paid to the undersigned forthwith.
E. R. STILWELL, Resident, Upper Sarawak.
Bau,
May 17th, 1907.
Notification.
No. XXI, 1907.
   THE use, for prepayment of postage, of counterfeit stamps or stamps already used, and the manufacture, sale, hawking or distribution of embossed or adhesive stamps forged nr imitated in such a manner as to be mistaken for the genuine issues of any country is prohibited, and, if detected. will be severely punished.
C. BROOKE,
Rajah.
     Kuching, I 18th May. 1907.


175	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 5, 1907.
Notice.
No. XXIV, 1907.
IN THE BANKRUPTCY COURT KUCHING.
In the goods of Lai Chung Hap, pepper planter of S. Tengah. (Absconded).
In the goods of Tan Chun Meng, pepper planter of Stapok. (Absconded).
In the goods of Tan Seng Cho, pepper planter of B. Moyan. (Absconded).
In the goods of Lai Jow and Lai Swee, pepper planters of S. Tengah. (Absconded).
In the goods of Lai Leong and Lai Fui, pepper planters of Simuiigo. (Absconded).
          In the goods of Chong Siew .	‘Chiu, pepper planter of S.
Moyan. (Absconded).
In the goods of Chong Chin, pepper planter of S. Loba. (Absconded).
In the goods of Lint Lan Seng, Clerk of Upper China Street. (zl bsconded).
In the goods of Gwee Chet and Chang Kai, pepper planters of S. Tengah. (Absconded).
   ALL creditors ami other persons having any claim whatsoever against the Estates of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned on or before the 15th July, 1907, after which date the assets of the above named will be divided amongst the parties entitled thereto regard being had only to those claims of which notice shall have been given. And all monies owing to the above Estates shall be paid to the undersigned forthwiih.
JOHN E. A. LEWIS.
Resident 2nd Class.
     Bankruptcy Court, Kuching, 30th May, 1907.
Notification.
No. XXV, 1907.
   FBOM 1st July the Post Office will accept insured parcels for the Malay Statts except for places on the Eastern coast of Pahang.
   The rates will be the same as for the Straits Settlements.
C. C. ROBISON, Postmaster General.
   General Post Office, Kuching, 10th June, 1907.
Notification.
No. XXVIII, 1907.
Insured PARCELS POST.
   NOTICE is hereby given that Insured Parcels may now be sent to the following countries:—? India, including the Andaman Islands and Burma.
The Federated Malay States, except places on the Eastern Coast of Pahang.
By order.
C. C. ROBISON,
Postmaster General.
   General Post Office, Sarawak, 28th June, 1907.
             Notice.
No. XXIX. 1907.
Ue Koh Kia Lim, Chop Keng Hap Kee, (A bsconded.) Trader in Shak Loong Mun.
   All creditors and other persons having any claim whatsoever against the Estate of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned within three months from date, after which date the assets of the above named wiil be divided amongst the parties entitled thereto regard being had only to those claim $ of which notice shall have been given. And all monies owing to the above Estate shall be paid to the undersigned forthwith.
E. R. STILWELL, Resident Upper Sarawak, Bau.
     Bau,
24th July, 1907.
             Notice.
                No. XXX, 1907.
IN THE BANKRUPTCY COURT. KUCHING.
In the goods of Tuu Hiang and Choo Boo, pepper planters of Tanah Puteh. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Tong Tad Sam, Tinsmith of China Street. (A bsconded.)
In the goods of Bong Jun Fwa, pepper planter of Rauto Pan- j ting. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Low Siting, pepper planter of Simungo. (.1 bsconded.)
In the goods of Chang Sam and Bong Chit, chop Jit On, pepper planters of Paku. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Bong Lee Soon, pepper planter of S. Tapang. (A bsconded.)
In the goods of Lai Bun Lee, pepper planter of S. Tengah. (Absconded.)


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 5, 1907.
170
In the goods of Bong Cho and Bong Niuk, pepper planters of Ranto Panjang. (Absconded.) In the goods of Ng'ITok Chia.
pepper planter of Simungo. (A bsconded.)
In the goods of Chang Hen, popper planter of Ranto Panjang. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Chang Toi, pepper planter of Ranto Panjang. (A bsconded.)
In the goods of Bong Kbian, pepper planter of Tabnan Road. (A bsconded).
   All creditors and other persons having any claim whatsoever against the Estates of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned on or before the 14th September. 1907, after which date the assets or the above named will be divided amongthe i arties < nt regard being had only to those claims of which notice shall have been given. And all moneys owing to the above Estates shall be paid to the undersigned forthwith.
JOHN E. A. LEWIS.
                           Resident 2nd ('lass. Resident’s Office.
   30th July, 1907.
Notice.
No. XXXI, 1907.
   ALL the timber comprised in the dwelling house in Mosque Road recently owned by Mr. H. H. Everett will be sold by public Auction on the premises at 9 o’clock on Friday morning the 9th of August.
   The purchaser will be required to remove the house within 14 days of the date of sale.
   For further particulars apply to the Public Works Department.
H. F. CAREW-GIBSON, Commissioner
Public JForZrs <('? Surveys.
Notification.
No. XXXIT. 1907.
   FROM 1st August the limit of insurance for
parcels sent to the United Kingdom or rid the
United Kingdom to the undermentioned coun-
tries is raised to .4'400.
Antigua	Cnmoroonx
Austria Hungary Denmark
I Ha hanim) i Ntissii n Dominion
Belgium	Egj’pt
Bcnuuiln	Eatw Islands
Bosnia Herzegovina Gnmbin
British Guin mt Germany
Britiah Somaliland Iceland
   For Parcels to the U
Rate will be 30 cents for
Malta Sierra Leone Mauritius Sweden Montserrat Togolniid Nevis Trinidad New Zealand Zanzibar
Russia St. Kitts nited Kingdom the the first AT 2 of in
sured value and 10 cents for each additional
1T2 or fraction thereof. Rates for other
countries will remain as quoted on page 15 of
the Postal Guide.
                          C. C. ROBISON,
Postmaster General.
Kuching, Sarawak,
     31st July, 1907.

   His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to grant to H. R. A. Day, Esq., eight months furlough to date from the 9th July 1907.
    • APPOINTMENTS.
   His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to make the following appointments :—
   H. F. Carew-Gibson. Esq., A. M. I. C- E., to be Commissioner of Public Works and Surveys to date from the 1st July, 1907.
   H. D. Ellis. Esq., on his retirement front the Commissionership of Public Works and Surveys to be Consulting Engineer for the Sarawak Government in England to date from his arrival in England.
Appointment of Native Officers.
   ON the 24th of Jure His Highness the Rajah and His Highness the Rajah Muda proceeded to the Court House in order to publicly confer Uncertain native gentlemen their appointments to the Supreme Council and promotions in the Service.
   All the lending Europeans and Malays were found places on the dais, while the body of the Court was crowded with people of all the various nationalities represented in Sarawak.
   The Datu Muda, Abang Mohamad Kassim, was appointed to be Datu Bandar in succession to his father the. late Haji Bua Hassan; while Haji Merais, a well-known and respected inhabitant of Sibu was appointed Datu Imam in succession to the late Haji Amin, ami Abang Mohamat Zin, well known both in Kuching and Kampong Grisek, was made a Member of Supreme Council, with the title of ‘Inchi,’ thus bringing the proportion of Europeans and Malays to the same level as has obtained over since the late Rajah’s time.
   His Highness the Rajah addressed a few words to the Chiefs on presenting them with their ‘‘surats” dwelling upon the importance of their offices and advising them ty work for the good of the Raj.
   After the ceremony, at which several ladies were present, an adjournment was made to the Court of Requests where champagne’ was served and the health of the Chiefs was drunk, though they themselves were contented with lemonade, etc.
   We must congratulate the newly appointed Officers on their promotion and feel sure that their efforts among their own people will always be directed towards the increase of the prosperity of the State and to the preserving of that feeling of loyalty towards its Head which has long been the distinguishing feature of the Sarawak Malays.


177
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 5, 1907.
The late Datu Bandar (Hj. Bua Hassan)
   The Estate of the late Hj. Bua Hassan, Datu Bandar, concerning the division of which among his numerous descendants there was at one time some disagreement has now been distributed by the Court.
   On the return of His Highness the Rajah from Europe this matter engaged his attention with the result that the settlement of the Estate was entrusted to a commission of three European Officers assisted by three Mahomedans of high cnaracter. The whole of the Data's property was sold by Public Auction and the sums realized together with the value of the personal Estate having been paid into Court the Beneficiaries under the deceased’s will have now receiveri their shares.
ABSTRACT OF ACCOUNT.
   DR.
Auction Sales realized $9,286.65
Less Commission and charges 109.93
	 $ 9.176.72
Various credits and Cash ...	...	16,427.79
$25,604.51
   CR.
Allowed for erection of tomb 500.00
Probate duty on chargeable
Estate 701.53
Wages and outstanding 37.25
	 1,238.78
                                     $24,365.73 i
Debt recovered from share
      of a beneficiary deceased 61.65
Less Probate duty ...	... 1.85
	59.80
Net sum divided amongst the
six beneficiaries $24,425.53
The Beneficiaries under the will of the late Datu
have set apart from this sum one thousand dollars
($1,000) which with subscriptions to be collected
from his numerous other descendants will form a
fund to make a H'akaf to the memory of the Datu
but what form the Wakaf will take is not yet
decided upon.
H. H The rajah’s visit to Simanggang and Sadong
His Highness the Rajah visited the Bataug Lupar in company with Dr. and Mrs. Wellington ou the 15th instant; stopping the night atLingga and starting the next morning at 4.30 A. M. they arrived at Simanggang at 8.30, only four hours which is a very- fast passage. The weather was generally rainy and cloudy. This place is always a model of tidiness and order, and attracts the notice of visitors. The farm ofcattic and sheep is a pattern to those who are not such good managers as the Resident Mr. Bai lev. Messrs. Owen and Lang were here as well as the Resident and a good crowd of Natives, Malays and Dyaks of this and the neighbouring stream's were assembled at the landing place.
The few matters that the Rajah had to attend to referred to a great extent to the reformation of the Malay Government, as the. head man died only a month ago, and another bad retired after long service, here as well as in Kuching certain new instalments had to be made to keep up the complement < >f the Native Chiefs so necessary to the good Administra
tion of this country: the native element since the
late Rajah’s time, now 50 odd years ago, has never
been relinquished, the real strength of the country
belongs to it and depends on it, though many
Europeans may hold different views, especially those
who have a limited experience of the East. The
unbiased Native opinion (Malay and Dyak) concern-
ing matters relating to thia Country’ is simply invalu-
able.
   The news, unfortunately, was not of a favourable
nature among the interior Dyaks and to some extent
has not fulfilled what was to be expected after the
meeting with Bautin and the other chiefs in the fort
at Kapit in Rejang waters held on the 16th of May,
however, up to the present time these interior reports
can scarcely lie looked on as reliable. The cause of
the present discontent among the upriver people
now seems to be that they wish to revenge them-
selves against a tribe called Kantu in the Nether-
land’s territory for having killed one of their people
some years ago; whether this is true or not does not
seem to be proved., The Kantus are known to be a
plucky as well as friqjidly tribe and nearly related to
our Undups, and we shall do all we possibly can
to protect them, and assistance will no doubt be sent
from the Netherland Officials. There is of course
a great deal of bluff in the talk of the young Dyak
warriors. After inquiring closely into the matter
from those who have charge of affairs in the upriver
at Lubok Antu. the Rajah gathered that the friendly
Dyak named Chendan had taken it on himself to
collect a bala to attack the Kantus; however, as the
force will have to pass over the Dutch territory, it is
? considered very probable that they will meet with
resistance enough to stop their proceedings. Mess-
ages will be, in fact have been, sent up river to try
and stop tins hostile movement, and if a fine can be
imposed, it will be the best method of settling the
matter. It seems from the news brought that this
party has boil no communication with the Miki
Pambars and that the Chief Bautin has not been
heard of, so it may lie hoped that he qtill holds him-
! self to his previous friendly intentions; there is not
any cause for anxiety on this account though such
reports occasion a great deal of trouble and tend to
keep the Resident and Officers of the Station in a
state of uncertainty.
Latest news which arrived late the same evening
(18th) is that the Resident received a note from Lubok
Anisa saying that the attacking force against the
Kantus had met with a severe reveise and bad ro-
treated with many wounded. The Kantus had been
I strongly reinforced by some of the neighbouring
| tribes. This news is highly satisfactory, and the
• attacking force have received a punishment winch
they richly deserved.
1 While staying at Simanggang Mr. and Mrs. Well-
I ingtoii visited the Sabu Mission distant about an
I hour. This is under the management of the Revd.
Howell who has been many years employed in the
S. P. G. Mission and has certainly been very success-
ful as the result of his zeal and hard honest work.
If there were a few more of his type in the Protest-
ant Mission it would show al llie present time a
different aspect throughout its length and breadth—
unfortunately they are not to be found. The Sabti
School under Mr. Howell consists of eighteen boys,
Dyaks principally, with a few Chinese and others.
Tiie Resident speaks most highly of the education
in this school and among our best qualified and best
conducted native Clerks most have been supplied
from this station.
   In walking through the Chinese bazaar one ob-
serves a large number of half Chinese half Dyak
children, cleanly kept, with fair skins and good phy-
sique. They nearly ail acquire the language of their
fathers. A Chinese school is now held in Simang-


THE SARAWAK GAZE’l
gang, teaching Chinese principally: in other ways
there is not much appearance of an active trade here
though the qxports and imports are at their usual
figure. Several Dyak ladies called, and the paddy
farming was just commencing, but many are still
holding their feasts in consequence of a good and
plentiful harvest last year.
   The reorganised native Malay administration of
Simanggang holding authority under the Resident
is that Abang Hnji Tamin becomes the head officer,
Abang Abdul Rasit the second officer, and Tuanku
Rahman the third officer and principal in the Upper
Kampong. Pensioner Dngang and Abang Haji Bua
Hassan to be second class officers taking six month-
ly turns to watch the up river at Lubok Antu.
   After leaving Simanggang the Zahnra entered the
Sadong river to visit Simupjan, where a new wharf
and coal sheds have been built, as well as a fresh
water supply laid down by pipes from Ngeli hill to
the bazaar and the shipping station at the mouth,
where before only dark and tainted water could
be found to drink.	•
   The wharf and sheds ended by the late
Resident. Mr. Donald Owen, and they show that the
work has been judiciously superintended combining
as it does a good strong erection with due regard to
economy. The water from the iron pipe was tested
by His Highness and found not good having a bad
flavour of stagnancy generally called banggar by
the natives. This must be seen to as it appears
that the pipes must leak and the water being
discoloured shows that it is mixed with the swampy
liquid. The water on the hill is quite pure flowing
from rocky beds.
   There are two points to be settled here: first the
site of the new Hospital, whether it is to be placed at
the mines on hilly ground and close to the workings
where accident:; happen, thereby saving 3 miles jolt
over a rough tramway, or whether it is to be placed
at the shipping station in the vicinity of the Resi-
dency where a better superintendence may be kept
up. The Government and Medical staff must decide
this important point without delay. The second is.
that the Malays who live in a Kampong across river
and away from the shops, apply to be allowed to
make a bridge across the river, which is about
400 feet in breadth with very strong tide. The
Government wiil be ready to assist them with a
certain amount of blanja, if they will undertake to
construct it and find all material. No cleverer men
can be found than Malays to complete such a con-
struction—strong and well done though probably
not according to the modern principles of engineer-
ing. This should be done for something not over
$500. a pathway of 3 feet in breadth, and 6 months
should see it finished. The more difficult question
to settle is. the keeping it in repair afterwards. The
river is shallow so the erection should not require
long posts—these could be roughly made with
round wood bound together with wire fastenings,
as rattans would not last more than a couple of
years and nails would be apt to split the wood
and would not to a certain extent give or expand
with the strength of the tides.
   Passengers to Kuching by Zahora were Mr.
D. J. S. Bailey, Mr. Lang. Mr. Gordon White and
Mr. Naysmith.
'TE. AUGUST 5, 1907.	178
ten years has been one of continued prosperity
I to Sarawak with the consequence that more
? money has been available for expenditure upon
| Public Works than ever before, and the most
casual observer, who knew Kuching ten years
ago, must notice the many improvements
which have been carried out during Mr. Ellis’
tenure of Office. The most extensive work
which Mr. Ellis undertook was undoubtedly
the River Wall, of which he was the originator,
and, although he leaves this work uncom-
pleted, considerable progress has been made
as also with the Fish Market, which stands
more or less upon it. We would mention that
; the River Wall at its present slow rate of pro-
gression. due to financial reasons, will take
some fifteen years to complete, so that it was
hardly possible for the same Commissioner to
i be responsible for the whole work.
   It is not our province to discuss the merits
of Mr. Ellis’ work, it is only necessary to say
I that he leaves this country with a testimonial
1 from His Highness the Rajah with which he
i is quite satisfied and that he has been
I appointed Consulting Engineer to the Govern-
ment m England, which shows how his work
is appreciated^ He was also the recipient of
a very fine silver bowl as a souvenir from
the employees of the Public Works Depart-
ment and a silver salver from the Kling
employees.
   We wish Mr. and Mrs. Ellis all prosperity
? in their home in England.
   WK are requested by the Datus and other
Malay inhabitants of Kuching to express the
esteem and regard in which they held Mr. and
Mrs. Ellis. The Data Bandar, Datu Hakim,
Abang Abdillah and Mohamat Taha accom-
panied them on board the Kuching as far as
the Quarries (Sejinkat) where a special demon-
stration took place. A number of tongkangs
decorated with Hags were drawn up, one having
a banner with the inscription “S’lamat berlaya
Tuan dan Mem Ellis,” and crowds of Malays
assembled and waved red handkerchiefs to
the accompaniment of loud cheering.
matang Waterworks.
   THE ceremony of opening the water supply which
was to have taken place on Thursday afternoon the
25th had to be postponed, owing to pipes bursting
on both sides of the river on being tested, and it
would seem impossible to say how often we may be
disappointed by these mishaps. Since then Mr. Grove
having effected temporary repairs has succeeded in
getting a very limited supply of water through to the
service reservoir under greatly reduced pressure.
   All the pipes were supplied by the Staveley Coal
and Iron Co.. one of the best known iron foundries
in England, and were ordered and tested by Mr.
A. V. Lawson of Cirencester acting under the
Rajah’s instructions. We do not know what average
number of pipes are generally supposed to burst but
we learn that the span; stock of pipes has been used
up in replacing broken ones. As these pipes are said
to have been tested in England at a very high pres-
Departure of Hr. and Hrs. Ellis.
—-
   BY the s. s. Kuching, which sailed on the
23ni July, Mr. and Mrs. Ellis left for England.
Mr. Ellis is leaving on completion of his Agree-
ment and after being ten years in charge of the
Public Works Department. This period of


179
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST o, 1907.
sure it is somewhat difficult to understand why so many have burst under we believe a considerably reduced pressure.
   No blame, of course, can bo attached to Mr. Grove who engineered this work from its start. The Head Works are practically completed with the exception of the conduit on the mountain which, when finished, will tap the farther stteam which is the purer and more [termanent source of supply and will be more generally in use. The recent drought and consequent stoppage of the water- supply has caused much inconvenience and been severely felt by the inhabitants generally who scarcely know where to turn for drinking an I bathing water, emphasizing the fact that the Matang Waterworks when in proper working order will prove the greatest of boons to all classes of the community.
cricket Match.
   Ox the-20th a cricket match “ Out-stations versijs
Kuching” was played in fine w-eathev and before a
large number of ladies and gentlemen. The match
resulted in a draw owing to the plucky stand made
by Messrs. Page-Turner and Johnson for the Out-
stations who succeeded in playing out time.
     Score:
J. M. Bryan
L. E. Slade
G. M. Allman
G. C. Gillan
H. F. Carew-Gibson
Byes etc.
Kuching.
retired
Bow-led Cntfield 1. b. w. B. Pope not out not out
54
13
4
26
1
9
107
   H. II. the Rajah Muda and Messrs. Robison, Gregg, Cunynghame and Stewart did not bat.
Outstations.
II. E. Pope	Bowled Slade	0
P. Gordon-White c. Rajah Muda b.	Slade	3
O. Lang	c. Gillan b. Bryan	7
A. J. Cntfield	b. Bryan	0
H. Bateman	b. Bryan	0
H. Hilton	b. Bryan	0
Ernest Hose	c. Rajah Muda b.	Bryan	3
F. F. Boult	c. Rajah Muda b.	Bryan	1
F. A. W. Page-Turner not out	10
H. 8. B. Johnson	not oift	20
Byes etc.	10
    Croquet Tournament Handicap.
Time Limit •• hours.
First Prize silver cup presented by H. II. the RAJAH. 2nd ., $10 (entrance fees.)
HANDICAP :—
    Mr. H. D. Ellis ... Scratch.
    Lady Cunynghame
    and Mr. C. S. Pearse Receive 2 Bisques. Miss Hose and Mr. Adams	,,	6	,,
    Mrs. Dallas and Messrs.
        Allman, Day arid Blade	,,	7	,,
    Mr. J. H. Brodie ...	,.	10
   The 1st game, both byes, was played on 26th June and was won by Mr. Pearse 24 points r. Miss Hose 22 Points=2 Points.
   2nd game, a non-bye, was played on 29th June, was won by Mr. Ellis 18 Points v. F. G. Day 6 Points=12 Points.
Mr. Day was unable to take more than 4 Bisques.
   3rd game, also a non-bye, on 2nd July was won by Mrs. Dallas 19 Points v. Mr. Allman 16 Points— 3 Points. .
   4th game on 3rd and 4th-July (rain interfering on the 3rd) was won by Mr. Ellis 25 Points v. Mr. Slade, a bye, 9 Points=16 Points.
Mr. Slade could only take 4 Bisques.
   5th game on 5th July, both byes, was won by Mr, Adama 21 Points v. Lady Cunynghame 20 Points=l Point.
   6th game on 6th July was won by- Mr. Brodie, u bye, 15 Points v. Mrs. Dallas 13 Points=2 Points.
   7th game on 8th July was won by Mr. Adams 28 Points (a full game) v. Mr. Brodie 5 Points=23 Points.
Mr. Brodie could only take 4 Bisques.
   8th game on 10th»July was won by Mr. Pearse 28 Points and 1 Bisque in hand r. Mr. Ellis 14 Points= 14 Points and 1 Bisque.
   9th game, and final was played on the 23rd (having been postponed from the 12th, when rain interfered) and was won by Mr. Pearse with 24 points v. Mr. Adams 5=19 points.
   Mr. Adams not having made 14 points was unable to take more than 2 Bisques.
   His Highness the Rajah then presented to the winner a handsome silver cup, the gift of His Highness, amid the cordial applause of the numerous spectators. The tournament was a great success and the handicappers are to be congratulated on the closeness of so many of the matches.
Golf Competition.
   Ox the 24th July a golf competition took place for a cup kindly presented by His Highness the Rajah. The weather was ail that could be desired and His Highness the Rajah and many ladies and gentlemen watched the finish with interest. The result was a tie between Mrs. Dallas and Mr. Bryan and on tossing to decide who should take the cup, Mrs. Dallas was the fortunate winner and His Highness presented her with the trophy.
   The match was for twelve holes against Bogey and the scores were as follows:—
1Mrs. Dallasrec84 downJ. M. Bryanscratch4down3L. E- Sladerec.13ndownf Hon. F. H. Dallasrec.96down1 C. C. Robisonrec.86down6H. A. Adamsrec.137down   1 . IT. the Rajah Muda and Messrs. A. B. Ward, H. B. Crocker, F. F. Boult, H. S. B. Johnson, and G. C. Gillan made no returns.
Mr. bryan’s dance.
   On Thursday evening, 25th July, Mr. J. M. Bryan, Manager of the Borneo Company Limited in Kuching, gave a dance in the Government Lay School. The dance was to have taken place at “Bnkit Mata”, but owing to the unfortunate accident to Mr. Brodie it was found necessary to hold it elsewhere and the School House naturally suggested itself. This had been tastefully decorated with flags and palms, etc; and was divided into a supper and a dancing room, card tables also being provided for those so inclined. The guests began to assemble about 9.30 I*. M. and just before 10 o’clock the strains of the


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 5, 1907.
180
Sarawak Anthem announced the arrival o£His High- ' ness the Rajah, who was accompanied by H. H. The Rajah Muda, The Hon’ble Capt. and Lady Evelyn | Young, the Hon’ble Sir Percy and Lady Cunyng- I hame and Mr. and Lady Rowena Paterson. Other . ladies present were Mrs. Wellington, Mrs. Grove. Miss Hose, Mrs. Hewitt, and Mrs. Brooks from Bidi. Unfortunately Mrs. Dallas was indisposed and unable to be present. -The number of men (whose indulgence I claim for not publishing their names) far exceeded the ladies so that the latter would have had no difficulty in filling their programmes several times over.
   Supper was served about midnight after which His Highness the Rajah and his guests left, and after a few more dances the party broke up. It may be mentioned that the School made an excellent ball room and Mr. Bryan and those who helped him must be congratulated on the success of their arrangements which must have necessitated an immense amount of trouble and supervision.
   Sarawak Rangers Annual Sports.
   The above sports were held in splendid weather on Friday afternoon, the 26th July, on the Fort Cricket ground under the patronage of His Highness the Rajah. The grounds were, as usual, gay with bunting and the surrounding hills were coveted with interested spectators. Their Highnesses the Rajah and Rajah Muda were present, as also our Visitors from Singapore, Captain and Lady Evelyn Young, Mr. and Lady Rowena Paterson, and a large number of Sarawak Residents.
   The Commandant. Mr. S. Cunynghame, assisted by Mr. H. A. Adams and Mr. A. B. Ward, carried through the following programme.
RACE.
2 . -3.00 P.M. Long Jump—1st prize $2.50. 2nd $2.00, 3rd $1.50. IstKayu, 2nd Rengkai, 3rd Matasan.
3 .—3.15 ,, High Jump—1st prize $2.50, 2nd $2.00, 3rd $1.50. 1st Matasan. 2nd Kancbel, 3rd Kayu.
4 .—3.30 „ Putting the shot—1st prize $2.50, 2nd $2.00, 3rd $1.50. 1st Aziinat Ali 22’ 8", 2nd Rengkai, 3rd Sancap.
,A—Hoys' it ace—80 yards, open to all comers living Fort side of river.—1st prize 25 cents, 2nd 15 cents, 3rd 10 cents.
1st Rungah. 2nd Kentol, 3rd
   .	. J Satem.
   ’* * ’ ' ”	|B—Boys' Race—70 yards, for
Rangers’ sons under 10years of age.—1st prize 25 cents, 2nd 15 cents, 3rd 10 cents. 1st Bagie. 2nd Abang, 3rd Jernat.
5.—4.00 „ Pole Jumping—1st prize $2.50, 2nd $2.00, 3rd $1.50. 1st Matasan jumped 71’. 2nd Kancbel. 3rd Rengkai.
(5.—4.15 ,, Veterans' Hat Race—100 yards, open to all ranks over 20years service, 1st prize $2.50, 2nd $2.00. 3rd $1.50. 1st Sgt. Major Cassim, 2nd Sait (I), 3rd Sgt. Major Mann. Cassim won easily.
7 . -4.20 ,. Hurdle Race—150 yards.—1st prize $2.50, 2nd $2.00, 3rd $1.50. 1st Matasan, 2nd Rengkai, 3rd Mujab.
8 .—4.30 ,, Flat Race—100 j-ards.—1st prize $2.50, 2nd $2.00. 3rd $1.50. 1st Dullab, 2nd Sait (IV), 3rd Kancbel.
9 .—4.45 ,, Handicap Flat Race—500 yards.— 1st prize $3.50, 2nd $3.00, 3rd $2.50. 1st Hassan Ali, 2nd Busang, 3rd Makran Singh. A good race the first three being close together.
10 .—5.00 ., Sack Race—100 yards.—1st prize $2.00, 2nd $1.50, 3rd $1.00. 1st Matasan, 2nd Kayu, 3rd Abang Bugler. *
11 .—5.15 „ Best Dressed Dyak—Native Costume.—1st prize $2.00, 2nd $1.50, 3rd $ 1.00. 1st Minggan, 2nd Jam- bah, 3rd Layong.
12 .—5.30 ,, Obstacle Race—1st prize $3.50, 2nd $2.50, 3rd $2.00. 1st Miuggat, 2nd Maluka, 3rd Raah Zudin. The winner well ahead of all the rest. The last obstacle of slippery poles proved to be the principal stumbling block to most of the competitors.
13 .—5.45 ,. Jockey Race—The man carrying boy to be blindfolded. 100 yards straight.—1st prize $2.00. 2nd $1.50, 3rd $1.00. 1st Raah Zudin, 2nd Buiug, 3rd Nawap.
14 .—5.50 ., Consolation Race—100 yards.—1st prize $2.00, 2nd $1.50,’3rd $1.00. 4th 50 cents. 1st Api, 2nd Ayum. (I), 3rd Santap, 4tb Amier.
15 .—6.00 ., Tug of War—Two winning companies of previous heats.—Prize $6.00. Won easily by Sgt. Ba- hadar Ali's team against Sgt. Snbing's team.
Concert and Dance at Astana.
Some eighty persons were the guests of His. Highness the Rajah nt a very successful Concert and Dance held at the Astana on Tuesday evening, the 30th July. The spacious dining room was arranged as a concert Hull and at a quarter past nine the Concert was opened by Mrs. Hewitt' with a piano solo which was much applauded, as indeed were all the items on the programme. Without wishing to single out anyone for special notice where all worked so hard to make the concert a success, it must be said that the arrangements were in the competent hands of Mrs. Dallas, and that Mrs. Wellington’s services as accompanist were invaluable, the greater share of this work falling on her. In response to


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 5, 1907.
hearty and well-deserved applause encores were given by Mrs. Dallas. Mrs. Wellington and Mr. O. Lang, while Miss Sharp, by request, also sang again.
   The following is the full programme as performed : -
Programme.
Piano Solo..........'I nite Hrillinnte’..............Chopin
                         MK». HEWITT
Song	'The Petter Land'	Cowen
                         MISHS SHAM*
Song	'I frar no foe'  	Phuuii
MIL F. F. BOI I-T
Song................'The Shade of the Palm'	Lettie Stuart
MR. H. A. ADAMS
Piano Solo	..'Prelude'			Kachmananoff
                         MRS. WKIXIXOTOX
* Encore:—Papillon........Ed rani Grieg Op. Ch
Song.				'Eelored it it mom'	E. .tyhrard
                         Mas. F. H. DAIXA*
t Encore:—'Two eyex of grey"	
Song	'The Vagabond'...............................
                         Mn. O. LAXO
Song	'Pnmtier of Life'..............Cowen
                         Mlwj C. SHAIU*
Song (Extra)........'Consider the liliet'............................
Miss SHARI*
Song	'The Yeoman's Wedding'	'	
                         Mn. O. LAXC.
( Encore;—'sing me to deep' i
   After the Concert a short programme of eight
dances was got through, which was followed by
supper laid for one hundred persons in the corridor
under the Astana. About one o’clock A. M. the
guests bid good-night to His Highness the Rajah
and took their departure having spent a most enjoy-
able evening at the Astana.
      ••At Home 'at the Esplanade.
THE Hon’ble the Resident and Lady Cunynghame
gave a garden party at the Esplanade on Wednesday
afternoon, the 81st July, which was attended by a
large number of Europeans.
The rain which at one time threatened to spoil the
afternoon held off after a slight sprinkling and did
not interfere with the games which were in progress.
Lady Cunynghame had arranged for certain games
to be played on the lawn for which she had kindly
provided prizes.
The golf croquet match in which only six |iersons
selected by Lady Cunynghame were competing was
won by Mr. J. M. Bryan by one point, the other
competitors being Mrs. Dallas, Miss Hose, Mr.
Pearse, Mr. Lang and Mr. Allman. The prize was
a silver mounted paper knife. Clock golf proved
very popular and was keenly contested, the best score
being Mr. Bryan s with 24 strokes for the 12 holes:
several scores of 25 were recorded. The ground was
rather rough for ‘putting’ but that added to the un-
certainty of the game. Many ladies who had never
had a golf club in their hands returned quite goixl
scores. The winner of this game had his choice l
between a silver mustard pot and a silver perpetual
date stand and chose the former. The third game
must lx* descriljed as ‘table Bowls' and was won by
Mr. E. Parnell who received a silver mounted photo
frame. While Lady Cunynghame was indefatigable
in keeping the guests amused and an eye on the
various games, the Resident was equally assiduous
in looking after the wants of the inner man, and both
can be assured that their efforts were greatly appre-
ciated and that the afternoon passed qj|T most
successfully.
Tennis Tournament.
   His Highness the Rajah having kindly presented
a silver cup for a tennis competition, a tournament
was arranged to take place during July.
   There wore twenty entries and it was decided
that the tournament should take the form of 'dou-
bles’, and a second cup, a duplicate of the one given
by His Highness, was subscribed for and purchased
by the members of the Sarawak Club. The Handi-
capper's were elected by ballot, and the drawings for
partners and the handicaps were;—
G. C. Gillan and H. Adama ...
   L. E. Slade and H. S. B. Johnson
A. J. Cutfield and H. Hannay
.1. M. Bryan and A. B. Ward
II. H. the Rajah Muda and O. Lang
G. M. Allman and F. F. Boult
C. C. Robison and F. H. Dallas
Mrs. Dallas ami Ernest Hose ...
Sir Percy Cunynghame
and F. A. W. PafceTurner ...
W. H. Geikie and S. Cunynghame
owe | 30
do
do
owe 4 15
do
Scratch
do
do
receive | 15
receive 15
The first round resulted as follows: -
   H. S. B. Johnson and L. E. Slade owe 1 30 beat
A. J. Cutfield and II. Hannay owe I 30 6 2, 6—3.
   W. H, Geikie and S. Cunynghame +15 beat Mrs.
Dallas aud E. Hose scr.; 6—2, 6- 2.
The rest Byes.
Second Round:—
   C. C. Robison and F. H. Dalias scr. beat F. F.
Boult and G. M. Allman scr. 3—6, 6—3, 6—3.
   H. S. B. Johnson and L. E. Slade owe 1 30 beat
J. M. Bryan and A. B. Ward owe ' 15, 6- -2, 0—6,
6—3.
W. H. Geikie and S. Cunynghame + 15 heat H. II.
the Rajah Muda and O. Lang owe A 15. 6—4, 6—0.
   G. C. Gillan and H. A. Adams owe | 30 beat Sir
Percy Cunynghame and F. A. W. Page Turner +1
15, 6—0, 5—6, 6—4.
SEMI-FINAL.
   H. S. B. Johnson and L. E. Slade owe A 30 beat
C.C. Robison and F. H. Dallas scr.. 6—1, I—6.6—5.
   W. H. Geikie and S. Cunynghame +15 beat G.C.
Gillan and H. A. Adams owe .1 80, 3—6. 6—2, 6—2.
FINAL.
   W. H. Geikie and S .Cunynghame +15 beat H. S.
B. Johnson and L. E. Slade owe A 30,6—3. G—4.
   We congratulate the winners on a somewhat easy
win and think the handicappers under-estimated
their true strength. We understand that Mr. W. II.
Geikie takes the Rajah’s prize and that the duplicate
cup goes to Mr. S. Cunynghame.
Sarawak Races.
—?—
   THE Races took place in perfect weather on the
27th and 29th instant and were well attended on
both days. Amongst the visitors from Singapore
were the Hon’ble Capt. Young, Colonial Secretary,
Straits Settlements, and Lady Evelyn Young, who
were the guests of the Hon’ble Sir Percy and Lady
Cunynghame, and Mr. and Lady Rowena Paterson
and Mr. W. S. Gibson, the guests of His Highness
the Rajah. The unfortunate accident to Mr. J. II.
Brodie some days before the races, and to which we
allude elsewhere, had cast somewhat of a gloom over
the racing atmosphere and decided Mr. Bryan to give
up all idea of riding his own horse, a decision which
must have been a keen disappointment to him.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 5, 1907.
   It is a matter for great regret that l>oth the Chinese I owned horses Junia and Shy Lass had to be scratched ? and took no part in either day's racing and that a I third horse (Impostor) was totally unfit to be trained and was scratched from all races on the 2nd day. ,
   The course was as usual gay with the colours of native garments but the number of young Malay bujangs who affect European garb on these occasions seems on the increase (is this a sign that the native has improved?).
   Chinese and Malays seem to take more interest in the races year by year and this year their enthusiasm was rather an inconvenience as they swarmed all over the enclosure and paddock at odd times and the few police on duty were quite powerless to keep them in their place. The only remedy for this appears to be to rail in the Grand Stand enclosure and paddock in such a way that the crowd cannot get tinder the railings, and make admission to the Stand by ticket only. This would add to the comfort of those who get up the races and speuc^ their money in providing amusement (sometimes with profit) for others and who surely arc entitled to some consideration.
Ist Hay.
    1ST RACE.—The Sarawak Cup.—Value $200. Presented by His Highness the Rajah. A race for subscription griffins of class A. 14 hands 1 inch to carry 11 stone with an allowance of 31 lbs. for every half inch below 14.1 Entrance fee $10. Distance R. C:
       OWXT.HS. HOMIS. Hgbt*. WOT*. JOCKZTK.
The Upper Sarawak
             Kongo's.. b R Aur .. 14.04.. 10.10). .Mr. Geikin 1 H. H. The Rajah's .. bl in Phantom.. 14.0 ..10. 7 ..Rajak 2 The Upper Sarawak
             KOIIRSI'S. .br m Her . .1I.0J.. 10.10*. .Sallrb 3 Mr.TJ.G. AtU-nboroiigh'M er in Bedclia .. 13.3).. 10. 3)..Sritian 0 Mr. J. M. Uryuu's	Duun . .14.0J.. 10.10J.. Mr.Cutfield 0
   The Upper Sarawak Kongsi's stable was much fancied for this race by the owners and was bought iu by them in the lotteries. Expectations were justified, Aye winning easily by 3 lengths without being pressed, the same distance between second and third. '
    2ND RACE. The Civil Service Cup.—Value $200. A race for subscription griffins of class B 14 hands 1 inch to carry 11 stone with an allowance of 3} lbs. for every 1 inch below 14 1. Entrance fee $10. Distance 1 mile.
OWNEKK.
       HOUSES. Hght*. WOTS. JOCKEYS.
II. H. The Rajah'* ,.bg Boy	..14.4..10.10.J..Riijiik	1
The Upper Sarais nk
             KOIIRBI'H .. b m Sea	.. 18.34.. 10. 84.. Sallvli	2
IL H. The Rajah
              Muda's ..RR Grey Tick. .13.3 . .10. 0 . .Dr. Bruce Low 3
Sir P. Cunynghame
and Mr. J’ E. A. lx-wis' br R Mr. Brou n 13.3J..10.8). .Senmit 0
The Kongsi Ampnt'* .. rg Sign of four 13.21..9.10).. Mr. Cntfield 0
Mr. C. C. Robison's ..bg Importer ..14. )..10.10). .Ahmat 0
   Grey Tick was favourite for this race but Boy won
rather easily by 3 lengths, 7 lengths between second
and third.
3RD RACE. The. B. C. L. Employe's Cup.—Value
$200. Presented by the Employes of Messrs, the
Borneo Co. Ltd. A handicap for subscription grif-
fins of class A- Top weight 11 stone 7lbs. Distance
5 furlongs. Entrance fee $10.
    OWNBU*.	HOUSES. H'CM>. JOCKEYS.
Mr. J. M Bryan *	..RR Dawn	. .10. 0. .Mr. Cutficld	(
Th* Upper Sarawak Kong*!'* b R Ayr	• 'll. 7. .Mr. Geikie
H. H. The Rajah's	. .him Phantom	..10.10. .Rajak	$	I
Mr. L. G. Attenborough** . .erm Bedelia	..10. 0. .Seninn	8
The UpiMT Sarawak Kongai's brm Bee	..10. 7.. Salle h	•*
0
Won by a length and a half, one length between |
second and third. A good race and the result might '
have been different had Mr. Geikie not lost his
stirrups at the commencement of the race. Dawn >
carried 6libs, overweight.
    4TH RACE.—The Padungan Stakes.—Value $150. A handicap for subscription griffins of class B Top weight 11 stone 7 tbs. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance fee $5.
IlWXKlls.
Homies. H'CAP. JOCKEY*.
H. H. The Rajah**	..bg/loy ..11. 7..Rajak	1
H H. Th.Rajah Muda* ..gg Grey Tick .. 9.10..Hiijang	2
Tin-r pt er Sarawak KOURM’S b in Sea	..	10.	7.-Sallch	3
Sir 1*. Cunynghame A
       Mr. J. K. A. Lewis’.. br g Mr. Brown	..	9.	8. .Seman	O
Tin* Kongni Ampat'x .. rg Sign of four	..	9.	3.. Mr. Cntfield 0
Mr. C. C. Robison'* .. b g Import or	..	8.	0.. Ahmat	0
   A close race and only won by a length, half a
length separating second and third.
   Sign of four carried 181bs. overweight, so derived
no benefit from the handicap.
    5TH RACE.—The Fund Cup.— Value $150. A
handicap for subscription griffins of class A. Winners
barred. Top weight 11 stone 7 tbs. Distance 4 fur-
longs. Entrance fee $5.
    OWNER*.	HOKAKM.	H'CAF. JOCKEY*.
The Upper Sarawak Kongsi's .. brrn Ber ..10. 7..Sslleh
Mr. L. G Attenborough'.. .. rr in Bedrlui . .11. 0..Seman
H. H. The Rajah's	..	Mm	Phantom ..11. 7..Rajak
   The Upper Sarawak Kongsi’s stable again success-
ful and justified the faith of the owners who bought
it in the lotteries. Won by a length, the same dis-
tance between second and third.
GTH RACE.—The Sekanta Stakes.—Value $100.
Presented by the Hon’ble F. H. Dallas with $50
added by H. H. Everett Esquire. A handicap for
subscription gri(fitis of class B Winners barred.
Top weight 11 stone 7 lbs. Distance 4 furlongs.
Entrance fee $5.
    OWXF.M.	HOBKES.	H’car. JOCKEY*.
H. H. The Rajuh Muda's ..RR Grry Tick" ’ll. 7. .llajak
Thr KooRai Ampul's . .rg Sign off our.. 9. 0. .Mr. Culfield
The Upper Sarawak Kong*i's .. bin Sea .. 9. 7. .Salleb Sir I*. Ciiiivnghninc ,V
         Mr. J. E.-A. Lewi**. .brgHr.Brown. .10. 3. .Semin
   A Very good race and close finish, the winner being
only half a length ahead, and one length separating
second and third. Sign of four carried 131bs. over-
weight anil but for that might have got home first.
2nd day.
   Rain fell heavily on the Sunday afternoon much to
everyone’s relief: it cleared the air and laid the dust
on the roads and Monday was not qnite so hot. The
Upper Sarawak horses had things all their own way
on the 2nd day. Aye winning three races out of five,
Sea and Bedclia taking the other two.
     1ST RACE. The Towkays Cup.- Value $200.
Presented by the Chinese Merchants of Kuching.
A handicap for Subscription griffins of class B A
winner of two races 1st day barred. Top weight 11
stone. Distance R. C. Entrance fee $10.
OWKBH*.
HOUSE*. H’CAT. JOCKEY*.
The Upper Sarawak KOBRNI'I. bin	Sea ..	9.10. .Sall-li	1
The Kongsi Ampat's .. rg Sign affair..	9.	0. .Mr. Cultlrlil 2
Sir 1'. Cunyngbame A
         Mr. J. E. A. kwls*.. br R	Mr. Brown ..	H.	0.. Rajak	3
H. H. The Rajah Muda's .. gg	Grey Tick . .11.	0..Neman	0
   Signof four was again handicapjied by carrying
1 stone 81bs. overweight. Sea won by a length and
a half; 2 lengths between second and third.
2ND RACE.—The Opium and Spirit Farmer's Cup.
   Value $200. Presented by the Opium and Spirit
Farmer. A handicap for subscription griffins of class
A A winner of two races 1st day barred. Top
weight 11 stone. Distance 1 mile. Entrance fee $10.
HOUSES. H'CAF. JOCKEYS
The Upper Sarawak Kougai's.. b g	Ayr	..11. 0. .Mr. Grikic	1
Mr. J.M. Bryan’a	..	R	R	Dawn	..10. 7...Mr.Cmfiel<]	2
Thr Upper Sarawak Kongsi's.. br ni	Bee	. .10. 7. .Salloh	3
II. H. The Rajah's	.. bl m	Phantom	. .10. 0. .Rajak	0
Mr. L. G. A^en borough's ..erm Bedclia ..9.0..Semen 0
   Won easily by 3 lengths, with Bee third being
pulled up about 5 lengths behind Dawn.


183
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 5, 1907.
   3RD RACE.—The Borneo Company, Limited Cup.— Value $250. Presented by Messrs, the Borneo Company Ltd. A handicap for all horses that have won a race at this meeting. Top weight 11 stone 7 tbs. Distance 5 fnrlongs. A forced entry of 5% of winnings.
*
The rpner Sftnv.vnk
               Kougsi's	..bg	..Ayr	..11. 7..Mr. Geikic	I
Mr. .1. M. Bryan's	.-KR	../burn	.. 9.10..Mr. Culfidd	2
Tb« Upper SarawakKoncai'abrm..Bee .. 9. 7. .Salloh 3 H. H. The Rajah Mada's	. ,g g	. .Grey Tick K 7.. Hujaug	0
H. H. The Rajah's	. .b g	. .Boy	.. 9.10. .Rajak	0
   Won easily by the favourite by half a dozen lengths, the rest following behind. Dawn carried 11 lbs. overweight.
   4TH RACE.—The S. «f S. S. S. Company's Cup.— Value $100.—Presented by Messrs, the S. & S. S. S. Co. Ltd. With $100 added. A handicap for all ponies that have rim at this meeting and have not won a race. Top weight 11 stone. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance fee $10.
OWSKMS.
Mr. L. G. Attenborough's ..cr m..Brrlrlia ..10. 7..Sallrh	1
H. H. The Rajah's	..bl iu..M«>Uo>»..ll. O..Rajak	2
The Kongsi Ampat's . .r . .Sign of four 9. 7. .Mr. Culfleld 3 Sir F. Cunynghame and
        Mr. J. E. A. Lewis', .brg . .Mr. Brown S. 0. .Seman 0
Won by two lengths, about the same distance
separating second and third.
Sign of four carried 1 stone overweight.
Phantom was fancied for this race.
5TH RACE.-— The Ladies' Purse.- Value $150.
Presented by the Ladies of Sarawak. A race for all
subscription griffins. Gentlemen riders only. Patch
weights 11 stone or over. Distance four fnrlongs.
Entrance fee $5. Post Entries.
    Owxr.lts.	Hows. Worn. Jocssn.
The Upper Sarawak Kangxi's b g ..Ayr	.. 11. 0. .Mr. Grikie 1
Mr. J. M. Brvau'a ..gg ..ft«ien . .11. O..Mr. Cutflrid 2 -
H. H. The Rajah Muda's ..gg . -Grey Tick.. 11. 0. .Mr. Robison .'II
H. H. The Rajah's ..b g ..Boy ..11. 0..Mr. Hannay 0 j
Sir F. CniiynghacuH and
       Mr. .1. E. A. Lewis’.-brg..Mr. Broirn.,11. 2..Mr. Ia>»g 0
Thenpper SarawaWEongsi'cbr in..Her	..11. 7..Mr. Grove 0
Mr. L. G. Attenborough's . .cr tn. .Betlrlia . .11. 8. .Mr. Tope u
A procession headed by the winner.
This race was uninteresting from a, racing point of ,
view, being a foregone conclusion, barring accidents, j
for Aye, who won easily by 3 lengths, the same dis- ;
tance separating second and third.
We are indebted to Mr. J. E. A. Lewis for the j
following analysis of the Racing.
           Analysis of Horses*.
1 1st I2nd =3rdI Unplaced.1 Total.Aye11001 5Boy001 21 4Dawn     ••• 1 13 10i 10Grey Tick     ... 1?1 122'6Bedel in- 11 |?I! 46Sea     ... 1 111 31 0? 4Bee..J 1O'31 6Phantom     ... 0221i 5Sign of four ...     ... 0?'12! 5Mr. Brown ...<16156Impostor     ... 000! 2j 211ii11‘ 21' 54Analysis of Owner*.l"‘2nd! 3rd1 Unplaced.Total.Upper Sarawak Kongsi ... H. H. The Rajahi 021 6   115221   4   9J. M. Bryan ...13' H1   ,r>H. LI. The Rajah Muda ...11L.    3   6L. G. Attenborough111 0   4   GKongsi Am pat1 0•’   2   5P. F. Cunynghame and
         J. E. A. Lewis...<11 <>1   6C. C. Robison...01 (10   2   -1 111 111 11' ai! 54           Analysis of Jockeys1st2mlMUnplaced.Total.Mr. W. II. Gcikie , ...41II   0   r>Rajak321 3   210Salleh314   210Mr. A. J. Cutfield11 *5 1I 11 310Soman	...	...011   7   9Bujang010   12Dr. R. Bruce Low001   0 '1Mr. C. C. Robison001   0   IMat	...	...1000   22Mr. Hannay ...(11 (J0   1IMr. i'ope0 ;1 00   11Air. O. Lang ...0 1o(1   1? 1Mr. E. L. Grove0   1111 1111154 ?51WHY SHOULD THE NATIVE IMPROVE ?
   lx the July number of this Gazette there appeared
a long article by an anonymous author entitled 'Does
the native improve.' AVhilst accepting many of the
facts mentioned in that paper we venture to believe
that on the whole he has presented a pessimistic view
of the case and this must be our excuse for the fol-
lowing remarks which arc offered us a supplement
to those of Mr. G. L. T. We shall try to shew that
improvement of the kind mentioned by that author
is'neither necessary nor desirable and that improve-
ment of any kind must of necessity be ve y gradual
and slow even as it has been with ourselves. In
dealing with this question it would lie well to be
quite clear on the following points.
   (1) What we mean by improvement? (2) In what
respects there is need for improvement ? (3) To what
extent the European community has furthered the
end in view ?
   We are not quite sure what the writer actually did
mean by improvement as he cleverly‘adduces a mass
of instances,chiefly of mechanical operation, to shew
that in many respects a native instinctively chooses
to work in a manner which to Europeans is unusual
or even absurd : and we me almost led to infer that
a native ‘improves’ when, leaving the time-worn
method of bis forefathers, he adopts a recent intro-
duction of Europeans. If we expr< -s Mr. G. L. T's
meaning in general terms we suppose it would be
that a native improves when, recognising a superiori-
ty in the methods of his neighbours, he modifies his
own in the same direction. But it is not quite ob-
vious in such instances as the author cites that there
is any real superiority m the European’s methods, or
that the native has obstinately refused to adopt them
and yet is conscious of the failings of bis own.
   Tlie same meaning for improvement persists when
the writer shews how readily the native turns to his
own medicine man in times of need, rather than to
the foreigner's doctor. Here again we would ask
whether it has ever been clearly demonstrated to the


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 5, 1907.
184
community as a whole—outside Kuching and Banting—that white man's tibat is any better than that of the native, or, as the Milano would put it, that the English doctor’s spirit is stronger than the familiar spirit of his own dukun. We fancy that an unbiased person would agree with the native that white man's ubat—again I except the above-mentioned places has not been invariably successful. The native thoroughly believes in the efficacy of lymph of katjput oil, of santonin and of Iodine, but he has no reason for supposing that the white man can cure all his ills. Why then should he desert his own professional dukun, who Assisted by the great healer Dame Nature has effected many a cure, to seek aid from a stranger?
   Later on the writer shews how reluctant is the average native to do anything for the general good, mentioning the case of a stream blocked by a fallen log over which for months and months dozens of natives will drag their boats when all this trouble might have been avoided had the first man been wise eui	the log: herein is indicated what we
believe to be a better meaning for the word, as the gradual devil. mini nt of a nubile spirit must be ci mured an improvement by all. Hut. as mentioned later on, an Esprit de. corps extending beyond the limits of his own house was a sentiment quite impossible to the Dayak of several generations ago. and can we expect them to develop it in so short a time, especially as we remember that their social organisation of today «is stiil very weak.
   We. would like to ask the writer what kind of changes really would improve these interesting people. At the present time in the Sea Dayaks w< nave a delightfully simple state of society which we as products of the highest civilisation may well envy ; they have no artificial grading into classes which have no sympathy with each other and of which the largest class, as amongst ourselves, toils unceasingly to provide the necessaries of life for themselves, at the same time also providing for another more petted class the luxuries of life. If there were any prospect of a serious struggle for existence due to foreign competition or ro a large increase in they- own population, then it might be necessary for specialisation and for a division of labour in the community: but. seeing that the land can for generations provide well for its people and seeing that the stale of society which almost invariably results from such specialisation -a grading into classes of which the largest one is oppressed— brings no more happiness with it because it imposes on many a struggle for existence and on many more a dependence on the luxuries of civilisation, it does not seem desirable to us that they should ‘improve’ in this direction. They are happy, honest, comparatively industrious and well to do and this we think is a goal to which civilisation docs not necessarily lend. At the same time, however, we must admit that in some directions there is room for improvement, especially in the treatment of their own bodies. If we could teach the Sea Dayaks the simplest rules of hygiene and of temperance in a wide sense of the word their lot might become an enviable one. But how long has it taken the product of so many centuries of European civilisation to learn the very rudiments of hygiene—I will not mention temperance. Do not crowds of our own countrymen shut up their houses to keep out the draught and sunshine—lest the carpets fade, forsooth !—and do they not delight in the thick atmosphere of a railway carriage redolent with smoke and foetid breath : ami in the Western Isles men sufficient to populate a thousand long-houses herd together in hovels not less wretched than those occupied by the poorer native. And while Mr. G. L. T. laments “that natives carefully shut up"
"everything evento the mousehole dignified by the" "name of a window." we would reply that the lesson which has taken us tin long to learn will not be accepted by the native in one or two generations.
   Again Mr G. L. T. contends that these people have not improved in proportion to what has been done for them and that any improvement which has occurred is very superficial. But we would like to ask what has been done by the European community as a whole to promote the end in view? Has it not been part of a wise policy to avoid pressure in these directions so long as peace and comfort prevails amongst the people; and as the Englishman is regarded as quite a different and superior being, the force of his example only does not induce them to copy him in every respect; and taking into account also the smallness of the European community and the scattered condit ion of the natives it is not strange that they have made so little 'progress’.
   A very important factor, perhaps the greatest, for or against the ‘progress’ of these people is their religion. So long as the Dayak thinks that all his misfortunes and sicknesses are the work of evil spirits so long will he turn to his own medicine man for good luck, he will regard omens and he will scare away the rats from Ins padi field by means of a
i
Observance of the laws of his religion involve th ? loss of much valuable time often at a critical stage of his agricultural operations, ami to the native religion is a very real part of his daily life.
   We cannot expect any change in his mode of thought unless w.e provide him with a better religion. Another factor against ‘improvement’ is the lack of internal organisation in the Community which alone has prevented the sea Dayaks from dominating the whole island. Thanks to Europeans they are now in a much better condition in this respect than they ever were. Under an able administration the chaotic position of innumerable petty parties kept apart by blood feuds handed down from posterity has by pacific methods given place to o.:e of peace and comparative prosperity. At the present day this country stands almost alone as a happy land where its natives, on the whole, do not know the meaning of ‘the struggle for existence,’ and so long as this holds good it is well for the Dayak not to know the burden of civilisation!
   It is true that in certain parts of this country—- amongst the Milanos—the natives are subjected to considerable competition from the immigrant Chinese, to the disadvantage of the Milano, and we fancy that their iot would not be bettered if any attempt weie made to improve them in the direction of the writer of the article under discussion : in their case, owing perhaps to an inherent incapacity, their salvation must be looked for not from themselves but in a judicious protection on the part of the governing powers.
   On the other hand the Kuching Malays afford a strong case in contradiction of the generalisations of Mr. G. L. T. Their case, too, is complicated by their religion and by the fact that they had some generationsago a certain civilisation : they have thus run themselves into a groove and are not so free to modify their methods as are the Dayaks. And yet it is obvious to any person who has ever seen the Malays of Kuching that during the period of European influence there has been a very considerable improvement along the lines of ordinary civilisation. They certamlj have learnt to become clever artisans, they do possess a good public spirit and there is a condition of content and even affluence such as could never have been without a guiding hand. They are not bubbling over with energy—as we are!—and their estimate of the relative importance of events— see Mr. G. L.T. on their calmness during emergen


185
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 5, 1907.
cies and excitement on trivial things—is not the same as ours, but these characteristics belong to a temperament which will be hknded down to posterity and which no external influence can permanently alter.
   One might take exception also to some of the statements put down by Mr. G. L. T. as general facts; for instance, the manner of holding a hammer and the treatment of a picture : but perhaps these facts dp hold good for a particular district and we rather suspect that herein lies the explanation of our author's pessimism, that he has limited his view to one small area where perhaps the native is particularly Conservative. We recognise much that is good in his remarks and as they clearly present internal evidence of a profound acquaintance with the life of his natives they should not be hastily rejected. To summarise in concluding—we believe that the Sarawak natives are happy and comfortable: that therefore the less civilised have no need to improve on the lines of ordinary civilisation but would do well to learn the simplest rules cf health : that there has not been the time fora mere handful of Englishmen—who are here to govern and protect—to effect I important changes of this kind amongst so large and widespread a country of people: and finally, that nevertheless, where natives who already are on the path of civilisation have come into real contact with Europeans, as in Kuching, they have distinctly risen.
J. H.
   (The Editor is not responsible for the opinions expressed by his correspondents.)
        Does the Native improve.
To
The Editor,
        Sarairak Gazette.
   DE AB SIR,—The title of G. L. T’s article in your last issue is very misleading. Had he headed it “why does the Native do things differently from the European" one could have understood it. G. L. T. might as well write an article “Does the Frenchman improve" and proceed to show that he does not do so because his rule of the road is opposite to ours and he prefers frogs to roast beef, absinthe to beer and has no cricket championship even in this XXth century.
   On reading G. L. T’s article it is rather difficult to find out in what particulars he considers the natives ought to have improved. He puts out of court their advancement politically, by which I presume he means the advantages they enjoy under the Sarawak flag as compared with the old days of Malay rule, and simply mentions certain habits of theirs which are opposed to European ways of doing things. The facts, if facts they are, which he cites simply show that they do a few things differently from Europeans but does not prove that they are done wrongly or in a worse manner
   It was no doubt unfortunate that when G. L. T. waved the native to the right he should have gone to the left and thus got in G. L. T’s way when about to shoot the snipe he had marked down, but presuming G. L. T. is fit to carry a gun one cannot see that it was “obviously” to the native’s benefit to go to the right, and G. L. T., having relieved his feelings with a few uu-improvable big “Ds”, might have spared us the recital cf his wrongs. Further, it does not seem to have struck G. L. T. that if every native goes to the right when waved to the left and vice-versa, it would be simpler for him to
follow the native custom when waving instead of trying to educate ail the |>eople of his district to follow his.
Again, with reference to trimming boats with their bows rather more down than we should, has it ever been proved that this may not lie better than the reverse way considering the length, shape and weight of the boats and that they are steered with paddles and not rudders. It is faintly possible that the native who has used these boats since early boyhood knows more about them than your contributor. At the same time, except in racing boats. I very much doubt if natives do trim their boats by the head as a rule. Of course, when G. L. T. is travelling by boat, no doubt his boat, may be a bit down by the head and he puts that down to native stupidity, but docs he remember that he himself occupies about one third of the length of the boat with his ‘cabin,’ in which only himself lies, and that the whole crew with the exception of two steersmen are in the front portion of the boat and have to remain there whatever they may think ps to the correct trim.
Again, as to mediciyes. I have n t as much faith in the Outstation Officer in the capacity of doctor as your contributor. About the only medicines to be safely entrusted to him are quinine and such things as cough and stomach mixture, all highly appreciated by the native. It is, however, hardly strange that the native should, if living in the interior of Borneo, not think it worth while to travel several days, when ill, to interview a white man, who, after hearing the report of bis complaint, will probably tell him he does not know what is the matter with him, and so he cannot justly be blamed for calling in “Ma Meriatfl”.
The writer of the article remarks that “a few real “changes for the better might at least have been “hoped for in matters that one would think were to “them very obviously beneficial" but none of the examples cited by him can have struck any native us very obviously to his advantage, as they certainly have not so struck the present writer, who, much though he envies the facility with which G. L. T. has poured out a flood of ink and words on matters of the very least importance to anyone, will at least endeavour not to follow his example^too closely.
Yours faithfully,
SILLY SEASON.
Monthly Notes
July.
OUR Race week visitors include the Hon’ble Capt. Young, Colonial Secretary of the Straits Settlements, and Lady Evelyn Young; Mr. Graham Paterson, Head of Messrs. Paterson, Simons <fc Co. Sarawak Government Agents in Singapore, and Lady Rowena Paterson, and Mr. W. S. Gibson of the Chinese Protectorate, Singapore.
His Highness the Rajah Muda is kindly presenting two prizes of the value of $50 and $25 respectively for a Bowling Handicap to be rolled off at the Club on Saturday evening, the 3rd August.
After the competition His Highness is entertaining the competitors to supper in the Club.
ON the 1st p. s. Adeli arrived from Baram.
ON the 2nd s. s. Rajah of Sarawak sailed for Singapore. Passengers, Messrs. R. Mit


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 5, 1907.
186
chell and C. A. Bell. The same day s. s. Alien I Lorraine returned from Sibu bringing Mr. A. J. I Cutfield.
   ON the 4th p. s. Adeh sailed for Brooketon and Limbang, vid Sadong. Passenger to Brooketon, Mr. 11 E. Pope. S. 8. Alice Lorraine also left for Sibu; passengers, Sister 1 Peter and Mrs. J. Mowc.
   The same day s. s. Kuching arrived from Singapore with passenger, Mr. A. S. Hitchcock.
   By this trip of the s. s, Kuching the first Motor car arrived in this country, imported by Mr. J. M. Bryan. Manager of the Borneo Company Limited. We know nothing about Motor cars but are informed that tins one is a 10—12 H. P. Coventry Humber; it has seating capacity for two with a platform at the back for luggage and is altogether a neat and smart looking little car.
   THE S. s. Sarawak sailed forBiutuluon the 5th ami the p. s. Kaka returned from Singapore on the 7th after docking.
   ON the 9th s. s. Kuching sailed for Singapore with passengers, Messrs. H. R. A. Day. F. G. Day ami J. Boyd. Mr. H.R. A. Day has gone home on eight months furlough.
S. S. Sarawak from Bintnlu this day.
T. S. Kaka sailed for Baram on the 10th.
   ON the 11th s. s. Rajah of Sarawak arrived from Singapore with passenger, Mr. H. F. Hilton. The same day p. s. Adeh returned from Limbang with passenger. Mr. IL E. Pope.
   THE final of the Croquet tournament was to have been played on the 12th between Mr. Pearse and Mr. Adams, but rain interfered and the match was postponed.
   S. S. Sarawak sailed for‘Oya on the 14th. Passengers, the Revd. Fathers Stotter and Mulder.
   His Highness the Rajah accompanied by Dr. and Mrs. Wellington left for Lingga and Simanggang in H. H. S. Y. Zahora on the 15th. His Highness remained the night at Lingga and with Dr. and Mrs. Wellington proceeded upriver by boat to Fort Alice, Simanggang, the following morning.
   ON the 15th p. s. Adeh sailed for Brooketon and Limbang with passenger, the Rev. Father A. Mulder for Brooketon. The same day Mr. F. F. Boult arrived by boat from Lundu.
   THE s. s. Rajah of Sarawak sailed for Singapore on the 16th and the p. s. Kaka returned from Baram.
   The same day s. s. .1//<?<.• Lorraine arrived from Sibu vid Lingga. Passengers—Messrs. H. S. B. Johnson, F. A. W. Page-Turner, and the Revd. A. Hopfgartner.
ON the 18th the s. s. Kuching arrived from Singapore and s. s. Sarawak from Oya.
S. S. Alice Lorraine sailed for Sibu vid Lingga on the 19th. The Right Revd. Bishop Hose took passage by her to Lingga.
Uis Highness the Rajah returned from Simanggang vid Sadong on the 20th. His Highness was accompanied by Dr. ami Mrs. Wellington, and also gave a passage in the. Zahora to Kuching to Messrs. D J. S. Bailey, O. Lang, P. Gordon White and E. R. Naysmith.
A Cricket Match Kuching vs. Outstations” was played on the Fort ground on the afternoon of the 20th, an account of which appears elsewhere.
ON the 21st p. s. Adeh arrived from the North with passengers, Messrs. Ward and Vivian.
The Tennis Tournament for a silver cup presented by H. H. The* Rajah commenced this day. The result of the tournament will be found in another column.
ON Monday afternoon, the 22nd, Their Highnesses The. Rajah and Rajah Muda were “At Home" at the Astana. The Band of the Sarawak Rangers played selections of music in the grounds in front of the Astana. The ii -ual attendance was much increased by the number of Outstation Officers present in Ku- ch ihg for the “Races.
S. S. Kuching sailed for Singapore on the 23rd with passengers, Mr. and Mrs. H. D. Ellis, Mrs. Waddell and Mr. Hilton.
Mr. and Mrs. Ellis leave Sarawak after ten years spent here. A very large number of Europeans including many ladies, the Datus ami theii- families and a number of Chinese towkays and others went on board to say ‘goodbye’ and heap good wishes, in which we join, on Mr. and Mrs. Ellis. There was also a great demonstration on the wharf rs the steamer moved away.
ON the 23rd the s. 1. Young Harry left for Sadong with Mr. E. R. Naysmith, and the p. =. Kaka sailed for Sibu and Baram with passenger, the Very Revd. Father E. Dunn.
The final round in the Croquet Tournament was played this day and was won by Mr. C. S. Pearse, whom we congratulate on having won the silver cup presented by H. H. The Rajah.
IT is with the greatest regret that we have to record that Mr. J. H. Brodie is laid up with a broken leg. On the morning of the 23rd Mr. Brodie was riding round the race course on Hl H. the Rajah Muda’s griffin, Grey Tick, in company with several other horses, when one of the latter got out of hand and forced Grey Tick against the railings, crushing Mr. Brodie’s leg and eventually causing him t > be thrown. At time of writing we understand


187
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGFST 5, 1907.
that Mr. Brodie is progressing as well as can be expected. He has the sympathy of all in Sarawak and their wishes for his speedy recovery.
   THE golf handicap for a cup presented by H. H. The Rajah played this day. the 24th. resulted in a victory for Mrs. Dallas and Mr. J. M. Bryan, who tied. The cup eventually went to Mrs. Dallas.
   Ox the 25th the s. s. Kuching arrived from Singapore with passengers—Capt. and Lady Evelyn Young and maid, Mr. and Lady Rowena Paterson and maid, Messrs. W. S. Gibson. F. G. Day, E. H. Williams, Roebelen and Bell.
   Mr. Bryan gave a dance at 9.80 the same evening at the Government Lay School, a short account of which we publish elsewhere.
   The Annual General Meeting of the Sarawak Club was held in the Club House at G r. M. this day, the 25th, at which there was a very large attendance.
   THE Sarawak Rangers Annual Sports were held pn the Fort Ground on the afternoon of the 26th.
P. S. Adeh sailed this day (26th) for Singapore.
   SATURDAY, the 27th, was the first day of the Races, an account of which will be found in another column.
   We are sorry to record that Mrs. Grove, with her little daughter Joyce, while on their way to the Racecourse in a rickshaw, were upset and Mrs. Grove sustained an injury to her arm which has caused her much pain ami prevented her from attending the Races on the 2nd day. Our little friend Joyce fortunately escaped unhurt. We are glad to say Mrs. Grove’s arm is nearly all right again.
   Tn order- to amuse our Singapore visitors the Commandant. Mr. Stuart Cunynghame, arranged for an entertainment to be given on the Fort parade ground on Saturday the 27th, at 9.30 p. M. The programme consisted of Dyak dancing and Indian juggling and concluded with a “Torchlight Tattoo” by the Indian contingent of the Rangers. The Rangers’ Band was in attendance and played during thee vening. H. H. The Rajah Muda was present throughout the performance together with a large number of guests from both sides of the river.
   THE second day of the Races took place on the 29th commencing at 3.30 p. M.
   HIS Highness the Rajah entertained some eighty guests at a Concert followed by a Dance and supper at the Astana on Tuesday evening, the 30th.
   ON the 31st the s. s. Rajah of Sarawak sailed for Singapore. Passengers, Capt. and Lady Evelyn Young and maid, Mr. and Lady Rowena Paterson and maid, Messrs. W. S.
Gibson, R. Pawle, Roebelen and the Revd. Father Heyden.
   His Highness the Rajah accompanied by H. H. the Rajah Muda left for Matang in the Zahora on the 31st to pay a visit of inspection to the Waterworks there. Messrs. 11. F. Carew-Gibson and E. L. Grove also, walked out along the road in order to meet The Rajah at M::tang.
   THE Hon’ble Sir Percy and Lady Cunynghame gave a garden party in the Esplanade grounds on Wednesday afternoon, the 31st. Mr. Bryan says it was a great success. (So do we, Ed.).
   The final match in the tennis tournament was also played off at the Club this same afternoon. We congratulate Mr. W. H. Geikie and Mr. Stuart Cunynghame on their victory.
   CONGRATULATIONS to Mr. G. Pratt Barlow.
   We learn that a marriage has been arranged and will take place in November between Mr. G. Pratt Barlow, late of the Sarawak Service, son of General Pratt Barlow of 4 Park Street, Bath, and Ethel, youngest daughter of the late Revd. J. H. Gale (late Vicar of Milton Lilbourne, Wiltshire,) and of Mrs. Gale of 40 Combe Park, Bath.
   THE Printing Office was entered by thieves on the night of the 2nd August and a clean sweep made of all ths brass composing sticks, rules, etc. From the nature of the theft there is no doubt that it was committed by a man lately working as a prisoner in the Printing Office. The loss of this property proved a serious temporary inconvenience to the work of the Office, but fortunately with the assistance of the Police a part of the stolen things were promptly recovered from various brass- smith’s shops and we hope to be able to execute all orders in due course, but are afraid there will be some little delay.

Medical Report. Matang
.
—?—
Sarawak. July 23rd, 190?.
   RAJAH. 1 have the honour to place before Your Highness the following account of my visit to Matang.
   1 left Kuching on Thursday morning in the Young Harry and arrived at Matang about five in the afternoon.
   The Manager of the Estate called on me that evening and arrangements were made for the Coolies to be mustered early the following morning.
   Early Friday morning 1 inspected the Coolies of which there were ninety-five. All with the exception of six were in excellent health. Of this six, one was suffering from a relapse of Beri-beri, and the rest from various grades of anaemia probably the result of infection by ankylostomes. They were not seriously ill, but as each case was a source of danger to his companions I ordered that they should


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 5, 1907.
188
be sent to the General Hospital at Kuching for
treatment.
   There were no complaints.
   The different coolie lines were now visited in
turn. The houses are substantially built and being
situated on the side of the bill have good drainage.
   Very little provision has been made for either
ventilhition or light, the only opening into each
room is a low door. There are no windows.
   Owing to the darkness I was unable to make an
adequate examination of the interiors, but the im-
pression received was that they were not very clean.
   All the lines have an abundant supply of water of
?excellent quality.
   T saw the tea factory and the coffee-husking mill,
both were clean and well kept. The latter is situated
above and to the right of the new reservoir.
   The water used in the prqcoss after passing
through the mill is collected, enters a concrete drain
and discharges into the stream below the dam.
There is thus no possibility of the water in the
reservoir becoming contaminated by it.
   The water works now engaged our attention. It
so happened that Mr. Grove was present and he very
kindly showed me over the works and explained
matters. The Inst few pipes connecting the reservoir
with the main pipe line were just being laid.
   The reservoir which has a capacity of three and a
half million gallons receives its supply from several
-small streams, one of which drains a portion of the
-coffee estate. As this portion has never been
manured and never will be, and as no coolie lines
4irc situated on it, this in itself is no objection.
   The coffee-mill however is situated just above,
-and coolies are working there. The drainage as
before mentioned cannot affect the drinking water.
But the coolie himself is not always very careful,
and there is thus a risk, and one which ought to he
seriously considered, of the adjacent ground being
soiled by human excrement. The first heavy rain
would wash this into the reservoir.
   The water from the reservoir will only be used in
-case of emergency. Ordinarily Kuching will receive
none of it, but will get its supply* from a stream one
and a half miles away. This water which is
?collected from virgin jungle will he conducted by an
open concrete channel and will be discharged into
the Kuching main direct. For three quarters of a
mile this channel is complete and Mr. Grove assured
me that in a short time the remainder will be in a
finished state.
   I left Matang on Saturday morning and reached
Kuching in the afternoon.
I have the honour to be,
Rajah,
Your Highness’ most obedient Servant.
A. R. WELLINGTON,
Medical Officer.
Antimony at Baram.
lit h July, 1907.
   RAJAH,—I have the honour to inform Your High-
ness that on June 29th I started up-river in s. 1. La
Fee accompanied by Tuanku Hamid the native officer
and the ten coolies engaged by Your Highness to
open the antimony at Long Plutan.
   We arrived at Long Atun Paillan the place where
the antimony is situated on July 3rd and I immediate-
ly proceeded with Wahap (the mandor) and Abun
Wat a Kaywn to inspect the place.
   The spot where the antimony is to be found is
situated on a hill bordered by the Plutan Paillan on
two sides.
   On July 4th the coolies started work at two
separate parts of the hill, but ultimately had to stop,
as they came upon hard rock, upon which the pick
axes made no impression. They then opened up a
large hole made by Mr. Everett and after digging
away for some time came upon the antimony. It
appears to be very good quality, but I cannot state
for the present whether this antimony is to be found
in a very large quality. Having found this lode, they
dug another hole, but up to the time of my return tor
Claudetown they had not arrived at a sufficient depth
to reach the antimony.
   The lode which they found was at a depth of 3
fathoms or more perhaps as much as 4 fathoms.
   I am glad to say that the gelignite has arrived
and I am forwarding it to Wahap, as without ex-
plosives their work will progress very slowly. I beg
to inform Your Highness that in the holes which we
just opened Wahap said there ought to be antimony
lower down on account of the nature of the soil.
Should his statements prove correct, there ought to
be a large quantity, of antimony.
   I beg to thank Your Highness, for Your letter
granting permission to the Kampar Dyak; to work
antimony ami to note Your Highness’ conditions.
   I beg moreover to state that I am sending Your
Highness a few specinlens of the antimony per Ban-
dong of the Kaku.
   I was four days at Long Atun Pa:ilan and re-
turned to Claudetown after an absence of 11 days.
T. S. KING,
Assistant Resident.
POLICE AND PRISON DEPT.,
Kuching, April 22nd, 1907.
   Sui,—I have the honour to make the following report for the Police and Prison Department for the half year ending December 31st 1906.
PRISON.
   Crime.—During the half year two hundred and | tiirce (203) persons were sentenced to various terms i of imprisonment as against one hundred and fourteen (114) for the corresponding period in'1905.
   Nationality of Criminals.—Having regard to the nationality of criminals there were sentenced as under:—
         Chinese	114
         Malays	35
         Indians	30
         Dyaks	12
         Javanese	7
         Milanuus	5
203
   Nature of Crime.—The following table shows the


189
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 5, 1907.
number of sentences inflicted under each head :—
    Theft	...	...	59
    Absconding in debt	...	30
    Contempt of Court	...	25
    Military offenders	...	,21
    Assault	...	...	13
    Miscellaneous ...	...	12
    Gang Robbery ...	...	9
    Obtaining goods on false pretences 6
    Breach of Police and Prison Regulations 5
    Breach of Trust and Contract	-1
    Illicit sale of pepper ...	3
    Breach of Prostitutes Regulations	3
    Intimidation	»..	...	2
    Trespass	...	...	2
    Burglary	...	...	2
    Robbery with violence	...	1
    Illicit gambling	...	...	1
    Receiving stolen property ...	1
    Fighting	’	...	1
    Impersonation	...	...	1
    Wilful damage	...	...	1
    Smuggling	...	...	1
203
Gaol State.—
    In Gaol July 1st 1906 Criminals 144
    Entered in half year	...	203
    Recaptured ...	...	1
348
In Gaol December 31st 1906 Criminals 139
Discharged in half year ...	196
Died 2. Escaped 3. Transferred 8.	13
348
   Escaped Prisoners. Three prisoners effected their escape during the half year, one (Chin Fook) breaking out of the Gaol latrine during a heavy rain storm. The remaining two escaped during their employment on the River Wall. Their sentences were 10 years, 6 months and 3 months respectively.
   Recaptured Prisoners.—One of the above. Chiu Fook, who was serving a sentence of 10 years when he escaped, was recaptured at Paku after having been away one month and eight days. This is the second occasion that he has escaped and been recaptured.
•July to December 1906.
Health of Prisoners. - Daily grand average of prisoners excluding those awaiting trial ...	...	138’45
Daily grand average of prisoners sick 22’37 Do percentage ...	1616
July to December 190b.
Daily grand average of prisoners excluding those awaiting trial	131’00
Daily grand average of prisoners sick 25 01 Do do percentage 19’09
   Giving a decreased percentage of sick of 11’94 as compared with 1905.
   Lunatics.—The number of lunatics in detention is such that the ground floor is entirely occupied with them, and the Gaol accommodation is greatly curtailed in consequence.
   Judicial Execution.—There was no judicial execution during the half year.
   Conduct of prisoners.—Has been fair, the most noticeable breaches of regulations being attempts to bring food and tobacco into Gaol.
   The prisoners working in Gaol have given no trouble.
   Profit and Loss A/c.—The following figures form a comparative statement of the value of prison labour and sale of articles made in Gaol.
            Dr.	Cr. *
To value of 16,913 incn’a labour
                 20 cents	By cost of Provisions $3,132.03
„	..	Baskets sold	1,M'S.64	..	Working Materials	1.616.94
           (foods aohl	909.60	..	(fool upkeep and
Ctunenlilig 89.33
           Gaol refuse sold	12.00	..	Fire-wood	14;1.3S
,.	Prison clothing sold	182.35	,.	Tobacco mid Boko	47.91
      Debtor’s diets recovered 203.96 .,	Kerosene oil	87.80
,.	Sundries	11.03
.,	Knjmign	9.48
.,	Tin Plates	13.20
..	Cocoatiut oil	9.00-
..	Soap	6.12
Paid Labour	19.20
Warders' pay	735.71
Value of men's labour on
goods 149.10 .. baskets 585.00
           [kbit Balance 039.26
$6,915.21	$6,915.21
• This represent!, the money {mid out by Government at $3n month to the wives and families offoorking debtors.
   The debit balance during the half year, although amounting to the sum of $689.26 is practically done away with by the fact that at the end of the year the value of the unsold baskets in stock amounted to $679.12—thus reducing the debit balance to $9.34.
POLICE.
Strength of Force.— In the force July 1st 1906. 161
Enrolled during half year. 17
178
    In the force on December 31st, 190(5. 162
    Dismissed the force	...	4
    Discharged at own request	...	9
    Discharged through ill health	...	1
    Unfit for Police duty	...	2
178
   Composition of Force.— The composition of the- force was as under on December 31st, 1906.
           Sergeant Major	...	1
           Sergeants	...	...	4
           Lance Sergeants	...	4
           Corporals	...	...	7
           Lance Corporals	...	13
           Constables	...	...	133
   Disposition of Force.—From the above strength there were detailed for Outstations as under on- December 31st, 1906.
L. Sergt. Carp. L. Corp. C'utablm. Total.
Upper Sarawak, Bau
Do Paku 1
Lundu
Sadong and Mine
Segobang ...
Santubong ...
Special Works
1

2	8	49	60
   Leaving one hundred and two (102) men available for duty at Head quarters, of which eighteel) being N. C. Os. the actual number of P. Cs. available is 84.
   Conduct of Force.—Four (4) men in all have been dismissed the Force during the half year. Two Malays, one Sikh and one Mahommedan Indian.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 5, 1907.
190
   The following are the charges against the men dismissed
        , Unfit for Police duty	2
General misconduct	2
                    4 z
   Nationality of Force.—As regards nationality there were in the Force on December 31st 1906.
Malays 77
Indians 85
162
   The conduct of the Police lias been good on the whole. The Indians, as their knowledge of the language increases, promise to become useful men and since some few who have recently joined the Force have had a previous military career with good characters, they may perhaps tend to add to the intelligence and smartness of th<? Force.
   Vacancies are kept for suitable Malays, but they are slow in offering themselves, and of those who ?offer themselves many have to be turned away ns under sized: some of the Police both Malay and Indian have a useful knowledge of Chinese in addition to Malay.
   The Non-Commissioned Officers have throughout given satisfaction, and those last promoted have justified their selection for promotion.
   Police Court.—-During the half year three hundred and two (302) cases were brought by the Police and two hundred and seventy six (276) convictions obtained.
LICENSES AND REGISTRATIONS.
   Alligators.—One hundred and forty-three (143) alligators were destroyed during the half year with a total measurement of 394'.4" fpr which rewards were paid to the amount of one hundred and forty •one dollars and ninety-six cents (S141.96) as against sixty two (G2) measuring 302'.1" and costing one hundred and nine dollars and sixty-two cents ($109.62), this sum includes the price of 29 eggs for the same period in 1905.
   lambangs.—Four hundred and thirty-two (432) lam bang licenses were issued during the half year as against three hundred and ninety-nine (399) for the same period during 1905.
   Hawkers,—Three hundred and forty-three (343) hawkers' licenses were issued during the half year as against three hundred and twenty-one (321) for the same period in 1905.
   Jinrickshaws.— Two hundred and tbirty-nine(239) jinrickshaw licenses were issued during the half year as against two hundred and sixty-nine (269) for the same period in 1905.
   Goldsmiths.—One hundred and five (105) goldsmiths’ licenses were issued during the half year as against one hundred and forty-three (143) for the same period in 1905.
   Public House.—Forty-four (44) public house licenses were issued during the half year as against forty-two (42) for the same period during 1905.
   Bullock Carts.—Thirty-seven (37) bullock cart licenses were issued during the half year as against thirty-four (34) for the saiue period in 1905.
   Hand Carts,—Thirty (30) hand carts were registered during the half year as against one (1) for the same period during 1905.
Stall Holders.—Thirty-five (35) stall holders licenses were issued during the half year as against sixty-six (66) for the same period in 1905.
Dog.—Forty-seven (47) dog licenses were issued during the half year as against eight (8) for the same period during 1905.
Butchers--There was no butcher license issued during the half year as against one (1) for the same period in 1905.
Prison labour.—Appended hereto I have the honour to furnish the usual return showing the distribution of Prison labour during the half year.
I have the honour, to be
Your obedient servant,
H. A. ADAMS, Superintendent of Police Prisons.

5 x g






THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 5, 1907.
Military.
ORDERLY ROOM, SARAWAK RANGERS, Kuching, July 8th, 1907.
   RAJAH,—I have the honour to subnfit to Your Highness my report on the Military Department for half year January to June 1907.
   Strength of the Regiment.—Dorin*; the past six months twenty three' recruits have joined 52 men renewed their agreements and 44 men left.
   Of these 20 men took their own discharges 8 men were discharged medically unfit and 1G men discharged on account of had conduct or insertion total on duty—442 men.
   Health.—There has been no serious illness in the Rangers during the period under review. In accordance with the wishes of the Principal Medical Officer nearly all the men now at headquarters have lieen vaccinated and in most cases the vaccination has I am told lieen a complete success.
   Arms and Ammunition.—We have at present in Armoury and use pt headquarters the following. Snider Rifles 443, Snider Carbines 238, Sword Bayonets GOO, Ammunition Snider Ball Cartridges 12,770, Snider Blank‘Cartridges-3,770, we also have about 4.000 rounds ball ammunition*returned to us from outstations damaged and this I wish to use (or target practice as soon as opportunity offers.
   T hope on the return of the Instructor Mr. Scott from home leave to be enabled to visit the outstations, and report on the arms kept at them of which we have no register at hendq. arters of either the number or the condition they are in.
   Accoutrements —In store and use at headquarters we have as follows. Black Pouches 533, Cross Beits 014, Waist Belts 580. Frogs 50G, Rifle and Carbine Slings 692 Win;.. Accoutrements. Pouches 279. Frogs 284. Waist Belts 315. All tliese accoutremeuis are in serviceable condition, the ones worn out having bi- n condemned by Your Highness last year and since destroyed.
   Powder.—At the beginning of the present month we bad in Magazine as follows. Powder 251b kegs 136, 101b kegs 307, 51b kegs 275,’Blasting Powder in 10th kegs G2 kegs. Flasks Red 1G. Yellow 249. F. F. F. 254. Gim Tubes 425. Your Highness will thus see that the only thing we are getting short of is Blasting Powder and for this I have already indented through the Hon'ble The Resident.
   The white ants have again been the cause of my having had to destroy five kegs of powder, as these pests ate away the wooden kegsand thus caused the powder to become exposed to'the damp air which soon ruined it. Am now having one large bilian box made in which I propose storing the kegs of powder, and as the cover of it will be tongued and grooved I hope by this means to prevent the white ants getting in. Should this prove a success I should like Your Highness to sanction more of them being made so that the whole of our siock of powder might be kept in this way. If this fails however I would suggest that arrangements should be made with Messrs. Curtis and Harvey to send out all powder in it on drums (which could for greater safety have an outside covering of wood) the same as paint is now supplied in. The cost of these drums would probably be a little more expensive than the wooden kegs but a saving in the long run would undoubtedly result.
   Barracks. — The Contractor Wan Usup is now at work rebuilding the last of the married men's quarters and after these arc finished there only remains one more block of buildings to be done viz the Bachelors, and as this is not a large barrack it should not take very long.
   Conduct.—The Conduct of the men taken as a whole has been extremely satisfactory, and the selling of uniform a crime which a few months ago used to be very prevalent has now almost entirely ceased.
   Several tad characters have also lately been discharged and this of course has had tlie effect of greatly reducing our crime sheet as some of these men used to be brought up to the Orderly Room day after day.
   Band- The Band now numbers 2G men of whom 12 are Manilamen, 13 Malays and one the assistant drummer a Sepoy. This man is very anxious to be allowed to join the band permanently and as our : present drummer Baing does not seem very strong and is often laid up I would suggest subject to Your Highness' permission that this be allowed. Four Manilamen on completion of their agreements left Inst month, the men to take their places have already- been sent for and should be here in about a fortnight’s lime.
   Recruits.—I have now three Corporals away on leave in the. Simanggang district and have made- arrangements with'ihe Resident of Simanggang by which I hope to receive a good many recruits through, the Agency of these men.
   I have nothing further to report to Yoiir Highness.
I have the honour to be,
Rajab,
          Your Highness most obedient Servant,
S. CUNYNGHAME,
Commandaiit..
MONTHLY report.
      Upper Sarawak, Paku
May.
   There is nothing of importance to report this, month.
   On the 7th I went to Kuching to meet Your Highness, returning on 12th.
   Registration.—Only 31 deeds were registered this mouths. Stamps and fees amounting to $58.65..
   On the 27th the Peninjauh Dyaks paid in their Revenue $146 the same as last year.
   On the 12th one Tsong Koo a trader in Paku. Bazaar reported that not having seen one Cliin Loy for about two months he went to his house and found him dead and reduced to a skeleton. The deceased was a very old man and lived by himself and appears to have died of old age.
   A house for the junior clerk was finished during the month. I am not able to say how much it cost as the price of the timber from Kuching has not all been advised yet. It is a substantial building with billian posts and attaps. The roofs of the senior clerk's house, police barracks, stable and syce’s house were re-attapped or otherwise repaired during month.
   The Government buildings at Paku, Busau and Seniawan were all whitewashed by the prisoners^
June.
   On the first 4 prisoners made their escape while at work on the Seniawan Road and have not since been re-captured. One Jee Tsok who escaped in 1902 was however captured at Sigobang by L, C. Baki.
   Planters are beginning to pay in their Road tax though rather slackly as compared with previous years. In many gardens a proportion of the vines is being abandoned. Two Chinese have reported


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 5, 1907.
192
that they are about to convert their pepper gardens into cocoauut plantations.
   Abang Amit has completed a map of the pepper gardens (60 in number) between Paku and Seniawan on the right side of the road. There now only remain to Ire surveyed the gardens between Seniawan and Lidah Tanah on both sides of the river. These will however take him about a year.
   Notice was given by the Borneo Company early in the month that after the 10th instant, they would no longer purchase native oxide and that the prices of No. 1 and 2 sulphide would be reduced about 25%. There* was consequently a rush of oreworkers to deliver their stocks of ore before that date and for some days 1 had to send extra police to Busau to keep order. T hear there will shortly be a further reduction in price but in consequence of the Company no longer purchasing native oxide and the low grade ores hardly anyone is now1 working so that it won’t affect the district much.
   On the 9th it was reported that a gang robbery had taken plr.ee the previous right at Tan Toh Durian. The house of an elderly man named Kuan Ilian was broken into and himself rather severely beaten and wounded by the robbers who stole some gold jewellery valued at $150. One of the gang was recognised in consequence of his mask becoming disarranged and he was arrested early in the morning and other incriminating evidence found in his house. This man was found guilty by the Supreme Court and sentenced to 5 years. The jewellery has not been recovered and none of the other men have been arrested. From evidence obtained by police there seems no doubt that some of them came overland from Bigobang but though the police and a guide were some days there searching they could not find the men wanted.
   On the 13th Mr. Crocker came up to do duty here. •On 17th he went to Samarahan to collect the Dyak Revenue returning here on 25th.
   All the shophouses in Paku Busau and Seniawan Bazaars have now been registered and the owners supplied with a certificate somewhat similar to the pepper garden certificates. None of the owners of these houses hold grants for their sites and these -certificates are i^ot intended to be in lieu of grants hut are simply to facilitate the registration of mortgages on and transfers of the houses.
   The Prisoners have been engaged in the usual upkeep of roads.
   Registration.—32 deeds were registered. Stamps rand fees $38.10.
H. R. A. DAY,
. Resident.
kalaka.
'May.
   On the 3rd a small girl aged about 10 years old -daughter of Metalli and Ayang (f) of Saratok who was subject to fits was accidentally drowned when bathing (with a number of other children) in the river. She must have been attacked by these fits in the water as the place was very shallow where the •corpse was found.
   The Assistant Resident, Mr. H. la Chard and H. Ta min arrived from Simanggaug on the 19th vid the Saribas and on the 23rd proceeded to Saratok. Not many cases came up for settlement. On the 25th Mr. H. la Chard with a Fortman left for the Uiu Erian where he went overland right up to the Ulu Sablak. On the 28th the Assistant Resident returned to Kabong.
   ?P. Dunggat of the Upper Erian did not come down as eight of his men were laid up with smallpox, and no one goes to his place and vice versa as
they are afraid of the infection. The news from this part is meagre and some said that two had succumbed.•
   The Arrack and Gambling Farms for the ensuing year have been relet to Kho Ah Lisp of Boban at a decrease of $10 per mensem ($42) and the Saratok Farms to Chiew Leong Hin at an increase of $8 per mensenv ($26). The total decrease for the river is $2 per mensem.
   The sum of eight hundred dollars has been trans- smitted to the Simanggang Treasury, and cashed a Simanggang Cheque for $200. Total $1,000.
   At Saratok a new rest house for accomodation of the Native Officers has been built, and the posts are all of bilian. and other material from the old Bungalow. This was built by the Enmpong men.
   The Indian Bull that came from Simanggang.had a nasty wound as if done by some sharp weapon, but now it has healed.
   The jungkst and pengireh fishing have had good hauls.
   The Fortmen were occupied in whitewashing the Bungalow and outbuildings and clearing the rushes.
The fines for the monthi amounted to $202.68.
   Tn the middle of the mouth the weather was hot and sultry as no rain bad •fallen for a fortnight. The scarcity of water was badly felt by the inhabitants, and even after it rained.
The Trade Returns for the month are:—
Imports.	Exports.
$6,883.	$15,491.
Jline.
   On the 1st the Assistant Resident (Mr. II. L. Owen) accompanied by the Malay Chiefs, II. Tamin and Abang Ain and I proceeded to Rohan, and returned again on the 4th to Kabong. On the 2nd we proceeded to the Ibus stream w ere all the sawyers who have taken to pepper j ’anting live. We walked up to inspect all the . rdens and huts of the Chinese. Some of the gani ns are looking well ami some are very poor as t'm owners bad absconded and no one was looking after them until they were auctioned. Whilst going round from house to house, we were privately m formed that thpsc three escaped prisoners from Sibu did turn up in the Roban and were living with some of tho sawyers. These prisoners must have got in soon after my visit in March. We returned to the Bazaar arriving there at 1 r. M. Mr. H. la Chard also arrived before we did from the Upper Sablak. The following morning we went up the Hoban in order to arrest the three prisoners, but we were too late as they hud fled. However the Assistant Resident, and Mr. H. la Chard managed to recure two Chinese who had assisted the prisoners to abscond and who were prepairing to do the same. After going into the matter it was found that a week Wore our arrival seven sawyers and the three prisoners had bolted in their own boat to Kuching. 1 am informed since that this boat was seen by some Kalaka bandong m -n at the sago manufactory in Kuching.
   It is incredible that neither the Rohan nor the Ibus people should have any knowledge of these men's appearance. I consider that being of the same kith and clan they were loth to give up their friends.
   On the 7 th the Asst. Resident and Mr. II. la Chard accompanied by the two Native Officers returned to Simanggang ci// the Saribas.
   The out-break of small-pox in P. Dmiggat’s house in the Budn, Upper Erian, has disappeared as several of the inmates have recently come down to tho Bazaar for purchases.
' Some of the Upper Krian Dyaks have commenced the preliminary clearing of their paddy farming lands at the end of the month.


193	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 5, 1907.
   A Dyak woman who is living with a Chinese pepper gardener in the Bratoug stream was bitten by a crocodile on her wrist and hand when washing' at the “pengkalan”. The saurian must have been a small one as it was unable to pull her into the water and hei screams brought her husband to the rescue. She is still suffering from the effects of tBe saurian’s bite which was very painful.
   1’ C. Ambang succeeds P. C. Salleh who left of his own accord, and Tambi Gani as herdsman vice Am bang.
   The hauls of the jungkat fishery have been satisfactory but the hauls of the pengirch were poor.
   The stretch of jungle below the cattle shed has been cleared by the Kampoug men and some parts of the road were remade.
   The fines for the month amounted to $102.04.
   The Trade Returns for the mouth are:—
Imports	Exports
$8,064	$9,306
A. E. CHEYNE,
II ri ter.
KAPIT.
May.
   On the 15th His Highness The Rajah accompanied by His Highness The Rajah Muda and the Hon’ble the Resident 3rd Division arrived here at 5 »•. M.
   On the 16th peace was made between Bautin etc: aud Penghulu Didam Muntin and the other down river chiefs, the usual Dyak ceremony of peace making was earned out. and after the ceremony His Highness met Bautin, Alum etc: in the Fort, these two men and their followers have been rebels for about seven years, and this is the first time they have been in any Government Fort during that time. His Highness imposed a fine of $1,000 on Bautin and his followers, and after they have returned to their own country, they are to proceed to Lubok Antu where they will make peace w ith the Batang Lunar Dyaks.
   His Highness The Rajah also met Penguin Merom aud informed him that his son Janin, also Luugut his son-in-law and party are to pay a fine of $1,500 for killing the Uma Lisums, the fine to go to relatives of those killed.
   His Highness the Rajah left here on the 17th at 8 A M.
   On the 24th s. s. Alice Lorraine arrived with the Hon’ble the Resident on board, when Bautin's affairs were brought to a conclusion. Hon’ble the Resident left for Sibu on the 27th.
   On the 29th 1 left for Balleh and expect to be away some time collecting in fines and settling various farming land disputes.
June.
   Ou the 2nd 1 received news from Kapit (1 being still in the Balleh) that four Dyaks had been killed in the Mesuah branch of Batang Rejang by the Uma Disums.
   On the 11th I reached Kapit having Ixien away over a fortnight.
   In the Police Court Man Jit was sentenced to 3 months for theft, on the prison door being opened at 11 A. M. Mau Jit was found dead, having committed aucide by hanging himself.
   On the 22nd s. s. Alice Lorraine arrived and per same the Resident 2nd Class returning again on the 26th.
   On the 27th I received news that three Dyaks had been killed in the Balleh at mouth of Mengiong, consequently this caused an up-roar and all Dyaks
from Song and upwards flocked to the scene of the murder as they beard that a big force of Uma Kulits were waiting to attack them. I left for the Balleh fearing the Dyaks might go off to the Batang Rejang. It appears that the people who killed the three Dyaks come from the Mekain.
   The Dyak force of over 2,000 men has now returned.
   Fines amounting to $1,550 were paid in during the month.
   I have nothing further to report to Your Highness.
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER,
Assistant Resident..
SIMANGGANG.
Jline.
   Obituary. I regret to report the death of Tuanku- Putra, the Senior Native Officer of the 2nd Division, who died after a short and painful illness on June 1st at Simanggang. Sherif Putra entered the Government Service in August 1885 and had served nearly twenty-two years. He was the only son of the well-known Sherif Sahib who was attacked and defeated at Pemutus in 1844 by the late Rajah Sir James Brooke.
   Tuanku Putra was a careful and painstaking Native Magistrate who could always be relied upon to steer a middle course in affairs. His loss will be much felt in the Courts at Simanggang.
   Mr. Thomas Hugh, Clerk at Lingga, died of vo- mitting and purging on the 12th. The deceased had. only recently joined the Government Set vice.
         • * • •
   The death of the pensioner Baat, a Dyak of Rein- bas (Pusa), was reported during June. This man, a cripple from his birth, had been supported for many years by Your Highness' bounty.
   The Estates of tile two Saribas Dyaks Manja of Gensurai and Japaug of Ajau have been wound up and Probate Duty $40.18 has been paid.
   Appointments.—Your Highness has been pleased to appoint Mr. H. L. Owen to he a^esident of the 2nd Class and Mr. O. Lang to be an Assistant Resident. both appointments to date from July 1st.
   Miscellaneous.—'Messrs. H. L. Owen and H. la Chard who had left for the Saribas and Kalaka trip on May 13tb returned to Simanggang on June 10th.
   Mr. Owen reports as follows :—The Court work at Betong was exceptionally light on the first visit but on the return journey there were a considerable number of cases for settlement.
   As the tenders for the Gambling and Spirits Farms were not satisfactory, an auction was held, which resulted in an advance of $15 per mensem being obtained.
? • • •
   After a stay of four days at Saratok, Roban was. visited. Mr. hi Chard walking from Saratok by the Ulu Krinn.
   At Rohan the Court work was fairly heavy. The pepper planters at Ibus were visited.' The gardens seemed to be in a flourishing state and the people there are giving no trouble. The bilian workers in the Uhl Roban were also visited, and some arrests were made.
   Uhl Ai Affairs.—I heard from Mr. Lang from Lubok Antu that certain Ulu Skaraug Dyaks, about the end of April, had “made peace” with Apai Biti’s following at Jembau’s house in the Engkan.
   Penguin Sli of Ulu Skaiang came down to report this on June 10th stating that this happened whilst be was away down river at Simanggang. According


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. AUGUST 5, 1907,
to his story the houses of Kibong, Jaran, Maleng,
Ketit, Lidoni, and the late Rudi's house—six houses
in all “made peace” through their representatives
under the following circumstances:—Five ulu Ska-
rang Dyaks were looking oiit for tracks of a reported
raiding force, and. penetrating into the Engkari
country went up to Jiinbau's house where a force of
Apai Biti's, under one Nanggom, surprised them,
and would have killed them, but for the intervention
of Jimbau and his people, who offered to go bail for
them, and Jimbau paid one tajau Bangka, and
Muntai (of Jiinbau's house) the sum of $60., and
then Langgong of Engkari and one of the five Ska-
rang Dyaks killed pigs to ratify their compact.
The Skarang Dyaks have now repaid Jimbau of
Engkari for the “services rendered”!
   P. Sii informed me that he had received messages
from these people, and Anggut and other loyal Dyaks
have likewise received messages threatening them
that if they do not pay up $2 a door they will be
attacked by Apai Biti’s people!
   Since then J ilom and oth r Skarangs have been
threatened in the same way by Unit very troublesome
Dyak Bamba son of the former Ulu Ai Chief Nge-
lengkong.
   Mr. H. L. Owen reported that P. Dimpi had met
him at Betong on the 9th and had reported Bamba
(as above) for levying a payment of $2 per door on
some of his people who were attacked in May in the
Ulu Entabai when three were killed and five wound-
ed. These Ulu Layers paid what was levied on them
by Ramba and have since been withdrawn from their
former house to the Penguin's house as being safer.
   The latest news from the Ulu is that a force of five
hundred men, said to be under Ngumbang himself,
has left to attack Scmpurai's house in Kantu waters,
in order to avenge the death of a man of Openg's
house who was killed, it is said, about a year ago in
the Kapuas.
   I have no knowledge of this murder and the peo-
ple of Openg's house have up to date made no report
about it to me.
   Simanggang.—The Court work at Simanggang
was somewhat light throughout the month. The
piisoners averaging 31 men were employed oh clean-
ing and repairing the roads, and on clearing the
resarn ferns, etc: on the marsh.
   I have nothing further to report to Your Highness
for the month of June.
D. J. S. BAILEY,
Resident.
SADONG.
June.
   Arriving here at (5.30 p. M. on the 1th ultimo I
took over all books from the Court Writer on the
following day and found everything correct and in
good order.
   A telephone message reported the death by suicide
•of a Chinese coolie who although not an opium
smoker purchased a large quantity of the drug and
swallowing it ran off to the jungle evidently deter-
mined that no assistance should reach him. Every
attention was given him by the Dresser and Manager ,
but he expired when in the train on the way down
to the Hospital.
   It is I suppose impossible to regulate the quantity sold to any one man as the farmer must supply the drug in proportion to the payment made by the purchaser.
   One Pengarah Rempo of Mupoh came down and complained about the seizure of his land by the Daha Entama Dyaks. This matter is deferred for settlement when I visit the Uhl.
194
1 In the meantime neither he nor the Daha Entama
I were to farm on the land in dispute.
   This Pengarah also gave me a list of men of the
Dahn Entama and Tembawang Dyaks who for years
I have been exempted from the payment of tax with-
out sanction.
   It is not long since certain Pengarah were dis-
missed and heavy fines inflicted for thus defrauding
the Government. I will investigate this matter later
I on.
   The Orang Kaya of Ris visited me and brings up
the perennial complaint of the boundary between
himself and the Lanebang. I examined the map
of this part of the country but it is quite impossible
to determine upon the proper boundary from it as
several bounderies are demarcated. An Order by
Your Highness precludes litigation on this disputed
point declaring that the only boundary known to
the Government is the old one. But until I go up
and see myself I cannot say which is the old one.
   But instructions have been given me by the
Hon'ble the Resident to deal severely with that
party which is deliberately and for no reason attempt-
ing to resuscitate this tribal dispute.
   Tho Tuah. nearly all of them, of the Simunjai*
collected in the Court House to elect a Penghulu.
Two men are put forward for the Penglwiluship, but
the majority of the Tuahs favour Engga son of the
late O. K. Pangkaof PrupokAi/./’ Padaly who married
into the Sea-Dyaks many years ago. But I shall
not submit this master for Your Highness' sanction
until later on.
   A “tree-way” is being laid from S. Sdiloo to S.
Sebangan. When completed communication lietween
> the Station and the outlying districts in that part
will be considerably facilitated. A sm-fll shanty of
kapor posts bark walls, and attaps roof will be erected
I halfway and willcome in useful as a rest house.
   Permission to build houses on a portion of the pre-
sent cattle ground has been granted to those Malays
who live up the Sim mi j an and are handicapped and
inconvenienced by the silting lip of the did mouth
of this river.
   This will not affect the cattle grazing area which
can be easily lengthened when necessa y.
   Disputes between buffalo and cattle owners uro
continual simply because the one hopes that Go-
vernment will order the other party to put up strong
fences and thus save him the trouble.
   I personally visited some fields and ordered each
party to fence in his laud thus double fences will bo
put up l>etween the grazing grounds. Should either
party capture the other's cattle in his field the owner
: of the impounded animals would have to redeem
tbeiu.
   Any.further dispute, the parties were warned,
would end in the land granted them for grazing
purposes.being taken back by Government and per-
force the sale of the stock.
   Courts. In the Police Court one Tukang sues liis»
father-in-law for a share of the paddy obtained
this harvest. Judgment was given for Plaintiff.
Defendant made a counter charge for the return of
his daughter Lutah which was dismissed, as Lutah
is a woman and not a minor and being a free woman
is no longer under the control of her father Kah.
   Lutah then prosecuted her father Kah for recovery
of ceituin property which however being clearly
that of Kuh's she cannot obtain. The case was
dismissed.
   A case of assault in which Defendant owing it
appeared from the evidence to great provocation best
a woman of doubtful repute. Defendant is fined $15
and costs. Plaintiff to repay value of clothes etc.
received from Defendant and the cause of the row.
   A charge of swindling by an old Mandor of tiia
Mines of some 20 years service is proved and deft*


195
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 5, 1907.
I same time and was actually on his way to Kuching
via Sibu but recovered on the way to Sibu and
returned by Oya on the 21st. There has been a
good deal of sickness in the Karapongs.
   I have borrowed the Mukah Tukoir for use hero
until 1 cun get a small Uarong from Bintulu, there
must lie one sea-going boat on the Station but it is
not necessary’ to have a large one. The weather has
been fine and warm with occasional showers, the sea
was not quite smooth towards the end of the month
consequently fresh fish have not been plentiful.
   The cattle now number 41 head and are doing
exceedingly well but they’ are not confined to a
I cattle ground and wander as far as the Kuala a mile
| away, consequently they obtain an excellent supply
of grass, but they do considerable damage to the-
I edges of the roads and, where not under grass, to the-
| roads themselves.
   The export of Raw Sago amounted to 467 coyans
. against 446 coyans exported during the eorrespond-
I ing month of last year.
‘ DONALD A. OWEN,
Resident-
MUKA.
June.
   General.—The 3rd, being Your Highness’ birthday
was observed as a public holiday .
   Mr. D. A. Owen, Resident of Oya, returned to his
station on the 4th after paying a short visit here.
Aw. Idin, the 2nd Native Officer started for
j Balingeau on the Sth, accompanied by P. C.
? Mahomat. He was sent to try and settle a dispute?
about farming lands which had arisen between
Penghulu Umpaug and some of his relations. He
returned on the 13th having thoroughly gone into
j the matter but been unable to settle it, as the
! Penghulu, though apparently in the wrong, would
' not come to terms with his brother-in-law. but said
he would come over to Mukah later on, and have
the case heard in Court.
   Abang Hj. Azhan. 1st Native Officer, sailed for
Kuching on the 11th for short leave.
   The Revd. Father Stotter paid a visit here from
the Cut mission, arriving on the 10th and leaving on
the 12th.
   The bridges and roads at Petian and Judan, on
the road between Mukah and Oya, have been now
put into thorough repair.
   On the 25th T. K. Dawi of the lower Tillian died,
after a long illness of nearly 3 months. He was the
mosl capable Tua Kampong in the Mukah district,
and it will be hard to find a man equally intelligent
and hard working to take his place.
   P. IF. D.—The prisoners have been employed
during the month chiefly on the up-keep of roads,
but they have also repaired the cowman's house and
the fence between the garden and the cattle ground.
   Trade.—Schooners to the number of 30 have come
into this river during the month, and 32 have cleared.
They took down to Kuching 615 coyans of raw sago
and 210 piculs of Jelutong gutta. and in addition
small quantities of gutta percha and rotan sega. In
June of 1906, 384 coyans of raw sago and 635
piculs of Jelutong gutta were exported from Mukah.
The export of raw sago has increased a good deal
lately, while that of Jelutong gutta has gone steadi-
ly down, owing to the difficulty of getting satisfactory’
labour to work the trees.
   Court.—There have been no cases of special im-
portance during the month. Fines and fees amounted
to $235.99.
   Cattle.—As the present cattle ground does not
supply enough grass for the herd here (73 head), a
fined, his length of service with clear record being
taken into consideration.
   Cattle.—The drafting into the Sadongherd of two
good milch cows and a well bred bull would greatly
improve the herd here. If this can be done I would
respectfully ask Your Highness to sanction it.
   Colliery.—The fall in No. 4 mine temporarily
decreased the output of coal at the beginning of the
month but the obstacle has been cleared away and
the amount of coal coming down is normal.
   Complaints about the malignering of mine coolies
are continual; but it is not possible to find out the
habitual shirkers as owing to the contract system
in vogue the contractor is the only man who knows
whether his men are working or no and for reasons
best known to himself will not say.
   A suggestion of mine, which will go a long way
to check workers and ascertain the malignerers, has
been favourably received by the Manager who, I
believe, intends acting on it.
Balance from May 	 508.07	tons.
   Coal received at wharf in June 1,535.12 .,
Balance in sheds at end of June 236.00 ,.
   The General Manager was here from 21st on his
quarterly visit.
   Treasury. $10,000 were received ex p. s. Adch
on 20th ultimo.
   Health.—Dr. Barker arrived on 20th ultimo and
fixed upon the site for the new Hospital, for the
erection of which tenders have been received but as
yet no tender has been filially accepted.
Daily average of patients in Hospital 8.
P. GORDON WHITE.
Officer in Charge.
OYA.
June.
   Court.—There have been several cases in the
Police Court but all of the usual kind, mostly Sago
Land and boundary disputes. But few cases have
been brought before the Court of Bequests during
the month, most of the Debt Court work is confined
to Dalat apparently where I shall be holding Court
early next month.
   Public Works.—The prison gang have been en-
gaged in rebuilding and repairing some of the bridges
in the Kampong. raising and repairing the Bakong
road from the Bazaar end onwards and ditching it,
and raising the Mukah road which is much worn
down and becomes a wet ditch after heavy rain.
   All the street lamps have been repaired and paint-
ed and 3 additional ones are to be put up at cross
roads.
   The channel marks have been put up in the course
of the month and lieing topped with tins painted
white are now plainly visible.
   The weather having been very hot towards the end
of the month grass fires were very common. Some
21 of the newly planted cocoanuts on the boom road
were destroyed* by fire before the burning grass could
be beaten down.
   The prison Dapor has been rebuilt, and the Bung-
alow Dapor repaired, but nothing can be done
towards building Hj: Taha's house until the attaps
arrive from Sibu and at present we have no boat that
can take them round.
   General. -The 3rd: of the month being the
anniversary of His Highness the Rajah’s birthday
the Court and Offices were closed and the day
observed as a Public Holiday.
   The s. s. Sarawak made several trips here taking
away her usual cargo of raw sago each time.
   I was down with fever from the 16th: to the 24th:
and unable to do any work. Curiously enough Mr.
Lawrence at Mukah was suffering from fever at the


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 5, 1907.
19fi
large piece of ground is being cleared on the bazaar side and will be added to the present ground as soon as it is ready.
   There is nothing further to report to Your Highness for the past month..
A. E. LAWRENCE,
Resident 2nd Class.
BINTULU.
June.
   There was the usual amount of Court work during the month but no cases of any importance.
   Geok Soon the Government Clerk returned from leave on the 2nd he had been delayed at Baram waiting for the steamer to get back by.
   Two more cases of people being seized by crocodiles occurred, a sad coincidence was attached to one •case.
   Au old Dyak had come over fxmi Baram with a letter from the Resident asking that he might be allowed to take hack his son to Baram. he arrived at his son’s house at midday and found that his body had just been recovered from the river he having been seized that morning whilst bathing.
   In the second case, a man was paddling up the Sebiaw river above the Bintulu Kampong when he was seized by the arm, he got his legs under the seat and hung on till the crocodile let go when be managed to get to a house near by. by paddling with one hand, luckily the crocodile made no second attack on him as his boat had filled with water.
   It has been reported to me from Tatau that numbers of Dyaks are going to Rejang from there in hopes -of joining some punitive expedition which Government is said to be raising there.
   As I have not received any intimation that they -are required I have sent over to stop them going, and will leave here for Tatau after arrival of the mail •which is now due.
   Several small parties of Dyaks have lately come in from Igan to settle in Tatau with permission from the Resident 3rd Division.
   On the 19th Rejap a Kadayan prisoner made his -escape from the prison gang, by bolting into the jungle at the back of the gaol, nothing has since been heard of him, he had only 6 weeks more of his term to do.
   Some people living in the Sebatang stream have complained that a Kadayan Haji Aim is moving into that stream from Sibuti and ask that he may be stopped doing so, they seem to be afraid of him.
   Haji Aim has not turned up and I think these people must have made a mistake in his destination. As in the Baram Report of April it is said he was granted permission to move into Simalajou.
   The prisoners have been employed on the roads and in stubbing Enkudok bushes on the plain, this shrub was choking out all the cattle feed.
   The imports for the month amount to $12,717 and -exports to $11,055.
   There is a large quantity of Gutta Jelutong now- in the bazaar.
E. A. W. COX,
Resident.
MATANG ESTATE.
June.
   Dining the month coolies have been employed in weeding, handling coffee, plucking tea and gathering coffee.
   A few women have also been regularly employed in cleaning coffee.
   Crops gathered during the month were 37 A piculs parchment coffee and 279 lbs tea.
   1,100 lbs tea in 16 chests were despatched to the Borneo Company Limited.
   The coolies have been paid their wages for May by Mr. Grove on the 5th instant.
J. M. GOMEZ,
Manager.
Upper Sarawak, BAU.
June.
   Agreements. -46 have been made out during the month, stamp duties and fees amounted to $98.31.
   Court.—Fines and fees amounted to $128.25.
   The 3rd instant being His Highness the Rajah's birthday, the Offices were closed and it was observed as a holiday.
   Mr. Pearse, who had been staying here for a few days, left on the 5th for Kuching.
   Dr. Bruce Low was in the district on the following dates 5th, 6th. 7th, Sth, 12th. 13th, 14th, 19th, 20th, 26th. 27th.
   Ah Nyuk, Court Writer, returned from sick leave on the 7th instant.
   On the 12th instant a Prisoner named Bong Tsin eseaped from the gang working on the Tundong road under the following evidently prearranged circumstances; abqjit 3.30 P. M. some*6or7 men were seen to pass close by the prison gang and enter it garden near by, soon after Bong Tsin asked his mandor to allow him to drink at a stream in the the garden, the mandor followed him to the stream on arriving at which the men lately seen to have entered the garden appeared from the jungle surrounded Bong Tsin and took him off. Some of the men were armed with long knives.
   I am glad to be able to report that a man called Tian Hong who was recognised as being present was the next morning arrested at Chiu Hee s antimony working at Buan Bidi and has since been sentenced to 5 years R. I. this ic the first case of this sort which has ever occurred here and I hope there will be no further attempts of the kind or it will be necessary to increase and arm with rifles the prisoner's guard, if they are to work any distance from home.
   A gang of prisoners have been employed nearly the whole month repairing the Puak road from suspension bridge to Jambusan corner and a gang of Dyaks have been employed at the same time on the same road.
   Mr. Collins has been over on sundry occasions to superintend the work done.
   There have been the usual number of petty theft cases from gardens and three cases of highway robbery, one man and two women were seized and their money taken off them all the cases occurred in the day light.
E. R. STILWELL,
Resident.
LUNDU .
—?—
June.
   The 3rd being Your Highness* birthday the usual public holiday was observed and the flag-staff was decorated.
   On the 15th Your Highness accompanied by His Highness the Rajah Muda arrived per s, I, Young Harry at 8 30 \. M. the S. Y. Zahora having anchored off the mouth of the river at 4 P. M. the previous evening. During the morning Your High-'


197
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. AUGUST 5, 1907.
uess conversed with the Native Chiefs and nt I i». M.
inspected the Government School. Your Highness
personally examined the l*oys and expressed great
satisfaction at the progress made in all subjects.
Tty kind permission of Your Highness the boys were
granted a week’s special holiday in honor of the
Occasion.
   At day light on the 16th \ II Highness* s left
for Kuching.
   Orang Kaya Rndai of the Poi Dyaks has com-
plained that some of the Dyaks of N. I. Territory
are felling the jungle on this side of the frontier
preparatory to farming. I informed the Orang
Kaya that unless these people paid revenue to the
Sarawak Government they would most certainly
nor be allowed to farm on thia side, if, however,
tii. v wished to move with their wives and families
into Sarawak Territory, they would be allowed
reasonable time in which to pay their tax. I have
since heard that it is the intention of these people
to live with Orang Kaya Rudai til Poi.
   A Sebuyu Dyak, mimed Amib, w ho is it lunatic
was send to Kuching for treatment. This man has
before been placet! under restraint on account of
his strange behaviour. Amih’s father was also a
lunatic.
   Your Highness haS been pleased to sanction the
appointment of Matzin aeTuab K u. pong of Sarmin-
sum.
   The prisoners have been employed raising the up-
river end of the bazaar road and in the g< neral up
keep of the station.
Appended are the . trade returns for the month.
Exports.	Imports
       Lundu. $7,622	$2,337
       Simainn. 2,424	5,100
         „ Foreign. 24
              Total $10,090	$7,437
F. F. BOULT.
Assistant Resident.
Baram,
June.
   The 3rd being the birthday of Your Highness was observed as a whole holiday and the flagstaff was dressed in honour of the occasion.
   On the 1st a Dayak prisoner by name Chendang escaped whilst the prisoners were fetching wood from the jungle for musts for s. 1. Lucile. He was fortunately re-arrested at Poyut next day and received the usual punishment.
   On the 13th I went to Poyut to visit Kalang the Dayak Penghulu, who was very seedy. I am glad to say that he has since recovered.
   The Long Kiputs snd Berawans paid in their tax during the month, amounting respectively to $126 and $196.
   There have been very few cases in either Police or Debt Court, but several payments have been made in the latter.
   The p. s. Adeh made two trips to this station during the month and on both occasions returned to Kuching with a full cargo of rattans.
   On the 26th the s. I. La Fee returned from Kuching under the pilotage of Ali Captain of the Lucile. She will be most useful to the Station.
   On the 29th I left for upriver, accompanied by Tuanku Hamid snd the men engaged by Your Highness, to start working the antimony at Long Plutan.
   Owing to the river having been in flood for some days, several rafts of rattans were brought down from the Vlu, so there is still plenty of cargo awaiting shipment for Kuching.
|	7*. IF. D.—The prisoners have been working on
| the new road from Kampong Naroin to Hidan and
i the coolies have been employed in mowing the roads.
    The rainfall for the month has been 3‘96 inches.
    1 have nothing further of importance to report to
| Your Highness.
T. S, KING.
.1 ssistant Resident.
Limbang
•
June.
' On the 5th Your Highness together with His
j Highness the Rajah Muda arrived here on a visit to
the station.
1 On the 6th and 7th Your Highness came to the
I Court and received and interviewed several people.
I The Chinese applied for the establishment of a
School in the station for the education of their
I children in Chinese, English and simple arithmetic.
Your Highness was' pleased to approve ••[ this and
directed that a suitable site for the Schoolhouse
| should lie found in the vicinity of the bazaar; and
? ordered that the Government should contribute
! towards the erection of a building and for the provi-
sion of a master, etc., to the same extent as has been
already granted in other stations.
    Until a pro]>er School has been built and in order
to save delay, it is proposed to rent a shop in the
' bazaar as soon as a' master has been abtaim d.
I Messrs. Chin Hong and Soon Thai owing the sago
| flour factories again asked that the duty on raw-sago
exported from Limbtuig might be raised to the same,
amount as in other parts of Sarawak, Your Highness
informed them that the interests of other people
had to be considered, and refused the application.
    Your Highness and His Highness the Rajah
Miula accotupaincd by Mr. Ricketts left the station
for Law as on the morning of the 8th.
    Mr. Rieke Its the Resident left for Labunn on the
19tb on his way to Singapore having been granted short leave of absence.
By the p. s. Kaka leaving hereon the 18th one Sim Anu sub-manager of the him bang Opium Farm was forwarded to Kuching on a warrant charging him with having defraudeq his employers Messrs. Chin Hok Bee of two thousand and three hundred dollars.
Tn the Court Matamit versus Dullah a case of alleged bufl'alo stealing in Sungei Lubai, occupied some time. The case was eventually thrown out, the evidence against Defendant not been sufficient to convict upon.. Subsequently the headmen of Kampongs Lubok Riugas, Singkarai and Gadong Laut complained to the Court of Dullah’s behaviour in catching huffaloes in the runs at night without giving due notice to the other owners. Certain animals had been missed and they suspected Dullah though they could bring no evidence whatever to support their convictions. Dullah was warned that if he offends against the custom which ordains, that anyone wishing to catch his buffaloes must do so openly and with due notice to others, he will be severely dealt with.
Other cases are fully reported in the Official Diary.
Ou the 28th I went up-river to Bidung to hold certain cases and to collect the Bisaya Exemption Tax. Down river most of this Revenue has now been paid in.
The latter end of the month was very dry though the rainfall for the period under report amounted to 8.58 inches.
In the six months January to June inclusive


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 5, 1907.
198
59.87 inches of ruin fell; this is an increase of exactly 10 inches on the rainfall recorded for the same months last year.
   The Trade Returns for the mouth are:—
    Foreign Imports $6,995.	Exports. $8,464.
   -Coasting do 4,553. do 8,287.
A. B. WARD.
Resident 2nd Class.
The Sarawak gazette
   THE Subscription to the Sarawak Gazette is ;as follows.—
   Payable in local currency—
         Single number ...	...	... $0.10
         Subscription for 1 year	...	... 1.00
 Do including postage to Outstation ...I Do	do	to Singapore ... • 1.00
            Do	do	to Englund	...)
   Payable in Sterling—
         For 1 year (including postage to places
                        in the Postal Union) 	 3s. 6d.
all subscription payable in
advance.
  Yearly subscriptions are renewable on the 1st January.
  Subscriptions will ***** be renewed unless due notice is given. All broken periods will be considered as full.
  Subscribers are requested to notify changes
•of address to the Editor in writing.
RATE OF ADVERTISMENT IN THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
—?—
Payable tee ariraare.
-Advertisement of 12 lines and under— First insertion ...	...	... $1.00
          Second and third insertion each	.... 0.50
          Subsequent do	do	... 0.25
.Advertisement of half a Column and under— First insertion ...	...	... 2.00
          Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
          Subsequent do	do	... 0.50
Advertisement of a Column and under— First insertion each	...	... 3.00
          Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
          Subsequent do	do	... 0-75
Special arrangements may be made for standing advertisements.
  All communications intended for insertion in the .*««•« »r<flr	must be directed
to the Editor at the Government Printing Office, Kuching, and sent so as to reach the Office by the 26th of the month at latest or their publication will have to be deferred until the next issue.
  Letters and other contributions must be authenticated by writer’s name sent privately to the Editor.
  We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not inserting them.
  Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early intelligence of all matters of general interest in their respective neighbourhoods.
Notice-
     /? ' ENTI.EMEN are requested to pay all Gazette snb- scrip tions and Printing Office Bills to the undersigned in future.
For the convenience of those unable to send cheques, Sarawak stumps will lx* taken inpayment of sums not over ?1.50—but only the 2 aud 4 cent values will be accepted.
Foreign subscribers to the Sarawak Gaatrfie are requested to send remittances by Post Office Order " not by “ Postal Order” as the latter cannot be cashed in Sarawak.
F. G. DAY.
Notice.
—?-—
Astana Farm Produce.
Terms Monthly.
        W ILL be supplied to customers at the following rates
         Milk—per quart bottle ..	... 10 cents
         Butter—per lb ...		 •	... 80 „
         Eggs—each	...	...	... Ij „
Orders, which should be addressed to the undersigned, attended to without delay.
J. STAPLES,
Notice.
THE WELL KK«WX
Singer and Wheeler .t Wilson Sewing Machines can bo purchased on easy terms. All we ask is o dollars down and 3 dollars per month.
         A liberal discount allowed for Cush.
Apply to
TAN BOON SIEW,
.1 gent,
                   SINGER SEWING M -.CHINE Co., C/o SYN HIN LEONG 4 Co Kuching, Sarawak.
2Sth March, 1907.
       RAINFALL AT SANTUBONG 1907.
1 January.Fabry.! March.I April.May.Juno.     1105 !.10I -40     *21-27i -18    •45     32-30 !2’64    ?20    •59     4? i-oe1 2-50    •17     aMS3-471'26•42     11410 '?259'78    2 >     7    •48    .63?Ka     H    •04 1•88    0G    ‘25?70TO     y    •11 j    10•18    13    •20182-64    u    •05 1?22182    49    12    *12| -W    18•62    •203'80    14    15'	081.54    •45    16? 8'00•47    1 i106    184-751741-85    •06    101 -2-07    '97?bi    208-:14    15    •10    21    ••• 1    22. ...    •15?47    •>31 '75    241 -    •482-48    25I -    •81    26    ?j,;•58    07•91    27    •48•80    283-80 :1 05161.84    29    •20    •08    80    •18•io i    31    •77    ?42...23-8114'8883'026'89 1IW.9.01

199
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. AUGUST 5, 1907.
Kucmng, Foreign Trade Returns for the month of June, 1907.
IMPORTS.
            Articles.     Quantity.Value.Aerated Water ...	...eases    1178 1.504Ammunition        220Arrack, etc	      1.320Biscuits      3,814Blnehnn	...	...piculs(>1	61Blanketsi	180Beads...65Brass * Copper-ware        778Boots * Shoes ...        642Butter A Cheese...1	84Caudles        284Canvas        728Cementeasks     78        402Clocks and Watches        306Cloth
     Cotton     62.724     Silk        380Clothing
     Cotton	...	? ...     11,899Coke ...tons     60      1.080CocofumtsNo.18.450        612Coffee
     Liberian etc....pic ids     24        580     In tins         78Coprahpion Is    117      1,080Cotton Seed      1,198Crockery A Glass-ware      5,091Onrry Stuffs A Sauce etc.      1.986Cyanide etc.cases    160      4,927Damar        339Dross and Chemicals      8.002Eggs (salted)No.20,785        483Exports Returned to Shippers97Fire-arms        200Fire-works        460Fish
     Driedpiculs     68      1.289     Salted	...piculs     88        889     In tins        697Flonr ...bags2,045      1.086Fruit
     Fresh        491     Dried      1.070     In tins        218Furniture        216Ghee ...piculs     10        482Gold ...07..     34      1.130     Bemis and peaspiculs    510      3,553     l’adi ...piculs    798      1.208     Bicepiculs13,658     61.540     Other Sorts...piculs bales1.14$      2.265Gunnies new     54      5,775Do old	...bundles     46        699Hains and Bacons         28Hats ...        469Iron-ware     12,692Japanese Curios ...        490Jars ...No.         OSJoss Sticks mid Papers      2,148Kerosine Oilcases" 3,216*     10.037laird ..piculs    164      8.858Lamps        461Leatherpiculs     12        77**iLive stock
     Cattlehead29     PoultryNo.    228        125     Swineh n '.’u i - -    106      1,810Machinery      5,288Mats ...      1.484Matcheseases    109      2,241Maccnroni & Vermicelli        904Milk Condensed ...cases    196      1.740Oils ...piculs    341      6.242Opium raw	...	...chests     10     10,000Paint. Varnish & Tar      8.488Papers      1,745Provisions Sundry      1.498Prawns Refuse ...piculs1.430      4.957Rickshaws        265Rope Coircoils     71      1.610     Wirecoil       1        105              Carry forward ...1265.397IMPOHTS.—(Continued.)
           Articles.      Quantity.Value.          Brought forward6265,897Sago Pearl or Rawpiculs	327455Salt ...pienls	1.491]      2,076Soup ...      1.026Stationery and Books      2,247Straw hats (Chinese)36Straw Shoes (Chinese)141Sugarpiculs	1,443      8.703Sundries      2.875Tea in Bundles ...boxes	217      2,887Tea in Tins287Timber      3,510Twine and Thread      6,886Tobaccos
     hi tins Cigars A Cigarettes      9,d88     Chinese ...	„.!cases	126      4.974     P’bang Java A S’rohok etc.piculs	136]      8,728     Bud or Pepperpiculs	S3]830Treasure	...	...     18,965Tuba ...315Vegetables Fresh      1.627     Salted      3,062     In tins25Wines and spirits     10,582Zinc ...      2,809   TOTAL VALUE$356,121    Brought forward1,916,441    Total Value to Date2,272.565190632.212.971EXPORTS.
Value.
Antimony	...tons    591}  S 9.448-Ant-eater-skins ...I piculi         44Betel-nutspiculs    902}      «,701Bces-wuxpienls      5]        238Birds-nestspiculs5|      1.488Bhudianpicul4Brass-ware        386Camphorcatties      1»76Cattleheads      3        105Charcoalpiculs    120*        112Cloth ...        150Coprah	...piculs    230*      2,800-Crockery-ware ...        285Cutch	...	...piculs    487*
    729}      2,377Damar	...piculs      4.526Eggs (Turtle)No.69,500        429Empties      1,355Fish ...pienls    125      1.844Gambierpiculs1,182      6.621Gold ...0X8.5.868    141.100GuLta jangkuipiculs    4984      7,227do Jclotong ...piculs7,713]     87,795do perchapiculs    104]     11,278Hidespiculs     21|        410Imports Returned to Shippers India Rubber    314]      4,180
     38,821piculsIron-ware        014Kajangs        127Kerosine Oilcases     71        201Matchescases      2]         60Mats...        281N. H. Specimens...        149Oils ...piculs;1        140Pearl sagopiculs     351         46Pepper (white) ...pienls8,762     94,990Do (black) ...piculs    899*     12,600Prawns (dried) ...piculs     23"        827Button s N o. 1 sega etc.piculs1,356}     13,225Rattans No. 2 tetnoi etc. Rice ...pienls piculs1,626*
    863]      4.735
      1,801Sago llourpienls30,124     82,866Sugar nipapienls     67        2S8Sundries      1,447Timber        156Timber (manufactured) „,         41              Carry forward ...8489'841

THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 5, 1907.
200
Ex PoHTs.—( Con (in tied.)
Articles.       Quantity.Value.         Brought forward*489,841Tobacco     Javapicnls	3-]200Treasure	...	...8.000167   TOTAL VALCK$497,708    Brought forward2,512,670    Total Value to Date3.010,37H1906*2,930,383Knelling, Coasting Trade Return for the minth of June. 1907
IMPOSTS.
            Articles.       Quantity.! Value.Goal... tons ’1,528i *
     12.084Damir... piculatil      2,787Guttn Jiuigkar ...... piculs357J      3,778Gutta Jclotong .....1 piculs6,720     30,496Gut la Percha...j piculs31      4,127India Rubber... piculs251’     23,810Prawns Refuse ...... piculs121266Pepper (white) ...... piculs4294     10,094do	1 black)	...... piculs197?      2.962Rattans No. 1 sega etc... piculs636      6,009Do No. 2 temoi etc.... piculs2,542’      6.810Rice ...... piculs527      2.154Sago flour... piculs1.79!)      5,104Do raw... t'pins 1111,250     60,625Sundries	...     15,670'Treasure	...      9,196     TOTAL VALUE$195,972       Brought forward899.427        Total Value to Date ,$1,095,399         190691,004,594Ex POUTS. .
            Articles.Quantity.Value.Brass-ware*1,402Ironware2,237Jars ...
Oil KerosineNo. "" 1091.060cases	1,1993,175Opium7.051Bice ...piculs	1.S06J8.836Sundries83.261Treasure81,738     TOTAL VALUE*188,745       Brought forward566,178       Total Value to Date ...$704,9281906?$663,431          0. C. ROBISON.            Reyietrar of Trade.ARRIVALS.
PEK S. S. Alice Lorraine -.—From Sibu, 2nd July. Mr. A. J. Cutfield.
PER s. s. Kuching: -From Singapore, 4th July, Mr. A. S. Hitchcock.
PER S. S. Rajah of SarawakFrom Singapore, 11 th July, H. F. Hilton.
PER p. s. AdehFrom Limbang, 11th July, Mr. H. E. Pope.
The 15th July, Mr. F. F. Boult from Lundu arrived by boat.
PER s. s. Alice Lorraine-.—From Sibu via Lingga, 16th July, Messrs. II. S. B. Johnson, F. A. W. Page-Turner, and the Revd. A. Hopfgartner.
PEB H. H. S. Zahora :—From Simanggang via Sodong, 20th July, His Highness the Rajah, Dr. and Mrs. Wellington, Messrs. D. J. S. Bailey, O. Lang, P, Gordon White aud E. R. Naysmith.
PER p. s. AdeltFrom the North. 21st July, Mess -;. Ward and Vivian.
I’F.R S. S. KitchingFrom Singapore, 25th July, Capt. and Lady Evelyn Young and Maid, Mr. Mr. and Lady Rowena Paterson and Maid, Messrs. W. S. Gibson. F. G. Day, E. H- Williams, Roebelcn and Bell.
DEPARTURES.
PEK s. R. Rajah of SarawakFor Singapore, 2nd July, • Messrs. R. Mitchell and C. A. Bell.
PER p. s. Adeh: -For Brooketon, 4th July, Mr. II. E. Pope.
PER a. s. Alice. Lorraine:—For Sibu, 4th July, Sister Peter and Mrs. J. Mowc.
PER s. s. Kuching:—For Singapore, 9th July, Messrs. H. R. A. Day. F. G. Day and J. Boyd.
PER S.'S. Sarawak:—For Oya. 14th July, the Revd. Fathers Stotter and Mulder.
PER LI. II. S. Zahora: -For Lingga, 15th July, His Highness the Rajah accompanied by Dr. and Mrs. Wellington.
PER p. s. Aden : For Brooketon, 15th July, The Revd. Father A. Mulder.
PER.S. s. Alice Lorraine. For Lingga. 19th July, the Right Revd. Bishop Hose.
PER 8. g. Kuching: — For Singapore. 23rd July, Mr. and .Mrs. H. D. Ellis. Mrs. Waddell and Mr. Hilton.
PER s. 1. Young Harry -. For Sadong, 23 d July. Mr. E. R. Naysmith.
PER p. s. haka -. For Sibu, 23rd July, Very Revd. Father E. Dunn.
PER S. S. Rajah of SarawakFor Singapore, 31st July, Gapt. and Lady Evelyn Young and maid Mr. and Lady Rowena Paterson and maid, Messrs. W. S. Gibson, R. Pawle, Roebelen and the Revd. Father Hoyden.
PER H. H. S. Zdhora :—For Matang, 31st July, Their Highnesses the Rajah and Rajah Muda.
Tiirsimim liiimr
ALMANAC.
AUGI'ST, 1007.
’ En-i Chi-lonths.!
iates. =| MOON'S PHASES, F.TC. 1st Last quarter (
9th New moon • 17th First quarter Jj 23rd Full moon '
    31st Last quarter >1 High
, water at Kuching
A. M. J>. ML
ih. in. | h. in.1 'Veek-1i Month. |rj Moous. r=se.
i 1<-—Th162821110 21'10 46F S324 ’25s22
23	11 1111 39
     0 8s126-A24x. Sun. ufter Trinity.1 0 43 I 21M“2725Sarawak Museum opened, 1891...1 59 2 33Tu6i28263 6 3 35W
Th829
3027
28Sheriff Sahib attacked A-deleated [1844;4 2 4 26
4 47 5 7F
S9
10129
I J. Corouatiou of King Edward VII.
[1992.5 26! 5 44
j 6 0| 6 17?113%i. Nun. after Trinity. .6 33' 6 50M124—3i 7 7 7 24Tu w Th F S s M Tu W Th F S
S M Tu W Th F 8Ci wG to IC IC IC IO IC IC IC IC tc — H- ?— — b— — »- o 'C x -i cr. o* OG tc o o x -1 c J- _cc•
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
234
;
8 9
10 11 12
13 14
15 16 17
18 I19 ?jn 21 >22	
Sir Ju*. Brooke 1st arrival in Kil l [cliing 1839.
xii. Nun. after Trinity ..
SI. Bartholomew.	..	..
xiii. Nun. after Trinity..
Sir.Tns. Brooke 2nd arrival 1810..7 41 7 59
8 15 8 32
8 49 9 9
9 31 9 54
|10 17 10 44
11 1311 47
     0 24
1 6 1 48
2 28 3 6 ,3 42 4 12
4 40 5 6
5 30 5 58
6 16 6 38
7 0 7 22
7 43 8 3
8 22| 8 41
8 59 9 18
9 3!)! 10 0
10 23H0 48

201
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 5, 1907.
Arrivals.
DATE.     NAME OF \ ESSKL.NAME OF CAPTAIN.WHERE
1CHINESE.
X«lr. female.NATIVES OF INDIA. U«lr. Hmde-| OTHER ASIATICS.
FrMte.TOTAL.1907. June4Bg. Bandar LaneGaparS’kawang153     186S. S. Kuching	..iW. WaddellSingapore16636 ...104    1898BoatBujangPamungkat2      28P. S. KakaBundongj Brooketon522i     2818S. S. Rajah of SarawakE. T. Moxon, Singapore
| Brooketon682*971     8720S. S. Kuchingi W. Waddell10558 ...6    11921P. 8. KakaBandong18      427S. S. Rajah of Sarawak, E. T. Moxon; Singapore82"i2 ...53     934441120 ...53    540Departures.
DATE.     NAME OF VESSEL.1 NAME OF CAPTAIN.WHITHRK
HOVND.CHINESE. NATIVKS] OTHER, OF INDIA. ASIATICS.? TOTAL.?Unfr. ;FJ-wifr. "«>'?M-l'. Fr^ulr.1907.
June 1P. S. K kaBandongBrooketon45 ... I     11I Bdg. Tong kangLai Leong HinSambas33 ... ...... 1 ... I      ft1 S. S. Rajah of SarawakE. T. MoxonSingapore342 1 6 . . 12 1 I I     45BandongMat LokoSambas1	1      1’’	1S. S. KuchingW. WaddellSingapore794	512	2    102       15 |P. 8. KakaBaudongBrooketon68 ... ;     13..	15 1Bg. Bandar LaneTan ShengS’kawang2••• *” I      2       188. S. Rajah of Sarawak1 E. T. MoxonSingapore771	7 ...2 ...     87       19Bdg. Tong kangLoe Chin LoongPamaiigkal111		1     12       25 1S'. S. KuchingW. WaddellSingapore 1GO7	2 .... 15 , I     84	?1	I27618 & ...44	3    363.C. C. ROBISON.
     SHs P iArrivals.Departures.VKHHKL'S NAME.FLAG.= i CAPTAINS OR    I '..AND Rio.£-< NACO DAS.VESSEL’S NAME.1i CAPTAINS ORFROM.1Sri MarionSar. sch.? 80 Jahar
i 189! Jeiuim
1 1401 Jam-eeSadongAND RIG.NAKODAS.Adehit sir.Baran•2Alice LorraineSibu1Kim Chin SiangSar.sch.54I DaudMukaSarawak?1	1946! Hj. MatOya1Tin Fook Leei c.JunkI H. ChoonTatauKian Mob„ sch.66 Seman2Swee Hong Annsch.68I GejehOya3M. N. Sri Jempaka78 Tku. HassanSingapore2Rajah of Sarawakstr.892MoxonSingaporeKuching„ str.903 Waddell4j Adeh189JemanSadong5Sri pembrian
T. K. Bain Arang,, sch.79] Abg. Sap-eiSadong.}Alice Lorraine146Jam-ceSibuC., 64 .UlanSarawak411
78Hj. A. Mat SaitBintnlu<SPutri Dungan5^ UeliDaro6rtim Seng Guan??sch.MukaKaka„ str.1 222- Bandon"! Singapore8Kian Moh66SemanOya8Fa la-hurra h manA sch.101! Hj. Hussin' Oya9Soon Seng B <«W71A. YamauSadong8Ban Senrj ll'aft511 Hj. D’hmanMuka9T. K. Balu Arang64' Allan8Kim Chin Soon59 Hj. Sa-at' Bintnin9Kuchingstr.90;> WaddellSingapore9Sarawak„ str.461 Hj. Mat10Kaka22a Bandong 80' JaharBaram11Bajali of Sarawak««	M892 MoxonSingapore10j Sri Marionsell*Sadong11Adeh       ..189 JcmiuiLimbang1!Sri Pembrian79 Abg.Supo.ee12Kim Watt Ann„ sch.67 HnssinMuka11M. N. Sri Jim pa hai 73 Tku. HassanMuka12Kim Chin SiangJi	?154' Daud18Kim Chin Soon1 59Hj. Sa-nt15T. K. Batu Arang»• ««64 AllanSadong14Saran’akstr.46Hj. A MatOya15Sri Marion11	*1SO' JaharSibu15Adeh189JemanLimbang16Alice Lorraine„ str.140 Jara-ee15Putri Dungunsch.52DeliDaro17Kaka«» w22a BandongBaram15Kim Watt Ann67BusinMukti17Kim Chin Tcck„ sell.51 Hj AseimMatu15Fatahorrahman101Hj. HussinOya17Sure Hong AnnM	1168 GcjehOya16Rajah of Sarawak Sri Marionstr.892MoxonSingapore17Soon Seng Wattt|	»i71 A. lamanSadong17sch.! 80JaharSadong18Sin Stan Ann»	t *Oya10Alice Lorrainestr.140Jnra-eeSibu18Kim Seng Guan**	M73 SaitMuka19T. K. Batu Arangsch.64AllanSadong18Sri Pembrian1'979 Abg. Sap-ei
903 WaddellSadong10Soon Seng Walt i„ i71A. Yam an18Kuching„ strJSingaporeSarawakstr.,HiHj. A. Mat Abg. Sup-eeBintulu18SarawakIt	tt46 Hj. MatSri Pembriansch.79Sadong21Adeh1 f189 JemanLimbangKakastr.: Bnndong Hi. AssimSibu21Kim	Ann„ sch.07 HussinMukaKim Chin TcckM-h."5LMatu21Sri Marion11	1180 JaharSadong28Swee Hong Ann158 Hi. Amin 903,' WaddellSadong21T. K. Batu Arang64 AllanBintulu28KuchingSar. str.Singapore** 1Sarawak„ str.46 Hj. MatSin Sian Ann*'<’ ’ I50GaniOya25Rajah of Sarawak     8<ih.892 MoxonSingapore?c.Kim Seng Guan73SaitMuti’* .Kim Chin Soon59 Hj. Sa-ntMuka.?Adehstr.189JemanSingapore25Scon Seng Wall11	1,71 A. YamauSadongSri Marion	.80JaharTatau26Kian Moh•«G6! SemanOya•JHSaiawakstr.46Hj. A. MatMaka28Kim Chin Siangi»	li54 DaudMukaKim Bull /hmsch.67Hj. Husiu27Sri Pembrianli	j, ?79 Abg. Sap-eiSadong.HISoon Srng H'atf71A. YamauSadong29Swee Hong AnnH	i,68 Hj. Amin    .»31Kim Chin Soon59Hj. Sa-atMuka29Putri Dungani,	W52 DeliDaro21!Kian Moh66SemanOya29M. N. Sri Jempaka78 Tku. HassanMuka"jRajah of Sarawakstr.892MoxonSingapore

THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 5, 1907.
•202
METEOROLOGICAL READINGS.
KUCHING OBSF.KVATOUY.
Observations Taken Daily at 8 a. m. July, 1907.
TEMPERATURE.
fl
1
2
3 4
5
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
18
19
20
•21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
3005 3006 30 06 30.04 30 02 30-04 30 04 80 04 3004 30 05 30 04 30 00 29 94 2997 30 00 29 94 £993 29-95 29 97 29 93 30 04 29-95 29-95 29 97 2997 £9 9u 29 94 3000 3000
29 96 29-96

888
89-U
90 2 S8-5
85 6
85-7
890 86-8 89-2 86 4
88-2 87.2 86-5 87 0
864 796
853 811
87 0 89-4 89-6 gj-o
898 92-6 92-7
889 92 1
898 81-6
89.3 89-7
73-5
71 3
72-3
72-9 73 9 70 3
74-4 71.5 731 72-6 72 9 72-5 71 8
737 73-8
72 8 78-3
73 7 72 1 740 725 719 70-4 72-2
71 9 71-8 72-4 729 72-8

790 75-3
76 1 784
74 3 77-3
76 4 76-8 76-7
76 1 75-1 751
74 1 76 7 771
77 6 74 1
76 7 76 9 81-7
731 77-9 77-3 770 768 771 786 754 78-1
75-7
759 739 73-5 76 0 78-3
74-6 74 6 74-8 74 3 74-8 7! I 74 2 733 757 753 76-3 73 3 74 8 75 3 77 6 74-6 73 8 74 9 73-5 73-8 750 75-6 72-9 75 4 73-4
73 2 70-9 71-4 723 73 6
70 0 74 0 71.3 730 72-3
713
73 2 73-3
73 0
72 9
71-5
73-1
719
710
69 5
71-6
713
71 3
721
72-3
159-2
125-2
155-2
1466
138-8
1524
151-6
154 0
1550
148.6
150 8s
151-2
146 4
145 6
146 0
136-4
145 4
1332
1450
1450 147-2
147-8
1460
119 9
147-6
150-2
154-0
148-2
109 0
154-4
150 0
3
J
I
Fine Dull Fino do
Dull Fine do do do do
Dull do
Fine do
Dull Fino do
Dull Fine do do do do do do do do do
Dull Fine do
hrs. min.
4 30
1 30
710
7 00
5 10
6 40
8.20 530 8-30 4-50
4-30 2-30
5-10
510
4-10
1-20 2-40
50
4 50 4-40 610 7-20 6-30
10-10 10-30
900 6-40
4 30 1-10 630 600
Highest recorded temperature 92-7 eF.
Lowest „	„	70 4 "F.
Total rainfall during the month	5.75 inches.
Height of observatory above sea level 100 feet approximately.
47 06 67 01
30 37
14 06 03 04 04
37
32
09
45
02
2-31
KUCHING:—Printed and Published by GUIN HSIO SO^X Government Print ir, at the Saranac (rusc'te Otic*.
Nos. 1», 20. and 21, Court House Road.

