
VOL. XXXVII.

No. 493.

— — CONTENTS.
—?—
ORDERS: —Export of Straits Dollars prohibited—Jinricksha Fares—Sailors taking discharge—Adulteration of Gutta Jangka.'
NOTIFICATIONS: —Outstation Money Orders—Consul for Sarawak— Post cards.
NOTICES: —Bankrupt Estates. Ban—Probate (Ban)—Unclaimed Court Deposits, Mukah	Export Duties--— Bankruptcy Court, Kuching— Sarawak Library.
COMMITTEE OF ADMINISTRATION—SUPREME COUNCIL—APPOINTMENTS— RETIREMENTS—RETURN OF H. H. The RAJAH MUDA—OBITUARY—SARAWAK REGATTA ACCOUNTS—GOLF CLUB ACCOUNTS—GOLF—CHRISTMAS FESTIVITIES AT SIBU —OUR NOTES—DIARY OF VISIT TO SINGHI.
YEARLY REPORT: —Limbang.
MONTHLY REPORTS: —Lower Rejang—Trusan—Oya—Baroni Kapit—Lawas—Upper Rejang (Sibu)—Kalaka—Bintulu —Muka— Lundu—Sadong—Bau —Matang Estate	 Liuibang.
ADVERTISEMENTS—TRADE RETURNS—RAINFALL—SHIPPING PASSENGERS—ALMANAC—METEOROLOGICAL READINGS.
The Sarawak Gazette
MONDAY, FEBRUARY 4, 1907.
Order-
No. XIII, 1906.
   WHEREAS His Excellency The Governor of the Straits Settlements has notified the Sarawak Government that it is his intention to shortly issue an order prohibiting the exportation of Straits dollars to all places except to Sarawak. British North Borneo and the Malay Peninsula, and whereas His Excellency has requested that this Government will assist by taking all possible steps to prevent the exportation of Straits dollars from Sarawak to China or elsewhere, it is hereby enacted :—
   That from date of this Order the exportation of Straits dollars to any place outside Sarawak except to the Straits Settlements or
British North Borneo is forbidden and any person disobeying this Order will be punished by fine or imprisonment.
By Order
                 P. F. CUNYNGHAME,
Resident 1st Division.
Administering the Government of Sarawak.
Resident's Office,
Kuching, Sarawak, 24th October, 1906.
Order-
                No. XIV, 1906.
   THE following is to be added to the table of fares for hire of Jinrickshas, Order No. I of 26th February 1896.
   If engaged by time
     For every hour	.... 25 cents.
     For every additional
1 hour .... 6 cents.
P. F. CUNYNGHAME, Resident 1st Division.
   Resident's Office,
Sarawak, 5th November 1906.
Order.
                 No. I, 1907.
   SAILORS signing “Articles’' for a year and working on board Government vessels are not allowed in future to take their discharge or elect substitutes without first making application at the Resident’s Office.
   Certificates of discharge to sailors to be issued only by the Shipping Master.
   See Order August 28th, 1899.
C. V. BROOKE, Rajah Muda. Kuching, Sarawak, 31st January, 1907.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 4, 1907.
Order.
No. II, 1907.
   WHEREAS complaint has been made that Gutta Jangka is being brought into the market. adulterated with raw sago, clay and other foreign matter.
   1 hereby direct that any person or persons found guilty of the adulteration of Gutta Jangka or other jungle produce shall be punished by a tine of not exceeding §1(K) or by imprisonment for not exceeding six months, and the adulterated produce may be confiscated at the discretion of the Court.
   Vide Order re Adulteration of Gutta Jelutong. 15th April, 1902.
C. V. BROOKE, Rajah Muda* Kuching, Sarawak.
     31st January, 1907.
Notice.
No. Ln, 190(i.
re Lai Jew Hin, chop Ilin Hup. (Absconded). Trader in Shak Lung Mun Bazaar.
re Tseyo Nyong Poh, chop Foong Hap, (Absconded ). Trader in Bau Bazaar.
   ALL creditors and other persons having any claims whatsoever against the Estates of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned within three (3) months from date, after which date the assets of the above named will be’divided amongst the parties entitled thereto, regard being had only to those claims of which notice shall have been given. And all monies owing to the above estates shall be paid to the undersigned forthwith.
E. R. STILWELL.
Resident, Upper Sarawak.
     Bau,
November Gth, 1906. .
Notice.
                 No. LV, 1906.
In re Soong Kwec Long, Chop Ngee Thai. (Absconded.) Trader in Bau Bazaar.
   ALL creditors and other persons having any •claim whatsoever against the Estate of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned within three (3) months from date, after which date, the assets of the above named will be divided amongst the parties entitled thereto, regard being had only to those claims of which notice shall have been given. And all monies owing to the above Estate shall be paid to the undersigned forthwith.
E. R. STILWELL, Resident, Upper Sarawak.
          Bau.
November 15th, 1906.
Notice.
                 No. LXI, 1906.
Re Bong Ngee Chin. (Deceased.)
Trader in Shak Lung Mun
Bazaar.
   PROBATE having been granted to Iliew Ah
Jew, wife of deceased, all claims and monies
owing to the said Estate should be sent to her.
E. R. STILWELL.
             Resident, Upper Sarawak,
Bau,
5th December, 1906.
Notice-
                 No. LX 11, 1906.
J^e Tian Sip, chop Jee Kce.
\( Absconded.) Trader in Tun-
dong Bazaar.
   ALL creditors and other persons having any
claim whatsoever against the Estate of the
above named are hereby requested to send
particulars thereof to the undersigned within
three months from date, after which date the
assets of the above named will be divided
amongst the parties entitled thereto regard
being had only to those claims of which notice
shall have been given. And all monies owing
to the above Estate shall be paid to the under-
signed forthwith.
E. R. STILWELL,
Resident, Upper Sarawak.
        Bau,
5th December, 1906.
Notice.
                 No. LXIII, 1906.
   THE following sums now in deposit in the
Court of Bequests. Mukah, if not claimed on
or before 31st March, 1907, will revert to
Government.
             For	From
          Hj. Daud	Lating	$1.60
          Tari	Salleh Nor	3.50
          Hj. Tahir	Taril	4.00
          Hj. Rais	Dulamit	5.50
Total	$14.60
A. E. LAWRENCE,
Magistrate, Court of Reguests.
Notification.
                 No. LXIV. 1906.
     Outstation Money Orders.
   NOTIFICATION of 17th January 1906 is here-
by cancelled and the following regulations are
substituted and will come into force on 1st
January 1907.
   After receipt of the amount of the money
order required and the commission (2 cents
on every dollar or part of a dollar, with a


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 4, 1907.
23
minimum of 10 t ents) Officers in charge of I Outstations may issue, cheques on the Sarawak Treasury for Money Orders on the following places or countries.
     1. Kuching (maximum $100).
12. United Kingdom (maximum £40) and through the United Kingdom on various British Dependencies and Foreign countries, (For maximum and other particulars see postal Guide.)
    3. Straits Settlements (maximum $100.)
4. Federated Malay States (maximum $100.)
5. India and through India on Burma -and Ceylon (maximum Rs*. 600.)
• I. These orders are intended for payment of email accounts only ?and should not be issued to traders who may appear to be making use of them for their usual trade remittances.
| 2, Orders issued through the United Kingdom are subject to the following deductions in London when being advised to the country of payment.
            For sums not exceeding	Ski.
            For every additional £5 or fraction thereof 3d.
   No order may contain a fraction of a cent, of a penny or of an anna. Orders on or “through” the United Kingdom and India should he calculated in accordance with the tables supplied by the Post Office, and the commission added.
   The cheques, accompanied by the special printed application form (Outstation Money- Order application), should be drawn in favour of, and forwarded to, the Postmaster General, Kuching.
   In the case of Money Orders (1) on Kuching, (2) on or through the United Kingdom and (3) on the Strait Settlements, an actual form of Money Order is issued for transmission to the payee and in order- to avoid delay, and provided the application is accompanied by a fully stamped and addressed envelope, the Money Order will be forwarded to him direct by the Kuching Post Office at the remitter’s risk; otherwise it will be sent to the Postal Officer applying.
   The envelope may contain the remitters advice to the payee but the Post Office accepts no responsibility in case of loss and it is advisable to send it separately.
   In the case of Money Orders on (4) the Federated Mala}- States and (5) on or through India no form of Money Order is issued to the remitter as the paying office issues and forwards a Money Order to the payee, and the above paragraph as to stamped and addressed envelope does not therefore apply.
   A form of acknowledgment will be forwarded by the Kuching office to the Postal Officer applying, for transmission to the remitter who should retain same and advise the payee as to remittance.
By order of the Officer
Administering the Government.
C. C. ROBISON,
                          Postmaster-General, 1st January, 1907.
Notice.
No. LXV, 1906.
re Phoong Sam Choon. (Deceased.) Shareholder in the firm of chopThoongOn Thai. Trader in Bau Bazaar.
   PRORATE having been granted to Ng Ah Lian, wife of deceased, and Chiew Fook the remaining partner, all claims and monies owing to the said Estate should be sent to them.
H. B. CROCKER,
Assistant Resident.
       Bau,
December L9th 1906.
Notice.
                No. LXVI, 1906.
   FROM 1st January 1907 and until further Notice duties upon the undermentioned articles will be as follows:—
    Fish Maws No. 1 per catty .20 cts.
      „	„	2	.15 „
      „	„	3	„	„	.10 „
    Gutta Jangkar	per picnl $1.50
    White Pepper	,,	1.25 ..
    Black Pepper	,,	„	1.00
    By order of the Officer Administering the Government.
C. C. ROBISON,
Superintendent of Customs.
21st December, 1906.
Notification.
No. LXVH, 1906.
   His Majesty the King having been pleased to appoint Malcolm Stewart Hannibal McArthur, Esqr. Consul for Sarawak, His Highness the Rajah hereby directs that he be received with the usual salute and honours whenever he visits Sarawak and that all Officers in the Service shall do their utmost to assist him in his duties and pay him the respect due to his rank.
           By His Highness’ Command
P. F. CUNYNGHAME,
Officer administering the Government.
     Kuching.
December 29th, 1906.
Notification.
No. LXVUI, 1906.
Post-Cards.
   POST-CARDS impressed with a stamp of the value of one cent, and double or reply-paid Post-Cards impressed with a stamp of the value of one cent on each portion of them, may be transmitted between places in Sarawak. These cards can be forwarded to other places outside of Sarawak, if the additional postage required is supplied by means of postage stumps affixed to the cards.


24
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 4, 1907.
In re. JpngTsin Hin f. alias Lai
Chin Hin f. and Jong Ngok,
owners of pepper garden No.
84 B Chop Sin Faw Shoon at
Singghi landing and two shop
houses at Busan.
   ALL creditors and other persons having any
claims whatsoever against the Estates of the
above named are hereby requested to send
particulars thereof to the undersigned within
three (3) months from date, after which date
the assets of the above named will be dividea
amongst the parties entitled thereto, regard
being had only to those claims of which notice
shall have been given. And all monies owing
to the above Estates shall be paid to the un-
designed forthwith.
  E. R. STILWELL,
Resident, Upper Sarawak.
Bau,
January 1st, 1907.
            Notice.
No. II, 1907.
IN THE BANKRUPTCY COURT, KUCHING.
In the goods of Lim Sam Kwi,
pepper planter of 11 mile Rock
Road. (Absconded.}
In the goods of Joug Nuik Lee,
pepper planter of Simunggo.
( A bsconded.)
In the goods of Ng Pai, pepper
planter of Simunggo.
conded.)
In the goods of Wong Uh, Dho-
bi, of Kuching. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Tian Joo Fai,
Chop Tian Nyuk Lee, shop-
keeper and pepper planter of
SungieMoyau. (Fraudulent
Bankrupt.)
In the goods of Kuan Kiew and
Kuan Lin, pepper planters of
Paku. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Chong Peng,
pepper planter of Sungie
Tenga. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Liew Hee Kwee,
pepper planter of Samaraban.
(A bsconded.)
   All creditors and other persons having any
claim whatsoever against the Estates of the
above named are hereby requested to send
particulars thereof to the undersigned on or
before the 15th April, 1907, after which date
the assets of the above named will be divided
amongst the parties entitled thereto regard
being had only to those claims of which notice
shall have been given. And all moneys owing
to the above Estates shall be paid to the
undersigned forthwith.
JOHN E. A. LEWIS,
Resident 2nd Class.
     Bankruptcy Court,
Kuching, 30th January, 1907.
Post-Cards impressed with a stamp of the value of
4 cents and double or reply paid Postcards impress-
ed with a stamp of the value of 4 cents on each por-
tion of them, may be sent to all parts of the world.
Private Post-Cards.
Private post-cards will be accepted by the Post !
Office in Sarawak for transmission under the follow-
ing conditions:—
(a) Private post-cards must be composed of ordinary card-
board, or paper sufficiently stout not to hinder their manipula- 9
tion; they must not exceed a maximum size of 51 inches by
inches, and the minimum size must not be less than 4 inches
by 2J inches. Prepayment of a private Post-can! addressed 9
to any place in Sarawak, can be effected by means of a one- j
cent Sarawak postage stamp affixed to it; and if addressed to ‘
any other destination prepayment can be effected by means of I
a Sarawak postage stamp or stamps for 4 cents affixed to it.
(b) Double or reply-paid private post-cards will be accepter!, 9
and postage can be prepaid by stamps affixed as stated above
to each half of the double card.
(c) The inscription “Post-cards" is not compulsory for
single post-cards of private manufacture, but the reply halves
of private double cards must bear the title “Post-cards.” In
no case is any other heading prescribed.”
(d) A private Post-card posted without a postage stamp
will be charged, on delivery, with double postage per single
card or for each half of a reply card.
Rules Applying to Official and Private Post-Cards.
(1) Post-cards bearing written or printed communications
on the left hand half of the address side can be sent to al!
British Possessions to which penny postage applies and to
certain other countries already notified. It is not compulsory
to affix the postage stamps to the address side, but the public
is strongly urged to do so.
(2) Engravings or advertisements, provided they do not inter-
fere in any way with the clear indication of the address or with
the stamping or marking of the Postal Service, may appear on
the front of a card, in addition to the name and address of the
recipient in writing or on a gummed label not exceeding 2
inches by J inch, and the name and address of the sender indi-
cated in writing, or by means of a hand stamp, stamping
machine or any other typographical process.
(3) In addition to stamps for prepayment Post-cards may
bear address-labels as above described, and engravings, illus-
trations. drawings and photographs on very thin paper may be
affixed to the back or to the left hand half of the address side,
provided they are completely adherent.-
(4) A Post-Card must not be folded, cut or otherwise altered. '
(5) Cit nit bearing the inscription “ Pont-card” are allow- ,
cd to go at the reduced rate of pottage for printed matter. '
prorided they conform to the general regulation* respecting 9
printed paper*. If they are not in accordance with the regula-
tion* for printed paper* or with the rule* applicable to Post-
card* they are treated a* letter*.
(6) The sender of a reply-paid Post-Card is recommended
to write his name and address on the stamped side of the reply
portion of the double card- The reply halves of double Post-
Cards are available for return to the country of origin, and to
that country only. If addressed to other countries they are
treated as unpaid Post-Cards
(7) Ordinary international Post-Cards of one country posted
in another are treated as unpaid Post-Cards.
     * These regulations will apply to Post-Cards of all kinds whether
addressed to places in the United Kingdom Sarawak, the Straits Settle-
ments, Federated Malay States or Johore; but. although there is reason
to believe that the same course will be generally adopted, no guarantee
ean at present be given that the aame privileges will be allowed by the
Post Offices of other Countries.
C. C. ROBISON,
Postniaster-Genera I.
Notice.
No. I, 1907.
In re Jee See Kwee. Gold-
smith in Sbak Lung Mun
Bazaar. (A bsconded).
In re Jong Khiook, Chop Jong
Khiook Hap. Trader in Shak
Lung Mun Bazaar.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 4, 1907.
25
Notice.
Sarawak Library.
' SUBSCRIBEBS are requested to send to the i Honorary Secretary lists of such books as  they wish added to the library.
H. A. ADAMS, Acting Honorary Secretary.
COMITTER
OF
       ADMINISTRATION
ASTANA.
               Kuching, 28th January, 1907.
Present.
     His HIGHNESS THE RAJAH MUDA,
The Acting Treasurer	(Mr. G. C. Gillan.)
.... ,r , f(Abang Mohamad
The Vatu Muda	}
The Data Hakim .... (Haji Mohamad Ali.)
    THE Committee of Administration was convened this day when His Highness the Rajah Muda announced that owing to his return the Committee would now cease to act. and that the Supreme Council would take its place. His Highness thanked the Members both European and Native for the manner in which affairs had been conducted during the period the Committee had been in force.
    SUPREME COUNCIL.
    A meeting of the Supreme Council was then held, at which no business of importance transpired.
GEORGE C. GILLAN,
Acting Recorder.
     APPOINTMENTS.
    His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to make the following appointments :—
    C. E. V. Collins, Esq., to be a Cadet to date from 10th January, 1907, and to do duty in Upper Sarawak at Bau.
    J. T. Chynoweth, Esq., to be a Cadet to date from 10th January, 1907, and to do duty temporarily in the Treasury.
    H. La Chard, Esq., Cadet, to do duty at Simanggang to date from 25th January, 1907.
Retirement.
    Da. J. White Hopkins, Medical Officer, retires from the Service on completion of his agreement.
Return of II. II. The Rajah Muda.
—?—
ON the 17ch January, by s. s. Kuching II. H. The Rajah Muda returned, after an absence of nearly nine months from the Country, travelling from England ui<l America and Japan. On the arrival of the Kuching Mr. J. E. A. Lewis, in the absence of the Hon’ble The Resident, went on board to meet His Highness, other Government Officials and Europeans attending at the Astana steps. A Guard of Honour of the Sarawak Rangers with Band under the command of the Acting Commandant was drawn up outside the Astana. After the usual short reception in the Astana everyone dispersed with a general expression of pleasure that the Rajah Muda had returned and was looking so well after his holiday.
Obituary.
Baroness Burdett-Coutts.
BARONESS Burdetts-Coutts, who had been suffering from bronchitis for several days, died on 30th ult. at her house in Stratton-street, London, at the age of 92. Angela Burdett was a daughter of Sir Francis Burdett, and grand-daughter of Air. Thomas Coutts, the richest private banker in England. In 1837 she inherited from her step-grandmother, the Duchess of St. Albans, a huge fortune amounting to nearly two millions in cash, and half the profits of the famous bank in the Strand, and her life has been an unexampled exhibition of princely but unostentatious charity in the widest sense of that sometimes abused term. Beyond all the examples of her munificence at home, such as the building of Columbia market, the foundation of various model town schools for girls, and dozens of other benefactions, there were enterprises which she directed or aided in the Imperial sphere. Her connection with Borneo may be recalled. When Sir James Brooke returned to this Country, depressed with his failure to obtain Government recognition for his project at Sarawak and smarting under a sense of the injustice done to him by public opinion, he had the good fortune to meet Miss Burdett-Coutts at Torquay. She soon grasped the probabilities of the situation at Labuan, and provided the eager “Raja” with the one thing, as he conceived it, necessary to make his authority effective. She presented him with a steamer, fully found, and allowed him in addition a subsidy towards the expense of administration. How successful from the patriotic standpoint the investment has proved our protectorate and the operations of the company declare. When the famous Raja Brooke died he made provision by will whereby, in default of any successor to his immediate heir, Baroness Burdett-Coutts was to take measures for retaining Sarawak as a British possession, and she duly executed a trust for this purpose. A model farm, designed to train the Dyaks in the art as well as the habit of agriculture, was for many years a specific indication of her interest in the people. The late Baroness is to be buried to-morrow in Westminster Abbey, close to the statue of Lord Shaftesbury, after lying in state at her residence in Stratton-street.
(London and China Express, January 4th 1907.)


26	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 4, 1907.

Golf club Account*.
January 9th, 1907.
To the Editor,
       Sarawak Gazette.
   SIR.—I beg to hand you for publication the ac-
counts of the Sarawak Golf Club for 1906.
Yours faithfully.
GEORGE C. GILLAN.
Honorary Secretary.
            Receipt.
Balance from 1905	$ 71.03
H. H. the Rajah’s donation 72.00
Subscriptions	314.50
Locker Fees	7.00
Entrance fee* to Competitions 15.00
Sale of old balls	40
r*YllEXTS.

*509.93
*509.93
Golf.
BI-MONTHLY MEDAL.
25th July, 1906.
   1 J. M. Bryan	scratch	45
   2 G. C. Gillan	„	59
   Messrs. Desbon, Robison, Adams and Hopkins returned no scores.
    No Competitions in . august and September.
        OCTOBER, ‘BOGEY’ COMPETITION.
31st October, 1906.
1 C. C. Robison
2 J. S. W. Bean
3 G. C. Gillan
4 G. M. Allman
rec.	8	4
„	4	5
scratch 6 rec.	9	8
         No Competition in November.
CHALLENGE CUP.
3rd January, 1907.
1 H. B. Crocker	44.	47= 91	less	1	90
2 G. C. Gillan	48,	45= 93	scratch	93
3 G. M. Allman	56,	57=113	less	18	95
4 J. S. W. Bean	49,	55=104	„	8	96
5 H. D. Ellis	58,	53=111	„	12	99
Mr. C. C. Robison no return.
        DECEMBER * BJGEY ’ COMPETITION.
5th January, 1907.
1 G. C. Gillan	scratch	6 down
2 J. M. Bryan „	7
Messrs. Ellis and Allman no returns.
Christmas Festivities at Slim.
? ?
Unusual interest was shown in the third division this year for the festivities arranged by a special committee under the chairmanship of the Hon'ble Dr. C. Hose for the end of the year at Sibu. Unfortunately the weather was anything but favourable; the almost incessant rains with an occasional storm by way of intermezzo and the high spring tides united to cool the ardour of both players and spectators. Still, everybody seemed to make the best of it, and one could witness at times great outbursts of joy and wonder; particularly so when, on the evening of December 27th, there was a successful display of fireworks. “Apoo, apoo. apoo”, were the shouts of the astonished Dyaks. when the rockets rose high up in the air and then burst into globes of various colours (“marik nadai madas nya”, they would exclaim).
Besides the fireworks there was a highly appreciated and well contested Regatta.
SIBU REGATTA.
Boat Race.—Sixteen long boats entered for this race with from forty to seventy men paddling in each boat.
Abang Anist and Haji Wahap’s Lang Manyambar being first, Abang Gapor and Maurice Than's Sri Tanjong taking the second place and Abang Ali's Singa Terbang third. First prize $20. Second prize $10. Third prize $5.
Sailing Race.—Twenty-five boats entered for this race, the winner being Sulong's Buntal Mas, Hj. Dra- him's I ng at Ingat second, and Dr. Charles Hose’s Skimalong third. First prize $7. Second prize $3. Third prize $1.50
The Race for small boats limited to five men in each boat was won by Mr. Lawrence's Batang Bra- nyut, second Ali’s Bujang Sibu, and Nglambai’s Bujang Pulu third. Thirty-two boats entered. First prize $3. Second prize $2. Third pri/e $ 1.
The second race for large boats holding forty to seventy men in each boat was won by Abang Gapor and Maurice Than's Sri Tanjong, Munan and Tsze Fook's Bujang Entimau second. First prize $10. Second prize $5.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 4, 1907.
27
   Jn Obstacle Race which caused considerable nmuHcmcnt was won by A. Atap. Cut School Boy; Puno (of the same school) being second; Elat mid P. C. Haling being third and fourth. Twenty seven men entered. First prize $4. Second $2 Third ’$1. Fourth 50 cents.
   On December 29th a Luncheon was given at the Residency, to which 164 persons sat down. Sixteen of these were Europeans and all the rest natives. Besides the more prominent Malays and Chinese of Sibu many visitors also attended this “makan besar ”, and all heartily joined in the Selamat to Mrs. Hose who presided upstairs, while Dr. CL Hose and Mr. Shaw presided on the ground floor.
FOOTBALL.
   Not the least interesting feature was a Football competition for a challenge cup, presented by Mrs. Hose.
   The teams who entered for the cup were as follows:—
   Sibu United (colours red and black).
   The Wasps, Abang Maling's team (colours black with yellow stripe.)	*
   The Cut School (colours rdU shirt with green sash).
   Oya (colours mauve and white).
   Mukah (colours white).
   Mukah School (colours grey).
THE FIRST ROUND.
   In every game Europeans acted as referee and linesmen, and Mrs. Hose had the first kick off in the first match between the p. s. Adeh and the Sibu United. The ground was poor and towards the end of the game there was a regular downpour of rain. The p. s. Adeh had an excellent goal-keeper on the field and also a Tamil of remarkable agility. Both teams played with much spirit and the p. s. Adeh beat Sibu United by two goals to one.
   The next two teams in the contest were Mukah versus Oya.
   The tides had almost completely inundated the field of play; only here and there one could see a small islet, which gave occasion to the not unnatural question: “Shall I send you a boat?" At times the ball was literally floating about the field. Nobody could expect a spirited game on such a ground nor a real trial of skill in football. However, at the end of the hour the score stood Mukah one goal and Oya nil.
   The Match between Mukah School and the Sibu Wasps was a hot game in more senses than one and ended in a draw of three goals all. In playing off the draw both teams were one man short, and the Mukah School managed to beat the Wasps by one goal to nil.
   The Cut School had drawn a bye.
THE SECOND ROUND.
   P. S. Adeh team scratched, not being able to be present, and Mukah drew a bye. Thus only the two School teams had to play against each other, with the result that the Cut School beat Mukah School by one goal to nil.
FINAL.
   The ground had been cleared of the accumulated mud but remained very slippery. The two teams were a contrast. Mukah had a powerful looking team, with a big, fat, funny man as goal-keeper. The Cut School Boys looked light and slender and had quite a diminutive goal-keeper, but their back was a splendid kick who would securely land the ball in the middle of the enemies’ field. There was hard but not rough play in the final. The chances seemed to be in favour of the Cut, still it was Mukah that scored the first goal, and the Cut only followed suit. At the close of the game each side hud two goals.
   On New Year’s Day the draw was finally played off. The school boys were in excellent form and played with much spirit, whereas the Mukah team looked rather tired. The Cut School beat Mukah by two goals to one and thus gained the much coveted challenge cup for 1906—7 amid loud cheering.
   Mrs. Hose then distributed all the prizes and handed the cup to the smallest boy of the Cut School team, saying: “May you keep it for many years.” Three vigorous cheers were given for Mrs. Hose and Dr. Charles Hose and their son and heir, to which the Honourable the Resident replied.
   The decorations and temporary buildings around the football field were both beautiful and practical.
   The youthful Cut Band had done its best to enliven the proceedings throughout and had certainly attracted many of the natives who always made a rush as soon as the band struck up. Their play was a credit to the bandmaster, the Rev. Fr. Ant. G. Mulder.
   Notwithstanding the annoyance caused by the bad weather, the Christmas week festivities at Sibu proved such a success that before separating the Europeans elected a permanent Third Division Sports Committee, as follows : The Hon. the Divisional Resident as Chairman, Messrs. H. S. B. Johnson as Hon. Treasurer, N. MacPhee as Hon. Secretary, W. J. M. Shaw, F. A. W. Page-Turner. P. Gordon White. A. Cutfield and Fathers A. Stotter and H. Jansen, Abang Ali, AbangMating, Ah Gong. Ah Loi and Ban Hok.
( Contributed.)
OUR Notes.
January.
   THE annual Regatta took place on* New- Year’s Day, as usual, an account of which will be found in our last issue.
   Ox the 2nd the s. s. Bajah of Sarawak sailed for Singapore. Passenger, Dr. Schlech- ter.
   The same day p. s. Kaka sailed for Brooke- ton and Lirabang, via Rejang. Passengers, Messrs. H. S. Young, E. Hose and Melville to Rejang. The s. s. Sarawak also left this day for Bintulu.
   S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore on the 3rd and sailed again for that port on the 8th. Passengers to Singapore—The Hon’ble Sir P. F. Cunynghame, Bart, and Mr. J. O’Hara.
   ON the 4th the Juragan of the Kian Ann reported seeing 3 Chinese bodies floating in the sea outside Muaratebas. Tt is possible that the heavy weather recently experienced has caused much loss to the Chinese fishing fleet.
   ON the 10th s. s. Rajah of Sarawak arrived from Singapore with passengers. Messrs. C. E. V. Collins and J. T. Chynoweth. The same day p. 8. Kaka returned from the North. Messrs. Collins and Chynoweth have both been appointed Cadets in the Government Service.


•28
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 4, 1907.
   S. S. Sarawak returned from Bintulu on the 12th and the A free Lorraine on the 13th.
   P. S. Adeh was despatched to Sibu on the 14th. She took passengers, Messrs. H. H. Everett and G. A. Luke to Rejang and Very Revd. Father Dunn to Sibu.
   ON the 15th s. s. Rajah of Sarawak sailed for Singapore with passenger, Dr. J. W. Hopkins who has retired from the Medical Service at the expiration of his agreement. A large number of friends and others went on board to wish Dr. Hopkins “goodbye.”
   ON the 17th the s. s. Kuching arrived from Singapore. Passenger, His Highness the Rajah Muda.
   ON the 19th p. s. Adeh returned from Sibu. Passengers, Mrs. J. Mowe from Sibu and Mr. Melville from Rejang.
   ON the 21st p. s. Kaka sailed for the North and s. s. Alice Lorraine for Sadong and Sibu.
   S. S. Kuching left for Singapore on the 22nd and s. s. Sarawak for Rejang on the 23rd.
   ON the 24tb s. s. Rajah of Sarawak arrived from Singapore. Passenger, Mr. T. S. Odom of Messrs. Robinson and Co., Singapore.
   ON the 26th s. s. Sarawak returned from Rejang and s. 1. La Fre arrived from Sibu with passenger, Mr. H. S. Young.
   S. S. Rajah of Sarawak sailed for Rejang on the 27th (Sunday.) After loading machinery at Rejang she was to proceed to Singapore.
   THE p. s. Kaka returned from Limbang and Brooketon vid Kidurong on the 28th. Passenger, Sister Laurentia from Brooketon, and Mr. V. W. Harington from Bintulu.
   ON the 30th p. s. .Adeh sailed for Sadong, Lingga and Sibu. Passengers, the Ven. Archdeacon Sharp and Mr. H. la Chard for Lingga.
   S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore on the 31st. Passenger, Mr. H. C. Brooke Johnson.
Diary of visit to Singhi.
December, 1906.
   Monday 10th.—I left Bau at 7.30 and arrived at Tundong at 9 A. M. There were no Singhi Dyaks to take my luggage but three men from Grogo were pressed to do so and the balance of the things were carried by Chinese coolies. Reached Father Dunn's house at 10.30. The roads were very slippery after the late rain which made walking anything but easy work. Fort Marguerita can be seen plainly from Father Dunn's house bearing 68 30’.
   After lunch I paid a call on the Sisters and then ascended to the summit of the hill. My aneroid shewed a difference of level of 1800' between the
Court House at Bau and the top of the hill and gave a reading of 550'for Father Dunn’s house. Then about half way up the hill it came on to rain very heavily and consequently the view was much restricted though Kuala Lundu was plainly seen. The top of the hill is a very narrow ridge and is very precipitous on the other side, there being almost a sheer drop for two or three hundred feet. A space could easily be cleared here for a trig, station but the outlook would be restricted on two sides. On my return I was met by the Orang Kaya whom I had sent for from his farm. lie asked permission to call on me in the evening. The villages here are filthy to a degree and I do not remember ever having seen such numbers of pigs in one place before; the houses are small and built very near the ground and therefore I should say most unhealthy as the pigs mostly live underneath.
   Father Dunn has fenced off a place round the Mission buildings which is nice and clean, and he has planted paddi and jagong here which are doing well.
   He intends building houses here later on for the Christian Dyaks. *
   In the evening the Orang Kaya came to see me and complained that Messrs, the Borneo Company Limited were taking his farming land in the ulii Sungei Tengar for a rubber plantation. I promised to go with him on the morrow and inspect this land.
   Tuesday 11th.—Left at 7.30 A. M. and on arriving at Pa Sait’s house (Kampong Bobak) I was shewn a survey line of the Company’s running due East and West to the foot of Brendang Hill, and passing through two Dyak paddi farms and to the S. of Pa Sait’s Kampong. I am told there are two more lines cut parallel to this one to the North, one to the foot of Sepugu Hill and the other to the foot of Matang but I did not actually see the last one.
   A large slice of the Singhi Dyaks’ farming land certainly falls within these lines and I think it will be hard on them if the Company are allowed to take up all this land. Some of the “paya” at the foot of these hills should certainly be reserved for the Dyaks, at least a mile from the base I should suggest.
   I had intended trying for a deer but could not get any dogs; however, we walked round by a circuitous route through the jungle to the Orang Kaya’s farm and tried for a deer in the “jarami” adjoining the farm, but, having no dogs, failed to put one up though there were undoubtedly deer there. The Orang Kaya's paddi was not looking particularly healthy, the soil appeared to me to be rather too sandy.
   Reached borne at a quarter to four after a very stiff climb and was glad to get a bath and rest, being thoroughly tired.
   The path on this side of the hill—the Matang path -is a very much more difficult ascent than the path from Tundong and in some places a slip would mean a very dangerous fall.
   In the evening I attended the usual “at home” at the Orang Kayo's house. All the Tuah Kampongs were present and the usual proceedings took place. I left early being somewhat tired.
   Wednesday 12th — Having strained my ankle slightly yesterday I did not feel equal to the walk to Grogo so went to the foot of the hill and tried for a deer. No luck. In the evening went with Father Dunn through his farm land down to the waterfall. There are four falls here, the top one being about 30’ high and the last about GO', the two intermediate ones being about 10’ each.
   The water unfortunately is not as pure as it might IM? as it contains the drainage from the Dyak villages above. Father Dunn has made a new path down this way which is a much easier gradient than any of the others.
Rained heavily at 0.30 p. M. SO gave up the idea


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 4, 1907.
2$
of going back through Grogo. It would not be much use going there at present as the people are all away at their farms and so nothing could he done in the way of revising the roll book.
. Thursday 18th.—Left after breakfast at 8.10 arriving at Tundong at 9.20 A. M.; the river hero was in flood.
   Reached H. H. the Rajah’s bungalow at 10.30 A. M. walking fairly fast. Under favourable conditions the return walk to Bau might be done in two hours— two and a haif being a liberal allowance of time. An extra half an hour should be allowed for the journey out as it is uphill most of the way.
n. B. CROCKER.
YEARLY REPORT.
LIMBANG.
10th January, 1907.
   RAJAH, -I have the honour to report as follows for this district for the year 190(5.
Revenue and Expenditure.
   The Revenue amounted to $13,255.75, an increase over that of 1905 of $1,590.51 notwithstanding a decrease in the farms of $1,440. The accounts which show the larger increases are Customs Account $1,907.97, Court Account $807.44, and Exemption Tax Account $248; the other accounts do not show any important differences.
   The Expenditure amounted to $10,498.02, an increase of $2,267.14. Court Account shows a slight increase of $207.71, General Miscellaneous Account $244.41, Police Account $154.11, and Officers Salaries $2,518; Military Account shows a decrease $950.88. The increase on the expenditure is more than accounted for by that in Officers Salaries which is due to the fact that I was on furlough for eight months in 1905 and that my salary during that time was not charged to the station. The increase in Police Account is due to extra police being taken on when the squad of Rangers was reduced; and that in General Miscellaneous Account due to passages and allowances for chiefs going to the General Council.
   Farms.—The Gambling and Arrack Farms for the year amounted to only $1,800 whereas for 1905 they fetched $3,240, a decrease of $1,440. For the year 1907 however there is an increase of $1,080 on this account.
   Public JForihi.—The sum expended under this heading was $2,922.92. an increase of $23.49, and the work done consisted of repairs to Government buildings, which in the case of the Court house were somewhat extensive, and the up-keep of grounds round the station and also at Bidang, and twenty miles of roads including repairs to bridges etc.
   Judicial.—There were two hundred and forty-six cases brought before the Police Court none of which call for any particular comment, there not being any of a serious criminal charactor. In the case of Datu Kalani, as the fine of two hundred dollars has not been paid he will serve an extra term of imprisonment in addition to the three years for being concerned in armed raids and cattle stealing.
   Native Affairs.—Orang Kayas Pomancha and Langgar with a few followers attended the General Council in July.
   As regards Orang Kaya Langgar it is not found that he acts satisfactorily as a Native Chief; it has been necessary on more than one or two occasions to severely reprimand him, and should he misbehave again I would beg to suggest to Your Highness that another Bisaya be appointed to replace him.
Trade Returns.—The Trade Returns for the year
are as follows and compared with those of the previous year.
1906 Coasting Imports $73,339 Exports $ 91,818 1905	„	„	91,289	„	122,963
           Decrease	17,950	Decrease	31,145
1906 Foreign Imports	62,317	Exports	54,803
1905	„	.,	38,219	„	26,355
           Increase	24.098	Increase	28,448
so that whilst there was a total decrease in the Coasting trade of $49,095 the increase in the Foreign trade was $52,546, or a nett increase in the whole trade of the river of $3,451. This apparently is a very small increase but it should be mentioned the figures would l>e different but for the rise in the value of the dollar. Rattans and sago flour were the principal articles of export, the former amounting to 6470 piculs valued at $18,900 as against-482 piculs valued at $1,643, and the latter 21,506 piculs valued at $57,055 as compared with 21,745 piculs valued at $67,859, so that, although there were only 239 piculs less exported in 1906, the decrease in value owing to fall in the price of sago amounts to $10,804 which makes a difference to the total of the exports of nearly that amount.
The Import trade amounts to $135,656 and Export to $146,621 or a total trade for the year of $282,277.
Staff.—Mr. Stuirt Cunynghame being appointed Acting Commandant left this in June for Kuching, and in July Mr. Clement was appointed extra Officer here.
Bainfall.—The following table shows the rainfall

Rajab,
           Your Highness’ most obedient Servant,
O. F. RICKETTS, Resident..


BO
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 4, 1907.
MO&TBLT REPORTS.
LOWER REJANG.
           September and October, 1906.
   Debt Court work kept me very fully occupied during the first half of September and on the 16th I left on a visit to Sibu, the Divisional Resident having very kindly sent down La Fee for me on hearing that I had been suffering from fever. I returned to the station on the 4th ultimo and found everything in good condition. Since I got back there has been an exceptionally heavy amount of work but no cases requiring special reference with the exception of one concerning the theft of 4 “bedils" in which some 14 or 15 people were more or less connected. The stolen property, part of which has been recovered, had been concealed in the river. The evidence produced did not reflect to the credit of the Tuab of the Kampoug concerned and his attitude throughout the case was, to say the least of it, most reprehensible.
   Abang Aiip left for Kuching on the 12th ultimo to get medical advice as he has been unwell for some time past.
Trade returns:—
           September Imports	$7,582
               Do	Exports	7.090
           October	Imports	3,624
               Do	Exports	15,923
November, 1906.
   La Fee arriving at Tanjong Jul on the evening of the 3rd I took passage to Rejang calling at Daro and Paloh where there were several cases awaiting investigation.
   At Rejang I found a great accumulation of work, principally in the Debt Court, and this kept me very busy until the 20th when I left for Sari.
   The timber trade at Rejang is now a very uncertain source of income for the people and I regret to learn that the Borneo Company have decided to close their sawmill at an early date. They have already given up the exportation of wood to Hongkong and the only firm now working timber, and that in much decreased quantities, is Pong Lee Wah’s. As this firm is financed and worked from China they may hold out for some time yet, although their agent in Rejang informed me that they had serious thoughts of closing down shortly. The cessation of these businesses and the low price of Gutta Jelutong will be very severely felt all round; fortunately, however, the Sarawak Cutch Company are giving employment to many of those formerly working timber anil who now find lucrative labour in the collection of bark.
   Although there are generally a great many cases to be gone into at Rejang there are rarely any of a serious nature, and the fact that the people there have just completed the building of a handsome new’ mosque, costing about $1000, may, I think, be taken as a healthy sign.
   Daring my visit to Sari I inspected all the pepper gardens, numbering 40, marked out their boundaries, and got together the necessary particulars for their registration, which I trust may help to prevent any future disturbances in this district. The pepper promises to be fairly successful this season' and several of the gardeners are planting large quantities of new vines.
   On my return to Rejang I was kept busy there up to the end of the month with general Court routine. Over 100 Court of Requests summonses were issued during the month and 130 Court of Requests payments received.	?
Trade returns for November
           Matu. Imports. $5,288.
            Do Exports. 2,350.
NORMAN MACPHEE, Resident of Lower Rejang
TRUSAN
?
October and November, 1906.
   The cases held in Court have been those chiefly connected with breach of contract and Court of Requests. One case, Chua Cho and Ko Kai, involved several hundred dollars in connection with an agreement of partnership; after a somewhat protracted case the defendant was ordered to pay naif share of the profits which amounted to nearly $700. Defendant had attempted to prove that only a third share was due to plaintiff.
   Forty-four agreements were made out between Chinese and Muruts to work jungle produce. This is a good sign, showing that the Muruts are commencing to work again after having ceased to do so for a long time owing to the late epidemics; only thirteen agreements were made in the previous ten months.
   On the 12th the Gambling and Arrack Farms for 1907 were sold for $85 per mensem, an increase of $15 on the present farm. The present farmer was under the impression that there would be no tenders against him for next year so he offered only $60, or ten dollars a month less than he is paying now.
   Under Public works the boat shed and covered way to the Fort have been re-roofed, the road to Gulapas through the old cattle ground cleared, as also that round the hill, and other small works carried out on the paths near the Fort which were washing away.
   The Rangers barracks require extensive repairs, including a new floor, but these cannot be carried out until planks have been obtained, these awaiting the first trip of the Gazelle from Limbang.
   The channel of the river at the mouth having altered and returned to its old course on the S. W. side opposite Muara Island very much facilitates the entrance of the Gazelle', and there is every possibility that as soon as the channel has been properly marked out the launch will be able to get into the river during the N. E monsoon, which she has been unable to do for more than 12 years past, the tides being only sufficiently high at night between October and March.
   The Trade Returns for the two months are as follows:—
     October Imports $2,713. Exports $1,706.
     November do 2,678. do 3,298.
   Mr. Kirkpatrick visited the station at the commencement of October as I was unable to do so until later; he returned again on the 8th to Lawas.
O. F. RICKETTS,
Officer in Charge.
OVA.
November, 1906.
   General.—The 9th being King Edward Vil’s birthday rhe usual holiday was observed.
   The month has been a more than usually uneventful one and there is therefore but little to report.
   The health of the district has suffered, as Influenza has been and is still epidemic throughout it.
   One Musa, a wealthy old native, made a request that he should be allowed to marry again; he is in a position to make a good and a reasonable settlement on a second wife.
   Musa having agreed to the arrangement of tho Court relating to his second marriage, his request has been granted.
   I visited Dalat twice during the month, on the first visit finding a good deal to attend to.
   Hari Raya falling on Sunday the following Monday, 19th instant, was observed as a public holiday.
   It was my intention to have proceeded to the Dyak Country, but on arrival at Dalat 1 was taken ill, and returned to Oya, where I was laid up for a week being unable to attend office.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 4, -J907.
31
   The people of Kampong Kakan were engaged for a few days in procuring a suitable log for a new Government boat which is in the hands of the builders,
‘ The present boat is too small for up-river work, and I therefore considered it advisable to have another one, considerably bigger, made.
   Court.—Several cases of “Breach of Promise of Marriage" were brought by various Chinese against native women : in no one case, however, did conviction occur as evidence was conflicting and insufficient.
   Ooe Wat alias Saat laki Piah, a Mohammedan and an Oyaman, married 3 years ago to one Piah of Mukah, left his wife in Mukah for several months and contracted a marriage in accordance with the Milano ?custom with one Inih, a kaffir, of Oya without, of course, disclosing the fact of his being a mussulman and married. The usual fines, amounting to $66/42, were imposed on Defendant who further was ordered to pay half of the debts incurred during the months he was married to Plaintiff Inih.
   The Court of Bequests adjudicated in some 52 ?eases.	•
   P. IF.D.—Prisoners have been planting cocoanuts, rebuilding Light-house keeper's house, fetching materials for new cattle-shed—the present one is in a very dilapidated state—and on other station works.
   Trade.—Eleven schooners were held up here for ?quite a month, it being impossible to clear the bar •on account of the breakers and heavy seas.
Exports $11,710.00.
Imports 4,714.10.
P. GORDON WHITE, Officer in Charge.
Baram.
October, 1906.
   On the 2nd 1 went to visit the Dyaks living in the Bakong R., returning again to the Fort on the 7th. I found all the Dyaks here were well off for paddy, and marked ont the boundaries between the Entu- lang Dyaks and a house of Kalleka Dyaks, who wished to move into the Malang R. -The Entulang Dyaks I had to fine $140 for disregarding the boundary for their fanning land laid down by my predecessor.
   I spent a night at Penghulu Ringgir’s house in the Upper Bakong, and heard several cases and received some fines from him. This man has made a very good Penghulu, as he is very honest and straightforward, if not a elever man. I ordered all the people to make proper pangkalans and roads up to their houses. The Punans under 0. K. Kajan I found had scattered all over the land reserved for them, but managed to persuade them to promise to collect and make a village at Beluru, after they had finished their farms.
   On my return I found that the Police I had sent up the Apoh to arrest certain Debtors had returned with the men, but had been unable to apprehend the Dyaks, who are living amongst the Kalabits, as they had run away into the jungle on the appearance of the Police.
   On the 11th Mr. King left to visit the people in the Tinjar R.; he was accompanied by Tuanku Hamid, Native Officer, and Penghulu Laid Batang, who proceeded on to Belaga to meet the Baloi Kayans with regard to their moving into Baratn waters according to agreement with the Hon'ble the Resident of the 3rd Division.
   Mr. King returned to the Fort on the 24th having visited ail the people in the Tinjar up to the Dapoi R. He brought down over $700 of Government money
which consisted of outstanding fines and tax. He heard several cases, but they were none of them H any importance. He reported that whilst he was -.t Dapoi Fort some people arrived from Belaga and said that a Belaga Chiranian named Ah Yong had been murdered in his boat, together with 4 Kayans who were working for him, whilst on a trading trip up the Baloi. It was uncertain as to who the murderers were.
   On the 15th a Chinese case, which excited much interest, was brought up before the Court. Ah Wa prosecuted his wife, a Bera wan woman, for adultery with one Seng Hoi, and he also accused the adulterous parties of attempting to poison him by means of certain potions, which were produced. Defendants were found guilty of adultery, but the other charge was adjourned to admit of the medicines being sent to Kuching to be examined as to their nature.
   There has been a good deal of Court work during the month and fines imposed amounted to nearly $1,500.
   The 9th was kept as a whole holiday in honor of Her Highness the Ranee's Birthday.
   There has been a tremenodus lot of rain during the month, the rainfall amounting to 9’00 inches, the result being that the river has been in flood, and opportunity has been taken to bring down the rattan rafts from up river, and some 5,000 bundles must have been brought down.
   The prisoners have been repairing the roads and clearing out ditches, and they have laid down concrete on the bathroom floors in the Fort.
   The coolies have been clearing the grass on the hills round the Fort.
   A mail from Sarawak was dropped at Baram mouth on the 7th and one despatched overland vid Brooketon on the 29th.
   I have nothing further to report to Your High ness.
November. 1906.
   On the 11th I started on my tour of inspection in the Upper Baram. I first of all visited the Kenyahs of the Pata River and Tama Lawai Jan, a nephew of the late Tama Bulan was chosen as Penghulu of the Kenyahb in succession to Aban Tingang, who had been dismissed from that post at the commencement of the year. I also managed to persuade these Kenyahs to move into the main Baram River, as, living by themselves in these sidestreams, they every year •suffer from starvation and as they aie faraway from traders who could assist them with rice etc: they are gradually dying off. Tama Lawai promised to move to Long Palei in the main-river directly after the harvest and make ofie large village of the following Kenyah tribes: Long Tikan, Leppu Sang, Long Beluknn, Teppu Ann, Leppu Ga, Leppu Likan, Leppu Jingan, Leppu Abong and Leppu Lutong.
   I then proceeded to visit the Kenyahs and Kayans in the Akar and as these people also seemed tired of living in the small streams, I selected places for them to live at in the main-river, and arranged that the Uma Piiau Kayans should move this year and the Uma Pohs next year.
   All these people moving back into the main-river should tend to increase trade greatly, as Chinese and Malays will be able to reach their villages with ease instead of having to toil up the sidestreams. It should also make Government work a great deal easier, as one always wasted a lot of time waiting for floods to run out. which made further progress impossible, when one went up rivers like the Akar and Pata.
   I made the Block-house at Long Akar my headquarters during these trips, and whilst I was there I heard various outstanding cases and received several payments from Debtors into the Court of Re-


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 4, 1907.
quests and generally wound matters up and brought things up to date. The only serious case brought before me was the theft of rattans belonging to Dyaks by some Leppu Annan and Leppu Sawa Kenyahs. I was lucky enough to catch the offenders and fined them $25 each and ordered them to pay up the value of the rattans they had taken.
   A Long Sibatu Kenyah named Ludan was killed by a landslip in the Silat River.
   I was still up the Akar River at the end of the month trying to get to the Kalabit country, but was much hindered by the heavy floods in the river.
   On the 6th the Gambling and Pawn Farms of this District for the year 1907 were sold by tender. The highest tender for the gambling farm was that from the firm of Ngee Hak Ann of $120 and that of Messrs. Joo Watt of $9 for the pawn farm. Both these tenders were accepted, showing an increase of $5 per mensem in the gambling and a decrease of $1 per mensem in the pawn farm on the sums paid during the present year.
   On the 19th two prisoners managed to effect their escape from the gang and their recapture has not been effected up to date. Their names were Ilun Ngau Sadau. a Tabun, and Mula, a Dyak. The first named is a very bail character. On my return an enquiry was held into the matter and I found that the Man- dor. Lanie, had been guilty of gross disobedience of orders and general slackness. He even knew that Ilun Ngau Sadau could slip his irons, but never reported the matter. I therefore sentenced him to 3 months imprisonment.
   The 9th was kept as a whole holiday in honour of King Edward Vil's birthday, and the flagstaff and launch were dressed in honour of the occasion.
   Hari Raya falling on a Sunday was celebrated on the following Monday the 19th, and the usual congratulatory visits were paid by the Mahommeddan portion of the population.
   On the 20th a fight took place at Miri between some Miri and Sibuti Milanaus. Mr. King enquired into the matter and found that the cause of the row was a love intrigue between one of the Sibutis called Drahman and a Miri woman called Utit. All the parties concerned were fined $20 each and bound over to keep the peace for the next twelvemonths.
   The house of Jayan, a Poyut Dyak^ consisting of about 3 doors, was totally destroyed by fire on the 29th.
   The prisoners have been engaged in repairs to the various Government buildings and also in constructing a new road from the bazaar to join the Limbang Road, thus diverting the traffic from passing the fort, which will be a great gain.
   There has been a great deal of rain during the month, the rainfall amounting to 5.22 inches.
   1 have nothing further to report to Your Highness.
December, 1906.
   I was still up the Akar River at Long Siniai at the beginning of the month. The river was in flood and I was detained there for 7 days unable to get up or down river, so I had to give up the idea of visiting the Kalabit country. I sent for Tama Libut, the Kalabit Penghulu, and he came to meet me at Long Siniai with about 50 men representing the Pa Butong, Pang Lab, Pa Trap and Bodok Wa Kalabits.
   Tama Libut paid in some arrears of tax and he also informed me that the Pa Mada and Bah Kalabits had been fighting and that they came and asked ‘him to make peace amongst them. He ordered the Bah people to give the Pa Mada people a buffalo, which the Pa Mada refused to receive, asking for a slave. Tama Libut would not allow this as it was against Government custom. However, after he had left them the Pa Mada persisted in their demand, and at last the Bah people banded
over to them a female slave named Sina Kayong. The Pa Mada people then returned and on arrival at their home killed this wretched woman.
   He also told me that the Bah, Pa Trap, Mein and Pa Bawan Kalabits had been making raids op one another. I have referred to these matters in detail under separate cover.
   I returned to Long Akar on the 5th and on the ‘ 12th accompanied by Penghulus Tama Wan Bayer and Tama Lawai Jan went up to the Silat River and visited the Kenyahs and Madangs in that river. I found that the Leppu Tans, Leppu Gaus and Madangs had made a large village at Long Tebau. received in these people's tax amounting to over $200 and also that out the Baram Punans. About 20 of these wild jungle people met me here and informed me that they intended moving over to right bank of the Baram, as they were afraid of being molested by wandering parties of Dyaks from the Rejang side. I strongly approved of this movement and informed them so.
   On the 14th I went to the Leppu Aga villages at Long Metisim and received in their tax. I also strongly recommended these people to move into the main Baram River as they would be far safer there, kind it would not be much trouble to them as their present houses are all rotten and tumbling down. They promised to do so directly after the harvest and selected Long Belukun as the site of their future home.
   The Leppu Aga chiefs complained to me that they were much annoyed by a Leppu Annan named Ngipa Enjau, who was spreading a report that the Leppu Agas were dissatisfied with the Sarawak Government and were intending to move into the Batang Kayan River in a year's time. They absolutely denied having any such intention anil were prepared to fulfil any pledges required to show their loyalty to the Government. I told them that I did not believe Ngipa Enjau’s statement and would send for him and severely punish him for spreading false reports.
   On the 17th I returned down-river and visited the Kayans living in the main Baram and collected some fines from Penghulu Laki Batang.
   Whilst I was at Long Akar I sent P. C. Dian and a party of Dyaks to arrest a Dyak named Abong,. who is a very bad character and has for many years defied the Government. This was effected and great credit is due to P. C. Dian for carrying it out without any bloodshed.
   I reached Claudetown on the 22nd, having been away for 42 days. I had collected over $1,500 of Government money in the form of tax and fines and about $200 in payments to the Court of Requests. I should mention the great assistance that Penghulus Tama Wan Bayer and Tama Lawai Jau afforded to me on my journey and I feel that the Government has two very loyal and trustworthy Native Officers in these men.
   Mr. King informed me that nothing of note had happened during my absence except the escape of 2 prisoners and the affray at Miri which I have already mentioned in my November report.
   On the 6th Lakim, a stoker on the Lucille, absconded to Balait with his wife. No reason could be given for his action.
   The mails left for Kuching by P. C. Bujang on the 12th, returning again on the 28th.
   A whole holiday was kept on Christmas day and the Government Offices were closed.
   The prisoners repaired the Dbobie's house and continued their work on the new road.
   The month has been very wet and the raiufal amounted to 6.84 inches.
   I have nothing further of importance to report to Your Highness.
R. S. DOUGLAS,
Resident.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 4, 1907.
33
KAPIT.
November, 1906.
   Tn the Police Court, Man Jit was sentenced to three months imprisonment fortheft; Dato, a Dyak, to 1 year for obtaining brass-ware etc. from Kay an s by making use of Penguin Munan’s name; Ah Hee of Kanowit was fined $50 for using a false datching and $25 for trading without a license.
   On the 10th I left for the Nganiah and visited Pengulu Nglambong at N. Kaja where I spent two nights, meeting Nyanggau. who informed me of all his troubles, on 13th. 1 left the Ngamah and reached Song that evening, made an early start next morning and reached N. Than, where the launch ?caught my boat up, arriving at Kapit at 4 p. M.
   On the 20th Mr. Johnson arrived in the La Fee, spent two days at Kapit and left again on the 23rd.
   On the 2(>th I received news of another murder in the Katibas." A party of five Dyaks (Poie) returning from work met six other Dyaks (on land) who asked them to come up and eat, whiah they did; whilst eating they were set upon by * the six Dyaks who killed two, the other three managed to escape to Song, where they reported the occurrence. The murderers are said to come from Mikai Painbar.
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER,
Assistant Resident.
LAWAS.
November, 1906.
   During the first half of the month nothing of importance occurred.
   I went to Sundar to meet the Resident Mr. Ricketts and thence by his invitation to Limbang, returning here in the s. I. Gazelle with Mr. Ricketts on the 22nd instant.
   On the 23rd instant Mr. Ricketts and myself went to Merapok by the launch. There was nothing to •call for attention there.
   On the ‘24th instant Dr. Dittmer arrived by the s. 1. Gazelle from Labuan to select land for planting.
   lie returned by boat on the 28tb instant very well satisfied with the land he had been over.
   During the stay of the launch the crew renewed the channel marks at the entrance to the river.
   Mr. Ricketts returned to Limbang on the 26th instant.
The rainfall for the month was 12.58 inches.
   The exports and imports were $7,315 and $8,351 .respectively.
IVONE KIRKPATRICK,
Officer in Charge.
UPPER Rejang.
November, 1906.
   Mr. Cutfield left here on the 3rd to visit Benatang and Sariki and returned here on the 6th having settled a number of outstanding debt court cases.
   The 9th being King Edward Vil’s birthday was observed as a holiday.
   Hari Raiah, the 18th, falling on a Sunday the preceding day was observed as a holiday.
   1 left here on the 20th for Kapit where I found everything quiet, and returned here on 23rd.
   The Hon ble the Divisional Resident, Mrs. Hose and Master H. R. Hose arrived here from Singapore on the 24th.
   The s. s. Alice Lorraine and the p. s. Kaka each visited this station once during the month.
   S. L. La Fee made four trips to Kapit during the mouth earning in fares and freights $363.20.
The trade returns for the month are as follows:— Imports	Exports
   Foreign $350 Foreign $3,185 Coast	21,093 Coast	25,617
December, 1906
   The p. s. Adeh arrived here on the 6th from Kuching, and on the following day left for Kapit with The Hon’ble The Divisional Resident, returning here on the 9th.
   Tambi Vitelingum, an old offender with six previous convictions, was caught red-handed stealing clothes from the dhoby’s quarters and was sentenced to two years hard labour.
   Two Chinese were had up in Court for taking salt up-river without leave; they protested that they did not intend to sell the salt but were only using it as ballast for their boats but were punished notwithstanding this excuse.
   I was away at Matu on short leave from the 18th to the 23rd.
   Messrs. Page-Turner, Shaw, Lawrence, Gordon White and MaePhee arrived here shortly before Christmas for the Christmas and New Year sports.
   The p. s. A deh made two trips and the s. s. Sarawak one trip to this Station during the month.
   The La Fee visited Kapit once during the month earning in fares and freights $264.67.
The trade returns for the month are as follows:—
               Imports	Exports
Foreign nil	Foreign nil
Coast	$37,375 Coast	$32,702
n. S. B. JOHNSON, Resident 2nd Class.
KALAKA.
November, 1906.
   On the 1st four Dyaks hired by the Saratok Chinese came to report that the corpse of the murdered Chinaman had been found in the Sedio stream where deceased and the Malay named Dobut had gone to buy gutta jelutong. Deceased’s sampan was found by some Dyaks who were working gutta jelutong in this stream some three days prior to the recovery of the corpse. When the Dyaks used the sampan to the Bazaar the Chinese instantly recognised her as belonging to the deceased. These people were interrogated and replied that they (seven in all) found her in the Sedio stream keel uppermost, and took her up to their house in the Awik. That same day search parties were organised by the Chinese with a few hired Malays. They went down to this stream and searched the bank, following the river, but had to return unsuccessful. The next morning they went again with some of the Dyaks who had found the sampan commencing from the spot where they stopped the preceding day: after a short search they found the corpse with the he id chopped off. The corpse was taken up to the Bazaar and the Policeman in charge examined it. I went up to Saratok the same day in order to investigate the murder, and on my arrival found that Dobut had been arrested on suspicion. The next morning, before cross-examining the prisoner, the Policeman handed me a broken walking stick that he had found underneath the corpse. Dobut, on being questioned, denied all knowledge of the murder, but gave an alibi which was corroborated by several people. He said that he was not in his house that particular morning and several men can prove that he was in the Bazaar, having bought an accordion from a Malay; also he with several others in the afternoon went to tire Chinese gardens and bought vegetables, etc :. As no one will give evidence to clear this case ! >• -


34
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 4, 1907.
cordingly arrested three other men. I left Saratok that evening arriving at Kabong at midnight: after two nights detention two of the (pur men turned Rajah's evidence, whom 1 released, and the other two were sent over to Simanggang.
   The Rev. F. W. Nichols arrived from Temudok per bandong en-route to Kuching.
   A Kau Chew pepper planter from Ibus came to report that his house was burgled and his box, containing $30 cash, and two silk trousers were stolen. He accused three Lew Chews of having done it.
   Mail, a small boy, son of the late Pensioner Rakit, was accidentally drowned on the 23rd.
   On the 28th I proceeded to Saratok in the Government long boat in order to meet the Resident, Mr. Baring Gould, who accompanied by H. Tamin proceeded overland from the Upper Rimbas.
   Heavy squalls and gales continued to blow during the past month. On one occasion part of the Barrack roof was blown off.
   A Bullock was sold to the Malays for their Hari Raya for the sum of §30.
   The Malays are commencing to work gutta jang- kar on account of the low price of gutta jelutong. There were 51 pikuls exported to Kuching during the past month.
   Tne tines for the month are $47.24 only.
   The Trude Returns for the month are: —
          Imports. •	Exports.
            $8,517	$11,323
December, 1906.
   The Resident, Mr. Baring-Gould, held an inquiry into the Sedio murder case. After hearing and settling cases be returned to Kabbng on the 6th, and on the 10th returned to Simanggang rui the Sari- bas.
   A Malay of Kampong Glam. Saratok, named Amin, was accidentally killed whilst working gutta jangkar.
   The scarcity of rice and paddy in this river is very badly felt. Should the bandongs not import any of this commodity from Kuching it is most probable there would be some deaths from starvation. Dyaks from Julau and Enbai with their families came over to the Krian and Upper Sablak to make purchases.
   The people are selling paddy now at a dollar a passu.
   A few Malays at S. Bia are near harvesting and some Malupa Dyaks too will commence to reap next moon.
   The weather has been very wet accompanied by violent squalls. A part of the Government boat shed was blewn down, but has been repaired.
   The sea outside on the bar is a mass of foam and there are immense quantities of damar threwn up on the coast by the violence of the sea. The people are collecting it and sell it to a Sarawak man for five or six cocoanuts per passu.
   Engkamat, a nephew of the late Penguin Jaya alias Sempurai, has been installed as a Penguin vice Bundak dismissed.
   The herd of cattle consists of the following:—
Bulls 3
Bullocks 8
Cows 36
Heifers 11
Calves 17
   The fines for the month amounted to $453.94.
   The Trade Returns for the month are :—
          Imports.	Exports.
            $6,370	$12,248
A. E. CHEYNE,
Writter.
Bintulu.
October, 1906.
   I returned to the Station on the.3rd having been on leave to Kuching. All was going ou well in Bia- tulu but the Clerk reported that on the 19th of last month the whole of tne Tatau bazaar had been burnt* down, nothing being saved : the fire began about 3 A. M.
   On the 4th instant Penghulu Merdan came to the station with a party of about 30 Dyaks collected from different bouses in the river. He reports they left here a year ago for Belaga saying they were g<. ing to work jungle produce, but it was afterwards found they had gone on a raid into the Kayan country with a Rejang Dyak named Rumah or Taman Bun- gan as leader. The story as told by these people is as follows.—
   They left here a year ago to work jungle produce at Belaga and soon after they got there they were called to meet Taman Bun gon who told them he had been ordered by Government to collect a force to go and attack the Kayans; the party were joined by 34 Rejan^Dyaks and they then set out; they were 8 months going to, they say, the Bebungan where they were met by a force of Kayans under one Aluar and were beaten back, losing 4 men.
   1 have written to the Resident 4th Division about this matter.
   On the 17th a Chinese trader Cheng Mang was taken from his boat at Kuala Labang by a crocodile; haif the body was found the next day near the spot where he was seized.
   Court has been slack, this is accounted for by so many men bei ng away to work ju ngle produce. Ud in was sentenced to one month imprisonment for swindling and Sunok one month for contempt of Court.
   There have been several cases of theft of gutta jelutong reported and 1 am sorry to say that up to the present no one has been arrested; the thefts are mostly from the fences in the streams where the jelutong is kept soaking.
   Abang Galow who was for many years Native Officer of this District died on September 19th; he was a very old man and for some time past had. been unable to move out of his house. Small-pox is reported to be spreading in Tatau and all people coming from there are placed in quarantine.
   A Clerk (Chinese) has been placed at Tatau instead of a Native Officer as formerly.
   The s. s. SaraicaA-camein twice during the month and got fuil cargoes each time.
   The imports amounted to $9,494 and exports to- $13,792.
December, 1906.
   There have been about the average number of cases before the Police and Debt Courts but none of importance.
   One Meree was sentenced to 2 months for breach of contract, and Ah Lai,Katel and Palengsix weeks for contempt of Court.
   According to instructions received from the Resident 3rd Division fines have been imposed upon the Dyaks who took part in the raid upon the Batang Kayan last year and about half has been paid up and I expect the balance to be paid during the next month.
   On the 3rd a party of Dyaks consisting of 35 men arrived by the s. s. Sarawak from Kuching. They were from the Sanbas and Simanggang, and as they had no letter from the Resident of that district, also from the fact that the leaders were all relatives of Penghulu Gelani who lost a nephew killed in the raid on the Batang Kayan, I suspected they were


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 4, 1907.
35
here for no good, so had them detained and reported the matter to the Resident 3rd Division, from whom T have since received instructions to return them to Simanggang by first opportunity.
   The s. s. Sarawak made two trips here during the month, and took out full cargoes. There are still sufficient rattans for five shipments left in the bazaar.
   There has been a great deal of rain lately and fever and a kind of influenza have been prevalent in the Kampongs.
   Small-pox is still bad amongst the Dyaks in the Upper Tatau.
   The imports and exports amount to $15,068 and 13,768 respectively.
E. A. W. COX,
Resident.
MUKA.
December, 190^.
   Trade.—The export of raw s*ago amounted to 148 coyans, jelutong gutta 330 pikuls and gutta percha 650 kts.
   Three schooners arrived from Kuching and six cleared, also the s. s. Sarawak.
   Court.—During the month there have been few cases in both Police and Court of Requests.
   Fines and fees amounted to $167.99.
   P. W.D.—The prisoners (average 19 93) have been employed during the month in getting fire-wood, making baskets, and in the usual up-keep of roads, bridges and ornamental grounds : the heavy rain storms during the month having done much damage both to the roads and bridges.
   General.—On the 3rd the s. s. Sarawak cleared for Kuching; she had been detained here since the 20th -of last month on account of heavy seas and insufficiency of water on the bar.
   A third R. C. Father arrived on the 13th. namely Father Halder; he returned to Oya on the 15th accompanied by Father Molder.
   On account of a heavy fresh in the river and high tides the compound has been flooded nearly every •day.
   On the 18th Father Jansen, the head of the R. C. Mission here, left with all the boys now at the school for the "Cut” to spend Christinas and New Year there.
   On the 22nd I left for Sibu rid Oya accompanied by the Assistant Resident Mr. Lawrence to spend ?Christmas and New Year.
   Nothing of interest occurred during my absence.
   The seine net was taken out only twice during the month, when moderate hauls of fish were made.
   I have nothing further to report on this occasion.
W. J. M. SHAW,
Resident.
LUNDU.
November.
   At 1.30 A. M. on the 5th instant I left for up river and after 71 hours fast paddling on a strong tide reached pengkalan Stungkor. I got to Orang Kaya Pa Nyuhin’s house at Stungkor at mid-day. Here I spent the night. The following morning at 7.30 1 left for Bau. reaching Bidi that same evening just before 4 o’clock, and went on to Bau the next day, the 7th instant.
   It is somewhat difficult to judge the distance one •covers when walking through the jungle over a Dyak track that consists for the most part of ba-
tangs not more than 4" in width. However, after deducting all stoppages, I find we walked for 6| hours with an additional 30 minutes ride on the tram from Sijeroh to Bidi. Reckoning we kept up an average of 3 miles an hour, the distance from Stungkor to Bidi would work out at over 20 miles. Although in places the track was difficult and we had one stiff climb at Gunoong ( dang (a continuation of the Sou range just close to Dutch Territory where the Sambas river has its source), the walking was not nearly so fatiguing as I have experienced in other parts of the country, or as bad as I had been given to understand I should find it.
   The first part of the road from the Lundu side passes through primeval jungle, but after leaving the foot of Gunoong Udang one comes to old farming land and the Jagoi Dyak country. Here I found the inhabitants all busy farming. They make very extensive farms and all their young paddi appeared very healthy.
   I left Bau on the evening of the 8th and Bidi at 7.40 A. M. on the 9th instant, reaching Stungkor the same evening at 5.40 and Lundu at 4.20 p. M. on the 10th instant.
   It is interesting to note that should it ever be necessary, during the landas, to send au urgently express message to Kuching it would be quicker to do so overland vid Bau than it would be to send along the coast obi the lobahs and Santubong. By using the first route one would get a message to Kuching for certain well within 20 hours.
   On the 13th instant I left for Kuching tmi the lobahs, having been ordered by the Hon'ble the Resident 1st Division to appear in Court there as witness in the case of Government vs. Cha Boo and Ah Chang.
   On my return I spent one night at Rombnngan and one at Stu. At the former place I reheard the case of Ampuan Haji Bujang ea. Pangeran Jarudai. Plaintiff had summoned Defendant for abuse and the latter had been fined $22.14 by Haji Bakri, Tua Kampong of Rambungan. Full minutes of this case have been forwarded to the Hon'ble the Resident and judgment now awaits his decision.
   Finding it very difficult for boats to work a passage through the lobahs, owing to the drift wood and timber that has been carelessly felled obstructing the channels, I ordered all those persons living on or around the lobahs to turn out and remove these obstacles. I also issued a local notice to the effect "thatpersons found placing any obstruction whatsoever in the lobahs would be lined”.
   On the 12th instant P. C. 105 Diding arrived from Kuching to relieve P. C. 95 Bujang whose term here has expired.
   P. C. Bujang returned to headquarters the following day.
I left for Simatan on the 30th instant.
   The prisoners have been employed in the general up-keep of the roads and paths around the station.
   The following are the Lundu and Simatan trade returns:—
Imports. Exports.
     Lundu	$4,224	$7,779
• Simatan	5,842	1,363
   1 have nothing further to report on this occasion to Your Highness.
December, 1906.
   I returned from Simatan on the 6tb instant. Whilst there a great many cases were brought by Malays against Malays for abuse. In one case no less than six summonses were issued and all the parties, who were females, were closely related. The reason of the abuse appears to have originated in a dispute between Siti (f) and Kaka (f) as to


36
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 4, 1907.
the lawlul ownership of a certain fruit tree, buah menqkala. The fruit tree case was settled and both parties were fined small sums for the abuse.
   As the result of a recent examination of the boys attending the Government Elementary Lay School a prize giving took place at the School House on the 11 th instant. All the parents of the pupils and a number of friends were present. Full particulars of this have already iteen forwarded to A our Highness.
   Referring to the case of Ampuan Haji Bujang rx; Pengeran Jarudai mentioned in last month's report, I received a letter on the 13th instant from the Hon’ble the Resident informing me that “the fine of $22.14 imposed on deft: by Haji Bakri T. K. of Rembugan had been remitted and that plaintiff had been fined 15 reals in the Data’s Court Kuching.” All parties concerned were informed of this decision.
   On the 22nd instant I left for Santubong where Thad been invited to spend Christmas and returned here again on the 28th instant.
   Daring the early part of the month the upper river was in heavy flood.
The trade returns for the month are as under.
Exports	Imports.
Lundu	$1,981	$6,144
Simatan	1,416	3,262
   This is all I have to report to Your Highness on this occasion.
F. F. BOULT,
Assisstant Resident.
   SADONG
December, 1906.
   Court.—There have been a number of cases heard and settled. Assim of Lingga, an innocent looking youth of good family, was sentenced to a term of imprisonment, a number of charges of theft having been proved against him, and his innocent appearance and plausibility have shielded him for many months while perpetrating various thefts quite unsuspected.
   Lai Tek, a well known gambler and thief, has been sentenced to 6 months hard labour for theft, the proceeds of his various thieving expeditions he had handed over to the Gambling Farmer as security for money advanced to him for gambling purposes. The Farmer, knowing the man's character, should not have taken the things without due enquiry having lieen made, and the property consisting entirely of gold and silver ornaments was returned to the owners, the Farmer receiving no compensation whatever. It may be a lesson to him.
   Corporal Joosamali made several well arranged raids on various coolie lines at the Colliery at all hours of the day and night as the result of information laid. A number of coolies were caught gambling and the offenders, being brought up in Court, were fined as usual in such cases. The coolies apparently expected to remain as undisturbed as they were in the time of the last Sergeant of Police, and' the awakening was sudden and expensive to them.
   Buffaloes at Ensingie, the property of Hadjis Wa- hap, Usop and Mudin. have been committing depredations among Cbik's cattle pasturing there, breaking down the fences and horning and killing 3 beasts. Tiie Hadjis had to pay $95 damages and were ordered to remove the buffaloes in a month's time, a.- they caused considerable damage to the Moha- medan graveyard there and Dyaks complain of flamage to their paddy and fences which are no protection against buffaloes. As they do not seem dis
posed to remove the beasts a fine of $3 a day has been imposed for every day over the month' the beasts remain on the land.
Public Works.—The cattle ground—a regular swamp—has been thoroughly drained by ditches cut inland running towards the Simunjan.
Dyaks have ditched both sides of the line to the Colliery, a great improvement, nothing having been done there for many years and the ditches being, for the most part, non-existent.
The water pipes burst in two places again. Clamps were fitted as usual aud the supply was not interrupted.
The prison gang has been employed filling the sites of the new coal sheds with stone and in general work about the station.
Wharf.—The new wharf has now a completed frontage of 100 feet and has been continually in use during the month. The s. s. Fin me loaded coal over it at the end of the month, but it requires to be lengthened 50 feet to accommodate steamers, most of which have a distance of 150 feet between the fore and aft holds. This will now be added. The sheds are practically finished and contained a quantity of coal at the time the ‘steamer called. They will be 130 feet long by 105 feet wide when completed, and the floors are raised 4 feet above the level of the ground on a stone embankment; consequently the coal will always be above the level of spring tides which formerly left a muddy mess on the coal spoiling its appearance and not improving its quality. The old sheds have disappeared and the ground on which they stood is being cleared up and allowed to go to grass'.
Coal received at wharf, December, 1,371 tons 14 cwt.
,, shipped during	.,	2,333	2
,, in stock at end of ,.	1,956	11
Large quantities of stone have lieen sent down by the Manager for filling the sites of the sheds and the out-put has decreased accordingly, the number of trucks available fcr the transport of coal being limited. The coal continues to be free of stone and impurities and does not require much attention on arrival at the wharf as it did some months ago. It would be difficult to pick out a few baskets of stone from a week's out-put. Formerly it was not an uncommon occurrence for coolies to pick 2 or 3 baskets of stone from a single truck of coal on arrival at the wharf.
Medical.—Another accident occurred on the railway on the 22nd, a coolie stepping off the buffer of a loaded truck on to the line as the train backed and having his foot terribly crushed. The man subsequently died of tetanus. Natives are forbidden to ride outside the trucks but they persist in doing it and accidents consequently happen.
It is rather early to speak of the reduction of the number of cases of beri-beri at the Colliery owing to the improvements in the housing of the coolies and the drainage of the houses that have been made of late, but it is at any rate satisfactory to be able to report but a single case during the month, though the weather has been unusually wet, a condition that has hitherto been the signal for an outbreak of beri-Leri at the Mines.
There has been a great deal of fever in the Kam- pongs.
The Hospital is in good order and there are no serious cases at the end of the month.
General.—Two separate attempts were made to wreck the engine. In one case an iron chair was jammed upside down over the rail and in the other a large iron bar was placed between guard and main rails. Both attempts were unsuccessful. The offenders escaped.
On the 18th a boat full of Jeuan Dyaks returning.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 4, 1907.	37
up-river awaited the bore in the wrong place, were caught in the breaking wave, upset, and were only saved from drowning by aid from Malay boats that were near at the time. They lost everything they h*ad. On the ‘21st another boat of Dyaks upset in the new Kuala Simunjan and they lost 20 lumps of jelutong gutta.
   The German steamship Flume arrived from Ilo-Ilo and Labuan on the 26th: She left on the 31st with 1,247 tons coal for Singapore. While she was loading at the new wharf two schooners loaded coal at the old one. The old wharf collapsed shortly after and will not be again repaired.
   The p. s. Kaka arrived on the 29th with $15,000 cash and passenger Mr. Stewart. . She left tne same ?day for Kuching.
   The weather has been very unsettled. Heavy rain day and night with but few fine days during the month. Strong winds have been blowing from the N. W. and N. Altogether an exceedingly unpleasant month.
DONALD A. OWEN, t • Resident 2nd Clam.
UPPER SARAWAK, BAU .
December, 190(1.
   Agreements 125 have been made out during the month. Stamp duties and fees amounted to $293.95.
Court fines and fees amounted to $284.78.
   Absconding both by Traders and Gardeners continues. Many of the former go over to Sambas, first having collected a few hundred dollars, and there begin trading again, leaving only their debts behind them.
   On the 10th the Assistant Resident visited Sing- ghi for the purpose of revising the Dyak Revenue list and also to ascertain if the mountain could, if necessary, be used for a trig station; he found the top of the mountain to be 1SO<5 feet above the Bau Court house and that it could easily be cleared for a station; the aneroid gave a reading of 500 feet at the R. C. Mission, from which point fort ?flarguerita was plainly seen; the villages which are small and scattered he describes as unusually filthy and built much closer to the ground than usual, very large numbers of pigs are kept and the mission land which is planted with paddy and jagong has to be fenced round to keep them out.
   The Orang Kaya mentioned that the land which has been surveyed by Messrs. The Borneo Company in Ulu Sungei Tengar was largely used by the Sing- ghis for paddy land, and this on inspection was found to be the case.
   Dr. Wellington visited here and Bidi on the 4th (leaving again on the 6th, and again on the 18th returning to Baku the same day.
   I left here on the 17th for Kuching returning on the 26th, and the Assistant Resident left on the 29th instant to be present at the Boat Races and new year’s festivities.
   The Malay Carpenters finished their work and returned to Kuching on the 31st; there was a good deal of repairing to be done to H. H. The Rajah’s Bungalow, to which the white ants have done considerable damage.
   I have been unable to obtain a Syce for sometime now; the reason I hear is that most of the men who used to work as such are now employed by the Public Works Department as Carpenters.
   The prisoners have been employed on the up-keep of roads and Government grounds.
E. R. STILWELL,
Resident U. S.
MATAAG ESTATE.
December, 1900.
   During the month coolies have been employed in weeding, gathering crops, supplying coffee and repairing roads.
   Crops gathered during the month were 54 piculs parchment coffee and 331 lbs. made tea.
   Nine Tamil coolies have come from Singapore to work on the Estate through the arrangements made by Vurasamy Mandor, and the coolies are working well.
   Mr. Grove paid the coolies' wages for November on the 6th instant.
J. M. GOMEZ,
Manager.
LIMBANG.
December, 1906.
   On the 10th Mr. Ward left for up-river to hold cases and look into such matters as required attention and returned on the 17th.
   On the 21st I left for Trusan, returning on 28th, I and on the 29th went to Brunei to hand over the Trusan Cession money to B. M's Resident.
   In the Court cases have been more numerous than usual. One in particular was brought up by Bujeng, a Sarawak Malay, against a Chinaman Ah Kee and four Adang Muruts accused of stealing six old jars and other property valued at about eight hundred dollars.
   Bujeng and another named Seman had taken these jars up-river and left them in a hut at Sehdong telling the Muruts to take charge of them. Bujeng came down river with Seman to obtain more provision and on their return to Selidong found the property gone.
   Warrants for arrest were sent up to Kuala Madihit, which is about ten days by boat from here, and the five accused brought down, the case lias been opened but is adjourned for further evidence.
   Ismail, a Brunei Malay, was sentenced to six months imprisonment for criminal misappropriation.
   Ah Piah fined $20 for coming in in his boat from Brooketon after 6 p. M. and not reporting himself.
   Two coolies at Seh Tiong’s sago factory committed suicide within a few hours of each other on the 8th instant, one by taking an over dose of opium and the other by hanging; an inquest was held on each of them.
   Marali, who was fined for appropriating $50 out of Haji Suleiman’s estate before it was divided, was reported by Orang Kaya Binjai to have absconded and gone to Brunei.
   A Bisaya named Lantang brought up a case against Orang Kaya Pomancha, the native chief, for breach of custom in marrying again before a certain number of days had expired and a certain number of feasts given. There seems to lie a considerable difference of opinion amongst the chiefs as to what the custom is; the case will, however, have to be settled up-river with the other chiefs present.
   Ah Kee, a hawker, was fined $50 for continuing to live up-river in contravention to the Government order and $25 for trading in the Adang country without a license; this man had every intention apparently of remaining amongst the Muruts in those parts.
The Trade Returns for the month are as follows.
     Coasting Imports $7,591	Exports $9,717
     Foreign .,	5,452	,,	4,976
   The Rainfall for the month amounted to 17.09 inches which fell on eighteen days, 3.95 inches being the heaviest fall in any twenty-four hours.
O. F. RICKETTS,
Resident.


38
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 4, 1907.
The Sarawak Gazette
   THE Subscription to the Sarawak Gazetie is
as follows .—
Payable in local currency—
         Single number ...	—	$0.10
         Subscription for 1 year ...	... 1.00
            Do including postage* to Outstation ...’I
            Do	do	to Singapore ... I 1.50
            Do	do	to England	...)
Payable in Sterling—
         For 1 year (including postage to places
                        in tlie Postal Union) ... 3e. 6d.
All Mibwriptioii* pay able In
advance.
  Yearly subscriptions are renewable on the 1st January.
  Subscriptions will not be renewed unless due notice is given. All broken periods will be considered as full.
  Subscribers are requested to notify changes of address to the Editor in writing.
RATES SUBSCRIPTION PAYABLE IN ADVANCE
	?	
Payable in advance.
Advertisement of 12 lines and under—
           First insertion ...	...	... $1.00
           Second and third insertion each	... 0.60
           Subsequent do	do	... 0.25
Advertisement of half a Column and under—
           First insertion ...	...	... 2.00
           Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
           Subsequent do	do	... 0.50
Advertisement of a Column and under—
           First insertion each	...	... 3.00
           Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
           Subsequent do	do	... 0.75
Special arrangements may be made for standing advertisements.
   All communications intended for insertion in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed to the Editor at the Government Printing Office, Kuching, and sent so as to reach the Office by the 26th of the month at latest or their publication will have to be deferred until the next issue.
   Letters and other contributions must be authenticated by writer’s name sent privately to the Editor.
   We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not in serting them.
   Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early intelligence of all matters of general interest in their respective neighbourhoods.
            Notice*
     /"GENTLEMEN are requested to pay all Gazette sub-
     ’ Bcriptions and Printing Office Dills to the undersigned ?
in future.	*
For the convenience of those unable to send cheques,
Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of sums not over ?
11.50—but only the 2 and 4 cent values will be accepted.
Foreign subscribers to the Sarawak Gatetle arc reqnested-
lo send remittances by “ Post Office Order " not by “ Postal
Order " as the latter caunot be cashed in Sarawak.
F. G. DAT.
Notice.
-—?—
Astana Farm Produce.
Terms Monthly.
       W ILL be supplied to customers at the following rates•”
         Milk—per quart bottle	..	... 10 cents
         Butter—per lb ...	...	... SO
         Eggs—each ...	...	... 1} „
Orders, which should be addressed to the undersigned, at- tended to without delay.
J. STAPLES.
Notice.
We. the undersigned CHOP SENO HAK (late TEO 1 T SIAXO Kow) Dealers and Contractors to the Sarawak Government, hereby give notice that, inasmuch as CHIN KEK has ceased to be in our employ as Manager as from the 26th November 1906, we will not be in any way responsible from the above date for any dealings which the said CHIN KEE may have with any persons whatsoever, nor will we be responsible for any debts contracted by the aforesaid CHIN KEE.
CHOP “SENG HAK.”
       Kuching,
12th December, 1906.
Notice.
IUE, the undersigned, CHOP “SIN 8KNG HAK 4 Co." No. 10 v v Muin Bazaar, shipchandlers and dealers with the Sarawak Government etc. beg to inform the public that TEO CHIN KEE. late manager of CHOP “SEKO HAK", joined our firm on 26th November 1906 as managing partner and we authorize him to transact all business of our firm as from that date.
SIN SENG HAK & Co.
      18th January, 1907.
Notice.
NOTICE is hereby given that I. HAJI FADELL, have transferred nil my shares mid rights in the Sternwheeler Jer Sen Fob to the Dutch Hakim HAJI MOHAMAT ALLI and that the management will from this date be in his hands and I shall not be responsible for anything whatsoever hereafter
iSd.) HAJI FA DELL.
      Kuching,
1st February, 11)97,


TH
Kuching, Foreign trade returns for the month of Dec, 1906
         Articles.
Aerated Water ... Ammunition
Arrack etc.	...	...
Biscuits
Blachan
Blankets
Beads
Brass A Copper-ware
Boots A Shoes ...
Butter A Cheese ...'
?Candies
Canvas
Cement
Clocks and Watches
Cloth
    Cotton
    Silk
Clothing
    Cotton
Coke
Coffee
    Liberian etc....
    in tinsE SARAWAK GAZETT
nis for the Mill of Dec, 1906.
IMPORT
		
    Quantity.	1 Value.
		 - - 	:
$
cases	138	,	1,450
115
3,785 | 2.106
piculs	11 i	142
150 120 248
847 286 208 510
casks	16	95
88
22.929
    • ...	1,180
        ...	8.605
tons	30 .	540
piculs	14	312
28
	E, FEBRUARY 4, 1907.
IMPORTS. —( Contin uedj
          Articles.	Quantity.
         Brought forward
Soap
Stationery and Books
Straw hats (Chinese)
Straw Shoes (Chinese)
Sugar	...	... piculs	1.027
Sundries
Tea in Bundles ...	... boxes	157
Tea in Tins
Timber
Twine and Thread
Tobacco
     in tins Cigars A Cigarettes
     Chinese ...	...	eases	129)
     Fining JavaA S'robok ete.	piculs	98)
     Bad or Pepper	...	piculs	286’
Treasure
Tube
V egctables
     Fresh
     Suited	...
     In tins
Wines and spirits	...	...
Zinc ...
     TOTAL VALUE
     Brought forward
    Total Value to Date ... •     39
  Value.
  1254,650
  807 1,621
  53 6.389 1.672 1,608
  42 1,647 1,199
 5,345 5.104
 6.428 8.591
14.270 1,711
 2,426 4.286
    37 10,512 8,846
6332,245 4,608,698
  4,940.943Colton Seed
Crockery A Glass-ware
Curry Stuffs A Sauce etc.
Cyanide
Daiuar
Drugs and Chemicals
Exports Returned to Shippers
Eggs(saltcd)
Fire-arms
Fire-works
Fish
    Dried
    Salted
    In tins
Flour
Fruit
    Fresh
    Dried
    In tins
Furniture
Gheecases	159
... No.	49,960
piculs	234
piculs	207
bags	1.401
piculs	6
piculs	490
piculs	21,468
piculs	803
bales	86
bundles	88
...
cases	1,268
piculs	105
pteuls	12
head	32
No.	884
head	187
Clises	62
cases	181
piculs	269
chests	15
piculs	19
piculs	2.655
...48l 2.747 1,014 4.912
278 2,618
20 988 120
       929
5.349 3.5:18
509 2.814
1,786 1.104
       164
       2671905			
EXP
           Articles.
Antimony
Ant-eater skins ...
Betel-mils
Birds-nests
Blochan
Brass-ware
Cloth
Coprah
Crockery-ware ...
Cutch
Damar
Eggs (Turtle)
Empties
FishORTH,
     Quantity.
tons	53
picul	J
picnls	163}
piculs	21*
piculs	30
picnls	12
picnls	2.150*
picnls	820j
No.	46,400
pienls	56J<5,730,447
  Value.
      9
      2.965
  15 1.076 7.000
175 120 • 157
ioo 475
11,610 3.26?
       848
1.777 1.635Grains
    Beans and peas
    Rice
    Other Sorts...
Gimmes new
   Do old	...	...
Hams and Bacons
Hats
Iron-ware	...	...
Jewellery
Joss Sticks and Papers
Kerosine Oil
Lard
Lamps
Leather
Live stock
    Cattle
    Poultry
    Swine
Machinery
Mats
Matches
Maccaioni A Vermicelli
Milk Condensed ...
Oils ...
Opium raw
Paint, Varnish A Tur
Papers
Provisions Sundry
Prawns
   Do Refuse ...
Rubber seeds and plants
Rickshaws
Rope
    Coir	...	,	...
    Manila
Salt ...
             Carry forward ...3.268 96,537
1.690 8,980
   705 158 342 11.065
SO 2,005 8.005 3.346 1.050 755
1.605 208
3.910 4.495
   745 1.378 1,220 1,523 4,484 15,000 1.980 2,771 1.188
452 8,281
310 69Gambier
Gunnies old
Gold
Gotta jangkar
   do refuse
   do Jelotong ...
   do percha
Hides
Imports Returned to Shippers
India Rubber
Iron-ware	...	._
Kajangs
Kerosine Oil
Mats
Machinery
Oils
Pearl sago	..
Pepper (while) ...
   De (black) ...
Rattans No. 1 sega etc.
Rattans No. 2 temoi etc.
Sago flour
Sugar nipa
Sundries
Tea (Matang)
Timber
   do (manufactured)
Tobaccos
     Chinese
Tortoise-shell
Treasare
Trepang Zincpiculs'	1,9511
bales	71
ozs.	1.521
piculs	655
piculs	5,469)
piculs	13)
picnls	12
picnls	200
Clises	4 4
piculs	101
pienls	4	J
piculs	3,684)
piculs	1.172)
picnls	558)
pie ids	571)
picnls	22.979}
piculs	146*
cases	13
        ...
case	)
catties	8)
piculs	3    11,902
108.520 9.300
       261
    28,716
1.437 298
     2,109
    24,389 '	951
        16
       114
     1.000
165 18
    91.761
    19.051
 5 725 1*580
60,808 448
238 475
4 47
 20 1O0
6,000 60
        28coils	106
coils	6
piculs	1,758)     1,267
       370
     2,416
<254,656    TOTAL VALUE
    Brought forward
    Total Value to Dale
1
1905        ...<406,178 6,174.149
6.580.322
<7,3W,-» 19

4<)
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 4, 1907.
Knctiing, Coasting Trade Returns for the month of Dec. 1906.
IMPOSTS.
           Articles.     Quantity.Value.Cod Damar Gutta Jelolong ... Gutta Percha Gutta Jangkar ... India Rubber ... Pepper (white) ...
do (black) ...
Rattans No. 1 sega etc.
Do No. 2 temoi etc. Saito flour
Do raw	...
Sundries Treasuretons piculs piculs piculs piculs piculs piculs piculs piculs picnls piculs t'pins1.094 844
5.897 20’
802 238} 192
180 908
958) 997
48.306•
       8.140
       2,124
      24.232
       2.580
      11,176
      21,696
2,156 8,689 2,872
       2,819
21,653 13.507 10,893TOTAL VALUE Brought forward*186.158
*1,819,976       Total Value to Date ...       1905*1,956,134
*1.953,570EXPORTS.           Articles.     Quantity.Value.Brass-ware
Iron-ware
Jars ...
Oil Kerosine
Opium	...	? ...
Rice ...
Sundries
TreasureNo. cases
piculs      82
10,451*
572
       1.488
150
       4.088
       8.140
48,472 55,997 22,282     TOTAL VALUE
      Brought forward?*136.084
• 1,379,932      Total Value to Date ...I $1,516,016       1905'•MBBAllC. C. ROBISON, Registrar of Trade.
SARAWAK MUSEUM.
Observations taken Daily at 8. a. m. January, 190G.
Temperature.0RainfallMaxiMini*    in        TOTAL.cmum.mum.24 hours.1     84'6     72-5    0*352     800     73-8     •868     88-8     73-6      ?Ui4     82.4     78-5     *585     820     74*8     ?266     80'0     78*7    8.89'T     81-7     78.4    2.058     82-8     74*6     "249     824     78*210     84'8     70*6     •—— 1     80'2     69'8     •—     Rainfall 9.43 inches12     814     71'6     * m. »18     813     71.4     .	14     82'4     78'6     ?0215     80-8     78'4     •2616     824     75-4     *0517     84-7     74'6     ?—18     818     743     •0319     88'7     73-7     •—20     «2'G     78*7     •—21     88-7     74-822     80-8     74*0     •0328     88-4     78-8     *0924     836     72'6     *1825     81-8     78'4     •1726     83.3     74'6     •04     82-3     74-2     *0528     81'7     74*6     •5829     808     78*7     •—30     79-8     73'4    •8981     82-4     72'6SHIPPING.
Arrivals,
I JAN.FLAG. S AND RIG. £CAPTAINS OR NAKODAS.FROM.2j Soon Seng WattSar. sch.71A. Yam anSadong8Kuching„ str.908,WaddellSingapore
Limbang10Rajah of SarawakHPMoxon10, Kaka222Bandong14Alice Lorraine140Jara-eoLnbuati14Kim Seng Guan„ sch.78SaitSadong14I M. N. Sri Jempaka..73T. HassanMatn14’ 1‘utri Dungun52DeliDuro17Kuching„ str.903Waddell? Singapore19Adeh189JemanSibu21| Soon Seng Waff” sch.71A. YaninnSadong?. 1( Kim Whatt Ann67HnsinMuka24Rajah of Sarawak„ str.892MoxonSingapore? Banjar Ron., sch.57Hj. AliSadong'; Sarawak„ str.| 46Hj. MatRejang26. La FfeI 40UdinSibu28Kaka„	It222BandongLimbang81Kuching908Waddell( Singapore811 Soon Seng Watt|	sch.! 71A. 1 IUUIU1SadongDepartures.
VESSEL'S NAME.FLAG S AND RIG. £CAPTAINS on NACODAS.FOR.2KakaSar. str, 222BandongLimbang8Kim Seng Guan„ sch. 73SaitSadong5Soon Seng Watt       ,, | 711A. Yaimui8Kuching„ str. 908WaddellSingapore14Adeh,, , 18^JemanSibu15Rajah of Sa ra wa k , Banjar'Rm892MoxonSingapore15„ sch. 5?lHj. AHSadong15Ban Seng Watt i..	,,	61Hj. Dram anMatn21Kaka.. str. 222Bandonglimbang21Alice Lorraine„	140Jara-ecSadongKuching..	.. I 908WaddellSingapore22Swee Hong Ann.. sch. 68(iejehSadong28Sa ra wakstr. 46Hj. A. MmRejang
Sadongi Soon Seng Waft., sch. 71A. Yamau27|1 Rajah of SarawakI „ str. 892I MoxonSingapore Bintulu; Sarawak: : s; Hj. A. Mat80i AdehJemanSadong"V $ IKvlS.
ARRIVALS.
PER B. s. Rajah of Sarawak:—From Singapore. 10th January, Messrs. C. E. V. Collins and J. T. Chynoweth.
PER B. S. Kuching:—From Singapore, 17th January-, His Highness the Rajah Muda.
PER p. s. Adeh:—From Sibu and Rejang, 19th January, Mrs. J. Mowe from Sibu and Mr. Melville from Rejang.
PER s. s. Rajah of Sarawak:—From Singapore, 24th
January, Mr. T. S. Odom.
PER s. 1 La Fie:—From Sibu, 26th January, Mr. H. S- Young.
PER p. s. Kaka:—From Brooketon vid Kidurong 28th January, Sister Laurentia from Brooke* ton, and Mr. V. W. Harington from Bintulu.
PER s. s. Kuching:—From Singapore, 31 st January, Mr. H. C. Brooke Johnson.
DEPARTURES.
PER 8.8. Rajah of Sarawak:—For Singapore, 2nd January, Dr. Schlechter.
PER p. s. Kaka:—For Rejang, 2nd January, Messrs. H. S. Young, E. Hose and Melville.
PER a. s. Kitching:—For Singapore, 8th January, The Hon’ble Sir P. F. Cunyngliauw, Bart, and Mr. J. O’Hiint.
PER p. s. Adeh:—For Sibu and Rejang, 14th January, Messrs. H. H. Everett and G. A. Luke to Rejang and Very' Revd. Father Dunn to Sibu.
PER 8. s. Rajah of Sarawak: For Singapore, 15th Jan-
uary, Dr. J. W. Hopkins.
PER p. s. Adeh:—For Lingga and Sibu, 30th January, the Ven. Archdeacon Sharp and Mr. H. la Chard to Lingga.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 4, 1907.
Arrivals.
DATE.      NAME OF VESSEL.NAME OF CAPTAIN.WHERE 1 FROM.CHINESE.
Male. female.NATIVES OF INDIA. Male. FemaleOTHER ASIATICS. Mair. Female.1 TOTAL.1906.Dec. 6S. S. KuchingW. Waddell1 Singapore   61	710 ...5 ...     83        7P. S. KakaBandong| Brooketor1 ...      1M	13S. S. Rajah of SarawakE. T. MoxonSingapore   of ...19 ""3	2 !       20S. S. KuchingW. Waddell   77	32 ...5 ...     87..	22P. S. KakaBandongBrooketor.3 1 ...       •S. S. Rajah of Sarawak ...E. T. MoxonSingapore   61 i"i4	1     681 1	;_	252 1133 ...21 I 3 1    319Departures.
DATII.     NAME OF VESSEL.   | NAME OF CAPTAIN.WHITHER BOUND.CHINESE.
Male. Female.NATIVES OF INDIA.' Male. Female.OTHER. ASIATICS. Mali. Female.TOTAL.1906.
Dec.L1 P. S. Kaka... BandongBrooketon211      44S. S. liajuh of .viraMk.... E. T. MoxonSingapore160961    17611S. S. Kuching	*.. W. Waddell   94 ...•711    11213Pee. Sri Laucha... Hj. BakirSambas33      616P. 8. Kaka... BandougBiooketon    r”221      918S. S. Rajah of Sarawak... E. T. Moxon] Singapore106	64    12326S. S. Kuching... W. Waddell   96 I1U-51    113i460	73135_7    543c. C. ROBISON.




42
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. FEBRUARY 4, 1907.
METEOROLOGICAL READINGS.
KUCHING OBSERVATORY.
Observations Taken Daily at 8 a. in. January, 1907.
TEMPERATURE.
2Barometer.Maximum.Minimum.Dry Bulb.Wet Bulb.Wet Minimum.Thermometer in the sun.Remarks at 8 A., Sunshine in 24 I( Rainfall in 24 h<   130 0289-471-778-877-371-31571Finehrs. min.’ 4 00    44   230-0486-273073 171-8720136-4Rain100    44   3300082-472-876-675-672-4144-4Dulk1-20 ’    58   4300083-473074-773-372-7;145-8Fine c5-30    81300484-773975-473-973-51152.3   do500    36   6300082978175-874-6731149.6Cloudy3.00 I?1.00   729 9476873874-273-773-795 0? Rain2.40   830.0083173.9"5'674 672-9141-4   do4-30    30   930 05 183072-475.3740716140-8i	<1°1 2-50    —1030 0884.168875-973-668-11150-5Fine| 5-8011300184267-473171066-7 !149-81 do, 910123001 ;85-870571 369-8C9-6I1501! do10-001330.0865-569878-5740691.
71-8155-7; <lo: 600    ——-14300067-472-973171-7153-5   do9-10    031530-0882.478-777175 773-3 (126-7   do1.20    321630-0887.774977175-C74-5160.7   doi 54-0    0517300781173-376175173-1118-4Dullj -SO1 ~1830 03? S5S73075 3i 74-2146-7   do1 5-80    051930-0686-872-177-6' 74 97^0 ?1498Fine1 7-50    —2030-0586T72-8799; 75-8I	11606   do4-30    —2130 0586174176-374-673-61620   do3-20I e. ——2230 07? 81-773-875-674-21 731118-4. Dull    052330 0080971-975474 81 71-7125-6Drizzlei -30    122429-9885-273173673-11148-5Dull530    14253004, 84-973174 573-872-7154-6Rainj 240    342629-98I 82-473375-774 872-8134-2Shwry   •50    052729-97l 85-772.975 573-9? 72-7151-2Dull2-50    082830 0085-274175174-3
73’51 73-6134 2   do1 2-50    562930 0383-773-274-41 72-7'144-9Rain   •50    —?30300282-672-375-073-8720 ;131-4? Dull1-10    523130 0385-475-075-173-41 740 ?151-2Fine9-80    —Total rainfall during the mouth 11.14 inches.
Highest recorded temperature	89-4 *F.
Lowest ,,	„	67 4 *F.
Height of observatory above sea level approximately 100 feet
KUCHING Printed and Published by GHIN HENG Soon, Government Printer, at the Sarawak Gazette Office
Nos. 19. 20, and 21, Court House Road.


MAIL TABLE
FOR THE YEAR 1907.
From the London and China Express.
OUTWARD.	~	HOMEWARD.
       LeaveLeave1 Doe atDu at* LONDON.PORT SAID.COLOMBO.SINGAPORE.G. M. Jan.Jan.	7Jan. 19Jan. 25M. M. Jan. 4Jan. 10Jan. 22Jan. 28P& 0. Jan. 11Jan. 16Jan. 26Feb.	2G. M. Jan. 15Jan. 21Feb.	2Feb.	8M. M. Jan. 18Jan. 24Feb.	5Feb. 11P & 0. Jan. 15Jun. 80Feb.	9Feb. 16G. M. Jan. 2!Feb.	4Feb. 16Feb. 22M. M. Feb. 1Feb.	7Feb. 19Feb. 25P&O. Feb. bFeb. 13Feb. 23March 2G. M. Feb. 12Feb. 18March 2March 8M. M. Feb. 15Feb. 21March 5March 11P & 0. Feb. 2-.Feb. 27March 9March 16G. M' Feb. 2(March 4March 15March 21M. M. Mar. 1March 7March 1'JMarch 25P&O. Mar. bMarch 13March 23March 30G.M. Mar. F_March 18March 29April 4M. M. Mar. 1.’March 21’•April	2April	8P&O. Mar. 22Mai ch 2?April 6April 13G. M. Mar. 2(April	1April 12April 18M.M. Mar. 2‘.Anni	4April 16April 22P&O. April 5April 10April 20April 27G. M. April !April 15April 26May	2M. M. April 12April 18April 30May	6P&O. April 19April 21May	4May 11G. M. April 23Aiiril 29May 10May 16M.M. April 26May	2May 14May £0P&O. Mtiv 3May	8May 18May 25G. M. May 7May	13May 24May 30M. M. May 10Muy 16Muy 28June 3P&O. May 17May 22June 1June	8G. M. May 21Mav 27June 7June 13M.M. Mav 24May 30June 11June 17P&O. May 31June	5June 15June 22G. M. June 4June 10June 21June 27M.M. June 7June 13June	25July	1P&O. June 14June 19June 29July	6G. M. June 18June 24July	5July 11M.M. June 21June 27July	9J uly 15P&O. June 2bJuly	3July 13July 20G. M. July 2July	8July 19July 25M.M. July 5July 11July 23 ?July 29P&O. July HiJuly 17July 27August 3G.M. July 16July 22August 2August 8M.M. July 19July 25August 6August 12P&O. July 26July 81August 10August 17G.M. July 30August 5August 16August 22M. M. Aug. 2August 8August 20August 26P&O. Aug. 9August 14August *24August 31G. M. Aug. 13August 19August. 30Sept. 5M.M. Aug. 16August 22Sept. 3Sept.	9P&O. Aug. 23August 28Sept.	7Sept 14G.M. Aug. 27Sept.	2Sept. 13Sept. 19M.M. Aug. 3(1Sept. 5Sept. 17Sept. 23P&O. Sept. 6Sept 11Sept. 21Sept. 23G.M. Sept. 10|Sept. 16Sept. 27October 3M. M. Sept. 13Sept. 19October 1October 7P&O. Sept. 20Sept. 25October 5October 12G. M. Sept. 24Sept. 30October 12October 18M. M. Sept. 27October 3October 15Octolier 21P&O. Oct. 41October 9October 19October 26G- M. Oct. 8October 14October 26Nov.	1M.M. Oct. 11October 17October 29Nov.	4P&O. Oct. 18October 23Nov.	2Nov.	9G. M. Oct. 22October 28Nov.	9Nov. 15M. M. Oct. 251October 31Nov. 12Nov. 18P&O. Nov. 1Nov.	6Nov. 16Nov. 23G. M. Nov. 5!Nov. 11Nov. 23Nov. 29M. M. Nov. bNov. 14N ov.	26Dec.	2P&O. Nov. 15Nov. 20Nov. 3JDec.	7G. M. Nov. 19Nov. 25Dec.	7Dec. 13M. M Nov. 22Nov. 28Dec. 10Dec. 16P&O. Nov. 29Dec.	4Dec. 14Dec. 21G. M. De,c. 3Dec.	9Dec. 21Dec. 27M.M. Dec. 6Dec. 12Dec. 24Dec. 30P&O. Dec. 13Dec. 18Dec. 28Jan.	4G.M. Dec. 17Dec. 23Jan.	4Jan. 10M.M. Dec. 2D, Dec. 26Jan.	7Jan. 13P&O. Dec. 27Jan.	1Jan. 11Jan. 18G M Dec. 311Jan.	6Jan. 18Jan. 24Leave    LeaveS2M&AP0&S.COLOMBO.Jan. 17Jan. 25Jan. 21Jan. 27Jan. 28Feb.	2Jan. 31Feb.	8Feb.	4Feb. 10Feb. 11Feb. 16Feb. 14Fob. 22Feb. 18Feb. 24Feb. 25March 2Feb. 28March 8March 4March 10March 11March 16March 14March 22March 18March 24March 25March 30March 28April	5April	1April	7April	8April 13April 11April 19April 15April 21April 22April 27April 25May	3April 29Mav	5May	6May 11May	9Mav 17May	13May 19May 20May 25Mav 23May 31May 28June 3June	3J uno	8June	6June 14June 11Juue 17J line 17June 22June 20June 28June 25July	1July	1July	GJuly	4July 12July	9Julv 15July 15July 20July 181July 26July 231 July 29July 29August 3August 1August 9August 6August 12August 12August 17August 15August 23August 20August 26August 26August 31August 29Sept.	6Sept.	3Sept.	9Sept. 9Sept. 14Sept. 12Sept. 20Sept. 16Sept. 22Sent. 23Sept. 28Sept. 2GOctober 4Sept. 30October 6October 7October 12October 10October 18October 14October 20October 21October 26October 24Nov.	1October 28Nov.	3Nov. 4Nov.	9Nov.	7Nov. 15Nov. 11Nov. 17Nov. 18Nov. 23Nov. 21Nov. 29Nov. 25Dec.	1Dec.	2Dec.	7Dec.	5Dec. 13Dec.	9Dec. 15Dec. 16Dec. 21Dec. 19Dec. 27Dec. 23Dec. 29Dec. 30Jan.	4Jan,	2Jan. 10Jan.	6Jan. 12Jaii. 13Jan. 18Leave FOR?SAIB.Due in
mm.Feb.4Feb.9 P&O.Feb./Feb.13 G. M.Feb.14Feb.21 M. M.Feb.18Feb.23P&O.Feb.21Feb.27 G. MFeb.28Mar.7 M. M.March4Mar.9 P&O.March7Mar.13 G. MMarcli14Mar.21 M. M.March18Mat.23 P&O.March21Mar.27 G M.March28April4 M. M.April1April6 P&O.April4April10 G. M.April11April18 M. M.April15April20 P&O.April,18April24 G. M.April25May2 M. M.April29May4 P&OMayMay8 G. MMay9May16 M. MMay15May19 P&O.May17May23 G. M.Muy23May30 M. M.May29June2 P&O.May31Tune6 G MJune6June13 M. M.June12June16 P & O.June15June21 G.MJune20June27 M. M.June26June30 P & O.June29July5 G.M.July4Julv11 M. M.July10July14 P&O.July13July19 G.M.July18July25 M. M.July24July28 P&O.July27Aug.2 G. M.August1Aug.8 M. M.AugustiAug.11 P&O.August10 1Aug.16 G. M.August15Aug.22 M. M.August21 ?Aug.25 P&O.August24Aug.30 G. M.August29Sept.5 M. M.Sept.4Sept.
Sept.
Sept.8 P&O.Sept.
Sept.7 
1213 G. M.
19 M. M.Sept.18Sept.22 P&O.Sept.21Sept.27 G. M.Sept.26Oct.3 M. M.October2Oct.6 P&O.October4Oct.10 G. M.October10Oct.17 M. M.October1GOct.20 P&O.October17Oct.23 G. M.October24Oct.31 M. M.October28Nov.2 P&0.October31Nov.6 G.M.Nov.7Nov.14 M. M.Nov.11Nov.16 P&O.Nov.14Nov.20 G. M.Nov.21Nov.28 M. M.Nov.25Nov.30 P&O.Nov.28Dec.4 G.M.Dec.Dec.12 M. M.Dec.9Dec.14 P&O.Dec.12Dec.18 G.M.Dec.19Dec.26 M. M.Dec.23Dec.28 P&O.Dec.26Jan.1 G. AlJan.2Jan.9 M. MJan.6Jan.11 P&OJan.9Jan.15 G. MJan.16Jan.£3 M.MJan.20Jan.25 P&OJan.23Jan.29 G. MJan.30Feb.6 M. M   NOTICE—English Mails marked P. & O. are despatched via Brindisi; French Mails, marked M, M., via Marseilles; and German Mails, marked G. M, Naples.

