
Price	. , FRIDAY, JANUARY 4, 1907.	10 cents.
Content.
1900.
ORDERS:—Export of Straits Dollars prohibited—Jinricksha Fnres.
NOTICES:—Straits Dollars may be changed at the Treasury— Bankrupt Estates, Sadong—Bankrupt Estates, Bau Unclaimed Court Deposits—Bankruptcy Court. Kuching < —probate Notices, Bau—Unclaimed Deposits. Mukah—
Outstation Money Orders—Export Duties—Consul for Sarawak—Postcards—Bankruptcy Court, Kuching— Sarawak Library.
LEAVE—APPOINTMENTS—SARAWAK REGATTA	AMATEUR THEATRICALS—OUR NOTES.
MONTHLY REPORTS :—Mukah -Lnndu—Paku—Sadong—Bau
—Simanggang—Mataug Estate—Limbang—Bintulu.
ADVERTISEMENTS—PASSENGERS—SHIPPING—TRADE RETURNS RAINFALL—ALMANAC—METEOROLOGICAL READINGS.
The Sarawak Gazette
      FRIDAY JANUARY 4, 1907.
1906.
, Ilfs Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Mr. H. F. Deshon as A. D. C., arrived on the 14th April and spent some 4 months in the Country’, part of which time His Highness occupied in visiting the Outstations. H. H. the Rajah Muda sailed for Europe on the 11th April, and is expected shortly to return.
On the -departure of the Rajah in August the Hon’ble the Resident, Sir Percy Cunynghame, Bart, was appointed Administrator of the Government.
•One of the principal events of the year was the suppression of a very widely organized Chinese Secret Society, the evidence being very conclusive and ttkiug considerable time and trouble to collect.
At the beginning of the year exchange was fixed at 2s. 4d.—This had the effect of causing a great fall in the Dollar prices of produce, the low price of Pepper being greatly felt by* planters, who, carried away probably by the high price pepper reached before, obtained excessive advances in cash and provisions, which they are now practically unable to repay unless their creditors give them a substantial rebate. Notwithstanding this, however, and the constant reports from Upper Sarawak and elsewhere of absconding gardeners, the quantity of pepper ex
ported during the year has been far in excess of that sent out of the country in 1905. At the same time, referring once more to the, Upper Sarawak reports and taking into consideration the fact that pepper is one of the principal industries of Sarawak and a great source of revenue in more ways than one, it would appear that serious steps must be taken to prevent the planters from swindling those from whom they have had advances and provisions, it being apparently a common dodge for them uOuseli their pepper for cash to someone with whom they have no debt and to abscond with the proceeds.
   Consequent on low prices the export duties on jungle produce had to lie reduced, but, taking the Customs receipts as a whole, as far as the returns are at present made up, we understand that they compare very favourably with the previous year, and though they will show an actual decrease in dollars this is more than discounted by the enhanced sterling value of the dollar.
   The fixity of exchange has enabled the Post Office to give facilities to Outstations in the sending of Money Orders to India and Europe, and arrangements were also made during the year for the exchange of Money Orders with the Native States.
   A useful addition to Shipping was the arrival in February of the s. s. Sarawak. a small steamer built to the order of the S. & S. Steamship Co. She has a capacity of about 145 tons and during the year lias made numerous trips up and down the coast.
   Some of the principal works upon which the Public Works Department has been engaged are the River Wall, New Fish Market, new Police Station at Batu Kawa, new Government Offices, laying down a ferro-concrete floor in Museum, a bridge in Kampong Grisik, and the Khoo Hun Yeang Street reclamation work. The coal shed was also remodelled for use as a Carpenters shed, the old Carpenters’ ! shed being thrown into the Machine Shop in„ order to give increased accommodation.
   The ferro-concrete work for the Museum floor and River Wall mark a distinct advance in the char acter of the structures previously erected around Kuching. That portion of the River Wall already constructed I shows what a marked improvement this work will be I when finished, and though we understand that Mr. . Ellis, the present Commissioner, will not see the ? completion of the work which he has planned and so far successfully carried out in the face*of numerous I difficulties, he will deserve full credit for it.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 4, 1907.
The new Lux lights with which the town is now lighted are another great improvement which has given general satisfaction.
Telephone extensions have been made from Kuching to Seniawan and a duplicate line running to Paku instead of Buso. thus giving an alternate line to Paku and Bau. Poles are erected ready for the new line to Batu Kawa and as soon as the Landas is over that station will be connected with Kuching.
The Rubber Estates at Satap and Sign have had 4,000 additional Para trees planted and most of them are doing well. The old rubber should soon lie ready for tapping and thus give the Government some return for the outlay.
We learn that His Highness the Rajah has just granted a large concession of land at Sungei Tengah for the purpose of rubber planting to Messrs. The Borneo Company Limited.
The Cold Storage plant is in place and ready for operation, but the Commissioner of P. W. informs us that until a plentiful supply of water can be maintained he will not guarantee being able to keep it in continuous working during the dry weather. There should now soon be no difficulty about this as we are given to understand that Mr. Grove expects to get his Matang Water scheme completed by the end of March. The pipes are now laid from a point near the Upper Reservoir down to and across the river, and about 2 miles towards Matang.
With regard to affairs in the Interior the Rebel Dyaks have kept quiet for some time past and there are rumours of their “coming in,” but up to time of writing nothing definite has come to hand.
In August His Highness the Rajah opened a New Club called the “Kuching Social Club” which has filled a long felt want.
We have unfortunately to record the deaths during the year of Mr. J. F. M. Bingley, Cadet in the Government Service; Hj. Bui Hassan. Datu Bandar of Sarawak; Hj. Mobommed Amin. Datu Imaum: and Hj. Usop, Datu Bandar of Sibu. H. H. the Sultan of Brunei also died on the 10th May, and Mr. B. Bettington who retired on pension two years ago died in November.
Messrs. C. W. Daubeny, G. P. Barlow and F. J. D. Cox all retired on pension during the year, and Messrs. W. R. T. Clement and H. La Chard joined the Service as Cadets; Mr. E. Parnell, the Treasury, as Assistant; Mr. N. McPhee was appointed Resident of Lower Rejang, and Dr. Bruce Low and Miss Hastie have been attached to the Medical Department.
Order-
No. XIII, 1906.
WHEHEAS His Excellency The Governor of the Straits Settlements has notified the Sarawak Government that it is his intention to shortly issue an order prohibiting the exportation of Straits dollars to all places except to Sarawak, British North Borneo and the Malay Peninsula, and whereas His Excellency has requested that this Government will assist by taking all possible steps to prevent the exportation of Straits dollars from Sarawak to China or elsewhere, it is hereby enacted:—
  That from date of this Order the exportation of Straits dollars to any place outside
Sarawak except to the Straits Settlements or British North Borneo is forbidden and any
person disobeying this Order will be punished by fine or imprisonment.
By Order
            - P. F. CUNYNGHAME,
Resident 1st Division.
Administering the
Government of Sarawak.
Resident's Office,
Kuching, Sarawak, 24th October, 190G.
Order-
No. XIV, ISKMi.
  THE following is feg^e added to the table of fares for hire of Jiir&kshas, Order No. I of 26th February 1896.	’
   If engaged by time
    For every hour	.... 25 cents.
    For every additional
J hour .... 6 cents.
P. F. CUNYNGHAME,
   Resident 1st Division.
  Resident’s Office,
Sarawak, 5th November 1906.
            Notice.
No. L, 1906.
  WITH reference to Order No. XIII 1906, it is hereby notified that persons leaving Sarawak for any place to which the export of Straits dollars is prohibited may, on application to the Treasury, have Straits dollars changed for their equivalent value in Straits Settlements’ notes, or otherwise as may be arranged.
G. C. GILLAN, Acting Treasurer. The Treasury, 24th October, 1906.
            Notice.
No. LI. 1906.
   IN THE BANKRUPTCY COURT, SADONG.
In the goods of Lim Ho Khuan, chop Hup Ki at.
In the goods of Lim Pioh and Koh Oh, chop Chin Hock Ann. Traders at Sbangan. (A bsconded.)
  ALL creditors and other persons having any claims whatsoever against the Estates of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned within


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 4, 1907.
3
three (3) months from date, after which date
the assets of the above named will be divided
amongst the parties entitled thereto, regard
lifting had only to those claims of which
notice shall have been given. And all monies
owing to the above Estates shall be paid to
the undersigned forthwith.
DONALD A. OWEN,
Resident 2nd Class.
    Sadong,
30th October, 1906.
Notice.
No. Ln, 1906.
re Lai Jew Ilin, chop Hin Hap.
(Absconded). Trader in Shak
Lung Mun Bazaar.
re Tseyo Nyong Poh, chop
Foong’’Wap, ( Absconded).
Traw Xm Bau Bazaar.
ALL creditors and ot^ier persons having any
claims whatsoever against the Estates of the
above named are hereby requested to send
particulars thereof to the undersigned within
three (3) months from date, after which date
the assets of the-above named will be divided
amongst the parties entitled thereto, regard
being had only to those claims of which notice
shall have been given. And all monies owing
to the above estates shall be paid to the under-
signed forthwith.
E. R. STILWELL,
Resident, Upper Sarawak.
    Bau,
November 6th, 1900.
Notice.
No. LIV, 1906.
THE following sums in deposit in the Office
of the Courts will be paid into Government
Revenue if not claimed before the 15th Jan-
uary 1907.
     For	From	Amount
Imong	Gunting	|1.00
Kwong. Yot Shing Chung Ah Choi 2.03
Lai Chong Est. Lai Mui	2.43
Lira Nam	,,	Kam Kwee	2.03
Leong Kwi	,,	,,	7.45
Ng Tai Nen	.,	Lai Mui	8.76
Nio Ngok Heng	.,	Kam Kwee	4.06
Ow Ah Hooi	.,	Soon Hap	4.92
Sun Keong Keng	..	Ngu Hong	2.05
Wong Ah Shing	„	Chung Ah Choi	2.20
Ah On	,,	Leong Seng	0.02
Borneo Company Ltd. ,,	0.55
Guan What	0.05
Hap Heng Long	„	0.10
Koh Kun Bee	,,	0.32
Koo Pee chop Chua Kun	Seng	0.40
Kim Watt, Baram	,,	0.24
Lau What Siow	,,	0.40
Leong Ann	„	3.22
Sam Hap Hin	0.31
Tek Chiang	„	0.17
Wha Ann	,,	0.82
                  JOHN E. A. LEWIS,
Resident 2nd Class.
16th November, 1906.
Notice.
No. LV, 1906.
In rc Soong Kwee Long, Chop Ngee Thai. (Absconded.) Trader in Bau Bazaar.
  ALL creditors and other persons having any claim whatsoever against the Estate of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned within three (3) months from date, after which date, the assets of the above named will be divided amongst the parties entitled thereto, regard being had only to those claims of which notice shall have been given. And all monies owing to the above Estate shall be paid to the undersigned forthwith.
E. R. STILWELL,
Resident, Upper Sarawak.
        Bau,
November 15th, 1906.
            Notice-
No. LX 1906.
IN THE BANKRUPTCY COURT. KUCHING.
In the goods of Chong Chee, pepper planter of Tundong West. Chop Hap Lee. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Tian Lak Koo. pepper planter of S. Moyan. ( A bsconded.)
In the goods of Tian Bun Liong and Jee Siow, pepper planters of S. Tengah. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Chin Fook and Chin Sang, pepper planters of S. Maung. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Tan Jin of Ran- to Panjang, pepper planter. (A bsconded.)
In the goods of Kuan Kow and Kuan Chiow, chop Van Hin. pepper planters of Paku. (A bsconded.)
In the goods of Piong Sen and Piong Loi, pepper planters of Tabuan. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Lai Kiam, pepper planter of S. Tapang, f .4 bsconded.)
In the goods ot Poh Lim Hong, pepper planter of 74 mileRock Road. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Hoo Seng Kong, pepper planter of Quop. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Eo Hee and Eo Fui, pepper planters of Sigo- bang Hill. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Ng Sam Hin. Lee Bet and Chong Kuai, chop
Lian Shoon, pepper planters of Paku. (Absconded.)
in the goods of Lim Liew and Ng Chio, pepper planters of Ranto Panjang. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Chai Kak. pepper planter of Batu Kawa. (Absconded.)


4	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 4, 1907.
In the goods of Bong Fah, chop
Liong Shin, pepper planter
of Bau. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Chen Pui, Chin
Kok, Koh Pien, Chin Siang
and Chin Sung Kee, pepper
planters of 7th mile Penrissen
Road. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Chai Sin and
Lee Fatt, pepper planters of
Stapok. (Absconded.)
  An creditors and others persons having any
claim whatsoever against the Estates of the
above named are hereby requested to send
particulars thereof to the undersigned on or
before the 15th January. 1907, after which
date the assets of the above named will be
divided amongst the parties entitled thereto
regard being had only to those claims of which
notice shall have been given. And all monies
owing to the above Estates shall be paid to
the undersigned forthwith.
JpHN E. A. LEWIS.
Resident 2nd Class.
    Kuching,
30th November 1906.
Notice.
                  No. LXI, 1906.
Re Bong Ngee Chiu. (Deceased )
Trader in Shak Lung Mun
Bazaar.
  PROBATE having been granted to Hiew Ah
Jew. wife of deceased, ail claims and monies
owing to the said Estate should be sent to her.
E. R. STILWELL.
Resident, Upper Sarawak.
      Bau,
5th December, 1906.
            Notice
                  No. LXII, 1906.
Re Tian Sip, chop Jeo Kce.
(Absconded.) Trader in Tun-
dong Bazaar.
  ALL creditors and other persons having any
claim whatsoever against the Estate of the
above named are hereby requested to send
particulars thereof to the undersigned within
three months from date, after which date the
assets of the above named will be divided
amongst the parties entitled thereto regard
being had only to those claims of which notice
shall have been given. And all monies owing
to the above Estate shall be paid to the under-
signed forthwith.
   E. R. STILWELL,
Resident, Upper Sarawak.
      Bau,
5th December, 1906.
Notice.
No. LX1II, 1906.
  THE following sums now in deposit in the Court of Requests. Mukah, if not claimed on or before 31st March, 1907, will revert to Government.
              For	From
          Hj. Daud	Lating	$1.60
          Tari	Salleh Nor	3.50
          Hj. Tahir	Taril	4.00
          Hj. Rais	Dulamit	5.50
Total	$14.60
      A. E. LAWRENCE, Magistrate, Court of Requests.
Notification.
No. LXIV; 1906.
    Outstation Money Ordeiis.
  NOTIFICATION of 17th January 1906 is hereby cancelled and the following regulations are substituted and will come into force on 1st January 1907.
  After receipt of the amount of the money order required and the commission (2 cents on every dollar or part of a dollar, with a minimum of 10 cents) Officers in charge of Outstations may issue cheques on the Sarawak Treasury for Money Orders on the following places or countries.
      1- Kuching (maximum $100).
1 2- United Kingdom (maximum £40) and through the United Kingdom on various British Dependencies and Foreign countries. (For maximum and other particulars see postal Guide.)
    3. Straits Settlements (maximum $100.)
4. Federated Malay States (maximum $100.)
5. India and through India on Burma and Ceylon (maxim'm Ps. GOO.)
? 1. These orders are intended for payment of small nccounU only and should not be issued to traders who may appear to be making usa of them for their usual trade remittances.
12. Orders issued through the United Kingdom are subject to the. following deductions in London when being advised to the country of payment.
            For sums not exceeding £5	3d.
            For every additional £5 or fraction thereof 3d.
  No order may contain a fraction of a cent, of
| a penny or of an anna. Orders on or ‘‘through’* 1 the United Kingdom and India should be 1 calculated in accordance with the tables 1 supplied by the Post Office, and the commission added.
   The cheques, accompanied by the special I printed application form (Outstation Money Order application), should be drawn in favour of, and forwarded to, the Postmaster General, Kuching.
   In the case of Money Orders (1) on Kuching, ‘ (2) on or through the United Kingdom ami


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 4, 1907.
(3) on the Strait Settlements, an actual form of Money Order is issued for transmission to the payee and in order to avoid delay, and provided the application is accompanied by a fully stamped and addressed envelope, the Money Order will be forwarded to him direct by the Kuching Post Office at the remitter’s risk; otherwise it will be sent to the Postal Officer applying.
  The envelope may contain the remitters advice to the payee but the Post Office accepts no responsibility in case of loss and it is advisable to send it separately.
  In the case of Money Orders on (4) the Federated Malay States and (5) on or through India no form of Money Order is issued to the remitter as the paying office issues and forwards a Money Order to the payee, and the above paragraph as to stamped and addressed envelope does not therefore apply.
  A form of acknowledgement will be forwarded by the Kuching office to the Postal Officer applying, for transmission to the remitter who should retain same and advise the payee as to remittance.
By order of the Officer
Administering the Government.
                      • C. C. ROBISON, Postmaster-General. I 1st January, 1907.
Notice.
No. LXV, 1906.
re Phoong Sam Choon. (Deceased.) Shareholder in the firm of chop Thoong On Thai. Trader in Bau Bazaar.
  PROBATE having been granted to Ng Ah Lian, wife of deceased, and Chiew Fook the remaining partner, all claims and monies owing to the said Estate should be sent to them.
H. B. CROCKER,
Assistant Resident.
      Bau,
December 19th 1906.
Notice.
No. LXVI, 1906.
  FROM 1st January 1907 and until further Notice duties upon the undermentioned articles will be as follows:—
     Fish Maws No.	1	per cattv	.20	cts.
2 „	„	.15	.,
3 „	.10
     Gutta J&ngkar	per picul	$1.50	.,
     White Pepper „	„	1.25	,.
     Black Peppei	..	1.00
   By order of the Officer Administering the Government.
C. C. ROBISON,
Superintendent of Customs.
21st December, 190G.
Notice.
No. LXVIT, 1906.
  His Majesty the King having been pleased to appoint Malcolm Stewart Hannibal McArthur, Esqr. Consul for Sarawak, His Highness the Rajah hereby directs that he be received with the usual salute and honours whenever he visits Sarawak and that all Officers in the Service shall do their utmost to assist him in his duties and pay him the respect due to bis rank.
         By His Highness’ Command
P. F. CUNYNGHAME.
Officer administering the Government.
    Kuching,
December 29th, 1906.
Notification.
'No. LXVIII, 1906.
Past -Curds.
  POST-CARDS impressed with a stamp of the value of one cent, and double or reply-paid Post-Cards impressed with a stamp of the value of one cent on each portion of them, may be transmitted between places in Sarawak. These cards can be forwarded to other places outside of Sarawak, if the additional postage required is supplied by means of postage stamps affixed to the cards.
   Post-Cards impressed with a stamp of the value of 4 cents and double or reply paid Post-Cards impressed with a stamp of the value of 4 cents on each portion of them, may be sent to all parts of the world.
Private Post-Cards.
   Private post-cards will be accepted by the Post Office in Sarawak for transmission under the following conditions:—
   ia) Private post-cards must be composed of ordinary card- board, or paper sufficiently stout not to hinder their manipulation; they must not exceed a maximum size of 5} inches by 81 inches, and the minimum size must not be less thau 4 inches by 2J inches. Prepayment of a private Post-card addressed to any place in Sarawak, can be effected by means of a oue- cent Sarawak postage stamp affixed to it; and if addressed to any other destination prepayment can be effected by means of a Sarawak postage stamp ar stamps for 4 cents affixed to it.
   (b) Double or reply-paid private jiost cards will be accepted, and postage can be prepaid by stamps affixed as stated above to each half of the double card.
   (c) The inscription "Post-cards" is not compulsory for single post-cards of private manufacture, but the reply halves of private double cards must bear the title "Post-cards." In no case is any other heading prescribed/'
   (d) A private Post-card posted without a postage stamp will be charged, on delivery, with double postage per single can! or for each half of a reply card.
Bules Applying to OHiciul ami Private Post-Cards.
   (1) Post-cards bearing written or printed communications on the left hand half of the address side can be sent to all British Possessions to which penny postage applies and to certain other countries already notified. It is not compulsory to affix the postage stamps to the address side, but the public is strongly urged to do so."
   Ui) Engravings or advertisements, provided they do not interfere in any way with the clear indication of the address or with the stamping or marking of the Postal Service, may appear on the front of a card, in addition to the name and address of the recipient in writing or on a gummed label not exceeding 2 inches by J inch, and the name and address of the sender indicated in writing, or by means of a hand stamp, stamping machine or any other typographical process.
   (3) In addition to stamps for prepayment Post-cards may bear address-labels as above described, and engravings, ilhis


6
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 4, 1907.
trations, drawings and photographs on very thin paper may be affixed to the back or to the left hand half of the address side, provided they arc completely adherent.	w
(4) A Post-Card mast not be folded, cut or otherwise altered.
(6) Cards bearing the inscription "Post-card” arc allowed to go at the reduced rate of postage for printed matter, prodded then conform Io the general regulations respecting printed paper.-. If they arc not in accordance with the regulations for printed papers or with the rules applicable to Postcards they arc treated as letters.
(6l The sender of n reply-paid Post-Card is recommended to write his name and address on the stamped side of the reply portion of the double card- The reply Mllvcs of double Post- Cards are available for return to the country of origin, and to that country only. If addressed to other countries they are treated us unpaid Post-Cards
(7) Ordinary international Post-Cards of one country posted in another are treated us unpaid Post-Cards.
    • These regulations will apply to Post-Cards of all kinds whether addressed to places in the United Kingdom Sarawak, the Straits Settlements, Federated Malay States or Johore; but. although there is reason to believe that the same course will be generally adopted, no guarantee can nt present be given that the same privileges will be allowed by the i'ost Offices of other Countries.
C. C. ROBISON,
Postmaster-General.
Notice-
No. LXIX, 1906.
IN THE BANKRUPTCY COURT, KUCHING.
In the goods of Lew Piang, pepper planter of Tan Teo Durian. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Tsai Hin Tet, and Tsai Jew Shoon, pepper flanterc of Pakn Chop Jee jee, (Absconded.)
In the goods of Lew Choon, pepper planter of 41 utile Rock Road. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Chai Khun, pepper planter of S. Tapang. ( A bsconded.)
In the goods of Chop Ban Chong, Carpenter. (Abscond- cd.)
In the goods of Koey Tai Hok, Chop Tai Hah, cake dealer. (A bsconded.)
in the goods of Lint Hong Tiew, Fisherman of Buntal. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Chee On, penper planter Chop Loong Shoon, ofPaku. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Lai Moh, pep- planter of 5| mile Rock Road. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Ngin Han. pepper planter of Tan Teo Durian, Chop Kee Look, (Absconded.)
In the,goods of Bong Ti, shopkeeper of 4I mile Rock Road. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Jong Lok, pepper planter ofPaku. (Absconded.)	.
  ALL creditors and other persons having any claim whatsoever against the Estates of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned on or before the 15th February 1907, after which date the assets of the above named will be
divided amongst the parties entitled thereto regard being had only to those claims of which notice shall have been given. And all moneys owing to the above Estates shall be paid to1 the undersigned forthwith.
JOHN E. A. LEWIS,
Resident 2nd±Class.
31st December, 1906.
Notice.
Saransk Library.
  SUBSCRIBERS are requested to send to the Honorary Secretary lists of such books as they wish added to the library.
H. A. ADAMS,
Acting Honorary Secretary.
      I 	_ r n
	15 *
  DR. A. J. G. Barker, Principal Medical Officer, returned from leave on 28th December 1906, and has resumed his duties.
     APPOINTMENTS.
  His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to make the following appointments :—
  Herbert La Chard Esq. to be a Cadet, and to do duty in Upper Sarawak at Bau, to date 28th December 1906.
  Dr. Robert Bruce Low to be Assistant Medical Officer, to date from 28th December 1906.
  Miss A. Hastie to the Medical Department as Nurse, to date from 28th December 1906.
  H. B. Crocker Esq. Assistant Resident, to do duty in the Resident’s Office, Kuching, to date from 8th January 1907.
SARAWAK REGATTA.
   Tuesday, 1st January, 1907.
   THE Annual Regatta took place as usual on New Year's Day. The weather was favourable with the exception of a heavy storm which swept over the town during the interval for tiffin. There was a very large attendance of spectators and the entrances for the principal races of the day showed that the enthusiasm of the Malay population has in no way abated.
Judges:— Sir Percy Cunynghame, Bart, and Messrs. J. M. Bryan, John E. A. Lewis, C. C. Robison, H. D. Ellis, and The Datu Hakim, The Data Muda.
Starters:—Messrs. G. C. Gillan, Stuart Cunynghame H. A. Adams and The Tuan Belal.
Umpire:—Mr. M. G. Bradford.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 4, 1907.
Stewards:- -Dr. Barker, Dr. Wellington, Messrs. F. G. Day. E. L. Grove. V. Harington. L. E. Slade, G. M. Allman, E. Parnell and Messrs.
• Chan Kee Soon, Ong Tiang Swee. Yeo ' Guan Chow, Low Ngee Siang and Khoo ' Siew Jin.
Hon. Treasurer:—Mr. G. C. Gillan.
Programme.
   1st Race, 9 a. nt.—SHIP’S GIGS.—1st prize $6.
2nd prize $3. From the Datu Bandar's Pangkalan
to the Stone Wharf.
P. S. Adeh first, H. FI. S. Zaliora second.
Won by 2 lengths.
   2nd Race, 9.15 a. in.—BANDONG RACE.—For bond
fide fishing boats. Crews limited to ten men. 1st
prize $15. 2nd prize $10. From the Datu Bandar's
Pangkalan to the Stone Wlgtrf.
Talip's bandong first, .'-j^/tr's - ond.
A very good race won 'zy a foot or two.
   3rd Race, 9.30 a. in.—H is HIGHNESS THE RAJAH'S
CUP.- Value $130. 2nd prize $65. For boats with
unlimited Crews. Entrance fee $2. 1st prize to
Crew $50. 2nd prize to Crew §25. 3rd prize to
Crew $15. From Tanjong Patingan to the Stone
Wharf.
     NAME or BOAT.
1 Lang Mangambar
2 Burak Datu Bandar
3 Api Xaraka
0 Shamrock IV
4 Bujang Sainbong ..
5 singa Bagu
   All three boats were close together, the winner having an advantage of 6 feet at the finish.
   4th Race, 10 a. m.—TAMBANGS.— Open to all licensed tambangs with one man in each. 1st prize $2. 2nd prize $1. 3rd prize 50 cents. From the Stone Wharf round H. II. S. Zahora and back to Stone Wharf.
              1st Tambang No. 134
              2nd „	172
                 3rd „	9
i Abang Hj. Hipni, Ab. Hj.
’ ’ i Nawawi, Ab. Abdulrahman
.. Abang Hj. Fadel
.. Iuchi Abu Bakar
.. A bang AlKiillah
i Abang Suliomau. Ab. Haji Su-
’ ‘ ? haili, Ab. Bulkia Ab. Nohmau Awang Jul and Mohd. Allan
   5th Race, 10.15 a. in.—PRAHU TEGORA RACK.—
For boats that have been bond fide carrying freight
to Tegora or above Buso. Crews unlimited. 1st
prize $20. 2nd prize $10. From Hj. Assim bin
Hj. Koleh's Pangkalan to the Stone Wharf.
              First—Poak Estate prahu.
              Second—Aroon’s prahu.
Won by several lengths.
   Gth Race, 10.30 a. m.—THE CHAMBER OF COM-
MERCE CUP.—Value $50.- Presented by the Chinese
Chamber of Commerce. For any description of
boat with Crews limited to 15 men. Entrance fee
§1.50. 1st prize to Crew $15. 2nd prize to Crew
$7.50. From Tanjong Patingan to the Stone Wharf.
          NAME OF BOAT.          O« XEU.1 Sejelli.. Abdul Wahap2 Bujang Kerbaii K. Tanjong. Haji Mabomat Fadel3 Ma.ilBabari0 Moontiara. Abang AlKiillah0 Suka Baga,. Capt. Jeman0 Sri GritekInch! Abu Bakar0 Malim Bahluu-an.. Mahomet Zin0 Singa Terbang	..	•.. C. C. Robison0 Sri Laical.. (rook Soon, and Eng Guan0 Sui.... Capt. Landak0 KUat Api.. Natu bin Sergt. Kaya0 Chahia Api Xaraka ..Jolin bin Sergt. Kapi0 Auer Jam Jani
0 Chahia Hangi 0 Sri Dalima.. Sgt. Major Kassim.Sgt. Braudah .. Sergt, Guang
.. Abdul Karim0 Bujang Ha pi.. Hj. Fadel)0 Maimon Sri Kilang .... BujilSeventeen entries made things rather difficult and several boats were shut out from the start. In the end Sejelli came in the winner by about a length; bad third. This is the 3rd year in succession that this boat has won this race.
7 th Race, 11 a. m.—ONE MAN RACE.—1st prize $2. 2nd prize $1. 3rd prize 50 cents. From the Stone Wharf round H. H. S. Zahora and back to Stone Wharf.
1st Sunial, 2nd Doilah.
Sth Race. 11.20 a. in. -SCHOOL BOYS RACE.—For bond fide School boys only. Crews limited to 18 boys. 1st prize $12. 2nd prize $4.50. From the Datu Bandar's Pangkalan to the Stone Whdrf.
           First—S. P. G. School.
           Second—Govt. Lay School.
Won by about 1| length.
During the interval Tillin was served in the Court Room to which some 130 persons (Europeans, Chinese and Malays) sat down. The Hon'ble the Resident presided and after tiffin proposed the usual loyal toasts and wished everyone a prosperous New Year. Inche Abu Bakar for the Malay Community, and Mr. Khoo SieXv Jin foi* the Chinese responded shortly.
During tiffin a terrific gale of wind blew over the town doing much damage to houses and blowing down trees, but fortunately it soon passed away and the weather cleared up again.
Racing was resumed at 1.30 p. M.
9th Race, 1.30 p. in.— FOR BOATS WITH CREWS LIMITED TO 8 MEN. -1st prize $8. 2nd prize $4. From the Muara Padungan to the Stone Wharf.
10th Race, 2 p. m.—FOR BOATS WITH CREWS LIMITED TO 3 MEN. 1st prize $3. 2nd prize $1.50. From the Stone Wharf round H. H. S. Zahora and back to Stone Wharf.
11th Race. 2.30 p. in.—ARMY. NAVY. CONSTABULARY AND CIVIL SERVICE.—Crews limited to 15 men. 1st prize $15. 2nd prize $7.50. From Ban Seng's Sago Factory to the Stone Wharf.
             1st—p. s. Adeh crew.
             2nd—H. H. 8. Zahora crew.
12th Race, 3 p. in.—BANDO.NG RACE.—For bond fide fishing boats to be propelled by oars, steersman only to use a paddle. Crews limited to.5 men. 1st prize $7.50. 2nd prize $5. From Muara Padungan to the Stone Wnarf.
1st Suntong, 2nd Abg. Antek, 3rd Hj. Mat.
Won by A a length.
13th Race, 3.20 p.m.—THE CHAMPION CUP.—Value $11X4. Presented by Mr. Khoo Siew Jin. Open to all boats, crews unlimited. Entrance fee $2. 1st prize to Crew $50. 2nd prize to Crew $25. 3rd prize to Crew $15. From Batu Biliong to the Stone Wharf.
        NAXE OF BOU .
1 Burak Datu Bandar
2 Lang Manganibar
3 Api Xaraka 0 Shamrock IV
4 Bujang Sainbong ..
5 Singa Bagu
Owsca.
       .. Abang Hj. Fadel
       i Abang Hj. Hipni. Ab. Hj.
’ i Nawawi, Ab. Abdulrahman
Inchi Abn Bakar
       .. Abang Abd ilia h
 ' Abang Snlleman, Ab. Haji Su-
"i haih,Ab. Bulkia Ab. Nohnun
.. A wang Jul and Mohd. Allan
This resulted in another good race between the
first 3 boats, the Burak Datu Bandar on this occa-
sion just managing to wrest the victory from Lang
Manyambar. Api Naraka was again only able to
obtain 3rd place. A few inches between first and
second, and a few feet between second and third.


8
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 4, 1907.
   14th Hare. 8.46 p. m.—FOR ANY DESCRIPTION OF
BOAT WITH CREWS LIMITED TO 15 MEN.—Entrance
fee $1. Winner of the Gth race to pull with 13
and 2nd in 6th race with 14 paddles only. 1st prize
115 to owner and $15 to Crew. 2nd prize to Crew
$7.50. From Batu Biliong to Stone Wharf.
           NA« or BOAT.
OWXER.
2	"
3 SwAa Buga
0 Moontiara
0 Sri Grurk
0 Malim PaUnmn ..
0 Bujang Krrbau K. Tanjvng ..
0 Singa Trrbang
0 Sri Laura*
0 Suit*
0 Kilat Api
0 Ckahia Api Xaraka
0 Aurr Jam Jam
0 Ckakia Plaugi
0 Sri Dtlima .
0 Bujang Bapi
0 Maimon Sri Kitang
Abdul Wah*p liahari ('apt. Jrinan Abang Abdillab Iuchi Abu Bakar Mabomat Zin Haji Mabomat Fadel C. C. Robiaon Geok Soon, and Eng Guan ('apt. I^ndak N»tn bin Sergt. Kava John bin Sorgt. Kapi Sgt. MajorKasuni, Sgt. Ilrandah Scret. GuanK Abdul Karim Hj. Fad. ll Uujit
   Sejelli, in spite of only having 13 paddles came
in first by about a yard. Masil managing to get into
2nd place this time. No. 3 close up. This is the
2nd year in succession that Sejelli has won this race.
   15 th Race. 4 p. m.—BANDONG RACE.—For boiui
fide fishing boats; Crews limited to 15 men. 1st
prize $22.50. 2nd prize $15. From Ban Seng’s
Sago Factory to Stone Wharf.
   1 Abang Abdillah, 2 Rais.
16th Race, 4.15 p. m.—FISHERMAN'S RACE.—One
man sculling. (Dayong Jkan). lstprize'$2. 2nd
prize $1. 3rd prize 50 cents. From the Stone
Wharf round H. H. S. Zahora and back to Stone
Wharf.
   1 Alli, 2 Udin, 3 Jen.
17th Race. 4.45 p. m.—THE CONSOLATION Crp.—
Value $70. Open to all boats that have not won a
race at this meeting. Entrance fee $1. 1st prize
to Crew $25. 2nd prize to Crew $15. From Batu
Biliong to Stone Wharf.
        NAMK or BOAT.	OWXKB.
           Iuchi Abu Babur
           Awang Jul and Mobd. Allan
.. A bung Abdillah
        ' Abang Sulieman. Ab. Haji Stl-
i baili. Ab. Bulkia Ab. Nohiuau
An easy win for Api Naraha.
Following the example of last year, some Europeans in ship's gigs indulged in a race, much to the danger of some of the racing boats which were coming down stream after one of the Races. One i boat w^s upset, and though this means nothing much to the natives who all swim like fish, it may ? mean a good deal to the boats which are lightly I built and not in any way able to stand collision; it , is nci an ..uy thing to turn a boat of the length of i those used for racing out of the way when a sudden 1 collision is imminent, we would therefore suggest that notice of an intended race be given to the proper authorities who can then clear the course, and any boat which after that gets in the way takes its | own risk.
         linatenr Theatricals.
a rapid adjournment to the bar at the termination of the piece seemed a perfectly natural coincidence.
   At 10 o’clock was presented the amusing comedy “THE SNOWHALL" which might equally well be designated "The Entanglement of Felix.'' The latter unfortunate individual thinking, in a moment of weakness, to outwit and give a lesson to his wife “Mrs. Featherstone," admirably presented Im Mrs. Sharp, gets badly left and has, to say the leawof it, a very poor time. Mrs. Wellington as “Penelope” was sufficiently fascinating to excuse the gloomy suspicions of "Uncle John" played by Mr. F. G. Day and founded apparently on his own youthful escapades, his appearance certainly lending colour to the belief that he must have had a “fearful past.” Finally “Felix" regains the dubious possession of his marital authority, the process being proved a somewhat expensive one to himself and for “Uncle John." “Felix" was played with effect by Mr. Stuart Cunynghame and the other parts convincingly and naturally by Mr. Ellis as "Prendergast." Dr. Wellington as "Saundc^i and Miss Johns as “Ethel Granger.”
   In conclusion, to drawbSmparisons between the performers would be invidious, it is sufficient to say that the whole thing was distinctly good and the staging of both pieces reflects the greatest credit on Archdeacon Sharp,’ Church and Stage in his person being once more happily united.
   Another performance is announced to take place on January 5th and should be well attended.
The full caste was as follows :—
Cliiselling.
A FARCE IN ONE ACT.
Harry Larkspur, (a Sculptor) Mr. Stuart
Cunynghame
Trotter (his Servant)	Mr. F. G. Day
Dr. Stonecrop	Mr. A. R. Wellington
Kate Norton	Mrs. Wellington
Mrs. Piper	Mrs. Sharp
    Scene. Larkspur's Studio.
Th:* Snowball.
       A FARCICAL COMEDY IN THREE ACTS.
Felix Featherstone	Mr. Stuart Cunynghame
Uncle John	Mr. F. G. Day
Harry Prendergast	Mr. H. D. Ellis
Saunders	Mr. A. R. Wellington
Mrs. Featherstone	Mrs. Sharp
Ethel Granger (her sister) ...Miss K. Johns Penelope	Mrs. Wellington
    Scene.—.4 room iii Featherstone’s house.
ON the 29th an amateur theatrical performance was given in the Govt. School house here which lends itself admirably to this kind of entertainment.
The curtain rose at 9 o’clock to the first piece , “CHISELLING." This farce has been so often performed and is so well known that no description is needed here, it is sufficient to say that the acting was distinctly good and the make up of the performers | excellent, Dr. Wellington’s particularly so in the > part of Dr. Stonecrop. Mr. F. G. Day as the bibu- I lous statue in his song "Beer, Beer. Beautiful Beer” I so appealed to the male portion of the audience that |
An extra performance was given on the evening of Regatta Day. 1st January, so that those who had come to attend the Regatta and were unable to stay on might have an opportunity of seeing the two pieces should they wish to do so. The evening was unfortunately wet but cleared up a little before the curtain rose, and the rain fortunately held off during the performance. Had it been otherwise it would have been very difficult for the performers to have made themselves heard. Both pieces went even better than on the first occasion, and the audience, if small, were certainly very appreciative.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 4, 1907.
      oc
Drcrmbfr.
   ON the 1st the p. s. Kaka sailed for Brooketon, Limbang, etc. and on the 3rd p. s. Adeh left for Sibu.
   THE s. S. Rajah of Sarawak sailed for Singapore on the 4th. No European passengers.
   ON the 6th the s. s. Kitching arrived from Singapore with passengers, Messrs. R. Pawle, A. C. Vivian and the Revd. J. Oss.
   The same day the s. s. Sarawak came in from Muka with passenger, Miss Dobson.
  THF. p. s. Kaka returned from the North on
the 7th, and s. s. Sarawak sailed for Bintulu
•n the 9th.
—
  ON the 11th s. s. Kuyhing sailed for Singa-
pore with passenger’. Miss Dobson, Mr. and
Mrs. A. G. Butler.
  The same day the p. s. Adeh returned from
Sibu.
  ON the 13th the s. s. Rajah of Sarawak
arrived from Singapore. Passenger, Mr. G.
Malcolm of Messrs. Ellis and Co., American
Agents of Singapore.
  ON the 16th p. s. Kaka sailed for Brooketon
and Limbang. Passenger, Mr. G. Dalton.
  The same day the s. s. Sarawak returned
from Bintulu.
  EAKLY on Sunday morning, the 16th, H.M.S.
Clio arrived from North Borneo Ports and
came up river. She dropped anchor just above
H. H. S. Zahora, off Ban Hok's Wharf.
  H. M. S. Clio is a Screw Sloop of 1070 tons
and is attached to the China Squadron. Her
full list of Officers is as foliows:—
Commander.
Lieutenant.
Cecil D. S. Raikes
R. H. B. Hammond Chambers
Do (X)	Neville B. C. Brock
Do	J. 8. Morrell
Staff Surgeon
R. L. Dickinson
Paymaster	A. W. B. Messenger
Chief Art. Engr. 8. J. Venning Gunner	W. Taylor.
  ON the afternoon of the 17th a party of
bluejackets landed from H. M. S. Clio and in-
dulged in a game of football on the Mission
ground. Owing to the rain which has fallen
every day for weeks the ground was very
sodden and in places there were pools of water
which, however, failed to damp the enthusiasm
of the players.
  The same evening the Acting Commandant,
Mr. Stuart Cunynghame, invited everyone to
witness some Dyak dancing, etc. on the parade
ground at the Fort. The Hon’ble’the Resident,
with Commander Raikes and a small party from
the Residency arrived about 9.30 P. M. when
the proceedings commenced with dances by
some of the Sarawak Rangers. A torchlight
tattoo by Sepoys proved very effective, but re-'
quired a little more rehearsing, and another turn by a Sepoy, who whirled fire at the two ends of a cord round in circles so rapidly until there was one complete circle of blaze, called forth much applause.
  Amongst those present at the entertainment we noticed the Hon’ble the Resident, Commander Raikes, R. N. and Officers of H. M. S. Clio, Mr. and Mrs. Ellis, Dr. and Mrs. Wellington, Mrs. Grove, Dr. J. White Hopkins, Messrs. Lewis, Stilwell, Bryan, Slade, Allman, Gillan, Harington, Etheridge and many others. Fortunately the evening was fine so that it was possible to sit outside and appreciate the Acting Commandant’s hospitality.
   ON the 18th the s. s. Rajah of Sarawak
sailed for Singapore with passengers Messrs.
Malcolm and J. H. Johnston.
   This afternoon the S. P. G. Obi Boys’ team
played a football match against a scratch team
from H. M. S. Clio and won by 4 goals to nil.
The heavy rain during the day made the
Mission ground worse than it had been the
day before, and it was a perfect swamp.
   In the evening Mr. J. M. Bryan entertained
the Officers of H. M. S. Clio at dinner at
B. M. K.
   H. M. S. Clio sailed for Singapore to rejoin
the Fleet on the morning of the 19th instant,
and we understand that she may return here
again about the end of January.
   On the 19th the s. s. Sarawak sailed for
Rejang, Bintulu and other ports. Passengers,
Mr. V. Harington and Revd. J. Oss for Sibu.
   ON the morning of the 20th Mr. Grove laid
the second lot of the Matang Water pipes in
the bed of the river from bank to bank. The
first lot were laid on the 14th; there are now
two lines of pipes in position under the water,
so that in the event of anything going wrong
with one, the other can be used. Some in-
teresting photos of the operation were taken
by Mr. Reutens.
   S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore on the
20th but brought no European passengers.
   ON the 22nd the p. s. Adeh returned from
Limbang and Brooketon. Passengers. Mr.
and Mrs. T. Nicoll and Mr. G. Dalton.
   TUESDAY the 25th, being Christmas Day,
the Hon’ble the Resident, Sir Percy Cunyng-
hame, Bart., entertained a large number of
guests at dinner in the new Outstation
Officers’ Rest House. A party of 27 sat down
to an excellent dinner, one of the principal
items of the menu being “Snipe,” which had
been shot a couple of days previously by the
Resident and Mr. Lewis and kept in the ice
house. The table was tastefully decorated,
and the gorgeous display of crackers of all
sorts and sizes gave the ‘.‘Christmassy”
appearance necessary to the occasion. After
dinner dancing and music were indulged in,


10
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 4, 1907.
the last of the guests not departing until the early hours of the morning.
  Ox the 26th the s. s. Kuching sailed for Singapore. Passengers, Mr. and Mrs. T. Nicoll.
  The same day s. s. Sarawak returned from Bintulu.
  Ox the 28th the s. s. Rajah of Sarawak arrived from Singapore with passengers—Dr. A. J. G. Barker. Dr. Bruce Low, Dr. Schlech- ter, Messrs. J. S. Geikie, J. H. Johnston, H. la (’hard and Miss Hastie.
  Dr. Barker and Mr. Geikie have returned from home leave, Dr. Bruce Low and Miss Hastie join the Medical Department, and Mr. la Chard has come out as a Cadet in the Government Service.
  We understand that the puport of Dr. Schlechter's visit to Sarawak was to obtain permission to enlist Dyaks to work gutta, etc. in New Guinea and ^o teach the Natives there to work it.
  ON the 29th the p. s. Adeh returned from Sibu with the Revd. Father Halder on board and p. s. Kaka sailed for Sadong with Mr. P. Stewart. The Kaka returned on the 30th, Mr. Stewart returning with her.
  MR. J. M. Bryan, Manager of the Borneo Company in Kuching, gave his usual dinner on New Year’s Eve at which some 36 guests were present, of whom six only were ladies. Music, dancing and cards helped to pass the time pleasantly until mid-night when a gun from the Fort announced the birth of the New Year, and all joined hands and sung “Auld Lang Syne”.
  IT will interest the many friends in this Country of Mr. G. Hourant to hear that he has entered the bonds of matrimony. Mr. Hourant was married on the 6th November last at Algiers, to Millie Camille Neyret, daughter of Monsieur Neyret, Chevalier of the Legion of Honour. Contragulations.
  Ax old iron gun, which looks as if it were made of a piece of piping, was found by a Malay named Bakri while working silver ore at Simbri, ulu Pansi. The gun still bears the faintly legible inscription in Chinese “General of the Sam Tiow Kew Kongsi”. This is the Bau Kongsi which attacked Kuching during the Chinese insurrection.
?KEnsnMOKansnMaMunmsmB
  IT is with the greatest regret that we have to announce the death on the 10th November from pneumonia of Mr. B. Bettington. The news reached us indirectly two mails ago and we have no further particulars. Mr. Bettington only retired from the Government Service in November 1904; he was 41 years of age at the time of his death.
MONTHLY REPORTS.
Ml KA.
October, 1906.
   Court.—There have been fewer cases in the Police Court during the month, the Court of Requests however has been fairly busy.
Fines and fees amounted to $245.28.
   Trade.—The export of raw sago amounted to 258 coyans as compared with 252 coyans for the corresponding month last year.
   Of jelutong gutta 50 piculs were exported, and of gutta percha 8 piculs.
   Twelve schooners arrived from Kuching and thirteen cleared.
   P. W. D.—The prisoners (average 28.2) have been employed during the month on the usual upkeep of roads, and cleaning the cattle ground of enkudoc weed.
   General.—The 9th, Tiring the birthday of Her Highness The Ranee of Sarawak, was observed as a Court Holiday.
   I returned from Oya on the 3rd by Government “barong," doing the journey in under four hours.
   Having found “Tuah Kampong" Bakal of Judan so unsatisfactory, he has been dismissed : a meeting of the Judan people was held in the Fort and one M’tair appointed in his place.
   On the evening of the 15th the usual salute of 7 guns was fired to usher in the Mohomedan fasting month.
   On the 27th the p. s. Adeh arrived at 10 a. m. with mails for this station and Oya; she left again at 11.30 a. m.
   Penghuiu Sama arrived from up-river on the 29th and reported all quiet among his people.
• During the greater part of the month the sea has been very rough, and a great deal of rain has fallen.
I have nothing further to report on this occasion.
November, 1906.
   Court.—There have been the usual number of cases in both the Police Court and Court of Requests, the principal of which have been reported in my official diary for the current month.
Fines and fees amounted to $284.53.
   Trade.—There have been no exports during the month, as, on account of high seas no schooners have been able to get away.
   Three schooners arrived from Kuching and also the B. s. Sarawak.
   P. B*. D.—The prisoners (average 24.2) have been employed nearly the whole of the month in making a new section of road, alongside the Petanak river, which had been washed away. The Judan and P’tian bridges have been put in good order and the approaches cleared.
   General.—On the 1st three schooners, in attempting to clear for Kuching, were driven on to the last sand spit by a sudden squall of wind: two of them were got off next day; the third, by name Kim Chin Eng, nakoda Haji Usin. becoming a total wreck.
   At the same time a house in Kampong Lintong was blown over, and a child very nearly killed in the ruins.
   A fire occurred at Kampong Tegar up-river on the 8th in which five houses were burnt down: this occurred between 3 and 4 a. in.; no lives were lost, but all the property was burnt; the fire originated in a kitchen.
   The same day Penghuiu Intin arrived from upriver and reported all quiet amongst his people.
   Another severe gale of wind prevailed on tire 7th, one of the small Government boat sheds being


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, .JANUARY 4, 1907.
11
     UPPER SARAW IK. PAKI .
October and November 1906.
   Planting.—Only one permit was issued in October
and one in November, both for planting rubber at
Busau Sebrang and Seniawan Sebrang respectively.
In the latter case the planter, a Chinaman, has
already got two or three thousand seeds planted out
in nurseries and they seem to be doing well.
   There is nothing favourable to report about
pepper gardens.
   Abang Amit has completed a map of the pepper
gardens round Jambusan and Ayer Panas and is
now mapping out those at Busau Sebrang and
Musi.
   Registration.—Sixty-seven deeds were registered
in October and 73 in November. Stamps and fees
amounting to $168.(50 and $188.75 respectively.
   Court account.—Fines and fees, October $526.50
and November $279. No cases of importance came
before the Court. On 27th October a man was
arrested at Seniawan for impersonating a detective.
He was subsequently sentenced by Kuching Court
to six months imprisonment.
   On 8th November I went io Kuching returnin"
on 12th.
   The prisoners have been working as usual on
Seniawan Road and have also cleared the telephone
lines to Busau and Seniawan, besides weedin"
Jambusan and Jambusan Tunnel Roads. On the
8th November two of them (in irons) escaped while
working on Seniawan Telephone line, the man in
charge showed even more than the usual stupidity.
   Slight repairs have been done topolice dapor,
bungalow and writer’s house, and cowshed has been
re-roofed with leaf attaps. The cowshed is much
too large for the small herd here and it would be a
good thing later on to pull it down and rebuild it
much smaller with billian roof. The leaf attaps to
lie got here are very bad, they are made by the
Dyaks from sago leaves, but the leaves are so young
that they barely last a year.
   Antimony is still being worked with great vigour.
In November the record quantity of over 150 tons
was received at Busau, probably the Malays put on
an extra spurt on account of Hari Raya. Paku
Bazaar, which during the pepper boom became com-
paratively deserted, is now once more expanding and
several new houses have been built by antimony
workers. Shops in Busau Bazaar are also in much
demand at a rent of $15 per month, though, being
only plank and leaf attap buildings, they cannot
cost much more than $200 to build. This is partly
due to the amount of ready money circulated by the
large number of antimony workers there, and partly
to the fact that there is no room for new shops at
Busau, except behind the existing Bazaar, where
they would get little business and consequently no
one cares to build there. The same kind of shops
at Seniawan only rent at from $3 to $6 per month
though they are much better built.
H. R. A. DAY.
Resident.
SVDOM..
October and November 1906.
   Court.—During October there were very few cases
of any kind either in the Police Court or Court of
Requests. During November there were two cases
of cutting and wounding from the Colliery, parangs
being used and severe cuts inflicted in both cases,
while at the wharf one of the loading coolies, while
sitting in the Mandor's house, drew a parang and
cut An Noo the Mandor over the head, laying it opt a
blown down, also a cocoanut tree in the compound,
and numerous attaps blown off the roof of the fort.
<The 9th being the birthday of His Majesty King
Edward VII was observed as a public holiday.
On Hari Haya, the 18th, the usual salute of 14
guns was fired.
The same day the s. 8. Sarawak arrived.
On the 23rd a Government steamer, going west,
was seen to pass quite close in shore: she went by
without stopping.
I’. C. Monomat of Balanian arrived on the 29th
and reported all well in that district.
The sea during the month has been very rough
indeed anil not a single mail has left for Kuching;
there have also been great quantities of rain, at
high tides the compound anil paths being under
water.
I have nothing further to report on this occasion.
W. J. M. SHAW,
Resident.
M \I>|Z.
October, 1906.
The Hon'ble the Resident of the First Division,
accompanied by Dr. White-Hopkins and Mr. Stuart
Cunynghame, arrived here at 1.30 p. M. on the 1st
instant per p. s. Adeh, and returned again at day-
light on the 3rd instant.
On the 2nd the Hon'ble Resident attended Court,
when several matters of importance were brought
before him.
I visited Simatan from the 20th to 23rd. I was
obliged to return sooner than I had intended owing
to the unsettled state of the weather. The neap-
tides coming on the approaches to the rivers were
each day becoming more dangerous.
Nearly all the nacodahs of the bandongs here
have been fined for breach of Port Regulations.
The falling off in the trade returns caused me to
make very minute enquiries as to the reason of this.
I found that to some extent the decrease was due
to nacodahs omitting to declare goods which they
received after having taken out a “Port Clearance.”
The importation of tobacco showed a very marked
deficit as compared with what it was several years
back. This lead me to suppose that a great deal of
smuggling had been going on. After close examina-
tion of the books and letters of the traders in this
district I find that the import of tobacco has kept
well up to the average. The mistake appears to be
that the shippers in Kuching are in the habit of
declaring tobacco as sundries. Although it is al-
most impossible to prevent a certain amount of
smuggling in a district situated as close as this is to
Dutch Territory, I am glad to be able to report that
the smuggling here is practically nil and only goes
on among those villages which are nearly on the
border.
Draman’s boat, which left for Kuching on the
20th instant, was wrecked off Sampadi mouth. The
mail was fortunately saved, and no lives were lost. .
The fines this month amounted to $216.61.
Per p. s. Adeh on the 1st instant arrived one I
pony for this station.
The prisoners have been employed the greater
part of the month repairing some of the bridges.
The following are the trade returns for Lundu
and Simatan.
           Exports.	Imports.
Luudu $ 5,789.	$2,089.
Simatan 22.366.	2,748.
F. F. BOULT,
Assistant Resident. I


12
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 4, 1907.
for 5 inches on the right side. In all 3 cases the
assailants were caught and sentenced to various terms
of hard labour, in the last case to three years.
Pangarah Rimpu of Mupub, ulu Sadong, was
charged with swindling the Government in respect
of tax. It was found that 18 men of his Kampong
had not been paying Tax. In three cases the Pang-
arah had reported the men “dead," two of them
having “died” some ten years ago. consequently pay-
ing no tax during that time. The Pangarah was
fined $300. The 18 men were brought down to
Simunjan and all an ears of tax paid in full at
once, as was the Pangarah’s fine, before they were
allowed to return.
   Public Tl’orA-s.—The water supply is now complete
and an excellent supply of good drinking water
available for the use of the Bazaar and Government
people. The water has been brought from the
mountain 41 miles away by a pipe line leading to
two stand pipes, one of which is situated in the
centre of the‘Bazaar and the other close to the
Government builfib	-idcrable trouble was
experienced laying the pipes as they are not of good
quality and numbers are defective. Unfortunately,
when the water was turned on defects which could
not have otherwise been detected became apparent.
The pipes split at the welding in a dozen places—
in some cases for 3 inches or more—and clamps had
to be fitted to render them water tight, unscrewing
such a length of pipe living out of the question.
Messrs. Howarth Erskine—a Singapore Firm-
supplied the pipes, and the supplying of such de-
fective tubes has caused considerable delay anil extra
labour, and extra and otherwise unnecessary expense
has been incurred in consequence. However, thanks
to the promptness of the Manager, Mr. Naysmith,
in supplying the necessary clamps, etc., Simunjan is
now in possession of a supply of excellent water
which is a great boon and highly appreciated.
   Good progress has been made with the new wharf,
part of which is now nearing completion and can be
used for loading or discharging. It is 127 feet from
the bank to the end, where the water has a depth of
34 fathoms at low tide, and the completed frontage
82 feet long. The line of rail has been brought
round to the wharf and an immense amount of em-
bankment work has had to be done. The new sheds
are now being erected and should be in use this
year.
   The centre of the old wharf was swept away late
in November by the strong tide and. though it has
been temporarily repaired, is exceedingly unsafe.
Coal is now being stacked over close to the new
wharf.
   The stacks of coal have been steadily growing and
the ground between the old shed and new wharf is
covered with coal, which appears to be of good
quality and is nearly all large, and has been ex-
ceptionally free from dirt and stone.
                        Tom cwt.
Received^1, wharf, Oct. -2,300. 10.
                  Nov. 1.798. 16.
Stock at wharf at
end of Oct. 1,848. 11.
Tom. cwt.
Shipped during Oct. 845. 17.
..	„ Nov. 724. 8.
Stock at wharf at
          end at Nov. 2,917. 19.
   The output during November decreased owing to
large quantities of stone having been sent by each
train for filling the sites of the new sheds, the
amount of coal sent to the wharf of course decreasing
by so many trucks. There was trouble with water
in No. 5 Mines which produced very little for many
days, the water completely filling the bottom of the
slope.
   The Opium Fanner has built a fine shop with a
frontage on the new Bazaar Road and Ah Song will
have a similar shop under construction in a few
weeks.
   Medical.—An accident occurred on the railway in
October, a Dyak girl of Senangib, named Lanan, in
trying to descend from a truck while in motion getting a number of toes cut off from both her feet by dropping on to the rail instead of the ground. A five ton truck went over both feet. She was at once attended to by the Hospital Dresser, who fortunately happened to be on the train, and was afterwards sent to Hospital, the Ven: Archdeacon Sharp kindly offering to take her in bis boat.
The 3 men wounded by parangs are all doing well.
A number of beri-beri patients have been under treatment in the Hospital, several serious cases being sent to Kuching and one dying here. As usual, these cases come from the low lying coolie lines and the patients recover in hospital here if the case is discovered in time. The Malay population at the Colliery are free from this disease though they consume exactly the same quality rice, bought from the same shops and taken from the same sacks as those from which the coolies obtain their rice. But the coolies consume vegetables salted (?) in jars, the smell from which is abominable, and eat all manner of doubtfuUr cured foods, while the Malays live on fresh vegetable and fish and their dwellings are in all cases raised some feet above the ground, while the beri-beri cases almost invariably come from the lines which have no floors but the bare and damp earth and have no drainage. Beri-beri cases are almost unknown at No. 8 lines which are built well above the ground and are fairly well drained, being situated on the slope of the hill. It remains to be seen what effect the completion of the drainage scheme now in hand at the Colliery, combined with the moving of the coolies into the new houses which are nearing completion and the destruction of the old beri-beri inspected lines, will have on the number of cases of this disease at the Mines.
General.—During October the Ven: Archdeacon Sharp paid a visit to the Station for the purpose of marrying two couples at the Colliery. The double ceremony took place in the Manager’s Bungalow- on the morning of the 12th, the Ven: Archdeacon leaving for Kuching that same evening.
The s. s. Sarawak arrived on the 7th November. Passenger, Mr. J. R. Ballingal. She left for Bintulu on the 8th.
Mr. Ballingal has unfortunately had to postpone the opening of a rubber plantation here owing to ill health. He returned to Kuching on November 11th.
The e. s. Alice Lorraine came in on the 20th with a large lighter in tow. The lighter went alongside the new wharf next day and shipped eight 42' logs of heavy timber and fourteen 18' logs for Kuching P. W. D. The steamer could not load much coal owing to the old wharf having given way the day before and not having been repaired. She sailed on the morning of the 22nd towing the lighter. She came in again on the 24th and took a cargo of coal for Labuan, sailing next day at daylight.
During November the Colliery ran out of oil owing to the non-arrival of stores by schooner. It would be better if a steamer could bring in stores during the N. E. Monsoon when schooners—very few of which are now running—cannot be depended upon. A week of rough weather might delay the transit of stores and stop all work at the Mines.
The new mouth of the Simunjan is widening at a great pace and the old mouth is rapidly silting up with the rest of the river up past the Kampong where it is now possible to walk across at low water. Last year the water was fathoms deep there at that state of the tide. The bank of the Sadong River, I am glad to say, is not falling away at such a rate now that the Simunjan River has formed a.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 4, 1907.	13
new mouth, the current flowing out in the middle
of the stream instead of rushing past the bank and
into the old mouth of the Simunjan.
   One exceptionally high tide on Hari Haya did con-
siderable damage to roads and grounds and com-
pletely covered the old wharf, part of which carried
away. The grounds were in a terrible mess after
the water bud receded, piles of driftwood being left
all over the grass.
   The weather has been very uncertain; the days
exceedingly hot, with heavy rain after midday and
often nt night.
   Obituary.—I regret to report the death of Ah
Kam which took place in Kuching on the night of
November 18th. He was the most-influential trader
in the District, having resided here for very many
years. His death is keenly felt by both Natives anil
Chinese, with all of whom he was on the best of
terms. Ah Kam was a naturalised Sarawak subject
and always evinced the greatest interest in anything
•concerning the welfare of the District.
Dqi^LI) A. O\VK\.
Resident 2nd Clans.
I PPE« SARAWAK. mt .
November, 1906.
   Agreements- 109 have been made out during the
month. Stamp duties and fees amounted to
$226.13.
   Court.—Fines and fees amounted to $182.75.
   Mr. Boult arrived here on the Gib instant having
walked over Did Stungkor; he returned on the 8th,
leaving Bidi at 7.-10 A. M. he arrived at Lundu
fort at 4.20 the next afternoon.
   Dr. Wellington passed through on the 6tb on his
way to Bidi and returned from there to Paku; he
came up again on the 20th and spent the night at
Paku. from whence he visited Puak; the Govern-
ment ponj, from here, was lent to him for the
journey.
   A gardener, called Hiew Man, was found dead in
his house at Singghi; as the body had a few marks
on it, it was taken to Busau where Dr. Wellington
viewed it, giving it as his opinion that death was
due to natural causes.
   Six Malay carpenters arrived oq the 7th instant
to do repairs required to Court House roof and floor;
these men went down to Kuching to spend Hari
Haya but returned again on the Wth.
   I lek tor Kuching on me 8th returning on the
13th.
   Mr. (.'rocker went to Kuching on the 16th to re-
lieve the Resident 2nd Class: he returned here on the
29th instant.
   I regret to have to report that trade is very bad in
this district consequent upon the continual illicit
sale of pepper from the gardens : this pepper should
be brought in to the traders who have advanced
provisions during the year on it: from the many
cases which have lieen before me I should estimate
that quite one third of the pepper crop has been
illicitly sold; the gardeners, of course, abscond after
selling the pepper and the garden is left to be again
provisioned by the trader (if he is not already bank-
rupt) or to go out of cultivation,* unless some very
strict regulations are made as to the buying and
selling of pepper before next crop is ripe. The
majority of gardens will have to be closed as there
will be no further provisions forthcoming.
E. R. STILWELL,
Hesident.
sim\G^A\<;.
—•—
November, 1!)OG.
   The chief event of the month is the meeting of the
Ulu Ai rebels Ngumbang, Bautin. Ugii and their
followers—some thirty men—with Mr. 0. Lang at
Guntor’s house, 8. Rak nt, on November 19th.
   Mr. O. Lang wrote me on November 21st that
Guntor brought a message stating that Ngumbang,
etc; were at Rakut and wished to meet the Native
Officer Abang Haji Bua Hassan if he would come up
to see them. As the Abang Haji was at Simang-
gang for .the Hari Raya festivities, Mr. O. Lang him-
self went up with Pensioner Dagang, Corporal Latep,
and two L. Antu Fortmen. The meeting took place
in Guntor’s house. . The rebels stated that they
wished to “come in;” “they were tired of taking
heads, and of being enemies of the Government, and
moreover, their supplies were failing them.” •
   They sent tokens that they were in earnest, and
desired to meet me and Mr. Baring-Gould later on.
   It was further stated that if these people “came
in,” “all the Rejang Dyaks would come in too.” (I
have asked for an explanation of the last sentence
and am informed that by “the Rejang Dyaks” is
meant those Kanowit (ulu) people who are in the
ulu B. Lupar, or else-where, still in arms.'
   I have sent word, through Mr. Lang, that I shall
be at L. Antu on December 18th with Mr. Baring-
Gould. when I shall be prepared to meet them and
bear what they have to say. Mr. Lang delivered
my message and they have left for their homes with
memoranda (temuku tali)* of how many days must
elapse before the meeting.
   On November 22nd Mr. Lang sent me a despatch
stating that two Dyaks from Kantu—they were
formerly Sarawak subjects—had been sent over from
the other side with the alarming news that Apai
Beti and other tuai were in the Netherlands India
territory with a force of two thousand five hundred
men with which they intended to attack Juwi’s
house in ulu Kumpang (Sarawak); and, further,
that Apai Beti had asked for Ngumbang's assistance
but that ho had refused to assist!
   As Ngumbang, Bantin, etc; were still at a hut
near Guntor’s house and in communication with
Mr. Lang about “coming in" and had said nothing
about a force of Ulu Ai being out. I could not credit
the story from the other side—it would have been
too great an act of treachery even for Ngumbang—
I therefore informed Mr. Lang that I considered the
news to be quite false, but that he would be right to
warn the Kumpang people to lie on the alert.
   I may say that I am indignant at the constant
succession of false reports about large armies of the
rebels being Gut to attack various places in Sarawak
territory. These stories have now been going on for
months and no attacks have been made since the re-
bels were repulsed on May 16th at P. Sumpit's hut
in Lower Lemanak. There is such a thing as calling
“Wolf, Wolf” too often, and wearing people out.
There is also a penalty, well-known to Dyaks, for
spreading what are called “False Reports.”
   Towards the end of November a party of twelve
Dyaks were sent here by the Controleur of Smitan,
they haring been expelled from the Upper Kapuas
by order.
   I presume these Dyaks (as is their custom) have
been exploiting the Upper Kapuas Natives and that
it became necessary to clear them out and forbid
Dyaks to live there. However, these Dyaks do not
appear to have eventually benefited themselves to
any extent as there were not two dollars among the
party, and some had been (they said) nearly twenty
years in the Upper Kapuas! Only two of these men
belong to the 2nd Division, the rest were all trout


14
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 4, 1907.
the Rejang, so that it was necessary to give them a free passage and food to their own country.
   Three Government boats (bong) were sent up to Lubok Antu on November 1st with twelve prisoners, in addition to the relief guard, in order that some cattle might be brought down to Simanggang. The boats with six head of cattle returned on the 4th.
   Mr. Parnell left Simanggang to return to Kuching ' after completing his Audit on November 2nd. but was unable to get away from Lingga as the s. s. Ali-e Lorraine was delaved in coming until November 11th.
   The Pengkalan Marup murder case was referred , to His Highness The Rajah Muda with certain recommendations on the part of those who were ' engaged in hearing it.
   Ou the 6th two Saratok Malays were brought over from Saratok, Kalaka, where they were arrested for the murder and robbery of the Chinese trader Kang Ah Chin. This murder is known as the S. Sedio (Saratok) murder. The trial is proceeding.
   A Skarang Dyak woman committed suicide by I strangling (hanging) herself in the house with a ' noose of bark (pua). It is said that she had for some time been suffering in health; she also had ' quarrelled with her daughter in whose empty room I she committed the rash act.
   On the 9th, whilst the surface of the treacherous ! B. Lupar river was guite calm and al about $ ths. ' ebb, a boat containing nine Dyaks put off near 8/ Bijat to cross to the other fide and about half way over a sudden squall knocked up an unusually bad succession of lelangan (small broken waves) which soou swamped the boat and threw the occupants into the water, drowning one woman; Grugu. son- in-law of the late Sari (who was the son of ‘'Orang Kaya" Gasing of Simanggang—well-known in the early sixties)— succeeded in rescuing the rest of the party.
   The Pusa Clerk reports two deaths from drowning in the Saribas, both were Malay women, and both accidents are really to be attributed to the boats lacking sufficient free board.
   The Simanggang Malays kept their Hari Raya Feast on the 19th. There was the usual concourse of people at Fort Alice after the salute of 14 guns had been fired. From November 13th to 19th one bull and five bullocks from the Government herd at Lubok Antu were sold to the Malays of Lingga, Gran I and Stern, and Simanggang; these beasts were not large and averaged about $26 a head.
   On the 21st Mr. Baring-Gould left for the Saribas and Kalaka. He took the route up the Rembas river to Debak in order to examine the planting work said to have been done by Mohamat laki Jeliah at Tg. Tui—upon which I will report to Your High- ? ness later on. He then went overland to tbeMe- lupar (a branch of the Krian) and on to Saratok where he has instructions to examine several witnesses in connection with the Sedio murder case.
   The prisoners (averaging 32) were engaged chiefly on the new ditches, and on cutting lalang grass in the Palm oil Plantations; the weather was fairly dry throughout the month.
   I have nothing further to report to Your Highness for November.
D. J. 8. BAILEY,
Resident.
HATAAG ESTATE.
November, 1906.
Crops gathered during the month were 30 piculs parchment and 243 tbs made tea.
During the month 15 piculs clean coffee and 870 tbs tea were despatched to the Borneo Company Limited.
Coolies have been employed as usual in gathering crops, clearing out drains, repairing roads and weeding.
Coolies have been paid for October on the 2nd instant by Mr. Grove as usual.
J. M. GOMEZ, Manager.
LIMBAAG.
November.
The Arrack and Gambling Farms for 1907 for the Limbang, Brooketon and Lawas districts were sold on the 1st of the mflfith with the following result— Limbang. $240 per numth, an increase of $90. per month; Brooketon $400 per month a decrease of $40 per month; Lawas, $190 per month, a decrease of $10 per month: as regards the Lawas farm there is in reality an increase ns. the tender for 1907 is only for the Arrack and Gambling as above stated, whereas the present one included the Opium Farm for the district and for which three farms $200 was given; this will give some idea of what a profit the present farmer must have made on his opium when others can afford to give only $10 less for the other two farms. As the Opium Fann for Lawas will next year be included in that of the whole territory, he now obtains it for nothing, to the loss of the station. Very much higher tenders than the above could have been received if the lottery known as “Wah Hai” had been included; owing, however, to Brnneis being quite unable to restrain themselves over putting money into this lottery and its consequently leading to theft, swindling and such like crimes, I deemed it adviseable not to include it in this agreement.
In the Court, amongst others was one case of a dispute as regards division of property by the heirs of Haji Suleiman of Ulak. In this the wife of deceased was accused of retaining a large portion of the cash, said to be six hundred dollars; the existence of the amount could not however be proved, although two hundred and fifty dollars were accounted for. It finally transpired in the case that Orang Kaya Binjai. who had authority to divide the estate, had allowed one Marali to take fifty dollars of the money before the proper division was made, ’and both were fined by the Court; a final order was made that all the money, two hundred and fifty dollars, was to be handed over together with all the other goods to the Native Court where it will be divided.
Two Chinese were fined fifty dollars each for remaining in Bisaya houses after the expiration of the Government order to that effect.
On the 12th Mr. Ward went up the Lubai to visit the Dyak houses and look into matters requiring attention.
On the 9th I left for Trusan, returning on the IGth, and on the 22nd went to Lawas returning again on the 27th, and on the 30th left for Brooketon.
The Trade Returns for the month are as follows.
Coasting Imports $3,282 Exports $G,851 Foreign „	5,167	,,	2,855
The Rainfall for the month was 9.04 inches which fell on seventeen days, 2.44 inches being the heaviest fall in any twenty-four hours.
O. F. RICKETTS,
Resident.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 4, 1907.
15
BIVH Lt.
#	November, 1906.
   Court.—There have been a good many case? before the Debt Court, mostly for small sums. In Police Court there have been few cases. ’
   Saudi and Garim were sentenced to six months imprisonment for theft of jelutong. Rinkoi 3 months for breach of contract.
   There being small-pox at Tatau, that river was quarantined. On the 3rd three men were fined $5 each for coming in from Tatau against orders.
   The Penghulus from up-river report all quiet. A Dyak named Ri kan, who came in from Baram on the 20th, was fined $12 for making false statements to the Resident there, in that I had granted him permission to take to Baram one Layain and family.
   The prisoners have been employed during the month in repairing bridges and in building a new one across the stream in front of the fort, and in repair ing the Government boats.
   The weather has been w^l but the sea fairly smooth.
   The 18th being Rayah a large number of people ?came up to pay respects; they seemed anxious to have the usual regatta, etc. at the New Year, so a meeting to consult about it was arranged.
   There is a large amount of jelutong and rattans in the bazaar.
Imports amounted to $3,N88and Exports to $2,280.
The s. s. Sarawak called in on the 8th.
E. A. W. COX,
         Resident. •
® b t § a r it to a li (£ a; 1111.
  THE Subscription to the Sarawak Gazette is as follows.—
Payable in local currency—
       Single number ...	...	... $0.10
       Subscription for 1 year	...	... 1.00
         Do including postage to Outstation ...1
         Do	do	to Singapore .... 1.50
         Do	do	to England	...J
Payable in Sterling—
       For 1 year (including postage to places
                   in the Postal Union) ... 3s. Od.
Ill	payable in
advmice.
  Yearly subscriptions are renewable on the 1st January.
  Subscriptions will ttttf be renewed unless due notice is given. All broken periods will be considered as full.
  Subscribers are requested to notify changes of address to the Editor in writing.
SA’ZS Of AJVffilBIBSB IS 72S "SARAWAK 8AZSTTE'
Panabte in ndrance.
Advertisement of 12 lines and under—
        First insertion ...	...	... $1.00
        Second and third insertion each	... 0.50
        Subsequent do do	... 0.25
Advertisement of half a Column and under—
        First insertion ...	...	... 2.00
        Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
        Subsequent do	do	... 0.50
... 3.00
... 1.00
... 0.75
standing adver-
Advertisement of a Column and under—
         First insertion each
         Second and third insertion each
         Subsequent do	do
Special arrangements may be made for tisements.
   All communications intended for insertion I in the tret ft 9*att'99c must be directed to the Editor at the Government Printing Office, Kuching, and sent so as to reach the Office by the 26th of the month at latest or their publication will have to be deferred 1 until the next issue.
   Letters and other contributions must be , authenticated by writer’s name sent privately ? to the Editor.
   We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not ? inserting them.
   Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early intelligence of all matters of general interest in their respective neighbourhoods.
Notice.
        ENTLEMEN are requested to pay all Gazette sub-
' T scriptious and Printing Office Bills to the undersigned
in future.
For the convenience of those unable to send cheques,
Sarawak stamps will be taken' in payment of sums not over
• 1.50—but only the 2 an<^4 cent values will.be accepted.
Foreign subscribers to the Sarawak (rosette are requested
to send remittances by Post Office Order " not by “ Postal
Order” as the latter cannot be cashed in Sarawak.
F. G. DAT.
hotter.
—?	:
Astana Farm Produce.
Terms Monthly.
       W ILL be supplied to customers at the following
        Milk—per quart bottle	..	... 10 cents
        Butter—per lb ...	...	... 80 ,,
        Eggs—each •...	...	... Ij ,,
    Orders, which should be addressed to the undersigned, attended to without delay.
J. STAPLES.
THE CHINA MUTUAL LIFE INSURANCE COMPANY LTD.
REGISTERED UNDER HONGKONG ORDINANCE.
CAPITAL, TAELS 500,000.
      HEAD OFFICE, SHANGHAI.
   Forms of application and all information will be promptly supplied on applying to the Undersigned, who have been appointed Agents for Sarawak.
*1* III X LEOJiG & Co..
Wine, Spirit and General Store Dealers, and Sole Agents
for FRASER & NEAVE S CRATED WATERS.
No. 14, CARPENTER STREET,
KUCHING.


If-
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 4, 190".
NOTICE.
? ? •
f bt Saratoah (Trailing tfompann.
i SABATO BATH WATER FACTORY.!
.Crated Waters can now be lind Hom the
above factory at the fallowlnglrates:
X? 1Split*, per dozenLemonade65 cents45 centsGinger Ale		65 ,,45 „Ginger Beer 	65 „45 ,,    „*	Stone		65 „45 ..Tonic 	(i.i15 ..Soda Water 	55 „40 „Sarsaparilla(l.I45Lemon Squash ...(IO45 „Lemon Soda6b45 .,Champagne Cider		65 „43 „Cherry Cider 	65 ..45 .,American Cream Soda ...45 „Lime Juice and Soda	65 A45 ..The undermentioned articles can also be obtained at the following rates :—
        4 lb Three Castles Tobacco 58 cents per tin.
        i lb Three Castles Tobacco 80 „	„
            .,	„ Cigarettes 50 „	..
              (or at $5.75 per dozen tin*.!
        May Blossom Cigarettes 55 cents per tin.
        State Express ..	70	..	„
        Capstan N. C. Cigarettes Med. 87 cents per tin.
               (or at $4.20 per dozen tins.)
        Capstan N.C. Cigarettes Mild 40 cents per tin.
   ., Tobacco Med. Mild and Full 45 cents per tin. Borden's Peerless Cream jier case of 48 tius $4.80. Bar Soap (Lockwood August & Co.)
            Fine Primrose per case of 20 bare $2.80.
TAN BOON SIEW,
Manager.
Notice.
         the undersigned CHOP SENG IIAK (late Tr.o > T SIANO Kow) Dealers and Contractors to the Sarawak Government, hereby give notice that, inasmuch as CHIN KKE hits ceased to be in our employ as Manager as from the 26th November 1906, we will not be in any way responsible from the above date for any dealings'which the said CHIN KEF. may have with any persons whatsoever, nor will we lie responsible for any debts contracted by the aforesaid CHIN KEE.
CHOI- “SENG HAK.”
       Kuching,
12th December, 1906.
PA S SE IT GSHS.
ARRIVALS.
PER S. S. Kuching-.—From Singapore. 6th December, Messrs. R. Pawle, A. C. Vivian and the Rev. J. Oss.
PER s. s. Sarawak:—From Muka, 6th December, Miss Dobson.
PER S. S. Rajah of Sarawak:—From Singapore, 13th Decemlier, Mr. G. Malcolm.
PER p. s. Adeh:—From Limbang and Brooketon, 22nd December, Mr. and Mrs. T. Nicoll and Mr. G. Dalton.
PER H. s. Rajah of Sarawak: - From Singapore. 28th December, Dr. A. J. G. Barker, Dr. Bruce Low, Dr. Scblecbter, Messrs. J. S. Geikie, J. H. Johnston, H. la Chard and Miss Hastie.
PER p. 8. Adeh:—From Sibu, 29th Decemlier, Rev. Father Halder.
PER p. s. Kaka: -From Sadong, 30th December. Mr. P. Stewart.
PER s. s. Kuching: For Singapore, 11th December. Miss* Dobson. Mr. and Mrs. A. G. Butler.
PER p. s. Kaka:— For Brooketon. and Limbang. 16th December, Mr. G. Dalton.
PER 8.- 8, Rajah of Sarawak:—For Singapore, 18th December, Messrs. Malcolm and J. H.
               Johnston.
PER S. s. Sarawak:—For Sibu, 19th December, Mr. V.
               Harington and the Revd. J. Oss.
PER s. s. Kuching:—For Singapore. 26th December. Mr. and Mrs. T. Nicoll.
PER p. s. Kaka:—For Sadong, 29th Decemlier, Mr. P.
               Stewart.
       cj yr -t « T•v •«. f..-„• -Arrivals-6
QVKSHEL'B NARK.FLAO. AND RIO.•suex |CAPTAINS OR HAKODAS.FROM.3Sri MarionStir. sch.80 JaharRejang3Putri Bungun52Le<iiDaro3Kim Sing GuanSaitSadongKuching„ str.903w.uitk-nSingaporeflSarawak40Hj. M.itMukaKian Moh.. sch.06DugongOvaKun Chin Soon59Hj. Sa-nt Wan SemanMuka$Sanjar Rot57Sadong8Kim Chin LeongGlHj. SuitOva10Sin Sian Ann50(null10Soon Seng H'utt71A. HainanSadong10Kim Chin Teek;>1Hj. TaliaMnka11Adeh., «tr.ISO.i emailSibu12
1 18Kim Seng Guan.. str.73Sait MoxonSadong
SingancreRajah of SarawakSara leak40Hj. MatBintulil17Lorna Boone    Kf'll130Hj. AminSadong20Kuching,. str.903WaddellSingapore•>•>Kaka*!•>'>BnndongLimbang•MBanjar Rot,. sch..1 .Wan SeiuauSadong24Sri Marion80?T nlinrRejang24Soon Seng Ua/f71A. YamanSadong•14Kim Seng GuanSnitSarawak.. str.40Hj. MatBintuln28Rajah of Sarawak892MoxonSingapore20Adeh189J e manSibu3(1a ku•moBandongSadong:;iKim Seng Guan„ sch.’i8SaitDepartures.£VESSEL'S NAUR.FLAO AND RIG.1CAPTAINS OR NACO DAS.   FOR.1KakaSar. str.O-IOBandongLimbang3.4 dch1811-lemnnSibu8Soon Seng Watt„ sch.71A. Yamau.SadongRajah of Sarawak.. str.892MoxonSingapore5Sri Marion.. sell.8C.TaharReiang Sadong?him Seng Guan711Sait8Lorna BooneISOHj. AminBintnlu0Sarawak.. Str.111Hj. A. Mat10Putri Bungun., sch.32DeliDaro11Kuching,. str.903M atldellSingapore1-1Soon Seng II alt., sell.71A. Yaman1-1Banjar RotWan Semin t..15Kim Seng Guan71SaitUKaka.. str.222BandongLimbang18Rajah of Sarawak..892MoxonSingaporeKSarawak40Hj. A. MatRejang,•>>AdehC. Junk18!JemunSibu24Keng Guan Seng5tLiam JikSiumIMKim Seng GuanSar. seh7tSaitSadong2(Soon Seng IFaff..71A. YnmanSingapore2(Kuching.. str903Waddell29Kaka” ..222BnndongSadong

THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 4, 1907.
17
IMPORTS.—(Continued.)
Mil® Fore® We Betnnis for Ue moiilli of Nor, 1906.
          Articles.     Quantity.Value.IMPORTS.        Brought forward•328.732Articles.    Quantity.Value.Rickshaws
Rope
     Coir
     Manila
     Wire Salt ... Soap Stationery and Books Straw hate (Chinese) Straw Shoes (Chinese) Sugar Sundries Tea in Bundles ... Tea in Tins Timber Twine and Thread Tobacco
in tins Cigars A Cigarettes Chinese
     1” bang Java A S'robok etc
     Bad or Pepper
Treasure
Trepang Tuba Vegetables
     Fresh	... x
     Salted	„.
     In tins
Wayang Effects ...
Wines and spirits Zinc ...
    TOTAL VM.UK
    Brought forward
    Total Value to Date
1905coils	189
coils	15
coils	2
piculs	585}
piculs	1,492
boxes	289
cases	175}
piculs	145}
piculs	878}
piculs	27
    1,881
      485
    1.116
    1.236
    1.249
39
102
    9,434
    2.557
    2.664
199
2.117
2,496
18.588 6.928 9,748
    11.959
35.505 60
    1,640
    2.290
    4.015
94
    1.000
18,735 2,017
•457.377 4,151,821
4.60H.698 »5.;Mii.M5OAerated Water ... Ammunition Arrack etc.
Biscuits Blachan Blankets Beads Brass A Copper-ware Boots A Shoes ... Butter A Cheese... Candles	...
Canvas Cement Clocks and Watches Cloth
    Cotton Silk Woollen Clothing Cotton Silk Coke Cocoanuts Coffee
Liberian etc.... in tins
Coprah Cotton Seed Crockery A Glass-ware Curry Stuffs A Sauce etc. .. Damar
Drugs and Chemicals Eggs (salted) Exports Returned to Shippers Fire-arms Fire-works Fish Fresh Dried Salted In tins
Flour Fruit Fresh Dried In tins Furniture 'Ghee
Grains
Beans and peas Padi
    Rice	... •
    Other Sorts...
'Gunnies new Do old Hams and Bacons Hats Iron-ware
?Jars ...	.„
Jewellery
Joss Sticks and Papers Kerosine Oil Lard
Lamps Leather
Live stock Cattle Poultry Swine Machinery Mats Mutches Maccaroni A Vermicelli Milk Condensed...
Oils ...
Opium raw
Paint, Varnish A Tar Papers Provisions Sundry Prawns Prawns Refuse ... Rubber Seeds- ...
Carry forward ...|cases	205
piculs	7
casks	485
    *
tons	10
No.	12,200
piculs	54
piculs	107
No.	68,5502,020 66
    2.550
    4,584
 70 360
 30 958 556 819
      451
154
2,110 530
41,258 1,347
50
14,172 610
180 387
1,113 119
856 602
4.277 1,608
257 4,566 1.236
65piculs	316
piculs	211
bags	2,860
piculs	13
piculs	674
piculs	425
piculs	24,907
piculs	984
bales	53
bundles	98
No.	11
cases	5,840}
piculs	162
piculs	17
head	32
No.	600
head	147
cases	79
cases	331
piculs	829
chests	20
piculs	9	'
piculs	6,065  220 1,213
  500 7,272 3,212 1.207 4,783
2,801 1,941
      306
273 695
    4,185
896 95,876
1.905 5,440 1,686
      102
      689
    6,491
      600
700 1,915
13.840 8.247 1,243 1,165
    1.501
801 8.450 14,326
 1,428 1.624
1,629* 2,676 5,164
19,500 2.801 2,332
1,820
261 16,860 2,050
•828,782EXPORTS.          Articles.
Antimony
Ant-eater skins ... Betel-nuts
Beeswax	...	• ..
Birds-nests Birds-nests refuse Blachan Brass-ware
Camphor refuse ... Cattle Cloth
Coffee (Liberian) ...
Coprah
Crockcry-ware ... Cutch Damar
Empties Fish Gambier Garru-wood Gold
Gutta jangkar
Gutta refuse
Gutta Jelotong ...
do percha Hides
Imports Returned to Shippers India Rubber Iron-ware Kerosine Oil Mats Oils
Pearl sago
Pepper (white)	...	...
Do (black)	...
Prawns (drieu)	...
Rattans N o. 1 sega etc.
Rattans No. 2 temoi etc.
Rice
Sago flour Salt
Sundries
      Carried forward     Quantity.
picul	’
piculs	813}
piculs	9}
picnls	4}
picul	J
head	1
piculs	75
piculs	55
piculs	2.477}
picnls	1.096}
piculs	138}
picnls	1,517
piculs	1}
ozs.	5,313
piculs	255}
picnls	5,048}
piculs	8}
piculs	82}
piculs	250}
cases	88
picul	1
piculs	2
piculs	6.788
picnls	729}
picul	}
piculs	513
piculs	1,141}
picnls	190
piculs 20,040 piculs	1}
piculs	S    4.076
22 2.225 460 1,460
' 16 5
100 8
21
191
960 550
29 12.683 2,277 1,739 2.261 9,254
6 135,800 4,180
183 22,718
937
760
3.165 30,598
395
86 286
16
7 173,095 12,580
2 5.386 3,153
856 52.726
3
85 551
•485,811

18
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 4, 1907.
EXPORT—(Continued.)
Articles.    QuantitxValue.       Brought forward Timber (manufactured i Trepang Vegetable tallow Zincpiculs piculs«MW,811 « 100 15 484   TOTAL VALUE
   Brought forward>488.4 111
5,687,786   Total Valuc to Date6.174.1491905•6,988.565SARAWAK MUSEUM.
Observations taken Daily al 8. a. m. December, 1906
S
QTemperature.0Rainfall in 24 hours       TOTAL.Maximum.Minimum.1    86-5   75-2    •86•*    86-4   74.0    •883    88-7   78-3   2 244    82.6   741    025    82 4   73-8-—6    83-8   736    .687    84’8   76.08    80 2   74-0    -389    81 2   73-8    •8510    826   74-211
12    82’8
    80-1   s?    •84
   103Bainfall 14'79 inches13    82’4   74.8    .1214    83-5   734    •4915    82-7   74-6•—16    83-6    •4517    888   74-6    0918    82-8   78 6    •3219    88-4   73-2    0920    88-2   74-2    •7021    83-3   74-7    •0122    80 7   73-4    •2323    85-2   74-8    0824    85 6   73-8    •6525    88-5   73-6    2126    88.6   73-4   2-2527    839   73-5    0528    81-7   73-S    •6829    820   74-0    0730    83-2   78-4    6031    827   74-0    •01Win, Mint Trade Beliru for Ue montb of Not 1906.
IMPORTS.
Articles.Quantity.Value.Coaltons7955
5.777Damarpiculs   84448GuttaJangkar ...piculs1451.585Gutta Jelotong ...piculs4.3IM118.576Gutta Perchapiculs piculs   8714,284India Rubber235 J22.590Prawn Refusepiculs41 1Pepper (white) ...
do (black) ...piculs47011.570piculs118'1.796Rattans No. 1 scga etc.piculs944)8,590Do No. 2 temoi etc.piculs889 j2.298Ricepiculs   28115Sago flourpiculs t'pins1.0933,080Do raw12,06016,030Sundries11,625Treasure	...	...11,924TOTAL VALUE Brought forward	'• 120,802
• 1,699,674     Total Value to Date ...      1905Iii • 'sillEXPORTS.
         Articles.Quantity.Value.Brass-ware•
207Iron-ware Jars ...No.	861.919
690Oil Kerosinecases	1,2133.186Opium4.1350Rice ... Sundriespiculs	6.781182,566
57.219Treasure5,100     TOTAL VALUE• 105,187     Brought forward• 1,274.745     Total Value to Date ......$1,879,982—	1905• 1.898.989C. C. ROBISON.
Regutrar of Trad*


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 4, 1907.
19
Arrivals.
DATE.      NAME OF VESSEL.NAME OF CAPTAIN.WHERE
FROM.CHINESE.NATIVES OF INDIA. Mair, FriultOTHER ASIATICS.TOTAL.Mair.malt.Mair.Prmalr1906.9 ? 1Nov. 1S. S. Rajah of SarawakE. T. MoxonSingapore6014      84        88. S. KuchingW. WaddellBrooketon82222      88        9WS.AdthJeman9       9„ 1 ioS. 8. Rajah of SarawakE. T. MoxonSingapore666 ...6      78..	228. S. KuchingW. WaddellP. Paujang521 ...41      58        22BoatDrahirn...3       3        26P. S. AdehJemanBrooketon4       5        27BoatMazienP. Seiasan1       1.	29S. 8. Rajah of SarawakE. T. MoxonSingapore134*3 ...4514839521	147*474Departures.
DATE.     NAME OF VESspt.NAME OF CAPTAIN.WHITHER
• BOUND.CHINESE.NATIVES OF INDIA. Male. Fmalr.OTHER.
ASIATICS.
Mair. Femair.TOTAL.Mair.rm.lr1906.P. S. AdehJemanBrooketon311... ...4..	6S. 8. Rajah of SarawakE. T. MoxonSingapore14714* ...29	1     182        138. S. KuchingW. WaddellP.S'rassan166412 i ...2 ...     184„	15PinnaceSi tarn4 ...4„	208. S. Rajah of SarawakE. T. MoxonSingapore17013 ...174        278. 8. KuchingW. Waddell1004 ...6 ...     110586621 i ...44	1     658c. c. ROBISON.


20
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 4, 1907.
METEOROLOGICAL READINGS.
KUCHING OBSERVATORY.
Observations Taken Daily at 8 a. in. December, 1906.
TEMPERATURE.
n gBulb.ag
2mometer the sun.Sas.=aPl&a   i30 0088-474175-875-3740154-8   230 0187-772-976 675-572 3148-1   329-9988-1, 1 *il75-1. 74171-5164-8   4300185-773-875174173-3147-5   529-9885873776-374 973-3143.0   629-9788-472576-175072-3158.8   7299990-374-374-673473-6153-2   8301)581-473.1781765731115-4   9300785-472-977.376-272-213601030 0685.873375-974-873-115401130-0785-573780176-373-5157012300582-473376-175-373-3132-01330.0583-273-575674 673-4130-21429-9885-672377-676-472-3150-21529 9583.873-475373-973-4124-61629-9586773076-375-273 1142.21729-9487174-875474 774-5148-518299484-171-976-775-671-615301929-9388072-174 7732721153-62029-8987 273-675474273-3151-721299388-875174-372-1128-82229-9783-973-874 173173313702329-9982173876175'673-613102429-9484-772676-174971-9139-8• 25300488-974179-976-873-6152-626300483-672076-775671-3151-82730 0482-972.175'673-5< 1-5155028300285372174-672-2155-429300186473-876074-673-4154-23029-9987-472078176-371 3152-63130 0086173-276-974-972-8140-8Dull dp ? do do
Fine Dull Fino Dull do do
Fine Dull Fine do do do do do do do
Dull
do
Rain Dull do do do do do do do
ci
1
hrs. min.!
300
210
330
4-20
5-20
710
710
100
2-30
400
6.30
0-50
4-30
2.30
2-20
4 30
250
5-50
520
0-20
3-20
1-20
3-30
3-40
2-30
1 00
1-30
315
2-30
4 00
124
02
81
52
45
43
108
118
20
53
53
10
36
10
81 02
28
10
79
30
2-76
07
82
09
01
Total rainfall during the month 18.24 inches.
Highest recorded temperature	90-3 *F.
Lowest „	..	71'9 *F.
Height of observatory above sea level approximately 100 feet.
KUOBUIQ Printed and Published by GHIN HENO Soon. Government Printer, at the Sarawak Gatette Office,
Nos. 19, 20, and 21, Court House Road.
4

