sa
VOL. XXXVII.
No. 497.


  Sarawak gazette
?rite	.WEDNESDAY,
JUNE 5, 1907.	10 cants.
          CONTENTS.
MARRIAGE:— MOIE-BRODIE.
(> RDE RH:—Iz^pcr < ’amp—Firearms.
NOTIFICATIONS :—Money Orders Advice of Payment—Planting Grant cancelled.
NOTICES: Bankruptcy (Haul—Bankruptcy (Kabongl—Land Grant No. 842 of 3rd March 1897— Unclaimed .Deposits, Kuching Court—Unclaimed Magazines in Post Office — Bankruptcy Court, Kuching—Counterfeit Stamps—Sale of Ihitu Bandar’s property.
LEAVE - APPOINTMENTS A NEW APPOINTMENT—AURIV AL OF His HIGHNESS THE RAJAH-H. H. THE RAJAH VISITS THE LAV SCHOOL. GAOL AND TELEPHONE EXCHANGE—THE I’MA LISOOMS—PEACE MAKING AT K.AI'IT-	REPORTED SURRENDER OF ULU KANOVW
REBELS	MEMORIAL TO THE LATE Mils. HOSE	WllDDIN't-
ASSOCIATION FOOTBALL—FOOTBALL AT LI M RANG--REVIEW'OF "MATERIAL* FOB A STUDY OF TATTOO IN BORNEO'—TRADE IN THE KALAKA AND SIKWAS RIVERS IN 1907—THE SVMPITAN OK BLOW PIPE—MONTHLY NOTES.
INVENTORY OF ASTANA FARM—REPORT ON THE PEPPER GARDENS OF UPPER SARAWAK—REPORT ON SADOXO COLLIERIES 1900. MONTHLY REPORTS:—Lundu—Lawns—Sadong— Banc-.: —
 M..tang Estate—Ova—Kapil—Kalaka—Sinianggang — Muka—Limbang—Pakn -Ban.
ADVF.RTISEMENTS-F.VSSENGF.RS— TRADE RETURNS—SHIPPING .METEOROLOGICAL READINGS -ALMANAC.
The Sarawak Gazette
   WEDNESDAY , JUNE 5, 1907.
MOIR—BRODIE.—On the 23rd April, 1907. at the Parish Church of St. Leonard's Streathaui. by the Revd. H. 11 Jcbb, M A. assisted by the Revd. .1 A. Grant, M. A. ALEXANDER MOIR of Little Firth Head. Dalbeattie. X. B.. (formerly of Sarawak) to ELEANOR JESSIE BRODIE, daughter of Mr. William Gibson Brodie, of Thirhnere Road, Strontluuu.
Order.
                 No. Ill, 1907.
   I HEREBY direct that on and after the 1st
proximo the Leper Camp at 5th mile shall be
entirely under the superintendence of the
Medical Department and not as hitherto of the
Police. The Principal Medical Officer or his
Deputy will therefore on ami after that date
be responsible for all arrangements connected
with the supply of food for the Camp and will
report whenever necessary on matters concern- *
ing it to the Hon’ble the Resident 1st Divi-
sion.
C. V. BROOKE, |
Kuching, Sarawak,	Majak Muda.
     13th March, 1907.
Order-
No. IV, 1907.
    THE following regulations regarding the im-
port of Fireaftns into Sarawak are published
i'or general information.
    1 .—Any person desirous of importing any Firearm
into Sarawak must in first place obtain a “Permit”
, m do so from Resident’s Office in Kuching and after
I the firearm in question has been imported it will lie
I necessary for the owner to obtain a license to carry
same. Europeans or others newly arriving in the
I Country and bringing in any firearms will have same
detained in the Customs Department until produc-
‘.tion of the necessary “Permit.”
    2 . - The above mentioned Permits and Licenses
are not transferable unless authority has been ob-
, taint'd authorizing the transfer and any person so
offending will be liable to a fine not exceeding $100.
    3 .-—Before importing ammunition it also necess-
ary to take out a “Permit” and the ammunition ini-’
ported is to be for personal use and not for sale or
disposal otherwise except with special permission.
The penalty for any iufrmgment of this regulation
will be the same as for unauthorized transfer of fire-
I arms.
   By order of His Highness The Rajab Muda.
P. F. CUNYXGHAME, ’
Resident 1st Division.
[ Resident’s Office,
   Kuching, Sarawak,
          23rd March, 1907.
Notice.
No. VII, 1907.
                 lie Liew Mooi and Lee Seb, chop
Shin Hap. (Absconded.) Tra-
der in Sbak Loong Mun Bazaar.
ALL cred iters and other persons having any
claim whatsoever against the Estate of the
above named are hereby requested to send
particulars thereof to the undersigned within
three (3) months from date, after which date
the assets of the above named will be divided
amongst the parties entitled thereto, regard
being had only to those claims of which notice


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 5, 1907.
shall have been given. And all monies owing to the said Estate shall be paid to the undersigned forthwith.
E. R. STILWELL, Resident, Upper Sarawak.
Bau,
March 1st, 1907.
Notice-
No. VIII, 1907.
   IN re Tan Ah Clink (Kan Chew Chinese), a pepper planter in the Ibus stream, Kalaka, against whom a warrant was issued on December 9th, 1906, for absconding under advances, it is hereby notified that all creditors and other persons having any claims whatsoever against the Estate of the above are requested to send particulars to the undersigned within three months from date, after which date the assets of the above named will l»e divided amongst the parties entitled thereto.
              By order of the Resident.
        A. E. CHEYNE, Clerk to Court of Requests.
Kabong,
March 1st, 1907.
Notice.
No. XI, 1907.
   NOTICE is hereby given to all whom it may concern that grant No. 342 issued on March 3rd 1897 to one En Kon Fook for a piece of land containing about 1 acre 0 roods 32 per-' ches situated on the Tabuan road, Simpang Tiga, is supposed to have been lost or destroyed.
   Any person holding said grant is required to present it r.t the Municipal Branch P. W. D. Office not later than 1st July 1907 otherwise grant No. 342 will be cancelled and a new grant issued.
M. G. BRADFORD,
Officer in Charge, Municipal Branch.
2nd April, 1907.
Notification.
No. XIII, 1907.
Money orders
ADVICE OF PAYMENT.
   FBOM 1st April 1907 remitters of Money Orders to, or through, the United Kingdom may obtain an “Advice of Payment” either at the time of application or at any time subsequent thereto.
   The fee for such advice will be 10 cents (additional to the Commission.)
   It is however pointed out that the Post Office undertakes only to pay the Order when duly signed in accordance with the application, but does not guarantee the genuineness of the Signature or the identity of the payee.
C. C. ROBISON, Postmaster-General.
Notice-
No. XIV, 1907.
He Nyam Kon Poli, Chop Hiap Ilin. (Absconded). Trader in Shale Lung Mun Bazaar.
   ALL creditors and other persons having any claim whatsoever against the Estate of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned within three (3) months from date, after which date the assets of the above named will be divided amongst the parties entitled thereto, regard being had only to those claims of which notice shall have been given. And all monies owing to the above Estate shall be paid to the undersigned forthwith.
E. R. STILWELL,
Resident, Upper Sarawak.
     Bau,
April 1st, 1907.
Notice.
No. XV. 1907.
   THE herein after mentioned sums in deposit in the Office of the Court, Kuching, will be paid into Govt, revenue if not claimed on or before 29th June 1907.
    For       fromamount.Bong KangEst. Chang Kiow    .57.Bong .Jun Seng    .. 1.    .50Ban Hok BeeEst. Hiap Seng31.30Chong HokEst. Bong Kiow   3.00Chai ManEst. Chai Nguan   5.32Chang KhimEst. Chang Kiow    .70Chin ThaiEst. Soon Watt   6.82Chin TaiEst. Hok Seng (Oya) .84Cheng HengEst. Tang Liang Hong 2.00Chan Kee Yan (deed.)Est. Teo Luu Ee    .61Chang NguaChong Bui Cheong142.00Chang NgeeChin Ann36.00Chang Ilin ManEst. Tek Guan36.00Eng Ann Teng   1.84Est. Soba Singh (deed.) Balance26.70Est. Seng SoonBalance51.82Guan Ho SengEsc. Tek Guan36.64Hok SengEst. Ng Man   5.06Kow Mook   9.00Kim Wat HinEst. Tek Guan16.95Lim San JinEst. Lim Fwee24.70Sim Swee SengEst. Tek Guan    .69Seng Tek33.70Sim Ghee Eng07.47Swee ChoonX i . 1 ‘J.Swee SengChin Non35.45Teng Loh Poli   1.50Tan Ah NgoPa wadi Muni Sumi    .10Tun Ah NangTun Ah Hok   2.00Topeh Tek VhiangMnnian
Est. Kian Ann   2.00
14.72JOHN E. A. LEWIS, Resident 2nd Class. Court House, Kuching, 12th April, 1607.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 5, 1007.
            Notice.
                No. XX, 1907.
lie Chew Boon San. chop Kong
Tsze Thong.
   ALL creditors and other persons having any
claim whatsoever against the Estate of the
above named are hereby requested to send
particulars thereof to the undersigned within
three (3) months from date, after which date
the assets of the above named will be divided
amongst the parties entitled thereto, regard
being had only to those claims of which notice
shall have been given and all monies owing to
the said Estate shall be paid to the under-
signed forthwith.
E. R. STILWELL,
Resident, Upper Sarawak.
Bau,
May 17th, 1907.
            Notice.
                No. XXI, 1907.
   THE use, for prepayment of postage, of coun-
terfeit stamps or stamps already used, and the
manufacture, "sale, hawking or distribution of
embossed or adhesive stamps forged or imi-.
tated in such a manner as to be mistaken for
the genuine issues of any country is prohibit-
ed, and. if detected, will be severely punished.
C. BROOKE,
                                   Rajah.
Kuching,
18th May, 1907.
          Notification.
                No. XXII, 1907.
   PROVISIONAL Grant dated 15th October 1905-
to Koh San 11 oh, Chop Soon Bee Ann, of 5,000
acres of land near Moratabas for the purpose
of planting Gutta or Rubber has this day been
cancelled by order of H. H. The Rajab, the
conditions upon which it was granted not
having been complied with.
 M. G. BRADFORD,
Officer in Charge,
Municipal Branch, P. IF. D.
   Kuching,
23rd May, 1907.
            Notice.
               No. XXIII, 1907.
   BY order of the Court there will be sold by
Public Auction at the Court House, Kuching,
at 9 A. M. on Monday the 17th June.
   Grant No. 773 dated 22nd April 1905 being
lot 1 Section 29 on the West of the Datus
Road having an area of 5 acres 2 roods -OB
poles or thereabouts and containing the dwell-
ing houses of the late Data Bandar with
stables and other out-buildings.
Notice.
                No. XVI, 1907.
”Ir is hereby notified that a copy of Cassell’s 1
Magazine for March 1907 is now lying in the J
Kuching Post Office without a wrapper.
C. C. ROBISON,
Postmaster General.
General Post Office,
   Sarawak. 22nd April, 1900.
Notice-
                No. XIX, 1907.
IN THE. BANKRUPTCY COURT KUCHING.
In the goods of Tian Kuai, Tian
Bnu Teo#and Ngwee Long
pepper planters of 8. Tapang.
(.4 bsconded.)
In the goods of Chang Lee,
pepper planter of Sigobang.
(Absconded).
In the goods of Chop Tian
Hong of Main Bazaar, Trader.
In the goods of Chang Put, j
Ngni Chin Fung and Ngui I
Loi Sun, pepper planters of S.
Sarawak. (A bsconded.)
In the goods of Chung Sioug, '
pepper planter of Jugati. (Abs-
conded.)
In the goods of Ah Soi. Saw- '
yer of Santubong. (Abs- '
conded.)
In the goods of Tong Sian chop
Shew Sen Tong. Druggist I
of Batu Kawa. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Ang Tek, Chop \
Ang Guan What, Fisherman |
and trader of Muara Tebas.
( A bsconded.)
Tn the goods of Talip bin Bu-
jang ( Sambas ) Trader and
Mariner of Kampong Grissek.
In the goods of Chua Lew Swee,
eating house keeper. (Abs- j
conded.)
In the goods of Goh S'eng Hok
alias Goh Wah Seng boat I
hawker. (Absconded.)
   ALL creditors and other persons having any
claim whatsoever against the Estates of the
above named are hereby requested to send
particulars thereof to the undersigned on or
before the 15th June, 1907, after which date
the assets of the above named will be divided
amongst the parties entitled thereto regard
being had only to those claims of which notice
shall have been given. And all monies owing
to the above Estates shall be paid to the
undersigned forthwith.
JOHN E. A. LEWIS,
Resident 2nd Class.
     Bankruptcy Court,
Kuching, 29th April, 1907.


184	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 5, 1907.
   The above will be sold in five lots which have been staked out on the ground and are as follows.
   Lot No. 1. That portion of Grant No. 773 on which stand the houses and stables of the late Data Bandar, and the house of Hadji Ma- tusin which however is not included in the sale.
   Lot No. 2. That portion of Grant No. 773 on which stands the house of Dyang Siti.
   Lot No. 3. That portion of Grant No. 773 with the house of Dyang Jeinaliah thereon.
   Lot No. 4. That portion of Grant No. 773 with the house of Jaliha thereon.
   Lot No. 5. That portion of Grant No. 773 on which stands the house of Abang Metas- sim with right of wav thereto through Lot No. 3.
   These lots are offered to Mahomedans only. The houses on lots 2, 3, 4 and 5 are not included in the sale.
   Lot No. 6. Grant No. 844 dated 16th July 1906 being lot No! 20 Section 1 Gambier Road having an area of 8.15 poles or thereabouts with the substantially built brick shop house thereon.
   Lot No. 7- One half share of Grant No. 655, having an area of 40 acres 1 rood 0 poles situated at Sadungus together with the cattle- sheds thereon (not including the dwelling house.)
   Lot No. 8. Three small fruit plantations without grants at Pulo Enggang, Tanah Putat and Tanah Tupong.
   Lot No. 9. One plantation at Pulo Ber- tundak.
   Lot No. 10. One plantation at Temiang.
   Lot No. 11. One cocoanut plantation at Sim unsam.
   Lot No. 12. Six head of cattle at Sadungus, (to be caught and removed by purchaser).
   Lot No. 13. Two shares in the stern wheel steamer Jee Sen Foil.
   There will also be sold at the house of the late Datu Bandar in Kain pong Batu at 1.30 1». M. on the above mentioned date the household furniture and effects, horses, carriages etc. the property of the late Datu Bandar.
JOHN E. A. LEWIS, Resident 2nd Class.
     Resident's Office, Kuching, 22nd May, 1907.
Notice.
No. XXIV, 1997.
IN THE BANKRUPTCY COURT KUCHING,
In the goods of Lai Chung Hap, pepper planter of 8. Tengah. (Absconded).
In the goods of.Tan Chun Meng, pepper planter of Stapok. (Absconded).
In the goods of Tan Seng Cho, pepper'planter of 8. Moyan. (Absconded).
In the goods of Lai .low and Lai Swee, pepper planters of S. Tengah, (Absconded). *?’ In the goods of Lai Leong and Lai Fui, pepper planters of Simungo. (Absconded).
Tn the goods of Chong Siew Chin, pepper planter of 8. Moyan. (A bsconded).
In the goods of Chong Chin, pepper planter of S. Loba. (Absconded).
In the goods of Lim Lan Seng, Clerk of Upper China Street. (Absconded)
                   In the goods of Gwee Chet and Chang Kai, pepper planters of S. Tengah. (Absconded). ALL creditors and other persons having any claim whatsoever against the Estates of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned on or before the 15th July, 1907, after which date the assets of the above named will be divided amongst' the parties entitled thereto regard being had only to those claims of which notich shall have been given. And all monies owing to the above Estates shall be paid to the undersigned forthwiih.
JOHN E. A. LEWIS.
Resident 2nd Class. Bankruptcy Court.
Kuching, 30th May, 1907.
   THE Hon’ble F. H. Dallas, Treasurer of Sarawak, returned from leave on 23rd May 1907, and has resumed his duties.
   His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to grant leave as follows:—
   R. S. Douglas, Esq. seven months furlough from 14th Maj’ 1907.
   J. Baring-Gould, Esq. fourteen months furlough from 14th May 1907.
   W. J. M. Shaw, Esq. seven months furlough from 21st May 1907.
   His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to make the following appointments :—
   H. B. Crocker, Esq. to do duty in Upper Sarawak, Baku, to date from his arrival at that Station >
   G.C. Gillan, Esq. to be Registrar of the Supreme Court and Auditor to date from the 25th May 1907.
   D. A. Owen, Esq. to be Resident at Oya to date from his arrival at that Station.
   P. Gordon White, Esq. to be OQicer-in-Charge al Sadong to date from his arrival at that Station.
   8. Cunynghame, Esq. is confirmed as Commandant, Sarawak Rangers, to date from 1st June 1907.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 5, 1907.	135
A New Appointment.
? ? ?
The late Datu Imaum’s Successor.
   Tuan Haji Merais bin Haji Mahomad has accepted the post of Imaum in Kuching and engages to come to Kuching shortly to take up his duties and receive the title of Batu. This Malay gentleman, the son of the late Haji Mahomad, bears an excellent character and is much respected in the Sibu (Rejang) District.
Arrival of His Highness the Rajah.
—*—
   After an absence of nine months His Highness the Rajah returned to Sarawak on Friday, the 10th May. The yacht Zahora was signalled about 4 p. M. and was saluted by the Fort Battery about 4.30, as she slowly steamed past to her anchorage above the.Xstana. His Highness the Rajah Muda and the Hon’ble Sir Percy Gunynghame, Resident 1st Division, went off to the Zahora to meet the Rajah who shortly after landed at the Astana steps where the European community, the Datus, and a few Chinese Towkays were assembled to receive His Highness, who shook hands with all present.
   The usual Guard of Honour under the command of Mr. S. Cunynghame was drawn up on the lawn and presented arms as His Highness the Rajah passed on his way to the Astana.
   Refreshment? having been served and one or two newcomers presented to the Rajah, the company then dispersed well pleased to see His Highness back again and looking so well.
   Mr. C. S. Pearse, formerly Treasurer of Sarawak for over 20 years, accompanied the Rajah from England and many old friends here were glad to see him again and give him a welcome. It is close on nine years since Mr. Pearse retired from the Service and this is his first visit since then to Sarawak. He will find many changes and improvements everywhere.
   We arc authorized to state that TTis Highness the Rajah accompanied by Mr. J. E. A. Lewis, Inspector of Schools, visited the Government Lay School on the 22nd instant (Muy). His Highness found a satisfactory attendance and very considerable progress amongst the Malays, Chinese and Tamils, numbering altogether 103 boys.
   H. H. The Rajah with the Hon’ble the Resident then visited the Gaol and was quite satisfied with it's condition in every respect.
   Subsequently His Highness the Rajah accompanied by Mr. H. D. Ellis, Commissioner of Public Works and Surveys, paid a visit to the new Telephone Exchange and Store mid found the Department kept in good working order.
The Uma Lisooms.
   A case of killing has lately taken place between the "Uhi Ai” tribe in Upper Rejang and a tribe called the “Uma Lisooms” located in the very head of the Rejang Water Shed. This act was committed by a party of mischievous young Dyaks who were
supposed to have been on a gutta hunting expedition.
   The “Lisooms" are a quite inoffensive people, mat- making being their principal means of gaining a livelihood. It is now arranged that the relations of the young Dyaks pay a heavy fine which will be seut as compensation to this unfortunate tribe.
   It is to be hoped that in this way amends may be made for a cowardly and dastardly crime of which the relations of the murderers may well be ashamed.
   His Highness the Rajah commented very severely before the Dyak Chiefs on this serious offence which •they or a few of them ought to have prevented. The Chiefs offered no excuse but said they were willing to pay up any fine that His Highness chose to impose.
   (Kapit, IGth May, 1907).
Peace making at Kapit.
   The meeting at Kapit of Bantin and many hundreds of Dyaks who have been disaffected towards Government and the lower tribes for some years past took place on the 16th May Jiefore their Highnesses the Rajah and Rajah Muda and the Hon’ble Charles Hose, Resident 3rd. Division, when everything passed off satisfactorily.
   After a pig killing ceremony in which Bantin and his “Uhi Ai” followers swore eternal friendship with Munan and the down river tribes, the Dyaks numbering about a thousand proceeded to the Fort where the great “Aum" or meeting was held.
   The pig killing ceremony produced a considerable amount of ease and contentment where before a certain feeling of nervousness was shown in the bearing of Bantin and his followers, so much so that they would not leave their parangs or spears. In the assembly, however, at the Fort no arms were seen nor were there the slightest signs of trepidation.
   Bantin assured His Highness the Rajah of his good intentions for the future and spoke feelingly and convincingly.
   In token of his good will he presented his spear adorned with the long hair of his late enemies to the Rajah with this remark “that as he was now a friend the spear was of no further use to him and no longer sharp."
   Certain arrangements were made about the payment of a fine which will lie eventually paid to those in the Batang Lupar who have suffered from Bautin's attacks.
   Bantin and his “Uhl Ai” followers are now proceeding to the Batang Lupar to make peace in that District and it is to lie hoped that these disturbances so close to the Dutch Frontier will cease forever.
   Great satisfaction between all parties seems to be the result of this day’s proceedings.
Reported Surrender of “ulu”
Kanowit rebels.
   On His Highness the Rajah’s departure from Sibu news was brought that a large party of Ulu Kanowit rebels from Miki Pam bar were on their way to Sibu to surrender to the Government.
   If this news is true it is to be hoped that in a short time the whole of the Ulu Ai Districts will lie at peace.


136
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 5, 1907.
Memorial to the late Mrs. Hose.
   THE Reredos purchased by the Committee of the Fund for the erection of a memorial to the late Mrs. Hose has duly arrived and has been placed in position in St. Thomas’ Church, Kuching.
   The Reredos which appears to give general satisfaction is the work of Messrs. Jas. Powell & Co., of Whitefriars Glass Works, Tudor Street, London, E. C. and the putting together and erection on arrival here were kindly arranged by Mr. Ellis, Commissioner of Public Works and Surveys.
   A brass inscription to be placed on the wall of the chancel is on order.
   The Committee hope that the work will give full satisfaction to the many subscribers to the memorial.
   The Reredos was consecrated on Sunday, the 2nd instant, by the Ven. Archdeacon Perham.
Wedding.
MOIR—BRODIE.
   FEELING sure that the many friends in this Country of Mr. Alexander Moir will be interested to read about his marriage which took place in England on the 23rd April hist, we publish the following account from the “Streatham News” of 27th April 1907. The bride, it is almost needless bo state, Is the sister of Mr. J. H. Brodie of the Borneo Company’s Service. Sarawak. We tender our hearty congratulations to Mr. Moir and wish him and Mrs. Moir every happiness.
(From the '‘Streatham News" 27 April 1907)
   The parish church of St. Leonard's, Streatham, was on Tuesday afternoon the scene of one of the most fashionable and pretty weddings that has taken place recently in the neighbourhood. Large crowds awaited, under the long awning outside the church, the arrival of the bride, whilst the interior of the sacred edifice was filled with guests, the ladies’ dresses being especially beautiful, chic, bright, and attractive.
   The occasion was the nuptials of Mr. Alexander Moir, of Little Firth Head, Dalbeattie, N. B.. and Miss Eleanor Jessie Brodie, the pretty daughter of Mr. William Gibson Brodie, of “St. Elmo,” Thirlmere-road, Streatham. The church had been tastefully and artistically decorated by Mrs. Knight, large towering paltns forming a canopy over the chancel, with choice white flowers and plants at the base.
   During the time the guests were assembling, the bells of the parish church rang out a welcome, and the organist, Dr. Cuthbert Harris, played some appropriate wedding music, which included Guilmant’s "Marche Nuptiale.” and “Cantilena” (also one of Guilmant’s). As the bride ?entered the aisle leaning on the arm of her brother, M r. Horace Brodie, who gave her away, the St. Leonard's Miriam Ladies’ Choir burst forth in “ Gracious Spirit, Holy Ghost,” which act-id as a processional. The officiating clergyman was the rector, the Rev. H. H. Jebb, M. A., assisted by the Rev. J. A. Grant, M. A., and the service was fully choral. The bride was charmingly and becomingly gowned in ivory crepe de chine, with full Court train hanging from the shoulders, trimmed with chiffon and Honilon lace. Her train was adorned with bunches of lilies of the valley and white heather, and in her hair -she wore a tiara of white heather under a bridal veil. Miss Brodie carried a bouquet of lilies of the valley,
orange blossom, and heather, her ornaments being an emerald and diamond pendant (the gift of the bridegroom), and a diamond ring (the gift.of her father). There were five bridesmaids the Misses Bettie and Lilftui Brodie (the sisters of the bride), Miss Elyard, Miss Marie Day and Miss Baker—all of whom were prettily attired in cream voile over silk, with crinoline hats trimmed with tulle and red roses. They carried handsome bouquets of Liberty roses tied up with silver, and wore gold Iieudant watches, with the monogram of the bride and iridegroom on the back (the gilts of the bridegroom).
   The mother of the bride wore a dress of champagne lace with cloth medallions, hat to match trimmed with ostrich feathers. Mrs. W. G. Brodie carried a beautiful bouquet of yellow roses and mignonette. Mr. Charles Batnpfylde supported the bridegroom as best man. “Oh, Perfect love” having been impressively rendered by tho choir and congregation, the Rev. H. H. Jebb addressed some words of encouragement to the happy couple in their start in married life, emphasising the fact that tho commencement of married life was like starting upon an unknown journey, and urging upon them the necessity of leading a Christian .life, then God would bless their future. While the register was being signed, Dr. Cuthbert Harris played the I* ridal music from Lohengrin, and the party left the church to the strains of Mendelssohn’s “Wedding March," the bells ringing out a merry peal.
   After the ceremony a reception was held at “St. Elmo,” Thirlmere-road, where a large number of well-known members and clergy of St. Leonard's Church and residents assembled to wish the happy pair long life and happiness.
   Later in the afternoon Mr. and Mrs. A. Moir, amid many felicitations and a perfect plethora of tiny silver horse-shoes, left for their honey-moon, which is being spent in Paris, the bride’s travelling dress being of white cloth trimmed with fancy braid, with white hat trimmed with lace and lilies. She also wore a gold pendant watch set with diamonds and pearls the gift of the bridegroom. The magnificent wedding cake was supplied by Messrs. W. & G. BuszArd, of Oxford-street, London.
Association Football.
- -?—
   ON Tuesday afternoon, the 7th Muy. a scratch team of Europeans played a return match with the 8. P. G. Old Boys on the School ground. The play was fairly even, but the wet, not to say swampy state of the ground together with want of combination told against the Europeans, and they were defeated a second time by one goal to nil. the ball being assisted through the posts by one of the “backs” who, in an effort to clear, made a mis-kick and only succeeded in helping the ball out of reach of the goalkeeper. It is a coincidence that the gaol scored by the S. P. G-. in the first match was also obtained in the same way.
   The S. P. G. Boys play a good game and combine well and their lightweight and bare feet are in their favour on a soft ground—on the other hand it is only fair to state that the Europeans seldom play football now and more than half their number have never played under Association Rules before.
   One thing the “Boys” must learn, and the sooner the better, that is the “off side" rule. Playing amongst themselves or against other local teams of Chinese or Natives they have never had this rule properly enforced, consequently when playing against Europeans they seem to have some idea that the latter are taking unfair advantage of them whenever there is a chance of their scoring a goal. This, we regret to say, has led to unpleasant remarks being made amongst themselves on the field as to the Europeans’ way of playing. These remarks have generally come from old boys engaged as Clerks in I Government Service and we would recommend them to discontinue them in future as being, for obvious I reasons, in bad taste.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 5. 1907.	137
Football at Limbang.
...The first occasion on which a football match
against an outside team has been played in Lim-
bang took place on the 5th May when Pangeran
Damit and Kamarudin brought over an eleven from
Brunei to meet the Limbang players captained by
Basar.
   A good number of spectators were present, but the
game was devoid of much interest. Brunei pressed
bard most of the time, Pangeran Mujun on the left
wing being particularly brilliant. At half time neither
side had Scored. The second half was but a repe-
tition of the first, both teams played hard but with
no result, the game ending in a draw.
   On the 12th another team came over from Brunei
to do battle. This time the visitors had strengthened
their numbers with some burly Sikhs of the Brunei
Police Force.
   Before a large crowd the Limbang team made a
brave start ami for the first twenty minutes held
their own. Brunei then, with the assistance of the
Limbang goal-keeper, scored*their first, goal, half
time being called soon after.
   In thes econd half Limbang appeared disheartened,
and evidently felt tin more senses than one) the
weight of their opponents. Brunei soon added three
more goals to their score, and Limbang failing to
score left Brunei victors by 4 goals, to nil.
   For the Brunei forwards Pangeran Mujun played
his usual dashing game, all worked well together,
and P. Sergeant Chadra Singh at buck was distinctly
useful.
   The Limbang team were unfortunately minus two
of their best men, but Awang Bakar, Brahim, Da-
man and Dtris were especially noticeable, and all
played a plucky game.
   Though Limbang footballers have only within
recent months learnt the game, they are fast recog-
nizing the advantages of *• passing ” and the art of
combination. It is to be hoped when an opportunity
occurs again of meeting Brunei in friendly rivalry
that the game will be more even.—(Contributed).
Review of Materials for a study of tatu in Borneo by Chas. Hose. D. Se and R. Shelford. M. A.. L.S
—•—
   UNPEB the above title there has recently appear-
ed (.Journal of the Anthropological Institute, Vol.
XXXVI, 1906) an interesting contribution to out-
knowledge of the art of tatu in Borneo. The subject
matter comprises all the facts which the two authors
have, during many years and from many tribes, been
able to acquire and it summarises all that has been
written on the subject by Dutch and other European
scientists. Without entering into any details we
propose to give here a very brief outline of the
authors’ paper.
   We are told that the Kayans are with one or two
exceptions the most tatued race in Borneo and their
tatu is best from an artistic point of view. Their
patterns are very much copied by other tribes. A
feature of Kayans is the very elaborate tatu of
women to which is attached an important ceremo-
nial. The tatuing of a Kayan woman occupies as
much as four years before completion and she is
ornamented with complicated designs over the whole
forearm and thighs, on the back of the hands and
metatarsal surfaces of the feet. The operation is
performed by women whose profession is one of
honour, and whose charges are usually high. The
tools used are a small hammer-like pricker whose
head carries a ball of resin in which is imbedded
? three or four short needles whose points project from
| the mass, and an iron striker : the pigment is soot,
sugar-cane juice and water.
   The designs are curved in relief on wooden blocks
which are smeared with ink and then pressed on the
part to be tatued. Designs of lower class women
are not nearly so complex as those of higher class,
but nowadays class restrictions are not so pro-
nounced as formerly.
   Apparently it is a general belief amongst these
people that the tatu designs act as torches in the
next world and without these to light them the
future would be one of total darkness. Kayan men
on the other hand are not so elaborately tatued and
there is no particular ceremonial connected with
the process. They tatu chiefly for ornament; but in
Sarawak, if a man has taken a head, he can have
the backs of his hands and feet covered with tatu,
though if he had only a share in the slaughter he
would tatu one finger only.
   In Kayan tatu the dog pattern and its derivatives
figure largely, but they have also hornbills and even
degraded anthropomorphs.
   In Sarawak, their neighbours the Kenyahs tatu
very much in Kayan fashion, the dog pattern receiv-
ing a new name. viz. prawn : also their Kowit (hook)
designs are apparently degenerated dogs. They
have no ceremonial in this connection.
   The men amongst Kenyah Kaiamautans (Kenyahs
who have not mixed with Kayans) rarely tatu. but
their women do so in simple broad bands and lines.
   Of Kalamantans proper the men in some cases
(Sibops, Tanjongs and Lirongs) tatu in Kayan man-
ner. Other Kalamantans, however, have original
tatus of their own but these arc mostly simple, no
tatu blocks being used, the work being entirely free-
hand. The Uma Long Kalamantans are interesting
in having a very simple tatu, the designs being
merely stippled into the skin, producing an appear-
ance of close set irregular dots.
' Dusuns and Muruts tatu but little. Kalabit
women have striking geonietric designs on the legs.
   Bakatans and Ukits are peculiar inasmuch as most
of their designs are left in the natural colour of the
skin against a back-ground of tatu. Formerly the
men were most extensively tatued in delicate scrolls,
circles and hooks.
   Finally, we learn that Sea Dayak men are now
the most extensively tamed tribe in Borneo, but
here, as in several other respects, they have seized
on what most pleases them in the art of their neigh-
bours and have so changed it as to become almost
unrecognisable, especially as it has been given a new
name. The Sea Dayak Kala (Scorpion), for-in-
stance, is nothing but the familiar dog of the
Kayans.
   Amongst the many tribes who do not tatn are
Punans, Land Dayaks. Milanos, Bisayas and Ka-
dayans.
   The paper is well illustrated by several figures in
the text and eight excellent plates.
   We are disappointed to find in this valuable pa-
per no indication of possible relationships to tatu
fashions elsewhere in the Archipelago or peninsula,
but it is the opinion of the authors that tatu can
never be of much value in clearing up racial pro-
blems seeing that there has been so much inter-
change of designs and a rejection of indigenous
designs for newer ones.
   Also we would mildly take exception to the sugges-
tion contained in the authors’ classification that
Milanos are Mohammedans on the whole, or that
they ever tatued, which statements we have it on
good authority are opposed to facts.
   Lastly we venture to point out how very arbitrary’
in many cases are the names applied to the various
patterns : the authors clearly shew*, for instance,


138
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 5, 1907.
that a pattern known as ‘tuba root’ is to be derived
from a man's head and this has happened with such
a conservative tribe as the Kayans. We incline to
think therefore that even long established pattern
names, such as the ‘dog’ of the Kayans. may really
have no actual relation to the object from which the
names lie taken.
J. H.
Trade in the kalaka and Saribas rivers
in 1907.
(Contributed.)
                THE KALAKA.
   1 .—THE Kabong Bazaar consists of eight shops
fairly well built of bilian wood and roofed with bilian
shingles. As it has not increased in size for many
years one might presume that the trade there re-
mains much the same, but, as a matter of fact, it has
of late undergone some marked changes. A few
years ago the Kabong Chinese bought and salted fish
for export to Kuching, now it does not pay them to
do so and the fish curing is in the bands of the
Malays who sell their fish inland, and up and down
the coast, little going ‘to Kuching unless the Ku-
ching Malays go to Kabong to buy it. The Kabong
Chinese, however, still purchase the dried prawns
(scsar) on the coast, chiefly at S. Samaludam,
(where, I hear, at the commencement of April, the
takes are very large indeed)—and export them in
great quantities to Kuching. There is also the Jelu-
tong and Jangkar gutta trade which has increased a
good deal of late and every Kabong Chinese traded
goes in for it.
   2 .—The next Bazaar to notice in this river is that
at Saratok which, I am sorry to say, still remains
the same cluster of insanitary ieaf-built shop-houses
which the Chinese have inhabited since the (second) ‘
THE SARI BAS.
1.—Curiously enough there are the same number
of Chinese-owned Bandongs in the Saribas river its
there are in the Kalaka, three of these at Betong
and three at Pusa. There are also some large
Chinese-owned 1 masted boats and several Malay
owned 5 ton prahu.
The trade at both Betong hnd Pusa is much the
same as it has been in its good years for some time
past. There are practically no Chinese engaged in
pepper planting in the Saribas—indeed theie is not
much room for them in this river.
Of course the trade in the Saribas has always
been inferior to the Kalaka as the river is smaller
and there are fewer people.
The Bazaar at Pusa is inferior to the Betong
Bazaar and always has been so, even if the small
Debak Bazaar be included with that of Pusa.
I do not see that there is likely to be any great
expansion of Trade in these two rivers unless some
new industry or minerals are found. In good paddy
years we shall have good exports of rice and paddy,
and if thgre is no sickness or disturbance we may
expect that the Exports and Imports will exceed
those of the very best years we nave enjoyed—by
some small amounts—but nothing more.
The welfare of the people, taken as a whole, and
their standard of living have undoubtedly improved
since I have known these rivers. Further improve-
ments, which must necessarily be very slow, depend
entirely upon the advance the people themselves
make in farming and planting. This advance is
retarded chiefly by the communal system of land
tenure, and the Dyak custom of living in ‘long’
houses (which paializes all individual initiative).
With these obstacles removed, or modified in some
way. we might expect a satisfactory advance in
agriculture.
D. J. 8. B.
fire of September 8th. 1901, destroyed their bilian-
built Bazaar (which was the finest building of the
kind in the Kalaka river.)
The Saratok Trade appears to be much as it was
with the exception that sago is not worked freely
(though I am pleased to notice that it is now coming
more into favour again). Still the working of the
common guttas is more lucrative and until these are
worked out the sago export will continue to be de-
pressed. There are a few Pepper plantations at the
back of the Station but they are not large nor very
flourishing In addition to the export of gutta and
sago, during good years there is always a very fair
amount of paddy and rice taken out from Saratok,
and there should be a good export of these in 1907 '
if the harvest is got in well.
3.—There remains the Roban Bazaar (which I did I
not however visit upon this occasion). It consists '
of eighteen shop-houses of which thirteen are fairly
well built of bihan. The trade done at Roban is j
much the same as in the Saratok Bazaar with the 1
exception that there is a quantity of black and some
white pepper from the gardens in the Ibus and near
Roban, and an uncertain amount of bilian sawn-
planks and scantlings. More might be done here
were it under better supervision.
There are six Chinese Bandongs running from the
Kalaka to Kuching (three from Saratok, and three
from Roban) and they seem to be fairly regular and
to take good cargoes. In addition to these are
Malay-owned prahu of about five tons burthen, the
exact number of which varies a great deal, but of late
they have certainly increased in number. The Na-
khodas of these boats take gutta to Kuching and
bring back, rice, kain-kain, oil, tobacco, etc.: which
their owners peddle for gutta.
The Sumpitan (or blow-pipe) and its Upas or Laja (Darts)
—?—
The Sumpitan
   Is made of Empata or Tapang woods, and is round
in appearance, having a small hole bored through
the centre of wonderful straightness, considering
Natives make them by hand. The length is about
one and a half depaslong (9 feet); and men who are
accustomed to use this weapon are wonderfully accu-
rate at quite a long distance, it seems about 40 yards.
   The Sumpitan has often a spear head attached to
one end. and thus can be tised either for thrusting
or shooting; nearly ail the Ulu Ai carry these
weapons and many Upas or Laja in Bamboo cases
• temilah).
Upas or Laja.
   These darts somewhat vary, but are made of a
wood cilled Kagu Apeng. or prepared from dauu
Mudor or Buloh Tcmiang or any Buloh, and are about
10 inches long, very thin and light. At one end pith
is used (called Ibol) to make them fit the bore of the
blow-pipe: the pith is gathered from various
sources:—
   Teberu, a long grass of sorts, which grows usually
by the river side: Pabong, the root of the Akar
Plai: or from the Joran. a very thorny plant found
in abundance in the jungle. Upas or Laja vary in
these respects :—
   (1) One end may be simply sharpened to a very
fine point, making a deep wound. (2) One end made
like a spear head, also very sharp, and having a
Genting or notch cut on both sides enabling the
head to break off easily and remain in the wound.
(3) As in No. 1 made perfectly straight, but very


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 5, 1907.
130
near the end there is a Gran (a circular cut) nearly through, which enables the end to break off in the wound, being very similar to a thorn (or duri), and difficult to extract. (4) A small bit of bone cut into the shape of an harpoon and fixed to the end of the Upas or Laja, which comes off and remains in the , wound.
   All the darts are dipped in poison, which when fresh is very deadly and is generally concocted as follows :—
   The sap of a tree like Tapang, called Ipoh, is collected by piercing the bark with a sharpened bamboo, the sap flowing into the hollow’ of the bamboo; natives employ this method of collecting the sap, in order that none shall touch any sore or wound they may have, it being exceedingly poisonous. They next burn to a fine dust the Kajang Engkruang or Krupok, and having obtained the fangs of some very poisonous spake. such as the ular Kendawang (often used) orjilar Tcdong bendar, they scrape the same to a fine powder; lastly, mixing all together forming a black paste, into which they dip the ends of their Upas allowing them to dry.
   It seems the effect of a wound by one of these darts on men, and especially animals, is very considerable. But of course a lot depends on the state of the blood. I am told w ithout any ubat (medicine) a man may expire within an hour! and 1 am also informed by a man who has wounded a llrok with the same, that the beast was hit on one of its fingers, and in about three minutes was dead. The poison travelled quickly through it's system producing a sort of intoxication in an extraordinary short space of time, the animal then falling to the ground un- concious and dying.
MANNAMEAD.

.Hay.
   ON the 1st p. s, Adeh sailed for Sibu. Passengers, Mrs. J. Mo we and the Revd. Father Halder.
. ON the 2nd s. s. Rajah of Sarawak arrived from Singapore. Passengers, Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Hodgson, Mr. Ewing Smith.
   The same day the s. s. Sarawak sailed for Oya and the s. s. Alice Lorraine returned from Sibu.
   ON the 3rd s. s. Alice Lorraine left for Sibu, rid Sadong.
   P. S. Adeh arrived from Sibu on the 4th and sailed again the same afternoon for Lundu with Sir Percy and Lady Cunynghame, and Mr. and Mrs. Hodgson, who all returned to Kuching again on the 7tb. Mrs. Leggatt and children were also passengers to Kuching from Lundu by the p. s. Adeh.
   THE s. S. Rajah of Sarawak sailed for Singapore on the 7th. Passenger, Mr. J. M. Bryan.
   ON the 8th p. s. Kaka returned from the North. Passengers, The Rt. Revd. Bishop Hose from Labuan, vid Brooketon, and Mr. R S. Douglas from Baram.
   S. 8. Sarawak sailed for Oya this day.
   S. 8. Kuching arrived from Singapore on the 9th and the launch Young Harry returned from Lingga. By the latter Mr. J. Baring Gould arrived from Simanggang.
   ON the 10th His Highness the Rajah arrived from Europe in H. 11. S. Zahora. His Highness was accompanied by Mr. C. S. Pearse, formerly Treasurer of Sarawak.
   P. S. Kaka sailed for Sibu this day.
   ON the 11th the s. s. Sarawak returned from Oya, and on the 13th p. s. Kaba sailed for Baram.
   ON the 14th His Highness the Rajah accompanied by H. H. the Rajah Muda left in H. H. S. Zahora for^Sibu en-route for Kapit, there to personally receive the surrender of the Dyak Chiefs who have been causing trouble in the interior for a long time past. The peacemaking being now an accomplished fact, there must be a feeling of great relief amongst all classes in the affected districts and the sense of security should tend to improve trade which from all accounts was getting into a very bad state.
   P. S. Adeh arrived from Sibu on the 14th, and s. s. Sarawak sailed for Muka vid Rejang. Mr. J. S. Geikie and Mr. H. Hannay were passengers to Rejang.
   S. S. Kuching also sailed for Singapore this day with passengers, Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Hodgson, Mrs. Leggatt and children, Messrs. R. S. Douglas and J. Baring Gould.
   Mrs. Leggatt and children, and Messrs. Douglas and Gould are all going home and we wish them a good time and great benefit from the change.
   ON the 16th p. s. Adeh sailed for the North with passenger, the Revd. F. W. Leggatt for Brooketon. The same day the s. s. Rajah of Sarawak arrived from Singapore—passenger, Mr. J. Scott.
   ON the 21st the s. s. Rajah of Sarawak sailed for Singapore. Passengers, Mr. and Mrs. Service and child, Messrs. G. A. Luke and W. J. M. Shaw. Mr. and Mrs. Service are on their way to Europe on furlough, likewise Mr. W. J. M. Shaw. To Mr. Luke, who, since Mr. Gate’s departure, has been managing the Cutch Company’s affairs at Santubong, we said “good bye” for good, as far as this Country is concerned.


140
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 5, 1907.
His Highness the Rajah visited the Gaol on the 22nd and wrote the following in the Visiting Justices’ Book:—
“Visited prison 22nd May 1907, quite satisfied in every way”.
ON the 23rd the launch Young Harry returned from Sadong with Mr. D. A. Owen who is appointed to take charge of Oya.
The same day the s. s. Kuching arrived from Singapore with passengers, the Hon’ble F. H. and Mrs. Dallas, Mr. J. M. Bryan and the Revd. Father Reyfert.
Mr. and Mrs. Dallas who have returned from the old country where they have been enjoying a long holiday were looking extremely fit and well. Mr. Dallas resumes his duties as Treasurer of Sarawak.
P. S. Adeh sailed for Oya, Muka, Bintuhi and Barain on the .2(>th. Mr. D. A, Owen was passenger by her as far as Oya.
Ox the afternoon of the 27th His Highness the Rajah accompanied by H. H. The Rajah Muda left in H. H. S. Zahora on a visit of inspection to the various stations along the coast. It is expected that the voyage will occupy about a month.
S. S. Kuching left for Singapore on the 28th.
ON the 30th s. s. Rajah of Sarawak arrived from Singapore with passenger Mr. G. A. Luke. Mr. Luke, to whom we thought we had said goodbye, found on his arrival in Singapore that he had to return to Sarawak on business connected with the Cutch Company. It is his intention to leave again by the return trip of the steamer.
P. S. Kaka and s. launch La Fee arrived from Barain on the 30th. The La Fee met with an accident to her engines in the Baram river and had to be towed to Kuching by the Kaka to undergo repairs.
     Inventor) of Astana Farm
—?—
HOME FARM.
Shorthorn Bulls	...	...	...	2
Halfbred Bulls stock	...	...	2
?Cows in xnilk	...	...	...	29
Heifers in calf	...	...	...	2
?Cow calves 1 to 3	months	...	...	9
Bull calves 1 to 3	months	...	...	3
Cow calves 3 to 6	months	...	...	9
Bull calves 3 to 6	months	...	...	4
Cow calves 6 to 8	months	...	...	6
Bull calves 6 to 8	months	...	...	4
Heifers 14 years	...	...	9
Steers ]| years	...	...	...	4
	83
INLAND.
Shed No. I.
Brought forward.	-83
Cows dry and in calf ...	... 12
Barren cows
Heifers in calfShed II.    ...» 2
    ...	4
       	18Heifers in calf0Maiden Heifers    7. 3Heifers 2 yearsShed HI.Steers         2Heifers 1J yearsShed IV.       —- 9
    ...	6Steer's 11 year'sQ	8Rams stock   , Total head	123
SHEEP.
                 .. 1Ewes    ... 17Wethers    ...	2I won LambsEwe Lambs         7CocksPOULTRY.        29
    ...	5Capons    ... 13Hens        (J 5Chickens    ...	4Pigeons about        87
    ... 80SALES SINCE LAST INVENTORY.1 Yearling Bull II. B... $30.001 Young Stock Bull   ...	40.001 Cow (old)   ...	30.001 Ram (young) ...        8.003 Capons (young)        3.0020 Pigeons        6.00Kuching, May 25th, 1907.J.$117.00
W. STAPLES.Report on the Pepper Gardens of
Upper Sarawak.
Fa AM, April 94th, 1907.
RAJAH,—I have the honour to make the following Report to Your Highness on the pepper gardens of Upper Sarawak.
The total number of gardens that paid Road tax last year is roughly 2,000 of which about 250 belong to Dyaks aud Malays and the rest to Chinese.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 5, 1907.	141
This Report, as Your Highness will see, only accounts for 1,507, but many of the gardens though registered separately in our books are really only extensions of o'jder gardens and I think that nearly all the gardens in Upper Sarawak have been accounted for, though as the survey of pepper gardens is not complete no doubt a few in out-of-the-way places have been passed over.
   With reference to the Dyak and Malay gardens, I did not examine them as they are very small as a rule and the pepper produced by them is a mere trifle compared to the total production of the district. I may say, however, that what I have seen of them in the course *of my rounds among the Chinese gardens shows they are being much neglected and a large proportion are going out of cultivation.
With reference to the Chinese gardens there are:—
In cultivation A. ,	1,135
               do B. .	185
              Total in cultivation	1,320
Abandoned since last payment of Road Tax 187
Total 1,507
   Of the above gardens I- personally visited 996 and Mr. Collins kindly did the rest, so that, though T did not visit all the gardens in the district, I yet saw so large a proportion that my remarks may fairly apply to the whole.
   With reference to the gardens still in cultivation, those marked A. are gardens in which the vines are still good. Many of the gardens are, however, very weedy and burnt earth is conspicuous by its absence. The planters say they cannot obtain labour to weed their gardens or to make burnt earth. In many of the gardens which had been weeded and were clean when I visited them I noticed that they had not been touched till the weeds were a foot or more high, as could be seen from the heaps collected between the rows of vines. The severe cbangkoling to which the vines must have then been subjected could not be good for them. I do not consider that more than half the gardens marked A. are in good condition, free from weeds and reasonably well supplied with burnt earth. The rest are more or less neglected and at least 5% will be abandoned this year. During my rounds I only saw burnt earth being made on three gardens and though, of course, there is no particular fixed period during which burnt earth is made, yet two or three years back things would have been very different. In consequence, I presume, of the numerous deserted and neglected gardens, blight of several kinds is very bad indeed all over the district. Many gardens were also pointed out tome, especially round T. T. Durian and Kranji, in which the vines were suffering from want of manure. The vines appeared to have a good crop and the pepper spikes were full of berries, but on picking the ripe ones it is found that only a berry or two at the end is of full size and properly formed, the rest being EO soft that they can be squashed between the fingers. Such berries, if soaked to make white pepper, dissolve and all that can be done is to make them into very inferior black pepper.
   A most serious point is that practically no new gardens are coming on and no extensions of old gardens are being made. Only 16 new Chinese gardens have been registered since .January 1st 1906 in Baku district and several of these are not being kept
I up properly. In nearly every case in which an ex-
tension was made last year the young vines have
been abandoned, and in other cases the young vines
have been ruined by being allowed to fruit.
   The gardens marked B. are those which are in so
poor a state, chiefly from the age of the vines but in
some few cases from neglect, that it is extremely
unlikely they will be carried on much longer, the
crop being so small that it must be impossible to pay
expenses. I think one may safely say all or nearly
all these gardens will be out of cultivation by the
end of the year. In fact, since I started my inspec-
tion of gardens, I know of several that have been
abandoned as well as some of those marked A. but I
have not thought it necessary to alter my figures, as
gardens are being abandoned daily.
I There must be a very considerable reduction in the
pepper crop of Upper Sarawak this year, for not only
have 187 gardens gone ont of cultivation, ail of which
Eroduced pepper in 1906, but numbers of gardens
ave suffered from neglect and wiil produce smaller
crops. The 187 gardens abandoned were as a rule by
no means old and worn out but with a few excep-
tions were very fairly good gardens. One reason for
this is that so many of the traders up-country who
used to supply stores to these gardens could no longer
afford to do so as the pepper*delivered to them by
the planter did not cover the cost of stores supplied,
and having come to the end of their resources they
had either to abscond or become bankrupt.
   During last .year 27 traders in Upper Sarawak
have become bankrupt or absconded, usually the lat-
ter. and a good many others must be on the verge of
bankruptcy. The unfortunate holder of mortgage on
, a pepper garden is decidedly between the devil and
the deep sea. By his agreement he has got to sup-
ply stores to the gardens during the year and the
amount of pepper delivered is usually much below
the estimated crop and seldom covers the cost of
stores and coolies* wages. The planter sometimes
absconds with some pikuls of pepper and sometimes
illicitly disposes of the pepper without absconding.
   In either case the mortgagee has to foreclose his
mortgage in the vain hope of getting an bonester
man. Having foreclosed the trader has to find some
one to take over the garden from him,but the would-
be purchaser seldom, in fact I may say never, pays
any ready money but simply gives a mortgage over
garden for the agreed upon price and the trader has
once more to supply stores for the coming year. If
the trader declines to supply stores he can get no one
to take over the garden, which rapidly goes to ruin
and he loses all his money at once, and if be does
supply stores he is slowly bled to death as at the end
of the crop he again finds he has not received any-
thing like the estimated quantity of pepper. To run
the garden with coolies alone would simply add an-
other $100 (at least) a year to his losses.
   Whether anything can be done to check the illicit
sale of pepper I don’t know, but unless traders can
be protected in some way I do not see how they can
continue financing gardens on the present terms and
without such advances few gardens will be made.
   In conclusion, therefore, I would repeat that 187
gardens have been abandoned since last payment of
Road tax and as far as I can judge from appearances
at least 250 more will be abandoned by the end of
the year.
H. R. A. DAY,
Resident.


142
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 5, 1907.
DATE.
Diary of pepper gardens visited
IN CULTIVATION.
18.2.07
19.2.07
20.2.07
22.2.07
23.2.07
24.2.07,
2fi.2.07j
2G.2.O7
27.2.07
4.3.07
   do
5.3.07
14.3.07
15.3.07
18.3.07
19.3.07 J
27.3.07 i
28.3.07 (
?12
56
28
3
54
8
79
54
21
30
19
45
63
55
24
5
85
B.
   9
10
   6
   1
10
      3
   8
10
   3
   1
   4
   7
   6
11
ABAN-
DONED.
TOTAL.
86
83
40
Ayer Panas anti Lower Jambitsan.—Gardens in lair order but many want burnt earth. Few really first class gardens here.
Klatli.—Gardens near Kladi mostly abandoned. Many gardens very yellow from want of burnt earth. Few really good gardens anywhere in this lot, nearly all in want of burnt earth.
Musan and Jugau.—About a dozen really good gardens.
6 Paku, Scniawan Road.—Very* small gardens and not very good.
Jugan — Some very good gardens in this lot, on the whole the best I have seen to date.
Paku.—A poor lot, kept clean but only one really good garden among them.
15
94
75
23
35
21
56
82
Scniawan Sebrang.—Near river rather poor gardens, bnt inland many very good gardens, much the best I have seen hitherto. One young garden which is being, neglected.
Seniawan to T. T. Durian. Very poon gardens on the whole, near T. T. Durian many abandoned and the rest poor. Right inland very poor also, all very short of burnt earth. Only one gardener has planted young vines and looking aftc them properly. A few really good gardens.
Seniawan to Paku Graveyard.—Good average gardens, those near road rather poor.
7'. T. Durian—Kranji Sebrang.—Gardens near T. T. Durian poor but near Kranji some very good gardens, 8 or 10.
Scniawan, Peuinjo Bead.—Very good gardens mostly. One garden has planted young vines which are being properly looked after.
Seniawan, T. T. Durian (this side).—Some very good gardens among this lot. but a good deal of blight. No gardens extending.
Upper Jambusan—Seringgok.—'Good average gardens.
65 Buan, Busan. Only fair average gardens, a few very good.
92
30
5
117
T. T. Durian, Lidah Tanah.—A very poor lot of gardens. Many very weedy and blight very bad, burnt earth badly wanted. One garden has extended and the young vines are being looked after. Few really good gardens.
Skunyet.—Fourteen gardens this side of Skunyet bill all very good gardens indeed. The rest lie between Skunyet hill and left hand branch. These are very poor and most are so weedy that I expect it is the owners' intention to abandon them.
Scniawan Sbrang.—Good.
P. Singghi - Musi.—Near P. Singghi fairly good gardens. Between Busau and Musi pengkallen rather poor and a number abandoned. Inland and towards S. Pinang very good gardens. Many gardens have small extensions but in only a few eases near 8. Pinang are the young vines being properly' looked after, in other gardens they are being neglected.
Various Chinese traders with whom 1 have spoken complain that gardens are not properly sux>plied with burnt earth this year. Planters aro only putting it on once instead of twice or three times during year. Yong Heng, a very respectable trader of Seniawan and who seldom lias any cases in Court, says ha finds it difficult to keep the planters on the gardens mortgaged to him. He has 12 gardens which he supplies with everything and eveu supplies wages for coolies when wanted, and has written down the debt on gardens by $5,000, and yet the planters wish to hand the gardens over to him as they say at present price of pepper they will have to work a year or two Iwfore they can make any profit.
I should say besides the gardens in class B at least 5 o o of those in class A will go out of cultivation this year.
H. R. A. DAY, Hesident.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 5, 1907.
1-13
SADONG Collieries 1906.
«	—?*—
10th April, 1907..
     RAJAH,—I have the honour to submit to Your Highness a short report giving the more important details of the work carried on at Sadong Mines during 1906 and to date.
     I also beg to submit my private underground plan to more clearly elucidate my notes: the workings shewn pink are those roads which have been worked during the last 18 months when I had my first surveys plolted. Old roads arc in burnt sienna. One of the most important operations being the new washing plant at the junction of the railroad where Nos. 8 and 9 Mines ont-put join the main line. This was sanctioned by Your Highness in February 1906, but on my visit in February 1907 I found very little had been done, the work being partly delayed#owing to Howarth Erskine it Co. failing to send railway •chairs and partly due to press of work at the mouth of No. 5 keeping the men busy. I have arranged with the manager to get this work completed at once and I understand it will be given full attention. When finished this work will save the cost and trouble of conveying the debris to the wharf, the colliery work will be more concentrated, the washing will be more perfect owing to cleaner water and the avoidance of a deposit of river mud on the coal and there will be less handling. This should mean 20 to 30 cents a ton cheaper treatment.
     The manager thinks he.will be able to complete the work before April (it is therefore finished now).
     1 am continually getting complaints from Sadong about the inferior ropes supplied and we have the same trouble here : I doubt whether the ropes supplied from Singapore are fit for important work although the cost is extremely high compared with European prices.
     The locomotives “Sampson" and ‘'Sadong” have been improved during the year—chiefly by Lange, the E resent mechanic- but owing to the heavy loads and the rough track between the Mines and the wharf, oth engines are nearly “ played out ” and the cost of repairs ami breakdowns would go far towards the •expense of one new locomotive; a locomotive with a longer wheel base would also»reduce the cost of railway up-keep and tend to straighten out the line, whereas these small enginesowing to a lateral or swaying motion when running light or with easy loads tend to increase the rail gauge beyond the normal.
     Mr. Sage, the late Manager, made several new wagons for conveying coal to the wharf: they are stronger and more serviceable than the old ones. Several of the old trucks (iave been broken up and the wheels and ironwork used for the newer ones. The present manager has put the timber contract into the hands •of Ah Song at the termination of the previous contractor's agreement and he thinks he will effect a saving of 20 % thereby, and I agree in his opinion.
     The local management changed hands in Mr. Sage returning to Europe and Mr. Naysmith I put on in his place, after receiving Your Highness’ sanction.
     The mechanical engineer Mr. College resigned on 30th May, Mr. Lange taking his place, being sent by Your Highness from Kuching. J. O. Maddocks, Assistant Manager, arrived on 11th September. Mr. Naysmith is doing well and I hope his health, which is not good, will improve.
     There are only two Eurpeans at Sadong and the manager says there is work for three.
     In December 18 new coolie houses were ordered to be erected and several others on low ground were 'destroyed; the old lines being full of beri-beri.
     I understand that periodical inspection by a medical officer has been arranged for also.
     The stores and store books are kept now with a greater degree of system.
     I have written Kuching asking for the Sadong store accounts to be sent me every qua ter, this will 'enable me to go through items with the local management on my inspection visits.
     Nothing has been written off the coal stocks at the wharf to compensate for the loss by washing and iBcreening etc. since 1903. I think 5,000 should be written off. When the sheds were empty about that ?quantity was shewn as “balance at wharf".
     A coke oven has been erected during 1906 but is unsuitable for coke making with Sadong coal. Its •capacity is about five tons.
     The new wharf was commenced almost immediately after being sanctioned by Your Highness. Ah Kam was given the contract and Mr. Owen superintending. It is a strong structure well braced and is not in the “vortex7’ of the river and therefore the heavy drift timber will pass clear of it for the most part.
T7u<l«i*$ri*oiiu*l 'W’ovlci
     Your Highness will have a fair idea of the amount of work done during 1906 by the pink colouring <m plan, unfortunately the surveys were not marked on at the end of 1905, but previously in June 1905, ana from that date I have tinted pink.
     The new work is more systematic and not unlike No. 6 Mine workings which were well laid out. The stall roads are kept at more regular distances and cut off by “cross-headings” when they attain a length of 200 feet, and the coal is afterwards trammed out of the stalls into the cross-headings and on to the “Main Haulage Road” and to the rope.
     The working faces have better, thicker and cleaner coal than formerly. In No. 4 Mine average sections of working face being:—



144
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 5, 1907.
In the extreme advanced work the Main Haulage Road the coal is thicker ns per Sketch

SiWWWSO' 	 I /I
3- Holeing Dirt
     This shews 4’. 8" of good coal. All sectional sketches are 2 feet to an inch scale. This is an excellent face of coal, the coal thickness out towards No. 5 Mine taking the place of the clod (a mixture of fireclay and shale). Again the few faces working in No. 5 Mine (K. on plan) are al) well over 4’. 6" clean, good coal.
     Sadong is a very easy mine to work and with good management must nay if we had selling agents working conscientiously in our interests: it is a pity to see excellent coal’going an bunkers at |5.50, knowing $8 to be considered a fair price by buyers of inferior coal to Sadong.
     The ventilative currents coursing through the main workings are fair, my anemometer giving 7,980' cub. feet as entering No. 4 Mine and upcasting through No. 5 shaft. This district should have about 11,000 or 12,000 cub. feet per minute but we have not been able to increase to this yet and the ventilation was greatly improved by Sage—from about 5,000 to the present quantity.
     Nos. 8 and t) Mines advancing to the deep I found also m good working order. The “main deep” or most advanced winning has been driven on slowly, about 90 feet in 18 months, as shewn in pink, and in No. 9 “main deep" 220 feet has been driven during the same time, but was idle from December last to my February 1907 visit waiting for a pump. I have arranged with the manager to get these places driven with’greater rapidity. On the West side of the main deep in No. 8 only two stalls are working at present and on the east side three. As the “main winning" is hurried on more room is available for working places.
     A new aircourse has also been driven through quite recently taking the ventilative currents nearer and more directly to the working points in both Nos. 8 and 9 (See “New aircourse” on plan).
     In the coal faces on the West side of No. 8 the section at the faces shews as sketch below:—

Roof; bastard cliff and fireclay.

Section marked J
on plan
2 ft.=one inch.
Floor: impure fireclay and spar.
and on the East side the coal is a few inches less but seems to be getting thicker.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 5, 1907.
14;
    Going through the road marked on working plan as “New Aircourse” I find the coal is better and tlncker except in the “Main deep”. I was unable to examine this fore-winning owing to water but Mr. Maddocks informed me the coal is 2 feet only. The best coal in No. 9 Mine being on the East :—


    In Nos. 8 and 9 .Mines the cost per ton for 190G averages $3.85. The total cost per ton taking the four mines $4.56 per ton on coal to wharf or on gross out-pul $3.92 (exclusive of stores).
    Some details of costs, out-put etc. I submit below :—
Total output.Colliery Connuinp- lion.Coni sent to Wharf.Colliery Pay- sheet.Pay Coat per ton.Machinery andCoat perGrand Total.TotalJanuary February March April May June July August September October November December1,747 1,679 2,296 2,352 2,649 2,303 2,037
1,825 2.453 2,812 2,449 2,035310
280
310
300
310
300
310
310
300
310
300
310   1,437
   1,399
   1,986
   2,052
   2,339
   2,003
   1.727
   1,515
   2,153
! 2,502
| 2,149
| 1,7257,4643
7.1058
8,412’8
8,769'7
9.498-3
9,193-9
7,532-2
7,6281
9.3547
1 10,156-2
9,5960
9,928-1519 5 08 423 4'26 406 3-99
4.37 503 4'35
4 06 4 46 5-75Particulars not yet received from Treasury    Totals26,63713,65022,987104,640-3-921 have the honour to be,
Rajah,
Your obedient Servant,
HARRY F. MAY.


146
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 5, 1907.
MONTHLY REPORTS.
Lundu
March and April.
   I have received from Messrs. The Borneo Company
Limited at Busan samples of the antimony they are
now buying with the prices they pay for delivery at
Busan. Native reports,say there is some in this
district. If this is so they will do well to work it as
the price is now high.
   Tne end of March saw nearly all the Malay ex-
emption tax paid in. I see there will be a marked
increase this year as compared with the last six
years. Many of the Malays lietween Sompab and
Rembungan have been fined for non-payment of their
tax which they have evaded for quite a number of
years.
   Malays anti Dyaks are all busy on their farms.
This year's crop is a very good one. The Sijiring
people only have complained of a bad harvest.
Twelve years or so back the whole of Tanjong Puron
was given over to Kheh Chinese to plant paddi. At
that time a dollar would buy 1'2 gantungs of rice,
now it will only purchase from 2| to 3 gantangs.
   It is interesting to notice and most creditable to
the Chinese here that out of the 192 pepper gardens
registered in the Lundu and Sampadi district (Sima-
tan not included) only two gardens have shut down.
These were owned by Sebuyou Dyaks. the reason
for their closing need not 1 think lie attributed to
the low price of pepper. In the Simatan district,
(I have not the particulars before me at present) J
I shall not be surprised to learn that none of the 1
gardens have been abandoned. The majority of these ’
are in the hands of two good firms, viz. Soon Hong ;
& Co. and Tek Hong Leng & Co. It is most satis- I
factory to know that the people here continue to I
keep up their gardens although they are passing I
through an exceedingly trying time.
   On the 6th April the new squad of police under ’
Corporal 81 Mut arrived. The old squad, under Cor- j
poral Dolut, which had been stationed here for over
2 years, returned to head-quarters the next day per |
Boon’s baudong. ’
The following are the trade returns for the past |
two months.
Exports. Imports.
      Lundu	March	§3,953	$3,463
         ,,	April	6,085	6,166
      Siinatan	March	1,229	2,790
         „	April	2,261	2,066
The prisoners have been employed as usual on the I
general up-keep of the station.
F. F. BOULT,
Assistant Resident.
LAWAS.
March.
   On the 6th instant the s. 1. Gazelle arrived. I took passage by her to Limbang, returning here on the 11th instant.
1 visited Merapok station on the 18th instant.
   I was occupied during two days inquiring into the circumstances of the deaths of the six Chinamen already reported, but I was unable to obtain any evidence as to the perpetrators of the murders.
   I sent P. C. Tinggal to inspect a corpse said to have been seen in the Manamur valley. He reported finding a skeleton but no skull. It is possible, from the description of the remnants of the clothing, this is the skeleton of a Mohamedan Chinese, called Mohamat, who was ill and remained on the moun
tain while bis companion returned to the bazaar for
provisions. There is no evidence how he met his
death or lost his head.
The natives are now afraid to go into the moun-
tains in search of gum kopnl and the export in this
article from Merapok has almost ceased.
The bazaar Chinese are to a large extent responsi-
ble for this fear and consequent loss of trade, owing
to the wild and unreasonable reports they have cir-
culated regarding the disappearance of their com-
patriots.	•
I am informed that the Banjarese Malay, whose
death has been reported, has been since met with in
the Jjfitish North Borneo Company's territory at
Mangalong.
I have been informed of,the desire of some fifty
families of Pa Matang people to remove to live in the
Lawas Damit, and 1 have granted them the loan of a
flag for use during their journey.
I have arranged with Pangeran Mohamed, son of
Pangeran Laki, deceased, of Punang, to collect cus-
toms duties and the exemption tax of that river on
payment of the usual‘commission.
The exports and imports for the month amounted
to $1,248 and $7,857 respectively.
The rainfall was 17.26 inches, the greater part of'
which fell during the first half of the month.
The rice harvest, though interfered with by the-
heavy rain, has produced a plentiful return in both
districts.
April.
The fine weather which commenced at the end of
March continued throughout the month with infre-
quent showers until the 21st instant.
The well used by the Rangers, police, and others
was soon exhausted, and water for drinking and
cooking purposes had to be carried from some dis-
tance up the Sloatepg stream, the lower part of which
as well as the main river is brackish after a few days
without rain. This water is polluted by people
living up stream and cannot be called good.
The water supply at the Officer's quarters would be
sufficient to witb-stand a longer drought if the storage
were increased and the daily supply conducted by
wooden troughs, or iron pipes, instead of bamboo-
cylinders which cause a great deal of waste as well
as constant trouble to replace.
The s. 1. Pren arrived on the Sth instant and sailed
for Labuan the next morning. I hope that in time-
arrangements will be made for this launch to call
here regularly.
During the dry weather attempts were made to-
clear the Merapok river of fallen tree trunks, but the
ropes in use were not strong enough. There is how-
ever a clear passage for a launch at half flood tide.
The Customs clerk at the Kuala was granted sick leave of absence from the 8tli to the 16th instant,, and Corporal Tuah S. R. took over his duty.
I visited Merapok on the 16th instant to collect Customs duties returning to bead quarters the next day.
Mr. Ricketts arrived in s. 1. Gazelle on the 24tb
instant, staying until the 29th instant. During his-
visit various matters were brought to his notice.
The Dyaks, who were granted land in the Gaya
stream at their own request by Your Highness last
year, were ordered to take up their abode there.
The Mu ruts who have hitherto occupied the land
having arranged a division, and allotted the upper
portion of the valley to the Dyaks, the latter will
pay a small sum in acknowledgement of the transfer,
and all fruit groves will revert to them.
A Lawas Damit Murut named Labuh informed
that a Briwan Trusan Murut, named Tadam, bad
notified his intention of re-opening an old feud which.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 5, 1907.	147
was settled in the Court two years ago. The matter will be inquired into by the Resident.
   Mr. Ricketts visited Merapok on the 26th instant.
   The Chinese traders complained of the decrease of trade, and loss consequent on the murder of the six- Chinamen, and the refusal of natives to collect gum kopal. They were informed that the District Officer of Province Clarke has notified he has been unable to trace the murderers among the Tagals; that there is no evidence who the murderers are, and that nothing further could be done for the present.
   The new Court house building and Officer s quarters at Merapok was erected and almost finished at the end of the month.
   P. C. Mamut was dismissed the force.
   The exports and imports were $5,472 and $4,283 respectively.
   The rainfall amounted to 5.69 inches for the imonth.
IVONE KIRKPATRICK, Officer in Charge.
Sadong*.
March.
   Court.—There have been a great many cases at the Colliery and several at Sadong, but none of them -of any importance. Some of the Mine coolies appear to do little else but set traps for fowls or steal them from runs. The Police caught two men removing Ah Kam’s fowls at 4 A. M. and these men were severely punished. Some coolies are able to get into a fowl run and clear out 30 or 40 fowls in a night without making or causing the fowls to make the ^slightest disturbance.
   Public Works.—The prison gang have been employed in making the new Sidiloo road most of their time, and in cleaning up paths and ditches, and in the general work about the Station.
   Colliery.—The Manager-—Mr. E. R. Naysmith-- returned from leave on the 23rd in the s. 1. Young Harry.
   No so-called ‘dirty coal’ is now sent down from the Colliery to the Wharf, it being treated at Sungei Ngli where a Washery has been erected. Only clean •coal is now received at the Wharf. This is a great advantage as the appearance of the coal is greatly improved by the washing in the clean jungle water instead of that from the dirty Sadong River which used to leave a layer of brown mud on the coal when it dried. There is very little actual dirt in this unscreened coal before it is washed but the washing removes all the very tine coal for which I believe there is a market to be found. If this is so there will be very little loss of coal between the Mines and ?the Wharf.
   Coal has been coming down slowly, the output having decreased owing to the number of falls of ground due to the late heavy rains : however, there has been an inprovemeut towards the end of the month. What coal has come down to the Wharf is •of fine quality.
'	Medical.—There have been a few cases of Beri
beri following on the wet weather as'usual. The Prison cook, while taking a short ride on the far side of a loaded truck close to the Weigh-bridge when the train was in motion, slipped off and the truck went over a couple of his toes with the result that he is now in Hospital and likely to remain there for some weeks.
   General.—I left for Simanggang on the 15th returning on the 22nd. A Mine coolie named Bong Kun, who has twice attempted to commit suicide, succeeded in taking his life on the 14th. He had been missing for a couple of days and the Police found • him in the water in the jungle opposite the Chinese
Cemetery in a dying condition, having evidently taken a killing dose of opium. He was brought down by train but died before he arrived.
   The mooring is now in position in the mouth of the Simunjan River and marked by a while buoy. Two old boilers were sunk as anchors.
   The s. s. Alice Lorraine arrived on the 14th for a cargo of coal. She sailed next day with coal and a deck cargo of timber for the Kuching P. W. D.
   The Month has been dull and wet, the wind blowing from the S. W. as a rule.
April.
   Court.—As usual most of the cases have come from the Colliery.
   All those heard are reported in the Diary for the Month.
   The Exemption Tux is now all paid in with the exception of that of natives who happen to be away in the jungle.
   Public Works.—Good progress has been made- with the Sidiloo Road which will soon be through to the stream. The work is necessarily slow as all the earth has to be brought down from the Colliery some 3 miles away. About I a niile has been completed and the jungle on either side is being cleared of timber by natives who are working pit-props.
   A good deal of rotten wood has been found among the planks and beams of the Bungalow; a carpenter has been engaged in repairing the building lately.
   The telephone at the Colliery has been out of order mid as it could hot be repaired I sent it down to Kuching and a new one has been sent up to take its place, and it is now working well again.
   Colliery.—The stocks of coal are very low indeed just now, the output for the month being only 1,381.6 tons; the reason for this decrease being that the seam of coal has been very thin and showing rather more dirt than coal. I went round No: 4 Mine with the Manager on the 19th to see what the seam was looking like. In places it was looking better bat in ochers it could scarcely be worse, being only a mixture of coal and dirt. The Manager is hoping for an improvement iu its appearance shortly. In some {daces the coal was close on 5 feet thick and of excel- ent quality.
   More coolies will have to lie obtained shortly as there is a constant stream of men being discharged, while I am sorry to say that a number of them have died from Beri-beri lately in rhe Kuching Hospital. There is usually an outbreak of this disease during a wet month. The new Lines at the Colliery have not produced any fresh cases though a couple of coolies suffering from the disease came from there, but they must have had the disease in them at the time when they moved into the Lines.
   Genera I —The p. s. Adeh. arrived on the 24th with passengers, Dr. and Mrs. Wellington. Dr. Wellington inspected the Hospital and Colliery, and the steamer returned to Kuching next day with'a cargo of coal for Government. The Adeh made another trip to Sadong on the 29th bringing $10,000 for the | Treasury here, and passenger Mr. E. Parnell. She left for Sibu after taking bunker coal.
   The supply of Oil at the Colliery ran out early in the month as the stores that were expected did not | arrive by schooner. An express boat was sent to Kuching and a supply was despatched by the Young Harry. The supply of Oil has run out in the same way before but the Colliery’ has been kept going by the purchase of Oil from the Bazaar. Schooners are often delayed and sometimes accidents happen to them and it would be both safer and surer if the stores for the Colliery could be sent round by steamer, say, twice a month.
   A Mine coolie was seriously injured by the explo- I sion of a charge of blasting powder in the Miue.


148	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 5, 1907.
The fuse took rather longer burning than he expected so he went to inspect it after a few minutes waiting, and the charge exploded in his face. The Chinese coolie seems to value his life but lightly and refuses to take the most ordinary precautions, and it is marvellous how few accidents happen underground.
   The weather has been very stormy and unsettled. The natives at the Kuala have set a great many of their Pengireh, or fish-traps, as the sea has been smooth, A number of these traps have been set in the river where their floats are a source of danger to small boats going up or down-river with the strong tide.
   Coal from Mines during the month
Coal shipped for the Borneo Company
,,	Govt:
     in stock at the end of the month
1,381.fi tons
1,211.0
318.4
350.8
DONALD A. OWEN.
Resident.
BARAM
April.
   On the 15th 1 collected all the Dayaks and epoke to them aiioiit going op the warpath, as I have heard various rumours that Imban, a Rejang Dayak, and some other restless characters intended to attack the Mndangs in the Bagin gan River. I told Imban clearly that if he went off his house would lie burnt down and he and Eis party would meet with short shrift from the Kayans upriver. I also ordered the Titai Rumah to look after their followers properly as I should hold them responsible for any misbehaviour in their houses. I hope that now that these Dayaks clearly understand that they will receive no pity from anybody, they will behave themselves properly.
   On the 16th 1 left for my usual visit to the Coast Stations.
   1 arrived at Niah on the 17th and installed the new Tuah Kampong Bujaug bin Anchi. After hcar- ing.cases here and settling up matters I proceeded to Sibuti on 20th. Whilst there I selected a new site'for the bazaar which had been burnt down and also a site for a new Court House, as the present one is tumbling down. The Kampong people and the Kadayans will work all the timber and have it all ready by harvest time next year. The site I chose for the Court House is a low hill on the opposite side of the river to the bazaar and about 100 yards further back. Oue will be able to get a good supply of fresh water here by digging wells. There was a lot of Court Work here and no less than 7 persons were sentenced to terms of imprisonment for swindling ami non-payment of fines. *
   Hadji Aim, a Kadayan, asked leave to move into the Simillajau 11., as he intended getting 100 families of Kadayans from Brunei. I readily granted him his request. All the people here have had a splendid harvest and trade seems prospering.
   On the 22nd I went on to Miri and after instructing the new Court Writer in his duties and holding Court, I returned to Baram on the 25th. As we were proceeding up the river in the evening the engineer of the Lunch reported a heated bearing, but after a short stop reported that all was r ight and we proceeded on. However, the Captain, All, felt that the engines were working unevenly and promptly stopped the launch and we went and inspected the engines and found that the crank on the propeller shaft had cracked right through. Il was very fortunate of Ali stopping the boat as he did, as otherwise the cylinder shaft would have worked loose and serious damage done. We proceeded to tow the launch up the next day, and that night I went up to
Claudetown in a swift boat and sent down some 30
Kampong people to assist. I got news on the 30th
that the launch had got as far as Bakong Mouth, but
that it was impossible to warp her up any further on
account of the fresh in the river.
   I found a crowd of Rayans and Kenyahs awaiting
my return at Claudetown. I hear that Penghulu
Laki Batang is much better.
   There has been a good deal of Court work this
month, but only trivial cases. All the Kenyah and
Kayan Tax of the Baram River is finished now, only
that of the Tinjar and Tutau Rs. remains.
   The Arrack Farm for the District was sold for the
years 1908—1910 inclusive to the old Farmers,
Messrs. Watt Ann, for the sum of $120 per mensem.
This is an increase of $G3 per mensem on the present
price paid.
   The Kaka only made one trip to the station daring
the month. There are stacks and stacks of rattans
awaiting shipment.
   The 1’oyui Dayaks have cleared all the babas on
the hills at the back of the Fort. The prisoners;
have been engaged *in the usual upkeep of roads.
The rainfall for th« month was 5'39 inches.
   I have nothing further of importance to report to-
Your Highness.
R. S. DOUGLAS,
Residents
          MATANG ESTATE.
April.
   During the month coolies have been employed1
in weeding, handling, gathering coffee and plucking,
tea.
   Crops gathered during the month were 23.) piculs
Parchment coffee and 284 lbs tea.
   Pengkallan road is in thorough good order and'
the road from His Highness The Rajah's Bungalow
round the Estate above the 33 acre field is also put
in order.
   Mr. Grove paid the coolies for March on the 5th<
instant.
• J. M. GOMEZ,
Manager-
OYA.
April.
   General.—The month was chiefly interesting for
the performance of the Mohammedan ceremony Man-
di Slamun w'hich took place towards the end of the
month Safar. All the Mohammedans, men, woriien
and children, collect at a certain well—this well was
blessed many years ago by a Tuankn—its waters
therefore seem to possess healing ami other powers
amongst which that of warding off evil is numbered.
   Into this well a piece of paper inscribed with some
extract from Al Koran is cast bound in a leaf of the
Lenggiwang and then as many as are able draw its •
water and bathe. Those upable on account of the
crowd to get water from the well place two sticks to
which, as in the case of the well, a piece of paper
bearing some prayer written by the Hakim and
bound in a lenggiwang leaf is attached, the one up
and the other down river on its bank at such dis-
tance apart as will permit of a great number of the
faithful performing their ablutions.
   The performance of this ceremony is said to keep
the performer free from sickness, accidents and the
like.
   Tuanku Mat, who went to Sibu to try and obtain
the wherewithal to meet his liability, i. e. $600 in the
Oya Court, and returned here having been able only
to dispose of his bandong, which realised $100, was


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 5, 1907.
sent bock to Sibu whence he will go on to Daro to
superintend the auctioning of bis lands the proceeds
of which he declares will amount to $500 or there-
about.
   Courts — -Very many eases have occupied the Court
during this month, chiefly Inheritance and land
cases.
   The Oya Chinese are prosecuting the former head
of the Tepckong for embezzlement, Defendant ma-
lting a counter charge of the Tepckong's indebtedness
to him of $100 odd. Defendant has been given time
to produce his books as on the occasion of the first
bearing two pieces of paper were all in the way of
Accounts he could show-.
   Cattle.—The arrival of a fine crossbred shorthorn
bull will no doubt improve the Oya herd, which has
• been served by a somewhat coarse native bull.
   Trade.
                 Exports.	Imports.
                $16,066.68	$9,171.29
P. GORDON WHITE,
• Officer in Charge.
KAPIT.
April.
   On the 5th I left for Sibu per s. s. La Fie for a
few days leave returning again on the 15th.
   On my arrival here I was met by Ara who had just
returned from the Empran. and he stated that Bantin
And Alum were in the Balleh, so I left on the 18th
to see Bautin and Alum who were waiting at mouth
of Gab in Ara’s house.
   I reached Kapit again on the 21st. I regret to re-
port that during the month one Langut, with Ali,
Jul and Unsam, also Penguin Merom’s son, Janin
with a following of 46 young men attacked the Uma
Lesuins and killed 15 women and children. I have
reported this occurrence in full to the Hon’ble the
Resident.
   On 27th the s. s. Alice Lorraine arrived with the
Hon’ble the Resident.
   On 29th Bantin and Alum arrived at Kapit and
informed the Hon’ble the Resident that they wished
to make peace, and would like to meet Your High-
ness.
   Trade has improved immensely, jungle produce is
-coming in steadily and from all accounts this year’s
trade returns will show a marked increase all round.
   The s. s. La Fee made one trip and s. s. Alice
Lorraine four during the month, taking good cargoes
•each time.
   I have nothing further to report to Your Highness.
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER,
Assistant Resident.
K A LA KA.
April.
   Al the commencement of the month the weather
?was windy ami there were frequent light gales blow-
ing. The leaf house at Roban Bazaar had its roof
blown off and all the goods of the shopkeepers got
wet.
   Two stranger Chinese who came overland from
Rejang were arrested as they could not give a satis-
factory account of themselves, besides having no
cash and only a few changes of clothing. The story
they told was that they were going to work bilian
timber at Sungei Krangan above Saratok, but as the
timber was so far inland they changed their minds
and were returning to Kuching. As their arrival
?coincided with the three Sibu prisoners’ escape I
149
arrested them and sent them on to the Resident at
Simanggang.
The orders given by the Resident to the Penguins
and Dyaks and Chinese—the former are order-
ed to send any Chinese back if they come overland
or else to arrest them, and the latter have to
report to the Fort if there are any new arrivals—
arc not effective as they do not carry them out.
I find that Iodide of Potassium is most efficacious
for stings of poisonous fish etc.: a man who was
stung by an ikan pari at midday came to me for an
antidote at 8 P. M. and was'crying at the time on
account of the pain. I applied a few drops round
the wound and soon after he stopped crying and
then went off to sleep. I have used this medicine
several times and found it each time effective.
The marriage of the Native Officer’s (Haji Usop)
second daughter to Abang Bnjang bin Abang An-
ding, Native Officer of Lingga, took place on the
27th. People from Rejang, Binatang etc. were in-
vited to the marriage feast ami four bead of cattle
were killed.
The carpenter returned to Simanggang vid the
Saribason the 29th after having finished repairing
the Saratok and Kabong Bungalows.
Three bullocks (not very large onesi were sold to
the Malays for their bulan Muliit feast for the sum
of $90.
Rice and paddy is getting much cheaper now that
the people have harvested.
I am informed that the pengireh fishermen have
bad satisfactory hauls ami the jungkat fishermen
have erected a few huts only and the rest are still
collecting material.
The fines for the month amounted to $180.10.
The Trade Returns for the month are :—
       Imports $9,495. Exports $6,933.
There was no bilian timber exported in the past
month.
A. E. CHEYNE,
J Infer.
SIMANGGANG
April.
On the 13th His Highness The Rajah Muda visited
Simanggang and made a stay here of five days.
During bis visit the village and Mission at Saba
were inspected and His Highness expressed bis
approval of the improvements made there.
The health of Tuanku Putra lias for some months
now been very indifferent and His Highness The
Rajah Muda very kindly took him with him to Ku-
ching on his return on 19th in order that he might
, obtain Medical advice. The Tuanku returned in s. 1.
Young Harry on the 28th.
Ulu .1/ affairs.—Mr. II. L. Owen left for Lubok.
? Antu on April 2nd to relieve Mr. Lang who came to
? Simanggang for a change on the 5th.
It is stated in the Ulu that Bantin, Alam. Imba,
and other tuai have gone to Kapit in company with
the Rejang Dyak Arab who stated that he was sent
to call them there. Ngumbang would have gone
but was prevented by a bad dream.
The paddy crop in the Ulu Ai and Engkari is a
complete failure.
It is said that the Ulu Ai Dyaks and the Kanowit
(living in the Ulu Ai) are still suffering from small-
pox aud many have not yet returned to their homes
from the last raid into the Eutabai, Rejang; they are
supposed to be lodging in huts in the jungle on the
route they took, having been struck down with small-
pox on their return journey. On the 18th the alarm
was beateu at the houses of Embuas and Cheudau.


150
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 5, 1907.
of Jelutong Gutta for the corresponding month last
I year.
I Twenty four sailing vessels entered and twenty
two cleared for Kuching.
   P. IF. D.—The prisoners (average 13.2) have been
j employed throughout the month on white-washing
' and tarring the Fort, Jail and other Government
buildings, also in the usual up-keep of the ornamental
grounds.
   Court.—There have been the usual number of
cases in both the Police and Court of Requests, also
a good deal of work in the Malay Court.
   Fines and fees amounted to $642.84.
   General.—On the 10th Penghuln Intin arrived
from up-river, he reports all quiet among his people.
   On the 14th T. K. Abai of Balanian together with
Penghulu Unipang and P. C. Mohamat arrived,
they report all quiet in that river: at the time of
their departure the s. s. Sarawak was waiting to clear
for Kuching: after paying in various Government
revenues thev returned to Balanian on the 17th.
   On the 20th aDyak named Lalat was arrested and
sent to Sibu, vid Ota: this man WHS one of the loaders
in an attack on the Uma Lim's, he was fined $100'
by order of the Hon'ble The Resident of the Third
Division, in default 15 months imprisonment: since
he left for Sibu his friends have paid the fine and I
have written to the Hon’ble The Resident informing
him so.
   The sea has been very calm during the month,,
and the “anchau”, i. e. seine net, has been taken out
3 times, plenty of fish being caught.
   The herd ofcattic now number 70 head.
   I have been alone here throughout the month, the-
Assistant Resident. Mr. A. E. Lawrence, being away
on short leave.
   I have nothing further to report to Your Highness
on this occasion.
W. J. M. SHAW,
Resident-
LIMBANG.
A pril.
   There was the usual amount of Court work during
the month but no cases of any particular importance.
   On the 17th a letter was brought by one Habib'
Mohamat from H. M’s Assistant Resident at Brunei
requesting assistance with regard to bearer's wife
who was alleged to have been enticed away by one.
Sarudin; there was, however, no evidence in support
of this. Habib Mohamat produced a paper stating
that he had bought the woman for $60 and then
married her. The woman, Kabok by name, refused’
to return to Brunei under any circumstances, she
was therefore fined the usual amount for divorcing
her husband and ordered to repay the brian and she
was given reasonable time to find the money. Ha-
bib Mohamat, however, refused to abide by the-
decision of the Court and therefore will receive no-
further redress in the matter.
   Mr. Ward returned from Madihit for which place
he left on the 19th of last month. During his stay
up there he visited most of the Munit houses inland
and took a census of the number of families; there
was nothing of any particular importance going on
up in that district.
   During the latter part of the month I was away
from the 18th to 29th visiting Trusan and Lawns.
   The Trade Returns for the month are as follows.
     Coasting Imports $9,438 Exports $8,629
     Foreign „	7,382	„	4,869
   The rainfall for the month was 8.39 inches, 3.50
inches being the heaviest fall in any twenty four
hours.
O. F. RICKETTS,
Resident.
above Lubok Antu Fort and urgent messages were
received to the effect that these people were to be
attacked by Apai Biti’a force which for some time
past was known to be out.
   Lt is a very noticeable fact that whenever a force
of the rebels is out in the main-river the Engkari
Dyaks at once cease to visit Lubok Antu.
   Mr. H. L. Owen, learning that nn attack was really
imminent, went up to reassure the people. Subse-
quently the force was located at S. Teliting where
they had huts for some two hundred men. However, I
they had .taken the alarm and dispersed very hur-
riedly, abandoning some of their equipment, when I
they'heard that the Assistant Resident was coming. .
   It is hoped that the whole of Apai Biti'£ force has ’
now dispersed as the Engkari Dyaks have now again
taken to coming down to Lubok Antu.
   General news.—The death, in China, of Tae Ah Eh
(alias Bujang) the head of the Chief Firm Seng Ju,
in the Batang Ltipar River, was reported during the
month and the Estate valued for Probate at $15,548
and fees amounting to $777.40 will be paid during
this year in three instalments.
   Two Chinese who were arrested at Saratok and
are supposed to be of the party who broke Jail at
Sibu last month were sent to Sibu via Kuching on
the 27th.
   Gemong of Ulu Uhdup was dismissed from his
Pengnluship. For some time past he has been very
unsatisfactory in his cases and had been frequently ?
warned to no purpose. Subject to Your Highness' |
approval I have appointed Santok of Entebar as the |
new Chief. He has a iarge following and is well i
spoken of generally, so I trust that he will make a .
satisfactory Penguin.
   Since the Chinese New Year festivities ended the
Simanggang Bandongs (6 in number) have been kept |
constantly running with very full cargoes. None of
this year’s paddy crop lias yet been exported, some |
is still being got in. Roughly speaking, in the Batang ?
Lupar river from Lubok Antu to Sabuyow and in the ,
lower Skarang and Endup the paddy crop is a bum- j
per one. Indeed it is said that many Balau Dyaks I
have had to hire labour to get their harvest in as it j
was more than they coukl deal with by themselves. I
   I have been obliged to issue two notices to the ;
Sabu people (Chinese and Dyaks) during this month—
the one to call their attention to the increase in the
growth of the “Sensitive Plant”—which must be
extirpated—the other to prohibit owners of pigs
allowing their animals to be at large.
   Cash $200 was sent from the Belong to the
Simanggang Treasury on the 9th.
   The usual Spring-cleaning was begun on the 22nd
and continued until the 27th when the supply of
lime gave out and the work was suspended until more
could be obtained from Kuching.
   The Prison gang finished rebuilding and repairing
the leaf boat-shed and bullock-shed, cleared the Bra-
yun and home roads, and commenced to open up
some of the ovcr-growti and choked-up dykes in the
plain until the wet stopped them. They then worked
on the hill cattle lands pulling engkudok, etc; and
getting out manure. The end part of the Bukit
Berlumba was cleared and the jungle at the foot of
it, so that it is now visible from the stable-road.
D. J. S. BAILEY,
Pestilent.
MUKA.
April.
   Trade.— The export of Raw Sago amounted to
467 coyans, and of Jelutong Gutta 446 Piculs, as
compared with 457 coyans of Raw Sago and 5 Piculs


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 5, 1907.
UPPER SARAWAK. PAKU .
April.
   Planting.--No new gardens have been registered and only one planting permit issued to a Dyak. Towards the end of the month some activity was shown in making burnt parth and not before it was wanted, a very large number of gardens having received none for a year. During the month Abang Amit completed the survey of the pepper gardens at Musi, 121 in all, including Malay gardens at Busnu rind some Dyak ones at 8. Pinang. lie is now surveying the gardens between Paku and Seniawan lying on the right of the main road.
   Court.—Fines and fees $289.69. There were no cases of any interest during month. Numerous thefts were reported during the month but in very few cases were the perpetrators caught. The,police are hardly adequate in numbers for their duties and in addition their lias been a considerable amount of •. ickm ss among them, so that atwtinv s it w.is difficult to find sufficient men for the ordinary routine duties. Whether it is that there is now a larger proportion of Indians among the police ih this district than formerly or whether it is due to some other cause, there is no doubt that during the last 18 months or so there has been much more sickness, especially inter mi tent fever, among them.
   On the 6th Kuan Hinn Sen, Junior clerk, went on 3 weeks leave and on the 12th 1 myself went to Kuching on sick leave returning on the 15th.
   The prisoners have been either getting gravel out of the Seniawan river when the state of the water permitted, or have been metalling the road with gravel already stored on the bank.
   On the 30th one Bong Nam Chow committed suicide by eating opium. Domestic troubles were the •cause.
   The same day it was reported that two Liew Chew epolies entrusted with $2,000 in silver to take to Puak had absconded with the money. Considering the loneliness and length of the road to Puak it is rather extraordinary that Messrs. The Borneo Company have never had any accidents before. As the ?coolies had had some 8 hours start nothing was heard •or seen of them again «in Upper Sarawak, but by chance they were arrested in Kuching a few days afterwards, most of the money, however, having disappeared in the interval.
   Registration.—42 deeds were registered during the month. Stamps and fees $85.50.
II. R. A. DAY, Resident.
      UPPER SIRAWAK. BAU.
April.
   Agreements twenty eight have been made during •the month.
   Stamp duties and fees amounted to $64.53.
   Court.—Fines and fees amounted to $213.
   II. II. the Rajah Muda arrived here on the 20th and on the 21st took part in a tuba fishing kindly provided by Mr. Pawle. The tuba was put in at Lobok Marong above Bidi pengkzllan; a very heavy ? down-pour the evening before had made the river in fresh and consequently somewhat spoilt the fishing, but considering the circumstances, a large number of fish were taken and a most enjoyable day spent.
   His Highness visited the Hospital and Government School next day, returning later on to Kuching.
   I went to Kuching on the 6th instant to see how the plans of the district were progressing, returning on the 9th instant.
Messrs. Lawrence and Etheridge arrived here on the 13th instant, the latter to inspect the bridge erected on the Jambusan road last year, he returned, to Kuching on the 15th and Mr. Lawrence returned on the 19th.
I regret it has been necessary to grant Law Ah Nynk, the Court Writer, a month’s sick leave; this it is hoped wil| enable him to resume his duties again.
Dr. Bruce Low was in this district on the following dates:— 1st. 2nd. 8th, 9th, 17th, 18th, 19th, 21th, 26th, 27th.
On the 29th Corporal Sadam arrived from Samarahan with a force of police on the truck of the perpetrators of a burglary and murder which had just taken place there. A Sea Dyak called Lehut, who was said to be connected with the affair, was arrested at Bidi, but no other arrests were made, although there was a large party of Chinese concerned as well.
On the 30th two Chinese coolies who were with others carrying money from Busauto Puak got away in advance of the other coolies with a box containing $2,000; however, on arrival of the others at Puak, nothing had been seen of the co pies or the money: on receipt of this news at 9 r. M. police were at once sent to the Dyaks living on the Sambas border and at Singghi to stop and bring in any Chinese they found attempting to go that why.
             E. R. STILWELL, x •	Resident.
       £ |) t > a r a to a II dt a n 11 c.
» —
   TUP Subscription to the Sarawak Gazette is
as follows .—
Payable in local currency—
Single number ....	...	... $0.10
         Subscription (or 1 year	...	... 1.00
Do including postage to Outstation ...1
Do	do	to Singapore ... 1.50
            Do	do	to Enghuid	...I
   Payable in Sterling—
For 1 year i including postage to places
iu the Postal Union) ... 8s. Gd.
All subscription payable in
advance.
Yearly subscriptions are renewable on the
1st January.
Subscriptions will *»of be renewed unless
due notice is given. AU broken periods will
be considered as full.
Subscribers are requested to notify changes
of address to the Editor in writing.
RATES OF ADVERTISERS » IBS '“SARAWAK GAZETTE’’
—?—
Payiiblr in atlvauct.
Advertisement of 12 lines and under—
First insertion ...	...	... $1.00
          Second and third insertion each	... 0.50-
          Subsequent do	do	... 0.25
Advertisement of half a Column and under—
          First insertion ...	...	... 2.00
          Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
          Subsequent do	do	... 0.50
Advertisement of a Column and under—
First insertion each	...	... 3.00
          Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
          Subsequent do	do	... 0-75
Special arrangements may be made for standing adver-
tisements.


152
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. .TUNE 5, 1907.
All communications intended for insertion
in the Aarrnnifc osrffr must be directed
to the Editor at the Government Printing |
Office, Kuching, and sent so as to reach the
Office by the 26th of the month at latest or
their publication will have to, be deferred
until tiie next issue.
Letters and other contributions must be
authenticated by writer’s name sent privately
to the Editor.
We cannot undertake to return rejected
communications, or to give reasons for not
inserting them.
Residents at the Outstations will confer an
obligation by forwarding to the Office early
intelligence of all matters of general interest
in their respective neighbourhoods.
Notice-
     /'• ENTLEMEN are requested to pay all Gazette sub-
' * scriptiony ;nul Printing Office Bills to the undersigned
in future.
For the convenience of those unable to send cheques,
Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of sums not over
?1.50—but only the 2 and 4 cent values will be accepted.
Foreign subscript .s to the Sarawak Gatetie are requested
to send remittances by *• Bast Office Order " not by “ Postal
Order" os the latter cannot be cashed in Sarawak.
F. G. DAY.
Notice.
?
            Astana Farm Produce.
Terms Monthly.
       W ILL I ?: supplied to customers at the following
rates:—
          Milk—per quart bottle	..	... 10 cents
          Butter—per lb ...	...	... SO „
          Eggs—each —	...	... 1J „
Orders, which should be addressed to the undersigned, at-
tended to without delav.
J. STAPLES.
Notice.
?
1VT0TICE is hereby given that the undersigned TAN
BOON SIEW has from this date resigned from the
managership of the SARAWAK TRADING COMPANY,
and that he will hereafter carry on business on his own
account, as well us for SYN HIN LEONG & CO., of No.
13 Main Bazaar. in which firm he is one of the senior
partners.
TAN BOON SIEW.
Kuching,
1st April. 1907.
Notice.
THE WELL Known
Singer and Wheeler Wilson Sewing Machines can be purchased on easy terms. All we ask is 5 dollars down and 3 dollars per month.
         A liberal discount allowed for Cash.
Apply to
TAN BOON SIEW.
SINGER SEWING MACHINE CO..
C/o SYN HIN LEONG & Co
Kuching, Sarawak.
28th March, 1907.
Notice.
TITE tho undersigned THE SARAWAK TRADING
V 5 COMPANY beg to inform the Public that in con-
sequence of the resignation of TAK BOON SIEW our
Manager, we now appoint KUEH CHIN HIN to be our
present Manager and to transact al I business of our firm
from date.
(Signed} YEO GUAN CHOW,
For SARAWAK TRADING Co.
Kuching.
1st April. 1907.
ARRIVALS.
PER S. s. Rajah of Sarawak : From Singapore. 2nd May,
Mr. and Mrs. Arthur Hodgson and Mr.
Ewing Smith.
PER p. s. Adeh : From Lnndu, 7th May, Sir Percy
and Lady Cunynghame, Mr. and Mrs.
Hodgson and Mrs. Leggatt and children.
PER p. s. Kaka : From the North. Sth May. the Right
Revd. Bishop Hose from Labuan. and
Mr. R. S. Douglas from Baram.
PER «. 1. 1'OMJU/ Harry : From Simanggang. 9th May.
Mr. J. Baring Gould.
Pr.ii H. H. S. Zahora . From Singapore, 10th May, His
Highness the Rajah accompanied by Mr.
. C. S. Pearse.
PER S. S. Rajah of Sarawak : From Singapore. 16th May,.
Mr. J. Scott.
PER S. 1. Young Harry : From Sadong, 23rd May, Mr.
D. A. Owen.
JPEH S. S. Kuching ; From Singapore, 23rd May. the
Hon ble F. H. and Mrs. Dallas, Mr’ J. M.
Bryan and the Revd. Father Reyfert.
PER B. S. Rajah of Sarawak : From Singapore, 30th May.
Mr. G. A. Luke.
DEPARTURES.
PER p. s. Adeh : For Sibu, 1st May. Mrs, J. Mowe ana
the Revd. Father Halder.
PER p. s. Adeh : For Lundu, 4th May, Sir Percy and
Lady Cunynghame and Mr. and Mrs.
Hodgson.
PER S. a. Rajah of Sarawak : For Singapore, 7 th May,
Mr. J. M. Bryan.
PER H. H. S. Zahora: For Sibu, 14th Muy, Their High-
nesses The Rajah and Rajah Muda.
PER s. s. Sarawak : For Rejang, 14th May, Mr. J. S.
Gcikie and Mr. H. Hannay.
PER a. s. Kuching : For Singapore, 14th May, Mr. amt
Mrs. Arthur Hodgson, Mrs. Leggatt and
children, Messrs. R. S. Douglas and J.
Baring Gould.
PER p. s. Adeh : For Brooketon, 16th May, the Revd. F_
W. Leggatt.
PER S. S. Rajah of Sarawak : For Singapore, 21st May,
Mr. and Mrs. Service and child, Messrs."
G. A. Luke and W. J. M. Shaw.
PER p. s Adeh : For Oya, 26th May, Mr. D. A. Owen.
H. H. S. Zahora : For various Outstations, 27th May,
Their Highnesses The Rajah and Rajah
Muda.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 5, 1907.
153
Wing, Foreign Trade Returns for themontli or April, 1907.
IMPORTS.IMPORTS.—(Continued.)            Art ;. l. -.      Quantity.Value.           Articles.Quantity.Value.          Brought forward Rope Coir Manila Wire
Sago Pearl or Raw Salt ...
Stationery and Books	...
Straw hats (Chinese) Straw Shoes (Chinese) Sugar
Suudries	...	...I
Tea in Bundles	...	...|
Tea in Tins	... •	...'
Timber	...	...
Twine and Thread	...
Tobacco
 in tins Cigars A Cigarettes Chinese
      P'bang Java A S'robok etc. Bad or Pepper Treasure Tuba ...
V egetablex
 Fresh Salted
Wayang Effects ... Wines and spirits Zinc ...	x...
TOTAL VALUK Brought forward
Total Value to Date 1906coils	156
coil	1
coils	15
picnls	180
piculs	1.711
piculs	1.878
boxes	189
cases	142
piculs	156*
picnls	103}?276.439
      1,866
50
694
  225 2,342 1,260 1,605
  105 7,964 2,216 2,149
65 2,807 4.078
14,412 5,758
10.828
  8,820 27,195
 1,129
 2,865 3,928
76 8,000 17,033 1,275Aerated Water ... Ammunition Arrack, etc	
Biscuits
Blachan	...	...
Blankets
Beads...
Brass A Copper-ware Boots & Shoes ... Butter >v Cheese ...
-Caudles
-Canvas
•Cement
•Ciceks and Walches ?Cloth
     Cotton
     Silk Clothing
     Cotton
     Silk .		
Coke ... Cocoannts Coffee
     Liberian etc*....	...
     In tins	...	...
Coprah Cotton Seed Crockcry & Glass-ware Curry Stuffs A Sauce etc. Damar Drugs and Chemicals Eggs (salted)
Exports Returned to Shippers Fire-works
Fish
     Dried
     Salted
     In tins	^..	...
Flour ... Fruit
     Fresh
     Dried
     In tins	...	....
-Furniture Ghee ... Gold ... Grains
     Benns and peas
     Padi ...
     Rice
     Other Sorts .- ?Gunnies new
Do old Hams and Bacons Hats ... Iron-ware Japanese Curios ... Jars
? Jewellery
Joss Sticks and Papers Kerosine Oil Lard ..
Lamps Leather Live stock
     Cattle	,...	. ...
     Poultry
     Swine .Machinery Mats ... Matches Maccaroni A Vermicelli Milk Condensed ... Oils ...
Opium raw
Paint. Varnish A Tar
Papers
Provisions Sundry Prawns
Do Refuse ...
Rubber seeds and plants Rickshaws	...cases	119
piculs	9
           •
tons	20
No.	15.700
piculs	41
piculs	111
No.	18,380
piculs	247
piculs	85
bags	1,856
piculs	9
os.	22
pietds	614
piculs	240
piculs	12,884
piculs	1,188
bales	50
bundles	35
No.	18
cases	6,014}
picnls	177
piculs	15	?
head	4
No.	414
head z 138	|
cases	119
eases	21'4
piculs	425
chests	10
piculs	11
pieuls	1,764  8 1,488 5.027
420 8,712
  86 50 479 905 518 507 452 7«M> 714 672
57.878 635
9.792 160 4fi9 559
   859 119 1,085
   542 4.829 1,5*28
415 8,901
836 •	356
620
 4,951 1,291 1,750
3,717
833 1.170
 252 858 470 7C0
4.298 500
62,502 2.896
 616 111 610
 9.787 1.000 1,960
  2,391 14,258
3,600 691 810
490 258
2,600 4,991
2494
898 2,890 7,634 10,000 4,869 2,472
'*288 5,575
85 1006894,214
1,042,294
1.436.508
? 1,422,146EXPOUTS.            Articles.      Quantity.Value.Ant-eater skins ...
Be tel-nuts Beeswax Birds-nests B lac han Brass-ware Camphor Charcoal Cloth ...
Coprah
Crockery-ware ...
Cutch
Damar Eggs (Turtle) Empties Fish ...
Gainbier Garrn-wood Gold ...
Gutta jangkar do Jelotong ... do percha
Hides
Imports Returned to Shippers
India Rubber Iron-ware Kajangs
Kerosine Oil ...	. ...
I.nka wood	...	...1
Matches Mats ... Oils ...
Paddy
Pepper (white) ...
Do (black > ...
Prawns (dried) ...
Rattans N 0.1 sega etc. Rattans No- 2 temoi etc. Rice ...
Sago flour Salt ...
Sugar...	...	...picul	;
piculs	4’41$
picnls	15}
pieuls	103}
pieuls	1}
cutties	19;
piculs	87$
pieuls	122
I	pieuls	4.872$
1 piculs	683}
1	No.	5,000
picul	44}
piculs	1,917}
picnls	28)
uzs,	5.974	I
tael	$
piculs	350}
picnls	6,821?
piculs	127}
piculs	59}
piculs	856f
eases	88
piculs	153
eases	6}
pieuls	8}
picnls	37}
picnls	4.695)
piculs	9651
piculs	18]
pieuls	916}
piculs	2,156}
piculs	212
picnls	31,800]
picnls	301
piculs	1}        ?
2,758 771
16.282 14
230 860
82 439
1,290 148
22,868 2.942
85 1,870 1,695 11,695
29 148,560
26 5.079 46.755 18.731
1,395 4.348 39.175
      1,063
285 5(M
140 483
64 85 123,250 15,442
188 9.393 (1.524
85.481 44
V              Carry forward ...?276,439              Carryforward ...?561.752

154
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 5, 1907
Arrivals—(Continued.)
EXPORTS.—< C’oitfmirerf.)
           Articles.      Quantity.Value.          Brought forward Sugar nipa Sundries Timber Timber (manufactured) Tortoise-shell ...	...
Treasure Jfincpiculs	28
catties	109561,75*2
84 1.485
112
8
100
     10.850 (
76 ;TOTAL VALUE Brought forward
    Total Value to Date
1906§1.1 ill g| i sMing, Coasting Trade Returns for tUf MtU of April. 1907.IMPORTS.           Articles.     Quantity.Value.Coal Damar	...	...‘
Gutta Jatigkar ...
Gutta Jelutong ...	. ...
Gutta I’ereha ...	....
India Rubber ...	' ...
Prawns Refuse «...
Pepper (white) ...	....
do (black)
Rattans No. 1 sega etc.
Do No. 2 tcnioi etc.
Bice ...	...	...!
Sago dour	...	...
Do raw	...	...
Sundries
Treasuretons	1.462
piculs	688
piculs	187
piculs	8,078’
piculs	«2j
piculs	-296
picnls	72
piculs	278J
piculs	64’
piculs	1.W65
piculs	1,678
piculs	81
piculs	1,954$
t'pins	116,7409 11.620
2.497 1,478
88.562 7.580
     28,116
195 7.157
   962 1 18.194 1 4,409 j 5,634 58,870 13,815 ' 5,165TOTAL VALUE Brought forward
       Total Value to Date ...       1906» 3? 1 "J5
P i<EXPORTS.
     VESSEL'S NAME.ELK, AND Rio.| TONS, jCAPTAINS OR NAKODAS.FROM.7l Adeh     str.189Jemati. Limdii •8 Kako222BimdongLimbang8( Sin Potc SrngC.’ Junk70Heng SoonMuka9; KuchingSar. str.908V, -.1 1Singapore9 Soon Seng Watt     sell*J 11 A. YamunSadong18 Store Hong .!«»68Gejeh13[ Kim Chin Teek..51Hj. AssimMitka18 Kim Srng Guan-.3Sait'Matu131 Put ri Dungun52Deli1 h't l‘l111 Adeho Str.189JemuiSilin •16 Rajah of Sarawak892MoxonSingapore16 Sri .Viirimi„ sell.80-TaharSadong17j Kian Molt66SemanOya17 Sarawak,, str.:46Hj. MatMuka18 7'. K. Bate Aratig., sch.64AllanSadong20 Kaka! .. str.l222Bandongi Baram20 Soon Srng B 'ait„ sch.71, A. Yamun? dong20 Kim ll'iiff Aim1 >< „67i HnsinMuka22 ABh„ str.186JetuanLimbang22 Kim Chiu Siang \.. Mb.54,. DaudMuka28 Sri Marion81)|JuharSadong*23 M. .V, Sri Jimpaka78i Tku. llnsMinSI ilka28 Kuchina1 .. str.9011WaddellSingapore28, SarawakI 46Hj. MatBintuhi25 Soon Srng IFatf' ., sell.71A. Yum anSadong27 T. K. Ba tu A rang61Allan27 Kim Stng Guan '? 78SaitMuka27’ Bau Srng ll'atf51Hj. D’hman27 Sin Stan Ann... ,.i 50GaniOva28, Kim Chin Soon: 59Hj. Sn-ntMuka28 Kirn Chin Teeki *• -1 31Hj. Assim29 Sarawak„ str.46Hj. MatBintulu80. La Pre1 ..?215AliBaram80( Kaka222i Bandong30i Rajah of Sarawak1 - ”!892? MoxonSingapore'Departures.
Articles.	Quantity. Value.
Brass-ware	...	...'
Iron-ware
Jars ...	...	...;
Oil Kerosine	...	...
Opium
Rice ...	...	...
Sundries	...	...
Treasure	"...	. ...
      TOTAL VALUE
       Bronght forwardNo.	164
cases	2,875
picnls	2,201’     9
905 2,049 1.138
7.188 6,214
 12. rut 88,671 85,215
9158,888 2-84.811       Total Value to Date ...       1906?8458.682
- 5	?C. C. ROBISON, Registrar of Trade.p iArrivals.    j VESHEL'K NAME.FLAG. AND RIG.= CAPTAINS OR NAKODAS.FROM.11 Swee Hong Ann
21 Rajah of Sarawak 2'. A tier Lorraine
‘1, Kim Chin Stang
:il Sri Marion
4| Adeh
fii Kim Chin Soon
C>. Kim Watt Ann
6i M. N. Sri Jimpaka 6! Ban Seng Watt
61 Sarawak
61 Sin Sian Ann
7! T. K. Bata A rangSar. sell. ,, str.
,, str.
„ str.
" ..68 Gejeh
892, Moxon
140 Jara-ee
54 Daud
80 Jubar
189 J etnan	.
59 Hj. Su-ut 1 67 Hnsin
78 Tkll. Hassan
511 Hj. D'hnian 1
46 Hj. Mat
50 Gani	I
64 AllanSadong Singapore Sibu Muka Sadong Sibn Muka
Matu Oya
SadongJ* VESSEL’S NAME.FLAO AND RIO.l CAPTAINS on 1 NACO DAS.    FOR.1 A dr ItSnr. str.181)j J emanSibu1 Soon Seng WattSar. sch.71I A. YamunSadong•2 T. K. Batu Arang64Allan2j Kim Seng Guan78SuitIMTut n*2. Sarawak      str.46Hj. A. MatOya8j Alice Lorraine,, sch.1401. Jara-eeSadong4! Kirin Mull661 SemanOya4. AilrhI	str.189' JcmnnSadong6 Kim Chin Leong;	sch.61Hj. SaitOya7] Steer Hong Anu16«GejehSadong7: Rajah of Sarawak1 .. str.892MoxonSingaimrort Kim Chin Soon      sch.59Hj. Sa-atMuka8j Sarawak,, str.46Hj. A. MotOya8| Sri Marion.. sch.80JuharSadong9 Kun Chin Siang54DaudMuka9 Kim H'u/f Ann67Husin10 Adeh„ str.189JenianSibu111 Sin Sian .Ina„ sch.50GaniOya11 M. N. Sri Jimpaka781 Tku. HassanMuka11 T. K. Batu Arang..61AllanSadong18 Ban Seng 11 rattr* 1Hj. D’hmanMuka13 Soon Seng ll’ufl71A. YannulSadong18 Kaka„ str.222BandongBaram18: Sarawak46Hj. A. MatMuka14 Kuching1 9118WaddellSingapore14 Sri Pembrian„ sch.79Abg. Sap.eeOyaW, Adrh,, str.189JemanLimbang16: Ktm Chin Teek„ sch.Hj AssimMuka16 Steer Hong Ann A|„ „ 1GejehOval«l Aim Seng GuanSaitMuku17 Krng Juan SengC.’ JnnkH. Lioni Jit1'. MedaiINI Sri MarionSar. sch.MJJ idiurSadong18 Sin Paw SengC. Junk7oHeng SoonSiam19 SarawakSar. str.46Hj. A. MatBintulu21i Rajah of Sarawak„ sch.892MoxonSingapore21 7'. K. Batu Arang64'AllanSadong22 Soon Seng IFitff71|A. Yumiui*2 2 Kaka,. str.BandongBaram28 Putri Dungun„ seh.DeliDuro23: Kian MohSemanOya25 Kim Chin Siang54DaudMuka26 Adeh      sir.189JenianBaram26 SarawakHj. A. MatBintuhi27 Kim Watt Ann     sch.117HnsinMuka27 Sri Marion80lJalinrSadong*28 Kuching„ str.903WaddellSingapore29 M. N. Sri Jimpaka„ sch.73Tku, HassanMuka29 T. K. Batu Arang99	H1.1AllanSadong30 Kim Seng Guan» "78SaitMuka

THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 5, 1907.
155
METEOROLOGICAL READINGS.
KUCHING OBSERVATORY.
               Observations Taken Daily at S a. m. May, 1907.
2
TEMPERATURE.
2
   R2 a? i gE
x cC55oi 1
?-
is •lermometer in the sun.   X
   d
Snshine in 24 h   Q=5ftb£a tnhrs. nrin.    12:r93SS-574*176-6 ?73 473 91148-2Fine2 30    •*3u*0J..; . i77^9! 76-673-21500do700    330-00<b(> i;? 71-978.471-4127-8do510     430 0190-875-27 -. -74-3? 74 6155-2do900    530 0289-275080-477-8I 74*6159-4do650    630-0181-272-877-576-772 71246Dull•30    730 0288-173-775-874-47341510Fine3 20    829 9888172.877375-372.81504do2-30    930-0188.473 175-875-1730137-8Dull1-50   1030 0089473-776175-473*3151.0do6-50   1130 0282 473 577 576 373-3130 6Fine1-00   1230 0288.474*377-175-774 01528do6-30   1330 0587-173577-17537331468do2-20   1430 0579-672-875674-8726113-4Dull1-00   1530 0388-572-875-674 173-1152-2Fine7.30   1630 0586-172077175-371-9154-3Dull2-50   17300783074875 173-974-0152-5Fine500   18301087072-777176372-3147-8Dull2-20   19301088-672-L75-473-9719140-4Fine2-50   2030 1088974175574-674 0157-2do4-40   21301089*273077476072-6I486   do4-40   2230-0789872-879-275-972-71474do5-40   23300091175076-375 174-51510do740   2430 0291-175079176674-51492do800   2530 0591-575-878 677-475 3153-6do6-10   2630 0590 473-981-578-578-5155-6do3-20   2780 0391-273077-3763725150-2Dull4-20   2880-0693-275977 375075-3149-2Fine7-40   29800291-675-580-878-274-9151-6   do600   30300386.873-377-475973-3143.0Dull1-10   31800088-974-877176074-7150-6   do2-3001
22
12
05
1.38
46
02
06
09
19
22
128
17
03
16
14
03
1 23
02
1-34
3
Lowest	„	71 9 *F.
Total rainfall during the month 7'76 inches.
Height of observatory above sea level 100 feet approximately.


The sarawak GAZETTE”
ALMANAC.
JUNE, 1007.
English.Chinese.Mo' dan.Week.5
Xi Moons.Dates.•sqjr.cn |Dates.S1121192220M323J21Tu. 124*r.22W,)2523Th626£24F7J t25S82826S92927M103028Tu115129W1221Th1332F1443S15. 14s1GG5M17GTu18s—7W19!l8Th20109F211110S221211S231312M-41413Tu251514W261615Th271716F281817291918s302019MOON'S PHASES, ETC. 3rd Laat quarter < 11tu New moon • 10th First quarter j) S6th Full moon O
H. H. THE RAJAH'S BIRTHDAY. ..
ii. Suu. lifter Trinity.
Sir James ^Brooke died, 1868.
St. Harnabat.
iii. Suu. nflcr Trinity ..
Battle of Waterloo, 1815.
iv. Nun. after Trinity ? -
St. John Baptiet.
St. Peter. ..
v. Sun. after Trinity
High
water at
Kuching.
A. M.r. M.It. mi. in.8 818 579 259 5410 24 10 5611 300 5? 0 421 171 512 212 513 193 444 54 264 475 75 255 436 16 19G 366 52(7 267 438 18 20S 388 579 209 4310 710 3411 211 31	0 20 381 121 442 142 443 133 404 64 324 585 235 496 166 427 67 327 578 238 48


15G	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE o, 1007.

