
VOL. XLIX.
No. 769.

Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, FRIDAY, MAY 16, 1919.
10 cents.
CONTENTS.
				Page.
Notes ...	...	...	...	••• 117
Matches	...	...	118
Passages Horne	...	...	...	...	118
The Public Services Commissions	...	... 118
The cost of living	...	...	•••	•••	119
The s. s. “Marama"	...	...	••• 120
The Peace Terms	...	...	...	•••	120
Farm Colony for Soldiers and Sailors suffering
from Tuberculosis ... 120
A visit to unknown Borneo	...	...	...	121
Limit of Useful Age in Malaya ...	...	...	123
F M. S. War Allowances ...	...	123
Wireless Telephony ...	...	...	...	123
The Shipping Strike	...	...	...	123
Sarawak Library	...	...	...	...    123
Bowls ...	...	... •	•—	...123
Correspondence	...	...	...	...	123
The Ga’at Expedition	...	...	••• 124
Monthly Reports : —Upper Sarawak Sadong Colliery              126
                  Limbang	...	...	... 127
Kuching Shipping ...	...	...	128,134
Passengers	...	...	...	...	128
Almanac ...	...	... .	—•	... 129
Rainfall ...	...	...	...	129. 131
Meteorological Returns	...	...		131
      The Sarawak Gazette.
? —
SUBSCRIPTIONS to the Gazette are as follows:
The Sarawak Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
    Single copy	...	...	...                      .10 cents
    Subscription for one year	...	...	$2.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations         2.25
Subscription including postage to all other
               Countries.	...	...	2.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING
    Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 5s. 10d
The Sarawak Government Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY -
Single copy	...	...	...      .05 cents
Subscription for	one year	...	...  $1.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 1.25
Subscription including postage to all other
               Countries.                                   1.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING—
    Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 3s. 6d
  All subscriptions are payable in advance anti must
commence from the 1st. January in each year on
which date they are renewable. All broken periods
will be considered as full.
  Subscriptions will not be renewed unless notice
of renewal given.
  Changes of Address should lie notified to the
Office in writing.
The Sarawak Gazette.
FRIDAY, MAY 16, 1919.
NOTES.
(May)
    WE regret to hear by the last mail that Her
Highness the Ranee has been stiffen ng from
the prevailing epidemic influenza, and trust
that by this time she has completely recovered.
    PASSENGERS by the s. s. Kuching on May 1st
were Messrs. Hyatt and Gray.
   The former, a member of Messrs, the Bor-
neo Company is on a short visit to Sarawak,
and the latter comes to join the staff of the
wireless here.
    THE amount of dry rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah during April was approximately 59,000 lbs.
    DAHAN Estate produced 12,300 tbs. of dry rubber during April.
   The rainfall on the Estate amounted to 9’48 inches.
    THE p. S. Adeh arrived from the North on the 4th.
   Mr. E. Parnell returned by her from Bintulu where he has been auditing and Messrs. J. Mills and D. 8. Murray were passengers j from Liuibang.
   The steamer brought a full cargo. She sustained slight damage to her paddles on the way down.
    WE hear that Mr. Harry de Windt, brother of Her Highness Margaret, Ranee of Sarawak, has been knocked down by a taxicab and is suffering from a broken thigh.
    THE S. S. Kuching left for Singapore on the 5th with a European mail. Passengers by her were Messrs. I. Shelton, Tseng Ho Tung,


118
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 16, 1919.
and S. Johno, Mrs. C. Kee Hock, Mrs. C. Kee Tuan and Mrs. Nakamura, and she carried a full cargo of sago flour, jelutong, and illipe nuts. Vast quantities of these nuts are arriving by coasting steamers and schooners from the various outstations for shipment to Singapore.
   IT is almost typical of Oriental fashion and to English ears almost ludicrous to hear, states the Public Services Commission in its report, that a domestic servant will not accept from a leading official the same wage which he will without complaint take from one in a more humble post: and that attitude is maintained in many ways.—(Straits Times.)
   THE only passenger by the s. s. Rajah of
Sarawak which arrived from Singapore on
the 7th was Mr. G. B. Burnand who has
come out to join the local staff of the Borneo
Coy., Ltd.
   Mr. Burnand, who is a brother of Mrs. J.
S. W. Bean of Dahan, has been on active
service in France.
   THE Holt Line is making accomodation on
five of its boats running out here, to enable
them to carry sixty first-class passengers 6ach.
This should relieve the congestion outwards.
We believe also that one of the vessels will
bring out women and children, an unusual
thing for the company in the past.—(Straits
Times.)
   HOME letters all complain of the Arctic
weather in March, and to make matters worse
coal was practically unobtainable. England at
present would appear to be no place for those
homing from this part of the world—at any
rate in winter.
   THE S.S. Gladys arrived from Sibu on the
8th with passengers Mrs. J. Baring-Gould
and 2 children, the Rev. Mother Dorothea,
Rev. Fathers Mulder and Oss, and Brother
Simon.
   THE Honble. H. B. Crocker left for Singa-
pore by the s.s. Rajah of Sarawak on the
11th on business connected with the food
supply of the country.
   Mr. Hyatt also left Sarawak by the same
boat en route for Singapore and Batavia.
   THE twinscrew motor tug Miri was docked
in Kuching for an overhaul on the 12th April
and was undocked on the 11th of May. She
left for Miri again on the 12th.
   THERE is still such a demand for silver dol-
lars and copper coin in the outstations for the
purchase of illipe nuts that dollars are now
at 8% premium in the bazaar and copper is
difficult to obtain.
   The greater part of the crop of illipe nuts
is being collected by Sea Dyaks who refuse to
accept notes in payment as they can neither
carry them about nor hoard them underground
without the probability of their being rendered valueless.
   Dyaks hoard quantities of silver and we fear that few of the silver dollars that find their way into their hands will return to circulation for some time to come ; but when the new dollars are issued and the old ones demonitised the hoards of coin will be revealed as they were under similar circumstances some years ago.
   Meanwhile the shortage of coin is causing a certain amount of inconvenience.
    THE out-put from the Bau Cyaniding Works for April was gold 2,466.4 ozs. and silver 840.5 ozs.
	Matches.
   There is now a very flourishing match manufacturing industry in Japan and matches from that country are rapidly ousting the Swedish article.
   Have we in Sarawak jungles—which cover most of the country—no wood suitable for matches ? The necessary machinery is said to be easily worked with little labour and the industry would seem to promise very large profits.
Passages Home.
   P. and O. passage rates from Singapore to London are now:—
2nd class.
1st class.
Mail Service               £80 & £74	£54 & £50
Intermediate                £66	£46
Return tickets are issued at a fare and a half.
    The Public Services Commissions.
   We reprint the following extracts from the Report of the Commissions published in the Straits Times as many of the remarks are equally applicable to Sarawak.
Inadequate Pay.
   On the question of the inadequacy of pay the Commissions say: There is no doubt in our minds as to the inadequacy of the pay throughout the entire service. The reason for this is due firstly to the high monetary unit of 2/4; secondly to the continued and rapid rise in the cost of living for about 10 years prior to the war ; and thirdly to the immense further advance since the outbreak of war and particularly during the last three years. . . . A salary expressed as £350 per annum may be read by eyes in England as something almost worth attention: transmuted into $250 per month in Singapore it is what one would pay on en pension terms for a front bed sitting room at any of the better class hotels. We accordingly recommend that salaries should be expressed in dollars per month in the same way as they are paid.
Scientific Scheme of Salaries.
   We have therefore thought it desirable to try and devise a new scheme of salaries and we shall put that forward presently : but before doing so we should like to reiterate a few observations which we are anxious should be once and for all clearly understood.
   These observations are :—
   1. It is a complete fallacy to compare a salary of £1,000 when (a) paid in Great Britain ; (b) expressed


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 16, 1919.
119
in sterling and paid in Straits dollars at a dollar
value2/4 as in Malaya; (c) expressed in sterling and
largely or altogether paid in Hongkong dollars at a
dollar value of 1/9 as in Hongkong; (d) expressed
in sterling and paid in rupees at, say, a rupee value
of 1/5 or 1/6 as in India or Ceylon.
   2. A shilling Great Britain and a rupee in
India or Ceylon have very much the same purchas-
ing value as a dollar in Malaya.
   3. Malaya is, apart from its high monetary unit,
R very expensive country for a European to live in,
especially in the large towns : practically all
European non-edible requirements are imported.
   4. Malaya is not a suitable country for the
“poor white”; unless a European can earn a wage
on which he is able to live decently as a European
should he merely brings discredit and contempt
upon the British community : this position is greatly
intensified in the case of Government officers.
   5. Marriage necessarily entails in Malaya a very
much greater proportionate increase of expenses
than it does in Great Britain.
   Now in approaching some suitable scheme of
salary we naturally must assume several postulates.
That Government wishes to obtain and retain a
good and suitable type of European officer; that
Government is willing to pay him enough to enable
him to live, in whatever post he may be. at such a
standard of comfort that he may support properly
the status of his position and be free from financial
temptation or worry : that he is not supposed to rely
on any private means for his maintenance; that he
can earn a reasonable pension ; that lie is not con-
demned to a life of celibacy but will, if he behaves
himself and is efficient, lie at reasonable ages in a
position to marry, to maintain his wife and children
and educate the latter after a certain age and up to
a certain age in Europe; that tie is given sufficient
means to go on leave with his family at suitable
intervals.
Effect of Proposals.
  The Commissions discuss fully the salary question
stating that the general effect of the proposals are :
In the main our recommendations are based on an
increase of 30 per cent on the 1918 salaries or if the
temporary allowance of 10 per cent be included an
increase of about 43 per cent. Besides this we have
suggested additional high appointments or more
rapid promotion in many cases and in some of the
departments we have proposed increases exceeding
30 per cent. Taking all these facts into consideration 
we believe that we shall not be far wrong 
if we estimate the total amount as equivalent to a
general increase of 50 per cent on the personal
emoluments of Appendices A. and B. On the other 
band the present war allowances would of course be
abolished.—( Straits Times. )
The cost of living.
?
   During the past four years prices have steadily risen, to what an extent can be seen by a glance at the lists published below which give approximately the prices ruling in April 1915 and April of this year.
   Prices of goods of home manufacture may possibly full somewhat in the course of the next few years, but the high rates of wages now paid in England and America are not at all likely to be reduced and, though raw materials may cheapen somewhat, the increased cost of labour will tend to prevent any great fall in prices, while it is exceedingly doubtful, ; judging by past experience, whether any fall in home prices will be followed by a corresponding re-  duction in those out here, and until that is the case the European must expect the cost of living to remain at it’s present high rate.
   Add to this the fact that wages of domestic servants and coolies have advanced 50% in the last 
ten years and the increased cost of a residence in the East to the European can be realised.
Kuching Market Price List
Note.-Fractions % in the above list have been omitted.


120
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 16, 1919.
The s. s. “Marama”
—•—
  From various accounts published in the Straits papers the passengers on the hospital ship Marama which left Singapore on the 8th of April for London have experienced anything but a pleasant time. The ship was apparently dirty, sanitary arrangements of the crudest description, nor was she fitted for a voyage in tropical waters, and deaths occurred amongst the children.
  British women and children are sent home in this way after many years in the East in a trying climate, few of them in a condition to stand the hardships which they had to endure on such, a ship, while German men, women and children from a cold climate in China are sent hack to Germany in special British passenger vessels fitted with every, convenience and supplied with every comfort to ensure their arriving in their own country in thrf best of health.
  We trust that those responsible for the arrangements will be brought to book, but none can recall the small lives that have been lost owing to somebody's carelessness and want of foresight.
  Sarawak passengers by the Marama were Mr. and Mrs. F. F. Boult, Mr. and Mrs. E. L. Grove, Messrs. K. H. Gillan and N. B. Levy and we shall be anxious to hear how they fared on the trip
THE PEACE TERMS.
  The following is a very short outline of the terms handed to the German Delegates:—
Saar Basin.
  Germany cedes to France, as compensation for the destruction of French coal mines, the full ownership of the coal mines of the Saar Basin with their subsidiaries, accessories and facilities.
Alsace Lorraine.
  The territories' ceded to Germany by the treaty of Frankfort are returned to France with their frontiers as before 1871.
German Austria
and
Tehccho Slovakia.
  Germany recognises their entire independence.
Poland.
  Germany cedes to Poland greater part of Upper Lilesia, Posen and province of West Prussia on left bank of Vistula.
  Danzig to be a free City under guarantee of League of Nations, and to be within Polish Customs and frontiers.
  Alteration of Belgium’s boundaries.
  All German colonies yielded to the Allies.
Military.
  Demobilisation of German armies.
  Abolition of compulsory service.
  Effectives not to exceed 100,000 men and 4,000 Officers. No General staff.
  Not more than 7 infantry and 3 cavalry divisions or more than 2 corps and staffs.
Naval.
  Two months from signing treaty not more than 6 battleships, 6 light cruisers, 12 destroyers and 12 torpedo boats allowed. Personnel not to exceed 15,000 including 1,500 officers and warrant officers.
  No submarines, naval or commercial, to be built or owned.
  All warships interned in neutral or Allied Ports to be sur rendered.
  All warships under construction to be broken up. Naval recruiting to be voluntary.
  No forts guarding the Baltic, or North Sea—Baltic, allowed, existing ones to be demolished.
  Stocks of ammunition limited to 1,500 rounds each for small and 500 for large guns.
Crimes of the War.
     Allies will publicly arraign ex-Kaiser for a supreme offence against international morality and sanctity of treaties.
     Ex-Emperor to be surrendered by Dutch Government, to be tried by, one judge from each Great Power.
     Germans to hand over for trial by military tribunals all persons accused of acts of violation of laws and customs of wars.
Reparation and Restitution.
Germany shall (i) accept ail responsibility for loss and damage caused to allied Govts, as consequence of the War.
(ii) Pay 20,000,000,000 marks in golds, goods or ships, etc., in 2 years.
(iii) Bond issues are required in acknowledgement of the debt as follows :—
20,000,000.000 marks gold payable Mav 1, 1921. @ 2½ % int.
40,000,000,000 marks between 1921—1926 2½ % and thereafter @ 5% and 1% sinking Fund, and an undertaking to deliver a similar amount bearing 5% interest under terms to be fixed later.
Shipping.
1. Germany to replace ton for ton and class for class all merchant and fishing vessels lost or damaged during the war.
2. To cede to Allies all German merchant shins of 1,600 tons upwards, half of her ships between 1,600 and 1,000 tons, and one quarter of all her fishing and steam trawling fleet within two months.
3. To build merchant ships for the Allies at a rate not exceeding 200,000 tons gross a year for 5 years.
Armies of Occupation.
Entire cost to be borne by Germany and to be a first charge on her resources.
      Guarantees tor execution of Treaty.
German territory W. of Rhine with bridge heads to be occupied by Allied troops for 15 years : should certain districts faithfully carry out terms they will be evacuated earlier.
If ail terms are carried out faithfully all territory will be evacuated after 15 years, hut should all or part of terms not be carried out occupation will extend beyond 15 years.
Farm Colony for Soldiers and Sailors
suffering from Tuberculosis.
34 QUEEN ANNE’S GATE, 
LONDON, S. W.
                            26th March, 1919. The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette, 
Kuching, Sarawak.
DEAR SIR,
    We are appealing to men and women of British blood over the Seas to help us to establish a Farm Colony for Sailors and Soldiers, and, knowing the spirit in which you are standing shoulder to shoulder with us in the Old Country to destroy the


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 16, 1919.
121
horrible menace of the War, we feel sure we shall not appeal in vain.
  It is on behalf of those who, while fighting the Empire's battles, have contracted Tuberculosis that we are making this appeal to their Kith and Kin beyond the Seas.
  We do so the more heartily because their case, sad as it is, is not hopeless.
  Left to themselves their path would be a sure and sternly one to the grave. But with your help and ours the disease can be arrested, and they can again be self-supporting, and enjoy years of useful life.
  Failure to cure Tubercular disease in its earlier stages can often be traced to the return of patients to unsuitable work and conditions of life, or their return at a stage when tin- disease has been only partly arrested.
  The Farm Colony will undoubtedly save most of these failures and fit them for a life on the land, where they will continue to serve the Empire, which even now owes them an undying debt of gratitude.
  The Council are much encouraged by the generous support already received (£28.000). and have acquired property of 115 acres at Firmley, in Surrey. They are most anxious that not a moment should be lost in overtaking the extensive necessary operations, which were started some time ago, so that it may be opened at the earliest possible date.
  Friends in the Old Country here are rallying to support the Farm Colony Scheme for our broken heroes. And now we are sending the appeal to Britons abroad,—the Empire builders of Dominion Overseas.
  Will you please read the outline of the plan of saving these men, and thereafter show your sympathy. for they deserve more than all we can do for them ? 
Yours faithfully,
BALFOUR OF BURLEIGH,
Chairman.
GLENCONNER.
Honorary Treasurer.
    [We are in receipt of a pamphlet giving an outline of the plan, but regret being unable to reprint it owing to lack of space. We shall however be pleased to forward it on application, and also to receive any subscriptions on behalf of the Fund. Ed. Sar. Gaz.]
A visit to unknown Borneo.
? 
(Continued from page 108.)
  The first long house we come to is that of Piok Serreh the chief of the Bawan who came out to meet us as we approached, a small, thin, and rather withered man dressed in a very dirty loin cloth of hark and his long hair tumbling over his forehead and ears in an untidy mass. He has a very pleasant face and kindly expression, but not for one. moment would he have been taken for a chief of any kind. There was a great crowd in the house where a feast was evidently in progress, and Piok himself was very unsteady on his legs aa he look my hand, more io support himself than from politeness, and led me up into his house. Jars of drink were quickly produced and the party settled itself down to drink, smoke, and chatter. I explained the object of my visit and Piok agreed to give me every help in endeavouring to get matters settled between the peoples, and arranged to send messengers down the valley to inform the others of our arrival and intention of
visiting them all the next day. Piok then suggested the slaughter of a buffalo and some of his men went out to catch one of the many that were wandering about in the long grass below the house, and they soon returned with a beast being led by its nose rope: a Bah Murut catches hold of the rope and leads him along in front of the house, gradually lifting his nose higher and higher until, just he is opposite where I am sitting, there is a flash in the sunlight as the man’s long sword flew from its sheath and, bending slightly, he delivers a right handed slash at the white mark on the beast’s throat severing everything except the spinal cord: the buffalo falls on its back, kicks for a few seconds and, before one can be sure that the beast is really dead, a dozen men fall upon it with parangs severing legs and ribs anyhow, the wooden fence of a bandy tobacco garden is appropriated and used as a floor on which the meat is chopped up in a few minutes, and inside of quarter of an hour that buffalo is in the Murut cooking pots and rapidly becoming food for the crowd.
   All day I sit and discuss matters with the Bawan Muruts, and discover that the only differences between them and their neighbours of the Trusan Bah consist of the murder of one of their people by Muruts of a house further down the valley, and another Bah man was shot at but missed by people of the same house. Having sat the whole day talking to these people I was only too glad to break away for a bathe in the evening in the cool waters of the stream that ran down the valley just be low the house. But don't imagine that you can get away and enjoy a quiet bathe on your own ; as I went away from the house I glanced back and saw a Dyak Ranger slip out of the door and, Snider in hand, settle himself down to smoke on a rise within 20 yards of and in full view of the bathing place; when told to clear off he refused saying that we were now out of Sarawak territory, that these people were strangers and reputed to be treacherous, and it was better to lie on the safe side, so there was nothing more to he said, and the man sat there and watched me enjoying a roll in the cold water and after the bathe followed me back to the house at a respectful distance, but eyeing several of the Muruts who had come out to see me bathe with evident distrust, and on every future occasion when I went down to bathe I was followed by one or other of the Dyaks with a loaded carbine, a precaution which I may say was entirely unnecessary under the circumstances.
   Next morning we were early astir as usual and trailed away down the. valley along the ridges followed by several hundred of the Bawan Muruts, but when scarcely a mile from the house we met a long string of people coining up the valley to meet us, one leading a couple of bleating goats, another with a buffalo in tow by the nose, two or three others carrying jars on their shoulders, and these proved to be the offenders of whom the Bah Muruts had complained who were bringing compensation both to the relatives of the murdered man and to those of the one who had been shot at and missed, but hearing that we intended visiting their house in any case they turned back with us and joined on behind the long string of people. We arrived at their house at midday, but though the sun was very hot the air was so beautifully cool that the walk was i quite pleasant, and we arrived cool and not in the least tired. Then, after the usual talk and smoke, matters were speedily settled and the offenders came up and squared matters, handing over the fines to the relatives, and the parties were very soon on friendly terms and drinking together though hitherto they had dared not meet one another. Here I made enquiries about the Muruts of the


122
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 16, 1919.
Brian and Belawit, who also had feuds with those of the Trusan, and found that they lived in a valley just over the hill and barely an hour’s walk from where we were sitting. So, after some trouble, I got messengers to go over and tell them that we proposed visiting their country with the Bah Muruts, and at 8 the next morning a long string of people came down from the hill opposite and stopped half way across the fields under one of the padi huts. Seeing them stop I went out to meet them, having the greatest difficulty in inducing the Dyaks to remain in the house as they sard these chiefs were those who had the worst reputation of any in the interior and it would not be safe to go out alone; however I got away and sat with them under the padi hut spreading my few words of Murut about as best I could, and at last induced them to come along to the house: they were a curious collection of men. some short and others fine tall men well above the average height for Muruts, and all were in full war dress with goat skin war coats and  feathers and armed with spears and long swords, but only one had a shield. However, when they reached the house wherein were their enemies of  many years standing they refused to meet them. Finally after a lot of talk an old spear head and an old parang were sent up by them to the Bah men who made a great deal of fuss about receiving them, but eventually did so, and the Belawit chiefs filed up into the house and came and sat down on the other side of me, the parties glaring at one another for some minutes and refusing to speak. They explained that unless the custom of banding over old weapons is carried out the parties will be struck blind should they meet one another under such ; circumstances as these where they had been bitter enemies for years. The host, Nibong Kesu, now produced a jar of native arrack, and I having drunk first both parties set to and finished the jar in a few minutes and their tongues then began to wag, but I stopped them by explaining the object of my visit, which puzzled them, as they were not capable of understanding that such feuds as existed between them could be settled in any way at all except by I force, and so must go on indefinitely. I assured them 1 that my small party had intentions none other than pacific and they ended by inviting us to their village next day.
  So the next morning we set out, a watch being kept ahead by two of the men in case traps were set in the long grass at the edge of the crack over the hill, as they all insisted that these Muruts were very treacherous. Just as coming from the Trusan to the Bawan valley we rose to the top of a ridge, and there obtained a magnificent view of the Brian valley irrigated in fields in just the same way as the others we had passed through but covering a very much larger area. The plain seemed to stretch away in the distance from below our feet, the long houses with their brown roofs standing surrounded by coconut palms and fruit trees along the lower slopes of the hills bordering the valley on either side. We reached the plain after a few minutes walking, so low was the dividing ridge, and. passing through groves of fruit trees finally reached the house of one of the head men of the district, a building such as I have already described about 120 yards long. Several head of fine cattle were feeding close to the house and two or three tame deer were also wandering about with them. As usual, native arrack and tobacco were produced before anything else and we all sat down to drink and smoke. The men here use a brass tube which they charge with tobacco to save the trouble of carrying about leaves in which to roll it. The long wall dividing the house longitudinally was covered with deers’ antlers and I counted over 100 pairs of different sizes fastened to
it, and as the house filled up rapidly and the outer room was unable to hold any more, a. dozen men laid hold of the antlers and in a minute demolished the whole of the walling, which was intended to be taken down on such occasions, turning the interior of the house into one vast hall. All that day and all night the chiefs of both tribes ant around the fires chattering and settling their differences, occasionally appealing to me on some point or other, and at about 3 a.m., everything having been amicably settled, they sat round in a circle and swore eternal friendship in the following way.—A small dish of arrack and a jar of the same spirit were placed in the middle of the circle and an old man, who appeared to be the master of the ceremonies, produced two pairs of the teeth of the tree leopard, which are often worn as ear ornaments, being put through a hole in the top of the ear pointing forward and held together by a string of beads which passes round the back of the head ; the old fellow then sat down, selected one chief from each tribe, and presented one of them with the sharp teeth and the dish of arrack : sitting opposite one of them he took hold of the outstretched arm of the other and drew the collected points of the teeth slowly down the arm from shoulder to wrist, pressing hard until the blood started, and swearing that should he ever kill any of the other's people, disturb their peace in any way or interfere with them when they happened to be travelling through his country, might he be killed and eaten by the tiger (ballang), and as the teeth reached the wrist he dipped them in the dish of arrack and then drank it off. The other man then did the same to him and the whole party went through this ceremony in turn. A large jar of arrack was then brought out and by daylight it was finished : then presents were exchanged, one man giving a gun, a most valuable thing in the eyes of a Murut. and the weapon was promptly tested there and then by the new owner letting off a couple of shots through the roof. We were all very tired by the morning having had no sleep at all, but another swearing ceremony took place al daylight, half a coconut shell being filled with water into which a little clay and a. bunch of dog's hairs were stirred ; the shell was then placed on the ground the whole crowd of some 800 men standing round. All the head men came forward in turn and, pointing at the shell, swore by it’s contents to behave themselves in the future and to cease killing their neighbours and making trouble, and to live in peace with those surrounding them. Should any man omit a sentence one of the crowd would chip in and tell him what to say, or suggest his saying something else that would make the swearing more complete, they then each took a sip from the shell. After this was over I took leave of them all and started off down the valley followed by about three hundred of them with guns ; they stopped when they got into line ready for marching and fired their guns into the air, the bullets dropping dangerously near some of themselves, and they then all filed down through the fields along the ridges, and after several hours’ walk stopped at another long house at the far end of the valley built on a low hill, the chief inviting us to stay the night there. On arrival four men brought up a huge fat pig and dumped it in front of me, a similar porker being placed in front of the other members of the party; the pig was carried out on to the stage al the head of the step at the end of the house and, having been handed a spear, I pushed it through him behind his shoulder, death being practically instantaneous, but the beast was so fat that I do not think that he was capable of squealing when alive and he certainly made no effort to do so when expiring. Goats, fowls, eggs and rice were also laid before the party, much more than it was possible to eat, and baskets of tobacco were placed


THE SABAWAK GAZETTE. AJAY 16, 1919.
123
at intervals along the house. Here we remained the night. The bathing was most enjoyable, much more so than in the icy streams of the upper Trusan as the streams all round here being utilised for irrigation the. water is muddy and useless for either bathing or drinking, so it is brought from the hills sometimes nearly a mile away by means of bamboo pipes carried on trestles across the fields, and it consequently arrives at the bathing place with the chill off. We were warned off one of the tracks leading up the hill the chief saying that it was covered with pig traps some little distance from the house.
(To be continued.)
     Limit of Useful Age in Malaya.
  It is a well known medical fact, report the Public Services Commissions, that after the age of fifty the mental and physical powers of the large majority of Europeans who have spent a number of years in these tropics decline markedly and rapidly : in Malaya men over the age of 50 have, as a rule, after 25 years’ local work, spent their best powers of energy and initiative: and after this age often do not display any greater capacity than that of a conservative adherence to their past methods. To burden the ship of State with dead weight of this kind must l*e uneconomical: and it could probably be with advantage jettisoned (Straits Times.)
F.M.S War Allowances.
  At the Federal Council meeting the Chief Secret-
in v moved that the Council approve the expenditure
during the current year of a sum of $336,269 for
temporary war allowances to Government servants
in addition to the amount provided in that behalf in
the 1919 estimates. He said since the estimates 
were prepared and passed it was found necessary to 
increase the war allowance which the Government
decided should be paid to Government employees. 
The scale now in force necessitated an addition to
the estimates for the current year. Officers drawing
less than $25 per mensem, allowance at the rate of
35 per cent, (instead of 20 per cent) ; from $300 up
to and including £660 allowance at the rate of 25
per cent, (instead of 15 per cent.) but that the
amount of the allowance payable to an officer should
not be less than $105 nor more than £100 per an-
num.—The motion was carried.— (Straits Times.) 
Wireless Telephony.
                      	
  “Newfoundland has a splendid wireless telephone base. Its Government is co-operating. Wireless telephone communication has been established experimentally overland from Newcastle, New Brunswick, to New Jersey. Tin; voices of operators at wireless stations thousands of miles away have been heard at the Marconi office here."—(Pinang Gazette.)
The Shipping Strike.
I wish I was a Skipper, 
And drawing Skipper’s pay ; 
With a nice big ship 
On the Kuching trip,
    And a stengah every day.—( Contributed. )
Sarawak Library.
The following books have been added to the Library:—
    F 5139 Regiment of Women by Clemence Dane
    F 5545 The Secret Sympathy ,, Mary L. Pondered
    F 6981 The Wrong Box „ Robert Louis
Stevenson
W. H. JACQUES, Honorary Secretary.
Bowls.
The usual monthly Bowling Handicap took place at the Sarawak Club on the 1st May and resulted as follows:—
    CORRESPONDENCE.
    [The Editor is not responsible, for the opinions of
correspondents.]
To the Editor,
    Sarawak Gazette.
SIR,
    “VISITOR" in the last issue of the Gazette seems
to me to be unnecessarily harsh in his criticism of
the Government Rest House. Not every one will
agree with his list of disparaging adjectives.
        Rest Houses, as in other parts of the East, have
been built by the Government for the use of
Government servants and the modest prices charged
preclude the luxuries of a modern hotel.
        On the other hand Kuching has now grown to a
sufficient extent to require a building such as your
correspondent demands. Why should not the new
Sarawak Steamship Company (like many Trans-
port Companies in other parts of the world) devote
some of their capital to this, no doubt, profitable
venture?
Yours faithfully,
HOPEFUL.
To the Editor,
    Sarawak Gazette.
SIR.
    In the Gazette report of the Public Meeting held on April 23rd to arrange for the celebration of Peace. I am quoted as advocating a national memorial to those who left this country to join the ranks of the Allies.
    This is incorrect. 1 proposed that a memorial should lie erected to those from Sarawak of all nationalities who had lost their lives in the cause of the Allies.
    The resolution, carried unanimously, was as 
follows :-
      “That a special fund be opened to collect subscriptions to erect a National War Memorial to those from Sarawak who had lost their lives in the Great War. That the names inscribed thereon be of those


124
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 16, 1919.
who died in the cause of the Allies including (1)
men who were born in Sarawak, (2) men who worked
here at least three years, (3) men who were working
here and left to offer themselves for service. That
such a Memorial be erected in Kuching in a con-
spicuous position and serve some useful purpose.”
   So far I have collected the names of fourteen men
who were killed and I fear that the list is still in-
complete.
Yours .faithfully.
D. L. GREENE.
To the Editor,
  The Sarawak Gazette.
DEAR SIR,
    Peace Celebrations with all their accompani-
ments of band playing, torch bearing, flag wagging, 
etc., seem to be the order of the day ; these of course 
naturally presuppose that peace is imminent, that in 
fact the Germans will take up their pens quickly and 
sigh, and the zeal with which the various pro- 
grammes have been entered upon gives evidence of 
such optimism (much to be envied) on the matter 
that one feels very diffident as to saying anything
that may look like trying to cast a shadow over the
proceedings.
   But it surely may be asked whether peace is so
certain, are the delegates of the thing the Germans
call a Government going to take the onus of signing
the Treaty? and if they do, are the people going to
abide by it? and therefore would not a little of the
“ wait mid see ” policy be advisable before under-
taking ambitious programmes for Celebrations which
may, I do not say will (and I sincerely hope not),
have to lie indefinitely postponed, causing dis-
appointment and perhaps loss to many natives and
others who have had their hopes raised—and further
avoid getting into the stultified position of those
who count their chickens before they are hatched,
or rather in this case their doves with olive branches
which as far as we know have not even left Ger-
many Surely there is nothing to be lost by waiting
until the horizon is much clearer than it is to-day.
   Further there may be two opinions as to whether
we are justified in expending a lot of money for what
seems at least a very problematical peace when there
something like a certain famine in prospect in the
near future ; however this may be, the curious in-
consistency of telling natives one day that they must
all set to work and plant foodstuffs to save themselves
from starvation, and then on another call for sub-
scriptions for jaunts and jollities, is too obvious to
be passed over by them.
   Now can anyone really say that the trend of events
in Europe point to anything even approaching peace;
if the Germans refuse to sign the treaty or the people
to abide by it, by no means remote contingencies,
all the Stales that conqiosed the Central Powers will
together adopt a policy of passive resistance nnd
leave the entente to get out of the mess as best it
can.
   In these circumstances the blockade will doubt-
less be continued, and there is very serious danger
that if pressed to desperation, the whole of these
Central States will throw everything over to the
Bolshevists, join Russia, then turn round to the
entente and bid them do their worst. Hungary has
already set the example, a most ominous sign—if such
comes to pass the Allies will be faced with the de-
lightful prospect of having to clean sweep the whole
of Central and Eastern Europe of Bolshevists which
will mean having to fight millions of desperate people
—a task about as easy as trying to put out an erupt-
ion of Mr. Etna with a few dozen fire hoses, and
compared to which the late war will have been an
excursion.
   Many people seem to imagine that the war is over,
but do things look like it? In my humble opinion
demobilization has been canned out too soon, too
much having been taken for granted, and it is de-
voutly to be hoped that it may not be found imper-
ative to remobilize; but should it so be, how it is
going to be done in the face of the storm of opposi-
tion certain to arise from Labourites, Socialists, and
all that class of people who want to govern England
to suit themselves only ; or how we are going to
get the Americans back again? I leave this to your
readers to work out for themselves, as also what the
result will be should the Bolshevists rise and find
the. entente demobilized and unprepared to meet
them.	
  In any case even if peace is signed to-day we
should be on firmer ground if the celebrations were
postponed for at least six months to avoid the
possibility of celebrating another “Scrap of Paper"—
to do so now with Europe a seething cauldron of
every element opposed to peace is rather like follow-
ing the example of Nero.
  It is somewhat a dark picture that I have drawn
and doubtless many will disagree with it, but if
time proves the conclusions to be wrong no one will
be better pleased than the writer, and whilst thank-
ing you, Mr. Editor, for giving this letter space I
cannot do better than sign myself
Yours faithfully,
“ WAIT AND SEE "
May 12th, 1919.
  [We would remind “Bizarre” that correspondent's
letters cannot be accepted for publication unless
accompanied by the name and address of the writer.
  We would suggest that the letter be re-written be-
fore being again sent in, as we are sure the writer must
be making a mistake in some of the hours mention-
ed therein. Ed. Sar. Gaz. ]
The Ga'at Expedition.
28th April, 1919.
   RAJAH,—I have the honour to forward for Your Highness' information the following summary of operations during the recent Ga'at river expedition, which I accompanied: details will reach Your Highness through the usual channels.
  The Government force left Kapit on the 5th April, with Mr. G. M. Gifford in charge, assisted by Messrs. H. D. Aplin, P. M. Adams and Lieut. Clark, S. R.
  From information received it appeared that the rebels were determined to delay the force as long as possible during its progress up the Ga’at river, and had prepared a final place of refuge on Bukit Tunggal. Here they would offer resistance in the (to them) unlikely event of our penetrating thus far.
  Mr. Gifford's object was to drive any parties of rebels who might be lurking on the banks, with the object of impeding the advance, towards Bukit Tunggal, instead of allowing them to escape to the Hanks, in the hope that if cornered there they would be forced to fight or escape into N. I. territory, where the authorities would intern or otherwise deal with them.
  In pursuance of this plan wing scouts accompanied the advance from the mouth of the Ga'at river, which was entered on the 7th, and likely places were “ searched " by maxim fire. Every possible landing place was found to be thickly scudded with bamboo calthrope, and deep barriers of freshly-felled trees delayed the boat in several places, but no attempt was made to harry the Government force.
  Excepting tracks, no other signs of the rebels were visible until the 10th, when, towards evening, Mr. Gifford, who was then with the advance river scouts, prepared to halt the force at the next suitable camping place, caught sight of two small boats rounding the end of a long reach. It was


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 16, 1919.	125
subsequently ascertained that, later on, a wing scout fired at one of these boats, which capsized ; the three occupants escaped into the jungle without waiting to retrieve the contents which included a gun.
   On the 12th, the force arrived and camped at Nanga Waning. Here was said to be a practicable overland route to Bukit Tunggal, which was likely to be held by the rebels: it seemed certain that they must also have a party operating along the river, since two tree-blockades up-river were reported, so a base for long-boats and sick was established at this camp in charge of Abang Hadji Metair.
   In pursuance of plan, the Government force was divided into two sections: Mr. Gifford’s and Mr. Adams’ to pursue the river route in small boats : Mr. Aplin’s and Lieut. Clark's to proceed overland.
   The sections, of which I accompanied the latter, started almost simultaneously on the morning of the 13th. The rendezvous for a concerted attack upon the Bukit Tunggal position was to be Nga: Bulat, which the land section was expected to reach about midday on the 14th, and the river section the evening of that day. Owing to there being no definite track however, as was anticipated, the land section went astray, and after spending two nights in the jungle, made its way down the Bulat Kiba on the morning of the 1,5th, without having come across any signs of the rebels.
   Here word was received from Mr. Gifford that he had arrived at Nga: Bulat the previous evening and was now on his way up the Ga’at to Pengkalan Bahai, whence there was said to be a track leading to Bukit Tunggal; if this bore traces of recent usage, he proposed following it with his section the following morning (16th) in the absence of any further information of a definite nature.
   About midday the land section arrived at the junction of the Bulat Kiba with the main Bulat stream : here a large number of boats belonging to the rebels were being collected, as well as household property and padi. These had been found at a landing-place on the left bank about twenty minutes up the main Bulat from the junction. This place was thickly sown with calthrope, and bore marks of recent usage by a large number of people.
   Later in the day, scouts investigating the track from the pengkalan came into touch with a few rebels : shots were exchanged and a spear Hung at our party; it was evident that this was the place we were looking for, so word was sent to Mr. Gifford that the land section would camp at the junction and start the following day at 7 a. m. to attack the Bukit Tunggal position by this road.
   On arrival at the pengkalan on the 16th, a halt was made to allow the wing-scouts to deploy. Here Mr. Gifford came up with Mr. Adams and the whole of his section. He had hastened back on receipt of the message of the previous afternoon, since the Pengkalan Babai track was found to bear no traces of recent usage, and might not even lead in the right direction; he therefore considered it sounder to throw the weight of the whole force on to the rebels by a road known to lead to their position, especially in view of the fact that there were “ strong rumours ” of a stockade and large reinforcements of malcontents from across the border, though the former conjecture, in any case, subsequently proved to be devoid of foundation.
   Orders were issued that the force should halt at the rebel position, when captured, in order that an organised pursuit of fugitives might be arranged. After a climb of an hour and a half, those in advance emerged from the jungle into farm land, across which, about 800 yards distant, was a long building, the roof of which had just been set alight. The ground was covered by felled trees, any intervening
spaces being set with calthrope, but, there being no resistance, the house was reached in time to save the main structure, which turned out to be a long, floored frame-work on piles, lacking the usual walls and divisions of a Dyak house.
   During the advance -across the farm land a few shots had been heard. It subsequently transpired that a small party from the right wing had gone forward past the house, and had paid the penalty of their disobedience by losing the heads of two of their number.
   The house was situated on a crest of a steep ridge, leading to Bukit Tunggal We had come up the north flank, so the opposite side was now “searched” by maxim fire from a platform on the house, and scouts were sent forward to see whether the rebels had split into small groups, or followed some mam line of retreat that might be worth, following up with the whole force.
   The south side of the ridge is cleared and falls away sharply for one half of a mile ; beyond is broken country consisting of sleep hills and high ridges covered with jungle. The scouts returned towards evening, and reported that a “large” river, held by some to be a tributary of the Meniong, by others the Kaniou (Kapuas), ran past the foot of the ridge, in a south-west direction. Here they had found a large number of boats, and had shot and killed one of a small party of rebels.
   As speed was evidently essential, Penghulu Merdan and Gani were ordered to select such men as they required, and to start in pursuit early the following morning, accompanied by forty men of the Sarawak Rangers, and carrying two days’ provisions. If the river they had reported should turn out to be the Kaniou, they were to return forthwith, if not they were to proceed as far as their supplies would allow them to in hopes of overtaking some of the rebels. Meanwhile the headquarters of the force would be at the house until the 19th, when it would proceed slowly down-river to the base camp, with the object of unearthing as much rebel food and property as possible on the way.
   This programme was adhered to, with satisfactory results, die Nga: Marang base being reached on the 22nd.
   Here Penghulu Merdan and Gani, who had arrived overland the previous evening, reported that, although they had been unable to overtake the fugitives, they had never seen traces of such confusion as must have prevailed during the flight.
   The rebels had evidently taken their women for safe-keeping to the house on the ridge, for these had abandoned their skirts upon the road. Mosquito curtains, Kayan mats, cooking utensils, baskets of provisions, valuable parangs, and even several guns were among the articles strewn along the route until all traces ceased, there being apparently nothing remaining to discard.
   An unfortunate incident had taken place at the base camp during our absence. Penghulu Bana had allowed two Sut Dyaks to join his boat on the way up, without even reporting this incomprehensible piece of folly. These men remained at Nga: Malang when the force moved forward, inveigled a companion into the jungle under pretence of getting umbut, and made off with his head and gun. Whether this was done out of sympathy with the rebels or in a spirit of pure mischief has yet to be ascertained, but the names of the criminals are known, and the Sut tuais have been summoned to Kapit for the purpose of investigation.
   On the return journey the corpse of a rebel was found near Nga: Aman. As it was near a place where “searching” had been carried out by Lieut. Clark on the way up, it is conjectured that this is how he met his death, but the body and head were too decomposed to invite close inspection.


126
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. MAY 16, 1919.
   The Government force arrived hack at Kapit on the 25th.	
   The health of the force was satisfactory, there being no outbreak of epidemic, hut the wet weather at Bukit Tunggal, and the cold damp fogs that clung round the slopes each night and a good portion of the day at that very considerable elevation gave everyone, Europeans included, bad coughs and colds, which in some cases turned to fever and in others affected the lungs, the worst case being a Javanese Ranger who developed a severe attack of pneumonia, and whose recovery is still doubtful.
   The behaviour of the Rangers was excellent, although, so far as the Kuching contingent is concerned, only some half dozen had been on a previous expedition. When volunteers were called for for any special purpose, there was no failure in response.
   That a large force of a somewhat unwieldly nature should have been enabled to start at the appointed time and return to Kapit after the estimated period of three weeks bad elapsed, to the day, without the occurrence of any “ hitch ”, I attribute to the careful forethought and preliminary preparation of the Honble. the Resident 3rd Division. Results proved the tactical soundness of Mr. Gifford’s scheme of operations, and though the “ round up ” for which lie bad hoped did not eventuate, this was not due to any technical failure in execution, but to the rebels having preferred headlong flight to the resistance that they had announced themselves as being prepared to offer.
   It is, however, satisfactory that such a severe lesson has been given with so small a loss of life. It would seem that the rebels having no property to return to in the Ga’at, must choose between unconditional surrender and moving into N. L territory. It is locally considered unlikely that they will take the latter course.
                 I have the honour to be.
Rajah,
             Your Highness’ obedient servant,
BERTRAM BROOKE,
Tuan Muda.
Hix Highness
   The Rajah of Sarawak.
  MONTHLY REPORTS.
UPPER SARAWAK.
BAU AND PAKU.
April.
   1 arrived at Bau on the evening of the 29th and on the following day checked the cash and books, which were in accordance with a memorandum left by the Resident.
   The following report is taken from Mr. Owen's diary.
   Court.—Two Krokong Dyaks, Matut and Gonieng, were severely dealt with under the new Order prohibiting the felling of wild gutta trees. Other cases were of minor importance.
   P. IF. D.—The prisoners were engaged upon the widening and metalling of the Buan—Bau Road.
   General.—On tbe 4th O. K. Krokong and P. C. Omar were sent to Pangkallan Ampat to try and obtain news of the Lingga murderers; they returned on the 13th without gaining any information.
   The Resident was absent from the station from the 6th to 21st of the month on local leave. On his return a meeting was held in the Court House which was attended by Chinese and natives. The difficulty of procuring rice in the future was explained to them and they were urged to plant substitutes as quickly as possible.
   Land has been surveyed at Suba and permits granted to pepper-planters; the land as far as possible, is divided into regular strips with jungle in front and behind. Patches of ground, scattered here and there, are being refused to cultivators.
   The Bau Cyaniding Works supplied the following figures for the month, gold 2,466.4 ozs. and silver 840.5 ozs.
   The total rainfall for the month amounted to 11 01 inches. •
J. C. SWAYNE,
Resident 2nd Class.
SADONG COLLIERY.
April.
   The gross out-put of coal produced by the mines during the month was 2,072.04 tons, 450 tons of this was consumed by our boilers and 1,622.04 tons delivered for export.
  The shipments for the month were :- -
  To the Kuching Municipality ...	128.10 tuns
  Messrs, the Borneo Company ...	1,283.10
      ,,	,, British Malaysian Co. 52.00
      ,. Soon Seng, Sibu ...	90.10
Total Shipments 1,554.10 tons
   The balance of stock on the wharf at the end of the month was 1,847.16 tons.
   There was a further increase in the out-put from- the new mines on the hill, No. 8 mine out-put also increased a little, but No. 9 mine produced below the average owing to the west-side panel striking old workings on the dip side.
   The machinery and boilers were kept in good working order. The month’s rainfall produced only 4'78 inches and for this reason we experienced a shortage of water for boiler consumption at No. 9
   The lower reservoir drains were further extended and there was a plentiful supply of water lor the washery and boilers nearby.
   Owing to the condition of the main reservoir and pipe line, a gang of men consisting of Colliery fitters, labourers, and prisoners, were engaged during the latter part of the month in repairing the water-dam, cleaning out the streams to their sources, and the water pipes for a distance of nearly 2,000 yards.
   A large quantity of rubbish was dumped and levelled on the swamp behind the Malay kampong- and the new road beside the railway line.
   There was a great shortage of labour for loading vessels, etc. The men who usually do this class of work being away harvesting on their farms, working jelutong and gutta leaves, which are commanding record prices, and the mines had to be partially closed down on two occasions for this reason in order to obtain the necessary labour for loading the coasting steamers.
   The usual repairs were carried out at the wharf and several tons of stone were dumped on the damaged parts of the river-bank.
   The use of the general store has been given to the Local Food Supplies Control Committee for storage purposes and large tracts of Colliery land are being measured up and divided out amongst the Colliery employees for planting rice substitutes and in order to impress on all concerned, in a practical way, that the situation will be serious before the end of the year as regards supplies of rice. The Colliery will, in a short time, have most of the new grazing land for the cattle planted up with early padi and rice substitutes.
J. W. EVANS,.
Manager.


127
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 16, 1919.
LIMBANG.
March.
  I arrived here from Lawas by the s.l. Datu on the 6th.
  The s.l. Peter Duff arrived here from Brunei on -the 8th io load planks for the Batu Apoi Rubber Estate. She left again for Tamburong the same morning. Mr. Bogosoff, the Manager of the Tamburong Rubber Estate, who was on board, came up and called.
  The British Resident, Mr. G. E. Cator, arrived here from Brunei the same day to discuss the payment of death duties on His late Highness the Rajah’s estate in Brunei. I also paid over to him the succession fee of $4,000. He returned to Brunei during the afternoon.
  Mr. K. Watson arrived here on the 22nd to spend the week end.
  The Manager of the Brunei Branch of the Island Trading Company, Mr. Whyte, called on the 26th to discuss a few matters connected with the bark working at Awat Awat.
  The p. s Adeh made one trip only during the month arriving here on the 5th during my absence at Lawas.
  The opium farmer’s agent at Brooketon ran short of opium towards the end of the month, but fortunately he was able to borrow enough from the agent here to last him for a few days.
  Court.—Ujan, a Dyak from Lobai came down on the 19th and reported that he had wounded, if not killed, a man by name Lenggang who he found in bed with his wife Jenn.
  Other Dyaks from Ansa's house, where the above occurred, arrived later and reported that Lenggang was very seriously wounded but still alive.
  They said that Lenggang was not in bed with Jenu when he was attacked by Ujan but was sleeping in the bachelor’s quarters, and further investigation tends to corroborate this.
  Lenggang has been sent to Labnan for medical treatment and Ujan detained in gaol, his sentence to depend on whether Lenggang recovers or not.
  Basi, a Bisaya, was sentenced to three months H. L. for theft of cloth from a shop.
  Basi, a Bisaya, was sentenced to nine months H. L. for being in possession of a stolen buffalo which he refused to account for, and two other Bisayas were fined for setting pig traps.
  Fines and fees amounted to $130.
  P. W. D.—The coolies have been employed trimming the bamboo hedges, repairing the "Court house wharf and on the up-keep of the kampong and Bengkita roads; and the prisoners on the Punga Puyan road, weeding the paths round the station, and cleaning out the ditches on the golf course.
  The m. l. Damit has been fitted with a new propeller shaft, the old one. which was very thin, having got bent through striking something on the way to Brooketon at the end of last month.
  The following are the trade returns:—
Imports.	Exports
      Coasting $10,038	$7,350
      Foreign 3,277	’ 2,503
  The rainfall for the month was 14'24 inches.
H. S. B. JOHNSON,
Resident 5th Division.
... $1.00
... 0.50
... 0.25
... 2.00
... 1.00
... 0.50
... 4.00
... 2.00
... 1.00

The Sarawak Gazette.
RATES OF ADVERTISEMENT IN THE “SARAWAK GAZETTE”
	—
Payable in advance.
Quarter of a column and under—
             First insertion
             Second and third insertion earth
             Subsequent do do
Half a Column and under--
First insertion
Second and third insertion each
Subsequent do	do
A Column and under—
First insertion each
Second and third insertion each
Subsequent do	do
Special arrangements may be made for standing advertisements.

  All communications intended for insertion in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed
to tile Editor at the Government Printing Office, Kuching. They should be clearly written and should reach the Office at least one day before the publication of each issue-
  Letters and other contributions must be authenticated by writer's name sent privately to the Editor.
  We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not inserting them.
  Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early intelligence of all matters of general interest in their respective neighbourhoods.
NOTICE.
ASTANA FARM.
THE Manager of Astana Farm begs to inform the Public that he is unable to
attend to Orders for milk after Office hours.
NOTICE.
—?—
Gazette subscriptions and Printing Office bills.
   FOR the convenience of residents at Outstations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums hut only the 1,2and 3 cent values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that Money Orders be sent if possible.
    J. C. SWAYNE, Manager, Govt. Printing Offer.


128
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 16, 1919.
NOTICE.
> —
AUCTION SALE
of unredeemed pledges from Pawn Broking Farm YEW CHEE & Co., Chop Wo SANG and Chop LOON YEK of Bau at No. 18, China Street on Saturdays of the following dates—17th May 1919 and 21st June 1919, at 9 a.m.
  List of all such unredeemed pledges can be seen at the Pawn Farmer’s premises.
SYN HIN LEONG A CO., . Authorised Auctioneers.
PASSENGERS. *
ARRIVALS.
PER S.S. Kuching:—1st May From Singapore—Messrs. Hyatt, H. G. Gray. S. Why Khu, S. Johno and Mrs. Nakamura.
PER p. s. Adeh:—4th May—From the North Mr. E.
• Parnell from Bintulu—Messrs. J. Mills and D. S. Murray fron Limbung.
PEK s,8. Rajah of Sarawak :—8th May—From Singapore —Messrs. G. B. Burnand, La Chin Eng and Lee Mia Sinh.
PER S. s. Gladys:—8th May—From Sibu—Mother Dorothea, Revd. F. Oss, Revd. F. Mulder. Brother Simon and Mrs. J. Baring- Gould and 2 children.
DEPARTURES.
PER S. S. Kuching : 5th May For Singapore— Messrs. I. Shelton, Tseng Ho Tung and S.
• Johno, Mrs. C. Keo Hock. Mrs. C. K<*e Tuan and Mrs. Nakamura.
PER S. H. Rajah of Sarawak:—11th May—For Singapore Honble. H. B. Crock.T, Messrs. Hyatt and Lee Mia Siah.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 16, 1919.	120

NOTICE.
N
OTICE is hereby given that the Trade Mark con-
sisting of the emblem of a double lion’s head
in conjunction with the word LION a® shown above
is the joint property of THE ASIATIC PETROLEUM
tOMPAAY (STRAITN SETTLEREATS) LIMITED and TllE
ASIATIC PETRDLETM COMPANY (FEDERATED MALAY
STATES) LIMITED, both incorporated in England, and
is used by them in connection with Lubricating Oils,
Greases, Petroleum Jellies, Refined Oils, Illuminating
Oik, Kerosenes, Benzines, Motor Spirits, Gasolines,
Paraffin Waxes and Caudles, Fuel Oils. Residual Oils
and other products of oil and petroleum imported by
them to the Straits Settlements, the Federated Malay
States and the States of British North Borneo, Brunei,
Johore, Kedah, Kelantan, Perlis, Sarawak, Siam and
Trengganu, and sold under the description of and known
in the trade as the “LION Brand”, the name of
•the class of product appearing in the space occupied by
the word LUBRICANTS in the above illustration.
  Legal proceedings will be taken against any person
infringing the rights of the said Companies in respect of
the above Trade Mark.
   Dated this 8th day of May, 1919.
            DONALDSON & BURKINSHAW,
19, COLLYER QUAY. SINGAPORE,
Solicitors for the Asiatic Petroleum
Company (Straits Settlements) Limited
awl the Asiatic Petroleum. Company
( Federated Malay States) Limited.
[2-1]
NOTICE.
THE KUCHING STEAM SAW MILLS LIMITED.
NOTICE is hereby given that Share Certificate
dated 25th August 1913, issued by THE
KUCHING STEAM SAW MILLS LIMITED, for 330
shares of $iocach fully paid bearing Nos. 971 to
1300 inclusive, and registered in the name of
J. H. BRODIE, is alleged to have been Inst or
destroyed.
     .Any person holding the said Share Certificate
is required to return it to the undersigned not
later than 15th June 1919, otherwise the said
Share Certificate will be cancelled and a new
one issued.
TAN SUM GUAN,
Secretary.
(G-6]
  THE “SARAWAK GAZETTE”
     ALMNAC.

Itninfnll. IVTni-oli, IDlf).


130
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 16, 1919.
FIREWORKS
for the forthcoming
PEACE CELEBRATIONS
  The above first shipment will arrive in Singapore on the 15th at the latest and will be ready for immediate distribution to complete orders already received. Please lead the printed circular overleaf with full directions how to let these Fireworks off.
PLEASE SEND IN YOUR
ORDERS
immediately if you want to participate
in this
National Event
to
Mr. Y. TAN.
Raffles Chambers,
SINGAPORE.
  Prices from $200, $330 and $450. Full remittance to accompany Orders, and accompanied by an import permit from the C. P. O. at your city. Outstation orders plus $25 cost of transport by railway.
  Set pieces, Day and Night Bomb Shells: Prices on application, if possible by wire, as the time is too short for correspondence. Selections may be left to me if preferred.
      Do Not Delay. 
[2-1]
“A clean tooth never decays.”
H. OHNISHI D.D.S. (T.D.C.)
(Graduated Tokyo Dental College)
Japanese Dentist
193-6, ORCHARD ROAD, SINGAPORE.
[12—101
WANTED.
 ONE OR TWO APPRENTICE CLERKS (Chinese) for the Post, Shipping and Customs Office. Kuching.
  Preference given to those having a knowledge of Chinese writing.
  Apply in own handwriting to the Postmaster General, Kuching.
     AOBA & CO.,
HIOH CLASS JAPAHESE PHOTOGRAPHIC ARTISTS.
                  (QUALIFIED IN TOKYO.)
     Will take outdoor photographs at any I place and time. Night photographs can also • he taken with the latest and safest Hash light process. Best attention will be always given to patrons.
No. 32, KHOO HUN YEANG STREET.
KUCHING.
1 [6—2]
  SYN HIN LEONG & CO.,
      22, CARPENTER STREET.
            COMMISSION AGENTS.
   Brer. Wine, Spirit A General Store Dealers.
                	:(o):	 *
SOLE AGENTS FOR I
  FRASER & NEAVE'S AERATED WATERS-
         (The Best throughout the East.)
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic
Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at
$1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 catties of dry rubber.
ASAHI BEER.
             ACETIC ACID.
	:(o):	
Fresh supplies of Stores are received regularly.
      PRICES MODERATE.
Free delivery to customers in Kuching.
Free packing & shipping for Outstation.
Orders.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 16, 1919.	131
M E T E 0 R 0 L 0 G I C A L R E TU RNS.
GENERAL HOSPITAL.
Kuching, April, 1919.
Highest Barometric reading
Lowest „	„
Highest temperature (shade)
Lowest „	,,
Highest	Sun
30-03 inches.
29’94	„
99 degrees.
70’5	„
166'5
Longest Period of Sunshine in one day 11 hours.
Total rainfall (Museum)	6’52 inches.
Greatest rainfall in 24 hours
1’29
Height of Hospital above sea level approximately 75 feet.
Rainfall, April, 1919.
DURING 24 Hours.


132
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 16, 14)19.
PURE POOD MEANS GOOD HEALTH
“ALEXANDRIA” CANNED MEATS
Every Tin Guaranteed under the New South Wales Pure Food Act, and packed under the constant and vigilant supervision of a Government Inspector.
ASK FOR “ALEXANDRIA”
flftRoast BeefRoast Mutton       Beef SausageCorned BeefCorned Mutton       Pork SausageOx CheekSpiced Mutton       Frankfurt SausageOx Tongues	HMutton Chops            Beef DrippingLuncheon TonguesAssorted Meats       Pork and BeansSheep TonguesMinced Scollops   ;	Irish StewExtract of Beef
ftAssorted Soups       Ox Tail SoupAs supplied in huge quantities to theImperial and Indian         Governments foruse by both theArmy and Navy.Sold by all Stores.
R. GOSLING & CO.,
2 Castlereagh Street, SYNDNEY, N. S. W.
“ALEXANDRIA MEAT WORKS.”
Distributors for tin; East:
Seremban General Agency, Ltd.
(Incorporated in F.M.S.)
SINGAPORE.
Sub: Agents—BAN JUI LONG,
14 Carpenter Street, KUCHING, SARAWAK.
and BAN JUI GUAN.
• [W-8J
MIRI, SARAWAK.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 16, 1919.
133
THE SARAWAK STUDIO
THE BEST IN KUCHING
WHERE GOOD PORTRAITS CAN BE TAKEN AND VIEWS OF THE
N EIGHBOURHOOD PROCURED.
VIEWS OF THE WANGKANG PROCESSION IN GREAT
VARIETY FOR SALE.
PHOTOS FOR PASSPORTS
AT SHORT NOTICE.
AMATEURS' FILMS & PLATES DEVELOPED, PRINTED &
ENLARGED AT REASONABLE CHARGES.
FRESH KODAK FILMS CAN ALWAYS BE SUPPLIED.
Free instructions given to Amateurs with pleasure.
C. M. LEE, Manager.
21, COURT HOUSE ROAD, KUCHING.
(12--C
= RIDE A RIGID, RAPID, RELIABLE =	?
RALEIM
GUARANTEED FOR EVER ALL THE WORLD OVER
Raleigh Cycle Co. Ld.
        NOTTINGHAM. ENGLAND.
with patent tubular fork-crown, a complete
circle of steel, instead of an iron plate,
as in other bicycles. Immensely strong
at this most vitally important part.



134
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 16, 1919.
S H I P P I N G
Arrivals.
Departures.
     
F. G. DAY,
liiyistrar of Trade.
KUCHING:—Printed and Published by GHIN HENG SOON, Government Printer, at the Government Printing Office.
Barrack Road.

