
VOL. XL?.
No. 771.

 Sararawak Gazette.
KUCHING, MONDAY, JUNE 16, 1919.	10cents
CONTENTS.
The Sarawak Gazette.
   The Sarawak Gazette.
   SUHSCHIPTIONS to the Gazette are as follows:
The Sarawak Gazette
  PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
    Single copy	...	...	                  ...        .10 cents
    Subscription for one year	...	...	   $2.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations                   2.25 
Subscription including postage to all other
                 Countries.	...	...	2.50
  PAYABLE IN STERLING—
    Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 5s. 10d
The Sarawak Government Gazette
  PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
Single copy	...	...	...	.05 cents
Subscription for one year	...	...     $1.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations                 1.25 
Subscription including postage to all other
                 Countries. ...	...       1.50
  PAYABLE IN STERLING—
    Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 3s. 6d
   All subscriptions are payable in advance and must commence from the 1st January in each year on which date they are renewable. All broken periods will be considered as full.
   Subscriptions will not be renewed unless notice of renewal given.
   Changes of Address should lie notified to the Office in writing.
MONDAY, JUNE 16, 1919.
Birth.
?
    OWEN.— AT Kuching, Sarawak, on the 14th June 1919 the
wife of DONALD A. OWEN (Sarawak Civil Service) of a daughter.
(Singapore papers please copy.)
NOTES.
(June.)
   THE Singapore and Sarawak Steamship Co.,
ceased to exist on June 1st having transferred
all its property to the newly formed Sarawak
Steamship Co., which came into being on
that date.
   The shares of the new Company are all
held locally and we trust the enterprise will
prove a profitable one for the shareholders.
   A salute of 21 guns and the closing of the
Government offices on June 3rd were the
only celebration of the King’s Birthday this
year. Had the Peace Terms been signed the
celebrations would have been of a very different
character, and we regret that such was not
the case, as the occasion would have been
a splendid opportunity for all Britishers to
shew their loyalty to King George who with
the Queen and the rest of the Royal Family
have through their untiring and devoted
labours during the 4 ½  years of war made a
bond between our Royal Family and our
Empire that will never be broken.
   ONE of the large steel tanks that got adrift while being towed to Miri from Singapore some months ago was reported ashore at Tanjong Datu recently.
   The m. t. Miri proceeded there on receipt of this news, located the tank and towed it to Miri arriving there safely on the 31st ultimo-
Page..Birth:—Owen    ... 155Notes155Fire in Kuching Bazaar	...	...    ... 157Reduction of Home Passage Rates    ... 157Wireless ...    ... 157Mercantile Marine Service Commission    ... 157Retirement of Mr. Thos. Lewis    ... 157The Java Eruption ...    ... 158A fishing trip on the coast of Borneo    ... 158Correspondence    ... 160Bowls    ... 161Cold Storage    ... 161Monthly Reports:—Sadong Colliery—Oya ...    ... 161                    Baram . ...    ... 162                    Miri—Limbang    ... 168Kuching Shipping    165,167Passengers    ... 166Miri Shipping    ... 166Almanac ...    ... 166Meteorological Returns	...	...    ... 168Rainfall ...	...	 ...    ... 168

156
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 16, 1919.
  THE usual salute of 7 guns was fired on the
evening of the 30th to usher in the Mohama-
den Fast Month.
  THE S.S. Rajah of Sarawak sailed for Singa-
pore on the morning of the 4th with the usual
cargo and eases of jelutong stacked high on
the decks.
  The Honble. F. G. Day who is going on
short leave, took a passage by her, as also did
Mr. J. M. Bryan and Dr. A. C. Hanton.
  Mr. Heap arrived from Sibu on the 6th by
s. s. Gladys.
  IT will interest many of our readers to hear
that Miss Doris Clark—daughter of- Lieut.
Clark. S. R. and Mrs. Clark of Kuching—has
passed the Junior Cambridge Local Examina-
tion in Singapore with distinction in Divinity.
  Miss Clark has been educated at the Con-
vent of the Holy Child in Singapore.
  THE out-put of gold and silver from the
Cyaniding Works at Bau during May amount-
ed to Gold 2,218.1 ozs. Silver 632.9 ozs.
  CAPT. Moulton, 4th Wiltshire Regt, has been
granted the temporary rank of Major whilst
acting as Staff Officer to the Local Forces in
the Straits and F. M. S.
  BRIGADIER General Borton, D. s. o., R. A. F.
acting on behalf of the War Office arrived
at Pending on board the R. I. M. s.s. Minto
on the 31st. He was met by the Honbles.
the Resident and Treasurer with whom he
came up to Kuching, being received there by
a salute of 11 guns and a guard of honour of
50 men. Capt. Withers accompanied him
to Kuching where they were guests at the
Residency.
  The object of the visit was to discover a
suitable ground for an aerodrome and landing
station should it be eventually decided to
make Sarawak one of the stations on the
Postal Air Route to the East, and we hear,
unofficially, that the Race Course was decided
on as the possible site.
  The General left next morning in the Minto.
  A few Sarawakians—members of Messrs, the Borneo Company Limited—who elected to return home via Australia, appear to have had anything but a pleasant trip. The anticipated landings at places en route were forbidden owing to a supposed infectious case on board, and on arrival in Australia temperatures were taken and masks had to be worn as a protection against influenza.
  However, the Australian stay was of a few days only, as they got away by the transport Ascanius very soon after arrival and travelled home via the Cape.
  IN consequence of the scarcity of subsidiary silver and copper coinage the Treasury have
issued a number of notes of the value of ten
cents in order to tide over the difficulty.
   The engkabang crop is now over and the
copper coin will gradually return to circula-
tion, but the coinage trouble will not be
righted until the new Straits dollars are in
circulation owing to the refusal of the native
population to receive paper money and their
tendency to hoard silver and copper coin.
   DAHAN Estate produced 14,000 tbs. and
Sungei Tengah Estate 59,500 tbs. of dry rubber
during May.
   THE Honble. the Resident accompanied by
Mr. Archer left for Sadong by the s. I. Lucile
on the morning of the 4th.
   In consequence of a wireless communication
received from the Manager of the Colliery a
large force of police proceeded to Sadong by
the launch.
   The Honble. the Resident returned to Ku-
ching on the 6th.
   THE Misses Ada Cubitt. Charlotte Gibson,
and Gwendolen Sebborn were passengers by
the s.s. Kuching arriving on the 6th of June.
Miss Cubitt returns from furlough, and will
resume her work at St. Mary’s School and
St. Thomas’ Pro-Cathedral. Miss Gibson and
Miss Sebborn are new arrivals in the diocese
and will be stationed at Kuching, Miss Gib-
son taking up work at St. Thomas’ School
and Miss Sebborn at St. Mary’s.
   THE p.s. Adeh returned from Limbang on
the 7th. Mr. Thos. Lewis, General Manager
of the Collieries, came down by her. She
left for Baram on the 11 th with Mr. J. Barnes
who is making an inspection of the wireless
stations at Miri and Sibu.
   THE s.s. Kuching left for Singapore on the
10th. She carried as passengers, Miss Olver
and Messrs. Lewis, Heap and Mills.
   Miss Olver goes to join the 8. P. G. Mission
in B. N. Borneo.
   Mr. Lewis en route for England after
17 years in Sarawak and we wish him a safe
voyage home and the best of health during
his well earned retirement.
   Mr. Mills has left the employ of Messrs, the Borneo Company at Bau, and Mr. Heap returns to Singapore after a short visit to this country?
   Pao Patria, writing to the Straits Times, suggests that an hour spent in one’s club every  evening after a hard day’s work will usually wash away the dirt of worriness from one’s mind which may have accumulated during his business hours in the course of the day.
   Some much worried and hard worked Ku- chingites might try the above remedy both for their own good and that of the club.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 16, 1919.
157
  THE S. S. Rajah of Sarawak arrived from
Singapore on the 12th. She brought no
European passengers.
  She was to have sailed for Sibu next day
which happened to be Friday the 13th, but
the combination of unlucky day and number
was too much for the new Company who wish
to run no risks at the beginning of their career
and the sailing date was altered to the follow-
ing day.
  We understand she is to make this her first
trip Sibu—Singapore and if it proves a success
further similar trips will follow.
  THE occupants of a small native house on
Satang Island were recently awakened at 2
a.m. by the heaving of the floor of the house.
A Malay, picking up his parang, went under
the house to discover the reason and found an
enormous python curling round the post be-
tween the beams and the floor and so displacing
the flooring.
  The Malay cut at the reptile and bolted—
so did the python though severely wounded,
and he was followed at a respectful distance
by the man until he disappeared into a hole
in the ground. The reptile was described as
being about 30 feet long and 12 inches in dia-
meter. The next night the goats under the
house commenced bleating and investigation
with a lantern shewed a python twisted
round a large goat. The python was des-
patched by a few parang cuts and the goat
survived.
  This reptile was 19 feet long and of pro-
portionate girth.
Fire in Kuching Bazaar.
   A fire that might have resulted in a serious con-
flagration broke out in Kuching Bazaar at 2.40 a.m.
on the night of the 14th June.
   The ashes of a baker's oven had been raked out
on the top of a quantity of debris which caught
alight and eventually the fire got a good hold of
the bakery outhouse.
   Owing to an eletrical storm the telephone to the
residence of the Supt. of Police was not working
and for some unknown reason the town water
supply is turned off at 6 p.m.—6 a.m. and was not
available for J hour, and it was 3.30 a.m. before
the mains filled. Had there been any wind the
conflagration would have been disastrous.
  Reduction of Home Passage Rates.
—*—
   The Singapore Agents of the P. & O. S. N. Coy: have reduced by 20% passage rates from Singapore to London by P. & O. steamer.
  Rates are now:—
To London.
1st class.2nd class.Mail     £80    £54Intermediate     £66    £62To Marseilles.1st class.2nd class.Mail     £74    £50Intermediate     £62    £44Wireless.

   Perhaps it may be of interest that through the
kind services of the wireless operator of the s. s. Minto
which recently visited here who offered to listen for
signals from the Kuching station, a distance of 63
miles direct from Kuching was reached by my wire-
less transmitting set; owing to bad atmospherics it
was impossible to receive any longer but under nor-
mal conditions the operator stated the apparatus
would have reached at least 100 miles. This set,
which is home made, is intended to work from Goe-
bilt to Kuching and will be installed later as the
telephone line between these two places is very un-
reliable. A duplicate set has been completed and will
be placed in the Kuching station so as to avoid using
the high power apparatus when communicating with
Goebilt. The receiving apparatus in the Kuching
station is also local made and has been in use now
for some. 12 months: it is much more efficient than
the Government apparatus and has enabled the
operators to carry on when work would have had to
lie stopped on some occasions. A service with
Jesselton is expected to be instituted soon by these
means.
   The farthest distance from which conversation
has been heard at Kuching station up to the present
is Belmar near New York. This station was con-
versing with the s. s. Pensylvania and signals were
distinct but were soon jammed and it was not
possible to hear any more.
J. R. BARNES.
Masters and                  $420
   Chief Engineers	
Chief Officers	$320
     2nd Engineers 
2nd Officers                 $210
     3rd Engineers
3rd Officers                   $150
      4th Engineers
Mercantile Marine Service Commission.
—?—
   The Report of the Straits Mercantile Marine
Service Commission states that “the main point on
which the claims for increases of salary were based is
the increase in the cost of living and Public Officials
and those on fixed salaries have been most seriously
affected”.
   The Commission consequently suggest that sa-
laries be increased all round and that the following
be the scale of salaries in the future.
               per month       up to            by annual
                                                                     increments of
                                                                $540                 $30 a month.
                                                                $380                 $20	„
                                                                $240                 $15    ,,
   This scale allowing of the 1st two grades of officers
marrying, $380 a month being considered by the
Commission the least salary on which a man in
such a position can marry.
   The report further states that “generally speak-
ing the extra sense of responsibility resulting from
matrimony is an asset to an employer in it's steady-
ing effects on the employee and in it’s resultant
desire on the part of the married employee for
continuous employment’’.
     Retirment of Mr. Thos. Lewis.
   Mr. Lewis, who left by the s. s. Kuching on the 10th, came out to Sarawak as a miner in Brooketon Colliery on August 13th 1903 and was appointed Manager in charge of the Govt. Collieries on July 20th 1912. He took over the management of Brooketon mine under conditions sufficient to dishearten any Manager, as it had being worked at a heavy loss for many years past. However this


158
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 16, 1919.
fact did not dishearten Mr. Lewis who managed to reduce the losses immediately, and in 1917 the Colliery made a small profit while that of 1918 amounted to $118,369.06.
  Doubtless this was due to a great extent to the rise in the price of coal owing to the war, but much more was it due to the, fact that Mr. Lewis had the welfare of the Colliery at heart and with untiring energy worked for the result that he has at last achieved, and he earned the respect not only of European and native employees on the mine but of all those with whom he has been in contact, and his retirement will be sincerely regretted by all.
The Java Eruption.
  Latest reports show that the eruption of the F Kloet volcano which took place on May 20th has caused enormous and widespread damage, and, as would he expected in such a thickly populated country as Java, unfortunately a terrible loss of life.
  Twenty-six villages have been completely swept away and the whole country in the vicinity of the volcano deluged with boiling mud to a depth of several feet, the large lake in the crater estimated to contain 10 million cubic yards of water and mud having been blown out.
  The country that suffered was extensively planted with sugar, coffee and rubber and some 40,000 acres of rice, land have been completely destroyed, a serious matter in view of the threatened rice shortage elsewhere.
  The Netherland India Government have sent 20,000 soldiers to assist in the work of restoration, and an appeal has been made by the Consul General for the Netherlands in Singapore for funds to assist in relieving the distress caused by this terrible eruption.
  The Sarawak Gazette will be pleased to forward any subscriptions that may be made for this object and to publish lists of donations.
  A fishing trip on the coast of Borneo.
  The cool land breeze was blowing gently through the bungalow as I struggled into an old khaki suit at five o'clock in the morning of a day in May and rubbing my eyes went out on to the grass on which the dew was shining in the dim light of the setting moon A hundred yards away the river ran swiftly past the broad stretches of sandy banks towards the belt of pale moonlight on the smooth surface of the eastern sea. Several figures were moving about near a longboat which was afloat close to the shore, and as I moved down towards it the mast was raised and the men took their places paddles in hand. 1 scrambled on board and sat down on a pile of black nets and immediately the paddles took the water together and the boat began to move down-river on the swift ebb tide.
  In a few minutes we were clear of the river and, as the land breeze blew stronger and stronger from behind us the paddles ceased thudding and a huge sail climbed slowly up the mast and spread far out over the water on one side. The boat's pace increased. The thud thud of the paddles gradually ceased until with a Tinal clatter the last man put down his paddle and very soon the clatter of brass boxes shewed that the crew had settled themselves down to smoke and chew sirih, and presently beyond the ripple of the water under the bows and an occasional creak from the rudder there was absolute silence. The broad belt of moonlight grew paler and the land breeze began to lose its cold edge while the long lines of casuarinas lining the coast could be dis
tinctly seen. Then of a sudden a bright glow appeared in the eastern sky and with a flash the sun rose above the horizon the whole sea becoming a vast sheet of dancing fire the blinding glare from which it was impossible to face and we instinctively turned our backs on what had now become a fiery furnace. It was now possible to see what kind of craft we were afloat in and what preparations had been made for a five or six days cruise.
  The boat was a double ended craft some forty feet long with a beam of six feet, fitted with thwarts in the ordinary way. The middle of the boat was taken up with a pile of dark seine nets and their floats of light wood, while disposed in the spaces between the thwarts were three huge iron-wood tubs each some three feet deep and four feet wide and these were filled with the gear of the crew, jars of water, bags of salt, empty sacks, a bag of rice, cooking pots and various tins containing provisions, etc.: between the tubs and the boat's sides were arranged fish spears with one, two or three steel prongs and long bamboo handles, while, the men's paddies were also wedged in there as well, and lying about on the thwarts were casting nets, and parangs (native knives always carried at the waist when ashore).
  The heat soon became intense and the ten brown men produced kadjangs from somewhere under the mass of gear in the boat, and spreading themselves out on the nets or in corners between the tubs settled down to sleep or doze under their shade, leaving only the steersman sitting stolidly smoking, his face in the shade of a huge palm leaf hat, occasionally giving a turn to one of the heavy rudders as a puff of wind came off shore from one of the hollows bet ween the hills. Near midday the land breeze suddenly died away and there was a dead calm, the sea being like glass: the men began to rout about for their lunch and were soon munching pills of prepared sago and dried fish, washing the meal down with draughts of water from the jars. The meal over, the sea breeze came down and the boat was soon heeling over and doing her best.
  As the part of the coast to be passed that night was a mass of reefs and steep cliffs, it was decided to camp for the night at the mouth of a small stream and leave early next morning so as to run no risk of meeting a change of weather when off this rocky coast. So we ran for the stream and next morning early set sail again up the coast.
  The cliffs for as far as we could see were sheer and the rocks ran in ledges far out to sea at their feet. However, all went well until we were within a mile of a small stream at the far end of the rocky bit of coast, when the sky seawards began to darken and then grew as black as ink and the wind suddenly died away altogether. The sail was lowered and we clutched at the paddles and drove the boat for the mouth of the small stream, but when 50 yards away a white line appeared on the water outside us and the inky sky and sea seemed to meet there ; the line drew rapidly nearer and suddenly the squall struck us heeling the boat over till the water poured in. The men righted her and we just managed to get into the stream. The storm then broke in its full fury—the surface of the sea was literally whipped off and the water flew in sheets over us. There was no possiblity of getting shelter so we sat in the stream under the lee of the boat with our heads just out of water, and any attempt to look seaward was impossible the clouds of spray stinging the face like hail. Trees began to fall all round; and we sheered off from under the lee of a row of tall casuarinas as the whole line fell inwards with a crash. The thunder was deafening, and the lightning flashes succeeded one another with scarcely an interval.
  The storm ceased as suddenly it began, and in an hour the sun shone out and the sea went down


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 16, 1919.
159
and we left the friendly stream and paddled up the coast in the warm afternoon. We soon left the rocky coast behind, and now the fishing grounds came in sight as we rounded the last point and made for the mouth of a stream that came out of the jungle under its shelter—a long curve of broad yellow sands—ending in a rocky point some ten miles away. There was no question about fishing however this evening, there being still too much surf after the squall, so we paddled into the little stream mid ran the boat ashore close to a broad ledge of rocks that projected into it from the sands on one side.
  The party then divided—a couple of men going off up-stream io find fresh water for drinking purposes, two others began unloading the boat, while the remainder took their parangs and went off to get polesand sticks for a shelter. In a few minutes a large hut was in course of construction on a patch of deep dry sand close to the ledge of rocks, several men brought stacks of nipa palm leaves from a patch close by, and with these the roof and walls were made, the big leaves being tied down so as to render the hut perfectly watertight Long before dark a fire was going, and the old man of the party—who had gone out with a casting net directly we arrived—returned with a three foot shark and a quantity of smaller fish he had caught, and by seven p.m. the inside of the hut was full of sleeping mats, mosquito curtains and endless small gear was hanging round the leaf walls, while curried fish and steaming rice were ready for the evening meal. Coffee and cigarettes followed, and very soon after the curtains began to be slung up and the whole crew were fast asleep in the warm dry sand. Three a.m. however found us up again : hot coffee had already been prepared by the man who constituted himself the cook of the party, and after finishing that the nets were coiled neatly down inside the boat and we paddled quietly out of the stream and along the edge of the sands in the dim moonlight. Every dip of the paddles lit up the boat with phosphorescence and the water broke away from tinder the bows in long waves of brilliance till the boat seemed to be moving through a sea of fiery milk. Flashes of fire in the water under us showed the presence of fish, and presently a short distance ahead the splashing of a shoal close inshore could be distinctly seen. As we neared, a couple of men slipped over the side without a sound into four feet of water, one holding one end of the net, and the other began to walk slowly inshore holding a long bamboo The boat was paddled quietly round outside the unsuspecting shoal the long net being paid steadily out over the side till the whole of its 140 yards had been thrown in a semicircle round the fish. Four or five more men then went over-board and those armed with bamboos stretched out between the ends of the net and the  shore, and at a given signal began to splash and beat the water making as much noise as possible, the ends of the net meanwhile being drawn slowly together. The startled fish at once charged the net which shook and jerked with the sudden strain, the floats sinking under the surface. The two ends of the net were now together inshore, and while one man remained in the water between them beating the surface to prevent the shoal making for the gap, the others got into the boat and began to haul in the net hand over hand. stowing it carefully between the thwarts as it came aboard. Presently a large fish came up in 1 the meshes, and then another, and then it was seen I of what the shoal had consisted—senangin a fish not at all unlike the salmon and one of the finest fish to be obtained in these waters. Now the net was a mass of fish varying from lb. to 14 lbs. each in weight, and the boat began to settle down in the water as the stream of fish were shot into the bottom.
Then the net came near the end and two more men came to help pull it in, faster and faster it came until with a final pull and lift the whole net was hoisted into the boat, the water pouring over the side as the weight increased. A huge struggling mass of silver fish poured on board and fell glittering into the bottom while men pushed the pile of fish away into the bows and stern, several of them slipping over into the water on the other side. This big haul consisted almost entirely of senangin scarcely another kind being visible, and the boat was nearly half full of fish. The men rest for a few minutes to chew betel-nut and sirih and roll cigarettes, and then pick up the paddles and move quickly up the coast in search of another shoal. .After paddling half a mile the water was seen to be full of a kind of small shrimp called bubok. the shoals of these jumping from the water as they were chased by the fish underneath, so the net was again shot in the same manner as before. This time the haul produced mostly senangin, but as the end of the net neared the boat the bobbing of the floats and jerking of the net showed that something larger than usual had got entangled. As many large fish in these waters are armed with poisonous spines or rows of sharp teeth more care than usual was taken, and the end of the net was twisted round the struggling fish and. both ends being brought on board, all hands set to work to lift. After a minute's hard work,  the boat meanwhile half filling with water, the head of a large shark appeared over the side, and, as these gentlemen make themselves very un-  pleasant on board a boat when alive, one of the men picked up his parang and slipping over the side quieted it’s struggles with a few hard cuts on the head, doing al the same time considerable damage to the net in which it was enfolded. The fish a six foot shark—was then lifted on board and stowed under the thwarts. Several other fish came on board with him —one a fine specimen of stinging ray weighing some 40 tbs with a couple of jagged spines near the root of the long tail each several inches long. To foul one of these spines means a week of agony, and so poisonous are they and consequently so dreaded is the fish by the natives, that when fishing it is forbidden to mention it's name pari—it being called daun (a leaf) instead. The natives say that a breach of this custom entails stepping on one of the fish when in the water pulling the net, which would bring the rash man s fishing to an end for the time being. The back of the pari is protected by a kind of armoured skin which is taken off and dried, and when dry can be used as a file so hard is it. It is commonly used by natives for smoothing off and finishing the surface of wood, such as a paddle or spear handle, and is capable of making an impression on iron.
   The ray's tail is cut off and thrown overboard, and the tide being on the turn, and the boat loaded down with fish, and the net in need of repair, we turn back to the stream which is reached at 4 a. m.
   In a very few minutes the senangin's roes were being fried and curried and the cook of the party- had the hot coffee ready, so after a quick bathe and change the whole party sat down to a well earned breakfast. This over, cigarettes were light ed and armed with small sharp knives we all sat on the rocks beside the pile of fish and set to work splitting and cleaning them;
   Finding that I was not an expert at this and that my fingers seemed to be as often in contact with the edge of the knife as with the fish. I set to work spreading the split fish on the rocks to dry in the sun after thoroughly rubbing a quantity of salt into each. This work went on all the morning and well into the afternoon when all the flat slabs of rock around were covered with the fish,


160
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 16, 1919.
which soon dried sufficiently to allow of their being packed in sacks, the rocks being so hot that one could not bear one’s hand on them for a second. Late in the afternoon we were all lying smoking in the hut when I noticed one of the large fish on a rock close by partly hidden by a bush begin to move gradually towards the bush. Guessing that it was probably a monitor lizard attacked by the smell of the fish doing a quiet steal. I picked up my gun and put a lord of buck shot through the bush a few yards away. The result surprised me. With a snort and a rush a huge boar bolted from behind the bush and disappeared in the jungle behind. But the chance shot had gone home and we found him lying dead a dozen yards away. I cut away his tusks— a fine long pair—and left him there to the mercy of the big lizards which would leave very little of the carcase in a day’s time, and they would be able to devote their attention to his carcase instead of perpetually stealing our drying fish. I had shot two or three of these lizards stealing fish off the rocks and someone had to be on watch the whole time the fish were drying. The heat of the sun was intense and the stroll along the hot rocks in the afternoon on sentry duty anything but pleasant.
  In the evening several of us went for a stroll along the sands in the cool to get shell-fish off the ridge of rocks that formed one horn of the crescent shaped bay. Several wild pigs were walking about near the edge of the jungle, and one big fellow walked up wind with his nose on the ground right up to us. Borrowing a /wrung from one of the men I walked-up to him and cut him a slash over the head—however it takes a heavy slash to kill a big pig, and he merely snorted and turned and bolted for the jungle at full speed.
  We collected a quantity of shell fish and brought away as much of the mass of small shrimps as we could carry. The shoals of these had been left by the tide in the gullies between the rocks, where they lay to a depth of 6 or 8 inches, and had merely to he collected by hand. They are excellent eating when fried, but the natives usually pound them tip with salt and dry the paste in the sun. This paste is a favourite article of food and is known as blachan.
  That-night we went out again after the shoals with the same result as before, and in the evening I strolled with the gun along the sands in the other direction. Green pigeon were very numerous and 1 found several tracks of temado (wild cattle), and deer were also plentiful but these beasts usually only come out at night. Walking back I met two of the party busy digging in the dry sand above high water mark, and before long they unearthed a nest of turtle's eggs—85 in number.
  The tracks made by a turtle as he comes up from the water are easily seen, and when he reaches the dry sand he walks some yards along it, digs a hole, deposits his eggs and covers them up again, and then walking a few yards further along returns to the water probably twenty yards from where he left it. The wind soon covers his tracks in the sand and levels up the marks of digging over the nest, so that the only way to find the whereabouts of the nest is to poke about with a small stick in the dry sand between the two tracks until it sinks into the space where the eggs are deposited.
  The sea being still Smooth the next night we again set out with the net, but the tides were unsuitable and the sea was full of jelly’ fish myriads of them—possessors of long rags of tails the slightest touch of which is like that of a red hot iron, and as it was impossible to remain in the water we gave up the fishing and paddled home again after a few hours out. Gur hands and feet were burning from contact with the jelly fish and we were glad to get back to the hut and go to
sleep. One or two of us were stung by the leppu, a little red stickle back about two inches long and covered with small sharp spines. 1 got hold of one when hauling in the net and the result was like a series of electric shocks running up one’s arm to the shoulder intensely painful for a time but not lasting long luckily. While paddling back across the bay we passed a large crocodile lying on the calm surface of the sea quite a mile from land. These beasts are often seen at sea during the calm weather a considerable distance from land, probably they go out in search of fish which are numerous and easily caught at that time.
   We spent next day fishing, drying the fish, and . salting down those we could not dry in the tubs- a layer of split fish and a layer of salt and so on, and putting the net in a proper state of repair. The next evening the camp broke up. the many sacks of dried fish were stowed in the boat and the tubs of salt fish in the middle between the thwarts, and by the time we were all on board the big boat had only a few inches of freeboard left. As the land breeze came down at 3 a.m. we hoisted the sails, and leaving a man ‘steering and another on watch the rest of us curled up on the sacks and lengths of net and slept in the brilliant moonlight as the boat slid quietly through the phosphorescent water on its way down the coast. The next evening saw us entering the river from which we started a week ago, the men thoroughly pleased with the trip from a fishing point of view, every man having secured sufficient fish to last him and his family for many weeks, and myself fit and well after one of the most pleasant picnics imaginable.
D. A. O.
CORRESPONDENCE;
   [The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of correspondents.]
To the Editor,
   The Sarawak Gazette.
DEAR SIR,
     Your Miri correspondent Mr. "Melrose" in his notes in your last issue on the Peace Celebrations “ wonders what the Huns would have done to impress Eastern peoples had they been Victors”, if from this one is to conclude that he thinks they are a people worthy of imitation (in which few outside Miri w ill be found to agree with him) he could not have put forth a more cogent reason for dispensing with the Celebrations; and if on the other hand the celebrations are to be a 'big bean feast for the Europeans why not say so no one will say them I nay, but it is quite unnecessary to camouflage the j matter with such stuff as it’s being the right policy to impress the native: anyone knows that 99% of natives here don’t care a half penny whether there ar any jubilations or not seeing that European wars, politics and conditions altogether are an absolute blank to their minds.
   It is some years since I was in Baram, and in the meantime civilization may have made much greater strides there than the writer is aware of, ano that the Leppu Tippus. Uma Poh Kayans, Kenyahs of Long Ikang and other tribes may have reached the length of discussing the salient points of the Peace Conference or League of Nations, in which case they will be duly impressed by the Peace Celebrations if invited to assist at them, and heaven help them poor things if they are to bes impressed after the manner of the Hun.
   Mr. Melrose’s lamentations over the loss of his cold storage and the awful misery he predicts if there


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 16, 1919.
161
were no “social activities" makes one do a little wondering also and wonder what he would have done had the fates placed him at some of the outstations where there are no social activities of any kind where the principal food was and is the homely hen, with tough and tasteless buffalo occasionally as a pleasing change, and yet where men have lived for 10, 15 or more years and are still mirabile dictu hale and hearty. Miri with it's Dramatic Society, highly classical concerts, cold storage (when they get it) mid other luxuries must be a veritable Paradise compared with some of these stations—but even in Paradise some people are not happy it seems.
  In the hope that the Miri Committee will be able to carry out their Peace Celebrations at an early date and thanking you again Mr. Editor.
I am,
Yours faithfully, “ WAIT AND SEE."
Bowls.
Cold Storage.
-
  It is interesting to learn that the cold storage
mutton which we obtain from Singapore at 75 cents a
lb. only costs 25 cents a lb. in Australia it's country
of origin
  This being so, consumers of Australian cold
storage would like to know the freight per lb. from
Australia to Singapore, and how a comparatively
short sea voyage and cost of storage, etc., in Singa-
pore multiplies the origami price by three.
MONTHLY REPORTS.
SADONG COLLIERY.
May.
  The gross out-put of coal produced during the
month was 2,018.17 tons, 465 tons of this was con-
sumed by our boilers, and 1,553.17 tons was delivered
to the wharf for export.
  The shipments for the month were : —
Tbe Kuching Municipality ... 280.04 tons
Messrs, the Borneo Co., Ltd., Kuching 1,032.18 ,,
,, British Malaysian Manu-
           facturing Co., Goebilt ...	6 00 ,,
The Sibu Station ...	...	80 00 ..
Total Shipments . 1,399.02 tons
  Our stock balance on the wharf at the end of the month was 2,002.11 tons.
  Mining operations underground went on smoothly and the engines and boilers were kept in good working order.
  The month's rainfall was 7’17 inches and a shortage of water was experienced at the No. 9 battery of boilers on the hill-side.
   The main pipe-line from the reservoir was cleaned
out to a point well below’ the Colliery crossing, and
the Colliery column was cleaned out, and the
wrought iron pipes well overhauled for a short dis-
tance.
   Over 1,000 tons of shale refuse was dumped on
the low-lying swamp behind the Malay kampong,
and only minor repairs were carried out to the
wharf.
   A new godown, with space for the Fairbank's
weighing machine added on to the up-river end, was
built on the down-river-side wing of the wharf, and
four bilian railway bridges were erected at the ex-
treme Colliery end of the line.
   The remainder of the allotments were divided
up amongst the Chinese coolies during the earlier
half of the month, and with the exception of a gang
of 27 singkhehs, who objected very strongly to the
scheme, everyone started clearing enthusiastically.
   A few days later this gang interfered and dis-
couraged those coolies who were well disposed
towards the planting scheme in every conceivable
way with the result they had desired, and, feeling
no doubt that they had become a power amongst the
labour force, their ringleaders showed great hostility
towards their mandors and organised their followers
to approach the mine Management in force on
several occasions in order to dictate their unreason-
able demands.
   The Malays have their allotments burnt and
partly cleared and the Colliery farm land is being
cleared and planted up.
   I am much indebted to Mr. Archer, The Resi-
dent, for large quantities of seed obtained by him
from up-river.
J. W. EVANS,
Manager.
OYA.
April,
   The Revd. A Mulder of Mukah passed through
Oy a on the 4th on a visit to Dalat.
   Early in the month coolies were employed clearing
the telephone rentis between Oya and Dalat; the
line bad not been tebassed for some years and was
found to be very much overgrown, the undergrowth
touching the wire in some places. Communication
with Sibu has much improved since this line was
cleared.
   The line to Mukah was down once during the
month owing, I am told, to a fire near Penat which
burnt the copper wire. 
   I went to Dalat on the 11th and returned on the
18th, there was plenty of Court work as usual,
principally in connection with sago lands. A
Chinese bandong trader of Kampong Kekan was
fined for knowingly buying and marking with his
chop sago trees on a laud which did not belong to
the person who sold the trees; the seller of course
was also fined. The buyer has entered an appeal
claiming ignorance of the boundaries. Some of
these traders will buy trees anywhere and from any-
body. and often from youths who own nothing them-
selves hut debt, but whose parents' own lands.
They will sell the trees on their parent's bind know-
ing that they are not likely to be prosecuted.
   The bakong weed or water hyacinth is again getting very bad in this fiver, and it has also spread to the lower reaches of the Igan. The native will not see that in lime, unless kept down, this weed will interfere with the navigation of the river and all its tributaries and make it impossible to Boat out sago trees. I have seen people picking out the weed from between the logs of their jelutongs, and
The usual monthly Bowling Handicap took place
at the Sarawak Club on the 2nd June and resulted
as follows:—


162
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 16. 1919.
instead of throwing it up on the land close by where
it will die, they actually throw it back into the
water again, because the water is a few feet nearer
them than the land. It is not the slightest use tell-
ing them as it has no effect at all.
  On the 23rd a fire broke out in the dapur of one
of the shops in the Dalat bazaar caused by
the fire-wood drying above the fire in the kitchen
becoming ignited : the roof quickly caught fire, but
fortunately there were a number of people around
and there was no wind and the flames were quickly
extinguished. Had there been a wind blowing at
the time the bazaar would probably have been
burnt
  I went to Dalat again on the 24th to look into the
cause of the fire and inspected the back premises of
all shops. In behind nearly every shop I found sheds
and pigsties, many joining the main buildings, and
all roofed with leaf attaps. I have ordered all these
sheds, where required, to be re-roofed at once with
bilian, attaps and have forbidden that any more be
built with leaf attap roofs or walls, or that kajangs
be used in their construction.
  A circular from the Committee of Food and Supply
Control, Kuching, explaining the rice situation and
offering recommendations for the encouraging of
planting substitutes for rice, arrived here towards
the end of the month, and steps have been taken
to acquaint the people with the situation and make
them realise the necessity for planting these sub-
stitutes without delay.
  Trade has been excellent during the month, the
price of raw sago at Dalat ranging between $1.10 and 
$1.30 per pasu. The Chinese are paying from $6 to
$8 per picul for jelutong, quantities of enkabang are
coming from up-river and all are bought nt three
gantangs a dollar.
  The shortage of copper money here is most annoy-
ing. Natives wishing to make a small purchase. of
a few cents are often unable to do so as the shop-
keeper either cannot or will not change a dollar note,
for each purchase amounting to a few cents only.
There is hardly any money visible here except notes,
and many of these, especially of the one dollar de-
nomination, are in a filthy and dilapidated condition.
  About a year ago there was very little else here
but copper money and very few notes indeed, now
nothing but these notes and copper money seems to
have entirely disappeared.
  Fourteen schooners entered the river and thirteen
left during the month.
  The exports are as follows :—
1918.	1919.
    Raw sago	172	coyaus	267	coyans
    Jelutong	450	piculs	138	piculs
    Engkabang	...	430	,,
May.
  I left Oya on the 4th for Dalat en route for the ulu
Oya to collect Dyak door tax and was away until
the Kith.
  Having visited all the houses on. the Oya river
last year, I visited this year those in the rivers
Petamin, Bauh and Bau Chelum, Sergeant Dullah
collecting door tax in the main river.
  Nearly $800 door tax was collected, a good deal of
arrears of tax being paid in. There is still some
outstanding, the Dyaks are so scattered about that
it is hard to find them all.
  Thanks to the wonderful crop of engkabang, and
the excellent price of the same, the Dyaks have plenty
of money, and the collecting of the tax was easy
enough.
  Of rice and padi however they have very little. 
but I do not think they are as badly off as they
state they are. In the ulu Petamin two or three 
houses had splendid crops, and there we were able
to buy a little rice at two gantangs the dollar, and
padi at one dollar per passu; but they were not
parting with very much rice as many people whose
crops had failed were continually coming to them to
buy padi and in the course of their visit enjoying
several free meals, and so they only husked a little
each day enough for their own consumption and
only sold padi.
  There were only one or two good harvests on the
main river, and those far up stream.
  On the 13th a small boy while bathing just beyond
the R. C. Mission at Dalat was taken by a crocodile,
the body was recovered two days later and bore
marks of the beast’s claws.
  Dr. Luhn, Medical Officer of the 3rd Division,
arrived from Sibu on the 19th, he visited Mukah on
the 21st and left here again on the 23rd for Sibu via
Igan.
  I visited Dalat on the 23rd returning again on the
30th, There was not a great deal of work there
this time, but several very obvious cases of attempt-
ed land grabbing were heard.
  Trade at Dalat has been splendid all the month.
The price of raw sago actually reached as high as
$2 per passu. The Chinese have been paying $10 a
picul for jelutong, and there are still large quantities
of engkabang in the ulu Oya waiting to be brought
down to Dalat.
  Fourteen schooners entered the river during the
month and fifteen cleared.
  The exports for the month are as follows :—
1919.	1918.
  Raw sago	145 coyans	277	coyans
  Jelutong	293 piculs	727 ½  piculs
  Engkabang	1,100 ..
  Para rubber	2 ,,
HENRY H. KORTRIGHT,
Resident 2nd Class.
BARAM
May.
  I returned from the Tinjar on the 12th inst. and
paid the sum of $3,231.87 into the Treasury being
tax and fines collected.
  Several Chinese were fined $100 each and severely
warned for having false daching. nothing else of
importance came before me.
  Owing to rice being very scarce in the bazaar, F
forbade any native rice to be sold to the Chinese but
they could dd so in the kampongs The Chinese buy
native rice at 00 cents a qantang but refuse to sell
again only supplying those who work jelutong.
  I informed all the Malays that they must commence
clearing land for farming at the end of the month
and also plant any substitute for rice.
  Penghulu Lanting came down during the month
and paid in the Poyut tax $598 and outstanding fines
amounting to $150.
  His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by
Mr. Gifford and several Baloi and Belaga chiefs,
arrived overland from the 3rd Division via Belaga,
Lobang and Tinjar on the 25th inst.
  Nothing of importance was brought before His
Highness and he left on a visit to the ulu Baram by
s. l. Chamois accompanied by Mr. Gifford, myself
and Penghulu Oyong Abun of Baloi on the 29th
instant, but owing to the pump which feeds the boiler
bursting it was found necessary to return, a start
being made on the following day.
  The 24th instant being Proclamation Day the
offices were closed and the flagstaff dressed.
  The Rt. Rev. Father Dunn and Rev. Father
Mulder paid a visit to the Mission during the month.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 16, 1919.	163
   The p. S. Adeh made one trip. This is only the third 
steamer for the year, and she cleared with only half 
cargo its did the s. s. Gladys the month before. 
   The steamers always seem to leave Kuching so as
to enable them to catch the neap tides at the month.
   Fines and fees amounted to $2,819.78.
   Datu Sheriff Hamid, Native Officer, resumed his
duties towards the end of the month.
   The rainfall was 8 39 inches.
   Prisoners were engaged during the month in clear-
ing kampong roads the grass being very long. The
contract coolies being ill it has been impossible to
find anyone to take their place owing to the high price of jungle produce.
           Imports.	Exports.
           $30,818	$18,455
C. D. ADAMS,
dissident 2nd Glass.
MIRI.
March.
   The Honble. the Divisional Resident Mr. R. S,
Douglas sailed for Singapore en route for Java on
the 10th on three months tropical leave.
   Mr. C. D. Adams came down from Baram on the
7th to see the Honble. the Resident about various
matters before his departure, he returned to Baram
three days later. On the 16th a fire broke out in
one of the Chinese gardens behind the bazaar and
rapidly spread in the direction of some of the oil
wells necessitating the calling out of the Anglo-
Saxon Company's staff and employees as well as the
local villagers to deal with it.
   The fire was however fortunately extinguished
just before it reached oil well No. 63.
   The Reverend Linton arrived from Kuching in
the s. s. Gladys on the 22nd. The following day
being Sunday Divine Service and a celebration of 
the Holy Communion was held in the Government
offices.
   On the 24th Native Officer Bujang came over from 
Niah and Sibuti and reported all well at these 
places : after attending to a few Native Court cases, 
none of which call for mention, he returned to Niah 
again in the s. 1. Chamois on the 28th.
   Mr. C. D. Adams, who had been suffering from 
fever of late, came down for medical advice on the 
27th and was still here at the end of the month. 
   Among the cases heard in the Courts during the
month were those of Bachee, Chop Hua Hong, fined
and ordered to pay compensation to the Anglo-Saxon
Petroleum Company for causing a fire in his garden
which might have had very serious consequences. 
Leong Kee Chong, a Hailam Chinese boy, punished 
and sentenced to eighteen months H. L. for attack- 
ing and wounding his employer Mr. Foien 
with a hammer. Hang Sang Hua imprisoned
for stealing a gold brooch from Captain Howard's
house while employed as a boy there. Fook Foh
Loong, a Chinese trader, fined for taking delivery of
other trader's goods with intent to swindle. Ho
Pak Sang, a clerk, fined for assaulting a Chinese
mandor. Tamby Mohamed fined, and afterwards
imprisoned by default, for causing a conflagration in
(the kampong.
   The local shop-keepers were also warned against
importing and selling imitation coins made up in the
form of buttons.
   On the 24th Awang Abu Bakar arrived from
British North Borneo to indentify a fugitive Chinese
named Fong Kwee alias Said wanted by the British
North Borneo Authorities. This man, it appears,
had been here some months working for the Anglo-
Saxon Petroleum Company, but unfortunately suc-
ceeded in getting away down the coast and taking
passage in the schooner Buah Mas for Kuching before
be could be arrested. Word was sent to Kuching
to look out for him and the cause of his sudden dis-
appearance is lining enquired into. The S. I. Chamois
made three trips to Niah and Sibuti during the
month and brought back cargoes of bilian attaps for
Baram bazaar, and rice and padi for local consump-
tion.
  Carpenters commenced repairing and refitting
various parts of the Residency. The Government
telephone line across the padang has now been remov-
ed to behind the Gymkhana Club. The crew of the
m.l. Helen were employed scraping and tarring the
bottom of the Japanese motor schooner which was re-
cently purchased by Government. I regret to report
that one of the valve sprocket guides on the wire-
less charging engine was found on inspection to be
broken, this was however, thanks to courtesy of the
General Manager of the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum
Company, quickly renewed in the Company’s work-
shop. The prisoners, who averaged 25 men, have
been employed on the general up-keep of the orna-
mental grounds and whitewashing the Government
buildings.
  Abang bin Anchey, the Resident's clerk, pro-
ceeded to Baram early in the month to do duty there
during the Honble. the Resident’s absence.
  The s.s. Utrecht sailed for Soesoe on the 8th with
a cargo of 1,415 tons of crude oil and the s.s.
Haliotis on the 25th with 2,118 tons of crude oil.
On the 20th the s.s. Nerite arrived to load oil and
also assist in the towing out of the new submarine
pipe-line at Lutong.
The rainfall was 3’03 inches.
The trade returns are as follows :—
Imports. Exports.
      Miri	...	516,220	$22,367
      Slab	...	420	649
      Sibuti	...	1,716	5,260
W. F. DE V. SKRINE,
Resident 2nd Class.
LIMBANG.
April.
  The p. s. Adeh made two trips here during the
month, arriving on the 1st and again on the 29th,
passengers on the latter occasion were Messrs. Mills
and Murray, who spent one night here and returned
to Kuching the following day.
  From the 4th to the 13th 1 was away at Sundar
and Trusan.
  The 18th and the 21st Good Friday and Easter
Monday, were observed as Government holidays.
  Mr. E. Roberts came over from Brunei on the
21st on a short visit, returning the following day.
  Lenggang, the Lobai Dyak, who was attacked by
Ujan, ride last month’s report, was sent to Labuan
for medical treatment. After he had been in hos-
pital a few days Dr. Clevertou found that to save his
life it would be necessary to amputate his arm and
informed him that if he would consent lo this
operation he was practically certain to recover but
otherwise his case was hopeless and nothing but a
miracle could save him.
  Lenggang refused to consent and was brought
back here by bis relations where he died on the 8th.
  His assailant, Ujan. was sentenced to 7 years
imprisonment for culpable homicide.
  Dahn was sentenced to 12 months H. L. and fined
$50 for theft of a buffalo.


164
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 16, 1919.
  Pte. Lenggai, S. R. was sentenced to 6 weeks H. L. for petty theft. Fines and fees amounted to $150.18.
  P. W. D.—The coolies have been working on the Limpaki and Sebukang roads.
  The prisoners on the ornamental grounds, the Bengkita and Sebukang roads.
  The following are the trade returns for the month: —
Imports. Exports.
    Coasting	...	$12,857	$19,852
    Foreign	...	4,676	4,535
The rainfall was 9’04 inches.
H. S. B. JOHNSON,
Resident 5th Division.
     The Sarawak Gazette.
RATES OF ADVERTISEMENTS IN THE " SARAWAK GAZETTE"
? ? -
Payable in advance.
Quarter of a column and under—
        First insertion .	..	... $1.00
        Second and third insertion each	... 0.50
        Subsequent do	do	... 0.35
Half a column and under—
        First insertion ...	...	... 2.00
        Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
        Subsequent do	do	... 0.50
A Column and under—
        First insertion each	...	... 4.00
        Second and third insertion each	... 2.00
        Subsequent do	do	... L00
Special arrangements may be made for standing advertisements.
  All communications intended for insertion in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed to the Editor at the Government Printing Office, Kuching. They should be clearly written and should reach the Office at least
one day before the publication of each issue.
    Letters and other contributions must be
authenticated by writer’s name sent privately
to the Editor.
  We cannot undertake to return rejected
communications, or to give reasons for not
inserting them.
  Residents at the Outstations will confer an
obligation by forwarding to the Office early
intelligence of all matters of general interest
in their respective neighbourhoods.
WANTED.
ONE OR TWO APPRENTICE CLERKS
(Chinese) for the Post, Shipping and
Customs Office. Kuching.
  Preference given to those having a know-
ledge of Chinese writing.
  Apply in own handwriting to the Post-
master General, Kuching.
NOTICE.
ASTANA FARM.
THE Manager of Astana Farm begs to inform the Public that he is unable to- attend to Orders for milk after Office hours.
RAILWAY RESTRICTIONS will be a powerful deterrent to many who wish to spend the Easter holiday away from home. But there is always the handy bicycle to fall back upon. With an easy-running machine as, for instance, the all steel Raleigh, one can make easily forty or fifty miles a day, with the advantage of being the master of one’s own time and route. Given decent weather and the lateness of Easter this year makes that probable—the number of cycling holiday-makers should be great.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO.,
     22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS.
Beer, Wine, Spirit & General Store Dealers.
	:(<>):	
SOLE AGENTS FOR:
FRASER & NEAVE’S AERATED WATERS
    
        (The Best throughout the East.)
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at $1 per quart bottle enough to make
            150 catties of dry rubber.
        ASAHI BEER.
ACETIC ACID.
	:(o):	
Fresh supplies of Stores are received regularly.
    PRICES MODERATE.
Free delivery to customers in Kuching.
I Free packing & shipping for Outstation Orders.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 10, 1919.	165
“A clean tooth never decays."
   H. OHNISHI D.D.S. (T.D.C.)
           (Graduated Tokyo Dental College)
Japanese Dentist
           193-6, ORCHARD ROAD, SINGAPORE.
[12—12]
KUCHING SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
     Departures. 	
NOTICE.
 AUCTION SALE
of unredeemed pledges from Pawn Broking Farm YEW CHEE & Co., Chop Wo SANG and Chop LOON YEK of Bau at No. 18, China Street on Saturday, 21st June 1919, at 9 a.m.
  List of all such unredeemed pledges can be seen at the Pawn Farmer’s premises.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO.,
Authorised Auctioneers.


166
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 16, 1919.
“GLORIA” INCANDESCENT 
MIRI SHIPPING.
LANTERNS.
    300 Candle Power of Brilliant Light at a cost
that is far cheaper than any other known method
of producing artificial light.
    Suitable for Indoor or Outdoor Illumination.
Will Burn Kerosene or Benzine
With Equal Facility.
No Noise.
No Smoke.
No Odour.

No Grease.
No Wicks to Trim.
No Trouble Whatever!
    Nothing to wear out. break or get out of
order.
    Made of heavy gauge brass, nickel plated,
fitted with a reinforced mica chimney.
Price $20. (Twenty Dollars) each.
Complete with all fittings and one
spare Generator.
      Spare Mantles 84.80 per dozen.
      Spare Generators 72 cents each.
Obtainable from
             VANSCOLINA & COMPANY, 
             Sole Agents, 
             LABUAN, S. S. 
[4-1]
PASSENGERS.
ARRIVALS.
PER S.S. Rajah of Sarawak:—31st May-—From Singapore —Mr. J. Coutts, Mrs. C. Kee Hock and Mrs. C. Kee Tuan.
PER s. s. Kuching:—6th June—From Singapore—Misses Ada Cubitt, Charlotte Gibson and Gwendolen Sebborn, Mrs. F. Toda. Messrs. Shelton, P. Yam Seng, P. Yong Long and T. Joo Kiew.
PER S. S. Gladys :—6th June—From Sibu—Mr. Heap.
PER p. s. Adeh:—7th June—From Brooketon—Mr. Thos. Lewis.
DEPARTURES.
PER S. S. Rajah of Sarawak:—4th June—For Singapore Honble. Mr. F. G. Day. Dr. A. C.
Hanton. Messrs. J. M. Bryan and K. Wee Tat and Mrs. C. Boon Phoi.
PER s. 1. Lucile : 4th June—For Sadong—Honble. Mr. A. B. Ward and Mr. J. B. Archer.
PER R. s. Kuching :—10th June—For Singapore—Miss Olver, Messrs. Lewis, Heap and Mills.
PER p. s. Adeh:—11th June—For Miri and Sibu—Mr. J. R Barnes.
     THE “SARAWAK GAZETTE”
    ALMNAC.
          JUNE, 1919.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 16, 1919.
167
SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
Departures.
F. G. DAY,
Registrar of Trade.
‘"REQUIRED two or three experienced ' typists and shipping clerks also Chinese dresser, good pay to capable men, applications and copy of testimonials to Box No. Sarawak Gazette."
            The British Malaysian Manufacturing Co., Ltd..
                  GOEBILT, SARAWAK.
  AOBA & CO.,
HIGH CLASS JAPANESE PHOTOGRAPHIC ARTISTS.
(QUALIFIED IN TOKYO )
    Will take outdoor photographs at any place and time. Night photographs can also be taken with the latest and safest flash light process. Best attention will be always given to patrons.
No. 32, KHOO HUN YEANG STREET,
            KUCHING.
[6-4]
NOTICE.
SALE BY AUCTION
of all unredeemed pledges from YEK YEUN & Co., Pawn Farmers, No. 8, Sibu Bazaar Sibu, will be held on the 15th September 1919 at 10 a.m. and quarterly from that date until further notice.
  Lists of all unredeemed pledges are on view at the Farmers’ premises.
LAW JEE THAI,
Authorised Auctioneers.
NOTICE.
—?—
Gazette subscriptions and Printing
Office bills
  FOR the convenience of residents at Outstations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums but only the 1,2 and 3 cent values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that Money Orders be sent if possible.
     J. C. SWAYNE, 
Manager, Govt. Printing Office.


168 •
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 16, 1919.
M E T E O R O L O G I C A L  R E T U R N S .
GENERAL HOSPITAL.
Kuching, May, 1919.
Highest Barometric rending	80’0l inches.
Lowest ..	..	29’92	„
Highest temperature (shade) 	98	degrees.
Lowest	,,	..	70
Highest	..	Sun        169
Longest Period of Sunshine in one day 9’50 hours.
Total rainfall (Museum)	17'10 inches.
Greatest rainfall in 24 hours 4’07
Height of Hospital above sea level approximately 75 feet.
Rainfall. May, 1919.
DURING 24 HOURS.



THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 16, 1919.
169
PURE FOOD MEANS GOOD HEALTH
“ALEXANDRIA” CANNED MEATS
Every Tin Guaranteed under the New South Wales
Pure Food Act, and packed under the constant
and vigilant supervision of a Government Inspector.
ASK FOR “ALEXANDRIA”
Roast Beef
Corned Beef
Ox Cheek
Ox Tongues
Luncheon Tongues
Sheep Tongues
Extract of Beef
     
Roast Mutton
Corned Mutton
Spiced Mutton       Mutton Chops
Assorted Meats
Minced Scollops
Assorted Soups
Beef Sausage
Pork Sausage      
Frankfurt Sausage 
Beef Dripping
Pork and Beans
Irish Stew
Ox Tail Soup
As supplied in huge quantities to the. Imperial and Indian
Governments for use by both the Army and Navy.
Sold by all Stores.
CHARLES BOWEN & CO.,
            2 Castlereagh Street, SYDNEY, N.S.W.
          “ALEXANDRIA MEAT WORKS.’’
Distributors for the East:
Seremban General Agency, Ltd.
(Incorporated in F. M. S.)
SINGAPOPE.
[24-7 J
       Sub: Agents—BAN JUI LONG,
14 Carpenter Street,
KUCHING, SARAWAK.
and BAN JUI GUAN.
MIRI, SARAWAK.


170
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 16, 1919.
THE SARAWAK STUDIO
(REPRESENTATIVES OF MESSRS. KODAK LIMITED.)
THE BEST IN KUCHING
WHERE GOOD PORTRAITS CAN BE TAKEN AND VIEWS OF THE
NEIGHBOURHOOD PROCURED.
PHOTOS FOR PASSPORTS
AT SHORT NOTICE.
KODAKS, KODAK FILMS, PLATES, PAPERS, CHEMICALS,
PHOTO PASTE AND ALL PHOTOGRAPHIC MATERIALS
SUPPLIED AT SINGAPORE CATALOGUE PRICES.
AMATEURS’ FILMS & PLATES DEVELOPED, PRINTED' &
ENLARGED AT REASONABLE CHARGES.
Free instructions given to Amateurs with pleasure.
C. M. LEE, Manager.
21, COURT HOUSE ROAD, 
KUCHING.
[12-7]
	:o:	
KUCHING:—Printed and Published by GHIN HENG SOON, Government Printer, at the Government Printing Office. 
                                                                                 Barrack Road.

