
VOL. XLIX

No. 772.
Sarawak Gazette.
Price	KUCHING, TUESDAY, JULY 1. 1919.	10cents
          CONTENTS.
Page.Interment of His Highness the late Rajah ... 
Marriage:—Kho Ewe Gee... 171    171Notes
Peace
Church Notes... 171
... 17HThe White Man's Burden... 173H. H. Y. ZahoraWireless ...... 174The F. M. S.... 174The Rajah Charles Brooke Memorial Fund... 174Hints for Cultivation... 174Fishing on the Sarawak Coast ...... 174The Kuching Regatta... 175Battle of Marudu Bay 1845    175Monthly Reports:—Upper Sarawak
                    Sadong — Simanggang ...... 176... 177                    Sibu... 178Trade Returns	...	...... 180Rainfall... 181Almanac ...... 181Passenger-... 181Market Price List for the mouth of May 1919... 182Shipping ...... 185The Sarawak Gazette.
SUBSCRIPTIONS to the Gazette are as follows:
The Sarawak Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY--
    Single copy	...	...	                  ...       .10 cents
    Subscription for one year	...	...	$2.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations                   2.25 
Subscription including postage to all other
                 Countries.	...	...	2.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING
    Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 5s. 10d
The Sarawak Government Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
    Single copy	...	...	...    .05 cents
    Subscription for one year	...	... $1.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations            1.25 
Subscription including postage to all other
                 Countries. ...	...   1.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING—
    Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 3s. 6d
   All subscriptions are payable in advance and must commence from the 1st January in each year on which date they are renewable. All broken periods will be considered as full.
   Subscriptions will not be renewed unless notice of renewal given.
   Changes of Address should be notified to the  Office in writing.	
         The Sarawak Gazette.
       TUESDAY, JULY 1, 1919.
INTERMENT OF HIS HIGHNESS
THE LATE RAJAH.
  A telegram on the 21st June from home announces that the remains of His Highness the late Rajah Sir Charles Brooke, o. c. M. G. were interred at Burrator on.June 12th.
  The body of the late Rajah was embalmed with the intention of conveying it to Sarawak for burial but circumstances prevented this being done and he now rests near his uncle Sir James Brooke at Barrator.
Marriage.
On the 27th June. KHO EWE GEE (of Lundu ) to WEE SIEW KIM. second daughter of Wee Hock Kee, Chief Cashier, Government Treasury, Kuching. .
NOTES.
(June.)
  UNDER date August 28th the Sarawak Gazette Almanac annually records “The Battle of Marudu Bay” but, as few know the details of that fight in which the late Rajah Sir Charles Brooke took part as a midshipman and which finally broke the power of the much dreaded Illanun pirates, we reprint on page 175 an interesting account of it which appeared in the British North Borneo Herald of June 2nd.
  THE locust plague continues in British North Borneo and the “hoppers,” of which millions have been destroyed by means of organised drives, have developed into “flyers” and the flights of these resemble miniature snowstorms and are doing serious damage.
  Sarawak has not, so far, been visited by a plague of these pests, and it is to be hoped will remain immune.


172	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1919.
  THE intense heat that prevailed from early in June culminated in a short but violent storm on Friday afternoon the 20th and the temperature fell rapidly and the air cleared.
  AT 11.30 a.m. on the 18th ultimo a curious phenomenon was observed near the Government Offices, Kuching.
  Although the air was quite still, several pillars of dust rose from the road near the Bund and, whirling at a great rate and gaining in density as they collected more dust, passed slowly along the road and turning in towards the river wall by the vegetable market continued their progress towards the Fish Market where they disappeared.
  The pillars were some 4 or 5 feet in diameter and 10 or 15 feet in height.
  Their appearance created some little excitement amongst the onlookers who followed behind them at a respectful distance collecting dust and leaves from the road in their track evidently with the intention of preserving them as charms.
  WITH reference to the Report of the United Malaysian Rubber Company Limited, referred to in our issue of June 2nd in error as the United Malaysian Manufacturing Company we are asked to state that the profit mentioned was made by the Company's Offices in London, Singapore, New York, Karimon and Goebilt, but that the New York and Singapore Offices were mostly responsible for this result.
  THE s. S. Kuching sailed for Singapore on the morning of the 21st. The vessel as usual was very heavily laden, bags of sago flour, pepper and illipe nuts being piled on deck up to the awnings and but little deck space remained.
  Passengers by her were Mr. Thos. Robarts, Ong Tiang Soon and K. Chong Seng.
  WE are glad to hear that Mrs. Danson who left Kuching for Australia on April 23rd arrived safely in Sydney on May 22nd.
  THIRTY persons were killed by wild animals during 1918 in the F. M. S. and rewards were paid for the destruction of 972 crocodiles, 2,303 crocodile’s eggs, 67 tigers, 38 leopards and panthers and 101 snakes.
  FRESH butter in Australia is 1s. 8d. per lb. f. o. b.
  The same butter is sold here from Singapore cold storage @ $1.20 = 2s. 9d. per lb.
  THE s.s. Rajah of Sarawak touched at Goebilt on her return from Sibu to take in a little cargo and to land passengers Mr. and Mrs. Parry Davis and Dr. Luhn for Kuching. She proceeded to Singapore on the morning of the 23rd.
  THE Rajah of Sarawak (892 tons net) is the largest vessel that has ever gone up the
Rejang river as far as Sibu so that the result of the trip is interesting from a navigating point of view, as it was doubtful whether so large a vessel could navigate some of the sharper bends. However the captain stated he arrived at Sibu without undue incident or difficulty and he believes it quite possible for the vessel to ascend the river as far as Kanowit or Kapit, this latter place being 150 miles from the mouth.
  The steamer on her return voyage experienced no difficulty in coming down the Rejang fully loaded, so it has now been demonstrated that a 900 ton ship can load at Sibu and possibly at Kapit, and this fact will be most interesting in view of any possible future development of the Rejang river, because until now no vessels of more tonnage than the s. s. Batavier 215, Flevo 127 and Gladys 172 have ever gone beyond the mouth of the river where two or three thousand ton steamers constantly loaded timber at Rejang village.
  THE s.l. Lucile left for Sadong on the 21st with the Principal Medical Officer who is making a tour of inspection of the various outstations. Dr. Luhn, who arrived from Sibu on the 22nd is acting for him during his absence.
  A rather unusual incident occurred recently at Bau.
  While the Manager, Mr. J. S. Geikie, was sitting on the verandah of his bungalow one evening three kijang entered the garden and approached the house. Fetching a rifle Mr. Geikie shot two of them the third one getting away.
  Kijang are occasionally met with in Upper Sarawak in spite of the perpetual hunting by Dyaks, but seldom have three been seen at one time of late years, and certainly not in the vicinity of European bungalows in such a place as Bau within a short distance of the Works.
  THE “NO treating” order at home was rescinded on June 3rd.
  MR. J. R. Barnes went to Miri in the p.s. Adeh on the 11th June to overhaul the wireless installation. He visited Bintulu to put the telephone in order and went on to Sibu in the s.s. Alice Lorraine to inspect the wireless station there, returning to Kuching on the 25th.
  He took a portable wireless with him on the Adeh and Alice Lorraine and was in touch with the Government Wireless Stations during the whole of the trip.
  THE s. s. Kuching arrived from Singapore on the 28th.
  Passengers by her were the Hon. F. G. Day, Messrs. J. M. Bryan, Balfour and Marshall.
  The steamer brought a heavy mail.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1919.
173
  A European mail was expected to arrive in Penang on the morning of June 28th. This should arrive in Kuching on or about the 8th July.
  THE m. t. Miri arrived from Miri on the morning of the 29th June with Miri mails for Europe which could not be sent direct to.; Singapore by the usual route. She returned to Miri the same day. Captain Gallien who came down by her is en route. for Singapore.
  NOTES of the value of twenty-five cents will shortly be issued by the Treasury in addition to the 10 cent notes already issued.
  THE p. s. Adeh left for the North via Kidurong and Miri on the 29th. Dr. and Mrs. Greene took passages by her for Kidurong.
  THE usual salute was fired from the Fort in the morning of June 30th the 1st day of the Mohamedan New Year and that day, Monday, was observed as a Public Holiday the Government offices being closed.
  THE s. s. Rajah of Sarawak arrived on Tuesday July 1st en route, for Si bn with a quantity of Kuching cargo that was shut out from the s. s. Kuching in Singapore, and berthed alongside the Government wharf. So, for the first time, both the Company’s big steamers are in Kuching together as the s s. Kuching leaves for Singapore on the morning of the 2nd.
PEACE.
—?—
   A. telegram was received in Kuching on the evening of the 24th June stating that the Germans had agreed to sign the Peace Terms unconditionally and that the Peace Celebrations had been fixed for August 2nd and three following days, and on the afternoon of the 29th another telegram arrived announcing the fact that the Peace Terms had been signed at 4 p.m. on June 28th and the following message from His Majesty the King.
   “The signing of the Treaty of peace will be received with deep thankfulness throughout the British Empire. This formal act brings to its concluding stages the terrible war which has devastated Europe and distracted the world. It manifests the victory of the ideals of freedom and liberty for. which we have made untold sacrifices. I share my people's joy and thanksgiving and earnestly pray that the coming years of peace may bring to them ever increasing happiness and prosperity”.
Church Notes.
»	
  THE Bishop of the Diocese accompanied by the Rev. W. Linton returned to Kuching on June 21st in the m.l. Sri Damai after a tour of 7 weeks in the 2nd Division in the course of which they, with the Rev. W. Howell, visited 22 churches and chapels; 50 catechumens were baptised and 169 persons confirmed, amongst them a Dyak penghulu and a manang or witch doctor, both of whom had been under
instruction for 2 years, the latter handing over his charms before baptism.
  In two of the ulu Krian Mission Stations adults were baptised in the river, according to primitive custom, the baptised persons proceeding to the chapel close by for confirmation immediately after the ceremony.
  These services were impressive and much appreciated.
  THE Mission staff in the 2nd Division now consists of 2 priests, 13 catechists and 4 teachers, and it is proposed to build new churches at Sabu and Betong.
  THE Bishop intends visiting Lundu, Quop and possibly Bukar during July and Miri, Labuan and North Borneo in August, returning to Kuching in October.
  Mu. Ellis, Head-master of St. Thomas’ School, will go On furlough on the arrival of Mr. S. H. Lawrence a trained school-master from Manchester who comes out to relieve him, leaving home for Sarawak about October, and Mr. L. E. Currey hopes to return to the Diocese at about the same time to assist in the School.
  A new banner on which is depicted St. Thomas, Patron Saint of the Pro-Cathedral, has been presented to the Church by Mrs. Currey and was used on Whitsunday for the first time.
       The White Man’s Burden.
    Life at Miri
Hard, but cheery: 
Concerts, work and plays. 
Social messings,
Fancy dressings, 
Relieve strain of days. 
Sudden shock, 
Ship in dock, 
Cause of nasty strife. 
Ice box crammed, 
Cold meat damned, 
Heavens! What a Life!—(Contributed.)
        H. H. Y. “Zahora.’'
? ? ?
   H. H. Y. Zahora arrived at her old moorings in the river on the evening of the 18th June after a protracted voyage from Singapore owing to difficulty in keeping up steam with inferior coal and foul boiler tubes.
   She presents a very business like appearance with her coat of slate grey and tall masts for her wireless, and would never be recognised as the yacht that left here on October 2nd, 1917.
   She was employed as a patrol vessel by the British Government and was returned at the termination of the war, since when she has been lying in Singapore roads.


174
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1919.
Wireless.
—?—
   The interesting statement by Mr. Barnes in our last issue in which he says that he now has in working order a small wireless transmitting set capable of sending messages for 100 miles brings within reach the connecting up of al! outstations by wireless at very small expense.
   Telephone lines in such a country as this continually give trouble and are more often down than up and communication between Kuching, Mukah and Oya is frequently impossible owing to the constant interruptions caused by breaks in the line from Sibu, while Simanggang—one of our most important stations—and Bintulu the most isolated, have no means of communication whatever except by sea with the outside world.
   Now it would seem easy to put wireless sets in each of these places—it would take but a short tune to train clerks sufficiently to enable them to work them.
   The improvement in communication since the wireless was put in at Miri, Sibu and Sadong is very noticeable and the value of the installation has been amply proved, so we trust the few remaining isolated stations will be enabled to reap the benefit of Mr. Barnes’ improvements.
The F. W. S.
—?
   The Chief Secretary to the Government F. M. S.,
Sir E. L. Brockman, in his annual report for 1918
mentions that British Malaya has probably been
more free from trouble during the war than any
other country and the ordinary life of the various
communities has been little interfered with. Food
has lieen ample and work and pleasures have been
pursued without disturbance.
   He paid a tribute to the men of the F. M. S. who
paid the great sacrifice, and further stated that it
was highly probable that the Empire was as well
served by many who stayed behind, even if they
might have gone, as by some who went, and closes
his report with a word of praise and thanks to all
members of the Government Service for their loyal
co-operation in the work of Government, many
departments having been shorthanded and many
officers long overdue for leave and suffering from
the effects of the climate and tension induced by
the war.
   The financial position shewn in the report is very
satisfactory, the revenue for 1918 ($7,985,700)
exceeding that of the previous year by $2,895,676.
On December 31st 1918 the F. M. S. had a credit
balance of $108,467,903 and investments amounted
to $60.262,899.
The Rajah Charles Brooke
Memorial Fund.
Amount already acknowledged ...                         $23,423.20
   Interest on Bank Deposit for
        $17,000 to 27th May, 1919 ...	680.00
The Sarawak Farms Syndicate ...	     10,000.00
$34,103.20
     27th June, 1919.
Hints for Cultivation.
The storage of sweet potatoes.
   Mr. F. G. Spring, of the Dept, of Agriculture,
F. M. S., in a recent letter to the Straits Times
gives the following useful information :—
   In view of the fact that large areas have recently been
planted up with sweet potatoes the storage of the tubers
in such a way as to prolong their keeping powers is of
importance. Sweet potato tubers are unquestionably
difficult to keep for any length of time without de-
terioration and in order to secure successful storage the
lifting of the crop, drying and housing must receive
! attention. The potatoes should be carefully lifted from
the field and properly handled so as not to cause wounds
to the tubers. Any such injury induces the potatoes to
rot and more especially when stored, consequently tubers
with wounds should not lie stored but used immediately.
It is recommended to lift the crop in the morning and
leave the tubers on the surface of the ground for a few
hours, in order that they may dry thoroughly after
digging. During the wet season this may not always
be possible and it then becomes desirable to spread out
the potatoes, under cover, and dry’ them in this way,
previous to storage. The store should be a well
ventilated, cool, dry building with a wooden floor or
hard earth covered with dry tine sand and protected as
far as possible from heat. The ground floor of a two
story building can generally be recommended.
   From the above it is obvious that where it is decided
to cultivate a large area of sweet potatoes, the planting
operations should be continued over a period of a month
or two so as to have small areas coining into bearing at
interval of say a fortnight.
Fishing on the Sarawak Coast.
   A large number of natives who inhabit a part
of the Sarawak coast make their living by catching
certain small salt-water fish. These fish are caught
in a curious way as follows:—
   Some fourteen or fifteen natives leave their leaf
huts at daylight in a clumsy looking boat called a
barang, whose dimensions are about 30 feet long by
12 feet wide. This boat is very strongly built with
double sides, and held stiffly together by means of
thick ribs of hard wood and crossbeams. The bow
and stern being closed with flat planks the boat has
the appearance of being anything but fast.
   If the land breeze is fair the two masts are step-
ped and stayed with twisted rattan ropes, and two
enormous square sails are hoisted and set one on
either side of the boat like wings. When under sail
it is steered by means of two huge rudders one on
each side of the stern, but if the breeze fails the
crew pick up their short oars, which are simply
7 foot sticks with square bits of thin plank bound
on to the end with rattan to serve as blades, and push
them through the rattan loops which do duty for
rowlocks, the big rudders are shipped and the steers-
man steers by a single long paddle pushed out over
the stern.
   After a few hours under sail the steersman, who
is on the look-out, sees a bit of sago-leaf stem
floating just ahead of the boat. This bit of green
stem about 4 inches in diameter and 6 feet long acts
as float to a sago leaf which is tied to it by a long
rattan rope, the whole being anchored to a large
stone by some 30 fathoms of similar line.
   The sails are now quickly lowered and stowed
away together with the masts on the lattice-work
projecting over each side of the boat. The oars are
got out and the crew pulling with short sharp
strokes bring the barong close up to one of the floats.
The man in the stern picks it up with a bamboo
hook and pulls it on board, the line attached to it is


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1919.
175
hauled in and the leaf is brought close alongside.
Peering over the stem one may see swarms of little
fish following the leaf, and if the fish are in suffi-
ciently large numbers to make it worth while taking
them, some of the crew set to work to spread the net.
   Two huge poles some 30 feet long are pushed
out over a bar which is fixed parellel to, and just
above, the bulwark. These poles are fixed in a V
shape, the point of the V being jammed under a beam
inboard, while the remainder projects over the side.
An enormous net is then stretched over the space
between the poles and the affair is ready for the fish.
   The man in the stern passes the line—to which the
leaf is attached—to one of the crew amidships, and
the barong is pulled quickly round until the net is
opposite the floating leaf. The net is then lowered,
the Coot of the V being released from under the beam,
and the huge net turns on its axis on the bar over
the side and is let down into the water till the poles
are nearly “up-and-down”. The leaf is now drawn
quickly towards the net, the little fish following it in
shoals, and when within a few yards of the side some
of the crew put their weight on the juncture of the
poles, thus raising the net out of the water, while the 
remainder run up to the opposite side of the boat 
to balance the weight of the net. The boat heels 
over and the water pours in but the weight of the
crew prevails and she slowly rights, the net rising
into the air at the same time full of the little silvery
fish that were so stupid as to follow the sago leaf.
   The four or five bushels of fish are slid spluttering  
down the net into the boat and. the leaf having been
thrown overhoard, the boat is pulled a few fathom further 
on to pick up another of this curious bait and repeat the process.
   Some thirty or forty of these leaves are in turn hauled up, some bringing several bushels of fish in their wake while others are thrown overboard again as but few fish are following, till about midday the crew adjourn for lunch consisting of sago and dried fish, which, having been disposed of the masts are stepped and sails hoisted and the barong returns to the river before the sea breeze, the crew for the most part sleeping or smoking in the shade of mats the heat being almost unbearable.
   Many jars of salt are brought out in the boat in case the wind should fail and the boat be thereby detained at sea for a night when the salt would lie spread over the pile of fish. But usually the breeze is unfailing and the fish arrive fresh at the native houses, where those that are not sold the same day are put into jars with salt and then taken up-river for sale.
   The best of the fish are picked out, split, and cleaned, while the barong is under sail for the river, are rubbed with a little salt and capsicum and eaten raw by the crew as delicacies. Fish prepared in this way are called umi.— (Contributed.)
The Kuching Regatta.
—•—
“ The day breaks bright, the morning light shines on a scene so gay,
The cloudless sky gives promise of a simply perfect day.
   The rows of ships, their decks a mass of gay humanity, While o’er them wave the strings of flags they never take to sea.
   The steamers of the Company are all of them on show, And gay with bunting, bright with paint are anchored in a row.
As far as one can see the river simply swarms with boats.
The crews of which have trousers on but never any coats.
   In many of the smaller craft sit boys who quite at ease Go paddling about—(their trews are minus quantities But no one ever notices mere details such as these) A little launch goes puffing by to open up the course.
And stalwart Europeans there are shouting them-
selves hoarse
Between the whiffs of Londres and the sip of B. & S.
The genial looking natives just look on but don’t profess
To understand what’s being said—so simply smile
and stay
Bang in the middle of the course, why should they
move away ?
The river just belongs to them, the country is their
own,
They've come from far to see the fun and should be
left alone.
A whiff of durian floats by, some boat has got a stock
Of that grand fruit (so called) by Jove the smell
would split a rock !
But every boat has rambutans and mangosteens galore
The skins float by on every side and thousands line
the shore.
At intervals a gun is fired, a race comes to an end,
While now and then one sees the bouts come racing
round the bend.
The clouds come up, the rain comes down, race after
race goes by.
What cares the native for the rain he’s got no clothes
to dry!
The launches have run out of drinks, cigars are get-
ting short,
The final race has taken quite an hour more than it
ought.
But finally the last gun fires, the band gets up to play
'God save the King', and so at last ends such a pleasant
day!"-—(Contributed.)
Battle of Marudu Bay 1845.
   The history of North Borneo prior to the time of its administration by the Chartered Company in 1881 is unfortunately but little known, owing to the lack of any written record of any events, which, judging from the few scattered and disconnected accounts which now and again come to light, must have been extraordinarily varied and full of interest. In “Sarawak Under its Two White Rajahs" we get an allusion to an attack made upon the pirates of Marudu Bay in 1845, but an account contained in an old journal belonging to a Captain Pascoe R. N. who took part in the expedition, is we believe, the only account that records the affairs in details.
   It was on the 18th of August 1845 that a British squadron, consisting of H. M. S. Agincourt, Vestal, Daedalus, Vixen and the sloops Cruiser and Wolverine, under the command of Rear Admiral Sir Thomas Cochrane, anchored at the entrance of Marudu Bay, the expedition having for its object the destruction of a nest of pirates under a Serip Usman, an Illanun pirate chief.
   The attacking force, which consisted of 530 seamen and marines, in 24 boats, of which nine were gunboats, took up station off the mouth of Taudik river, in the S. E. corner of the Bay. at 3 p.m., and at dawn next day proceeded up the river, the pinnaces with guns leading. Two Malays from Sarawak accompanied the force as guides.
   About six miles from the entrance the advance was checked by a boom moored across the river by heavy chain cables, and the party came suddenly in view of three batteries “about musket range from the boom the largest fort, mounting eight large pieces, stood on the right bank gaily decked with banners and crowded with men ; the next, mounting three guns, stood at the junction of the river, which at this point divides into two branches , the third was a floating battery moored to the left bank.
   A messenger “ an Illanun from Mindanao in rich attire," with a flag of truce came down to meet the force, with the request that the two Senior Officers
* l write subject to correction, the book in question not being available at the moment.


176
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1919.
should proceed to the fort and negotiate, “but they were not thus to be trusted," and a reply was sent back that unless Serip Usman himself came down fire would at once be opened. Immediately the messenger’s boat was clear of the boom a galling fire was opened from the forts. Gibbard, mate of the Wolverine, fell mortally wounded, and a brisk fire was kept up from both sides. The enemy’s guns, being laid on the boom, caused fairly heavy loss amongst the attacking force, which was working hard to remove the obstacle. In about an hour an opening was effected; two cutters with marines instantly carried the three gun-battery, and the enemy, abandoning the forts, fled through the town in the rear and made for the jungle.
   The defence, while it lasted, seems to have been conducted with considerable spirit and determination by the occupants of the forts. We are told that on one occasion their “red flag with a tiger on it” was struck down by a well directed shot, but the Malays, nothing daunted, sent a volunteer up the broken mast to set it up again, and the writer “felt gratified when the fellow, cooly slid from his exposed position unhurt.”
   The general pursuit of the fugitives then took I place, the attackers apparently throwing discipline to the winds and chasing the enemy “helter-skelter as though going to a Fair.” Had the enemy’s retreat been gradual instead of precipitate, the losses among the pursuers would undoubtly have been much heavier.
   “After all our battalion drill at Penang in May and June last,” says the writer," I cannot say much for the order and regularity in our blue jacket brigade, nor did the marines appear to lie much better in hand.’’
   Many of the Malays wore armour of various patterns, some jackets made of fine chain, others had enveloped themselves in sheet lead, the linings of tea chests, and some wore a description of brass helmet, etc. We gather that souvenir hunting was carried on with some zest, so much so that more than once the attackers nearly cut down their own comrades, and would have done so but for hearing them shout out “avast there shipmate. I’m Agincourt." It was found that the boom which formed the obstacle had been fastened with the chain cable of a vessel of some 400 tons, a proof of the piratical exploits of the Serip; other chains were found in the town, a ship's long boat, two ships' bells, one ornamented with grapes and vine leaves, anil marked “Wilhem Ludwig Bremen,” and many other pieces of ship's furniture. Twenty-four brass guns were captured, and the iron guns, also said to have been stolen from some ship, were spiked or otherwise rendered useless.
   It would be interesting to discover whether any relics of the fight are to be found in existence near the scene of the battle.
   At 2 p.m., the forts, towns and enemy vessels being destroyed, the force reassembled to return to the ships, taking with them the hospital pinnace with the wounded. The casualties amounted to ten killed and fifteen wounded, three mortally. The number of the enemy slain is not computed, though it seems to have been very large, the carnage being described as frightful, and the destruction of the pirates' stronghold was complete.
   Sir Charles Brooke, then Mr. Charles Johnson, we are told, accompanied the expedition as midshipman of the Wolverine’s pinnace, and "thus,” he says in his journal of that date, “Maludu ceased to exist.”
   Marudu no doubt cease to exist as a stronghold of Illanun pirates, but some 43 years later it was near this very spot that the present New London Borneo Tobacco Company first opened up land for
the cultivation of tabacco ; Taritipan Rubber Estate is now flourishing within a few miles of the Tandik river, and the glories of Pangiran Usman and his buccaneers have faded away and given place to the peaceable, if indolent and far less picturesque Dusun yokel of Marudu Bay.
   MONTHLY REPORTS.
UPPER SARAWAK.
BAU AND PAKU.
May.
   Courts.—The usual number of cases came before the Courts during the month. Three Dyaks were sentenced to six months imprisonment for stealing a considerable number of immature birds’-nests from Bidi caves.
   On the 6th it was reported that Liew Sze, who cultivated a small vegetable garden at the back of the bazaar, had committed suicide by hanging himself. From the evidence produced at the inquest it appeared he had contracted a most unhappy marriage. A verdict of suicide due to melancholia induced by incipient senility was brought in.
   P. W. D.—During the month one gang, containing the majority of the prisoners, was working on the Buan—Bau road. The point at which they were engaged is below flood level and has been raised five feet in places and widened to conform with the rest of the road. Part of a limestone outcrop was blasted and the fragments used for revetting the embankment. By decreasing the curve of the old path a corresponding saving was made in labour and material.
   A second gang, early in the month, cleared the side of the hill facing the Court house and prepared the ground for growing rice substitutes. Since then two skilled Chinese prisoners have been planting sweet potatoes, yams find tapioca. The land, which lies in the Company’s concession, has been kindly lent for this purpose by the Manager, Mr. J. S. Geikie.
   A few prisoners were sent, in charge of a mandor, when and where necessary to weed certain paths which appeared neglected, the regular weeding party being employed with the main gang.
   All roads kept up by contracted labour were inspected and found to be clean and in good repair, with the exception of that beyond Kranji. The men in charge were urged to use greater diligence or forfeit the contract.
   General.—The 24th, Proclamation Day, was observed as a holiday and the Government offices were closed.
   At the beginning of the month it was observed that too many prisoners were on the sick list and one bad case was sent to Kuching for treatment. He was found to be suffering from beri-beri and the Principal Medical Officer, suspecting an outbreak, asked that all cases should be sent down at once. In nil fourteen men were sent, most of whom were found to be infected. A change in diet was made and at the end of the month the health of the prisoners was good.
   Ngoi Ngim On, who has worked here as Court peon for over four years, resigned at the end of April and so far his place baa not been filled.
   Yong Heng, an old established Siniawan merchant, has made a request for a grant of land near Paku on which to plant padi. The land in question has been surveyed and amounts to some ten acres. Yong Heng has been to Kuching to make representations and the matter is still under discussion. It appears that he is unwilling to go to the expense of importing coolies and buffaloes unless the land is.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1919.
177
assured to him. Probably a grant given to him on which to plant padi only would lead to an interesting and instructive experiment being made.
   An unfortunate boating accident at Blimbing was reported on the 22nd: a small, heavily laden boat was caught in a fresh late in the evening and upset; a woman, one of the nine occupants, was drowned and all the cargo lost. The body was recovered next day. It was incidentally discovered, on enquiring, that the contents of the boat belonged to a Chinaman who was trading without a license for which he was subsequently fined.
   A general fire alarm was given in the bazaar on the night of the 5th, when a badly made lamp broke in an upper storey of the gambling farm and set alight to the flooring. The Company’s fire engine was brought out, but fortunately was not required as the fire was got under at the expense of some bedding which lay at hand, it is most regrettable that the Chinese do not keep fire-extinguishers in every wooden shop.
   The returns from the Cyaniding Works show a yield of 2,218 oz. gold and 632.9 oz. silver. The rainfall for the month was 10’83 inches.
J. C. SWAYNE,
             Resident 2nd Class.
took place. A number of vegetable gardens were destroyed in the night also. There appear to be a number of bad characters loafing round the station.
   Prisoners have been engaged during the month in planting the Government farm and in the usual upkeep of roads and grounds, a small gang was also employed in taking up and cleaning the pipes from the Colliery to the station. I managed to obtain a quantity of seed and cuttings of various rice substitutes and work is progressing well at the Colliery. I understand that some of the mine coolies have been giving a little trouble lately but I hope the matter will pass over.
   I left for Kuching by A lice Lorraine on the 23rd and was still away at the end of the month.
   Six steamers and ten schooners entered and clearing the port during the month.
   Coal shipped to Kuching 1.339 tons 2cwts.
           Imports.	Exports.
           $17,861	$30,607
J. BEVILLE ARCHER,
Resident 2nd Class.
SIMANGGANG.
SADONG.
May.
   On the 3rd of the month I left for up-river and 
was away nearly three weeks. Most of my time 
was spent at Tebekang where a number of cases 
were brought up before me.
   A case which caused much local interest was that 
in which a charge of incest was made against several 
well known Chinese residents. The case is still 
“sub-judice”. Owing to complaints made by Tebe-
kang Dyaks against various Chinese for burying
a body in their land and in a indecent manner 
made a personal investigation and found that the
complaints were well founded. The body bad been
buried in the most revolting manner and the stench
was nearly unbearable. Heavy tines have been
imposed on the guilty parties. There were a
number of other cases but none which call for any
special mention. Reports of the padi harvest varied
but as most of the Tebekang bazaar had big stores
of padi one supposes that the ciop has not been so
bad as reported.
   Hearing that the Controleur of Sanggoh was at
Balai Karangan just over the frontier I started to
meet him on the 13th and reached Balai Karangan
about 1 p. m. the next day.
   There is a passable road from Pengkallan Amur
to Peripin in the Skayam river, and from there we
took boat down to the station. The Controleur,
Mr. C. L. Blume, arrived the next day and we 
talked over various official matters especially with
reference to absconders.
   I left again on the 16th and reached Tebekang on 
the 17th. From all reports the padi harvest in .
Dutch territory has been very good ; the local prices
were 10 gantangs of padi for 1 guilder and 1 picul 
of rice for 8 guilders. There was a stock enough :
for two years. I visited Gedong, Ampungan and
Pichin but found nothing much to do there.
   The Dyak tax, to the amount of $1,000 odd, was 
collected and a good many fines paid up. I returned 
to Simunjan on the 20th.
   During my absence a number of offences were
committed. A bull was speared near the bazaar by
some person or persons unknown, and had to be 
destroyed, whilst the usual thefts in the Residency 
May.
   On 1st Mr. P. M. Adams accompanied by Abang
Dulrasid arrived at Lingga in the s.l. La Follette,
from Sihu Mr. Aplin came also on a visit.
   On the 7th Mr P. M. Adams accompanied by
Abang Haji Buassan left for the Saribas and Krian.
Mr P. M. Adams got as far as Pusa, and as he was
suffering from a poisoned leg left for Kuching by
boat to seek medical advice, returning to Simang-
gang on the 18th per m.l. Sri Damai. Abang Haji
Buassan proceeded to the Krian via Debak to settle
cases and attend to various matters; he returned to
Simanggang on 31st with cash and notes amounting
to $3,000 for the Simanggang Treasury.
   I herewith append Mr P. M. Adams'  report on-
his visit to the Saribas: —
   I left on the 7lb for Betong accompanied by
Abang Haji Buassan. My time was fully occupied
with cases until the 11th. Two Malay women
named Sideng and Pisa were fined for attempting to
abduct a young girl for immoral purposes. Lai a
Dyak was lined 10 katties for seizing a spear during
a quarrel. One Cheri opened up an old land case
which was apparently settled years ago. Owing to
circumstances the case was adjourned for further
investigation as Draup appears to have inspected
the land in question quite recently. Soon Thai was
fined for being in possession of a knife during a
quarrel with Tek Kieng, and as the latter was proved
to have been equally aggressive both parties were
ordered to put a pledge of $25 each in the fort as
security for their good behaviour for 6 months.
   The. circular concerning the food shortage was
read out and explained to a mixed gathering of
Chinese, Malays and Dyaks and the seriousness of
the rice problem was duly emphasised
   Tenders for the Saribas spirit and gambling farms
were called for, these were opened at Pusa in order
to give the Chinese there a chance to compete. Ang
Hock Kongsi’s tender of $320 per mensem for three
years, being the highest, was accepted. This is an
increase of $194.50 per mensem on the previous
rental.
   A complaint was made against a Chinese trader
who has been in the Paku for 2 months without
once returning. This man has been sent for to
return at once. Sabeng brought a case against
P. C. Abu Bakar for misappropriation of money
paid to him for timber royalty, I have referred this


178
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1919.
case to the Resident. I discouraged Dyaks going
to other stations to seek employment on account of
the rice shortage, and urged them to remain and
plant padi. On the night of the 11th Penghulu
Sang brought in the body of a Chinaman who had
been drowned in the Paku as the result of his boat
capsizing. There were no marks of violence on the
body.
   I left for Pusa on the 12th. Soon How and Mui
Kiani asked to be allowed to withdraw their cross
summonses concerning some letters which they
accused each other of destroying, this was permitted
sis it will be probably keep them quiet and save
trouble in the end.
   Durman a Malay was lined for interfering with 
the police in execution of their duty. The Chinese
complained that Malays changed notes with them 
simply for the purpose of obtaining small change in 
order to buy padi from the Dyaks. It was pointed 
out that the Chinese were accused of taking per- 
centage on payments by notes.
   A charge of theft of rice brought by a woman
named Indo against Bojeng and Kumang was
dismissed owing to lack of evidence, though sus-
picion against defendant was very strong. The
Chinese complained of repeated thefts from their
shops one man having lost over $200 worth of
goods and cash.
   Two Chinese traders Soon How and Tye Juak
were fined for being in possession of false datchings.
   I originally intended to go on via Debak to
Saratok and Kabong but on account of what
appeared to be a poisoned leg decided to go across
to Kuching for medical treatment. I sent Abang
Haji Buassan on to Saratok and gave him all the
necessary instructions as to the work to lie done.
   I left Pusa at 8 p. m. on the 13th and sailed to
Goebilt and the next day Mr. Hunt very kindly
sent me on in his launch to Kuching.
   On the 10th the m. l. Sri Damai arrived with the Right Rev. Bishop Danson accompanied by the Rev. W. Linton and they proceeded direct to Sabu. The Right Rev. Bishop will visit the various Mission Stations in this division, and expects to be here until the end of June.
   Mr. H. D. Aplin left for Lingga on the 19th where he will meet the s. 1. La Follette which will then take him back to Sibu.
   All Dyaks under nine different penghulus commenced working bilian wood for the building of a hospital and dresser’s quarters, etc. Towards the end of the month a considerable amount had been brought in, and I have now written to Kuching asking for some Chinese carpenters.
   There have been numerous cases before the Courts during the month ; and the following call for mention, viz :—Chan Ah Mok, Tay Ah Whatt and Tay Hoi Siow all of Roban were brought up on a charge of murdering one Lim Ah Tsui, the jury brought in a verdict of manslaughter against the three Chinese, and minutes of ease were sent to Kuching. Taha of Pusa sentenced to six months for theft. Pte. Jahan, S. R. one month for various offences, Lawin a Dyak three months for theft.
   Abang Udin, N. O., Debak, and Gelanggang of Rimbas brought a Charge of wounding cattle against one Mohainat of Debak. As Mohamat has continually given trouble, and has a so-called grievance against the Native Officer, he was ordered to leave Debak and live at Pusa. Mohamat's father Haji Drahman was turned out of the Rimbas by the late Mr. Maxwell for interfering with the Native Officer’s work, etc. Numerous natives were fined for working jelutong without a license.
   Penghulu Kama visited this station during the month and reported all quiet in the ulu. The Ulu
Ai Dyaks have buiilt two boats for Government
these will lie kept at Lubok Antu for express service.
   Kalaka.—Penghulu Sumpieng of the S’blak being
found unsatisfactory in bis work was relieved of hie
penghuluship, and by general vote Engkamat and
Chaung were appointed penghulus, one will look
after the right hand bank and other the left as in
former days. Confirmation of above awaits the
approval of His Highness the Tuan Muda.
   A Dyak by name Nyangai was reported to have
been drowned by the capsizing of his boat. Two days
afterwards a search having been made, a crocodile
came to the surface with a body in it’s mouth, the
searchers gave chase and the crocodile let go of the
body which proved to be that of Nyangai.
   The 8.6. Alice Lorraine called in once to load
gutta leaves, having been chartered by the B. M.
Company Limited, Goebilt. She returned to Kuching 
with a cargo of 1.000 piculs.
   Both Dyaks and Malays have started to clear
their padi farms
   The following are the trade returns for this
division:—
Imports. Exports.
May, 1919	$ 94,549.50	$135,300.65
Total to 31.5.19	384,951.50	485,008.65
Total to 31.5.18	$171,160.05	$187,355.85
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER.
Resident.
SIBU.
May.
   His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by
Mr. G. M. Gifford, left Kapit for Belaga on the 5th.
His Highness after spending a few days at Belaga
went overland to Tenger, en route for Baram.
   Mr. G. M. Gifford reported from Belaga that a Skapan and a Bukitan killed two Ukits early in the month. The Skapan and Bukitan have been arrested and will be detained in custody until the return of Mr. G. M. Gifford when the case will come up for bearing.
   Mr. H. D. Aplin was granted three weeks local leave and left for Simanggang on the 1st; be returned on the 21st.
   On the 7th, I left for Rejang in order to hear the case in which a Chinaman, named Ho Ah Kian, was charged with having committed a murderous assault on a woman named Iyut and her daughter Salabiah. Ho Ah Kian was found guilty and sentenced to a long term of imprisonment.
   Ho Ah Kian had been living with the woman Iyut for a number of years, and gave as his reason for attacking her that she had been unfaithful to him. Iyut was severely cut about the head, back and legs; it is feared that the tendons of one leg have been severed and that she will never regain the use of the member. Salabiah, who came to her mother’s assistance, was slightly wounded on the head.
   On my way back from Rejang I stopped one night at Binatang. Abangs Seman and Latep took proceedings against one Abang Sip for having maliciously set fire to their houses m the Binatang kampong during the absence of the inmates. The houses were totally destroyed and had it not been for the prompt assistance rendered by the Malays and Chinese it is more than probable that the greater part of the kampong would have been burnt down.
   The case has been adjourned pending further evidence.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1919.
179
   On the 12th, the Native Officer of Kanowit
reported that a Dyak named Lieu had been killed by
his cousin Hongkong on the previous evening. I
left for Kanowit the same day and there held an
enquiry. It appears that Lieu became enamoured
of Srawa, the wife of Bongkong, which led to bad
feeling 1 between the two men.
   On the evening of the 12th, Lieu went to the
cow-shed where Bongkong was working and attacked
him with a parang. Bongkong was able, however,
to defend himself with a cone shaped piece of bark
until Lieu got into difficulties when he in turn
attacked Lien and killed him
   The case subsequently came before the Court and
a verdict of justifiable homicide was brought in
against Bongkong: the woman, Srawa, being sen-
tenced to a term of imprisonment.
   From Kanowit, I went to Kapit and arranged for
P. Mata-hari to proceed to the Ga’at and ascertain
if the rebels still wished to defy the Government or
were prepared to surrender. P. Mata-hari and his
party were still away at the end of the month.
   Proclamation day, the 24th, was observed as a
public holiday.
   I left for the coast stations on the same day and
was still absent at the end of the month.
   Mr. Aplin reported by telephone that on the
night of the 25th Kong Liok, Kong Chit, and a small
boy, were murdered at Durin and their heads taken.
Two Poi Dyaks named Jebat and Niung are sus-
pected of having committed the crime and every
effort has been made to trace them and to bring them
to justice hut, as yet, without success. Pending
their arrest the relations of these men have been
detained at Sibu, and the Poi Dyaks have been
warned that should they assist the fugitives in any
way they will be severely punished.
   Surplus cash amounting to $1,000 was remitted
from Rejang to the 8ibu Treasury and a further
sum of $7,000 remitted from Kapit.
   The Sibu Treasury transmitted, by the s. s. Alice
Lorraine, $40,000 to the Sarawak Treasury.
   The s. I. Lucile arrived on the 20th bringing Mr.
W. H. Jacques who had been appointed to take
charge of the Treasury, Customs and Post Office
Departments in place of Mr. C. B. Betts who has
been granted furlough to Europe, prior to conclud-
ing his agreement with the Sarawak Government.
   Mr. C. B. Betts left for Singapore per the
s. s. Batavier on the 26th. The Rev. Wallace and
Mrs. Miner, who were also passengers to Singapore
by the same steamer, are not expected to return.
   Dr. O. G. F. Luhn visited Kanowit early in the
month and later visited Mukah, Oya, and the Igan
districts.
   The prisoners after having completed the annual
whitewashing and painting of the wireless pylons,
have been employed entirely on planting food sub- 
stitutes. In consequence the roads and grass lands 
in and around the station are in a very neglected 
state.
   Every effort has been made to impress on all
classes of the community the necessity of planting
substitutes but with not over much success. I am
of opinion that not until the imports of rice are con-
trolled by the Government and the native and
Chinese are rationed will the greater number of 
them realise the urgent necessity of planting rice
and substitutes on any comprehensive scale.
   The large profits still to be made by the Chinese 
and Malays traders purchasing illipe nuts from
Dyaks is the cause, to some extent, of more not
having been done in the way of cultivation.
   The principal item under exports for the month is
illipe nuts. Some 10,896.55 piculs of these nuts
were exported. It is expected large quantities will
be still available for export during the coming and
perhaps the following month as the upper Julau
stocks have not as yet been put on the market.
   The 8. s. Gladys made two trips to and from
Kuching and one trip direct to Singapore and back.
   The s. s. Sarawak after a long absence, was again
put on the Sibu—Kuching run. She called once at
Kapit during the latter part of the month.
   The s. R. Batavier and s. s. Flevo made two trips
each to and from Singapore.
   The 8.8. Alice Lorraine arrived during the month
with a cargo- of coal and cleared with a full cargo
of illipe nuts.
   The imports and exports for the past month
show the following figures :—
Imports.Exports.Coasting$ 61,684$ 146,964Foreign    272,227297,115$ 333,911$ 444,079Brought forward    676,313804,538Total to 31/5/19$1,010,224$1,248,6171918 ...           $ 351,500	$ 411,308
Immigrants 32.
J. BARING-GOULD, 
Resident 3rd Division.
The Sarawak Gazette.
RATES OF ADVERTISEMENTS IS THE " SARAWAK GAZETTE"
Payable in advance.
Quarter of n column and tinder—
        First insertion ...	...	...$1.00
        Second and third insertion each	... 0.50
        Subsequent do	do	... 0.25
Half a Column and tinder—
        First insertion ...	...	... 2.00
        Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
        Subsequent do	do	... 0.50
A Column and under—
        First insertion each	...	... 4.00
        Second and third insertion each	... 2.00
        Subsequent do	do	... 1-00
Special arrangements may be made for standing advertisements.
   All communications intended for insertion
in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed
to the Editor at the Government Printing
Office, Kuching. They should be clearly
written and should reach the Office at least
one day before the publication of each issue-
Letters and other contributions must be
authenticated by writer’s name sent privately
to the Editor.
    We cannot undertake to return rejected
communications, or to give reasons for not
inserting them.
     Residents at the Outstations will confer an
obligation by forwarding to the Office early
intelligence of all matters of general interest
in their respective neighbourhoods.


180
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. JULY 1, 1919.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1919.
181
Kuching, Coasting Trade Returns for the month of May., 1919. 
THE “SARAWAK GAZETTE”
ALMANAC.
JULY, 1919
PASSENGERS.
ARRIVALS.
PER S. S. Kuching:—17th June—From Singapore—Mr. Lim Cheng Soon.
PER s. s. Rajah of Sarawak: -20th June—From Rejang —Mr. H. D. Aplin—From Sibu— Dr. Luhn and Mr. and Mrs. Parry Davis.
PER s. s. Alice Lorraine : -25th June—From Sibu—Mr. J. R. Barnes.
PER s.s. Kuching: 28th June—From Singapore—Hon. Mr. F. G. Day. Messrs. J. M. Bryan, Balfour and Marshall.
PER in. t. M7ri29th June—From Miri—Capt. Gallien.
DEPARTURES.
PER s.s. Rajah of Sarawak:—14th June -For Sibu-
                Messrs. Parry Davis and J. Coutts.
PER S. 1. Lucile:— 21st June—For Sadong—Dr. Greene.
PER s. 8. Kuching: 21st June—For Singapore—Mrs. L. Miang Yang, Mrs. O. Ah Chew, Messrs. T. A. Hobarts, O. Tiang Soon, O. Blow Sim, K. Chong Seng, S. Whv Khu and P. Meng Teck.
PER p.s. Adeh: -29th June—For the North—Dr. and Mrs. Greene.
D. A. OWEN,
for Registrar of Troth.
Rainfall, May, 1019.


182
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1919.
Market Price List for the month of
May 1919.
NOTICE.
SALE BY AUCTION
of all unredeemed pledges from YEK YEUN
& Co., Pawn Farmers, No. 8, Sibu Bazaar
Sibu, will be held on the 15th September 
1919 at 10 a.m. and quarterly from that 
date until further notice.
  Lists of all unredeemed pledges are on view at the Farmers’ premises.
LAW JEE THAI,
Authorised Auctioneers.
NOTICE.
»—
Gazette subscription and Printing
Office bills.
  FOR the convenience of residents at Outstations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums but only the 1, 2 and 3 cent values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that Money Orders be sent if possible.
J. C. SWAYNE,
Manager, Govt. Printing Office.
LOOK OUT
FOR
2nd—5th August.
FIREWORKS
for the forthcoming
PEACE CELEBRATIONS.
   I have in stock about $100,000 worth of fireworks of the best European made, consisting of: Torch-lights (Bengal lights coloured also with Magnesium brilliant and pearl mosaic), one light gives 1000 candle-power lasting 15 minutes, for processions, Cannons-signal (mortars), flying pigeons, day and night bomb-shells in different sizes.
DO NOT WAIT TILL THE LAST
TO SEND IN YOUR
Please send in Your Orders
            IMMEDIATELY
if you want to participate in this
National Event
to
Mr. Y. TAN.
Raffles Chambers,
SINGAPORE .
who has various assortments to satisfy
EVERYBODY and ANYBODY.
    Batavia Fireworks in cases containing full sets of
assortments such as a large quantity of assorted rockets
and Bengal lights (coloured and magnesium), balloon,
golden rain, magnesium star, rosettes-wheels, sun, turn-
ing wheels, flower pots, flying pigeon, Roman Caudles,
Neptunes whistles, magnesium-fountains, etc. etc., fine
display for the use on Rubber Estates or Outstations
except set pieces, these go off easily themselves.
    Prices from $200, $850 & $450. Full remittance to
accompany Orders, and accompanied by an import per-
mit from the C. P. O. at your city. Outstation orders
plus $25 cost of transport by railway.
Set pieces, Day and Night Bomb Shells. Prices on
application, if possible by wire, as the time is too short
for correspondence. Selections may be left to me if
preferred.
Do Not Delay.
NOTICE.
ASTANA FARM.
THE Manager of Astana Farm begs to inform the Public that he is unable to
attend to Orders for milk after Office hours.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1019.
183
  AOBA & CO.,
          HIGH CLASS JAPANESE PHOTOGRAPHIC ARTISTS.
            (QUALIFIED IN TOKYO.)
   Will take outdoor photographs at any place              and time. Night photographs can also be taken with the latest and safest Hash light process. Best attention will be always given to patrons.
      No. 32, KHOO HUN YEANG STREET,
         KUCHING.
10-5 
“GLORIA” INCANDESCENT LANTERNS.
   300 Candle Power of Brilliant Light at a cost that is far cheaper than any other known method of producing artificial light.
Suitable for Indoor or Outdoor Illumination.
 Will Burn Kerosene or Benzine With Equal Facility.
No Noise.
No Smoke.
No Odour.

No Grease.
No Wicks to Trim.
No Trouble Whatever!
   Nothing to wear out, break or get out of order.
   Made of heavy gauge brass, nickel plated, fitted with a reinforced, mica chimney.
Price $2O. (Twenty Dollars) each.
Complete with all fittings and one spare Generator.
   Spare Mantles $4.80 per dozen.
   Spare Generators 72 cents each.
Obtainable from
          VANSCOLINA & COMPANY,
Sole Agents,
LABUAN, S. S.
WANTED.
ONE OR TWO APPRENTICE CLERKS (Chinese) for the Post, Shipping and
Customs Office, Kuching.
Preference given to those having a know-
ledge of Chinese writing.
  Apply in own handwriting to the Postmaster General, Kuching.
SYN BIN LEONG & CO.,
22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS.
Beer, Wine, Spirit & General Store Dealers,
	:(o):	
SOLE AGENTS FOR :
FRASER & NEAVE'S AERATED WATERS
(The Best throughout the East.)
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic
Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at
$1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 catties of dry rubber.
ASAHI BEER.
ACETIC ACID.
	:(o):	
Fresh supplies of Stores are received regularly.
PRICES MODERATE.
Free delivery to customers in Kuching.
Free packing & shipping for Outstation
Orders.
[4-2]


181
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1919.
PURE FOOD MEANS GOOD HEALTH
“ALEXANDRIA” CANNED MEATS
 Every Tin Guaranteed under the New South Wales Pure Food Act, and packed under the constant and vigilant supervision of a Government Inspector.
ASK FOR "ALEXANDRIA”
Roast BeefRoast MuttonBeef SausageCorned BeefCorned MuttonPork SausageOx CheekSpiced MuttonFrankfurt SausageOx TonguesMutton ChopsBeef DrippingLuncheon TonguesAssorted MeatsPork and BeansSheep Tongues     1Minced ScollopsIrish StewExtract of Beef  Assorted SoupsOx Tail SoupAs supplied in huge quantities to the Imperial and Indian Governments for use by both the Army and Navy.
Sold by all Stores.
    CHARLES BOWEN & CO.
2 Castlereagh Street, SYDNEY, N.S.W.
“ALEXANDRIA MEAT WORKS.’’
Distributors for the East :
Seremban General Agency, Ltd.
(Incorporated in F. M. S.)
SINGAPORE .
Sub: Agents—BAN JUI LONG,
14 Carpenter Street,
KUCHING, SARAWAK.
and BAN JUI GUAN,
[24-8]
MIRI, SARAWAK.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1919.
185
THE SARAWAK STUDIO
(REPRESENTATIVES OF MESSRS. KODAK LIMITED.)
THE BEST IN KUCHING
WHERE GOOD PORTRAITS CAN BE TAKEN AND VIEWS OF THE
NEIGHBOURHOOD PROCURED.
PHOTOS FOR PASSPORTS
AT SHORT NOTICE.
KODAKS, KODAK FILMS, PLATES, PAPERS, CHEMICALS,
PHOTO PASTE AND ALL PHOTOGRAPHIC MATERIALS
SUPPLIED AT SINGAPORE CATALOGUE PRICES.
AMATEURS’ FILMS & PLATES DEVELOPED, PRINTED &
ENLARGED AT REASONABLE CHARGES.
Free instructions given to Amateurs with pleasure.
21, COURT HOUSE ROAD, KUCHING.
C. M. LEE,
        Manager.
SHIPPING.
Arrivals.


186	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1919.
Departures.
       D. A. OWEN, 
for Registrar of Trade.
KUCHING :—Printed and Published by GHIN HKNG SOON, Government Printer, at'the Government Printing Oilice.
Barrack Road.

