
VOL. XLIX
No. 774.

 Sarawak Gazette.
Price                               KUCHING, FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1919.	10 cents
--		——
The Sarawak Gazette.
           CONTENTS.
                 Page.
Notes ...		...                ...                   201 
Death of Dr. D. Latimer Greene	. .	202
The Rajah Charles Brooke Memorial Fund	202
Funeral of His Highness the Late Rajah ...	...                   202
The Silver Thimble Fund	...	...	208
Hints on padi and its cultivation         ...	...                   208
Peace Celebrations ...	...	...	205
Monthly Reports: -Sadong Colliery—Simanggang ...                 206
                   Sibu ...            ...	 ...                    206
                   Lower Rejang—Mukah—Limbang       207
Trade Returns	...	...		...                     209
Rainfall ...	...	...	   ...	                     210
Passengers	...	...               ...	 210
Almanac ...	...	...	  ..	.                     210
Sibu Shipping	...	...	.	...	...	211
Miri Shipping	...	...	...	...	211
Kuching Shipping Returns	...	...	...	214
FRIDAY, AUGUST 1, 1919.
NOTES.
   The Sarawak Gazette.
(July.)
    MR. Day informs us that a sum of $200
being unclaimed prize money in the Our Day
1918 Lottery has now been handed over to
the Hon. Treasurer of the Red Cross Fund
and will in due course be forwarded to England.
    THE Honble. J. and Mrs. Baring-Gould
arrived from Sibu by s. l. Lucile, on the 16th
and returned the next day by s. s. Alice
Lorraine with Miss Lorna Baring-Gould.
    THE Rev. Father Stotter who has been
spending a short time in Kuching returned to
Mukah mouth by s. s. Sarawak on the 17th.
   S. S. Alice Lorraine arrived from Oya on
the 20th with Mr. and Mrs. H. H Kortright
and children and Mother Clare. Mrs. Kort-
right is on her way to Singapore from where
she hopes to get a passage to Vancouver.
   S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore on
the 21st with passengers Messrs. H. C. E.
Zacharias, Page and Lee Kui Lim.
   P. 8. Adeh left for the North on the 23rd
with passenger Miss Tait.
   S. S. Kuching sailed for Singapore on the
24th with the following saloon passengers
Mr. and Mrs. H. H. Kortright and children,
Lieut. W T. Clark, Messrs. Larkins, Chan Kee
Ong, Lim Tee Chew, Lim Seng Joo. Lim Mia
S’nua, Jong Poong Chong, and C. Peck Tee.
   Mr. Stewart, who has been for a short time
in the Pavilion, returned by her on his way
to Java for a holiday.
S. S. Sarawak arrived from Sadong on the
with passenger Mr. E. H. Haldane.
   SUBSCRIPTIONS io the Gazette, are as follows
The Sarawak Gazette
   PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
    Single copy	... .	...	...     .10 cents
    Subscription for one year	...	... $2.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations    2.25
Subscription including postage to all other
                Countries. ...	...   2.50
   PAYABLE IN STERLING—
     Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 5s. 10d
The Sarawak Government Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY—
     Single copy ...	...	...     .05 cents
     Subscription for one year	...	... $1.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations   1.26
 Subscription including postage to all other
                Countries.                                     1.50
   PAYABLE IN STERLING—
    Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) Sa. dd
   All subscriptions are payable in advance and must
commence from the 1st January in each year on
which date they are renewable. All broken periods
will be considered as full.
   Subscriptions will not be renewed unless notice
of renewal given.
Changes of Address should be notified to the
Office in writing.


202
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 1, 1919.
   THE Bangkok Daily Mail of July 15 contains
a mysterious telegram from Singapore to the
effect that “ the Tuan Muda of Sarawak, who
is staying at Government House, commissions
the Straits Times to deny that the water
supply there is contaminated, stating that it
is absolutely safe.” About tins time we had
a paragraph with regard to the Tuan Muda
staying at Government House, and another
giving the Singapore Commissioners’ denial
to the rumour regarding the water supply. 
The telegraph clerk deserves recommenda- 
tion.—( S. T.)
  S. S. Alice Lorraine left, for Sibu on the 
27lh with Mother Clare and Mother Mary.
   THE first contingent of outstation' visitors
arrived from Sibu on the morning of the 31st.
These were the Honble. J. and Mrs. Baring-
Gould and children and Messrs. Aplin and
Gifford.
  His Highness the Rajah desires to record
his deep appreciation of the excellent work
accomplished by the late expeditionary
force to the Gat and to acknowledge thank-
fully the services rendered by His Highness
the Tuan Muda who commanded the ex-
pedition, the Honble. J. Baring-Gould, Mr.
G. M. Gifford, the other Government Officers
accompanying the force and all ranks of the
Sarawak Bangers whose effects greatly con-
tributed to the successful issue.
   THE following extract is from Mr. Thomas Burke’s new book Out and About: A Note Book of London in War-Time—
  I am glad I have clicked chopsticks in Limehouse Causeway with the yellow boys who can talk of Canton and Siam and North Borneo and San Francisco ... I am glad from having met men who know Java as I know London; who know the best places in Tokio for tea and the most picturesque spots in Formosa; who can direct me to a good hotel in Singapore, should I ever go there, and who know where Irish whisky can lie bought in Sarawak.
   Death of Dr. D. Latimer Greene.
?
  It is with very sincere regret- that we have to record the sudden death of Dr. Latimer Greene from malaria, at Labuan on the 21st, news of which reached Kuching on the morning of the 22nd. A mail received on the previous Saturday had stated that Dr. Greene had gone to Labuan for medical treatment, but there was no intimation of serious danger.
  Dr. Downes Latimer Greene was the only son of Dr. R. Latimer Greene of Stratford-on-Avon and was born on 2nd June 1883. A graduate of Edinborough University he gained his first medical experience as house-surgeon at the Royal Infirmary, Gloucester. In January 1910 he came to this country as assistant medical officer and in January 1915 he was appointed Principal Medical Officer and placed on the permanent staff. In 1918 he was sworn in as a member of the Council Negri, of which he had formerly been an honorary member. During leave between 1916—1917 he was attached to the R. A. M. C. and spent several months in France. On his return to this country he was a passenger on the P. O. Mongolia which was mined off Bombay.
  In the medical world he will be best remembered as the pioneer of novarsenobillon for yaws and also a devoted enquirer into the treatment of leprosy.
  In this country his kiss will be keenly felt both socially and professionally. For many years a Committee man of the Sarawak Club, of which he was at one time Honorary Secretary, there were no firms of athletic activity in which he did hot take a prominent part.
   We feel sure all his friends in Sarawak will join in offering their sympathy to Mrs. Greene whose marriage took place as lately as March 1918.
The Rajah Charles Brooke
Memorial Fund.
Amount already acknowledged	...	$39,103.20
J. W. Evans ...	...	100.00
30th July, 1919.	$39,203.20
Funeral of His Highness the
Late Rajah.
  Another chapter in a bit of romantic history was concluded yesterday with the burial in the pretty little churchyard at Sheepstor, nestling among the tors of Dartmoor, of the late Rajah of Sarawak—Sir Charles Antoni Johnson Brooke, who died at bis English residence, Chesterton House, Cirencester, while on a visit to this country, on May 20tb, 1917, at the age of 87 years. It was his wish that Sheepstor should be his last resting place, and the embalmed body has for two years been reposing in a vault pending the arrival in England of the present Rajah and Ranee from Sarawak.
  The beautiful polished mahogany shell containing the mortal remains reached the moorland church yesterday morning, and, covered with the national flag of Sarawak, lay in state throughout the day. On the massive breastplate was the simple inscription :
Charles Brooke,
G.C. M.G.,
Rajah of Sarawak.
  The grave, lined with choice flowers and foliage, was near the tomb of the deceased’s uncle, both being overshadowed by a huge beech tree. Yesterday the coffin was carried hence by residents of the village—Messrs. W. Manning (churchwarden), Amos, George, and Harold Shilleheer, P. Ware, S. Moses, W. Brown. R. Legassic, and W. Smale. The mourners who followed were:
  The Ranee Margaret (widow).
  The Rajah and Ranee of Sarawak (son and daughter-in-law).
Captain Brooke, Tuan Bunsu (son).
  Mr. C. Wills Johnson, R. N., State Advisory Council in England.
  Mr. F. H. Kortright (Resident Second-class Miri) and Mrs. Kortright.
  Mr. J. A. H. Hardie (Resident Second-class- Simanggang).
  Mr. and Mrs. H. F. Deshon. Mr. and Mrs. Buck, and Mr. C. W. Daubeny (Sarawak Civil Service, re-, tired).
  Mr. C. E. Brittan was among the congregation, which included many parishioners. The service, was conducted by the Vicar, the choir leading the- singing of the hymns “On the resurrection morning” and “Abide with me,” and chanting “Lord, now lettest Thou thy servant depart in peace” as the cortege was leaving the church.
  The floral tributes were exquisite. They were sent by the Rajah and Ranee of Sarawak, Captain


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 1, 1919.
203
Harry Brooke, Mr. and Mis. O. Lang, Mr. and Mrs.
F. H. Kortright, Mr. C. C. Robison, and the Officers of
Simanggang (Messrs. P. A. W. Page Turner. J. A.
H. Hardie, and P. M. Adams).
   After the obsequies, the distinguished party paid
a visit to Burrator House prior to motoring back to
Plymouth.
   The circumstances in which the Brooke family
became bound up with the destinies of Borneo, over
a' part of which they exercise a kingly and benevolent 
away, am most thrilling. According to the Rev. H. 
Hugh Breton, M. A.. vicar of Sheepstor, who details
them in his delightful and informative work “Beauti- 
ful Dartmoor," the eventful life of the first Rajah, 
Sir Jas. Brooke, K. C. B.. D. C. L., commenced
when, ns an officer in the East India Company’s
service, he was severely wounded in action, and
compelled to resign bis commission. Many men
would have returned to a life of stagnation at home,
but not so one of Brooke’s temperament. Fortunately, 
a comfortable income enabled the ex-ensign
to gratify a passion for exploration and adventure,
which military discipline had hitherto restrained, and
a small yacht was commissioned for a long cruise.
   This was undertaken at first with no definite
object, and it is probable that at this time Brooke
had never heard of Sarawak. It was perhaps the
wanderer’s lucky star which guided the Royalist
around the Cape of Good Hope, and finally drifted
her into the blue mid sunlit waters of the East 
Indian Archipelago.
   On August 14, 1888, the coast of Borneo was
sighted, and on the following day Brooke's yacht
anchored off a tiny village of palm huts on the banks
of a river 20 miles inland. This was Kuching, now
the capital of Sarawak, and the Englishman landed
to pay his respects to a Malay Rajah, the former
little dreaming that he was destined shortly to ex-
change places with his native host.
   Sarawak was in those days a dependency of Borneo 
(a Sultanate in North Borneo), and Brooke found
the Rajah of Sarawak, as Viceroy of the. Sultan, in
dire straits, occasioned by the deplorable condition
of the country. Rebellion reigned inland, piracy on
the coast, and trade was at a standstill. The Rajah
was, he confessed, powerless to act, and any day
might see him deposed and the country seized by
lawless mauraders.
   There was only one way, the Chief said, of saving
the situation, and that was by means of armed inter-
vention by his guest. Luckily the Royalist was ns
well equipped for warfare as any British gunboat of
those days, and alter due consideration her owner
decided to assist the Government.
   On receipt of this welcome news the Sultan of
Brunei at once despatched a messenger with the pro-
mise that should Brooke succeed in restoring peace
and order he would be installed as Rajab of Sarawak,
which title would descend to bis heirs for ever.
   After several months’ hard struggle Brooke gained
the victory. Hostilities ceased in December, 1840,
and on September 24, 1841, he was proclaimed
Rajah of Sarawak. Under his wise and tolerant
government this little eastern kingdom entered
upon a new ere of prosperity and peace. In 1847
the Rajah visited England. He was greeted with
much honour, and was knighted by Queen Victoria
when on a visit t« Windsor Castle. He became a
freeman of the City of London, and Burrator House
was purchased for him by public subscription. It 
was here that he died on June 11, 1868.
   The second Rajah was a nephew, and he
ruled this eastern kingdom for all but half-a- 
century.—( Home Paper.)
The Silver Thimble Fund.
——
  The following letter is published for the informa-
tion of subscribers to this Fund.
2, CRESENT ROAD,
WIMBLEDON, S. W. 19.
June 6th, 1919.
The Right Revd.
     The Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak.
DEAR SIR,
     We have received from the Chief Accountant
of the S. P. G. your splendid cheque for £66.0.9,
also your own letter advising us of same We beg
you will accept our very sincere thanks, and that
you will convey our appreciation of this generous
gift to all who have so kindly contributed towards
it. We cannot express how much it means to us to
have the sympathy and co-operation of the British
men and women throughout the Empire. It has
been our greatest encouragement and inspiration.
  We have now raised over £55,000, and our latest
gift was £10,000 to the Seamen's Hospital at
Greenwich. This was presented to the hospital
yesterday, by II. M. Queen Alexandra, patron of
the Fund, it was a gala day at the hospital and
the weather was perfect.
  Wo. shall in all probability close the Fund on July
8th, as this will complete four years work which has
been entirely voluntary all through. My hope is
that every charitable organisation will individually
continue the scheme for its own benefit. Now that
people have got into thrifty ways and have found
such good use can be made of unwanted oddments, 
a “Silver Thimble" Society could well be
organised and carried out to a good purpose. Again
thanking you,
I beg to remain,
Yours very truly,
H. E. HOPE-CLARKE.
    Hints on padi and its cultivation.
—?—
A. Seed.
  The first consideration is the selection of the seed.
This should be gathered at harvest time from the
standing padi.
  A seed which will give a large yield in average
seasons is co be aimed at. Those ears should be
gathered which appear to possess the largest sized
seed with the maximum quantity of seed per ear.
  Other points to be aimed at are to select a variety
of padi which does not readily fall from the ear on
reaching maturity. Further a thin hull or husk is
required The percentage of busk varies in differ-
ent varieties from 14—-40%. The best size of a
grain from the point of view of milling by machinery
is 7 mm X 3.5 mm. Ability to withstand adverse
climatic and local conditions, the number of days a
padi takes to mature (average 120—150 days) and
strong stems to withstand heavy rain are equally of
great value.
  Uniform height of the plant (1 ½  metre high is the
optimum height), the number of stems per stool
(10 stems per stool is said to be best) and the num-
ber of ears per stem (6 ears per stem are desirable)
also require consideration.
  In shore a standard variety is to be aimed at.
B. Soil and its preparation.
  The felling of new jungle and making fresh farms
every year is not desirable for many reasons. In
fact it is much better to work the same ground more


204
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 1, 1919.
from each other. Too close crowding leads to poor
yield, too scanty planting leads to weakness of the
plant. The correct spacing is a very important
point.
  The Philippine Journals give 15 cm X 15 cm
as the optimum with 4 seedlings per hole.
  20 cm X 20 cm as the optimum with 6 seed-
lings per hole.
  The British Guiana experiments suggest a spacing,
of 9—10 inches wide with 2—3 seedlings per hole.
The correct spacing varies with the variety of the
padi, the nature of the soil and the climatic con-
ditions e. g. rain.
  No planting however should be done closer than
15 cm x 15 cm e. g. 6 inches by 6 inches.
  The seedlings take a week to take root. Water is
now admitted very carefully and gradually, only
about two inches high at first.
  The height of water should never be over eight
inches for any length of time, but irrigation must
be maintained until the padi begins to get yellow.
Controlled irrigation is essential to be certain of
success. When the padi is ripe, the water is run off.
E. Harvesting.
  The actual gathering of padi should be done in a
dry field. Standing water during this process means
considerable loss.
F. Pests.
  Weeds are dealt with by weeding. If the plants
are properly spaced and aligned, it is easy to use
a changkol for the purpose. Weeding is essential
and must on no account be neglected or omitted.
  To reduce losses from the ai tacks of pests, farmers
should combine to plant large square areas competitively. This method of planting exposes the
minimum of side to the jungle and losses on the
outskirts can be pooled. Fencing is also important,
in fact usually essential. There should be a wide
clear path all round and other paths traversing
the fields to permit of patrolling of the farm.
  Rats are dealt with by removing all stumps and
logs and thoroughly ploughing or puddling. Arsenic
in pills of engkabang oil may be scattered. This
practice however is dangerous to fowls and domestic
animals. Man also may suffer, unless great care is
exercised, as the arsenic may get into the drinking
water.
  The insect of most importance is the padi borer.
This is the caterpillar of a small moth. This moth
lays its eggs on the leaf of the padi. The caterpillar
is found inside the stalks at the bottom of a male.
Leptocorisa acuta attacks the youngers and prevents
formation of the grain. Tylenclus orizte is a
nematode worm attacking the roots. There are
further diseases such as smur. etc . and others about
which little is apparently known as yet.
  The best way of tackling insects is to patrol the
fields at night with burning torches or lamps and a
tin full of water and brush toe plants. In this way
large numbers of insects are drowned or burnt. Such
insects should make good poultry food, Flooding
will prevent the metamorphosis of some kinds of
caterpillars.
Summary.
   Select the seed, clean it, grade it and test it,
prepare the soil by cleaning, stumping, burning,
manuring, ploughing and harrowing. Be. very careful 
to give the seedbed the very best preparation.
Do not overcrowd. Irrigation is essential to pro-
duce good results. Be systematic. Weed regularly.
Use buffaloes wherever and whenever possible.
Plant catch crops.
   There is no need to fell fresh jungle every year.
The same ground will do for some years if properly
thoroughly for a number of years. This applies especially to riverside land which is frequently flooded. “ An impervious subsoil is to be aimed at. Irrigation can be done on hills also by terracing. After cleaning away all stumps and timber by burning or otherwise, one of two methods of preparing the soil is employed:
1. —(hand, buffalo, steam or motor
ploughing ) the land should lie repeatedly ploughed. A rough home-made plough breaking the soil about six inches deep is usually sufficient. After ploughing, the soil is harrowed to collect and remove the weeds. The surface is then levelled to permit of even irrigation. A number of suitable ditches and dams to bring and take away the water are necessary. The admission of water must be under perfect control. Where possible natural differences of level are made use of, otherwise pumps or water-wheels are required. Dams should be made two foot high by two to three feet wide.
  2. By puddling the toil with buffaloes.—In this case the land is first flooded and soaked, to kill the weeds and make the soil soft. Buffaloes ate then admitted and the soil is churned up until it resembles drift mud. If necessary level with a plank. Irrigation under proper control must be provided for as above.
  Manuring.— If after a few years crop-taking, the yield per unit area decreases, the soil requires manuring. It has been found that the most suitable way to do this, is to cut leaves, grass and other vegetable matter and throw all this, as well as any animal manures available, on to the soaked land and pound and churn it into the soil with buffaloes In this way crops have been doubled and more.
  If artificial immure is used, ammonium salts should be used. Nitrates are unsuitable. Quantities to be used are given as below :—
250—350 Kerosene cases full of manure per hectare
300 about			ashes „	,,
100 Kilos double superphosphate	,, ,,
300—900 Kerosene cases full of lime ,, ,,
          C. Sowing and making of seed beds.
  Padi can he sowed by broad casting or by more or less regular spacing or drilling. Before Sowing, the seed should be tested. One rough method is to throw the seed into water—that which sinks is good and is quickly removed from the water and dried, where is the seed that finals is poor and is thrown away I here are other methods, such as germination tests, bill these for the time being need not be considered. Hand picking for uniformity of seed can also be practised.	
  The best method of sowing padi is to prepare the ' grid bed by method B (2 and 3). When the soil is in perfect condition. the water is run off and the seed is uniformly scattered at the rate of 1,500 seeds per : Equate metre or 8 10 gantangs per acre. The best soil for seed lads is a medium soil, not too light and notion heavy. By paying proper attention to the soil and manuring and avoiding over crowding, experiments have shown that the height of the seedlings is doubled and the weight trebled. Proper care of the seed beds ensures good crops. The seed bed is kept moist but no water is allowed to stand on it, otherwise the seed rots. Once the seeds have grown, with is admitted.
  At the end of 30—35 days the seedlings are transplanted.
D. Transplanting.
  The seedlings me transplanted before the joints form in the stalks, th.it is when they are about a foot high. The seedlings must not be torn out but dug up with the fingers. They are now planted in the prepared field in straight lines 3—5 seedlings to a hole. These holes are spaced 8—9 inches apart


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 1, 1919.
205
attended to. By systematic agriculture, crops are doubled and trebled.
The use of buffaloes, besides saving manual labour and manuring the ground, leads to a natural increase in these animals and a general increase of wealth as a result.
    7 mm — .27 inch. 3.5 turn13 inch. 1 mm — .039 inch.
    14 metre 4 ft. 11 inches. 1 metre — 3 ft. 8.3 inches.
    One Kilo — 2 lbs. 3 ½  ozs.
    One hectare 24 acres.
    1 sq., metre = 1.56 sq., yard.
    15 cm=5.86 inches.
    20 cm==7.86 inches.
(Extracted mainly from the Philippine Journal of Science.)
PEACE CELEBRATIONS.
	»	
First Day.
SATURDAY.
August 2nd.
Mommy 8.30—10.00—Official Celebrations on the S. P. G. Ground.
Review of the Sarawak Rangers, Police and Cadet Corps.
          March Past and Grand Salute.
Afternoon 2.00—5.00—Sports (Boys only) on the S. P. G. Ground.
Evening 8.00—Chinese processions & Illuminations. 9.00—Fire-works
Second Day.
S U N D A Y 
August 3rd.
Morning 7.00—Service at the Pro-Cathedral.
Asperges followed by High Mass at St. Joseph’s Church.
Afternoon 5.30 —Thanksgiving Service at the Pro- Cathedral.
4.00—Prayers (Chinese) and Solemn Benediction at St. Joseph’s Church.
Third Day.
M O N D AY
August 4th.
Morning 9 00—11.00— River Sports.
Afternoon 2.00 —5.00—Sports (Open) on the S. P. G. Ground.
livening 8.00—Malay, Tamil, etc. Processions. Illuminations.
   On Thursday August 7th Special prayers and thanksgiving will be held at the Sikh Temple from 6 p.m. until daylight.
   All School Children will be fed at their respective Schools.
ED. PARNELL,
Joint Hon. Secretary.
         MONTHLY REPORTS.
         SADONG COLLIERY.
June.
   The gross out-put of coal produced by the mines during the month was 1,679.06 tons; 450 tons of this was consumed by our boilers and 1,229.06 tons delivered to the wharf for export.
  The shipments for the mouth were as under- The Kuching Municipality ... 191.00 tons Messrs. The Borneo Company,
Kuching 1,251.00 ,,
     „	Soon Seng, Sibu ...	181.08	,,
     ,,	Paterson Simons A
Co., Singapore	420.00	„
     ,,	Straits Steamship Co.,
          (bunkering s. s. Malacca)	90.00	„
                Total shipments 2,133.08 tons
  Our stock balance on the wharf at the end of the month was 1,098.09 tons.
  The Honble. the Resident accompanied by Mr. Archer arrived early in the month with a good force of police, and the disturbing elements amongst the labour force with their ringleaders were promptly arrested and dealt with.
  The Honble. the Resident on his return to Kuching very kindly sent round a guard of Rangers in the event of further mischief. This squad was posted on night duty, and the singkehs with the removal of their ringleaders, once more became quiet and orderly.
  The rainfall for the month was only 2T9 inches, and we experienced a great shortage of water for boiler consumption on the hill-side at the No. 9 mine entrance.
  The engines, ladlers and locomotives were in good working order and everything went well with the mining operations underground during the month.
  Fairly good progress was made with the planting of padi and rice substitutes ; large quantities of shale refuse was dumped on the swamp behind the kampong.
  A large area, of the employees’ allotments have now been planted up and their crops are doing well.
J. W. EVANS,
Manager.
SIMANGGANG.
?
June.
  The 3rd being the birthday of His Majesty King George the offices were closed.
  Kayan’s house, of 19 doors situated at Emplam, Batang Lupar was burnt to the ground owing to carelessness; a great amount of property was destroyed, also much padi lost. They were temporally assisted by Government.
  Lakim of Saribas arrived here from Kuching having been there to complain about his farming land. Lakim was proved to have made false statements concerning this land, he himself having agreed to a boundary being laid down by Government.
  On the 15th I left for Betong accompanied by Abang Dulrasid to settle numerous appeals mostly dealing with engkabang tree disputes. Penghulu Unjit complained about certain lepers in his district not removing to the stream specially reserved for them. Anding for harbouring lepers was fined $50. Malays have at last made up the kampong road and have gravelled it. I returned to Simanggang on the 19th taking $3,400, mostly notes, for the Treasury here.
  A tremendous gale of wind blew about 7 p.m. on the 23rd and much damage was done to pepper gardens; also a great number of trees were uprooted along the Sabu and Brayun roads.
  On the 29th P. C. Apaw arrived from Kabong with Mat, a Malay, who had killed his aunt in a fit, of madness Mat was sent to Kuching as he appears to be insane.


206
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 1, 1919.
  The 29th being the last day of the Mohammedan fasting mouth, a salute of 14 guns was fired next morning to commemorate Hari Haya.
  The Native Officer of Lubok Antu reports all quiet, and that Dyaks are busy preparing their farms.
  Saribas.—The new police barracks at Betong were completed with the exception of the kitchen, P. C. Abu Bakar was dismissed the force on account of neglect of duty and P.O. Awan discharged on account of ill health.
  Kalaka.— Mr. F. C. Chapman of the Island Trading Syndicate paid a visit to Kabong in order to obtain coolies to work bako, but was not successful as Malays are nearly all away working jelutong.
  Amin, a Malay youth of Nyabor, was injured by a pig trap, set by Abak, a Dyak of Nyabor. The usual penalties were imposed on Abak.
  All Dyaks and Malaya living on the lower reaches of the Krian are bard at work on their padi farms; the Malays appear to be really serious, as this is the second year that they have had no padi. They mostly depend on Dyaks fur padi.
  The principal exports dating from January 1st to June 30th are:—
  The following are the trade returns for this divi-
sion, viz.:—
Imports.	Exports.
June 1919	$ 90,672.00	$ 90,814.00
Total to 30. 6. 19. 475,628.50	575,922.65
Total to 30. 6. 18. $212,854.75
$235,143 55
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER,
Resident.
SIBU .
June.
  The 3rd being the birthday of His Majesty the
King was observed as a holiday and the flagstaff
was dressed in honour of the occasion.
  On the same day I returned from visiting the
coast stations and on arrival received news that the
Ga'at rebels were prepared to tender their sub-
mission and requested an interview at Kapit, later
in the month.
  I visited Kapit on the 10th but returned on the
12th, as these people have not yet arrived. On the
24th I again visited Kapit and was met on the follow- 
ing day, by some fifty of the Ga'at Dyaks who re-
5[nested that 1 should inform His Highness the 
iajab that they were prepared to give up their law- 
less ways and would accept any terms of surrender 
which His Highness was pleased to impose on them, 
  Subject to His Highness’ approval certain condi- 
tions were laid down ; a full text of which has been 
forwarded to His Highness the Tuan Muda under
another cover.
  The relations of the two Pot Dyaks, Jabat and
Nuing, who murdered three Chinese in the previous
month were ordered to remove from the Poi and re-
side in the Igan. This order has been carried out
and they are now living with P. Manggi.
  It is my opinion that the Poi Dyaks, as a whole,
were not aware that Jabat and Nuing left the Poi
with the intention of going on the head hunt, with,
perhaps, the exception of Nyangau of ill fame. The
Poi Dyaks have now been informed that Jabat and
his accomplice have been out-lawed and should they
receive them in their houses or assist them in any
way they will render themselves liable to the sever-
est penalty.
  It was found necessary, early in the month, to
take over control of all imported rice as the traders,
expecting a shortage, later in the year, were bring-
ing in larger consignments than were necessary for
present consumption. It was also reported that
Foo Chows and others who had large stocks of padi
were purchasing imported rice in considerable quan-
tities, A rationing system has been introduced and
it is hoped thereby to reduce the consumption of rice
and also to mitigate, as fur as it is possible, pro-
fiteering.
  Mr. H. D. Aplin visited Binatang, Sarikei and
Rejang in connection with the Food Control. Owing
to the shortage of clerks the work in tins department
has been very heavy.
  Mr. W. R Tudor Clement was absent from the
8th to the 23rd visiting Matu and the other stations
in the delta where there was an accumulation of
work. The sum of $7,000 was remitted from the
Matu to the Sibu Treasury and $5,000 from Kapit
to Sibu. A sum of $5,000 was remitted from the
Sibu to the Mukah Treasury.
  Dr. O. G. F. Luhn left, per the s. s Rajah of Sara-
wak on the 20th for Kuching to do temporary duty.
  The arrival of the s. s. Rajah of Sarawak on the
16th caused great excitement amongst the native
population living on the banks of the river as no
vessel of her size had ever ascended the Rejang as
far as Sibu. I am given to understand that Captain
McDonnell found little difficulty in navigating toe
vessel round the numerous sand banks in the river,
but that the rocks below Sankei are somewhat of a
hinderance as they can only be crossed on a rising
tide; the depth at low water in places being 12 feet
and at high waler 24 feet.
  Every effort to salve the s. I. Hong Line has so
far proved abortive. The owners have obtained a
Japanese diver with a diving outfit and ropes have
been attached to the vessel; the prospects of salving
the boat now appear to be more hopeful.
  The month has been abnormally hot, no rain fell
for nineteen days and in consequence, it is feared,
that much damage has been done to the food sub-
stitute plantations.
  There has been a lot of fever and stomach troubles
amongst the natives which is presumably due to the
long drought anil shortage of drinking water.
  Practically the whole of the illipe nut crop has
been shipped, a certain amount still remains in the
upper Julau but owing to the lowness of the rivers
it has been found impossible to transport the nuts
to the bazaar. No less than 11,686 piculs of these
nuts were exported during the month. A larger
quantity of para rubber was exported in June
than in any previous month. The export figures
show 96,331 lbs.
  Trade returns for the past month are as follows :—
Imports. Exports.
Coasting ...                       $ 36,146	$ 31,266
Foreign	...	203,066           280,828
                                   $ 239,212
Brought forward ...       1,010,224
$ 312,094 1,248,617
Total to 30/6/19 ...      $1,249,436	$1,560,711
           1918 ...       $ 443,724	$ 513,787
Immigration figures show 76.
J. BARING-GOULD.
Resident 3rd Division.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 1. 1919.
207
LOWER REJANG.
June.
  I left per s. 1. Mermaid for Matu on 9th, owing to the bad weather 1 had to pass the night at Daro, arriving at Matu the following day. Numerous cases in the Police and Debt Courts were brought before me. The most important case was wherein the Datu Bandar took proceedings vs. Aludin, Kria, Bakar, Awang Bakar for cattle lifting; after a hearing of some hours the above mentioned persons were sentenced to a term of 18 months imprisonment. Merusin on second conviction for theft was sentenced to nine months R. I.
  A contract was made with Chan Gook Chin for the up-keep and repair to the road leading from the office to the bazaar. The sum of $4,000 in silver and $3,000 in notes was brought up to the Sibu Treasury.
  I left for Daro on 15th, most of the cases heard there were in connection with contracts and agreements signed in Court by Melanoes with Chinese.
  The bazaars in Matu and Daro are both in a dilapidated state. Raw sago was being sold at $2.50 per pasu.
  Leaving Daro on 18th, I arrived at Rejang. Few matters of importance were brought before me.
  On 21st Mr. H. D. Aplin arrived per s. s. Rajah of Sarawak in connection with the rice control.
  I returned to Sibu on 23rd with Mr. Aplin per s.l. La Follette.
W. R. TUDOR CLEMENT,
Resident 2nd Class.
MUKAH.
June.
  The Honble. Divisional Resident presided in Appeal Court on the 2nd of the month, and left for Oya on the following morning.
  Early in the month news from Kuching caused the local Chinese to raise the retail price of rice by some 20% regardless of the fact that they still held a considerable quantity of rice purchased at lower rates. The principal traders were sent for and the price again returned to its original level. I am now taking over all rice brought into the district and am retailing at fixed prices to certain Chinese. I do not think it will be necessary to introduce the system of rationing in this district as long as a certain amount of control can be exercised over the bazaar traders. The average Milano, since the rise in price, has been consuming much less rice than in normal times, and has, of course, no difficulty in finding a substitute in sago used in different forms The people most affected by shortage of rice will be the Chinese and the Dyak jelutong workers.
  The Divisional Resident having very kindly placed the launch at my disposal for a few days, I left for Balingian on the 15th and remained there until the 19th, the launch meanwhile returning to Mukah with a cargo of timber.
  I found large numbers of Dyaks awaiting my arrival, and, by dint of sitting in Court the greater part of the day, managed to settle off the majority of cases brought up for hearing before I left. Most of the cases were of the usual description, but two, one of incest, and one of grave robbery, involved payment of pemalli menoa and were of great importance to the Dyak community.
  I found that the two Dyak Penguins were dissatisfied with the division of commission on door tax, and have therefore arranged to pay these men
a fixed sum each year without taking into consideration the amount of tax collected in their respective districts, Taking the size of the river and the number of Dyaks there into consideration it Would hardly seem necessary to employ two Penguins, but the up-river Dyaks are all from the Rejang, while those down-river are from the Saribas and Krian, so it is not possible for one man to settle disputes owing to difference of customs.
  For some time there have been continual complaints at Balingian about theft of jelutong, and it has been impossible to bring these thefts home to any person. A Chinese was found in possession of a quantity of jelutong plainly marked with another man's “chap". As he was unable, or unwilling to explain how this came to be in his boat he was sentenced to pay a fine of 5250 or three months R. I. in default. The fine was paid.
  During my stay at Balingian I took over a quantity of rice consigned to various traders, and also fixed the retail price of the rice in stock in the bazaar. Dyaks informed me that up-river Chinese had been soiling at $2 per gantang, but this is probably an exaggeration. The Balingian Dyaks are in a bad way as regards padi, many of them not having harvested sufficient last year to use for planting this season.
  The Mukah and Balingian arrack farm was let for two years from the end of June, the amount realised being about $100 per annum over the price paid by the last holder.
  Owing, I imagine, to the Puasa, work at Mukah has been considerably lighter than usual. Both Native Officers have been away during the month.
  On my return from Balingian I settled up a few outstanding matters and left for Sibu.
Trade returns are as below :—
1919.	1918.
    Raw sago	338 koyans	472	koyans
    Jelutong	791 piculs	3,101	piculs
    Eugkabang	728 ,,
    Guita mirah	2 ,,
H. L. OWEN,
Resident 2nd Class.
LIMBANG.
May.	,
  I left here by the m. l. Damit on the 5th for Brooketon en route to Lawas, returning here from Lawas by the s. s. L'Aubaine on the 17th.
  Messrs. Cator and Whyte came over from Brunei on the 20th to ask if 300 gantangs of seed padi might be released from Trusan to be planted in Brunei. I agreed to this, provided anyone could be found willing to sell.
  Mr. Thomas Lewis arrived here by boat from Brunei on the 21st and left for Brooketon by the m. 1 Damit the following day.
  The Government offices were closed on Proclamation Day, the 24th.
  A salute of seven guns was fired from the fort on the evening of the 30th to notify the Mohammedans that their fast had begun.
  Kasom, Tuah Kampong of Bengkita, died during the month. No one has as yet been elected by the exemption tax payers of the village to succeed him.
  Court.—Latip and Panjang were sentenced to twelve months H. L. and fined $50 each for theft of buffaloes.
  There were no other cases of importance. Fines and fees amounted to $179.28.
  P. IF. D.—The coolies have been felling jungle (later on to be burnt) at the further end of the old


208
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 1, 1919.
cattle ground and planted up with padi, assisting the prisoners to plant kribang close to the site of the old cattle shed and trimming the bamboo hedges.
The following are the trade returns :—
Imports. Exports.
    Coasting ...	$ 635	$ 213
    Foreign ...	5,849	6,860
The rainfall for the month was 8 79 inches.
H. S. B. JOHNSON, 
Resident 5th Division.
The Sarawak Gazette.
RATES OF ADVERTISEMENTS IN THE " SARAWAK GAZETTE"
—?>—
Payable in advance.
Quarter of a column and under—
        First insertion ...	..	... $1.00
        Second and third insertion each	... 0.50
        Subsequent do	do	... 0.25
Half a Column and under—
        First insertion ...	...	... 2.00
        Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
        Subsequent do	do	... 0.50
A Column and under—
        First insertion each	...	... 4.00
        Second and third insertion each		... 2.00
        Subsequent do	do	... 100
Special arrangements may be made for standing advertisements.
  All communications intended for insertion in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed
to the Editor at the Government Printing Office, Kuching. They should be clearly written and should reach the Office at least one day before the publication of each issue.
  Letters and other contributions must be authenticated by writer’s name sent privately to the Editor.
  We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not inserting them.
  Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early intelligence all matters of general interest in their respective neighbourhoods.
NOTICE.
ASTANA FARM.
THE Manager of Astana Farm begs to inform the Public that he is unable to
attend to Orders for milk after Office hours.
NOTICE.
SALE BY AUCTION of all unredeemed pledges from YEK YEUN & Co., Pawn Farmers, No. 8, Sibu Bazaar Sibu, will be held on the 15th September 1919 at 10 a.m. and quarterly from that date until further notice.
  Lists of all unredeemed pledges are on view at the Farmers’ premises.
LAW JEE THAI, 
Authorised Auctioneers.
“GLORIA” INCANDESCENT LANTERNS.
	
    300 Candle Power of Brilliant Light at a cost that is far cheaper than any other known method of producing artificial light.
    Suitable for Indoor or Outdoor Illumination.
Will Burn Kerosene or Benzine
With Equal Facility.
No Noise.
No Smoke.
No Odour.

No Grease.
No Wicks to Trim.
No Trouble Whatever!
    Nothing to wear out, break or get out of
order.
    Made of heavy gauge brass, nickel plated, fitted with a reinforced mica chimney.
Price $20. (Twenty Dollars) each.
NOTICE.
	-?—
Gazette subscription and Printing Office bills.
   FOR the convenience of residents at Outstations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums but only the 1,2 and Scent values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that Money Orders be sent if possible.
J. C. SWAYNE,
Manager, Govt. Printing Office.
Complete with all fittings and one spare Generator.
Spare Mantles 84.80 per dozen.
Spare Generators 72 cents each.
        Obtainable from VANSCOLINA & COMPANY, Sole Agents,
LABUAN, S. S.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 1, 1919.
209
IMPORTS —(Continued.)
EXPORTS.


210	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 1, 1919.
Kuching, Coasting Trade Returns for the month of June., 1919.
IMPORTS.
TOTAL VALUE
Brought forward
$ 664,880 2.457,663
Total Value to Date
  1018
18,122,043
81,249,941
EXPORTS.
PEE
PEE
Rainfall, June, 1919.
PASSENGERS.
ARRIVALS.
PER s. Lucile:—16th July—From Sibu Honble. J.
and Mrs. Baring-Gould and daughter.
PER s. s. Alice Lorraine: 20th July—From Oya—Mr.
and Mm. Kortright and Mother Clare.
PER s. s. Kuching:—21st July—From Singapore Messrs.
Page, H. C. E. Zacharias and Lee Kui Lim.
PER S. S. Rajah of Sarawak:—27th July—From Singa-
pore—Dr. A. C. Hanton and Mr.
Graham.
PER s. s. Alice Lorraine:—31st July—From Sihu—Hon.
J. and Mrs. Baring-Gould and children
and Messrs. Aplin and Gifford.
DEPARTURES.
PER s. s. Sarawak:—17th July—For Mukah month —Revd. F. Stotter.
PER s. s. Alice Lorraine:—17th July—For Sibu—Honble.
J. and Mrs. Baring-Gould and daughter.
PER p. s. Adeh:—23rd July—For the North—Miss Tait.
PER S. S. Kuching:—24th July—For Singapore—Mr.   and Mrs. Kortright and children, Messrs. C. F. Page. W. T. Clark, Larkins, Chan Kee Ong, Iain Tee Chew, Lim
Seng Joo, Lim Mia S'nua, Jong Poong Chong and C. Peck Tee.
s. s. Alice Lorraine:—27th July—For Sibu Mother
Clare and Mother Mary.
s. s. Sarawak: —28th July — For Sadong Mr E. H.
Haldane.
—
THE “SARAWAK GAZETTE”
ALMANAC


AUGUST, 1919
   F. G. DAY, Registrar of Trade


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 1, 1919.
211
NOTICE.
AUCTION SALE
of unredeemed pledges from the Pawn Broking Farm YEW CHEE & Co.. Chop Wo SANG at 1 No. 18, China Street on Saturdays of the following dates:—16th August 1919; 20th September 1919; 18th October 1919; 15th November 1919 and 20th December 1919. at 9 a. m.
  List of all such unredeemed pledges is on view at the Pawn Farmer’s premises.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO., Authorised Auctioneers.
WANTED purchase a second-hand Empire type-writer. Must be cheap and in good order. Please reply Box A. C/o. The Editor, Sarawak Gazette. [2—2]
SYN HIN LEONG & CO.,
     22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS.
Beer, Wine, Spirit & General Store Dealers.
	 :(o):	
SOLE AGENTS FOR:
FRASER & NEAVE'S AERATED WATERS
        (The best throughout the. East.)
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic
Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at
$1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 cat ties of dry rubber.
ASAHI BEER.
ACETIC ACID.
	:(o):	
Fresh supplies of Stores are received
regularly.
PRICES MODERATE.
  Free delivery to customers in Kuching.
Free packing & shipping for Outstation
Orders.
[u. c.]
SIBU SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
MIRI SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
Departures.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AVGUST 1, 1919.
PURE FOOD MEANS GOOD HEALTH
“ALEXANDRIA” CANNED MEATS
Every Tin Guaranteed under the New South Wales
Pure Food Act, and packed under the constant
and vigilant supervision of a Government Inspector.
ASK FOR “ALEXANDRIA’’
Roast Beef
Corned Beef
Ox Cheek
Ox Tongues
Luncheon Tongues
Sheep Tongues
Extract of Beef
s
Roast Mutton
Corned Mutton
Spiced Mutton
Mutton Chops
Assorted Meats
Minced Scollops
Assorted Soups
Beef Sausage
Pork Sausage
Frankfurt Sausage Beef Dripping Pork and Beans Irish Stew Ox Tail Soup
As supplied in huge quantities to the Imperial and Indian
Governments for use by both the Anny and Navy.
Sold by all Stores,
    CHARLES BOWEN & CO.,
2 Castlereagh Street, SYDNEY, N.S.W.
“ALEXANDRIA MEAT WORKS.”
Distributors for the East:
Seremban General Agency, Ltd.
(Incorporated in F. M. S.)
SINGAPORE .
Sub: Agents—BAN JUI LONG,
14 Carpenter Street, KUCHING, SARAWAK.
and BAN JUI GUAN,
[24-9]
MIRI, SARAWAK.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 1, 1919.
213
 THE SARAWAK STUDIO
      (REPRESENTATIVES OF MESSRS, KODAK LIMITED.)
THE BEST IN KUCHING
WHERE GOOD PORTRAITS CAN BE TAKEN AND VIEWS OF THE
NEIGHBOURHOOD PROCURED.
PHOTOS FOR PASSPORTS
AT SHOUT NOTICE.
KODAKS, KODAK FILMS, PLATES, PAPERS, CHEMICALS
PHOTO PASTE AND ALL PHOTOGRAPHIC MATERIALS
SUPPLIED AT SINGAPORE CATALOGUE PRICES.
AMATEURS’ FILMS & PLATES DEVELOPED, PRINTED &
ENLARGED AT REASONABLE CHARGES.
        Free instructions given to Amateurs with pleasure.
          C. M. LEE,
Manager
21. COURT HOUSE ROAD.
               KUCHING.
NOTICE.	NOTICE.
In the matter of THE SARAWAK & SINGAPORE In the matter of 
THE SARAWAK & SINGAPORE
STEAMSHIP COMPANY LIMITED.
     AT an Extraordinary General Meeting of the above named Company duly convened and held at Kuching on Saturday the 29th March 1919 a resolution was passed by which the Company was to go into Liquidation in the event of the business being sold to a New Company then in course of formation and at a subsequent General Meeting of the Members of the said Company also duly convened and held at the same place on Tuesday the 15th April 1919 the above resolution was duly confirmed as a special Resolution and at such last mentioned Meeting Messrs. J. M. BRYAN, ONG TIANG SWEE and CHAN KEE ONG were appointed Liquidators for the purpose of the winding up.
    NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that in accordance with the above Resolution and the sale having been completed, the said Company went into Liquidation as at 1st June 1919.
         By Order of The Board,
(Sgd.) J. M. BRYAN,
                                     Chairman. Kuching, Sarawak.
STEAMSHIP COMPANY LIMITED. (In Liquidation.)
    NOTICE IN 1IERER1 GIVEN that the creditors of the above named Company are required on or before the 30th day of September to send their names and addresses and particulars of their debts or claims to the undersigned, one of the Liquidators of the said Company, and if so required by notice in writing from the said Liquidator are personally or by their agents to come in and prove their said debts or claims at such time and place as shall be specified in such notice, or in default thereof they will be excluded from the benefit of anv distribution made before such debts or claims are proved.
      Dated this 7th day of July 1919.
(Sgd.) J. M. BRYAN,
Liquidator.


214
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 1, 1919.
SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
    F. G. DAY, Registrar of Trade.
KUCHING Printed and Published by GHIN HENG SOON, Government Printer, at the Government Printing Office.
Barrack Road.

