
Vol. XLIX
No. 775

        KUCHING, SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1919.                                   10cents
CONTENTS.
Birth:—Slade	...	...	... 215
Death:—Gibbon	...	...	...	... 215
Notes ...	...	...	...	215
Obituary—Peace Celebrations at Sadong ...	... 216
Simanggang Regatta	... 217
Peace Celebrations—Tim Review—Illuminations	218
Thanksgiving Services—River Sports—Land Sports
    Victory Dance—Dance at B. M. K. Club Tournaments 219 Tennis Tournament—Sarawak Golf Club—
    Bowls—Entertainment at Fort Margherita-
           Astana Ball — Memorial Service—Wireless... 220 
The Departure of H. E. Sir Arthur
        Young, G. C. M. G.—A War Trophy—Locusts ... 221 Sarawak Union Tenuis Tournament—
        Sarawak Red Cross Fund—Sarawak Library ... 222
Monthly Reports— Bintulu	...	...	...	222
                  Baram	...	...	...	228
                  Miri—Limbang—Brooketon Colliery 221
Kuching Shipping ...	...	..	...	226
Passengers—Almanac	...	...	...	227
Meteorological Returns Rainfall	...	... 228
   The Sarawak Gazette.
   SUBSCRIPTIONS to the Gazette are as follows-
The Sarawak Gazette
   PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
    Single copy	...	...	...	.10 cents
    Subscription for one year	...	...	$2.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations          2.25 
Subscription including postage to all other
               Countries.	...	...	2.50
   PAYABLE IN STERLING-
    Subscription for one > ear (including postage abroad) 5s 10d
The Sarawak Government Gazette
   PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY—
    Single copy	...	...	...	.05 cents
    Subscription lor one year	...	... $1.00
 Subscription including postage to Outstations 1.25 Subscription including postage to.all other
               Countries,	..	1.50
   PAYABLE IN STERLING—
    Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 3s. 6d
  All subscriptions are payable in advance and must commence from the 1st January in each year on which date they are renewable. All broken periods will be considered as full.
  Subscriptions will not be renewed unless notice of renewal given
  Changes of Address should be notified to the Office in writing.	
       The Sarawak Gazette.
   SATURDAY, AUGUST 16, 1919.
Birth.
   Slade -On June 28, at Frankfield, Seal Chart, wife of L. E. SLADE, formerly of Sarawak, daughter.
Death.
—•—
   GIBSON—On August 2, at 8, Queen Street Singapore. Alexander Mac Dougal Gibson.
NOTES.	
(August.)
   ME. J. M. Bryan, by completing a break of 101 at billiards on July 28th, has broken another record in the Sarawak Club. We understand from a spectator that the break, except for a critical moment when the player was 84, was made without hesitation or the need of any risky shots. This is, as far as we can find out, the first time a three figure break has been made in the Sarawak Club.
  P. S. Adeh arrived from the North on the 31st with passengers Honble. Douglas and Mrs. Douglas and nurse, Honble. Johnson, Messrs. Lawrence and Adams, Mrs. Greene, Miss, Tait, Revd. Mulder and Revd. Duxneuner.
  Dry rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah during the month of July amounted to 56,000 lbs. and at Dahan to 12,000 tbs.
  S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore on August 1st with the following saloon passengers Mr. and Mrs. Dennis, Mr. and Mrs. Perry and three children, Miss Merrels, Lieut. Clark, Miss and Master Clark Messr H. E Kortright, J. L. Beardon. Larkins and Mr. and Mis. K. Hee Kye, A. Hong Choon, A. Cheng Khoi, K. Ah Ee and J. Poong Chong.


216
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 16, 1919.
  S. S. Kuching left for Singapore on August 5th with passengers Mr. and Mrs. 0. M. Peiniger. Mother Baptista and Mother Helen, Messrs. W. H. Geikie, Dr. A. C. Hunton, A. W. Henderson and Cook.
   MR. and Mrs. Peiniger are going home on leave and we understand have secured passages on the P. <& 0. Egypt.
  S. S. Rajah of Sarawak left for Sibu on August 5th. No passengers were carried. 
  S. S. Alice Lorraine left for Oya on the 3rd with passenger Mr. H. H. Kortright.
	 
   S. S. Alice Lorraine left for Sibu and ; Lingga on the 9th, passengers Messrs. R. M. Adams. H. D. Aplin, F. A. W. Page-Turner and G. M. Gifford.
   P. S. Adeh left for the North on the 9th the Right Rev. Bishop Danson, the Honble. H. S. B. Johnson, the Rev. Father A. Mulder and C. D. Adams.
    THE wet out-put of No.1 Sheet for June pf Lawas Planting Co. amounted to 9,200 tbs.
    IN the House of Commons, replying to Mr. C. Jesson, Mr. Kellaway state that the Government, in conjunction with the Dominions and Colonial Governments, is considering the advisability of organising and co-ordinating all sources of oil supply within the Empire, with a view to preventing the establishment of a world monopoly therein by financiers. (S.T.)
   S. S. Alice Lorraine arrived from Sibu on the 31st with the Honble. Mr. and Mrs. Baring-Gould and child, and Messrs. Aplin and Gifford, and on the following day brought Messrs. F. A. W. Page-Turner and P. M. Adams from Lingga.
   H. H. S. Y. Zahora left for Miri on the 9th with the Honble. and Mrs. Douglas and child Honble. and Mrs. Baring-Gould and child and Mr. and Mrs Dennis
   S. S. Rajah of Sarawak arrived from Singapore at 7 p. m. on the 16th with a large complement of European passengers who included Mr. and Mrs. M» ad and child, Mrs. I Imafuku, Rev. A. G. Gamble, Miss Chapman. Mrs. Anna A. Zinn. Master G. Bateman, Miss M. Reutens. Mr. and Mrs. C. Kui Eng, Miss Ricketts, Miss J. Reutens, Dr. Hanton, Messrs. W. S Chelton, I Shelton, J. C. Reutens, O. Lang, Currey, Roberts, W. Dick and G. Bateman.
   S. 8. Alice Lorraine left for Sadong, Mukah and Ova with passenger Mr. H. L. Owen on the 16th.
Mils. Greene asks us to express her sincere thanks to the officers of the Sarawak Service for their kind telegram of condolence sent to her at Labuan.
Obituary.
Though it is many years since Mr. A. M. Gibson left this country his death on August 2nd in Singapore will be heard of with great regret by his friends here.
Mr. Gibson first came to this country from Ceylon in 1888 as a tobacco planter and later was instrumental in opening up the Matang Estate. On the failure of this enterprise, mainly due to under-capitalisation; Mr. Gibson went to Singapore where he was successively Secretary to the Singapore Club and Manager of the Hotel de la Paix, where a ready welcome was always extended to travellers from Sarawak.
     Peace Celebrations at Sadong.
Peace was celebrated at the Collieries on the 2nd and7 the 4tb hist. The weather was delightfully fine and the crowds of local inhabitants and visitors which had fore-gathered, bore the outward aspects of people being in high spirits and fashionably dressed for the occasion.
The programme as given below was very Well carried out.
1st DAY, SATURDAY.
8.00 A. M.—Mahomedan thanksgiving service in the Mosque and a Chinese thanksgiving service and offering on the sports grounds.
The attendance at these meetings was so large, that standing space was difficult to obtain in the Mosque and the field was crowded.
10-11 A. M.—Chinese and Malay speeches, some of which must have been prepared in advance.
3.00 p. M.—Land sports.
4.30 ,, First round of the tournament football matches.
6.30 ,, Lantern illuminations and a large bonfire on the hill-top.
8.00 ,, Malay and Dyak concert and dancing to the accompaniment of the gong, drums, accordions and fiddles, which lasted well into the early hours of the next day.
   MONDAY.
7.00 A.M.—Second round of football matches followed by land sports throughout the day.
4.30 P M.—Final football match, the winners being one of the Colliery teams.
6.00 „ A pageant procession of young boys marching with great enthusiasm through the principal thoroughfares and grounds, singing suitably worded Malay songs io the discordant notes of a local band of mixed instruments, and judging from the hilarity of the crowds as this procession was swinging past, it must have been acclaimed as the most popular event of the Celebrations


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 16, 1919.
217
(5.20 P. M.—Distribution of prizes and a peace present of twenty cents each to all the children under workable age.
>>.80 „ A concert and Malay Bangsawan composed of local actors, the whole performance was quite good, and a credit to the local unprofessional men engaged. The hand in attendance at midnight played off the Allies and Sarawak National anthems with stirring effect, and the tired crowd dispersed after an event which will be pleasantly' remembered by them for many years to cone.
J. W. EVANS.
            Simanggang Regatta.
  Most accounts of regattas are uninteresting to the general reader and the usual list of events and their winners unsatisfactory. I must therefore crave pardon for writing what will probably be a dull article.
  The Simanggang regatta, however, which took place on the 18th and 19th of July, was far from dull. Everything bad been arranged on a most elaborate scale and no expense spared. There was a great assembly of Native Officers, Penghulus and others and it afforded a good opportunity for a general meeting where matters could be discussed  and old feuds forgotten. The greatest interest was taken in the racing and one noticed even the careful Saribas risking his money by backing the boat of his choice.
  The lotteries were well tilled, the biggest being won by an Ulu Ai Penghulu. much to his astonishment and the contentment of his friends who immediately reminded the lucky winner of their acquaintanceship.
  A Malay tiffin was held in the fort on the first day, where, after a most excellent curry, congratulatory speeches were made. On the second day the Chinese and Dyak chiefs were entertained to a Chinese meal, the quality and quantity of which left nothing to be desired, so much so that after dinner speeches were either undesirable or unattainable. The conclusion of the tiffin was marked by u rush of Dyaks who in an astonishingly short time cleared the board.
  Land sports took place each afternoon. The Native Officers and Penghulus were afforded a chance of showing what they could do by having separate races of their own. The former seemed to cause more amusement to the onlookers than it did to the runners; the slippery state of the ground compelled the competitors to proceed in a staid manner and with care. The pillow fighting, sitting astride a boom, caused much amusement, albeit many of the would be gladiators failed even to sit on the pole, let alone fight. A European visitor having knocked the Resident over was himself humbled to the dust or rather mud by one of the Simanggang Officers whose seat on the pole proclaimed him a rider of no small ability.
  The final of the football competition was won by the Sadong Colliery team who beat Simanggang by two goals to ml. The visitors were always the better lot, but Simanggang had bad luck in not flooring.
  On the evening of the 19th a pyrotecnic display was given on the parade ground. The fireworks were supplied by Mr. Y. Tan, and considering the cost, were not worth the money. The Europeans j were kept busy letting them off and were generally taken by surprise, it being difficult to read the attached labels. What appeared to be a Roman 
Candle generally ended by nearly shattering the arm of its unhappy holder, whilst a species of squib, much enlarged, caused havoc amongst the feet of the fair sex. who in enormous numbers lined the ground on all sides. However, except for a few burns and a smell of smouldering clothing, no harm was done.
     Of the boat racing, Mr. Page-Turner’s Sri Kenda- wang, although beaten in her first race, pulled off all her others. She is a particularly fast boat and paddled by Balaus.
      The ladies' race as usual caused much amusement, the second boat on the first day were challenged by some new-comers on the second day.
      Some of the costumes affected by the fair paddlers evoked admiration. The flag bearer of the Undups, an- elderly Sabu matron, was attired in a pair of sky blue knickerbockers, a white singlet and a pith helmet with a red gnaze veil flowing behind, whilst the popular costume seemed to be a neat panama hat and a singlet. There was some slight bickering amongst the ladies and the problem was solved by giving them all prizes.
      The Marup Chinese paddled as to the manner born and outdistanced their opponents in the Chinese race. A difficult greasy pole was stretched over the water and many natives were successful in performing what appeared to be the impossible.
      It would be difficult to mention the names of all those who helped to make the regatta such a success, bat one noticed the Resident, Mr. P. M. Adams, Abang Dulrasid- and Lau Ah Nen who shared most of the organizing.
     The following is the usual list of the principal races:—
      Long Beda Race. (Crews unlimited).
    1. Tuku's Sri Belalang Biak.
    2. Mr. Page-Turner's Sri Kendawang.
    3. Lau Ah Nen’s Bintang Berasap.
Won by about a length, good second, the favourite only gained second place, 17 starters.
Bong Race, (unlimited)
    1. Abang Haji Dulgapar's Pelor Senapang.
    2. Ajan's Sri Berluai.
Won easily.
Beda Race. (40 men).
    1. Mr Page-Turner’s Sri Kendawang.
    2. Tuku's Sri Belalang Biak.
    3. Abang Dulrasid’s Sri Melelah
Won by 2 lengths, good second.
Champion Cup.
    1. Mr. Page-Turner’s Sri Kendawang.
    2. Tuku's Sri Belalang Biak.
    3. Mr. Hardie’s Sri Belalang.
Won easily, good second.
Beda Race. (30 men).
    1. Abang Dulrasid’s Tepong Tawa.
    2. Mr. Page-Turner’s &Mang's Kitai Terbang.
Won by 3 lengths, good second.
Bong Race. (40 men).
    1. Asoi’s Api Naraka.
    2. Ajan’s Sri Berluai
Won easily.
Consolation Race.
    1. Kranji Dyaks’ Sri Mintu Na ma
    2. Lau Ah Nen’s Bintang Berasap.
    3. Abang Dulrasid’s Sri Melelah.
Won easily


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 16, 1919.
Women’s Race. 1st day.
    1. Batang Ai women.
    2. Balau women.
Won easily.
Women's Race. 2nd day.
    1. Balau women.
    2. Undup women.
Won easily.
Chinese Race.
    1 Marup Chinese.
    2 No others finished.
There were also races for 15 men (a very good
race) 8 men, 3 men and 1 man.
A VISITOR.
Peace Celebrations.
By a happy chance it was possible this year to
combine the official peace celebrations with what
is still known as Race Week. By this means
a large proportion of the Europeans in Sarawak
met together in Kuching and celebrated the
occasion in a very adequate manner. We give
below a brief summary of the events which took 
place, and have only to add that thanks to an un-
broken spell of fine weather a very pleasant time 
was spent both by the visitors and inhabitants of
Kuching.
             The Review.
—*—
  The opening ceremony of the peace celebrations
was held at 8.30 a. m. on the morning of Saturday
the 2nd, when guards of honour of the Sarawak
Rangers, Police and Cadet corps from the various
schools were reviewed and the flags of the principal
Allies were saluted on the Church of England foot-
ball ground.
  A large crowd of all nationalities were gathered
round the natural amphitheatre which makes this
such an admirable place for proceedings of this kind.
At 8-20 the guards of honour marched to the ground
proceeded by the Rangers’ band playing “Tipperary.”
No little astonishment and delight was manifested
by the crowd when it was found that a band of a
hundred Sea Dyaks, panoplied, were to take part in
the review, an item not mentioned in the programme.
Their full war dress of feathered coats, shields, spears
and crested head-pieces made a contrast with the
uniformed Rangers that added more than a little to.
the dramatic effect.
  Punctually at 8.30 His Highness the Tuan Muda
in the uniform of the British Army, arrived on the
field, when the national flag was broken on the
central mast and the guards gave a royal salute to
the strains of the Sarawak anthem.
  Th» Allied flags were then-broken in the following
order while the band played the respective national
anthems and the guards of honour gave a royal
salute.
    (i) Great Britain.
    (ii) France.
   (iii) United States of America.
   (iv) Italy,
  After the last flag had been saluted the troops
and school children formed fours and wheeling to
the left marched past between the flags and the
pavilions, and after coming round for a second time,
resumed their original positions on the ground, the
Dyak body-guard still maintaining its position in
the rear.
  When all bad reached their stations a bugle
sounded the “commence", and after a seven gun 
salute followed by a feu de joie the band played the 
 Marseillaise. The same procedure was followed I while “The Star Spangled Banner” was given, and I finally after the salute and feu de joie came “God save the King”. After a short, but impressive, pause the guards fixed bayonets and three cheers were given for the Allies in which the crowd heat lily joined. The band then played the Sarawak anthem while the guards of honour gave a royal salute.
    After His Highness had left the ground the troops and schools inarched back to their respective starting points, while the European spectators, by invitation, concluded the morning by drinking loyal toasts at the Ranee’s club.
    The following schools took part in the parade,
marching in Order of the age of their foundation :—
    1. St. Thomas' School.
    2. St. Joseph's School.
    3. Kampong Jawa School.
    4. Kampong Gersik School.
    5. Government Lay School.
    6. Hokien Free School
    7. Teochew School.
    8. Kheh School.
    9. Cantonese School.
Illuminations.
   On both August the 2nd and 4th a large part of
Kuching was elaborately illuminated to an extent
and in a manner which was well worthy of the
occasion. From the corner of Blacksmith's Road
to the Stone Wharf, a distance of half a mile,
strings of Chinese lanterns decorated both sides of
the road-wav while all the European houses on each
side were a blaze of lights. All Government offices
were lit with innumerable lanterns and Venetian
lights, while round the bandstand gardens illumina-
ted mottoes and lamps made the square almost as
bright as day.
     The Borneo Company's offices showed up well
on the river-bank in a blaze of white light, with an
enormous VICTORY across the frontage. It would
be hard to say whether the Sarawak Steamship
offices or the Farms deserved the greater praise for
the novelty and beauty of their decorations; both
were the work of Chinese artists who deserve the
greatest credit for their work. Both offices, too, were
redecorated for the second night’s illuminations.
     At 9 p. m., by kind permission of His Highness
the Tuan Muda, a firework display’ was given from
the Astana grounds, which was witnessed in great
comfort from the decks of the p. s. Adeh and s. s.
Kuching. If would scarcely be true to say that the
display had any great merit, but this was due to the
poor variety and quality of the fireworks and not at all
to the energy of the Committee, Capt. Cunynghame,
Dr. Ujita and Mr. Boon Siew. Perhaps the most
popular part of the performance was the play of the
s.y. Zahora’s search-light, which illuminated the river
with wonderful effect. At the: conclusion a general
adjournment was made to the offices of the Farms
where the celebrations were carried on with patriotic
fervour.
     On both nights illuminated processions, organised
and carried out by the local Chinese, Tamils and
Malays took place, the familiar dragon of the Chinese
and the huge and grotesque figures of the Tamils
making a most striking effect down the illuminated
streets.
     Abang Suleiman and bis staff of workers who
undertook all the Government illuminations carried
out their work in a manner which it would
have been very hard to improve upon and it was
very largely due to them that the illuminations were
the undoubted success that they were.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. AUGUST 16, 1919.                                     219
Thanksgiving Services.
  Services of Thanksgiving were held at the Pro- Cathedral both in the morning and evening of Sunday the 3rd and were largely attended by the Europeans in Kuching.
  At St. Joseph's Asperges (a short service introductory to the mass, so called from the words Asperges me, Domine, hyssopo et mundabor. ps. li) and High Mass were held, followed by a Solemn Benediction in the afternoon.
  On Thursday August 7th special prayers and thanksgiving were held at the Sikh Temple, which was specially illuminated, from 6 p.m. until daylight.
  Mohamedan Mosques held sembayang sukor on the morning of the 3rd.
River Sports.
  The whole of the morning of August the 4th was devoted to river sports, which proved especially attractive to the native population. Unfortunately from the spectators’ point of view these were scarcely visible from the p.s. Adeh which was moored off the Astana grounds.
  Thanks to Abang Suleiman (in whose hands it must be remembered the whole work of illuminations and decorations lay) an excellent programme was gone through which included swimming, tub and boat races.
Land Sports.
  On both Saturday and Monday sports were arranged to lake place, by kind - permission on the Mission ground. Saturday was devoted to school children and a very good and varied programme was gone through. Hao there been a prize for the school with the largest number of wins, this would undoubtedly have gone to the Church of England who carried off ten out of the nineteen events. They had, however, the considerable advantage of running on their own ground. During the sports free refreshments were on band for ail school children, under the genial supervision of Honble. F. G. Day and his efficient staff, and as far as we could judge none of the hundreds of children who crowded the refreshment-sheds had any reason to be dissatisfied with the quality or quantity of what they received.
  On Monday the sports were open to all and we imagine there have been few occasions in Sarawak when so many different races engaged in such varied athletic exercises. Pole jumping, Malay dancing, a tug of war, weight lifting and racing of all kinds were included in the programme. A hundred yards sprint open to all Europeans brought out eight starters, the Honbles. R. S. Douglas, J. Baring-Gould, A. B Ward, Capt. Cunynghame, and Messrs. H. C., C. D. and P. M. Adams, and G. M. Gifford. A carefully devised handicap based on age and length of residence in Sarawak led to a very close finish, the verdict being a tie between Messrs. Ward and Douglas with J. Baring-Gould third and G. M. Gifford a good fourth.
  Messrs. G. C. Gillan. J. M. Brvan ai d A. N. Ellis, have every reason to congratulate themselves on the success of the meeting, the popularity of which can be guaged by the fact that some three or four thousand people thronged the ground.
Victory Dance.
—?—
  Those who were responsible for the Victory dance held in the Government Lay school have every reason to be pleased with their efforts which were crowned with remarkable success The decoration of the school and of Mr. Crocker’s house, which had been kindly lent for supper, were admirably appropriate and the floor was in far better condition than could have been thought possible.
  The hosts and hostesses on this occasion outnumbered  their guests who consisted of all those present in Kuching who had been mobilised since the beginning of the war. After supper, when the loyal toasts had been drunk the toast of the evening "Our Guests” was proposed by the Honble R. S. Douglas and enthusiastically received. His Highness the Tuan Muda replied in a very clear and audible speech with characteristic modesty.
  Dancing was then resumed and when the band, whose exertion through the week were remarkable, bad retired, a second edition was called upon from the gramophone. When this had been exhausted mid no further partners were to be found the remaining hosts and guests gathered together in the Upper School and terminated the proceedings with a smoking concert.
  The thanks of all tbe hosts and hostesses are due to the Committee (including Mdes. Ward and Adams) for their endeavours and especially to Mr. Parnell upon whose shoulders fell a greater part of the organisation, and also to Miss Tait who was responsible for the artistic flora) decorations.
  The following were amongst the guests present:—- Kuching—H. H the Tuan Muda, Messrs. 0’Xians.
Burnand, Cobbold. Mr. and Mrs. Dennis (on their way to Miri).
Sungei Tengah—Messrs. Nalder; Gunn, Strike, Thomas, Marshall, Chapman.
Bau— Mrs Griffiths.
Goebilt—Mr. Hunt.
  (Mr. and Mrs. Parry Davis sent regrets being unable to arrive in time).
Dance at B. M. K.
  On Thursday 7th Mr. J. M. Bryan, Manager of the Borneo Company, was at home at 9 p m. at B. M. K Dancing, for which the Rangers’ Band supplied an excellent programme, was the feature of the evening. At supper Mr. Bryan proposed the health of His Highness the Tuan Muda, whose birthday occurred on the following day, this was drunk with full musical honours. His Highness replied in a few well chosen words.
  Amongst the ladies present were Mdes. Adams, Baring-Gould, Bean, Cunynghame, Dennis, Douglas, Griffiths and Ward and the Misses Andrews and Tait.
Club Tournaments.
  Thanks to the enterprise of the Committee of the Ranee’s club a very interesting tennis tournament for mixed doubles was arranged ; the final between the Honble A. B and Mrs. Ward and Honble. and Mrs. Douglas affording a particularly well fought finish before mi audience consisting of all the Europeans in Kuching. Unfortunately no record of the score has reached us, but as each side won a closely contested set it was obvious that the handicappers had done their work well. In the final set the Miri pair had a good deal the better of the game and won by 6—3, so currying off the handsome silver salvers presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda.


220
THE &BAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 36, 1919.
Tennis Tournaments.
  A tennis tournament was arranged by the Committee of the Sarawak Club for which seven pairs only were entered. The finals took place on Saturday the 9th and ended in an easy victory for Messrs. Douglas and Cunynghame.
The following is a list of the players and scores :— FIRST ROUND.
R. S Douglas and S. Cunynghame (—½  15) beat J. C. Swayne and R. G. Hunt (+ ½  15) 6-3, 6—5.
P. M. Adams and G. T. Bates were beaten by G. M. Gifford and H. D. Aplin (—30) 5—6, 6—3, 6—3.
P. C. W. Cobbold and G. B. Burnand (+15) beat A. E. Lawrence and C. D. Adams 6—1, 6—4.
H. H. the Tuan Muda and J. M. Bryan a bye. SECOND ROUND.
R. S. Douglas and S. Cunynghame beat H. D. Aplin and G. M. Gifford. H. H. the Tuan Muda and J. M. Bryan beat Burnand and Cobbold.
FINAL.
R. S. Douglas and S. Cunynghame beat H. H. the Tuan Muda and J. M. Bryan (6—4, 6—1).
Sarawak Golf Club.
  A nine hole stroke competition took place on Thursday and Friday, the 7th and 8th August, Mr. P. M. Adams won the contest with a net score of 39.
  A handsome silver tea caddy was presented by Mr. C. Ermen as first prize.
The following returned cards :—
    P. M. Adams 	 46	— 7 =39
    J. B. Archer ...	... 53 — 12 = 41
    J. S. W. Bean	 46	—	4	= 42
    Honble. R. S. Douglas ...	50	—	7½ 	= 42½
    F. A. W. Page-Turner ...	51	—	7½	= 43½
Honble. G. C. Gillan ... 45 scr. = 45 
H. D. Aplin 	 50	—	3	=47
G. T. Bates 	 64	—	7	=57
Bowls.
  A Bowling handicap was rolled off during the week and resulted as follows.
  Owing to some defect in the alleys scores averaged much lower than is usually the case.
G. T. Batea ...
H. H. the Tuan Muda 
P. M. Adams...
J. B. Archer ...
F. A. W. Page-Turner
G. B. Burnand...
C. E. A. Ermen
C. D. Adams ...
G. M. Gifford ...
J. C. Swayne ...
P. C. W. Cobbold
H. D. Aplin
Score. H'cap. Total.
     368	+	40	=	408
     880	+	40	=	376
     260	+	100	=	360
     216	+	140	=	356
     220	+	100	=	329
     181	+	140	=	321
     818	+	scr.	=	318
     241	+	70	=	314
     194	+	120	=	314
     295	+	10	=	305
     219	+	80	=	299
     229	+	40	=	269
Entertainment at Fort Margherita.
   A very large number of Europeans accepted Capt. and Mrs. Cunynghame's kind invitation on Friday the 8th to attend a Dyak dance held on the Fort parade ground.
   In spite of a shower in the afternoon it proved possible to illuminate the whole ground as well as the long path leading from the river, the whole presenting a very beautiful picture under the light of the full moon. Dyak dancing is no novelty to many of those who composed the audience, but it can have been very seldom that any have seen such a collection of talent together at one time in Kuching giving such, an exhibition with so appropriate a back ground. The footlights, tall bamboo torches, held by impassive Dyak chiefs in their full war dress lit up a space of some hundred feet in which dancer after dancer performed with a grace and agility that surprised even the most blase of the spectators. Choreographic artists from India, fire-dancers and fencers added to the variety of the entertainment, while a touch of comedy was added by two gaunt figures in female garb wandering here and there swallowing fire and broken glass to the delight of the native audience.
   It was not until well past elevon o’clock that the assembly broke up after witnessing ns interesting an entertainment as any given during the week.
Astana Ball.
   The last and possibly most enjoyable feature of the week was the ball given by His Highness the Tuan Muda at the Astana on the night of the 9th, when some seventy Europeans were present.
   An excellent programme was gone through by the Sarawak Bund and the fine weather fortunately allowed a full illumination of the Astana grounds.
Memorial Service.
   An impressive memorial service to the late Dr. Latimer Greene was held in Sc. Thomas’ Pro- Cathedra) on the morning of Saturday the 9ch. The service was conducted by the Bishop of the diocese, the Rt. Rev. Logie Danson. There was a large attendance of Europeans and others living in Kuching and of visitors from outstations.
Wireless.
—?—
   It may be of public interest to know that the wireless telephone has been heard at the station in Kuching on three occasions: 12.40 a.m. on 18th July being the first instance. Whilst listening in for stations on long wave the last bars of YIP-I-ADDY- I-AYE were heard sung distinctly by a man’s voice. Again at die same time the following day some voices were heard talking and also later. It should be mentioned that no special apparatus is necessary for receiving wireless telephone messages, only the transmitting arrangement is different, so that any ordinary station is able to pick up telephone messages, but is unable to send them.
   This brings to us a reminder of the time when in the future some of us will be able to avoid the expense of a journey home to Europe, as, when the wireless eye is perfected (and this has been used experimentally already, but is still undergoing improvements) we shall be able to sit down and have a few minutes talk with and look at those we have left behind us.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 16, 1919.
221
  In this connection it may be mentioned that the wireless telephone originated in England and was in use in Northampton in 1912 ; but although speech was satisfactory yet the regularity was uncertain and cost of working considerable, since then many improvements have been made.
  Of late Kuching station has been tested in the evenings (this not having been done properly since its erection), in order to find out the distance it is possible to transmit and to test the purity of the wave for 1 lining purposes. It was found that our short wave as used for ships was incorrect, so was altered and considerably improved as verified by Saigon-radio, the manager of which station kindly offered to listen and converse as long as we wished at any time. Conversation has been proved possible with Saigon and we ought to be able to get considerably further. No doubt Hong Kong would be able to read us in the evening. The Admiralty station at Singapore which is one of the Imperial chain is exceedingly loud ; in fact, the signals can be beard thirty feet away with the head-gear placed on the table.
  Miri station has been ordered to listen in for ships especially’ every day now at 9 a. in. and 12 am. and 9 p. m. in order to pick up any possible messages, this station being important for shipping.
  Many interesting scraps of conversation may be heard any evening at the wireless station here generally between operators in ships, far instance this from some Dutch ship to a Britisher, “ the Germans are not as bad as you think they are. ” This forms part of a telegram from shore to ship to a Miss— “Full moon and still all alone.” And this also, • Wife just had three.’, and many others.
  The advantages of wireless in this country have been well proved by now and surely it Would be a boon to the public if the steamer Rajah of Sarawak and Kuching were fitted with wireless sets.
  Since these steamers are fitted with electric light, the outlay would lie small the power need not be great, and would be amply repaid for afterwards, not to mention the safety at sea.
  The following radios have been heard lately in the Kuching Government station:—Aden, Falkland Isles, Seychelles, Honolulu, and one which whistles like a person, being either the wireless telephone again or a new Morse Code.
The Departure of H. E. Sir Arthur
Young, G. C.M.G.
  The following telegrams are officially communicated to the Gazette for publication.
    His Excellency,
Sir Arthur Young, G. c. M. »., Singapore.
  Your Excellency’s departure is nowhere more regretted than in Sarawak where all wish Lady Evelyn and yourself a safe and prosperous journey home. BERTRAM BROOKE, Tuan Muda.”
His Highness the Tuan Muda, Kuching.
  “On behalf of Lady Evelyn and myself I thank you for your kind telegram in bidding farewell, both of us send our sincerest good wishes for the continued prosperity of Sarawak. YOUNG.”
A War Trophy.
  We publish the following correspondence received from the Secretary of the Sarawak State Advisory Council at home. It will be remembered that on May 23rd at a Public Meeting held in Kuching to discuss Peace Celebrations it was voted that a cablegram should be sent home asking that Sarawak’s claim for a war trophy should be considered.
MILLBANK HOUSE,
WESTMINSTER,
20th June, 1919. 
Hon. the Resident,
        1st Division,
              Sarawak.
SIR,
    I have the honour to acknowledge receipt of your cablegram dated 26th April last on the subject of a- German trophy for a War Memorial and to inform you that a communication was addressed to the Army Council on the subject. A reply was received stating that all such requests from Colonies or Protectorates must be made through the Colonial Office 8nd I forward herewith a copy of a letter from the Under Secretary of State which has been received.
               I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Your obedient servant,
            FOR THE SARAWAK STATE ADVISORY COUNCIL,
            J. F. ROWLATT,
Secretary of the Council.
DOWNING STREET,
          ,	LONDON, S. W. 1.
16th June, 1919. 
SIR,
    I am directed by Viscount Milner to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 3rd of June regarding a request for some German trophy to be presented to the Sarawak Government as a War Memorial, and to request you to inform the Sarawak State Advisory Council that the War Office are being asked that your application may Ire given favourable consideration.
   2. The War Office are at present unable to state what number of war trophies will be available for distribution, as the total number taken on the various fronts is not yet known.
I am, Sir,
Your obedient servant,
(Sgd.) G. GRINDLE.
  The Secretary,
          Sarawak State Advisory Council.
Locusts.
   Mr. Bateson, Director of Agriculture, arrived on Tuesday, 4th March, on Locust duty. A native brought tbe news that locusts were seen at Tajau, but it proved to be wrong. Eventually they were located at Lapasau, a kampong about two miles from the Pengkalan Tengilan. On Thursday Mr Bateson with something over a hundred men from adjacent villages went to Lapasau and started offensive operations against the locusts. First a large patch


222
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 16, 1919.
of grass was sprayed with a mixture of Sodium Arsenite and Molasses. The men then proceeded to drive the locusts, which were mainly in the late hopper stage, with a fair amount of fliers, towards the poison parch ; a little difficulty was experienced in keeping the line of beaters straight, but with the aid of the subordinates and the village headmen, they advanced slowly armed with branches, driving countless thousands of locusts before them. With only four sprayers, and men new to the job, it was not possible to poison a very large patch, but the locusts were not feeding and passed through the patch. They were then driven towards a stream which crosses the Lapasau valley obliquely. This stream was ' oiled ’ with kerosine oil, and the locusts were soon falling into the stream by thousands, and large numbers of them were soon asphyxiated. The stream is unfortunately very narrow and in many parts overgrown with grass and weeds. A slightly larger and clearer stream would have been very much more effective. This operation was repeated again on Saturday with a larger number of men, many of whom had gained experience from the former drive, and a very large number of the hoppers were destroyed. 'Die locusts die very quickly when they full into the oiled water. A large number of the locusts in Lapasau valley are in the later hopper stage and may Ire seen shedding their old skins, and coming out in the flying stage. Unfortunately most of the Dusuns around Tengilan will not kill a locust, and I have seen a party of Dusuns going to tamu, carefully picking their way through a road black with the insects, lest they inadvertently trample on them. There is a legend among them that in the olden days two Dusuns killed a large number of locusts that were feeding on their padi, and, tired with their exertions went to sleep in their room. As they did not appear for some time the villagers looked into the room and found that the locusts had eaten them up, not leaving even a bone. One tribe of Dusuns somewhere near Kota Belud eat them and say they me said to taste like udang kring. “It’s an ill wind that blows nobody any good,” and the poultiy feed on the hoppers till they look like aldermen after a banquet. Dogs and cats also eat them, and it is usual to see a few Dusun dogs in the midst of a swarm.
   M r. Bateson left Tuaran on Monday morning for Jesselton and left the same afternoon for Kudat where the locusts are causing much damage.— (B. N. B. Herald.)
SEMI-FINAL.
Ong Eng Hin (+ 152) beat Wee Kheng Chiang (—15) 6—2, 7—5.
Law Chin Swee (—15) beat Ong Kwan Hin (scr.) 6—0, 6—s:
FINAL.
Ong Eng Hin (+ 152) beat Law Chin Swee (—15) 6—1, 6—3.
      Sarawak Red Crass Fund.
—•—
The following sums have been received and payments made since Kuching “Our Day” 1918 account was closed, viz :—
Payments.
Paid for cooly labour .. $ 1.80 
Cost of telegram
  to Red Cross 
   Society, London, intimating 
    result of “Our Day" 1918 
                                collection ,. 19.00
Balance ..	.. 423.01
          Receipts.
Balance of Money
   received for raffle of
     jewellerv presented
        by Mrs. Boult              $ 13.50
Balance Jumble sale
      per Mr. Jacques ..        6.81
Mr. Skrine,collected from:—
    Chuan Song. Merapok $5.00
    Ann Seng, K. Lawas      5.00
	 10.00
Proceeds of sale 3 coils
     rubber tyres presented
       by The British Malay-
                       aian Co., Ld. 213.50
Unclaimed prize* “Our
     Day" Lottery per Mr. Day 200.00

$4 411.81
414381
  A Draft for $4913.8 the equivalent at exchange 2/4 3/16  of $423 01 has been sent to the Red Cross Society, London
            GEORGE C. GILLAN,
Hon. Treasurer
Sarawak Library.
- ?—
  Subscribers are resquested to send to the undersigned before the end of September, lists of new Books which they would like purchased for the Library.
                    A. B. WARD, 
          Acting Honorary Secretary. 
      Kuching, 
31st July, 1919.
Sarawak Union Tennis Tournament.
On August 9th a singles Tennis tournament was
played off for a silver cup presented by Mr. Chan
Kee Ong in honour of Peace.
FIRST BOUND.
Wee Kheng Chiang (—15) beat Lim Khay Leong
(+ 152) 2—6, 6—2, 6—1.
Ong Eng Hin (+ 152) beat Joseph H. Law (+154)
6—2. 6—2.
Ong Kwan Hin (scr.) beat Tan Sum Guan (—153)
3—6, 9—7, 6-4.
Byes : Lim Cheng Soon, Law Chin Swee, Chan Chin
Hee , Chau Qui Cho and Rev. F. S. Hollis.
SECOND ROUND.
Ong Kwan Hin (scr.) beat Lim Cheng Soon (—15) 4—6,
6—0, 6-4.
Law Chin Swee (—15) boat Chan Qui Cho (—153)
6—1, 6 -0.
Ong Eng Hin ,( + 152) beat Rev. F. S. Hollis (scr.)
8—6, 6—4.
Wee Kheng Chiang (—15) beat Chan Chin Hee (+ 152)
            6—1. 7—5.
MONTHLY REPORTS.
BINTULU.
May.
   After a period of slackness lasting over several
months the Court of Requests has now renewed its
normal activity. The number of civil and other
cases was much as usual. An enquiry was held
into the death of a Tatau Dyak who was speared by
one of his companions while snaring deer with a
jaring. The unfortunate man was moving about in
the undergrowth when another Dyak mistook him
for a deer. stabbed at him through the leaves and
killed him on the spot. There seemed no doubt
that the matter was an accident and the culprit was
therefore only ordered to pay the customary patik
nyawa or wergeld to the dead man’s father.
   An absurd rumour got about among the Dyaks of
the upper Anap that they were about to be attacked
by Bintulu Dyaks under Penghulu Merdau and


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 16, 1919.                                 223
Gani In consequence of this the inmates of
several long houses carried off all their valuables
and hid them in the jungle. On enquiry it was
found that the story had been started in the house
of a man named Jamia and spread by him and his
people. As J an da had to admit this and could give
no excuse for his conduct he was fined. A message
was also sent to the upper Anap Dyaks by their
own Penghulu assuring them that the rumour was
entirely false and this ended the trouble.
   On the 2nd having finished auditing the accounts
of the district, the Auditor left for Kuching by
p. s. Adeh.
   On the same morning the s. l. La Follette arrived
bringing back the Bintulu squad of Rangers which
had been to Sibu on special duty. Dr. Luhn was
also on board, but was not able to stay more than a
very short time for fear of missing the tide and left
before mid-day.
   Again on the 25th the s. l. La Follette arrived with
the Honble. the Resident of the 3rd Division,
Mrs. Baring-Gould and the Datu Hakim. After
hearing appeal cases and attending to various official
matters brought before him the Honble. the Resi-
dent returned to Kidurong where the launch was
ready for the return journey to Sibu on the 30th.
   Attempts are constantly being made through the
Tuah Kampong to get the people to realize that there
soon will be a serious shortage of rice and that con-
sequently, for their own sakes, they should plant
substitute foods at once. So far there has been a
great deal of talk about planting with very little
material result. The approach of Ramthan has fur-
nished an excuse for most people to put off clearing
until the fasting month is over, although a few men
have planted out tapioca and maize. None of the
Chinese shop-keepers have cleared or planted any-
thing at all although offered good land within easy
distance of the bazaar and also Government help to
procure labour in case they should be in any need
of it.
   However as a set-off to this gloomy picture it is
as well to point out that no actual famine should be
expected in Bintulu as a consequence of rice shortage, because the bulk of the, people are eaters of
sago and own plantations of sago palms, so that,
although they’ prefer rice, they can, without much
inconvenience, substitute sago as their staple food.
   Of the Dyaks, who can only eat sago when mixed
with rice, those in Bintulu are said to have enough
padi to last with care until next harvest, but those
in Tatau will lie really short of food and it is here
that the only actual famine is to be feared.
June.
  Telephone communication with Tatau has been verv often interrupted of late owing to breaks in the wire which have all been somewhere about half way between the two stations and have therefore taken in each case some two days to locate and mend. There is in this part a stretch of between two and three miles wired with the iron wire formerly used for the Mukah—Oya line and this is now so rotten that the telephone men cannot pull the ends together when mending a break, nut have to solder in a long new piece to the slack wire New copper wire for this section has been applied for.
  Mr. Barnes paid a short visit, arriving on the Slat and leaving next day. While here he inspected the telephone and cable and chose a suitable site for the future erection of a small wireless station which is very badly needed here.
  The Bintulu arrack and gambling farms were put up to auction and fetched prices slightly in advance of those for 1918—1919. As however the farms went in that year for a good deal under their red value and trade is a great deal belter now than it
was then this result cannot be called very satis-
factory. The joint increase for the two farms
amounts to $17 a month only.
   News was received on the 26th that a Javanese
who had formerly worked at Miri bad made his way
down the coast to Suai, stolen several articles from
people there and made off in this direction. This
man was arrested at once and gave his name first
as O’ong—which was certainly assumed—and then
as Mirin. Some of the property he is said to have
stolen was also found. Early next morning Mirin
escaped from gaol and ran off into the jungle. On
the second day afterwards he was found and brought
in by one Bato and a companion. Mirin bad some-
how got hold of a spear and a knife after escaping
and tried to put up a fight with his captors, but
luckily did not succeed in wounding either of them.
   The people of most kampongs have chosen land
on which to plant rice substitutes and a few men
have actually cleared, but the great bulk of them are
putting off all w irk of the kind until after Hari
Haya, which will put back their maize and tapioca
crops another month.
   Penghulu Merdau’s own people have planted very
large ureas of tapioca and I am told that the inmates
of many other Dyak houses have done the same
although perhaps not to the same extent.
A. E. LAWRENCE,
Resident 2nd Class.
BARAM.
—?—
June.
   His Highness the Tuan Muda was only able to
get up-river as fur as Long Akar and then had to re-
turn owing to illness, arriving back on the 15th instant.
   The up-river chiefs reported that all the police at
Lio Matu were trading and always help their Brunei
friends. Bna Hassan, the wakil, w.is doing the
same. While at Long Akar, Bua Hassan arrived
with his Brunei friends, with goods amounting to
nearly $2,000, and it is reported that about the same
amount has been left behind at Long Silat.
   All the Kenyahs that rowed them down had been
paid nothing and were also ordered to fetch the 
remainder or the matter would be reported to 
Government.
   His Highness the Tuan Muda imprisoned Bua
Hassan one year. Pangeran Mumin nine months in
Kuching and then to be banished. Ajak and Omar
to six months and forbidden to trade. The remaining three Tengah, P. C. Baim and Bakar are not
allowed in the headwaters in future.
       All tax and outstanding fines in the Bir.vn river
were collected except those of the Uma Poh Kayans.
Penghulu Tama Wan Bayer their chief being very
ill-in the ulu Akar.
   I arranged with these people that I will pay them
a visit in three months and collect this, and also
decide where they are to live. I hear many of them
wish to move down-river near Bawang Takun.
   Fines and fees amounted to $1,948.
   The Chinese finished paying the Government
advance.
   His Highness the Tuan Muda left here by p. s.
Adeh on the 16th instant accompanied by Mr. Gifford
and myself for medical treatment at Labuan. I
was still away at end of month.
   Rainfall was 4’74 inches.
             Exports.	Imports.
             $91,667	$31,194
C. D. ADAMS,
Resident 2nd Class.


224
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 16, 1919.
MIRI.
June.
  The 3rd being His Majesty the King’s birthday was observed as a public holiday and all offices closed. Doctor Cimino, the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Company’s late Medical Officer, sailed for Europe on the 7th. Mr. H. Berry arrived on the 8tb and Mr. E. C. Robertson on the 17th to join the staff of the Company.
  Early in the month Datu Udin, Native Officer of Mukah, arrived at Sibuti to buy $500 worth of seed padi; I informed him that there was insufficient padi for local requirements, he has now decided to await the return of the Honble. the Divisional Resident for sanction.
  Mr. J. R. Barnes, Superintendent of Wireless, arrived from Kuching on the 14th to inspect the local installation, after thoroughly overhauling the wireless plant and the telephone system, he left for Bintulu en route for Sibu on the 20th.
  Native Officer Bujang came over from Sibuti on the 20th, to report on local affairs, he also attended to a number of outstanding Native Court cases. The s. l. Chamois called in twice on her way from Baram to Niah to have her boiler feed pump repaired, the necessary repaired were very kindly carried out by Messrs, the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Company Limited. Owing to the s.s. Kajang having sailed without the Singapore mail, the m.t. Miri made a special trip to Kuching on the 28tb in order to catch the Singapore mail from there.
  The 30tb being Han Raya was observed as a public holiday and all offices closed.
  A Chinese washer-man named Hiew Kang committed suicide on the night of the 29th by hanging himself. The enquiry into the circumstances of the death of Ng Hoi at the hospital was concluded and the minutes sent to Kuching. Lam Fat Shin was sentenced to nine months H. L. for being asleep in charge of a boiler tinker steam. Chan Yong Heng was imprisoned for theft. Chiew Sang was sentenced to a term of imprisonment for house trespass, Lam Cheong was imprisoned and punished for smoking on an oil well.
  Five of the Company’s coolies were punished for refusing to work overtime on an important job, and five others were punished and imprisoned for refusing to work at all. Chung Cheong was fined for assaulting Chee Kong (f), Matusin bin Drahman was fined for a breach of the Jelutong Regulations. Ali bin Ahmat was imprisoned for breach of contract, and Braham bin Hj. Mohamed imprisoned for cheating.
  Ng Ah Chai who was found wandering along the beach near Suai and had been detained pending enquiries escaped from custody, owing to the negligence of P. C. Sadu Singh., but was recaptured the same day by the village chief of Bekam.
  A set of old brass gongs found buried in the sands by Wan Ala was declared treasure trove and sold by auction half the proceeds going to Wan Ala. At midnight of the 30th the local opium farm was duly handed over by Chop Kim Guan to Chop Sang Heng of Singapore.
  The prisoners were employed clearing the roads around the station and the general up-keep of the ornamental grounds.
  During the month the s. s. Nerite cleared twice, and the s. s. Haliotis once, with full cargoes of crude oil for Soesoe.
The rainfall amounted to 7 67 inches.
The trade returns are as follows : —
Imports.	Exports.
      Miri	...	$11,971	$111,863
      Sibuti ...	6,349	8,874
W. F. DE V. SKRINE,
Resident 2nd Class.
June.
   On the 3rd, the birthday of H. M. King George V, the p.s. Adeh being in port the offices were kept open as usual and the following day observed ns a holiday.
   The maximum selling price of padi and rice grown locally has been fixed as under: -
   Padi 20 cents per gantang and rice 60 cents per gantang.
   The p.s. Adeh made one trip only during the month arriving here on the 2nd.
   The s.s. L'Aubaine. also made one trip calling here on the 12th to load a cargo of timber for Brooketon Colliery.
   Matusin has been elected to succeed the late Kasom as Tuah Kampong of Bengkita.
   A small Malay boy was taken by a crocodile at Kampong Malais. The crocodile was caught with the remains of the body inside it, but as it was not brought up to lie measured no reward has been paid. I left here on the 18th to visit Brooketon and on I the same evening His Highness the Tuan Muda accompanied by Messrs C. D. Adams and G. M. Gifford arrived there unexpectedly from Baram by the p.s. Adeh.
   I was absent at the end of the month.
   The 30th being Hari Haya was abserved as a holiday and a salute of 14 guns fired from the fort to announce the festival.
   News that the peace treaty had been signed by Germany was received here the same day.
   Court.—Pte. Mohamad III S. R. was fined for taking three prisoners out at eight to steal coconuts from a Chinaman’s garden.
   There were no other important cases.
   Fines and fees amounted io $83.19.
   P. W. D.—The coolies and prisoners were engaged during the month in tarring and whitewashing Lite Government buildings and in planting padi and potatoes on unused parts of the golf course.
   The following are the trade returns;—
                Imports. Exports.
   Coasting	$10,790	$12,068
   Foreign	4,056	5,058
   The rainfall for the month was 4’68 inches.
H. S. B. JOHNSON,
Resident 5th Division.
BROOKETON COLLIERY.
—?—
June.
   The gross out-put of coal from the mines was 2,212.5 tons, 561 tons were consumed by our boilers and the balance of 1,651.5 tons was sent to wharf.
   We shipped 524 tons coal to Labuan and 65 tons were taken by launches and p.s. Adeh.
   The out-put of coal from the North Drive Mine showed an improvement on the previous month. A connection was made with No. 9 level and the main return airway, which will enable us to continue work in the main deep.
   Two of our boilers were cleaned and machinery overhauled at the beginning of the month.
   We started repairing the Labuan office wharf about the middle of the mouth, and a number of new piles were put in.
   The re-timbering of the Buang Pawar oil level was continued. The usual quantity of oil continues to flow.
   Mr. Lewis, who retired from the management of the mines at the end of May, left for Kuching on the 3rd.
   The rainfall for the month was 11’22 inches.
J. O. MADDOCKS,
Manager.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. AUGUST 16, 1919.
225
    The Sarawak Gazette.
RATES OF ADVERTISEMENTS IN THE " SARAWAK GAZETTE ”
                   Payable in advance.
Quarter of a column and under—
        First insertion ..	..	... $1.00
        Second and third insertion each	... 0.50
        Subsequent do	do	...	0.35
Half a Column and under—
        First insertion ...	...	... 2.00
        Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
        Subsequent do	do	... 0.50
A Column and under—
        First insertion each	...	... 4.00
        Second and third insertion each	... 2.00
        Subsequent do	do	... I 00
Special arrangements may be made for standing 
Advertisements.
All communications intended for insertion
in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed
to the Editor at the Government Printing
Office, Kuching. They should be clearly
written and should reach the Office at least
two days before the publication of each issue-
Letters and other contributions must be
authenticated by writer’s name sent privately
to the Editor.
We cannot undertake to return rejected
communications, or to give reasons for not
inserting them.
Residents at the Outstations will confer an 
obligation by forwarding to the Office early
intelligence of all matters of general interest
in their respective neighbourhoods.
NOTICE.
ASTANA FARM.
THE Manager of Astana Farm begs to  inform the Public that he is unable to attend to Orders for milk after Office hours.
NOTICE.
—? —
   Gazette subscription and Printing Office bills.
   FOR the convenience of residents at Outstations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums but only the 1,2 and 3 cent values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that Money Orders be sent if possible.
J. C. SWAYNE,
Manager, Govt. Printing Office.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO.,
     22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS,
Beer, Wine, Spirit & General Store Dealers.
	: (o):	
SOLE AGENTS FOR :
FRASER & NEAVE’S DERATED WATERS
        (The Best throughout the East )
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic
Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at
$1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 catties of dry rubber.
      ASAHI BEER.
ACETIC ACID.
	:(o>:	
Fresh supplies of Stores are received
regularly.
   FRIGES MODERATE.
  Free delivery to customers in Kuching.
Free packing & shipping for Outstation
Orders.
[U. C.]
NOTICE.
—?—
N
OTICE is hereby given that the partnership here-
tofore existing between, LIM OH LIEW, LIM OH
PHIO, LIM THIAN SANG, LIM THIAN LAI, LIM THIAN Do,
LIM THIAN KHAY, LIM OH CHAI, LIM THIAN HAI, LIM
THIAN LIANG and LIM THIAN TECK, carrying on business
at No. 88 Main Bazaar, Kuching, under the style or
firm of ENG WHATT has been dissolved by mutual con-
sent on the 26th July 1919 and the aforesaid LIM THIAM
LIANG and LIM THIAN TECK retire from the partnership
and have no further interest in the firm nor will be 
responsible as from the above date for any debts incurred
by the said business.
  An agreement to the above effect has duly been registered in the Supreme Court, Kuching, and the undersigned, LIM OH LIEW. LIM OH PHIO, LIM THIAN SANO. LIM THIAN LAI, LIM THIAN HO, LIM THIAN KHAY, LIM OH CHAI and LIM THIAN HAI are now sole proprietors of Chop ENG WHATT.
(Sgd.) LIM OH LIEW
„ LIM OH PHIO
„	LIM THIAN SANG
.,	LIM THIAN LAI
„	LIM THIAN HO (Sgd.) LIM THIAN	LIANG
„	LIM THIAN KHAY	„	LIM THIAN	TECK
„ LIM OH CHAI	Retired Partners.
„ LIM THIAN HAI
         Sole Proprietors.
Kuching, 11th August, 1919. 
[6-1]


226
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 16, 1919.
NOTICE.
SALE BY AUCTION
of all unredeemed pledges from YEK YEUN Co., Pawn Farmers, No. 8, Sibu Bazaar Sibu, will be held on the 15th September 1919 at 10 a.m. and quarterly from that date until further notice.
  Lists of all unredeemed pledges are on view at the Farmers’ premises.
LAW JEE THAI,
Authorised Auctioneers
Departures.
NOTICE.
  AUCTION SALE
of unredeemed pledges from the Pawn Broking Farm YEW CHEE & Co., Chop Wo SANG at No. 18, China Street on Saturdays of the following dates:—16th August 1919; 20th September 1919; 18th October 1919; 15th November 1919 and 20th December 1919 at 9 a.in.
  List of all such unredeemed pledges is on view at the Fawn Farmer's premises.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO.,
      Authorised Auctioneers


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 18, 1919.
227
“GLORIA" INCANDESCENT
LANTERNS.
    300 Candle Power of Brilliant Light at a cost that is far cheaper than any other known method of producing artificial light.
    Suitable for Indoor or Outdoor Illumination.
Will Burn Kerosene or Benzine
With Equal Facility.
No Noise
No Smoke.
No Odour.

No Grease.
No Wicks to Trim.
No Trouble Whatever!
    Nothing to wear out, break or get out o
order.
    Made of heavy gauge brass, nickel plated,
fitted with a reinforced mica chimney.
Price $20. (Twenty Dollars) each.
Complete with all fittings and one
spare Generator.
      Spare Mantles $4.80 per dozen.
Spare Generators 72 cents each. Obtainable from
            VANSCOLINA & COMPANY, Sole Agents, LABUAN. S. S. 
[4-1]
PASSENGERS.
ARRIVALS.
PER p. s. Adeh:—31st July—From the North Honble. Mr. and Mrs. Douglas and nurse, Honble. Mr. Johnson, Messrs. Lawrence and Adams, Mrs. Greene and Miss Tait, Rev. Mulder and Rev. Duxneuner.
PER S. B. Alice Lorraine:—31st July—From Sibu—Honble. Mr. and Mrs. Baring-Gould, Messrs. Aplin and Gifford.
PER S.S. Alice Lorraine:—1st August—From Lingga Messrs. Page-Turner and Adams.
PER S. S. Kuching1st August—From Singapgre—Mr. and Mrs. Dennis, Mr. and Mrs. K. Hee Khye, Mr. and Mrs. W. A. Perry and 3 children, Miss and Master Clark, Miss Merrels, Messrs. L. Hip Tong, A. Heng Choon, A. Cheng Khoi, K. Ah Ee, J. Poong Chong, J. L. Beardon, Larkins, Kortright and Lieut. Clark.
PER S. S. Rajah of Sarawak: 15th August -From Singapore -Messrs. W. S. Chelton, I. Shelton, J. C. Reutens, O. Lang, Currey, Roberts, W. Dick, G. Bateman, Mrs. I. Imafuku, Rev. A. G. Gamble, Miss Chapman, Mrs. Anna A. Zinn. Master G. Bateman, Miss M. Reutens, Mr. and Mrs. C. Kui Eng, Miss Ricketts. Mr. ami Mrs. Mead and child, Dr. I Ian ton. and Miss J. Reutens.
DEPARTURES.
PER S. S. Alice Lorraine—3rd August—For Oya Mi. Kortright.
PER S. S. Kuching: 5th August- For Singapore—Mr. and Mrs. O. M. Peiniger, Mothers Helen and Baptista, Dr. A. C. Han ton, Messrs. J. P. Reutens, W. II. Geikie, A. W. Henderson and Cook.
PER S. s Alice Lorraine—9th August—For Sibu and Lingga—Messrs. Aplin, Page-Turner, A lams and Gifford.
PER p. s. Adeh—9th August—For Limbang—Honble. Mr. Johnson, Mr. Adams, Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak and Revd. Mulder for Mukah.
PER S.S. Alice Lorraine:—16th August—For Mukah— Mr. Owen.
THE “SARAWAK GAZETTE”
ALMANAC.
AUGUST, 1919.


228	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 16, 1919.
METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS.
GENERAL HOSPITAL.
Kuching, July. 1919.
			_ - ?- —			 				
Rainfall, July, 1919.
DURING 24 HOURS.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST 16, 1919.	229
THE SARAWAK STUDIO
(REPRESENTATIVES OF MESSRS. KODAK LIMITED.)
THE BEST IN KUCHING
WHERE GOOD PORTRAITS CAN BE TAKEN AND VIEWS OF THE
NEIGHBOURHOOD PROCURED.
PHOTOS FOR PASSPORTS
AT SHORT NOTICE.
KODAKS, KODAK FILMS, PLATES, PAPERS, CHEMICALS
PHOTO PASTE AND ALL PHOTOGRAPHIC MATERIALS
SUPPLIED AT SINGAPORE CATALOGUE PRICES.
AMATEURS’ FILMS & PLATES DEVELOPED, PRINTED &
ENLARGED AT REASONABLE CHARGES.
        Free instructions given to
21, COURT HOUSE ROAD, KUCHING.
[24-11]
NOTICE.
In the matter of THE SARAWAK & SINGAPORE STEAMSHIP COMPANY LIMITED.
     AT an Extraordinary General Meeting of the above named Company duly convened and held at Kuching on Saturday the 29th March 1919 a resolution was passed by which the Company was to go into Liquidation in the event of the business being sold to a New Company then in course of formation and at a subsequent General Meeting of the Members of the said Company also dulv convened and held at the same place on Tuesday the 16th April 1919 the above resolution was duly confirmed as a special Resolution and at such last mentioned Meeting Messrs. J. M. BRYAN, ONG TIANG SWEE and CHAN KEF. ONO were appointed Liquidators for the purpose of the winding up.
    NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that in accordance with the above Resolution and the sale having been completed, the said Company went into Liquidation as at 1st June 1919.
         By Order of The Board,
(Sgd.) J. M. BRYAN,
Chairman.
Kuching, Sarawak.
Amateurs with pleasure.
C. M. LEE,
Manager.
NOTICE.
In the matter of THE SARAWAK & SINGAPORE STEAMSHIP COMPANY LIMITED. (In Liquidation.)
    AOIKE IS HEREBY GIVES that the creditors of the above named 'Company are required on or before the 30th day of September to send their names and addresses and particulars of their debts or claims to the undersigned, one of the Liquidators of the said Company, and if so required by notice in writing from the said Liquidator are personally or by their agents to come in and prove their said debts or claims at such time and place as shall be specified in such notice, or in default thereof they will be excluded from the benefit of any distribution made before such debts or claims are proved.
Dated this 7th day of July 1919.
(Sgd.) f M. BRYAN.
Liquidator.


230
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, AUGUST Hi, 1919.
            PURE FOOD MEANS GOOD HEALTH
"ALEXANDRIA” CANNED MEATS
Every Tin Guaranteed under the New South Wales
Pure Food Act, and packed under the constant
and vigilant supervision of a Government Inspector.
    ASK FOR “ALEXANDRIA”
Roast BeefRoast Mutton	Beef SausageCorned BeefCorned Mutton	Pork SausageOx CheekSpiced Mutton	Frankfurt SausageOx TonguesMutton Chops	        Beef DrippingLuncheon TonguesAssorted Meats	Pork and BeansSheep TonguesMinced Scollops	Irish StewExtract of BeefAssorted Soups	Ox Tail Soup         As supplied in huge quantities to the Imperial and Indian         Governments for use by both the Army and Navy.Sold by all Stores.
CHARLES BOWEN & CO.,
2 Castlereagh Street, SYDNEY, N.S.W.
“ALEXANDRIA MEAT WORKS.”
Distributors for the East:
Seremban General Agency, Ltd.
( Incorporated in E. M. S.)
SINGA PORE.
     Sub: Agents—BAN JUI LONG,
14 Carpenter Street, KUCHING, SARAWAK.
and BAN JUI GUAN.
MIRI, SARAWAK.
[24-10]
KUCHING:—Printed and Published by GHIN HENG SOON, Government Printer.at the Government Printing Office. Barrack Road.

