

No. 778.
 Sarawak Gazette.
Price                       KUCHING, WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 1, 1919.              10 cents
          CONTENTS.	The Sarawak Gazette.
Death:—Ward	...	...	...	...	255
Notes ...	...	...	...	255
Clippings ...	...	...	...	...	256
Visit of H. E. the Honble. F. S. James C. M. G.	257
A Floating School ...	...	...	257
Correspondence:—Simple Arithmetic—Britain 
                                                          and the Pessimist ... 258
Monthly Reports:—Oya—Mukah	... 259
Baram ...	...	... 260
Trade Returns	...	...	...	...	261
Rainfall ...	...	...	...		262
Almanac ...	...	...	...	...	262
Passengers	...	...	...	...	263
Kuching Shipping Returns	...	...	...	264
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE.
   SUBSCRIPTIONS to the Gazette are as follow:-
The Sarawak Gazette
   PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
Single copy	...	...	...	.10 cents
Subscription for one year	...	... $2.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 2.25 Subscription including postage to all other
                Countries. ...	...	2.30
   PAYABLE IN STERLING—
    Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 5s 10d
The Sarawak Government Gazette
   PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
Single copy	...	...	...	.05 cents
Subscription for one year ...	$1.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 1.23 Subscription including postage to all other
                Countries. ...	1.50
   PAYABLE IN STERLING—
    Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 3s. 6d
  All subscriptions are payable in advance and must continence from the 1st January’ in each year on which date they are renewable. All broken periods will be considered as full.
  Subscriptions will not be renewed unless notice of renewal given.
  Changes of Address should be notified to the Office in writing.
   WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 1, 1919.
—
    On the 19th September at sea. on the voyage home ALAN, the dearly.loved infant son of Mr. and Mrs. A. B. WARD, the Residency, Kuching.
NOTES.
(September.)
    THEIR Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee and family are expected to leave England in ; October by s. s. Tyreseus, a Blue Funnel boat.
   S. S. Alice Lorraine left for Lingga on the 15th with passenger Mr. W. F. Dick, who is going to take up duty at Simanggang.
    PASSENGERS to Singapore on the J 6th by s. s. Rafah of Sarawak were Mrs. Zebu, Mrs. Parry Davis, Messrs. O. F. Ricketts, P. H. O'Nians, A. Henderson, Wiyano and the Misses D. Ricketts and Chapman.
    IN the Government Gazette the appointment of M. P. Cochrane is recorded as Consul for Sarawak in Jeddah, dating from September 1st.
   S. 8. Kuching arrived from Singapore on September 18th with passengers Mother Helen and Mother Baptista and Messrs. C. J. Cook and Ng Swee Ing.
   A very bold robbery was reported on the night of the 20th, when the offices of the Nissa Shokai Rubber Estate were broken into and a safe removed which contained some $1,600 in cash and 2.000 packets of opium.


256
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1919.
The safe, which had been forced, was found
later some distance off in the jungle.
  A reward is offered for information leading
to the conviction of the robbers and also for the
recovery of the stolen property.
  S. S. Kuuhing left for Singapore on the
23rd. The following sailed by her, Messrs.
Kadir Hussian, L. Lok Choon, Ho Tee Chin,
Wee Cheng Yew, Song Keng Hai, T. Sam
Guan. Y. Chin Seng and W. Nakagawa.
Mrs. Chin Seng, Teo Soo Ann and daughters
and Mrs. Uyeno.
   THE Honble. J. and Mrs. Baring-Gould and
children returned from the North on the 23rd
by p. s. Adeh. The Rev. Father Jansen was
also a passenger.
   THE Honble. J. and Mrs. Baring-Gould and
children and Miss Tait left for Sibu on the
24th by s. s. Alice Lorraine.
  S. S. Rajah of Sarawak arrived from Singa-
pore on the 25th with passengers Messrs.
S. F. Ricketts, J. A. H. Hardie, Andreini,
S. T. Hilly, Caleb Voon, Tan Joo Tek. Ho
Eng Chiang, Chiong Siew Lin and Lim Song
Kee and Mrs. Kon Siong.
  Mu. J. A. H. Hardie returned after Euro-
pean furlough and left the next day by
p. s. Adeh for Labuan.
  A second appointment gazetted is that of
Mr. E. S. Andreini as cadet, to do duty at
Baram.
  P. S. Adeh left for the North on the 26th
with Messrs. A.E. Lawrence, J. A. H. Hardie
and i he Rev. Fathers Jansen and Morris.
Clippings.
   Margaret, Ranee of Sarawak, held a garden fete
at Ascot, Wood Cottage, Ascot, on 20th August, in
aid of the Animals Hospital, Hugh Street, London,
for the free treatment of the sick animals of the
poor. Nearly 50,000 animal were treated at this
institution during the war —(P. G.)
   Nothing further has transpired as to the despatch
of the mails for the Straits Settlements, Borneo,
Siam and Netherlands India per Holt steamer via
Birkenhead. Last week we questioned whether any
saving in time could result as against the route via
Marseilles and Bombay. The view of the postal
authorities seems to be that any loss of lime at this
end, consequent on the all-sea route, would be made
up on the other side. It appears that the mails
going via Bombay are not sent on by rail across
India, but await what chance there may be for
despatch by steamer, and here there may be delays,
where time would he lost — -“L. and C. E."
   Mr. J. F. Owen, District Officer, Kinta, goes to
Johore Bahru in succession to the Hon. Mr. W. ft.
Maxwell, C. M. G., General Adviser to the Johore
   A personality looming large in the oil world
just now is that of Mr. H. W. A. Deterding, managing director of the Royal Dutch-Shell combine and
the leading genius of that concern. In America his
reputation is steadily growing, and in some quarters
they are wondering if he is not going to become a
greater and more powerful figure in the world's oil
business than Rockefeller ever was. Now that
the Royal Dutch combine has taken over the Cowdray interests in Mexico, its standing is second to
none.
   It may be recalled, says the L. and C. Express,
that Mr. Deterding, who is still a young man, began
commercial life in a bank in Java, but soon became
interested in oil promotion in Borneo and Sumatra.
From that time onward bis advance was rapid, and
it was not long before he came in contact with the
Shell Transport. The famous world-wide war—not
the one started by Germany, but the one in which
the Standard and the Shell were engaged—was
materially affected by the Court decision command-
ing the Standard group to dissolve. That decision
partially crippled the effectiveness of the Standard,
and gave a tremendous advantage to its competitor.
-(S. T.)
  S. S. Rajah of Sarawak left for Singapore
on the 30th September, among the passengers
were Messrs. S. F. Dilly and C. J. Cook.
  WE have to thank a correspondent for the
following cutting from the “Observer” written
by a spectator of the Southend pageant last
July. The comments are his own.
  I looked closer in shore to regain the sense of reality.
There were men in flannels, clerkly, City-bred, loosing
sailing boats, ready to hand mid reef and steer, putting
out for a sail—or, row probably, seeing that there was
scarce a breath of wind—round the Fleet; there were
maidens in the water, not "bobbing” in “creations" of
the milliner as on a foreign plage, but clad in business-
like dark blue, and starting out to swim in business-like
fashion as near the ships as they could get. Our people
truly deserve the name of Orang Laut—as truly as Sea
Dyaks. They take to water as their second home
   Do they really! The Observer ought to do
a little observing in Sarawak. If there is one
thing the Sea Dyaks keep clear of as much as
possible it is salt water. Besides orang dyak
is the exact opposite of orang laid. (Dyak =
darat, inland).
   X Chinese woman mimed Loh Ah Moi, who
arrived here from Sarawak on the 4th inst., was
placed Wore Mr. Monk, Third magistrate yesterday
and charged with being concerned or interested in
the removal of chandu for importation. It was
stated that she hid the prohibited article in the soles
of shoes, in mirror frames, and in her hair. She was
convicted and fined $750, in the alternative awarded
two months’ rigorous imprisonment.—(F. P.)
   Il is reported that more than one aeroplane
manufacturing company at home is considering the
possibilities of Singapore as a centre of commercial
aviation. That development in this direction is
hound to come sooner or later is obvious, and there
should be a good deal of money to be made by the
first firm that has the enterprise to take it up.
Hongkong and Shanghai will soon have their aerial
mail service, and in that direction no doubt some-
thing could be done between Singapore and Penang
and possibly the Dutch Indies.—(S. T.)


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1919.
257
Visit of H. F. the Honble. F. S. James,
C. M. G.
stage of the performance shows the corpse writhing
in a fit while he is charmed back to life by a
necromantic physician." Besides dances of this
kind others of a more homely character were given,
including, we understand, what is known as the
plandok dance and only those who have tried to
keep time to music on all fours with their hands
between their feet and their arms behind their backs
will understand the difficulty of this corybantic
exercise. Indeed the efforts of the performers
seemed to be warmly appreciated by the spectators
and it was only when the chiefs confessed that they
had gone through their entire repertoire that the
party broke up.
  As the state of the tide necessitated the sailing of
the Sea Belle at 8 a. m. on the 27th. His Excellency
had thoughtfully requested that formal farewells
should be dispensed with owing to the hour. His
departure from the Astana was attended by the
guard of honour, and the party conducted to the
State Barge by Mr. Lung, Superintendent of Police,
the official salute being opened as the yacht started
on her way down-stream.
  We hope that what Mr. and Mrs. James have
seen of Sarawak during their “flying visit" will
cause them to desire to renew the experience on some
future occasion, when cares of office are less
weighty than at the present time, and affairs of State
admit of a longer absence from Headquarters.
   On Thursday 24th a brief visit was paid to
Kuching by II. E. the Honble. F. S. James, the
Officer Administering the Government of the Straits
Settlements. Mr. James was accompanied by
Mrs. James. Miss Gove. Mr. M. E. Sherwood
(aide-de-camp) and Mr. Mackray, Acting Secretary
to the High Commissioner.
   Shortly after three o'clock the signal from Fort
Margherita was given that the s. y. Sea Belle had
passed Finding, but it was not until well after the
half-hour that she was seen coming np the Kuching
reach. Anchor was dropped above the Astana and
the yacht was made fast to the Zahora’s moorings.
The Slate Barge, with Mrs. Cunynghame, Honbles.
A. B. Ward and G C. Gilian brought the party
ash ore and on His Excellency entering the boat
a salute of seventeen guns was fired from the
Fort battery.
   A hill guard of honour of Sarawak Hangers un-
der the command of Capt. Cunynghame was drawn
up on the Astana, lawn and after climbing the steep
Hights of steps which lend to the Astana grounds
His Excellency was greeted by a general salute.
“God save the King" was meanwhile played by
the Rangers’ Band, after which His Excellency in-
spected the guard of honour. H. H. the Tuan
Muda with some of the principal officers, the Datus
and Chinese Magistrates welcomed the distinguished
guest at the main door of the Astana.
   The afternoon was fortunately fine, which enabled
Mr and Mrs. James to take a motor-drive round
Kuching in the car which Mr. Cheng Hew had
kindly placed at His Excellency's disposal during
his stay.
   Later in the evening a visit was paid to the 
Sarawak Club where sonic of the party were able to
indulge in a few sets of tennis before an adjournment
wits made to the Ranee’s Club.
   The next day, a public holiday (being both His
Highness the Rajah's birthday and the first day of
Moharram), was spent in visiting the Museum and
short motor-rides, unfortunately heavy rain pre-
vented a projected excursion up-river on the Young
Harry.
   In the evening a dinner Was given at the Astana
to which some thirty were invited. After the health 
of tbe Rajah had been drunk the Tuan Muda, in a ,
short and amusing speech, proposed the healths of 
Mr. and Mrs. James to which His Excellency 
replied in appropriate terms regretting that affairs of
State prevented a lengthier stay in Sarawak. He 
then proposed the health of His Highness the Tuan
Muda.
   After dinner the fine weather made it possible for
an adjournment to the gardens where a display of
Dyak dancing was given by a selected band from
the Second Division. This was done on a specially
prepared platform lit by native torches while
the music was supplied by an orchestra of
Dyak pipes and gongs. The usual sword and
head dances were given, including the commonest
and perhaps most characteristic of all. A description 
of it, which appeared many years ago in
tins paper, may not be without interest now.
“ One warrior is engaged in nicking a thorn out of
his foot, but is ever on the alert for the lurking
enemy with his arms ready at hand. This enemy
is suddenly discovered and after some rapid attack
and defence, a sudden plunge is made at him and
he is dead upon the ground. The taking of the
head follows and the story concludes with the
startling discovery that the dead man is the brother
of the warrior who has slain him. The lost
A Floating School.
?
( The Times.)
  The British Empire within the tropics is largely
dependent for its commercial expansion upon a
small band of workers, who have undertaken to
fight and control the ravages of disease. These
workers have enjoyed a measure of success which is
one of the wonders of modern science. They have,
again and yet again, achieved the apparently
impossible. Malaria fever, that deadly enemy of
white life in hot countries, has been solved as a
scientific puzzle, and is in process of being defeated
as a menace to enterprise; kala-azar, which used to
kill 95 per cent, of its victims, is being banished
from its haunts in India and elsewhere, and is now,
thanks to the use of antimony, so curable that no
one should die of it: bilharziosis, a plague of Egypt,
has been elucidated, is being prevented and can be
cured: dysentery is coming under control ; the
dreaded typhoid and the more dreaded plague and
cholera are all passing into the ranks of “preventable
disease." A new epoch in tropical life has begun.
The theory that it is the climate which kills is
slowly being abandoned as disease after disease
yields to attacks.
  It is not surprising that medical men engaged in
this wonderful campaign should be urging now new
efforts to assail the strongholds which still persist.
The great difficulty encountered by these workers
has been that of securing cooperation and inter-
change of ideas and methods. From the nature of
their duties tropical workers arc isolated from one
another. They labour alone, individually, in most
instances. They do not often receive much 
encouragement. Frequently hinderances and obstacles
are placed in their way. Moreover, because joint
action is not taken, efforts fail which might have
been crowned with success, and disease remains in
possession long after it might have been forced to
capitulate.
  These considerations have moved a number of
eminent scientific men to suggest the establishment
by the Government of a floating school of tropical
medicine. The scheme, which thus reappears, is
not new, for it was mooted so long ago as 1910 by


258
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1919.
letter it was pointed out that on the showing of the
Public Instruction Department of Queesnland,
Australia, “the direct outcome of tbe results of such
a blighting disease ” (hookworm), “ which is preying
upon 40 per cent, of the total school population from
Cooktown to Townsville, and which is stamping
serious mental, physical, and sexual degeneracy
upon 25 per cent, of the total school population, can
be nothing other than the weakening of the social
fabric and the unfitting of the coming generation
for the struggle of existence. Indeed, the tendency
of the disease, if not controlled, is towards the
obliteration of the race through the unsexing of its
victims and reducing individual resistance toward
acute infections such as pneumonia and tuberculosis.”
   Dr. Leiper adds : “If Australia proposes to attempt
to colonize the tropical north from her own States
it is her own affair. But if the appeal is, once more,
direct to Homeland we may be allowed to express
the doubt if Britain can spare her most virile and
enterprising sons for a political experiment which is
foredoomed.” This is an authoritative statement.
Hookworm is a world-wide disease. A world 
campaign against it has often been urged, but not so far
undertaken. The new floating school might serve
as the stimulus to such a good work, and so materially assist in rendering the Empire safe for colonization.
Dr. Andrew Balfour, Director of the Welcome
Laboratories at Khartoum. Dr. Balfour got the
idea from the success which attended the Welcome
floating laboratory on the Nile. He conceived the
possibility of fitting out a ship as a tropical school,
and taking it from station to station throughout the
tropical littoral. By this means the isolated worker
would be brought into touch with his fellows and
the student afforded, what he lacks at present, the
opportunity to study many different diseases on the
spot in their most acute stages.
  The idea, however, was not taken up, and it
remained for Dr. Louis Sambon to revive it in a
lecture before the Royal Society of Medicine. He
pointed out that the islands of the Lesser Antilles,
which he had recently visited, were ravaged each by
its particular breed of epidemic. The medical
officers were isolated, and their labours remained
inco-ordinated. A floating school was. in his view,
the best means of bringing them together.
  The response to this appeal has been good, and a
short time later, at a meeting held under the 
chairmanship of Sir Humphery Rolleston, the president
of the Royal Society of Medicine, Dr. Andrew Bal-
four set forth his idea once more, and urged that
this Heating school would form an important link
between the Mother Country and the Dominions on
the one hand, and between the British Empire
and nations having tropical possessions on the
other. A committee was finally appointed, 
consisting of Dr. Balfour, chairman, Dr. Low of the
Seamen's Hospital, Dr R. T. Leiper and Dr. Sambon as secretaries, to inquire into tin. question in all
its aspects.
  There is little doubt that the advantages of the
plan will bear it to accomplishment, for the prosecution of campaigns against tropical disease is now a
vital concern of all peoples living within the danger
zone, and also of the very important, interests 
engaged in the trade and commerce. The scientific
world too has welcomed the scheme. The Jnter-
Allied Fellowship of Medicine, a body of growing
inportance, perceives in it a new link between the
peoples and a new weapon against disease. The
Lancet declares:—
  “We are inclined to agree with Dr. Balfour, who
has from first to last been the moving spirit in the
proposal, that the cost of such a floating school
might reasonably be regarded by Parliament and
public in the same light as polar expeditions. The
adventures and prices are much the same, the gain,
indeed, presumably much greater: the difference
consists chiefly in the substitution of pith helmets
and mosquito nets for fur caps and moccasins.
Within a generation, if ankylostomiasis and pellagra
are not then extinct, we doubt not that the floating
school will be a routine method of education and
preventive study.”
  It is stated that the French and Italian Governments have viewed the proposal favourably. The
American Government may be expected to do like-
wise. Experience in the Panama zone has taught
our Allies on the other side of the Atlantic that only
by combination and massed attack can disease be
brought under effective control They are more
concerned than we are ourselves by the prevalence
of infection, and notably hookworm infection, in
several of our colonies. This condition, which
stunts and destroys vast numbers of healthy men,
women, and children every year, is able to flourish
because its character and wide distribution are not
understood by the general public as they should be.
The floating school would bring the subject to light
and warn students of its importance. It would
further stimulate the local authorities to embark
upon new enterprises, and to make a really deter-
mined effort to stamp out the plague.
  How important this is may be gathered from the
letter by Dr. R. T. Leiper on Emigration and
Disease published recently in The. Times. Tn this
     CORRESPONDENCE.
     [The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of
correspondents.]
Simple Arimethic.
DEAR MR. EDITOR.
   I send you a newspaper cutting. The little story
of Mr. Scrooge and his book keeper may be of interest 
to some of those overworked employees known
to most of ns, who, if given a little extra work to do
in their not always fully occupied office hours, im-
mediately apply for extra pay.
Yours etc.,
“THE DICKENS. ”

   “Mr. Scrooge, ” said the book keeper, “ the past week
I did the junior clerk's work as well as my own. This
being pay-day, I thought it only right to remind you. ”
   “ Very good," said old Scrooge. “Let me see—your.
salary is two pounds and the clerk's one pound?"
   “Yes, sir," replied the book keeper, beaming 
expectantly.
   “Then, working half the week for yourself is one
pound, and the other half for the clerk is ten shillings.
Your salary this week will be thirty shillings. As you
can comfortably do his work and your own as well we
will do without a junior in future. " .
   [We publish the story for its moral and not be-
cause we think Bob Cratchit would have despised a
100% rise in pay, had he been offered it. Ed. Sar.
Gaz. ]
        Britain and the Pessimist.
—?— -
DEAR MR. EDITOR,
   Thank heavens there are still some optimists left.
I admit the enclosed is an advertisement, but still a
little more of this would do no harm.
   In these days it does one good to get some sense
from the home trade. If they think like this we
may and shall pull through, though the engineering
trade is worst hit of all by the coal-strikes.
Yours etc.,
MELIOR.
   What are these rumours that we hear around us?
Who are these men who talk so glibly of declining trade,
of shipping inferiority, of engineering decadence, of labour


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1919.
259
troubles which will be our undoing? Though the war is over we still have enemies, and amongst these the Pessimist is the worst. Our competitors have no better friend and no more helpful traveller than the Pessimist in our midst. The Pessimist is a propaganda merchant of the worst type ; he works against us instead of for us, he busies himself by driving nails into an imaginary coffin, he never allows that he is wrong, and in his own conceited opinion he will be right to the end.
  We must put on one side these cancerous theories, we must believe in ourselves if we would have others believe in us. The Engineering Trade of Britain has been the envy of the world. Let it remain so. As we determined to win the war in 1914, let ns equally determine to win the trade to-day. Let us lay our money on ourselves, let ns spurn anything that is not British ; we will not have it, we do not want it, and we cannot tolerate it.
Out password to success is BRITAIN.
    Food Control.—The same methods of distributing rice as exists in Mukah have been applied to this district.
Exports.
Raw sago Jelutong Engkabang
August 1919.
286 koyans
250 piculs
135 ..
August 1918.
173 koyans
615 piculs
Three steamers and eleven sailing vessels entered
during the month and the same number cleared.
J. BEVILLE ARCHER.
Resident 2nd Class.
MUKAH
MONTHLY REPORTS.
OYA.
August.
   General—Nr. H. H. Kortrigt arrived from
Kuching on the 6th. by s. s. Alice Lorraine; he left
for Dalat on the 14th returning to Oya the same
day.
   Acting under instructions from Hrs Highness the
Tuan Muda I arrived here from Sadong on the 18th
and took over charge of the district from Mr. Kortright 
the same day. We also visited Dalat by the 
steamer returning in the evening
  Mr. Kortright left Oya on the next day.
   The 8th, His Highness the Tuan Muda’s birthday, 
was observed as a holiday.
   I left for Dalat on the 24th. returning on the 30th. 
I regret to say that Pangeran Mohomat, the chief
native officer, has been seriously ill for some time. 
I have obtained medical advice from Mukah.
   Court.—Whilst at Dalat I heard a great number 
of cases, mostly dealing with sago lands and breach 
of agreements. The local order referring to the 
compulsory registration of sales and mortgages of 
sago lands is being enforced, also that dealing with
sago trees remaining unfelled alter their purchase.
   A number of Melanaus were imprisoned for short 
terms for breach of agreement.
   Buassan, the light-house keeper at Oya. was 
dismissed for negligence.
   P. W.D.,etc.—Prisoners have been engaged on
the usual up-keep of grounds The Mukah road 
was put in thorough repair and all the bridges 
examined. The Quala Oya road was cleared by 
kampong labour.
   A new stable has been built in Oya. Abas, the
linesman, completed the new direct telephone line 
from Dalat to Mukah on the 3rd. The whole line '
from Oya to Kekan is rather overgrown, due to the
small rent is at present. Next mouth arrangements
have been made to enlarge the rentis to a uniform
width of ninety-six feet.
   In pursuance of Order No. XIX 1913 I have ordered
all the young rubber trees planted within thirty foot
of the hue to be removed at once.
   Trade.—Raw sago still commands a very high
price and both Chinese mid Melanaus are most 
prosperous. Whilst at Dalat I was approached by a
deputation of tua kampongs who asked that an order 
forbidding Chinese to work sago be recommended
to headquarters. This is an old complaint and
the remedy is obvious: unless the Melanaus sold
sago palms to Chinese it would be impossible for
the Chinese to work sago flour.
August.
  I returned from Kuching by s. s. Alice Lorraine on tin 18th of the month and found that everything had gone on as usual during my absence.
  There was no great accumulation of work us all the natives had been busy fishing. The catches this year have been unusually heavy, but the price of fish has remained high, partly on account of the increased price of cloth, rope, etc., but to a great extent from a natural desire on the part of the native fisherman to “get a bit of his own back" from the Chinese trader.
  Mr. J. B. Archer reported having taken over charge of the Oya district from Mr. II. H. Kortright on the evening of the 18th.
  P. S. Adeh called off the mouth on her way North on the 24th and about sixty passengers were landed in boats.
  A good deal-of trouble has been caused by natives selling immature sago trees in large numbers to Chinese and others These trees are marked by the buyers at the time of purchase, but are not felled until they reach maturity, which may be four or five years later. The consequence is that disputes arise, as in the meantime the marks have been either accidentally or purposely erased. I am now ordering purchasers of trees to fell within fifteen days from date of purchase. This will prevent owners of plantations from selling any but mature, trees.
  In order to keep the station in anything like good order I have invited the Bangers to work overtime for extra pay. The present gang of prisoners is altogether insufficient to cope with the work.
  During the drought the natives were enabled to burn off their padi clearings, in many cases after clearing only a small patch of the farm. Most of the padi had been put in by the end of the month, mid, given normal weather and freedom from pests, there is every prospect of a good crop.
  The price of sago has dropped considerably, but is still above the normal price. Jelutong working has been somewhat hindered by the rice regulations, more especially in the Balingian district where the out-put for the month is nil.
  During the month the dresser vaccinated al Balingian. He returned to Mukah on the 8th having successfully treated 145 persons.
  The principal exports for the month are as below
1918.	1919.
    Raw sago	271 koyans	387	koyans.
    Jelutong	1,684 piculs	475	piculs.
    Kayu laka	40 ,,	4
H. L. OWEN, Resident 2nd Class.


260
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1919.
BARAM.
August.
  Very few cases came before the Court for settlement. Three Chinese were fined $100 each and one $50 for being in possession of false datching.
  Tim natives seeiu tu be waking up to the fact that they are being swindled by the Chinese and many 'latching have been brought down and several have been reported. The favourite trick is to have two weights.
Finns and fees amounted to $828.
  I returned on the 14th instant having been to Kuching to attend the Peace Celebrations.
  P. C. Asai was dismissed the force for neglect of duty.
  I sent the prison mandor and twelve prisoners to carry padi bought at Bakong, but owing to the low state of the streams they were still away at end of month. A prisoner, Ah Fiatt, escaped while carrying padi at Liam and is still at large.
  Tuanku Drahman, Native Officer, paid a visit to Long Palai and also took some prisoners with him to obtain stone for concrete. He reported that the Kayans were pantang for planting padi agit.
  I sold the gambling and pawn farms for a period of three years at a monthly rental of $465 and $40: this is an increase of $385 and $36 respectively.
  Chinese traders paid up in full for their first consignment of rice obtained from the Food Control Officer.
  Datu Sheriff Hamid, Native Officer, after a long illness resumed his duties.
  News was received from the Tutau of the death of Penghulu Tama Saging's wife.
  Pengbulu Lanting paid a visit and reports that all the Poyut Dyaks are ready to plant padi and have had a very successful burn. Bakong Dyaks report the same.
  All the up-river people except those of the Tinjar have finished planting.
  The Rt. Rev. the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak paid a visit here on the 14th returning again to Miri the next day.
  Only one steamer entered during the month, the p. s. Adeh.
  Chinese asked that another four steamers may enter before the landas. There are at present over two cargoes of jelutong, damar and rubber and three of cotans. I have informed the Honble. Resident 4th Division of their request.
  A new squad of Rangers under L. C. Ali arrived to do duty at this station.
  I left for Bakong on the 29th instant and was still away at end of month.
The rainfall was 2’29 inches.
  The sum of $6,000 was transferred to Kuching Treasury.
Exports.	Imports.
$37,768	$32,988
C. D. ADAMS.
Resident 2nd Class.
    The Sarawak Gazette.
RATES OF ADVERTISEMENTS IN THE "SARAWAK GAZETTE"
Half a Column and under—
         First insertion ...	...	... 2.00
         Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
         Subsequent do	do	... 0.50
A Column and under—
         First insertion each	...	... 4.0(1
         Second and third insertion each	... 2.00
         Subsequent do	do	... 1 00
Special arrangements may be made for standing advertisements.
   All communications intended for insertion in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed
to the Editor at the Government Printing Office, Kuching. They should be clearly written and should reach the Office at least two days before the publication of each issue.
   Letters and other contributions must be authenticated by writer’s name sent privately ' to the Editor.
   We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not inserting them.
   Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early intelligence of all matters of general interest in their respective neighbourhoods.
NOTICE.
ASTANA FARM.
THE Manager of Astana Farm begs to inform the Public that he is unable to attend to Orders for milk after Office hours.
NOTICE.
     Gazette subscriptions and Printing
     Office bills.
   Foil the convenience of residents at Outstations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums but only the 1,2 and 3cent values will be accepted- It is requested, however, that Money Orders be sent if possible.
J. C. SWAYNE,
Manager, Oort. Printing Office.
For Sale.
BEST BILIAN
     TIANGS, SUIT, GILEGAR, etc. Quotations, (F. O. B.) Kapit, made on applications stating
               Payable in advance.
Quarter of a column and under—
        Find insertion ...	...	...$1.00
        Second and third insertion each	... 0.50
        Subsequent do do	... 0.25
sizes.
Please apply to the RESIDENT 2ND CLASS, 
KAPIT.
[4-2]


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1919.
261


262
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOEER 1, 1919.
F. G. DAY.
Registrar of Trade,


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1919.                           263
NOTICE.
N
OTICE is hereby given that the partnership here-
tofore existing between CHUA MOH CHOON, CHUA
BOON KHIAN, CHUA BOON SIANG, CHUA BOON CHUA,
CHUA BOON LOK, CHUA BOON PHOY and CHUA BOOM
CHHWEE carrying on business at No. 32, Main Bazaar,
Kuching, under the style or firm of Chop HONG KIAT
has been dissolved at the expiration of ten years agreement 
on the 11th day of August 1919. The aforesaid
CHUA BOON CHUA, CHUA BOON SIANG, CHUA BOON PHOY,
CHUA BOON LOK and CHUA BOON CHHWEE, having
retired from the partnership and have no further 
interest in the firm nor will be responsible as from the
above date for any debts incurred by the said business.
All accounts and estates of the said Chop HONG KIAT
were examined and declared in the Supreme Court and
the undersigned CHUA MOH CHOON and CHUA BOON
KHIAN are now the sole proprietors of Chop HONG KIAT.
(Sgd.) CHUA MOH CHOON
CHUA BOON KHIAN
Sole Proprietors.
27th September, 1919.
           NOTICE.
- ?—
N
OTICE is hereby given that the partnership here-
tofore existing between, LIM OH LIEW, LIM OH
PHIO, LIM THIAN SANG, LIM THIAN LAI, LIM THIAN HO,
LIM THIAN KHAY, LIM OH CHAI, LIM THIAN HAI, LIM
THIAN LIANG and LIM THIAN TECK, carrying on business
at No. 88 Main Bazaar. Kuching, under the style or
firm of ENG WHATT has been dissolved by mutual con-
sent on the 26th July 1919 and. the aforesaid LIM THIAN
LIANG and LIM THIAN TECK retire from the partnership
and have no further interest in the firm nor will be 
responsible us from the above date for any debts incurred
by the said business.
    An agreement to the above effect has duly been
registered in the Supreme Court, Kuching, and the under-
signed, LIM OH LIEW, LIM OH PHIO, LIM THIAN SANG.
LIM THIAN LAI, LIM THIAN HO, LIM THIAN KHAY, LIM
OH CHAI and LIM THIAN HAI are now sole proprietors
of Chop ENG WHATT.
(Sgd.) LIM OH LIEW
    ,. LIM OH PHIO
    .. LIM THIAN SANG
    „ LIM THIAN LAI
,. LIMTHIANHO (Sgd.) LIM THIAN LIANG
.. LIM THIAN KHAY LIM THIAN TECK
.. LIM OH (’H AI	Retired Partners.
    „ LIM THIAN HAI
          Sole Proprietors.
Kuching, 11th August, 1919.
[6-4]
PASSENGERS.
"GLORIA" INCANDESCENT
LANTERNS.
     300 Candle Power of Brilliant Light at a cost
that is far cheaper than any other known method
of producing artificial light.
     Suitable for Indoor or Outdoor Illumination.
Will Bum Kerosene or Benzine
With Equal Facility.

     Nothing to wear out, break or get out of order.
     Made of heavy gauge brass, nickel plated,
fitted with a reinforced mica chimney.
Price $20 (Twenty Dollars) inch.
Complete with all fittings and one
spare Generator.
       Spare Mantles $4.80 per dozen.
       Spare Generators 72 cents each.
Obtainable from
             VANSCOLINA & COMPANY.
Sole Agents,
LABUAN, S. S.
ARRIVALS.
PER p. s Adeh: -6th September From the North Mr. Gray.
PER S.S. Kuching:—18th September—From Singapore Messrs. C. J. Cook and Ng Swee Ing, Mothers Helen and Baptista.
PER s. s. Kuching:—23rd September—For Singapore Messrs. Kadir, Hussain, L. Lok Choon, Ho Tee Chin, Wee Cheng Yew, Song Keng Hai, T. Sam Guan, Y, Chin Seng and W. Nakagawa, Mistresses Chin Seng, Teo Soo Ann and daughters and Mrs. Uyeno.
PER p.Adeh :—23rd September—From the North Honble. Mr. and Mrs. Baring-Gould and children and Rev. Father Jansen.
PER S. S. Rajah of Sarawak:—25th September—From Singapore—Mrs. Kon Siong, Captain Andreini, Messrs. Caleb Voon, Tan Joo Teck, Ho Eng Chiang, Chiong Siew Lin, J. A. H. Hardie. O. F. Ricketts, Lim Song Kee and S. T. Dilly.
DEPARTURES.
PER p. s. Adeh :—23rd August—For the North—Mr. Gray.
PER s. s. Alice Lorraine:—3rd September—For Sadong and Sibu—Revd. Father Jansen for Sibu.
PER S. R. Alice Lorraine:—15th September—For Lingga, —Mr. Dick.
PER s. s. Rajah of Sarawak:—16th September For Singapore—Mr. P. H. O’Nians, Mis. Zehn, Miss D. Ricketts, Miss Chapman Mrs. Davis, Messrs. Wiyano, O. F. Ricketts and A. Henderson.
PER s. s. Alice Lorraine : — 24th September—For Sibu Honble. Mr. and Mrs. Baring-Gould and children and Miss Tait.
PER s. S. Adeh : 26th September—For the North - Messrs. Lawrence and Hardie and Rev. Fathers Jansen and Morris.
PER S. S. Rajah of Sarawak:—30th September—For Singapore—Messrs. How Teck Sze, Tang Kuan Yan, Chong Sew Lan, Goh Kang Tong, Lim Mo Ngo, Ang Chu Hui. S. T Dilly and C. J. Cook.


264
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1919.
SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
Departures.
F. G. DAY.
Registrar of Trade.
NOTICE.
AUCTION SALE
of unredeemed pledges from the Pawn Broking  Farm YEW CHEE A Co., Chop Wo SANG at No. 18, China Street on Saturdays of the following dates:—18th October 1919; 15th November 1919 and 20th December 1919 at 9 a. in.
  List of all such unredeemed pledges is on view at the Pawn Farmer’s premises.
             SYN HIN LEONG & CO..
Authorised Auctioneers.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO.,
22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS.
       Beer, Wine, Spirit & General Store Dealers.
	:(o):	
SOLE AGENTS FOR !
FRASER & NEAVE'S AERATED WATERS
(The Rest throughout the East.)
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic
Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at
$1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 catties of dry rubber.
NOTICE.
SALE BY AUCTION
of all unredeemed pledges from YEK YEUN & Co., Pawn Farmers, No. 8, Sibu Bazaar . Sibu, will be held on the 15th September 1919 at 10 a.m. and quarterly from that date until further notice.
  Lists of all unredeemed pledges are on view at the Farmers’ premises.
LAW JEE THAI, 
Authorised Auctioneers. 
ASAHI BEER.
ACETIC ACID.
	:(o):	
Fresh supplies of Stores are received
regularly.
PRICES MODERATE.
Free delivery to customers: in Kuching.
Free packing & shipping for Outstation.
Orders.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1919.
264
             PURE FOOD MEANS GOOD HEALTH
“ALEXANDRIA” CANNED MEATS
Every Tin Guaranteed under the New South Wales
Pure Food Act and packed under the constant
and vigilant supervision of a Government Inspector.
    ASK FOR “ALEXANDRIA”
  Roast BeefRoast Mutton       Beef SausageCorned Beef     Corned Mutton       Pork SausageOx Cheek     Spiced Mutton       Frankfurt SausageOx Tongues          Mutton Chops   Beef DrippingLuncheon Tongues     Assorted Meats       Pork and BeansSheep Tongues     Minced Scollops       Irish StewExtract of Beef     Assorted Soups       Ox Tail Soup             As suppliedin huge quantities to theImperial and Indian          Governmentsfor use by both theArmy and Navy.Sold by all Stores.
CHARLES BOWEN & CO.,
2 Castlereagh Street, SYDNEY, N. S. W.
“ALEXANDRIA MEAT WORKS.”
Distributors lor the East:
        Seremban General Agency, Ltd.
(Incorporated in E. M. S.)
SINGAPORE .

      Sub: Agents-BAN JUI LONG,
14 Carpenter Street,
KUCHING, SARAWAK.
and BAN JUI GUAN.
MIRI. SARAWAK.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1919.
266
THE SARAWAK STUDIO
     (REPRESENTATIVES OF MESSRS. KODAK LIMITED.)
THE BEST IN KUCHING
WHERE GOOD PORTRAITS CAN BE TAKEN AND VI FAYS OF THE
NEIG HBOU RH( )OD PIIOCU R E1).
PHOTOS FOR PASSPORTS
AT SHORT NOTICE.
KODAKS, KODAK FILMS, PLATES, PAPERS, CHEMICALS
PHOTO PASTE AND ALL PHOTOGRAPHIC MATERIALS
SUPPLIED AT SINGAPORE CATALOGUE PRICES.
AMATEURS FILMS & PLATES DEVELOPED, PRINTED &
ENLARGED AT REASONABLE CHARGES.
Free instructions given to Amateurs with pleasure.
C. M. LEE, Manager.
21. COURT HOUSE ROAD.
           KUCHING.
[M-i:.
Kuching:—Printed and Published by GHIN HENG SoON, Govemment.Printer, at the Government Printing Office. 
                                                                        Barrack Road.

