
VOL. XLIX.
No. 779.

 Sarawak Gazette.
Price                              KUCHING, THURSDAY, OCTOBER 16, 1919.         10 cents
CONTENTS.
The Sarawak Gazette.
			       Page.
Marriages:- O’Nians Scott —Zehnder- Lang 	        267
Notes                                                                                     267
Clippings                                                                               268
The Rice Moth                                                                      268
Kuching Rainfall                                                                   269
Kuching Peace Celebrations Fund                                        270
Bowls ...                                                                                270
Monthly Reports:—Sadong—Sadong Colliery                    270
Simanggang                                         271
                 Sibu—Brooketon Colliery                   272
                 I.imbang                                               273
Kuching Shipping ...	...	...                 274
Passengers                                                                             275
Almanac ...                                                                            275
Rainfall ...                                                                      276, 277
Miri Shipping ...	, ...                                        276
Meterological Returns                                                            277
THURSDAY, OCTOBER 16, 1919

O’NIASS—SCOTT.—On September 22nd, at St. Andrews
Cathedral Singapore, Percy Henry O'Nians to Agnes Aithnah Scott. 		
	ZEHNDER— LANG.—On July 12th, at St. Michael’s Church,
Louth, Lincolnshire. Walter Frank Zehnder, Barrister-at-law (Gray's Inn), Singapore, third son of the late Rev. J. L. Zehnder S. P. G., Borneo, to Daisy Christine, elder daughter of the Rev. Edward Lang, Louth. Lincolnshire.
NOTES.
October.

SUBSCRIPTIONS to the Gazette are as follows:
'The Sarawak Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
    Single copy	...	...	...     .10 cents
    Subscription for one year	...	... $2.00
Subscription including postage to Outstation    2.25 Subscription including postage to ail other
               Countries. ...	...	2.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING
    Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 5s 10d.
The Sarawak Government Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
    Single copy	...	...	.05 cents
Subscription for one year ...	... $1.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 1.25 Subscription including postage to all other
               Countries. ...	1.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING—
    Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 3s.6d
All subscriptions are payable in advance and must commence from the 1st January in each year on which date they are renewable. Ali broken periods will be considered as full.
Subscriptions will not be renewed unless notice of renewal given.
Changes of Address should be notified to the Office to writing.
    WIRELESS service between Sarawak and British North Borneo is now established dating from 29th September at 2 p.m.
   Hours of working arc week days 10 a.m. and 2 p.m., Sundays 9 a.m.
   The charge for transmission is -10 cents a word between any station in Sarawak and any station in British North Borneo. Telegrams to and from Labuan also may be accepted via Jesselton, at an extra charge of 15 cents per word.
   Five words in a message is the minimum Iallowed.
   Telegrams should be handed in before the above hours.
    DRY rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah during the month of September was approximately 57,000 lbs.
   At Dahan Estate 11,600 tbs. were produced.
    THE site for the new cemetery at Miri was consecrated by the Bishop during his recent visitation.
   S. S. Kitching arrived from Singapore on the 2nd. Passengers were Lieut, and Mrs. B. V. Seaward. Mrs. Parry Davis. Messrs. P.


268	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. OCTOBER 16, 1919.
H. O'Nians, C. Fenwick, G. H. Gordon, G. A. Roach, K. Russian, Law Lok Choon and Yeo Chin Seng.
   MB. S. II. Lawrence is expected to arrive early in November. He will take over the headmaster’s work at St. Thomas’ school and relieve Mr. A. N. Ellis whose furlough is long overdue.
   THE following extract from a monthly report seems equal to most of the shooting stories told in Sarawak.
  “A Dyak of Trusan, by name Angkas, whilst stalking a deer, accidentally shot one Badindang who near his hut. The bullet passed through his arm and killed the deer. ”
  Miss Tait returned from Sibu on October 5th by s. s. Sarawak.
  S. S. Rucking left for Singapore on October 7th with passengers Messrs. J. M. Bryan, G. D. Burnand, G. H. Gordon, Sim Choon Puang and J. Phiong Nyuk.
   INFORMATION from Sibu shows that there is a prospect of a heavy engkabang crop next year in the Rejang, all young trees as well us trees that fruited last season are again in flower.
  S. S. Alice Lorraine arrived from Sadong on the 8th, passenger Mr. Haldane.
  S. S. Rajah of Sarawak arrived from Singapore on the 9th, no European passengers arrived.
  S. S. Rajah of Sarawak sailed for Singapore on the 14th. Passengers included Messrs L. M. Nalder, J. W. McGowan, W. F. Alder and E. Laemmle.
  The last two gentlemen we understand are representatives of the Universal Film Company So far no moving pictures have been taken in Sarawak, with the exception of a few by one of the members of the Cambridge Scientific Expedition.
   PASSAGE control ceased to exist in Singapore from October 4th.
   WE are informed that the Wireless Station was struck by lightning on evening of the 21st, and considerable damage done; the operating table had all the wires and connections burnt out and was itself alight and smouldering, but luckily the station was saved from destruction. Had not a new, locally made, aerial grounding switch been recently connected most of the instruments would have been ruined.
Clippings.
?
  In a gang robbery case heard on Monday at the Ipoh Ass Ur Justice Farrer-Manby took advantage of the recent amendment of the Penal Code to order two Chinese robbers to receive 2 lashes each with a cat-of-nine-tails instead of the usual rottan m addition to terms of 8 years’ rigorous imprisonment each.—Ipoh Times.
   The Milling Magazine says that oil magnates in America are becoming alarmed at the gradual increase of British control of the oilfields of the world. In the United States the influence of the Shell combine is regarded with some anxiety, and in Western Canada strenuous opposition has even arisen. The purchase of the Scottish oil-shale properties by the Anglo-Persian company, the activities in connection with oil-drilling in the Midlands and elsewhere, and the development of the Norfolk oil-shales, arc helping to focus the attention of the public on the importance of oil. The Admiralty and certain section's of the mercantile marine are backing oil. a fact which explains their comparative indifference in the matter of the coal strike.
    At a meeting of the Singapore Municipal Commissioners reference was made to the statement in
regard to the outbreak of cholera that shell fish had been collected from the bottom of ex-German steamers at Tanjong Pagar which were supposed to have caused the outbreak. There is no foundation for this allegation.
   Forty-seven cases are repotted. —(P. G.)
The Rice Moth.
   The Bureau of Entomology, of the United Stan s Department of Agriculture, has issued a full account of the life history of the Rice Moth, a little insect which is responsible for an increasing amount of damage to stored food.
   The adult insect is a pale moth, varying very much in size, the expanse of its wings varying between half an inch and an inch. It is sluggish, except when disturbed, and is generally found resting in the. projections of rough beans, where its blunt head and closely folded wings effectively conceal it. The eggs arc minute, with a pearly lustre. The larvae, when fully grown, are less than half an inch in length; they are hairy and dirty in appearance, chiefly on account of the food which shows through the skin. Those which feed on rice are whiter. The larvae are very voracious, and do much damage to the substances on which they live. When about to pupate, they spin great masses of silken threads; with these they bind together the material on which they are feeding, and thus form a protective cocoon.
   The rice moth appears to be of Eastern origin, and was probably imported to England with Rangoon rice. It has been known in this country for a number of years, and was one of the pests of Army biscuits identified and described by Messrs. Durrant and Beveridge of the British Museum of Natural History. Recently it has been causing a good deal of trouble to firms dealing in raw cocoa beans, in cocoa products, and in dried currants and raisins. It has been found in a large number of tropical parts. The moth has been known to occur in. the United States only since 1911, but was not identified until 1916 It is now thoroughly established at Puerto Rico, and is causing much trouble in Western Pennsylvania.
   The Bureau recommends the use of heat ns the cheapest and most effective method of destruction, wherever this is possible. Exposure to a temperature of 140 degrees Fahrenheit for from half an hour upwards is fatal to most forms of insect life, in the larval pupal or adult stages, and 130 degrees have been found sufficient for the rice moth a temperature which does not split the rice grains or cocoa beans. If a warm day be selected, the necessary temperature can lie obtained in any mill or warehouse provided with a heating-plant sufficient to maintain a winter temperature of 75 degrees. Where heat is not available, fumigation with hydrocyanic gas is recommended. This has the advantage of not destroying the vitality of seeds, and is therefore specially applicable in the case of substances which may be used as seed as well as for food.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 16, 1919.
269
Kuching Rainfall.
  In a Gazette published 2nd February 1906, Mr. J. Hewitt, the then Curator of the Sarawak Museum, wrote an article on Kuching rainfall with very full statistics of the records kept by the Observatory and Museum from 1876—1905. Unfortunately these records were not complete ns two critical years 1883 and 1895 are blank. We now publish the record kept by the Sarawak Museum from 1906—1918.
  These thirteen years show an annual rainfall averaging 158’44 inches, compared with 160 inches as given in the old series of thirty-nine years.
  It does not appear from these figures that Mr. Hewitt’s general rule that a wet monsoon means a dry “summer” is borne out, nor the conjecture of another writer that wet and dry years occur in cycles of five or six years.
  Since no doubt we would be accused of moral cowardice if we did not advance another theory for future writers to controvert we would suggest that there is a slight approximation between the wet and dry monsoons; in other words it is dryer in January and wetter in July than it used to be.
L. B. B
Monthly Rainfall of Kuching , 1906 -1918.
12-10 inches fell on December 22nd.
Figures in italics supplied by Kuching Observatory. Museum rain-gauge was stolen and not replaced for four months. 
       Distance of Observatory from Museum about ½  of a mile.
9’62 inches fell on January 21st


270
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 16, 1919.
Kuching Peace Celebration Fund.
Summary of Receipts and Payments.
GEORGE C. GILLAN.
Hon. Treasurer.
BOWLS.
  The usual monthly Bowling Handicap took place
at the Sarawak Club on the 1st October and
resulted as follows:—
Average. Score.H ’cap.Total.C. E. A. Ermen161-0381+6-7 =    387-7G. T. Bates ...151-9333+25-8 =    358-8H. H. the Tuan Muda116-4366+90-5 =    356-5J. C. Swayne	142-1310+11-3 =    354.3G. C. Gillan	161-6333+8-8 =    341-8P. C. W. Cobbold ...14 3127817= 325O. Lang 	166-2290+scr.= 290H. B. Crocker...
A. B. Ward	160-8
1221 Did not compete.MONTHLY REPORTS.
SADONG.
August.
  Mr. J. B. Archer left for Kuching on s.l. Young
Harry on the 1st, and returned by the same vessel
on the 10th. The hospital mandor was dismissed
for cheating on the 12th.
Court was held at the Colliery on the 13th.
  I arrived here from Oya on the 20th by s.s. Alice
Lorraine having received orders from His Highness
the Tuan Muda to do duty at this station.
  The following day I took over the Government
cash from Mr. Loong Quee and found everything
Correct.
      Court work has been light during the month, only
a few cases of breach of jelutong regulations and
breach of agreements.
      It has been very dry here ail month, and. rain is
badly needed, as much young padi is dying off on
account of the drought.
Twelve steamers and eight schooners entered and
cleared the port during the month.
There was 1,549 tons 6 cwts. of coal shipped.
Exports.	Imports.
           $17,662,80	$19,274.
September.
There has not been much Court work during the
month, and no case calls for special mention.
A good number of fines have been imposed on
both Dyaks and Malays for ringing jelutong trees.
There seems to be a great deal of this going on here :
no doubt the high price of jelutong tempts many
to get as much out of a tree as possible and in as
short a time as possible.
   The Rev. Father H. Jansen arrived here on the
3rd on s.s. Alice Lorraine en route for Sibu. He
left on the following day.
   On the 8th I visited the Collieries where Mr.
Evans kindly showed me over the works ; we spent
about two hours underground, and stayed the night
at the bungalow on top of the hill. A wonderful
view may be obtained from this spot on a clear day.
   I have visited the hospital at the Colliery once
during the month, and the wireless station many
times.
   Meetings of the Sadong Food Control Committee
have been held, and it was found necessary to ask
the Food Control Officer, Kuching, for a very much
larger supply of rice for the next few months.
   The locally grown rice and padi has now been 
entirely consumed, and all the rice growing population
has now to be fed. Tabekang is the only place in
the district which still has some padi left; all the
other outstations and Dyaks living in the various
tributaries have absolutely nothing.
   In spite of the warnings and instructions issued to
the people by the Government to plant up rice sub-
stitutes, the majority did little or nothing in that
line at the time, and only started to plant a month
or so ago, when they found their own supplies were
fast dwindling; and then only on a very meagre
scale They rely entirely on the Government to
feed them this year, and have no intention of doing
anything to help themselves.
   Mi Evans has planted padi and foodstuffs on a
very large scale, and has a model farm; this ought
to have encouraged people to do likewise, but it
takes more than a good example to get these people
started.
   The river hank opposite the Residency from the
tennis court to the summer house is badly cracked
from one to two fathoms back, and I am afraid that
a lot of land will subside during this monsoon.
      Three ditches draining into the main river have
been stopped, and the water turned back to drain
into the Simunjan river.
   There was 1,529 tons IM cwt. of coal exported
during the month.
   The rainfall was 5’55 inches.
            Imports.	Exports.
            $26,884	’	$24,615.40
HENRY H. KORTRIGHT,
Resident 2nd Class.
        SADONG COLLIERY.
September.
   The gross out-put of coal produced by the mines
during the month was 2,170.12 tons. 450 tons of
this were consumed by our boilers, and 1.720.12 tons
were delivered to the wharf for export.
   The shipments for the month were : —
    The Kuching Municipality                      190.03 tons
    Messrs. The Borneo Co.,
Ltd., Kuching	...	538.00	..
        ,,	,, S’wak Steamship
Company	...	571.06	..
        „	Soon Seng & Co.. Sibu	...	180.00	.,
    The Govt. station, Sibu	...	           50.00	..’	
Total 1.529.18 tons
   The stock balance on the wharf at the end of the
month was 589.19 tons.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 16, 1919.
271
  The fall in No. 8 mine was cleared early in the
month, and a fairly good out-put of coal was
produced.
  The workings of No. 9 mine were driven through
a good deal of bad ground, and the out-put produced
was well below the normal average.
  The upper seam mines produced during the month
a record out-put.
  The Colliery end of the new road was nearly
completed and a small ana of swamp near the
bazaar was tilled in and reclaimed.
  A new bilian coolie line was completed, and the
work on another house of similar design is 
proceeding
The usual repairing was carried out at the wharf.
  The rainfall was 661 inches, and our water
supplies were regulated up to the 29th of the month.
  The crops are doing well and planting is still
going on.
J. W. EVANS,
Manager.
             SIMANGGANG.
July.
  On the 3rd three prisoners by name Nyawai, . Tegah and Bujang escaped from the prison gang I whilst getting wood from the jungle An express  letter was sent immediatelv to Saribas mid also Saratok. Towards the middle of the month Tegah gave himself up at Rohan, he staled the other two  prisoners were making for Selalang, but I have since heard that they are most probabh in the ulu Sarikei.
   Tenders for the birds'-nest farm were opened on the 11th and the tender of Chop Liang Heng of Lingga was accepted at a rental of $982 per year, an increase of $259.
   On the 18th and 19th a regatta and land sports look place to celebrate the signing of peace and a large crowd of natives was present. Native Officers mid pengkulus arrived from the Krian, Saribas and other rivers.
   On the 17th Mr. J. Seville Archer arrived from Sadong on a visit, returning again on the 22nd.
   Comparatively few cases have been before the Court during the month. Toi Hang was fined for in tempting to export rice and the rice seized. Ah Lok a Hylam was sentenced to three months for theft.
   Nyanggai of Saribas fined $50 for laying claim to certain land belonging to other Dyaks. Nantar of Banting fined one picul for interfering with the decision of Penghulu Angkoon about the Seduku farming land. Thiam Jew and Tei Poh three months each for swindling, and Pandong for obtaining money under false pretences, six months.
   The m. 1. Sri Damai arrived on the 24th from Kuching having on board the Rev. W. Linton who proceeded the same day to Sabu, via the Undop.
   On the 29th Mr. P. M. Adams and myself left for Kuching to attend the Pence Celebrations. Datu Abang Haji Tamin was left in charge of Simanggang.
   Kalaka.—The s. s, Sarawak made one trip to Snratok taking in a full cargo of gutta rian leaves for Goebilt.
   Mr. J. Haldane of the Borneo Company visited Saratok about the working of gutta rian leaves.
   A Japanese, by name Mohmoto, arrived at Saratok during the month from Miri. he died after a short illness, and was buried in the Malay cemetery he having entered the Mohamedan faith.
   On the 25th news was received that a boat, burden two tons owned by mi Emplam Malay, capsized off Meranti. No lives were lost
   Malays have been mostly employed in the working of nipa, sugar; this fetches $2 for four gantangs.
   Saribas.—The Betong and Pusa reports contain nothing of particular note, the population for the most part being busy on their farms.
The following are the trade returns for this
division : —
July 1919	...
Total to 31.7.19
.. .. 31.7.18
Imports.
$ 71,995 37 517,018.87 244,459.75
   Exports.
$126,940.80
702.863.45
276,091 57
August.
   I was away from Simanggang during the whole
of the month, and the Assistant Resident. Mr. P. M.
Adams, reports as follows : -
   I returned from Kuching on the 11th and the
next day took over the cash from Law Au Nen
who left the same evening for Kuching on leave.
The Resident, having been granted leave, went to
Sibu and was due to arrive at Kabong towards the
end of the month to attend to affairs in that district.
   Penghulu Majeng reported that a Dyak named
A bah hail been shot by Bundan in the jungle whilst
out hunting. Ahab was wounded in lhe shoulder,
but not seriously. An enquiry was held as soon as
the wounded man was able to appear, and the 
evidence proved it to be a pure accident, but Bundan
was fined I picul for carelessness and his gun 
confiscated
   Two Chinese carpenters arrived from Kuching on
the 21st to build the new hospital; for the present
they am occupied in preparing the wood which has
been brought in by the Dyaks.
   Two or three cases of theft of pepper were report-
ed. but the owners of the pepper are not anxious to
prosecute unless they are certain of proving their
case. A Chinaman named Lee Jee absconded with
$170 belonging to his employer and is thought to
have gone to Kuching, via Betong. Two Chinamen
who helped him to get away were arrested, and
sentenced to terms of imprisonment.
   The health of the prisoners has not been good
owing to the long spell of dry weather, one, a
Chinaman named Lee Sam, died of dysentery, and
another Lee Boon Khian was sent to Kuching for
treatment.
   In a land case Buaw vs: Ujai which has been out-
standing for some lime and which has caused a
great deal of interest amongst the Skrang and
Bangat Dyaks, judgment was given for defendant,
as plaintiff was unable to trace bis descent from the
original holders as known to Government. Plain-
tiff has appealed against this decision. Tay Toi
Hang has also appealed against the decision of the
Court concerning a claim for wages made by Tan
Kiok Sim.
   The Police and Rangers have felled and burnt off
their farms. Every one who can spare the time is
farming this year and seem to be really in earnest.
Padi is very scarce in the kampong, and is being
sold at three gantangs a dollar. It is rumoured that
there is still a great deal of padi up-river, but the
Dyaks are waiting to see how their new farms
progress befoie parting with their surplus stocks.
   The Resident had not returned by the end of the
month. Dry and excessively hot weather prevailed
throughout the month, consequently the water
supply has been affected and this has caused a fair
amount of sickness in the kampong.
   Kalaka.— The weather has been very sultry and
no rain fell for twenty-two days, and in consequence
the natives found it very hard to get drinking water.
   All natives have burnt off their farms with good
results, and the number of farms are about double
what they were last year.


272
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 16, 1919.
     Most of the jelutong workers have ceased working this commodity mid taken to working sago, which is fetching $200 a coyan.
     I arrived at Kabong from Sibu on the 25th by 6.1. Lucile which sailed the same day for Kuching.
Saribus. —A Dyak of Trusan by name Angkas whilst stalking a deer accidentally shot one Badin- dang who was near his farm hut. The bullet passed through his arm and killed the deer.
    There was very little work to do as natives were all busy planting out padi.
     Five wealthy Dyaks died during the month their estates were valued and probate duty imposed.
The trade returns for this division are as follows: —
Imports. Exports.
August 1919
Total to 31.8.19
$118,875.09
821,738.45
$ 84,340.00
631,958.87
Total to 31.8.18	$286,433.45	$317,332.57
                F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER.
Resident.
SIBU.
—?—
September.
    The 26th, being the birthday of His Highness the Rajah, was observed ns a public holiday and the flagstaff dressed in honour of the occasion.
     On the 25th, I returned from local leave and took over from Mr. Aplin who reported that nothing of great importance had happened during my absence. I found everything up to date and running smoothly.
     Mr. G. M Gifford reported, early in the month, that the Ga’at Dyaks, Kunjat, Blikan. Gila and Unyat, with twenty-four families, had removed to Netherlands India Territory and that the remainder of the Ga’at Dyaks had removed to the Kapit district. Later in the month His Highness the Tuan Muda wrote stating that the Netherlands India Authorities bad interned Kunjat and party on arrival.
    Mr. G. M. Gifford left for Belaga on the 10th, and was still away at the end of the month.
      From the 5th to the 23rd, Mr. H. Jacques was absent from the station on audit duty in the Mukah and Oya districts. The Balingian, Mukah, Oya and Dalat accounts have now been audited up to date.
       Pte Jawa deserted on the 4th and was arrested by Penguin Dana in the Assan two days later. This man who is a very bad character has been sent back to headquarters for punishment.
        A Poi Dyak, named Sriban, who escaped from custody some twelve months ago was recaptured and sentenced to the usual penalty.
       All the Malays, Dyaks and Foochows are planting padi this season. The Malays were unable to procure seed padi, but fortunately the Government had some 50 passus in stock and this, including a consignment forwarded by the Food Control Officer, was sufficient.
       The land cleared for padi is now being planted up and the young plants, on both hill and swamp, are reported to be doing well
         All the old star is of padi and rice have now been finished and it is necessary  to	supply a greater part of the Dyak population as well as the Malays and Chinese with imported rice.
        It had been arranged that the s. s. Gladys brought a consignment of rice from Singapore on every occasion she came direct. For some, as yet unknown reason, this vessel arrived at the end of the
month without her usual consignment; this caused considerable inconvenience as there was no more rice in hand.
      H. H. S. Y. Zahora was at once despatched from Kuching with 200 bags of rice which relieved the situation for the time being.
      It is reported from all the up-river districts that the engkabang trees are covered with blossom, all the young trees as well as trees that fruited last season are again in flower. Should the flowers set it is estimated that the crop will lie double that of the last.
        On the 13th, a Chinaman named Lau Fook, reported that on the previous night one Wong Tze had been murdered by Ng Chan and Choi Chong. Lan Fook who WaS living in the same house fled when Wong TZE was attacked. The bodies of the three Chinamen were found in the river on the 15th and 16th, and were identified as the remains of Wong Tze, Ng Chau, and Choi Chong. The body of Wong Tze had been badly mutilated and that of Ng Chan bad several wounds on it while that of Choi Chong had no marks of violence. At the enquiry, subsequently held, it transpired that the three men had quarrelled over the division of their wages. There is little doubt that Ng Chan and Choi Chong murdered Wong Tze; it is surmise that Choi Chong later killed Ng Chan and then committed suicide.
      H. H. S. Y. Zahora called at Sibu twice during the month, on each occasion bringing a consignment of rice.	
    The s. s. Alice Lorraine arrived on the 12th, with a cargo of coal for l he S. S. S. Company, and again Inter in the month with coal for the Government, on her way to Brooketon.
     The s. s. Gladys made one clearance only for Singapore, during the month, and the s. s. Flevo cleared twice for Singapore.
      The trade returns for the past month show the following figures:
Imports.Exports.Coasting Foreign$ 51.350 126,777$ 13,141 169,481Brought forward$ 178,127
1,510,331$ 182,622
1,916,844Total to 30th Sept.$1,688,458$2,099,466       1918$ 679,158$ 746,222Immigration figures show:— Men. Women. Boys.
   Foochow	H	5	6
   Cantonese	5	5	5=37 Total.
J. BARING-GOULD.
Resident 3rd Division.
      BROOKETON COLLIERY.
August.
    The gross out-put of coal for the month was 1,554 tons, 544 tons were consumed by OUT boilers, and the balance, 1.010 tons, was sent to wharf. 71.5 tons of riddlings were returned to boilers from stock, making a total boiler consumption of 615.5 tons.
     The total shipments amounted to 868 tens, of which 770 urns were sent to Labuan, 98 tons were supplied to launches, etc.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 16, 1919.
273
   The coal in stock at the end of the month
amounted to 3,503 tons.
   Owing to the large stock of coal on hand the
out-put was restricted and the surplus labour caused
thereby put on to development work.
   Everything went smoothly in the Mechanical
Department. Two boilers were cleaned and machinery overhauled in the early part of the month.
We pm. 50 new tubes into the Robey boiler at the
North Drive.
   The new funnel was put into the s. s. L’ Aubaine,
at the same time her boiler was cleaned and engine
overhauled
   The work of repairing the Labuan wharf iris
continued throughout the month.
   At Buang Tawar the usual quantity of oil 
continues to flow. We have at present about 1,000
gallons Parembang oil in stock.
  The rainfall for the month was 1'71 inches.
J. O. MADDOCKS, .
Manager.
LIMBANG.
July.
   His Highness the Tuan Muda accompanied by
Messrs. D. Adams and G. M. Gifford left Brooke-
ton for Kuching on the 3rd by the p. s. Adeh.
  I returned here on the 6th in the m. l. Damit.
   Mr. J. P. Baird, Acting Manager of the Lawas
Planting Company, was here on a visit from the
12th to the 15th.
   The Revd Father A. Williams of the Roman
Catholic Mission. Labuan, visited the station twice
during the month and on the second occasion spent
a few days up the Lubai river.
   The sad news of the sudden death in Labuan of
Dr. D. L. Greene, Principal Medical Officer of Sarawak, was received here on the morning of the 23rd.
The flag was lowered to half-mast for the remainder
of the day.
  On the 24th I left here in the m. l. Damit for
Brooketon en route for Labuan to call on Mrs.
Greene, returning here on the 26th.
  The p. s. Adeh arrived here on the 26th and the
following day I left by her for Kuching.
  There was very little Court work during the
month and no cases of importance.
  Fines and fees amounted to $60.64.
  P. W. D.--- The coolies finished whitewashing
and tailing the Government buildings and were
afterwards employed on the Three Mile round and
the Lempaung Road.
  The prisoners were employed weeding the 
Government rubber garden, planting sweet potatoes and
cleaning out the ditches on the golf course.
  The following are the trade returns lor the
month ; -
                 Import-	Exports
  Coasting	$5,154	$15,085
  Foreign	2,50b	13,869
  The rainfall for the month was 6’26 inches.
August.
  The 2nd, 4th and 8th were observed us holidays.
  The 2nd and 4th to celebrate the signing of peace
and the 8th in honour of His Highness the Tuan
Muda’s birthday.
    returned from Kuching by the p. s. Adeh on the
13th and found everything in order here. The
Honble. J. and Mrs. Baring-Gould and children,
who joined the Adeh at Miri, arrived at the same
time on a visit and were here until the 29th on
which date we left for Brooketon by the s. s.
L.'Aubaine.
     A Chinese coolie, by name Ah Foh, was murdered in Lim Tiong’s garden at Merasam on the night
 of the 11th. The supposition is chat his assailant
had gone to the garden to steal fruit and on being
caught stabbed Ah Foh. possibly not intending to
inflict a fatal wound.
   A reward of $100 has been offered for information
leading Lo the arrest of the murderer, but hitherto
no clue has been forthcoming.
   Dr. T, C. A. and Miss Cleverton, Miss Tbring
and Captain Gallien paid a short visit arriving
from and returning to Labuan on the 17th by
the s. s. L’Aubaine.
   The Honble. J.. Mrs. and Miss Baring-Gould
and myself visited Brunei on the 18th returning
here by the m. l. Damit the same evening.
	Court.—Ah Sam was sentenced to three months
for theft of kerosine oil from the store and Ku Kok,
Kau Liong and Lim Chui were fined $25 each for
purchasing the stolen oil from Ah Sam.
   There were no other cases of interest. Fines
and fees amounted to $209.
      P. W. D.—The coolies finished the Seven Mile
round and were afterwards employed on the Nuran
Road, weeding the Government padi and trimming
the bamboo hedges.
   The prisoners were employed on the Government
rubber garden and replanting some sweet potatoes
that had been eaten by wild pigs.
   The following Were the trade returns for the
month
     Imports.  Export-.Coasting     $29,229$30,026Foreign7,5196,807The rainfall for the month was 4 44 inches.

H. S. B. JOHNSON, Resident 5th Division.
The Sarawak Gazette.
RATES OF ADVERTISEMENTS IN THE "SARAWAK GAZETTE "

Payable in advance.
Quarter of a column and under—
       First insertion .	...	...£1.00
       Second and third insertion each	... 0.50
       Subsequent do	do	... 0.5?
Half a Column and under—
       First insertion ...	...	... 2.00
       Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
       Subsequent do	do	... 0.50
A Column and under—
       First insertion Meh	...	... 4.00
       Second and third insertion each	... 2.00
       Subsequent do	do	... 100
Special arrangements may be made for standing advertisements.
   All communications intended for insertion in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed to the Editor at the Government Printing Office, Kuching. They should be clearly written and should reach the Office at least I two days before the publication of each issue-
   Letters and other contributions must be authenticated by writer s name sent privately to the Editor.


274
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 16, 1919.
We cannot undertake to return rejected
communications, or to give reasons for not 
NOTICE.
inserting them.
Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early intelligence of all matters of general interest hi their respective neighbourhoods.
NOTICE.
ASTANA FARM.
THE Manager of Astana Farm begs to
inform the Public that he is unable to
attend to Orders for milk after Office hours.
NOTICE.

Gazette subscriptions and Printing
Office bills.
  For the convenience of residents at Out-
stations Sarawak stamps will be taken in 
payment of small sums but only the 1,2 and 3 cent values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that Money Orders be sent if possible.
NOTICE, is hereby given that the partnership here-
tofore existing between. LIM OH LIEW, LIM OH
PHIO, LIM THIAN SANG. LIM THIAN LAI, LIM THIAN HO,
LIM THIAN KHAY, LIM OH CHAI, LIM THIAN HAI, LIM
THIAN LIANG and LIM THIAN TECK, carrying on business
at No. 88 Main Bazaar. Kuching, under the style or
firm of ENG WHATT has been dissolved by mutual con-
sent on the 26th July 1919 and the aforesaid LIM THIAN
LIANG and LIM THIAN TECK retire from the partnership
and have no further interest in the firm nor will be 
responsible as from the above date for any debts incurred
by the said business.
     An agreement to the above effect has duly been 
registered in the Supreme Court, Kuching, and the under-
signed, LIM OH LIEW. LIM OH PHIO, LIM THIAN SANG,
LIM THIAN LAI, LIM THIAN HO, LIM THIAN KHAY. LIM
OH CHAI and LIM THIAN HAI are now sole proprietors
of Chop ENG WHATT.
(Sgd.) LIM OH LIEW
    .. LIM OH PHIO
,	.. LIM THIAN SANG
    .. LIM THIAN LAI
    ,. LIM THI AN HO	(Sgd.) LIM THIAN LIANG
         LIM THIAN KHAY .. LIM THIAN TECK
    ., LIM OH CHAI	Retired Partners.
    .. LIM THIAN HAI
          Sole Proprietors
Kuching, 11th August. 1919,
	
J. C. SWAYNE,
Manager, Govt. Printing Office.
KUCHING SHIPPING
Arrivals.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO.,
22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS.
Beer, Wine, Spirit & General Store Dealers.
	: (o): —;	
SOLE AGENTS FOR :
FRASER & NEAVE'S AERATED WATERS
(The Best throughout the East.)
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic
Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at
$1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 catties of dry rubber.
       ASAHI BEER.
ACETIC ACID.
	:(o):-	
Fresh supplies of Stores are received
regularly.
PRICES MODERATE.
Free delivery to customers in Kuching.
Free packing & shipping for Outstation
Orders.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 16, 1919.
275
Departures.
ARRIVALS.
NOTICE.
N
OTICE, is hereby given that die partnership here-
tofore existing between CHUA MOH CHOON, CHUA
BOON KHIAN, CHUA BOON SIANG, CHUA BOON CHUA,
CHUA BOON LOK, CHUA BOON PHOY and CHUA BOON
CHHWEE carrying on business at No. 32, Main Bazaar,
Kuching, under the style or firm of Chop HONG KIAT
has been dissolved at the expiration of ten years agree-
ment on the 14th day of August 1919. The aforesaid
CHUA BOON CHUA, CHUA BOON SUNG, CHUA BOON PHOY,
CHUA BOON LOK and CHUA BOON CHHWEE, having
retired from the partnership and have no further 
interest in the firm nor will be responsible as from the
above date for any debts incurred by the said business.
  All accounts and estates of the said Chop HONG KIAT
were examined and declared in the Supreme Court and
the undersigned CHUA MOH CHOON and CHUA BOON
KHIAN are now the sole proprietors of Chop HONG KIAT.
(Sgd.) CHUA MOH CHOON
.. CHUA BOON KHIAN
Sole Proprietors.
27th September, 1919.
THE “SARAWAK GAZETTE”
              ALMANAC
PASSENGERS.
  
PER s. s. Kuching:—2nd October From Singapore— Mrs. Parry Davis, Messrs. G. H. Gordon. C. Fenwick, G. A. Roach, P. H. O’Nians, K. Hussain. Law Lok Choon and Yeo Chin Seng, Lieut, and Mrs. B. V. Seaward, and 1 Chinese lady.
PER s. s. Sarawak: -5th October—Front Sibu Miss Tait.
PER s. s. Alice Lorraine:—8th October. -From Sadong-  Mr. Haldane.
PER s. s. Rajah of Sarawak:—9th October -From Singapore—Messrs. Khoo Chong Seng and Tan Sum Guan.
DEPARTURES.
PER S. s. Kuching:—7th October—For Singapore Messrs. Sim Choon Puang, G. D. Burnand, J. M. Bryan, G. If. Gordon and J. Phiong Nyuk.
PER S. S. Rajah of Sarawak:—14th October—For Singapore— Messrs. L. M. Nalder, J. W. McGowan, Ed. Laemmle, W. F. Alder and 1 Chinese lady.



OCTOBER, 1919





276
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. OCTOBER 16, 1919.
NOTICE. 
SALE BY AUCTION
of all unredeemed pledges from YEK YEUN & Co., Pawn Farmers, No. 8, Sibu Bazaar Sibu, 
will be held on the 15th September 1919 at 10 a.m. and quarterly from that date until further notice.
  Lists of all unredeemed pledges are on view at the Farmers’ premises.
LAW JEE THAI
Authorised Auctioneers.
NOTICE.
AUCTION SALE
of unredeemed pledges from the Pawn Broking Farm YEW CHEE & Co., Chop Wo SANG at No. 18, China Street on Saturdays of the following dates:—18th October 1919; 15th November 1919 and 20th December 1919 at 9 a. m.
  List of all such unredeemed pledges is on view at the Pawn Farmer’s premises.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO.
Authorised Auctioneers.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 16, 1919.
METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS.
277
GENERAL HOSPITAL.
Kuching, September. 1919.
Highest Barometric reading
Lowest	„
Highest temperature (shade)
Lowest „	..
30'06 inches.
29'94	..
97 degrees.
98
157
Highest  Sun
Longest Period of Sunshine in one day 11’15 hours.
Total rainfall (Museum)	6’95 inches.
Greatest rainfall in 24 hours 1'11	„
Height of Hospital above the sea level approximately 76 feet.
Rainfall, September, 1919.
DURING 24 HOURS.


278
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 16, 1919.
PURE FOOD MEANS GOOD HEALTH
“ALEXANDRIA” CANNED MEATS
Every Tin Guaranteed under the New South Wales Pure Food Act, and packed under the constant and vigilant supervision of a Government Inspector.
ASK FOR “ALEXANDRIA"
Roast Beef
Corned Beef
Ox Cheek
Ox Tongues
Luncheon Tongues
Sheep Tongues
Extract of Beef
Roast Mutton
Corned Mutton
Spiced Mutton
Mutton Chops
Assorted Meats
Minced Scollops
Assorted Soups
Beef Sausage
Fork Sausage
Frankfurt Sausage Beef Dripping Pork and Beans Irish Stew Ox Tail Soup
As supplied in huge quantities to the Imperial and Indian
Governments for use by both the Army and Navy.
Sold by all Stores.
CHARLES BOWEN & CO.,
2 Castlereagh Street, SYDNEY, N.S.W.
“ALEXANDRIA MEAT WORKS.”
Distributors for the East:
Seremban General Agency, Ltd.
( Incorporated in F. M. S. )
SINGAPORE.
      Sub: Agents—BAN JUI LONG,
14 Carpenter Street,
KUCHING, SARAWAK.
and BAN JUI GUAN.
MIRI, SARAWAK.
Kuching:—Printed and Published by GHIN HENG SOON. Government Printer, at the Government Printing Office 
                                                                                      Barrack Road.

