
VOL. XLIX.
No. 781.

I
Price                        KUCHING, MONDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 1919.               10 cents
CONTENTS.
				    Page.
Notes ...	...	...	...	... 295
Miri Notes	...	...’	...	...  296
Clippings ...	...	...	...	...  296
Death of Lo Ah Nyuk	...	...	... 297
Execution of Samarahan Murderers	... 297 
Sarawak Red Cross-Fund	...	...	...  297 
To the F.C.O. ...	-	.-  297 
Expedition to Gunong Poi	-...	...	...                297	
The Mangosteen ...	...		... 299 
Sarawak Regatta	..	...	                   299	
Sarawak Regatta Accounts	...	...	...                300
Bowls ...	...	...	...  300
Monthly Reports:—Sadong—Miri ...	...  300
Kuching Shipping ...	...	...	...                302
Miri Shipping	...	...	...	.                  303
Almanac ...	...	...	...	...                303
Market Price List for the month of November 1919	... 303
Passengers	...	...	...	...                303
Rainfall ...	 ...	...	...	... 304
   The Sarawak Gazette.
   SUBSCRIPTIONS to the Gazette are as follows:
The Sarawak Gazette
   PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY -
Single copy	...	...	...                       .10 cents
Subscription for one year	...	...	    $2.00
Subscription including postage to Outstation            2.25 
Subscription including postage to all other
                Countries.	...	...	      2.50
   PAYABLE IN STERLING—
    Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 5s. 10d.
The Sarawak Government Gazette
   PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY —
Single copy	...	...	...	.05 cents
Subscription for one year	...	... 11.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 1.25 Subscription including postage to all other
                 Countries. ...	1.50
   PAYABLE IN STERLING —
    Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 3s. 6d
  All subscriptions are payable in advance and must commence from the 1st January in each year on which date they are renewable. All broken periods will be considered as full.
  Subscriptions will not be renewed unless notice of renewal given.
  Changes of Address should be notified to the Office in writing.
The Sarawak Gazette.
  MONDAY, NOVEMBER 17, 1919.
NOTES.
(November.)
   THEIR Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee are
believed to have sailed from England on the
8th of this month by s. s. Tireseas accom-
panied by their three children.
  S. S. Brisbane, arrived at Rejang port on
the 25th October to load timber for Hong
Kong.
   THE Post Office has been informed that the
steamer Fazilka, by which Sarawak home
mails of 20th and 24th October were des-
patched has been wrecked. The mail was tran-
shipped to the s. s. Mytilus bound for Colom-
bo.
   IT seems almost assured now that u second
Pacific cable is to be laid between San Fran-
cisco and the mainland of Japan.
  In the past the laying of any important cable
has always directly affected this country by the
enormous increase in the price of gutta percha.
  P. S. Adeh left for the North on the 4th
with passengers Messrs. Allman and Cook.
   DRY rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah
during October amounted to 67,000 tbs. The
rainfall for the month was 13’52.
  At Dahan 15,500 tbs. were harvested.
Rainfall 10’40.
  A notification in the Official Gazette calls attention to the fact that the light at Oya river will consist, until further notice, of one white light instead of two (one above the other) as heretofore.


296	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 17, 1919.
  S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore on November 7th. Passengers were Messrs. A. C. Playne and Law Swee Yong.
  S. S. Kuching left for Singapore on November 11th. Passengers were Mr. and Mrs. Wright, Messrs. E. S. Holl, G. D. Burnand and R. Gunn, Mrs. Wee Siong Hiong and Messrs. H. Eng Chiang, Teo Cheng Kee, Tan Boon Siew, Ang Hong Choon and How Choon Soo.
  A smart capture was made by the Customs’ Officers on a recent steamer to Singapore. A bundle consisting of twelve brooms, which normally sell for ten cents each, was part of one passenger’s luggage. The worthlessness of this form of export excited the suspicion of the officer and led to the discovery of a good haul of opium, though when the examination was over the passenger had decided to forfeit his passage to Singapore and was no I longer to be found.
  P. S. Adeh arrived from the North on November 14th. Passengers were Mr. Clark and Father Morris.
   STUDENTS of the market price list on p 303 (which we hope to print regularly in future) will observe a considerable increase in the price of commodities during the last two weeks.
  A motor lighter “Moratebas” has recently been acquired by the British Malaysian Manufacturing Co. She is carvel built, 90 feet long, driven by 80 h. p. motor engine and will carry 100 tons cargo.
   IN accordance with a message received from His Majesty the King, a simple, but not unimpressive service of remembrance was carried out in Kuching on the 11th, the first anniversary of the Armistice.
  The following is part of the text of the King’s message:
   I believe that my people in every part of the Empire fervently wish to perpetuate the memory of that great deliverance and of those who laid down their lives to achieve it. To afford an opportunity for the universal expression of this feeling it is my desire and hope that at the hour when the Armistice came into force, the eleventh hour of the eleventh day of the eleventh month, there may be for the brief space of two minutes a complete suspension of all our normal activities. During that time, except in the rare cases where this may be impracticable, all work, all sound, and all locomotion should cease, so that in perfect stillness, the thoughts of every one may be concentrated on reverent remembrance of the glorious dead.
  This was communicated, as far as possible, to all in Kuching. At eleven o’clock a single gun was fired from the Fort and for the space of two minutes a general cessation of business and sound took place, until the bugles from the other side of the river sounded the Last Post.
Miri Notes.
——-
  On November 2nd Miri was woken up with the report that another serious crime had taken place.
  Report proved true and it was found that at 1.30 a. in. some unknown miscreant attempted to murder Mrs. Howard. It appears that she was awaken by a terrific blow on the head : she retained her senses sufficiently to ring up and call for assistance so the Doctor and the Government Authorities were soon on the spot. Capt. Howard was unfortunately out at sea superintending the loading of an oil-tanker.
  Mrs. Howard was found to suffering from a severe blow on the right side of the head, which caused however only a small deep wound, but the force of the blow was such as to knock out two teeth on the left side of her jaw.
  The hilt of a parang was found in her bed, whilst the blade was sticking into the skirting-board at the side of the bed. It would seem that as the blow was struck the parang slipped out of its hilt and that Mrs. Howard was struck by the extreme tip of the blade which spun on and stuck in the board. No blood was found on the blade except at the extreme tip.
  Footmarks were found in a flower bed under the window in the sitting room and also where the man had climbed, up the creeper frame and made his entrance through the window, and also on the floor of the sitting room.
  The actual perpetrator of this dastardly deed has not been caught yet, but several persons have been detained under suspicion.
  Much sympathy is expressed for Capt. and Mrs. Howard m her terrible experience.
  No possible motive can be discovered for the perpetration of this attack and it is to be hoped that some deterrent will be found to prevent its recurrence, ns this being the second of its kind, makes, matters distinctly uncomfortable.
Clippings.
• ?- -
  Lord Jellicoe points out that the water from the Indian Ocean to Canada are one and all parts of the Empire situated there are equally interested in the security of sea communications. Therefore he recommends for defence purposes a Fleet composed of units from these countries and directed by a high flag officer stationed in Singapore— ( P. G. )
London, October 21.
  The Australian airman Captain G. C. Matthews has started from Hounslow this morning on a flight to Australia for the Australian Government’s prize of £10,000.
  The following are the competitors :—Captain C. J. Matthews, aboard a Sopwith ; Captain If. Rigby, on a Nieuport; Lieut. Roger Douglas, on an Alliance;. Captain C. E. Howell, on a Martinsyde and Wilkins: and Lieut. C. S. Kingsford Smith, on a Blackburn- Kangaroo, Lieut. V. Rendle has also entered. According to later arrangements, Lieut. Jas. S. Ross will accompany Douglas, while Kingsford Smith will not fly, and the Blackburn will .be manned by Rendle, Williams, Wilkins, mid Potts.
  A London message of September 20 stated : Capt. H. Larkin, interviewed on behalf of the Larkin- Sopwith Co., states that General Borton is unduly pessimistic about the prospects of the flight. Captain Mathers, who lived for 12 years in the Malay Peninsula, is confident that it i.\ possible for a first class aeroplane with a good pilot to get down the Peninsula, as there are satisfactory landing places


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 17. 1919.
297
not more than 900 miles apart. For example, General Borton did not mention the landings at Timor and Sourabaya. It is a matter for individual pilots to decide as to the desirability of adding floats after Calcutta is reached. This is being discussed, and the Sopwith Co. has already arranged for petrol supplies to be provided between London and Calcutta, without relying on the Air Ministry’s Depots.—( S. T. )
  There are statements about, says the L. and C. Express, that a company of £500,000 entirely under Japanese auspices has been formed in Borneo to manufacture rubber goods. The Japanese we know have acquired interests in British North Borneo, but we doubt the accuracy of the figure given for one single company. Both Japanese and Chinese interests are acquiring estates in the Near East, whenever they are on the market, and the competition for the material between them is believed to have berm responsible for the somewhat rapid advance which has taken place recently in the raw commodity in Singapore. It is said that Chinese speculators, having sold forward when rubber was much lower, have been scared by the recent advance, and are now anxiously buying back. Another explanation is that the Chinese and Japanese ate competing for control of the market.
Death of Lo Ah Nyuk.
—•—#
  Lo Ah Nyuk, who has been Government clerk at Baku and Bau, Upper Sarawak, since 1900, died of heart disease on November 1st at Bau, the remains being interred in the Protestant Cemetery in Kuching the following day.
  For many years past he had been suffering from heart trouble, but was never seriously ill until early in October, when he was unable to attend to his duties. The end came suddenly at 3.30 in the afternoon.
  Ah Nyuk joined the Sarawak Government Service, as a clerk in the Treasury, Kuching, on August 20th 1893 and was later transferred to Tatau and Bintulu where he served for some six years. Fie then left the Government Service for a short time and joined again in September 1900 as clerk at Paku and he remained in Upper Sarawak till his death.
  He was an excellent and trustworthy clerk and his early death at the age of 47 is much to be regretted
  He leaves a widow and twelve children, many of them wry small, and for them the deepest sympathy is felt.
Execution of Samarahan Murderers.
- —?—
  The Saribas Dyaks Drahman, alias Ado, and Entaban, alias Bakar, the murderers of the Chinaman, Ong Swee Pak of Samarahan, last March were executed on the morning of November 12th at Bukit Ringit.
Sarawak Red Cross Fund.
  The following letter from the Chairman of the Red Cross Finance Committee is published for the information of subscribers. 
1st October, 1919.
DEAR SIR,
    I beg to acknowledge with warm thanks the receipt of your letter of the 15th August last enclos-
ing draft value £49. 13. 8 being the balance of the Sarawak Red Cross Fund.
  I enclose herewith our official receipt, and am desired by the Joint Committee to express to you, and through you to the members of your Committee, our deep gratitude for the generous and constant help we have received from the Sarawak Red Cross Fund during the war.
Yours faithfully,
ROBERT A. HUDSON,
Chairman of Finance Committee.
To the F. C. O
  Please, Mr. Controller, I’ve something to say.
  I know you’re an overworked man,
  But push back your chair for a minute to-day, 
  And light a cigar	if you can.
  
  Time was when Starvation had threatened the land
  And we all were struck dumb with dismay,
But you came on the scene and just held up your hand
  And drove Master Starvation away.
  So now in distress I turn only to you
  With the strong simple faith of a child
  And demand you’ll procure, if you cannot get two. 
  Just one tin of cigarettes, mild.
  	.
  For what, is the use of Saigon or Siam
  Rice, cargo, or broken, or clean,
  ( shall still be the grovelling being I am
  While I’m cut off from all Nicotine.
  For days I have whinnied along the Bazaar
  And begged for one small cigarette,
But the shop-keepers watch me with sneers from afar
  And that's about all I can get.
For poor Johnny Walker has lost bis old charm, And Gin from the far U. S. A.
Which cheers and consoles, tho’ they say it does harm
  Now fails to keep sorrow away.
O King of Control ! tho’ my language be crude, 
(These verses are rotten, I know.)
Please chuck up the job of controlling our food
  And become our Tobacco C. O.
  (For some unexplained reason certain coast- stations have not been supplied with their usual brands of tobacco and cigarettes with the above effect.)
Expedition to Gunong Poi.
  H. H. the Tuan Muda, Mr. Crocker and the writer left Kuching by s. s. Alice Lorraine at 9 a. m. on 11th October and arrived at Sematan after an extraordinarily smooth passage, at 3.30 p. m. There is quite good sea-bathing, although the water is rather too shallow. The next morning we left Sematan on foot and sent our luggage up river to meet us at Kampong Paun, Sebaku. The forest on the way is rather poor with the exception of a few Meranti, Keruing and Bintangor. The last of our barang did not arrive till about 9 p. m. and we spent the night in a Dyak house. The headman of


298
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 17, 1919.
the house has sons, grandsons and thirty great-
grand-children. He said he was sa'ratus tahun
umor. The Dyaks in this district say they originally
came from Selakoh in Dutch Borneo, ten days'
journey away. At 9 30 a m. on 13th a start was
made for Gunong Poi. The path leads through
Dyak kampongs almost the whole way to the foot
and follows the Sungei Sebaku, the ulu of which
forms the Poi waterfall. The foot of the mountain
was reached at 12.20 Old jungle begins here, 
containing fine Chengal, Kerning and Meranti, there
is also Behan, but most of the old trees have been
cut out. Camp was pitched at a height of 1,030 feet
on a spur of Poi at 3.30 p. m. The next day,
14th October, camp was struck at 7.55 a. m., the
position chosen for the next camp being a reputed
cave on the ridge at the foot of the summit. We left
the bearer! to bring on the barang and pushed on
for the top, taking two local Dyaks as guides. On
the way Mr. Moulton’s old camp was passed. The
guide evidently thought him rather mad. After
telling us that he collected Howers, leaves, beetles
and birds, he remarked sampai chaching-chaching
datum tanah di-ambil juga.
  We arrived at the cave at 10.15 a.m. at a height
by barometer of 3,665 feet We pushed on to the
top at 10.45 and at 1.15 p. m. arrived at the
highest point, called locally Berumput, presumably
because it is cleared and covered with short 
vegetation. The height is 4,850 feet. On the way up 
we were caught in heavy rain.
  A return was made to the cave at 3.30 p.m.
The tent had not been brought up, contrary to
instructions and a very uncomfortable night was
spent. This is not really a cave at all hut two large
rocks leaning against each other. Both ends are
open, the floor is at an acute angle and it is very
draughty ; also there is no water except immediately
after rain.
  The next day Mr. Crocker and the writer went Tip
to Berumput again, arriving at 10 a. m. We left
most of lhe bearers behind to make a langkau and
then pushed on to what is apparently the highest
and central peak on the range. It was a two hours
walk. The height of this peak is 5,090 feet. Nothing
could be seen of the surrounding country owing to
mist and the top not being cleared. A Sea Dyak, of
whom two were with us, climbed the highest tree
and fastened along pole with a bundle of brushwood
at the end to the highest branch to enable a bearing
on the point from Berumput to be obtained. We
returns to camp at 3.45 p. m. A very cold night
was spent, the temperature at 6 a. m. the next
morning registering 61° Fahr.
  The next morning bearings were obtained on
various peaks in Dutch territory, on the mouths and
bends of the Sambas river and on the other peaks of
the Poi range. Nothing was visible on the Sarawak
side except the Talang-Talang Islands. H. H. the
Tuan Muda arrived from the cave at 9 a. m. and we
proceeded down a spur to the ulu Sungei Sebaku,
which we struck above the waterfall just at the
junction of two streams at a height of 2,800 feet.
We returned up a spur to camp near the cave.
  The next morning, 17th October, the luggage was
sent oil direct to Kampong Risen, Sebaku. We
again descended u spur to the head of the waterfall,
a difficult climb over large rocks. The height of the
head of the fall is about 1,400 feet. From this place
a fine view is obtained over the Lundu district.
  The fall itself is rather disappointing. The actual
bare rock is very broad but there not much water,
about 600 c. feet only at the time we saw it. The
dip of the fall is about 26°. In really wet weather
however there must be a great volume of water.
We continued the descent of the hill and arrived at
Kampong Risen at 5.30 p.m. without having seen
the foot of the fall.
  The forest on Gunong Poi is very good up to
about 2,000 feet, but after that the growth gets
smaller and smaller and Meranti, Kerning, Chengal,
etc., are replaced by such species Its Mempening
(Quercus Spp. the Malay oak) and Berangan
(Castanopsis spp. the Malay chestnut) Ru Bukit,
Damar Minyak (Damara alba), Kelat (Eugenia)
and Gordonia concentricicatrix. D.imara alba
( Damar Minyak or Bedendang) is one of the few
conifers in Borneo. Its damar is collected by the
local Dyaks who ascend the tree by a ladder of pegs
driven into it and tying saplings thereto and by this
means collect the resin on the branches.
  The ridge just below Berumput at a height of
4,400 feet widens out to a plateau which would be
suitable for a bungalow and tennis courts.
  On 18th we left Risen at 9 a. in. for Lundu.
  Between. Sungei Sebaku and Sungei Serayan and
between Sungei Serayan and the point where the
Lundu bridle-path crosses the foot of Lundu
mountain are two particularly fine forests of Borneo
camphor (Dryobalanops camphors Malay Kapur
Barns), seedlings, saplings and mature trees being
all represented, an unusual state of things in old
jungle. These forests should be reserved and all
species which are interfering with the development
of the camphor either cut out or ringed. Camphor
is very responsive to the effect of light and in a few
years practically a pure camphor forest would be.
obtained.
  This tree has many products : —
(i) Timber.—The primary use of this tree is for
its limber. The wood floats and is strong
and durable. It is used for building and
furniture.
(ii) Camphor.—The camphor is known to the
Malays as isi kapur. The method of
extraction is to split the wood and pick out
the camphor crystals which are found m
small pockets. 11 is worth anything up to
£5 per tb. and is much sought after by
the Chinese for use in their funeral rites.
In Pahang where it was extensively worked
formerly there is a superstition that unless
the searchers after camphor talk a peculiar
language (bahasa kapur) while working.-
they will have no luck. Some men are said
to be able to tell whether a tree contains isi
or not by the sound given out when it is
struck with the buck of an axe. Only a few
trees produce this isi.
(iii) OH of camphor.—About one tree in every
twenty contains this oil. Oil bearing trees
can be distinguished by a swelling on the
bark about six feet from the ground. This
oil is obtained by making a cut about
four inches deep at its base. Up to five
gallons of oil can frequently be obtained
from one tree by this method.
It is among these oil-bearing trees that
the trees containing isi are found.
Although repeated attempts have been made
to manufacture camphor from this oil, none
has ever been successful.
(iv) Damar.—Damar smelling of turpentine and
       camphor exudes out of any cut male in
       the trunk.
(v) Bark.—The bark is used for the walls of
  native houses and is said to become so hard
     that it can be planed like a plank.
We arrived at Lundu 4.30 p. m. after a walk of
about 12 miles. The track is a very good one,
particularly the last few miles which have been
converted by the Chinese pepper cultivators into a
real bridle-path. A road could very well follow this
track except for one or two deviations to avoid hills.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 17, 1919.
299
  After two days at Lundu, we left at 9.45 a.m. on 21st October by boat for Setungkur. The next we again ascended the river as far as Sungei Butan, a few miles above Pangkalan Satengang, where camp was pitched.
  The next day a decision was made to try and get through to Bau. Leaving the barang to be brought on late? by the Satengang Dyaks, we set off at 8.40 a in. guided by two local Dyaks.
  The track followed the Sungei Butan till 1 p.m. when our guides admitted they had gone wrong. We went back about a mile to another track which led us southeastwards along the ridge of Bukit Nyatoh. We came out at Kampong Sauh, a very poor place at 5 p.m. and arrived at Gerogoh at 7 p.m. doing the last half hour or so by torch light. After a halt we descended the Sungei Selalang by boat to the pengkalan on the Sarawak river and walked from there to Bau. arriving at 10.30 p.m. On this day's inarch, scattered Kapur Burns was seen all along the Butan and on Bukit Nyatoh there is a considerable quantity of Getah Rian, called Getah Taban Merah in the Straits. The Dyaks call this tree Nyatoh Rian hence the name of the hill.
   J. P MEAD, Conservator of Forests.
           The Mangosteen
—?—
  Within the favoured localities of its limited distribution few fruit crops demand less attention in cultivation. After it survives the early stages of its growth, no operations of a cultural in lure beyond manuring require to lie carried out. The method of cultivating the species is as follows.-—When the rounded capsules mature in the rains and their rinds become deep purple in colour, they are carefully plucked off the trees by hand. The largest and most evenly developed fruits are then selected and set apart to furnish the seed. A fruit consists of from six to eight divisions (locales), each of which is filled with a mass of white pulp that may, or may not, enclose a seed ; for it frequently happens that even amomg the most perfectly grown mangosteen fruits, few contain more than two fertile seeds each. For the purpose of sowing, the seed is best when it is detached from the fruit by hand and sown with the edible pulp adhering. If the seeds are sucked prior to sowing them, the warmth of the mouth, as well as the scouring action of the tongue, exert au injurious influence upon the soft membranous seedcoats, which it is essential should be maintained in as unimpaired a condition as possible. The decay through fermentation of the pulp surrounding the seed sets up a beneficent stimulative action not only upon the seed coat itself, but also upon the germinating embryo. The seeds ordinarily germinate in a fortnight from sowing, though some have been known to sprout in a week, while others again take a month or even longer. The seed should be sown about a foot apart in nursery beds four feet wide and of convenient length.
  About 175 seedlings could be raised in a bed 40 feet long and 4 feet wide. Throughout the one year during which the seedlings remain in the nursery the beds should be daily watered as well as occasionally heavily manured with vegetable mould. The manure should be carefully raked in between the seedlings, which by the by are extremely sensitive to bending, breakage or other injury.
  Well-grown seedlings would, be at least a foot in height at the close of the year and have from four to six leaves each. At the commencement of the monsoon rains, the seedlings should be removed from the nursery beds and planted out in holes previously prepared on the estate. These holes are best made at distances of 20 feet from one another,
and should be dug in open, well drained loamy land. They should each be 3 feet square and 3 feet deep, and be filled in with surface soil, vegetable mould, and cattle droppings worked up to a friable and hue degree of tilth. Ln planting, care should be taken to see that every plant occupies the centre of the hole in which it is put out. for, being surface feeders, the fullest facility should be afforded for developing feeding-roots evenly around. The plants should be shaded with light bamboo, and grass tatties placed horizontally over each bed and supported upon bamboo or other light posts (5 feet high. This shade should be given directly the plants are put out, and maintained for at least one year. The tatties may be removed when there is ruin as well as at night and in the cooler parts of the day. The plants should be copiously watered throughout the warmer months of the year for at least two years after they are put out.
   The mangosteen plant has been known to bear fruit in the fifth year from planting out or in the sixth from germination. At this stage it ordinarily attains to a height of 4 feet and a basel girth of one foot, and its conical crown, which is formed low on the bole, casts a cover of about 10'feet in diameter. The yield of fruit varies with locality as well as care in manuring and general cultivation ; but it is usually small and continues to be poor until the plant reaches its tenth year. I know of one estate of which I was superintendent in the Galle district in which each tree yielded over 250 fruits in the ninth year. The earlier fruits are small and irregularly developed and contain very few pulpy seeds. Thus, the number, size, shape and flavour of the fruit are improved only with advancing years. But even in young crops, considerable improvement could be effected by heavy periodic manuring and. watering. A healthy plant in its tenth year is capable of yielding from two to three hundred mangosteens valued at from Rs. 3 to Rs. 6 per hundred in Colombo. An acre stocked with plants standing at distances of 20 feet from one another would hold at least 100 plants. And if, at . the end of the tenth year, they yield on an average 200 fruits each, valued at the rate of Rs. 4 per hundred, the estate would yield an income of about Rs. 800.
   The species is well adapted for cultivation in all localities having a heavy rainfall, a loamy soil, and enjoying freedom from frost. It flourishes in bright sunshine and requires plenty of light for its most perfect development. The soil, however, should be moist and well drained. It is best suited for cultivation in the lowlands of Ceylon. The mangosteen is also found on the Malabar Coast, Assam and Lower ? Burma. It is best grown as a single crop, unmixed I with other species.-(Times of Ceylon.)
Sarawak Regatta.
   A meeting was called on the 6th to consider the holding of the Regatta on January 1st. Representatives of all those interested in the matter met in the Resident's Office where His Highness the Tuan Muda was invited to take the chair.
   On considering the accounts it was found that the expenditure of recent years was increasing and the capital still remaining was considerably reduced.
   After a general discussion it was agreed that if funds should allow the same programme as last year should he carried out and if thought desirable the school race, which was dropped some years ago, should be reintroduced.
   It was then proposed and carried that Mr. H. A. Adams be asked to act as Honorary Secretary and Mr. Swayne kindly consented to carry on the duties of Honorary Treasurer.
   The Meeting then terminated.


300
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 17, 1919.
  Sarawak Regatta Accounts 1919.

J. C. SWAYNE,
Honorary Treasurer.
Bowls.
  The usual monthly Bowling Handicap took place at the Sarawak Club on the 1st November ayd resulted as follows:—
MONTHLY REPORTS.
SADONG.
October.
  The pee. Sri Mas Igan arrived from Kuching on
the 2nd and unloaded three hundred bags of rice.
  The s. s. Alice Lorraine brought two hundred on
the 6th, a hundred on the 15th, and four hundred
on the 28th ; this latter shipment is part of November's supply.
  Five hundred and ninety-five bags of rice and
fifty bags of kribang have been distributed during
the month, and at least seven hundred bags will be
needed for November and the same for December.
  Mr. Hunt, Manager of the British Malaysian
Rubber Co. arrived from Goebilt on the 7th by s. 1.
Margaret, and having taken bunkers left for Sibu
the same day. He came again on the 30th and
left for Gedong the following day.
  Eight thousand dollars worth of notes of various
denominations and one thousand silver dollars were
remitted to the Kuching Treasury on the 10th.
This surplus money is derived from the various 
payments for rice, etc.
     About the middle of the month the tides were
very high and the lawns around the Residency
were inundated.
    It was found necessary to move the Summer
House again hack from the edge of the river, as
the bank was fast losing at that spot.
    There have been several thefts. Ah Guan of
Gedong reported the loss of twenty piculs of jelutong.
A house near the bazaar was burgled, and clothes
and jewelry stolen, a shop in the bazaar was also
robbed. In both the latter cases the thief was caught,
and most of the stolen property recovered.
     There has been practically no Court work here
during the month, most of the people being away on
their farms, or working jelutong.
      Reports of the padi, up to date, are all good, and
a very great deal more has been planted this year,
than in former years. There are. no signs of rats or
mice. Last year these pests had arrived even be-
fore the seed was planted.
   I hope to visit Tabekang during November; a
good many people at that place are applying for
land to plant pepper.
   The prices of jelutong and gutta rian leaves are
very good, but a lot of damage is being done to the
latter industry by the persistent felling and lopping
of these trees. If it is considered that this industry
is worth protecting steps should be taken at once to
appoint inspectors to supervise and watch the working 
of the trees, as it is during the wet season, when
there is plenty of water in the little streams, that
most of the work is done. At present the two
jelutong inspectors here cannot cope with the double
work of looking after jelutong and gutta rian.
   The inspectors have just returned from the ill a
Melikin, where they report, that in one comparatively small area seventy-four gutta rian trees
have been cut off, about half way up
   The s.s. Gladys, which arrived from Sibu on 31st
was searched, as news had been received of the loss
of a large amount of jewelry from the pawn shop
of that place. Nothing however was found.
   There were four days only during the month, on
which rain did not fall: 21’76 inches were recorded.
The mosquitoes have been very bad indeed.
   Mr. Evans has interviewed me with regard to
the removal of the Government boat she  which is
situated at the up-river end of the yards. He wishes
to extend the? yards, and dump material on the river
bank at the place of the present site. The shed is
in a very delapidated condition, and would have had
to be rebuilt very shortly; a new site has been
chosen, but nothing further has been done yet.
     Eleven steamers and six schooners have entered
and cleared the port during the month.
     Total coal exported was 1,709 tons 5 cwt.
         Imports.	Exports
         $44,588	$34,478.50
HENRY H. KORTRIGHT,
Resident 2nd Class.
MIRI.
September.
   The Honble. the Divisional Resident, accompanied
by Mrs. Douglas and family, sailed for Baram in
the s.l. La Follette on the 7th and was still away
at the end of the mouth.
   After overhauling and adjusting the receiving
apparatus at the wireless station, Mi. H. Gray
returned to Kuching on the 4th.
   On the 8th Mr. and Mrs. W. J. Rice and Messrs.
W. W. Goulston and H. F. Turner arrived from


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. NOVEMBER 17. 1919.	301
Europe to join the stuff of the Anglo-Saxon Patroleum Co., Ltd. and Captain R. G. Gallien left the employ of the Company on account of ill health.
   Messrs. W. F. Alder and E. Laemmle of the Universal Film Company and California Unniversity arrived from Singapore, on the 21st with the object of filming and studying scenes of native life. They sailed for Butain in the s. l. La Follette on the 28th.
   Mr. and Mrs. H. Long and Mr. E. J. Souter sailed for America on the 21st.
   The 26th, His Highness the Rajah's birthday, was observed as a public holiday and all offices closed.
   Early in- the month the various Chinese opium saloons were inspected and the proprietors ordered to take out licenses in future.
   The new Well’s incandescent kerosene oil lamps were set up in the bazaar during the month and are a decided improvement in the illumination of that part of the township.
   The s. l. La Follette made two trips to the coast stations bringing away cargoes of belian timber and attaps for Baram bazaar.
   In the Courts, Chong Wan and Chow Kee, a clerk in the Company's employ, were each sentenced to four months H. L. for attempting to obtain money from the Company under false pretences. The Captain China and officials of the Chong Wah school gave notice that they intended to petiton against the judgment on Chow Kee Aug Ah Chiaw, Mr. York's Hylam Chinese cook, was fined for being in possession of a revolver and cartridges without a permit, and the revolver confiscated.
   Chan On, was sentenced to a term of imprisonment for being asleep while in charge of the Superheater at Lutong refinery; Wong Ho was imprisoned for assaulting and injuring Tang Po; Wong See and Kong Sam were fined for brawling in the bazaar; Tan Kheng Choon, Wong Shin and Tan Jong Seng were fined for causing a dangerous tire in the bazaar; Thua Ah Poh was heavily fined for attempting to smuggle opium to Labuan and C. P. Eng Wah who detected the concealed opium was duly rewarded ; Mataris bin Hj. Ludin, a probationery police constable, was imprisoned for gross negligence; Aris bin Hashim was sentenced to two months JI. L. for forging Mandor Tewit’s signature and obtaining goods with same; and Sheikh Said and Munggol bin Ahmat were fined for a breach of the Port Regulations.
   The prisoners were employed planting foodstuffs, clearing the Luak road and on the general np-keep of the station grounds.
   Carpenters continued fitting out the Miri Maru, and repaired the clerk's bouses and other buildings.
   The long spell of fine weather broke towards the end of the month, the rainfall amounting to 4’35 inches.
   The trade returns are as follows:—
Imports. Exports.
      Miri	... $33,326	$14,067
      Niah	...	1,804	1,494
      Sibuti
W. F. DE V. SKRINE,
Resident 2ml Class.
The Sarawak Gazette.
RATES OF ADVERTISEMENT IN THE "SARAWAK GA2ETTE"
Payable in advance.
Quarter of a column anti under—
         First insertion .	...	... $1.00
         Second and third insertion each	... 0.50
         Subsequent do	do	... 0.52
Half » Column and under—
         First insertion ...	...	... 2.00
         Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
         Subsequent do	do	... 0.50
A Column and under— 
         First insertion each	...	... 4.00
         Second and third insertion each	... 2.00
         Subsequent do	do	... 1Of)
Special arrangements may be made for standing advertisements.
   All communications intended for insertion in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed to the Editor at the Government Printing Office, Kuching. They should be clearly written and should reach the Office at least two days before the publication of each issue-
   Letters and other contributions must be authenticated by writer's name sent privately to the Editor.
   We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not inserting them.
   Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early intelligence of all matters of general interest In their respective neighbourhoods.
NOTICE.
ASTANA FARM .
THE Manager of Astana Farm begs to inform the Public that he is unable to attend to Orders for milk after Office hours.
NOTICE.
	•	
  AUCTION SALE
of unredeemed pledges from the Pawn Broking Farm YEW CHEE & Co., Chop Wo SANG at
No. 18, China Street on Saturday, 20th December 1919 at 9 a. m.
   List of all such unredeemed pledges is on view at the Pawn Farmer’s premises.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO., 
Authorised Auctioneers.


302
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 17, 1919.
KgCHHeG SHIPPING.
Arrivals.SYN HIN LEONG & CO., 
22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS.
Beer, Wine, Spirit & General Store Dealers. 
	: (o):	 
SOLE AGENTS FOR:
FRASER & NEAVE'S AERATED WATERS 
(The Best throughout the East.)
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at $1 per quart bottle enough to make 150 catties of dry rubber.
ASAHI BEER.
ACETIC ACID.
	:(0):	
Fresh supplies of Stores are received regularly.       Departures.        PRICES MODERATE.Free delivery to customers in Kuching. Free packing & shipping for Outstation Orders.
[u.c]
NOTICE.
 SALE BY AUCTION
of all unredeemed pledges from YEK YEUN & Co., Pawn Farmers, No. 8, Sibu Bazaar, Sibu, will be held on the 15th September 1919 at 10 a.m. and quarterly from that date until further notice.
   Lists of all unredeemed pledges are on view at the Farmers’ premises.
LAW JEE THAI,
Authorised Auctioneers.

THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 17, 1919
303
MIRI SHIPPING.
Market Price List for the month of
Arrivals.
THE “SARAWAK GAZETTE”
A LMANAC.
NOVEMBER, 1919.

November 1919.
AIUUVALS.
PEK s. s. Knehiuj :—7th November From Siiigajxire—? Messrs. A. C. Play ne and Law Sweo Yong.
PI:H p s. Adeh:—14th November From the North—• Mr. Clark and Father Morris.
DEPAUTVHES.
I’KB p. s. Adeh: -4th November For the North— Messrs. Allman and Cook.
1’Elt s. s. Kucktnj:— 11th November—For Singapore— Mr. and Mrs. Wright, Messrs. E. 8. Holl. G. 1). Burnand, R. Gunn. H. Eng Chiang, Teo Cheng Kee, Tan Boon Siew, Aug Hong Choon. How Ciioon Soo, Mrs. Wee Siong Hioug and Mrs. Siti.
NOTICE.
Gazette subscriptions and Printing
Office bills.
  FOR the convenience of residents at Outstations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums but only the 1,2 and 3 cent values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that Money Orders be sent if possible.
J. C. SWAYNE,
Manager, Govt. Printing Office.


304	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 17, 1919.
THE SARAWAK STUDIO
(REPRESENTATIVES OF MESSRS. KODAK LIMITED.)
THE BEST IN KUCHING
WHERE GOOD PORTRAITS CAN HE TAKEN AND VIEWS OF THE
NEIGHBOURHOOD PROCORED.
PHOTOS FOR PASSPORTS
AT SHORT NOTICE.
KODAKS, KODAK FILMS, PLATES, PAPERS, CHEMICALS
PHOTO PASTE AND ALL PHOTOGRAPHIC MATERIALS
SUPPLIED AT SINGAPORE CATALOGUE PRICES.
AMATEURS’ FILMS & PLATES DEVELOPED, PRINTED &
ENLARGED AT REASONABLE CHARGES.

