
VOL. XL1X.

No. 788.
Sarawak Gazette.
Price                 KUCHING, TUESDAY, DECEMBER 16, 1919.	10 cents
          CONTENTS.— **Arrival of Their HighnessesPage.
321Notes... 321Clippings	» •••
Stream Bridging	...	* ...
Water Power... 322
... 323Locusts ...St. Thomas' School prize distribution... 324Miri School Prize giving    324Correspondence.325
Bowls ...	...	......325Sarawak Regatta... 325Monthly Reports :—8adong-Colliery—Simanggang... 326                       Brooketon Colliery... 327Miri Shipping... 328Rainfall328, 330Kuching Shipping... 329Passengers... 329Meteorological Returns... 330   The Sarawak Gazette.
    SUBSCRIPTIONS to the Gazette are as follows:
The Sarawak Gazette
   PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
      Single copy	...	...	…                             .10 cents
      Subscription for one year	...	...	$2.00
Subscription including postage to Outstation                                 2.25 
Subscription including postage to ail other
                    Countries.	...	...	2.50
  PAYABLE IN STERLING—
      Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 5s. 10d
The Sarawak Government Gazette
  PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY —
      Single copy	...	...	...	.05 cents
      Subscription for one year	...	..        $1.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations                              1.25 
Subscription including postage to all other
                    Countries. ...	1.50
  PAYABLE IN STERLING—
      Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 3s. 6d
  All subscriptions are payable in advance and must commence from the 1st January in each year on which date they are renewable. All broken periods will be considered as full.
  Subscriptions will not be renewed unless notice of renewal given.
  Changes of Address should be notified to the Office in writing.
The Sarawak Gazette.
  TUESDAY, DECEMBER 16, 1919.
Arrival of Their Highnesses.
   The arrival of S. s. Kuching with Their Highnesses the Rajah, Ranee and children was signalled from Goebilt at 4 a.m. on the 11th and the ship started up-river on the tide about an hour later.
   His Highness the Rajah had telegraphed from Singapore intimating that owing to the ear. mess of the hour he desired no official reception. No public function therefore took place but as the vessel founded the Fort the band of the Sarawak Rangers played the Anthem, and all guards came to the present,) followed by a salute of 21 guns, while on the other side of the river an incessant fusillade of Chinese crackers was maintained. Their Highnesses, including the Tuan Muda, who had gone to Singapore to meet the party, were met on board by the two European Members of the Supreme Council in Kuching and the Datus bade them welcome at the Astana landing stage.
   In the afternoon nearly the whole of the European population assembled at the Ranee's Club and warmly welcomed Her Highness back to Sarawak.
NOTES.
( December.)
   A notification in the Government Gazette states that the price of opium is to be raised from $3.60 to $5.40 a tahil,
   DRY rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah during November amounted to 67,000 tbs. and at Dahan to 16,000 lbs.


322                                    THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 16, 1919.
  S. S. Kuching left for Singapore on Decem-
ber 2nd with passengers His Highness the
Tuan Muda, the Right Rev. Father E. Dunn,
the Rev. Fathers V. Halder, A. Kiezer and F.
Duxoveuner, Messrs. E. N. Westwood and
G. Parry Davis, the Datu Bandar, Dayang
Z’ada and Messrs. H. E. Teck, Lim Cheng Kia
and How Teck Sze.
  S. S. Alice Lorraine left for Sadong and
Lingga on December 3rd with passenger Mr.
J. R. Barnes, she returned here on the 7th.
   THE auction of the various papers, mentioned in our issue of November 1st. will take 
place at 11.30 a. m. on January 3rd, at the 
Sarawak Library.
—
   WE have to thank the Managing Director of
the Sarawak Steamship Co. for the following 
details of the latest arrival in the river.
  The s. t. Ping Ha arrived on Wednesday, 
the 10th December, having left Singapore on 
Sunday. It is hoped to employ her as a coal-
carrier between Sadong and Kuching which
will relieve the s. s. 'Sarawak and free her for
the coastal trade. At present she is owned by
Mr. Ong Soon Tee, Singapore, but it is possible
that the Company may purchase her at some
future date.
  She was built in Singapore on 1916 and her
engines am by the Singapore Engineering
Company.
               Length	85’
Breadth	27' 5”
Depth	9' 6"
               Tonnage	73
   THE S.S. Kuching arrived from Singapore
on December 11th passengers, besides 'Their
Highnesses, included Mr. and Mrs. K. H.
Gillan, Mrs. P. H. O’Nians and Mrs. Parnell.
   THE following appointments are notified in
the Government Gazette, Mr. P. H. Hayward
to be Assistant in the Treasury, Messrs. F.
G. Carpenter and R. D. G. H. N. St. J. Horton
to be cadets.
  As there is a constant shortage of bottles
for dispensing, the public are requested to
return all empty medicine bottles to the
Government Dispensary.
  Outstations which have not sent back their
empty bottles, pots, etc., are requested to do
so as soon as possible.
  S. S. Kuching left for Singapore on December 14th with passengers Messrs. F. Weiding, A. N. Ellis, D. M. Graham, H. G. Gray, Miss E. S. Andrews, Mr. and Mrs. Wee Chin Ek and Mr. Lau Lok Choon.
A Reuter’s cable in a recent Singapore
paper says that the Board of the Manchester
Chamber of Commerce has adopted the minutes of the China Executive, stating that
although trade directly with ex-enemy countries is desirable in the national and international interests, it is against the country’s
interest to reopen connections with German
firms in China and the Far East, where
British and Allied firms are adequately equipped and sufficient in number to deal with all trade with those countries. No doubt that this is the hope of all Allied traders in the East and we sincerely trust that they may be strong enough to hold what they have won. At the same time a few days ago we saw a shelf-load of cotton goods in a Chinese shop unashamedly labelled “Made in Germany”.
  WE have received for sale a few numbers of the souvenir volume published by Messrs. Kelly A Walsh to celebrate the Singapore Centenary. It is well printed and illustrated and forms a permanent memorial of an event unique in the annals of the East.
 The price is $1.50, post free in Sarawak.
Clippings
   Capt. Boss Smith arrived on a Vicker's Vimy-Rolls
aeroplane on Singapore Race Course at 4.48 p. in.
December 4th on his Hight to Australia.
   The following table shows the progress as far as
Calcutta with the dates of arrival at the various stopping
places:
       1 Hounslow start on November 12
       2 Lyons 500 miles 12th
       3 Pisa 350 miles 18th
              Bogged 14th
       4 Rome 250 miles 15th
       5 Taranto 800 miles 16th
       6 Suda Bay (Crete) 450 miles 17th
       7 Cairo 450 miles 18th
       8 Damascus 430 miles 19th
       9 Ramadie 490 miles 20th
     10 Basra 280 miles 21st
              Attention to engines 22nd
     11 BUNDA Abbas 615 miles 23nl
     12 Karachi 718 miles 24th
     13 Delhi 700 miles 25th
     14 Allahabad 400 miles 27th
     15 Calcutta 500 miles 28th
From this point on the landing places have been : -
         Akiab 29th
         Rangoon 30th
         Bangkok 1st December
         Singora 2nd
    To win the £10,000 prize, he must reach Port
Darwin by Friday 12th next. They thus have six
days in which to do four days’ actual flying.
    The Scandinavian Association for a Tropical
Biological Station has decided to send an expedition
this autumn to select a site for n research station to
study marine biology. Dr. Th. Mortensen, who is
chairman and foamier of the association, will lead a
small party including probably Dr. Nils Holmgren
and a botanist. They will visit Celebes. North
Borneo, Amboina, and New Guinea.- -Nature.
    Mr. Wee Chin Ek is leaving for Sarawak early
to-morrow morning by the Kuching and will return
with his wile after the marriage of their eldest
daughter. Miss Tho Neo, who is to be wedded to Mr.
Chan Qui Chong, fourth son of the late Towkay Chan
Kee Soon, of Chop Chin Ann, Sarawak.—(S. T.)
    Washington, November 25th.—The International
Labour Conference Special Commission which dealt
with the limitation of hours of work in Eastern
countries recommends considerable reductions in the
present hours of employment, with a definite max»-
inuin in each case. -Reuter.
    Money Orders on India and Ceylon are now issued
at the rate of Rs. 100=$ 100.—(M. T.)
    Harmston's Circus will arrive in Singapore on I Friday by the Rajah of Sarawak.—( F. P.)



THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 16, 1919.
Stream Bridging.
  As the subject will. I think, be of considerable
interest to District Officers in Sarawak who have to
carry out their own Public Works I venture to
draw attention to an article by Prof: C. E. Inglis,
O. B. E , R. E. in “The Engineer" of September 26th,
1919 giving a most interesting description of a new 
form of light bridge for streams up to 100 feet wide
which was invented in 1915 and was immediately
adopted by the British War Office, and proved of
immense value at the Front. The design was so
perfect that it was one of the few inventions of the
War in which the original design of the inventor
was practically retained.
  The article in question is profusely illustrated by
photographs which make the construction quite
clear, but roughly the following is the design.
  The bridge is constructed of steel pipes (the sizes
of which vary according to the size of bridge re-
quired) and these pipes are screwed into steel castings
to form pyramids, a series of which are placed in a
row, their apices joined longitudinally by other
steel pipes passing through them, and support the
two longditudinal pipes which carry the roadway
at their base.
  In the smallest size bridge the base of each
pyramid is an 8 foot square, the vertical height of
the compression tube above the tension tubes being
also-8 feet, and tuis bridge will carry men in single
file packed closely together over a clear span of 96
feet. The whole structure weighs about 2 ¾  tons.
  Inverted the structure becomes a deck bridge suit-
able for light wheeled traffic which could not pass
through the triangular space of the pyramids were
the bridge in its normal position.
  The larger size bridge with 12 loot pyramids on a
12 foot base will carry heavy traffic over u clear
span of 96 feet.
  These structures would appear to be eminently
suitable for bridging the small streams of this 
country for the reason that: —
i. They are very portable, the tubes being easily
carried across country or up-river by bout.
ii. They are easily and quickly erected, all the
tubes being of the same length and therefore
interchangeable.
iii. Skilled labour is not required in their erection,
iv. They can easily be taken down and moved else-
where should the road which they serve be
abandoned.
  Having regard to the present price of hard wood
which alone can be utilised for bridge construction
in this country, the practical impossibility of moving
such a bridge when once built and the cost of skilled
labour and time taken in construction, the price of
these tube bridges should necessarily compare very
favourably with that of the wooden bridges while a
good coat of red lead and an occasional coat of paint
or tar would be sufficient to keep them in good
condition.
  It would be interesting to see a bridge of this
kind erected out here as an experiment the cost
in any case would not be very great while if
the trial proved a success, which there is every
probability would be the case, one at any rate of the
numerous inventions of the War could be used to
considerable advantage in Sarawak.
Water Power.
—*—
The preliminary report of Mr. J. W. Meares,
chief engineer to the Hydro-electric Survey of India,
on the water-power resources of that country has
recently been issued. A copy is obtainable from any
British agent handling Government publications,
and it is to be wished that its circulation will not be
limited to circles most immediately concerned,
comprising Indian engineers and Indian power 
consumers. Much of the information comprised in
the report relates to the investigation and utilisation
of water power in general, and may be studied with
advantage by those interested in the water power
of any country. One of the salient features brought
out by the report is the importance of collecting
information concerning every stream which may
possibly be developed for power purposes. It is
within the powers of almost anyone with little or
no technical knowledge to collect but essential data,
which will save much labour, and greatly reduce
risks when the time comes for serious investigations
of the possibilities of a stream. The general scope
of the information required is set out in Mr. Meares’s
report, and comprises one of its most important
features Of course, very similar information is
conveyed in several modern works on hydro-electric
schemes, bur an exceptionally practical application
of such knowledge is made in the present report.
Two simple rules of universal applicability arc given.
The first is that, in the absence of a definite and
ever-present fall of at least several feet, no water-
power scheme is likely to mature as a commercial
success The second is that any site is worth
considering where tire product of the minimum
discharge in cubic feet per second, multiplied by the
height of the fall in feet, is not less tiffin 16,(MX).
Anything less than this is too small for industrial
purposes, though it may be of used for lighting
supply. Observations over a period of about thirty
years are required to ascertain definitely the mini-
mum flow of a stream, but a knowledge of the
minimum flow in a single year is of considerable
value, especially in conjunction with rainfall records
for the district, and an estimate of the average
run-off. The method of measuring stream discharge
is familiar to the skilled observer, but even non-
technical persons may render invaluable help bv
estimating the flow of streams in out-of-the-way
places, using the formula: Flow, in on. ft. per sec.
= surface velocity (ft. per sec.) X width of stream
(ft.) X mean depth (ft.)	2. The surface velocity
is determined by timing a stick floating in mid-
stream, down a measured length of stream : and the
mean depth is determined by taking the average of
a number of soundings. The dividing factor 2 is an
empirical factor allowing for the roughness of the
bed; it gives conservative values for the flow in
most small and medium streams It is suggested
that British interests, wherever located, should 
concern themselves with the water-power resources of
their district. Not only is valuable data thereby
likely to be collected, but a larger share Of the
business in hydro-electric plant and equipment
may by the same influences be steered into British
channels.—(L. «(• C. E.)
323


324
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 16, 1919.
in the West Coast residency alone totalled 85,000
gallons of hoppers, estimated to number well over
a thousand millions. South of the Tempasuk the
work was so successful that only a few small swarms
escaped destruction and reached the flying stage,
and by working at night it was possible to kill these
swarms either by band methods or by the use of
poison. Complete extermination is of course not
possible, but if only scattered individuals are left
their natural enemies can perhaps be trusted, in
normal conditions, to keep them and their offspring
under control.
In the Tempasuk district and the Kudat residency
the natives did not co-operate so willingly and operations were not attended with the same success. An
unfortunate result is that the locusts have again
spread south from the Tempasuk; at one time it was
feared that the Papar district would be re-invaded,
but happily Inanam, on the southern edge of the
Tuaran district, was the farthest point reached.
   According to the latest reports the Sandakan
residency is now clear of locusts and there are very
few in the Interior. There are, however, numerous
swarms of hoppers in Norin Keppel and in the
Kudat residency, but an active campaign is being
waged and it is hoped to reduce their numbers so as
to make extermination possible in the next generation. Meanwhile, in the parts of the Territory now
reported free from the pest, patrols are being maintained to guard against the possibility of scattered
individuals multiplying into swarms and to ensure
that immigrant swarms from other districts may lie
discovered and destroyed without delay. ~(B. N. B.
Herald.)
Locusts.
,	—«>—
   Until this year North Borneo has never suffered
from a plague of locusts on a big scale. As far as is
known the only occasion on which they have appeared
previously was about fifteen years ago in the Tenom
district, when they died out spontaneously without
increasing to large proportions.
   The present visitation started in the Tempasuk
at the end of last December. The insects rapidly
increased in number—their multiplication being
doubtless assisted by favourable weather conditions
—and by June of this year they had spread to Kudat
and Mempakad on the north, Membakut and Kuala
Penyu it on the south, and Parenchangan in the
Interior residency on the east. Since June the only
fresh areas invaded have been the river Bengkoka in
the Maradu district, the Sipitang district, and ihe
river Lingkabao in the Sandakan residency.
   In combating the plague considerable difficulties
were at first experienced both with regard to staff
and materials. The only men available were the
Sub-Inspectors of Coconuts, who numbered seven ;
these were withdrawn from their ordinary duties and
trained in methods of extermination, and they were
afterwards allocated to districts where they worked
under the direction of the District Officers. 
Temporary Sub-Inspectors were engaged in suitable
numbers for each district, and the trained staff
gradually rose from seven to over fifty.
   The first method of destruction used was to drive
the hoppers into traps composed of sheets of canvas, 
arranged generally in the form of a V, the hoppers
being prevented from climbing over the sheets by a
strip of smooth oilcloth sewn near the top. A pit
was dug at the apex of the trap and filled with water
with a little crude oil on the surface; on fulling into 
this the locusts were immediately killed. When 
labour is scarce swarms cannot be exterminated in
this way and it is necessary to poison them; the 
vegetation on which they are feeding is sprayed with 
sodium arsenite, molasses being added to make the
poisoned substances attractive. It was some time. 
however, before adequate quantities of the materials 
necessary for spraying could be procured.
   The visitation has been particularly severe in flat 
padi-growing areas. Fortunately the first few 
generations occurred when the. land was unoccupied 
by a crop : a minimum of damage was therefore 
suffered and as the fields were dry it was possible to 
kill most of the swarms by driving. The difficulty
of obtaining sufficient canvas and oilcloth was over-
come by using trenches-with smooth vertical walls,
the floor being deepened at intervals into pits in
which the hoppers collected and were killed either
by their own weight or by crude oil. This method
was not adopted at the beginning of the campaign
because it had been reported on unfavourably in
some other countries, e.g., the F. M. S., but its
suitability to local conditions was demonstrated by
a native experiment near Tuaran early in May, and
independently, in July, by a police constable stationed
in the Marudu district. It was found that the heavy 
labour of digging trenches is largely compensated 
for by the ease, celerity and completeness with which
the actual driving can be done. Hoppers advancing
towards a trench are unconcious of any obstacle and
jump straight in, whereas on reaching canvas screens
numbers of them climb up—pqptbably to sun them-
selves—and can only be got intafhe pit at the apex
with great difficulty.
   The hopper generation which bred out between
June and September was a very large one; but the
natives, especially the Dusuns on the West Coast,
realised the danger to their next padi crop and
worked extremely well, and very useful assistance
was rendered by several estate managers. Catches
St. Thomas’ School prize distribution.
   The annual prize-giving took place at St. Thomas’
School on November 27th, Mrs. Danson kindly presented the prizes and the chair was taken by the
Bishop of the Diocese.
   The Headmaster, Mr. A. N. Ellis, said that the 
results quite satisfactory ; but as usual, the majority
of prizes went to the boarders. The sports bad been
equally good, St. Thomas’ more than holding their
own at the Peace Carnival on August 2nd. Three
additions had been made to the staff during the last
few months, these being Miss Gibson, Mr. Curry
and Mr. Lawrence. The addition of a School Chapel
is contemplated, and it is hoped that sufficient subscriptions will be forthcoming to save the drain of
School funds.
   The Bishop of the Diocese thanked Mr. Ellis for
the work done, and wished him a well earned and
restful holiday.
   Mrs. Danson then gave away the prizes kindly
presented by His Highness the Rajab.
   The Rev. F. S. Hollis then proposed a vote of
thanks to Mrs. Danson, which motion was carried
unanimously, and the proceedings were terminated
by the Bishop who thanked Mr. Hollis on behalf of
his wife.
| 	-	-					 		
Miri School Price-giving.
   Miri school held its first prize-giving on December
7th when Mrs. R. S. Douglas kindly presented the
 prizes.
   Mr. Kang Kee, the schoolmaster, was unfortunately absent through illness.
   Before the actual distribution of the prizes, the
Rev. Father Jansen, the examiner, read a report on
the progress of the pupils. He also pointed out the
'necessity for another schoolmaster owing to the


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 16, 1919.                                                    325
numerous applications for tuition, including night-
classes.
The Honble. the Resident then wished the
children a pleasant holiday and called for three
cheers for Father Jansen who replied suitably and
so terminated the proceedings.
               1st Class 1st Prize Channan Singh
               2nd	„	.,	Mat Tapek
               3rd	,,	..	Dawai
               4lh	.,	.,	Huseli
               5th	„	„	Emiliano	Anoug
Prize for attendance Mat Tapek who attended 1,294 hours
out of 1,825.
Good Conduct girls (presented by Mrs. Douglas) Kusang
.,	..	boys (	..	the Resident) Bujang

    CORRESPONDENCE.
    [The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of
correspondents]
SIR,
    In your last issue the new Hymnal is said to l>e
a collection of “the best hymns in the English
language." I think many will agree that any
collection that does not include the 500th hymn
(A. & M.) can hardly be described thus with accuracy.
It would be interesting to know the reason for the
omission of this singularly faithful and delicate
rendering of the beautiful passage on which it is
founded.
  [The fust line of the hymn to which our
correspondent refers is “O voice of the Beloved”.
Ed. Sar. Gaz.]
Miri,
                          November 19th, 1919.
The Editor,
    The Sarawak Gazette,
But.
    1 notice in the Sarawak Gazette of October 16th
under “Notes" the statement that moving pictures
were taken by the Cambridge Scientific Expedition
when in this country. This is incorrect. The only
moving pictures ever taken in Sarawak were a few
hundred feet taken by Dr. Hose Baram. The
film then unfortunately stuck, so nothing further
could be done This was. I think, in 1902.
Yours faithfully, 
R S. DOUGLAS.
SIR,
    A warrior, recently returned to Sarawak and one who held a very responsible position during the recent hostilities, has been heard to remark that he knew for certain that the "Big Bertha” which shelled Paris was a 15" gun firing a 5'19" shell, no doubt your readers will be interested to hear that this mystery is now solved.
Yours etc.,
“ THOUGHTFUL.”
December 15th, 1919.
The Editor.
    The, Sarawak Gazette,
DEAR SIR,
    Whilst studying a narrative on Borneo, composed in the year 1865, I came across a passage which should certainly delight a good many of us who have spent some number of years in this country
and have undergone many inconveniences
through various jungle “torments” and have be-
come acquainted with the language.
   It runs as follows :—
   “ When we had penetrated about half-way through
the tangled brushwood I struck a fern with my head.
The next moment a pain shot across my cheek as if
a red-hot iron was thrust through it.
   I screamed with the sudden agony, and when the
Malay, who was behind, saw the cause, he seemed
half inclined to run away. In striking the fern I had
shaken down a “sumut upi”*, or fire-ant, the most
terrible torment of the jungle With the presence
of mind, which this sagacious insect never loses, he
bit my cheek instantly. After this adventure, it was
of little use to look for my leer, which is still, 1
hope, happily browsing upon the brushwood	
Arthur had no better sport; but he was not attacked
by a “sumut api”. ”
•"The “sumut api" is a small red ant. fortunately rather uncommon. Its bite is fearful. though not venomous, and the pain soon passes. An army of natives would not hesitate to run from these little torments. "
Yours faithfully,
“ KERIXGGA. ”
BOWLS.
    The usual monthly Bowling Handicap look place at the Sarawak Club on the 1st December and resulted as follows:-
Sarawak Regatta.
    Entries for the Regatta will close on Monday
22nd December. It is not proposed to hold a
school-race this year, nor will it lie possible, as has
been suggested, to have a race for motor-boats.
Perhaps laith these events might take place next
year if sufficient entries arc notified at least one month before the Regatta is held.
     The following is the programme proposed to be ? carried out on January 1st.
	His	HIGHNESS THE RAJAH'S CUP.—Value $200—2nd prize $65. 1st prize to crew $80. 2nd prize to crew $40. 3rd prize to crew $20. Entrance fee $2. Open to any make of boat, unlimited as to size or number of crew. From Batu B'liong to the Stone Wharf.
	REGATTA CUP.— Value $50.—Presented from the Regatta Funds. For any description of boat with crews limited to 15 men. Winner of the 2nd race to pull with 13 and 2nd boat in 2nd race with 14 paddles only. 1st prize to crew $15. 2nd prize to crew $7.50. Entrance fee $1.50. From Batu B’liong to the Stone Wharf.
	 Value $125. 2ml prize $40. 1st prize to crew $80. 2nd prize to crew $40. 3rd prize to crew $20. Open to any make of boat, unlimited as to size or number of crew. Entrance fee $2. From Batu B’liong to the Stone Wharf.


326                              THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 16, 1919.
	Value	$75.—Open to all boats, Crews limited to 30 paddlers. One flag-man and one bailer may be carried in addition, but these must not use paddles. Entrance fee $2. 1st prize to crew $30. 2nd prize to crew $15. From Batu B’liong to the Stone Wharf.
	THE CONSOLATION CUP.—
Value; $100-—with $50 added. Crews unlimited. Entrance fee $1. From Batu B’liong to the Stone Wharf.
	Value $75.—Open to all boats, Crews limited to 30 paddlers. One flag-man and one bailer may be carried in addition, but those must not use paddles. Entrance fee $2. 1st prize to crew $30. 2nd prize to crew $15. From Tanjong Patingan to the Stone Wharf.
INTERVAL.
Racing will be resumed at 2 p.m.
		BANDONG	RACE—For bona
fide fishing boats to be propelled by oars, steersman
only to use paddle. Crew limited to 5 men. 1st
prize $7.50. 2nd prize. $5. From Pengkalan Dayang
Atun to the Stone Wharf.
	Value	$50.—For any
description of boat with Crews limited to 15 men.
1st prize to Crew $15. 2nd prize to Crew $7.50.
Entrance fee $1.50. From Tanjong Patingan to the
Stone Wharf.
	SHIP'S	GIGS— 1st prize $6.
2nd prize $3. From Pengkaian Dayang Atun to
the Stone Wharf.
	FOR	BOATS WITH CREWS
LIMITED TO EIGHT MEN.—1st prize $8. 2nd prize
$4. From Pengkalan Dayang Atun to the Stone
Wharf.
...	FISHERMAN’S	RACE
( Dagong Ikan ) — 1st prize $2. 2nd prize $1. 3rd
prize 50 cents. Men to wear a distinctive mark on
the left arm. These badges will be provided and
prizes will only be given to men who have them
on at the Winning Post. From the Judges' box
round s. Y. Zahora's mooring buoy, turning to the
right, and return.
	ARMY.	CONSTABULARY AND STEAMERS.—Crews limited to 15 men. Mixed
Crews from steamers will not be allowed; each
steamer must run a boat containing members of its
Crew who are ‘‘signed on" before January 1st, 1919.
1st prize $15. 2nd prize $7.50. From Tanjong
Patingan to the Stone Wharf
	A	CONSOLATION CUP.—Value §45.—Open to all boats that have not won a race at this meeting. Crews limited to 30 paddlers.
Entrance fee $1. From Batu B’liong to the Stone
Wharf
	THE	OFFICES RACE—For
employees in Government and Mercantile Offices,
who shall be employed on inside or office work only.
A list of crews to lie sent in before December 20th,
.1919, which will be subject to the approval of the
Umpire. Number of Crew to be arranged later.
1st prize §16. 2nd prize $8. From Pengkalan
Dayang Atun to the Stone Wharf.
  MONTHLY REPORTS.
SADONG COLLIERY.
November.
The out-put for the month was 1.680 11 tons, 450
tons of tins was consumed by mu boilers, and
1,230.11 tons were delivered to the wharf.
The month's shipments were :
- To the Kuching Municipality ...
    „ „ Sibu Station
,, Messrs. The Borneo Co.,
Ltd., Kuching
    „	.. Sarawak Steamship
Co., Kuching ...
    „	,. British Malaysian
            Manfg. Co., Goebilt
116.00 tons
100.00 .,
393.07 „
581.14 ..
85.00 ..
                Total Shipments 1,276.01 tons
   The balance of stock on the wharf at the end of the month was 121.02 tons.
   The fall on the No. 8 mine engine-plane was sealed off and the new level, which is to go round the fall, was driven for a distance of sixty feet, with a concrete retaining wall fifty-four feet long built between the old engine-plane and the new opening.
   The east panel workings of No. 9 mine have been rendered unworkable since the accident in No. 8 mine and are now filled with foul air and Carbon- monoxide gas, so that pillar coal had to be worked beside the main Deep in order to supply the local demand.
   The mines in No 1 seam produced rather less than usual owing to the effect of a down-throw fault running at an acute angle to the longwall face-line.
   The strong tides damaged the wharf rather badly ' on the down-river side, here the repairing gang was i employed throughout the month.
   A gale of wind al the end of the month blew down I the telephone lines at the wharf and an old house in ' the Malay kampong at the Colliery and damaged ! several other mine buildings.
   The early padi crop has been destroyed by pests, I but the padi planted later is growing well.
 The rainfall was 14'94 inches. There was a good
deal of fever and minor ailments amongst the labour
force.
   The November stocks of provisions were kept
very low by the towkays in the Colliery bazaar and
several lines of perishable goods were unprocurable,
while prices are steadily going up.
J. W. EVANS.
Manager.

SIMANGGANG.
October.
One Tambi Drahman arrived here from Saratok overland on the 3rd and next day reported that all his trading goods had been stolen : these Inui been left in an empty shop house. A search was made and various articles of old clothing were discovered. Tambi Drahman told me that he was returning to Saratok to inform his	creditors of his	loss,	but instead of doing so left	for Lingga	by boat; a few days afterwards a P.	C. warrant	arrived for his arrest for absconding under advances and he left Lingga by bandong for Kuching. On the 12th one Chang Yang, whilst washing clothes, fell into the river opposite the bazaar, as no one was near and he was unable to swim he was


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 16, 1919.	327
drowned. His holy was discovered two days after-
wards.
   On the 14lh the Assistant Resident, Mr. P. M.
Adams, returned from Lubok Antti, having been
away fourteen days, waiting the arrival of the Ga'at
rebels, who did not turn up on the expected date.
On the I7th the Ga'at rebels were handed over to
Abang Haji Buasan, A bangs Omar and Zin repre-
senting the Sarawak Government, at the frontier,
and they arrived at "Simanggang next day. An
express was sent to Kuching asking-for a steamer,
which arrived on the 24th and the Ga'at rebels
were shipped to Lingga where they boarded the
H.H.S.Y. Zahora and immediately sailed for Sibu.
   On the 26th Mr. P. M. Adams left for Kuching,
having been granted European furlough ; he took
with him four Ga’at rebels by name Unyat, Gila,
Blikau and Kunjang, these are tour of the head
men, who were ordered by His Highness the Tuan
Muda to be sent to Kuching. Mr. P. M. Adams
sailed from Lingga in the s.s. Alice Lorraine on the
27th.
   The number of cases before the Courts were
much as usual. Mut, prisoner, for theft six months
extra Moi ami Ala, wives of silver-smiths, were
fined for buying stolen property. Ah Kau of Ba-
kong was lined $250 for selling rice above the
Government, fixed price, and $50 for offering a bribe
of $10 to the Native Officer of Lingga. Chola,
prisoner, received additional time for theft of a
coat from another prisoner, Lim Chiap six months
for assaulting another Chinaman with a sword
   Penghulu Engkramat of S'blak Krian arrived on
the 28th to give evidence in a case of theft and
assault Two Dyaks, by name Linggir and Untan,
were discovered stealing pepper by the owner, Kho
Ken, the two Dyaks assaulted him and another
Chinaman who came to the rescue with a knife.
These two Dyaks were sentenced to eighteen months
R. I.
   Abang Zin, Native Officer of Lubok Antti, reports
that he has visited the Engkari Dyaks and Dyaks as
far as Jingiu in the main river. The padi looks
exceptionally good, and is waist high, and if all goes
well they will begin harvesting at the end of
December.
   The engkabang crop is excellent, Dyaks say they
have never seen the fruit, so plentiful.
   The reports on the padi in this division are most
promising: natives have planted out about three
times more than in former years.
   A Dyak house situated at Teberlu was burnt to
the ground and all the property destroyed. The fire
originated from the kitchen.
   Saribas.— One Eng Bui Seng of Belong bazaar
reported the theft of jewellery valued at $138 from a
box which he had placed in his bed-room.
   Penghuhi Unji of Spak reported that the lepers
living in the Penguloh refused to remove to the
Tegurungan, the stream put apart for them by order
of His Highness the Tuan Muda. These lepers
have also stolen from other Dyaks large quantities
of padi. Abang Indut, Native Officer, has been
ordered to look into this matter at once.
   Umpoh's house consisting of three doors was destroyed by fire. The inmates were away attending a feast not far off and during the night they saw their house in flames. Umpoh suspects the house was set on fire and most probably goods stolen.
   Kalaka During the month ten Malay houses were blown down, and much damage done to property.
   Bujang of Nyabor reported that his house was burnt to the ground whilst he and bis family were away on their farms. He lost property valued at 4300. Chua Mat Gee of Kabong reported that he discovered one morning that some person or persons
had removed over a picul of rice by boring holes  through the floor of bis shop house.
   At Saratok all weights and measures were examined and one Chinaman by name Kian Tee was found with a (lacking 28 katties out.
   The following are the trade returns for the month of October, viz: —
Imports. Exports.
      October, 1919 $113,257.50	$ 161,544.00
   Total to 31/10/19	849,030.37	1,128,008.45
      Do. 31/10/18 $374,176.95	$ 464,201.84.
F. A. W PAGE-TURNER,
Resident.
BROOKETON COLLIERY.
October.
    The gross out-put of coal for the month was 1.850
tons, 530 tons of which was consumed by our boilers,
and the balance 1.320 tons was sent to wharf. The
boilers also consumed 8 tons small coal returned
from stock.
    Shipments of coal from Brooketon amounted to
1,995 tons, made up as follows:—
     To Labuan	...	... 848 tons
      .. Manila	...	... ],040 ,,
     Bunkers p. s. Adeh, etc. ...	107 ,.
Total 1,995 tons
Coal in stock at the end of the month was 400
tons.
    Everything went smoothly in both the Mining
and Engineering Departments. The usual work
of cleaning boilers and overhauling of machinery
was done in the early part of the month.
    The s s. L'Aubaine was under repairs from the
8th to the 12th inclusive: one of the old patches
was taken off her boiler and a new one put on : also
about twenty-five new tubes were put in. The
L'Aubaine was also beached while the repairs was
being done, and her hull, including sheathing, was
found to be in very good condition.
    The coal sales at Labuan amounted to 1,399 t >n-»,
making a total coal sale of 2,546 tons for Labuan
and Brooketon. The following ships bunkered .t
Labuan.
          S. S. Benvenue ...	... 850 tons
     S. S. Begona ...	... 113 ,,
     Straits Steamship Company
and launches ... 436 ,,
Total 1,399 tons
   The rainfall at Brooketon was 13’46 inches.
J. O. MADDOCKS.
Manager.
         The Sarawak Gazette.
RATES OF ADVERTISEMENTS IN THE "SARAWAK GAZETTE”
—»
Payable in advance.
Quarter of a column and under—
           First insertion ...	...	... $1.00
           Second and third insertion each ...                                       0.50
           Subsequent do do	...   0.25


328
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 16, 1919.
Half a Column and Under—
          First insertion ...	...	... 2.00
          Second Mid third insertion each	... 1.00
          Subsequent do	do	... 0.50
A Column and under—
          First insertion each	...	... 4.00
          Second and third insertion each	... 2.00
          Subsequent do	do	... 100
Special arrangements may be made for standing advertisements.
WANTED to purchase it good second-
hand greatcoat of recent fashion.
Please apply giving particulars and price to
Box B. C/o. Sarawak Gazette Office.
MIRI SHIPPING.
  All communications intended for insertion in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed to the Editor at the Government Printing Office, Kuching. They should be clearly written and should reach the Office at least two days before the publication of each issue-
  Letters and other contributions must be authenticated by writer’s name sent privately to the Editor.
  We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not inserting them.
  Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early intelligence of all matters of general interest in their respective neighbourhoods.
NOTICE.
ASTANA FARM.
FJ1HE Manager of Astana Farm begs to inform the Public that he is unable to attend to Orders for milk after Office hours.
Arrivals.
Departures.
Rainfall, October, 1919.
NOTICE.
Gazette subscriptions and Printing 
Office bills.
  FOR the convenience of residents at Out-  stations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums but only the 1,2 and 3 cent  values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that Money Orders be sent if possible.
J. C. SWAYNE,
Manager, Govt. Printing Office.
     NOTICE.
     GOVERNMENT STORE.
M
ATANG TEA is now obtainable at the
Government Store in 1lb packets.
          Price 50 cents.
 Carriage to Outstations extra.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 16, 1919.	329
NOT1CE is hereby given that by a Deed Poll or Power of Attorney executed by LAU KIONG NGHEE alias KIONG NGHEE of 31 Arab Street, Singapore, the 6th day of November 1919, the said LAU KIONG NGHEE appointed and constituted LAU CHENG CHOON, of 6 Main Bazaar, Kuching, Sarawak his lawful attorney and agent in Sarawak and that he also thereby absolutely revoked and cancelled the Deed Poll or Power of Attorney made by him the said LAU KIONG NGHEE in favour of TAN WEE JOO the 24th day of October 1913, and. every power and authority expressed to be given by the said letter deed-poll.
   Dated at Singapore this 6th day of November 1919.
A. de MELLO,
               Solicitor for LA I' KIONG NG II EE.
4, Cecil Street, Singapore, 
[6-2]
NOTICE.
SALE BY AUCTION
of all unredeemed pledges from YEK YEUN & CO., Pawn Farmers. No. 8, Sibu Bazaar, Sibu, will be held on the 15th September 1919 at 10 a.m. and quarterly from that date until further notice.
   Lists of all unredeemed pledges are on view at the Farmers' premises.
LAW JEE THAI,
Authorised Auctioneers.
PASSENGERS
ARRIVALS.
PER S. S. Alice. Lorraine:- 7th December—From Sadong Mr. J. R. Barnes.
PER s.s. Kuching:—11th December—From Singapore— Their Highnesses the Rajah, Ranee and Tuan Muda, three children and servants, Mrs. Parnell. Mr. and Mrs. K. H. Gillan and Mrs. P. H. O’Nians.
DEPARTURES.
PER S. S. Rucking 2nd December For Singapore— JI. H. the Tuan Muda, Revd. Fathers E. Dunn, F. Duxoveuner. A. Kiezer and V. Halder, Messrs. N. Westwood, G. P. Davis, H. E. Teck, Lim Cheng Kia and How Teck Sze, Data Bandar and Dayang Z'ada and one Chinese lady.
PER a. s. Alice Lorraine:—3rd December—For Sadong
— Mr. J. R. Barnes.
PER s. s. Kuching14th December For Singapore— Messrs. F. Weiding, D. M. Graham, A. N. Ellis, H. G. Gray. Miss E. S. Andrews, Mr. and Mrs. Wee Chin Ek and Mr. Lau Lok Choon.
NOTICE.
? —
AUCTION SALE
of unredeemed pledges from the Pawn Broking Farm YEW CHEE & Co., Chop Wo SANO at
I No. 18, China Street on Saturday, 20th December 1919 at 9 a. in.
   List of all such unredeemed pledges is on view at the Pawn Farmer’s premises.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO.,
Authorised Auctioneers.
KUCHING SHIPPING.
Arrivals.


330
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 16, 1919.
METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS.
GENERAL HOSPITAL.
Kuching, November, 1919.
                                                                                       Highest Barometric reading	30-04 .inches.
Lowest ..	20-90	..
                                                                                        Highest temperature (shade)	96 degrees.
Lowest	..	68’5
                                                                                        Longest Period of Sunshine in one day 8-40 hours.
                                                                                        Total rainfall (Museum)	13*40 inches.
Greatest rainfall in 24 hours 2*42
                                                                                        Height of Hospital above the sea level approximately 75 feet.
Rainfall, November, 1919.
DURING 24 HOURS


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 16, 1919.
331
             PURE FOOD MEANS GOOD HEALTH
“ALEXANDRIA” CANNED MEATS
Every Tin Guaranteed under the New South Wales 
Pure Food Act, and packed under the constant 
and vigilant supervision of a Government Inspector.
ASK FOR
“ALEXANDRIA”
Roast Beef      Roast Mutton       Beef SausageCorned Beef      Corned Mutton       Pork SausageOx Cheek      Spiced Mutton       Frankfurt SausageOx Tongues          Mutton Chops           Beef DrippingLuncheon Tongues      Assorted Meats       Pork and BeansSheep Tongues      Minced Scollops       Irish StewExtract of Beef      Assorted Soups       Ox Tail Soup  As supplied in huge quantities to the Imperial and Indian
Governments for use by both the Army and Navy.
Sold by all Stores.
CHARLES BOWEN & CO.,
2 Castlereagh Street, SYDNEY, N.S.W.
“ALEXANDRIA MEAT WORKS.”
Distributors for the East :
Seremban General Agency, Ltd.
( Incorporated in F. M. S.)
SINGAPORE .
      Sub: Agents—BAN JUI LONG,
14 Carpenter Street, KUCHING, SARAWAK.
and BAN JUI GUAN.
MIRI, SARAWAK.


332                              THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 16, 1919.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO.,
     22, CARPENTER STREET.
           COMMISSION AGENTS.
Beer, Wine, Spirit & General Store Dealers.
          		 : (O):	
SOLE AGENTS FOR:
FRASER & NEAVE'S CRATED WATERS
(The Host throughout the East.)
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic
Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at
$1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 catties of dry rubber.
ACETIC ACID.
	:(o):	
Fresh supplies of Stores are received
regularly.
PRICES MODERATE.
Free delivery to customers in Kuching.
Free packing & shipping for Outstation
Orders.
|u. c. |
NOTICE.
NOTICE is hereby given that LIM EWE TENG Administrator of the Estate of LIM THIAN HAI (deceased) has sold, transferred and made over to LIM THIAN HAI, LIM THIAN HO and LIM CHENG SOON Administrator of Estate of LIM THIAN SANG on 30th September 1919 the whole of the deceased's shares, lights, titles and interest whatsoever in Chops ENG WHATT and ENG HO and the aforesaid LIM EWE TENG has no further interest in the above firms nor will be responsible as from the above date for any debts incurred by the said business.
An agreement has duly been registered in the Supreme Court. Kuching with regard to these matter-.
(Sgd.) LI XI TH I AN LAI
LIM TH I AN HO
.. LIM CHENG SOON
ADMINISTRATOR OF ESTATE
LIM THIAN SANG.
NOTICE.
NOTICE is hereby given that the partnership here-tofore existing between LIM OH LIEW, LIM OH PHIO. LIM THIAN LAI, LIM THIAN HO, LIM THIAN SANG, LIM THIAN KHAY and LIM OH CHAI carrying on business at No. 88, Main Bazaar. Kuching, under the style or firm of Chop ENG WHATT has been dissolved by mutual- consent on 29th October 1919 and the aforesaid LIM OH LIEW retires from partnership and has no further interest in the firm nor will be responsible as from the above date for any debts incurred by the said business.
An agreement to the above effect has duly been registered in the Supreme Court, Kuching and the undersigned, LIM OH PHIO, LIM THIAN LAI, LIM THIAN HO. LIM THUN SANG, LIM THIAN KHAY and LIM OH CHAI are now sole proprietors of Chop ENG WHATT.
(Sgd.) LIM OH PHIO
.. LIM THIAN LAI
       LIM THIAN SANG
„	LIM THIAN KHAY
„	LIM OH CHAI
„ LIM THIAN HO (Sgd.) LIM OH LIEW 
Sole Proprietors.	Retired Partner.
[6-2]
KUCHING:—Printed and Published by GHIN HENG SOON, Government Printer, at the Government Printing Office.
Barrack Road.


