
VOL. XL?

No. 762.
Sarawak Gazette.
Price         KUCHING, MONDAY, FEBRUARY 3, 1919.	10 cents.
CONTENTS.
Page.
Departure of H. H. the Rajah	...	...        29
Notes ...	...	...                  ...	...        29
Lieut. H. M A. Day ...	...	...	30
Bau Returns for 1918 ...	...	         ...	...        30
The Rajah Charles Brooke Memorial Fund ...	...        30
New Year at Sibu                ...                  ...	...           ...         31
Bandjermasin—Kuching, via Central Borneo	...        31
Monthly Reports: — Sadong Coal ...	 ...                                      ...	        33
                    Upper Sarawak—Sadong	...         34
                    Sadong Colliery	...	...	35
                    Simanggang—Sibu	...	...	30
                    Bintulu —Baram	...	...	37
                    Brooketon Colliery - Limbang —
				             Lawas	 ...          38
Trade Returns	...	...	...	...	40
Rainfall	...	...	...	...	...	41
Almanac	...	...	...	...	...	42
Shipping	...	...	...	...	...	43
Passengers	...	...	...	...	43
   The Sarawak Gazette.
SUBSCRIPTIONS to the Gazette are as follows:
The Sarawak Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY—
    Single copy	...	...	...	.10 cents
    Subscription for one year	...	...	$2.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 2.25
Subscription including postage to all other
                Countries. ...	...	2.5(1
PAYABLE IN STERLING—
    Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 5s. 10d
The Sarawak Government Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY —
    Single copy	...	...	.05 cents
    Subscription for one year ...	...$1.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 1.25
Subscription including postage to all other
                Countries.	1.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING—
    Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 3s. 6d
  All subscriptions are payable in advance and must
commence from the 1st January in each year on 
which date they are renewable. All broken periods
will be considered as full.
  Subscriptions will not lie renewed unless notice 
of renewal given.
  Changes of Address should be notified to the 
Office in writing.
           The Sarawak Gazette.
     MONDAY, FEBRUARY 3, 1919.
  Departure of His Highness the Rajah.
      His Highness the Rajah left for Europe on
the 30th January. In the morning a meeting
 of the Supreme Council was convened and His
Highness informed the Members that he was
proceeding to England and expected to return
o Sarawak in the month of October and that
during his absence His Highness the Tuan
Muda would carry on the Government of
the State,
   At half-past two His Highness with His
 Highness the Tuan Muda and Mr. J. A. H.
Hardie, who is accompanying the Rajah home,
arrived on the s.s. Kuching where the leading
representatives of the capital were met to
wish him a safe and pleasant journey home.
   Before leaving. His Highness the Tuan
Muda left authority with the Honble. the
Resident of the First Division to act as his
deputy during his absence from Kuching.
NOTES.
(January.
  THE Lawas Planting Estate has 770 acres under cultivation of which 530 acres are mature. Dry rubber exported in 1918 amounted to 97,586 lbs.
  S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore on 15th January, passengers Mr. and Mrs. Peiniger and child, Mrs. Ong Wee Hian, Messrs. Takanobu, Tan Joon Teck, Tong Siew Ha, Sut Chuan Joo and Sim Why Khu.
  SUNGEI Tengah harvested 43,000 lbs. of dry rubber during the month of December.
  S. S. Gladys arrived from Sibu, via the North, with passengers Messrs. G. M. Gifford


30                            THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 3, 1919.
and T. A. Robarts. The former we regret to learn is suffering from a bad arm, which will necessitate hospital treatment.
  S. S. Kuching sailed for Singapore on 18th January, passengers Mr. and Mrs. Bean, Honble. Mr. H. B. Crocker, Capt. S. Cunynghame, Messrs. Hobarts, Geikie, Nalder  and Lim Tee Chew.
  IT is expected that the firm of Tong Lee Wah will recommence shipping timber from Rejang shortly. This considerable industry was interrupted by the war.
  PASSENGERS from the North were Messrs. Clement and Haldane by p. s. Adeh. 
  
  S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore on January 26th. Passengers were Dr. and Mrs. van Hemort, Capt. S. Cunynghame, Messrs. Shelton, W. Woeltz. C. Bowen, G. P. Davis and Miss C. H. Yew.
  LAWAS Planting Estate exported 7.661 lbs. dry rubber during the month of December.
  A Bombay Government communique draws attention to the increasing prevalence of water hyacinth in various parts of India and invites officials and non-officials in the Presidency to combine to eradicate the pest. But in Singapore it may still be seen growing unchecked, in violation of regulations.—(M. T.)
  THE S. S. Kuching left for Singapore on 30th I January. Passengers Their Highnesses the Rajah and Tuan Muda, Miss Olver and Messrs. J. A. H. Hardie, Shelton, Kirkpatrick, AV. Woeltz, H. Kimura and T. Iwater.
  WE are asked to state that visitors to the Government Bungalow at Santubong should apply at the Resident's Office in Kuching for the key of the crockery and glass cupboard. Visitors will be held responsible for any breakages occurring to Government property during their tenure of the bungalow and at the end of their stay they are asked to lock up any articles used and to return the key to the Resident’s Office.
  A telegram from Sibu received on 31st
brought the news that s. s. L’Aubaine had
broken down in the Kalaka river. The s. l. 
Lucile was despatched there at once, but it 
is feared that the bad weather at sea will 
prevent her rendering much assistance and it 
may be necessary to requisition the Adeh to 
tow L'Aubaine back to Kuching
  MR. Law Miang Yang, son of the late Mr. 
Law Ngee Siang, has reported to the Police
that the temporary resting place of his father’s
body near Batu Kinyang has been broken into
and one or two articles rifled from the coffin.
Whether the desecration was caused from 
malice or by thieves it is as yet impossible 
to say.	
  A reward of $500 is offered by the relations of the deceased for any information leading to the arrest of the culprits.
  DRY rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah Estate amounted to 19,300 lbs. for the month of January.
  Mn. F. G. Day has received a list of tickets in the Straits Settlements lottery which have been alloted to holders of tickets in the Labium lottery (one S. S. ticket to five Labuan). Holders of Labuan lottery tickets can consult the list at Mr. Day’s office or at the Sarawak Chinese Bank in the Main Bazaar. Those unable to inquire personally can do so by letter.
Liuet. H. M. A. Day.
  Mr. F. G. Day has received news by the Inst mail that his nephew, Lieut. H. M. A. Day, Royal Marines, has been awarded the Albert Medal.
  Mr. H. M.A. Day, was born at Snipe Cottage, Kuching, in August 1898 and is the elder and surviving son of Mr. H. R. A. Day (late Sarawak Civil Service, now serving in the Straits Civil Service). He entitled the Marines in 1916 and was appointed to H. M. S. Britannia in October 1917 and served in that ship until she was torpedoed in the Straits of Gibraltar on 9th November 1918.
  The Britannia sank in about three and a half hours after being hit by one torpedo out of four which were fired at her. This one struck the after 9 2 magazine which exploded and killed and wounded a large number of men, and cordite fumes accounted for many more casualties Day had a narrow escape as his cabin was not far from the place where the torpedo struck. He was saved by the armoured door which on his deck was always kept closed at sea. He was awarded the Albert Medal probably for (in the words of the Captain of fl. M. S. Britannia) " displaying resource and courage of the highest order in rescuing injured officers and men from main deck which was in darkness and full of cordite fumes."
        BauReturns for 1918.    Month.    Tonnage.Ozs.Gold.Ozs. Silver    January    5,957	5 957    1,038.9    303.1    February    5,130    1,161.3    520.7    March    8,062    2,169.0    730.0    April    8,104    2,448.1    797.9    May    8,374    2,899.1    844.6    June    7,811    3,320.0    700.8    July    7,047    2,499.5    829.5    August    7,582    2,044.2    640.5    September    6,964    2,457.6    623.0    October    7,577    2,005.4    469.7    November    6,329    2,024.0    618.4    December                (estimated results)       5,820        1,763.8    500.0          Total    ... 84,757	84.75725,830.9    7,578.2The Rajah Charles Brooke
Memorial Fund.
Amount already acknowledged                   ... $20,623.20
The Honble. Mr. H. S. B. Johnson                     ... 100.00	
28. 1. 19.	... $20,723.20


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 3, 1919.	31
New Year at Sibu.
   After an interval of four years it was decided to
revive the New Year Regatta and Sports in celebration of the conclusion of hostilities and the
glorious victory of the Allies.
   There being very few long boats left a slightly
modified form of regatta was held which afforded
good sport and was a source of great interest for
many weeks before. 
   On New Year's Eve a public tiffin for Chinese 
was held in the Court room. Seme eighty persons 
sat down to a real Chinese meal, the excellence of 
which did much credit to Mr. Lan Jee Thai and 
others of the Chinese Committee. After the tables
were cleared the Honble, the Resident in a few
words proposed the health of the Allies and ex-
pressed a hope that trade would prosper now that
the Germans had been defeated. Several Chinese
replied to the loyal toast. In the afternoon a
parade of Chinese school-boys took place, some two
hundred lads taking part, representing five schools.
A prize had been offered for the smartest corps and
for an hour and a half a most interesting display of
what discipline can accomplish was offered to the
astonished natives.
   The Kwong Hua school-boys under Mr, Ling
Chung Huak—himself an ex-soldier in the Chinese 
army marching past to the strums of “Marching
through Georgia” sung in Chinese were awarded
the first prize, whilst the second prize was given to
the Lam Keng School under Mr. Chong Cha Ching,
whose command more than compensated for their
lack of inches by their smartness on parade. Tire
usual Sibu mud was distinctly trying, to some of the
smaller lads, who were attunes in danger of being
engulfed by the quivering morass which formed part
of the parade ground. The other schools repre- 
sented were the Guang Neang School, Tieng Hua 
School, and the Roman Catholic School at Binjai, 
   The march past being finished a photograph of 
the whole parade was taken, the effect of the white- 
coated lads with their numerous flags being 
distinctly pleasing.
   At nine in the evening a lantern procession
started from the bazaar and made a round of the 
Malay kampongs and Government grounds. A 
pyrotechnic display had been advertised, but unfor- 
tunately the fire-works did not arrive in time.
   On New Year's Day the Regatta started at
8.30 a.m. and continued without a hitch until noon.
The first race for boats limited to crews of 25 men
was won easily by Mr. G. M. Gifford’s Raja Wali
paddled by a mixed crew of Tanjongs and Dyaks,
Abang Enjah’s Bujang Rusa coming in second.
Later on Mr. Gifford’s boat again won with a
two paddle handicap. A good race for the second
place ensued between the Bujang Rusa and
the Api Naraka, the former winning by inches. 
   In the 15 men race the Raja Wali once more
passed the post first, but was disqualified by the
judges for carrying too many paddles, the prize
going to Haji Mat’s Lampau Pancha.
   In the Services race a good tussle between the 
Navy and Police resulted in a win for the former, 
the Military being a bad third, and the Clerical 
Stuff nowhere. There were other races for smaller 
bouts, all of which afforded good sport, whilst the
local Blondins were given a chance of exhibiting 
their skill on (and off) an extremely difficult greasy 
pole with a drop of 12 feet to the river.
   The weather was perfect and large crowds assembled
along the banks of the river, the female element, 
their charms more or less concealed under gorgeous 
silks, occupying boats and displaying great interest
in the proceedings.
  At noon a move was made to the fort where
about 70 sat down to a Malay curry. The luncheon
interval proved a welcome rest to some of the
Europeans, to some of whom the change from
megaphone to beer was not unwelcome.
  In the afternoon the final of the football com-
petition was played off. the teams being Sibu United
and the Mudlarks, who had survived out of seven
teams entered. A somewhat uninteresting game
ensued. A great many chances of scoring were
missed by both sides and in spite of extra time
the game ended in a pointless draw. The two
teams played again a few days later, when, after
a slow game, the Mudlarks managed to score
just before the whistle went for time. The final of
the tug-of-war also took place on New Year’s Day
and resulted in a win for a Dyak team under
Penghulu Rantai, whose men, after a hard struggle
pulled a very strong Malay team over. One must
not forget to mention the Roman Catholic brass
band, which, in spite of all difficulties, played
throughout the Regatta and also during the inter-
vals of the football matches.
  The Committee deserve a word of praise for the
way they arranged the proceedings, and it is due to
their efforts that, everything went off smoothly.
The weather was kind and the river for once in a
way confined itself to its proper limits.
  Fewer Europeans than usual were at Sibu this
year, but in spite of this the usual Bridge and Billiards competitions were held in the Club. The
former competition was won by Mrs. Boult and Mr.
Gifford, who took the final rubber off Father
Quadekker and Mr. Betts. In the Billiards Mr.
Gifford heat Mr. Archer in the final round.
  Large numbers of Dyaks were at Sibu for the
Regatta and the bazaar Chinese must have made
quite a considerable sum from the sale of straw hats,
which appear to be the fashionable form of head gear
amongst the Dyak hunts this year.
  The fort was prettily decorated on the occasion of
both luncheons, while the station flagstaff flew the
flags of the allied nations, thus helping to impress
on the natives and Chinese that the occasion was no
ordinary one, and that the rejoicings were not only
a celebration of the New Year. -(Contributed.)
Bandjermasin- Kuching. via
Central Borneo.
(Continued from page 19.)
  Leaving the S. Moeboeng there are three more
rapids to be passed—the Raim Boenoet, R. Gailoeng
and R. Boentoet Asoe -it was at the R. Gailoeng
that I nearly lost one prahoe and two men their
lives. At the worst point in the rapid the triple
rotan rope broke under the strain and the men who
had been feuding off the prahoe from the rocks
leaped just in time, one shoreward and one to a
boulder in mid-stream—from whence he was rescued
with rotan ropes. The prahoe filled and was dashed
on the rocks which split the bottom (2" thick) for a
length of eight or nine feet and sprung every plank,
the marvel being that the whole prahoe was not re-
duced to match-wood. We managed to patch it up
sufficiently to proceed next day with one man con-
stantly bailing out the water, and passed the S.
Djojang Ketchil and Djojang Besar which join the
Boesang from the Eastward a short distance above
the last big rapids.
  The first big clearings on the Boesang are at Pulau
Katiphoen, where we arrived on 30th November.
They have been planted by Malays and Kenyaboeng
Punan's from Tamaloe (the largest of the two vil-
lages in the ulu Boesang), these were the only peo-
ple I met with who had gone to any trouble to stave


32
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 3, 1919.
off the hunger of which they complained and which
was only too real. They have fine crops of padi
which were already ripening, also tapioca, sugar-
cane and vegetables in plenty. I stayed here for two
nights, and having obtained fresh coolies, left for
Tamaloe, which place I found deserted but for a few
Kenyaboeng Punans.
   They had news of my coming, so had cleaned up
the house a little and had prepared a place for me,
where 1 found the chief waiting to receive me,
dressed in a picturesque costume composed of a kind
of Scotch bonnet with a strip of gold braid round it,
a blue policeman's coat with Government buttons
and a chawat. I found the people destitute of food and
dependant on wild sago and what the men could get
by hunting. They had planted a little padi, but
hopelessly inadequate for their needs and seemed
to be incredibly lazy, a fact of which I had a good
example on the night of my arrival. The whole
night it rained heavily and the Kenyaboeng, being
too slack to watch their prahoes while the river was
rising, in the morning found the only ones left were
my own, the river having risen about twenty-five
feet in the night and washed away and destroyed
the rest.
   At Tamaloe, the S. Boesang takes a sweep N. East-
ward to the Goenoeng Langangoei, a range of moun-
tains running roughly N. and S.,of which there is a
fine view from the village. The S. Tamaloe joins the
S. Boesang here from the N. West and it was up
this river that I proceeded as soon as the flood had
sufficiently subsided.
   I reached the last Kenyaboeng village of Sabaoi on
the 4th December and on landing was met by the
wakil headman who informed me that all the men
were away hunting or on the ladangs, which account-
ed for the humorous sight which met my gaze on
arrival at the house. The women, taking me for
that rara avis in those parts a Government official,
had all run out and were trying to get rid of the piles
of filth from under the house before I should see it,
the result was most amusing, about thirty women,
young and old,some of them carrying weeping babies,
were rushing about brushing, scraping and carrying
away the dirt, shrieking and falling over squealing
pigs which were being ruthlessly hunted from their
favourite refuse heaps; cackling fowls scratching in
the mud, were being smothered in avalanches of sand
which the more energetic women were using to hide
the sloppy places; I have never before seen such a
scene of utter Pandemonium.
   I was fortunate in obtaining four Kenyaboengs here
to guide me over the mountains, the Malay whom I
had previously engaged as guide proved to be an
utter fraud and knew nothing of the mountain tracks.
   As my supplies were getting low and being unable
to obtain anything to replenish them, I had to push
on immediately over the mountains and left Sabaoi
on the 5th December.
   At Sabaoi the river again forks and the S. Tamaloe,
turning Westward, is joined by the S. Sabaoi from
the North.
   I followed the S. Sabaoi for a short- distance, be-
fore taking a path across the hills, to join the river
again further up on the following day ; after follow-
ing the S. Sabaoi for some distance, I branched off
up a small tributary mountain stream to the N. W.
and begun crossing the main watershed of Central
Borneo. Then followed days of mountain climbing
and wading up mountain torrents (tributaries of the
S. Tamaloe). The country is devoid of any kind of
track and only now and then did we strike the slight
paths of Punan hunters. On the 8th December I
reached and slept on top of the Goenoeng Petcha
Pinggan, which is one of the highest of the moun-
tains forming the boundary between the S. Eastern
and Western watersheds. The cold was intense
at night, but much was atoned for by the glorious
panorama of mountains of which I had glimpses be-
tween the trees. It was impossible to keep a record
of the names of all the mountains through winch
and over which I passed, but one of the finest (of
which a full view can be obtained from Petcha
Pinggan) is the Goenoeng Saoeng, distinguished by
a precipice of white rock near the apex of the peak.
The natives are afraid of the Goenoeng Saoeng and
say that many have lost their lives while collecting
damar there, they relate that these people were burnt,
to death by fires which burst out in a spot below the
white precipice and sets fire to their damar—over-
coming anyone in the vicinity before they have time
to retreat. This story was common to both sides of
the mountains.
   Decending the Goenoeng Petcha Pinggan into
the Kerihan valley, I crossed the head-waters of the
S. Kerihan and several tributaries of the same
river, but so far up in the mountains these are mere
torrents. On the 10th December we reached the
S. Merab (a tributary of the S. Belatoeng) in
the afternoon and the same evening reached the
Kenyaboeng house on the bank of the S. Belaboeng
(a tributary of the S. Kerihan). These people
were no exception to the rule and had no food, so,
our own rice being finished, I obtained fresh guides
and pushed on the following day over the Goenoeng
Tjai range, to S. Tjai, another tributary of the
S. Kerihan. The Belatoeng Kenyaboengs previous-
ly lived here and the ruins of their old house were
still standing, but, more to the point, we found
some unripe bananas and papaya which we were
glad to boil and eat as we had been going for some
days on concentrated soup and a few dried beans,
winch fortunately I had brought from Bandjer-
masin.
    A day’s walk over the Goenoeng Bakoel, brought
me to Pulau Linau on the Sgi Kerihan (tributary
to the Batang Kapoeas) on the 12th December.
   I was very sorry that food shortage prevented
me making any collection in the mountains especial-
ly of birds and orchids, the latter in places
being very abundant and varied. 1 should say that
a butterfly collector would find a paradise in the
mountain streams where I saw the most lovely
insects of species not met with lower down in the
Boesang. I only saw the fresh tracks of one
rhinoceros, and as they need very careful tracking
and stalking, I was unable to spare the time to go
after it. The Kenyaboengs make an interesting
study in the jungle, where they areas much at home
as the animals they hunt, and I was afforded
opportunities of seeing the deadly use they make of
the sumpitan; although most of the animals they
killed were small, such as kedjang and monkeys,
on one occasion they' killed a full-grown pig with a
single dart, the pig running away, but succumbing
in less than half an hour.
   The Kenyaboengs at Belatoeng and Pulau Linau
are a much liner and cleaner type than those of the
ulu Boesang, which may perhaps be accounted for
by the proximity to the latter of the Olo Oets, the
lowest and most dangerous of the upper Boesang
tribes, with whom they have probably intermarried.
     From the Kenyaboengs at Pulau Linau I was at
last able to obtain some food of sorts and make a
square meal, which we were all needing pretty badly.
   Pulau Linau is a large island, the only building,
however, being the small rest house (chiefly inhabit-
ed by ants and impossible to obtain any rest in),
the native houses and ladangs being on the right-
hand bank of the river From the island there is a
splendid open view of the surrounding mountains and
it is noticeable that in the S. Kerihan one meets
with the same type of towering white cliffs as in the
S. Boesang, but here they are for the most part


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 3, 1919.
33
only seen from a distance. It is highly probable that below the point where I crossed the Kerihan, that river passes between these cliffs, hence the roundabout course taken by my Punan guides who told me that the direct way was impossible.
  Having obtained fresh coolies and a prahoe which was a cross between a rocking-horse and a sieve, I left Pulau Linau on Friday the 13th December with the river in flood for Poetoes Sibau. It was rather a risky business passing the rapids with such  a high water, bat there are only two, the Riam Boemboei and R. Saloeh in the Kerihan below  Pulan Linau (the latter being the more dangerous), and I decided to risk it. We passed the rapids safely, in spite of the Kenyaboengs who nearly lost the prahoe on the second rapid owing to their bad management, and entering the Batang Kapoeas in the morning, reached Poetoes Sibau at 10 p.m. that night, when I promptly woke up the owner of the biggest shop to hear the war news.
  Poetoes Sibau is a place of considerable size, but there seemed to be very little trade of any description— I stayed there for two nights to obtain fresh supplies and see something of the place and left by launch on the 15th December for Soehaid where I arrived that night. Leaving the launch here I had  considerable trouble in getting men to take me up to Madjang, but eventually got away the following afternoon, and travelling at night, reached the lakes in the early hours of the morning.
  I reached the village on Pulau Madjang before mid-day and was disappointed to find a very small place, mainly noticeable for its dirt, so was very glad to be able to obtain Dyak coolies to take me on to Badau at once. Crossing the lake from Madjang, we entered a small stream up which we ; paddled as far as the pangkallan where the Badau- Lobok Antu path commences. We arrived at the path late in the afternoon, and having had some food, pushed on to Badau the same evening and put up for the night in the one-room house which with the exception of a few ruins is all that remains of the old Dutch fort which used to stand there. The country between the pangkallan and Lobok Antu being quite devoid of shade, it is advisable to travel in the early morning and evening; however there is a good rentis most of the way and easy going. It rained heavily during the night at Badau and next morning on proceeding I found the path flooded in many places and it was sometimes necessary to wade waist deep over the bridges. I passed the Sarawak  boundary at about 9 a.m. and reached Lobok Antu an hour later. I found the Sergeant very much alive and was soon made comfortable in the fort, where I spent the night
  Leaving next morning by boat for Simanggang, I arrived late at night with a dose of fever on me and surprised Mr. Hardie who. having been informed of the arrival of an Orang Blanda, came down expecting to meet a large, bearded Dutchman (as he expressed it).
  On Christmas Day I went with Messrs. Page- Turner and Hardie to the Sabu Mission station and spent a very pleasant day with Mr. and Mrs. Howell. Altogether I had a most enjoyable week at Simanggang, thanks to the kind hospitality of Messrs. Page- Turner and Hardie ; we all left for Lingga by boat on the 27th and having spent two nights there left for Kuching with the s.a. Alice Lorraine on the morning of the 29th, arriving here in the afternoon, thus completing my journey from the S. East to the N. West coast.
  The only man who did the whole journey with me was my old Chinaman, Thio Tek Bui, but two Malays followed me from Poerok Tjahoe; otherwise I had to rely on getting coolies en route.
W. B. E. MASSEY.
MONTHLY RETORTS.
SADONG COAL
   The following report is the result of my examination of Sadong coal supplies consumed by (Government departments in and around Kuching.
   Marine and Mechanical department- Mr. Service. the Superintendent, informed me that the coal supplied of late has been finer than (Anal and that the consumption of this by the coasting vessels had increased. He also said that the methods of firing had not changed and that the coal supplied burned freely.
   Public Works and Hallway departments.—Mr. Grove, the Commissioner, said that the coal supplied to them some tune ago could not be used in the locomotives, but was quite satisfactory at the quarry boilers, and that it was very small and broken. A visit was then made to the locomotive sheds and the steaming plant at the quarry.
   Observations taken.—There were no stocks to inspect at the mechanical department. The railway supplies at the tenth mile were examined and found to contain a large quantity of the upper seam coal which was rather small with hardly any good size lumps, but in appearance fairly recently mined coal.
   The quarry boilers were not under steam on my arrival and judging from a heap of clinkers and ashes stored nearby it was at once evident that the coal had been thoroughly consumed and the stoking well done.
   The coal in the bunker of the locomotive was mostly from the top seam and too fine for economical stoking with forced draughts, the result was a deposit of fine unburnt particles and ashes on the roof and footboards of the front carriages of the train, due to the escape of the finer coal through the funnel before combustion was complete, but the steam gauges showed an uniform pressure of steam at the end of the journey, which, after all, is a good practical testimony in favour of the calorific value of the coal.
   A remedy -The coal from the lop seam, if burnt alone, is unsuitable for locomotives and small tubular boilers with a small fire space applying forced draughts. Furthermore, it does not stand the rigours of handling during shipping and transhipping as well as the coal from the other seam, so that it is advisable to reduce the out-put from this top seam to one quarter of the total out-put from the two seams combined.
   This rearrangement is now being rapidly carried out and by the beginning of March we shall be turning out a high percentage of good lump coal and we shall lie burning nothing but the top seam coal and dross from the other seam, in our stationery boilers at the mines.
   It will be economically expedient to bum medium size lump coal in our locomotives as here-to-fore and the same thing applies to the Kuching Railway locomotives, of which I have duly advised the Commissioner, who informed me that be experienced some difficulty in obtaining it. This could probably be surmounted if whole cargoes, directly on arrival from Sadong. were taken over when required, whereby the large coal could be stored (or the locomotives and the smaller variety sent on to the stationery boilers at the quarry.
   I am glad to be able to assure His Highness that it. will not become necessary under this arrangement to abandon the top seam as we had feared, and the slight reduction in the out-put for export will be , only temporary, especially, if additional labour for the underground can be procured, after the Chinese New Year from Singapore.


34		 THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 3. 1919.
  The prospecting drift searching for a coal seam below the swamp and the prospecting levels going through barren ground on the east side of No. 9 mine are being developed as hard as possible and the results will, in a few months time, enable us to decide on the site of the proposed new developments. In the meantime the surveys will be made and plans prepared for His Highness' consideration and approval of the scheme.
J. W. EVANS,
            	Manager.
UPPER SARAWAK.
BAU AND PAKU.
The Dyak padi crop is very much behind-hand, as usual. Many Dyaks never got their clearings burnt off at all as they were so late in felling. However the crop is doing quite well in places. A few Malays have made efforts to plant, patches of swamp padi and these are all doing well, but it is a pity the area planted is not greater.
DONALD A OWEN.
            Resident.
December, 1918.
  Court. The Court work during the month has
not been heavy. There have been several cases of
petty theft and one man tried to escape from the
gang the day after he was sentenced, but was re-
captured almost immediately by the prisoners.
  Sendom, a Dyak, was fined for working gutta
percha leaves in such a manner as to seriously
damage the trees.
  Bong Jin and Chen Pooi were each fined $50 for
the illegal manufacture of arrack, and the arrack
farmer* was also fined for selling arrack several
degrees below standard.
  A number of Malays—headed by one Brahim—set
on and violently assaulted Lee Hee and his coolie
at Musi They were all heavily fined.
  A number of claims were heard in the Court of
Requests.
  Public Works.- The prison gang (averaged forty-
seven) have widened the Buan road for a considerable
distance. Limestone out-crops in the line of the
path were blasted out and a good length of the road
gravelled and rolled.
  A new 54' bilian bridge has been built on the Poak 
road to replace the old one which was rotten and 
also smashed by a big tree falling across it.
  A new 65' hardwood bridge has also been put 
across the mouth of the Seringgok stream, the
former erection of soft wood having collapsed
altogether.
  The extension to the bungalow was put in hand
during the month.
  General.—His Highness the Tuan Muda accom-
panied by the Honble. Mr. H. B. Crocker arrived
from Lundu overland at 5 p.m. on the 2nd and
returned to Kuching by river on the 4th.
  A Grogo Dyak, named Garang, committed suicide
by shooting himself through the bead with his gun
on the 6th. His wife had been ill for some time
and he had been left with the care of the children
and this appeared to have been too much for him.
  I went to Kuching on the 15th returning next 
day. The 18th having been set apart as a Day of
Thanksgiving for Victory the Court and offices were
closed.
  A small Chinese boy who was sitting outside his 
father's house at Tundong received a charge of shot
in his hands and one leg from a gun tired by some 
unknown person. The damage done was not serious 
and the affair obviously accidental. Powder has not 
been on sale at Bau for over three years and shooting
accidents have been very few in consequence, but
directly powder is again for sale the Dyaks begin I
shooting either themselves or someone else.
  There has been a heavy crop of fruit of all des-
criptions mostly durian, mangosteen, rambutan and 
lansat.
  The rainfall amounted to 15'87 inches which fell
in the first half of the month. Since the 15th there
has been practically no rain and the weather has
been hot and oppressive.
October November, 1918.
   During the early part of October there was it
considerable shortage of padi and rice. The local
towkays had none, since, so long as any Sadong rice
was obtainable here, they would not lay in stocks of
the more expensive foreign rice. Therefore the day
came when there was none to be bad in the bazaar
and many of the kampong people were reduced to
one meal a day. When opportunity was found, rice
in small quantities was obtained by Government,
up and down river, wherever news of padi came to
hand. In this way a small stock of perhaps two
koyans was laid in. primarily to serve the gaol, but
at the same time to be drawn on by others when
absolutely necessary It was thought advisable
I temporarily to hold up any supplies in the river and
the down-river Tua Kampong were notified to this
effect. Permission was obtained from the Honble,
the Resident to import a certain quantity of padi
from the Saribas. This could not be acted upon
however as information was sent subsequently that
there was no padi to be obtained there. A wireless
message was therefore sent to Kuching asking for
fifty bags of rice. These arrived in due course and
there seems to be no further likelihood of any
shortage. At the end of November news came to
hand that harvesting was likely to begin at several
places within a few days. The endeavour to es-
tablish a second planting of padi in the year, has
not succeeded, because the idea could only be put
before the natives in the form of a suggestion.
This was acted upon by the more enthusiastic, but
not being backed up by the whole community who
usually farm on the Hats, these; enthusiasts in many
cases had their farms eaten off by rats. Had the
scheme been taken up by everyone and begun
earlier, there seems no reason why it should have
failed.
   Numbers of permits are being issued to work rian
leaves. Claims have been made of rights over trees,
but they cannot lie accepted unless the trees are
within twenty-five fathoms of the house or standing
in the padi land. Other claims are made of tem-
porary rights over trees by the holders of the permits.
Dyaks claim the rights over trees in their districts
and object to the Malays coming in to work these
trees. The Malays, in many cases, are making
Toads similar to the jelutong workers, possibly
hoping thereby to establish rights. Several reports
are to hand of rian trees felled in the extreme ulu
and Haji Usop has been instructed to enquire into
this and send down the names of the persons con-
cerned. The Bedup Dyaks also report fifty trees
having beau felled in their district. Abang Daud
has been sent to enquire and call in those who are
said to have done this.
   There have been several accidents and untoward
occurrences during October and November. On
October 2nd an accident occurred in No. 9 mine
resulting in the death of Bong Ah Poh, Hylam,
aged about forty-one. A fall of earth crushed him
and he only lived two hours after his admission to


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 3, 1919.
35
hospital. On November 15th, Ludin, arrested on
a Kuching Debt Court warrant and awaiting pass-
age to Kuching, contracted tetanus. He was at-
tended by the dresser and put in the care of a Malay
family. Later he developed neuritis and died on
the 17th. On the 15th again Li Man, a mine coolie
sustained a compound fracture of the femur and
was sent to Kuching by express boat. Li Ah Ngi,
a Cantonese mine Coolie, died on the 18th of pneu-
monia following influenza. Several deaths from
influenza are reported from the coast. The Cor-
poral at Semunjan was bitten by a snake on the
20th. This was treated with permanganate of
potash at once and the dresser sent for. By the
following day he was better and able to get about.
A local Chinese reported on the evening of the 22nd
that his Dyak wife had attempted suicide by taking
opium and arak in large quantities. She was
wholly unconscious when the dresser arrived, but
he succeeded in bringing her round after two hours
strenuous work.
  On the 2nd October Mr, Hunt arrived from
Goebilt and proceeded to Gedong. He returned to
Kuching on the 4th.
  On October 3rd the local cowman lodged a com-
plaint that his wife, to whom he had been married
some fifteen days, refused to live with him. She
could give no reason for this, but as the ceremony
was irregular, she was told to repay the brian if
she elected not to return to her husband.
  Mr. Parnell arrived on the 3rd October to audit
the station accounts. He left on toe l lth. On the
16th Tuanku Chi proceeded to Gedong to repair the
Government bungalow. On this occasion repairs
were effected by reducing the size and using the
spare material. On the 19th October Mrs. Boult
arrived per s.s. Alice Lorraine, en route for Kuching,
whither the launch proceeded the following day
with additional passengers Mrs. Adams and daugh-
ter and myself on short local leave. I returned on
November 12th with Mrs Adams and daughter.
Nothing serious had transpired during my absence.
Two cases were waiting trial, both were charges of
theft from the mine. On the afternoon of the 13th
November the offices were closed since the intima-
tion that His Highness the Rajah had accorded Sadong
and no holiday observed on that date. The s. s.
Alice Lorraine and Margaret sailed on the 13th,
Mr Hunt being a passenger on the latter boat. A
theft occurred mt the Residency during my absence
in Kuching. After looking into the case for some
days the constable on duty and the. tukang ayer
working there were detained. S. S. Alice Lorraine
arrived on the 16th, sailing at dawn on the 17th.
The s. l. Margaret arrived on the 20th with Mr.
Henderson and sailed on the night of the 21st. On
the 26th a Tebekang towkay reported leaving $80
lying on the counter of a local shop while he came
to Court. On his return the money was missing.
He suspected a Malay whose house was searched,
as also that of the shop-keeper, but nothing was
forthcoming. The Semunjan bridge was inspected
on the 28th as to a means of strengthening it. It
was decided to put in stronger and fewer spans, ns
the main cause of the piles shifting, is due to drift-
wood collecting between the spans which are only
twelve feet apart.. There will lie nothing new needed
beyond two piles The old piles and braces will
supply sufficient material and are in good condition.
  The Come work in the latter part of November
was very heavy. Numbers of exemption tax sum-
monses had been issued which (with several cases
of theft) were awaiting settlement after my return.
  The prisoners averaged thirteen during the two
months and were employed on clearing the Govern-
ment lands, the Sedilo road and on general up-keep.
  Influenza has been prevalent throughout the district. The mine bad a great number of cases and the average of patients in the hospital was more than doubled in the month of November. At Smrah. on the coast, there have been several deaths reported.
  Five steamers and twelve schooners entered and cleared the port in October.
  Six steamers and fifteen schooners entered and; cleared the port in November.
TONS. Cwt.
Coal	shipped in October	to	Kuching,	            1.433 06
   „	„	Sibu	                     73 00
Total	1.506	06
Coal	shipped	in	Nov.	to Kuching	1,615	05
H. A. ADAMS.
            Resident 2nd Class,
SADONG COLLIERY.
December, 1918.
  The gross out-put of coal produced during the month was 2,181 tons; 465 tons of this was consumed by our boilers and 1,716 tons delivered to the wharf, for export.
The shipments for the month were :—
The Kuching Municipality ...                   140.12 tons
Messrs. The Borneo Co . Ltd.	...  1,212.05
     ., Soon Seng, of Sibu	...     225.00 ,,
Bunkering s. l. Margaret. Goebilt ...	 6.10
                               Total shipments 1,584.07 ,,

   The balance of stock on the wharf at the end of the month was 732.06 tons.
, No. 9 mine produced less coal than usual during December, owing to the increase of disturbances in the upper panel and a huge fall of roof, which took ; place on the double-parting of Hie lower panel, completely closing up these workings early in the month. Work was carried on day and night at full pressure on this fall and over 3,000 tons of material has been removed. As we are not yet half-way through it is difficult to predict when these workings will be open again
   Two of the old roads were re-opened on the west side, in the direction of a coal pillar of unknown size and excellent coal was struck towards the end of the month This is the only spot where coal can be profitably worked in No. 9 mine at present.
   No. 8 and No. 11 mines produced a good out-put. These two mines were connected up during the month and are now ventilated with the fun. The coal seam here is quite good and there are no visible signs of the approaching end of this large coal pillar.
   The out-put from the new mines on the hill was restricted, owing to complaints having been received about the quality and size of the coal supplied to the s. s. Alice Lorraine about the middle of November, and again to-day from Messrs. The Borneo Company who state that the recent shipments received here contained more small coal than usual. The bulk of those shipments was coal turned out from these mines. Our local experience of this coal, for steaming purposes, is most satisfactory and the native stokers prefer it to the coal I from the other seam, but in appearance it is inferior being smaller and finer and so brittle that it breaks up rather badly in the handling during shipping and transhipping.
   It is unfortunate that, our consumers consider our present supplies of coal inferior, as the seam which produces the best lump coal is at present so


36		THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 3, 1919.
disturbed and uncertain that we had to rely on the
upper seam, which produces the small coal com-
plained of, but in order to give satisfaction I have
already abandoned one of the new mines. The rail
tracks have been taken up and brought out, and
the labour employed here transferred to No. 8 and
No. 11 mines, where larger coal can be produced,
at higher costs, and I hope to be able to come round
to consult His Highness the Rajah on this matter
as soon as possible, as it is a question of vital
importance to the future working of the Collieries.
  There was more than the average number of
breakdowns in the mechanical department. One
of the Davy tubular boilers was thoroughly cleaned
out and the tubes partially overhauled.
  The ditching and draining of the swamp in the
vicinity of the kampong, which had been begun in
November, was continued and branch lines were
laid from the railway in order to dump refuse
material from the mines on the low ground, and to
raise it above the water level in the ditches after
heavy rains.
  A new prospecting drift was begun al the fool of
the hili in search of a coal seam lying underneath
the swamp. This was driven down a vertical depth
of fifteen feet, with convalescent labour, through
shale and course sandstone, and a small layer of
coal, about one inch thick, was struck at the end of
the month.
  The usual repairs were carried out at the wharf.
The general health of the employees was good.
The rainfall for the month was 15'71 inches.
J. W. EVANS,
Manager.
SIMANGGANG.
December, 1918.
  On the 3rd the s. 1. Hong Line arrived from Kuching; and during the landas will ply between Mar up and Sebuyow, towing a bandong for cargo.
  On the 4th the Resident 2nd Class left for Lingga and Sebuyow in order to hear numerous outstanding cases; and to audit accounts. On his return here on the 13th, he reported that Lee Boon Khian, the Lingga clerk, had forged the counterfoil of receipt books and by so doing converted Government money, amounting to $117.08, to his own use dating from September.
  Gan Ah Tho was sent down as temporary clerk, and Lee Boon Khian detained at Simanggang until orders from His Highness the Rajah.
  Inche Mohamat Ali of Kuching sent his boat here twice during the month and shipped in all six head of Government cattle for $200.
  On the 8th I sent a bandong to Saratok to ship six coyans of Government padi, but only obtained one coyan, the stock of padi is now finished, most of the padi having been shipped to Kuching and Kapit.
  On the night of the 19th Mr. B. E. Massey, late of Sungei Tengah Estate arrived here from Lubok Antu, he having come overland from Banjarmasin E. B., the journey taking two and a half months.
  There was very little Court work during the month on account of the influenza epidemic.
  Tuanku Haji Mansor, the Government vaccinator returned to Kuching; lie has not yet finished vaccinating in this division, on account of the epidemic.
  1 regret to report the death of Abang Andieng of Lingga, who joined the service some 40 years ago as clerk at Lingga; in 1893 be was appointed Native Officer, and retired as a pensioner early this year.
   On the 27th Mr. J. A. H. Hardie and myself
having been granted leave, left for Kuching, via
Lingga, per s. s. Alice Lorraine to attend the
Sarawak Regatta.
   The 25th being Christmas Day the offices were
closed
   Saribas.—The epidemic of influenza has gone all
through the district ; attacking both natives and
Chinese, but towards the end of the month died out.
A sad drowning fatality occurred at N. Bla, a party
of five Dyak women were returning from their
farms and encountered a strong ebb tide, and on
going across from one side of the river to the other,
they capsized and one young girl by name Srika.
was drowned before assistance arrived.
   Kalaka. —There have been numerous thefts in the
vicinity of Rohan, and this put down to the famine.
There are many complaints against the Chinese who
do not import sufficient rice for those who are able
to buy at the high price ruling now arid most of the
natives are living on sago.
   The trade returns for this division are as follows : —
December. 1918
Total to 31/12’18
   Total to 31/12/18
Imports.
$ 38,594.00
 477,448.15
$441,018.85
Exports.
$ 48,231.70
 580,511.12
$567,136.82
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER.
Resident.
SIBU.
December, 1918.
   On the evening of the 3rd I received a report
from Semah that a Hokien Chinese named Seng
Chong Seng, with his wife and child, had been
murdered in his boat in the Mupong stream. The
bodies were found by a Foo Chow Chinese, and
Dyaks living nearby brought the news to Sibu.
From reports made by various people suspicion fell
on a Dyak named Saieng. Mr. Aplin left for Mu-
pong on the 5th and returned on the following day
having arrested Saieng. Whilst at Benatang the
suspected man attempted to escape and when 
rearrested was found to be in possession of a knife.
Later a quantity of Chinese property was found in
Saieng’s room. Saieng was Charged with murder
before five assessors on the 14th and. after an ad-
journment, was found guilty and sentenced to death
on the 19th. the sentence being referred to His
Highness the Rajah for confirmation.
   A Chinese Woman was accidentally drowned at
Sungei Kunit. A Dyak boy at Song is reported to
have died two days after having been bitten by a
mad dog.
   Mr. G. M. Gifford reports that three Punan Bar
were murdered on the 7th instant by a party of
fifty Gat Dyaks under tbe leadership of Guntor,
Jubang, Blikau and Jok. One other Punan wag
wounded. The murder took place a short distance,
below Giam Mikai.
   On the 27th I was informed that a Chinese man
and woman had left their houses on the 25th and
their bodies had been found in the river at Bukit
Lan. As the woman’s hand was tied to the man’s
it is evident that the couple had deliberately thrown
themselves into the river. The woman was married
to another Chinese.
   Another Chinese married woman committed suicide by hanging herself after a quarrel with her
husband.
   I am given to understand that the firm of Tong
Lee Wah expect to recommence shortly the export
of timber from Rejang to Hongkong.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 3, 1919.
37
   Five tenders were received for the pawn farm,
which was secured by the previous holder at a rental
of $156 per mensem for three years, an increase
over the previous rental of $86 per mensem.
   The envoys ordered by His Highness the Rajah
to visit the Gat Dyaks arrived at Sibu on the 12th
and have left for Kapit.
   Dyaks from up-river state that the influenza
appears to be over. A large number of Dyaks seem
to have died during the epidemic.
   Chiefs from various parts of the district report
that there are prospects of a fair padi crop this year.
   Under the supervision of Revd. Mr. Hoover the
spreaders of the wireless aerial have been replaced
with piping.
   Mr. G. M. Gifford arrived at Sibu from Kapit on
the 18th, and Messrs. F. F. Boult and H. H. Kort-
right and family strived on the 23rd.
   S. S. Flevo cleared for Singapore twice during the
month, and s.s. Batavier also mode one-trip
   During the month 712 piculs 86 katties of planta-
tion rubber were shipped to Singapore. This is the
equivalent of 95,021 lbs.
   The trade returns for the month of December  1918 are appended.
Imports.
   Coasting ...	$ 20,162
   Foreign ...	79,183
$ 99,295
   Brought. forward       847,492
                     $946,787
             1917	$844,213
   Exports.
$	11,155
     94,028
$ 105,183
   952,712
$1,057,895
$1,090,139
   Total Immigrants for December 1918.
                Men. Women. Children.
   Foo Chow	3
   Heng With	8	3	15 =29 total.
J. BARING-GOULD, 
Resident 3rd Division.
BINTULU.
—?—
November, 1918.
   In the Courts the aeries of disputes relating to inheritance and ownership of lands which began during the recent fruit season still continues, but these cases are less numerous than they were during October. Work in the Court of Requests was less than usual, possibly’ owing to the people being a good deal scattered just now through living on their padi farms instead of in the kampungs. Their creditors know that they will return to their permanent homes after harvest and will probably then be in a position to pay their debts.
   Jelutong working has decreased lately with the fall in price, but sago flour has gone up to $1 a pasu so that there is more activity in the manufacture of that commodity.
   Both here and at Tatau the recent Order about wild gutta caused some excitement. The Chinese here will not deal in gutta percha leaves although they are still apparently quite willing to buy the gutta percha itself. Those who sell to them now simply give the excuse that they went into the jungle to work it before bearing about the Order. Chinese who export say they are merely getting rid of old stock. Of course neither of these excuses can be valid for very long, but I think that, as far as this district is concerned, a penalty on the buyers, who can lie got at through the export lists, would lie absolutely effective in stopping work by the old style of felling which is now forbidden. There would be
no market for gutta percha made in this way and nobody therefore would work it.	
     The health of the district still leaves a good deal
to be desired. Influenza is still prevalent, but although cases are less numerous than formerly the pneumonia that follows is apt io be much more severe and there have been a number of deaths from this cause.
  As in October only one mail was received from Kuching during the month, on the 10th, and in the mail from Miri which the p. s. Adeh dropped on her return voyage and which reached Bintulu on the 15th, was news of the German breakdown and armistice. The Adeh had also left mails from the North at Kidurong on the 4th.
  At Bintulu fort the rainfall was 13.42 inches during November, but from all accounts there would seem to have been more up-river, as Tubau was flooded for about ten consecutive days, during seven of which the water level was well over the floors of all shops in the bazaar and the inmates had to live in their lofts above. The police, whose quarters arc also in the bazaar, took shelter in Tubau tort until the flood went down.
  Rough seas in the middle of the month destroyed all old channel marks, so when the weather improved new’ ones were put up. Temporary bridges were also erected over the Plan and Sebatang streams.
  Penghulu Merdan has for some time been collecting hard wood and other materials to make a new house, his old one being in rather a shaky condition. On the 27th he reported that material for the frame work was ready and that he intended to build his new house at once so as to have it finished before this harvest.
  Prospects for the padi harvest, both here and at Tatau, seem to be fairly good, although insect pests on the farms have been worse than usual. Unless the floods of last year are repeated there should be plenty of rice in the district during 1919.
A. E. LAWRENCE,
Resident 2nd Class.
BARAM.
November, 1918.
  The river rose to a great height at the beginning of the month and stayed up for about a fortnight. It was one of the worst floods experienced in the district and all the low lying ground was some three or four feet under water. The padi was all submerged and 1 am afraid is ruined which i4 unfortunate as is was promising well. The bazaar was also under waler so all work on the new bazaar was stopped.
  The Honble. the Resident arrived on the 20th and after settling up various matters left again on the 23rd.
  There has been very little Court work during the month.
  The Forestry Inspectors have finished their rough survey and inspection of all the fruit orchards pulau buah in the district and they should all lie registered by the end of the year.
  The prisoners have been repairing the roads and damage done by the floods.
  Large quantities of sago have been imported from Belait by the Pagalayan canal to ease the food question.
The trade returns for the month are as follows:—
Exports.	Imports.
$5,216	$6,245
DATU S. HAMID,
Native Officer.


38	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 3, 1919
      BROOKETON COLLIERY
                December, 1918.
  Our out-put for the, month was 2,724 tons; 717 tons were used for the boiler consumption and 2,007 tons were sent to the wharf for sale. Our sales amounted to 1,988 tons. The coal was taken by Messrs, the Straits Steamship Co.’s ships as bunker and cargo. Messrs, the Mitsubishi Trading Co. as bunkers and the local launches and coasters.
  The rainfall for the month was 14’86 inches.
  Everything went well with the machinery, our three large Lancashire boilers were under steam during the whole of the month, also the two smaller boilers; our present rainfall necessitates this. At I no time during the month was there any chance of I the water rising to danger point. We removed the ' two large pulley wheels from the No. 1 shaft. The mining went on quite smoothly during the month, we made good progress in our No. 2 dip, also the cross drift exploring for the expected seam of coal. Our No. 1 and No. 2 levels came to the end of the coal driving south, and we turned No. 8 level in the main dip. This will compensate us a little for the two top levels finished. We have a lot of trouble in our shallower workings with the smell coming off from the spontaneous combustion. This calls for a lot of supervision.
  The repairs to the oil level at Buang Tawar were proceeded with and made good progress. During the rainy weather the oil increases a little.
  We beached, cleaned and repaired our tongkang during the month, also cleaned the L’Aubaine's boiler The patch on the boiler gave us a lot of trouble during the month, scarcely doing a journey without the tubes leaking. We have a piece of plate ready and the first convenient time we are going to try to remedy this. We did repairs to both the wharves during the month. Two accidents occurred in our shallower workings (not of a serious nature). The health of the coolies were good, with a plentiful supply, of labour on hand.
THOS. LEWIS,
General Manager.
LIMBANG.
                December, 1918.
  Mr. W. R. T. Clement, Resident 2nd Class, left
for Pandaruan in the m.l. Damit on the morning of
the 3rd to select a site for the new Customs Office.
Fie returned the same evening and reported that he
had chosen one just above the Pandaruan end of the
Engkrumi road.
  The p.s. Adeh arrived from Kuching on the 4th
with passengers Messrs. Dun and Mc. Gowan, she
returned the following day with the same passengers.
  The Resident 2nd Class was absent at Danau 
from the 10th to the 13th. On his return he re-
ported having settled a number of Debt Court cases
and that the up-river padi, of which very much
more than usual has been planted this year, was
looking very well
  The p.s. Adeh arrived here from Kuching on the
17th she sailed for Lawas the following day with
Mr. W. R. T. Clement who is to take charge of the
I .awns and Trusan district in place of Mr.
W. F. de V. Skrine who is going to Miri to relieve Mr. F. H. Kortright who goes home on furlough.
  I left here for Lawas on the 24th returning on the 31st accompanied by Messrs. Allman and Skrine.
  One thousand dollars, the Brooketon Mining rent for the first half of the year 1919, was remitted to Brunei.
  Court.—There were the usual number of cases of petty theft, breach of contract, etc., but none calling, for special mention. Fines and fees amounted to $27.84
  P. W. D. The coolies have been working on the Sebukang and Sungei Poyan roads and repairing the Sungei Poyan bridge.
  The prisoners have been working cm the Three Mile round and clearing the Government rubber plantation.
Trade.- -The following are the trade returns: — Imports.                 Exports.
    Coasting ...	$5,616	$14,226
    Foreign	...	2,307	3,210
The rainfall for the month was 14’08 inches.
H. S. B. JOHNSON, Resident 5th Division.
LAWAS.
December, 1918.
  I arrived here by the p.s. Adeh on 19th to
take over charge of the district from Mr. Skrine.
Finding that he was in Trusan I left for that station
by the overland route on 21st and having checked
the cash, etc., returned hero with him on 23rd.
  The Honble. Mr. H. S. B. Johnson arrived on
23rd to spend Christmas with Mr. Allman. He
returned to Limbang on 31st accompanied by
Messrs. Skrine and Allman.
  Tenders for the arrack and gambling farms were
invited. The successful tenderer was Eng Hock
Heng of Limbang. There is an increase of $216.
per annum.
  There has been considerable amount of sickness
throughout the district, evidently of the influenza
type. Work on the Lawas Planting Estate was
largely curtailed owing to it.
  Goh Kim Swee who has been in charge of the
Customs at the kuala has been sent to do duty
at Sundar ; Drahman, who was formerly looking
after the Customs at Punang, has been appointed to
take his place.
  The prisoners were employed on the extension of
the road leading to the Lawas Planting Estate.
  The Lawas Planting Estate exported 7,661. tbs.
dry rubber.
The rainfall was 12'55 inches.
The trade returns are -
       Foreign Imports. Foreign Exports.
$3,781	$7,950
W. R. TUDOR CLEMENT
Resident 2nd Class.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 3, 1919.
39
      The Sarawak Gazette.
RATES OF ADVERTISEMENTS IN THE " SARAWAK GAZETTE"
Payable in advance.
Quarter of a column and under—
         First insertion .	..	...$1.00
         Second and third insertion each	... 0.50
         Subsequent do	do	... 0.25
'Half a Column and under—
         First insertion ...	...	.. 2.00
         Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
         Subsequent do	do	... 0.50
A Column and under—
         First insertion each	...	... 4.00
         Second and third insertion each	... 2.00
         Subsequent do	do	... 1.00
Special arrangements may be made for standing advertisements.
  All communications intended for insertion in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed to the Editor at the Government Printing Office, Kuching. They should be clearly written and should reach the Office at least one day before the publication of each issue.
  Letters and other contributions must be authenticated by writer’s name sent privately to the Editor.
  We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not inserting them.
  Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early intelligence of all matters of general interest in their respective neighbourhoods.
NOTICE.
ASTANA FARM.
THE Manager of Astana Farm begs to inform the Public that he is unable to attend to Orders for milk after Office hours.
            “A clean tooth never decays.”
H. OHNISHI D.D.S. (T.D.C.)
(Graduated Tokyo Dental College)
Japanese Dentist
         193-6, ORCHARD ROAD, SINGAPORE.
(12-3)


WANTED.
C
OURT INTERPRETER with know-
    ledge of Foo Chow (essential), Hok-kien
and Cantonese dialects and able to read and
write Chinese characters and understand
Chinese accounts.
    Applicants please apply to Resident’s
Office, Sibu, Sarawak.
[.6-3]
NOTICE.
? ?
    Gazette subscriptions and Printing Office bills.
   Foil the convenience of residents at Outstations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums but only the 1,2 and 3cent values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that Money Orders be sent if possible.
J. C. SWAYNE, 
                 Manager, Govt. Printing Office.
 
 Notice of Sale.
: THE undermentioned lots in the district of Kuching will be offered for sale by public auction at the Court House, Kuching on Friday, the 21st of February 1919, at 9 a. m. on the terms below specified:—
Schedule.	Reserve Price.
Lot No. 22 West of 1½  mile Rock Road
2 ½  acres $250.
Quit Rent @ 50 cents per acre, per annum.

Conditions.
   The applicant shall maintain the. said land in good order and any buildings erected as dwelling houses on the said laud shall be of a substantial character.
   The title will be a grant for 999 years.
   The purchaser will be required to pay a deposit of 25 per cent of the purchase money and the balance within 14 days from the date of sale, failing which the deposit will be forfeited to Government. Plans may be seen and further information obtained at the Land Office where also offers may be made by persons desirous of purchasing the said land. Government reserves the right to withdraw the property from auction in the event of any satisfactory offer being made for same before the date of the auction sale.
           ABANG SULEIMAN.
for Supt. of Land Survey Dept.
NOTICE.
WE beg to notify our customers that our
Town Office has been closed since 31st December 1918.
   For the sale of our sawn timber locally we have appointed Mr. YEO CHOO HONG of Chop SOON TECK of Jawa Street as Agent, who will give his attention to all orders.
   Prices for all timber delivered at our Works at Sungei Priok will be 5% less than those for town deliveries.
   In future ail communications should be addressed to THE KWONG LEE BANKING CO., our Financial Agents, and all monies due to us should also be paid to them.
   THE KUCHING STEAM SAW MILLS LIMITED.
[6—2]


40
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 3, 1919.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 3, 1919.	41
Kuching, Coasting Trade Returns for the month of Dec., 1918
Rainfall, January, 1919.
IMPORTS.
Rainfall December, 1918
GOVERNMENT WHITEWASHING AND PAINTING CONTRACT, 1919.
28th February next for the above contract, particulars of which may be obtained upon application. All tenders must be made on the forms provided by the Municipal Department and should be forwarded in sealed envelopes addressed to the Municipal Officer.
K. H. GILLAN, Municipal Officer.
For Sale.
? —
     (1) 8 h. p. Oil Engine.
(2)4 inch Pump with 40 feet Pipings. 
(3) ‘Tauton’ Dynamo (English made)
           60 Amperes. 100 Volts.
    ALL the above are guaranteed in best working order.
    Any reasonable offers accepted as the company required a 14 to 18 h. p. Engine.
  For further particulars please apply to
     THE SIBU TRADING Co., SIBU, SARAWAK.
[7-TJ


42
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 3. 1919
THE KUCHING DRUG STORE.
NOTICE.
KUCHING, SARAWAK.
The place where you can always get: -
PHOTOGRAPHIC CHEMICALS, SURGICAL APPLIANCES,
OPTICAL GOODS, PATENT MEDICINES, TOILET
REQUISITES AND THE LATEST NOVELS.
HOURS.
From 8 a.m. To 11.30 a.m.
„ 1p.m.	„ 4.30 p.m.
         PRICES MODERATE.
   ORDERS PROMPTLY EXECUTED.
(12—8]
THE: ''SARAWAK GAZETTE"
ALMANAC.
FEBRUARY, 1919.
AUCTION SALE
of unredeemed pledges from Pawn Broking Farm YEW CHEE & Co., Chop ’Wo SANG and Chop LOON YEN of Bau at No. 18; China Street on Saturdays of the following dates—15th February 1919, 15th March 1919, 19th April 1919, 17th May 1919 and 21st June 1919, at 9 a.m.
   List of all such unredeemed pledges can be seen at the Pawn Farmer’s premises.
SYN BIN LEONG & CO., 
Authorised Auctioneers.
SYN HIN LEONG & C0.,
     22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS.
Beer, Wine, Spirit & General Store Dealers.
	:(o):	
SOLE AGENTS FOR :
FRASER & NEAVE'S AERATED WATERS-
(The. Bent throughout the East.)
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic
Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at
$1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 catties of dry rubber.
ASAHI BEER.
ACETIC ACID.
	:(o):	
Fresh supplies of Mores are received
regularly.
    PRICES MODERATE.
Year KI Bl or 56th year at the Cycle.
  Free delivery to customers in Kuching.
Free packing & shipping for Outstation
Orders.
[u. c.]


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 3, 1919.
43
SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
Departures.
F. G. DAY,
Registrar of Trade.
PASSENGERS.
ARRIVALS.
PER S.S. Kuching : - 15th January—From Singapore—Mrs. Ong Wee Hian, Messrs. Takanobu. Tan Joon Teck, Fong Siew Ha, Sut Chuan Joo and Sim Why Khu and Mr. and Mrs. Peiniger and child.
PER S. s. Gladys: —16th January—From Sibu Mr. G. M. Gifford—From Rejang—Mr. T. A. Robarts.
PER p. s. Adeh :—25th January—From the North Messrs. Clement and Haldane.
PER s. s. Kuching:—26th January From Singapore— Messrs. Shelton, Win. Woeltz, C. Bowen, G. P. Davis and S. Cunyng- hanie, Miss. C. H. Yew. Mr. and Mrs. J. G. van Hemort.
DEPARTURES.
PRR S. S. Kuching:—18th January—For Singapore— Mr. and Mrs. Bean, Messrs. Crocker, S. Cunynghame, Robarts, Nalder, Gei- kie and Lim Tee Chew.
PER S. s. Kuching:—30th January—For Singapore— T. H. the Rajah and Tuan Muda, Miss Olver, Messrs. Shelton, Kirkpatrick, Wm. Woeltz, J. A. H. Hardie, H. Kimura and T. Iwata.

RIDE A RIGID, RAPID, RELIABLE 
RALEIGH
THE ALL-STEEL BICYCLE 

with wheels carefully built and hand-trued
bx the most highly skilled British opera-
tives. Thus comfort in cycling is assured
and
wheel runs and remains true
Raleigh Cycle Co. Ld.
        NOTTINGHAM, ENGLAND.
GUARANTEED FOR EVER ALL THE WORLD OVER


44		THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 3, 1919.
THE SARAWAK STUDIO
THE BEST IN KUCHING
WHERE GOOD PORTRAITS CAN BE TAKEN AND VIEWS OF THE
NEIGHBOURHOOD PROCURED.
VIEWS OF THE WANGKANG PROCESSION IN GREAT
VARIETY FOR SALE.
PHOTOS FOR PASSPORTS
AMATEURS’ FILMS & PLATES DEVELOPED, PRINTED &
ENLARGED AT REASONABLE CHARGES.
FRESH KODAK FILMS CAN ALWAYS BE SUPPLIED.
Free instructions given to Amateurs with pleasure.
21, COURT HOUSE ROAD,
KUCHING.
C. M. LEE, Manager..
      KUCHING:—Printed and Published by GHIN HENG SOON, Government Printer, at the Government Printing Office
Barrack Road.

