
VOL. XLIX.

No. 764.
Sarawak Gazette.
Price	KUCHING, SATURDAY, MARCH 1, 1919. 10cents

CONTENTS. Marriage:—Johnson (Brooke)Page.
55Notes... 55The War s Shipping Losses... 56Rattans... 56 Sadong RegattaMonthly Reports:—Sadong Colliery—Simanggang... 57                    Bintulu—Baram.. 58                    Miri—Brooketon Colliery...59 Trade Returns... 60Miri Shipping... 61Passengers... 62 Almanac... 62Kuching Shipping	... .	....... 63Rainfall ...	...	•••... 63The Sarawak Gazette.
SUBSCRIPTIONS to the Gazette are as follows :
The Sarawak Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
Single copy	...	...	•••	•10cents
Subscription for one year ...	$2.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 2.25 
Subscription including postage to all other
                 Countries.	...	...	2.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING
    Subscription for one year (including postage abroad! 5s 10d
The Sarawak Government Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
    Single copy	...	•••	•••	.0.05cents
    Subscription for one year	...	••• $1.60	
Subscription including postage to Outstations 1.25 
Subscription including postage to all other
                 Countries.	1.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING -
    Subscription for one year (including postage abroad 3s.6d
  All subscriptions are payable in advance and must commence from the 1st January in each year on which date they are renewable. All broken periods will be considered as full.
  Subscriptions will not be renewed unless notice of renewal given.
  Changes of Address should be notified to the Office in writing.
The Sarawak Gazette.
SATURDAY, MARCH 1, 1919.
Marringe
       JOHNSON (BROOKE)—WYNCH.—On Dec. 18, at Exmouth, H. C. BROOKE JOHNSON, Captain A. S. C., of Lawas. Black heath Park, to PHYLLIS LOVEDAY. daughter of Lt.-Col. F. Wynch.. Exmouth.
NOTES.
(February.)
  His Highness the Tuan Muda left by p.s. Adeh for Lingga on the 28th. After staying H few days at Simanggang His Highness proposes to visit the ulu Batang Lupar and from there may journey across land to the Saribas and Krian rivers
  S. S. Gladys arrived from Singapore on the 20th. A European mail was brought.
  THE price of engkubang at the end of the month in Kuching was quoted at $9.85 for the first quality. The smaller nut was quoted at $7.28, but there was no great demand for it.
  THE Director of Agriculture for the Government of the Philippines is anxious to get in touch with some fruit grower in this country who could supply him with a few cuttings of the best varieties of pomeloes obtainable here.
  Any cuttings should be sent by post direct to the Director of Agriculture, Manila, P. I., who will defray ail charges.
  CUTCH to the extent of 3,161 tons was exported from Selalang during 1918.
  AT an American tiffin at the Hotel- de I’Enrope, in the absence of Bishop Stunz, the Rev. J. M. Hoover, who has been sixteen years in Sarawak, gave an informal address on that country. I am the advance agent for Sarawak, said the speaker; when people get to know what the interior of that country is


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1919.
like, and it becomes safe to venture into the interior, nobody will go to India, Ceylon, or even the Malay Penisula, for on the vast plateau in the centre of Borneo is a climate and a soil and natural wealth that can beat anything yet discovered.
  AT the W. E. Congress held in Singapore it was decided that Sarawak should be detached from the Singapore District and constitute a separate District, with the Rev. J. M. Hoover as Superintendent. Mr. and Mrs. Miner are to go on leave.
  RATES and rents for the Kuching Fish, Pork  and Vegetable Markets amounted to $15,150.09  for the year ending 31st December 1918.
  A large iron tank or boiler is reported to have been washed ashore hear Tanjong Datu. It is described as being approximately 24 feet long by about 10 feet in diameter. It is possible this may turn out to be the tank which was abandoned by s. s. Mentin in October when towing it from the Karimon Islands to Mini.
  DRY rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah
during the month of January amounted to
19,330 lbs.
  Two motor driven, deep sea fishing vessels
have recently arrived at Tawau after an
eventful and dangerous voyage from Formosa.
The vessels were under the command of Mr.
J. Orita who is to be congratulated on his safe
arrival. The method of fishing to be adopted
is with deep sea lines, known by the Malays
as rawai The enterprise is financed by the
Kuhara Estate with the primary object of
supplying fish to their Labour force, any excess
above their requirements being disposed of in
the local market.—(B. N. B. Herald.)
  Two of the smaller prizes in the B. N. B.
lottery are said to have been won by ticket-
holders in the First Division.
  S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore on
the 22nd. The saloon passengers were H. H.
the Tuan Muda, Mrs. Swindell, the Rev.
Father Quaddecker, Messrs. Robarts, P. H.
O’Nians, H. Honda, Lau Chin Heng and Sim
Kim Eng.
  No European mail was brought.
  S. S. Alice Lorraine left for Sadong on the
22nd and returned here on the 25th. Pass-
engers by her were Messrs. J. R. Barnes and
Jacques.
  S. S. Kuching left for Singapore on February
26th. No European passengers were carried.
She exported the largest cargo that has left
this country since 1913, sago and jelutong
accounting for a greater part of the space.
Amongst some novel exports were charcoal
and live stock. The latter consisted of
chickens and pigeons for the Singapore
market.
  IN the Second Division natives started har-
vesting their hill farms at the end of January
and there is an expectation of a very good crop; farms along the riverbank have been badly attacked by field mice.
  IN the Lower Rejang Report for 1918 it is suggested that the influenza epidemic, coming at a time when natives are usually busy on their farms, is responsible for the large destruction of padi by vermin.
The War's Shipping Losses.
  Syren and Shipping has compiled a Mercantile War Loss Book, which makes a formidable list. It gives an alphabetical enumeration of steamships destroyed during the Great War, 1914-18, together with a list of the losses of the world's principal steamship companies. Amongst the latter list are the following
  Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Co.—Area, Bullmouth, Bulysses, Conch, Goldmonth, Telena, Trocas.
  British India Line. —Berbera, Chilkana, Chilka, Golconda, Islands., Itinda, Itria, Itonus, Malda, Mantola, Mashobra, Matiana, Mombass, Mongara, Nirpura, Okhla. Orissa, Rewa, Shirala Uganda, Umaria, Umballa. Upada.
  East Asiatic Co—Columbia, Indien.
   Glen Line.-—Glenartney, Glengyle, Glenlogan,
Glenogle, Glenstrae.
   Holt and Co.. A. —Achilles, Autolycus, Calchas,
Eumivus, Glaucus, Kintuck, Laertes, Machaon,
Moyune, Oopack. Perseus, Phemius, Troilus.
   Messageries Maritimes de France.—Annam, Athos,
Australian, Breton, Caledonien, Ernest Simons,
Gauge, Karnak, Magellan, Mechanician Douzell,
Mossoul, Polynesian, Portugal.
   Nippon Yusen Kabushiki Kaisha.—Hirano Maru.
Hitachi Maru, Miyezaki Maru, Moyari Maru, Toba
Maru, Tokuyama Maru.
   Peninsular and Oriental.—Arabia, Ballarat, Cale-
donia, Candia. Macedonia, Maloja, Marmora, Medi-
na, Moldavia, Mongolia, Mooltan, Namur, Pera,
Persia, Salsette, Simla.
	Royal Mail.—Brecknockshire, Merionetshire, Rad-
norshire.
      Ruys and Zonen, Wm. —Bandoeng, Djember.
Jacatra.
Rattans.
   It is the little things that count sometimes says
the Dutch E. 1 Review. Here is a letter from a
big rattan and reed concern in the U. S. A. that
seems to be interested a great deal in the Dutch
Indies. Dutch Indian exporters of rattans please
take notice.
   “It will be a pleasure for us to do all we can
towards giving business throughout your section.
The stock that we require is of the very highest grade
and we can use anywhere from 1,000 to 1,500 tons
per annum. The business that we are doing now is
mostly through Singapore.’’
   “ It may interest you to know that we have been
handling Rattans here since the early ’40’s and this
stock was used for making imitation whalebone
and went into the manufacture of umbrellas and
parasols, and this was brought about by the scarcity
of whalebone."
   “ The writer has lived in your section, having
visited all the sections producing Rattans: Sumatra,
Borneo, Java, also Celebes. I made this trip
during 1879 and 1880. Our entire interests here
are devoted to the Rattan industry. Any of your
friends that may be interested, can drop us a line
at any time mailing samples of just what stock is
procurable, and we shall always be pleased to give
it consideration as well as other business that can
I be put our way."


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1919.
Sadong llegatta.
   The Regatta will take place on the 25th March. Other features will be the final of the football competition and land sports.
    1st Race 7 a.m.—SADONG CUP.—For boats with crews limited to 36 men. 1st prize Cup value $40; 1st prize to crew $18. 2nd prize to crew $9. From No. 1 mark, Lubok Bo to Wharf.
    2nd Race 7.45 a. m.—OPIUM FARMER'S CUP — For boats with crews limited to 30 men. 1st prize Cup value $30; 1st prize to crew $9. 2nd prize to crew $5. From No. 2 mark, Lubok Bo to Wharf.
    3rd Race 8 30 a.m. SADONG COLLIERY TOWKAY’S Cup.—For boats with crews limited to 25 men. 1st prize Cup value $25; 1st prize to crew $6.25. 2nd prize to crew $5. From No. 3 mark, Lubok Bo to Wharf.
    4th Race 9.15 a.m.—SADONG COLLIERY CUP.— For boats with crews limited to 36 men. 1st prize Cup value $40; 1st prize to crew $18. 2nd prize to crew $9. From No. 1 mark to Wharf. Winners of 1st race to paddle with 34 men and 2nd in the 1st race to paddle with 35 men only.
    5th Race 10 a.m.—BOYS RACE.—For boats with crews limited to 15 boys 1st prize $15. 2nd prize $7.50. From Sedillo to the Wharf.
    6th Race 10.15 a. m—SIMUNJAN TOWKAY’S CUP. -For boats with crews limited to 20 men. 1st prize Cup value $20; 1st prize to crew to 2nd prize to crew $5. From No. 3 mark to the Wharf.
    7th Race 11.30 a. m. CONSOLATION RACE. —Open to all boats that have paddled at this meeting crews limited to 36 men. Cup value $20. Prize to crew $5. From No. 2 mark to the Wharf.
   MONTHLY REPORTS.
SADONG COLLIERY.
—?—
January.
   The gross out-put of coal produced by the mines during the month was 2,402.06 tons; 465 tons of this was consumed by our boilers and 1,937.06 tons delivered to the wharf for export.
The shipments for the month were :—
   The Kuching Municipality ... 140.00 tons 
   Messrs. The Borneo Co., Kuching ... 659.01 ,, 
   Chop Soon Seng, Sibu ...	205.00
      Bunkering Goebilt launch ...	3.00 ..
Total Shipments 1,007.01 tons
   The balance of coal in stock on the wharf at the end of the month was 1,662.11 tons.
   There being no signs of a normal seam in the upper panel workings of No. 9 mine, all the stull toads were abandoned, as they were fur too expensive to work and only the main level, with a parallel road, is now being driven in this section of the mine.
   We made good progress with the fall which has closed up the lower panel and about 3,800 tons of debris was removed.
   The coal pillar on the west side produced 90% of the out-put from this mine.
   No. 8 and No. 11 mines produced an increased out-put of coal from the pillar on the west side. Two of the upper roads in this section, driven on the “Bord and Pillar” style, struck the old workings about the middle of the month and a large volume
of water burst through into the new workings and continued to run at a great pressure for three days and nights, when it exhausted itself. The coal pillar at this point is now being worked on the retreating longwall method.
   The out-put from the upper seam was restricted to 25% of the gross out-put from the two coal seams combined and the spare labour was transferred to the mines in the lower seam.
   The new bilian coolie line, begun in November, was completed towards the end of the month.
   The construction of the new hospital, including the whitewashing, etc., was completed early in the month and the patients occupied the new building on the 18th.
   The high tides damaged the wharf rather badly on the down-river side and a large piece of the river-bank also subsided.
   The prospecting drift was driven down a vertical depth of fourteen feet, through two hard conglomerate beds, interstratified with very fine* hard sandstone.
   The old Tamil coolie line was demolished and also a portion of the old Chinese coolie line on the swampy ground beside the railway line
   The general health of the labour force was fairly good Lam Khaw, one of the oldest and best mine mandors, died of consumption on the 14th.
   The lainfall for the month was 16’20 inches.
J, W. EVANS,
Manager.
SIMANGGANG.
January.
   On the 3rd M r. J A. II. Hardie and myself returned here from Kuching in the s. s. Alice Lorraine; and on the 5th I sent Mr. J. A. H. Hardie back to Kuching by boat as he was very ill and in great pain Towards the end of the month news was received that he was on the high road to recovery.
   Mr .P. M. Adams, Assistant Resident, arrived here on the 8th, having been sent to do duty in this division
   The Court work at Simanggang during January was very light. Lee Boon Khian. late clerk at Lingga, was sentenced to five years imprisonment for embezzling Government money. Lee Sam one year for theft of pepper. There were a few cases concerning ownership of engkabang and gutta rian trees, and these were adjourned for examination.
   Towards the end of the month natives started harvesting their hill farms, and from what one hears they expect a very good crop; farms along the river bank have been badly attacked by field mice. I think on the whole the harvest in this division will lie far above the average.
   On the 22nd I left for Lubok Antu accompanied by Abang Dulrasid, the s. 1. Hong Line gave us a tow as far as Engklilih, and in consequence we reached Batu Kudi at 3 p. m. and Lubok Antu next day at 5 p. m. I found the grounds in good order and inspected the herd of cattle which looked in excellent condition. This herd numbers fifty head.
   Mr. Voorhoere, Assistant Officer. Smitau, N. I., arrived at Lubok Antu on the morning of the 24th and we left for Badau, N.I. at 3. 30 p. m. where we spent the night. Next morning making an early start we reached the m. I. ” P ” which had the Controleur of Smitau on board, Puloh Madjang was reached at 1 p. m. In the owning a meeting was held, and Dyak chiefs from the Kantu, Merakai, also Undup and Kumpang  were present. The Controleur informed them that if Sarawak subjects


58
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1919.
wished to collect engkabang nuts in Dutch territory
they must first obtain permission from the chief of
the district they were going to collect in, and that
if they exported the engkabang to Sarawak territory,
the exporter must pay 50 cents per picul. I returned
to Lubok Antu next day reaching the fort at 3 p. tn.
  On the 27th I left Lubok Antu at 1 p. m. reach-
ing Engklilih at 5 p. m. where I stayed the night.
Next morning a site for now bazaar was measured
out. The s. l. Hong Line gave us a tow, and
Simanggang was reached at 12 p. m. on the 28th.
  Abang Haji Buassan, Penghulus Kama and Ramba
arrived here from the Ga’at via Sibu and Kuching on
the 29th.
  Abang Zin bin Abang Arip arrived here towards
the. end of the month from Blait. He has been
appointed Native Officer of Lubok Antu in the place
of Abang Abu Bakar deceased.
  Saribas.—A sad drowning fatality occurred just
above Betong. The wife of Idik Tua Kampong
Sebuloh and her grand child were returning home
in their boat laden with fruit, this capsized and they
were both drowned.
  There have been numerous complaints concerning
ownership of engkabang trees, and the Dyaks have
been holding diving contest contrary to orders.
  Kalaka. —The s.s. Alice Lorraine arrived off the
mouth of the Kalaka on the 25th, unfortunately her
propellor shaft broke, and she was unable to proceed
to Saratok to load gutta rian leaves. She was still
off the Kalaka at the end of the month waiting for
assistance from Kuching.
  The Malays are busily employed working sago,
which is fetching a record price.
  The following are the trade returns for this
division:—
Imports. $45,745 21,021
January, 1919
.. ' 1918
Exports.
$40,199.00
26,422.90
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER.
Resident
BINTULU.
January.
  This year the padi harvest will be earlier than usual and in fact by the end of January a few people had already begun to reap although there was no grain as yet offered for sale. Reports from Tatau are again not good. Many of the young padi plants were eaten by grubs and a good deal of the grain has been spoilt by various insects. Meanwhile the engkabang crop, which is quite good in Bintulu and exceptionally heavy at Tatau is being gathered in, although the price given by local traders is lower than in former years, $4 a picul being the last quotation. Some kampongs and houses, notably those up-river, are almost deserted, the usual inmates being either away on their padi farms or in the jungle collecting engkabang.
  During this month there were even fewer cases brought before the Courts than in December 1918. This is also owing to the people being busy with padi and engkabang, and there will probably be a rush of work in the Court of Requests a little later when most of the crop has been gathered in.
  A new boat would be a convenience for the Government service between here and Tatau, besides paving a certain amount of money in hire. One of the prisoners now in Bintulu gaol happens to be a boat builder, so he has been set to work to make one of good durable wood (meraka).
  Abang Taris, Tua of Tatau kampong, died on the 8th. He was an old man and had been far from well for a long time.
   On the 5th and 7th the p.s. Adeh lauded mails from
Kuching at Kidurong, mails from the North being
left there on the 11th and 24th. On the 30th at 1.30
p.m. the Adeh camo in for cargo, leaving fully load-
ed at 2 p.m. the next day.
   The motor launch Miri lowed in a lighter for a
cargo of bilian timber on the 11th. They left next
day.
   At the beginning of the month there were rough
seas and for some days the bar was impassable.’
About the 22nd the sea got up again, but not enough
to prevent’ steamers getting in and out or even the
larger fishing barongs.
A. E. LAWRENCE,
Resident 2nd Class.
BARAM.
•	—?—
January.
   Many cases came up for hearing mostly concern-
ing the ownership of fruit trees.
   Fines and fees amounted to $966.42.
   I returned from leave on the 20th instant.
   Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident 2nd Class, Miri,
paid a visit here from the 20th till 22nd in order to
repair the aerial cable, the tree across river being,
rotten.
   Pingan, Lirong chief, came down during the
month with reference to One of his followers moving
to Belaga. It appears that Tama Lim, a Badang,
went with his wife, a Lirong. on a visit to Belaga
leaving two of their children behind. Tama Lim’s
relations living in the Belaga, wished him to stop
there so Be obtained a letter from Resident 2nd Class,
Kapit, to fetch the children. But as no brian has
been paid I refused to allow them to go to Belaga
and have written to Aw. Matnor of Belaga inform-
ing him that if the Badangs wish Tama Lim to
move, they must pay brian as decided by the Tinjar
chiefs.
   Penghulu Lanting came down on the 26th return-
ing again the next day.. He paid in some outstand-
ing lines, but had nothing of any importance to
report.
   The Honble. Resident 4th Division paid a visit
here from 13th inst. until 17th inst.
   The Chinese are getting the building of the new
bazaar underway and any amount of wood is arriv-
ing. Taking everything into consideration the
Chinese seem to be very, contented and are expecting
a record year. Jelutong arrives at the rate of 100
piculs per day. There is more foodstuff to be had
at present than this time last year.
   Gumbang, Long Kiput chief, arrived on the 31st
inst. Informed him that the Dyaks of Brett are com-
plaining that the follower of his Badu son-in-law
Lipang has leprosy and he must take him away
from living with the Dyaks and find a place for him
to live by himself on Long Kiput land.
   Messrs. Moffat and Beard arrived from Miri to
spend a few days.
   The rainfall was 4'74 inches.
      Exports.
      $664.80
C. D. ADAMS,
      Resident 2nd Class.
Imports.
$3,278.80


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1919.
59
MUM.
January.
  New Year’s day was observed as a public holiday
and all offices closed.
  I arrived from the North in the p.s. Adeh on the
10th to take over from Mr. F. H. Kortright.
  On the 13th the Honble the Divisional Resident,
left for Baram, via Lutong. and was away four days.
  Mr. C. D. Adams, returned from leave on the 17th
and proceeded to Baram accompanied by Mr. F. H.
Kortright who went there to put the telephone in
order. 
  On his return from Baram Mr. F. H. Kortright
handed over his various duties to me and sailed on
the 29th for Singapore en route for Europe, on
furlough.
  Mr. and Mrs. H. H. Kortright and family of Oya
who had been here on a visit left for Limbang in 
the p.s. Adeh on the 23rd.
  On the 20th a message was received from the
Superintendent of Telegraphs ordering the local 
operators to listen continously from 8 a.m. to4 p.m., 
this is now being carried out. daily.
  Early in the month Mr. it. Phelps arrived from 
Brunei to join the stuff of the Anglo-Saxon Petro-
leum Company
  The s.s Haliotis called on the 28th and cleared
three, days later for Singapore, with 2,100 tons of
crude oil
  The Honble. the Resident left for Bekam on the
31st to spend Chinese New Year.
  A number of cases of theft and assualt were heard
in the Courts and debt and Malay Courts were much
as usual.
  During the month the prisoners were employed
clearing and enlarging ornamental grounds and on
the general up-keep of the roads around the station.
  It was found necessary to add an extension to the
present police barracks on account of the large. 
number of married police in the force.
  The S. S. Company’s steamers called in as usual 
on their outward and homeward journeys, and the 
p. s. Adeh made two trips from Kuching.
  Throughout the month the weather was very dry 
.the rainfall only amounting to 517 inches.
  The trade returns are as follows:—
                 Imports.	Exports.
Miri	$129,543	$23,166
Niah 1,160	570
  Messrs, the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Co., 'Ltd.
exported 2.110 tons of oil during the month.
W. F. DE V. SKRINE,
Resident 2nd Class.
      BROOKETOON COLLIERY.
 we were troubled with more water coming from the
foot wall, which will necessitate placing a pump in
this drift, we have managed to keep it down hither-
to with a water barrel, hut as it is getting down a
good depth, the water would not run off. We made
good progress in the exploring drift, but we have
not yet come to the seam of coni as found on the
surface.
     We continued The repairs to the Buang Tawar oil
level. The oil trickles through just about the same.
The L’Aubaine continues to carry coal to Labuan,
we had her laid up for three days placing a patch
on her boiler, but the tubes are in a rather bad
condition and when stopped in one place, other tub's,
give way. This will be remedied in due course.
We beached and cleaned our, tongkang during the
month. The weather has been exceptionally rough,
which makes it difficult to gut coal across to Labuan.
Nothing new in the Agency affairs, no accident
occurred, the health of the coolies good, with a plenti-
ful supply of labour on band.	
THOS. LEWIS.
General Manager.
        The Sarawak Gazette.
RATES OF ADVERTISEMENTS IN THE " SARAWAK GAZETTE"
                  Payable in advance.
Quarter of a column and under—
      First insertion
      Second and third insertion each
      Subsequent do	do
Half a Column and under —
      First insertion
      Second and third insertion each
      Subsequent do	. do
A Column end under—
      First insertion each
      Second and third insertion each
      Subsequent do	do
Special arrangements may he made for standing advertisements.

All communications intended for insertion
in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed
to the Editor at the Government Printing
Office, Kuching. They should be clearly
written and should reach the Office at least
one day before the publication of each issue-
Letters and other contributions must be
authenticated by writer's name sent privately
to the Editor.
We cannot undertake to return rejected
communications, or to give reasons for not
inserting them.
$1.00
0.50
0.25
2.00 1.00 0.50
4.00
2.00
1 00
January.
  Our out-put for the month was 2,725 tons; 618 tons were consumed at the boilers and 2,107 tons were sent to wharf to be sold. Our sales were 954 tons, sold to Messrs, the Straits Steamship Co., Mitsubishi Trading Co. and the local launches.
  The rainfall for the month was 3'90 inches.
  Everything went smoothly during the month, the light, rainfall made things. easy pumping. We cleaned one of the Lancashire boilers, doing necessary repairs. We replaced the haulage rope at the North Drive, the old one after several splicings had got too bad to be used hauling coal any longer. In the mining line we advanced in our main dip, but towards the end of the month
  Residents at the Outstations will confer an
obligation by forwarding to the Office early
I intelligence of all matters of general interest
in their respective neighbourhoods.
NOTICE.
ASTANA FARM.
THE Manager of Astana Farm begs to
 inform the Public that he is unable to
attend to Orders for milk after Office hours.


60	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1919.
Kuching, Foreign Trade Returns for the month of Jan., 1919.
IMPORTS —(Continued.)
EXPORTS.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. MARCH 1, 1919.
61
Kuching, Casting Trade Returns for the month of Jan., 1919. 
IMPORTS.
MIRI SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
F. G. DAY,
Registrar of Trade.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO.,
22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS.
NOTICE
Gazette subscriptions and Printing Office bills.
  FOR the convenience of residents at Outstations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums but only the 1,2 and 3 cent values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that Money Orders be sent if possible.
          J. C. SWAYNE,
Manager, Govt. Printing Office.
SOLE AGENTS FOR
FRASER & NEAVE'S AERATED WATERS
(The Best throughout the East.)
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic
Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at
$1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 catties of dry rubber.
NOTICE
ASAHI BEER.
ACETIC ACID.
AUCTION SALE
of unredeemed pledges from Pawn Broking Farm YEW CHEE & Co., Chop Wo SANO and Chop LOON YEK of Bau at No. 18, China Street on Saturdays of the following dates—15th March 1919, 19th April 1919, 17th May 1919 and 21st June 1919, at 9 a.m.
  List of ail such unredeemed pledges can be seen at the Pawn Farmer’s premises.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO.,
Authorised Auctioneers.
Fresh supplies of Stores are received
regularly.
    PRICES MODERATE.
   Free delivery to customers in Kuching.
 Free packing & shipping for Outstation Orders.
 [n.c.]
Beer, Wine, Spirit & General Store Dealers.
	:(o):	


62
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1919.
PASSENGERS.
ARRIVALS.
PER s. s. Kuching: - 22nd February—From Singapore- H. H. the Tuan Muda, Mrs. Swindell, Rev. Quaddecker, Messrs. Robarts. P.
         	     H. O’nians, n. Honda. Lau Chin
        Heng, Sim Kim Eng and 3 Chinese 	gentlemen.
PER S. S. Alice Lorraine:—26th February — From Sadong —Messrs. Barnes and Jacques.
DEPARTURES.
PER S. s. Alice Lorraine—22nd February—For Sadong— Messrs. Barnes and 
Jacques.
THE KUCHING DRUG STORE.
KUCHING. SARAWAK.
The place where you can always get:
PHOTOGRAPHIC CHEMICALS, SURGICAL APPLIANCES
OPTICAL GOODS, PATENT MEDICINES, TOILET
REQUISITES AND THE LATEST NOVELS.
WANTED.
COURT INTERPRETER with a knowledge of Foo Chow (essential), Hok-kien and Cantonese dialects and able to read and write Chinese characters and understand Chinese accounts.
   Applicants please apply ty Resident’s Office, Sibu. Sarawak.
[6-5]
              HOURS.
     From 8 a. m.	To 11.30 a. m.
       „ 1 p. m.	„ 4.30 p. m.
         PRICES MODERATE.
  ORDERS PROMPTLY EXECUTED.
[12-10]
            “A clean tooth never decays."
N O T I C E. 
WE beg to notify our customers that our Town Office has been closed since 31st December 1918.
  For the sale of our sawn timber locally we have appointed Mr. YEO CHOO HONG of Chop SOON TECK of Jawa Street as Agent, who will give his attention to all orders.
  Prices for all timber delivered at our Works at Sungei Priok will be 5% less than those for town deliveries.
  In future all communications should be addressed to THE KWONG LEE BANKING CO., our Financial Agents, and all monies due to us should also be paid to them.
   THE KUCHING STEAM SAW MILLS LIMITED. 
[6-4]
  H. OHNISHI D.D.S. T.D.C.
          (Graduated Tokyo Dental College)
        Japanese Dentist
         193-6, ORCHARD ROAD, SINGAPORE.
[12-6]
THE “SARAWAK GAZETTE”
ALMANAC.
MARCH, 1919.
Notice of Sale.
THIRTY lots of land for building shops situated on the river bank at Engkililih, landing place for Marup, etc., will be auctioned in the Court House, Simanggang on March J4th, 1919. Each lot consists of 3 fathoms by 15.

Condition.
  That each owner of a lot must build a substantial shop of wood with Lilian ataps, same to be completed within 6 months from date of auction.
  F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER.
Resident.
    Simanggang,
29th January, 1919.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1919.	63
S H I P PI N G.
Arrivals.
F. G. DAY,
Registrar of Trade.
Rainfall. January, 1919.
DURING 24 HOURS


64		THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1919.
             PURE FOOD MEANS GOOD HEALTH
       “ALEXANDRIA” CANNED MEATS
Every Tin Guaranteed under the New South Wales
Pure Food Act, and packed under the constant
and vigilant supervision of a Government Inspector.
As supplied in huge quantities to the Imperial and Indian Governments for use by both the Army and Navy.
Sold by all Stores.
R. GOSLING & CO.,
2 Castlereagh Street, SYNDNEY, N.S.W.
“ALEXANDRIA MEAT WORKS.”
Distributors for the East:
Seremban General Agency, Ltd.
(Incorporated in F. M.S.)
SINGAPORE.
       Sub: Agents- BAN JUI LONG,
14 Carpenter Street,
KUCHING, SARAWAK.
and BAN JUI GUAN.
MIRI, SARAWAK.
[24-1 J
KUCHING:—Printed and Published by GHIN HENG SOON, Government Printer, at the Government Printing Office.
Barrack Road.

