
Vol. XLIX.

No. 766.

Sarawak Gazette.
Price                              KUCHING, TUESDAY, APRIL 1, 1919.	10 cents
CONTENTS.
The Sarawak Gazette.
       Page.Death: — Mesney      75Notes      75Clippings ...    ... 76Extracts from Miri Yearly Report (1918)       77Murder at Muara Tuang        77The Rajah Charles Brooke Memorial Fund ...    ... 78Red Cross Fund    ... 78A visit to unknown Borneo  ... 78The Sarawak Union    ... 79Sarawak Library    ... 79Monthly Reports—Upper Sarawak    ... 79                    Simanggang ...    ... 80                    Oya—Bintuhi    ... 81Passengers    ... 82Almanac    ... 83Rainfall    ... 88   The Sarawak Gazette.
SUBSCRIPTIONS to the Gazette are as follows :
The Sarawak Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY-
Single copy	...	...	...     .10 cents
Subscription for one year	...	... $2.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations        2.25 
Subscription including postage to all other
                 Countries. ...	...   2.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING—
     Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 5s. 10d Sarawak Government Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY—
Single copy	...	...	...	.05 cents
Subscription for one year	...	...     $1.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations            1.25 
Subscription including postage to all other
                 Countries. ...                                           1.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING—
    Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 8s. 6d
  All subscriptions are payable in advance and most commence from the 1st January in each year on which date they are renewable. All broken periods will be considered as full.
  Subscriptions will not be renewed unless notice of renewal given.
  Changes of Address should be notified to the Office in writing.
TUESDAY, APRIL 1, 1919.
Denth.
    MESNEY.--- On the 13th inst.. at the General Hospital of bronchial pneumonia. WALTER MICHAEL MESNEY, Captain S. s. Namsang, eldest son of the late Venerable Archdeacon W. R. Meaney of Sarawak, in his 45th year.
NOTES.
(March.)
   WE regret to record the death of Mr. Lee Ah Seng of Chop Tong Sang, one of the leading Cantonese Towkays resident in Kuching, which took place on the 19th instant at his house in the Tabuan Road. Deceased, who was about 67 years of age leaves two sons. The funeral took place on the 22nd instant and was largely attended by relations and friends
   THE out-put from Bau Works amounted to 1,580.4 ozs. gold and 511.8 ozs. silver for the month of February.
   S. S. Alice Lorraine left for Sibu on the 17tb with passenger the Rev. Father Odyk.
   THE Manager of the Government Ice Machine asks us to state that he would find it a convenience if customers wrote their orders for ice both in words and figures on the forms supplied gratia by that office.
   S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore on March 17th, passengers Lieut, and Mrs. Clarke, Messrs. Rennie, S. G. Dilly, I. Shelton, F. Weiding, Chee Fook Heng, Ng Swee T’ng and Chiam Eng Jek.
   THE Hon hie. Mr. C. W. Darbishire’s departure from Singapore on the 13th instant came as a surprise to many here. The Honble. Mr. Darbishire had been Manager of Messrs. Paterson Simons & Co. and in charge


76		THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1919.
of Sarawak Government interests in Singa-
pore since 1909 and his kindness to Sarawak
officers passing through Singapore was always
greatly appreciated.
   THE Honble. the Resident of the First
Division was at home on Thursday the 20th
at the Sarawak Club (by permission of the
Committee) to enable every one to say good-
bye to the numerous passengers returning to
England on the following day. The weather
permitted a little tennis to be played and the
music of the Rangers' Band helped to mitigate
the sadness of the occasion.
   S. S. Kuching left for Singapore on March
21st with an unusually large compliment of
passengers. These were Mr. and Mrs. Grove,
Capt. and Mrs. Cunynghame and family, Mr.
and Mrs. Young and child, Mr. and Mrs. 
Hose, Miss Wilson and Messrs. Levy, Gillan
and Rennie. In spite of the early hour a 
large gathering was present to wish them 
a pleasant and speedy passage home. 
   THIS lamentable exodus deprives the First 
Division of three well-known hostesses who 
for many years have greatly increased the 
amenities of life in Sarawak and who can ill 
be spared.
   Outstation officers will particularly feel the 
loss of Mrs. Grove, while Upper Sarawak can 
never hope to replace Mrs. Hose, Mrs. Young 
and Miss Wilson.
   WE have to thank various correspondents 
for the following notes on the four gentlemen 
who have taken their last leave of this country.
   The Honble. E. L. Grove, late Com-
missioner of Public Works, came to this
country in 1902 from the F. M. S. where he
had held an appointment on the Sanitary
Board. He will be chiefly remembered here
for the completion of the Matang Water
Works and for the inception of the Sarawak
Government Railway.
   Mr. E. Hose, who originally came as a
visitor to his brother, Dr. C. Hose, at Baram
as a collector of natural history specimens
for various well-known Museums, joined the
Borneo Company in 1901 and was at various
times interested in the production of antimony,
gambier and pepper, both in Upper Sarawak
and in the Rejang. He planted the first rub-
ber trees in what is now known as the Dahan
Rubber Estate. In 1907 he was made Superin-
tendent of the Company’s rubber interests in
Sarawak and later planted up the Sungei
Tengah Estate which remained under his 
supervision until his retirement.
   Mr. H. S. Young arrived in Sarawak in 
1900 and joined the staff of the Borneo Corn- 
pany’s Cyaniding Works. On Mr. Pawle’s 
retirement he succeeded to the position of
Superintendent, a post he most successfully 
held until he left. By many he will be re- 
membered as the owner of “Lady Pat”, pro-
bably the most famous pony that has raced in 
Kuching.
   Mr. Levy who has been here less than a 
year joined the Service as a cadet and was
transferred on his arrival to the Police. Un-
fortunately ill-health, due to shell-shock gained
in France, caused him to resign his post.
   THE following appointments are notified in
the Government Gazette. The Honble. Mr.
F. G. Day to be a Member of the Committee
of Administration, Mr. P. H. O’Nians to be
Acting Superintendent of Public Works and
Mr. W. H. Jacques to be Acting Traffic
Manager of the Government Railway.
   SUBJECT to confirmation the Honble. Mr.
H. B. Cracker is to be Acting Registrar of the
Supreme Court and Abang Suleiman is to be
Acting Officer-in-Charge of the Municipal De-
partment of Kuching.
  S. S. Alice Lorraine left for Sadong on the
23rd with passengers Messrs. Bates, Haldane
and Strike.
  S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore March 28th with passengers Mr. and Mrs. Parry Davis, Messrs. J. T. Marriner, Nalder, Teo Chin Kee, Lim Swee Kee, Lim Say Choon and Lim Why Kee.
   OWING to the efflux of silver and coppers to the outstations to pay for the engkabang crop S. S. notes stand at a discount of 5% in the Kuching bazaar. An order is being issued in the Government Gazette prohibiting unlimited export.
  S. S. Kuching left for Singapore on March 31st with passengers Mr. and Mrs. Boult, Messrs. Shelton, J. T. Marriner, Ang Hong Choon, Lim Tek Khoon, Wee Cheng Yew, Lee Yang Kiang, Lim Chee Ghim and Lim Kim Tek. Mr. and Mrs. Boult are leaving on furlough.
Clippings.
—•—
  Her Highness Margaret, Ranee of Sarawak, gave a lecture, illustrated by lantern slides, at South Ascot, Parish Hall, on January ‘22. Pictures illustrating the work of the Blue Cross Fund and Our Dumb Friends’ League were shown. Captain Henry de Windt presided.— (S. T.)
The Penang agents of the P. and O. Company,
says the Straits Echo, have received cable advices
from the Singapore agents regarding the loss of $5
Currency Notes on board the P. and O. steamer
Nellore, which left Penang on Monday last bound
for China. When discharging the packets of notes
consigned to the Straits Government at Singapore,
one of them was found damaged, and on examina-
tion it was discovered that 1,208 of these notes were
missing. It is not known at which port the loss
actually occurred but the police and the banks have,
we learn, been acquainted with the fact. For the
benefit of our readers and also to assist the police
in bringing those responsible for this robbery to
book we give the numbers of the missing notes: -
    B	B	B
    —20001 to          —21000,	—07001	to
    75	75	75
    B	B	B
—07116, and 75
—07125 to	—07216
75	75
Anyone receiving any of these notes in the course
of business transactions should endeavour of detain


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1919.		                 77
the man presenting them or try to find out from him where he got them, and then inform the police.
  We recorded in our last issue a lucky find of some 30 katis of ambergris by a Chinese cooly near Sandakan. We hear that Messrs. Man Woo Loong * Co., the purchasers, realised a total of over $20,000 on the sale of the ambergris in Hongkong, the value being roughly $50 a tahil.
  Ambergris, or “ grey amber,’’ which is actually a morbid secretion in the alimentary canal of the spermaceti whale, is usually found Boating in lumps ranging from half an ounce in weight to 100 tbs. and upwards, and is much sought after by whale fishers. It is used principally in the preparation of perfumery and we believe it was the highly agreeable smell in this instance which attracted the attention of the lucky finder.
  This is one of the very few cases of ambergris being found on the coasts of Borneo. It is occasionally found off the Bahamas, Japan and China.— (B. N. B. Herald.)
  The General Post Office, Kuala Lumpur, is once more well stocked in its stamp department, and there are now on sale the new two cent issue, of a colour similar to the old one cent stamps, a light green ; the new four cent stamp, similar in colour to the old three cent-stamp, cerise ; and an entirely new issue of six cent stamps, of a colour approximating to that known to artists us “gamboge " The two and four cent denominations are put up in booklets of twenty-live stamps, on sale at 49 and 97 cents respectively.—(S. T.)
Extracts from Miri Yearly
Report (1918)
  Eight new producing wells have been drilled in dining the year and six new wells were under the drill at the end of the year. One well has been abandoned, one intended to reach the thousand foot sand is now being utilised as a water well, and another is being deepened in search of new production. In August our well No. 60 encountered gas sands from which natural gas flowed at the rate of over a quarter of a million cubic feet- per day, which gas was controlled and distributed for use as fuel over almost the whole of our working area until November 15th when water obtained access to the gas sands which were flooded and the gas supply ceased.
  Again we have to complain of scarcity of tonnage for removal of production and as a consequence of the necessity for continued storage underground of distillate. Therefore no reasonable comparison can be made of last year’s production with previous years.
  Total production of crude oil for 1918 was 75,585.92 tons compared with 75,785 62 tons for previous year: the reason for the decrease is accounted for in the previous paragraph ; moreover difficulties in procuring material considerably restricted development work.
  58.323.72 tons of crude oil have been treated to our Topping Plant and of this 11,936.93 tons were shipped as petroleum distillate for further refining and 42,907.71 tons as Admiralty fuel; the greater portion of this latter product was supplied to the Imperial Japanese Navy Tanker Shijiki whilst 13,168 tons of distillate were pumped to underground storage in wells.
  With the exception of a lengthy stay of the Shijiki during the early part of the year, which was the result of damage caused to the terminal of the
submarine pipe line at Lutong during a spell of rough weatner, shipment of products through the line has been carried out successfully, and with the installation of further pumping facilities towards the end of the year the rate of loading was increased considerably.
   Completion of operations for laying and launching sea-loading line Lutong No. 2 has been delayed owing to the difficulty in obtaining supplies of protective covering. In fact in July we were advised that owing to war requirements the Government of the U. S. A. had commandeered all supplies of the material we were expecting.
   However, eventually the authorities agreed to release sufficient material for our requirements, but it was not until December that shipment to Miri was effected.	“ .
   The old trumble “Topping Plant" near Tanjong Lobang ceased operating on December 1st and dismantling work began preparatory to transfer of plant to Lutong for use in the new refinery
   Work at the refinery itself was nearing completion at the year end, and we hoped to begin refining operations about middle February, but erection has been very seriously retarded in consequence of difficulty experienced in securing shipping space across the Pacific tis the whole of the material for the fractionating system had to be procured from. America.
   An additional 4,000 tons steel tank is in course of erection at Lutong and should be completed early in the New Year.
   Labour has been a difficult problem throughout the year and at no time have we been able to obtain sufficient for our needs. Repeated efforts to import singkeh coolies from Singapore were unsuccessful and we have been compelled to try Hongkong. We understand, however, that not until after Chinese New Year 1919 will new force of labour be available.
   In an endeavour to establish a new industry in Sarawak the Company have purchased in Australia second-hand saw-mill machinery for the manufacture of caseboards from plai or similar timbers and it is hoped that native labour will come forward and regularly work sufficient logs to keep the factory going and so enable this venture to prove a success.
Murder at Muara Tuang.
   On the 23rd instant news was brought in from Muara Tuang, of the murder of a local shop-keeper Ong Pak Sui. He went up-river with three Dyaks on the 20th to buy jelutong and had with him $1,000 in ten dollar Singapore notes. A Dyak boat, a jalor with a split bow, was towing behind. The following day the towkay's boat was found adrift and various things missing including the cash,, anchor, docking weight and Dyak boat. This led to a suspicion of foul play which was borne out when the Chinaman's body was found on the 22nd with large parang or axe wounds in the head. The Dyaks who are suspect are said to be from Saribas or Lingga and to have worked a long time in the latter place. They appear to affect Malay costume, khaki or dark clothing, blachu undershirts, black velvet Malay hats and are young, two having only just attained to man’s estate. These two are fair and not tattooed, while their companion is bigger dark skinned and tattooed on chest and arms, he suffers also from an eye which blinks incessantly. It is possible that these men have made for the coast and a reward of $100 is offered by the Government for their apprehension.


78
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1919.
The Rajah Charles Brooke
Memorial Fund.
Amount already acknowledged	... $22,223.20
   The Hon. Mr. C. W. Darbishire ...                100.00
Messrs. Paterson Simons & Co., Ltd.,          1,000.00
                  $23,323.20
            Red Cross Fund.
  The following letter has been received by the Chairman of “Our Day" Committee 1918, and is published for the information of subscribers.
83, PALL MALL,
LONDON, S. W. 1.
24th January, 1919. 
DEAN SIR,
     I have the pleasure to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 7th December last covering First of Exchange value £16,209. 12. 10. as the response to the “Our Day” 1918 Appeal from the people of Sarawak.
  I beg to hand you herewith our official receipt, and am desired by the Joint War Committee to ask if you will be so good as to convey to the contributors, in whatever manner you consider proper, an expression of the warm thanks of the British Bed Cross Society and Order of St. John for the wonderful record achieved. 1 beg that you will accept for yourself, and express on our behalf to the Committee and members of the Sarawak Red Cross Fund the profound gratitude of the Committee for the energy and zeal you have displayed in making our appeal known to our friends and sympathisers in Sarawak.
Yours faithfully,
ROBERT A. HUDSON,
Chairman of Finance Committee.
Chairman of Committee,
     Sarawak Red Cross Fund,
            Kuching, Sarawak.
      A visit to unknown Borneo.
   Look at a map of Borneo. You will see that the territory marked North Borneo is divided from that marked Dutch Borneo and Sarawak by a line running across the smallest part of the island from a point north of Labuan on the west coast to another on St. Lucia Bay on the east. From the centre of this dividing line a range of mountains runs from N. E. to S. W. dividing Sarawak from Dutch Borneo. Numerous rivers rise in this range and run practically E. and W. draining the territories of Sarawak and Dutch Borneo.
   At the northern end of this mountain range several large rivers rise, the Baram, Limbang and Trusan flowing W. through Sarawak territory and the Sesajab and Balungan finding their way E. and 8. E. through Dutch territory to the sea, while the Padas river flows N. W. passing through North Borneo. The mountains in which these rivers have their origin attain a height of some six or seven thousand feet and it was this country that I proposed to visit at the end of 1912.
   Away in the mountains further up the Trusan a tribe of Muruts were said to exist who were constantly troubling those who ventured into their
territory and it was even said that Europeans who had intended viewing their land were told that to go any further and cross the border meant the certain loss of their beads. For some years these reports had been coming in until I decided to go up and see what amount of truth there was in them.
  On the 1st of December 1912 I left Trusan fort, the Government station on the Trusan river some forty miles from the mouth. 1 brought eight Saribas Dyaks from the Limbang river, three of whom were mere boys, of the others one had been a Sergeant in the Rajab's military force and was now retired on pension while a second was a manang or Dyak doctor whom the others possibly imagined might be useful on such a trip in case of illness. Ten natives of the lower Trusan (Muruts) formed the rest of the party, in charge of a head man named Kaya, while a couple of the Rajah's Rangers and a Dyak policeman completed the muster, with myself twenty-two in all.
  For weapons each Dyak carried a spear and his native sword, the Muruts wore their long curved swords, and in addition to these three of them brought ancient rusty double-barrelled muzzle loading guns which, judging by their appearance, would be far more dangerous to the person behind them than to anyone in front of the muzzle. These antiquated gaspipes carried a small charge of powder and a large rectangular chunk of iron for a bullet. The Rangers and policeman were armed with Snider carbines, handy weapons for jungle work, and I took a .351 five shot automatic Winchester and a .303 Martini Enfield sporting rifle.
  The natives carried but light loads: a supply of rice for a few days only, as we knew that there was plenty in the country through which we were to pass before reaching the head waters, a little salt fish and a considerable quantity of Javanese tobacco and matches, a spare waist-cloth and a sleeping cloth completed their outfit. My gear consisted of old khaki suits, shoes and putties, two small cooking pots, a bottle of curry powder, a sleeping mat, small pillow and a good thick rug; these the men divided amongst their loads. So equipped we pushed off in a couple of Murut boats against a slight fresh which was coming downriver and within half an hour the paddles were discarded and the men picked up their poles and punted the boats up through the swift water which was now rushing over the gravel beds. At midday a stop was made to cook and while firewood was being collected I saw a fruit tree across river full of green pigeon ; I had no shot gun, but thought it possible to get one with the small rifle. I crept up the bank, and stepped into several holes which proved to be jars sunk in the ground, and on enquiry, I discovered that it was a Murut burial place; the jars were buried close to the surface and very many were broken, but I did not trouble to look into them and so left them undisturbed. On looking up into the tree I saw a large black beast like a mongoose crawling along the branches and eating the fruit, so instead of trying for a pigeon I turned the Winchester on to him and a lucky shot caught him in the head, he was taken back and skinned and the Dyaks soon cooked and ate him. This turned out to be a specimen of cynogali benetti, which, owing to its smell, is known as padi baru (riew padi) to the natives.
  We reached a Murut house early in the afternoon and as there was no house further up-river, owing to the close proximity of rather nasty rapids, we decided to leave the boats here and start tramping the next morning. The house was only tenanted by women, the men having gone off to the mountains to work gum damar which is found there in large quantities, the women being left to drive off the myriads of rice birds from the fast ripening padi crop. Before daylight


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1919.                                            79
next morning the men had arranged their loads and we started off in the usual single file through the thick while mist which soaked everything in a very few minutes The country was now getting rather hilly and the Brayong hills could be seen due E. in the distance, rising some two or three thousand feet. The Tengoa stream was crossed waist deep, a nasty slippery walk over large round boulders in swift water; striking a stream called the Bliau we started climbing up the hills to its source the walking being unpleasant and slippery, owing to our guide taking us along the path by winch the numerous water buffaloes and cattle me taken to the various Murut houses in this country, Many hundreds of these beasts are bred on the plains of the lower Trusan and find their way up-river every year to be killed by the Muruts whenever they have a feast, which is very frequently the case with them. Just before nightfall we reached the top of the hill and luckily found an old but excellent hut built of bark and evidently in use by natives working damar, as several large baskets of the resin were standing up outside the hut. Under these conditions, the resin of course being highly, inflammable, a fire was soon blazing and before morning it was badly wanted as the temperature up here was several degrees lower than that to which we had been accustomed for many months past and complaints to that effect were numerous all night, the Dyaks particularly grumbling at the cold.
              ( To he continued. )
       The Sarawak Union Club.
During the month of January a Tennis handicap tournament was arranged, the prizes being given by Mr. Ang Kian Chiang.
1ST ROUND.
           Sarawak Library.
  The following Looks have been added to the Library:—
F 3102 The Loom of Youth by Alec Waugh
F 6792 White Ladies of
                Warcester „ Barclay
F 730 Capt. Gault	„ William Hope
Hodgson
F 3127 Lost Naval Papers ,, Bennet Copplestone
F 5980 The Starlit Garden
H 9,10,11 British
     Campaign in France
      A Flanders 1914, 15, 16 by Conan Doyle
F 5905 The Spotted Panther J. F. Dwyer
H 61 The First Seven
                 Divisions ,, Ernest W. Hamilton
          W. H. JACQUES, 
Honorary Secretary.
  MONTHLY REPORTS
UPPER SARAWAK.
BAU AND PAKU
February.
  Court.—Lee Jong, a coolie at Bau Works, was sentenced to nine months imprisonment for interfering with a boiler under steam, thereby risking a serious explosion.
  Chong Tson, who was arrested for being a vagrant at Siniawan last year but escaped from custody wearing handcuffs, was arrested in Kuching. He was duly punished. Curiously enough on the very day he was re-arrested a boy found the handcuffs, which he had slipped off and thrown away, in the bed of a stream and brought them to the Police Station at Siniawan.
  Ah Kong was found giving money to prisoners working on the roads and was sent to gaol for a month.
  Ho Ah Fook was sentenced to six months for theft and Bong Wan to a similar term for assaulting the police and attempting to release a man in their custody.
  A Peak coolie by name Rasit also went to gaol for four months for theft, and another Poak coolie was sentenced to eighteen months for causing grievous hurl to Salimin by hitting him on the side of the head with a changkol
  Ngui Hee and Lim Thooi were found guilty of the murder of Choong Kui on January 4th at Kranji. Sentence will be passed by the Supreme Court, Chong Eng. who cut his wife on the head with a parang bengkok and then burnt down their house at Musi, was found to be a leper so sentence was deferred and he was sent to the leper camp in Kuching.
  There were a number of other cases of minor importance.
  Public Works.—The prison gang (averaged 54 2) have been working mostly on the Buan mad of which a section has been widened, straightened and graded. They have also whitewashed the new quarters for the operators and have filled in and ditched the ground under and around the building. Paths and ditches in and around the station have been weeded and kept in order.
  Two miles of the Bau—Buso road have now been raised and put in order and the coolies have begun on the other half which is in a bad condition. Other roads are in good order. When the landas is over a great part of the Jambusan—Poak road will have to be raised. In some places it is nothing less than a ditch.
  General.—The 1st of the month being Chinese New Year’s Day was observed as u public holiday. As usual it went off quietly, the only disturbance being caused by one of the police in the. gambling farm and he was sent to gaol and dismissed the force as a result. Usually this date in the Chinese calendar is noted for the downpour of rain that accompanies it, but this year it was extraordinarily fine for a change.
  Chong Fa, son of the head clerk at Bau Works, died of pnuemonia on the night of the 2nd after a short illness. He had been in the employ of Messrs, the Borneo Co. here for very many years and his death is much regretted by all at Bau.
  An accident occurred on the main incline of Tai Parit on the 18th. A coolie was sitting on a loaded wagon on its way up when a descending empty broke loose and began careering down the steep slope on a parallel set of rails. The coolie Inst his head and got off his wagon, where he would have been perpectly safe, and tried to run across the rails


80
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1919.
which was to bring a horse for Simanggang. The
steamer not arriving up to date, Mr. P. M. Adams
returned to Simanggang. The p. s. Adeh arrived on
the 6th with the horse, but was unable to unload
it as there was no boat ready at Lingga.
   On the 9th Mr. J. Haldane arrived here, to see
into the working of gutta rian leaves, leaving here on
the 11th for the Saribasand Krian to appoint buying
agents.
   Mr. P. M. Adams left for the Saribas on the 18th
accompanied by Abang Dulrasid and reports the
following:—
   Accompanied by A bang Dulrasid I left for Betong
on the 18th and arrived there about 2 p. m. I
checked the cash which was correct and discussed
some of the cases with the Native Officer and
penghulu and told the latter to try and settle all
fruit and engkabang cases before bringing them
before the Court. I spent two days at Betong
during which time several Cases were heard, but
none of which call for special comment. I went to
Pusa on the 16th and held Court the following day.
A Malay named Jubin was sentenced to three
months imprisonment for non-payment of brian, and
Tinggal (f.) was by request of the Native Officers
banished from the division, there being several cases
against her in the Malay Court. Two Chinese
merchants, Mui Kiam and Soon How summonsed
each other for witholding letters sent by their
towkaws Kuching quoting prices of jungle produce,
etc. It appears they are in the habit of receiving
such letters by the bandongs plying between Kuching
and Pusa direct, and as there is no mail sent direct,
the letters do not pass through the Post Office, so
that the persons to whom they are addressed have
no proof that the letters were sent. Mr. Haldane
of the Borneo Company who had been to Saratok
and Kabong in connection with the gutta rian
industry, arrived at Pusa on the 17th and we
returned to Betong together the next day.
   One or two engkabang cases which had been
adjourned for examination were satisfactorily dis-
posed of with the exception of one, in which the
oser wishes to appeal to the Resident's Court.
Several applications to plant rubber both at Betong
And Pusa were refused.
   The site for the new police barracks at Betong
was selected, but up to the time I left the carpenter
had not closed with my offer regarding the cost of
the building. Ex-Penghulu Biji has been ill, but
managed to get to the fort to pay men visit. Mr.
Haldane and I visited the school on the 19th and
attended a dance there m the evening. The follow-
ing day we returned to Simanggang. The harvest
reports were not very favourable.
   Trade has been very brisk and most Malays and
Chinese are away buying engkabang. The Ulu Ai
Dyaks were informed, they say, that there was no
price for engkabang so did not trouble to gather this
product in any quantities, but collected buah kranji
instead which fetched a fair price.
   Court work has been light on the whole, there
were numerous cases of theft reported, but up to
date no one has been arrested.
   On 21st Mr. J. Haldane returned to Sadong by
boat.
   The 24th.being the anniversary of Her Highness
the Ranee’s birthday the offices were closed.
   Mr. P. M. Adams left for Lingga on the 27th in
order to meet the p.s. Adeh which is bringing a horse,
kindly sent here by His Highness the Rajah.
   Kalaka—One Ah Oi of Roban reported that some
one had destroyed 250 pepper vines by cutting
through their stems; so far there is no clue as to who
did this.
   On the 14th news was received from Kuching
that Chop Siang Seng’s bandong had been sunk
in front of the run-away with fatal results, the
wagon catching his head which was smashed.
  Accidents are extremly rare on the mine and when
they do occur are seldom fatal.
  Two prisoners, named Ah Tze and Ng Kwi,
escaped from the gang on the Buan road on the
22nd. The former had been running opium across
to Sambas and enquiries have been made at Sluas
where the Dutch authorities are on the lookout for
him. He disappeared from Paku some time ago
and it now transpires that he was in gaol at
Pontianak for smuggling opium over the border.
He is a short man, wiry in build and his face is
badly pitted by small-pox. He speaks Malay well.
So far no traces of either have been found, but I 
hear both have got away into Dutch territory.
  The 24th, being the anniversary of the birthday of 
Her Highness the Ranee, was observed as a public 
holiday.
  Mr. W. H. Geikie’s house was raided by a party 
of thieves during his absence on the night of the 28th ,
at 7 p. m. The watchman, who was armed with a
snider rifle, fired at one of the men at close range
with blank and knocked him over and the other
seven or eight men ran away. By the time assist-
ance arrived they had all escaped into the surround-
ing jungle. They failed to effect an entrance to the
bungalow and nothing was taken. This is not the
first time Mr. W. H. Geikie’s bungalow has been
the object of such visits.
  The Dyaks are harvesting their padi crop in places. 
As usual it is ripening as it was planted—in patches
—and the numerous rice birds are dealing with each 
patch as it ripens. Had it all been planted at the
same time it would have been harvested more or less
together and the birds being scattered over a larger
area would have done less damage. As it is the
birds have done considerable harm.
  The staff of demarcators are steadily surveying
the gardens here and are making good progress.
This revenue survey is very necessary. When it is
completed it will be possible to tax all gardens
according to their acreage irrespective of what they
contain and the collection of the revenue will be a
comparatively simple matter. Under the present
system I cannot possibly check the number of ‘trees
or their age for revenue purposes and I am certain
that a large number of trees pay no tax at all in con-
sequence, and the Government loses a considerable
revenue. This also applies to pepper as well as
rubber so that the money spent on the demarcation 
will be well laid out. If possible the staff of demar- 
cators should be increased, but I am given to un-
derstand by the Supt. of Surveys that more men are 
not available.
  There is still a certain amount of sickness in the
district, but the epidemic does not seem to be
serious.
  The out-put from the Cyaniding Works amounted
to gold 1,580.4 ozs. and silver 511.8 ozs.
  The rainfall was lighter than usual. A few
storms broke, but more usually they merely threat-
ened and passed over leaving the atmosphere hot
and oppressive.
DONALD A. OWEN,
            Resident.
SIMANGGANG.
——?	
February.
   The 1st being Chinese New Year's Day the
offices were closed and the day observed as a public
holiday.
   The Assistant Resident, Mr. P. M. Adams, left
for Lingga on the 2nd in order to meet the steamer


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1919.
81
on account of heavy seas off Tanjong Apit whilst
returning from Sadong with a cargo of sago for
Kuching. The crew managed to get ashore.
  The p.s. Adeh arrived on the 5th in order to tow
the s.s. Alice Lorraine she having broken her pro-
peller shaft. The p.s. Adeh left next day towing the
s .s. Alice Lorraine.
  Mr. J. Haldane arrived on the 16th and left next-
day by boat for PUSH.
  The following are the trade
division, viz.-.
February. 1919
Total -to 28/2/19
returns for this
   Exports.
$55,621.00
   95,810.00
Imports.
$44,381.00
90,126.00
     Do 28/2/18	$50,351.95	$62,859.75
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER,  Resident.
OYA.
January.
  I was away from the station ail month having 
been granted short leave.
  It has been reported that an attempt to burgle
the bungalow was made on the night of the 7th.
A man was seen climbing up the trellis work at the
front of the house, but on being seen jumped down
and escaped in the darkness.
  About the middle of the month the price of raw ,
sago jumped up and reached $1.40 per pasu.
February.
  The 1st being Chinese New Year’s Day was observed as a holiday.
  Mr. F. F. Boult, Acting Resident of Mukah and Oya and Mrs. Boult, arrived from Dalat on the 3rd on their way back to Mukah, and remained here until the 6th.
  On the 9th a cow was taken by a crocodile from the edge of the river, this being the second occurance of this kind since December. The clerk who was quickly on the spot with a gun was unable to do more than retrieve the carcass, which was offered for side, but did not prove a marketable commodity.
  Abas,telephone inspector from Kuching inspected the Oya and Dalat telephones during the month. The R. C. Mission at Dalat have asked to have an instrument installed at the Mission, and Abas stated that he would lie returning here Shortly to do the necessary work. Another instrument at Dalat means that a new switchboard will be required.
  The present switchboard at Oya has been giving trouble lately, it was a second hand one when put up about four years ago, and, I think, it needs a thorough overhauling.
  On the 17th a small boy about 12 years old while sailing a toy boat at Kampong Teh was taken by a crocodile, and the body has never been recovered, later on the same day the victim’s grandmother while feeding ducks at the edge of the river was attacked and bitten by a crocodile. She was lucky to escape with only a few scratches on her leg.
  A cow belonging to Haji Matsalleh near the quala was also taken a few days previously.
  I returned from short leave on the 21st, fortunately the sea was calm, and we were able to leave the Adeh at the quala .which saved us from having to go to Rejang and back here via Sibu and the Cut and Dalat.	
  The 24th was the birthday of H. H. the Ranee and was observed as a holiday.
      The price of raw sago has been very high all mouth and reached $1.60 per pasu. which is said to be the highest price ever paid here. Sago palms were worth from three to seven dollars each.
      I left for Dalat on the 27th and was away at the end of the month.
      There were only forty-seven coyans of raw sago exported during the month.
HENRY H. KORTRIGHT,
Resident 2nd Class.
BINTULU.
February.
    Early in the month new padi was being sold at Bintulu, but the Tatau harvest was later and the bazaar there had almost exhausted their old stocks of rice. Consequently Bintulu traders did a very profitable trade with the Tatau Chinese for a short time until the Dyaks there began to market their padi. Neither at Bintulu nor Tatau is the harvest so good as was expected for empanqau and other harmful insects attacked the padi when it was ripening, causing much of the grain to shrivel. Indeed it is reported that the Tatau harvest this year will be very little better than that of 1918.
     Higher prices are being paid for sago flour and jelutong than have obtained for a long time. Engkabang is also being eagerly bought by local traders and also a few agents of Kuching Chinese firms who arrived here by steamer during the month. Unfortunately all these people have any amount of notes ranging in value from $5 to $10 but not much silver or copper and are therefore finding some difficulty in buying from Dyaks, Punans and others who always want to receive payment in cash.’ Many traders have applied to Government to change notes for cash but although these requests could not be granted the bulk of payments on Letters of Credit have been made in silver.
     Owing to the continuation of high prices for produce and the fact that the harvest is not yet over there has been very little work in the Courts during the month.
     A policeman while returning to Tatau by boat with his wife and small child met stormy weather and capsized just before reaching Tatau mouth. Those on board managed to reach the shore with some difficulty and the boat drifted in later but all Government stores on board and the private property of the policeman were lost.
      On the 26th a mail arrived from Mukah bringing the news that a schooner belonging to the Bintulu firm of Teo Thai had sunk off Petian and that the cargo was a total loss except what little may be washed up on the neighbouring coast. A Chinese passenger, clerk to Teo Thai, was drowned. This is the more to be regretted in that the owners are one of the most reputable and least litigious firms here. This schooner had only made two coasting voyages since her purchase last year.
      Chinese New Year fell on the 1st of the month and was observed as a holiday. The principal Chinese paid a visit to the fort in the morning.
      One trip was made by the p s. Adeh, which called at Kidurong on the 16th and again on her way back to Kuching on the 21st.
      On the 16th, Her Highness the Ranee s birthday, the offices were closed and the flagstaff dressed.
The motor tug Miri arrived on the 25th towing a lighter as usual to load bilian, and left on the 28th.
A. E. LAWRENCE,
Resident 2nd Class.


82
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1919.
The Sarawak Gazette.
RATES OF ADVERTISEMENTS IN THE “ SARAWAK GAZETTE"
—-
Payable in advance.
Quarter of a column and under—
         First insertion ...	..	... $1.00
         Second and third insertion each	... 0.50
         Subsequent do	do	... 0.25
Half a Column and under—
         First insertion ...	...	... 2.00
         Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
         Subsequent do	do	... 0.50
A Column and under—
         First insertion each	...	... 1.00
         Second and third insertion each	... 2.00
         Subsequent do	do	... 100
Special arrangements may be made for standing advertisements.
  All communications intended for insertion in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed to the Editor at the Government Printing Office, Kuching. They should be clearly written and should reach the Office at least one day before the publication of each issue.
  Letters and other contributions must be
             “A clean tooth never decays."
   H. OHNISHI D.D.S. (T.D.C.)
          (Graduated Tokyo Dental College)
         Japanese Dentist
            193-6, ORCHARD ROAD, SINGAPORE.
[12— 7]
     NOTICE.
	!	
AUCTION SALE
of unredeemed pledges from Pawn Broking  Farm YEW CHEE A Co., Chop Wo SANG and Chop LOON YEN of Ban at No. 18, China Street on Saturdays of the following dates—19th April 1919, 17th May 1919 and 21st June 1919, at 9 a.m.
   List of all such unredeemed pledges can be seen at the Pawn Farmer’s premises.
authenticated by writer's name sent privately to the Editor.
  We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not inserting them.
  Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early ,intelligence of all matters of general interest in their respective neighbourhoods.
         NOTICE.
ASTANA FARM.
THE Manager of Astana Farm begs to inform the Public that he is unable to attend to Orders for milk after Office hours.
NOTICE.
—•—
Gazette subscriptions and Printing Office bills.
   FOR the convenience of residents at Outstations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums but only the 1,2 and 3 cent values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that Money Orders be sent if possible.
J. C. SWAYNE,
Manager, Govt. Printing Office.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO..
Authorised Auctioneers,
PASSENGERS .
ARRIVALS.
•
PER S. S. Alice Lorraine: 17th March—From Sibu— Father Odyk.
PER s. s. Kuching : 17th March--From Singapore—Mr. and Mrs. Clarke, Messrs. Hennie, S. G. Dilly, I. Shelton, F. Weiding, Chee Fook Heng, Ng-Swee T’ng and Chiam Eng Jek.
PER S. S. Kuching : —28th March—From Singapore—Mr. and Mrs. Parry Davis. Messrs. Nalder, J. T. Marriner, Teo Chin Kee, Lim Swee Kee, Lim Say Choon and Sim Why Kee.
DEPARTURES.
PER S. S. Kuching :—21st March—For Singapore—Mr. and Mrs. S. Cunynghame and children,. Mr. and Mrs. Young and child, Mr. and Mrs. Hose, Mr. and Mrs. Grove, Miss Wilson, Messrs. N. B. Levy, K. H. Gillan and A. A. Rennie.
PER s. s. Alice Lorraine:—23rd March—For Sadong— Messrs. G. T. Bates, S. L. Strike and Haldane.
PER S.S. Kuching:- 31st March—For Singapore- Mr. and Mrs. Boult, Messrs. Shelton, J. T. Marriner. Ang Hong Choon, Lim Teck Khoon, Wee Cheng Yew, Lee Yang Kiang. Lim Chee Ghim and Lim Kim Teck.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. APRIL 1, 1919.
83
THE KUCHING DRUG STORE
Rainfall, February, 1919.
KUCHING. SARAWAK.

The place where you can always get:—
PHOTOGRAPHIC CHEMICALS, SURGICAL APPLIANCES.
OPTICAL GOODS, PATENT MEDICINES, TOILET
REQUISITES AND THE LATEST NOVELS.
From 8 a. m.
  „ 1p.m.
ALMNAC
PRICES MODERATE.
To 11.30 a. m.
„ 4.30 p.m.
ORDERS PROMPTLY EXECUTED.
[12—12
THE “SARAWAK GAZETTE”
N
OTICE is hereby given that the Trade Mark con-
sisting of the emblem of the rising sun and the words
“RISING SUN” as shewn above are the joint pro-
perty of THE ASIATIC PETROLEUM COMPANY (STRAITS
SETTLEMENT) LIMITED and THE ASIATIC PETROLEUM
COMPANY (FEDERATED MALAY STATES) LIMITED both in-
corporated in England and is used by them in connection
with petroleum, kerosene, illuminating oils, refined oils,
benzine, motor spirit, gasoline, lubricating oils, grease,
paraffin wax candles, petroleum jellies and other pro-
ducts of oil and petroleum imported by them to the
Straits Settlements, the Federated Malay States and the
States of British North Borneo, Brunei, Sarawak, Siam,
Kedah, Perlis, Johore, Kelentan and Trengganu and sold
under the description of and known in the trade as the
“RISING SUN” brand.
Legal proceedings will be taken against auy person infringing the rights of the said Companies in respect of the above Trade Mark.
Dated this 24th day of March, 1919. 
DONALDSON & BURKINSHAW,
 Solicitors for the Asiatic Petroleum 
Company (Straits Settlements)Limited 
and The Asiatic Petroleum Company 
(Federated Malay States) Limited.
[2-1]
HOURS .

NOTICE.


84
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1919.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO
22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS.
SOLE AGENTS FOR:
FRASER & NEAVE’S AERATED WATERS
(The Best throughout the East.)
Coagulatex.
Au ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic
Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at
$1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 catties of dry rubber.
WE beg to notify our customers that our Town Office has been closed since 31st December 1918.
  For the sale of our sawn timber locally we have appointed Mr. YEO CHOO HONG of Chop SOON TECK of Jawa Street as Agent, who will give his attention to all orders.
  Prices for all timber delivered at our Works at Sungei Priok will be 5% less than those for town deliveries.
  In future all communications should be addressed to THE KWONG LEE BANKING CO., our Financial Agents, and all monies due to us should also be paid to them.
  THE KUCHING STEAM SAW MILLS LIMITED.
[6-6]
NOTICE
ASAHI BEER.
ACETIC ACID.
Fresh supplies of Stores are received
regularly.
    PRICES MODERATE
Free delivery to customers in Kuching.
Free packing & shipping for Outstation
Orders.
[U. C.]
THE KUCHING STEAM SAW MILLS LIMITED.
NOT1CE is hereby given that Share Certificate dated 25th August 1913, issued by THE KUCHING STEAM SAW MILLS LIMITED, for 330 shares of $10 cach fully paid bearing Nos. 971 to 1300 inclusive, and registered in the name of J. H. BRODIE, is alleged to have been lost or destroyed.
   Any person holding the said Share Certificate is required to return it to the undersigned not later than 15th June 1919, otherwise the said Share Certificate will be cancelled and a new one issued.
TAN SUM GUAN, Secretary.
(6-2]

Beer. Mine. Spirit & General Store Dealers.
NOTICE.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1919.
85
          PURE FOOD MEANS GOOD HEALTH
    “ALEXANDRIA” CANNED MEATS
 Every Tin Guaranteed under the New South Wales Pure Food Act, and packed under the constant and vigilant supervision of a Government Inspector.
   ASK FOR “ALEXANDRIA”
    -   _ ——	•— 		—
  Roast Beef    Roast Mutton       Beef SausageCorned Beef    Corned Mutton       Pork SausageOx Cheek      Spiced Mutton       Frankfurt SausageOx Tongues        Mutton Chops                Beef DrippingLuncheon Tongues    Assorted Meats       Pork and BeansSheep Tongues    Minced Scollops       Irish Stew
       Ox Tail Soup
   Extract of Beef    Assorted Soups     Ox Tail Soup As supplied in huge quantities to the Imperial and Indian Governments for use by both the Army and Navy.
[24-1J
Sold by all Stores.
    R. GOSLING & CO.,
          2 Castlereagh Street, SYNDNEY, N.S.W.
        “ALEXANDRIA MEAT WORKS.”
Distributors for the East :
       Seremban General Agency, Ltd.
(Incorporated in F. M. S.)
SINGAPORE.
   Sub: Agents-BAN JUI LONG,
14 Carpenter Street,
KUCHING, SARAWAK.
and BAN JUI GUAN.
MIRI, SARAWAK.


86	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1919.
THE SARAWAK STUDIO
THE BEST IN KUCHING
WHERE GOOD PORTRAITS CAN BE TAKEN AND VIEWS OF THE
NEIGHBOURHOOD PROCURED.
VIEWS OF THE WANGKANG PROCESSION IN GREAT
VARIETY FOR SALE.
PHOTOS FOR PASSPORTS
AT SHORT NOTICE.
AMATEURS’ FILMS & PLATES DEVELOPED, PRINTED &
ENLARGED AT REASONABLE CHARGES.
FRESH KODAK FILMS CAN ALWAYS BE SUPPLIED.
Free instructions given to Amateurs uith pleasure.
C. M. LEE, Manager.
21, COURT HOUSE ROAD, KUCHING.
[12-3]
KUCHING Printed and Published by GHIN HENG SOON, Government Printer, at the Government Printing Office 
Barrack Road.

