TUESDAY, JANUARY 3, 1928.
Acknowledgments.
Mr. Ong Seng Chai thanks his friends and relatives for attending the funeral of his wife, the late Madam CHUA SIAN LOH, and also those who sent scrolls or rendered assistance in his bereavement.
Mrs. Lim Khay Leong and family beg to thank all friends and relatives who sent wreaths, scrolls and letters of condolence and also those who attended the funeral of the late Mr. Lim Khay Leong.
WE do not intend to attempt to give a review of the past year for such a thing is impossible : at this time we can but touch on the main incidents which have occurred during the year.
His Highness the Rajah left for England in April, and returned again in October. During the absence of His Highness the the Government of the country was adminis¬tered by His Highness the Tuan Muda.
The British Agent for Sarawak, Sir
Laurence N. Guillemard, G.C.M.G., re-
tired, and Sir Hugh Clifford was appointed
in his place in February last.
Mr. H. B. Crocker acted in the office of
the Chief Secretary, and in November the
Office of Resident, First Division, was
re-established by the appointment of Mr.
F. F. Boult.
The monthly reports from the various districts will have given their readers a fair account of the affairs in outstations. The country is in a peaceful state and no disturb¬ances have been reported.
The Sarawak Oilfields’ operations in Miri have been carried on satisfactorily, and the output of oil was maintained at over 700,000 tons, and the importance of that town as an oil producing place to the British Empire is very evident.
Financially the year has been a good one, but it is not thought that the revenue will reach the figures of last year owing to the low market price of rubber, the export duties on which are calculated on an ad valorem basis. Trade generally has been progressive though the prices of the principal commodi¬ties have fluctuated considerably. The value of our imports amounts to approximately twenty-six million dollars, which is an increase of about two million dollars over the previous year.
The only feature of importance which
merits attention is the increased quantity of
rice brought into the country; 300,000 pikuls
valued at 1/4 million dollars is shown under this
heading. The value of our exports is ap-
proximately fifty million dollars, which is a
decrease of six million dollars on the previous
year. This decreased value of exports may
be directly attributed to the fall in the market
value of rubber. Of this commodity, about
192,000 pikuls have been exported, which is
an increase of 25,000 pikuls on the previous
year’s exports. There is a further decrease
recorded in the quantity of sago exported,
making our total export of this commodity
i million pikuls only. It is thought that the
small margin of profit made in relation to
that on other commodities is responsible for
the falling off of this industry.
It is regretted that the crop of illipe nuts
anticipated is not expected to realise more
than 90,000 pikuls which will be harvested in
the first month in the new year. The recent
climatic conditions have so damaged the
flowers as to warrant this prediction. In
this connection it may be remarked that the
total export of illipe nuts in 1923 was over
a | million pikuls.
Public works carried out during the past
year have been numerous and include the
construction of water works in many out-
stations. Among the other more important
works are the construction of a Treasury,
Public Works Department offices, new hos-
pital, European club and a river wall. Sibu
has been provided with an electric power
station.
Legislation has been under revision, and
several new orders were published in addition
to those revised. Among these were the
Labour Protection Order, Netherlands
Indian Labourers’ Protection Order, Women
and Girls’ Protection Order, Pensions (Senior
Staff) Order and General Orders in relation
to Officers of the Sarawak Civil Service.
Many minor orders and amendments to orders
were also passed.
A Labour Department has been inaugu-
rated to give a guarantee to the Governments
of countries whence labourers arrive and to
labourers themselves that their interests are
being safeguarded.
Negotations have been in progress with the
Government of India and are nearing com-
pletion with a view to the immigration of
Indian labourers. At the end of the year the
standing committee for the immigration of
Indian labourers had recommended that the
immigration to Sarawak of Indian labourers
he permitted and it is only for the Legislative
Assembly of. the Indian House of Legislature
to pass a law empowering the Government of
Sarawak to take advantage of their recommendation 
Public health has been aggravated only by
the incident of slight outbreaks of small-pox,
but as the result of the strong measures of the
Health Authorities there were no fresh cases
during the month of December.
We have been fortunate in obtaining the
assistance of the Rockefeller Foundation of
America in attaching an officer to our Health
Department, whose specialised advice is of
the greatest value to us in deciding upon a
health policy competent with our revenue.
Politically, the event of the greatest im-
portance during the year was the triennial
meeting of the General Council at which the
various representatives of the government
from all parts of the State were present.
The policy of the government to cover the next
three years was outlined in His Highness the
Rajah's Speech.
It is reported that a new fort has been
constructed at the mouth of the Gat River,
and it is hoped that this will serve to maintain
the peaceful disposition of the Dyaks of the
interior of the Rejang River which has been
evinced during the last few years.
A Judicial Commissioner has been engaged
and will arrive in the country early in the
new year.
It is to be regretted that three serious out-
breaks of fire have occurred, the Betong.
Simanggang and Batu Kawa bazaars having
been burnt to the ground.
During the year a regrettable number of
crimes of violence took place but there was a
tendency towards a falling off of these
unfortunate occurrences during the end of
the year.
For purposes of administration it was
found necessary to abolish the Coast Division.
This Division was accordingly divided into
two portions and absorbed by the Third and
Fourth Divisions.
To conclude we may congratulate ourselves
on a year of average prosperity marked
neither by booms nor startling eventua-
lities and we extend to our readers our best
wishes for a prosperous New Year.
NOTES.
(December.)
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied bv Dayang Leonora, Messrs. J. A. H. Hardie and G. T. M. MacBryan, Mr. and Mrs. F. H. Kortright, Mr. and Mrs. K. H. Gillan left on November 30th for Sibu by H.H M Y Maimuna and returned on the 8th.
Her Highness the Ranee, accompanied by the Dayang Elizabeth, arrived on the 20th by the s.s. Kuching at 1 p m. We under- stand Her Highness has prepared and completed a play which is shortly to be produced in London.
MR. J. G. Barraclough, of Messrs. McDougall, Robertson & Co., Ltd., returned from England on the 5th.
THE Government Dental Surgeon, Mr. A. T. Partridge, who was accompanied by Mrs. Partridge and children, arrived on the 12th from Miri.
THE Rejang Wireless Station was opened for traffic on the 15th. This completes the chain of 21 stations throughout Sarawak.
WE regret to report that the Simanggang bazaar was completely destroyed by fire on the morning of the 13th. The conflagration started at 2 a.m. and reduced the whole bazaar to ashes by 6 a.m. It is gratifying to be able to record, however, that no casualties occurred and that a large quantity of provi¬sions was saved.
MR. F. H. Kortright, left Kuching on the 14th to take up an appointment as Acting Resident of the Fifth Division vice Mr. A. E. Lawrence who proceeded on furlough on the 20th.
MR. and Mrs. P. H. Hayward left on the 17th for a short visit to Singapore.
THE remains of the late Mr. Lim Khay Leong, whose death, we regret to record, occurred in Singapore on the 6th, were brought to Kuching for interment. The funeral took place on the 20th and was attended by a large number of relatives and friends of the deceased. The late Mr. Khay Leong, who was 51 years old at the time of his death, joined the Sarawak Government Service as a. junior clerk in the Police Depart¬ment thirty years ago, with which Depart¬ment he served faithfully for the whole period of his service, and was holding the post of Chief Clerk on his retirement on pension in January this year.
MR. C. S. Griffiths, Superintendent of Lands, departed on the 24th on furlough.
A new lighthouse has been erected at Sirik Point and commenced operating on the 27th. The lamp, which is of the 4th order revolving type., gives a single flash every ten seconds. The height of the lamp above high level spring tides is 60 feet and the light is visible for about ten miles. The position of the light¬house is given as latitude 2° 46'00" N. and longitude 111° 18'55" E.
MR. H. B. Crocker, Acting Chief Secre¬tary, and Dr. E. M. Marjoribanks, Principal Medical Officer, left for Mukah by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 2.3rd instant in order to spend their Christmas holiday with Mr. H. H. Kortright, and returned on the 30th.
GOVERNMENT Offices were closed on the 26th and the 27th, both days having been declared public holidays.
WE understand that Mr. A. R. W. Landon has arrived to assume charge of the agency of the Chartered Bank of India., Australia and China at Kuching.
As from 1st January, 1928, the Coast Division will no longer be regarded as a separate Division. For purposes of admin¬istration, the Mukah and Oya Districts will be included in the Third Division and the Bintulu District in the Fourth Division.
A sale of work was held at St. Teresa’s Convent on the 15th and 16th instant and, we believe, moved very successful.
MR. E. V. Andreini arrived from Kapit on the 21st.
MR. F. H. Pollard arrived from Simang¬gang on a short holiday on the 28th instant.
KUCHING was visited by a terrific electrical storm on the afternoon of the 28th instant. The effect of the lightning was to deprive us of electric light as the main fuses were blown. We are informed that a policeman whilst holding the telephone was the chief sufferer, being rendered unconscious by a flash.
WE congratulate Mr. G. M. Gifford on winning the Gold Cup at Ipoh for the third successive year.
THE final of the “Black and White’’ Trophy football competition, which was played on the 9th, was won by the Police, who were successful for the second time. The Sarawak Rangers were the runners-up.
IT is with great pleasure that we note that the Government Gazette contains a notifica¬tion appointing Mr. H. B. Crocker to the office of Chief Secretary and we are sure that all our readers will join us in offering Mr. Crocker heartiest congratulations on his promotion.
A salt water condensing plant was also added to overcome the necessity of repeated visits to ports for fresh water supplies.
After conclusion of hostilities the vessel returned to Singapore in January, 1919, where she was docked and refitted, and finally reached Sarawak on 18th June, 1919.
The last ocean voyage of Zahora was a trip to Singapore with passengers in May 1924: she also conveyed His Highness the Rajah and party on a visit to the Outstations for the last time in November. 1924 when His Highness the Rajah was obliged to put into Brooketon for boiler re-pairs ; this breakdown culminated in her being placed on the sale list in 1925. After a survey carried out by experts from Singapore His High-ness the Rajah decided to withdraw Zahora from the sale list and place her in charge of a care and maintenance party pending dismantling preparatory to being broken up.
P.S. Adeh:— This vessel was built for the Sarawak Government by Messrs Blackwood and Gordon and was launched at Port Glasgow in June. 1 88A
Her length overall was 156 feet, breath 25 feet ana depth mouled to upper deck 0 feet.
The gross tonnage of the vessel was 450 tons.
P.S. Adeh was fitted with a pair of compound surface condensing paddle engines of 70 h p. which were also supplied by the builders, the diameter of the cylinders being 20 inches with a 37 inches stroke.
At her trials which took place on the measured mile, she attained a speed of 93/4 knots.
P S Adeh reached Kuching, Sarawak, on 3rd October, 1884
Her first voyage was to Brunei and Labuan, sailing on 29th October, 1884 when she conveyed the Hon'ble the President of the Committee of Administration and the Datu Bandar on an official visit to the Sultan of Brunei in connection with the troubles in the Limbang River District.
She made frequent trips to Singapore from Kuching and Sibu and kept up a fortnightly communication between Kuching and the Out-stations up to January, 1925, when she was laid up and placed in charge of a care and main-tenance party, pending her final scuttling at Salak, near Santubong, on 31st October, 1927.
P.S Adeh took part in the annexation of Limbang, 16th March, 1890 and convened the forces of all important military expeditions during the last forty years.
Captain Woolridge brought ps. Adeh out from England and remained in her until December, 1885. A Mr. Constable was Engineer-in-Charge of the vessel in 1893, and afterwards she was under the supervision of Captain Mathie until 1899, when a purely native crew took charge of the vessel and continued to run her until the end of her commission.
P.S. Adeh was sold to the Sarawak and Singa-pore Steamship Company in 1907, but remained on her regular Singapore and Coast run ; until in 1916 the Government decided to repurchase the vessel and continued to run her until the end of her career.
[W. F DE V. S.]
A Chronical of an Act of the
Accounts Department.
FROM “THE ACCOUNTANT."
In the Temple, yea, in the place of the Mighty Ones, did these things occur. And it came to pass that balancing tin e drew near, and the Chief Scribe said unto the lesser scribes, “Behold my sons the appointed tune is drawing nigh, and verily, we are not up-to-date Complete ye the posting therefore, and prepare the Trial Balance that I may examine it "
And the senior of the lesser scribes saw that it was good, and made reply unto him, saying, "Yea, my father, thy words are as pearls of great price and full of wisdom Lo, the matter shall be put in hand in the twinkling of an eve."
And the lesser scribes posted up-to-date and did prepare a T.B. But the T.B. did not agree, and the difference was great, yea many shekels of silver was the discrepancy.
And the lesser scribes rent their clothes and fasted, saying. “There shall be no maidens nor tennis these days until the figures do agree." But behold, the matters was too much for them, and they spake amongst themselves, saying, " Let us call the Chief Scribe, peradventure he shall help us "
And they called the Chief Scribe.
And when he had examined the T B. he was exceeding wroth, and spoke with a loud voice, swing, “ Oh ye fools, and men of little under-standing, know ye. not that capital is a credit balance, and ye have entered it upon the debit side ?"
And they marvelled to hear such things, and
cast down their heads, being filled with a great
shame
But the Chief Scribe said, “ Be not afraid, my sons, for the matter is now in order, and I will prepare the final accounts forthwith ."
And the lesser scribes rejoiced an were exceed-
ing glad.
Now the Chief Scribe and the senior of the
lesser scribes repaired them unto the small
tabernacle, yea, unto the very Holy of Holies,
and did wrestle mightily with the final accounts,
and finally did prevail.
And the accounts were passed by the City Fathers, yea, by the very men of audit, for they were accurate.
And, seeing this, the Chief Scribe gat him away to Brighton, and the lesser scribes hied them into the city yea. in the very streets thereof did they disnort themselves
Now, the rest of the Acts of the Accounts Department, first and last, are they not written in the ledgers and in the journals, upon the very folios thereof?
Report of St. Andrew’s Night Dinner
in Miri, 1927.
The Scots community of Miri celebrated the Day of St. Andrew in traditional fashion, fifty-eight with their guests meeting in the Rest House at dinner in the evening, Capt. G. Steele and Mr. R. Moffat two of the Scots longest resident in Miri occupying the positions of Chairman and Toast Master respectively. After an excellent dinner during which the Haggis played a prominent part, the address to this Scottish delicacy being rendered by Mr. Kerr, the loyal toasts were proposed by the Chairman and duly honoured, the Allied Forces were drunk to, the Resident, Mr. Aplin, proposing and the General Manager, Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd.,
Major Richards responding to the toast, ML. Murray proposed the St. Andrew's Night gathering, the second annual gathering of the clans. The guests were proposed by Mr. Bowie and spoken for by Mr. Noble. The Eadies were proposed by Dr. Webster, and Mrs. Steele replied on their behalf.
The toast of the Chair was proposed in the ver¬nacular by Mr. Kerr, and this was drunk with Highland ’ honours. The Chairman in his reply spoke of the great services rendered by the Secretary Mr. Geddes, and Mr. Rhys Jones, whose joint organizing abilities had done so much for the success of the evening. After a photograph had been taken, a varied and excellent entertainment, of music from Messrs. Mayer and Kerr, of song from Mrs. Steele, Mrs. Geddes, Messrs. Mayer, Bracy, Andrews. McKelvie, Strathdee, Bowie and Jones, and of dance from Mrs. Geddes, was contributed. Mr. Geddes’s slanders on Scotland were also enthusias¬tically received. After the Artistes had been thanked from the Chair, the evening concluded with the singing of "Auld Lang Syne."
Rubber in British North Borneo.
A glance at the statistics of stocks m London1 shows very clearly that Restriction is failing to stabilise the price with the ease that was anticipated, says the "B.N.B. Herald.” and as the output of unrestricted areas grows in proportion to the whole, the policy of Restriction will become less and less successful. To-day, with Restriction fully operative, more rubber is produced than the world is using. True, the adverse balance is not great as yet, and exhaustion of unused coupons or a slight increase in consumption may turn the scale for the time being, so that Restriction may fulfil its purpose for some years, but it is merely a temporary expedient.
Inevitably sooner or later Restriction will be abandoned and the price will drop to a level at which it pays the average estate to tap. and there it will remain for some years, secured against any great or lasting advance by the existence of poor areas ready to be tapped again as soon as their economic minimum price is reached. There will be lean years for even the best estates, and there may be extinction for the poor estates; then as consumption gradually increases true stability will be reached.
A DANGEROUS POSITION.
In this country small-holders have pinned their faith to rubber, and their faith is justified if a long view is taken, but their position is particularly dangerous during the next few years, because the majority are depending upon the profits from small areas in bearing to maintain much larger immature areas, and if the price of rubber does not remain profitable for, at least, the next four years, many immature areas must be abandoned and the thrift of years be sacrificed.
Dangerous as the general position is when a large portion of the population are dependent on one un¬stable crop, the small-holder can secure himself if only he will act in time, but although cultivation of the soil engenders many excellent qualities foresight is not among them, and it is for the merchant and educated classes therefore to persuade the small agriculturists not to stake their all on rubber, but to safeguard themselves by turning a part of their energies at once to the production of other commodi¬ties and so insure themselves against complete ruin if a rubber slump does come.
The Gymkhana Club, Miri.
AMATEUR DRAMATIC SOCIETY.
For some months past odd bursts of melody and frenzied exhortation from the European School had been wafted across the evening silence of the Padang, harassed looking individuals had tottered home at unearthly hours, conjecture was rife—the Members of the Dramatic Society were in intensive training for another offensive.
Zero hour was fixed for 9 p.m. on December 10th and prompt to time some two hundred eagerly expectant folk were present in the Club when the curtain was rung up on the revusical tonic very rightly entitled "Just The Stuff.”
The opening Chorus made the audience sit up and ask for more. They got it. and then some Songs soulful and stirring by Mrs. Mackenzie, Andrews and Rhys Jones, Songs snappy by “Solly” Mayer, tuneful Duets by Mrs. Roberts and Harry Bishop, sketches and concerted items by the “Gang” all followed each other with bewildering rapidity. Short intervals between items were filled by Stick¬land and Dunlop who, as “Time Wasters,” must have had many an aching side to answer for.
Amidst such a galaxy of talent it is difficult to mention outstanding items.
The three sketches “The Silent Prompter”, “The X-Ray Mind”, and "The Man in the Stalls" were particularly good. In the first two all the characters were excellent and the third was a triumph As Betty Allan, Mrs. Bettany proved herself an artiste of great ability while Bettany and Bishop played extremely difficult roles to the life.
The concerted items "Golfing" and “My Moon” met with tremendous applause, the latter being most artistically produced and probably registered the bit of the evening. The “Grand Parade” finale was a fitting climax to a splendid Show.
To Harry Bishop for his masterly production and unflagging energy, to all his “Gang” for the generous manner in which they devoted their time and talent, our thanks are due for a wonderful evening and a real " Tonic”. Here’s to the Members of the Miri Dramatic WSociety—You're “Just the Stuff”
A. D. C.
THE GYMKHANA CLUB.
MIRI.
THE DRAMATIC SOCIETY
PRESENTS
“JUST THE STUFF.”
A REVUSICAL TONIC IN NINETEEN DOSES
Concocted and Produced by Harry Bishop
One Performance Only
Saturday, December Tenth, 1927.
Sarawak Regatta
MONDAY, 2ND JANUARY, 1928.
Judges
Messrs. H. B. Crocker, A. A. Rennie, F. F. Boult, J. B. Archer, J. A. H. Hardie, Tan Sani Guan, Chan Keo Ong, The Datu Bandar, The Uatu Imam Tua, The Datil Imam, The Datu Hakim, The Tuan Imam, The Tuan Khatib, Haji Hassini, Inche Mohd. Zin. and Abang Haji Zulaihi.
Umpire
Major S. Cunynghame, and N. A. Middlemus.
Starters 
Messrs. G. M. Allman, \V. W. Duncan, R, E. Edwards, Pitt-Hardacre, R. C. Kay, The Datu Bandar, Datu Haji Abang Abdulrasid, Abang Suleiman, Inche Abu Bakar, and Indie Mohd. Zin.
Stewards
Captain C. P. Lowe, Dr. E. M. Marjori- bunks, Dr. T. E. Walsh, The Tuan Belal Messrs. Wee Kheng Chiang, Law Chin Hiang. Mohamad Sheriff, and Dr. Krishna.
Citrus of the Course
Captain W. T. Clark, Messrs- A. C. Street, F. D. Haigh and W. H. Avery.
Totalizator
Mr. A. P. Merrells.
In Charge of Refreshments 
Mr. L. D. Kennedy.
Sideshows
Mr. \V. Clark, Abang Suleiman and Abang Haji Hipny.
Honorary Treasurer
Mr. G. T. Bates.
Honorary Secretary 
Mr. R. E. Le Sueur.
1st Race, 3 am.
VBB NIPPON STAKES FOR boats with crews limited to eight men. A alue $30. Presented by Nissa Shokai, Ltd. 1st prize $20. 2nd prize $10. From Godown Ban Seng to Stone WHARF. 
2nd Race, 8.15 am SHIPS’ GIGS.—1st prize $10. 2nd prize $5. Limited to 4 ours and one paddle From Mnara Padungan to Stone Wharf.
3rd Race, 9 a.m. THE DATUS' STAKES.— Value $125. Presented by Kuching Datus’ Court $100. Regatta Fund $25. 2nd prize $30. 1st prize to crew $50. 2nd prize to crew $25. 3rd prize to crew $15 Open to any make of boat, unlimited in size or number of crew. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
4th Race, 9.30 a.m.—THE FAN TAN CUP.— Value $50. Presented by The Seng Chiang Gam¬bling Farm. 2nd prize $15. 1st prize to crew $15. 2nd prize to crew $8 Open to any description of boat with crews limited to 15 men, drawn in Class A. From Godown Ban Seng to Stone Wharf.
5th Race, 10 a.m.—THE RANEE'S CUP.—Value $100. Presented by Her Highness the Bailee. 2ml prize $10. 3rd prize $15. 1st prize to crew $50. 2nd prize to crew $20. 3rd prize to crew $10. Open to boats limited to crews of 30 paddles, one flag man and one bailer may be carried in addition, but these must not use paddles. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
6th Race. 10.30 a.m.—(Offices Race).—THE YAMASHITA STAKES.—Value $30. Presented by the Yamashita Rubber Estates, Limited to employees in Government and .Mercantile Offices whose names as being in the receipt of monthly wages appear on the pay sheet of any such Office for December, 1927. Limited to crews of eight paddlers in each boat. 1st prize $20. 2nd prize $10. From Muara Padungan to Stone Wharf.
7th Race, 11 a.m.—B. II. THE RAJAH’S CUP.— Value $200. Presented by H. H. the Rajah. 2nd prize $65. 3rd prize $20. 1st prize to crew $80. 2nd prize to crew $40. 3rd prize to crew $20. Open to any make of boat, unlimited in size or number of crew. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
8th Race, 11.30 a.m.—THE INDIA STAKES.— Value $50. Presented by the Indian Community. 2nd prize $15. 1st prize to crew $15. 2nd prize to crew $8. Open to any description of boat with crews limited to 15 men, drawn in Class 11. From Godown Ban Seng to Stone Wharf.
INTERVAL.
Racing was Resumed at 2 p.m.
9th Race. 2 p.m.-The PAHLAWAN STAKES — Value 175. Presented by Inche Mohamed Zin $50. Regatta Fund $25. 2nd prize $25. 1st prize to crew $20. 2nd prize tn crew $10. 3rd prize to crew $7. Open to boats finishing 1st, 2nd or 3rd in Races Nos. 4 and 8. limited to 15 paddlers. From Ulu Tanjong Patingan to Stone Wharf.
10th Race, 2.30 p.m.—ARMY, POLICE AND STEAMERS.—Crews limited to 15 men Mixed crews from steamers will not be allowed, each steamer must have a boat containing members of its crew who are signed on before January 1st, 1928. 1st prize $30. 2nd prize $15. From Pengkalan Dayang Atun to Stone Wharf.
11th Rare 3 p.m.—THE CHINESE BANKERS’ STAKES.—Value $75. Presented by The Sarawak Chinese Bank. The Kong Leo Bank and Bian Chiang Bank $50. Regatta Fumi $25. 2nd prize $30. 3rd prize $10 1st prize to crew $10. 2nd prize to crew $15. 3rd prize to crew $10. Open to boats limited io 30 paddles, one flag man and one bailer may be carried in addition, but these must not use paddirs. From Ulu Tanjong Patingan to Stone Wharf.
12th Race. 3.30 p m. -THE DAYANG DIAH MAS STAKES.—Value $50. Presented by Haji Hassim. 2nd prize $15. A Consolation Race—For boats which have not finished first in Races Nos. 4,8, or 9. From Tanjong Patingan to Stone Wharf.
13th Race, 4 p.m.—THE KUCHING STAKES.— A alue $75. Presented by the Regatta Fund. 2nd prize $25. A Consolation Race.—For boats which have not finished first in Races Nos. 5, or 11. From Ulu Tanjong Patingan to Stone Wharf.
14th Race, 4.30 p.m.—THE CONSOLATION STAKES.—Value $125. Presented by the Sarawak Steamship, Co., $50. Borneo Co., $50 Sarawak. Trading Co., $25. 2nd prize $25. A Consolation Race.—For boats which have not finished first in Races Nos. 3 and 7. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
Extracts from Monthly Reports.
First Division.
November, 1927.
KUCHING.
Lond Office. The Superintendent of Lands. Mr. C. S. Griffiths, reports:—
Swen foot drain from Sungei Mayan to Sungei Nonoh. The final section, measuring 1,604 feet and opening into the Sungei Nonok, was taken  over during the month. This contract- is now complete. The total length of the ditch is 13,600
Clearing of the Sungei Moyan. This work was also completed and final payment made.
The two latter works being completed, the only contract now in force is that for the fifteen foot drain.
I visited this area recently. The ditches were dealing with very considerable quantities of water, and the land appeared to be drying un satisfactorily. It was evident however that heavy rains would seriously interfere with any future work undertaken during the landas and nothing more will be attempted until the advent of the dry season.
Lundu Road, The earthwork was completed as ar as Sungei Rayo, but the felling and clearing to the full width has vet to be done	&
Temporary culverts were completed as far as Sun ei Matang and a temporary bridge across that stream was commenced.
Some three miles of road was roughly surveyed. .
Kuching. The laying out of lots for the occupation of the migrating Padungan Malays was completed and many of the lots were duly allocated. In most cases the purchase of the necessary land was effected without great difficulty, but one case went to arbitration an award on which had not been made at the end of the month.
The new forms of application for land were brought into use during the month and the entire new routine will be introduced gradually.
Seventy-three applications for land were secured and sixty examinations were carried out
Number of Leases and Squatters Licences issued dining the month were as follows:—
Ten leases - 138 acres 1 rood 20 poles.
Number of Occupation Tickets issued during the month were as follows
Fifty-one Occupation Tickets =• 351 acres 2 roods to poles of which—
Occupation Tickets issued at Sungei Moyan.
Seven Occupation Tickets = 55 acres for  Coconuts.
BAU, UPPER SARAWAK.
During the month 125 Occupation Tickets were ; issued for new gardens and 190 to replaced old titles.
SADONG.
A light gauge truck line has been laid down to enable the transport of shale from the main colliery tram line to the site of the new bazaar road, alongside which four more sites were applied tor and subsequently auctioned. This makes a total of 15 new shop-houses, to be erected in accordance with approved plan, within one year, and it is estimated that too truckloads of shale will be required to raise and complete the road through the centre.
Health. 893 unvaccinated persons were at-tended to, in nearly every cases voluntarily.
Exports included :—
Coal 1,215 tons: Jelutong 386 piculs, F. Rubber 61 piculs; Padi 2 koyan; Belian timber valued $ 1,207
Agriculture and Land. 21 Occupation Tickets for rubber, 4 for coconuts, and 54 for three Native Holdings, were issued during the month, mostly to Dyaks.
General. Land Dyaks above Ampungan did not appear keen to take advantage of the otter of free 3 acre Native Holdings tor themselves, stating that they have not enough land wherein to make the reserves, unless they encroach into their own ‘ jerami ’ there being no jungle now in this large area.
5.93 inches of rain were recorded during November.
F. F. BOULT, Resident, First Division, Sarawak
Sadong Colliery.
Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager, Sadong Collieries reports :—
The output, export, local consumption, conversion into coke and coal stock figures for the month were as follows:—
Stock balance at end of mouth 114.07
The rainfall for the month was 11.23 inches.
Second Division.
November. 1927.
SIMANGGANG.
Agriculture.—The following permits were issued—rubber 103. pepper 109.
Medical.—A total of two hundred and fifteen persons were treated in hospital during the month as follows:—Chinese thirty-six, Malay twenty and Dyak one hundred and fifty-nine.
One hundred and fifty-two N.A.B. injections for Yaws, etc. were given and five hundred and twenty persons were vaccinated during the month.
Third Division.
November, 1927.
SIBU.
The Divisional Medical Officer, reports:—
During the month 101 people were treated in the hospital, 67 being new patients. 719 out-patients were treated, 324 being new-comers, 109 N.A.B. injections were given and 217 valuations performed, 389 passen¬gers on the Singapore vessels were inspected at Rejang.
LOWER REJANG.
The new Malay school was opened on the 27th with 40 scholars, at the end of the month these amounted to sixty.
KAPIT.
Trade, etc.	One or two trees were noticed with Eng-
kabang fruit in the Katibas but the crop there is, on the whole, a failure. Custom duties amounting to $1,946 were collected.
Agriculture	Ground nuts and potatoes having been
successfully grown in an experimental garden seeds were given to Dyaks to encourage them to plant, also several kinds of corn of which the Mexican variety seems to thrive best.
H. L. OWEN,
Resident Third Division.
Fourth Division,
1927.
MIRI.
September and October.
P.W.D.— A new block of clerk's quarters on the padang were finished and occupied; and a nibong fence was later erected round its precincts.
Work on the Salome stream was proceeded with and it is hoped that the new water course will be completed before the end of the year.
The new oil store and wharf were finished and the building painted with red lead.
BARAM.
September.
Rainfall for the month was 4'93 inches.
Public Works.--The Government carpenter has been putting the root on to newly rebuilt Kayan rest house A carpenter was engaged to do alterations to the lower part of the Baram Fort. A contract was made for a concrete main along the front of the back bazaar but owing to abnormally high water, at the end of the month not much work bad been done.
Professor Harrison Smith's Fund.—Dresser Lazaroo left on 13th instant for Tinjar and returned at the end of the month, eight persons were treated at the Dispensary and three hundred and nineteen up river of whom eighty-seven were given N.A B. injections. ,
Trade.—The trade figures for the month are as
October.
Public Works.—The contractor from Miri started work on the new Customs' Quarters, the framework was not ready for erection at the end of the mouth. The Government carpenter completed the new Kayan rest house and rebuilt bridge washed away by the high water.
Professor Harrison Smith's bund.—Forty adults and four children were given N.A.B. injections out of a total of eighty-nine patients treated.
Trade.—The main imports were rice, kerosene, cigarettes and tobacco while the main exports were para rubber 622 piculs, damar daging 347 piculs and jelutong 1,941 piculs.
H. D. APLIN, Acting Resident, Fourth Division.
Fifth Division.
LIMBANG.
1927.
May.
For the time of year there was an unusually heavy rainfall, amounting to 2180 inches, which fell on nineteen days, the remaining twelve days of the month being rainless.
Buffaloes shipped to Kuching eighty-eight head.
June.
For this mouth the rainfall was normally low. totalling 6’59 niches with fourteen rainless days.
Buffaloes shipped to Kuching sixty-eight head.
July.
Dr. Wilhelm, geologist for The Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, came from Brunei on the 14th, going on up river the same evening to meet the British Resident of Brunei who was coming through that way from a tour in Tutong and Belait.
August.
August was a very dry month, with only 253 inches of rainfall and twenty-four days without any ram at all. The weather was decidedly hot and fresh water would have been difficult to obtain had it not been for the new supply.
October.
Rainfall shows a decrease as compared with last month, the total this month being 7 85 inches against 12 55 inches in September. Days when no rain fell numbered 11 in October.
LAWAS AND TRUSAN.
July.
Agriculture.—It is satisfactory to see that the area now being felled for padi planting is larger than was the ease last year. The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estate, Limited, exported 39,588 lbs. of dry rubber to Labuan during the month.
The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estate, Ltd., ex-ported 29,697 lbs. of rubber to Labuan during the month.
