FRIDAY, JUNE 1, 1928.
NOTES. 
May.
His Highness the Rajah and party re¬turned from .Java on the 21st in time for the first day of the Spring Meeting of the Sarawak Turf Club. The races were held on the 22nd and 24th, and, except for occasional rain, were highly successful. An unusually large number of visitors were present from outstations.
MESSRS. C. D. and P. M. Adams are to be congratulated on their success. The former winning four races with Flying Fox and the latter riding six winners.
In the usual tournaments the outstations were well represented by Mr. F. Mudford who won both the Billiard and Bowling handi¬caps.
AMONGST the many festivities that took place were dances at B. M. K., the Club and Astana.
THE Government Gazette prints the follow¬ing appointments :—Mr. C. E. A. Ermen to act as Resident, Fourth Division and Dr. Gilbert E. Brooke to be Chief Health Officer.
Mr. A. Humphreys is gazetted Electrical Engineer, Kuching and Mr. G. Poushkine Assistant Electrical Engineer, Sibu.
FOUR Government Officials left on Euro¬pean leave during the month :—Mr. H. D. Aplin, who sailed direct from Miri, Mr. S. W. Harris and Messrs. H. H. Kortright and E. S. Holl. The two latter are travelling home together. We understand they will have as a fellow passenger, Mr. Ormsby Gore.
OWING to the scarcity of billian, from and after July 1st until further notice, the export of billian is prohibited from the State.
IN future the Sarawak Gazette and Sara¬wak Government Gazette will be under separate Editorships.
WE are asked to announce that two Chubb Safes (without duplicate keys) the property of the Government, will be sold by auction on Friday the 8th, outside the Court House, Kuching at 9 a.m.
THE following Officers were gazetted for home leave in the Gazette dated 15th May :— Messrs. A. A. Rennie, W. F. Dick, G. J. D. Walters, E. O. Bruce.
Mr. C. E. A. Ermen is reported as returned from leave.
Death of Sergeant Anchi,
Sergeant Anchi was born at Lingga of Dyak parentage and at the time of his death must have been close on 90 years in age. He became a Mahomedan al an early age. He was connected with the Sarawak Government, when Ills Highness the late Rajah WAS Tuan Muda and remembers the old Skrang Fort.
He joined the Sarawak Rangers and became a Sergeant and used to accompany His Highness the late Rajah on all his expeditions. When Haram was first ceiled to the Sarawak Government, he was placed in charge with the late Tuanku Muda from where he retired on pension 46 years ago. One of his sons, Bujang. is now Native Officer at Miri and a member of the Council-Negri.— (Contributed.)
Oil from Rubber.
Wide-spread interest was shown at a large gather¬ing of Perak planters at Pingi Estate near Ipoh when a demonstration was given by Mr. David Gra¬ham, a local chemist, and Mr. R. W. Kendall, manager of 1’ingi Estate, of their process for the cheap extraction of oil and spirit from rubber scrap.
Extracted by the cheap distilling machine dis¬played, the cost works out at ten cents per gallon. The process is very simple and can easily be handled by an estate staff and it was explained that since the discovery the health authorities had found that rubber oil is most deadly when employed against mosquito larvae. The subject is to be discussed at the medical conference which is to be held shortly.
The demonstrators showed that the oil extracted was being used as fuel for the factory power plant whilst the spirit was used to driven motor car engine.
The discovery has given rise to great satisfaction and is regarded as being full of possibilities.—(Straits Times.)
Holland and Insulinde.
To placate native aspirations a bill has been intro¬duced to amend the Constitution of the Dutch East Indies. In this connection. Dr. M. J. A. Steenhuis, in a forcible paper read before the Indische Genootschap at The Hague last month, declared that if the bill is passed native politicians would only try to obtain fresh concessions and further encroach on the political power of the Netherlands. According to the “Gazette de Hollande" he contended that the native population would become the dupe of such a policy and that the national and international im¬portance of the Netherlands would thereby be weakened. In spite of Japanese opinion to the con¬trary, be held that the policy of the Netherlands Government should b6 directed towards the fullest maintenance of its political power in the Dutch East Indies, at the same time continuing its purely economic welfare policy for the natives. He argued that in the mass the natives do not wish for a trans¬fer of power to a group of native politicians who "unjustly call themselves the People's represent¬atives.” The suggested passing into law of such a bill has been giving the Dutch authorities "furiously to think," and we have no doubt that while native aspirations will receive the sympathy they deserve, Holland will not, and cannot, from the national as well as an international view point, permit the reins of power to leave her hands.— (China Express and Telegraph).
The Mukah Recreation Club.
In the absence of the Resident of the Third Division (Mr. H. L. Owen) the new Mukah Recreation Club was opened at midday on Saturday, the 6th May, by the Resident of Mukah and Oya (Mr. H. H. Kortright). The Resident in a short speech declared the club duly and formally opened and after short speeches by the Native Officers and others the brief ceremony came to an end.
The club itself is a substantial building erected at the South end of the football field adjoining the Green Road and consists of two large rooms. The biggest room houses a bar and various tables for writing, reading, etc., while the other contains a full sized billiard fable, the gift of His Highness the Rajah. Facing the football field is a verandah running the whole length of the building.
The club has begun it’s existence with a roll of some 40 members and if the present enthusiasm and keeness is maintained it should be a very great boon to the goodly number of Government servants resident in the Mukah and Oya districts.
A football competition on somewhat similar lines to that held last year was also entered upon during the week preceding the opening of the club and was an even greater success than last year as new teams entered who bad not been in evidence before end these revealed an astonishing aptitude for the game; particularly one might mention the Mukah Police team who played with great pluck and determination which brought them a well deserved success. 1’he ground was in magnificent condition and the weather, in contrast to last year’s depressing conditions, was ideal. The field was packed with spectators at every match and the number of " langko,” large and small, was double the number erected lust year, many of them being gaily decorated in bizarre and fascinating colours.
Owing to their victories last year three teams
were handicapped by having to give a goal to their
opponents, viz:- Government, Dalat and Abun 1st. The final which was played on Saturday the 5th was a somewhat lifeless game played between two tired teams, however the Government demonstrated their superiority by winning 5—0.
They received a set of silver medals as did Dalat the runners up and the Police who bent Kg. Abun for third prize
Kg. Abun, however, played so well and so
sportingly throughout the whole competition that
it was decided to award them a set of medal as
an appreciation of their very plucky display
Last, but by no means least, mention must be made of the very successful sports meeting held on Saturday the 5th which was primarily intended for the. benefit of the schoolboys of the Vernacu¬lar School, but which contained a large number
of events open to all. Needless to say the sports were a great success and the enthusiasm shown by all the competitors, big and small, was splendid. This account cannot be finished without a tribute to the generosity and energy of the Tua Tua Kampongs who gave a curry tiffin to some hundred people just after the opening of the Club.
This was an entirely spontaneous effort on their part and it may safely be said that everyone appreciated their kindness which helped to make it one of the many pleasures of an evenful day. In conclusion a vote of thanks must be offered to everyone, whether competitors or spectators, who helped to commemorate, with such wholehearted enthusiasm, the opening of the Mukah Recreation Club.— (Contributed.)
Innocents Abroad.
The Geographical Journal for March reprints a very interesting lecture by Capt. Kirby on the aerial survey now finished in Johore. The problems faced were very similar to those which confront us here and the article is well worth attention. How¬ever, from a local point of view Capt, Kirby’s views on his Dyak force will probably make the best reading.
After stating that he found both Malay and Chinese labour unsatisfactory Capt. Kirby continues.
"To replace the Malays as coolies I was enabled by a stroke of luck to recruit a party of Dyaks from Sarawak who appeared in Johore Bahru looking for any work which would enable them to avoid falling into their besetting sin of stealing gutta percha from the Government forest reserves. This party tattooed From head to toot and exuding a noisy geniality over all with whom they came in contact, were taken on with some misgivings. They proved however most excellent coolies. They were good workers, and being born naturalists and jungle men they were far happier in the unexplored regions at work than they were in more civilized places. They carry their loads in ambonqs on their backs, andean travel fair distances with a full load along jungle rentes at a speed of some 2 miles per hour.
"They were however rather difficult to deal with because they were entirely unaccustomed to the ways of the white man, having probably only en¬countered a few in their lifetime, and thus there was always a mutual unexpectedness in one's deal¬ings with them. Secondly, they were in no sense "coolies." Their attitude was much more that of an independent colleague, and this fortunately with¬out any lack of respect or willingness. Thus I found they were much more easily dealt with by a combination of humour and firmness than by any other method	
"In contrast to the Malay the Dyak lives on the jungle, plus a certain amount of rice. His diet consisted of turtles, pig, monkeys, loots, fruit, soft bark and other things which he alone knew were edible, all matters of doubt being solved by empirical methods. There was no necessity to carry tents or tarpaulins for them, as they were quite able to
produce waterproof shelters out of the jungle itself. Their living expenses were nil, and they thus banked their pay with their employer, so that at the end of their period of work in the country they were enabled to return home to their own country as capitalists.
It is not so long ago that the Dyak was a head¬hunter, but only on one occasion did any of my Dyak coolies show a tendency to relapse. One was dis¬covered with a newly garnered human head as his pillow. On investigation I am glad to say this head was not taken from a member of the section, but that the coolie had found a dead Chinaman
In sickness the Dyak proved rather a handful. You gave him medicine, he would not take it but kept it, for it represented capital in his own country. The leger de main with which the Dyak
could vanish a quinine pili would make Messrs. Maskelyne and Devant jealous. It was next to impossible to get him to go into hospital, for, as he says, and quite rightly, so many people go in alive and come out dead; and in his own case, as he invariably delayed his entrance to the Inst possible moment, this was unfortunately true.
“From an educational point of view the Dyak was prepared to make the fullest use of his opportunities, and on more than one occasion I have known a gang of coolies purchase slates and pencils in a village when passing through, and in the evening invade
their employer's tent and ask to be taught something: the selection of the subject being left entirely to the employer’s good taste. I generally attempted to teach them how to write the numerals, but found that six and nine presented an insurmountable difficulty. I attempted to tell them about London but I was very quickly told that I was not telling the truth. Even the production of picture postcards merely impressed them with the elaboration of the fake.
“In his own country, Sarawak, neither elephants nor tigers are to be found. His first remark on seeing an elephant's footprint was that if they could but secure an animal that size they would have, no need to do anything but eat for weeks. However when they did meet either of these animals they were terrified, and I have never been called a liar so point-blank ns when I explained that the despised Indian coolie of no physique rode on one of these animals in his own country controlling its move¬ments. in the Dyaks' eyes this was absolutely incomprehensible.” In a dismission which followed, the lecture” Lieut J. C. T. Willis said "It is with some diffidence that I find myself on the platform attempting to add anything to what has been so ably said with regard to Johore but there is one point which I should like to amplify. Cant. Kirby, when speaking of our labour difficulties, mentioned Dyaks, and on the strength of three years rather intimate acquaintance with these folk, in the jungle and more or less under their own conditions, I should like to say a few words to show you what nice people they are to deal with. Short and stocky, clad almost entirely in blue tattoo, they wear their hair right down their backs and appear to have no definite knowledge of the white man beyond what they get from one or two District Officers in the course, of their lifetime. When first they came they were full of unexpected surprises. They were in no sense coolies. ' Genial survey collaborators' was much more their general outlook. A story may enable you to realize how one had to deal with them and what an attractive mentality they had. “I was walking along a very narrow jungle path. A Chinaman coining in the opposite direction re¬quired a great deal more than his fair share of the path. As we brushed past each other, four of my Dyaks pattered up with very broad smiles on their faces and very large knives in their bands and said, 'Did you see that man ? he did not give you anything like enough room to walk ; may we please cut his head off?’ I had to act quite quickly, for silence is taken as consent, and it is somewhat awkward to explain afterwards that one did not really mean it. “I left these folk with very genuine regret, and I may also add. with a certain amount of subterfuge, because six of them, having saved enough money for a journey to Europe and equipped themselves, with a general view of appearing well in London society, with one Hamburg hat apiece, announced their intention of coining home with me.”
A Literary Competition.
We give below the solution of the Competition in the last number of the Gazette No competitor sent in a completely correct list Mrs Pitt-Hardacre scored twelve out of twenty points and wins the five dollar prize. Quotation number five seems to have caused the greatest difficulty and perhaps would only be familiar to students of late Victorian verse.
Along the cool sequestered vale of life, They kept the noiseless tenour of their way.
Gray’s Elegy
And the wicked cease from troubling, and the weary are at rest.
Tennyson. The May Queen, (last line)
The stars threw down their spears, And watered heaven with their tears.
Blake The Tiger.
For Cambridge people rarely smile, Being urban, squat and full of guile. Rupert Brooke. Grantchester.
And if the scheme should possibly seem, a rather absurd pretence,
Think that your chance of promotion lies in a delicate reticence. A.C. Deane. New Rhymes for Old.
Man wants but little here below.
Goldsmith. The Hermit
And two French copper coins, ranged with careful art.
To comfort his sad heart.
Coventry Patmore. The Toys.
Though I be rude in speech.
St. Paul. II. Cor. II. 6.
But when the deep-red eye of day is level with the broad highway.
Elroy Flecker. Yasmin. (Serenade
in Hassan).
Richard's himself again.
Richard The Third. Colley Cibber's version.
Sarawak Library.
The following books have recently been added to the Library.-
guminosae.
GREEN COVER PLANTS AND GREEN MANURE
Professor Dr. Hellrigel discovered in 1888, that all varieties of plants related to the Leguminosae, will grow on soil, which has no chemical com¬bination of nitrogen in its structure, and on which other kinds of plants would not have any chance at all.
This discovery was supplemented afterwards
by Dr Beverinck of Delft (Holland), who found
out, that the Leguminosae obtained the required
amount of nitrogen for their proper growth, from
the atmosphere, with the assistance of the
Leguniinosae-Bacteria, briefly called: “in
zymbiose ”
Every species of Leguminosae has its own
special bacteria, which serves for the purpose of
extracting nitrogen from the atmosphere.
The botanical group of Leguminosae has for
some years been attracting the attention of all
Experiment Stations, with the result that an
enormous use of these plants for interplanting on
Rubber, Tea. Coffee and Cinchona Estates has
taken place.
In consequence of this the amount of chemically
combined nitrogen in the soil is now increasing,
notwithstanding the extraction of it through the
main-crop in cultivation.
The advantages are, a strong growth attended
with a considerable fall of leaves, which forms
the. vegetable mould (humus). 
The advantages of humus, both chemically and
physically, are of common knowledge. Carbonic
acid, caused by the disintegration of humus, serves
as a solution of stones (rocks), and simplifies the
formation of nutritious matter for plants into
simpler chemical combinations.
This operation has also a very favourable influence on the capacity for water absorption and ventilation of the soil, and has the same effect on sandy and clay soil as well as on marl and lime grounds.
Moreover, the Leguminosae, serving as green cover, prevent the humus from being burnt by the fierce rays of the sun and the soil from getting solid through the rains, while erosion of the most important part of the soil is reduced to a minimum.
Further, the fallen leaves and other plant-parts form an excellent food-stuff for the aerobe-bacteria, attracting at the same time the earthworms, while the presence of the latter practically means free cultivation of the soil.
In brief, the main advantages of the humus is the formation of a favourable structure of soil, known as " crum-structure.”
And finally, the attention has to be drawn to the fact, that no bad weeds, not even lalang, can withstand the growth of Leguminosae in the long run.
In connection with the recent fall in price of several agricultural products it is essential to endeavour to effect economies in the general cost of upkeep if it can be done without harm to the estate itself.	'
Mr. Behrens, a well-known planter in East Java, says in one of leading periodicals, that by- planting Leguminosae all over his estate on an acreage of 1,000 bouws (1,750 acres), his figures on upkeep showed a saving per bouw and per annum of F 25.—Guilders, equal to F 25,000 - for the whole estate, or fully $ 10.000 SS per acre.
It is a well known fact, that the old system of "clean weeding” has now been abandoned . by' many estates in the Federated Malay States and by nearly all plantations in Java and Sumatra, being replaced everywhere by culti-vating Leguminosae.
Club News.
Tuesday, 22nd and Thursday, 24th May.
The Races took place on 22nd and 24th May, and unfortunately both days were marred by heavy rainstorms during the afternoon. The going was accordingly heavy, and several of the later races were run under adverse conditions for the majority of ponies carrying heavy weights.
The outstanding feature of the meeting was the success of Mr. C. D. Adams' recent im¬portation from North Borneo, Flying Fox, who won four out of his five races, including the Sarawak Stakes (weight for class) and the Sarawak Cup (the Winners' Han Heap) the latter under top weight of 11 stone, and was also awarded the Civil Service Trophy for the best pony at the meeting. Flying Fox won a three furlong race at the last Autumn Meeting when first raced here, and has come on a lot since, being at present easily the best pony in the country in the shorter dis¬tance races and, judging by the stamina shewn by hi in when badly left in the Kuching Stakes, it seems quite possible he may train on to be equally as fast at five and six furlongs. In Division II, Adham. owned by the Datu Imam Tua, won two races and was second once . while in Division Ill, Osaha won three out of his four races, and was third in the Winners' Handicap.The Ranee’s Prize (R. C„ about 1 mile 2 furlongs and 130 yards) was won by Shooting Star, owned by Mr Law Chen Hiang, and very well ridden by Lundu. an apprentice, who kept his mount going to win by a head from Kismet in record time for the course of 3 minutes 48 second. The odds against the pony at the previous night's Selling Lotteries were approximately 50 to 1 in a field of eight. Mr P. M. Adams with 6 winning mounts easily won the Jockeys prize. For the second meeting in succession, unfor¬tunately, Hopeless broke down during the last part of the. training with leg trouble and had to be scratched As While Wings was also unfit, His Highness the Rajah was only represented by Wembley. There were no run-away wins during the meeting, yet a further tribute to the remark¬ably accurate and painstaking handicapping of Mr. E. S. Holl, as similar results have occurred at every meeting since Mr. Holl assumed the duties of Official Handicapper several years ago. The condition of the course, paddock, and building improves yearly, and the Ground Com¬mittee, Messrs. C. D. Adams and B. J. C. Spurway, are to be congratulated on the results of their supervision. The arrangements for tea and refreshments, this year kindly supervised by Mrs. Tait, were much appreciated, There were decreases in the revenue from the Totalisators and Cash Sweeps, only to be expected in times such as these—and partly accountable for by the rain on both days—but the Selling Lotteries, reintroduced after a lapse of two years, should counterbalance any falling off in the receipts. The thanks of those attending the meeting are due to those gentlemen who kindly undertook the duties of Starters, Paddock and Grand Stand Stewards, Clerks of the Scales and Semaphore, and Supervisors of the Cash Sweeps. Without such willing assistance it would be impossible to run the meeting as it is, and the general public do not perhaps always appreciate how much of these gentlemen's time, and, consequently, one may assume, private enjoyment of the meeting is curtailed by these duties. The Totalisators were again capably run by Mr. A P Merrell., and Mr. Tan Sum Guan once more was in-charge of the Cash Sweeps, now housed in a new separate and substantial building. His Highness the Rajah was present on both days and very kindly personally presented the prizes in plate to the successful owners at the conclusion of the second day's racing. 
Another capitally ridden race by Brahim, Adham banting Lee Mah by 2 lengths, while the Judge was unable to separate Black Pirate and Pegasus for third place, | a length off. Time 1 min. 7 secs.
Brahim completed a treble, leading all the way to win by 3 lengths — 1. Seduan was 4th and Singa last Time 51 secs.
Also ran —Beaver 10 3, Sakbon9.7.
Flying Fox led by lengths half way up the straight where Burak started to gain on him and was steadily drawing up at the finish. With another half furlong to go it appeared to be Burak’s race, though it is difficult to gauge bow much Mr. P. M. Adamson Plying Vox had in band. Akai was 3rd, 2 length away. Beaver 4th, and Sakbon last. Time 1 min. 15 S.'CS.
Lundu rode an excellent race to keep bis mount going to win by a bead from Kismet who appeared to have the race won a few strides from the winning post. Azab ran 3rd, three parts of a length away. Untong being 4th and Bagaimana last. Time 3 mins. 42/5 secs, (beating the local record by 4/5 sec.)
Salleh, on Black Pirate, lost his whip at the en-trance to the straight, and sitting down to ride his mount home with his hands, won a capital race by half a length from Sisit, with Shooting Star only beaten a short head for second place. Badad was 4th, and Sakbon last. Time 1 min. 40 secs.
Mr. P. M. Adams' jockeyship alone got his mount home to win by three parts of a length from Jorrocks with Typhoon 1/2 a length behind. Bagaimana was 4th and Tai Hu last. Time 1 min. 253/5 secs.
Flying Fox was left fully fifty yards at the start, but had caught up the field at the road, and went on, beautifully ridden by Mr. P. M. Adams, to win by a neck from Burak with Azab and Apa Kena tying for third place, only half a length off. Little Tommy Tucker was last Time 
Also ran—Kismet 10.0, Akai 10.0, Adham 8.5,
Shooting Star 8 8, Black Pirate 9.0.
Won by a length, three parts of length between 2nd and 3rd, Kismet 4th and Akai last. Mr. P. M. Adams fourth winning mount for the day. Time 75 secs.
Extracts from Monthly Reports. 
First Division.
April, 1928.
KUCHING.
Resident's Court (Criminal) There were nine ; cases, with eight convictions. The principal were Chin Hin Thiam, Chin Kim Joong and Chong Voo Quee who were each sentenced to the maximum penalty of seven years, under section 193 I.P.C. in connection with the Stapok murder perpetrated last October.
Wee Ah Kow, employed in the Government Dispensary was given two years under section 408 Chai Chia was lined $500 or in default six months for breach of the Opium Order 1924 and Queh Meng Chuah was sentenced to eighteen months imprisonment and a fine of $1,500 for  breach of the Opium Order 1924 and section  411 I.P.C.
I paid Divisional visits to Ban from the 10th, to 12th and Sad ong from the 21st to 25th.
Mr. Bruce made a quick trip to and from Ulu Samarahan.
Mr. J. C. Swayne, relieved Mr. Bruce as District Officer, Kuching on :2th and was appointed Coroner as from the 20th.
District Court Fifty-eight cases were heard, forty one of which were criminal and seventeen civil.
The civil claims involved amounts totalling $4,302.46.
Magistrate's Court. Ninety-four civil suits were brought for hearing.
Police Court. Twenty-four summary cases were brought before the Court.
Land Office—Lundu Road. The work on con tract No. 9 of 1927, extending the road towards Lundu from Sungei Rayo a distance of five miles has been made passable for a distance of 2,600 feet, but the jungle on each side though felled had not been cleared up ac wording to terms of the contract.
Contract No. 2 of 1928. Work has been completed for a distance of nearly 6 miles.
Sungei Moyan, Samarahan. The following works were in progress at the end of month.
Clearing the upper reaches and deepening of Sungei Moyan to a minimum of five feet.
Clearing of Sungei Subi and Sungei Kutup.
Clearing of Sungei Moyan from Kampong to 7-foot drain.
Construction of 15-foot drain from Sabang towards Moyan.
These works are progressing satisfactorily and No. (iii) is practically finished.
The 15-foot drain at Telok Sabang has been taken over for a distance of two miles and will eventually go to Sungei Moyan a further two miles and then to Sungei Semara another three miles. ". he water here is running freely.
No quit rent had been paid to Mr. Miller-Hallett at present although all people in this district have been ordered to do so. He was ordered to visit all gardens and demand their titles and receipt of last payment and order them to pay to him before the end of the month.
Abang Spuan spent most of the month on finding a suitable direction for a bridle path to Siniawan to Samarahan from railhead.
Land at Pending comprising six lots was taken over for the new Jail, Isolation and Quaran¬tine Camps.
LUNDU.
General. Chia Qui Chai, Court Writer, was granted three months leave, and James Lau was transferred from Upper Sarawak to do temporary duty as Acting Court Writer. The Venerable the Archdeacon of Sarawak and two ladies stayed at the S.P.G. Mission part of the month.
Few channel marks were put in at the Kuala. Six crocodiles were caught by professional catchers.
BAU, UPPER SARAWAK.
General. The Postmaster-General and Mrs. Gillan returned to Kuching on the 1st. During his stay the Postmaster-General discussed the reorganisation of Postal work in this district; and later in the month submitted his proposals in writing In view of the peculiar circumstances in this district . am not in agreement with these proposals, and have written to the Postmaster- General accordingly.
The Divisional Resident and Mrs. Boult arrived on 10th and returned to Kuching on 12th. During his stay I motored the Resident round the principal places in the district, where he inspected the various bazaars and public buildings. The Resident also visited the Schools at Bau and Buso, and the Dahan Rubber Estates.
Other visitors to Bau were Messrs. C. D Adams, E. S. Holl, G. M Allman, R. E. Edwards, L. D. Kennedy, Miss Slater and Captain Powell- Mr. Holl, came up to inspect the Government Ex¬perimental Garden on the Dahan Road. He asked me to auction the latter, which was done.
During the month I was invited to visit the Upper Sarawak Gold Mining Syndicate Works at Jambusan. Mr Voon Kon Siong and his eldest son showed me over the works and explained he different processes by which gold is won. The. first royalty on gold was paid in to Government during the month.
On the 29th, accompanied by Mr. Stirling, I walked from Buso to Sungei Tengah Estate along the Government road.
A detailed report on this has been submitted to the Resident.
On Good Friday a Chinese singkeh named Chung Sit was killed by a falling tree near Tan Teo Durian, I proceeded there at once and held a Coroner’s inquiry on the spot. A verdict of death by' misadventure was returned.
On the 20th a shooting case occurred at Krokong when a Dyak named Setin was shot in the shoulder and face by some person unknown. It appears that Setin was gathering rotan and his assailant possibly mistook him for a pig Setin called on the shooter to assist him home, but the latter with the greatest callousness, took to Hight
Large numbers of Chinese of the labouring classes are leaving the district for Sambas to look for work This is on account of the low price of ubber, although circumstances in Sambas may not be much better than in Sarawak.
Ah Chong, brother of the Capitan China of Bau, had his Motor Driver's Licence suspended for 6 months for continually driving in a rash and dangerous manner. This man had three recent endorsements on his licence, and this conviction is welcomed by the other drivers.
The site for the new Buso Barracks and lock-up was levelled and the contractors started work during the month
During the whole mouth the Government car¬penters were employed on bridges, and few now remain to be done. Many were widened or straightened out; and rails were put out on all the longer bridges. One or two of the bridges were in a dangerous condition when opened up, and had to be entirely rebuilt
All overhanging trees on Government roads
were lopped. The Bau trolley line was in a very
bad state and a gang of Chinese coolies have
been working on it during the whole month.
Mr. Edwards of P.W.D inspected the Siniawan Dam and advises that no new dam shall be built. Government has therefore advised the consumers accordingly.
Land. The padi harvest is poor in this district.
Education The Government School at Bau started on 12th under new management. The teaching staff now consists of one Malay and two Chinese Masters. The School is administered by a Committee composed of the District Officer (ex-officio) as Chairman, and three Chinese and one Malay. Government makes a contribution, and those pupils whose parents can afford it pay small fees.
SADONG.
P.W.D. The iron stays for the Simunjan bridge arrived towards the end of the month and were fitted to the structure. The bridge has already sunk about six inches on the upriver side.
Land. I arranged with certain land holders at Sedilo that they move to other plots as their presence there would mean the cramping of Government building land should it become necessary in future owing to bank erosion. This was arranged to everyone's satisfaction without compensation
Health. Vaccinator, Cheng Kek Cheng returned upriver on the 3rd and finished his work. He arrived again at Simunjan on the 18th and reported that 6,572 persons had been vaccinated, these in¬cluding the Samarahan side. The chiefs of the villages who refused vaccination last month were brought to the District Office and warned. They gave as their excuse that they were busy harvest¬ing and were afraid that vaccination would interfere with their work.
Education The daily average attendance at the Lay School was 2576 out of a possible fifty. This shows a marked improvement.
The Resident, First Division accompanied by Mrs. Boult arrived per s.l. Lucile on the 21st and returned again on the 25th.
Mr. Bruce reports on his visit to Samarahan as follows :— Sailing on the 23rd I reached Munggu Babi Court House on 24th at 10 a.m., after having stopped to inspect a reported hot spring, a short distance inland, on the true left bank of Sungei Samarahan about half an hours' journey by launch above Kampong Mura Bahru. I have sent a sample of the water to the P.M.O , for analysis. I met several Dyaks and discussed minor affairs with them and Tua Kampong Sudin. Apparently there are still cases of smallpox in Srin vicinity, but no fresh outbreaks reported elsewhere. The Manager of Samarahan Rubber Estate showed me the new openings, and 1 gather that the present price of rubber hits the Company hard, causing a loss on monthly production. They are, however, apparently intending to con¬tinue full tapping and have not yet made any appreciable reductions in their labour force. I also gather that they are now going in for the bud grafting system very strongly. 
F. F. BOULT,
Resident, First Division.
Sadong Colliery.
April, 1928.
The output, export, local consumption, conver¬sion into coke and coal stock figures for the month were as follows:—
The underground labour shortage is now a serious
matter and output has dropped to a point below the
economic working figure as the result.
The labour force for surface work is now at full strength and the young Javanese recruits are becom¬ing useful workers.
The rainfall for the month was 13 55 inches
Second Division.
March, 1928.
BATANG LUPAR
Courts, Resident.—Clerk, Foo Lai Fatt, opium salesman was sentenced to three years R.I., under Courts is Order section 408.
General.—On the 3rd Mr. H. E. Cutfield, Acting District Officer, Kalaka. arrived from Ka bong in m.l. One. Unfortunately the m.l. One struck a stationary log off Entulang and badly damaged the propeller and put the gear out. of action, a few days later she was towed to Kuching by m.l. Hong Soon Hunt for repairs.
Mr. H. H. P. Langton on the 11th, 17th and 18th visited the Simanggang Belong road in order to see that Dyaks were repairing this thoroughly, there being numerous complaints that certain Dyaks were not doing their share, properly as ordered by the Penghulu and mandor.
On the 14th I left in m.l. Anne accompanied by Abang Zin. N.O. and Penghulu Renang for Engkilili On arrival I found Penghulus Suel and Imong awaiting to meet me as they had various matters to discuss.	
On the 18th Mr. E. W. Oswald and a party of seven Chinese arrived at Lingga by the s.s. Lupar and next day left for Selantik in order to inspect the coal field.
On the 19th, Lan Ah Yam of the Monopolies De-partment arrived from Kuching in order to audit opium stocks here and in substations of the Batang Lupar.
The 23rd being Hari Raya a salute of fourteen guns was fired.
SARIBAS.
Mr. G R. H. Arundell, Officer in Charge reports :— General.— On the 5th I went up river to measure land for rubber gardens at Nanga Tiga. I returned to Betong on the 10th, having completed measuring land required.
KALAKA.
The Acting District Officer reports:—
General.—On the 3rd I left on a short visit to Si- manggang in the m.l. One. While proceeding up the Batang Lupar with a Lingga pilot on board a sub-merged log was struck which caused severe damaged to the launch, one blade been broken off the propeller and the gear been jammed into reverse from where it could not he moved until dismantled. The m.l. One had to be towed to Kuching for repairs.
Two fatalities occurred among Chinese at Saratok during the month. The first by drowning and the second committing suicide by poisoning. The drowning accident occurred when two men and two children were crossing the river in a small boat which capsized. One man and the two children were saved, but the other man sank and never re¬appeared. It was two days later that his body was recovered.
Sites for sixteen shophouses were marked out on the new road behind the bazaar at Saratok and these were taken up immediately.
One Dyak death from smallpox is reported in the Rimbas and all precautions are being taken.
April, 1928.
BATANG LUPAR.
On the 7th, vaccinator Sebla arrived from Kuching and vaccinated 106 persons, he then proceeded to Betong in order to can v on the vaccination.
On the 12th Mr. L. N. Reynolds, Probationer, Police Department, Kuching, accompanied by Abang Taha, Inspector of Police and Serjeant-major Nam Singh arrived in the m.l. Santana in older to make a report on the general method of duties to be carried out by the Police Force here. Mr. L. N. Reynolds and party returned to Kuching on the 15th.
The m. l. Para arrived on the 14th with Mr. G. M. Allman. Superintendent of Rubber Improve¬ment Fund and Mr. Smith of the Agriculture Department, after a short stay they proceeded to Engkilili to inspect the various forms of diseases connected with pepper vines. They returned to Kuching on the 17th.
I arranged with the Penghulus for arrangements to obtain land for pepper gardens. One plot of land was obtained in the Lemanak, another in the Sedarat, and possibly a large acreage above Serangau which would hold I should think about two hundred pepper gardens. The land in question is useless for farming and was examined by myself.
The present pepper gardens situated across river are the best I have ever seen and great number of vines should fetch about $6 to $7 for price of pepper per vine. The soil is evidently most suitable for pepper although covered with lalang grass originally.
SARIBAS.
Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, Officer in Charge reports :— Court.—There was hardly any Court work during the month owing to every one being busy harvesting ; the crop is said to be good.
Agriculture— Penghulu Jabieng reported sickness amongst his cattle, and specimens of blood were taken and sent to Director of Agriculture for in¬spection. No bacteria were discovered and in the opinion of the Director of Agriculture the sickness must be due to eating some poisonous herbs. The cattle are being treated with Epsom salts.
KALAKA.
The Acting District Officer reports :—
General.—The Resident was at Saratok at the end of last month and I returned with him on the 1st. The Resident, being ill however, had to leave direct for Kuching in the m l. Anne the following day. A few hours after his departure I left for Rohan, re¬turning again on the 5th. I visited Nyabor and Pasir Hukum from the 9th to 11th. Abang Bujang and the Court Writer having left with luggage in m.l. One on the 8th.
From the 16th to 20th I visited Pusa and Debak. At Debak the Tuai Rumahs were interviewed con¬cerning who they wished to take the place of Penghulu Mon who has constantly asked to be relieved of his Penghuluship.
I went to Saratok on the 26th and was there at the end of the month. A lot of work was dealt with during my visit.
There was a drought at Kabong during the first half of the month and then about 2 hours heavy lain and after that no more with the result that there was again a shortage of water at the end of the month. The jungkat fishing season has started, but no big catches have yet been taken. Dyaks report tint engkabang trees are again flowering.
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER.
Resident, Second Division.
Third Division.
April, 1928.
SIBU.
General-—His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by the Chief Secretary, arrived from Kuching on the afternoon of the. 3rd. Auxiliary Yacht Kallisto followed H.H.M.Y. Maimuna up the river arriv¬ing the same evening. His Highness and party with Mr. E. V. Andreini left for Kapit the following morning, returning to Sibu on the 5th and leaving for Kuching on the afternoon of the 6th. The Resident of Mukah and Oya arrived on the 5th inst. leaving again on the 10th. Abang Abu Bakar and Wan Husin, Native Officers, visited the Ulu Kanowit and Julau from the 9th to the end of the month calling at all Dyak houses and settling outstanding cases of which there was a considerable number. I fear the Penghulus responsible for these Districts arc not as energetic as they might be. A Kayan the son of the Penghulu of the Skapans, was brought down under arrest by the Native Officer of Belaga charged with having speared one of his people through the wrist The assailant admitted having been under the influence of an excess of bura2 at the time, while the victim maintained that the son of a chief had a perfect right to spear him and refused to take any pro ceedings. Payment of a fine settled the matter. The motor lighter Big Bill, built at Rejang and engined at Selalang arrived on 14th inst. She is 25 tons register and is fitted with a 21 B.H.P. Petter heavy oil engine. Speed 7 miles P H This lighter has been of very great use since her arrival and in view of the work in hand another lighter of the same type is now on order. On the 17th I left for Kapit with Mr. E. M. Woodward, who has been appointed to that District. The Dyaks were still harvesting, so there was very little to do I spent a night at Kanowit on the return jour¬ney reaching Sibu on the 21st after hearing several cases and inquiring into various out¬standing questions On the 23rd I left Sibu for Singapore by s.s. Rajah of Sarawak. The District Officer, Sibu, reports. General — A good deal of my time was taken up in collecting money in payment of foodstuffs supplied after the fire. In order to get rid of supplies before they became unfit for consumption it was found necessary to reduce the prices, con¬siderably and this on top of the high prices charged by Kuching Towkays will result in a big loss to Government. Upwards of 150 bags of rice still remain in stock the quality of which is fast deteriorating. The heads of Areas met to discuss wages of coolies owing to the drop in the price of rubber and fixed daily wages at 80 cents, monthly $15 with food, and contract prices were reduced by 30%. They have been told to report any un¬employment in their Areas, as a precaution against thieving.
I inspected the new shops with the Divisional Land Officer and checked the names in order to prevent changing of chops. The collection of licence fees and assessment outside the Municipal area and also that of the temporary shacks in the bazaar was taken over by the Police Department. The books are in a deplorable condition and the whole system will have to be. reorganized.
Immigration.—Two hundred and ten immi¬grants arrived, but it is hoped that there will be a decrease of new arrivals whilst rubber remains at a low price.
Heads of Areas are now being made jointly responsible with the importers for immigrants imported by permit
Education.—The Committee of the Chinese School in the bazaar asked that a fixed grant up to the balance of the figure estimated should be paid in spite of the poor attendance at the mo¬ment owing to the children scattered about since the fire and unable to attend school. This has been recommended to the Director of Education in order to allow the school to carry on.
Monopolies — After a certain amount of argu¬ment all rents due for April were duly paid.
Opium is now being sold in the Port. As there is not sufficient employment for the old divan staff the surplus has been sent to Kuching. I strongly recommend that Government should build a brick divan which could later on be con¬verted into a shophouse which could be sold and so recover the cost of building.
Medical During the month an increase in cases of dysentery diarrhoea and other allied complaints was very noticeable, and is no doubt due to the state of the present temporary bazaar. Adequate drainage, removal of refuse, and the proper dis¬posal of night-soil etc is more or less impossible, with the result that the increase in flies, is appal¬ling, wholesale spraying of the bazaar roads and in and around houses was instituted by the mid¬dle of the month with a noticeable decrease in the number of flies, the sanitary state of the bazaar is however far from satisfactory, and steps are being taken to improve it where possible.
With the exception of one case of dysentery, the health of the European community continues to be good.
KAPIT,
The Assistant District Officer, reports;-—
I arrived here with the Resident per s. 1.Chamois on the 17th inst. to take charge of this station, the Resident subsequently returning to Kanowit and Sibu on the 20th inst.
On the morning of the 5th inst. His Highness the Rajah accompanied by Messrs. Andreini, Near, Bayes, and Mrs. Wyse arrived per H.H.M.Y. Maimuna but only stayed about two hours during which time Mr. Near took some cinema¬tograph photographs of up river Dyaks. His
Highness sailed for Sibu at 12 noon and that evening Abang Sleh, Native Officer, Gat. and many Dyaks from up river arrived here These latter had been ordered to proceed to Kapit in order to meet His Highness, but unfortunately they arrived here a few hours after His Highness had left for Sibu.
On the 10th, Abang Ahmat, Native Officer, Belaga, proceeded to Sibu, in connection with a case in the Resident's Court, returning here on the 17th inst. and proceeding to Belaga again a few days later.
On the 16th, Native Officer, Abang Abdul Gapor left here for S. Mujong, hut owing to high water he only succeeded in reaching S. Sut and so returned here on the 21st inst.
On the 27th inst The Rev. Father Klerk arrived from Kanowit and proceeded to Pala Wong on the 29th
I have told Mata Mata Nuak that since the Sians do not wish to pay their door tax through him they may pay it through their own Tua Rumah, Jawa. I have also given permission to the Sians to move into the S. Metah but they do not seem very keen on moving there and persist in asking to be allowed to return to the S. Pila.
Education.—The Hock Lam Chinese School was registered during the month under Order No. XI, 1924 Only English and Chinese are taught in this school. Malay is not taught
Trade, Shipping ind Customs—The market in¬ceases apparent in the lower grades exported of damar and rattans as opposed to decreases in the higher qualities of these products is I think large ly due to the competition and lack of co-operation amongst the Chinese traders here who will not combine by all refusing to purchase inferior damar and rattans. I understand from the Chinese traders themselves that there is a good market at present for inferior damar in Hong Kong and Japan, and for inferior rattans in Hong Kong, Annam and Japan. It would seem there- fore that the Chinese traders are pandering to the demand for inferior qualities to the detriment of the market value of higher qualities of damar and rattans.
Fourth Division.
April, 1928.
MIRI.
MUKAH AND OYA.
The Resident of Mukah and Oya, reports
Judicial — The decision of the Resident's Court in the case of Sui Lan (f) on behalf of Yuk Boi a small girl aged seven years versus Tan Yu Teck alias Robinson on the charge of rape, heard during March and in which case Robinson was found guilty and sentenced to five years R. I. was appealed against. This case was retried in the Divisional Resident's Court at Sibu. Robinson was found guilty and the appeal was dismissed with costs.
The trial of Talim, Buyo, Alli, Geli, Jahan, Mat and Jim who wen: concerned in the cutting affray previously mentioned was concluded. Buyo was sentenced to ten years under section 326, I.P.C. Alli and Geli to three years each and Mat to two years under section 324- Talim was ordered to pay $500 compensation for Jahan and all his hospital expenses, Alli. Geli and Mat to defray the cost of medical attention rendered to them.
P.W.D.— Very good progress has been made on the No. 2 Bungalow, which should be ready for occupation by the end of May.
The old stables which were pulled down to make a site for the Power Plant are being re-erected on another site.
General —Mr. J. O. Gilbert, Cadet, arrived on s l. Chamois or. evening of the 4th to take over from Mr R. G. Aikman who has been transferred to Oya to relieve Mr. G J. D. Walters. Mr. Aik¬man went to Oya on the 12th and Mr. Walters sailed for Kuching proceeding on home leave on the t6th.
OYA AND DALAT.
P W.D.—At the end of the month the new Oya bungalow was practically ready for occupation and it is hoped that the old building will be out of the way by the end of next month
Mr R.G Aikman arrived on the 12th to take over the station from Mr. G. J D. Walters who is proceeding on home furlough.
I took over the affairs of this district from Mr. J.C. Swayne who proceeded to Kuching on the 7th by s.s. Sulong.
Mr. J. C. Swayne and I visited Matu and Daro from the 4th to the 6th for the purpose of handing over.
I again visited Matu and Daro on the 17th returning to Rejang on the 21st. The possibility of starting to rebuild the bazaar at Matu this year seems remote owing to the low price of lamanta ' and the fact that the traders have not yet re¬covered the losses sustained in the fire. There is only one trader who seems in a position to re¬build and he has applied for a loan of $6,000 which he states will enable him to start building six shops at once.
H. L. OWEN,
Resident, Third Division.
urth Division.
April, 1928.
MIRI.
The new Order as a precaution against fire at Lutong Refinery and at the Charcoal Plant, Miri, was brought into force during the month.
It was reported that the Lutong coolies had gone on strike one afternoon as smoking in the area had been stopped, but on the visit of the General Manager and myself, the matter was amicably settled.
Sanction was obtained for the increase of 30 men to the Miri Police Force.
By kind permission of H. H. the Rajah, the Sara¬wak Ranger Band arrived on the 18th for a stay of one month. Their playing was much appreciated by the Miri community.
The Malay Club in Kampong Dagang is in a dis-reputable state and not used as a Club any longer and so I have given orders that the building must be removed or sold by public auction, as on the site I proposed to build a Malay Court House. I have suggested that the proceeds of the sale should be given to the Mosque Funds.
Mr. E. V. Andreini arrived on the l0th on the way to take up his appointment as District Officer, Baram, vice Mr. W. F. Dick, who has been granted 7 months furlough. I visited Baram on the 15th,. returning on the 17th with Messrs. Dick and Calver.
Some Leppu Taus and Uma Badangs were present from the Batang Kayan and asked permission to remove into the Silat. They were told that they must obtain permission from the N. I. Government.
The Assistant Conservator of Forests visited Sibuti in connection with a survey of a proposed mangrove reserve at the mouth of the Sibuti river.
Major F. W. Richards, D.S.O., M.C., General Mana-ger, Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., and Mrs. Richards departed for Europe on the 27th. Major Richards will not be returning to Miri having been appointed to another oilfield.
A District Court Martial was held on privates Senin and Salleh of the Sarawak Rangers for disobeying a lawful command and inciting others to disobey the order. Both were found guilty and sentenced to 6 months imprisonment.
BARAM.
The District Officer, Mr. E. V. Andreini reports
I arrived on the 12th taking over from Mr. W. F. Dick who is proceeding ml furlough.
Galau reported that there is a distinct increase in the number of nests at. Tekin caves winch have been protected for some time from collectors whilst P. C. Hassan reported that there is an increase in the young birds at Long Palai which seems to justify the protection of these caves from time to time.
Owing to the depression in the rubber trade there is a good deal of unemployment.
BINTULU.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny reports :—
Arrangements for the repairing of the Fort Tubau have been made, including complete re-flooring and walling, also the erection of a new kitchen. Work had been started on both these contracts by the end -of the month.
General.— On Thursday 24tb, one Ah Lok, con-victed of murder by the Supreme Court, Kuching, was duly executed by a firing party of Sarawak- Rangers
The Divisional Treasurer, Mr Trechman, arrived here on 4th instant in connection with Treasury and Postal affairs and returned again to Miri on 13th in the m.t. Pergani. During his visit it was arranged that a Post Office Savings Bank should be opened at Bintulu.
A joint application by the Lee Wha Company, Sihu, and Chop “Hiap Guan Hin" to erect a sawmill at Sungei Selnba, Sebauh, has been approved by the Resident, Fourth Division on condition that the rights of Mohamad Akbar under bis monopoly end¬ing 31st December, 1928, are not infringed.
H. D. APLIN, Acting Resident, Fourth Division.
Fifth Division
LIMBANG.
April, 1928.
Court.—The most important cases heard were the State vs. Drahman charged with wilful mur¬der, a verdict of not guilty on the grounds of insanity was returned by the assessors, but prisoner was ordered to be detained for life as a criminal lunatic
An appeal against the decision of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Lawas was upheld.
Travelling.—I visited Brooketon from the 6th to 8th and found His Highness the Rajah’s Bungalow in an excellent state of repair and all the roads very well kept up by the remaining gang of wharf coolies.
Mr. W. Lowry, Assistant Superintendent of Rubber Exports, having finished his examination of the rubber gardens in the Panderuan, I went over to look into the condition of affairs in that river. The suggestion of rubber smuggling from Brunei into Sarawak via this river was disproved as it was found that less was being exported than it was actually capable of producing.
General.—The Acting Assistant District Officer of Lawns succeeded in bringing down the Fa Tawing M units who were responsible for the murder of Dyak Grissah m 1923 and a formal peace-making was held between these Muruts and relatives of Grissah who live in the Panderuan. The ceremony wont off very satisfactorily.
Mr. Lowry completed the examination of all the rubber gardens in the district and returned to his headquarters at the end of the month. A large num¬ber of gardens were found to be without titles, the owners of these have now been called for registration to bi- made.
Owing to the sudden fall in the price of rubber the contractors of the Government trees gave notice to terminate their agreements.
Medical. — Dr. Boyer, Medical Officer, paid his monthly visit of inspection, and Dresser, Atten¬borough, visited Lawas and Trusan.
Sanitary Inspector Ah Jin came from Kuching to investigate the cause of the high rate of infant mortality at Sundar.
LAWAS.
In the. Resident's Court, Hitam's appeal against the decision nf the District Court, convicting him of a breach of the marriage regulations was disallowed and the conviction and line upheld.
The Fa Tawing people, fifty-one in all, arrived at Trusan on 21st. A peace-making ceremony with the Pandaruan Dyaks was held on 24th, and the Grissah murder case may now be considered us settled. The question of ‘pati nyawa' is still under discussion as Grissah had a Tugal wife by whom he had two children and t.hese should have a share.
The Fa Tawing people are at present at Mengang- glih, but will move to Siang Siung next year.
1 returned from up country on 16th having left Jala and the Fa Tawing people at Udan Mero's house, Fa Merarap. On 17th I went down to Sun¬dar ; on 18th leached Lawas.
On 20th I went overland to Trusan to meet Jala and his party who arrived on the afternoon of 21st having been held up by floods in the Mediyan. On 23rd the Resident and Mr Lowry of the Rubber Improvement Fund arrived bringing the Pandaruan Dyaks. On 25th we went down to Sundar at mid¬day, leaving there next morning via Awat Awat for Punang whence, we walked up to Lawas. On 27th we visited the estate and on 28th went to Melabing mid up the Merapok visiting the Vamco Timber Company's mill at Tagai on our return. _
The instrument having arrived from Kuching, the telephone to Kuala Lawas was in use during the mouth. This will prove particularly useful in re¬porting arrivals and departures of steamers.
The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estate Limited, exported 25,760 lbs. of dry rubber to Labuan during the month. In spite of the low price of rubber, owners are still tapping as usual and no daily labourers have been discharged.
H. H. KORTRIGHT,
Acting Resident, Fifth Division.
