THURSDAY, MARCH 1. 1928.
NOTES.
February.
WE understand that His Highness the Rajah will take a short holiday in Java and Bali during next month. Her Highness the Ranee, the Dayang Leonora and the Dayang Elizabeth will be leaving Kuching for the F.M.S. and England on the 17th instant.
THE 24th being Her Highness the Ranee’s Birthday was observed as a public holiday. The ball which was held at the Residency in Her Highness’ honour was largely attended.
MR. F. F. Boult, Resident of the First Division, has been appointed Chairman of the Kuching Sanitary and Municipal Advisory Board, in addition to his other duties, as from the 4th.
MR. C. D. Adams has been appointed to act as Superintendent of Lands as from the 5th.
MR. J. P. Baird, Municipal Commis¬sioner, left Kuching on the 4th on seven months’ furlough. Mr. C. Pitt-Hardacre acts for him during his absence.
MR. E. O. Bruce, having been relieved by Mr. F. G. Carpenter, arrived on the 4th from Sadong to take up the duties of District Ollier, Kuching.
MR. D. Evans returned from furlough on the 13th and was accompanied by Mrs. Evans.
MR. J. P. Mead resigned his appointment of Conservator of Forests as from the 19th in order to take up an appointment as an Assistant Conservator of Forests in the Malayan Forest Service.
WE understand that Mr. C. D. Le Gros Clark, who left Singapore for England, on the 10th on seven months’ furlough, has passed his final examination in Hokkien which was held in the Chinese Protectorate, Singapore. He proceeded to Amoy in May 1926 and is the first Cadet to be sent by the Government of Sarawak to study the Chinese language in China. We congratulate him on his success in mastering a language, which is by no means an easy one, in such a comparatively short period.
AMONG those who arrived on the 13th were the Misses C. and E. Dowell, friends of Mr. J. A. H. Hardie, who are here on a pleasure trip.
MR. P. S. Scott, of Singapore, was over here from the 13th to the 18th in connection with contracts for the new Kuching water¬works scheme.
MR. L. N. Reynolds, lately Assistant Inspector of Police, Kenya, arrived on the 21st to take up an appointment in the Police Department.
WE learn that the Sarawak Steamship Company’s new steamer “Vyner Brooke” sailed from Leith on the 17th and is expected at Singapore about 16th March.
DR. Victor G. Heiser, of the International Health Division of the Rockefeller Founda¬tion, arrived on a short visit by the s.s. Kuching on the 27th. By the same vessel Mr. and Mrs. J. Scott returned from their home leave.
THE Rt. Rev. L. Danson, Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak, and Mrs. Danson returned from leave on the 6th.
MR. Howard Smith has severed his connection with Messrs. McDougall and Robertson, Limited, and has taken up an appointment in the Department of Agri¬culture.
IT is with deep regret that we have to record the death of Mr. Edward L, Grove which took place in London on 6th January, at the age of 58 years. The late Mr. Grove first came out to Sarawak in April. 1902, when he joined the Public Works Depart¬ment as a Civil Engineer, and was promoted Director of Special Works in June of the same year. He resigned his appointment it} September, 1907, but rejoined in March, 1908, as Principal Officer of Special Works, and was appointed Commissioner of Public Works and Surveys on 1st May, 1913. He finally left the Government Service on pension in March, 1919, and made his home in England until the time of his passing away.
Mr. Grove was responsible for the design and construction of the Matang Waterworks, and also for the inception of' the Sarawak Government Railway.
We wish, on behalf of his many friends here, to express our sincere sympathy to Mrs. Grove in her bereavement.
Sarawak Association, Singapore.
“At the annual general meeting of the Sarawak Association. Singapore, held on the 12th February, the following gentlemen were elected office hearers for the ensuing year.—President, Mr. Su Hai Seng (re-elected); Vice Presidents. Messrs. J. 8. Than (re-elected) and Song Teck Ghee ; Hon. Secretary, Mr. Song Lian Siong (re-elected); Asst. Hon. Secretary. Mr. Woon Kim Hock ; Hon Treasurer, Mr. Goli Whye Goh ; Hon. Auditor, Mr. Kueh Ah Bee. Committee, Messrs J. Louis Lira (re-elected), Wee Kheng Watt, Wee Kim Hock and Chew Ah Teck-. Employment Committee, Messrs. Mathew Lira and Lint Teck Seng.”
Moral Decay Due to Clothes.
NATIVES SPOILED BY EUROPEAN FASHIONS.
ISLAND EVILS.
"Clothes covering bodies which once went naked and unconscious have contributed to the moral decadence of the native by stimulating nasty curiosities which never before existed.”
This indictment of European clothing is con¬tained in the report of Mr. Arthur Grimble, Resident Commissioner of the Gilbert and Ellice Islands Colony, in the South Pacific.
"Clothes are now so closely associated in the popular mind with Christianity,” writes Mr. Grim¬ble, "that an open crusade against them would be regarded by the natives as a deliberate assault on religion; they must now be regarded as an ineradicable evil, and the only hope is to promote a habit of cleanliness and good sense in their use.”
"European clothes have been used in the colony for a quarter of a century. The dirtiness of the garments worn by women and infants in arms is often horrible and indescribable.”
Cure of Leprosy.
GOOD WORK IN SARAWAK.
The current issue of ‘‘The Chronicle," the quarterly report of the Borneo Mission Association, after mentioning that Miss Olver reports that on one of her monthly visits to the Leper Camp thirteen patients were being discharged as cured and twenty more were under observation awaiting discharge, states : It seems only yesterday that leprosy was considered incurable, but so rapid has been the progress in knowledge and treatment of this disease that one looks forward hopefully to the time when
it may be stamped out. The Sarawak Government have adopted the most up-to-date ideas with regard to the treatment of lepers. They are allowed in their place of segregation considerable freedom, are encouraged to cultivate land, and reap the fruits of their industry. There arc special facilities given for their friends and relations to come and see them, so they no longer feel they have lost contact with the outside world. While leprosy is contagious, it is not dangerously so, and by taking simple pre¬cautions it is possible to work among lepers safely, as indeed many people are doing to-day.
Take Care of Your Dog.
The following is the text-of a lecture given by Mr. R. Macgregor, Veterinary Surgeon, Pahang West, at a meeting of the Central Pahang Planters Association held in Bentong and reproduced in "The Planter” :—
I have chosen the dog as the most suitable animal for to-day's discourse since, after all, you all know a good deal about dogs. Most of you consider very reasonably that dogs are essential to you, whatever they may be to the town dweller, and many of you have very close friends amongst the canine world. I wish, therefore, to say a few words about their health, both for their own sakes and from the idea that the principles that apply to a dog apply too in various ways to all animals. The most important point is to give him healthy companions. Man was not made to dwell alone and neither was a dog. If the nearest lines, where he can meet his own species, are filled with mangy curs, he also will develop mange. I know that many of you claim that your dog never goes to the Lines and I quite agree that the ordinary European-owned dog is acutely aware of differences in the social scale—is, in short, a bit of a snob. But the biggest snob on earth has his moments of unbending, and I think it stands to reason that when a dog feels like '‘unbending” he too knows that “Love laughs at locksmiths"!
INSIST ON OWNERSHIP.
The reason why the dogs at home are. as a rule, clean and healthy is that we,' at home, insist on ownership. I recommend you to insist on owner¬ship of every dog on your ground as the first rule of health. I do not mean only legal ownership by purchase of a licence, but practical and real owner¬ship. In the Negri Sembilan, during the outbreak of rabies in 1926, two planters instituted a weekly parade, or some such thing, in which all dogs were led up to one assistant, thus proving that they had owners who could control them, while another assistant went round with a gun and took shots at any loose animals he could find. This of course was a special step to meet a special circumstance, but I think it would be wise if you could, say, once a month shoot at every dog that had no owner you knew of. It is admittedly a bit brutal, but it is, you will remember, an adoption of the method
adopted by the wisest of all kings to decide the ownership of a baby! Even a Tamil cooly who can control his dog will take steps to have it under control when he hears that someone is round after loose dogs with a gun.
When once you have ensured ownership, it is a fairly easy matter to ensure health by destroying any dog that is unhealthy, after giving the owner a reasonable time to treat it. Of course, you may say that this is useless as the masterless dog from the Chinese holding next door will always he running on to your ground. That, I quite admit. You cannot keep away disease but you can make it as difficult as possible for the disease to spread, and, after all, it should be easier to keep away dogs than to keep away mosquitoes, and you seem Io be very successful with mosquitoes!
I will now pass on to the commonest diseased conditions met with out here.
WORMS.
All dogs have worms of sorts. -For the most part they dwell in various parts of the alimentary canal and feed either on the undigested food of the host, or by sucking the digested matter and the blood from the intestinal walls. Only the blood suckers are dangerous. The others bring on ill effects only when in very large numbers.
Puppies who are perpetually vomiting usually have worms in the stomach and these can be found in the vomit if you care to look. If you really wish to rid the animal entirely of worms, it is a fairly big job and for all purposes useless, as at the very next post he stops at he will probably lick up a few eggs. He certainly will from the next dog he meets. You have only to remember this habit of theirs to realize how hopeless is your undertaking. What you can do, however, and that quite easily, is to keep worms from accumulating in any numbers. What I recommend to this end is that once a month you should dose him with some, good worm mixture. Oil of Chenopodium and Felix Mas make a good one. Santonin is excellent against most types, but not all. My experience is that nine dogs out of ten shew a great improvement in spirits after any such dose. There is no need to make him thoroughly uncomfortable by starving him or following the dose with a purge—that is, no need unless you are really wishing to get rid of the worms altogether, which as I have said is futile.
Two types only are dangerous. One is the ankylostome, the same type but not necessarily the same species of worm that the human being harbours. Your Dresser should be able to find eggs if you suspect it, and you should treat that pretty severely. A dose of Felix Mas every other day for a fortnight will usually dislodge them. The second type is the heart worm. Very little is known about it. It is apparently mosquito-carried, and the embryo will live for years in the blood. If, how¬ever. it lodges in the heart or lungs, it will kill the dog in time from heart stoppage or pneumonia, but he may recover from several attacks before passing over.
MANGE.
Many people seem to have the idea that mange is more severe out here than at home. This has certainly not been my experience. There are, you probably know, two kinds of mange, the sarcoptic and the follicular. Follicular mange is rather commoner than at home and is practically incurable, but sarcoptic, the usual type, yields readily to treatment. Sarcoptic mange starts on the belly, under the arms and between the legs and thence spreads over the back. The dog scratches fre¬quently, leaving raw patches on his skin which become covered with scab. It is this scab that causes the trouble, for herein the mites meet one another in minute tunnels and chambers burrowed for the purpose, and here they increase and multiply, some sixty and some an hundredfold '. It is quite useless applying lotions or ointments to the surface of this scab. You must fetch it off with water, oil, or yellow soap, and then rub in the ointment well. But remember this, that if one little piece of scab remains, in that scab will lie some few mites whose progeny will come forth in about a week's time and repopulate their world. Therefore repeat the dressing every week for a month at least.
Better than this is to see that your dog does not catch mange. Don’t wait for symptoms. If you dress him regularly once a month with any good lotion, you can ensure that any mites that have attempted to establish a colony upon his hide will see their attempt frustrated, in the first generation. Follicular mange is distinguished from ordinary mange by the fact that the dog does not shew much irritation. Yet his hair drops off, and the bald patches shew small blisters in which the parasities live. Later on the skin wrinkles, and if this occurs on the face, the animal has a comical look of worry as though wrestling with some abstruse mathematical problem. Possibly he is. He is calculating how- much longer he will live 
When I said the follicular type was incurable, I meant incurable by ordinary means. But careful treatment, including blood injections of silver or arsenic might be tried.
ECZEMA.
This is a non-contagious condition of the skin. It is distinguished from mange by the fact that it starts usually on the back. It causes as a rule fat- more irritation, and the sufferer frequently cannot bear to be touched- It may cause sloughing of the skin in parts, with bleeding or suppurative sores- It is usually caused out here by too much washing. I have met people who bathe- their dogs every day I Many do it once a week. Once a month is quite often enough. I do not mean that a sousing in water hurts him, for there is nothing toxic in water applied externally, but I do think that soap is bad, particularly the poisonous soaps such as carbolic and the various scented soaps. If you must wash him, use plain water, and, at the most, plain yellow soap. The dog will usually let you know what he thinks of a bath, but what he likes, and is far better for him, is a good grooming with a fairly stiff brush.
Eczema may also be brought on by stomach trouble, and finally by difficulty in changing the coat. You should therefore keep him away from spices such as curry, feed him lightly once a day, and give him a pill if he needs it. If eczema occurs, clip off his coat and dress him with mange lotion. Ringworm occurs fairly commonly here and is often mistaken for mange. As the treatment is exactly the same, you can continue to mistake it!
WOUNDS.
Wounds of the skin are very rarely serious. The only trouble is the maggot, and you should look for maggots whenever a wound is slow in healing- A healthy wound is filled with matter, which can be washed away, showing the granulating fresh tissue- A fly-blown wound looks hollow. No matter forms. The skin tends to heal over it except for a small, absolutely circular hole, and in this the maggots can be seen. No need to pick them out if you cannot be bothered. Dress the wound well with iodoform, or turpentine, and creosote, taking care that the drug enters the hole, and the maggots will drop out or die and be absorbed.
BABIES.
Rabies at present is occurring in two places in Malaya—-i.e. Negri Sembilan and an area including the junction of Kedah, Province Wellesley and Perak. It is therefore forbidden to move dogs from these States without a permit. A permit may be obtained from the British Resident, but each case depends on its merits and no general rule can be laid down as to whether or not it will be granted. The trouble, the only danger of rabies is that the first rise or two is apt to pass unnoticed. The fury and amok popularly associated with rabies is actually not yet very noticeable, and frequently doesn't occur. The only certain diagnosis is the microscopical one. Any dog that you suspect should be chained up until I arrive, or if dead, sent to me or direct to the I.M.R., Kuala Lumpur- If diag¬nosis is positive, you would be well advised to consult a doctor.
In the detention of rabies, the point I made at the beginning of this discourse, i.e. insistence on ownership and the shooting of masterless dogs, is of particular importance. If the slaughter of the innocents is thoroughly done, it is rare for a second dog to develop symptoms.
Well. Gentlemen, I have spoken at some length and possibly bored you, but I do want to feel that I have persuaded you of two main points :—
That the masterless dog is a danger to your own animals and a peril to you in time of rabies. He is the real cause of all the canine diseases in this country. Get rid of him.
That it is only fair to your own dog to submit him to a routine. I don't think it is asking too much- Most people will spend one day a week putting their car in trim. Do the same one day a month with your dog and give him a dose of worm mixture, and a good dressing for mange whether he looks well or ill.
Two dogs were then produced, one showing advanced sarcoptic mange and one showing eczema. The differences were indicated by the lecturer who emphasized that mange was contagious while eczema was not-. Tn this case the eczema was probably due to excessive feeding on rice.
In reply to questions the lecturer said :—"There are many excellent mange dressings and worm mixtures on the market and many poor ones. But if you deal with a good firm you will probably get good stuff. A cheap and useful dressing that your own Dresser can make up is : Sulphur Sub. 1 part. Pot. Carb, or Sod. Carb. 1 part, Oil (olive, coconut or linseed) eight parts. Apply with plenty of elbow grease, and wash off with plain water after three hours- If Zinc Oxide can be obtained, one part of this may be added. For wounds, use Creosote, one part. Turpentine 32, Oil (Olive or coconut) 80. that is one teaspoonful creosote, one wine glass full tur¬pentine, half a pint of oil. Squirt into wound by
means of a hypodermic syringe from which the needle has been removed. For worms use Oil of Chenopodium, two drops, Oil of Turpentine, two drops, Castor Oil two teaspoonfull. That is for a dog the size of a fox terrier. Airedales and the like can be given an extra drop of each drug and an extra teaspoonfull of oil.
Remember this—that a dog possesses the peculiar faculty of vomiting, at will, so that if he does not like his medicine he will spew it out. Therefore, after giving him a dose, keep his mind off it by taking him out immediately afterwards for a romp or a run. That is a very important point.
Amusing Schoolboy “Howlers.”
An amusing list of schoolboy and schoolgirl "how-lers.” collected by Mi. A. Terrett, of Dereham, Norfolk, is published in the "University Correspon¬dent,” the journal of the University of London Graduates' Association.
Here is a selection from the list:—
Greenwich Meridian is the largest telescope in Greenwich Observatory.
A welsher is a native of Wales.
The sun never sets on the British Empire because the British Empire is in the east and the. sun sets in the west.
Finally James the Second gave birth to a son so the people, turned him off the throne.
The Minister of War is the. clergyman who prea¬ches to the soldiers in the barracks.
After twice committing suicide Cowper lived till IBLIU when he died a natural death.
A passive verb is when the subject is the sufferer as "I am loved.”
A blizzard is the inside of a duck.
Queen Elizabeth rode through Coventry with nothing on and Raleigh offered her his cloak.
Cotton is grown on some parts of the deacon.
Shakespeare lived at Windsor with his merry wives.
The “Root and Branch Bill” ordered farmers to prune their trees every year.
The King wore a scarlet tube trimmed with vermin.
The whole world except the United States lies in the temperance zone.
Wolsey saved his life by dying on the way from York to London.
Polonius was a mythical sausage.
The masculine of “vixen" is vicar.
Henry VIII. was very cruel to Ann Boleyn and ironed her. (The text-book says "he pressed his suit on her ”)
In the eighteenth century travelling WAS very romantic: most of the highroads were only bridal paths.
A fissure is a man who sells fish.
The Immortal William is a name applied to the German Emperor.
A Trade Union is a place to which a workman goes when he gets the sack.
The chief duties of an M.P. are to go to sleep when another man is speaking, and force his party into power.
G. B. Shaw is the captain of the London Fire Brigade.
A street is n road that has a very good class of people in it.
A connoisseur is a MAN who stand outside the picture palace,
Barbarians are things put into bicycle wheels to make them run smoothly.
Ambiguity means telling the truth when you don't want. to.
A Soviet is a cloth used by waiters in hotels.
To be culled to the Bar is to be treated to a drink.
A Jungle Parsonage.
MFE OF A MISSIONARY IN BORNEO.
In the current issue of "The Chronicle.’’ the quarterly report of the Borneo Mission Association, "F. S. H.” contributes the following interesting account of life in what he calls a jungle parson¬age :—
People at home who have never travelled beyond the range of our modern comforts and luxuries often have a difficulty in picturing either the life of their ancestors at home or that of pioneers now, whether the latter be settlers or Missioneries. It may be a help towards understanding the life of a Missionary out here if I give some details of my house and of its non-human inhabitants.
The Mission bungalow at Quop stands on 7-feet piles, and the paths from the village to the Church passes under it. My main room in the centre of the house serves as sitting-room, dining-room, and work-room or office. The bedroom adjoining con¬tains a good-sized mosquito box, an enclosure about 8 feet square. In this space are a bedstead, table, and chair. The sides are made of very small mesh wire netting, and the top is covered with a thick, coarse material through which mosquitoes and other insects cannot penetrate. When with darkness the reign of the insect world begins one take refuge in the mosquito box, taking into it one's book, etc. The main room has the luxury of a wooden ceiling. In the rest of the house one looks up to the shingles of the roof. The outside walls are just plain planks. Rain is kept out by their overlapping, but strange creatures take up
their abode in the spaces and invade one's quarters. There is one room in which for want of a separate schoolhouse a few boys sleep, the nucleus of a future boarding school, another that I use as a dispensary, and a bath-room. Pray don't imagine there is a bath. What serves as such is a large wooden barrel with the top cut off. and a small pail used for hot water. The one luxury is a constant supply of water, coming through a branch from the stream that is led down bamboo pipes from a spring on the hill to the village: this branch supply flows through the tub to a hide in the sloping concrete floor. The kitchen is detached, chimneyless, save for a 2-iucb chink provided in the roof. The wall decoration is soot. The fire is of wood, on a sort of stone altar, and above it are placed iron bars resting on Ilie bricks, as support for saucepans. Dry coconut shells are used as fire¬lighters. For baking, an empty paraffin tin is used. It is amazing what good results are obtained by the native cooks, and remembering that "what the eye does not see the heart does not rue." one refrains from visits to the kitchen and enjoys one's food. When an inquisitive fit is on I have inquired the nature of a meal and find I have been eating porcupine flesh, bamboo shoots, jungle ferns, or a rare delicacy called "umbut," obtained by cutting out the heart from the top of a coconut or other palm tree (of course, destroying the tree). Some¬times there is fish from the streams, and just now I am actually getting fresh milk, for an enterprising Dyak about a mile away has recently purchased three milch kine from which he seems to get a good supply. I take the precaution of having it boiled. It goes without saying to any one who knows the East that birds called by compliment chickens are a common item of diet. These when served up have their bones in small fragments: apparently they have been passed through a mangle.
"TROPICAL FURY."
There is a larder furnished with a sort of dove-cot box with mosquito-proof doom. Its legs stand in bowls of water to keep insects from climbing up. You must change the water often, or the bowls become breeding places for mosquitoes. The box must not touch the walls or it would soon swarm with ants. Ants mid other insects get even into closed jars. A strict, vegetarian would he quite repelled by our jams.
A reason given in a medical journal tor the pre¬valence of nervous illness (or as I call it. Tropical fury) among Europeans is the torment of insects. None but scientists love insects when these keep house with you in millions. Cockroaches abound in your drawers and eat round holes in your clothing, papers, and books. I loathe them! Spiders webs do catch a few mosquitoes, etc but one does not enjoy finding one has run one's head and face into a thick mesh of web. And gigantic spiders are terrifying though they seldom bite
Ants swarm. Everyone knows how the white ant may eat the woodwork of your house to pieces. Then there are the scavenger, the giant, the red, and the one I call the electric, because of the strange sensation its bite gives you. If the red ant bites you, you feel as if a hot needle had pierced you. Then there are centipedes, scorpions, rhino¬ceros beetle, praying mantis, locust, and other queer creatures too numerous to mention.
Of all minute insects perhaps the sand fly is the most trying. They can squeeze through the smallest holes of the wire netting, and one can no more disregard their bite than one can the unexpected prick of a needle. The irritation lasts -.ollie time, ceases, and returns twenty-four hours later. The only preventive 1 have been able to discover is to light a fire under the house and sit in an atmosphere resembling that of the M.E.T. Railway before the line was electrified.
LIZARDS.
The only creatures one can really welcome are the tiny house-lizards, resembling miniature croco¬diles, 1 to 5 inches in length. These go by the name of chik-chak from the peculiar sound they emit. They are excellent hunters of all flying insects on the walls and ceiling, to which they skilfully cling with their sucker feet. There is a larger and destructive kind, 8 or 9 inches long, that makes a sound like koh-gob. Woe betide your clothes if one finds its way into your wardrobe. Their bite is said by the Dyaks to lie poisonous. The chik-chak is an uncanny little chap, and it is amusing to see him. upside down on the ceiling, attack a large moth, and after a tussle swallow it whole. He frequently, however, falls off the ceiling and may land on your head, to his surprise and yours. When he falls his tail may break off. Scavenger ants then arrive by hundreds, and. apparently under the leadership of one of their number, carry off the discarded tail. The chik-chak soon grows another, as easily as we grow our hair after it has been cut .
At 9 p.m., on Friday. January 20, the Govern¬ment steamer "Weger" sailed for the Krakatau group of islands with the Governor of West Java and Mrs. Hillen, Den Heer Putman Cramer, Resident of Bantam and two members of the Batavia press on board. Upon arrival at "Lang” island, the party were met by Dr. Stehn and his colleague, who gave them the following information :
Since his arrival and after making careful obser-vations from "Lang” island, he had noticed several erruptions occurring repeatly and ejecting molten lava and huge stones, and at the same time evacuating steam and ash to a height of 200 metres and quite a number of times to a height of 800 and even 1.000 metres. Sometimes there was a pause of half a minute between each eruption. Nine or ten eruptions have been seen to occur with a pause of half a second between each. The water surrounding the crater within a radius of 500 metres is hot and a thin vapour can be seen rising above the surface. The first day Dr. Stehn arrived on the scene in the motor-schooner, the "Albertine", before she anchored at “Lang” island, and a trip was made around the principal points of activity. The “Albertine” was actually only 200 metres away from the centre of activity, which is as close as anyone can getv and when the temperature of the water was tested it revealed a temperature of 104 degrees Fahrenheit. It can easily be imagined how much greater the tempera¬ture must be the closer one is to the crater. Huge stones are hurled into the air to a height of 250 to 1,000 metres, accompanied by loud sounds similar to those of several 16-inch guns in action. Dr. Stehn stated that, during frequent eruptions, distinct sound of heavy rumblings could be heard which would indicate the enormous power that seemed to be held in check, apparently for the time being, in so as signs now show. Between 8 a.m. to 12 noon on January 15, 1.928, 217 eruptions were registered, -18 being large, rising to a height of more than 250 metres. The number of eruptions is gradually increasing. On the 16th instant, 380 eruptions wpre registered in the short space of four hours. 29 of which rose to a height exceeding 250 metres. On the 17th instant, out of a total number of eruptions exceeding that of the previous day, 55 were large and rose to more than 250 metres. On the 18th instant, 341 eruptions took place within a period of four hours, more than forty of which rose to a considerable height. More figures could be given to demonstrate the increasing activity of the Krakatau. At 8.30 a.m., on Saturday. January 21, a tremendous eruption took place. Molten lava, huge stones, ash and steam were ejected to a height of 1,200 metres Dr. Stehn's attap hut was enshrouded in a light curtain of ash immediately after the eruption.
Later reports to hand now state that the eruptions which were working towards the formation of a crater above sea-level have achieved their purpose and a peak has been formed a few feet above the sea-level. This can easily be explained. The molten lava and stones which were hurled into the air fell into the sea not far from the mouth of the crater and this continual action as well as the accumulation of molten lava and stones augmented the rising of the crater above sea-level.
In View of the excitable state of affairs in Bantam, the authorities have taken the necessary precautions to avoid a panic in so far as is possible.
Dr. Stehn in replying to a series of questions with regard to the seriousness of the situation, said that in his opinion, the present state of activity did not warrant any anxiety but immediately the volcano ceased its operations, say for a couple of days , or a week at least, anticipated that it would aggravate the condition of things in view of the fact that a sudden cessation of a series of eruptions would indicate a blockage in the creator which might develop to a head and cause trouble.
The Java papers are of the opinion that in the case of a huge tidal wave occurring, it would probably reach the coasts of West Java and South Sumatra in about four hours' time.
Wireless has been installed on "Lang'' island at Dr. Stehn’s suggestion and he has since been in communication with Weltevreden. On Friday night, January 27, the Governor of West Java received a wireless message from Dr. Stehn infor¬ming him that the volcano had censed its eruptions and was only evacuating gas and that he considered the situation as somewhat alarming.
It may be apparent to a great many people that at all events the unreasoning fear of shadows is never justified but more often than not it has been proved that coming events cast their shadows before.
Sarawak Library.
The following books have been kindly presented by His Highness the Rajah.
Donations of books, not more than a year old, to the Sarawak Library will be. greatly appreciated.
Third Division
SIBU.
January, 1938
General.—Oh the 2nd of the month the Annual Regatta was held at Sibu, the event attracting as large a crowd of natives and Chinese ns usual. The weather was fine and thanks to the excellent organization of the various hard working Com- mi trees, everything, football, boat races, land sports, fireworks, illuminated boat parade, etc., went off without a hitch. In spite of lavish expenditure of funds the balance in hand showed an increase over that of the previous year.
It was not until the 7th of the month that the station was clear of the many hundreds of Dyaks, Kayans, etc., who had arrived for the races.
Immigration.—No permits to immigrate were issued. Arrangements have been made for al] im¬migrants in future to produce their photographs in duplicate on arrival; their names will be registered and each man's name ami number will be writ ten on his photo for identification pm poses. This photo¬graph must be produced whenever be has any business with Government ami all items of interest, including property acquired or disposed of, will Ire noted on ids identification card filed with Government. This scheme will also be extended to Chinese already in the district and should eventually serve the purpose of a census. It will also be an excellent safeguard to the ignorant but honest settlers. The heads of areas haw expressed their appreciation of the scheme, and have promised to co-operate and en¬courage their people to produce their photos. It may take two years to obtain a more or less complete record but, however, incomplete it will have been worth while.
Education.—The Chinese have, arranged amongst themselves to levy a tux on rubber exported during 1928 on the proceeds of which they promise to build a school to a design approved by Government W hen they prove that they are in a position to fulfil this, a site already earmarked will be granted to them for this purpose. There is every reason to believe that tins time they will achieve their object if however, they fail the present school building will be pulled down and the site otherwise disposed of.
REJANG.
January, 1928.
"With reference to my lust report I regret I omitted t record we distributed free supplies ojv,Sodium Sulphate to producers in the Kut area which was appreciated by them and resulted in greatly improved sheet rubber.
“SeVen more smoke houses were erected daring the month all amongst the Chinese. Against this the houses erected at Binatang and Rejang are no longer being used. Both will probably come into use again with the fine weather when the Malays tap .with more regularity.
"Further I treated in a small way some gardens attacked by white ants, I was not able to save the trees as they were too far gone but the treatment should have the effort of preventing the spread of the attack. It might also encourage the gardeners to make early reports of the attack of white ants."
OYA AND DALAT.
January, 1928.
Trade.—Thirty-seven koyans of raw sago, 338,60, piculs of jelutong, and 100.95 piculs of para rubber were shipped to Kuching.
Smallpox.—On the 2nd of the month the Court Writer, Kapit, reported that six cases of smallpox had occurred in the Malay bazaar. I accordingly left early in the morning of the 3rd, arriving at Kapit that night to find that Ah Kui, the Court Writer had already made an isolation camp 1/2—1 mile down river, where all cases had been removed. He hail also, pending my arrival, caused the s.s. Sarawak to anchor in raid-river, and stopped any communication between ship and shore. As some of the cases bad actually been on board, and all passengers and crew were all direct contacts with the disease, also cargo was on board which had come ' from the infected houses, I upheld his action and quarantined the ship. This eventually was found to be justified as a case occurred nine days later on board, thus it is certain that had the ship been allowed to proceed she would have brought the disease once more to Kuching. The ship was even¬tually allowed to proceed on the 22nd after fumiga¬tion, etc. The Malay bazaar was isolated as a whole, police guards being placed at both ends of the bazaar and all communication stopped, the infected houses were fumigated on my arrival.
I consider both on the first occasion of the out¬break and during the course of the disease Ah Kui’s actions were to be highly recommended, and by his initial prompt action he undoubtedly prevented a touch further spread than actually occurred.
Cases occurred from time to time during the month, bringing the total at the end of the month up to forty-live, with nine deaths, of these, twenty- six actually occurred in and around Kapit itself with four deaths, one only occurring in the camp, there were no cases in the Chinese bazaar. Eight cases occurred at Sungei Kedai below Song, at the house in which the fatal case occurred. Last month two other deaths occurred here, both these cases had run into the jungle, and so escaped vaccination the remaining five in the house who were vaccinated contracted the disease but in a very mild form.
Six cases occurred in the Baleh with one death, and four in the Katibas, also with one death. IN these two rivers the Dyaks according to their custqm segregated themselves, and it is to be hoped further spread will be checked.
One case occurred in Sibu and the whole house¬hold were removed to a temporary isolation hut on Puloh Kertan. Wholesale vaccination was carried out throughout the Division, both by dressers and a Government vaccinator (who arrived at the middle of the month) and also by Native Officers and Court Writers, exact figures are not yet obtain able (except that, of 2,420 in and around Sibu by the Hospital Staff) but many thousands of people were vaccinated. All traffic on the Rejang above Kanowit was stopped nnt.il the 30th when Song and Kapit bazaars were opened.
With the exception of eight or nine Malays, all the person affected were Dyaks, I visited Kapit three times dining the month, being away from Sibu from the 3rd to the 9th. the 13th—18th, and the 21st—26tb, the hitter time I investigated the reported cases in the Baleh, travelling as far as the Gat.
H. L. OWEN.
Resident, Third Division.
Fifth Division.
IMBANG.
December, 1927.
P.W.D.—The Panderuan road was inspected with the object of possibly remaking and opening it up for motor traffic during next year ; it was found to be in a very fair state and will not need a great deal of work to recondition it.
Nineteen head of buffaloes were shipped to Kuching.
The rainfall amounted to 16'22 inches.
