SATURDAY. DECEMBER 1. 1928.
Birth.
CLUNIES ROSS.—On November 22nd, at “Hillview," 13th mile, Kuching, to Mr. & Mrs. C. Clunies-Ross, a daughter—Eveline.
Marriage.
WAN—SIM.—On 3rd November, 1928, at St Joseph's Church, Kuching. MICHAEL WAS CHIN HOCK, of Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, Miri, to Miss ANTHONIA SIM, of St. Teresa's Convent, Kuching. Father A. Haideggar officiated at the wedding.
NOTES.(November)
HOME papers have recently contained several articles which state that Her High¬ness the Ranee intends in the near future to take part in screen productions in America. There is, of course, no truth in this assertion whatsoever. It is, however, correct to say that Her Highness is returning to Europe by way of America during next year.
H.H.M.Y. Maimuna reached Kuching on 31st October from Penang, via Singapore. Mr. C. Willes Johnson, who has come to Sarawak on duty, arrived as a passenger.
THE following appointments were pub¬lished in the Government Gazette of 16th November:—Mr. J. A. H. Hardie to be Director of the Government Air Service; Mr. W. H. Phillips to be Flight Lieutenant; Mr. J. W. Goodban to be Leading Air¬craftman; Mr. T. A. Reid to be an Assistant Executive Engineer in the Public Works Department.
ON 11th November the now customary two minutes’ silence was observed at Kuching, and we believe at all outstations. In another column we give an account of the Ex-Service Dinner held on the same day.
WE publish the Menu of the Armistice Dinner held at the Hotel Publico, Sibu, on November the 11th.
MENU.
Zakouska
Bychnoi Hvost
Kit Sarawak
Kourinye Kotlety
S. Goroshkon
Jareny Gous
S. Yablochnom Saousom,
Kartofel, Boby
Asparaj
Rcy Mackenyenoo
Morojenoye
Kofe
No further details have been sent except that every host was his own guest and a good time was had by all.
THE Chief Health Officer, in his published statistics, estimates the population of Ku¬ching at 24,575. The birth rate is 30.6 (per mille) and the death rate 22.23.
A friend of the late Archdeacon Perham, the Rev. A. R. Carr, of 8, Shrubbery Avenue, Worcester, England, is hoping to write a booklet in regard to him, and would be grateful for any information about his life in Sarawak and Singapore that might be sent him.
ANOTHER link with old Sarawak history, and perhaps rather a pathetic one, is con¬tained in a letter from Mr. James Channon, son of Capt. Channon, at one time in the Sarawak Service.
Mr. Channon writes to His Highness the Rajah that he is now seventy years of age and that he lost his only son in the war, he now wishes to send to Sarawak the pearl¬handled sword of honour presented to his father by Sir James Brooke.
The following note is from the Sarawak Civil Service List:—
Channon, John (1852—1868). Captain H.H. Gunboat Heartsease. Entered the Service 21 July 1852. Commanding the Jolly Bachelor on $30 per mensem. Com¬manding the Badger December 1852; the Venus June I860; the Heartsease April 1865. Retired on pension 6 April 1868. Served in many engagements against Dayak and Malay pirates. The Tuan Muda wrote of him in 1859: “His valuable services, as well as steady and brave conduct, both on board and in the jungles, cannot be too highly praised in the annals of Sarawak.”
ON 1st November, 1928, Kuching received a visit from the Royal Air Force Flight, consisting of four “Southampton” type flying boats, which are carrying out a further cruise in Eastern waters.
Each boat has a span of 75 feet, a length of 50 feet, a draught of about 3 feet and a weight, at normal full load, of about 7 tons. They are each propelled by two “Napier Lion” engines of 500 horse-power and carry a crew of four persons.
The officers and airmen of the Flight were received on their arrival at Pending and during their stay of four days many parties were given in their honour, terminating with a most enjoyable evening at Astana.
The opportunity was taken by many residents to visit the machines at their anchorage and, through the kindness of the officers, were shown over the craft.
The Flight left at dawn on 5th November for Labuan.
We take this opportunity to wish them again "bon voyage” and to assure them of our hope that we may again be given the pleasure of entertaining the “Junior Ser¬vice.”
THE following is the programme to be followed out with the names of the officers.
The flight is commanded by Group-Capt. H. M. Cave-Browne-Cave, D.S.O., D.F.C., and the second-in-command is Squadron- Leader G. E. Livock, D.F.C. The other officers are Flight Lieutenants P. E. Mait¬land, A.F.C., D. V. Carnegie, A.F.C., C. G. Wigglesworth, A.F.C., H. G. Sawyer, A.F.C., and Flying Officers S. D. Scott and G. E. Nicholetts.
THE following telegram from the Members of the Far East Flight was received on 5th November, 1928 :—“His Highness the Rajah. Many thanks for all the kindness we all re¬ceived during our visit, the arrangements were excellent.—Far East Flight.” A correspondent informs us that Capt. H. M. A. Day, son of H. R. A. Day, late of the Sarawak Civil Service, has taken up flying and has recently been promoted Captain and Flight Commander. He is at present attached to H.M.S. Hermes on the China Station. Mr. W. H. Phillips, who is gazetted this month as Flight Lieutenant in the Government Air Service, was serving in the Hermes in 1925. WE have to thank the Electrical Depart¬ment for the following :—
TEN ELECTRICAL COMMANDMENTS.
A notification appears in the Government Gazette that His Highness the Rajah has approved of the name “Thomson Road’ being given to the new road running through the Borneo Company’s property connecting the Main Bazaar with Padungan.
This is in deference to the memory of the Company’s late Managing Director Mr. Peter Duguid Thomson.
Armistice Day.
Owing to Armistice Dav falling on a Sunday this year, the selling of Flanders Poppies was held on the previous day. Mrs. Bean, Mrs. Cunynghame, Mrs. Griffiths and Miss Tait kindly undertook this somewhat arduous task. They achieved splendid results, realizing in all $196 for the disabled soldiers’ fund.
A dinner for ex-service men, followed by an in¬formal dance, was held at the Club on Sunday. Thirty ex-service men and nineteen Sikhs and Sepoys were present at the dinner. After the toasts to the Rajah, the King, and the Dead, the President called on Mr. Willes Johnson to speak. The gist of his remarks is given below.
“Gentlemen, in response to the request of your President, Dr. Marjoribanks, I rise to say a few words to you.
"We have met here to-night in order to observe the 10th anniversary of the Armistice following the Great War. The most important feature in the celebration of this anniversary, to my mind, is the Two Minutes’ Silence which is observed in so im-pressive a manner not only by service men but by everyone of the Empire to whom the Great War means anything. The institution of that Silence was a master-stroke and it is difficult to imagine any other manner by which the great event and all its consequences could have been better kept alive in our minds.
“It is intended, I like to think, first as an expression of our thankfulness for deliverance; secondly as a mark of our profound respect for those who gave their lives for their country; and thirdly as a re¬minder to those of us who were then living, as well as to those that come after, of the awfulness of war. so that we may each one of us to the best of our power, do what is possible to assist in avoiding another such catastrophe.
“I hope and believe that the Great Silence will continue to be observed so long as the British Umpire lasts. No words can add anything to its significance.
"Turning now to these annual reunions such as that in which we are taking part to-night, their primary object, I take it, is to afford ex-service men, wherever they may be found, an opportunity of com¬ing together and celebrating the occasion in such manner as may be thought fit. It is right and only natural when the event is more or less fresh in our minds that we should make this in part an occasion or rejoicing. For how. long we shall continue to do o remains to be seen. Memories are short and new generations appear. In the light of past history I venture to think that the idea of rejoicing over victory may gradually die away. However that may be, it is difficult to say much regarding the war which has not already been said.
“But this 16th anniversary may perhaps be considered a special milestone at which we may take stock of our position.
“The feeling of most of us, for some years after 1918, must have been chat another war was unthink- able. The nations were weary and it was even said that, if another war were declared, the great mass of their peoples would refuse to fight. I am not so sanguine, and, though progress has been made in many directions during the last decade, the further we go from 1918 the more we realize the difficulties, if not the impossibility of securing universal peace. We hear of the League of Nations, of Conferences and of proposals for disarmament and we hope and pray for their success, hut we can hardly help notic-ing that almost before the signatures on a Peace Pact are dry, the very nations advocating disarma¬ment, which even if achieved would not necessarily prevent war, are wrangling amongst themselves about the number of battleships and so forth which they regard as essential they should keep for what they are pleased to call defensive purposes. So long as each nation remains the judge of its own require¬ments. I see no way out of this deadlock.
“But 1 am getting rather out of my depth and before I close I should like, if yon will bear with me, to say a few words about the Country in which we are most interested and to consider what we as ex- service men can do for the good of Sarawak.
“Three important principles which are impressed upon the fighting services—I put them in inverse order of importance—are comradeship, discipline, and loyalty.
“Let us remember that most of us—I refer tc Government Officers—are still in service and always keep before ns all that the word “ Service” implies While we are proud to have been born British it is well to remember that Sarawak is not a European Country and that the policy of Government has always been to further the interests of its indi¬genous peoples and of those others who do so much for its trade and prosperity.
“If we. move away from the original and well recognized Brooke policy, now of some years standing, the policy of working for the good of the inhabitants, if we countenance the extravagant ideas that have been so prevalent elsewhere since the war. so, as surely as the sun rises, we shall fail it our Trust. Simplicity has been the key-note to the success of Sarawak. Let us all, in our own spheres keep it so, and help to see that the resources of the country are devoted to the best interests of gradual progress, not wasted in unremunerative undertakings or in producing a false standard of comfort which is unsuitable to our circumstances. Expenditure of that kind only adds to the cost of living, just as those Great Stores which have sprang up in London and elsewhere, vieing with each other in providing huge buildings with every comfort and luxury, must
to meet the expense, increase the price of the goods they sell and so cause a demand for higher wages, leaving the wage earner no better off than before.
“Let us not follow all western ideas and standards. We may and should base ourselves in principle upon British justice and British manners but let us adapt them to suit our surroundings and beware of importing too quickly western methods which cannot be appreciated or even understood by eastern races. Do not let us think that only what happens in our own time matters. The life of a country is a very long one, we who serve it may best do so by curbing our impetuosity and by building slowly and surely.
"I realize, Gentlemen, how easy it is to criticize, how difficult to construct, and you may well ask yourselves why I should presume to stand here preaching to many of you who have spent your best years in the country. My apology must he my intense love of Sarawak and I would further add that while my official connection with the service dates back sixteen years from the present month of No¬vember, I was also born and brought up in the Sarawak atmosphere. One of my earliest recollec¬tions is that of being taken to stay with the late Rajah in England when 1 met for the first time our present Rajab and the Tuan Muda sitting on their nursery floor uttering strange cries which I no doubt immediately recognized as having had their origin in the jungle.
“Following the spirit of comradeship, we should see to it that there is no trace of jealousy or of unwholesome rivalry whether between one indivi¬dual and another or between one department and another. We are all in the same boat so let us pull together.
“We may count ourselves fortunate in being mem¬bers of a unique Service, under a Rajah who, after 31 years of activity, has his heart and soul in his country and whose zeal for and love of Sarawak, as was the case with his predecessors, only increases as the years roll on. It is no particular credit to any of us to have been able to enter this Service. We had no examination to pass and some of us may have had little or no qualification. We were chosen because it was anticipated that we were of the type that would make good. If we—each of us—import into our service the true spirit of comradeship and that second principle which I have mentioned — discipline, we shall make good.
“I know, Gentlemen, that I shall have you with me when I say that there has never been any ques¬tion about the third principle—loyalty, and if we keep always before us and observe those three prin¬ciples we shall have the great privilege and satisfac¬tion of knowing that we are doing our bit in the Service of our Rajah by working for the good of Sarawak and upholding its constitution and indepen¬dence.
“Before I sit down let me add a foot-note to say bow really happy I am to have been given this opportunity of being in Sarawak once more and of meeting you all here to-night.”
Stone Remains in Sarawak.
Mr. E. V. Andreini, District Officer, Baram, has reported the discovery in the Kelabit country of some very interesting stone remains. An account of these is given in the Singapore Free Press. The remains were found in the interior of the Baram District, not far from the Dutch border. There was one stone monument, about 20 feet high, some¬what bell-shaped, with an inscription in Chinese
of which the words "Sum Peng” have been de¬ciphered. Ong Sam Peng, it will be remembered, was the name of the Chinese Governor of a colony on the Kinabatangan whose sister married the first Mahomedan Sultan of Brunei. Another monument bore writing which is unknown, but not Chinese, and there were also geometrical patterns; the second monument is described as being about 12 feet high, in the shape of an elephant lying on its back. In another place were what seemed to be grave stones, some with crude carving of a woman, elsewhere again were stones showing affinities with Buddhist culture, and the remains of an ancient fort.
The news of this discovery will no doubt en¬courage those who believe in the theory of a Chinese origin for our Dustin tribes, but it will not really help them much. A party of Chinese, traders or prospectors or possibly refugees, may have pene¬trated to the headwaters of the Baram, but it does not follow that instead of dying out they founded a new race of quite different language and charac¬teristics. The Sino-Dusun enthusiasts had better remember how prone the Chinese tongue is to turn an 'r' into an ‘l’; and pin their faith to a place name: ‘Kinabalu’ then clearly becomes ‘Kina bahru’ “The New China”—watchword of a 14th century : forerunner of a movement of our own day : name bestowed on the most prominent feature of the Northern territory from which the new order was to spread : home of a nation yet unborn : an Orien¬tal Olympus : and a peg for a more than dubious ethnological assertion.— (B.N.B. Herald.)
Sarawak and the Aerial Factor.
BY AIR TO INDIA.
Speaking at the Lord Mayor's Banquet, Sir Samuel Hoare, the Air Minister, announ¬ced that international difficulties connected with the right to fly over foreign territories, which stood in the way of a weekly London- Karachi air service, had finally been removed, and the service would start early in the spring.—(Extract from Straits Times.)
Of the vast numbers of people who have read the above and similar notes with mild interest it is safe to say that a large majority would own to quite nebulous ideas on the subject of the economic im¬portance of commercial aircraft.
The carrying of passengers and freight by aero¬plane over great distances, at speeds unequalled by any other form of transport, is steadily becoming more general and it is of interest to conjecture how and when Sarawak will be affected by this changing order of things.
Recently, in England, a meeting of General Managers of Railways discussed the question of seeking Government support for the promotion of a bill granting railways powers to undertake aerial transport. The very contemplation of such a step as this is a clear indication that commercial aviation is now regarded as a sound business proposition.
There are to-day, operating in the United States alone, no less that 3,230 Civil end Commercial Aeroplanes, a fact which points to the progress which is being made and the part which is now being played by aircraft in everyday affairs.
The recent visit of the Royal Air Force Flight, their arrival to schedule time after a trip of 470 miles can scarcely fail to stimulate our interest. Little further imagination is needed to visualize the possibilities and to realize the importance of the aerial factor in the future of Sarawak.
When, therefore, I was asked to referee a ladies'  
football match, it took much argument to convince
me that I really was awake, and taking nourishment.
Arriving on the ground, which was surrounded by
a large aim talkative crowd, I blew shrilly on my 
whistle and the players rose up from the ground and 
walked upon the field.
Twenty-two (or was it thirty-two, the numbers
matter little) Javanese, ladies of all ages and sizes 
much to my alarm began to take off their coats and
sarongs. Modesty, however, was not outraged as
every player had her fighting clothes on beneath.
Each one pleased herself, and the variety was
astonishing.
Pink shorts with black stripes, blue and white check-
shorts, pule blue with pink insertions, pink and black
hoops,’ black with lace bottoms all very skimpy and
tied tightly round the waist with a short cord.
Their upper works were clothed in skin-tight bodices
(or are they camisoles?) Here again exotic colours
were popular. The players ages ranged from mature
matrons of powerful physique to slim girls whose
physique seemed to have been left behind. Several of
the more experienced players sported headgear, the
popular choice being that article known as a “horsey
can." Others bound their heads with yards of cotton,
but the youngsters screwed their hair up and trusted
in Allah.
The teams lined out, 8 forwards, 4 halves, 3
three-quarters, 2 goal-keepers and a reserve of three
or four on the touch line to help where necessary.
Up goes the ball, thrown in the air by the re-
feree, and the game has started.	•
The forwards hurl themselves at it as it comes
down, and in a moment half a dozen are on the
ground, the sound of a loud tear proclaiming the
fact that disaster has fallen early on someone. A
stout lady emerges from the scrum, running with the
ball held in front of her, ludicrously like a steward on
a channel steamer. She is pursued by the scrum,
whilst two or three of the more agile overtake her
on either side and wait for an opportunity to spring.
Forward dashes an opposing back who grabs the
running lady by the hair, they take a bad loss and
the goal-keeper runs out and kicks both. The re-
feree, whilst attempting to give a foul, is kicked
as well, and pairs of females engage in single com-
bat in far corners
A long lean lady gets the ball, forgetting which
side she is on, neatly scores into her own goal.
Dashing madly along to retrieve the ball the re-
feree is tripped up and a mob of women surge over
his body. Goals are scored every minute, but who
by and into whose goal everyone has lost count.
The gorgeous shorts are bedraggled, and one or
two of the flamboyant bodices have not stood the
unfair strain.
Females in the crowd, unable to look on, fever-
ishly throw off their clothes and join in the game.
Faster and faster the struggle becomes, and the
appearance of another bull enables one to wit-
ness the unique spectacle of two goals being
scored at the same time.
Half-time is disregarded and is really quite un-
necessary as players change ends with impartiality.
Forty minutes is considered enough, and then
their men folk swarm upon the field and appropriate
both balls and the game is at an end.
Battlefields are pathetic sights at all times. Bits
of lace-insertion, hairpins, fragments of ribbon and
(dare I say it) tufts of hair cover, the ground. The
hysterical warriors sit on the ground and regard
their torn and split war-coats with pride. The
fighting shorts may have parted, hut what of it “it
was a famous victory"?
The referee is led off by his friends. He walks
with downcast, glazed eyes staring at nothing.
For, indeed, he has looked upon a scene of mighty
valour, a struggle of prodigious deeds, and of pluck
and endurance beyond the ken of any man.
THE-OPTIMISTIC FIDDLER.
Inter-Schools’ Football Competitions.
The keenest competition was shown between the
seven schools which entered for the Senior and
Junior Shields presented at the Annual Competition
by Mr. Tan Siang Kim.
The Junior Shield was won by the Kampong
Grisik School, who managed most unexpectedly to
beat the Hokien School. Both teams put up a
wonderful contest and it has been a real eye opener
for many to realize how popular the game has be-
come.	
The Senior competition was won most deservedly
by the team entered from the Homan Catholic
Mission, who were without any doubt far superior
to the Church of England’s team.
The match was played on a “sticky" ground, and
would have been of a far more interesting nature
had it not been for heavy rain.
The R.C. team deserve much praise, for in spite
of their having to attack in the “stickier" half, they
managed to score by really first-class “shooting.”
Mr. C. H. Willes Johnson kindly consented to be
present and, before handing the shield and medals
to the winners, said: “It gives me great pleasure
to have been asked to come here to-day in order to
present the shield and medals to the winning team
in your Inter-Schools Football Competition.
“We have seen a very interesting and keenly
contested match, au outstanding feature being the
shooting of the winners which in my opinion attained
a high standard. If, in the greater game of life,
after you leave school you play with the enthusiasm
which you have shown to-day, you will do well.
Always remember that that game too must be played
fairly and squarely and that you must also play
as a team. It will be as much your duty in life to
help a colleague to win through as it is to make
every effort to become successful yourself.
“I congratulate both winners and losers on their
play to-day and I wish for all every happiness and
success in the future."
The competitions ended with three hearty cheers
for Mr. C. H. Willes Johnson.—(Contributed.)
The Adventures of Limbang,
a Hero of Dyak Mythology.
( Continued.)
In the meantime Klieng and the others had become alarmed at his prolonged absence.
They forgot their own privations in their anxiety for him. And when the day broke and still no appearance, they set forth in quest of him. They sought for him far and wide, but discovered no trace of him. After several days search, they gave him up for lost, and sped home again by way of Sigu Bungkany and Nidi Kandis, the latter an affluent of the Gelong. With sad and sorrowful faces they told this story to the assembled kinsmen, and had to bear the unmerited reproaches of the mother that bore him. There was wailing and weeping throughout the land; there was smiting of bosom and rending of hair. An “ulit” of a very severe character was laid upon the country ; the women went into mourn-  ing, and the young men discarded their ornaments and sat on their mats in sullen silence. Then Klieng arose amidst an awful hush and proclaimed the punishment of death to any cock that should crow, or to any old man that should cough, before the days of mourning were over.
And now to pursue the fortunes of Limbang. He continued to live with Gumba (for so the ogre was called) for many a. day and many a year. He led a quiet and regular life, unbroken by any adventure
He saw no company, as strangers never passed that way ; nor did visitors ever come near the house. He was not permitted to assist in the work of the farm, as Gumba was unwilling that he should soil his hands with labor and spoil his complexion in the sun. Nor was he allowed to help in the menial work of the house. He only angled and hunted ; made fish-traps and casting nets; fed his dogs and played with his pets. And thus his days were passed. He made three meals a day, with which Gumba provided him. Rice and vegetables, fish and flesh were always plenty with him. He was never in want; nor did ho lack for clothing. His kind protector made himself but one meal a day, but this was a heavy business and took long to digest; indeed it rendered him incapable for the rest of the day; when his victuals were ready, he would lie down on his back in the middle of his verandah, and let Limbang fling into his open mouth first a pailful of rice and then a potfull of vegetables and to wash the whole down, he would pour down his throat a bucketful of water. After this he would rest his feet on the "sadau" and dispose himself to sleep; first., however, remind¬ing his son to wake him up in the morning by smiting him on the forehead a heavy blow with a sledge¬hammer that lay in the corner.
Years passed on and Limbang grew up a hand¬some stripling. Gumba was rich, and loved to lavish his wealth upon his son. He dressed him in the most gorgeous attire and covered his person with gold and silver; so that when in full gala costume he rivalled the moon in his splendour. One day he put on his war-dress, his skins and feathers, girt on his sword and played on the ‘‘klurai’' ; and as he played he beat time with his foot and swayed his body to and fro with a graceful motion, when, suddenly without warning and without ever having done so before, he launched out into a wild and war¬like dance, for the blood of his father began to warm within him.
Gumba's eyes sparkled with pleasure, as he watched the dear lad advancing and retreating, crouching and leaping, closing and disengaging in mimic combat, and although gorged with food and unable to stir, he contrived to roll himself round more than once as the interest increased, and at the climax exclaimed: "Worthy brother of Klieng! there is no one, in the wide wide world, there is no one, to compare with my son!" Limbang admitted that this was all very nice so far, but suggested that it would be more agreeable to have some feminine society, and would not a woman be able to relieve his dear father of the trouble of preparing the victuals? Gumba replied that there was some sense in all this; he would think the matter over, and should be decide to give him a companion, he would go out on the morrow in guest of a suitable person. Early in the morning Gumba got up and. putting Limbang in the hollow of his ear on a spread mat, he strode away to his farm.
He set him down under shelter and told him to remain quiet until he had finished weeding for the day. But Limbang could not keep quiet and, to soothe his mind, he produced his "klurai’ played on it and danced to the accompaniment. A medicine¬man in Heaven, Jaban by name, happening to look down, witnessed the performance, and thinking it might amuse his daughter, he called to her to come and see.
Bunsu Matahari (for such was her name), looked long and looked hard, and became aware of a flutter about the region of the heart. Observing her emotion her father asked her if she fancied the lad,
and would she like to have him for her husband? Her only reply was that she was her father’s, to do with as he list. So he tied a rope round her waist and let her down, and dropped her in front of Gumba who was asleep on the farm. Something chancing to sting him, Gumba awoke and perceiving the damsel, he put her in his ear without more ado. He then picked up Limbang, saying it was time to go home, and placed him in his other ear. And off he set. Arrived at his wharf, he took out Limbang, undressed him and bathed him and packed him off home. He then took out Bunsu, unclothed her, and dipped her in the river and sent her off to the house while he remained by the water-side to watch the meeting between the pair. He saw Limbang advance to the head of the ladder as Bunsu was about to mount. He understood by the flush on his face that he was smitten by her charms and enamoured of her wondrous beauty. She was invited to enter and seat herself; "sirih" and “penang” were placed before her, and she was shewn every attention. She soon began to feel herself at home and engaged in conversation. Gumba now came up and joined in. He cooked some rice and vegetables and summoned them into his room to cat. He placed the food before them, and told them not to be shy of one another, for they were now man and wife, and it behoved them to take their meals together. After they had completed this repast, Gumba partook of his own heavy meal in the usual fashion. There was much in his manner to surprise and alarm Bunsu, but she was comforted by her lover and felt safe with him. That night she did not get a wink of sleep; there was so much that was new, and that kept her awake thinking. The giant's snore soun¬ded in her ears like the rumble of thunder, and was of itself enough to banish slumber from her eyelids and sleep from her eyes. She rose early in the morning and before the break of day. She was now a wife and had her own business to attend to. It was hers to light the fire and cook the victuals, to winnow the rice and to draw water. She felt proud of her comely husband and was supremely happy in his love. And nothing occurred to estrange them. Gumba gave her a wedding-gift the next day—a couple of costly rings in an antique casket. He cautioned her to be careful of them, and on no account to lose them ; but she did lose them notwith¬standing, one day as she was bathing. She had taken them off her finger before undressing, and set them in the casket, which she placed on a piece of fallen timber. As she was splashing about in the water and kicking her heels, the casket slipped into the river and was carried away by the current. It was too light to sink. She shouted for help on missing the treasure, and her husband bounded to her assistance. He sought for it but without dis¬covering it. He followed the course of the river for some distance down but with no befter success. He dived into the cervices of the rocks, he sprang from bank to bank and from point to point, outstripping the current , but without avail. He then gave it up for lost, and comforted his wife the best way he could. But the casket was not lost. It was picked up some distance further down by Daiang Ida, wife of Timbang Singanan, a famous Malay Chief of the olden day. She opened the lid and discovered the rings which she shewed to her husband. He fell in love with them at once on account of their rare beauty, and inferring that their owner must be a woman of surpassing loveliness, he directed his servants to scour the country in search of her, and bring her to his haram as his concubine, married or unmarried, bond or free, it was all one to him. He must not be thwarted. His messengers went forth accordingly, and tried the rings upon the fingers of every woman they came across, but without encoun¬tering any one whom they fitted.
(To be Continued.)
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.
Singing Rivers.
a/b. WATERGEUS, KAPOEAS RIVER.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
DEAR SIR,
JUST a few words to answer “Flevo” on the subject of the singing of the Kapoeas, which was heard during the visit of the Maimuna to Pontianak
The Kapoeas band only plays during the dry season, when the water up stream is very low and the current very slow. Never the band will play when the tide is running down, but during the first two hours of the rising tide. The water with the highest specific gravity (salt sea water) runs over the bottom of the river up stream and at the same time the fresh river water runs down stream (following the mechanical law of inertia). The two currents flowing in opposite directions produce mutual friction and occasion “boiling'' in the horizon where they meet. “Boiling” is the cause of the noise, which can only be heard when you are on the water and not when you are ashore.
But this explanation is not poetical or musical at all and perhaps "Flevo” will be better pleased by the following story.
Brawidjaja, a royal prince from Madjapahit (Java), was suffering from a bad illness and so be was not allowed to stay in the palace, but had to live on a raft at the mouth of one of the big rivers of Java. During a heavy storm bis floating home got released from the shore and came adrift and after a bad time on the rough sea the prince came to the mouth of the Ketapang River, where the crocodile “Sarassa” pilot¬ed him and brought him ashore. Brawidjaja became the first Sultan of Matan and Sukadana, but after coming to prosperity he forgot the help of his old friend the crocodile. Sarassa wanted as a recom¬pense forty of the Sultan's subjects and not getting them willingly, he turned over a Sultan's boat with forty people and a big “gamelan" orchestra, which sunk in the deep sea bet ween Ketapang and Sukadana, and still “the band plays on.” “Borneo's Westen- afdeling” by P. J Veth, 1854, p. 23.
Yours, etc., WATERGEUS.
The Football Cup.
The Editor.
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
SIR.
I shall be much obliged if you will be kind enough to allow me a little space in your valuable columns.
As I am a keen reader of your monthly issue, the Sarawak Gazette, I seldom fail to read its contents which interest me very much.
• It is, however, strange to me that this time nothing has been written about the final match of the Black and White Cup Football Competition.
For the past two years some comments were put in your paper when the Police Team carried the Cup. This time, being the third year, the Steamship United Team has won it, and ever since I have looked for¬ward to read with interest about the said match.
May I, Mr. Editor, be enlightened for its non- pnblication in your Gazette?
Yours, etc.,
“A SPORTSMAN."
[We regret no report of this exciting match reached us. We trust it is not too late to repair the omission.—Ed. S.G.]
Club News.
Sarawak Club
Sarawak Regatta.
Tuesday, 1st January. 1929
(Entries close 18th December, 1928.)

1st Race, 8 a.m.—
Value §	 2nd prize $... 3rd prize $... 1st prize
to crew $... 2nd prize to crew $... 3rd prize to crew $... Open to boats limited to rew of 3O paddlers, one flag man and one bailer may be carried in addition, but these must not use paddles. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
2nd Race, 8.30 am.—For boats with crews limited to eight men. 1st prize $... 2nd prize $... From Mora Sungei Sinjan to Stone Wharf.
3rd Race, 9 a.m— SHIP’S GIGS.—1st prize $	
2nd prize $ . Limited to four oars and one paddle. From Mora Sungei Sinjan to Stone Wharf.
4th Race, 9.30 a.m.—
Value?	 2nd prize $... 1st prize to crew $...
2nd prize to crew S .. Open to any description of boat with crew limited to 15 men. From Ulu Tan- jong Patingan to Stone Wharf.
5th Race, 10 a.m —
Value S 	 2nd	prize $... 3rd prize ?... 1st
prize to crew S .. 2nd prize to crew ?... 3rd prize to crew ? .. Open to boats limited to 30 paddlers, one flag man and one bailer may be carried in ad-dition but these must not use paddles. From Ulu Tanjong Patingan to Stone Wharf.
6th Race, 10.30 a.m— ARMY, POLICE AND STEAMERS.—Crews limited to 15 men. Mixed crews from steamers will not Ire allowed, each steamer must have a boat containing members of its crew who are signed on before January 1st, 1929, 1st prize $ .. 2nd prize $... From Tanjong Patingan to Stone Wharf.
7th Race, 11 a.m.—
Value $	 2nd	prize $. . 1st prize to crew $...
2nd prize to crew $ .. 3rd prize to crew $... Open to boats finishing 1st, 2nd or 3rd in Races Nos. I and 5, limited to 30 men. From Ulu Tanjong Patingan to Stone Wharf.
8th Race, 11.20 a.m— OFFICES’ RACE.—Value $... Limited to employees in Government and Mer-cantile Offices whose names as being in the receipt of monthly wages appear on the pay sheet of any such Office for December, 1928. Limited to crews of 12 men in each boat. 1st prize $.. 2nd prize $... From Sungei Sinjan to Stone Wharf.
INTERVAL
Racing will be resumed at 2 pm
10th Race, 2.20p.m.—
Value$.... 2nd prize$.. 1st prize to crew 2nd prize to crew $... Open to any description of boat with crew limited to 15 men. From Bain Bliong to Stone Wharf.
11th Race, 3 p.m.—
Value $	 2nd prize $... 1st prize to crew »
2nd prize to crew $... 3rd prize to crew $... Open to any make of boat unlimited in size or number of crew. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
12th Race, 3.30 p.m.—'
Value $..... 2nd prize $... A Consolation Race.— For boats which have not finished first in Races Nos. 4 nr 10. From Godown Ban Seng to Stone Wharf.
13th Race, 4 p.m.—
Value $	 2nd prize ?... A Consolation Race.—
For boats which have not finished first in Races Nos.
1	or 5. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
14th Race, 4.30 p.m.—
Value ? 	 2nd	prize $ . A Consolation Race-—
For boats which have not finished first in Races Nos. 9 and 11. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
Greasy Boom Billow Fight—Diving Ducks.
Extracts from Monthly Reports.
Second Division.
SlMANGGANG.
October, 1,928.
Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner, Resident of the Second Division, reports:—
In re Estate of Chop “Choon Seng," Sebuyow, v. Tuanku Ahmat of Sebuyow. This case was reheard in the Resident’s Court by order of the Supreme Court and the former decision was reversed and defendant ordered to pay as claimed with costs.
P. C. Dollah was sentenced to six months' R.I. under section 408 I.P.C.
On the 1st Penghulu Jalin of Bintulu paid me a visit stating be was on leave and had collected certain property which he inherited from relations who live in the Nyakai Undup, his original home.
On the 2nd Mr. R. D. Binnie and Mr. G. M. Allman returned from Streng, beyond theTermudok Range, and have set Dyaks to work on felling rentis for the proposed Kuching-Simanggang Road. They left next day in m.l. Para for Kuching.
Mr. R. W. Hirst, Assistant Superintendent Rub¬ber Improvement Fund, arrived from Engkilili on the 9th and next day left for Kuching.
On the 16th 1 left for Engkilili in m.l. Anne, accompanied by Mr. R. H. P. Langton, Abang Zin, Native Officer, and Abang Mentaril, Assistant Sub- Inspector of Police; on arrival Abang Dulatip, Native Officer, reported a number of cases adjourned for settlement.
The site for “ Pasar Miskin " was again measured out sufficient for eighteen small dwelling-houses.
Jarau, Tuai Rnmah of Selantik, complained that by order of the Selantik Coal Prospecting Syndicate seven fruit trees of hie had been felled and compen¬sation refused. A letter was given to Jarau stating the Native Officer, Lingga, would examine into the matter.
On the 26th the m.l. Para arrived from Saratok with Mr. R. D. Binnie and Mr. G. M. Allman.
Mr. R. D. Binnie left next morning for Belong to inspect the work done by contractors on the new bazaar road and the erection of new shophouses. Mr. R. D. Binnie returned on the 29th.
Accompanied by Mr. G M. Allman and Datu Abang Haji Dulrasit, we left for Terbarrong, Skrang, on the 29th, and visited the sixteen gardens which have been cleared and partly dug up for planting pepper. The sixteen gardeners are being given advances by the Agricultural Improvement Fund under agreement and security. The land on the whole is good and the gardeners appear willing and energetic. The conditions are very good, there being plenty of timber and sufficient land for expansion.
Mr. R. D. Binnie and Mr. G. M. Allman left for their encampment at Streng and will from there proceed to Mulugu and Selantik in connection with the Kuching-Simanggang Road.
On the 21st Dresser Attenborough arrived from Kuching in order to visit Dyaks of Dor who are Buffering from dysentery.
The weather conditions have been bad during the month, continual rain day after day, with little sunshine and the river in heavy flood; the lowlands having the appearance of a huge lake.
The heavy rains have done a great deal of damage to the engkabang crop and other fruits and in conse¬quence the crop will not be the success as was originally thought.
Medical— A total of 263 persons were treated in hospital during the month as follows Dyaks 194 Chinese 33, Malay 31, Sikhs 2, European 2, Sepoy 1
SAMBAS.
Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, Officer-in-Charge, Belong, reports:—
On 28th Mr. R. D. Binnie, P.W.D., arrived from Simanggang to see the new road and bazaar. He gave the contractors full instructions and arranged the levels of the bazaar. He and Mr. R. W. Hirst both left for Simanggang on Monday 29th, via the Tisak.
Court work has been rather heavier this month than in September.
In the District Court, Tiang Chia was sentenced to three years’ imprisonment under section 379 I.P.C
Mr. R. W. Hirst had planted up three experimental beds of soap palm seeds near the Simanggang road.
KALAKA.
Mr. II. E. Cutfield, Acting District Officer, Kalaka, reports:—
Kabong and Pusa were visited from 4th to 8th, and Kabong again on 16th to 18th.
On the 21st all the Dyaks of the Krian, Awek, Sebetan, Rimbas, Seblak and some from Nyabor congregated at Saratok for a big meeting with reference to making the telephone rentis from Saratok to Roban, and from Saratok to Debak. About 2,000 doors were represented. They then all turned out to clear a 40-fathom rentis through the jungle opposite the fort and continue it to where it meets the old Pengkalan Abu-Debak road. The old roads, where used for the telephone, were also cleared both to Debak and Boban. The Dyaks then returned to work posts and these were nearly all delivered in their required positions by the end of the month.
Men are expected from Kuching to erect the line during November. Two consecutive days were spent in measuring towards Roban and Debak and putting marks for telephone posts.
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER, Resident, Second Division.
Third Division.
SlBU.
October, 1928.
Mr. H. L. Owen, Resident, Third Division, re¬ports :—
A Dyak was fined for causing death through gross carelessness and the usual payment of one half of the pati nyawa ($60) was ordered.
In an appeal against the decision of the District Court the appeal was allowed and the decision of the lower Court reversed.
Anchu, Dyak, was sentenced under section 325 I.P.C., and his wife Anoh for abetting.
Mr. C. D. Adams took over the duties of District Officer as from the 8th instant. Mr. E. M. Wood¬ward was at Kapit from the 5th to the 9th and took over the duties of Acting Assistant District Officer of Lower Rejang as from the 11th. The Divisional Medical Officer left on the 20th instant on resignation and Doctor Chand took over bis duties on the 24th. Mr. Baron relieved Mr. Harnack in the Surveys Office. Mr. W. F. de. V. Skrine proceeded to Mukah on the 5th instant to act as Resident of Mukah and Oya.
On the 1st instant the Matu-Daro telephone line was opened to traffic.
The new Wireless Station at Sibu was completed during the month, and the old station is in process of demolition.
Permission was given for the erection of a number of shophouses on the race-course at Sibu. These houses will be of timber but must be rebuilt when necessary of brick or concrete.
The purchase of a, large house standing in granted land in the Kampong Pulo was completed. The Chief Native Officer will move into this house, his present quarters being rather restricted as regards space; these will be converted into quarters for two or more Malay clerks.
On the 19th Major Cunynghame arrived from Kuching with a large batch of prisoners and additional warders for Sibu and other stations. The Right Revd. the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak visited Sibu on the 24th, returning to Kuching the following day. I left for Kapit by ml. Young Harry on the 30th instant to inquire into a report of the murder of four Poi and two Katibas Dyaks in the Upper Rejang.
The celebrations arranged by the Chinese for 10th October were entirely spoilt by heavy rain.
Awang Haji Gusti, for many years Tua Kampong of Selalang, and Penghulu Assan of Sarikei, both died on 10th October.
The District Officer, Sibu, reports :—
I arrived here on the 8th instant from Mukah, having been appointed District Officer. Arrivals at this station from Kuching were Messrs. Tait, Baron, Woodward, Major Cunynghame, Dr. Chand and the Right Revd. the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak, also Mr. and Mrs. Kidd from Kanowit. Mr. Tait in¬spected the wireless which has been erected on a new site and is now in working order. Mr. Baron was appointed to do duty in the Survey Department. Mr. Woodward was transferred from Kapit to do duty at Lower Rejang.
The Native Officer, Kanowit, arrived on the 20th, bringing with him a Dyak named Anchu who was accused of causing the death of one Ganya by assault¬ing him with a piece of wood. The assault was made in consequence of misbehaviour by deceased with Anchu’s wife Anoh. The case was dealt with in the Resident’s Court. Mr. Macpherson visited the Assan to settle a land case and also visited Binatang and Sarikei, accompanied by Abang Enjah, N.O. Nothing of importance was brought before him. Several names were mentioned to take the place of Penghulu Assan deceased.
Owing to many complaints being received against
the Kong Wong Sia Association (Foochow) the head
members were called up and ordered to produce a
statement of accounts and property. In future a
monthly statement will be produced and any
matters settled by them and reported. Chinese
notices have been distributed to this effect amongst
the different areas by head men.
Five cases of drowning occurred during the month,
all Foochow.
On the 21st, sixty-five prisoners were transferred from Kuching to Sibu Jail to serve their sentences.
On the 22th, ten prisoners were transferred to Rejang Jail and Prison Warder Suba Singh.
On the 25th, twenty-nine prisoners were trans¬ferred to Mukah Jail and Prison Warder Azis Zullah. Anoh (f.) was transferred to Kuching Jail. Jail- Sergt.-Major Bagga Singh and nine prison warders were transferred from Kuching to Sibu.
The Acting Divisional Medical Officer, Sibu, re ports
There were seventy-five in-patients during the month, fifty-five being new admissions, amongst these five deaths occurred.
During the month there was an increase of diarr¬hoea amongst the prisoners and prison warders, but care being taken of their drinking water it has greatly lessened. Also there was an outbreak of catarrhal conjunctivitis amongst the R. C. School children which has been almost stamped out.
On the 20tb, Dr. L. B. Haye left Sibu.
On 23rd, Mr. Mason went down to Sarikei, by order of the District Officer, to exhume the body of a Chinese, named Yap Thow, Cantonese, male, who was buried six days previously and, after a post¬mortem examination, he found death was due to a ruptured spleen.
On 24th I arrived at Sibu and resumed my duties. On the 29th, on receiving a wireless message from Dresser, Mukah, stating the serious illness of the Resident, I left Sibu for Mukah on the 30th at 6 a.m. via Dalat and Oya. Under appropriate treatment he recovered.
MUKAH,
October, 1928.
The Acting Resident, Mukah and Oya, reports:—
I accompanied the Acting Resident, Mr. C. D. Adams, on his return from Kuching to Mukah via Sibu, reaching here on 5th instant. The following day I took over the cash and general affairs of the district, and assumed charge of Mukah and Oya as from the 6th; Mr. C. D. Adams left for Sibu in s.l. Chamois the following day.
Accompanied by Native Officer, Datu Awang Udin, I sailed for Balingian in m.l. Leonora on 19th in¬stant and, after settling all outstanding cases and checking books and accounts, attempted to return on 23rd. Owing to the heavy seas we were unable to cross the bar and bad to remain at Balingian until 29th when the weather was sufficiently calm to return to Mukah. I was prevented from returning on foot owing to a severe attack of influenza.
During my absence at Balingian many Dyaks came down with their Chief, Penghulu Inteng, who appears to be incapable of settling the smallest case himself, and whose followers are in the habit of refusing to abide by his decision if any, on principal. These cases were only quarrels over ownership of fruit trees and were dealt with by the Cadet Officer assisted by Native Officer Abang Haji Mohidin.
During the month the waterworks pumping engine was taken down and cleaned, and additional pipe-line and standpipe were laid into the gaol com¬pound in order to supply the large number of prisoners with water and also the Wireless Quarters.
The Tamil labourers, numbering eight men and four women, were employed clearing and draining the Kuala Road, weeding the Bazaar Roads, clearing the Petanak pipe-line road and the Green Road from Kampong Abdul Hamid, deceased (now Kam¬pong Mat).
The prison gang, averaging 22 15 persons, was in-creased during the mouth by twenty additional con¬victs from Sibu and Kuching Gaols; these were accompanied by an Indian Warder who has since then returned to Sibu owing to sickness and general
BINTULU.
The Acting District Officer, Bintulu, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, reports:— Certain alterations to the interior of the Fort have been carried out by which the Customs Department has been given a larger office and a new office made for the Stores and Monopolies Clerk. On 2nd instant s.s. Angas called in here fora short while with Drs. Braendlin, Wilhelm and Mr. Tiedemann of the Sarawak Oilfields Limited Miri. The two latter were on their way to Tatau where they are erecting a gravimetric survey camp at S. Anaw, about one hour in the launch from the mouth of the Tatau river. According to reports from both this river and the Tatau this year’s engkabang crop is expected to be a large one, the trees being heavily laden with nuts. Trade— Trade is still slack this month. A slight rise has taken place in regard to jelutong, the highest price being $10 and lowest $8.50. Of billian attaps 370,000 pieces were exported this month the price being $110 per laksa f.o.b. Bintulu. Rainfall.—Rainfall for the month was 19’52 inches. C. ERMEN, Acting Resident, Fourth Division. 
Fifth Division. LIMBANG. October, 1928. The Acting Resident of the Fifth Division, Mr. F. H. Kortright, reports:— Court work was unusually heavy, the principal cases being those of buffalo stealing, of which there were no less then six charges with four convictions. Mr. L. K. Morse left for an up-river visit on the 11th and was still away at the end of the mouth. Mr. Morse is to try and form an idea of the most suitable route for the proposed road to Baram. There has been great activity in the Public Works Department and, with the introduction of mechanical appliances, a great deal of work has been ac¬complished. The excavation of the site of the new Recreation Club has been completed and the clay used for raising the main bazaar road, which will ultimately have a top dressing of laterite. Rails and a tip truck have been in use in raising the ground under the clerks’ houses, which has hitherto been entirely submerged at high tide. The Trojan Lorry and hand-cart have been in continual use transporting stone and materials. The Ukong road is now completed as far as the Sungei Berawan and only requires the culverts to be made to put it into use ; the length of this section is now 51/2 miles. The road to Panderuan is also progressing very well and about two miles is com¬pleted in sections, these, however, cannot be joined up until after the padi harvest without the des¬truction of the crops. The owners of buffaloes through whose grazing ground both these new roads run have voluntarily erected barbed wire fences to prevent the animals straying on the road and to date 19,917 yards of wire has been bought and put up.
The m.l. Saripah arrived from Lawas with engine trouble which was put right after completely dis-mantling the engine, but on her trial run after reassembling, she cracked a cylinder water jacket, a new pump fitted being too powerful for the old and thin casting. It has since been decided to install a new Thornycroft R.A.4 engine and get rid of the old Parson’s engine which, although it is in very good condition, is difficult to obtain spares for without a long delay.
A new set of batteries for the wireless station were installed and are now being regularly charged by water power, a great saving in cost and trouble.
Mr. W. Lowry, Superintendent of Customs, visi¬ted all the stations in the Division in connection with the work of his department.
Medical.—Twenty-seven N.A.B. injections were given and one hundred patients were treated at the hospital during the month.
LAWAS.
September, 1928.
The Acting Assistant District Officer reports:—
In the Resident's Court, Matusin bin Jaya was sentenced to six months’ R.I. under section 420. Great interest was evinced in a Murut adultery case, which was eventually dismissed after a long hearing.
The wharf and Customs shed at Trusan have been completed.
I returned from Limbang via Punang on 4th. Ou 28th I went to Sundar via Punang. The bridges are now finished and I was able to ride to Punang for the first time.
After holding Court at Sundar I left for Trusan on the evening of 29th, and was still away at the end of the mouth On 11th H.H.M.Y. Maimuna m jived with the Resident, Fifth Division, and the Director of Agriculture, leaving next day for Ku¬ching via Labuan and Limbang. Mr. D. S. McLeod, A C.F., arrived from Labuan on 4th.
Visitors to the station during the month were Mr Gilmour, Resident of Labuan, Dr. Bowyer, Medical Officer, Mr. W. H. Doughty, Manager, Island Trading Company, Brunei, Mr. C, Tull, Exe¬cutive Engineer, Brunei, and Mr. M. P. Anderson, Visiting Agent for the Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Ltd.
The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Ltd., ex-ported 24,528 tbs. of dry rubber to Labuan during the month.
F. H. KORTRIGHT,
Acting Resident. Fifth Division.
