TUESDAY. MAY 1, 1928.
NOTES.
April
WE are informed that Messrs. Tan Sum Guan & Son are undertaking the supply of provisions from the Singapore Cold Storage Company, Limited, arriving on S.S. Vyner Brooke.
MR. Herbert Welham has been appointed editor of the Straits Times, but will remain with the Malay Mail until that paper has secured the services of another editor.
Practically the whole of Mr. Welham’s journalistic career has been spent in Malaya, for after a few years in Paris with Mr. Norman Angell on the staff of the now defunct Galignani’s Messenger, a year in London as correspondent of the Paris Eclair, and a short period on the Car, he came out to the Straits in January, 1905, as editor of the Pinang Gazette, where he remained till 1910. From 1912 to 1926 he was editor of the Straits Echo of Penang, which he left to take over the Malay Mail in March. 1927.
Mr. Welham represented the press of Malaya and the Far East at the Imperial Conference held in Australia in 1925.
THE draw for Mr. Ennion’s Harley-David¬son motorcycle, took place at the Globe Cinema at 4 p.m., on 5th April, 1928.
The winning ticket, No. 279, was held by Mohamad Kadir of the Land Office, under the nom de guerre of Brothers and Sons Kongsi
EDUCATION is among the many problems which Mr. Ormsby Gore, the Under-Secre¬tary for the Colonies now visiting the East, will discuss, and we have no reason to doubt that this Country will be able to learn much from these deliberations. In another column we publish an account of Kuala Kangsar College.
THE Sarawak Steamship Company’s new vessel the Vyner Brooke arrived from Eng¬land on the 9th. On the following day a large number of visitors were shown over the ship. We understand the voyage out was made without incident and that the company have every reason to be pleased with their purchase.
THE following appointments were in the Government Gazette of 16th April: Mr. L. K. Morse to do duty at Limbang, Mr. J. 0. Gilbert to do duty at Mukah and Mr. A. Macpherson and J. G. Anderson at Sibu and Lower Rejang respectively.
DR. W. Hutchison M.B.,ch.B. has been appointed Assistant Medical Officer, and Mr. J. C. Swayne as District Officer, Kuching.
THE amended Rent Restriction Order of 1925 is notified as continuing in force until 30th September 1928.
THE three masted yacht Kelisto paid a visit to Kuching and the Rejang river early in the month. The owner, Mr. Wallace Near, was accompanied by his niece, Mrs. Wyse and Mr. Baynes. After a short' stay in Kuching a trip was made as for as Kapit. His Highness the Rajah who was then at Sibu made his return trip by her. Some cinema-tograph pictures were made at Kapit. The yacht returned to Kuching to pick up a pilot for Singapore and sailed on the 11th.
WE regret to note in the Bintulu report the death of Pengulu Passu at Tubau. We do not know for how many years he has worked for Government, but it must have been a great many; his memory stretched back to very early days of Sarawak occupa¬tion. He must have been of great activity in his youth, on one occasion he made a journey from Tubau to Belaga in under twenty-four hours, a trip most people would be glad to accomplish in three days.
THE dates of the Spring Meeting of the Sarawak Turf Club arc now definitely fixed for the 22nd and 24th of May, In another column we publish a full list of the weights and entries with a few comments from an old correspondent “Centaur”.
His Highness the Rajah’s Visit
to Java.
ON Monday, the 16th His Highness the Rajah, left by S.S. Vyner Brooke for a short trip to Java, he was accompanied by Mr and Mrs. Bean and Messrs. Parnell and MacBryan. We understand His Highness’ visit is entirely unofficial and he will be returning to Kuching on the 21st
A Public School for Malays.
A new and promising development- in the Malay States which has been brought to the notice of the Under-Secretary for the Colonies during his tour is the growing interest of the Malays in education.
Here is an example. An English school in Kuala Kangsar had 180 pupils six years ago, and of that number 35 were Malays. To-day that school has an enrolment of 400. the Government has had to provide a fine new building to house it, and half its pupils are Malay boys. That is a significant de¬
velopment, and it could be paralleled in many other F.M.S. schools. The number of Cambridge ex-amination successes among Malay pupils in the Malay States is still not high, but it has increased a hundred per eent in both the Junior and Senior ex¬aminations in six years.
The leading institution for Malay education is the
Malay College at Kuala Kangsar, which is unique
among the schools of this country, and which was shown to Mr. W. G. A. Ormsby-Gore to-day. The
College is the only secondary school in Malaya
reserved exclusively for Malays, and it is purely a
residential school. That, together with the fact that
its primary purpose is to provide Malays of good
birth with an English education, and the general excellence of its buildings, grounds and equipment, brings the College, nearer to the English public school than any other school in the country.
The College was founded by the F.M.S. Govern-ment in 1905, and it has been a most useful factor in helping the Malays to adjust themselves to the march of progress in their own States. The whole emphasis of the College is upon character and sports¬manship. \\ ben it was first founded examinations
were not held at all and although they are taken to¬day, and with considerable success, they still remain a secondary factor, and the atmosphere and traditions of the College are still governed by the fact that it is training Malay boys of good family.
ROYAL PUPILS.
It will be realised that the College is a somewhat aristocratic institution. Three of the royal houses of the Malay States are represented there at present, and all nave been at one time or another. The College is a thing apart in Malayan education in that the principal is solely responsible to a Board of Governors, consisting of the four British Resi¬dents, a leading Malay from each State and the
Director of Education, and admission to the College, can only be secured by application to the Resident of the State in which the applicant lives. There are 130 boys in the school, and a most interesting group they are, enjoying to the full their athletic and social life, and yet retaining unimpaired the courtesy dignity, and self-respect of the Malay society from which they come
Instruction ls given in English, but the College remains very much a Malay institution. The boys wear their national costume, except on the playing fields, and they have special instruction in the Mohamedan religion and in reading and writing their own language, so that polite Malay correspon¬dence will be no mystery to them when they leave school. Sundays and Fridays are reserved for religious instruction, the boys having their own praying room, and the main school holidays are given during the Puasa month. It is interesting to see how successfully the internal discipline of the College is left to the boys, the monitors showing themselves as capable and responsible as any English public ¬school prefect.
The College equipment is palatial compared with Singapore schools. On the expanse of beautifully kept turf in front of the College there are three foot¬ball grounds and an excellent cricket pitch. Ail games are compulsory, and the boys play football, cricket, hockey’, fives and tennis. Incidentally, they are taking to cricket very well, their splendid eye¬sight, unspoilt by generations of citybred ancestors, being a great asset in this game. There is also a freshwater swimming pool, and every boy has to learn to swim
AN IMPRESSION OF DIGNITY.
Membership of the cadet corps and scouts is com-pulsory, and the cadets have then- own miniature rifle range. Incidentally, the College is the bolder of the Leslie Challenge Shield competed for annually by seven school cadet corps in the F.M.S. The junior classes have their class rooms and dormitories in a separate building, and the headmaster, Mr. C. Bezell, has a staff of three European masters, two English mistresses, a Malay instructor, and two local teachers.
The boys, after leaving the College, often join the Malay administrative service, in which they can rise to the rank of Assistant District Officer, but recently there has been a welcome tendency to join other branches of the Government service and to serve in any Malay State where posts are available. These are instances of the changes, which the College is bringing about. Some years ago a Malay of good birth would have refused to take anything except an administrative post, and he probably would not have wished to go outside his own State, but to-day these boys are going into the survey service, the P.W.D., the police, the railways, and, in fact, all Government Departments. Altogether, the Malay College is a most interesting institution, and to a visitor ac¬customed to the crowded, cosmopolitan secondary schools of Singapore, with their inadequate buildings and playing fields, their overflow afternoon classes, and their atmosphere of bustling, congested huma¬nity, the College leaves an impression of dignity, spaciousness, ordered corporate life, and happy, healthy alternation of class room and playing field which is nearer to England than most things in Malaya.	(Straits Times.)
Home Photography.
“ I purpose ‘Macaulay starts off ' to write the History of England" ; equally modestly I purpose to note down a few photographic experiences of developing and printing in Sarawak in the hope of interesting other photographers.
It does not take long to realize that purchasing materials casually is expensive and wasteful since local dealers seldom stock one's requirements and what they have may be stale. This may not ap ply to films, but 1 only use plates and an occasional film-pack I find it cheapest to send an order home for six or more packets of plates If slow or ordinary plates are required 1 buy the cheapest brand (advertisements of which can be found in any photographic paper) and find they give excel-
lent results and keep indefinitely. If panchro¬matic or very rapid plates are needed it pays to buy the best and to get them sent out in sealed tins. I generally include in my order an ounce or two of pyro, metol and hydro quinone; other heavier and cheaper chemicals can be obtained locally. •
A dark room is not essential though naturally a great advantage. I have developed plates in a good many outstations in Sarawak with no other appliances than a couple of dishes and a cupboard and never been troubled by fag. Of course it is necessary to wait till dark and cut out all possible light, but if the dish is kept covered during de¬velopment there is very little risk Development by time and temperature is called for. as in¬spection. is. of course, out of the question. 1 have long since broken my thermometer, but reckon the temperature of water in an ordinary bath tub at 73° F and with a pyro developer give from two to four minutes development in accordance with the make of plate and sort of negative required.
The Sulphite and Metabisulphite are mixed dry and dissolved in about a quart of hot water and brought to the boil in an ordinary iron sauce-pan, the mixture is allowed to cool and the bromide, and pyro dissolved in it. When quite cool the whole amount is brought up to 60 ounces with boiled, but cool water. I then filter this into six ounce bottles which are corked and waxed to keep them air-tight. The use of boiled water undoubtely prolongs the life of the developer, I have used stock six months old which was perfectly fresh. For the Sodium Carbonate Solution I dis¬solve 7 ounces of Sodium Carbonate (anhydrous) in boiled water, cooled to about 90" F, to make 80 ounces altogether. taking care to sprinkle the powder into the water ; if the water is poured on, the Carbonate forms a hard cake which is hard to
dissolve. These two form the stock solutions and for use I mix one ounce of pyro, one of Car¬bonate and one of water for dish development ; for tank development 1 take one ounce each of the stock solutions and add twelve ounces of water. It is impossible to give an exact time for develop¬ment as this depends on various different factors. However, as an example for an average negative to be printed on bromide paper 11/2 minutes at 73’ would be correct for an Ilford panchromatic plate and 41/2 minutes for Kodak films developed in a dish, while and 15 minutes would be right in a tank.
The fixing solution consists of a pound of hypo dissolved in 64 ounces of water. This can be used repeatedly I never use a hardener unless the negatives are to be washed in running water when they are apt to frill. In this case I generally buy a special acid hardener and fixing, as the home made article does not keep long. Ten minutes is long enough for fixing. Ten changes of water in fifteen minutes will wash out all the hypo and the negatives, if carefully wiped on both sides and stood in a current of air should be dry in two hours However, if the atmosphere is damp it will take longer.--(To be continued.)
A Literary Competition.
CASH PRIZES.
The Sarawak Gazette has never been behindhand where literary competitions are concerned. Old readers, no doubt, remember our Cross-word puzzles many years ago, but since general knowledge and literary questions seem to rival treasure hunts in popularity we propose this competition.
The Editor offers a prize of $20 for the first list, to be opened on the 31st May. containing the names of the authors and the places in which the following quotations occur. In case of no competitor giving a completely correct solution a prize of $o will be given to the one most nearly right. Envelopes to be marked “Competition” and addressed to the Editor, Sarawak Gazette. Outstation competitors may send by wireless, special messenger or pigeon post. The Editor’s decision is final
A Possible Play Plot.
First Citizen (happily) : My fortune is made—I have written a play !
Second Citizen (doubtfully): But arc you sure you can get it, produced ?
First Citizen (with confidence) : Absolutely! It is in the modern manner.
Second Citizen (still more doubtfully): Oh! And may I ask what it is called ?
First Citizen (promptly) : Certainly. It is called “‘Seven Corpses in Search of a Coroner.”
Second Citizen (shaking his head) : The Pirandello manner, I presume? My poor friend, that will never be a popular success!
First Citizen (with some annoyance): Pirandello
is prehistoric! I tell you my play is a West End
Wonder of the newest model. It is bound to beat
all records.
Second Citizen (unconvinced): Well, what is it about?
First Citizen (triumphantly): It is about a man
with three legs, no face, and eyes in the back of his
head who runs a lethal chamber as a honeymoon
hotel where he murders young married couples in
order to extract the sold from their artificial teeth.
He has as his assistant a dog-faced man who walks
backwards and speaks in an unknown tongue with
an accent like an electric road drill. He also breeds
basilisks in his spare time. The stage properties
are peculiarly ingenious. In the first act there is a gallows and an apparatus for making soap out of human remains. In the second there is a guillotine and a hopper for feeding corpses into a mincing machine. The third act contains the light relief—a
garden scene (with grave). In the last act the dog¬ faced man goes mad, puts his employer—and two members of the orchestra—through the mincing machine, and makes them into potted meat, free samples of winch are distributed to the audience as they leave the theatre.
Second Citizen (admiringly): What a theme! What a masterpiece ! I trust you will remember me when you are rich and famous.— (Manchester Guardian.)
Notes on the Entries and Weights for the Spring Race Meeting 1928.
The classification remains unchanged except for White Knight who has been reduced to Division II. The griffins which raced in a separate class last Autumn are now classified as follows:— Division II, Jaih, Shooting Star, Radium and Black Pirate. Division III, Nugget, Typhoon, Seduan, Tai Hu and Jorrocks.
It has been found impossible to prepare Radium for this meeting owing to back trouble. This must be a disappointment to his owners after the encouraging performance this pony put up as a newcomer. Nugget carries top weight in Division III not having raced as a griffin.
The card shows two fresh races. On the first day race seven, which is best described as a “ weight for class handicap ” and on the second day the Witmers' Handicap has been once more revived.
The meeting is opened by Division I, over six furlongs. There is a good entry of thirteen, but three of these are from a lower division. The treat¬ment of Wembley (8 12) last year’s winner seems to call for comment. Wembley now receives 23 lbs. from Untong (10.7) for beating him a length when in receipt of 19 lbs. Untong is a very consistent
performer and was second three times last October. Nevertheless it looks a very good thing for Wembley here again at the weights. Burak (10.0) might do something here if he is in form. Flying Fox (9.0) is hardly up to the distance yet even at this weight and he will probably not face the Starter.
The five furlongs for Division II has White Knight (10.7). Black Pirate (10.0) and Sakbon (9.8). Jaih (8.10) is very nicely treated. It will be remembered in the autumn that over this distance Black Pirate failed to concede 19 lbs. to Jaih by a short head. The time for their race was also much better than that of Sakbon, who took this race from Sisit (9.0) by one and a half lengths, conceding 3 lbs. While not denying the qualifi¬cations of Jaih here, Black Pirate is a much improved pony and should extend anything which is to beat him.
The race for Division III over six furlongs should prove another duel between Bagaimana (8.4) and Osaha (9.12). Osaha appears to have bettor chance at the weights now in spite of the slight increase. Typhoon (9.7) stands a good outside chance and may prove too much for both of them.
In the three furlongs for Division I, the fourth race on the card, Untong (10.7) and Kismet (9.0) will not be pulled out here in all probability. Flying Fox (10.3) looks good and is going well in his gallops. Wembley (9.7) and Beaver (9.0) carry the same weights with which they dead-heated behind Flying Fox in the autumn Flying Fox should have no difficulty here in convincing the Judge that he has improved a good deal since he won the Royalist Stakes.
The four furlongs for Division II lies betweep Black Pirate (10.0) Jaih (9.3) Sisit (9.0) and Sakbon (9 0). Presuming that Black Pirate will be carrying 5 lbs. penalty for his previous win, Jaih should have the chance of turning the tables here. Sisit (9.0) and Sakbon (9.0) catch the eye at lev"l weights and over the distance I prefer Sisit's chances, and even Jaih will have to gallop here to bent last year’s champion pony. The Scurry race for Division III has Singa (8.7) very nicely handicapped. This pony is looking very well and should satisfy his con¬nections here. White Wings is to be struck out of all engagements. Should Osaha (9.0) fail against Bagaimana in race three, he may win here un¬penalized. The winner of the seventh race will probably be found amongst the top weights. Hope¬less (10.3) if he is fit has the legs of all except Flying Fox (10.3) at the weights Provided his fet¬lock gives no trouble he should win here. The
weight is too much for Aka). The round the course race, to complete the card for the first day’s racing, has Burak (10.12) at the top of the list. In spite of rather a disappointing performance last meeting, it must be borne in mind that in this race he carried 11.8 and finished close up fourth. It was the only occasion on which he showed anything approaching his usual form at all during the meeting. Untong (10.7) can now concede 3 lbs. to Kismet (10.4) and I expect to see him win here. Azab (8.7) will have friends after his goods howing at the weight last autumn. Of the outside chances Black Pirate (8.2) can gallop and is up to carrying the weight over the distance.
Scratchings at the time of writing are as follows : —
Race 1, White Knight and Pengarah. Race 3, Nugget. Race 4, Kismet and Azab. Race 5, White Knight. Race 7, Azab and White Knight. Race 8, Akai, Flying Fox, White Knight, Pengarah and Typhoon.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.
Heathen Fishers,
The Editor, Sarawak Gazette Kuching.
In Mr. Banks’ very interesting article on ‘Fishing by Milanos,’ I notice he gives all the credit to the heathen. I think myself nearly all the fisher folks are now Mahomedan, but perhaps Mr. Banks found otherwise?
SIR.
Yours faithfully, J. C. SWAYNE.
SARAWAK,
25th April, 1028,
The Editor, Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
DEAR SIR,
With regard to the very interesting article in your last issue by Mr. E. Banks entitled Fishing by Milanos ; although, perhaps, a small matter, I should like to point out a very obvious mistake which Mr. Banks has made.
He says “ In the Bintulu, Muka and Oya districts live a pagan nice well known to all as Milanos, whose chief occupation is fishing and cultivating sago." This is not so. Practically all the fishermen are Mahomedans—the exception is extremely rare.
When the writer was living in Oya some years ago there WAS only one pagan (liko) Milano living below Kampong Trus. The Oya fishermen came from the Kampongs at the Kuala and a few from Bakong.
In Mukah the fishermen are from the mouth of the river, bar some up the Telian, There may possibly be a few pagan fisherfolk here, but very few.
“ The enormous credit” does not reflect ‘‘on the heathen” but almost exclusively on a Mahomed an Race.
Yours faithfully,
J. BEVILLE ARCHER.
The Disaster at Sibu.
GOVT. ELECTRICITY DEPT.,
SIBU, SARAWAK,
14th April, 1928.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
Kuching. Sir, I beg to call your attention to the article which appeared under the above heading in the Sarawak Gazette dated the 2nd April. I refer to the last paragraph in which it is reported that the fire originated by the attachment of appli¬ances co the electric wires. An official inquiry was held here soon alter the fire which disproves the above theory. The customs officer reports all electrical fittings imported and these have to be approved by this Department before permission is granted for their use.
Yours faithfuy,
A. HUMPHREYS,
Electrical Engineer, Sibu.
We regret the report referred to by our corres-pondent was mentioned, but the writer (who is not at present in Sarawak) expressly states the cause of the fire was unknown. The further news we publish from Sibu, makes it very clear that the cause of the fire was in no way due to electric lighting.—ED. S.G.'.
Extracts from Monthly Reports.
First Division.
March, 1928.
KUCHING.
General,—A meeting was held in the Resident’s Office on 20th, to discuss with the Chief Health Officer and Advisory Health Officer the measures to be adopted with regard to His Highness the Rajah's instructions to look into the health conditions of the Dyak village at Kuop. ft was proposed to start on this village as an experiment and if the results are favourable it would form the nucleus for other native villages in the Division
It has been reported that Orang Kaya Rancha of Baruh, Samarahan, died on the 2nd.
Land Office-—Lundu Road—Temporary bridges and culverts were completed as far as Sungei Rayu and taken over.
Stencilled number boards were prepared and affixed to each bridge and culvert.
Twenty-five turn-offs were completed at about half mile intervals, grade pegs were put in for a distance of four miles 38 chains west of Sungei Rayu.
Five miles of felling and clearing were completed on Contract No. 9/1927 and over one mile of earth work completed but not taken over.
Nearly two miles of road from Sungei China
Pipe Line were reconditioned in accordance with
Contract No. 2/1928. Sites were cleared and burnt
off and timber was cut and transported to sites for a
drawing office and coolie lines. Attaps for buildings
were arranged for.
Moyan District.—The original three foot drain (which has been enlarged by the Chinese gardeners) was connected with the Ulu Sebandi by a new drain and path ; the new drain being seven feet wide and five feet deep. The scheme has been most successful
Occupation Tickets.—
Cuts Nos. 1 and 2 were widened to fourteen feet and two cuts were made at places where urgently needed on Sungei Moyan. The benefit of these has been felt already as the water now gets away more easily. The Sungei Moyan is now being cleared of obstructions which should further assist matters from a drainage point of view.
Leases.—Two leases (coconut) 42 acres, 0 rood, 20 poles.
Seventy-one applications for land were received during the month and twelve inspections were car¬ried out.
BAU.
The District Officer. Mr. J. B. Archer reports
General.—During the month I inspected the bazaars at Bau, Buso and Siniawan with regard to precautions against fire. In Buso matters were bad, and in all three places orders were given to effect various additions and changes. A separate report is being prepared on this subject.
P. W.D.-A Contract for the new Police Barracks and Lock-up at Buso was signed and the contractor is collecting material. Towkay Ah Khai has agreed to give a piece of his granted land at Buso for the site, and the barracks will be erected between the bazaar and the Kampong alongside the main road.
The old site will be abandoned and will revert to Ah Khai. A contract was also signed to construct brick steps down to the Government wharf at Buso
and the work is nearly finished. Small contracts were also made to erect a new ferryman’s house at Selalang, and an addition to the oil store at Bau. Carpenters were kept busy on bridges during the month. A large area- of land near the District Officer's bungalow at Bau was cleared by coolie and prison labour.
Education.—A meeting of Chinese Towkays in Bau was held in connection with the Government School here, and it is hoped to reorganize com¬pletely the school before long. The present Chinese teacher has been given notice and two other men engaged. New schools were registered in Tundong (2), Jugan and near Baku. These are Chinese private schools. The Tong Hua school al Siniawan has re-opened again under management and Father Hopfgartner and I have arranged matters satis-factorily.
An unregistered school was found in Siniawan and closed immediately. The promoter, Lee Tet Khim, an S.P.G. Catechist of Jugan and the teacher were fined $25 each.
There seem- to be a real effort being made to increase education in Upper Sarawak, and I am giving it all the encouragement possible.
Motor Traffic. — Again it has been necessary to warn drivers against excessive speed and absence of signs when turning, stopping, etc. Drivers seem to look upon their cars in the light of racing machines.
Messrs. Patterson, Curie and Stirling were in-
volved in an accident on 31st when owing to their
driver’s carelessness the car was overturned when travelling at high speed. Luckily all escaped with minors injuries, but the car was damaged.
SADONG.
P.W.D.—-A bridge over the Simunjan at Kampong Sageng was repaired temporarily. When a new road is made, a good bridge will be erected there.
Agriculture.—It was reported that the padi harvest is everywhere the best known for many years. Only Gedong has not done very well, their crop having been half eaten by rats.
I hope to obtain a sufficient quantity of rat poison for everyone’s requirements during the next season.
Padi.—The harvesting of hill padi started this month, mid i= reported as very good. On the other hand the swamp padi, which was coming on well, was unfortunately abandoned when the engkabang was being collected, and is, in conse¬quence, poor.
Rainfall.— The rainfall was 11.25 inches.
Sadong Colliery.
March, 1928.
Third Division. February, 1928.
SIBU.
Court.—In the Resident’s Court, two Paloh
Milanoes were sentenced to 3 years R.I. under Section 304.
Two Foochow who had been dealing extensively in forged $10 notes and Straits Dollars were sentenced to 4 years RI. A Milano of Kampong Nangka was sentenced to 2 years R I. for a similar offence.
Staff - Mr Woodward left for Singapore on the 6th on six weeks vacation leave
Mr. Anderson arrived from Kuching on the8th to do duty here.
The District Officer of Lower Rejang resumed his dunes there on the l0th.
The Divisional Medical Officer returned from Kuching on the 11th and left for Katibas on the following day to investigate reported smallpox cases
Dyaks were busy harvesting during the month
and good crops are reported from down river.
All Revenue and land business connected with the village of Igan was re-transferred from Oya to  Sibu and a police was supplied from the
latter Station
KAPIT.
Kapit.—Very little was doing owing to the small¬pox being still active, but by the end of the month there were no fresh cases and Dyaks started coming down to the bazaar again. The isolation camp was demolished at the end of the month all patients being cured Vaccination was continued, both the Native Officers and Government Vacci¬nator being busily engaged but there are still many unvaccinated. At the present time Abang Abdul- gapor and the vaccinator are away in the Mujong and tributaries.	 
Belaya.—I visited this station. Travelling by outboard motor the journey was made in one night only. Considerable progress in planting is befog made both by Kayans and Malays. I went up as far as Penghulu Taman Usan Hang’s where I met a large party of Leppu Kulits from Dutch Borneo who had comedown ro trade. This is the first time these people have ventured so far since the peacemaking
A party oftwenty-five Leppu Kulits came ..own with me as far as Manggoi (Dyak house) where they spent the night but I did not think it advisable for them to come further in view of smallpox
Pala Wong.-The remaining Sinns, some four doors, have asked to return-to the Pila their old home. In view of the influx of Dyaks I am of the opinion both these people and the Bukitans should be allowed to live m this river winch I went up for a considerable distance during my visit.
Agriculture, etc.—Two calves were born at Kapit and two at Belaga. I am sending some cattle to  Gat to start breeding there. The cattle bought by the Dyaks and Skapans at my suggestion, to start keeping amongst these people are thriving. I venture to suggest, that if the Government were to loan a certain amount of cattle to natives, on condition that the off-spring were to be divided a good many natives would ne encouraged to take up the keeping of these beasts for winch the country above here is so favourable for their pasture, etc., and in time would supply the long felt want of meat at the towns m the mam river. The Foochows here are planting tuba, ground nuts, corn and tobacco and are also putting a certain amount of land under padi.	b
Medical.—1 was absent from Sibil from 7th—11th on a visit to Kuching in connection with the inquiry into the detention of the s.s. Sarawak at Kapit during January. I returned quickly to Sibu owing to news having been reported of a further outbreak of small¬pox up the Katibas River. I accordingly left Sibu on the 12th and was up to Ulu Katibas until the 15th when I returned to Song and to Sibu on the following day. Four cases were found, of which one died the night I arrived, the disease bad shown itself some 18 days previously. The necessary stops were taken to prevent any spread, although 1 did not expect any ns the Dyaks themselves had carried out their practice of isolation.
By the end of the month no further cases had been reported from any place on the Rejang and its tributaries, the isolation camp at Kapit had also been cleared and I consider that the disease bas now been stopped and no further cases will occur

The practice of inspecting ail launches, etc. at the
 hospital wharf, winch leave or call at Sibu has now
 been stopped, but not the inspection of the vessels
at Raping which I consider should continue for
another month.
Mr. Allman and myself visited and examined the
Cantonese pepper gardens at Sarikei. We found
both blackfruit disease and unidentified leaf disease
or pest, but neither was noticeable to a considerable
extent. The vines in the majority looked healthy
and were well kept up and the gardeners were
apparently enjoying good crops. I afterwards visited
the pepper gardens at Kanowit. Here all the old
vines (planted 10-12 years ago) were suffering from
blackfruit disease to a serious extent and in many
cases had been abandoned by the owners. On the
other hand, some were trying to cope with the disease
with a wash of tuba and tobacco. Even the new
young vines were not so well cultivated as those at
Immigration.—Two hundred and thirty-three im-
migrants arrived and were, duly registered under the
new scheme. About 1,000 photographs of land
owners were registered during the month, at this
rate it should not take more than six months to
complete the records so far as landowners are con-
cerned, and it has been decided that except for
immigrants it will not be necessary to register. Travelling.- I visited Binatang and Sarikei spend¬ing a night at encl; place. The question of the sago coolies being affected by the new-Labour Order was brought up as some of the coolies had struck work after Chinese New Year. Their grievances were inquired into and the matter has now been satisfactorily settled.
MUKAH.
General- This has been a very slack month and there is very little to relate A serious cutting affair occurred on the 8th at 8. Tegan, Sissok during the examination of a disputed sago land A pitched battle seems to have taken place between the two parties concerned and at 8 p.m. six badly wounded people arrived at the Station. The Dresser was unfortunately at Dalai, but was Mt back early the next morning. In the meantime
everything that was possible was done for the
patients and by midnight with the great assistance of the Rev. Fathers A. Mulder and C, Quadekker they had been made as comfortable as possible. So far there have been no deaths, but one man is very seriously wounded.	
The motor Kim Chin Teck was in this port the whole of the month. The Juragan said the sea was too rough for him to go out. The Kim Chin Seng however made two tups from Kuching to Ova during that time.
Trade. -The value of exports and imports for the month is as follows :—
Mukah.	1928.	1927.	1926.	1925.
Exports $ 8,408 §26,336 §10,872 $ 6,587
Imports L0,183	21,562	15,674	12,609
OYA.
Trade.—One hundred and thirteen koyans of raw sago, 49.59 piculs of para rubber and eighty piculs of jelutong were shipped to Kuching.
SIBU.
March, 1928. General.— I returned to Sibu from Mukah and Oya on the 2nd of the month.
On the 3rd inst Her Highness the Ranee with Dayang Elizabeth arrived at Sibu by H.H.M.Y Maimuna, the yacht sailing for Miri the same evening. Her Highness kindly consented to open the new Island Club on the evening of the 5th. The cere¬mony was performed by the cutting of ribbons of Sarawak colours with a Dyak “parang ilang", this weapon being subsequently presented to Her Highness by Mr. Pascoe. 
The new CLUB minding, the gift of His High ness the Rajah was designed by an I erected under the personal supervision of Mr. Whiteside. Divi¬sional Engineer, and consists of a verandah 62’x 12’, a billiard room with space for two tables, a central bar and panelled smoking room and a bridge and reading room. A bowling alley will be added as soon as possible. To any one who knew the accommodation afforded by the old club building it will be obvious that a very great improvement has been effected and I consider that the present building will be sufficiently large to accommodate 30 to 40 members without overcrowding, whereas the former building could with difficulty afford space for 12 members.
The total destruction of the Sibu bazaar by fire in the early hours of the 7th instant was not a altogether unforeseen catastrophe. Although of late years precautions have been taken in the way of providing water supply and hydrants, installing electric light, placing lire extinguishers at frequent intervals throughout the bazaar and organising a Fire Brigade with a most efficient motor engine, it was fairly obvious that a lire which once got well set would be impossible to deal with On this occasion the lire started in the back premises of a shoo abutting on the channel and it was therefore impossible to detect from the Mam Bazaar until flames actually showed In consequence of the drought, there having been no rain for over a fortnight the wooden buildings were in a highly inflammable state and it was frequently the case that a shop some distance away from the fire burst into flames.
The fire was detected at about 1 40 a.m. and by 4.30 a.m, the whole bazaar of about 230 shops was destroyed, but a change of wind helped to save the Kampongs. The Dennis motor engine was working for 16 hours without a break
Wireless messages were sent to sub-stations Io collect all available leaf attap and kadjang and a large quantity of these arrived the same afternoon while Dyaks worked and brought up wood so that by the evening a number of temporary sheds were erected and occupied.
The s. s Melang was placed at the disposal of Government by the Sarawak Steamship Com¬pany and transported a large number of Chinese to the gardens.
I he District Officer with the active assistance of Messrs. Anderson and Buck and a staff of Government clerks, and the very nominal assistance of a committee of Chinese, organized the distribution of food partly through The Borneo Company, Limited and partly through supplies taken over by Government. Messrs. Pascoe, Divisional Land Officer and Whiteside, Divi-sional Engineer did invaluable work allotting sites for ten porary buildings, which were quick¬ly erected as material came to hand from differ¬ent parts of the Division, and later from Kuching.
The task undertaken by the District Officer and the other Officers concerned was no light one in view of the helpless state of the Chinese who appeared to the suffering either from shock or apathy, and it is entirely due to their efforts that the burnt-out population was fed and sheltered and very little suffering ensued.
The District Officer of Lower Rejang, who had kindly offered his services at Sibu arrived on the 10th and returned to Rejang on the 25th. During his stay at Sibu he conducted an exhaustive inquiry into the origin of the bazaar fire, it was established that the lire started in a kitchen and that there could be no presumption of incendiarism. As the kitchen was not fitted with electric light there can be no question of the fire being caused by faulty installation.
By the end of the month plans had been got out and arrangements were in hand for rebuilding in concrete and brick. The new bazaar will com¬prise a 40 foot "bund" running along the river and channel with shophouses on the inland side only, facing the water, while at the back there will be a series of broad streets with shops on both sides. Special attention will be paid to draining and sanitation.
A good deal of difficulty will inevitably be experienced with holders of existing titles, but it is felt that private individuals cannot be allowed to hold up a scheme which is obviously designed for the general good.
Her Highness the Ranee and Dayangs Leonora and Elizabeth left for Kuching on the 7th instant. I was 111 Kuching from 14th to the 19th arriving at Sibu on the 20th.
I regret to have to report the death on the morning of the 14thof Dato Haji Azahari Chief Native Officer of the Third Division. The Dato b id served Government for some 27 years and was sworn in as a Member of the General Council in the year 1906.
He was stationed for many years at Mukah being transferred to Sibu from there The Dato possessed a sound knowledge of Mohammedan Law and his loss will be very severely felt by both European and Native Government Officials.
On the 3rd a faction fight took place between Foochows and Hylams but nobody was seriously hurt The bazaar Chinese are still nervous about the so called Foochow Secret Society but I do not think there is any cause for alarm".
Food Relief. - There were still 200 bags of rice remaining unsold from the stock sent from Kuching also several bags of salt and sugar. The shop which was started for Government employees was closed after three days as it was obvious there was no shortage and the precautions taken immediately after the fire prevented pro¬fiteering. Roughly $50,000 worth of foodstuffs and building materials were supplied by Govern¬ment on credit but it is not expected that there will be many bad debts. The alacrity with which the Kuching authorities shipped foodstuffs by s.s. Auby was most praiseworthy but it is to be regretted that the Kuching Chinese saw fit to take advantage of the Sibu disaster by char¬ging ridiculous prices.	
Medical.--During the month 85 patients were admitted into hospital making a total of 106 in all.
749 patients were treated in the Out-patient Department and 106 NA 13. injections given.
It will be noticed that there is a decided increase both in in-patients and out-patients this 1 consider is indirectly due to the Sibu fire, all the shops of the local Chinese “doctors" having been burnt, the Chinese had perforce to come to the Government Hospital as also, if they were seriously sick, they more willingly came as in-patients having no other dwelling to go to.
The actual number of casualties during the fire were four, two of these actually while the fire was raging, and were merely burns of the second degree after the fire had subsided, salvage work was being carried out on one of the remaining brick houses and a coolie fell to the ground from a collapsing first floor, sustaining concussion etc. The fourth casualty occurred to a Chinese who was being brought to hospital from up river, he being delirious, plunged into the red hot ashes before his friends could prevent him, this man died some two-three weeks later.
No more cases of smallpox were reported dur¬ing the month, and it is now evident that the epi¬demic has completely died out—the practise of in¬specting all vessels passing Rejang has therefore now been stopped and foreign vessels only are inspected.
LOWER REJANG.
The District Officer, reports
Two lepers were sent direct to Kuching for treatment: it is supposed that there are now no cases unreported
ML Helen was laid up and the engine taken down on the 1st, the new circulating pump had not arrived by the end of the month
Her Highness the Rance stopped for a short while off Rejang on the night of the 7th.
News of the Sibu fire was received on the afternoon of the 7th and kajangs and attaps collected locally anil from Selalang were sent up the following day. I left for Sibu on duty' on the 10th and was away' at the end of the month.
KAFIT.
The District Officer, reports :—
General.—In the early part of the month 1 visi¬ted the rivers Gat, Marirai and Balleh- Nothing of much importance was brought up but there is a tendency to renew requests to farm further up river although there is still plenty of good far¬ming land round all villages. A cattle shed was erected at Gat and three cows sent up from Kapit. The padi crop is excellent in the Balleh but reports from Pala Wong are that what would have been a very good crop was spoilt by floods and it is generally a failure there.
Abang Abdul Gapor visited the Mujong, Paku and Majaw.
MUKAH AND OYA.
The Resident of Mukah and Oya, reports:—
General - —Mr. H. I.. Owen, Resident, Third Divi-sion left for Oya on the 1st and I accompanied him Mr. Owen left the following day for Sibu and 1 returned here
On the 9th news of the sudden death of the Revd. Father Bernard Mulder of the Roman Catholic Mission at Dalat was received here and his brother the Revd. Anthony Mulder left at once for Dalat.
On the 13th I left for Balingian returning on the 17th. What is known as the “simpan batang" came down on the 14th and the sea was very rough for a week- The return journey in the m.l "Leonora" was very unpleasant. This launch is getting very shaky indeed and lately seems to have become very slow. The trip from the mouth of the Mukah to Balingian mouth used to take four hours it now takes six. From Mukah to Oya was two hours but is now three.
Awang Juli son of Datu Lidin was installed as Native Officer at Balingian.
Saum “juragan of pec. Eng Choon Ann property' of Chop “Tong Hin“ of Kuching reported that his vessel foundered in 40 fathoms of water off Tanjong Serik on Sunday, March 18th. Says that a rough sea caused the planks to open up The pumps were manned for two hours, but the water gaining loo rapidly the ship was abandoned, there were no passengers and the “juragan" and his five sailors got ashore in the ship’s boat and worked their way back to Quala Matu where they were taken on board Kim Soon Heng, juragan Haji Daud
The "Chong Boon" Mukah Chinese School was opened on the 15th.
P.W.D.—The old bungalow has been pulled down and is now being re-erected on a new site, the posts are already up.
The stables which were in a dilapidated state have been pulled down. The site on which these stood had been selected by Mr. Humphreys the Electrical Engineer, as the most suitable place to build the Power Station, and has now been levelled and prepared for this purpose.
At Balingian the Court Writer. F. Ansin has superintended the rebuilding of the Government wharf, and all the bridges through the bazaar and Kampong. All these have been well and substan¬tially built of belian and credit is due to Ansin for this work. We have a fair amount of belian left over and with this two houses are being built, one for the Native Officer and the other for the second clerk, the contract to built these houses is only $200 each, and the total cost will come well within the amount estimated and sanctioned.
OYA AND DALAT,
Obituary It is with much regret that I have to record the death of the Reverend Father Ber¬nard Mulder at the Roman Catholic Mission, Dalat. on the 9th March, from heart failure. Father Mulder died very suddenly while sitting with Father Epping in the Mission at midday.
Fathers Anthony Mulder and Quadekker arriv¬ed from Mukah the same evening. The funeral service, which was largely attended, took place the following morning, when the remains were laid forest in front of the church.
Father Mulder first came to the Milano district in December, 1901, being appointed to the Mis¬sion in the Cut. In 1904 he went to Mukah and built the first houses of the Mission there. He later returned to Dalat and in January 1919 be¬came Rector of the Dalat Mission, where he re¬mained until his death. He was a fluent scholar in Milano, having made a close study of this language.
His jovial personality will be greatly missed and the kind hospitality he has always shown to all who visited Dalat, will always be remembered.
Public Works.— At the end of the month, the new  bungalow at Oya was nearing completion, and it is hoped that all the work will be finished next month
The new wharf was erected at Oya by prison labour under the supervision of P. Lance-Corporal, Awang Lai.
General.- On the 1st instant, the Resident, Third Division accompanied by the Resident of Mukah and Oya, arrived at Oya. The new bungalow and other buildings were inspected, and the following day the Resident, Third Division returned to Sibu and the Resident of Mukah and Oya returned to Mukah. Four days of the month were spent at Dalat, where all affairs were at¬tended to On the 22nd. I cycled to Mukah at Mr. Kortrights invitation. The following day being Hari Raya, I returned to Oya on 26th.
H. L. OWEN,
Resident, Third Division.
Fourth Division. 
February, 1928.
MlRI.
I had intended returning to Miri by the La Follette, but owing to the high seas, she unable to leave the Baram. I attempted on 6th to try to get to Suai by the m.l. Joan hut on rounding Kidurong, a strong X. E. wind was blowing the sea up, and so we had to return. The s.s. Anyas arrived from Tatau at the same time and so I took a passage by her to Miri taking 224 hours, whereas an average tune is about twelve hours. Communications between Bintulu and Min during the landas is very bad and some means to allow of quicker despatch of mails between the two places, will have to be thought of. Bouts coming North during the landas, never stop at Kidurong and during this last season no Government boat came North.
At the request of the Resident, Second Division. Dyaks employed by the 8. O. L. as coolies were told that they would not be allowed to gamble in the future. All the Dyak mandors were unanimous that gambling should be prohibited. The gambling farmer was informed.
Mr. J. ,J. Hill visited the Coast Stations in m.l. Lene on 22nd returning again on 26th. He reports that there was every prospect of an excellent padi harvest at Sibuti. He attended various matters at all three stations. He was asked to make a report on the feasibility of opening a road between Niah and Suai and reports that there is too much swamp land and certain amount of travelling by boat by the route he took, making it not at nil suitable for a road.
General.—Tuanku Hj Drahman returned from the Tinjaron the 12th and reports everything all right. Harvesting has started and the prospects are fairly good, although in the lower Tinjar most of the farms are too small.
Travelling.— I was unable to attend the Punan meeting at, Long Malinau but Wan Taha WAS there and reports that 164 Punans attended. A number of them came expecting to find a dresser there to treat them for various ailments, mainly yaws, but unfortunately a dresser to relieve Ahmat Chee has not arrived yet. Thirty Punans turned out at Long Keseh, they did not bring down much beside wild rubber for tax. We arrived at Long Akar on the 23rd and went to the Punan meeting at Long Abang the following day. Seventy-two Punans attended the meeting, and two Chinese trailers were brought up to compete against the Kenyahs in bartering, this has become necessary as the Kenyahs have adopted an attitude of passive resistance and refuse to take Punan produce at reasonable prices, the ad ent of Chinese altered mailers considerably, to the advantage of the Punan. We arrived at Leo Matu on the 27th, only thirty-three Punans attended the meeting with very little produce except soft rubber to pay tax. but one man had a pair of rhinoceros horns which sold for goods value $260. The Kelabits should have arrived on the 24th but only a few had turned up by the 29th.
BINTULU.
General.—I regret to report the death of Penghulu Passu (Kayan) nt Tubau. He had been suffering from chronic asthma for some years and in spite of the various cures taken was unable to check this disease.
Trade.—2,089.66 piculs of jelutong were ex¬ported 333,650 pieces of belian attaps and 220.00 piculs of raw sago were also exported during the month.
Rainfall.- Rainfall tor the month was 9 65 inches.
March, 1928.
MIRI.
On the 9th by kind permission of the General Manager. Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd. I took passage by the s s. Min as far as Kidurong The following day the trial of Ah Lok for the murder of Timah (f) at Tatau was heard. A verdict of guilty of murder was brought in but with a recommendation for mercy.
On the 12th I visited Sebauh and inspected the Foochow colony and also settled various matters in this district. Arrangements were made for the opening of drains and the upkeep of roads. The new bazaar is progressing very slowly. In a few years this district will be a very busy centre.
Mr- R- D. Horton arrived from Miri in connec¬tion. with the. accounts and we returned together in La Follette on the evening of the 12th, but owing to heavy seas had to shelter at Kidurong for the night. Miri was reached the following night.
An Order for precautions against fire at Lutong Refinery was drafted and sent to the Chief Secre¬tary for confirmation It is proposed to draft a similar Order at the Charcoal Plant, Miri.
Representatives of Lemanan Dyaks wishing to pindah to the Ulu Sibuti arrived and were sent to go over the land with the Native Officer from Baram.
Capt. Le Sueur has started a school for police who are now taught and initiated every afternoon into the duties of their work, and it is hoped that in time they will become smart and efficient.
Major Cunynghame, Commandant, arrived with half a company of Sarawak Rangers and returned to Kuching with the relieved half company.
Mr Dick reported that Baram bazaar was nearly burnt down on the night of the loth but owing to prompt action by Wan Mahomat, Native Officer, the fire was soon extinguished. Wan Mahomat was suitably rewarded
The new Residency was completed and occu¬pied on the 22nd. The building, which is a new departure in design of bungalows in Sarawak, occupies a site on the point of the Peninsular with the open sea facing it and the river running behind. The land is making at this point.
Visitors to the station during the month were the Dayangs Leonora and Elizabeth, Miss Tait, Dr. Walsh, Dr. Heiser and Dr. and Mrs. Yeager of the Rockefeller Institute and Mr. Pretty, Bri¬tish Resident at Brunei-
BARAM.
The District Officer, Mr. W. F. Dick reports
General- -On the night of the 10th Wan Moha-
mat. Native Officer, was instrumental in stoping
a fire in th bazaar, apparently a lamp had been
upset presumably by a cat, and the oil pouring out
was on fire quite close to some bundles of rubber.
Everyone in the house was asleep, the occu-
pants with great difficulty were aroused and
the fire put out before any damage was done
This has shaken up the local shopkeepers who
have asked for a motor firepump and a water
supply, as at present the only fire fighting appliances
are some chemical extinguishers. I went to Miri
per s.l. La Follette on 16th instant with two cases
For the Resident's Court and returned on the 20th
accompanied by the collector of customs, Mr.
D Horton and Master Ian Steele
The new Tilley street lighting lamps were
erected and are a distinct improvement on the old
tax lamps. A contract for lighting the lamps
was made at a substantially lower figure than previously.
Penghulus Tama Wan Bayar and Tama Tng-
gang" Malang came, down during the month and
paid in tax. The other up river Penghulus are
expected to be down early next month. Dyak tax.
has not vet been paid as the Dyaks are still har-
vesting, and from all reports, they have had a
much better harvest than the Kayans, Kenyahs or Kiputs.
"There has been very little rainfall during the
month, and the river has been particularly low, the
rainfall was 2.98 inches
S. L. La Follette.—The launch was in use most of
the month, but Is very badly ta need of a thorough
overhaul. The return trip from Leo Matu was
done very quickly by out-board motor, the actual
running time from Leo Matu to Baram being three
days.
BINTULU.
Mr. R. L. Daubeny, Acting District Officer
General-The Resident, Fourth Division, Miri.
arrived here at midnight on the 9th instant in con-
nection with the case His Highness the Rajah
versus Ah Lok. murder. On Wednesday 12th I
accompanied the Resident to Sebauh where the
Foochow Reserve was visited and several matters
in connection with this were settled. The Resi-
dent left for Miri the same evening at 6 p.m. in the
La Follette Mr- Horton, Collector of Customs,
Fourth and Fifth Divisions, arrived here on the
evening of the 10th in connection with the revisiting
and re-writing of the accounts of the Trade, snip
ping and Customs Department and left again for
with the Resident on Wednesday evening.
H. D. APLIN, Resident, Fourth Division.
Fifth Division.
LIMBANG.
March, 1928. 
Travelling — I visited Labuan for one night and looked into the Agency affairs there.
On the 30th instant the s.s Sulong arrived from Kuching with Mr. L. K. Morse, Cadet, to relieve Mr A. Macpherson who has been appointee to do duty at Sibu, also Mr. Lowry, Assistant Superin¬tendent of Rubber Exports with a staff of Customs Officers to assist in completing statistics of all rubber planted in this Division, and investigate reports of illicit traffic in rubber between the Brunei territory and the State of Sarawak.
The rainfall amounted to 3.59 inches.
LAWAS.
February, 1928.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, reports: Court— At Trusan, in the Residents Court, Drahman was sentenced to death for the murder of his wife and child, the assessors returned a verdict of guilty with a strong recom- mendation to mercy which will be forwarded to the proper quarter The charge of murder against Lallong Ballang and Sawai Bangau was dismissed, there being no evidence that defendants actually did the deed The murder was committed in 1922 and most of the witnesses are now dead. The Fa Tawing people were ordered to pay pati nyawa and to move down river and deposit pledges for three years. This case was heard at Lirnbang.
Traveling.-The Resident and Mrs. Kortright, Mr Horton, Collector of Customs Mr. Spur way, A C F , and Mr. W. H. Avery arrived on 2nd. On 6th and 7II1 we were at Trusan and Sundar and on the8th the Resident & Mrs. Kortright returned to Limbang whilst Mr Horton, Mr. Avery and I went back to Lawas overland from Mel .pat. Various matters were brought up for discussion with the Resident and visits paid to the Estate and the Vamco Timber Company's mill P. W .D-The Melipat Road is very overgrown, the work being too much for one man. I am looking for a suitable man who will take on the Lawas-Belansat section, leaving the present contractor to do the Belansat-Betong section. The Burning Road is in excellent condition
General.—Mr W. H. Avery visited the district with a view to opening a jelutong refinery here. Unfortunately the output of raw jelutong is insufficient for his requirements.
Mr. J S Hill, Cadet-in-charge of Sipitang. B N B arrived with a football team on the 12th Sipitang proved the winners of an excellent game I. O In the evening there was a main, the visitors returning to Sipitang next day.
F. H. KORTRIGHT,
Acting- Resident. Fifth Division.
