MONDAY, APRIL 2, 1928.
THE CUSTOMS OFFICE, 1927.
A report from the Customs Office is to hand, from which it is gathered that the total amount of duties collected during 1927 was $1,398,437.71. This amount constitutes a decrease of $260,195.51 on the previous year's figures. The estimated revenue from Customs duties for 1927 was therefore $50,000 less than actually collected.
The import duty receipts which amounted to $556,071.78 rise by $20,090.42, and it may be recorded that the increase on imports of cigarettes and tobacco in tins swelled the import duty receipts by $15,000. Furthermore, the augmented imports of Chinese, Java, Siam and Palembang tobaccos account for another increase of $13,000.
While the import duties on spirits decreased by $10,700, those on wines and beers shew a com¬pensating increase of $9,900.
During the year no legislation was introduced to amend the import duties charged.
In this connection, it is interesting to recall the speech of His Highness the Rajah in the General Council during 1927, anticipating an increase on the duties to be charged on non-essential com¬modities.
The steady increase in the import of tobaccos portrays the possibilities of increased revenue which may be derived from the adoption of such a procedure. The import duty on tobacco is one of those taxes which might be made to yield a big increase in revenue without approaching the rates in force in neighbouring States.
The export duty collections which totalled $842,365.13 shew a decrease of $'280,285.93 as compared with those for 1926. This decrease is accounted for by the falls in the market prices of two of our principal exports—Plantation rubber and gutta jelutong.
The duty paid on plantation rubber decreased by $102,500 while that on jelutong exports was down by $187,000.
Under the Orders introduced early in 1926 governing the export duties on these products, any fall in the market price is very appreciably reflected in duty receipts. While the duties paid on these two most important Sarawak products have decreased very appreciably, it is to lie noted that the volume of our exports on plantation rubber and jelutong has increased considerably.
An increase of $27,000 in duty paid on pepper is accounted for by the abnormal rise in price during the year.
In spite of the considerable depression in the industry, it is satisfactory to record that sago export duty receipts remain stationary in the region of $80,000.
One of our chief forest products (gutta percha) which however has now become a rapidly diminish¬ing product, shews decreased duty collections of nearly $6,000.
The Commissioner of Trade and Customs in his report quotes from Sir Spencer St. John’s Bio¬graphy of Rajah Sir James Brooke, K.C.B., pub¬lished in 1899 as the seventh of the series of "Builders of Great Britain” as follows :—
"Though the export duties on agricultural produce are light, they are unsound in principle, interfere with trade, and lessen the profit of the industrious steady planter	It	would be
better to add to the list of imports subject to duty	There is another tax which checks
what might become a considerable industry—the duty on salt. This prevents any real development of the extensive fisheries of the coast, as not only is a necessary product taxed, but a duty is also raised on the exported salt fish, which has thus to bear a double weight. A bounty might be granted equivalent to the amount of the duty on the salt used	The	increase in the revenues may
enable the Rajah to do away with or modify those taxes and duties which impede commerce and hinder the progress of the country	Duties
on imports are often, necessary, and export duties on timber and jungle produce are very defensible, as someone aptly remarked that the collectors only reap the harvest without having been put to the trouble or expense of sowing or planting, and someone must pay for the protection they all enjoy. As a rule, however, duties on agricultural products should be avoided."
The Commissioner suggests that these remarks are as true to-day as when they were written ; and that, while the industrious native at present, indirectly, pays his full quota through taxation of exports, it is time that means wore employed to explore other volumes of taxation which will bring the foreign exploiter of the country more into line, and, thereby, if possible, in time reduce the pro¬portion paid by the former on the cultivation of his own soil.
It is considered that, this can be effected by the legitimate taxation of imports more largely con¬sumed by our immigrant population than by the natives of the State.
There are many imports that are in general use by all sections of the community. which it is only right should not be ignored as a source of revenue when the State has to incur heavy expenditure on wop's for the benefit of the general public, which is particularly reflected in the 1928 estimates.
The Rev. Father Bernard Mulder.
The many friends of the Rev. Father Bernard Mulder of the Roman Catholic Mission at Dalat will read with deep regret of his sudden death from heart failure, which took place at Dalat on Friday the 9th of Marell 1928.
Father Bernard arrived in Sarawak in December 1901 and was 56 years of age when he died. Out of the 26 years he lived in Sarawak 23 were spent amongst the Milanoes of Dalat and the neighbour¬ing kampongs. and amongst these people he did very great work and was greatly beloved and respected by them. He was a wonderful Milano Scholar and spoke their language and knew their customs as no other European has ever done. He was a most kind hearted man and generous to a fault. His jovial personality appealed to everybody and he will be greatly missed at Dalat. Father Bernard was also a great sportsman and until a few years ago was a capital snipe and pigeon shot. For many years also he had taken the greatest interest in long boat racing and it was he who definitely proved that the Milanoes are the most skilful performers in these long boat races. He sent boats from Dalat to compete both at the Sibu and Kuching Regattas and won many prizes : Two of his boats the Semut and the Sixty One won races in the recent Kuching Annual Regatta.
Father Bernard was buried near the entrance to the Church which he had built and which he had only recently considerably enlarged.— Contributed
NOTES.
March.
THE following gentlemen had the honour to dine with their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee at the Astana on the 15th :— Messrs. H. B. Crocker, F. F. Boult, H. L. Owen, A. A. Rennie, J. A. H. Hardie, E. Parnell, Ong Tiang Swee, Tan Sum Guan, Wee Kheng Chiang, Ong Siow Sian, Ong Chip Yan, Lan Chin Heng, Wee Boon Chew, Wee Hoek Kee, Lau Chen Hiang, Sim Cheng Liang, Tan Ah Boh, Lim Song Kee, .long Fong Chong, Chong Joon Kiew and Dr. Wong Cheong Way, Messrs. T. Mohri and Hayashi.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Messrs. H. B. Crocker and A. A. Rennie, attended the regatta held at Santubong on the 24th and spent, the week-end there.
AMONG the passengers who arrived by the s.s. Kuching on the 12th were Miss James, Mr. and Mrs. G. F. W. Clifford, of Lawas, Mr. G. Paterson, of Sungei Tengah, Capt. P. Smith, Mr. Hockaday. Mr. E W. Oswald and Mr. S. S. Tang travelled by the same boat and are, we understand, under-taking prospecting operations for the Silantek Coal Prospecting Syndicate, in which some wealthy Chinese gentlemen here and in Perak, F.M.S., are interested.
MR. H. L. Owen, Resident of the Third Division, visited Kuching on the 14th and returned on the 19th.
DR. Clark H. Yeager, Advisory Health Officer to the Government, of Sarawak, proceeded to the Straits Settlements on the 24th, where he will be taking charge of certain health campaign activities of the International Health Division of the Rocke¬feller Foundation. We understand that there is a possibility of Dr. Yeager returning to Sarawak again early in 1929 to act as Consultant in putting into effect his recommendations for creating a better Health Organization in Sarawak. The services of Dr. Yeager in mapping out a preliminary health survey of the country, during his residence of eight months, have been of the greatest value to the Government. In this connection, it is of great interest to mention that, the Sarawak Government has been for¬tunate enough to secure the services of Dr. Gilbert E. Brooke, who is shortly retiring from the Straits Settlements Service, as Chief Health Officer.
THE New General Hospital in Rock Road was occupied as from the 16th and the premises are decidedly a great improvement on the old building.
Her Highness the Ranee visited the hospi¬tal on he 16th and expressed appreciation of all she saw.
Mr. C. P. Lowe, Commissioner of Public Works, left furlough on the 3rd to connect with the P . & O. s.s. Khiva which sailed from Singapore on the 16th.
IN the early morning of the 17th, Mr. S. T.
Ennion, who was driving a Morris-Cowley
car, met with a very serious accident a few
yards away from the path leading to the
Residency. It transpired that Mr. Ennion
was returning home with Mr. B. J. C.
Spurway as the. only passenger, and, whilst
negotiating the bend at that portion of the
road, the back of his car hit against a billian
electric lamp post, breaking it into three
pieces. The back of the car was wholly
smashed. Luckily Mr. Spurway escaped
unhurt, though he was thrown out and
buried under the debris when the car over-
turned. Mr. Ennion became unconscious at
the wheel, as the result of the collision, and
had to be admitted to the hospital. We are
glad, however, to say that he was discharged
from the hospital, within a few days of his
admittance.
AN auction sale of the late Mr. J. C. Moulton’s books took place on the 10th. My Ten Years in Sarawak by Charles Brooke fetched $46. the highest price known to have been paid for the two volumes of this book. Raffles’ History of Java fetched $13.
MR. W. Harnack, Assistant Superinten¬dent of Surveys, returned from vacation leave on the 19th and passed through Kuching on his way back to Sibu.
THE Malay kampongs were illuminated on the night of the 22nd in celebration of Malam Raya, and large crowds of spectators thronged the roads to witness the beautiful display of lights. Hari Raya, which fell on the 3rd this year, was observed as a public holiday, when Malays in their picturesque national costumes paid the customary visits to each other’s houses.
CAPTAIN C. Carstares-Dunlop and his family departed on the 17th on furlough.
MR. H. D. Aplin, Acting Resident. Fourth Division, and Mr. F. W. Richards, General Manager, Sarawak Oilfields Limited, arrived on the 30th by the Angas and returned to Miri on the 1st April.
MR. J. O. Gilbert arrived on the 5th to take up a Cadetship in the Sarawak Civil Service, and Mr. W. J. Chater, son of Mr. R. W. Chater of the Government Printing Office, also arrived on the same date to take an appointment as Assistant in the Treasury Department, Kuching.
THE British Resident, Brunei, Mr. E. E. F. Pretty, paid a short visit to Kuching on the 11th and was, during his stay here, the guest of Mr. F. F. Boult, Resident, First Division.
MR. L. K. Morse arrived on the 12th to join the Sarawak Civil Service as a Cadet and has been appointed to do duty at Limbang. Mr. D. Murphy, who also arrived on the same date, has been appointed a Probationer in the Police Department, Kuching.
THE Headmaster of St. Thomas’ School has requested us to state that the boarding estab-lishment of this school has now reached its maximum capacity. Parents living in out¬stations would be well advised to inquire first, if there be a vacancy, before sending their children to the school; this would often save unnecessary expense in sending the children back again. Applications for admission will be considered in the order of their arrival. It should be noted that an entrance fee of three months fees is required before admission, but this is returned at the time of leaving provided three months notice has been given.
THE drawing for Captain A. S. Lowe’s Motor Car took place on 31st March. The winning ticket was No. 811, drawn by Abang Amin of Kampong No. 2.
Departure of Her Highness the
Ranee.
After an only too short stay, Her Highness the Bailee, together with Dayang Leonora and Dayang Elizabeth, left for Singapore en route to Europe by the s.s. Kuching at 11 a.m. on the 17th.
Farewell gatherings had taken place during the whole of the previous week, and on Friday, the 16th, a large number of guests were invited to a dinner and dance at the Astana.
A large number of Europeans and leading members of various communities were present on board to wish them bon voyage, and we voice the wish of everyone here in hoping that we may soon welcome them back to Sarawak.
The Disaster at Sibu.
Dining the last three years Sarawak has indeed been unfortunate in that no less than five bazaars have been burnt down throughout the country.
A disaster of the first order occurred on the 7th March, when the Sibu bazaar was entirely destroyed by fire between one and four o’clock in the morning. The consequences of this fire were that a very large number of traders were rendered homeless and destitute.
Next to Kuching, Sibu bazaar was of course the biggest in the country, and the greatly increased trade of the Rejang River had done much to enhance the value of Sibu as an important trading centre. It is, therefore, to be deplored that such a valuable town has been destroyed, but at the same time the fact of the bazaar being constructed entirely of wood was in itself a criterion of its ultimate destruction. From a sanitary point of view, it is possibly the best thing that could have happened. Conditions at Sibu were not desirable and congestion was extremely bad.
The rice supplies after the fire were found to amount to only 300 bags and it was necessary that assistance be sent by despatching a cargo of necessities. With this object in view, the s.si Auby sailed from Kuching in the afternoon of the 7th, and later arrangements were made with Messrs. Paterson, Simons & Co., Ltd., of Singa¬pore. to send a direct shipment of rice from that town by the s.s. Rajah of Sarawak.
The immediate cause of the fire is unknown but it is reported to have originated by the attachment by certain persons of appliances' to the electric wires, which were intended to reduce the con¬sumption of current.
The Sibu bazaar was built after the fire of 1869, and was very nearly burnt down in 1902, but was practically saved by Mr. H. L. Owen, who is at present the Resident of that Division, and who was at that time a Cadet.
It is gratifying to report that there was no loss of life, and this was very fortunate in view of the fact that not only was the wooden bazaar destroyed, but the brick buildings and piles of coal heaped up at the end of the bazaar for supplying Chinese vessels were also consumed owing to the ferocity of the fire which swept over all buildings in such a short time. Owing to the wind having changed to the east, the Malay kampongs were undamaged and the inhabitants are to be congratulated on their good fortune.
It is understood that the total losses and damages amount to approximately four million dollars. At the same time, over and above these damages, the insurance companies are heavy losers.
In conclusion, we can only hope that the new bazaar, which will in course of time be built at Sibu, will be constructed of bricks or some other durable material in order that such unfortunate happenings may in the future be avoided.
In view of the recent fire at Sibu. it is interesting to recall that that bazaar was burnt down on February 11, 1889. The reports contained in the Gazettes of that year, relative Io this incident, are published below.
Fire at Sibu.
FEBRUARY, 1ST 1889.
Another disastrous fire has again occurred in Sarawak, whereby the whole bazaar at Sibu was destroyed in a few hours. After Kuching, the bazaar at Sibu is. or rather was. the finest and most busy in the country, carrying on almost, the whole of the trade of the Rejang River. Files of rattans and other jungle produce are always lying stacked there awaiting ship¬ment and the shops are well stocked with trade goods. The immediate cause of the fire is net certain, but it is reported to have originated in an opium shop, that fruitful cause of trouble; later reports say in a kitchen: this is equally likely as the style of kitchen range in vogue amongst Sarawak Chinese is of wood covered with a coating of clay or cement. The Sibu bazaar was built of bilian planks only, but these and the workmanship employed to put them up were of the best, quality and the majority of the shops were comparatively new. Such buildings when once alight burn rapidly and so fast did the flames spread in this case that but little was savedThough the outbreak of fires cannot be stopped by legislation, the risk might he diminished in some degree by the issuing stringent regulations with regard to the placing of lamps, storing of dangerous goods, and the use of suitable buildings for trades known to be a constant source of fire. Thus if all opium smoking shops were bound to be brick buildings or even corrugated iron, and cooking stoves were only placed at a safe distance from inflamable walls, many fires which have but small beginnings, but which increase in size owing to the ready supply of good food for the flames, could be extinguished before much damage had been done. The method of building brick houses also leaves much to be desired, whole streets being sometimes erected without, in the upper storey, a single brick partition to separate house from house and even where there are such brick partitions they reach only to below the tiles, and the beams of the roofs invariably overlap each other in a manner which is certain to allow and promote the spread of fire from one house to its neighbour, and so on for the whole length of a street.
We do not know whether fire insurance com¬panies care to take such risks as these, but be that as it may, there is no insurance effected on Chinese property here. This should at least cause care to be taken by owners and occupiers, but precaution against danger from fire appears to be entirely wanting amongst Chinese, who however in the presence of an actual outbreak are too panic stricken and excited to do anything to help check the flames. The want of water at a high pressure renders the extinction of fires by this method extremely doubtful and the two large fires which have previously occurred here, the burning of the Kuching bazaar in 1884 and the sago factories in 1888, were only prevented from doing much greater damage, by sheer luck; in the former case by a heavy rain storm coming down in the nick of time and in the latter by the wind being in the right direction; had it veered round the whole range of factories would have been destroyed on the one side, or the Malay Kampong of Padungan on the other. In the case of Sibu no such good luck intervened ; consequently a clean sweep was made of the whole place and many have been. at. least lor the present, entirely ruined ; it will be years before they can make good their losses, if they ever do so at all. by legitimate trading, and many of those who less than a month ago called themselves towkays will now have to start afresh from the level of coolie.
FIRE AT SIBU.
On the morning of the 11th ultimo at 1.30 a.m. a fire broke out in the up river end of the Sibu bazaar, and in the space of about half an hour the whole of that end of the bazaar was in flames. As the wind was blowing up river it was hoped that the fire could be checked, but. as usual in such cases, the Chinese were soon in despair, and confined their attention to saving goods. With the aid of Malays and Dyaks several attemps were made to check the fire by pulling down some of the houses, but these attempts were of no avail, owing to the wind shifting, the intense heat and the difficulty experienced in dismantling these strongly built houses, and by 6 a.m. the fire had burnt out, having completely destroyed the bazaar. The fire, as far as can be ascertained to date, arose from carelessness in not putting out a kitchen fire after use that evening. In some cases the inmates had no time to save anything, in most cases very little was saved, and even the greater part of what was brought out of the houses and piled on the road caught fire and was destroyed. The police station was also destroyed. Sibu bazaar consisting of some 60 houses, was recently rebuilt and was entirely made of bilian wood which, though slow to ignite, when once on fire burns fiercely. The loss in house property, trade goods and personal effects amounts to about $150,000, a severe loss to the unfortunate traders of this district, and it will he some time before a similar bazaar is erected. The Sibu traders hope to be able to build the new bazaar entirely of brick.
Fishing by Milanos.
In the Bintulu, Mukah and Oya districts live a pagan race well known to all as the Milanos, whose chief occupation is fishing and cultivating sago. Their method of fishing may be unique and as there has been only one short note on it so far I propose to describe it more fully.
A continuous string of rotans up to about half a mile long is sunk on to the sea bottom (here, a firm grey mixture of sand and mud) at a distance of anything over five mile from the shore; at intervals along this cable other rotans are attached, their free end joined to a piece of nipah stem about 3 or 4 feet long, acting as a float. Somewhere on this upright rotan is attached by its thick end a similar length of the tip of a nipah stem complete with its leaves, so that it floats at a depth of say between 5 and 6 fathoms, at any rate not resting on the bottom nor yet visible from the surface, as a rule.
These floats may be 50 yards or so apart and arriving near one of them the boat is very deftly steered so that its stern in swinging round just passes the bit of stem ; the man in the stern catches this with a boathook, hauls it up and lays it care¬fully in a special rack provided for it. He then slowly hauls the palm leaf to the surface and his sharp eyes soon detect any fish that may have followed; whereupon he slips the noose of a long line into a notch of the float, pays the whole out astern again. He now slides down this line as far as the bit of leaf a light soft wood float (temulong) shaped like a big flat fish which serves to keep the leaf on the surface; passed through the eves of this float is a piece of rotan whose ends can be joined by a sort of hook and eye arrangement at will. When the leaf is towing on the surface about 10 fathoms away and the crew have been rowing as hard as possible for a few strokes there comes a sharp order, they cease rowing, the boat is swung, sharp at right angles to its former course and the man in the bows starts hauling in the leaf at a fair rate: the crew jump each to his own job and let down over the side of the boat a huge triangular net. This net is equilateral, sides about five fathoms long, kept spread open by two long poles (just like a large prawning net or "paka”) meeting at a movable joint so that they can he closed together when not in use; this joint of course remains in the boat and the free edge of the net. supported by a rotan, is parallel with the side of the boat. The large outrigger so prominent on one side of a “barong” acts as a fulcrum for this net when being lowered and raised ; the much smaller outrigger on the other side acts as a platform for the man who looks after the joint of the two poles, which of course goes high up in the air when the net is down and has to be forcibly brought back again when the net is to be lifted. Anyway, having lowered this net so that its extremities are say 6 or 8 feet under water, they tow the leaf into the net area, hastily raise the net and there are all the fish flopping about; the leaf and line are deftly pitchforked out and can be used again. Tn moments of excite¬ment, especially if there are a number of “dueh” there someone steps into the sea as the leaf enters the net area, swims round under water to the mouth of the net and frightens hack any fish who try to dart out again.
The originality and unexpectedness of the first haul is quite one of the funniest things one is likely to experiece.
I can hardly think the fish follow the leaf for shade as it is originally sunk to some depth, though may be the shade on the surface is appreciated as the leaf is towed along; the very time of course when they are caught. I noticed that the older more encrusted leaves often though not invariably caught more than fresh clean ones and think the fish haunt the leaves for food as much as anything, the barnacles and other hangers on attracting may be the small fish and these the predaceous ones.
The "barong," the boat used, deserves consider¬able mention—very stoutly built, about 30 feet long and 6 or 8 beam amidships and a pointed stern they are seaworthy in the roughest of weathers. Very buoyant—too much so for some tummies, they seem to ship no water when pitching (as on the bar) and of course they roll with the greatest of ease, the one gunwale (usually to port) being flush with the water when the big net is down and this position may be safely maintained when hove to. They carry two masts, each with a square sail; the yard, throughout the length of which the sail is attached, hoisted by its middle; the boom has the sail attached at the extremities only, either end may be called on to serve as tack or clew. The usual method of sailing however is before the wind—“goose winged,” one sail to port, one to starboard. They only sail to and from the fishing, usually morning and evening with land and sea breezes; the sails are reefed by rolling a little up on the boom. The boats draw very little; the keel as usual one huge plank, but a "barong” on the mud shows a graceful curve from bow to stern, deepest just abaft amidships.
To look at a "barong” one wonders what use are all the racks, poles, sticks, platforms and stray bits of rotan but in the fishing each has its one very special use and is just in the right place. Similarly the men each have their own soecial job in the actual fishing operations and are always in just the right place to do it; the smoothness with which this intricate operation is carried out, the efficiency of men and gear, the fairness all round in dividing the catch and finally the size of the catch itself all reflect enormous credit on the heathen.—(E. Banks).
Upriver Fish.
by
E. BANKS, B.A., (Oxon.)'
The lower reaches of a river are accessable to all and are always of much the same appearance; so no doubt are the upper reaches but they are less seldom visited. Inder the different conditions found there flourish many curious animals.
Half a day's travel in a launch from Mukah brings one to Sikat and it took another four days paddle to reach the last Dayak house in the mainstream far beyond the Kuala Selangau. Changing into Dayak boats, three more days paddling and poling through quite a different uninhabited kind of country and one is still only about 400 feet above sea level but has arriv¬ed at the foot of Bukit Lila Bulu. which sticks up for about 3,000 feet. This mountain was very deep and its highest point was attained by walking along a ridge whose ups and downs made it quite the hardest whole days walk I have had ; the hollows in between provided the only water on the mountain and were mostly pig wallows, undoubtedly visited occasionally by rhinoceros. The top of the moun¬tain was in cloud but an extensive view is said to be
had on a clear day to Mukah and the sea in one . direction, Kanowit, Song, Kapil, Bukit Tibang,  Bukit Bate. The Selagus,. Beings lulls and the1 Tatau and Aup rivers in their various directions; Kapit may be reached in one night down the Iban into the Rejang River. There were many smaller bills visible, notably Bukit Rimau Antu which is said to have in a cave two tigers that fly.
The river in these parts was particularly pleasing, narrow, with sandy banks and quite arched over with trees, the water quite clear, either roaring down a gravel bed or moving placidly in a deep poo) or else tippling through long shallow reaches where every detail of the pebbly bottom was evident, lots of fish skidding about singly or in shoals.
The “Punan” boats at Mukah caught some very confining fish and their representatives here were no less comical ; for the wily Dayak standing m the bow of Ins bout cast a small pebble into a pool some ten yards ahead of him. gently paddled up, spotted a few fish crossing round the rippies made by the stone and threw a jala over them in this way they would get 40 or 50 in a few hours mostly under hall pound but a few large samah and occasionally adong (Barbus sp.) of a pound or ponni and a half kulong (Barbus sp.) was the most numerous fish, easily recognized by a big black spot near its tail, kepiat ; selui and S. Pangut (Rasbora spp.) were the next most numerous and have been mostly recorded from elsewhere, sometimes even from the 10th mile. Rock Road.
Examination of the fish caught was even more astonishing for none of them had any teeth (they say the big fish have but 1 saw no evidence of it.) Further search revealed far back in their throats be¬hind the gills, an upper and a lower horny crushing pad and an examination of Stomach contents showed them to feed solely on fruits and seeds chiefly of a thing that goes whirling round and round as it fails off the tree ; on one occasion there was quite a rise going on for these and the Dayaks sometimes used them as bait for their hooks; the aborigines had no doubt observed this partiality for newly fallen fruit and copied it by banging a stone in instead, when the more eager fish were the ones to get Caught.
In the clear water the fish were easy to observe, large and small mingling together and though very large fish were always given room they were never studiously avoided nor chased the smaller ones to show any predacious tendencies. Many fish had barbels round the mouth, suggesting bottom feeding, hut most were surface or mid depth feeders and here it was worth noting the lack of aquatic insect life; bard cased water beetles and water “spiders” were fairly numerous but very little else. The place was a paradise for the most beautiful dragonfly's whose caddis flies (ladools) would no doubt be fine fish food though I saw no actual sign of them; butterflies were numerous but there was a complete absence, of swifts and bats which indicated a lack of small soft bodied insect life.
The stream was of course impossible for boats to go against after rain and even the wretched fish fare badly, for the “kulong” could be seen in swift Water to go and anchor himself in the lee of a stone by means of bis lips which had been converted into a big fleshy sucker (the frogs likewise all had “pneumatic” pads on their toes tor hanging on to Stones in swift water). Of enemies the fish bad few. they didn’t prey on each other, no herons and only a very small kingfisher (alcedo euryzona) though other tracks were numerous.
The overhanging trees, clear rushing water, the gravelly bottom with fish darting about makes one instantly think of a trout brook at home and one wonders how trout would fare here; how they would fare in the spate when other fish are hanging on by their suckers to escape being washed away to unsuitable parts; whether there really is the insect
food for small fish, in winch case they should thrive mightily or whether the lack of insect feeders is due to the lack of suitable insects (as would seen to be indicated) in which case trout would soon be at his wits end. At any rate in such a remote spot the native would again use his flair for finding the weak spot in foolish fish.
Sarawak.
The following essay may prove of interest to our readers :—
Sarawak is situated exactly on the equatorial line. This is half of an island. The other half is called Borneo.
As Sarawak is situated just on the equatorial hue, the climate is very hot.
On the south of Sarawak is Borneo, on the south¬west are Sumatra and Java Island, on the west is the Malaya Peninsula and on the north are Philip¬pine Island.
The capital of Sarawak is Kuching, and this town is situated on the River Kuching.
The natives of this place are called Dayaks. But now-a-days there are many different kinds of people living in this country. They are the Malays, the Indians, the Chinese and the Europeans.
Kuching is not so big a town as any capital of any country should be.
As this is a place of hot climate cocoa-palms grow here abundantly.
Only some parts of Sarawak are made into towns. Most of the other parts are jungles and these jungles are inhabited by wild people and big monkeys.
In Kuching they have put the railways only for a distance of ten miles. But these railway carriages are not so big ones as those of Singapore. Within these ten miles there are eight or nine stations, some of winch are built and unbuilt.
There is a road which leads to the third mile from the town. This road is culled the ‘"Rock Road.” From the third mile there are two other roads, one of which leads to Batu Kawa while the other leads to the twenty-first mile.
A Little Humour.
There has recently been published the second edition of a selection of schoolboy “howlers,” com¬piled and edited by Colin Mcllwaine, of which the following are a few examples:—
“Genius is an infinite capacity for picking brains.”
“Aladdin was a mini who had a ring, and every time he rang a guinness sprang up out of the ground.”
“In Christianity a man can only have one wife. This is called Monotony.”
"King David was renowned for his catapult. If lie bad a fault, it was a slight tendency to adultery.”
“They gave William IV. a lovely funeral. It took six men to carry the beer.”
"There are a few well-known Scotch poets alive to-day, but none of them write free verse."
"A grass widow is the wife of a dead vegetarian.”
“Ali Baba means being away when the crime was committed.”
“A politician is a man who stands because he wants to sit and is expected to lie.”
“Sa turnine means ‘gloomy, sad-looking.' Sa turn was the god of agriculture."
“Milton was the poet who wrote ‘Paradise Lost.’ When his wife died be wrote ‘Paradise Regained.’ ”
A translation—Void l'Anglais avec son sangfroid habituel.—“Here comes the Englishman with his usual bloody cold.”
Does Exercise Prolong Life?
AN UNCONVENTIONAL DOCTOR SAYS “NO.”
Love and Eugenics.
Robust views of health fads—views with which many people will disagree—are contained in a book by Dr. Logan Clendenning, a leading Kansas City practitioner, which has lately been published.
“ Men are not going to embrace eugenics," he writes. “They are going to embrace the first likely, trim-figured girl with limpid eyes and flashing teeth who comes along, in spite of the fact that she is probably reeking with hypertension, colour-blind¬ness, hay fever and amyotrophic Internal sclerosis ”
On the subject of fashionable diseases : “ Surely everyone can recall one or two friends who have complained all their lives, and have lived all that time in the most perfect conditions of health. They are inclined to have ‘ fashionable.’ diseases.
THIN AND FAT PEOPLE.
“In 1885 they had too much uric acid. In 1890 they bad chronic appendicitis. In 1895 they took the Kneip water cure, In 1900,1905 and 1910 they had other troubles. In 1915 they all had their teeth extracted. In 1920 they had non-surgical biliary drainage. In 1925 they had inferiority complex.
“ Exercise and fresh air are supposed to be the sovereign augmenters of long life," continues Dr. Clendenning. “I admit they make one feel better. That they promote longevity 1 seriously doubt.
“ An impartial examinations of all the means yet proposed to prevent early death or lengthen life leaves me with the conviction that nothing any¬body does to himself after he is born makes more than a few hours’ difference at the most.” Discussing thin and fat people, the doctor writes: “The thin type has enormous lungs, more than lie requires for his nutritional needs, so that air does not blow in and out of all bis lung spaces, and these people are peculiarly liable to tuber¬culosis.
PEOPLE WHO WORRY.
“The heavy one, on the contrary, has very small
lungs, and because he does no: regularly breathe in
and out a good over-supply of oxygen to burn all the
food he eats, it accumulates in the form of fat, and
this may have something to do with bis obesity
“The thin ones seldom have heart or arterial
diseases, and if they live past youth, the period of
tuberculosis, they are likely to live for ever; notice
that at least 60 per cent of very old people are of
this type."
Dr. Clendenning does not believe that a person
should be medically examined once a year.
“I have seen the plan in operation, and I have
seen practically nothing result but grief and
unhappiness.
“A middle-aged man is the usual victim. In the
great majority of cases if such men have anything
to be found wrong with them it is a slight defect of
the heart, some kidney Change, and a beginning of
the hardening of the arteries, or hypertension.
FEARING THE WORST.
“ This report is handed to a man who believes he is in good health. He looks up things in an encyclopaedia or medical book, and decides he has received his ; each sentence.
"He goes on a diet to reduce his uric acid, is denied whisky, gin, and tobacco; in fact, anything, which might lighten his gloom. Not one of bis abstentious changes the tissues of the body.
“ If he had not had the examination he might have lived 25 years without a symptom. He has been turned from a happy, self-contented member of society into a morose, apprehensive hypo-chondriac.”
“ The Human Body,” by Dr. Logan Glendenning.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.
The, Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
SIR,
WHAT- IS BEING DONE FOR AGRICULTURE
The General Public of this country are only able to glean knowledge of what is happening throughout the State through the valuable columns of your paper, and for many years the reports from outstations have at least served to give us an insight into the happenings, however trivial, in the various outstations; even if the reports are confined to the amount of rainfall, we seem to get a glimpse of the life of the place.
From time to time articles appear stating that we do not grow a sufficient quantity of rice, or a District Officer’s report mentions that certain natives of the country or other persons are interest¬ing themselves in some new crop, but seldom do we see the Agricultural Department mentioned as having assisted those natives or other persons by encouragement in a practical form, such as supplying seeds to enterprising persons or endea¬vouring to interest our large Chinese population in new methods of planting.
The Board of Trade have their Rubber Improve¬ment Fund and the method employed by them in simply sending men to any particular spot and shewing, training and assisting natives to grasp what should be done has proved to have done an enormous amount of good to the rubber industry throughout Sarawak. In this connection it may be mentioned that there has been a tremendous awakening amongst natives and Chinese, and there are indications of a great desire towards progress and to improve methods of production.  They are, however, seriously handicapped by ignorance and lack of opportunity. Could not, therefore, the Agricultural Department get some¬thing done on similar lines as those of the Board of Trade?
The Asiatic has only to see and to be convinced that a particular method will improve his lot and make for a better standard of living to be enthusiastic. The vast majority of our population arc illiterate and uneducated, and methods must he demonstrated to convince them of their utilities.
Could not, for instance, a motor tractor be taken round with a plough? Or the use of jacks for up-rooting trees be shewn? Or cinematograph pictures of harvesting in more advanced countries, be procured and demonstrated ?
There are many other things and ways that only need demonstration to be appreciated.
At a certain outstation, no sooner had the Government used an out-board motor for a few weeks than four similar out-board motors were purchased by traders and others. Yet the out¬board motor had been on the market for years but people in that outstation had not realized its possibilities.
Of course the Agricultural Department may be hiding its light under a bushel, but in the absence of a published report and signs of new activities in the part of the country in which your corres¬pondent lives. 1 think one is entitled to ask the above question.
I am, Sir,
Yours faithfully,
INTERESTED.
SARAWAK,
22nd March, 1928.
To
The Editor, Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
SIR,
In a copy of the Government Estimates for the
year, I see that provision has been made for metal-
ling Green Road, Kuching.
When, and if, this is done there will disappear
practically the last place in Kuching where ponies
can be exercised without " ’ammer, 'ammer, 'ammer,
on the 'ard ' igh road”.
, The Race Course is not always convenient for
those stabling their ponies near the centre of the
Town Moreover, that zealous body, the Turf Club,
quite rightly close the course for certain periods of
the year.
There remain a few rubber gardens where kind-
hearted land-lores do not chase off intrepid eques-
trians who attempt a canter over the rubber-rooted
twisting paths.
Will not the Municipal Board re-consider their
decision? or has Government already decided that
the grass must go There used to be a perfect
gallop along what I think is called Datu's Road.
Alas! this was one day dug up and laid with a kind
of loose rubble where cars certainly could and did
go, but where ponies stumbled miserably along.
Since then, however, it does not appear to be used
for anything more than occasional joy-riding.
Will Green Road became a busy motor thorough-
fare ? Give the ponies a chance!
Your faithfully,
“THE OPTIMISTIC FIDDLER.”
To
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching, Sarawak.
SIR,
I am enclosing herewith copies of two letters received from London with reference to the Ancient Order of Froth Blowers, Ltd.
As they are of general interest to the members of the A.0.F.B, in Sarawak I shall be pleased if they can be reproduced in the Sarawak Gazette.
Yours faithfully, T. K. WALSH.
ANCIENT ORDER OP FROTH BLOWERS. LTD.,
J15, CHEAPSIDE A 37, GUTTER LANK,
LONDON, E.C. 2,
DEAR TORNADO WALSH,
I have received to day your draft for T95.13.t4rf, and I am really amazed at the generosity of the Sarawak Vat.
I phoned up Sir Alfred this morning and men¬tioned this amount, and he was hugely bucked. As a matter of fact, I came alone from it little dance at Fittleworth in Sussex this morning. We held it oyer the week-end and over eighty Blowers turned up including the Overseas Scrounger, the Grand Hurricane, the Cloudburst, the Gentle Zephyr, the Welcome Breeze, the endorser of dud cheques, and several Grand Typhoons. We had a very cheerful little do, and the Oast Box was found to show £33 profit at the end of the evening; although no flues were abstracted from the members, but merely little donations and eccentricities.
The proprietor of the Vat No. 0, Fittleworth, H. T. Oliver with the Grand Hurricane, and myself went off fishing on Sunday morning, and although a Gland Hurricane was blowing we managed to hook and land a 141b. pike on Major Cortauld’s water near the village pub’.
The pike was initiated into the Ancient Order. Herewith I enclose the two booklets as requested. Under separate cover I am sending you a Froth Blower's Annual” which will be on sale for the next six weeks. You will be pleased to hear that the revenue from the advertisements alone was £1 ,002.
Our balance sheet for the last six months has just been drawn up by the Accountants, and it shows a profit of £16,500 making a grand total of money placed at the disposal of Sir Alfred Fripp of £76.503.
We have now forty cots endowed in perpetuity, and several more are. under consideration by Sir Alfred Fripp.
1 have introduced a stamp fir sealing all our correspondence, but this is not yet in print, although I have had a few proofs, of same. The first stamp was seemed by a little village pub' in Letherhead, and fetched £ l0.5s.Od. I am sending you also one of the original pulls which I am sure will interest you.
Please convey to the Blowers of the Sarawak Vat, the cordial greetings of all the Headquarter’s staff.
Although J. have personally acknowledged your cheque Sir Alfred will send you along the official receipt within the course of a day or so, and I must really express again to you my amazed thanks at the extraordinarily gratifying keenness which nil yon boys in Sarawak are showing and doing in aid of our "Wee Waits " fund.
Cordially yours, (Signed) BERT TEMPLE, N. O.
The Gentle Zephyr sends hearty greetings to all members of Sarawak!
ANCIENT ORDER OF FROTH BLOWERS, LTD., 145, CHEAPSIDE & 37, GUTTER LANE,
LONDON, E.C. 2. 
DEAR TORNADO WALSH,
I want to send you my most grateful and hearty thanks for the splendid work you are doing in Sarawak, and also to all those who are working with you. You seem to have got exactly “the spirit" of the thing ; the cheeriness, the good old British fare and the auctioning even of rubbish.
You ass how tiie show is going at home, and the answer is just amazingly well. We seem to have a great boost out of the successful combat with the prohibitionists of which I enclose you a reprint in case you have not seen it. They have been reduced to complete silence, a fact upon winch many Mem¬bers of the House of Commons have written to con¬gratulate us, for it is more than they have ever been able to do with her Ladyship of Astor.
Up and down the country we have now endowed no fewer than 40 cote at £500 each, and this autumn we have had tremendous -rallies at Bradford, Lei¬cester, Kings Lynn, Manchester, Chatham and other places: and Brighton in a few days. I personally never go unless the Mayor of the place promises to turn up in state! so as to do proper honour to the Order and the biggest room in the town has to be guaranteed to be full! We have had as many as 500 at these dinners. That was at Cutlers Hall, Sheffield, and the Colston Hall at Bristol is also on the list. Similarly in all the Dominions, South Africa having led the way, and in all the Colonies great and small, and we are tremendously strong on the ships.
Nothing heartens us more than the splendid support we get from men like yourself, the Britisher away from home It is such a splendid example that you are willing to work like this for the good of the Wee Waifs in the slums at home.
Yours cordially, (Signed) ALFRED FRIPP.
Extracts from Monthly Reports.
First Division.
February, 1928.
KUCHING.
General.—Sudin, Tua Kampong of Smarahan on the 10th reported that Jaree anak Mut, a small child, of Kampong Tanjong Bunut had been seized by a crocodile on the 30th ulto.
Permission was granted to call in the services of a professional crocodile catcher from Sadong.
Ali, Tua of Kampong Puloh died at 8 p.m. on the 11th. A new Tua Kampong is to be elected after Hari Raya.
Grants.—
Two (Permanent Grants) = 2 acres 0 rood 6 poles 18.150 sq. yds
Seventy-eight applications for land were received during the month and nineteen examinations were carried out.
LUNDU.
Land.—Notices regarding the allowance of 3 acres- each free of quit rent, to Sarawak subjects were issued to all communities, and were received with great satisfaction.
Orders were issued that no more permits to plant would be given out, but new land would be allotted under Occupation Tickets.
Trade The Kampongs were Almost emptied of their adult population on account of the engkabang crop. That in the Lundu District is reported as excellent, mid all me very optimistic. The Simatan. crop is rather poor.
PER SARAWAK, BAU.
The rainfall for the month was 20'64 inches.
Land - Twenty-two Occupation Tickets were issued. Many hundreds have been applied for, but the land waits inspection.
SADONG.
Land.—Work on the first main rentis for the new Native Holding Reserve was finished on the 26th. Now that the cost of cutting 835 fathoms has been ascertained, I proposed putting the rest of the work out to contract, which should be very much quicker than paid daily labour.
Sadong Colliery.
February, 1928.
The output, export, local consumption, conver¬sion into coke and coal stock figures for the month were as follows :—
Second Division.
SIMANGGANG.
February, 1928.
Cattle.—Simanggang herd numbered seventy-four
head, four were slaughtered for eale. Lubok Antu
herd numbered thirty-eight head during the month.
Agriculture.—Planting permits issued during the
month were ;—Pepper eighty, para rubber nil.
The padi crop on the low lands I near is ex-
ceptionally good and a great number of native farmers
had started harvesting towards the end of the month.
Medical.—Two hundred and thirty-five N.A.B.
Injections for yaws, etc., were given.
Trade.—The principal exports were:—
Fourth Division.
Miri.
January, 1928.
Mr. Dick, District Officer, Baram made a trip to
the Malinau for the purpose of attending one of the
Punan meetings, which he has started.
These are held every three mouths and are
already beginning show effect, as he reports that
the Punans are openly coming out to meet the
Government representatives and realise the ad-
vantages of being able to trade in an open market.
Travelling.—I left on the 7th accompanied by
Messrs. Spurway and Avery for long Mutan, ulu
Tutan to meet the Seredan Kelabits there, we used
the long boat with outboard motor as far as Leppu
Peniew in the Belana river and then transferred to
small boats. We arrived at Long Mutan on the
12th and found the Kelabits waiting for us there
with Penghulu Tupong Bala and Tania Mayang.
A party of eight Punans came to Long Mutan on the
following day, and 1 arranged to go and visit their
camp on my return Messrs. Spurway and Avery
left on the 14th for the Seredan on their way to
Limbang and I left on my return stopping the night
at Long Temburu where about forty Punans bad
come to see me and brought a big supply of jungle
fruits for the party. The following day on the way
downriver I stopped and went to visit the Punan
camp which was on top of a steep hill, the camp
consisted of seven shelters, the biggest of which was
not more than eight feet long by 6 feel broad, these
seven huts represented the living quarters of
about fifty people. After spending about MI hour at
the camp I returned to the boat and proceeded down
river and arrived at Leppu Peniew for the night.
The next night was spent at. Tama Anie Detig’s
house, Tama Annie Deug had been ill for some
time, from what appeared to be consumption and was
obviously sinking fast. I arrived back at Baram the
following afternoon.
Telegraphs and Telephones.—149 wireless mes-
sages were received and 129 messages despatched.
Trade and Shipping.—The s.s. Gladys made one
trip during the month, total imports and exports
for the month being:—

