SATURDAY. SEPTEMBER 7. 1928. NOTES. (August)
THE following appointments appear in the Government Gazette of August 16th: Miss R. Silcock to be Matron of the General Hospital. Mr. C. F. Birt to be an Assistant Executive Engineer in the Public Works Department. Mr. T. M. Griffiths to be a Land Officer and Dr. C. 0. Gange to be Assistant Health Officer. THE Post Office is extending the insured letter service to Baram from 1st September. Insured letters will be forwarded and des¬patched by s.s. Gladys only. THE Norwegian Steamer s.s. Dampto arrived at Pending on the 8th from Hong¬kong, under charter of Messrs. The Sarawak Timber Company, Limited, to load timber at their works at Telok Serabang for China. S.S. Dampto is a steel screw steamer of 1430 registered net tonnage, and has visited Sarawak previously to embark coal cargoes from Sadong under the name of Chefoo. She is commanded by Captain E. A. Johnson, and is manned with a crew of 6 European officers and 125 Asiatics. She sailed for Hongkong on the 29th and a large number of persons took advantage of the direct voyage by travelling as deck passengers. His Highness the Rajah will hold a review of the Sarawak Rangers at the Fort Parade Ground on 26th September, and will afterwards present Long Service Medals and Decorations to those Government servants who have been awarded these marks of re¬cognition of their loyal services. Everybody who wishes to witness this ceremony is cor¬dially invited to be present.
Boats will be available at Pengkalan Batu at 7.30 a.m.
The End of His Highness the Rajah’s
Steam Yacht “Zahora.”
On the morning of Friday, 10th August, 1928, there passed to her last anchorage in tow of s.s. Alice Lorraine and s. l. Lucile the old steel single screw steamship Zahora of 225 tons and 365 horse¬power.
This vessel had been used as the Royal Yacht of Sarawak by both the late Rajah Sir Charles Brooke and the present Rajah since 1896.
 She was to have been sunk with Naval honours in deep water, but owing to the general shallowness of the sea around this coast and the likelihood of her becoming a danger to shipping, it was finally decided to beach her on the mud flats off Pulau Salak, Santubong, in close vicinity to the old paddle steamer Adeh beached in November 1927
The ship's bell and the two figure-heads, the first of which was damaged in a collision with s.s. A lice Lorraine in 1906, and the second figure-head which Was made locally, have now been housed in the Sarawak Museum.
The Egg Plant.
To vegetable growers in Sarawak it is interesting to know that the egg plant or aubergine (trong) seed imported by His Highness the Rajah is a complete success. Vegetables of over two katis have been grown and the average yield per hush is very good. The seed was planted at the 12th mile in poor soil with¬out any fertilising agencies whatever. The recent drought was responsible for the crop having taken some time to mature—about five months from seed— but under more favourable conditions of weather and soil very heavy yields ought to he expected with more rapid growth.
Sutton's seed (from which these were grown) is sold in shilling packets and in three varieties long purple. New York purple and white. His Highness the Rajab is now experimenting in American maize, vegetable marrows, English cucumbers and the larger kinds of gourds (labu) .—(Contributed.)
Sarawak Association.
His Highness the Tuan Muda was in the Chair at the Fifth Annual Dinner held at the Trocadero Restaurant on 11th July, 1928. Forty members in all sat down to table.
Messrs. H. C. Brooke Johnson, R. V. Carr and S. T. Ennion, who had accepted, were unavoidably prevented from attending.
After the toasts of H.M. the King and H.H. the Rajah, tbe Chairman proposed the health of the Honorary Members, responded to by Sir Gilbert Grindle and Mr. Pountney; Sir Percy Cunyng- hame proposed the health of the Chairman which was drunk with musical honours and suitably acknowledged.
Judging from the remarks of most of those pie- sent and from the late hour to which the proceedings were carried on, the dinner was a great success.
The following were present : His Highness the Tuan Muda of Sarawak (President), Sir Gilbert Grindle, A. M. Pountney (Honorary Members), Messrs. H. D. Aplin, E. O. Bruce, J. M Bryan, Capt. Carstares-Dunlop, Mr. H. La Chard, Professor W. E. Le Gros Clark, Mr. D. B. Crane, Lt.-Col. Sir Percy Cunynghame, Messrs. J. C. Ferrier, A. M. Forrest, Dr. C. 0. Gauge, Capt. W. R. Barry Gifford, Messrs. G. C. Gillan, J. Baring Gould, E. S. Holl, Dr. C. Hose, Messrs C. Willes Johnson (Hon. Secretary), H. S. B. Johnson, H. Wynd am Jones, H. H. Kortright. Capt. A. S. Lowe, Capt. C. P. Lowe, Messrs. C. MacAlpine, S. R. Maw. R. Pawle, A. A Rennie, Major F. W. Richards, J. F. Kowlatt, Major H. W. V. Scott, Rev. A. F., Sharp, Messrs. L. E. Slade. J. A. Smith. P. J. Stewart, K. Thorburn, G. J. D. Walters, and A. B. Ward.
Miri Amateur Dramatic Society.
"MIXED GRIM,."
Nothing is more depressing than an inferior mixed grill, which usually consists of about three meagre ingredients. The Miri Dramatic Society, however, gave us a most generous “Mixed Grill” on 14th July, containing nineteen ingredients, all of which were, as its previous production had been. “Just the Stuff.”
It is impossible to consider all the artistes and items separately—equally impossible not to comment on some of the more outstanding ones. Mrs. Bettany was prominent as usual throughout the programme, excelling herself in vocal and yet more in facial expression ; as Mr. St. John Ervine would say—"an actress, ladies and gentlemen!” Mr. North, as the licensed buffoon of the gang, filled the gap left by the enforced absence of Mr. Stickland from the cast. We must add in passing that Mr. Stickland's speech on behalf of the Organ Fund formed a delightful and unexpected addition to the “Mixed Grill.” Mrs. Bishop’s wit and quickness in duet and dialogue and her general versatility makes her a most valuable member of the Dramatic Society. On course "Solly and his Piano” are always a joy. We only regret that approaching home leave will so soon deprive us of the pleasure of hearing him again for some time.
A mere enumeration of the parts played by Mr. Harry Bishop before he even appeared on the stage, to wit, producer, stage manager, musical director, part author, designer and painter of scenery, fill us with amazement and admiration— add to these that he acted, sang, and danced, with equal ability thoughout the evening and it is easy to see that he was the pivot and mainspring of the whole performance. Needless to say his task was made easier by the talent and energy shown by each member of "the gang” and especially by that of Mr. Saker. on whom, as accompanist, there rested such an almost continuous burden of responsibility.
From previous experience we expected at least one outstanding decorative number—we got it in "Honeymoon Lane,” with its charming Dolly Vardon costumes and picturesque setting. When "Melody Land” opened with “Ole Man River” sympathetically sung in a partial darkness, admir¬ably suited to the haunting wistful melody, we began to feel that a new and especially attractive departure was being made with negro spirituals, but alas! the scene ended in a blaze of light and a blare of hackneyed jazz.
Perhaps we laughed most over the "Three Spinsters.” Mrs. Bettany, Mrs. Bishop and Mrs. Kerr, made three ideal spinsters, and this number was probably the hit of the evening.
The four sketches though played with much spirit, and often amusing, were rather too trivial and slight. Mention should be made, however, of the two “Ladies of 'Oxton” (complete with pails and scrubbing brushes) ns cleverly portrayed by Mrs. Bishop and Mrs. Stickland. Messrs. Bettany and Pracy as the husbands of these two "ladies” took their parts well.
Mr. Andrews’ songs were much enjoyed, especially "The Wheel-tapper.”
Mr. Bishop announced at the end of the show that the next venture would be a straight piece (or rather a crook drama) and we much look forward to seeing a fuller display of histrionic talent that has so far been given rather tantalizingly little scope.
On Saturday the 28th July “Mixed Grill," with several fresh ingredients, was again presented in honour of the Hon. and Mrs. T. G. Cochrane, who have just arrived in Miri. The show was received with even greater enthusiasm than on the previous occasion.
As an extra item Mr. Dickson showed the very interesting cinematograph picture which he took of the launching of the No. 2 A Sea Line.
It was announced during the performance that the Organ Fund Appeal had resulted in the whole of the $700 needed being subscribed.
“Mixed Grill” was undoubtedly a great success and we hope that the next production will be given as soon as possible.
Mr. Harry Bishop and his "gang" have our best thanks for this excellent show.—(Contributed)
British North Borneo.
The ninety-first half-yearly meeting of the British North Borneo (Chartered) Company was held on July 17, at Biver Plate House, Finsbury Circus, E.C.
After Mr. Cecil F. Collins, the acting Secretary to the Company, had read the notice convening the meeting, Major-General Sir Neill Malcolm, K.C.B., D.S.O. (President of the Company), who was in the chair, said, in the course of his speech : It is a great satisfaction to me to be able to meet the share¬holders of this company with a statement of accounts which—(or the first time since I have had the honour of being your President—shows a very satisfactory profit. Last year—that is, for 1926— you will remember that we had a loss of over £2,000. The accounts which are before us to-day show a realized profit of more than £56,000, which has been arrived at after writing down the value of our telegraph system by the substantial amount of £10,422 7s. 5d.,and making full and proper provision for every form of depreciation.
As is stated in the report, the revaluation of our assets—which has taken three years' work—is now completed, and I am in the happy position of being able to assure you that your property and business have at last been placed upon a thoroughly sound commercial basis. For that reason it is quite unnecessary for me to deal with the accounts at length as I have done on previous occasions. They are perfectly clear and straightforward, requiring no further explanation. Had anyone suggested to me when I first became connected with the com¬pany that within two years' time we should be in the position in which we actually find ourselves to-day I am afraid that I should not have taken him very seriously.
The recovery has been much more rapid than I or any other member of the Court ever thought possible.
Moreover, not only are the affairs of the company on a thoroughly sound commercial basis, but they are remarkably free from the ordinary commercial risks. Your interests and your risks are quite usually widespread. The capital which yon have provided has opened up a whole new area of the world You are directly concerned in every phase of the lives of some 300,000 people ; and in one way or another 300,000 people are contributing to your revenues. In this sense we may claim to be one of the largest employers in the world, and for this reason 1 hope to be able to show that we can face the present very serious fall in the value of rubber with comparative equanimity.
More than once in past addresses 1 have referred to our dependence upon rubber for our prosperity. Since the introduction of restriction we have benefited by the high price of that commodity; now that the boom days are over we cannot hope not to suffer. It is true that we draw no direct revenue from rubber, for we have as yet no export duty such as there is in Malaya, but already we are feeling the effects in our banking, our railway receipts and our Customs. How great the shrinkage will be we cannot yet tell, and this very uncertainty makes it absolutely necessary for us to husband our resources and to conduct our business on the most conservative lines. 1 must say that I have the greatest sympathy with those shareholders who have written to me complaining that there is again no dividend for them.
One shareholder has gone so far as to ask me to express his “dismay and disappointment’’ at the non-payment of a dividend. I do so at his request, but I consider that in the present state of un¬certainty the Court has taken the only possible course, aid that any distribution of profits would be absolutely unjustifiable. The exceptionally large number of proxies which have been sent in encourage us to believe that this view is supported by a very big majority of 'he shareholders.
Fortunately, however, there are several en¬couraging factors in the situation which we need not overlook. The new tariff which came into force last December is proving a great success; immigration figures continue to be good; and revenue is rising steadily. More than all, the new land terms, com¬bined with our road-making scheme, are an unqualified success. I use those words advisedly. Last year I said that I hoped that the numbers of approved applications for land would exceed 1,000. We fell short of that figure simply because the survey department could not keep abreast of the work.
The figures for the last quarter of the year were, therefore, disappointing, but for the first quarter of this year they exceeded all previous records, and for the first five months the number of approved appli¬cations is 498, covering 4,270 acres, against 344 covering 3,367 acres during the same period of 1927, when the price of rubber was almost twice what it is to-day.
The immigration figures are also satisfactory, being practically equal to those for 1927, and more than five times those for the same period in 1926. It is not too much to say that under the influence of these two factors—land terms and road develop¬ment—the country is undergoing a remarkable and most interesting change in character. It is no longer a land of only a few large companies, whose profit are distributed in London, but is rapidly becoming a home for Chinese peasant proprietors, working and living under British administration.
I know of no parallel to this state of affairs in any part of the world, and I have sufficient faith in the Chinese peasant—and more than all in British administration—to look with confidence to the future.
The Chinese peasant will not only invest his earnings in the country, but in due course will help to provide the necessary labour for the great companies. That I is, 1 venture to think, a most satisfactory stale of ' affairs, and far more important to us than a tempo¬rary setback in the rubber industry.
Between December 31, 1927, and June 30 of i this year, the value of our holdings in rubber has fallen by £38,000, not a very large figure when you consider the. total sum of our investments, over £900,000, as you may see by reference to the accounts for 1927. Against that, other investments have improved, notably our own debentures, which on June 30, stood at about 88, and the shares of the timber company, which is doing quite well. No doubt there will be some depreciation to betaken into account next year owing to the rubber crisis, but 1 hope that will not be very serious.
To sum up, while the existing situation renders it imperative for us to act upon the most conservative lines, I consider that so long as we do so we need have no great anxiety about either our revenue or our capital account, and that, as 1 have already said, we can face the rubber slump with equanimity. Had it come two years ago, before the bouse bad been put in older, most certainly this would not have been the case. I have dealt with this subject at some length, as it is by far the most important factor in our economic problem. Had it not been for the slump we should be in a very happy position to-day. I hope that 1 am not too optimistic when I say that even in the very middle of the slump there is no real ground for despondency.
Apart from rubber, I think I may say that the country is doing very well. More settled conditions in Chinn have reacted very favourably upon the timber company, whose products are also beginning to be highly appreciated in this country. I believe that in this respect our difficulties are now safely behind us.
At our meeting last December 1 said that we were —in my opinion—almost within sight of the end of our difficulties. I venture to think that the report and accounts for 1927 fully justify that modest degree of optimism.
Captain A. G. Cowie, in seconding the motion, expressed satisfaction with the impressions he had gained during his recent visit tn Borneo.
Mr. Reginald Woodward, a shareholder, congratu¬lated the President and the Court upon what had been done in so short a time. What it did amount to was that in the space of two years things had been pulled round in an astounding manner.
The report and accounts were adopted, and preposed amendments in the deed of settlement were approved.—China Express.
Cicadidae from Northern Sarawak.
BY THE LATE DR. J. C. MOULTON.
The collection of Cicadas brought together by Dr. E. Mjoberg during his expeditions to Mt. Murud and Mt. Dulit and neighbouring country numbers 52 specimens representing 9 genera and 16 species. Among them are two new species one of which represents a most interesting new genus. These were described in my recently published monograph on the Cicadas of Malaysia, but the descriptions are republished here to form a com¬plete record of the valuable collections made by' Dr. Mjoberg in Northern Sarawak, particularly in the mountainous region of Mt. Murud.
Nearest to Pomponia decem. but differs in the longer rostrum, smaller expanse of tegmina, more rounded opercula, heavier mottlings on me- sonotum. and heavier infuscations on the tegmina. It lacks the intra-neural smoky tinge characteristic of the apical areas in decem. The ocelli in that species are not on black ground-colour as in rajah. Both species occur together in the same region.
One male of the three examples of rajah has a second infuscated nervule closing the 3rd apical area on the left tegmen
KALABITA new. gen.
Moulton. F.M.S. Museum Journal, 1923, p. 116.
Head including eyes considerably narrower than base of mesonotum. its length about equal to space between the eyes, its lateral margins tumid but continuous; pronotum considerably shorter than mesonotum, narrowed anteriorly, lateral margins convex anteriorly, sharply concave posteriorly; abdomen slightly longer than space between apex of front and base of cruciform elevation ; tympana completely covered, tympanal covering about as broad as long, but narrowed anteriorly; opercula short very globose, wider than abdominal margin and conspicuous from above ; rostrum just passing posterior coxae ; tegmina and wings hyaline, the former spotted.
Type K. operculata described below, from Mt. Murud. Kalabit country', Northern Sarawak, Borneo.
This interesting new genus resembles Lahugada Distant, from Assam, in the globose opercula and narrow head, but differs otherwise in many particulars. It is possibly' more nearly allied to Oncotympana Stal, which, however, is remarkable for the small opercula and enlarged globose tympanal coverings. In this genus the opercula are enlarged and globose, while the tympanal coverings are small.
KALABITA OPERCULATA n. sp. (Plate 14 fig-1)
Moulton. F.M.S. Museum Journal, 1928, p. 117.
Front of head testaceous, with castaneous striations on face; vertex testaceous, centrally castaneous and with narrow castaneous fasciae at base of antennae Pronotum testaceous with central castaneous fascia, a castaneous spot at base of lateral margin Mesonotum, castaneous except for two incurved olivaceous lines meeting just before the cruciform elevation. Abdomen dark castaneous tympanal coverings and opercula blackish. Tegmina hyaline, the bases of apical areas except the 6th infuscated ; a row of well- defined hind-marginal neural spots. Wings clear hyaline. Clavus of tegmina and wings greenish- grey. Exp. tegm. 93—99 mm. Total length abdomen (excl. tegm.) 33 —34 mm.
Type from Mt. Murud 6,500 leet, Sarawak, 14th November, 1922, coll. Dr. E. Mjoberg. Deposited in British Museum.
Three from the same locality in the Sarawak Museum. A curious feature about this series of four specimens is the variation in the neuration of the tegmina. The base of the 4th apical area on the right tegmen in three specimens is closed by an additional infuscated nervule; in one of these three the left tegmen is similarly abnormal. The base of the 1st apical area is crossed by one additional infuscated nervule in both tegmina in one specimen, by two in another, by two on the left tegmen and one of the right in a third, and by two on the left tegmen alone in the fourth specimen. 
This is the smallest Cicada known in Borneo; it measures only 20—25 mm. across the tegmina, while the largest Bornean species, Pomponio morula, measures about 200 mm., or nearly 8 inches across the tegmina when set.
Prof C. F Baker took 2 and a of N, tener at Sandakan in British North Borneo These three together with Dr. Mjoberg's pair from Sarawak are the only specimens known from Borneo. Prior to their capture the species was only known from the Philippines.
Two others species of this curious primitive genus are found in Madagascar and another in the Philippines.
In a collection such as this, particularly that part of it which is the result of Dr. E. Mjoberg’s work during his prolonged stay on Mt. Murud, the absence of certain species is often just as interesting as the presence of other species.
In the Mt. Murud collection for instance, one would have hoped to see Pomponia graecina, a mountain species confined to Borneo. And of the two rare species of Nabalua. at present only known (in Borneo) from Mt. Kinabalu might be expected to occur there, especially as one of them (N. mascula occurs on Mt Ophir in the Malay Penin¬sula. The genera Purana, Maua and Cryptotym - pana are unrepresented, although collecting on other Bornean mountains usually results in the capture of one or more species of these genera. The absence of any species of Huechys, brightly' coloured little Cicadas, and of Mogannia which has four species from Borneo, chiefly from mountain parts, is remarkable and would suggest perhaps that Mt. Murud. although the home of one or two extremely interesting species, has neverthe less rather a scanty Cicadid fauna.
His Highness the Rajah’s Birthday
Sports.
Wednesday, 26th September, 1928.
Programme of School Championships and Sports to be held on the S.P.G. Ground on Wednesday, 26th September, 1928, His Highness the Rajah’s Birthday.
To Commence at 2.30 p.m.
Not more than 3 boys from each school may represent their school in boys' events.   Entries for all events to be sent to Archdeacon
Champion at St. Thomas' School before Septem¬ber 15th and to be typewritten.
No entrance fees.
Two Prizes in each event.
There will also be Sideshows on ground.
L. N. REYNOLDS, Honorary Secretary, Sports Committee.
Rajah’s Birthday Sports Fund.

I am, Sir,
The contract is not to rebuild the Sibu Bazaar hut to construct certain blocks of shophouses amounting to about one-seventh of the total number required to replace the shops destroyed by lire.
With reference to the paragraph published in the Sarawak Gazette of 1st August in which it is stated that a contract has been given to Messrs. Gammon & Company of Singapore to rebuild the Sibu Bazaar.
SIR,
To
The Editor, Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
SIBU,
9th August, 1928.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.] Your’s faithfully,
H. L. OWEN,
Resident, Third Division.
NOTE.—Entries for the two Tournaments (men’s doubles and mixed doubles) will not be accepted unless there are at least two couples competing. Partners must be drawn for.
By order of the Tennis Sub-Committee.
O. LANG.
OPTIONAL POOL HANDICAP.
Reynolds and Landon + 20. Clark and Middle- mas + 30, Crocker and Walsh — 30, Lang and Edwards—90. Fenwick and Allman + 20, Swayne and Pitt-Hardacre + 40, Binnie and Flood-Page + 10, Boult and Marjoribanks—60, Chater and Bathurst— 10, Bean and H. H. the Rajah — 40.
BILLIARDS HANDICAP (250 UP).
Marjoribanks — JOO, Bean — 35, Chater + 25, Humphreys — 75, Bengtsson — 50, Allman + 50, Clark — 50. Crocker — 25, H. H. the Rajah + 50, Benfield —75, Fenwick —50, Bathurst — 75.
TENNIS HANDICAP (MIXED DOUBLES). Edmett and Mrs Brooke — 15. Crocker and Miss Tait + 15, H. H. The Rajah and Mrs. Champion Scr., Boult and Mrs. Fenwick —£15, Fenwick and Mrs Smith -f- 115, H. Adams and Mrs. Bean + 1/215, Hayward and Mrs. Gillan + 30, Boyd and Mrs. Hay¬ward + 15. TENNIS HANDICAP (MEN'S DOUBLES). Boyd and Cunynghame Scr., Boult and Crocker — £15, H. Adams anU Fenwick + 415, Lang and Landon Scr.. Walsh and Allman — J15, Edmett and H. H. the Rajah — £15, Middleman and Moir —15, Hayward and Griffiths — 15.
Kuching Football Club.
“BLACK AND WHITE" TROPHY.
First Round.
Medical and Health beat Municipal and Treasury 4- 1.
European Merchants v. Land, Forestry and Survey draw 2—2.
New World v. Sarawak Steamship United draw 1—1 ; replay S. S. U. won 3—2.
The following were byes: — Police No. 1 team, Police No. 2 team, Public Works Department, Wireless. Sarawak Rangers.
Second Round.
Steamship United v. European Merchants or Land, Forestry and Survey. (Date to be arranged after replays for first round.)
Police Team No. 1 v. Sarawak Rangers. Saturday, 1st September.
Wireless v. Public Works Department. Wednesday, 5th September.
Police No. 2 Team v. Medical and Health, Satur¬day, 8tb September.
The draw for the semi-finals will take place on Saturday, 15th September, on Kuching Football Club ground at 6.30 p m.
1st Round.
Dr. Chetti—15 heat Dr. Nadarajah-f-15, 4—6. 6—2, 6—2. Ong Hap Leong+15 beat Ong Siow Sian—15, 3 -6, 6—0, 6—3- Wee Ah Chew + 15 beat Lim Cheng Soon—15, 6-1, 6—3. Ho Hong Soon—15 beat Rakawi +15, 6—0,6—0. Tan Thian Sang—15 beat Lim Ah Bee scr. 6—3,6—1. Chan Kim Leong—15.3 bent Ong Eng Ilin scr. 8—6, 6—2. Lim Soon Kow scr. beat Ong Kwan Hin—15, 6-3. 6-3.
Result of the Handicap Singles Tennis Tourna¬ment.
2nd Round.
Wee Kheng Chiang scr. (Bye) beat Dr. Chetti scr. 4—6, 6 —3, 7—5. Wee Ah Chew scr. beat Ong Hap Leong scr. 7—5, 6—0. Tan Thian Sang scr. beat Ho Hong Soon—15.3,6—1,6—0. Chan Kim Leong—15 beat Lim Soon Kow-f-15, 7—5, 6—4.
Semi-Final.
Wee Ah Chew + 15 beat Wee Kheng Chiang—15, 6—0, 6—4. Tan Thian Sang scr. beat Chan Kim Leong—15.3, 6—3, 6—4.
Final.
Tan Thian Sang—15 beat Wee Ah Chew scr. 6-3, 6-4.
Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang has kindly offered Prizes for a Handicap Doubles Tennis Tournament which will be competed for on 3rd September, 1928.
It is proposed to hold an open Championship Tennis Tournament for men's singles and men’s doubles at the Sarawak Union during the month of October.
Mr. Lint Song Kee is presenting championship cup and prizes for the singles, and Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang the same for the doubles.
Competitors are invited to send m their names to Mr. Lim Cheng Soon, Sarawak Union. Entries close on 29th September, 1928.
Police Notice.
TRAFFIC CONTROL, AUTUMN RACE
MEETING, 1928
After the hour of 11 a.m. on 22nd and 24tb in¬stant. all Cars, Buses, Motor Lorries, Motor Cycles, and Carriages, must proceed to the Race Course via the Ban Hock Road only, and up to the hour of 7 p m. on each day, they shall return by the Sekama Road.
O. LANG.
Commissioner of Police, Sarawak.
Exceptions: —
His Highness the Rajah’s Car.
Red flags will carry no authority.
After depositing passengers at the Grandstand, vehicles will line up on the extreme left-hand side of the Grandstand Road one behind the other, and within four yards of each other, facing away from the Grandstand.
No VEHICLES MAY PARK ON THE RACE COURSE.
Rickshaws and pedal Bicycles may proceed at any time via Central and Ban Hock Roads and may park on the left-hand side, opposite the Grandstand.
They will not be allowed to remain on any part of the road leading to the Grandstand, and must move to their parking ground without delay.
Extracts from Monthly Reports.
Sadong Colliery.
July, 1998.
Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager, Sadong Colliery, reports: —
The output, export, local consumption, conversion into coke and coal stock figures for the month were as follows: —
The representatives of the Silantek Prospecting Syndicate visited the Colliery during the 19th and 20th and inspected the mines, plans, and office accounts.
I was away prospecting the sandstone hills situate at the Ensingai headwaters from the 26lh to the 30th inclusive.
The dry weather had definitely set in, and the rainfall for the whole month was only 4'01 inches.
J. W. EVANS.
Manager.
Second Division.
July, 1998
BATANG LUPAR.
General.—On the 4th, accompanied by Abang Zin, N.O., I left for Engkilili in ml. Anne and on arrival Abang Latip, N.O., had nothing of importance to report. A number of Dyaks complained of Chinese taking land for pepper gardens without permission. In the afternoon I visited numerous pepper gardens; a great number of gardeners have already started gathering the fruit and the crop should be a fairly good one.
Next day I examined the new bazaar. It consists of sixteen shops and is completed except for the cementing of the ground floors ; this should be finished by end of the month I left Engkilili at 2.30 p.m., reaching Simanggang at 5.40 p.m.
Representatives of Chop "Ling Tek Long” of Singapore applied for land to erect a saw-mill and electric lighting plant; a suitable site was found at the mouth of 8. Tawang. The firm hope to have buildings erected in four months' time.
On the 9th I left for Saratok, accompanied by Penghulus Jaul, Lambai and Mekoi, in order to attend the Saratok Regatta. Saratok was reached the same dav. I returned to Simanggang on the 14th.
On the 11th Datu Abang Haji Buassan was taken ill and I regret to say died on the 17th. The funeral took place next day, and was largely attended by all communities. The late Datu leaves a widow, Dayang Jinnah, and ten children. He started work in 1906 and was Native Officer at Lubok Antu for some years ; his work amongst the Ulu Ai Dyaks was invaluable. He was appointed Datu on 1st January, 1924, and received the Long Service Decoration in 1927.
Abang Mantaril, Assistant Sub-Inspector of Police, arrived from Kuching early in the month to do duty in this Division and the police force here have already taken on a smarter appearance. P.C. Drahman was sent to Betong and promoted to P. Lance- Corporal in place of Ngelambong.
On the 20th Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, Officer-in- Charge, Upper Saribas, arrived after visiting the ulus of Skrang, Lemanak, Engkari and Batang Ai.
Abang Sedik, Acting Native Officer, PUSA, returned to Simanggang to do duty as Abang Haji Dulkarrim had returned from the “Haj" and took over his former duties as Native Officer.
Dr. W. Hutchison, M.O., arrived from Kuching in the m.l Santosa on the 25th in order to visit the various stations in this Division. He visited Eng¬kilili, accompanied by Mr. R. H. P. Langton, and on the 30th be proceeded to Betong via Tisak.
There was no rain from July the 9th to the end of the month and drinking water had to be carried from a long way off.
1 herewith append Mr. G. R. H. Aruudell's report on his trip to the Ulu Ai.
"I left Betong on 2nd July, went up to the Layer to Tebalau Leaving Tebalau the next day I examined the land in dispute between Mawan and Lanyau in the Jaloh and went to Nanga Linsom, where I spent the night.
“The night of the 4th I spent at N. Tiga and on the 5th walked across to Penghulu Unji's house at 8. Bias in the Spak. Here I settled one or two cases and the next day left for the Skrang. The road taken crossed the Blas and followed the S. Tong up stream a short way then crossed the 8. Lebayu and mounted Bukit Emperdu, a very steep and high hill, on the top of which is a house of 16 doors. This house, although only for farming, is a big one, being just as roomy and well built, as the real long house at S. Blas. I went down the other side of the Em- perdu and almost immediately climbed Bukit Bling- on which is higher then Emperdu but not quite so steep. I followed the ridge for some way and even¬tually dropped into S. Buak which I followed down stream for a short way. then crossing a low ridge dropped into Lalis stream which I followed for an hour or more to its mouth nearly opposite N. Plok in the Skrang. Here the night was spent at Penghulu Labang’s house.
“The next day, the 7th, it rained hard until mid-day and as it was said to be useless to attempt to reach the Lemanak that day I only went down river to Ijun's house nt N. Bunk.
“On the 8th our party started for Lemanak by way of S. Entalan. S. Senan, S. Lalang, S. Arap, Tinting Penyangit, S. Jeringut, S. Blaih, finally dropping down to the. Lemanak a short way above N. Uyau. This was an easy walk, there being no hills to speak of all the way.
“The next day we were unlucky as the people of N. Uyau said they knew of no road to the Engkari from there but only from N. Matoh some way down river. This road they said went to R. Ngalih in Ulu Penyebut and straight on to the Engkari. This was found to be untrue, everyone else in the river knowing of a shorter way to Ulu Penyebat from N. Uyau. Leaving N. Mutoh we walked to Buloh Antu and added to the carriers there. These men, instead of taking us to R. Ngalih, deliberately took as down the Penyebat to Mring's house in the Tipus. Here we found they were just about to start a bergawai and we were held up there for two nights.
"From the Tipus we went along a low ridge of hills to drop down to the Engkari at Nanga Ubu, thence to Spun and from Span to Ingkan’s house in the Ulu Tutong where we, spent the night.
“Leaving Ulu Tutong next day we went on to the Batang Ai We started by going up Tinting Sligi and along it to Tinting Muntang on the highest peak of which Berasap has thought fit to build his house. This, though the highest hill we had crossed, was an easy climb, no part of it being very steep. From there we went down to Ulu Telaus where we had lunch.
"We then went along the ridge above the Tutong, dropped down to Ulu Uboh, went up this stream for some way, crossed a low ridge to Ulu Spipit. Tins stream we followed down to its mouth in the Batang Ai, where Penghulu Kana now has his house, Kijam being the Tuai Rumah.
“The next day we went up to Penghulu Ramba's house at N. Busoh, an hour or two’s poling above N Doha Baya.
“Tire next day we spent fishing above Ramba's house and caught about 100 big fish with a jala alone, we went up as far as Wong Mepal a short way above N. Mujau where Ramba is going to make his new house.
‘‘There is little to report from the Batang Ai except that Ramba is very eager to kill a pig with the Kayans of Belaga and Nanga Pila with whom he has not as yet made peace. Failing that he says he intends to make war on them. Bamba. Ngindang, and Ingkak, all brothers, are together at N. Blusok, but Ramba's younger brother lives down river, a very short way above Lubok Antu and close to Penghulu Tarang.
“Leaving Penghulu Ramba's house the next day we went down river and after settling no incest case at N. Telaus went on to Nanga Bengap and spent the night there at Melingtang’s house
“The next day we reached Lubok Antu and spent the night there and next morning proceeded to Engkilili. At Engkilili I spent three nights and settled one or two cases. I also examined the land in dispute between the Merioh an Lemanak Dyaks.
“I finally reached Simanggang on July 20th.” SARIBAS.
Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, Officer-in-Charge, Belong, reports : —
On the 2nd of the month I left for the Ulu Layar and from there walked to the Ulu Batang Ai. I was away until the 22nd of the month. Penghulu Isek accompanied me.
There is little to report on affairs in the Layar. I examined the Jaloh land about which Mawan is again trying to open his complaint. It was even¬tually found in the old ease books that he had no grounds for complaint.
Sixteen motor vessels entered and cleared during the month.
KALAKA.
Mr. H. E. Cutfield, Acting District Officer, Kalaka, reports:—
Amongst a number of Malays to return from the pilgrimage to Mecca during the month was Abang Haji Dulkarrim, Native Officer, Pusa, and be resumed his duties in that capacity. Kabong and Roban were visited towards the end of the month.
Mr. Binnie of the Public Works Department paid a short visit to Kabong and Saratok from the 30th to 31st. The new clearing for the waterworks was visited and advice obtained with regard to the work to be done on the Saratok Fort. The Fort was to be cemented underneath but on pulling up the old billian flooring it was found that the foot of every post was completely rotten and it is considered necessary to build brick and cement pillars up to the gelegar of the floor of the officer’s quarters. Some of the old billian posts have sunk as much as 8 inches, and the fort is in none too safe a condition.
Contractor Lee Kai Tee arrived at the end of the month from Kuching with 15 coolies to take up the contracts for certain work on the Sebetan road and the making of a new road behind the new bazaar. Two masons and two mason coolies arrived with Mr. Binnie for the cementing of the Saratok
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER,
Resident, Second Division.
Third Division. SIBU.
July. 1928.
The Resilient of the Third Division reports:—
In the Resident's Court several Chinese traders were fined in connection with proceedings instituted by the Customs Department. A number of Civil claims were dealt with.
The Dyak Kudi, who wounded a number of Chinese in Binatang bazaar, was pronounced insane and ordered to be detained in the asylum. An Indian charged with a serious offence was acquitted, insuffi¬cient evidence being forthcoming.
Accompanied by the Divisional Treasurer I left Sibu for Rejang on the 14th instant, holding Court at that station on the Kith and leaving the following day for Matu. Whilst at Rejang I arranged for very necessary repairs to the Assistant District Officer's bungalow to be put in hand at once. The station at Matu was exceedingly well kept, both as regards grounds and buildings. There was a fair number of Civil claims to be dealt with and instructions were left as regards procedure in such cases, neither the Native Officers not the clerks having much accurate knowledge on the subject.
Arrangements were made for the telephone line between the bungalow and Court House (11/2 miles) to be erected at once and for the Matu-Daro line to be proceeded with as soon as possible.
I hope to be able to arrange for ten or twelve, new shops to be erected at Matu within the next few months, but the very low price of raw sago renders this difficult.
Leaving Matu on the 21st I arrived at Mukah at 6 a.m. Whilst at Mukah the matter of Land Regulations was discussed with the Native Officers.
I visited Oya and Dalat from the 25th to the 28th arriving at Sibu that evening.
The work of reconstructing the Sibu bazaar was started by the contractors and the foundations of a number of shops were well in hand by the end of the month.
Mr. J. S. Mudford, Superintendent of Customs, resigned as from 5th instant, and sailed for Singapore on the 9th. The Assistant Superintendent of Cus¬toms was dismissed. Wan Husin, Native Officer, returned from leave and resumed his duties.
The District Officer, Sibu, reports: —
Much damage was caused by burning newclearings. According to reports received at least 1000 acres of rubber has been destroyed of which approximately 200 was in bearing. At the time of writing the fires are still smouldering and only rain can prevent further damage. The cause cannot be definitely traced to anyone in particular.
Penghulu Langgong was found to have contracted leprosy and was sent to Kuching.
A Foochow woman named Ting F,e Moi fell into the river and was drowned. Another Foochow woman hanged herself. A Foochow Chinese named Tang Neng Sing murdered his sister-in-law and seriously wounded his brother on the night of the 31 st and gave himself up to the police. The wounded man was taken to hospital and it is hoped may recover.
A Dyak in the Pakan Julau died from loss of blood caused by a wound in the foot by the spur of a fight¬ing cock. Saweng, a Kanowit Dyak, was charged with murdering his wife Unchong and throwing her body into the river. A .Rejang Chinese cut up four
Dyaks, including Penghulu Ambu, but none of them were dangerously wounded. Kilat's house of seven¬teen doors in the Assan was burnt out. Two mys¬terious fires occurred at Repok tor which the Chinese blamed Dyaks hut. there appears to be no evidence to support this.
The Native Officer, Rejang, reported that a tambi named Inu asked to he locked up in jail as he had high fever and feared he might amok. He. was treated by the local dresser but was Inter found hanging in his cell.
A Dyak named Brauk, at Sarikei. was accidently shot by his brother-in-law Jingga but not seriously wounded.
Penghulu Nibong applied for a school on same lines as Bating Assam He was told to erect a building and start the school which, if approved, would be recommended for a grant-in-aid next year.
KAPIT
The Acting Assistant District Officer reports : —
At the beginning of the, month Abang Ahmat. Native Officer, Belaga, left for the Sungei Lutau to visit the Punans and returned to Belaga on the 17th instant. On the 27th instant. Native Officer Abang Abdul Gapor left for Nanga Gat, Sungei Mujong. and Sungei Sut. Ho was requested to arrange for someone to act as future caretaker for Gat Port and to inform Abang Sleh, Native Officer, Gat, that he is transferred to Kapil and is to bringdown to Kapit the Government, cows, prisoners, and police at present stationed at Nanga Gat.
From the 12th to the 16th instant I visited Song and Sungei Katibas. using the Government 8 h.p. Johnson Outboard Motor which went satisfactorily except for one day when it refused to start.
A now prau has been kindly presented to Govern-ment by Penghulus Sirai. Priak and Matu since the old Government praus at Song were no longer fit for use.
The Divisional Medicial Officer, Sibu, reports :
During the month seventy-eight people were admitted into hospital, making a total of one hundred and fifteen in-patients.
During the month there was a marked increase in cases of dysentery and acute diarrhoea and also typhoid. Although the bazaar is considerably cleaner there has been a long spell of dry weather which has no doubt helped to increase the incidence of the disease.
I was absent from the station for only one day during the month to attend the exhumation of a murdered Dyak woman at Kanowit Two other post-mortem examinations were carried out, one on the body of a Chinese found dead in the bazaar, a large fatty embilus was found in the right ventricle, the other on the body of a Chinese woman who had committed suicide by hanging.
MUKAH AND OYA.
The Resident of Mukah and Oya reports:—
Divisional Land Officer and Divisional Surveyor arrived here on the first instant The latter went up rivet to lake Some observations, the former put the present Land Regulations in force ; I accompanied him to Oya and Dalal for same purpose from 6th to 8th, be returning to Sibu via the Cut.
His Highness the Rajah, Chief Secretary and the Judicial Commissioner paid a visit to Oya. Dalat and Mukah, from 10th to 12th, sailing for Bintulu. The principal matter brought before His Highness was asking not to come under new Land Regula-
lions The matter was left until the return of Datu Udin from up river, who now considers that they should come under Land Order as other districts.
Mr. Gilbert and Datu Udin, accompanied by Penghulu Inting, visited all Dyaks in Mukah and Selangau rivers from 5th, returning on 21st instant.
The Resident Third Division and Divisional Trea¬surer arrived on the 21st, leaving for Oya and Dalat on 25th instant; I accompanied them, returning on the 27th.
The waterworks at Sungei Petanak have been visited three times this month; the engine has to run every other day owing to the drought. During the month the R. C. Convent has been connected up with a water supply from the Kuala Road.
The Tamil gang have been employed generally in making the road from Fort to Kampong Mat and widening and improving the surface.
The Leonora has been docked most of the month. She is not for work until overhauled, as the cylinder block wants welding and the shaft is worn out.
The s.s. L'Aubaine came into the river once. M.S. Kim Chin Tech, on its way to Mukah from Kuching, dropped her propeller and had to proceed under sail, taking fifty-six hours to get here instead of twenty.
OYA AND DALAT.
The principal event of the month was the visit of His Highness the Rajah to this district.
His Highness, who was accompanied by the Chief Secretary, Mr H. B. Crocker, and the Judicial Com-missioner, Mr. J. T. L. S Boyd, arrived at Ova on the morning of the 11th and at once proceeded on to Dalat where he was met by the principal people and at once went into the Court House and met all those who wished to speak to him.
After this His Highness walked through the bazaar to the Mission and after a short time there returned to Maimuna which at once left for Oya.
In the afternoon of the same day His Highness met Oya people in the Court House and the next morning left for Mukah.
On the 6 th the Resident of Mukah and Oya arrived, accompanied by Mr C. E Pascoe, Divisional Land Officer, and Mr. W. Harnack, Assistant Superin¬tendent of Surveys.
Various matters affecting both land and survey affairs were discussed both here and at Dalat.
On the 8th the Resident returned to Mukah and I left for the ulu Oya in m.l. Mentis.
Mr. Pascoe, returned to Sibu viii Sungei Kut the next day. I returned from the ulu in m.l. Nellie on the 20th.
On the 25th the Resident Third Division, accom-panied by the Divisional Treasurer, arrived in s.s. L'Aubaine.
The Resident of Mukah and Oya arrived earlier on the same day by pony.
The Resident Third Division discussed various matters with the local headmen while Mr. Cotterill audited the accounts both here and at Dalat.
Mr. Adams returned to Mukah on the 27th and Messrs. Owen and Cotterill to Sibu the next day.
On the 31st The Resident of Mukah again arrived to hear a Resident’s Court case and to attend a tuba fishing at Dalat.
H. L. OWEN, Resident, Third Division.
Fourth Division.
MIRI.
June, 1928.
The Resident, Fourth Division, reports: —
H.M.''. Herald anchored m the roads on the 2nd and again on the 9th. The 4th was observed as a Public Holiday to
celebrate the birthday of H.M. King George V.
The Miri Recreation Club held their animal sports
meeting on the padang.
On the 8th I motored to Riam with the Assistant General Manager of Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., Mr. A. H. Noble, to inspect drilling operations which are being resumed there. Owing to transport difficulties the work had been held up for some time. Mr. K. H. Gillan, Postmaster-General, accom¬panied by Mrs Gillan, arrived from Limbang on the llth, returning to Kuching by s.s. Gladys on the 22nd. Cant. Le Sueur and Mr Trechman visited Baram during the month in connection with Police and Treasury matters. Peaceful boycotting of the Japanese has been in evidence lately, the Chinese refusing to handle any Japanese cargo. July, 1928. Sea Line No. 2A was successfully launched from
Lulling on the 4th without a hitch or any descrip-
tion. Weather conditions on the day of launching
were ideal and very little trouble was experienced
in shackling on the towing cable and freeing the
hose of the pipe in the water.
The s.s. Buccinum and s.s. Eburna were used in line-a-head for towing the pipe our, to sea. The mooring of the two ships took a considerable time and it was 12.20 p.m. before they began towing. The operation was, however, performed in 30 minutes 49 seconds. The length of the line when completed will be approximately 15,200 feet. Mr. Horton proceeded to Sibil by a s. La Follette
on the 9th to take over the Shipping and Customs
Department there. Mi. B. A. Trechman acted tem-
porarily in charge of the Department here until
the arrival from Sibu of Mr. W. Lowry on the 14th.
.M.S. Herald anchored in the roads on the 7th
and again on the 13th.
H.M Y Maimuna anchored in the roads on the
16th at 7 a.m. with His Highness the Rajah on
board, accompanied by the Chief Secretary, the
Judicial Commissioner and the Commissioner of
Trade and Customs. His Highness was unable to
enter the Baram river as intended owing to a heavy
swell and proceeded direct to Limbang the same
day.
The Judicial Commissioner. Mr. T. Stirling Boyd, landed at Miri and proceeded to Sandakan the following day.
H.H.M.Y. Maimuna returned from the north on the 28th and, after dropping Mr. Hardie, proceeded direct to Kuching. The Right Rev. Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak arrived from Sandakan on the 27th and was still here at the end of the month. The General Manager Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., Hon. T. G. Cochrane, accompanied by Mrs. Coch¬rane, arrived on the -23rd. The District Officers of Baram end Bintulu visited the station dining the month. I proceeded to Baram with the District Officer on the 31st. On arrival there it was reported that a Chinese dentist in the bazaar had attempted to murder his wife but was prevented by the prompt action of the police. The woman was in a serious condition and, after being attended to at Baram. was sent by special launch to Miri Hospital.
Mr. Hill proceeded to Niah during the month in connection with the erection of the new Court House.
A serious cash occurred at Lutong on the 13th when a Chinese coolie struck Mr. J. H. Wells on the back of the head, as he was sitting at his desk, with a heavy piece of lead The injury inflicted was very severe and I am glad to be able to report that Mr. Wells is progressing favourably.
BARAM.
June, 1928.
The District Officer, Mr. E. V. Andreini. reports:—
I visited Long Lama together with the Lund Inspector and plotted out the land for the new Court house and barracks mere. Accompanied by Tuanku Drub man, N.O., I visited the Bakong river on the 11th going up to the Ulu Bakong and walk¬ing across to the Tinjar via Sungei Bok, Tuanku Drahman returning by boat. I went up the Tinjar as far as Long Miri, returning to Baram on the 20th.
Wan Mohamat, N.O., returned from visiting Punans at the various meeting places and reports that all is well with these people.
Some Leppu Tau from the Batang Kayan and some Kelabits from Ulu Baram came down ; the former in connection with their desire to return to Sarawak Territory.
Captain Le Siiem and Mr. Trechman visited the station on duty and I accompanied them to Bakong and Kuala Baram on their return.
I visited the Foochow colony, walking from Ulu Poyut to Lubok Nibong. Many of these people have not sufficient capital for the large amount of land they have taken up and, I am sorry to say, are unemployed and their gardens are neglected, whilst they are looking for work. Measures are being taken to help them find work and to see that they do not hold up hind that they are unable to develop.
Dresser Lazaroo returned from up river, having met sod treated many Punans. Later in the month he was sent to spend a week or so in a Lirong house with a view to making a thorough examina¬tion of these people who have a great deal of sickness. Dresser Su-aut has been helping to im¬prove the sanitation of the town • in addition to his other work and has been most useful.
July, 1928.
At the beginning of the month I visited Long Lama and the Tutoh, taking the contractor upto the former place to start work on Court House there. Later in the month I visited Miri, returning by way of the Ulu Riam to Bakong. Paymaster Lieutenant-Commander Rue of H.M S. Herald accompanied me on the latter trip and came on for short stay at Baram.
Most of the upriver chiefs were in Baram in expectation of His Highness the Rajah’s visit on the 15th instant, which was unfortunately post¬poned owing to state of the weather off Baram Bar.
BINTULU.
July, 1928.
June 1928.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, reports:—
The combined Native Officer and Police quarters at Tuban have now been completed and white¬washed. The quarters consist of two semi-detached houses with separate verandahs and a main entrance.
During the month six new Tilley Outdoor Sus-pension Lamps were received, making the total number now in use twelve in all. Of these, eight have been Disced at intervals in the bazaar, three have l>een placed on the road behind the bazaar and one has been erected on the end of the Fort wharf which serves as a guiding light for craft entering at night.
Travelling.—Tubau was visited twice this month from 10th to 13th and again from 21 st to 22nd, the substations Sebauh, Pandan and Labang being  visited en route.
At a meeting of the Tua Kampong to choose a successor to the late Penghulu Passu (deceased) it was unanimously voted that Ovat Mereng should be elected for this position and a letter was duly forwarded to the Resident, Fourth Division, for confirmation.
Mr. McLeod, A.C.F., Fourth Division, arrived here 7th instant and left for up river on a search for belian stands on 10th and was still away at the end of the month. Drs. Braendlen, Wilhelm and Laufer, of the Geological Department, Sarawak Oilfields Limited, Miri. arrived here by s.s. Angus on 19th and left for up river on 20th. Drs. Braend¬len and Wilhelm returned here on 28th and left again for Tatau on 30th.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Mr. H. B. Crocker, Chief Secretary, and Mr. T. Stir¬ling Boyd, Judicial Commissioner, was pleased to visit this station during the month, arriving by the H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on 13th instant. His High¬ness came ashore the next morning, being greeted by the various members of the community who were assembled at the Fort Wharf. Various mat¬ters were brought up before His Highness in the Fort during the morning. His Highness left the next morning at 9 a.m. for Kedurong, leaving the same evening at 10 p.m. for the north.
Mr. Hardie arrived by the La Follette on Satur¬day 13th and accompanied His Highness for the north.
Mr. McLeod arrived down river on Monday 2nd and left again for Tatau on 5th, returning to Miri via Bintulu again on 22nd. I was away at Miri in connection with various matters from June 22nd to 26th, returning to Bintulu again on 27th.
Mr. Avery arrived here on 12th and, after hav¬ing applied for a site to erect a jelutong factory, which was approved, started felling and clearing a few days later. Mr. Avery left for Kuching in s.s. Gladys on 19th to collect his men and materials.
On 18th a tremendous gale sprang up and, com¬bined with exceptionally high tides, produced floods in Bintulu that caused a great deal of damage, there being over two feet of water in some parts of the Government Road. Many of the kampong houses suffered considerably owing to the velocity of the wind.
On 1st instant the m l. Joan was sent to Kuching, being towed by the s.s. Sulong. for her annual over¬haul and was still away at the end of the month.
The m.l. Para was left here on 15th by Mr. Hardie, for service while the Joan was in Kuching.
C. F.RMEN, Acting Resident, Fourth Division.
Fifth Division.
LIMBANG.
July, 1928.
The Acting Resident of the Fifth Division re¬ports : —
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by the Chief Secretary and the Commissioner of Trade and Customs, arrived in the H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 17th. On the 19th it was intended to visit Trusan in the Maimuna, the Acting Assistant District Officer having very carefully marked out the channel, but the sea at the kuala was miming so high that it was impossible to attempt to enter the river and so Lawas was made instead. His Highness visited the Vamco Sawmill and was shown round by Mr. C. J Cook, and later the Lawas Rubber Estate, where the new type of coolie lines were pointed out to him. Labuan was visited on the 21st and Brooketon the same evening, from whence return to Limbang was made the next day; Brunei was visited on the 24th when His Highness, accompanied by the British Resident of Brunei, called on H .H. the Sultan. His Highness the Rajah left Limbang on the 25th, but was unfor¬tunately delayed at Brooketon by bad weather until the 28th when he left for Kuching.
Whilst in the division numerous important matters were brought before His Highness and these have been referred to separately.
The road coolies were employed in making up the surface of the road as far as the laterite deposit at the 3rd mile, in readiness for use of a lorry which has been sanctioned for work in making up the Main Bazaar Road. Three mowers were engaged to work in the mornings on the golf course which, after having been neglected for some time, has now been recleared and made fit for play again. A preliminary investigation was made of the proposed new road to Panderuan, and a rentis is being cut to enable levels to be taken.
Work at the dispensary was very light and only two minor cases were admitted to hospital. The Medical Officer of Labuan paid his usual monthly visit of inspection.
LAWAS.
June. 1928.
The Acting Assistant District Officer reports
Court.—In the District Court Criminal, Kadir and Ripin were fined under section 323 and Jabari sen¬tenced to three months' imprisonment on a charge of theft. A case brought against Tadam Sigar and Umang Bina (f.) for breach of Murut custom by cohabiting during the period of mourning for Umang’s late husband, was adjourned for further evidence.
Tai Langub, having shot a rhinoceros, came down during the month with his followers and paid in arrears in tax.
On 6th I went to Punang, going on by boat next morning to Kuala Trusan to sound the channel there. I eventually found another channel nearer to Lawas which is 11/2 feet deeper than the old ore and the Maimuna should be able to enter at spring tides. I left instructions for new panchangs to be put up and left for Punang at 1 a.m. I walked back from Punang on 8th by the Melnsok Road, taking Entong with me and pointing out parts in need of resurfacing. On 13th I left for Sundar by launch and in the afternoon went down to the Kuala by bout, taking soundings. I returned to Lawas via Awat Awat and Kuala Lawas on, 15th.
On 16th I left for Limbang with Mr Cook in his launch returning on 19th and taking the inside channel through Sundar spit both ways. This channel is only about 10 yards from the shore but at high water there is about 7 feet and nearly an hour could be saved if this channel were properly marked.
F. H. KORTRIGHT, Acting Resident, Fifth Division.
