VOL. LXII.
No. 949.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Saturday, October 1st, 1932.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 1st, 1932.

Engagement.
BROOKE-AUSNIT. -The engagement is announced between Her Highness Dayang Leonora, eldest daughter of His Highness the Rajah, and Mr. Max Ausnit of Bucharest.

Births.
ABANG BESIUNI. -At Darol Kornia, Haji Taha Road, Kuching, on 7th September, 1932, at 10 a.m. the wife of Abang Besiuni, Dayang Hadijah the granddaughter of Datu Shah-Bandar, a son.

ABANG ADENG. -On 9th September, 1932, to the wife of Abang Adeng bin Datu Bandar Haji Usop, of Sibu, a daughter.

Local and Personal.
September.
We understand that His Highness the Rajah will be leaving for Sarawak by s.s. Comorin, sailing on 29th September.

We announce, in this issue, the engagement of Her Highness Dayang Leonora to Mr. Max Ausnit of Bucharest. We beg to tender our hearty congratulations.

In our columns we published an account of the marriage of Her Highness Dayang Elizabeth, daughter of His Highness’ the Tuan Muda, to Lieutenant T. A. K. Maunsell, R.N.
We take this opportunity of wishing the bride and bridegroom every happiness for the future.

Mr. C. F. C. Macaskie, Government Secretary, arrived at Kuching by m.v. Marudu on the 10th September.

A very enjoyable dance was held at the Sarawak Club on Saturday evening, 24th September.

The Sarawak Turf Club Meeting was held on 24th and 26th September. A large number of Outstation Officers arrived in Kuching during the month to attend this meeting. An account of the races appears in our columns.

Mr. W. H. Jacques returned from home furlough by s.s. Vyner Brooke on the 12th. Mr. W. F. Dick, accompanied by Mrs. Dick, returned from leave on 19th September, and proceeded to Sibu on 30th to resume his duties as District Officer, Sibu.

The final of St. Michael’s Catholic Club, Doubles Tennis Tournament took place on Monday 12th instant at 5 p.m. between Chan Kim Leong partnered with Chun Kim Hin (Class A-15) and Lim Teck Soon partnered with Matthew Chong (Class D. +15) resulted in a win for the former in 2 straight sets 8-6, 6-3.

Mr. E. M. Woodward proceeded to Singapore en route for England per s.s. Vyner Brooke.

HIS HIGHNESS THE RAJAH’S BIRTHDAY.
Monday, 26th September, being His Highness the Rajah’s birthday, a Public Holiday was observed in Kuching and throughout the State. At 8 a.m. a salute of 21 guns was fired from Fort Margherita. After the salute His Highness the Tuan Muda proceeded across river to the Pengkalan Batu where a Guard of Honour of the Sarawak Constabulary were drawn up under the command of Mr. P. Murray-Scott. After inspecting the Guard His Highness proceeded to the Court House, where European and Native Government Officers were assembled His Highness then distributed Long Service Decorations.
During the afternoon, the second days’ meeting of the Sarawak Turf Club was held.
A very enjoyable dance took place at the Astana the same evening.
On Tuesday 27th in honour of His Highness the Rajah’s birthday, Malay sports and a football match were organized by Abang Sulieman. Datu Amar, on the old police parade ground. From 2 to 4 p.m. a number of races were contested, throwing the cricket ball, high jump and various obstacle races. The large crowd of spectators, the keenness displayed by the athletes, the band and tastefully decorated ground all went to afford the occasion the success it deserved.
His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by Her Highness Dayang Anne, arrived at 4.30 p.m. to witness the football match which had been arranged between the Medarasah Melayu and Kampong Gersik School. His Highness the Tuan Muda kicked off and after a well-contested game the Medarasah Melayu won by 4 goals to one The Datu Amar, thanked their Highnesses for being present and requested on behalf of all present, that their wishes for many happy returns of the day might be conveyed to His Highness the Rajah. His Highness the Tuan Muda in a short speech thanked and congratulated the Datu Amar and all who had taken part in the organizing of the sports and football match for the great success, which had attended their efforts.
Her Highness Dayang Anne then presented the cups and the proceedings ended.

A Naval Wedding.
LIEUTENANT T. A. K. MAUNSELL AND MISS ELIZABETH BROOKE.
PICTURESQUE CEREMONY AT REDBOURN.
THE RAJAH OF SARAWAK GIVES BRIDE AWAY.
Between a picturesque guard of honour formed by five Naval officers and an officer in the Royal Artillery, who formed an arch of swords above their heads a Hertfordshire bride and bridegroom left Redbourn Parish Church after their wedding on Wednesday afternoon.
The bride was Miss Elizabeth Brooke, daughter of Captain Bertram W. D. Brooke, of The Priory, Redbourn, and Mrs. Brooke, of Paris, and the bridegroom was Lieutenant Terence Angustus Ker Manusell, son of the late Captain Ernest Maunsell and of Mrs. Maunsell, of “Dennistoun,” Hillside-road, St. Albans.
Miss Brooke, who comes of a very well-known family, has a distinguished uncle in His Highness Sir Charles Vyner Brooke, the Rajah of Sarawak, who escorted her to church and gave her away.
Lieutenant Maunsell is in the Royal Navy and is at present attached to the Torpedo School. H.M.S. Vernon. Both he and his brother, Mr. M. S. K. Maunsell, who is an officer in the Royal Artillery and who acted as best man, were in full uniform.

VILLAGE EN FETE.
The wedding was the most notable to take place in Redbourn for many years and the whole of the village was en fete for the occasion. Villagers, standing two or three deep, lined the long path leading to the church and occupied every available vantage point near at hand in the hope of catching a glimpse of the bride, and the picturesque bridal retinue.
Inside the church most of the seating accommodation was reserved for guests who, on their arrival, were shown into their places by Naval officers and other ushers. The building had been beautifully adorned with masses of white phlox, marguerites, gypsophila and deep pink rambler rosea.
The officiating clergymen were the Bishop of Barking (uncle of the bridegroom), the Rev. T. Brackenbury (uncle of the bride), the Rev. H. W. Birkhead Berry (Vicar of Redbourn) and the Rev. H Gathorne Crabtree (Vicar of St. Peter’s, St. Albans). The Bishop of Barking gave the address and pronounced the Blessing.
The service included the singing of the hymns “Love Divine'” and “O God of Jacob” and Psalm ixvii. was chanted. The organist was Mrs. Birkhead Berry, who, as the guests were assembling, played Andantino in D flat (H. D. Wetton), Caro Mio Ben (Giordani) and Minuet from “Berenice” (Handel), and as the bride and bridegroom left the church after the ceremony Mendelssohn’s “Wedding March.”

MET BY CHOIR.
The bride on her arrival with her uncle was met at the church door by a procession of clergy and surpliced choristers who preceded her up the aisle. She was attired in a beautiful gown of palest cream satin gracefully cut with long-fitting waist and fully-flared skirt, over which fell her veil of exquisite lace which formed the train. She carried a bouquet of lilies.
Walking immediately behind her were two child attendants-Master Robin Squires (nephew of the bridegroom) and three-year-old Sarah Halsey (niece of the bride).
The little boy wore a white sailor suit-this probably as a compliment to the bridegroom-and the little girl was daintily attired in a frock of pink spotted muslin trimmed at the waist with a wreath of deep pink sweet peas. Pink sweet peas also formed the wreath which crowned her fair bead and filled the little basket of flowers she carried.

WREATHS OF SWEET PEAS.
The two grown-up bridesmaids who completed the bridal retinue were miss Alicia Maunsell (sister of the bridegroom) and Miss Heather Leslie Wilson (friend of the bride).
They wore dresses of a lovely shade of deep bine chiffon, the tiny coatees to match having short puff sleeves. Pink sweet peas composed the wreaths they wore in their hair and they carried bouquets of these lovely blooms.
The bridegroom’s gift to the bridesmaids were naval crown brooches.
The reception was held at The Priory, Redbourn, and afterwards Lieutenant and Mrs. T. A. K. Maunsell left for their honeymoon, which they are spending in Cornwall.

Through London by Taxi Boat.
FASHION THAT WAS SET BY PRINCE GEORGE.
NO HOLD-UPS.
“Taxi-!” Instead of a decrepit car with an old driver smoking a potent pipe at the wheel, a blue-uniformed seaman replies: “Aye, aye, sir,” and we step into a streamlined speed craft.
I went river-taxi-ing yesterday in a boat whose prow seldom touched water. We pounced across the river-wash prodded by the three-pronged fork of Neptune.
Within twenty minutes of our spectacular start from the Cadogan Pier, Chelsea, we had passed under the Tower Bridge and beyond the “Prospect,” where you climb up rickety steps to a rickety balcony.
We escaped the dust, the noise of traffic, the aggravating hold-ups, and the roar of Underground trains. The sun poured on us and the wind kept us cool as we nipped around barges, shot beneath bridges, and made wide, quick-curving sweeps.

HOME FROM THE CITY.
Before long this service will be extended to Putney, and hundreds of business people will be able to travel home in breezy comfort.
This efficient river taxi-service is due to two men’s pluck, initiative and imagination. They were ex-officers of the sea. For months they combed London for work. One day with the courage of despair, they bought an ancient speedboat for a song, and set up as the first river-taxi. Beginners’ luck was theirs.
One afternoon an important-looking man came down to their boat, looked at it doubtfully and went for a ride. He was returned safely. As he walked off, he said: “His Highness Prince George will be here in half an hour.”
They borrowed cushions and a rug and prayed that the engine wouldn’t break down. After the Prince left the propeller came to pieces.
They attribute their success to the royal initiation. -Daily Express.

6 Years’ Rope Tests.
SCIENTISTS’ WATCH ON PIER-END BOXES.
SOUTHEND, Tuesday.
Visitors here have often been puzzled over the contents of five wooden crates clamped to the end of Southend Pier so that at high tide the boxes are submerged, but at low tide are exposed.
To-day a solution of the mystery was provided by the Imperial Institute. The boxes contain rope, and are under the closest observation of scientists.
The scientists wanted to find out whether a rope made of sisal hemp (which can be grown in the British Empire) withstands the action of sea-water as fully as ropes of Manila hemp-Manila being in the American possession, the Philippine Islands.
Sailors said that sisal hemp rapidly weakened when continually wetted by the sea and dried and wetted again.
The scientists put the ropes where, they are wetted twice a day by the tide and dried twice a day by the wind.
For six years they have been making these experiments. They leave the ropes for two. four, six, and nine months, and then find how great a pull is needed to break them.
The results, so far, show that sisal ropes maintain their strength as well as Manila ropes. But the experiments are being continued. -Daily Mail.

The New White Man’s Burden.
By DOROTHY BLACK.
The slump has arrived in the East, and nowhere is the word economy less welcome than in those communities at the other side of the world, where people have fallen into the bad habit of doing themselves a great deal too well; where young men keep horses and motor cars as a matter of course, and the clubs vie with one another in the length of their bars, the potency of their drinks; where in good days ordinary men erected palaces for themselves to live in.
Now, with depleted coffers, they have got to try to go on living in them, forced to keep up the extravagant standards they themselves unthinkingly set; for there is nothing more difficult in the East than ceasing to do that which you did yesterday.
The plaster is falling sadly off Government Departments. In the big offices, Burra Sahibs sit, busy cutting down. It is a heartbreaking business. Six out of twelve young assistants to go, all of them nice young men who in ordinary times could have looked forward to a prosperous future.

THE WOMEN’S BATTLE.
Small wonder that the pencils of the Burra Sahibs move slowly and reluctantly, postponing wherever possible the unpleasant task, unwilling to ring the knell on so many hopes.
But the slump has arrived, and there is nothing else for it. In the bungalows outside the city, the white women are also fighting their battle, and their difficulties are legion. In the West you fix your budget and abide by it. You cut your coat accord-ing to your cloth. In the East your coat is cut for you.
Prices are ruled entirely by what the seller considers the consumer is in a position to pay. Let no man pin his faith to the Official Bazaar list, that voice of one crying in a wilderness. There is one price for the poor man and one for the rich, and in the eyes of those who sell in the bazaars all white people are rich. If they pretend not to be it is their cunning.
The memsahib paid this and that yesterday, therefore she can pay it to-day. With pained hand the cook waves aside the suggestion of a pay cut. The butler makes it clear such a thing cannot be expected of him, or his name will become debased, the importance of his master and mistress much diminished in the land. Importance, out East, matters more than anything, and we have, only ourselves to blame.
Were the cuts universal, matters would be easier. Wages would come down if there were no higher rates to be had. But here, as everywhere, there are the two or three who hold out, and so increase the difficulties of their neighbours. The companies who pay the same salaries, the Government Department who still see reductions only as a distant cloud upon the horizon, no bigger than a man’s hand, keep up the old standards and live at the lavish rate of extravagant days, and for them the rest have to suffer.

OH, THAT POSITION!
There are still dinner parties, sickening in their lavishness, given solemnly to those who would infinitely rather have a handful of herbs, and the rest in cash, dared they say so. There are still people living at a rate they cannot begin to afford to keep up their position
Oh, that position! What a deal it has to answer for in the East, and more than half of it is the fault of the women. People who must shortly retire on inconspicuous pensions live in houses quite out of proportion to their needs or means, belong to clubs they never use, take part in a whirl of synthetic gaiety they do not enjoy, to no other end.
They do not really like it. It is all rather cowardly and pitiful and out of date, but no one has the courage to take a stand, and those who might give a lead are often the worst offenders in the other direction. It is a moot point whether the accumulating of debts one can never hope to pay does really enhance the prestige of anybody.
This is the White Man’s burden to-day. It is a shoddier one than of old, this playing a game the more intelligent have long ago ceased to believe in, or care about. -Over-Seas Daily Mail.

Summer Time in Sarawak.
Sarawak has not only stolen a march on Malaya in the matter of twenty minutes of daylight saving, but has actually instituted summer time! The following paragraph appears in the Sarawak Gazette: -
“We are informed that ‘summer time’ will commence as from midnight Sept. 13-14, when clocks will be advanced twenty minutes. This time will continue until midnight Dec. 13-14, when clocks will be put back again to normal.”
The information is tantalizingly vague and we should like to hear a good deal more about the Sarawak departure. Presumably it is a new venture, and while Singapore has contented itself with discussion only, Kuching, in a most businesslike way, has gone ahead and brought the plan into operation. But why “summer time” and for three months only? Perhaps it is an experiment, and if it proves popular for three months the advancement of the clock by twenty minutes will become a permanent institution. Sarawak is to be congratulated on giving the lead to Malaya in a reform which the majority of people seem to think would be well worth while. -Straits Times.

Time in Sarawak.
It was decided early in 1926 to lay down a Standard Time for Sarawak, adopting the meridian 7 1/2 hours ahead of Greenwich Mean Time. This Meridian passes close to Balingian, east of Kuching, so that the Standard Time for the State is approximately 9 minutes ahead of Kuching local mean time and, in common parlance, Kuching “daylight saves” 9 minutes all the year round.
Lundu “saves” 11 minutes, but Lawas being a similar distance to the east of standard meridian “loses” 11 minutes.
British North Borneo and Labuan standard time is 8 hours ahead of Greenwich. The meridian lies beyond the east coast of the island of Borneo so that no place is on the “losing” side as is all Sarawak east of Balingian. Malaya uses the meridian 7 hours ahead of Greenwich, slightly to the eastwards of Singapore.
Now, thanks to the fact that the sun does not conform exactly to mean time as kept by clocks, the evenings become noticeably short during October and November and sunset in Kuching is for a short time as early as 5.51 p.m., 18 minutes earlier than the average.
In 1929 it was decided to try a short period of “Summer Time” or “daylight saving,” just to counteract this unwelcome shortening of the evenings, and 20 minutes was considered a suitable figure as it makes the shortest evening into one of average length. The experiment being a success, this three months of “Summer Time” was made a permanent institution at the end of 1931.

Holiday Exhibits.
Interesting development of the “permanent wave” idea in beauty culture: -
There was a young lady of Dinting
Who said “I’m fed up with this tinting;
I shall tattoo my toes,
And my ears and my nose,
Cos I’m all for indelible printing.”

Secret addiction to iron rations at Alderley: -
A tripper to Alderley Edge
Took with him a terrible wedge
Of veal-and-ham pie.
Which he gnawed on the sly
As he crouched at the back of a hedge.

Insulting behaviour at Old Trafford: -
There was a young man at Old Trafford
Who haggled and bargained and chaffered
To get in at half-price,
And, when turned away twice.
Said “I’d rather watch Cheshire or Stafford.”

Severe comment on modern “beachwear”: -
A sea-nymph from Hale (of all places!)
Said “What price my wide, open spaces?”
Her Papa replied “Lass,
Things have reached a nice pass-
You might just as well bathe in my braces!”

Sad evidence of uncertain moral values: -
There was a young man from Parr’s Wood
Who said “I try hard to be good;
But I often forget,
And it’s always a sweat-
And I really don’t know why I should.”

Commendable example of resistance to modern ideas: -
There was an old girl from Miles Platting
Who sat on the front doing tatting:
When they said “Don’t you hike?
Mountaineer? Motor bike?”
She replied “Why, I’d rather go ratting!”

Deliberate affront to ancient mariners: -
A flipper residing up Hyde ways
Went tooling round sluices and tideways
As a platinum blonde
From the Hock o’ Beyond,
Till she knocked all the fishermen sideways.
LUCIO,
Manchester Guardian.

OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 51 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
1881.] THURSDAY. 1ST DEC., 1881. [Price 5 cents. 
During the last few weeks most of the roads in the immediate vicinity of Kuching have been taken in hand and re-metalled. The labour entailed by this is considerable. Tongkangs having to be sent as far as Moratabas for the shingle, which is used for this purpose that being the only material available now that antimony slag cannot be procured from Buso. But this with a dressing of sandy soil to bind it is found to make good durable roads considering the very heavy rainfall we frequently experience at this time of year. A rather heavy piece of work has also been commenced at the Cross roads by the Blacksmiths’ bazaar in making a new and substantial stone culvert under the road, and in embanking the stream with stone walls on each side for a distance of some 200 yards. As this stream will form the principal source for supplying the town with water when the proposed reservoir is constructed-the overflow from which will during the heavy rains bring a considerable force of water down-the work was a very necessary 
one; as the road past the blacksmiths’ bazaar was gradually being washed away and the houses themselves undermined, not to mention the accumulation of dirt and refuse which takes place in consequence of its being now used as an open drain. The Cross road leading from the Mosque has been, planted with acacia trees of which an avenue is also to be planted between the Rock road and the Mosque, and the bridge over it having been made beautiful with fresh paint, all that remains in order to completely satisfy the eye is to rebuild or remove the very unsightly shed known as Bleak house and this we hope the Bishop on his arrival may possibly cause to be done.

First Division News.
RESIDENT’S OFFICE.
August, 1932.
Extracts from tire Divisional Reports by Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division: -
General. -The 8th, His Highness the Tuan Muda’s birthday, was observed as a public holiday and the offices were closed.
I left for Lundu on the 11th and returned on the 14th.
Sadong and Bau were also visited during the month.

DISTRICT OFFICE.
August, 1932.
The District Officer, Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, reports: -
Coroner’s Court. -An inquest into the death of Amit bin Tambi Kechi on 2nd August, 1932.
Verdict. -Deceased met his death through the result of a pine stem being thrust into his left eye by Sergeant-Major Sulong.

UPPER SARAWAK, BAU.
August, 1932.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports: -
Judicial. -Resident’s Court. -Two criminal cases were heard and both resulted in convictions.
An appeal case (civil) was adjourned.
Coroner’s Court. -One inquest was held during the month on the body of a Malay woman named Nor binti Latip. A verdict of death by misadventure was returned.
Rainfall. -Highest recorded in 24 hours was 1.25 inches; the daily average was .10 of an inch and the total rainfall for the month was 6.17 inches.
General. -Visitors to the station during the month included the Resident, First Division, Mr. J. C. Swayne, the Principal Medical Officer, Dr. E. M. Marjoribanks, the Commissioner of Sarawak Constabulary, Mr. D. V. Murphy, the Commissioner of Trade and Customs, Mr. H. M. Calvert and Mrs. Calvert, and Messrs. A. K. Brown, Edwards, T. M. Griffiths, Holl and Noble.
An unfortunate accident occurred on the 5th when a Malay woman named Nor was crushed to death by a piece of walling which collapsed when she was working firebricks at the base of the big chimney near the Government Store.
His Highness the Tuan Muda’s birthday, the 8th, was observed as a public holiday and the Government Offices were closed.
Gold Mining. -Actual gold obtained by the following mining companies for the month of July, 1932, was: -

LUNDU.
August, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
General. -On 11th the Resident visited the station and settled the few outstanding cases. Permission was given to the Lundu gambling farmer to open a farm at Blungei.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall for the month was 3.93 indies and the greatest in any one day being 1.00 inch.
Trade. -The total returns for the month and for comparison with those for the corresponding month of last year were as follows: -

SADONG.
August, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports: -
Court. -There was very little court work during the month, and no criminal cases of note.
Prison. -Munin bin Sleh, one of the two men who escaped from Tebekang Prison during July, was recaptured in Dutch Territory and returned to Tebekang by the Dutch Authorities.
Medical. -It is understood from the Dresser at Serian that the epidemic of dysentery, which was reported in the vicinity last month, has abated.
Travelling. -On the 1st instant I accompanied Mr. J. G. Anderson, Acting District Officer, on a tour of inspection up river, returning to Sadong on the 3rd instant. Gedong, Ampungan, Serian and Stebuu were visited.
General. -I took over the affairs of this district from Mr. J. G. Anderson on the 5th instant. Mr. Anderson returned to Kuching on the 9th instant per s.v. Lucile on transfer to Bintulu.
The 8th, the Birthday of His Highness the Tuan Muda, was observed as a public holiday.
Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division, visited the district on the 31st instant, and was still here at the end of the month.
A tuba fishing was arranged to take place during the month in the right-hand branch of the Semunjan, but failed to materialize owing to incessant bad weather and the resultant height, of the river.
Trade and Customs. -Comparative trade returns for the month are as follows: -
Shipping. -During the month four vessels entered and cleared the port.
Rainfall. -Rain fell on twenty-one days, when a total for the month of 15.30 inches was recorded.

Sarawak Club.
GENERAL COMMITTEE. 1932-1933.
The following Members were elected at the Annual General Meeting held on Sunday, 25th September, 1932.
Messrs. G. T. Bates, R. W. Chater, H. M. Calvert, R. E. Edwards, Dr. E. M. Marjoribanks, H. Jacques, N. J. Austin, and for Outstations Mr. C. D. Adams.

Sarawak Turf Club Jottings.
At a Committee Meeting held on 29th September the following ponies were demoted to Division II. Adham, Poparatapetl, Cockpen and Mickey Mouse; and Beaver was demoted to Division III. The rest of the previous classification stands.
We understand that it was suggested that the 1933 Spring Meeting beheld on April 1st and 3rd. Personally we think the owners fool us poor backers quite enough as it is without rubbing it in by choosing such an inappropriate date for the first day.
We should like to correct an item in the account of the recent meeting which will be found in another column. Wakijan tied with Awang Bakar as the most successful jockey and is to receive a similar prize.
The price of tickets for the Cash Sweeps at the next meeting will be $1 each instead of $2.
Flying Fox, White Knight, Popacateptl, and Mickey Mouse, have left for the Third Division; and Royston, Adham, and Corkpen for the Second Division. There will then be seven ponies in Simanggang, which is, we believe, a record for an outstation. Unkind persons may argue that quantity is not quality. Certainly, the daily parade up the Sabu Road is not an exhilarating sight.

SARAWAK TURF CLUB.
AUTUMN RACES.
A FAVOURITES’ MEETING.
“FLYING FOX” STILL WINNING.
CHAMPION CUP WON BY POPULAR CHINESE OWNERS.
The Autumn Meeting took place on the 24th and 26th of September when two days good racing was provided. The attendance on both days was perhaps less than on previous meetings, but this may be put down to these depressing slump days. In spite of this, however, over $14,500 passed through the Tote whilst more than $9,238 was invested in the Unlimited Sweep. The Double Tote, a new innovation, was not generally patronized only some $330 passing through. In any case these who hoped to pick a remunerative double were disappointed as of the two chances one paid $6.80 for every dollar and the other the amazing odds of but $1.60 to the dollar.
It could not but be observed what a number of Europeans in Kuching did not attend the races. In those dark doleful days it is surprising that such an English sport at so low a cost dogs not attract more.
His Highness the Tuan Muda and the Dayang Anne attended on both days, and the fine weather gave an opportunity for the ladies to show off a large number of charming dresses.
The Constabulary Band and a ten room were there to while away the time of those who find racing a too serious business, whilst the crowd was amply provided for by numbers of booths and stalls where indigestibles of all description from pickled eggs to jellied eels could be purchased at competitive prices.
The arrangements on both days were splendid, and the Turf Club Committee, the gentlemen who assisted, and the Police, are to be congratulated.
The weather on the first day was very hot and the going hard. On the second day the heavy rain the previous night and all the morning made one despair of anything but a miserable afternoon. As it turned out, however, the rain stopped just in time and apart from a rather greasy course no inconvenience was felt.
As regards the racing it may be regarded as a favourites’ meeting, in spite of Flying Fox’s failure in his first four races. Kim Mah again proved to be a remarkable pony and the Champion Cup went to Messrs. Chan Teck Cheng and Wee Boon Chew. Akal is always good for at least one race and might have won another if his owner had not chosen to run the pony with 7 1/2 lbs. overweight in the Tuan Muda’s Cup September won two races and is obviously a Division I pony. Division III proved an easy task tor Jorrocks, who won his races with ease. The new pony Flamingo showed his great superiority in the Division I sprint, but could not stay a longer distance. When this pony is a bit older he may well be a champion. White Knight again proved himself an honest pony and never stops trying. In the big race of the meeting Flying Fox showed us that if he likes he can still gallop past anything and he won the race with the greatest ease. Mudahan is a good pony but very uncertain. Of the new ponies perhaps H. H. the Rajah’s 
White Label showed up best. He ran well and with more training is a certain winner in the future, Royston and Sabar carrying top weight were disappointing. Casanova’s saddle slipped in one of his races but he was going well at the time. Micky Mouse and Cockpen as yet lack sufficient training, Awang Bakar and Wakijau shared the honours for the most successful jockey. It is remarkable how few young jockeys ride nowadays. Salleh and Rajak were riding 25 years ago, whilst of the four European riders two had done a total of nearly 40 years in Sarawak, and it may be that their non-success was partially owing to their mounts rather than to their ability!!!
On the conclusion of the second day His Highness the Tuan Muda presented the three cups and prizes for the most successful jockeys. It was an enjoyable meeting although no fortunes were to be made on the Tote. In fourteen races the dividend was under $2 in four races, the average dividend working out at about two to one. The biggest dividend was $7.40 for a dollar. The Cash Sweeps were more popular as being less of a strain on brain. In conclusion once more we remind those who attend these races that the work of running such a meeting is more than meets the eye. and their thanks are due to those gentlemen who give up a lot of their time and go to any amount of trouble, and we can assure them that their efforts resulted in a most enjoyable and sporting meeting. The results are as follows: -

RESULTS.
First Day.
Saturday, 24th September, 1932.
(GOING FAIR.)
RACE 1. -2.30 p.m. 
THE TUAN MUDA’S CUP. 6 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
Kim Mah was never in doubt and won by a length from Akal who was two length ahead of Flying Fox. White Label ran well for half the distance.

RACE 2. -3 p.m. 
THE SATOK STAKES. 5 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
A very good race September finishing strongly half a length in front of White Knight. Workman looked like winning once or twice. The winner started at very small odds.

RACE 3. -3.30 p.m. 
THE B.C.L. STAKES. 6 furlongs.
DIVISION III.
Only three runners. Jorrocks won by a neck from Mudahan.

RACE 4. -4 p.m. 
SIMPANG TIGA STAKES. 3 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
Flamingo jumped off and in a few strides gained a lead of 6 lengths and won easily. The rest finished in a bunch.

RACE 5. -4.30 p.m. 
THE MATANG STAKES. 4 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
A very good race White Knight just beating Workman who looked like winning, with September a good third.

RACE 6. -5 p.m. 
THE PENDING STAKES. 3 furlongs.
DIVISION III.
Mudahan just got home by a short head from Gruda, with Jorrocks third. Bakar rode the winner well.

RACE 7. -5.30 p.m. 
THE RANEE’S CUP. 1 Mile.
OPEN TO ALL DIVISIONS.
Akal was in his old form and won with comparative ease from September with Flying Fox third.

Second Day.
Monday, 26th September, 1932.
(GOING HEAVY.)
RACE 1. -2.30 p.m. 
THE SLUMP STAKES. 5 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
Kim Mah again won by 1 1/2 lengths from Sabar, with White Label third.

RACE 2. -3 p.m. 
THE COUNTRY STAKES. 6 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
This looked like Wembley’s race until the last stride when September just got home by a short head. Workman was only a short head behind Wembiey. This was a most exciting race.

RACE 3. -3.30 p.m. 
THE SARAWAK STAKES. 5 furlongs.
DIVISION III.
Jorrocks had no difficulty in beating Gruda by 6 lengths, who just beat Ardan.

RACE 4. -4 p.m. 
THE TURF CLUB STAKES. 4 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
Flamingo got off with a big lead but could not stay the distance. Flying Fox made a great effort and finished strongly but just failed to beat Kim Mah. Flamingo was a good third.

RACE 5. -4.30 p.m. 
THE STATE SPRINT. 3 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
White Knight won this by 1/2 length from Workman, who again looked like winning but got shut out half way up the straight. Water Polo was third.

RACE 6. -5 p.m. 
THE TOWN STAKES. 4 furlongs.
DIVISION III.
This was another easy win for Jorrocks who beat Pengarah by 1 1/2 lengths.

RACE 7. -5.30 p.m. 
THE RAJAH’S CUP. Round the course (1 1/3 Miles.)
A HANDICAP FOR ALL DIVISIONS.
Flying Fox came into his own at last and won, easily by 8 lengths in front of Azab who in spite of a bad start ran very well. Indeed had Azab got off well the result might have been different. September was third 2 lengths away. The rest were tailed off.

Second Division News.
August, 1932.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident: -
During the month work was started on the Simanggang Engkilili telephone line, and it should be completed by the end of next month. The original rentis had to be altered in places so as to avoid damage to Dyak property.
Mr. T. A. Reid, of the Public Works Department, and a party arrived in Simanggang during the month and began a preliminary survey of the proposed Simanggang Engkilili road. Accompanied by Mr. Fisher, he walked to Engkilili and back and was still here at the end of the month.
The Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Captain C. D. Le Gros Clark, paid a visit to the Division and went to Engkilili and Betong, as well as Simanggang.
Mr. G. St. F. Dare was in the Division from the 12th until the 16th and made arrangements for, the disposal of the remaining properly at Lebok Tedong. He also visited the State-aided pepper gardens at Tabarong.
On the 2nd Mr. Macpherson arrived from Engkilili bringing Abang Abu Talip and Penghulu Ramba. Having arranged with the Resident, Third Division, to meet him in Kuching, I proceeded there the next day, taking with me Abang Abu Talip, Penghulu Ramba and other Dyaks. Penghulu Ramba was given an opportunity of airing his alleged grievances before His Highness the Tuan Muda, in the presence of the Resident, First Division, Resident, Third Division, the Secretary for Native Affairs and myself. We returned to Simanggang on the 9th, and Abang and Ramba left again for the Ulu Ai on the 11th.

SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
August, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, reports: -
Trade: -
General. -On the 18th I proceeded to Lingga, spending two nights at that station. Several cases were heard and most of the outstanding fines collected.
On the 20th I proceeded to Sebuyow where most of my time was spent on P.W.D. work. Arrangements were made for the long bridge at the down river end of the bazaar to be repaired.
During the month work has steadily gone forward on the Simanggang-Engkilili telephone, and at the end of August some 600 posts had been shipped up river. Unfortunately exceptionally heavy rains have made river transport slow, but nevertheless it is hoped that the telephone will be working by the end of September.
A total rainfall of 16 inches has been recorded for August and very few Dyaks have so far been able to burn off their padi land. It is feared that this will cause considerable distress amongst them and that next harvest will even be poorer than the last.
Constabulary. -General training was carried out during the month in arms drill, route marching, and extended order drill.

ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
August, 1932.
The Assistant District Officer. Mr. Macpherson, reports: -
I visited Simanggang on 2nd taking down Abang Abu-Talip, Native Officer, Penghulu Ramba and party. I stayed at Lubok Antu from 6th till 15th.
Abang Abu-Talip and Penghulu Ramba returned from Kuching, arriving at Lubok Antu on 11th. and proceeded up river to hold a meeting with the chiefs in Ulu Ai.
The Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Messrs. Reid, Fisher and Bates, paid visits to the station during the month.
Rain fell on 23 days when a total of 16.83 inches was recorded.

SARIBAS DISTRICT.
August, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe, reports: -
The daily downpour of rain which is experienced locally is apt to prove serious for the padi crop, as the up-river Dyaks complain it has so far been impossible to burn off their farms. There has been no suggestion of a drought this year, which is phenomenal.
The substations were visited twice during the month, once accompanied by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident, Second Division.
Native Officer Abang Abu Bakar was transferred to Kabong, his place being taken by Native Officer, Pangiran Azit.
Abang Haji Dulkraim left Debak for Sebuyow, being relieved by Native Officer Abang Sedik.
Eight motor vessels entered and cleared the port during the month.
Trade: -

KALAKA DISTRICT.
August, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. L. K. Morse, reports: -
No cases of importance came before the Court. At the present time the majority of the cases heard are for non-payment of Native Court fines.
The Post Office was transferred en bloc to the Wireless Station during the month. Mr. Harding, of the Posts and Telegraphs Department, superintending the transfer.
The chief exports for the month: -
Comparison of imports and exports: -

LAND OFFICE.
August, 1932.
The Land Officer, Mr. B. Summers, reports: -
Pepper Occupation Tickets are being plotted as fast as possible at both Simanggang and Engkilili, so as to be ready for issue when the planters appear in office to collect same and payment, etc.
Application slips of rubber gardens numbering 62 were issued to Dyaks at Simanggang during the month; it is expected that many will be issued during September; in some cases Dyaks apply for pepper gardens as Free Land, but this is not encouraged, as these gardens do not last more than about 4-5 years, which would lead to continual issue of Free Land titles as the gardens died.

SURVEY DEPARTMENT.
August, 1932.
The Assistant Superintendent of Surveys. Mr. N. Mace, reports: -
Demarcation of gardens is proceeding in the Ulu Kedumpai, near Sebuyow, Ulu Lingga Sanjau, and at the end of the month was started along the Batang Lupar.
Theodolite controls are in progress at Punggu and Bait and at the middle Klauh, and at Sebuyow.
At the beginning of the month I made a trip by launch to Sebuyow to inspect the survey parties there.

Third Division News.
August, 1932.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident: -
Court. -There were altogether four criminal cases disposed of during the month; one of attempted burglary, the other three being members of an unlawful society dangerous to the good order and peace of the State. All the accused were convicted and sentenced to various terms of imprisonment. There were no civil cases.
General. -On the 3rd instant I left by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna and met the Resident, Second Division, Mr. Archer, Native Officer Abang Abu-Talip, and Penghulu Ramba at Lingga, and then proceeded to Kuching, arriving on the 4th instant, in order to discuss Dyak affairs with His Highness the Tuan Muda. I returned by Sri Mukah on 9th instant.
The Travelling District Officer, Mr. Cutfield, and Acting Assistant District Officer, Kapit, Mr. Hudden were recalled from the interior and patrols of an N.C.O. and ten constables under a Native Officer were left in the Entabai, Kanowit, Poi and Katibas.
A visit was paid to Kapit from the 17th to the 19th instants. All Penghulus of the Balleh and Katibas were interviewed and they were given the latest information as regards the expedition against Asun.
I left by s.l. Chamois on the 25th instant on a visit to Mukah, Oya and Dalat, accompanied by Divisional Forest Officer, Mr. Spurway, and Assistant District Officer, Mr. Hill, the former in order to audit the accounts of his department and the latter for temporary duty at Mukah. I returned on the 30th instant accompanied by Divisional Forest Officer and District Officer, Mukah, Mr. Woodward. During my visit no matter of importance was brought before me.

SIBU.
August, 1932.
The District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfleld, reports: -
General. -On the 3rd Mr. Spurway returned from temporary duty in Kuching. On the 4th Mr. Goodall left for Mukah by m.l. Irene accompanied by Mr. and Mrs. Le Gros Clark.
Mr. Crossley arrived from Sarikei on an official visit to the Resident on the 6th, returning on the 11th. Mr. K. E. Parker also paid two visits to the station during the month.
I returned from the expedition in Ulu Kanowit and Katibas on 10th but left again the next day for the Poi in an endeavour to arrest the eight Poi Dyaks who have returned from Dutch territory with heads. Also Mikai who had killed a Chinaman in the Poi and after taking his head had together with the eight from Dutch territory gone to join the rebels. They had got a four days start thus their capture was impossible.
Others, however, were prevented from joining them, and a number of Tuai Rumahs and others who had harboured and assisted the head hunters, were brought down and various fines were later imposed, pledges as security also being demanded. I returned to Sibu again on 19th and took over from Mr. Hill on 24th, the latter leaving for duty at Mukah in company with the Resident on 25th.
Mr. Woodward, who was relieved by Mr. Hill at Mukah, arrived here with the Resident on 30th.
Penghulus Endu and Manggi from Entabai and Kanowit respectively, visited the station during the month and reported all well with the patrols under Abang Abu Bakar, Native Officer, in the Ulu.
Twelve rebels including five men surrendered themselves to the patrols in the Ulu Entabai at Chendang’s house in the Puak. One of these was an escaped prisoner from Mukah but was using a different name. He was, however, recognized on arrival at Sibu.
It is reported that six more rebels have returned to the Sugai, Julau, and the Entabai-a patrol has left to arrest them.
A patrol of ten constables and one N.C.O. under Abang Indih left to patrol the Ulus Poi and Ngemah.
It is likely that Mikai and the eight men from Dutch territory are likely to return there in search of food.

KAPIT.
August, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hudden, reports: -
Abang Sleh, with a patrol of eleven police, remains in the Katibas until further orders. He is superintending the removal of five houses which have been ordered down river, and completing a blockhouse at the mouth of the Bloh to safeguard the farms.
Five Dutch Dyaks arrived in the Katibas towards the beginning of the month, to ascertain by whom the Kantoks in the Kepuas were murdered. Three of them proceeded to Kanowit, and all returned home about a week later. In connection with this, reports have been received, originating from the Poi and Ngemah, that a head feast was held in a house in the Bangkit on the return of the marauders. The matter is still under investigation.
General. -The Resident and Mrs. Adams, accompanied by Mr. H. E. Cutfield and Abang Ahmat, Native Officer, whom they opportunely met at the month of the Poi, visited the station from the 17th to the 19th.
The Resident discussed the Asun affair with the Dyak. Penghulus, who were all waiting here. The Penghulus expressed no concern when informed officially of the death of certain Balleh Dyaks who had been with the rebels, merely remarking that it was their own fault.
I accompanied the Resident on his departure for Sibu and returned here on the 25th. I had intended proceeding to Belaga almost immediately, so as to be back by the end of September, but the continual rain and high water has made the journey so far, impossible.
Rainfall. -Rainfall for the month was 19.40 inches.

MUKAH.
August, 1932.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports: -
The 8th instant, being the anniversary of His Highness the Tuan Muda’s birthday, the offices were closed.
On the 8th instant, Mr. E. M. Woodward, Acting District Officer, Mukah, proceeded to Oya. He returned on the 10th instant.
S.S. Angas arrived from Miri on the 12th instant with Messrs. Johnson and Hamilton on board. After a short stay they proceeded up river to Kenyana.
On the 26th, the Resident and Mrs. Adams, accompanied by the Divisional Forest Officer, Mr. B. J. C. Spurway, and Mr. J. J. Hill, arrived from Sibu by s.l. Chamois.
I took over temporary charge of the Mukah District as from the 27th instant from Mr. E. M. Woodward, who has been transferred temporarily to Sibu.
The Resident and party left for Oya on Sunday the 28th.
Other visitors to the station included Mr. and Mrs. W. L. Clerk, Mr. G. M. Goodall, Agricultural Field Officer, Mr. W. Harnack, Acting Superintendent of Surveys, the Revd. Fathers C. Epping. A. Klerk, V. Halder, W. Van Odyk, 0. Van den Fergh, and Mr. F. Harding of the Posts and Telegraphs Department.
Public Works. -The new waterworks engine shed was completed on the 23rd instant and the engine was started on the 27th instant.
During the month the survey of gardens was carried on in the Ulu Telian-Bedanga Jebungan area, and now practically all the big blocks of sago gardens behind Mukah have been surveyed. Approximately 656 gardens were surveyed during the month making a total of about 3,041 gardens as on the 31st August.
The Acting Superintendent of Surveys, Mr. W. Harnack, visited the station on the 9th instant.
Posts and Telegraphs. -Mr. F. Harding, of the Posts and Telegraphs Department, arrived here on the 25th instant. He made an inspection of the wireless installation and reported that everything was in good working order. The Post Office was transferred to the Wireless Station and Post Office work is now being carried on by the Wireless Operators.
Rainfall. -An abnormal amount of rainfall has been experienced during the last fortnight of the month, as much as 3.65 inches falling in one night.
Trade. -499 koyans of raw sago and 259 piculs of jelutong were exported during the month.
Comparative trade returns are as follows: -

OYA AND DALAT.
August, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports: -
General. -On August 28th Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident, Third Division, accompanied by Mrs. Adams, Mr. B. J. C. Spurway, Divisional Forest Officer, and Mr. E. M. Woodward, arrived at Oya in s.l. Chamois.
Oya Native Officers and Tua-Tua Kampongs were interviewed the same morning, and on the 29th I accompanied the Resident and party to Dalat. No matters of importance were brought before the Resident at either station.
Other visitors to the district included Mr. W. Harnack, Mr. J. L. Noakes, and the Reverend Fathers V. Halder. W. Van Odyk, and A. Klerk. These Fathers passed through Oya and Dalat on their way through to Sibu from Mukah.
Public Works. -The work of raising the Bakong Road was completed, and edging and surfacing are now proceeding.
The work on the Dalat Roads was completed from Sungei Anak to the bazaar, this stretch being surfaced with sand. The improvement here is noticeable, since during wet weather the road is clean and firm.
Land and Surveys. -On the 15th instant Mr. J. L. Noakes, Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Third Division, arrived at Oya and on the following day he accompanied me to Dalat and then up river to Semanek.
Mr. Noakes expressed satisfaction with the preparatory work now being done at Dalat by the Land Inspectors, which, will, he stated, be of considerable help to his department later on. Mr. Noakes also gave it as his opinion (which is borne out by the Natives) that there are far more gardens in the Oya than in the Mukah district, and he informed me that they extend much further up river than they do at Mukah.
The connection survey made good progress, since there was not the usual spate of probate work to be dealt with, but an extra Land Inspector would be appreciated, since so much of the district has not yet been touched. The Officer in-Charge of Lands, Third Division, has kindly agreed to transfer a man from Sibu or Binatang as soon as one can be spared.
Dyaks. -On the 16th instant I left for up riven intending to visit the Paku and tributaries and the Ulu Oya, where several matters were waiting attention.
I spent the night of the 17th at Nanga Tamin, then continued up river. The water was high owing to incessant heavy rain, and travelling was therefore rendered slow and difficult.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall recorded for the month was 6.0.
Trade. -342 koyans of raw sago and 23 piculs of rubber (para) were shipped to Kuching and Binatang during the month.

SARIKEI, BINATANG AND REJANG.
August, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. F. L. G. Crossley, reports: -
Public Works. -Upkeep work on the roads was continued. Two sections of the Peninjau road were re-graded by daily labour.
General. -Visitors to the district included Messrs. Goodall and Daly, and Dr. Hutchison.
Trade and Customs. -A record amount of pepper was exported during the month, 3,119.21 piculs of white and 2,494.46 piculs of black being shipped to Singapore from Sarikei.
Figures for Sarikei and Binatang are appended: -

MATU AND DARO.
August, 1932.
The Officer-in-Charge. Mr. G. F. J. Pegler, reports: -
Trade. -89 koyans of raw sago, 186 piculs of jelutong, and 50 piculs of para rubber were shipped to Binatang during the month.

Fourth Division News.
August, 1932.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports by Mr. F. G. Carpenter, Acting Resident: -
General. -Mr. J. W. Whiteside visited the station during the month on a tour of inspection in connection with Public Works.
The Municipal Electric Lighting scheme earns into effect on the 1st and is proving entirely satisfactory.
Mr. W. V. Hanson, Divisional Treasurer, visited Baram during the month and audited the books of that district.
Mr. I. S. Hammond arrived from Kuching on the 12th and proceeded later with Mr. D. S. MacLeod of the Forestry Department to Mount Dulit for special duties in connection with the Oxford Expedition.

MIRI.
August, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. M. Selous, reports: -
Municipal. -The new electric lighting of the bazaar and kampongs was very satisfactory.
At a meeting of the Municipal Board the new taxi fares were slightly modified.
Outstations. -I visited Niah, Suai and Sibuti during the month, carrying out the usual routine duties. From Niah a most disappointing report of the birdsnests harvest was received-this matter will be looked into and a report made on my next visit.
Public Works. -Mr. J. W. Whiteside, Divisional Engineer, Third and Fourth Divisions, visited the station from the 12th to the 17th and carried out a general inspection.
General. -The 8th, being the birthday of His Highness the Tuan Muda, was observed as a Government holiday.

BARAM.
August, 1932.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
Travelling. -Mr. W. V. Hanson, Divisional Treasurer, visited the station from 11th to 16th. Mr. I. S. Hammond, Assistant Surveyor, arrived on 14th on a visit to the Oxford University Expedition camp on Mount Dulit. On 21st, accompanied by Wan Taha, Native Officer, I left on a visit to the Tinjar, Mr. Hammond accompanying us as far as the base camp at Lubok Lejok.
Trade. -Trade returns are as follows: -

BINTULU.
August, 1932.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports: -
General. -Mr. Youngberg, of 7th Day Adventist Mission, visited this station on the 22nd, and Mr. L. E. Gifford, of British American Tobacco Co., Ltd., passed through on the s.s. Gladys.
I arrived here on the 14th instant by s.s. Auby, having been instructed to take over the affairs of this district from Mr. W. H. Morice. I did so on the 19th instant and Mr. Morice left for Kuching by s.s. Auby on 27th.
Mr. Morice visited Sebauh Labang, Pendan and Tuban on the 3rd and having settled all cases returned on the 7th.
Trade and Customs. -Trade statistics for the month: -
Principle exports during the month: -

The Noble Cup Competition.
Open Golf Competition for a Cup presented by Mr. A. H. Noble of Miri to be contested for over the Miri Course.
Conditions under which the competition shall take place: -
(1) The name of the Cup shall be THE NOBLE CUP.
(2) The Competition shall be open to all players resident in Sarawak, Brunei, Labuan and British North Borneo who have a recognized handicap of 10 (ten) or less.
(3) The Competition shall be considered to be an individual Championship and not a Club Championship.
(4) The Competition shall be played under Championship conditions, i.e., 18 holes knock out, match play, scratch.
(5) An entrance fee of $2.50 (two dollars and fifty cents) per competitor shall be charged to cover the cost of a replica.
(6) The Competition shall be played over the Miri golf course.
(7) The Cup shall not be won outright.
(8) The winner’s name shall be engraved on the plinth and be shall receive the replica but the Cup itself shall remain in Miri.
(9) Should the Cup be won by a competitor not resident in Miri the Cup shall be handed to the Secretary of the Gymkhana Club Miri for safe keeping until the following year.
(10) The Competition shall be played during the month of April of each year.
(11) The draw shall be arranged by the Committee of the Miri Golf Club.
(12) Competitors not resident in Miri shall be made Honorary Members of the Gymkhana Club and the Golf Section during the period of the Competition.





















