VOL. LXII.
No. 951.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Thursday, December 1st, 1932.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette
THURSDAY, DECEMBER 1st, 1932.

Engagement.
DAUBENY-MARSH.-The engagement is announced between Richard Louis Daubeny, Sarawak Civil Service, elder son of Mr. and Mrs. Daubeny, of Treetops, Farnham Common, Bucks and Madeline Florence, only daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Marsh of Oakdene, Farnham Common, Bucks.

Local and Personal.
November.
His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by Dayang Anne, left for Singapore by s.s. Kudat, on 19th November, en route for England.

Saturday, November 18th, being Dayang Leonora’s coming of age birthday, a very enjoyable dance was held at Astana. We take this opportunity to tender Dayang Leonora our congratulations and wishes for many happy returns of the day.

In view of the serious financial situation, His Highness the Rajah has instructed the Treasurer of Sarawak to make a 20 per cent reduction in the amount of his Privy Purse for the year 1933, and a similar reduction will apply to the Privy Purse of His Highness the Tuan Muda.

We are informed that the Sibu Rest House will be closed as from 1st January, 1933, until further notice.

During December and January, No. 1 Football ground at the Song Keng Hai Recreation grounds will be closed.

Mr. A. A. Rennie, Treasurer of Sarawak, returned from home leave on 4th November by s.s. Vyner Brooke. By this same vessel Captain and Mrs. C. P. Lowe arrived, accompanied by Miss M. F. Backus. Miss Backus is the guest of Captain and Mrs. Lowe.

Mrs. C. S. Griffiths arrived in Kuching by s.s. Kudat on 7th November. We welcome Mrs. Griffiths back to Kuching.

We were afforded the opportunity, during the month, of visiting the gold workings at Bau. Owing to the high price of gold and successful prospecting by the majority of the companies operating in the district, most of the mines are in a thriving condition. It is very gratifying to see, even in a small way, signs of prosperity in these hard times. Owing to this industry large numbers of, whom might have been, unemployed, are profitably occupied. Apart from the mining companies, individuals can achieve considerable profit by panning. The following figures may be of interest to our readers.

Mr. N. A. Middlemas, Superintendent of Surveys, accompanied by Mrs. Middlemas and daughter, returned from leave on 28th November by s.s. Kudat. By this same vessel arrived Messrs. R. L. Daubeny and C. F. Birt.

On 7th November, two squads of Constabulary left by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna for the Second and Third Divisions to assist in the rounding up of the rebel, Asun. Mr. D. V. Murphy, Acting Commissioner of Constabulary, accompanied the troops to Sibu. While at the mouth of the Batang Lupar River the Maimuna sustained damage to her “tail-shaft.” Wireless communication from Simanggang was established with Kuching, and the s.s. Gladys proceeded to the Batang Lupar to take the Sibu squad on to Sibu.

We are informed that His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom has concluded an agreement with the Austrian Government for the abolition of visas under which British nationals will be permitted to travel in and pass through the territory of the Federal Republic of Austria without an Austrian visa, and Austrian nationals will be allowed entry without visas into Great Britain and Northern Ireland and all British Colonies, Protectorates, etc., except Malta, Gibraltar, Aden, Palestine, and Trans-Jordan.

SARAWAK CONSTABULARY BAND.
Provisional Programme.
Monday, 5th December, at Globe Theatre, before, and during interval, of performance given in Aid of Earl Haig Poppy Fund.
Friday, 9th December. Museum gardens.
Sunday, 18th December. Museum gardens.
Friday, 30th December. Museum gardens.

Gold Mining.
His Highness the Rajah wishes it to be known that individuals or syndicates applying to him personally for concessions on which to start gold mining operations will receive no attention. Such applications must be made through the usual channels: in the case of Upper Sarawak these should be addressed to the Assistant District Officer, Bau.

Notice.
Notice is hereby given that, in order to provide an opening for Government employees whose services are being dispensed with from motives of economy, His Highness the Rajah has decided that any such persons may obtain State land on the following special terms and conditions: -
TERMS AND CONDITIONS.
(a) Area. -The area selected may not exceed ten acres.
(b) Title. -Titles will be issued to those whose applications are approved.
(c) Premium. -No premium will be payable by original applicants under this scheme, but in the event of the land being transferred the same premium will be payable to Government by the transferee as would have been payable had the land been alienated to him in the first instance.
(d) Quit Rent. -No quit rent will be payable for the first two years. Thereafter unit rent will be payable at the rate of thirty cents per acre per annum for so long as the land is not transferred.
In the event of the land being transferred quit rent will be payable on account of the year during which such transfer took place and each succeeding year by the transferee at the same rate as would have been payable on account of those years find the land been alienated originally to the transferee on the date on which it was actually alienated to the applicant under this scheme.
(e) Land Order. -Subject to the above modifications of premium and rent, all titles issued under this notice will be governed by Order No. L-2 (Land) 1931, and the Rules issued there under.
(f) Seeds. -Seeds may be obtained at cost price from the Agricultural Department by applicants under this scheme.
(g) Agricultural Tuition. -Any applicant under this scheme who was employed in a clerical or skilled technical capacity and who wishes to receive agricultural tuition may apply to the office, in Kuching, of the Director of Agriculture for appointment as a pupil. On receiving such appointment he will undergo a three months’ course at the Agricultural Station at the 12th Mile and during this period he will receive a maintenance allowance of fifty cents for every day on which he is actually in attendance.
PROCEDURE.
The following procedure has been laid down and must be adhered to by those who are eligible and who wish to take advantage of this scheme: -
(1) Any person who desires to avail himself of the offer of land now being made, must apply, within three months of the termination of his service under Government, to his former Head of Department for a letter entitling him to select up to ten acres of State land available for alienation.
(2) He must then make application at the nearest Land Office, taking with him the letter from his former Head of Department, for the land which he wishes to select.
(3) It, after inspection, there appears to be no objection to the alienation to the applicant of the land selected, a title will be issued bearing a certificate to the effect that it has been issued subject to the terms and conditions of this Notice.
(4) Any applicant wishing to avail himself of the offer of seeds at cost price or agricultural tuition must apply at the Kuching office of the Director of Agriculture, producing his letter from his former Head of Department.
The Director of Agriculture will then issue such instructions as may be necessary.

Armistice Day.
November 11th, Armistice Day, was observed as a general holiday in Kuching. The customary “two minutes’ silence” was kept, at the conclusion of which the Last Post was sounded, most expressively, by buglers of the Sarawak Constabulary.
Flanders Poppies were sold in aid of the Earl Haig Appeal Fund on Thursday 10th, the arrangements for this being carried cut by a Committee, formed by Mrs. Bean, Mrs. Hutchison, and Mrs. Harding. The excellent results obtained, as reported below, bear eloquent testimony to the
efficiency of the organization, and to the zeal of the ladies who volunteered to carry out the somewhat arduous task of selling the Poppies. The ladies who performed this charitable function were Mrs. Hutchison. Mrs. Blagg, Mrs. Corson, Mrs. Harding, Miss Christie and Miss Scott, their joint collections amounting to the substantial sum of $340.10, which is remarkably good considering the difficult times.
More remarkable still are the amounts collected in the Outstations. Sibu contributing $229, Simanggang $61, and Bintulu $36.12. These figures constitute a record and the total to date of. $670.22 is approximately up to last year’s effort. To further augment this sum Mr. Lim Soon Kaw and Mr. Ah Bee, Managers of the Globe Picture Theatre, have kindly offered to arrange a special Cinema performance in aid of the Fund. The date has not yet been fixed, but will be advertised later, and it is hoped that everyone, will attend and ensure that this generous offer attains the success which it undoubtedly deserves.

EX-SERVICE DINNER.
A highly successful Armistice Dinner was held at the Rest House on the night of 11th November, when twenty-two ex-Service men sat down to dinner with Mr. C. F. C. Macaskie in the Chair.
An innovation to this occasion, which proved extremely popular, was the presence of the band of the Sarawak Constabulary, which played popular and war time airs before, during and after dinner. All present were unanimous in their praise of the way in which the band played these (to them) unfamiliar tunes, and which must have entailed much special practice.
The band was perhaps a little too loud during dinner to allow of an exchange of elegant small talk or intelligent ideas, but it is doubtful if much was missed in this direction.
The toasts to “The Rajah” and “The King” were drunk with enthusiasm and to “The Glorious Dead” with customary solemnity and feeling. And here a word of praise must be given to the buglers who, after the latter toast, played the “Last Post” faultlessly.
The evening, of course, was not without it’s humorous episodes such as when the Vice-President’s end of the table rose en masse to sing “Whose baby are you, dear,” to a senior member at the President’s end.
Everyone was glad to see Monseigneur Dunn present, and our thanks are due to Mrs. Tait for the trouble she took arranging details, and for the tasteful manner in which the table decorations were carried out. The latter was arranged with red silk poppies and large bowls of red and white roses kindly send from the Sungei Tengah Estate, and the effect was very pleasing.
Following a life-long custom the writer retired early after dinner, so he is unable to state how or when or why the party broke up.
TANTALUS.

Clothes Made of Rubber.
DISCOVERY STARTS NEW INDUSTRY.
People in Britain will soon be wearing rubber clothes.
A revolution of the textile industries of Europe will begin within the next few weeks if negotiations between a great American rubber company and European firms for the application of a new weaving invention to wool, silk, and cotton come to the expected satisfactory end.
This invention involves the use of a new rubber thread as the weft in all materials, giving them extra wear, greater elasticity, and making them crease proof.
The invention can be applied to both men’s and women’s clothes and also to furnishing fabrics without increasing the cost of the materials.
Negotiations for the application of this new process in Great Britain are nearly concluded. If they are successful work will be provided for thousands of men and women. Lancashire and Yorkshire will hear the hum of scores of looms which have long been idle.
America has gone mad about this new rubber thread. Sales amounted to more than £800,000 in the first week when it was put on the market not long ago. The factories are working twenty-four hours a day, yet cannot meet the demand.
I learned the story of the invention from the representative of the American firm in Paris.

LONG WEARING.
It consists of a superfine thread of latex (pure rubber as it comes from the tree), which is wound with from two to nine spider webs of silk or cotton.
The thread, it is claimed, can stand any amount of washing and ironing. It resists damp and heat, and is said not only to prevent fabric from creasing where not intended to crease, but also to keep folds and creases in materials where they are intended.
Clothes made of these materials will automatically fit the figure.
Materials made with the thread will have a life, it is claimed, from four to five years longer than other fabrics, yet they will retain their appearance to the end.
The price of the thread is at present high owing-to the precision with which it has to be made. It is, however, thin and light and being sold by the pound like rubber It can be woven to produce lengths at a normal cost. -Sunday Express.

Agriculture in Brunei.
We print below extracts of a report on Agriculture in Brunei by H. A. Tempany, Director of Agriculture, S.S. and E.M.S., published by the Malayan Agricultural Journal. Dr. Tempany mentions experiments, with mechanised rice cultivation in Sarawak, which are of interest: -
LAND ALIENATION.
Alienated land at the end of 1931 amounted approximately to 74,900 acres, and there were 4,500 small holdings. Land is alienated by entry in the Land Office register, from which an Extract is issued as title following Malayan practice.
Land that has not been alienated is termed State land, and may be disposed of by the Resident under the Land Code, 1909, the procedure under which follows generally that which obtains in the F.M.S.
There is at present no Survey Department; surveys of alienated land being performed by prismatic compass.

COMMUNICATIONS.
Until comaratively recently, communication was entirely by river or by jungle tracks, but latterly a programme of road construction has been embarked on, a road from Brunei to Tutong having been completed. A second from Brunei to Limbang in Sarawak is now practically complete, a third from Barakas Estate to the Coast is under construction, while there is a fourth from Bangan to Panderuan in Tembarang district; it is understood that the construction of other roads is contemplated in due course.
The effect which the programme of roading is likely to have on the agricultural development of the country is considerable: already there are abundant signs that the system of shifting “ladang” (dry land) cultivation which was formerly universal is tending to become replaced by permanent wet padi cultivation in the areas opened up by the road system, and both on the Tutong road and on the Limbang-Brunei road at Lumpas there are numerous holdings on which the making of permanent “sawah” has made considerable progress.

RICE CULTIVATION.
The writer was greatly impressed by the possibilities which exist for wet padi cultivation in Brunei; there are in all the localities visited very large tracts of land which appear admirably suited to it, provided they can be opened up; there are also in most localities sufficient areas of “permatang” land to permit of the formation of homesteads.
One is also impressed by the manner in which the Kedayan cultivators had cleared the land for cultivation, there being little signs of jungle stumps and partial cleaning such as is commonly seen in the opening up of new sawah areas. Some of the homesteads seen were also surprisingly good and well-kept and might serve as a model for many that are met with in the Malay Peninsula.
It is stated that there are at the present time 7,400 acres under rice cultivation in Brunei of which 3,500 acres are under cultivation in “wet” rice, the remainder being in “dry” rice. The average yield is stated to be about 100 gantangs per acre all round, but from a consideration of the figures for rice imports and of the population it is probable that this may be an underestimation.
Individual yields as high as 500 gantangs per acre are stated to have been recorded, while 350 gantangs per acre are stated to be usual in favoured localities.
Selected strains of seed have been imported for two successive years from the Department of Agriculture, S.S. and F.M.S., and are stated to have given uniformly satisfactory results and to meet with appreciation from the cultivators.
The writer was able to see land preparation in progress at one or two points; methods employed are primitive, but the people themselves-namely Kedayans-are very painstaking and hardworking.
Dry seed beds are sown and the rice transplanted, land being prepared by trampling with buffaloes, the animals being yoked five or six abreast for the purpose. The formation of bunds is performed by means of the “changkol.” Ploughing is nowhere practised, it would seem that if more through and systematic draining of the land was undertaken the introduction of more economical and efficient methods should be possible.

FUTURE DEVELOPMENT OP RICH CULTIVATION.
The developments that are taking place as the result of the opening up of the country by means of new roads are of considerable significance and importance, and provided these developments are fostered and helped there is no reason why the country should not become self-supporting in the matter of rice production in a comparatively short space of time.
But to enable this to be achieved satisfactorily, considerable care and forethought will be necessary; the problems likely to arise will have to be foreseen and provided for and dangers guarded against.
One of the first requisites is that attention should-so far as possible-be concentrated on a small number of areas which should be so situated that considerable expansion is possible at a few parts rather than diffused over a larger number of small areas: this will tend to economy of effort and more efficient work. So far these requirements appear to be largely realised.
The second point is that attention should be given to improvement of agriculture methods including seed supply, cultivation, drainage and irrigation and control of pests. This necessitates some provision for agricultural services, and this must be regarded as essential if progress is to be achieved.

REGULATION OF RICE PLANTING.
A further point that will probably require attention is the need for provision that operations in relation to padi planting can. if necessary, be capable of official regulation, while powers will also be required to deal with possible outbreaks of disease. Titles for padi lands are at present issued with a clause providing for resumption of the land if implanted for three years.

ECONOMICS OF RICE CULTIVATION.
The economic side of rice cultivation will also require attention, and in this connection the possibility of the provision of some assistance to intending padi planters in the clearing of the lands should be considered.
A further point is the question of marketing of surplus padi and rice so soon as the production begins to exceed the consumption powers of the producers themselves, and the allied question of indebtedness.
Probably the most effective way to approach this and the allied problem of indebtedness may be found to be the establishment of small supervised marketing groups and the provision, if need be, of Government controlled buying and selling agencies; if these are established the question of linking up the provision of credit therewith is an obvious further step.
It is understood that the Resident proposes, during the coming season, to establish buying centres for rice and padi in the three principal urban areas.
Rice is at present prepared in the native homesteads by the usual primitive process of pounding in a mortar by hand. The samples of prepared rice seen by the writer were very indifferent in quality with much broken grain. So soon as rice in commercial quantities becomes available for sale, the question of milling is bound to arise.

MECHANISED RICE CULTIVATION.
A factor in the present situation is the interest which is being taken in rice cultivated by certain of the estates. Two estates are taking steps to induce Malay cultivators to take up rice cultivation on lands in their concessions with the object of attaching labour to the estates which will continue to be available if and when conditions in the rubber industry improve, and on one of these estates a considerable area has been cleared by Malay settlers for the purpose.
It is understood that the manager of the other estate is considering the question of undertaking mechanical rice cultivation in uncleared areas in the estate.
The idea is interesting and is no doubt the outcome of tendencies in the same direction which are said to be in evidence in Sarawak; in Limbang which adjoins and bisects Brunei, a Japanese company has, it is understood, obtained a concession from the Sarawak Government for the purpose of undertaking large scale mechanised rice cultivation, while in other parts of Sarawak one or more groups of Chinese are stated to have taken up land with a similar object in view. If these ventures show promise, the possibility of similar developments in Brunei may be expected to arise.
Padi cultivation has been considered at some length, as it appears to be the agricultural question of outstanding importance in Brunei at present, and the one on which the attention of Government should chiefly be focused with a view to rendering the country independent of imported padi, but this does not preclude attention to other crops.

M1SCELLANEOUS CROPS.
Obviously the planting of coconuts is capable of marked extension, while coffee also is capable of considerable expansion with a view to meeting local needs.
Attention should also be paid to the probability of a steadily increasing demand for meat, poultry, eggs, frosh vegetables and fruit as the development of the oil fields proceeds, and here Brunei and Labuan can very well compete. Groundnuts, arecanuts and tobacco also are worthy of attention. There also appears to be a marked shortage of buffaloes, and attention to this point also would serve a useful purpose, while the improvement of poultry is also an important line.
In relation to the possibility of extension of estate agriculture, one is struck by the probable suitability of much of the undulating country for oil palm cultivation. and this view is strengthened by the fact since learned that an estate of about 1,200 acres under this crop has been established in Sarawak and is stated to be showing considerable promise
The possibility in this direction in Brunei might well be tested out by experimental plantings at one or two points.

ORGANISATION OF AGRICULTURAL SERVICES.
But for these developments to be achieved, the establishment of Agricultural services seems essential; these should include the opening up of test and demonstration plots and plant distributing centres, and definite efforts in certain other directions, namely, the holding of periodical shows of agricultural produce, the organizing of regional small-holding competitions, and the establishment of school gardens in connection with the vernacular schools of which there are now ten in operation.
It is also suggested that attention might be directed to the feasibility of establishing district agricultural committees with a view to assisting developments on the lines adumbrated in one of the resolutions of the recent Inter-departmental Agricultural Conference.
It is probable that moderate expenditure in establishing services with these objects in view would fully recoup itself in due course.

Broadcasting Intelligence.
THE EMPIRE STATION.
As has already been stated, it is hoped that the Empire Short-wave Station, which is at present being built at Daventry, will be completed and will radiate test transmissions before the end of the year. It is further Imped that if the results of the tests, which must obviously occupy a comparatively extended period, are sufficiently satisfactory a regular and full Empire service will be in operation before the summer of 1933.
To define with any degree of accuracy what form the Empire programmes will ultimately take is at the present time quite, impossible. While, however, the B.B.C. are by no means barren of ideas, it can be stated that the general policy is gradually to build up a scheme based largely upon the information which it is confidently anticipated will begin to flow in soon after the testing period has started.
The B.B.C.’s endeavour will, in the initial stages, be to provide between the hours of 6 p.m. and midnight, local time, a programme of about two hours’ duration. Owing to the difference in time east and want of the Greenwich meridian the service will have to be by zones, and there will be necessity for the transmission of at least three programmes daily. Every effort will be made to broadcast these programmes in such a manner as to ensure their local reception al toe most convenient listening time, probably between the hours of 8 and 10 p.m. local time. Owing, however, to the differences in time within a given zone-as illustrated for example, by the four hours’ variation between Nova Scotia and Vancouver-some listeners will inevitably be more fortunate than others. -World-Radio.

Coming Event.
There will be a special performance on Monday, 5th December, at the Globe Picture Theatre in aid of Earl Haig’s British Legion Appeal Fund. The film “SUCH MEN ARE DANGEROUS” will be shown, and the Constabulary Band will play from 6 to 6.30 p m. at the early performance, and from 8.30 to 9.15 p.m. at the later one. Book your seats early.

Dollar Topees.
That locally made topees are on sale in Malaya at $1 or $1.50 each is evidence that some person or persons are making a brave effort to tempt money out of depleted purses, and the full story is told in this month’s Malayan Forester. The hats are made from the roots of a tree which grows in fresh-water swamps and on abandoned mining land. Large tracts covered with it can be seen from the railway between Batu Gajah and Kampar. This rootwood is only one third the weight of cork and is little, if at all, inferior in many other respects, so that other uses besides hat-making may be found for it. “The originator of the industry,” writes Mr. D. S. P. Noakes in the Malayan Forester, “was a local-born Chinese, who had lived for many years in French Indo-China where he learnt the trade. He started business as a purely family affair in his own squatter’s hut on the outskirts of Ipoh. Here, with the help of his wife and two sons, he produced about half a dozen hats per day. Later he engaged workmen who, after learning 
the trade, broke away to start businesses of their own. In this way from a small beginning, the industry has continued to expand, until to-day, it is in a comparatively flourishing state.” What is more, this new industry, unlike many others sponsored by much more powerful interests, has never asked for a protective import duty and has successfully bored its way into a long-established business enjoyed by manufacturers in Sumatra and India Once again, hats off to the Chinese! -Straits Times.

Empire Broadcasting.
The news that tests in Empire broadcasting will be made next week and the regular daily service will begin on Dec. 19 is very welcome not only to wireless, enthusiasts, but to that large body of people who take a sympathetic interest in the question but are content to await developments. It has to be confessed that reception in Malaya has not always been a pronounced success, neither is the matter received particularly inspiring on all occasions. Most of us have had the experience of visiting a friend’s bouse, waiting while he turns on the wireless and then being regaled by a series of alarming explosions-or else gramophone records from Bandoeng or Manila. Let us hope that the Empire service will change all that. We look forward to really worth while programmes and reception as clear as if we were in London. That is what the experts hope for, and they assert confidently that expectations will not be disappointed. It may be that we shall be able to spend quiet evenings at home, listening to two hours of 
delightful music and other entertainment, culminating with the mellifluous tones of the announcer saying soothingly. “Good-night, everybody. Goo-ood night.” -Straits Times.
The Empire Broadcasting station is nearing completion and the British Broadcasting Corporation has announced that regular programmes will be broadcast commencing on 19th December, 1932.
To cover the variation in time in various parts of the Empire and also night end day effects on the reception of Broadcast programmes over great distances, the British Empire has been divided into five zones and will be served by two transmitters working simultaneously on two wavelengths.
The five zones, wavelengths to be used, and times of transmission are as follows: -
Sarawak is midway between zones 1 and 2. It is thought that reception of zone 1 programmes will be poor but zone 2 programmes will be received throughout the year at good strength.
Technical tests on zone 2 wavelengths took place on November 21st, 22nd and 23rd, the results obtained were very encouraging.
The following is a report from one wireless enthusiast on the reception of the tests: -
“I have pleasure in giving the following report of my reception of the British Empire Broadcasting Station’s tests on the 21st, 22nd and 23rd instant.
“I was listening in all the time with an Eddystone ‘Homeland Four’ receiver using a Ferranti permanent magnet moving coil loudspeaker. No headphones were used.
“Monday, 21st November, 1932. -GSG 16.9 meters came in punctually at 10.20 p.m. Kuching time at weak loudspeaker strength but distinct. The first item sent out was a Columbia record whose title was “Singing In The Moonlight.” At 10.45 p.m. it disappeared entirely and could not be heard again. Between 10.20 to 10.45 p.m. I tuned in to GSE 25.3 meters which gave better result and was slightly louder than 16.9 meters. At 10.45 p.m. GSE 25.3 meters was fairly loud till 11 p.m. when it was much better and louder. It began to fade at 11.20 pm. and lost from 11.30 p.m. for the remainder of the test. No Static throughout. “History of the broadcasting of the BBC” was read out.
“Tuesday. 22nd November. 1932. -I tuned in to GSE 25.3 meters. At 10.20 p.m. the half-hour chime of the studio clock was beard at weak loudspeaker strength. Then, came the announcement “This Is The British Empire Broadcasting Station testing to the Indian Zone.” After radiating a few pieces from gramophone records, an article on “Broadcasting in India in future” was read out. From 11 p.m. to 11.45 p.m. the reception was at medium loudspeaker strength, after which there were signs of fading till 12.10 am when it became weaker but clear up to the time of closing down. The titles of the pieces radiated were “When Work Is Through,” “I Lost My Heart In Hildenburg,” “Singing In The Moonlight,” “A Friend, A Good Friend.” “Listening In To-night My Darling,” “Coming To Myself.” “Let Us Have Another Cup Of Coffee,” “Little Romanie,” “Martyr,” etc. The half-hour chime of the studio clock at 4.30 p.m. GMT followed immediately after the announcer wished “Good afternoon, good afternoon.” The reception was better and louder than the previous night but there was slight atmospheric occasionally. I tuned in to GSG 16.9 meters every now and then but could not even get the carrier wave.
“Wednesday, 23rd November, 1932. -At 10.20 p.m. I tuned in to GSG 16.9 meters which came in very weak with signs of fading. I immediately switched on to GSE 25.3 meters which came in at very much better strength than the previous two nights and the reception was excellent up to 11.08 when it began to fade. The titles of the gramophone records radiated were “When We Are Alone,” “Good Night Moon,” “Day By Day,” “Nobody Else But Elsie,” etc. The announcer read out “Empire Broadcasting Station will be testing to the African Zone transmitters today, tomorrow and day after tomorrow from 6 to 8 p.m. GMT on wavelengths of 31.3 meters 9585 kilocycles and 49.6 meters 6060 kilocycles per second. There was no atmospheric. At 11.35 p.m. reception was very weak and could hardly be heard on the loudspeaker at 11.40 p.m. when I switched off.
“During the three nights’ tests, after every piece of music the announcer gave the time of the studio clock followed by the announcement that the BBC Broadcasting House London will be glad to receive a report by cable if possible from any listener who may be receiving the test.
“On November 24th, 25th and 26th tests were carried out on zone three wavelengths 31.5-49.6 meters. Although Direction of aerials were used to communicate with South Africa the programme on 49.6 meters was received here at fair loudspeaker strength, but atmospheric disturbances marred the clarity of reception.
“Further tests are to take place on November 28th, 29th and 30th for zone 4 on wavelengths 31.6 and 49.5 meter, at 8.30-10.30 G.M.T. (4.00 a.m. -6.00 Sarawak Standard Time).
“On and after 19th December, 1932, there appears no reason why anyone resident in Sarawak and interested in Broadcasting should not be able to receive programmes of good quality and the latest news of the day direct from London.” -Contributed.

An Impression of 1847.
I think it was in 1929 chat I wrote a short article in the Gazette describing a quaint old book on Sarawak which had come into my hands.
There are many books on Sarawak, perhaps not as many as it deserves, but quite enough to bewilder any inquirer into the life and customs of the inhabitants.
Some appear dull to present day readers, some are frankly Christian propaganda; a few are typical of the flying-visit-must-see-everything-in-a-day author (or generally, may I dare to write, authoress).
One thing one cannot help noticing, however, is the dearth of good illustrations. Most old illustrations were so untrue to life that readers have long given up the search for the delightful cleared spaces and charming vistas depicted in the earlier works on Sarawak.
In the more modern books photographs take the place of engravings and the less said about most of these the better.
Picture my delight, therefore, when a rather tattered, but imposing looking volume came into my possession the other day, which, on being opened, displayed a maximum of delightful engravings and a minimum of tiresome letterpress.
The title is typical of the years that are past; when people had time (and the inclination) to read more leisurely and enjoyed a well-sounding and well set-up title: -
“Views In the Eastern Archipelago, Borneo, Sarawak, Labuan, etc., etc., etc., from drawings made on the spot by Capt. Drinkwater Bethune, R.N. C.B., Commander, L. G. Heath, R.N., and others.”
“The descriptive letterpress by James Augustus St. John, Esq.”
“Author of Manners and Customs of the Ancient Greeks
Drawn on stone by J. W. Giles.”
“Printed by McLean & Co.. 70, St. Martin’s Lane.”
“1847.”
The frontispiece is a carefully thought out and complicated design of native weapons, coconut palms, monkeys, fruit trees and other tropical growths.
On the next page is the dedication to-
“The Right Hon. Lord Viscount Palmerston, H. M. Principal Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, etc., etc.”
The principal contents, however, are twenty-five full page engravings, so intricate and so full of detail that a full description would fill may more pages than the Editor would possibly allow me to use.
To mention a few. There is a charming view of Kuching, which, in spite of the modern bund and imposing block of new offices, was surely a much more picturesque township than at the present day.
Then there is a Dyak suspension bridge which in no way differs from the ones in use to this day in Upper Sarawak.
“Mr. Brooke’s Bungalow” is the picture of a very modest building, much on the same lines as some of the few remaining “old style” outstation bungalows to-day. In this respect one cannot help thinking that perhaps our great-grandfathers had a better idea of a verandah than we have now.
“Brune” is the Brunei of the photographs without the dreadful camera-cannot-lie appearance. Some of the other plates are “Keni Balu” (Kinabalu), “Santubong,” “Singghi Mountain,” “Matang,” “Cutting The Boom at Malludau,” and “Coal Seam at Labuan.”
If I had the same facility of expressing in words the charm of these old engravings, as the authors had in executing their drawings in pen and ink, my task would be easy.
It is impossible for me, therefore, to describe fully the beauty and restfulness of this little collection of illustrations.
No doubt many modern art experts might decry the meticulous attention to detail and the obvious intention of the artist to leave nothing for granted. Persons might say “You would not be able to see the rigging of a ship at that distance, therefore why put it in? It is not correct in nature.” Quite true, perhaps, but then it looks all right, and that after all is what the average man wants to see. “I’ve never seen a sunset like that!” someone told Turner. “Ah! but don’t you wish you had,” Turner replied.
I do not suppose these engravings are of much value purely as works of arts, but they are certainly satisfying to me, and I can turn to them over and over again with fresh enjoyment every time when the most expertly made photo illustrations leave me cold after the first look.
To conclude this short article. I found gummed to the inside of the cover a letter which may interest some readers as an example of the carefully written style which letter writers used in 1847; when telephones, fountain pens and typewriters were not yet invented to spoil the art of letter writing, although I must admit that several of the words defied my ingenuity and I must leave several blank spaces!!
9, North Bank,
Regent’s Park, Wednesday, May 31 (1847?).
My Dear Sir,
While returning the…translation of your work, and the pamphlets you were so kind as to send me will you permit me to do myself the pleasure of presenting to Mrs. Mackinson a copy of an illustrated work which 1 have just published on the Indian Archipelago.
If you can…spare your copy of the paper…to…more daylight on the affair of Sir H. Bulwar and the Spanish Government I shall feel much obliged and will return it to you on any day you may indicate.
Very faithfully yours,
J. A. St. John.
W. A. Mackinson. Esq.,
Perhaps after all we may wish that the typewriter had been invented as I do want to know what the…translation was, and what the mysterious paper could have been that would have solved the intrigue between Sir H. Bulwar and the Spanish Government.
Alas! like the unfortunate in Bab Ballads who was caught with his eye to the keyhole of the door, I shall never know.
THE OPTIMISTIC FIDDLER.

OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 47 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
1885.] SATURDAY, 1ST AUGUST, 1885. [ Price 10 cents.
BRUNEI.
The inhabitants of Brunei seem to have received the installation of the new Sultan in a satisfactory manner, and he is desirous of making himself popular by entertaining them liberally and keeping his doors open to all comers. This is certainly a great improvement on the old regime, which seemed to have been generally surrounded by one party, and was encircled with spies and mischief makers, all anxious to enhance their own importance, or to enrich themselves. There is of course a party adverse, though not in any way powerful, to the present Ruler. This party is headed by Pangeran de Gadong, and he possesses as a following all those who are the near relations of the late Sultan-the remnant of the ancient branch of aristocracy of Brunei, which has, for the most part, now become very effete and almost without ambition, except to reap as much money as they can from the different portions of territory left them.
The present Sultan is, however, very naturally desirous of trying his hand at governing, and this is of course as it should be. Unfortunately the late feud between the Limbang population, so near to, and supposed to be subjects of Brunei, does not seem to have been conclusively settled. Since the election of the Sultan, none of these chiefs have presented themselves, which they certainly would have done had they been well disposed. And also, about ten days ago, two more Brunei people, while fishing, were killed by some Muruts from the Tamburong river, which is situated close to the Limbang. It was first supposed that these murders were committed by the Trusan Muruts, in revenge for having had some things stolen from a small party while on a trading excursion to Brunei. The act of plunder was by all accounts of a barbarous description, and, as generally happens, no satisfactory result of justice could be obtained from the Government of Brunei-in fact, some agents of the present Sultan were supposed to have 
been the principal in this outrage. There are reports that His Highness wishes to establish Courts of law, with suitable Magistrates, and one can only hope that his efforts to bring about a better state will be successful, but it is to be feared that the instruments that he can find in Brunei to act in such positions will be of a very deteriorated character. The whole place is split up in such cliques and parties that no native Magistrate would feel himself safe while administering justice, the princes of Brunei having always been recognised as being superior to any petty system of police jurisprudence.
The Ramadan month is now over, and we are anxious to see what move the new Sultan and his Government will make in the way of bringing the surrounding tribes into a peaceful state. The Bruneis can scarcely submit to be killed at the pleasure of these wilder tribes, nor can they, so far us we can see, bring any adequate armed force into the field to subdue them. Any attack, unless well and thoroughly done, will bring a swarm of these armed men on and around them, which might endanger the capital and cause the deaths of thousands. This is the dilemma in which the new Sultan is placed, a short time must show the result.

Sarawak Library.
The following books have been purchased by the Committee: -

First Division News.
RESIDENT’S OFFICE.
October, 1932.
Extracts from the Divisional Reports by Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division: -
Health. -With the exception of influenza, reported at Serian, the health of the Division has been good.
Obituary. -It is with regret I report the death of Chang Jee Koo on the 1st October. He will be remembered as a zealous assistant for many years in the Sarawak Museum.
Agriculture. -Reports from all districts show that padi planting has been earlier or later than is usual, this was due to the continued wet weather during the period allowed for burning.
General. -Their Highnesses the Rajah and Dayang Leonora arrived from Europe on Monday 31st. 
Some eighty Japanese emigrants on the Samarahan plantation have returned to Japan after an unsuccessful attempt to start padi planting on a large scale.
The returns from Bau show a yield of 837 ounces of gold on which royalty has been paid, and while these figures are satisfactory, it should not be forgotten that the gold is being extracted from small pockets which are being rapidly exhausted. So far no new deposits have been located.
During the month visits were paid to Lundu, Sadong and Bau.

UPPER SARAWAK, BAU.
October, 1932.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports: -Rainfall. -Highest recorded in 24 hours was 1.10 inches; the daily average was .21 of an inch and the total for the month was 3.46 inches.
General. -The laboratory of the Kwong Lee Mining Company caught fire on the evening of the 20th and was partly destroyed.
All the apparatus in the laboratory was saved.
The fire was due to the faulty construction of the furnace.
Public Works. -The Astana was painted and whitewashed during the month.
Several bad corners on the Kuching and Jambusau Roads were cut off and the work is still proceeding.
Minor repairs were effected to several bridges.
Gold Mining. -Gold mining activities in the district continue unabated and the price of gold remains high.
Nine General Prospecting Licences were issued during the month.
Eight applications for Exclusive Prospecting Licences were received and one such licence was issued.
Actual gold obtained by the following companies for the month of September, 1932, was: -

LUNDU.
October, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -General. -I visited Rambungan on 20th and went up the Sungoi Rayu to inspect the Kuching to Lundu road, I have reported on this separately. During my visit to Rambungan m.l. Nellie broke down completely and was ordered to Kuching by the Shipping Master for docking at the end of the month. She proceeded in tow of m.v. La Follette. Native Officer Abang Mustapha visited Simatan on 19th, in connection with the election of a new Tua Kampong, Buassim having died on the 13th.
Most Malays and Dyaks have, finished planting out both hill and swamp padi, this being considerable earlier than last year.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall for the month was 8.12 inches, the greatest in any one day being 1.33 inch.

SADONG DISTRICT.
October, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. H. G. Hansom, reports: -
Agriculture. -The burning off of local padi lands still progresses slowly and it appears that the bulk of the padi is already planted. Local natives profess to be very dissatisfied with the general weather conditions during the past four months, which has delayed burning off almost universally.
An increasing number of Chinese are applying for land in the Tebekang area for the planting of pepper. It would appear that this area should be eminently successful, and I intend to make further investigations during my next visit up river.
A second attempt is being made to plant padi within the old Mine Reservation area, but it is thought that the land is too dry. Several plots of land have been lent to local Chinese for the purpose of experiment.
Constabulary. -Messrs. Hannigan and Kelley visited the Station from the 8th to 9th instant when the local Constabulary and quarters were inspected.
Various matters concerning the Constabulary were discussed, and it was arranged that members of the existing local force shall be sent to Kuching in rotation, for training.
The regular constable at Gedong has been replaced by a village constable.
Health. -No serious disease or epidemic was encountered during the month, and the epidemic of influenza reported last month by the Dresser at Serian is understood to have abated.

Chinese Affairs.
October, 1932.
Extracts from the Report of The Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Captain C. D. Le Gros Clark: -
The Secretary for Chinese Affairs proceeded to the Third Division, on the 24th October and was still absent at the end of the month. During his tour he visited Sarikei, Sibu. Dalat Oya and Mukah. So far as the coastal districts are concerned, there is nothing to report, though here as elsewhere, the Chinese have been badly hit by the “Slump.” The question of the sago trade through the Kut was raised at Dalat, but the Chinese were informed that in view of the fact that His Highness the Tuan Muda had already given a decision in this matter no further action could be taken unless they, the Chinese, had new arguments to bring forward.
A representative of this Department visited Lundu on the 28th October for the purpose of consulting with the Chinese there in matters connected with Chinese family law, especially the registration of marriages and betrothals. He reports that conditions are quiet in that district.

Second Division News.
October, 1932.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident: -
I returned to the Division on the 2nd.
On the 4th the Simanggang-Engkilili telephone line was open for traffic, but broke down on the last day of the month.
Mr. J. C. B. Fisher was absent on sick leave in Kuching from the 13th to 28th.
Mr. A. Macpherson paid two visits to Simanggang and Mr. J. R. Combe one in order to discuss the forth-coming system of patrols next month.
Penghulu Ramba and Tuai Rumah Ranggau came down to Simanggang to see me with regard to up-river, affairs. I instructed them to go and see Asun once more.
Penghulus Goyang and Sait and Orang Kaya Jaul visited Simanggang.
I sat in Resident’s Court on the 29th to try Metassim for murder. The case had not been concluded at the end of the month.
During the month I inspected Sekolah Abang Aing, Simanggang, and have reported the result to the Director of Education.

SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
October, 1932.
The Cadet Officer, Mr. W. H. C. C. Morice, reports: -
Trade and Customs: -
General. -On the 2nd of the month the Resident returned from Kuching.
On the 13th I took over the District Office pro tem from Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft.
On the 14th, the telephone line being through from Engkilili, I told Mandor Dulkadir and his men to return home.
On the 19th Mr. Combe and Mr. Macpherson arrived to discuss matters connected with the proposed Asun Expedition. They returned to their stations on the 23rd.
On the 19th news was received that Lim Ah Phui had been murdered in the Ulu Sebuyow, I proceeded to Sebuyow to investigate on the 20th, and arrested four people in consequence, Metassim, Usin, Sam and Toma (f.). I brought these people back to Simanggang via Lingga on the 24th, subsequently putting the case in the Resident’s Court. On the 29th this trial was commenced.
Office work is not very heavy at the moment owing to the fact that people are still on their farms.
A few Dyak appeals have been heard during the month.
A good amount of door and exemption tax is, still unpaid, Penghulu Kalong’s people being the worst offenders in this respect. It is hoped in the near future to have a scheme on hand whereby some of these may be given work in lieu of payment.

ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
October, 1932.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. A. Macpherson, reports: -
Telephone. -The line was completed on 3rd, and has been a great convenience.
Travelling. -I paid two visits to Simanggang with reference to patrols in Ulu Ai, etc.
General. -The bungalow at Lubok Tedong was sold to S.P.G. Mission, and the pepper garden was auctioned, fetching $266.
Bazaar. -All new shophouses are now completed. A new Kapitan was appointed; no representative for the gardeners has yet been found.
Trade and Customs: -

SARIBAS DISTRICT.
October, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe reports: -
Travelling. -Accompanied by Mr. B. Summers, Land Officer, the substations were visited from the 8th to the 13th when all outstanding matters were settled. It was arranged with the Rimbas Dyaks to clear the telephone rentis at the end of the month.
Trade: -
Shipping. -Seven motor vessels entered and cleared the port during the month.

KALAKA DISTRICT.
October, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. L. K. Morse, reports: -
Taxes. -The Saratok figures shew that well over 90% of the Arms, Gun, and Exemption Taxes have been paid. The Dyak Door Tax approximately fifteen doors remain outstanding, while the Malay Exemption Tax collected up to the time of writing exceeds the figure for the whole of the previous year. Weights and Measures verification fees for the year shew the collections to date to be very little less than for the whole of the previous year.
Dyak Affairs. -Pengarah Nyalu, Penghulus Undom and Entri visited the station during the month. They had nothing of interest to report.
The padi planting has been completed in the Ulu, but the Sebetan Dyaks are still planting and in some cases have not yet burnt off the land. The Malays generally appear to have finished their planting.
General. -I visited Roban on the 14th-15th and checked the books at that station. I was pleased to see the improvement in the appearances of the kampong, the fruit trees close to the road having been cleared away, the road repaired and covered with gravel. Kabong Station was not visited during the month. The leading marks at Kabong Mouth were whitewashed, and the undergrowth around cleared. The Rev. M. Bradshaw and Mr. M. I. Mills visited the district during the month.
Trade. -Trade statistics for the month are appended: -

LAND OFFICE.
October, 1932.
The Land Officer, Mr. B. Summers, reports: -
Land Officers visit to Betong, Pusa, Debak, Saratok and Roban: -
Betong. -On the morning of the 5th instant I left Simanggang on foot for Betong, remaining there until the 8th. The usual routine was gone through, of checking books, etc., also the Inspectors’ previous work.
Rent. -The percentage of the total number of gardens that had paid up to the end of September amounted to 62; whereas the amount of revenue for the nine months in comparison with the total for last year amounted to seventy per cent (a small collection is expected for October owing to the farming season).
Pusa. -On the 8th instant I accompanied Mr. Combe to Pusa; here again the usual routine was carried out, but rapidly, as there is very little land work in this District.
Rent. -The percentage of the total number of gardens, that had paid to the end of September amounted to fifty-two per cent.
Debak. -At noon on the 9th, Debak was reached; all books, etc., were cheeked, and the matter of pepper applications gone into; the pepper industry in the district is apparently increasing.
Revenue. -The total revenue collected in the Division, up to the end of September, in comparison to the amount estimated for the present year, amounts to ninety-eight per cent; whereas the collection for the nine months in comparison to the total collection for last year amounts to seventy-seven per cent.

SURVEY DEPARTMENT.
October, 1932.
The Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Mr. N. Mace reports: -
During the month of October, demarcation of gardens has been carried out in the small tributaries of the Batang Lupar below Stumbin. and at Stirau.
Controls were started at Sungei Tatai. Strap, and at Bt. Lintang, Sebuyau.
Next month demarcation will be continued at Stirau, and controls at Tatai, Sebuyau and Triso.
I made one supervision trip to Stirau. The Acting Superintendent made a visit of one trip of the boat, and inspected the office work.
One theodolite surveyor has gone to Kuching for annual leave and training. A compass man will be going to Kuching next month also for training.
A few more sheets have been passed to the Land Office. The main work in the office has been the droving of field work, and clearing up of outstanding oddments. Completed sheets now cover the Undup Valley, and westwards as far as the Ulu Klauh. The Sebuyau work is necessarily held up, waiting on the triangulation scheme, of which the Sebuyau portion requires connection to the Simanggang portion.

Third Division News.
SIBU.
October, 1932.
Extracts from the Third Divisional reports by Mr. C. D. Adams. Resident: -
Dyak and Native Affairs. -Three rebels and their families have voluntarily given themselves up during the month and are now living with their friends down river, they all seem to be very disgusted with Asun and say that he has plenty to eat but won’t give food to his followers.
Trade, including Kanowit: -
Education. -Wan Haji Mohamat, the second teacher at Rejang, was transferred to Sibu at the end of the month, as the work at Rejang did not justify employment of a second teacher any longer. There is marked decline in attendance figures at most of the Chinese Schools, this probably due to the necessity for children to help their parents by working.
Mrs. J. M. Hoover held an exhibition of work at her School on 11th, the variety and quality of the work exceeded the already high standard attained in previous years, and it is a pity that some of the exhibits are not seen by people outside Sibu.
General. -The Travelling District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, left on 13th for Kanowit, on a visit to the Ngemah and Poi rivers and returned on 21st.
Teo Chong Loh of Chop “Soon Seng” was appointed Capitan China in place of Teo Hoi Siew, who resigned on grounds of ill health.
Visitors to the station during the month included Mr. Justice Boyd, Mrs. Boyd, Mr. and Mrs. Calvert, Mr. C. S. Griffith’s, Mr. F. L. Crossley, The Rev. Monseigneur Dunn and Mr. P. Cobbold.

MUKAH.
October, 1932.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports: - 
General. -Some very rough weather has been experienced during the month especially on the evening of the 23rd, when the wind reached gale force.
During the storm numerous kampong bouses suffered damage to roofs, etc. Nine schooners were held up for over ten days owing to the roughness of the sea.
Visitors to the station included the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N. E. Hughes, The Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Captain Le Gros Clark, Dr. Breindlin and Messrs. Hunter and Fountain of the S.O.L., Miri, and Mr. and Mrs. Harrop of the United Engineers, Singapore.
Survey. -The Assistant Superintendent of Survey, Third Division, Mr. J. L. Noakes, visited Balingian, proceeding via the overland route and returning by sea.
On the 26th a survey party surveying from Mukah to Oya along the seashore were shifting camp and had just left Kuala Panat by boat when the sea proved too rough and the boat was sunk. Due to the presence of mind of a chainman, the theodolite was saved but all records, tapes, etc., including the parties gear, were lost.
During the month the survey of gardens was carried out in the Judan, Penakub, Sisok and Teh Districts. Approximately 599 gardens were surveyed during the month making a total of about 4,249 gardens as on the 31st October.
Balingian. -My trip to Balingian had to be postponed as it coincided with Mr. Harrop’s visit to Mukah.
Trade. -513 koyans of raw sago and 422 piculs of jelutong were exported during the month.
Comparative trade returns are as follows: -
Shipping. -During the month 24 vessels entered and 25 cleared the port.

OYA.
October, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports: -
General. -The landas is now in full swing, and storms and rough seas have been the rule during most of the month. As a result, fishing has been largely held up, and the Melanaus have now reverted to their time-honoured practice of buying back from the Chinese, salted and at a comparatively high price, the very same fish that they sold them for almost nothing during the fine weather.
On October 6th a youth named Abun died as a result of being bitten by a sea-snake.
M.V. Kim Chin Seng and Sri Chindrawasih arrived at Oya on October 12th and have not yet been able to clear, the former being held up by rough seas, the latter by an engine breakdown.
On October 5th a Chinese at Dalat went mad and bolted into the jungle, but was arrested by police and kampong people the following day. This man, was confined in the jail for some days for observation, but was eventually released on his relatives agreeing to make themselves responsible for him.
Captain C. D. Le Gros Clark, Secretary for Chinese Affairs, arrived at Dalat via the Kut on October 27th, proceeding to Oya the following day. Captain Le Gros Clark interviewed the loading Chinese at both stations but reported that apart from an attempt to re-open the Dalat sago-traders petition nothing of any importance was brought before him.
Captain Le Gros Clark proceeded to Mukah by m.l. Leonora on October 30th.
Trade. -I understand that certain Chinese who are independent of the Kuching sago ring are considering opening a sago-refinery on the Oya river. If this project matures, the refined product will be shipped direct to Singapore.
Public Works Department. -The Kampong Oya and Boom Laut roads were raised to above high-water level; all roads at Oya have now been raised sufficiently to ensure that their surface is above high-water mark.
Dyaks. -Wan Hussein returned on the 20th, reported that as a result of the destruction of last season’s padi crop by floods the Dyaks in the Batang Oya are now in a serious stole of want. They are entirely dependent on sago, and apparently they have not even enough of that; owing to constant rain preventing a proper burn, prospects for next season’s crop are bad.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall recorded for the month was 12.68.
Trade. -261 koyans of raw sago and 1 picul of Gutta Jangkar were shipped to Kuching and Binatang during the month.

MATU AND DARO.
October, 1932.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. G. F. J. Pegler, reports: -
General. -The Superintendent of Lands, Mr. C. S. Griffiths, and the Officer-in-Charge of Divisional Land Office, Mr. T. E. Parker, arrived in Matu on the 21st instant and proceeded to Daro on the morning of the 24th instant.
The Yu Thee Chinese School sports were held on the 9th inst. A number of events were open to the public and some good performances were put up.
On numerous occasions, during the last landas season boats were held up for several days at both Tanjang Jol and Kuala Matu. As a result there was always the possibility of foodstuffs running short, and local merchants did not hesitate to charge exorbitant prices for absolute necessities. To prevent any further recurrence of that and to improve communication with other stations it was decided that a small canal be constructed joining the ulu Tian with the ulu Daro. On completion it will be navigable for light craft and it may be possible in a few months to use an outboard motor boat. Progress is, however, slow and it is not expected that the canal will be completed before the end of December.
Land. —During the visit of the Superintendent of Lands and the Officer-in-Charge of the Divisional Land Office various matters affecting the local Land Office were discussed and dealt with and all Land Office books were checked.
P.W.D. -The path to Kampong Ska-an Kechil was completed about a week ago. Prisoners are now occupied on the bridle path to Kuala Matu where construction had temporarily to be abandoned owing to high water.
Education. -A request having been received from the members of the Daro community an application was sent to the Director of Education for the formation of a Malay School in that station. Owing, however, to the present financial stress it was considered nothing could be done in this connection until times have improved.
Trade. -Trade statistics are as follows: -

SARIKEI, BINATANG AND REJANG.
October, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. F. L. Crossley, reports: -
Dyak and Native Affairs. -T.R. Aja, from the Ulu Binatang, came down on the 12th instant and reported that Bantan, an escaped prisoner and one of Asun’s followers, was staying in his. Aja’s house, and wished to meet me under truce, to discuss the terms on which he might surrender. I proceeded to Rumah Aja on the 15th instant and met Bantan, with whom I had a long but seemingly fruitless talk, as he insisted that he would only surrender on the terms of fine without imprisonment. I gathered that Indit, another of the rebels, was in the near vicinity, living in a hut on his wife’s farm, and that he also desired to surrender on similar terms. Indit, however, refused to meet me. I reported this matter to the Resident, Third Division, on the 17th, visiting Sibu for that purpose. A message was then sent to Bantan that he must surrender unconditionally, and that the truce might be considered at an end. This message was delivered on the 22nd, and both Bantan and Indit were surprised and captured on the 24th, the 
arrests being effected by a file of constabulary from Sibu under Sub-Inspector Wan Bujang.
Agriculture. -Large numbers of Chinese have taken up padi planting this year in the Sarikei and Binatang areas. Reports indicate that the crop is likely to be successful, but the pest ulak seems to be much in evidence.
Trade: -
The pepper crop is now practically over, so Sarikei figures are likely to be low for the next six months.
The export trade of sago from Binatang is in a flourishing condition, and is likely to improve, as the manufacturers are hoping shortly to extend their premises and increase production.
Education. -The Assistant Teacher at the Rejang Malay School was transferred to Sibu at the end of the month, it being considered unnecessary to keep more than one teacher in Rejang.
The Sarikei Malays were informed that the Government School would be closed unless the attendance improved, and the school buildings were kept in better condition.
The conduct of Chinese Schools in Sarikei and Binatang was satisfactory.
General. -Binatang was visited four times during the month, and Rejang and Selalang twice each.
Visitors to Sarikei included the Superintendent of Lands, Mr. C. S. Griffiths, and Mr. T. E. Parker; the Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Mr. C. D. Le Gros Clark; the Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. A. D. Hutchison, and Messrs. Spurway, Cobbold, and Kidd.

KAPIT DISTRICT.
October, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hudden, reports: -
Health. -On my recent visit to the Balleh information was received of an epidemic of dysentery in Penghulu Jugah’s house in the Mirirai. Five persons had died and no Dyaks or Chinese hawkers were entering the river for fear of infection. On arrival at the house-the Penghulu was absent with Abang Aboi in the Belaga district-one person was found with dysentery and most of the children had measles. Out of the five deaths, two were due to dysentery and the others, apparently, to fever.
Obituary. -Tan Ah Tit of Chop Kim Hiap Ann, who has been resident in Kapit for over twenty years, died on the 20th instant.
Native Affairs. -Penghulu Temonggong Koh, Penghulus Grinang, Atan, Jugah, Briak, Sirai, Matu, Manok Manchal and Bedimbab were in the Station at various times during the month.
A Mujong Dyak whilst working jungle produce in the headwaters of one of the tributaries of the ulu Rejang suddenly disappeared and has not been seen or heard of since. All Dyaks working in the vicinity, numbering well over a hundred, searched for nearly a month but found no trace.
On the 10th, Abang Aboi, Native Officer, and Penghulu Jugah started on a visit to the Belaga District.
Five Ngemah Dyaks travelling without passes were brought down by Tuai Rumah Langut and sent to Kanowit under escort.
A scheme for a Malay kampong was planned and arranged during the visit of the Divisional Land Officer. Those who have the means will commence to build almost immediately and arrangements are being made to move the mosque.	.
Agriculture. -The anxiety concerning the next harvest is universal since only in a very few cases were people early enough to be able to burn. The story is the same everywhere. Rarely has such continuous rain and high water been known. Even on those farms where the seed has sprouted and begun to grow the grass and weeds are as abundant as the padi
Constabulary. -The patrol in the Katibas had four or five cases of bad fever and those suffering were sent back to Sibu for treatment.
Staff. -The Customs Inspector was recalled to Sibu during the month as it is now considered unnecessary to have one stationed here. The work is now done from Sibu by Inspectors who come up and return on s.s. Angby.
General. -On the 3rd, I left for a visit to the Balleh and Gat, accompanied by Penghulu Grinang. It had been intended to go as far as the Menyong but owing to the high water the Putai rapids were impassable and we had to come back. At the month of the Gat I met the Divisional Forest Officer who was on a tour of inspection. He visited the Gat and later the Balleh, accompanied by Penghulu Temonggong Koh, and suggests a large reserve in the Menyong, which is about the only area of virgin jungle left in the Balleh. The Temonggong is all for this, and, in advance of the general trend of thought amongst his people, seems to realize the wastage of timber caused by present farming methods. I returned to Kapit on the 28th, but at the end of the mouth the Divisional Forest Officer had not yet arrived.
The Divisional Land Officer and the Superintendent of Customs, Third Division, paid visits during the month.
Since the order prohibiting traders in rivers near the troubled area, the percentage of hawkers in this district has increased out of all proportion, This, far from being a boon to the natives, is just the opposite, since the hawkers both Malay and Chinese take very few provisions and rely on the hospitality of the country to feed them. The hawkers themselves admit that the amount of trade done is infinitesimal and does not repay the cost of the journey.
Rainfall for the month was 13.75 inches.

Fifth Division News.
LIMBANG.
October, 1932.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident: -
Obituary. -Datu Pomancha, Bisayah Chief, died on the 9th instant.
General. -Assistant District Officer, Lawas. Mr. J. O. Gilbert, paid a visit of two days to discuss possible retrenchments.
Cadet, Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas, was away on six weeks’ vacation leave.

LAWAS.
October, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. O. Gilbert reports: -
General. -On Monday 24th the Reverend Father Jansen arrived from Trusan, returning to Miri via Labuan on the 26th.
The rainfall has been exceedingly heavy this month and on the night of the 19th the Government padang was flooded to a depth of three feet, this only left a margin of six inches before the Police Barracks floor would have been under water.
Agriculture. -The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Limited, exported 23,520 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
Rainfall. -The following rainfall was recorded during the month: -
Trade. -Trade returns in comparisons for 1931 and 1932: -






































