VOL. LXII.
No. 942.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Tuesday, March 1st, 1932.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette
TUESDAY, MARCH 1st, 1932.

Birth.
ANDERSON. -On February 9th at the General Hospital, Kuching, to Mr. and Mrs. J. G. Anderson, a daughter.

Local and Personal.
February.
Her Highness the Ranee’s birthday, the 24th, was observed as a public holiday.
In the evening the Datu Amar gave a very enjoyable party, which Her Highness the Ranee and the Dayangs Leonora and Valerie attended.

His Highness the Tuan Muda left for the Second Division, on February 11th, to visit friendly Dyak chiefs, while Mr. P. M. Adams, Secretary for Native Affairs, and Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, District Officer, Kuching, went on to the Third Division, in order to arrest the rebel Asoon.

Capt. and Mrs. C. Hannigan arrived in Kuching by the Vyner Brooke on the 12th.
Capt. Hannigan has recently accepted an appointment as Adviser to the newly-formed Sarawak Constabulary; we welcome him and Mrs. Hannigan to Sarawak.
The new Constabulary is an amalgamation of the Sarawak Police and that now defunct corps the Sarawak Rangers, familiar to all in the past, especially on ceremonial occasions and in Outstations Forts, as the “Orang Kubu.” A short account giving the history of the corps is published in this number.

Kuching will be sorry to lose two of its most popular residents in Mr. Forrest, Manager of the Chartered Bank, and Mrs. Forrest, who are leaving Sarawak on retirement in March.

Many Government Officers are due to proceed on leave and passenger lists for Europe, this month include Mr. Jacques and Mr. and Mrs. Dick, from Kuching and Sibu respectively.

The steam yacht Camargo came up river as far as Pending on 6th. The owner Mr. Fleischman, who we understand is a son of the well-known American yeast magnate, his wife and their party were entertained at dinner by Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee.

A heavy landslide occurred in the Rasso Pass, completely covering about a mile of the partially constructed Simanggang Road, at about the 45th mile.
This was probably due to the loosening of a fault in the side of Gunong Seroban which stands to the south of the pass at this point.

The Right Rev. Noel Baring Hudson, newly-appointed Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak, arrived in Kuching on the 8th.
An account of the enthronment is contained herein and we wish Bishop Hudson a long and happy tenure of his office.

Mr. R. W. Chater arrived back from furlough on the 1st and resumed his duties as Superintendent, Government Printing Office.

A team of six golfers from Miri visited Kuching and administered to the experts of this town a fairly sound whacking, in spite of which everyone concerned appeared to have enjoyed an excellent week end.
A full account of the results may be read on another page.

Hari Raya and Chinese New Year, falling close together this year, occasioned a somewhat prolonged holiday in which both Malays and Chinese had ample opportunity of celebrating, if not as expensively, at least as cheerfully, as hitherto.
Now that all three of the main “New Years” usually celebrated in this country have been launched, let us hope they will all be happy ones.

Passengers by s.s. Vyner Brooke on 22nd were Mr. and Mrs. J. M, Hoover, who are returning to Sibu, Mr. and Mrs. N. J. Austin, Mr. D. H. Hampshire and Mr. W. H. Martin. Mr. Austin is to succeed Mr. Forrest as Manager of the local branch of the Chartered Bank.

H. H. the Rajah.
We understand that His Highness the Rajah is returning to England earlier than he intended, on medical advice. He will probably leave Singapore on 23rd March.

The Empress of Britain.
Luxury and comfort reach new pinnacles in the giant Canadian Pacific liner Empress of Britain now in port. Being, at the moment, a tourist vessel and having Egypt as one of the places visited, mechanical camels are provided in the gymnasium. Special rooms in which there is nothing to break are set aside for bachelor parties and this morning the Turkish baths were in full use as though Singapore was not a natural Turkish bath. There is a full-size tennis court on the upper deck, complete with galleries and its own cafe and a squash racquet court near the swimming pool, which looks like a crystal cave. According to the stewards the Heath Robinson cocktail bar is the hiding place of all missing husbands. Round the walls is a panoramic picture of cocktail making showing weird machines tied up with string putting sticks in cherries, and finally the many trying situations a cocktail can unravel. The vessel is so big, with lofty lounges decorated by world-famous artists, telephones, wireless and elevators 
everywhere, each room in a different decorative style, that one gets lost in its immensity. It is Clydebank’s biggest achievement. -Straits Times.

The Witty Compositor.
Those who refuse to believe that a “printer’s devil” resides in the nimble finger-tips of the linotype operator should read “Breaks, or Unintentional Humour by Tired Newspapermen and Others,” compiled by W. W. Scott and published by Jonathan Cape at 2s. net. Here are some of the gems for which chapter and verse is quoted: -
From his left ear to the corner of his month ran a long sear, the result of a duel many years before. -Short story.
She was married in Evansville, Ind., to Walter Jackson, and to this onion was born three children. – “Willard (Ohio) Times.”
By an unfortunate typographical error we were made to say on Tuesday that the departing Mr. -was a member of the defective branch of the police force. Of course, this should have read: “The detective branch of the police farce.” -New Zealand paper.
The Soviet Government has been recognised by Great Britain as the awful Government of Russia. -Birmingham paper.
It took many rabbits many years to write the Talmud. – “Holland Evening Sentinel.”
This wealthy young American was married yesterday to Miss -, the 19-year-old London cabaret danger. -Sunday paper.
Charles Sales went to Kansas City Wednesday night to meet his wife his wife his wife his wife his wifezdjdgwihwmyxETAOIN- “Buffalo Courier-press.”
The male quartet will sing “Angels that Around us Hoover.” -Zanesville paper. -Straits Times, Feb, 8.

The Colonial Civil Service.
The Colonial Office announce that it has been decided to discontinue the competitive examinations hitherto held annually for Cadetships in Malaya and Hongkong and to assimilate the method of appointment that is already in force for the Colonial Service generally. The decision marks another stage towards unified control of Service envisaged by the Warren Fisher Com-mittee’s report of two years ago and full abandonment, where it still exists, of the system of competitive examination in favour of personal selection of Candidates by men familiar with the special reeds of the Service. No decision has been reached as to the future method of recruitment for the Ceylon Civil Service for which the recruitment of European Officers is at present suspended. -British Official Press. Rugby, 25.1.32.
For many years a single competitive examination has been held for vacancies in the Home Civil Service, the Indian Civil Service and the Eastern Cadetships-the Services for Ceylon, Malaya and Hong Kong, and it has often been discussed whether better results were to be expected as a general-rule from a purely competitive examination or from a carefully regulated process of selection combined perhaps with a “qualifying” examination. The old Egyptian Civil Service was regarded as their shining example by those in favour of “Selection” who spoke of the “Examination” method as offering a refuge for the mere bookworm or the dazed product of the crammer’s lecture rooms, whilst their opponents professed to believe that the sine qua non for Egypt was the possession of a Varsity “Blue” or blue blood or blue eyes. The fact remains that no Service has ever gained and deservedly held a higher reputation than the old I.C.S. and its sister Services in Ceylon, Malaya and Hong Kong; it remains to be seen whether the results of the new method can equal it: to surpass it would be impossible. -B.N.B. Herald.

British Passports.
New British Passport fees, as under, are leviable with effect from 1st March, 1932, according to a Notification issued on 10th February, 1932: -

St. Thomas’ Cathedral.
ENTHRONEMENT OF THE RIGHT REVEREND NOEL BARING, BISHOP OF LABUAN AND SARAWAK.
In the presence of a crowded congregation, which included Her Highness the Ranee of Sarawak and the Dayangs Elizabeth and Valerie, this ceremony took place in St. Thomas’ Cathedral, Kuching at 5.30 p.m. on the 1st Sunday in Lent (February 14th).
The Bishop, vested in cope and mitre, and accompanied by two Deacons of Honour (Fr. Hollis and Fr. Kong), and by Fr. Buda as Crucifer and Fr. Si Migaat as Chaplain, proceeded from the Bishop’s house to the west door of the Cathedral, on which he knocked with his pastoral staff six times, to indicate his position as sixth Bishop in order from the first Bishop of Sarawak, Francis McDougall. The double doors were then opened from the inside by the Archdeacon of Sarawak, who read the document from the Archbishop of Canterbury, authorizing and requesting him to do all things necessary for the due “reception, enthronement, installation and induction” of the newly-consecrated Bishop.
A procession was then formed to the Sanctuary, and after prayers and the reading of the Archbishop’s Mandate and the Rajah’s Letters Patent, the Archdeacon conducted the Bishop to his Throne and enthroned him with these words: -
“I, Arthur Beresford. Archdeacon of Sarawak, instal and enthrone thee, Right Reverend Father in God, Noel Baring, duly appointed and consecrated Bishop of this Diocese. And I induct thee into all the rights and privileges of Bishop and Ordinary in this Cathedral Church, as conferred by the statutes and laws of the same. May the Lord bless thee in thy going out and thy coming in, and keep thee in all thy ways.”
After further prayers and the singing of psalm 150, the Bishop entered the pulpit and gave his first message to the Diocese-a straightforward call to loyalty and service in response to the words of our Lord recorded by S. John. “Lovest thou Me? . . . Tend my sheep.”
Then followed solemn Evensong in the accustomed way, and concluding with the Episcopal Benediction
The Bishop celebrated in his Cathedral for the first time on the following morning, when a large number made their communion with him.
All sections of the community, we believe, and in particular the members of his own flock, unite in welcoming to Sarawak our new Bishop, and the ceremonies of the Enthronement were a fitting expression of this welcome. -Contributed.

Sarawak Union Club Entertain New Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak.
On Saturday the 13th instant at 5 a.m. the Committee and members of the Sarawak Union Club were “AT HOME” to welcome their new President The Rt. Rev. Noel Baring Hudson
M.A., D.s.o., M.C., the newly-consecrated Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak and the successor of The Rt. Rev. Bishop Danson.
The Club premises were elaborately decorated, and the members and their guests, the latter consisting chiefly of missionaries, were served with light refreshments.
A fusilade of crackers and an overture by the string band greeted the arrival of the Bishop who was accompanied by the Archdeacon of Sarawak, and, before entering the Club house, the Bishop was received by the Honorary Deputy Secretary, Mr. Tan Kui Choon.
The meeting was presided over by the Vice President of the Club, the Ven. A. B. Champion, who in his speech of welcome introduced the new Bishop to the members and proposed the health of their new President, which was drunk by everybody present with musical honours.
Mr. Tan Sum Guan then spoke on behalf of the members and said they were very glad of the safe arrival of Bishop Hudson and were pleased to meet their new President. He wished the Bishop good health and every success in his new appointment.
Datu Shahbandar gave the next speech in Malay, which was interpreted by Mr. Tan Sum Guan. The Datu claimed that he was the first Malay pupil of St. Thomas’ School. He acknowledged that his education was poor, because his late father was not interested in education, but he himself would make sure that he would not follow the blunder of his late father. He would see that, with the guidance of the Bishop, his grandchildren received good education in the future. He hoped the new Bishop would like the country and its surroundings.
Then the Bishop rose amid loud applause and suitably responded to the speeches, and said he was pleased to meet such a large number of people who had gathered together to give him such a warm welcome. Being a complete stranger it was not possible to remember every one of them, but he hoped he would get acquainted with them in a short time. He expressed his deep gratitude for the reception and the honour expended to him, and as President of the Club he promised to do his best for the furtherance of its interests.
Father Hollis, the Honorary Secretary, then asked the Bishop to give away the prizes for the 1931 Handicap Billiards Tournament to the following recipients: -Winner: Lee Buck Sang: Runner-up; Au Ah Lah. The former was also presented with a special cup for the highest break among the competitors of the season and was winner for two years successively.
Before the gathering dispersed a group photograph was taken to mark the occasion. –(Contributed.)

The Sarawak Rangers.
1862-1932.
Although the Sarawak Rangers were only given that title in September, 1872, an armed force had been maintained in Kuching since 1862. Until then a small force of armed police had been in existence, but in the latter year a corps 120 strong was raised under Major W. H. Rodway.
In 1870 the command was assumed by Major F. A. Walter, a retired Officer of the 97th Foot. His duties were apparently not sufficient to keep him fully occupied, and he was dismissed the service for illegal trading in 1871. His successor was G. H. Bacchus, formerly of the 7th Dragoon Guards, and it was during this Officer’s tenure of command, that the force was granted its present title.
At this time, and in fact until quite recently, recruiting was not confined to natives of Sarawak, and drafts of Indians and Javanese were brought into the country on more than one occasion. This is only to be expected, as the various Dyak tribes which later on were to form the chief sources of recruitment were at the time quite happily engaged in opposition to the armed forces of the State.
There do not appear to have been any definite regulations laid down as to the training of the new force, and probably each new Commandant introduced his own particular fads. Major Rodway, twice in command, must have had a trying time on taking over from a “Cavalry Wallah,” and probably discovered that in the interval the corps had been forming “Line of Squadron Columns” instead of “Battalion Mass.” However he, or some subsequent Commanding Officer, got his own back by including in his training programme the pretty, but, in terrain as found in Sarawak, quite useless formation, the command for assumption of which was sometimes preceded by the caution “Prepare to receive Cavalry.”
In fact most of those Officers, whether Gazetted in command or not, who have had anything to do with the training of the Sarawak Rangers, have left their mark in some peculiarity of drill or customs. Until quite recently the perfectly amazing number of unsuitable and unauthorized (in the infantry) bugle calls sounded throughout the day inevitably led one to suppose the force had at one time born on its rolls the name of an ex-member of H.M. Jollies!
Although Kuching has always been the Depot and Headquarters of the Sarawak Rangers, small detachments were kept at various out-stations. These were withdrawn as the country became quieter, and those at Limbang and Trusan having been permanently returned to Kuching in 1931, the only ones remaining at the date of disbandment were at Miri and Kapit. Until 1916 or thereabouts the force was armed with the Snider rifle, and in some cases the carbine, and an assortment of M.L. Guns of varying weights and calibers. The bayonet, although issued, seems to have been used entirely for show as, until quite recently, the men were not trained in its use, it was not fixed by sentries, and it was and still is, discarded in favour of the parang on all expeditions. All ranks were trained in M.L. Gun Drill, and firing with blank charges, but it is doubtful if any organized firing with shell ever took place, although guns were, of course, employed against recalcitrant tribes. A hand-drawn battery of seven pounder rifled 
muzzle-loaders was in use for saluting purposes until 1929 and was considered an effective wing of the corps. About the year 1916 the S.M.L.E. Rifle was issued end has been retained. There are those, however, who consider the Snider more suitable for this country, and undoubtedly its 577 solid lead bullet, though it may not comply with the rules of war, is very effective even in the hands of a third-class shot.
It is possible that several of those who were in command at various times were ex-Officers of the Regular Army, but the only other mentioned as such in the Sarawak Civil Service list is F. H. I. Day, 66th Foot, now 2nd Bn. The Royal Berkshire Regiment.
This Officer was Commandant from 1886-1894, he being with the exception of Major Stuart Cunynghame the longest in Command of the ten or so who have held the appointment. The latter was the last to be gazetted Commandant, his tenure of command being from 1906-1913 and again from 1917-1929.
Small detachments of Rangers have taken part in major expeditions since the force was raised, but it would appear that no time has it seen active service as a complete unit. The shortage of Officers throughout its history would in any case have rendered this impossible, but for all that the
Rangers have played their part in the history of the State and have undoubtedly exercised a certain moral effect on the foreign population of Kuching and Miri.
Their usefulness is now ended and nothing they could do could not be done equally well by an efficient constabulary, but many will miss them on His Highness the Rajah’s Birthday, and many more will regret the loss of the Band, which was always in great demand for private and public functions of every description.
We can only hope that many of those Rangers who left so hurriedly at the end of 1931, will return to enlist in the newly-formed Sarawak Constabulary.

Disarmament and World Peace.
To the most casual observer of the march of world events, three points cannot fail to impress.
China is defending herself from the aggression, not so much of Japan as a whole, since war is not declared though it is being waged, but from that of Japanese militarists, in opposition to Baron Shidehara’s defeated policy of peaceful but undoubtedly aggressive penetration in Manchuria.
Secondly, the Chinese commercial boycott of Japan has succeeded beyond all expectations. Japanese goods are lying to rot and thousands of Japanese workers are thrown out of employment; the Chinese, encouraged by this, are demanding a world boycott of Japanese trade.
Thirdly, the other Powers with League membership, have done nothing effective in staving off war widen may assume huge proportions consequently disastrous to the whole world.
In spite of this, the disarmament conference is sitting in Europe. Taking these points into consideration, several questions arise as to their effect on insure events. Is the weapon of economic boycott sufficiently strong as a substitute for force versus armed aggression of one State by another? It is hardly reasonable that the whole world or even all members of the League of Nations should be expected to hamper their trade by joining in such a venture, assuming the venture could be made universally effective, which is doubtful. In the present instance it has succeeded (as between China and Japan) but it does not appear to have crippled , -it has merely distressed both nations in greater or lesser degree and further aggravated the quarrel.
Has the League any real power to enforce its will or intervene with effect in international disputes? If so, why has she not exercised that power? In view of the fact that Japan has torn up every restrictive and peace making treaty she has ever signed, surely it seems a little futile for the parties to the present disarmament deliberations to place their agreements, if any, for reduction of armaments and maintenance of peace by arbitration through the League, in such a position that they are liable to follow the recent fate of the Kellogg Pact and the Nine-Power Treaty, at the hands of Japan?
History repeats itself. Japan, under the sway of her militarists wishes to expand. She uses as an excuse for armed aggression, an event or events from which she alone of Nations is by no means the sole sufferer; she strikes at a time when the house of China, distressed by some of the worst floods the world has ever known, is divided against itself. She is following in the path taken by Germany in 1914. The circumstances are very similar. But look at Germany to-day, or even yesterday. One might suppose, and with reason, that her plight would cause Japan to pause and consider, but not so. The wheel is in motion and will break the hand that would check it.
Let it be said here that the fault lies by no means at the feet of Japan alone.
China for some time past has had many gentle but firm hints from all quarters to put her house in order, and she has failed. Chaos rules in that huge semi-continent-a lesson in itself to Ghandi and the Indian Congress who have been doing their best to put India in the same state of utter confusion, for some yours. Security from murder, abduction, insult and injury has been a negligible quantity in most parts of China since the republic, and probably before it. In fact at the outset of the “Sino-Japanese crisis” one felt strong sympathy for Japan and even thought it might have been better had other Nations with similar complaints taken like action but it is now quite obvious that she has either gone too far or that her motives were, from the start, purely and simply piratical and no more to be condoned than those of a common thief.
But to return to our parallel instance of events in 1911.
Japan is determined, it appears, to face the whole world if necessary, as Germany did.
Incidentally any other Power which may propose to intervene, with armed force, in this crisis might well consider the economic condition of the Powers, especially Great Britain, which took part in the so called Armageddon of 1914-18.
Apart from the poverty cast upon these Powers, by actual participation, they are now suffering from political and economic indigestion caused by rash and hasty indulgence, in the raw fruits of Socialism, Bolshevism, Supertaxation and experimental Democracy.
None of these Powers can, at any rate, afford to participate in the present struggle.
But it is becoming increasingly clear that the ideal of World Peace cannot be obtained and maintained by treaties which can be torn up like so much waste paper.
In other words therefore force, and force alone, appears unfortunately to be the only answer to the problem, as it has been since time immemorial. The time is not yet ripe. It would appear that the only alternative, a commercial boycott by the League Nations of an aggressor, is tantamount to commercial chaos for the whole world.
Apart from international differences, many of the Powers have little or no interior control of force or police. China and Japan being outstanding examples in the East coupled with Spain and Germany in Europe. Such nations have therefore but a very thin wall of security from internal strife and bloodshed.
President Hindenburg, a force in himself, is informed by Hitler’s fascist and the “steel Helmets,” etc., that they will withhold their support of him unless Bruening’s cabinet goes. This is no idle threat for these political organizations have the power to create internal war in Germany if their particular aims are thwarted.
The Premier of Spain. Don Manuel Azalia, wisely, it is said, supports the troops for the moment loyal to him in actions condemned by the nation at large.
The tenure of power of these dictators rests on the sandy foundation of the critical exacting, temporary loyalty of their country’s trump suit, namely her military forces organized or disorganized, legal or illegal.
England however is unique in fortune. Loyalty to the King and His Constitution, in spite of communism, back bench Socialism (so called) and other poison, is, thankfully, still the main controlling force. But what inspires this feeling which has held the country together through general strikes, abnormal unemployment and the legalized filching which is excessive taxation of wealth justly gained by hard creative effort?
Partly discipline, bred in the bone and fostered by an educational system (for which we now have to pay such a very high price, whatever the Headmasters may say) partly loyalty to an ideal, fought for and established by such men as Sir James Brooke, Rhodes and Stamford Raffles, and lastly and largely loyally to the King’s Person. In this it is repeated, England as a power is fortunate, both in the King’s Person and in that of his Heir.
The days of the foolish dictum “L’Etat c’est Moi” have gone, but there is nothing to prevent a recurrence of that spirit in the few remaining monarchies of the world. In other words it cannot be prophesied with any accuracy that Great Britain or any other Nation will continue to occupy their present fortunate state under a wisely tolerant and broadminded monarchic system.
Any such nation may be smitten with an unwise King or worse by some brazen robotic red-taped “axe grinding” socialist or other democracy with its alleged freedom for the masses, who when they are free consider themself individually all-wise and all-knowing, instead of themselves as minute all-ignorant entities of the State as a whole.
Thus we come back to China with her numerous generals and unruly students, for an example of this latter possibility, the argument being that the monarchial system is preferable to the ultra democratic in that a good (or bad) monarch is better than a good (or bad) democracy, for this reason, that assuming each may in time cease to be good, the expulsion of the bad monarch is infinitely easier than the uprooting of a powerful factional democratic party, the one generally necessitating bloodless revolution as in Spain (though we may consider they have acted unwisely), and the other causing civil war, as in China, the weakening of which Nation from this cause being the main reason for the success of the present Japanese action, and without which Japan would presumably have pursued a saner and more normal policy, with war only as a last defensive resort.

Revised Advertising.
Insufficient attention is paid these days to proper and effective advertising. Hoardings, bill posters, sky writing and other offences against the public taste should be made penal.
What is the use of posting up in large blockletters such exaggerations as-
PRONDLEBERRY’S PIPECLEANERS PREDOMINATE.
Underneath a life-size picture of a smug, disgustingly handsome, grinning Admiral, with colossal, and too many, gold stripes, cleaning out his foul pipe?
If the Prondlebury was functioning properly he would not be smiling, he would be pulling, if he happened, as he looks, to be a Swiss Admiral, what he would call a monce.
Further, in any decent navy, no Admiral cleans out his own pipes in full dress uniform, he sends them all down to the boiler room to be blown through.
Looking a little further along the hoarding, a blazing insult to passersby in itself, you read (or you can if you keep a hold on your rising indignation) the controversial statement!
PRONKINGTON’S PIPES ARE PARAMOUNT!
NO CLEANING OR POLISHING REQUIRED!!
By our acquisition, at huge cost, of a Famous Scientist’s Discovery, this is all done for you by merely Pulling your PRONKINGTON out of your pocket!
SEE OUR PRICE LIST and SMILE!
GIVE FATHER ONE FOR CHRISTMAS!
PIPE JOY PLEASES PAS!
What is one to believe? Positively perplexing, and definitely distressing.
Another horror forced on the innocent public is the highly-coloured monthly magazine which starts say ten stories on its first ten pages after which a grim female is portrayed or a nurse, saying- “Let me be your mother,” which impossible suggestion consists of offering the reader a bottle of Belcher’s gripe water at 1/9, or 3/6, the large bottle. The said reader, having reached the most exciting part of “Blood Will Out” flicks over the page in horrified search for the remainder of the story and eventually finds a small note to the effect that this bloodfreezer is continued on page cxxiii; this is eventually found after heated conversion to arabic or common numerals and back again only to find the whole of that page is-occupied by a florid frozen illustration of a wizened, dejected looking man with a large yellow stained waxed, moustache, who is obviously in the final death grip of dread halitosis, under which in poisoned yellow and black lettering smoulders this sepulchral symposium: -
PIPE SMOKERS BEWARE!!
Death Lurks in disease-forming Tobacco Habit. 
Pause, consider.
Examine your pipe mouthpiece under a microscope!!
Just imagine what germs lurk in its dark hollows, so close to your
LIPS, GUMS, TEETH.
Are they already infected?
Are you a social menace??
Do you notice people draw away from you ?
Statistics show you have but little chance of ESCAPE from DREAD SINO-ESCHOLTZIA 
which takes its toll of four out of five Adults over the critical age of 20. Your only chance lies in our FREE Treatment. Thousands cured-millions of Testimonials-a crossing sweeper writes-“I suffered for years and tried everything. No one would think of crossing at my crossing. I was destitute. Then I tried your treatment two years ago and since then have used no other. (Original letter can be seen if required).
Cut out the coupon carefully, using the dotted line, with a pair of nail-scissors a sharp knife or cigar cutters and post NOW together with 3/6 in stamps (obtainable at any Post Office) and we will send you FREE our illustrated booklet entitled.
“THE SLIMEY SYSTEM FOR THE CIRCUMVENTION
OF SINOESCHOLTZIA”
Thousands of Doctors recommend it. On sale everywhere and at our Head Office, The Slimey Institute, 14 Billingsgate. E.C. (Room 4).
UGH! This sort of thing should have been scrapped with the crinoline and the Dundreary face forest. The reader is repelled-he casts his “Flask’s Magazine” from him, squirming at it’s ugly bilious warning, he has failed to find the remains of “Blood Will Out” or possibly when it is too late he discovers it tucked away like a dreg at the end of the fearful paper, the print too small to read without glasses two inches thick.
Something entirely new should be tried by these advertisers instead of causing acute pain to the millions by the above crude methods. The interest of the prospective customer must be aroused. This could be done by the monthly publication of serial “booklet novels,” one chapter, one booklet, each month, on sale by the million at every Book Stall, Butcher’s Shop, Bar or Barber’s waiting room, on the theory that “He also Serves who only stands and waits” (old Portugese saying).
This serial penny dreadful could comprise the announcements, slyly worded, of countless firms, this reducing publication costs for each, to a mere frazzle (Russian money).
The following is an example of a specimen first chapter booklet, quite enough for one month, you will agree: -
Title. -The Great Banana Plot, by Covent Garden.
Publishers. -Eatmore Froot & Co., Orchard St., London.
BOOK ONE
Chapter One
The Prime Minister of Ipecacuana ground his teeth in baffled rage but they withstood the test, being made by that well-known house, Scrape, Grinde, and Scrape.
At length with a gesture of resigned defeat which displayed his neat linen (Broke and Reed) he snatched up the gold mounted pen (an Inkerman) which he always carried with him and dashed off his signature on the paper before him (Phoggin’s Handwoven Bond). The only other occupant of the huge, rich, panelled apartment (Spitta and Polish, Decorators), smiled, sardonic.
A scarcely discernable smile, for his face was in a shadow; it was as well-for he had not used his Slapstyck Shaving Compendium nor slept since his arrival at dark the previous night.
It was not only for this reason, however, that he had placed the Ipecacuanian with his face to the windows whose “Stane glass” panes allowed the light of early dawn to reflect clearly every thought that gave expression on his hardlined face.
It was five a.m. of a cold winter’s morn by the clock on the mantle (The Cuckoo Clock Company, Ltd., Greenwich) (Big Ben had struck, five minutes fast.)
The distinguished but as yet untonsored stranger stiffened in his chair (Frumpey Frousy, Furnishers).
Vell, my fren,you ‘ave at last decide to sign? It is vell. His voice purred out its soft steely Angostusan accents like milk on ice.
But Fear, cold grey fear, glazed the eyes of the Premier of Ipecacuana, even through his modish yellow tortoise shell spectacles, specially made for him, for he had been blind, by Horns Woggle & Co., Opticians, 2 Strand. “I have signed,” he sighed, “but I beg of you to exercise discretion; are we alone?” (Messrs. Foote, Padd., Co., private inquiry agents, utmost secrecy and discretion, also Messrs. Keye, Hoole and Co., Detective Agency, second to none). The steel-faced blue- chinned (Bloggs Electric Needle) stranger took three long strides to the door (The “Open Sesame” Door and Window Co.). Opening it, shutting it and silently reseating himself all in one motion, without even waking the parrot, snoozing lightly by the window.
“We are (not counting the parrot), so calm yourself, my dear Sir,” purred he through blue-steel jaws.” Then I will take you into my confidence said the other.”
“Let me be your Father.” Said Blue Jaw.
Very well then, since you are so kind. I have signed then, agreeing to transfer to the State of Cascara Segrada, the great Banana Monopoly of Ipecacuana, I gather you are the secret envoy of Sagrada, plenipotentiary, and very extraordinary. The Ipecacuanian State Bananas have been sold, hitherto, to the Bluebottle Fruit Combine who retailed them so cheaply to the public that we found we had been losing money on the sale owing to one of our clerks leaving out a nought in the contract, Dunces Adding Machines being unknown at that early date.
However, I and my colleagues in Ipecacuana realized there was money in Bananas, if we could succeed in selling the Monopoly to someone unaware of conditions in the State (Globe, Trotter & Co., Travel Agents).
Fortunately for us and incidentally for you mon ami, your Sovereign, the Emperor of all the Sagradas had heard so much of the Banana Monopoly through the propaganda of our stock brokers, Messers. Bucket Shoppe & Co., that he decided to buy, although you will admit that the sum down to which you have just beaten me represents a bargain.
Ah, but I have taken a postal course in Accountancy, Salesmanship, Boilermaking Banking and Browbeating with the Pennet College, Wigan (Let us be your Uncle), said the other.
“Quite,” the Premier’s voice dropped to a croak. “But listen, I can make you rich” (Overdraft Banking Corp.).
“Good,” said Mr. X, snapping his blue jaw (Enock Arden, Beauty Specialist, 6 Poultry, E.C.).
Well then return swiftly to your master, at Segrada (Roadhogge Motor Hire Co.), obtain his signature ratifying your own on this deed (he flapped the Phoggin’s Bond), and return here. When you do so, twenty of the one hundred thousand Bolnos which Ipecacuana will receive for her Bananas, are yours!
“Make it fifty-five,” snapped the grim stranger.
“No, fifty,” said the Premier.
“Right,” snapped the Jaw.
Well then, said the Premier, now that we have concluded the Bargain (Rosenberg and Lohengrin, money lenders, no security required), I may as well confess that the Ipecacuanian Banana Plantations were entirely destroyed by rabbits a few days ago; but have some more of this Semi-Diesel 1745 Bonnie Prince Charlie Champagne? His hand shook as he poured out two glasses of the precious fluid (Sanophin for the nerves). The stranger did not drink, he never did (not even water), but on observing the famous blue label, he drank the whole bottle and both glasses.
Leaning forward he fixed the wily native of Ipecacuana full in the eye, at the same time drawing back his coat to expose the famous Sagradinn order of the Rifted Lute, 1st class, and throwing off his red wig (by Clarkson) “Do you see, my fren”? he whispered? “Vell, I am the Emperor of Cascara Segrada.”
Crash-Darkness-Two pistol shots-the great chandelier crashed to the floor, in a thousand pieces (it was Russian manufacture) beside it, bleeding, lay the inscrutable monarch or Sagrada, a banana pinned on his breast (Blue Bottle Fruit Combine, cheap prices). He was dead (Twice, Daly & Co. Chemists).
The Prime Minister of Ipecacuana had vanished.
END OF CHAPTER ONE.

Performance of Malay Dancing etc., given by the Datu Amar in Honour of H.H. the Ranee’s Birthday, 24th February.
Her Highness the Ranee was met at the Pangkalan Batu steps by the Datu Amar, and proceeded with him in his car to the Datu’s residence, Haji Taha Road, arriving at 9.15 p.m. Their Highnesses the Dayangs Elizabeth and Valerie followed in one of His Highness the Rajah’s cars. On arrival, Her Highness was welcomed with a speech and song and dance by some small children who presented them with bouquets, tortoise shell bangles and locally woven Sarongs.
The ground’s were beautifully illuminated, rain unfortunately somewhat marring the effect.
After a while, however, the weather improved slightly end the performance took place in the grounds.
Side shows including a Bangsawan were much appreciated by the guests, who included the Resident, Mr. J. C. Swayne, Mr. A. A. Rennie, Treasurer of Sarawak, and Mr. Hampshire of Kuala Lumpur.
Her Highness the Ranee and Dayangs Elizabeth and Leonora eventually took their departure at 12.15, accompanied by their host who escorted them in his car to the Pangkalan Batu.
This party in Her Highness honour was a great success and we take this opportunity of wishing Her Highness many happy returns of the day, on behalf of our readers.

TAMASHA.
ULANGAN HARI JADI DULI YANG MAHA MULIA TUAN RANEE, SARAWAK, 1932.
KENYATA’AN.
Keramain yang handak dilakukan oleh yang berhormat Datu Amar, Abang Suleiman, dimejelisnya di-Darolsalua, Kampong Bintangor, Kuching, pada malam Arba’a 24th February, 1932, kerana persambutan kedatangan Sri Paduka Duli Yang Maha Mulia Tuan Rajah, Sir Charles Vyner Brooke, G.C.M.G., Sarawak, serta Permaisuri-nya Tuan Ranee dan kedua Patri-nya Dayang Elizabeth dan Dayang Vava-Dari kerana membesarkan ulangan hari jadi Duli Yang Maha Mulia Tuan Ranee pads 24th February, 1932.
Menyambut kedatangan baginda itu anak ber-anak semua dipangkalan Batu serta melayani di-Darosalua: Datu Amar laki isteri serta Dayang-Dayang.
PEGAWAI PEKERJA’AN.
1. Aheli Mashuarat-Abang Haji Hipni. Abang Mohamed Daim, Inchi Ahmat Arbi, Mohamad Joli, Abang Suhai, Abang Median, Inchi Mohamad Yassim, dan Mohamad Alli.
2. Katua mejelis-Abang Haji Hipni, Abang Suhai, Abang Haji Osman.
3. Aheli perhiasan-Abang Madian, Abang Jadal, Abang Arabi dan Abang Manshawi.
4. Katua permainan-Abang Haji Adenan, Mohamad Alli dan Abang Sapuau.
5. Manjaga miuuman-Abang Jadal, Abang Jawawi dan Mohamad Obeng.
6. Penjaga tuutong Api-Abang Ne’man, Abang Rawi, Mohamad Obel, Mohamad Kina, Abang Abdul Wahap dan Salem.
7. Tukung Menukang-Mohamad Munsam, Sitam, Seton dan Kipli.
8. Penjaga tembak merchun-Abang Abdul Wahap, Abang Kassim, Abang Somaili dan Abang Bohan.
9. Penulong-Abang Mad’an, Abang Hasbuli, Abang Haji Deban, Abang Haji Fadeli, Abang Morshidi, Mohamad Siraj dan Len.
10. Pemangku-Abang Mohamad Daim dan Mohamad Joll.

MENITAH SEKALIAN PERMAINAN.
Haji Yaman, Haji Ahmat Zaidal, Wan Abdullah, Ismail dan Sirat.

NAMA BUDAK-BUDAK BERMAIN.
Kinajong. -Drahman (Ketua), Sijili, Jobli, Dahlan, Munir, Buang, Abang Bolhassan, Sahari, Ibrahim dan Sulong.
Main Tar. -Nor (Ketua), Daud, Batu, Mail, Hail, Mustapha, Pawi, Buang, Simoh dan Tambek.
Topeng Kera. -Teroki (Ketua), Hassan, Sijili, Sahari, Matazin, Mujir, Salleh, Juis, Hassan, dan Kallang.
Topi Tinggi. -Taibi (Ketua), Taim, Ja-ie, Sahari, Alli, Salleh, Taha III, Sapong, Boit, dan Abang Khaider.
Jinaka. -Taril (Ketua), Jafar, dan Hamid.
Permainan Mencha. -Senen dan Gendot (Ketua) Bonto, Awet, Mat-belangking, Batang bin Taril, Ismail, M. Amin, M. Abang, Bujang, dan Sitam. (Memukol bunyi-bunyian).
Pekayan Persi. -Abang Abdillah, Abang Openg, Zaini, Abang, Dahlan, Alis, Taha, Jajol, dan Mat.
Pekayan Mata-mata. -Musa dan Kadir (Major), Morshidi dan Rosli (Sergeant), Abong dan Tubo (Corporal).
Policemen. -Han, Sobek, Abang Lemau, Abang Bubu, Trem, Abang Pengayoh, Ali dan Delima.
Main Zepen. -Pa Bujang dan Awi (Ketua), Abang Morui, Rambli, Yaman, Pawan dan Drahman II.
Dancing. -Buserah, Hassan, Munir, Abang Sapuan, Bobo, Sitam, (Pemain) Mohamad Nor, Abang Hasbuli dan Kria (Pemukol Rabana),
Ketua lagu orang puteh: Mohamad Jobli ada lain permainan lagi.
Katua’an lagu Malayu: Suleiman ada lain permainan lagi.
Directors (Pemimpin): Mohamad Alli, Obel, Mohamad Kina dan Hamid.
Tua-tua kampong, Tuau-tuan Haji dan Perabangan akan sedia khadir menanti kedatangan baginda itu auak beranak serta menyaksikan sebagai permainan.

Mainly About Nothing.
The following acrid correspondence which has been sent us by our foreign News Editor leads us to suppose that whatever else may befall that unhappy country India, her railways will continue to be administered by her zealous sons, with the same conscientious devotion to duty as displayed in these letters.
CHUNDABOCHANDRA HALT.
Railway Station Offices.

DEAR MISTER ACHI,
Every time I am telling you man that I meet with you, sociably or unsociably, on cloister or hearth about that time you have travel on my train fee is 12 annas, pay quickly please-
Yours,
RAMATILEKH CHUKERBUTTY CHOLIA JARNAWARKARALIA JUND, 
Head Station Master.

CHUNDRABOCHANDRA P.O.
DEAR SIR,
I say, man, what did you say your name was please?
Yours,
Mr. RAYNA PANA VEENA LANA
MEENATCHI ACHI.
Head Clerk, Post Office.

CHUNDRABOCHANDRA HALT, 
Railway Station Offices.
DEAR SIR,
I am not telling you asking my name I am telling you pay fare for train excursion damn quick please, or I pay myself and take proceeding with Magistrate, then you have no chance.
Yours,
Mr. RAMATILEKE CHUKERBUTTY CHOLIA
JARNAWARKARALIA JUND,
Head Station Master.

CHUNDRABOCHANDRA P.O.
DEAR SIR,
Alright man-No need for you to pull coals over the fire if you have let your irons out of the bag.
I am sending you with runner the train fares the six annas in stamps from my postage Office because when you ask me for my ticket I already half way to destination-you are very avaricious man.
I remain, 
Mr. RAYNA PANA VERNA LANA
MEENATCHI ACHI.

CHUNDRABOCHANDRA HALT, 
Railway Station Office.
DEAR SIR,
This being sixth letter I have written you I am using the six stamps you send not enough-therefore yon must pay me for them also I have taken Summons out for 12 annas fare six annas stamp for request for payment and one rupee costs of litigation to teach you man, I am not avaricious gentleman when I lend yon train fare.
I remain,
Mr. RAMATILEKE CHUKERBUTTY CHOLIA
JARNAWARKARALIA JUND,
Head Station Master.

OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 52 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
1880.] TUESDAY. 2ND NOV., 1880. [Price 5 cents.	
His Highness The Rajah, accompanied by The Ranee, left for Rejang on the 3rd in the Aline, arrived at Sibu the day after and found the Resident of the Rejang, Mr. Houghton, Mr. Bampfylde, and 150 Malays, who were ready by previous arrangement to join him on that day. After they had embarked, the Aline, accompanied by the small Rejang steamer The Ghita, proceeded without delay up the river to Kapit, which was reached on the afternoon of the next day. They landed the same evening, and took up their quarters in the new fort there, situated 160 miles from the mouth of the river. The object of this visit was to take some measures against a small refractory party of Dyaks living in the Mujong stream up the Balleh River, which is itself a branch of the Rejang.
The insurgents consisted first of all of six men, who committed themselves some years ago by making an onslaught on a few Malay traders, killing them without any cause or provocation. They then sheltered themselves among the Dyaks inhabitants of the Balleh, who were friendly to Government. It was known they were living somewhere in this place, though their exact abode could not be ascertained; The Government was in consequence helpless in trying to bring them to justice, as they were to some extent protected and concealed by their numerous relatives. Finding it impossible to arrest them, the Resident held a meeting of all the Balleh Dyaks, and gave them notice that they must follow one of two courses, viz., either deliver up the murderers, or move out of Balleh stream, and live below Kapit fort in the main river. They chose the latter alternative, and at once separated from the rebels, who with a small following then ascended the river Mujong into an almost inaccessible part, and put a stockade on the top of a steep hill defended by precipitous rocks over the path of ascent. They have also a few doors of the wild Penan tribe around, and supposed to be with them.
A short time after this separation took place, the rebels; with three other men cut off three more Malays in a sampan below Kanowit. The object this small party of murderers had in fortifying themselves on Batu Kajang Hill was evidently to induce the Government to raise a force to attack them, when probably some would have been killed on both sides, and most certainly on the attacking one, their empty and valueless houses burnt down, and then they hope to be received as friends without any further punishment. These were their tactics: but instead of attempting such a useless attack, the Government have thought it better to build a strong stockade at the mouth of the Mujong, and establish a force to guard this point to prevent the rebels from coming out for the purpose of either committing further depredations, or of getting food which they are much in need of, being almost in a state of starvation. The Rajah and Mr. Houghton were four days away from Kapit, building this stockade; and now harassing parties are permitted to ascend the Mujong to molest the rebels as much as possible, who are also threatened by an attack from their upper or interior side by the Kayans, and on another side by the Ukits (a wild tribe seldom seen before being felt, by their poisonous blowpipe arrows, which they use with deadly aim) and being so much in want of food, it is generally thought that all except the actual murderers, who only number nine men, will soon draw aside and make off. With the exception of this small mischievous party the Rejang is in a peaceful state, with a prosperous trade.

Sarawak Library.
The following books have been kindly presented by His Highness the Rajah: -
Purchased by the Committee: -

Sadong Collieries Report.
January, 1932.
Extracts from the Sadong Collieries Report for January, 1932, by Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager: -
The output, export, local consumption, and coal stock figures for the month are as follows: -
Coal stocks remaining at the end of the month were as follows: -
Despite the loss caused by the landslide, in December, between No. 8 and No. 9 mine entrances, it is estimated that coal stocks at the Simunjan Depot will show a surplus after the final shipment has been made.
I proceed to Kuching on the 19th by the s.l. L’Aubaine to discuss affairs connected with the final closing down of the mines with the Resident, and returned again by the same vessel on the 24th.
Large quantities of general stores, together with the dark oak-stained furniture from the Engineer’s empty bungalow, were shipped to The Government Stores Department during the month.
The total rainfall for the month, which was particularly stormy during the first fortnight, was 39.28 inches.

Fourth Division News.
MIRI.
December, 1931.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports for December, 1931, by Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident: -
Court. -At Baram Pasu Aran, a Pa Delih Kelabit, was tried for the murder of Asong, a Kelabit woman of the same house, and found guilty and sentenced to death, subject to confirmation by the Supreme Court.
At Miri there was only one case in each of the Resident’s Court and they do not call for any special mention.
General. -At a Municipal Board meeting the plans for a sewage plant and dump at Pojut were approved and passed at an approximate cost of $3,400. The Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, have agreed to go shares in this cost and make up all road approaches, and work has begun.
I visited Baram from the 12th-16th instant.
A meeting of Dyak tuai was called and the new Kampar Dyak regulations were explained to them.
The Acting Commissioner of Police, Mr. Reynolds, paid a quick visit to Miri in connection with police work, and matters dealing with the change over to the now Constabulary next year were discussed.
The Divisional Treasurer visited Sibuti and Niah to make arrangements to exchange all old silver dollars. He reports that the Kadayans wished to change all their silver dollars and that he exchanged the sum of $9,000 in notes. An attempt was made to persuade them to deposit their money in the Post Office Savings Bank, but they refused to have anything to do with it.
I called on His Excellency Mr. A. F. Richards, Governor of B.N.B., who passed through Miri with Mrs. Richards on their return to North Borneo.
Mr. T. Corson, Divisional Forest Officer, left for Kuching on 18th by the duty on transfer. Mr. D. 8. McLeod has taken over his duties in the Fourth Division.
The Offices were closed on Christmas and Boxing days.

BINTULU.
December, 1931.
The District Officer, Mr. E. V. Andreini, reports: -
Administration, etc. -Accompanied by the Datu I visited Sebauh and other upriver substations from 1st to 3rd instant and Sebauh again from the 20th to 24th.
P.W.D. -Prisoners were engaged draining in front of Government quarters and in general upkeep of station. Work was started to raise the load at the back of the bazaar, which has been washed away by heavy floods and is almost impassable at high tide at present.
The Government carpenter was employed in the Fort making alteration for offices below the Court House.
Police. -The whole of the local police force resigned in order to take the bonus offered on the starting of the new constabulary.
Several of them were temporarily re-engaged as village constables. One N.C.O. and four men arrived from Miri for duty in the Constabulary.
Education. -The bazaar shopkeepers were informed that one school was considered sufficient at present for their needs. They had requested another school to be built, chiefly on account of one or two of them being dissatisfied with the present school. They were told any complaints should be brought up for investigation.
A Sports meeting was held on the 26th for schoolboys and others and was favoured with fine weather and a large attendance.
Ex-Sergeant-Major Badar Ali (Pensioner) kindly consented to give physical drill instruction to the schools three times a week in the afternoons.
Agriculture. -Coffee and coconut plants were received from Kuching and distributed to Foochows at Sebauh.
Land.— The Laud Inspector was employed at Sebauh.
Quit rent was checked and found in some cases to have been insufficiently collected and back rent was paid by the holders.
Usual application from Dyak for new farming land was refused.
An interesting case came up at Sebauh in which Malays. Dyaks and Foochows were concerned. The Malays had not used the lands for years and Dyaks were allowed to farm on it which they did and on it being found that there were fruit trees on the land the Dyaks were ordered to pay compensation to the Malays. The Dyaks then left the land for several years and a
Foochow without any permission planted rubber on one part of it and then absconded and another Foochow bought the land from his estate although there was no title to it. He then considerably extended the garden. Then the Dyaks suddenly claimed it as their land and expected to reap the reward of a large rubber garden nicely planted up. The decision of the Court was that the land was Dyak farming land and the rubber which had been planted without any permission and was outside the Foochow Concession would have to be felled for farming. The Foochows have appealed.
Forestry. -Permanent belian pegs were put in the Rasan and Nyabau Reserves and notice boards posted. This completes the demarcation in those reserves.
Trade and Customs. -Trade statistics for the month were as follows: -
The principles exports during the month were as under: -
Rainfall. -The rainfall for the month amounted to 10.60 inches.

MIRI.
December, 1931.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports: -
Courts. -Two hundred and fifty-eight writs were issued of which 39 were in the Criminal and 219 in the Civil Courts. Two hundred and thirty-four suits were disposed of comprising 38 Criminal and 196 Civil actions. In the 33 Criminal cases, 27 convictions were obtained. Claims in Civil matters totalled $8,015; fines amounted to $304 and fees to $477.
Health. -The general question of drainage was under attention and much was done in all areas to improve conditions. At Tanjong Lobang a number of concrete drains were made to replace existing sand ones which were falling in. The compound of the Clerks’ quarters was also improved by the addition of culverts.
The contract for clearing undergrowth at Tanjong Lobang was held up owing to inclement weather; but, despite this, satisfactory progress has been made.
Two public latrines were added to the bazaar; these should satisfy a long felt necessity.
The conservancy contractor did not carry out his duties satisfactorily and he was severely warned.
Householders in the bazaar and Kampong China made numerous applications for slabs and buckets, and in most cases started their buildings in readiness for the new conservancy scheme. A site was finally chosen at Pujut for the sewage disposal plant and work was started.
Under the retrenchment scheme Tan Ah Say, Assistant Supervisor, and three coolies were discharged as from the 31st instant.
Land. -Assistant Inspector Ng Ah Chak was employed on revising the list of gardens held under old permits so that these can be kept in a separate register.
Four new applications were received for 6 acres of coconuts, 10 of pepper and 3 of vegetables. Nine demarcations were finished and Occupation Tickets were issued for these.
Assistant Inspector Jaini was still away at Sibuti.
Medical. -At the Government Dispensary 151 out-patients made 592 attendances for treatment. Five patients were transferred to the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, hospital. Three N.A.B. injections were administered.
Of the 151 out patients treated 91 were from the Police and Rangers and 26 from the gaol.
The table of diseases treated shews nothing of a serious nature.
Monopolies. -Owing to deterioration of opium said to be due to conditions in the strong-room, this storage chamber was altered to allow of a free passage of air through three of its walls both top and bottom. The godown in which the strong-room is housed was similarly altered.
All opium books and affairs were handed over to the control of the Collector of Customs as from the 31st instant.
Municipal. -The question of improving the various markets was discussed at a meeting, and it is hoped that stricter regulations regarding cleanliness and crowding will lie enforced in the near future. The new Municipal Regulations should facilitate this.
Reconstruction work in the fish market was held up owing to distorted tiles which have since been returned to Singapore.
Outstations. -These were visited by Mr. Morice from the 16th to 22nd. The people were all engaged on their farms and very little work was awaiting his attention.
Prison. -The daily average was 45.22 and the gang was employed, as before, on Tanjong Lobang. The health of the prisoners was not so good as it was in November, but it was satisfactory on the whole.
Public Works. -The Customs Wharf in the bazaar was completely overhauled and should now stand for some time without repairs.
In co-operation with the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, a new drainage scheme for the Brighton Barracks and bungalows was started. This work was very necessary owing to silting of the river bank which completely blocked the old system.
The poor quality of the water supply at Tanjong Lobang was again investigated, and it is now considered that it may be due to a quantity of old piping which is to be replaced. The tank was cement washed inside, but this did not improve matters.
Bazaar and kampong water meters again gave the overseer considerable trouble, which could have been avoided had we the necessary rubber packing to effect immediate repairs.
Minor repairs to various buildings were effected.
Repairs to Tanjong Lobang Road were still held up owing to shortage of asphalt.
Staff. -Sanitary Inspector Suleiman returned to Kuching on the 28th, having practically finished the special duties for which he was posted to this district.
General. -The Resident visited Baram from the 12th to 16th when he returned accompanied by Mr. P. H. Pollard. Mr. Hanson accompanied Mr. Morice on his monthly visit to Niah and Sibuti.
A small piece of land beyond the Chinese burial ground was reserved for a Sikh graveyard.
The Offices were closed on the 25th and 26th instants.

BARAM.
December, 1931.
The District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
Court. -In the Resident’s Court, Pasu Aran was sentenced to death for the murder of Asong (f.) at Fa Delih. The sentence awaits the confirmation of the Supreme Court.
Travelling. -Galau returned from the Kelabit country on 9th with the necessary witnesses for the murder case. Wan Taha and Wan Ahmat returned from ulu Baram on 12th. Hassan, upriver Agent, arrived from Long Lobang on 6th.
Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident, Fourth Division, visited the District from 12th to 16th when I accompanied him to Miri to meet Mr. L. N. Reynolds, Commissioner of Police. I returned from Miri on 18th. On 21st I proceeded to Long Lama to hold Court, returning on 2nd. On 24th I left for Miri to spend Christmas and the New Year there. Datu Tuanku Haji Drahman returned from Miri on 10th, but though very much better he is still unable to attend office.
Prisoners. -The prisoners, averaging 25 men, were engaged on the usual routine work of the station and in repairing the cement work under the bungalow. Seman bin Haji Gapor was engaged as Prison Mandor vice Lumut resigned.
P.W.D. -The bridges on the road through the Foochow Colony were reported completed during the month. On investigation they were found not to have been constructed as specified in the contract, and as the contractor refused to put them right he was paid a lower price.
Land. -Very little Land Rent has been collected during the month. Garden Assessment has nearly all been collected.
Agriculture. -The prospects for padi harvest are everywhere reported good.
Medical. -74 out-patients were treated during the month. Under the Professor Harrison Smith Fund two patients were admitted to hospital and one discharged during the month. Twenty-two out-patients were treated during the month and 17 N.A.B. injections given.
Rainfall. -4.89 inches of rain fell on eight days.
Shipping. -S.S. Gladys made two trips during the month.
Trade. -Continues very slack Trade returns are as under: -

Visit of Miri Golf Team.
During the week end from the 6th to the 8th February, Kuching had the pleasure of entertaining a golf team of six stalwarts from Miri. As this article is intended to refer to nothing but their visit as golfers I shall leave the description of the other details of a very enjoyable week end to somebody better able to describe them.
A match was played on Sunday the 7th against the chosen six of the Sarawak Club. Decided by foursomes and singles over 18 holes, the Miri team proved excellent winners by 7 points to Kuching’s 22. The details of the various matches are given below.
The foursomes in the morning were very closely contested, the leading Kuching couple, Davies and P. M. Adams, going down to Kay and Bowie by 2 and 1. The golf in this match was very mixed, the brightest item being Davies’s nearly holed tee shot to the sixth, a feat he almost repeated later in the day at the ninth.
The second Miri couple, Dr. Webster and Howie, recovered magnificently from the position of 4 down and 6 to play, to beat Trechman and Hammond 1 up. In this game Howie started rather shakily, but with the doctor’s expert nursing, recovered to play grand golf at a very critical stage of the match. Hammond and Trechman were very steady and only a missed 3-footer on the last green by the latter prevented the match from finishing all square. According to Taffy Reid the third couples’ game was the one which provided the golf, “all threes and fours my lad!” Unfortunately Reid and Kimpster must have had too many fours, as they were beaten by Carpenter and Lilley by 2 holes, and Miri had the satisfaction of tottering into lunch leading by 3 points to 0.
The singles, which took place in the afternoon and evening, were all very closely contested. Davies halved a grand match with Kay and would have won if another of those irritating “3-footers” had gone down on the last green. P. M. Adams against Bowie, was up against it from the word “Go” and went down by 2 and 1. Again the result might have been different if “P.M.” had used his feet instead of a golf club at the 17th hole. Hammond (10.6) fought extremely well against Dr. Webster (14.3 1/2), but weight and good golf told, and another win was recorded by Miri. Trechman revived Kuching hopes somewhat with a steady win from “Slim” Howie. How anyone has the heart to beat “Slim” I can’t make out, except perhaps that he is such a delightful loser Trechman’s opening drive in this match went a full 10 yards, which says a lot for the tiffin he drank. George Carpenter, allowing himself to be photographed every few yards, and putting beautifully, was a little too much for our Kimpster who added an extra hole on to his 
defeat by cheerfully conceding himself a foot putt on the 16th green. The Committee are rapidly getting a line on Kimpster’s “36’s.”
We now come to the last match between “Allthreesandfoursmylad” Reid and Lilley which was halved. If you hadn’t taken your threes and fours after reaching the green, Taffy my boy, you would have won. The match was very much enjoyed by both teams. The weather was perfect, perhaps a bit hot, and the course was in excellent condition. Miri adapted themselves remarkably considering they had had so little practice, and their welcome visit will assuredly stimulate, in Kuching, an oft flagging interest in what must be considered the world's greatest game.
A return match at Miri is an interesting thought, and might be arranged at some future date if circumstances permit, and if
(1) Kay uses the Darvel’ rudder as a putter
(2) Bowie convinces us he’s not a Scot
(3) Doc Webster goes in for strenuous prebreakfast exercises
(4) Slim Howie looks glum
(5) George Carpenter breaks his “Speug” mashie and refuses to be photographed on the course
(6) Lilley tells himself that he can’t go round in under 40-
then we may win, who knows?

Fifth Division News.
LIMBANG.
January, 1932.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports for January, 1932. by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident: -
Court. -Only a few trivial cases were brought before the Courts.
General. -On New Year’s Day a very successful regatta was held at Limbang, there was a record attendance both from up river and Brunei, and very keen competition was shown between boats entered by Brunei and Awat Awal.
There were present twenty-two Europeans and three launch loads of other visitors from Brunei. Messrs. E. Banks and W. S. B. Buck were visitors from Kuching. Heavy rain prevented the land sports being held in the afternoon but these were subsequently held on the 2nd, when buffalo racing again proved to be a great attraction, there being no less than twenty-two entries in one race.
Native Officer Hamdan, was transferred from Sundar to Danau, where he commenced his duties as from the beginning of the year. It is hoped that by having an Officer permanently established up river it will be possible to collect more revenue.
Mr. N. Mace, Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, arrived from Kuching with a party of surveyors to do certain work in the Division. The Inter-State Boundary east and west of the Brunei Road near Pandam has now been finally marked with concrete pegs, and other work is being done in the Merapok and the Trusan.
A party of Kelabits from Sungei Parroh, a branch of the Medihit, came down and paid in their tax; the chief produce they brought for sale was padi, rice and rattans; they reported that Tama Kuling was very ill, and unable to come down.
Mr. J. R. Combe, Acting Assistant District Officer, Lawas, proceeded on six weeks furlough on the 6th. Mr. F. A. Moore, Cadet, paid a visit to Lawas, Trusan and Sundar, and reported all well and very quiet, everyone being busy with their padi farms.
Mr. Francis N. Lim, Divisional Book-keeper, visited Lawas, Trusan and Sundar in order to inspect the accounts, etc.
P.W.D. -Prisoners, averaging 13.01, were employed on general maintenance of the Station’s grounds, in cutting ditches across the football field preparatory to making trench drains to carry away water which accumulates in the middle of the ground and cannot get away.
One of the food stalls in the bazaar was converted into a vegetable market, and stalls are now leased out at $5 per month.
During a gale which blew on the morning of the 4th, a large tree fell in the Residency grounds, and completely demolished the covered way to the kitchen, only missing the kitchen by a few feet. The repairs were effected as quickly as possible.
Medical and Health. -The Medical Officer of Brunei, Dr. E. W. Martindell, paid his usual visit during the month.
A Chinese, Lee Miah, who was taken to Brunei Hospital suffering from a fractured leg, unfortunately died after amputation.
There were no patients admitted to the hospital, but fifty were treated in the dispensary for various ailments.
Rainfall amounted to 18.95 inches.

CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
KUCHING,
23rd February, 1932.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
SIR,
I beg you will forgive me for imposing on your patience with the following suggestion, which, I consider, concerns a matter of public interest. I think in this, I am voicing the feelings of many of your readers but if I am not, then I shall certainly know all about it, and shall no doubt quiver with fear behind my cowardly pseudonym on reading subsequent issues of your widely read and erudite periodical.
The matter is this. Subscriptions, payable for the privilege of belonging to the Sarawak Club, are payable, monthly, you as are aware, Sir, as follows: For Kuching residents. Gentlemen $7, Ladies $3 (or total for one married couple $10 p.m.), a moderate sum, yon will agree, for the consistent clubman, who spends his evening within its walls 29 out of the 30 or so days of the month.
But there is also the case of the club member who for various reasons is able to visit the club very occasionally; but who is, nevertheless, a frequent enough visitor to justify continual membership and payment of subscription fees.
To take an imaginary pair of illustrative cases in contrast. A, is a bachelor, approaching middle age, earning a comfortable salary-he plays golf on most evenings and afterwards adjourns to the club bar to settle up with his tonsils, which are dryish and heated. This process completed, be reads the newspapers for half-an-hour and then makes up a four of bridge, lingers over a gin pahit or may be two, then returns home at about 8.30 or 9 to cope with the handiwork of his cook, and so to bed.
Suppose he stands two rounds of drinks during the course of each evening on an average. His club bill will figure round about $60 to $70 p.m. In addition he pays $7 only subscription, or 10% of the whole. Agreed that he and those like him are the
backbone of the club, they do most to help it pay its way; ipso facto they are therefore chiefly the ones to whom such a club owes its existence on its present rather luxurious scale.
Now take the case of B., who for the sake of argument is younger, not a bachelor (“He should be” one hears the cynic snort), and quite naturally and probably, is drawing n considerably smaller income than A.
He cannot afford and perhaps has no need or desire to visit the club every evening of his life. He is no unsociable hermit or rabid prohibitionist however, but, say, a fairly normal human, liking to be in touch, socially and otherwise, with the people and affairs of the town.
He reads his own papers, has other means of exercise or amusement than tennis, golf or bridge, or possibly indulges in them but rarely, or at home. He is in the habit, therefore of spending say only two evenings a week at the club, as a general rule, He stands one or may be two rounds of drinks on each of these evenings, and his club bill for the month will probably vary between say, 5 to 12 dollars.
Mrs. B. has a game of Mahjong, and a ginger beer all round at the same time or once a week, and is debited with, say, an additional $2 or $3 which brings B.’s total up a little. In addition to a bill therefore of say $15 at must, he pays $10 in subscription fees, or 75% at least of his bill, as against A. who only pays 10%.
It might he argued that A. is the man the club wish to encourage, B. being unprofitable in that he does little to swell the profits on stores which must be held, and therefore sold.
But surely the logical aspect of the question is this. The club has put out money for building, it pays out large sums monthly in lighting, power and wages for service and upkeep.
A. uses that power, lighting and service as a 100% individual case. B. uses the same thing as a 10% or 15% case, yet he pays the same as A. for 90% less usage of charges incurred. Is he not logically entitled to remain on the club membership board, provided he obeys the rules of the club, and yet subscribe to that club in direct proportion to his usage of its
amenities?
Some adjustment of the present system, I venture to think, could be brought about, and thus benefit such cases as B.’s without causing undue dwindling of the club’s revenue. This could be effected by rating subscriptions on a percentage basis, viz., say 12 or 15% of a member’s bill being added as subscription fees (with a minimum of say $3 for single members and $5 for married couples). A. would pay a little more, true, but not much and not too much in proportion to services rendered, and B. would cease to feel he was throwing money away by failing to attend the club as much as A. in order to get his money’s worth.
I am, sir, etc.,
A. WEEKLY-WALLER.



































