VOL. LXII.
No. 945.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Wednesday, June 1st, 1932.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette
WEDNESDAY, JUNE 1st, 1932.

Local and Personal.
May.
His Highness the Tuan Muda left for Miri and Baram in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 20th, and returned to Kuching on the 26th.

Her Highness the Dayang Anne arrived from England on the s.s. Vyner Brooke on the 30th. We are very glad to see Her Highness in Sarawak once more, and hope her visit will be a long one.

The s.s. Vyner Brooke, on the 6th, brought a distinguished visitor in the person of Mr. L. Maynard, until recently American Consul-General at Singapore. Mr. Maynard, who was accompanied by his wife, is returning to the United States, but hopes to spend about a month in Borneo first. During their stay in Kuching they were the guests of His Highness the Tuan Muda.

The Resident, Mr. J. C. Swayne, returned from a short visit to Singapore by the s.s. Darvel on the 9th.

Dr. E. Le Sueur, and Messrs. P. H. Hayward and E. H. Elam, were passengers by the m.v. Marudu on the 14th. Dr. Le Sueur returned on the 23rd but Mr. Elam is, we understand, taking six weeks’ local leave.

Capt. C. P Lowe returned from leave by the s.s Vyner Brooke on the 30th. Mrs. Lowe is not, we understand, coining out until later in the year.
Mr. W. L. Clark was also passenger and was accompanied by his wife, to whom we extend a hearty welcome on her first visit to Sarawak, while we congratulate them both on their marriage. An account of the wedding will be found on another page.

Mr. P. H. Flood-Page has become the proprietor of “Ye Olde Angel Hotel” at Henley-on-Thames. We wish him every success in his new venture.

The football season is now in full swing, and games are taking place regularly three or four times a week. In this connection, we are, asked to state that the Padungan Football Ground is already booked on all Tuesdays, Thursdays, Saturdays and Sundays until the middle of October.

A list of the fines agreed upon by all Penghulu and Tuai Rumah at the “Aum” held at Sibu on December 31st of last year, has now been published. It should prove of great assistance to officers concerned with Dyaks affairs in the Third Division.

Rajah of Sarawak’s Niece.
Miss Elizabeth Brooke, second daughter of Their Highnesses the Tuan Muda and the Dayang Muda of Sarawak (Capt. and Mrs. Bertram Brooke), is engaged to Mr. Terence A. K. Maunsell, eldest son of Capt. and Mrs. Ernest Maunsell, of Dennistoun, St. Albans.
Capt. Brooke, who is heir-presumptive to his brother, Sir Charles Vyner Brooke, Rajah of Sarawak, is Special Commissioner for Sarawak in England. His address is The Priory, Redbourn. -Straits Times.

The Bishop in North Borneo.
The Rt. Rev. N. B Hudson, Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak, accompanied by his Secretary, Mr. I. M. Mills, arrived in Sandakan by the Darvel on 22nd April. Archdeacon Mercer had gone to Kudat to meet him and returned at the same time. The congregation at Evening Service on 24th, when the Bishop preached a sermon that will long be remembered by all who heard it, was one of the largest that has been known for many years and included over 40 Europeans. The Bishop was the guest of the Hon’ble Mr. F. W. Pinnock until 25th, when, with Archdeacon Mercer, he left for the East Coast. -B.N.B. Herald.

Mr. P. H. Hayward.
FUNERAL AT BIDADARI CEMETERY.
The funeral of Mr. P. H. Hayward, of the Sarawak Civil Service, whose death in Singapore was reported yesterday, took place at the Bidadari Cemetery yesterday afternoon, the Kev. H. T. Malahar. Chaplain to the Forces. officiating. Among those attending were Mr. G. A. G. Walker. M.C.S., representing the Colonial Secretary, Mr. C. G. Windle, representing Paterson. Simons and Co, Ltd. the agents for the Sarawak Government, and Mrs. Le Sueur.
Wreaths were received from His Sorrowing Mother, His Highness the Rajah of Sarawak, His Highness the Tuan Muda of Sarawak, the Straits Settlements Government, His Brother Officers of the Sarawak Civil Service, Messrs. Paterson Simons and Co., Ltd., Sarawak Government Agents. Mrs. Le Sueur, Messrs. Mansfield and Co., Ltd. -Straits Times.

Obituary.
It is with very great regret that we have to record the death of Mr. P. H. Hayward, of the Sarawak Civil Service, which occurred in Singapore on 18th May.
Mr. Hayward, who was only forty-four years of age at the time of his death, joined the service in 1919. He had since held many appointments, and was gazetted Registrar of the Supreme Court in 1927. Early this year he was appointed Acting Tieasurer during the absence of the Treasurer on leave. A keen tennis player, and a wireless enthusiast. he will be greatly missed by his many friends in Sarawak.
During the Great War Mr. Hayward saw active service with the R.N. R. in the North Sea, Baltic, Gulf of Finland, West Coast of Ireland, and the Channel.
He had been in poor health for some time, and was, in fact, on his way home on sick leave when his death occurred.
To his mother and Mrs. Hayward, we extend our heartfelt sympathy in their great loss.

No More “Coolies.”
TERM BANNED IN CEYLON.
For some time past, organisations seeking to protect the interests of the labouring classes in Ceylon have been objecting to the use of the term “coolies” when referring to estate labourers, who are mostly South Indians. They have averted that the word has the same contemptuous meaning as the word “native.”
Consequent upon this representation, the Government of Ceylon has issued a communique to all departments banning the use of the term “coolie” in all official correspondence and documents, and asking that the term “labourer” be used instead.
It may be recalled that as a result of an agitation the word “native,” too, was banned not long ago from all Government documents in Ceylon. -Free Press.

Patriotism?
Apparently Sarawak Chinese are more reasonable than their fellow countrymen in North Borneo. At least we have not seen any examples of this sort of thing, as described in the B.N B. Herald.
Chinese labourers at Sandakan still persist in refusing to load Japanese steamers, though they will cheerfully handle timber sent to Japan, sometimes by Chinese firms, in steamers flying flags other than Japanese. Their attitude is both ridiculous and deplorable. They do no harm to the country against which their spite is directed, as Japanese steamers are merely loaded by other labour. They do, however, cause an enormous loss both to the exporters, who are forced to deplete their timber camps of labour to supply the deficiency and also, indirectly, to the country of their adoption. In addition they lose the chance of good pay, without any benefit to themselves except a possible feeling of smug self-satisfaction of having scarified themselves for so-called political principles. Whatever else it is, such shortsighted behaviour is not true patriotism.

Negligent Cyclists.
A Penang Magistrate recently remarked that cyclists seemed to want to commit suicide. Kuching cyclists appear to be just as anxious to quit this life, but since the volume of traffic is very much less here than in Penang and other towns in Malaya, they have to be more than merely “rash and negligent.” Thus we often see them the Chinese are the worst offenders-rushing out of blind openings without any warning, turning round in the road with a car or two just behind them, or riding along with their hands off the handle bars, or even looking behind them. If they find themselves still alive after this they deliberately fall off in front of a car, and then, having picked themselves up, walk straight into a car coming the other way. Many of them cannot tide at all, and wobble all over the road. In Europe, if one is not quite sure what the driver of a vehicle is going to do, it is best to stand still. With Kuching cyclists, however, this is fatal. Having tacked about five times from pavement to pavement, they 
will then run right into the bewildered pedestrian, or at least fall against him. In either case the pedestrian gets the worst of it. There is really only one safe course open to him-as soon as he sees a Chinese coming at him on a bicycle, he should get right off the road, and preferably on the nearest lamp-post from which elevation he can watch the lunatic fall in a heap under his bicycle after raising an arm in an attempt to make some fool signal.
It is amazing that there are not more accidents. In any case it is time the Police got a line on these suicidal maniacs, failing which the latter should be made fair game. They, at least, should be grateful.

Dry Coated Horses.
The Singapore Free Press of May 4th contains an interesting article by Mr. Osborne, a Veterinary Surgeon, on the malady commonly known as “dry coat.”
It is, of course, a long time, if we except Mr. G. R. H. Arundell’s grey mare, since horses, either English or Australian-bred, have been imported into Sarawak, but as the question of doing so again is periodically revived, the subject may prove of interest to owners in Sarawak.
Mr. Osborne has come to the conclusion that Australian horses are far less subject to the malady than are English horses, while brown horses are most liable to be affected.
The malady is incurable, but the condition may sometimes be improved by sending the affected horses to cooler climates, even a change to an elevation of no more that 1,200 feet bringing about a very marked improvement in one case quite recently.
Prospective owners are advised against importing brown English-bred horses, and particularly those of a “washy” colour. If a brown is imported it should be of a “true” rich colour.
Mr. Osborne has ascertained that out of 138 English horses in Malays at least 30 or 22% are dry coated, while out of 115 Australians, only 10 or 9% are dry. The distribution of colour of dry horses is as follows: -
Ponies, whether English or Australian, are not nearly subject to the condition, and become more readily acclimatized.
There are two, and probably more, types of the malady. There is the case of horses who are dry, but never exhibit signs of distress, that of “dry” horses who “blow” unduly after fast work, but are normal at other times, and that of horses who are seen to “blow” during the heat of the day when standing in their stables. Mr. Osborne considers that these are distinct types, and not merely degrees of the malady, while it is generally agreed by Veterinary Surgeons that it is the condition itself which effects the heart, and not vice-versa.

Marriage of Mr. W. L. Clark and Miss J. D. G. Kelly.
The marriage took place at St. George’s Church Hanover Square, on Friday afternoon, of Mr. William Leslie Clark, Sarawak Civil Service, only son of Captain and Mrs. Clark, and Miss Joan Doreen Greene Kelly, the twin daughter of Sir Henry and Lady Greene Kelly, of 14 Court-field Gardens, South Kensington.  The Rev. E. C. Opie officiated.
The bride, who was given away by Mr. Harry Greene Kelly (her brother), wore a simple dress of white satin with a long, full skirt and a closefitting bodice with puffed sleeves. Her veil of ivory lace was held with a coronet of orange-blossom, and she carried a bouquet of white carnations, roses, and lilies of the valley. Miss Joyce Greene Kelly (sister of the bride) was the only attendant. Her dress of printed chiffon, in shades of grey, black, mauve, and green, was worn with a black straw picture hat, and she carried a bouquet of mauve carnations. Mr. Binnie was best man.
After the ceremony Lady Greene Kelly held a small reception at Brown’s Hotel.  -Straits Times.

OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 51 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
1881.] WEDNESDAY, 1ST JUNE, 1881. [Price 5 cents.
Such a fearful wholesale murder as took place recently, is we are glad to say of rare occurrence in this country. The details, which are most shocking, are as follows: -
On Thursday, May 5th, a Saribas Malay, Sujang by name, residing at Stiram, incited by jealousy for which apparently there was no foundation, “amok”ed killing no less than three people and dangerously wounding a fourth. Between 4 and 5 in the afternoon several of his wife’s relations were collected in the house, she being very near her confinement. Feeling unwell she retired within her curtains her husband following her; soon after two sharp blows were heard, but not much notice was taken by the people outside as they thought that Sujang was hitting his parang against its sheath as Malays frequently do. Shortly afterwards he rushed out with a blood stained parang, attacked his mother-in-law and cut her down, killing her on the spot; then rushed on his father-in-law. who had been roused by the noise, and was sitting in a corner of the house, and cut him down, killing him also. His wife’s sister ran to her bed to seize her child, and whilst in the act of taking it up with out-stretched arms with one below he 
severed both hands at the wrist, and then gave her a severe cut over her shoulder. Two other women who were in the house ran out; one of them took refuge in a neighbouring house, the other, whilst crossing a field, was overtaken and cut down, her body being nearly severed in two; he then attempted to enter a house, but the inmates having been alarmed by the screams of the women, were in waiting on each side of the door and secured and disarmed him. At his trial the prisoner was in a very weak condition and had to be supported. He appeared to be in a dreamy state of mind, but after being conducted back to gaol asked some rational questions.
He was a very small weakly looking man and does not appear to have strength sufficient to have executed such, a terrible crime. The court at the trial was crowded to overflowing with spectators on whom the details and sentence appeared to have a great effect.

Mitchell’s Maritime Register of the 25th March has the following paragraph: -
“Lorna Doone. -On the 17th March Messrs. Blackwood and Gordon launched a gunboat name Lorna Doone for Rajah Brooke, of Sarawak. The dimensions are: -Length, 100 feet; breath, 17 feet; depth of hold, 8 feet; and 150 tons. The builders have fitted the Lorna Doone with engines of 40 horse power. She is intended as an auxiliary gun and despatch boat. There are two 9-pounders on board.”
The Lorna Doone sailed from England on the 10th ultimo, and may therefore be expected in Sarawak about the middle of July. She is intended as a dispatch vessel between the outstation ports and Kuching, and during the N. E. monsoon such communication will be a great boon, as it is not infrequent at that time for Mukah and Bintulu to be a month or six weeks without connection with the outer world.
On the 1st instant, the Ranee, a new screw steamer built by Messrs. Ramage and Ferguson, Leith, for the Borneo Company, the launch of which we recently noticed, went out on her official trial, which was attended with very satisfactory results. She had over 800 tons dead weight on board, 75 lbs. pressure of steam, and the engines working at from seventy-four to seventy-eight revolutions. On the run of thirty-five mile to the Bass Rock and back, a mean-speed of about eleven and a quarter knots per hour was attained. The Ranee has been specially built for trading between the Straits Settlements and the adjoining islands, and her arrangements are all of the most suitable kind for both cargo and passenger traffic in a hot climate. A large party of gentlemen connected with the East went out with the steamer, and expressed themselves much pleased with her arrangements and performance. The Ranee leaves Leith for Singapore direct with a full cargo. -Straits Times.

First Division News.
RESIDENT’S OFFICE.
April, 1932.
Extracts from the Divisional Reports for April, 1932, by Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division: -
Resident’s Court. -One criminal and two civil cases only came before the Resident’s Court, Kuching. At Lundu, Phang Kuoi who was implicated in the murder of Ho Loi, was sentenced to death, but with a strong recommendation for mercy; the matter is now before the Supreme Court. At Bau two civil cases and one criminal were heard.
The shutting down of the Government Colliery at Sadong has led to some dislocation in communications, as no regular steamship service is being run and the wireless station has been closed. An experiment is being made of sending mails overland by the Simanggang Road.
General. -Her Highness the Ranee and the Dayangs Elizabeth and Valerie left on the 23rd to return to England.
Hari Raya Haji was observed as a public holiday; the first time this has been done in this country. The Spring Meeting of the Turf Club was held on the 2nd and 4th and was attended by several out-station officers. An American-owned aeroplane, The Flying Carpet, arrived unexpectedly during the first day’s racing.
The Datu Shahbandar, Abang Haji Abdillah, was granted leave to go to Singapore on the 5th and returned on the 11th.
I regret to report that at the end of the month the Acting Treasurer, Mr. P. H. Hayward, was taken ill and the Medical authorities have recommended his return to England.

DISTRICT OFFICE.
April, 1932.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. P. Murray-Scott, reports: -
District Court. -Fourteen cases were heard, four of which were criminal and ten civil. Of the four criminal cases, all resulted in convictions. The fees collected amounted to $5.50.
The civil claims involved amounts totalling $1,514.40, for which fees collected amounted to $210.
Magistrate’s Court. -Sixty-seven cases were heard, nine of which were criminal and fifty-eight civil. Of the nine criminal cases, all were convictions. There were three cases of assault, three of theft, one contempt of Court and two other offences.
Fines imposed amounted to $53 and fees collected $31.25. The civil claims involved amounts totalling $1,207.18 for which fees collected amounted to $339.65.
Police Court. -Twenty-five summary cases were brought before the Court. Twenty-three convictions and two acquittals were adjudged. The principal charges were thirteen of theft, one breach of Municipal By-law and eleven other offences. A total amount of $40 was paid in fines.
In addition twenty eight judgment summons cases were dealt with during the month.

UPPER SARAWAK, BAU.
April, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports: -
Resident’s Court. -Two criminal cases were heard and resulted in convictions.
District Court. Three cases were heard, one of which was a criminal case and two civil. The one criminal case resulted in conviction.
Magistrate’s Court. -Ten cases were heard, four of which were criminal cases and six civil of the four criminal cases all resulted in convictions.
In addition three judgment summons were dealt with during the month.
Fines imposed amounted to $532. The civil claims involved amounts totalling $818.71 for which fees collected amounted to $32.
Judicial. -Notable cases during the month were: -(1) State vs. Daleng who was sentenced to one year’s imprisonment for attempt to murder under section 307 I.P.C., and (2) State vs. Bong Khian Tok alias Bong Nai Kim who was fined $500 or in default one year’s imprisonment for breach of Order No. O-4, section 6.
General. -Her Highness the Ranee, accompanied by the Dayangs Elizabeth and Valerie, Mr. and Mrs. Culvert and Mr. and Mrs. A Hannigan visited the station on the 10th. Other visitors included the Resident, First Division, Mr. J. C. Swayne, and Messrs. Kelley and Linton of the Sarawak Constabulary.
On 24th a tuba fishing was held in the Ulu Sarawak from Bidi to Buso, but owing to heavy rains it did not meet with much success.
Coroner’s Court. -Two coroner’s inquisitions were held during the month, one on the body of Lim Ah Min who died by drowning, and another on a Dyak girl named Nayib (f.) who was killed on falling from the Jungkar on to the stump of a tree. On both of these verdicts of death from misadventure were registered.
Public Works. -Government buildings were in process of being whitewashed during the month, and new cuttings are being made through the Chinese cemetery at Seniawan whereby it is hoped this dangerous piece of road will be made safer.
Staff. -Mandor Ebet (Sea Dyak) was dismissed on the 28th instant for allowing a prisoner Bong Nai Kim to escape and was replaced by an ex-P.C. Ali Osen, who has been taken on three months’ probation.
Health. -I am glad to be able to report that the malaria returns for the jail have shewn a great improvement. Six months ago the average for the month was eight cases and now nil returns have obtained for three consecutive months.
Considerable work has been done in the way of filling and draining under the direction of the Chief Health Officer, and it is satisfactory to be able to, show results so quickly. The health of the station, generally is very good, but in view of the large increase of miners in the district arrangements have been made for the Bau dresser to make weekly inspections of lines and sanitary conditions of all mines in the district.
Gold Mining. -Two new gold mining concerns have been granted options during the month.
155.21 ounces of actual gold were obtained by the Bau Gold Mining Syndicate for the month of March, 1932.
Prisons. -At the end of the month the female prisoners numbered 11 and the male prisoners 26. Total 37.
A male prisoner, Bong Nai Kim, escaped on the 28th and has not yet been recaptured.
Rainfall. -Highest recorded in 24 hours 1.46 inches; daily average .35 of an inch; total for month 10.55 inches.

LUNDU.
April, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
General. -On 2nd Phang Ngee was executed for the murder of Ho Loi. On 24th the Resident visited the station together with the Acting Commissioner of Sarawak Constabulary and Mr. Hannigan. The trial of Phang Kuoi for complicity in the murder of Ho Loi was held and accused was found guilty. Mr. Reynolds and Mr. Hannigan inquired into police affairs and suggested that the floors of the kitchens in the police lines be cemented and cement drains be put in. Simatan was also visited and an opinion expressed that for the better control of that district, which is thickly populated with Chinese, chiefly pepper planters, and which is only a few hours from the border, a lance-corporal and three men be stationed there and a telephone installed between Lundu and Simatan.
Mr. T. M. Griffiths arrived on 9th and left on 13th.
On 26th P. Native Officer Abang Mustapha left for Sambas with a warrant against Liew Choon for murder. He had not returned at the end of the month. On 25th Native Officer Abang Zamhari was transferred to Sadong after four years’ duty at Lundu.
Travelling. -On 14th I left Lundu with the Native Officer, Abang Zatuhari, for Telok Srabang. In that kampong all seem quite pleased as the paddi crop has been successful, and good catches of fish have been made. There was nothing of importance at Simatan; a man was engaged to cut the grass round the office, this having been done by the constables before, but as there is only one man stationed there now his other duties keep him fully engaged. On 16th I arrived at Rambungan where two Native Court cases were settled, and returned to Lundu on 17th.
On 26th I visited the Sungei Pasir where the paddi is half in; the quality is not good and the Dyaks say they will have barely enough for the year. The heavy rains in January spoilt the crop.
At Kampong Bedaun, which was visited by a dresser earlier in the month, a meeting was held and the people agreed to pull down their old house and build a new one after the harvest is in. A new Pengarah will then be elected.
At Sebakau and Srayan the Dyaks complained that the paddi was not good and also were afraid they would not have enough for the year. On Tanjong Purun, Lundu, the people have not yet started to gather the crops I returned from Srayan via Blungei where the pepper is in good quantity and of good quality.
Prison. -The prison gang averaging 9.7, which is considerably larger than before, were employed in whitewashing the Government buildings. Discipline and health in the jail were both good.
Land. -Assistant Land Inspector Sujang was granted three weeks’ leave on 13th. Land Inspector Abubakar marked up the Chinese pepper gardens at Blungie Kechil and Blungie Besar. Office routine is now in order and every effort is being made to get the payable gardens demarcated and occupation tickets issued by September; but with only two land inspectors this will be very difficult.
Marine. -On 13th two quarry men arrived from Kuching and started making a hole in the Batu Mandi at Kuala Lundu. On 26th a steel pipe filled with cement was cemented into the rock two feet deep, leaving seven feet of the pipe above the highest water mark, which submerges the rock six feet. A while beacon was affixed to the top and can be seen by mariners from near Simpadi Island.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall for the month was 6.33 inches, and the greatest in any one day 1.50 inches.
Trade. -The total returns for the month and for comparison with those for the corresponding month of last year were as follows: -

SADONG.
April, 1932.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports: -
Court. -Very few cases came before the Court.
Staff. -Native Officer Abang Zamhari arrived as new Native Officer on the 30th.
Agriculture. -The Malay paddi harvest in the Simunjan district was completed and reported as fair.
The paddi planted at the mines by ex-mine coolies has died owing to the fact that the land at Tanjong Pansi bears a heavy sublayer of useless coal and slag. etc. This fact was not discovered until quite recently.
The ex-miners have planted a fair quantity of vegetables, and they should become self-supporting shortly.
Land. -The R.C. Mission applied for a piece of land within the Srian reserve. It has been arranged with the Land Office, Kuching, that all such applications will be notified. A sketch allowing the site required try the R.C. Mission has been sent to the Land Office.
Land Inspectors made six inspections, and fourteen titles were issued for 30 3/4 acres in all.
Prisons. -Prisoners averaged 14.1 and were engaged on loading and transporting material from mines to wharf, etc.
Rainfall. -Amounted to 9.68 inches.
Shipping. -M.L. Peng Ann made three trips to Kuching.
M.L. Vava was sent to Kuching for repair and was quickly returned in good order within the month.
S.L. L’Aubaine made one trip on 26th and loaded fifteen cows, four buffaloes and fifty large billion posts for Kuching.
One cow died as a result of these shipping operations, as the cattle are very wild.
Trade and Customs. -Comparative trade returns are as follows: -
During the month four vessels entered and cleared the port.

Golf.
On Sunday the 8th May a caddies’ and club boys’ one club medal competition over 9 holes was held. The event had been eagerly anticipated by the competitors for a number of weeks, and early risers could tell a tale of witnessing practice games at the ghastly hour of 6 a.m.
Thirteen competitors lined up at 8.30 a.m. and clubs were examined. Nine caddies had old clubs which they had shafted themselves, and the others were either provided with or produced the genuine cast-off article. Two balls per competitor were handed out where required, and of the twenty-four issued it is worth recording that twenty-three were returned.
The play over the medal round was really a revelation, especially that of the younger caddies.
Style, remarkable length and direction, and a concentration on the game that any European might have envied, combined to make many of the players really worth watching. But for trouble on the greens some excellent scores might have been returned. The following were the prize winners: -
At the finish of the proceedings Mr. P. M. Adams presented the prizes.
The Golf Committee tender their thanks to all the gentlemen who volunteered as markers, and to lenders of clubs and balls.

Sarawak Golf Club.
MEDAL COMPETITION.
April, 1932.
This competition, played over 18 holes, was won by Mr. A. L. McLaine, who returned a card of 76 nett. Only three cards were returned.
Scores were as follows: -

Second Division News.
March, 1932.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports for March, 1932, by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident: -
Owing to the fact that I did not take over charge of the Division again until the 29th, most of this report is made up of notes made by Mr. E. O. Bruce in his diary.
On the 1st His Highness the Tuan Muda attended the offices at Simanggang and discussed various matters. His Highness sailed for Kuching the next day, accompanied by Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, who returned to the Division after a few days in Kuching as guest of His Highness the Rajah.
The Acting Resident, Mr. E. O. Bruce, accompanied His Highness as far as Sebuyow.
During the month Native Officers and ex-Sarawak Rangers have been patrolling the Skrang and Layer in connection with the alleged outbreaks in these districts. Attempts, too, have been made to induce Asun to surrender but without avail. A full report on Dyak affairs has been transmitted under separate cover.
During the month the ex-Sarawak Rangers detailed for the Third Division expedition returned. Mr. N. A. Middlemas, Superintendent of Surveys, visited the Division.
The Acting Resident, Mr. E. O. Bruce, left for Kuching on the 13th and returned on the 16th, bringing with him Mr. Reid of the Public Works Department. This latter Officer made an inspection of the proposed “cut” at Tanjong Kuseng, Lingga.
I left Kuching on the 24th and was met at Lingga by the Acting Resident. We reached Simanggang the same evening. 
The long Easter holiday impeded the work of taking over, but Mr. Bruce finally handed over the Division on the 29th, and left on the next day.
Mr. J. R. Combe reported his arrival in Betong on the 30lh. He is to take over the Saribas District from Mr. R. L. Daubeny. At the same time Mr. N. Mace reported his arrival there en route for Simanggang to take over the Survey Office from Mr. W. Harnack. Mr. Mace arrived in Simanggang on the 31st via Sungei Tisak.
Padi farming is in full swing, and in spite of heavy rains much of the padi is good.
Mr. B. Summers was in Kuching for a few days in order to sit for the examinations and returned to Simanggang with me.
Below are extracts from the reports of the Officer-in- Charge, Constabulary and Prisons (Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft), the Officer-in-Charge, Engkilili (Mr. S. G. Hansom), the District Officer, Saribas (Mr. R. L. Daubeny), the Acting Assistant District Officer. Kalaka (Mr. L. K. Morse) and the Land Officer, Second Division (Mr. B. Summers).

SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
The Officer-in-Charge of Constabulary and Prisons, Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, reports: -
District Office. -The district report has been compiled from notes handed to me by Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas.
On the 5th the Superintendent of Surveys, Mr. Middlemas, arrived from Kuching, accompanied by Mr. Goodall who had paid a flying visit to the capital. Mr. Goodall proceeded to Lubok Tedong on the following day, and Mr. Middlemas returned to Kuching on the 8th.
On the 8th the Acting Resident proceeded to Lingga to meet the Maimuna, which arrived from Sibu bringing back one hundred and fifty Second Division Reservists. The Acting Resident arrived in Simanggang on the following day with the Reservists.
On the 9th Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft returned from Kuching.
On the 13th the Acting Resident left for Kuching to discuss Dyak affairs. The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas, accompanied the Acting Resident as far as Lingga, and later visited Sebuyow, returning to Simanggang with the Acting Resident on the 16th. Mr. Reid arrived at Lingga on the 16th en route for Kabong.
On the 24th, the Resident, Mr. J. B. Archer, returned from furlough.
On the 30th Mr. E. O. Bruce left for Kuching in m.l. Anne at 11 a.m.
Most of the Malays in the vicinity of Simanggang have now gathered in their harvest and on the whole report a good crop. Dyak affairs continue to cause trouble, the area chiefly affected in this district being the Ulu Skrang from whence reports are still received of continued stone throwing and general alarm.
On the 3rd Pangeran Azit arrived from Ulu Skrang to report that news had been received that Asun wished to surrender. The following day Abang Abu-Talip proceeded up the Skrang to get in touch with Asun and inform him that Government was only prepared to accept an unconditional surrender of Asun, his followers and womenfolk.
Abang Abu-Talip returned to Simanggang accompanied by Penghulu Sait on the 9th to report that Asun’s surrender had not materialised, and it is felt that Asun never seriously considered handing himself over to Government. Patrols of Ranger Reservists still continue their rounds in the Ulu Skrang but it is doubled whether their utility warrants continued expenditure in this direction.
Meanwhile Balau, Undup, Lingga and Sebuyow Dyaks remain quiet and peaceful though widespread reports of a failure of crops will probably cause distress before the end of the year.
Chinese Traders state that a general decrease of trade continues and many of them have been forced to close down their business. The unsatisfactory state of Dyak affairs necessarily reflects seriously on all classes of trade.
At Sebuyow, eight minor cases were heard during the month. Fines collected during the month amounted to $99.99 and Court fees to $31.55. Two Dyaks warranted for non-payment of fine were ordered by the Acting Resident to work billian in payment.
The Acting Resident gave instructions for certain additions and alterations to be carried out to the European bungalow at present in course of construction.
The Court Writer visited Maludam on the 13th in order to arrange about shop assessment.
Medical: -
During the month 345 out-patients were attended to, 116 N.A.B. injections and 94 vaccinations were given at the Hospital, and during the Dresser’s visits at various substations in the Batang Lupar.
Nine cases were heard in the Magistrate’s Court, five of which were criminal and four civil. Of the five criminal cases there were two convictions.
Three cases were heard in the District Court, two of which were criminal and one civil. Two criminal cases were convictions. Civil claims involved amounts totalling $249.20. Fines imposed $83.40, and fees collected $42.10.
Trade and Customs: -
At the end of the month the Simanggang Police were five men below authorized strength, and as three men had been promised to the Officer-in-Charge of Engkilili it will be necessary to recruit eight constables.
Over eighty per cent of the present Simanggang constables may be graded as recruits.
All ranks are undergoing recruits training, and although the standard of efficiency and general smartness is very low it is thought that constables are making very satisfactory progress.
Prison. -Daily average of prisoners March 45-51.
During the month prisoners were employed mowing and on other routine work.
Prisoner Buan, who escaped from jail on the 29th of February, was re-captured in the Saribas district on 9th instant. Buan has been sent to Kuching Hospital for treatment for gunshot wound on the thigh.
The discipline of the jail during March was anything but satisfactory, there being frequent fights amongst Chinese prisoners.
It is thought advisable to transfer one or two of these prisoners to another station, but as the number of prisoners is inadequate for the present work of this station no transfer can be effected at present.
General health of the jail was good.

ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports: - 
Nine criminal cases were heard in the Lower Courts convictions being obtained in each case. Hiew Choi was fined $50 or two months’ imprisonment for breach of Forest Regulations. There were no other cases of note Civil suits amounting to a total of $334.02 were heard.
On the 14th instant I went up the Lemanak, as far as Sungei Semanju, accompanied by Abang Sedik, Native Officer, and three Dyak Reservists, for the purpose of posting these men in the Semanju, from whence reports have been received that stone throwing, of a similar nature to the Skrang incidents, has been taking place. I spent two nights in a house in the Semanju, and stones and pieces of wood were certainly thrown into the house during my stay, causing, apparently, great excitement and claim.
It was impossible to catch or see the offenders, who were no doubt hidden in the thick undergrowth surrounding the house On the following day I caused the babas surrounding the house to be cut away in order that it might afford no cover, and there was no recur-rence on the second night. Stone throwing, however, is still reported from this area, from three or four houses.
It is difficult to ascertain the object of these disturbances, which seem to cause considerable perturbation among local Dyaks, and is inclined to make them neglect their padi, as they state they dare not go to their padi fields unless walking in numbers.
Nothing has been reported as stolen, but the local people are convinced that there is a party of Dyaks lurking in the neighbourhood, in the hope of cutting off anyone who is out alone and taking his or her head. Penghulu Suel has been instructed to take charge of the reservists, and to calm down any excitement or alarm that may arise, until steps can be taken to catch the offenders.
I was in Simanggang from the 24th to 28th instant.
On the 19th instant, Dr. G. ter Brugger, Geologist of the Dutch Government, arrived in Engkilili from Marup, where he had been for several days. Dr. Brugger spent the night here and returned up river the following day, via Lubok Antu. Dr. Brugger informs me that his work in the Geologist Survey of these parts is nearly completed, and that he will not be visiting Sarawak Territory again.
Abang Omar, Native Officer, came down from Lubok Antu on the 17th instant, with Antas, who together with Bangkang (f.) had escaped from custody at Song. Bangkang is reported to be on the point of giving birth, and was unable to travel. Antas was sent down to Simanggang from here.
There are various rumours that affairs in the Ulu Ai and Engkari are not as they should be, and the Native Officer at Lubok Antu reports that no Dyaks whatsoever from the districts of Penghulus Kana and Ramba have been down to Lubok Antu for over a month. This is distinctly abnormal, and an early visit up river is important and will be undertaken in a day or so.
Mr. B. Summers, Divisional Land Officer, accompanied me on my return from Simanggang on the 28th instant, and was still here at the end of the month.
Dyaks report that the Trigonometrical Station, erected by the Survey Department on the top of Tiang Laju, has been badly damaged by lightning.
I visited the gold workings at Marup on the 20th instant. A considerable amount of blasting is taking place there, in the solid rock, for the purpose of cutting a deep channel down the entire length of the valley in question, and a large sum of money has already been expended. It is not anticipated that any gold will be won for some months, until this work has been completed.
The Government Dresser from Simanggang came up on the 28th instant and was still here at the end of the month. A number of N.A.B. injections and vaccinations were performed.
Rainfall. -Rain fell on fourteen days when a total of 17.40 inches was recorded.

SARIBAS DISTRICT.
The District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, reports: -	
The following cases were heard during the month: -	
Tahir one year for theft, section 380 I.P.C., and Reduan eighteen months for lurking housebreaking by night section 456 I.P.C. There were various other small cases in both Civil and Criminal Courts. The inquiry re the murder of Chang Koi was adjourned for further investigation.
The prison gang has been employed on the usual routine work during the month. Buan, an escaped prisoner from Simanggang, caused a certain amount of alarm during the month in the Betong area. Various thefts by this man were reported and finally on 9th instant he was shot in the thigh, while evading capture at Bangai, by a Dyak named Skalai.
I paid a visit to Kampongs Bungin and Tanjong Assam for one night in connection with the murder of Chang Koi, Abang Bunsu, accompanied by Penghulu Jabieng, paid a visit to the Ulu Skrang and Ulu Spak in connection with the recent disturbances there. Abang Bunsu and Penghulu Jabieng later left for the Ulu Spak and Ulu Layar respectively, accompanied by a few reservists, in order to form patrols there.
The recent disturbances in the Skrang have now spread to this district, and considerable uneasiness is being caused by stone throwing. It is said that two attacks on local Dyaks have been made in broad daylight by these marauders, but so far no casualties have occurred, although two of the marauders are reported to have been wounded. A band of eighteen upriver Dyaks have been reported to have been seen at Sungei Langit, and they are said to have stated that they were some of Penghulu Kana’s men from the Engkari. Many houses in the district are being disturbed at night by stone throwing, and during the month 15 reservists were called in from Simanggang to form patrols there being at the moment 5 in the Ulu Layar, 5 in the Ulu Spak and 5 in the Betlong area.
The engine for the m.l. Rita was sent down to Kuching for repairs.
Seven motor vessels entered and cleared during the month.
Trade: -

KALAKA DISTRICT.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. L. K. Morse, reports: -The only case of interest before the Court was State vs. Ah Ow, Order No. 0-4 (Opium) 1931, Part VII, section 30 (i), disposing of ebandu, which was referred to the Resident’s Court, Simanggang.
It was found impossible to continue regular bazaar guards owing to the shortage of men. Ex-Pte. Gudap, S. R., joined the Constabulary in place of ex-P.C. Akup dismissed.
The prisoners were engaged on the usual upkeep work, and in addition a start was made on a new road to No. 1 Police Barracks.
The conduct of the prisoners under Mandor Saun is remarkably good.
Mr. T. A. Heid, of the Public Works Department, Kuching, visited Kabong during the month and inspected the new school and the waterworks. I have not yet received his report.
Clerk Impenit arrived from Kuching on the 25th and took over the station, but, as he is a shorthand typist with no knowledge of accounts, affairs are little better.
Wee Chong Kui was again sent to Kabong at the end of the month to close the accounts and instruct Impenit in his duties.
J. Julia was transferred to Lubok Antu during the month, and this, together with Kabong affairs, has thrown much more work on the Chief Clerk than he can well manage. James Jubin, the probationer clerk, has done remarkably good work under the circumstances, but nevertheless the Chief Clerk is very much over-worked.
I visited Kabong from the 16th to the 19th. A dispute between the Malays and Chinese regarding the weighing of ikan paya was amicably settled.
The pengaih fishing is fair and the people are now preparing for the jungkat.
The harvest at Kabong is quite good, while many people have planted a second crop.
A calf was found on the sands at Kabong shot dead. L.C. Omar carried out efficient investigations, and traced the culprit. The case has not yet been heard.
The Rev. W. Linton was in the district for some ten days during the month. Mr. O’Hara, Assistant Forest Officer, also visited the district.
Pengarah Nyalu and Penghulu Undom were down during the month; they report all quiet up river, and say that the harvest is fair, but that the people are very poor as regards actual cash.
The Malay harvest at Saratok does not, appear to have been good.
Abang Latip, Native Officer, Roban, visited the Ulus Seblak and Roban during the month. He reports that although the harvest was poor, the people have sufficient.
The Malays at Sessang are reported to have had a very good harvest.

LAND OFFICE.
The Divisional Land Officer, Mr. B, Summers, reports: -
Abang Omar, Assistant Land Inspector, was away until the 29th instant examining the three parcels of Government Padi Land at Tanjong Apit, Tajor and Muara Entulang; each individual small portion farmed had to be examined. This was very necessary, and will prevent certain individuals from obtaining now land without permission in the future.
Throughout the department all inspectors with the exception of two have had their annual leave.
C. Khee Chin, Land Clerk, proceeded to Engkilili on the 5th instant, returning on the 10th. During his visit as much outstanding work as possible was brought up to date, especially that of making up Occupation Tickets ready for issue.
On the 11th instant Latiff proceeded to certain gardens in the locality requiring boundary alterations, returning to office on the 16th.
On the evening of the 17th I accompanied Mr. Goodall as far as Lingga; the following day was spent in checking up all registers, etc., and the general improvement in Land Office routine since the present clerk was transferred there is very noticeable.
On the night of the 18th I proceeded to Kuching in the Chinese motor Sin Kim Suah, returning on the 24th with the Resident.
Engkilili. -On Monday the 28th I proceeded to Engkilili, and was still there at the end of the month.
All registers. etc., were checked up to date together with Inspection books; it was noted that very little rent had been paid up to date, the majority having been paid by those who had taken out new titles, or mortgaged their gardens.
About 146 Occupation Tickets are ready for issue, but much difficulty is experienced in issuing them owing to the planters at present being very short of cash.
Assessment and Quit Rent. -February Cash Receipts shewed a marked increase compared with January, but it is expected that March will shew a decrease owing to the padi harvest.
All defaulters will be called in, as soon as the harvest is over.

Third Division News.
March, 1932.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports for March, 1932, by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident: -
Court. -Many cases came before the Court, chiefly those concerning the Asun affair. Others for special mention are: -Hu Seng Wang vs. Teo Soon Seng, Arrack Farmer, and an appeal by defendant Hu Seng Wang against his conviction by the District Court, Sibu, which was dismissed.
Yung Ngat vs. Chan Leng, section 379 I.P.C. An appeal by defendant Yung Ngat against his conviction by the Magistrate’s Courts, Binatang, which was allowed and the sentence quashed.
His Highness the Rajah vs. Wong Hang Hang, Toh Yeng Yeng and Ting Suk Chai (f.), Hu Leng King and Wong Ngok Eng (f.) murder under section 302 I.P.C. This case was not settled at the end of the month and further inquiries are being made.
General. -I returned on the 5th instant from the expedition against Asun, accompanied by Secretary for Native Affairs, Mr. P. M. Adams, mid District Officer, Kuching, Mr. Le Sueur (a full report has been sent under separate cover). Travelling District Officer Mr. Cutfield remained in the Kanowit and Entabai streams, returning on 17th with all the brothers of Asun and their families.
I proceeded to Kuching by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna for a consultation regarding Dyaks with Their Highnesses the Rajah and Tuan Muda, the Resident, First Division, Mr. Swayne, Resident, Second Division, Mr. Bruce, and the Secretary for Native Affairs, Mr. P. M. Adams. I returned again on the 17th instant.
Travelling District Officer Mr. Cutfield visited the Julau from the 17th instant, returning again on the 29th instant.
I left for Kuching on the 24th instant to attend the races and was still away at the end of the month.

April, 1932.
Court. -There were four criminal cases before the Court during the month and all resulted in convictions. The only case worthy of mention was His Highness the Rajah vs. Wong Hang Hang, Foochow, for the murder of his step-daughter, Pang Lang Tieh, aged nine years, under section 302 of the Indian Penal Code. After a lengthy hearing the accused was found guilty under sections 176 and 193 and sentenced to one year’s imprisonment, and his wife. Ting Suk Chai was subsequently charged and found guilty under section 325. She was sentenced to four years’ imprisonment and two others concerned were also convicted.
An appeal by M’bi and Rabieng, Dyaks, against the decision of the District Court, Binatang, in which they were sentenced to imprisonment under, section 394 I.P.C., was heard and resulted in the decision being upheld in so far as Rabieng was concerned and M’bi was acquitted.
General. — Tuai Rumah Gani who left with Maleng, brother of Asun, at the end of last month to try and meet Asun and bring him in returned on the 8th instant. He had failed to locate Asun, but there was no doubt that he was still in the vicinity of Kakup as fresh signs had been found, and it would appear that he was roaming between the Kakup Atoi streams and Ulu Skrang. Nyalin and Mareng were brought in.
On the 8th instant Mr. F. A Moore took over the duties of Magistrate’s Court, Constabulary and Prisons, from Mr. Pegler, who proceeded to Matu on the 15th instant.
Two Americans. Messrs. Halliburton and Stephens, flying round the world, arrived on the 7th instant, leaving for Brunei via Mukah on the 16th instant.
A meeting of shophouse owners of Government built shops was held on the 11th instant to discuss the reduction of rent, and it was decided that arrangements should be made first between the owner and tenant, the result to be reported to Government for approval.
On the 19th instant Mr. Goodall of the Agricultural Department arrived and inspected land at Paloh and Igan for paddi planting by Chinese. He returned to Simanggang via Kuching on the 28th instant.
A Chinese Secret Society was found, and documents concerning same, and names of the committee, obtained; many arrests were made. The Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Mr. Le Gros Clark, arrived on the 26th instant in conjunction with this case and was still here at the end of the month.
Penghulu Umpor arrived from Julau and reported all quiet, but asked that Penghulu Dalam might proceed to his district and give him help in explaining the situation, and also order all those in the tributaries of the Julau, true right, to move down to the month of these streams. Penghulu Dalam left on the 28th instant.

SIBU.
March, 1932.
The District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports: -
Court. -There were 12 criminal cases in the District Court and 13 in the Magistrate’s Court. In the Civil Courts 6 District Court cases and 59 Magistrate’s Court cases were dealt with. Fines and fees amounted to $600.18. Claims in the District and Magistrate’s Courts amounted to $2,222.32.
General. -Gokal Singh, a Sikh and ex-Sergeant of Police, was murdered at Kanowit and his head taken and several wounds inflicted. An inquiry was held but up to the present no arrests have been made.
The Principal Medical Officer, Dr. Marjoribanks, paid a visit to the Station early in the month.
Mr. Crossley was transferred from Matu to Sarikei, where he relieved Mr. Gilbert who was transferred to Lawas.
Mr. Hughes arrived from Oya for medical treatment and during his convalescence was employed in the District Office.
The body of a Foochow child was exhumed, with the result that three men and two women were committed for trial for murder.
On 14th instant two Foochows were drowned.
Mr. Kennedy was transferred to Kuching, his place in the Shipping and Customs being taken by Mr. Lowry.
Messrs. Pegler and Mansel proceeded to Kuching to sit for the examinations, but returned before the end of the month.
The Resident, Mr. and Mrs. Spurway, Mr. Cutfield, and Mr. Strong proceeded to Kuching to attend race week and were all away at the end of the month.
The Travelling District Officer Mr. H. E. Cutfield sent down 65 Dyak prisoners including men, women and children, who had been with Asun, and later followed himself, accompanied by Manang Bays and his family.
The Travelling District Officer then proceeded to Julau and Sugai via Sarikei and returned again on Easter Monday with a further 13 Dyak prisoners on various charges.
Friday 25th, Saturday 26th. and Monday 28th, being the Easter Holidays, the offices were closed.

April, 1932.
Court. -Litigation was unusually light during the month. There were eleven criminal cases in the District Court and twenty-two in the Magistrate’s Court.
In the Civil Courts six District Court cases and thirty-eight Magistrate’s Court cases were dealt with. Fines and fees amounted to $714.53. Claims in the District and Magistrate’s Courts amounted to $1,861.50.
General. -The Resident, accompanied by Mrs. Adams, the District Officer and Mr. Strong, returned from Kuching by m.s. Sri Mukah on the 6th instant.
By the same trip Mr. F. A. Moore also arrived, having been transferred for duty in Sibu where he takes the place of Mr. Pegler who was transferred to Matu.
On the 7th Messrs. Halliburton and Stephens arrived in their aeroplane The Flying Carpet from Kuching on their world tour. During their stay they visited some Dyak houses in the Igan and also went for a short visit above Kapit. On their return from Kapit they very kindly consented to take two Penghulus for a flight one at a time. Penghulu Temonggong Koh and Penghulu Dalam were the two selected. This is believed to be the first record of a Dyak having flown in an aeroplane, and their description of their flight and sensations were somewhat vivid. Messrs. Halliburton and, Stephens left on Sunday 17th instant for Brunei via Mukah where they halted to take fuel.
Monday 18th. Hari Raya Haji, was observed as a holiday and the offices were closed.
On 12th Father Halder of the R.C. Mission returned from furlough and everyone was pleased to see him back looking so fit.
On the same boat were also Mr. and Mrs. Spurway and Mr. Daly on their return from Kuching; also Messrs. Cobbodd of the Borneo Co., Ltd., and Grifford of the British American Tobacco Company. Other visitors to the station were Mr. Goodall and Mr. Le Gros Clark, Secretary for Chinese Affairs.
Information of the existence of a Chinese Secret Society was received, and by the immediate raid of a house at Bawan, near Kanowit, the insignia and books of the society were obtained in which the names of sixty-one officers of the society were mentioned. Thirty arrests were made and Mr. Le Gros Clark, Secretary for Chinese Affairs, arrived to investigate the matter. The case was still in progress at the end of the month,
A short visit was paid to Kanowit.
Twenty more Dyaks were recruited and sent to Johore as coolies with the Survey Department.

MUKAH AND OYA.
February, 1932.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. E. M. Woodward, reports: -
General. -From the 6th to the 9th instants the Chinese New Year and Hari Raya public holidays were observed, and the Government Offices were closed on those days. A salute of six guns was fired at 8 a.m. on Chinese New Year’s day on the 6th instant, and on Hari Raya on the 9th instant, and the customary complimentary visits were paid and returned on those days.
The anniversary of the birthday of Her Highness the Ranee on the 24th instant was observed as a public holiday and the Government Offices were closed on that day.
The Very Reverend Father Anthony Mulder, Rector, Roman Catholic Mission, Mukah, returned from Kuching on the 15th instant, and visitors to the station during the month were Messrs. Summer, Hunter and Johnson of the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited. Mr. Summer proceeded to Miri by s.s. Angas on the 9th instant on home furlough.
The Foochows who were employed on clearing the remainder of the kuala padang completed their contract during the month.
On the morning of the 14th instant the annual Mohammedan and liko Melanau kaul ceremony of “Blessing the Sea” for a prosperous fishing season was held at Kuala Mukah. A large number of Mohammedans and likos attended the ceremony with decorated boats, and after a feast on the seashore returned up river. The liko Melanau custom of three days’ respite from sea fishing after the ceremony was not, however, observed, and it is possible that the superstitious consider that this breach of custom was the cause of poor catches of fish and of one or two barongs capsizing while fishing out at sea on the days following the ceremony.
On the 23rd instant three Sulus called in at Mukah from Bintulu in a small outrigger, and stated that they had been blown down the coast by adverse winds on their return to Sulu after fishing at Pelawan, and that they intended to return to Sulu via Singapore, leaving Mukah on the 25th instant. They were given one week’s provisions and medical treatment, but as they were unable to clear owing to rough seas were still here at the end of the month.
In view of that fact that Sulus, on ostensible fishing but probably piratical expeditions, frequently call in at Sarawak ports to request assistance from Government in the matter of provisions, etc., I see no reason why international courtesy in the matter of free practical assistance should be extended to these people on every occasion they visit this country, and it is therefore proposed to debit the Government of the Philippines, through the Secretarial for Native Affairs. with the cost of the provisions and medical treatment supplied to the three Sulus concerned.
Constabulary. -In January twelve men out of thirty-two applicants were selected for service in the Mukah contingent. Of these twelve seven assumed duty on the 1st January and five on the 1st February. The Mukah Force now consists of one corporal, one 2nd grade constable, one 3rd grade constable, and fourteen ordinary constables, making a total of seventeen men in all, which is one man below approved establishment.
In February proper training was started and the force as a whole and the duties of the force were reorganized.
The two applicants for service in the Balingian contingent were interviewed during February and engaged as from the 1st January. The force stationed at Balingian now consists of one 2nd grade constable, and two ordinary constables.
Prisons. -During the month the daily number of prisoners averaged 28.28. They were employed on the general upkeep of the station and on transport work.
P.W.D. -During the month a subordinate officer of the Public Works Department, Siou, took a line of levels from the Waterworks Pumping Station to the 1st Water Tank in connection with the instillation of the new crude oil pumping engine with which it is proposed to replace the present engine this year.
Forests. -A map shewing the locality of all jelutong roads in the Mukah and Balingian districts is being made. Each road will be properly numbered on the map and on the ground, and when completed this procedure will greatly assist in keeping a check on, and in apportioning road’s amongst, jelutong tappers in the district. It would also assist in tracing the whereabouts of kampar Dyaks who come here in large numbers every year to work jelutong. Credit is due to the Mukah Forest Clerk, Chang Ah Siew, for initiating this scheme.
Education. -In January advantage was taken of the Bulan Puasa holiday to commence the whitewashing of the inside walls, and the cleaning of the outside walls of the Government Vernacular School, which were in a dirty state and which had not been whitewashed and cleaned since the school was built about four years ago. The work was completed at the beginning of February, and on the 15th February the school re-opened after the Bulan Puasa holidays.
Balingian. -Mangah bin Merawang was sentenced to one month’s imprisonment in default of the payment of a fine of $15.
Rainfall. -Mukah rainfall figures for the month were as follows: -
Trade. -Mukah trade returns for the month as compared to those for the corresponding month last year are as follows: -
The principal exports are: -

March, 1932.
General. -The Easter Holidays from the 25th to the 28th instants were observed, and the Government Offices were closed on those days.
Visitors to the station during the month included the Assistant District Officer, Oya and Dalat. Mr. N. E, Hughes, and the Rev. Father Williams from Sandakan. B.N.B., who paid a visit to the Roman Catholic Mission, Mukah
During the month Chai Say Lah assumed the duties of Stores Clerk. Mukah, vice Wee Ah Loo who resigned from Government Service on 31st December, 1931, and clerk Jack Douglas proceeded on annual and grading leave.
Court. -A large number of non-payments of rubber garden quit rent cases came up for hearing. A provisional order for the auction of the rubber gardens concerned has been made in the majority of cases, but in the meantime the matter is still sub judice pending an examination into the capability of defaulters to pay.
Ismail bin Drahman and Nait adek Tok were sentenced to three months’ and four and half months’ imprisonment respectively, both in default of payment of Native Court fines.
Travelling. -During the month Native Officer Abang Mustapha visited the Ulu Mukah and settled most outstanding matters. He confirms previous reports that the Dyak padi harvest has commenced, that the hill padi crops are of good quality and fair quantity, but that the padi planted on low-lying land was completely destroyed by the floods in January.
In the absence of the Assistant District Officer, Oya and Dalat, Mr. N. E. Hughes, on sick leave and duty in Siou, I visited Oya and Dalat, leaving here on the 25th instant, accompanied by the Rev. Father Luppes of the Roman Catholic Mission, Mukah, and was still away at the end of the month. Various small matters were dealt with but nothing of importance was brought up. Mr. Hughes unexpectedly returned to Dalat on the 31st instant.
Prison. -On the 29th instant three Dyaks prisoners, by name Lidi, who was on remand for theft, Dilang and Langkau, both of whom were serving sentences for culpable homicide, escaped from Mukah soon after I left for Oya on that day. Armed patrols, to warn everyone and to effect their arrest, were immediately despatched to the Ulus Oya, Mukah and Balingian. A reward of $20 each has been offered for their recapture, and all stations in the Division except Matu and Daro were advised, but they were still at large at the end of the month. It is possible that they may attempt to join the rebel Asun in the Ulu Kanowit district.
During the month the daily number of prisoners averaged 24.4. They were employed on the general upkeep of the station and on transport work.
Land. -The Officer-in-Charge of Lands, Third Division, Mr. T. E. Parker, visited the station during the month and has submitted a separate report on his visit regarding land affairs in the district.
From this report it would appear that certain matters of land routine have not been carried out satisfactorily, and that the land affairs of the district as a whole require further investigation and re-consideration, especially in the light of the new Land Order and new Land Regulations which have been brought into force recently.
Surveys. -The Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Third Division, Mr. J. L Noakes, arrived from Sibu on the 9th instant for duty, bringing a party of draught-men, surveyors, coolies and a considerable quantity of survey gear. Survey work on gardens was begun in the vicinity of the Sungei Tellian and bazaar, two land inspectors being detailed off to work in advance of the surveyors preparing rentises. Mr. Noakes left for Kuching on the 13th instant in order to sit for the Junior Government Examination and was still away at the end of the month.
Shipping. -On the 6th instant m.l. Leonora returned from Kuching in tow of m.s. Kim Chin Soon after undergoing annual docking in Kuching.
Balingian. -I visited this station on the 8th instant, accompanied by the Officer-in-Charge of Lands, Third Division, Mr. T. E. Parker, returning to Mukah the following day. The Land Inspector’s work was found to be unsatisfactory and he was transferred to Mukah as it was considered unnecessary to have a Land Inspector stationed in the Balingian district.
Rainfall. -Mukah rainfall figures for the month were as follows: -
Trade. -Mukah trade returns for the month as compared to those for the corresponding month last year are as follows: -

April, 1932.
General. -I returned from Oya on the 2nd instant.
During the month Dr. Braendlin, Chief Geologist, Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., paid a visit to the Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., Camp in the Ulu Penipah.
Visitors to the station during the month included the Assistant District Officer, Oya and Dalat. Mr. N. E. Hughes, and the Revd. Father Epping from Dalat. Mr. Hughes came over from, and returned to, Oya in the Government temoi with outboard motor, which gave no trouble on the journey.
The Hari Raya Haji holiday was observed on the 18th instant, on which day the Government offices were closed.
On the 17th instant Messrs. R. Halliburton and M. Stephens called in here from Sibu at 11.15 a.m. by the seaplane Frying Carpet on then round the world tour. After refuelling they left direct for Brunei at 12.3 p.m. the same day.
With a view to increasing the Government stock of billian while the price of billion is cheap, a timber raft of 90 billian posts of varying sizes was purchased for $39.55 from some Dyaks on the 30th instant. It is proposed to take advantage of the present low price of billian to augment the stock by arranging contracts for the supply of suitable-sized billian posts and planks.
Court. -Ali bin Malai and Samat bin Hok were sentenced to two months’ and two and half months’ in prisonment respectively in default of payment of Native Court fines, etc.
A Native Court case in which the defendant, Likit bin Uban, was dissatisfied with his conviction by, and with the order of, the Native Court under Malay Undang Undang Fasals Nos. 6, 14 and 15, was reheard by the District Court, which Court upheld the decision of the Native Court. The defendant has given notice of appeal to the Resident’s Court.
Travelling. -On the 26th and 27th instants, accompanied by the Assistant Superintendent of Surveys Third Division, Mr. J. L. Noakes, Datu Awang Udin and Assistant Land Inspector Austin Druce, I visited Kampongs Tutus Ulu, Jebungan, Tegah, Sisok, Teh, Tabo, and Siteng. The regulations relating to the survey of gardens and those governing sago lands were explained to the Tua Kampong, who were informed of the approximate date of survey of gardens in their respective districts, and were instructed to try to settle all land disputes, and to see that owners declare their gardens and clear their boundaries before the survey in their districts commences. It was explained that the survey of gardens now being carried out is to the ultimate advantage of owners, and that it would be foolish not to declare their gardens now for fear of being charged quit rent on sago lands at a future date, if and when the price of sago attains a reasonable level, since, it was pointed out, all gardens which have had the opportunity of being surveyed and which, on completion of the survey, are found to be still unsurveyed, will ipso facto revert to the Government who can realienate them, and who will not consider any disputes arising out of such un-surveyed gardens, whilst owners of surveyed gardens, will receive proper titles or possibly grants for their land.
The river was ascended as far as Pedada, and the trip as a whole was most informative, since a good deal was learnt about the location of the various kampongs, and shout the vast quantity of gardens, especially sago, up river. It was ascertained that sago gardens occur in large quantities as far as Sau Bulus, and that from Sau Bulus to Pedada there are quite a number of rubber gardens.
The Marriage and Divorce Receipt books in the possession of Tua Kampong were checked where possible, and one or two apparently clerical errors, which will be investigated, were found.
Prisons. -Prisoners were employed on the general upkeep of the station and on basket work, and their daily number averaged 21.4.
Surveys. -The Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Third Division, Mr. J. L. Noakes, returned from Kuching on the 3rd instant and visited Oya for one night on the 23rd instant.
The survey of gardens situated behind the bazaar and in the vicinity of the Tellian and Misan roads was continued. Approximately 400 gardens had been surveyed in this district by the end of the month. As usual trouble in being experienced in getting owners to clear and point out the boundaries of their gardens to the surveyors, whose work is thus greatly hampered and delayed. It is feared that it will be necessary to make an example of one or two of these offenders, as also of those owners of gardens who interfere with survey marks, by imposing heavy fines or terms of imprisonment on conviction, before the work of the surveyors can be expedited.
During the month Mr. Noakes took observations at Mukah for latitude and longitude and the computations are now being worked out.
Shipping. -During the month the deep water channel on Mukah bar was marked out with new channel marks, the top marks of which shew a red disc on a white ground and are therefore easily visible and recognizable. The channel from seaward now runs approximately in a south-easterly direction towards the mouth of the river, is about 400 yards in length by 100 yards in breadth, and has approximately 3 3/4 feet of water at low tide and 8 1/2 feet of water at high tide.
Rainfall. -Mukah rainfall figures for the mouth were as follows: -
Trade. -The price of raw sago had dropped to 20 cents per pasa by the end of the month, which is making matters worse for all concerned.
Mukah trade returns for the month as compared to those for the corresponding month last year are as follows: -
The principal exports included: -

OYA AND DALAT.
March, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports: -
Court. -No cases call for mention.
Police. -Two recruits were engaged on probation to take the place of those discharged last month. On the 8th cash and jewellery worth $300 was stolen from a shop in the Oya bazaar. On the following day some of the jewellery was recovered from the bottom of a well, but the cash is still missing. A certain Chinese is suspected of having committed the robbery, and is being watched.
Prisons. -Prisoners were employed on the roads and the general upkeep of the station. Discipline was good.
Dyaks. -Wan Hussein, Native Officer, reported to me at Sibu that the Dyaks in the Ulu Oya were frightened of a Kaya anak as a result of the recent disturbances, and that a general state of uncertainty prevailed. This Officer was despatched overland from Kanowit with two Oya police in order to reassure the Dyaks in the Ulu, and give them a true version of the Asun affair. He was instructed to tell the Penghulus that anyone creating a scare or deliberately starting false rumours would be fined. On the 31st P.C. Maja left for upriver in an attempt to arrest the three Dyak prisoners who escaped from Mukah jail on the previous day. It is hoped that Wan Hussein will be able to intercept them at Nanga Paku.
General. -Mr. T. E. Parker, of the Sibu Land Office, proceeded to Mukah on the 5th.
On March 8th I succumbed to an attack of malaria, and proceeded to Sibu for treatment on 12th. I was still away at the end of the month.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall recorded for the month was 16.41.
Shipping. -One motor schooner entered, and three motor schooners and one schooner cleared.
Trade. -131 koyans of raw sago and 20 piculs of raw jelutong were shipped to Kuching.

April, 1932.
General. -I returned from Sibu on 1st April.
The fishing season, though it started late, has opened propitiously. large catches of duai, jamah and other fish having been obtained.
Court. -Court work was exceptionally light, no cases calling for mention.
Prisons. -Prisoners were employed on the roads and the general upkeep of the station. Discipline was good.
P.W.D. -Oya wharf, which had been badly damaged by the floods at Christmas, was taken down and re-erected.
Dyaks. -On April 6th Wan Hussein, Native Officer, and a police patrol returned from the Ulu Oya, having explained to all the Penghulus the true situation regarding the Asun trouble, and having warned them about the escaped prisoners.
He reported that the Dyaks were late with their harvest this year and that no door or gun tax could be expected much before the end of May.
Lands. -There was a lot of work for probate during the month, and the connection survey suffered accordingly.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall recorded for the month was 9.51.
Trade. -353 koyans of raw sago and 60 piculs of raw jelutong were shipped to Kuching and Binatang.

KAPIT.
March, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hudden, reports: -
Court. -There were two criminal charges, one resulting in a sentence of two months, a case of voluntarily causing hurt, section 323 I.P.C.; the other, in Song, negligent conduct with respect to fire, section 285, was dismissed.
Fines reported during the month totalled $213.72.
Civil claims amounted to $33.
Song. -The station was visited on the 10th and 11th.
The Court Writer, Lu Chi Choon, was to Sarikei, and was relieved on the 14th by Joseph Chin Siong from Kapit.
A deputation of Kheh pepper planters complained of the prices and interest imposed by the Song towkays, but, on investigation, everything was settled amicably.
The Malaya objected, rather late in the day, to the unsuitability of certain lots on the new kampong area. The matter has been reported and the Divisional Land Officer intends to pay a visit in the near future.
Dairy Farm. -The herd numbered thirty-eight at the end of the month. One cow died of old age, a cow calf died of colic, and a bull calf was born.
Native Affairs. -Penghulus Aran, Jugah and Manok Manchal were down during the month.
Whilst there appears to have been a good crop in most districts, nearly everyone reports very considerable damage from the ravages of wild animals, due to the fact that fruit this year is practically non-existent. In some cases whole farms have been completely ruined.
I had intended visiting Belaga during the month but have been unable to do so, owing to the continual high water.
Native Officer Abang Abu Seman returned from the Mujong on the 9th and reports that, as far as he can ascertain, should Government decide not to replace the late Penghulu Semada, everyone would be perfectly agreeable were Penghulu Ugak given control of the Mujong and all its tributaries.
General. -Tiong Khai Kuang, a prominent Foochow and the local doctor, absconded on the 8th, leaving his family destitute, and considerable debts.
A half-wit Chinese arrived in the bazaar, starving, on the 6th, having paddled himself all the way from Kanowit in a rotten leaky old boat-the average native would think twice about using it for the purpose of crossing a stream. He had intended proceeding on his way to Belaga (and thence to America per s.s. Angby), but was detained, fed, and sent down to Sibu.
The Kapit boats used in the Kanowit expedition arrived back on the 13th.
Visitors to the station during the month were Father W. J. Van Odijk, the Rev. J. M. Hoover and Dr. A. D Hutchison.
Rainfall. - Rainfall for the month was 21.37 inches.

April, 1932.
Court. -There was one criminal charge, causing death by a rash and negligent act, section 304A, I.P.C., resulting in a sentence of one year’s imprisonment and peti nyawa $100. Civil claims amounted to $17.49.
Constabulary. -Corporal Nomeng was transferred to Sibu and was replaced by Corporal Jani.
Dairy Farm. -The herd numbered 36 at the end of the month. Two bull calves were sold.
Arrangements have been made by the Director of Agriculture to ship all milkers and potential milkers to Kuching by s.l. L’Aubuine early next month, leaving only seven cow calves to start a new strain with a pure bred pedigree Scindhi bull calf.
Native Affairs. -Penghulu Temonggong Koh and Penghulus Ugak, Atan, Sirai, Briak, Matu and Manok Manchal were down during the month. The Temonggong recently in Sibu had the distinction of being the first Dyak in this country to be given a flight in an aeroplane.
The three Katibas Penghulus intimated that they desired to tender their resignations as they objected to the annual visit of the Penghulu Temonggong. This is understandable since it was the Temonggong who reported certain irregularities concerning payment of fines. They were told, however, that their resignations could not be accepted at present, and that they must wait until after their case had been heard by the Resident.
Antas returned to Kapit on the 1st. A meeting of Penghulu was held to discuss his case in accordance with the request of the Resident, Second Division, since it would certainly be one of the points raised in the approaching aum at Simanggang. One or two Ulu Ai Penghulu. apparently, contend that the stigma pertaining to the incest of father-in-law with daughter-in-law can be abolished and that Antas is free to marry Bangkang. Those present at the discussion here ridiculed the idea and very emphatically declared that they could never marry in this district. If they could do so in the Ulu Ai, well and good, Antas had better move there.
Abang Abu Seman, Native Officer. visited the Menuan and Ibau in connection with reports of the presence there of the three escaped Mukah prisoners.
Nearly all the crops in this district have now been harvested with very satisfactory results in most cases. A good many have been ruined by deer and pig and the owners may be short towards the end of the year, but the general result is excellent. In some cases up river they have sufficient for three years.
General. -The two Americans, Messrs. Richard Halliburton and Moye Stephens, who are travelling round the world in an aeroplane called the Flying Carpet, paid a visit of four days to this district. They spent two nights in houses in the Balleh and Mirirai, and I accompanied them back to Sibu on the 21st.
On the 22nd an attempt was made to set fire to a shop in the bazaar, with kerosene and matches. Fortunately one of the inhabitants heard a noise and was able to put out the flames before any damage was done. The perpetrator escaped without being recognised and inquiries have, elicited no further information.
I spent two nights in the Mujong towards the end of the month in connection with the death of a Dyak, killed by a hunting spear. Whilst accidental in every way, the spear was thrown before dark and deceased was standing in a much frequented pathway lending from a large temporary farming hut to the various farms.
On the 29th Penghulu Ansi arrived with three Foochow hawkers whom he found in the rapids just above Lirong Wan. Their boat had capsized and their two companions were missing, presumed drowned.
Visitors to the station, other than those already mentioned, were Father W. J. Van Odyk, Messrs. G. F. J. Pegler and G. H. Daly.
Rainfall. -The Rainfall for the month was 13.94 inches, and that for Belaga for the month of March was 14.58 inches.

SARIKEI, BINATANG AND REJANG.
March, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. F. L. G. Crossley, reports: -
General. -I arrived in Sarikei on the 16th, and took over from Mr. Gilbert on the same day. Mr. Gilbert left for Kuching on transfer on the 19th.
Mr. H. E. Cutfield visited Sarikei on the 21st, proceeding to the ulu with a party of Rangers in connection with the Asun trouble.
The offices were, closed on the 25th, 26th and 28th for the Easter holidays.
Court. -Mbi and Rabieng, Dyaks, were sentenced to one year R.I. each under section 394.
Travelling. -I visited Binatang from the 21st to the 23rd Mr. Gilbert visited Rejang on the 7th.
P.W.D. -Prison labour on the Peninjau road was maintained. Mr. Whiteside visited Sarikei from the 17th to the 21st to set out port of the new bazaar under the town-planning scheme.
Work will commence on the first block of five shops as soon as the purchase price of the lots has been sanctioned.
The building of a brick and cement tank for the jail was commenced.
It has been decided to stop upkeep work on the Binatang road, as the expense is not justified under present conditions.
Trade and Customs. -There is still a lot of pepper held up in the bazaar, but returns show a slight improvement.
Sarikei returns are given below: -

April, 1932.
Courts. -Chan San, Cantonese, was sentenced to fifteen months’ R.I. for theft of growing pepper. No other case calls for mention.
Travelling. -Rejang and Selalang were visited from the 7th to 11th. Binatang was visited four times during the month. I was in Matu from the 15th to the 18th, handing over the district to Mr. Pegler.
Coroner’s Court. -An inquest was held on the 20th at Binatang on the body of an unknown adult male, found at Stubah. The body was so decomposed that even nationality could not be determined. A verdict of found drowned was returned.
Public Works Department. -The prisoners were temporarily withdrawn from the Peninjau road, and were employed on upkeep of grounds, repairs to local roads, erection of the gaol fencing, and demolition of the old police barracks. The new Constabulary barracks were completed, the men moving into their new quarters on the 21st.
The contractor commenced work at the end of the month on the erection of a new godown on Sarikei wharf. The large water-tank for the gaol was completed. Gravelling and cambering of the Binatang road, as far as made up, was completed during the month, under an old contract.
Chinese. -An application from the Sarikei Foochows for Government work to relieve the distress among rubber-tappers, was received and forwarded to the Resident, Third Division. It is hoped that employment will be found in extension of the Repok, Peninjau and Binatang roads. The situation in Binatang would appear to be easier, most of the Chinese having their own paddi fields and not relying entirely on rubber. The Cantonese, being mostly pepper-planters, are not in any serious difficulties
Native Affairs. -Large number of Dyaks in the Ulu Binatang wish to move to Bintulu on account of the steady encroachment of Chinese gardens. The matter is being negotiated through the Resident, Third Division.
Trade and Customs. -Sarikei trade was very poor indeed, as the appended returns will show: -
Binatang figures were better: -
General. -Visitors for the month included Messrs. Halliburton and Stephens, the American aviators, who spent a night at Binatang; Messrs. Cobbold, Gifford and Dr. Hutchison.
The Island Trading Company, Selalang, reopened their Cutch Factory on the 26th April.

MATU AND DARO.
April, 1932.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. G. F. J. Pegler, reports: -
General. -Leaving Sibu on the 15th instant I proceeded to Sarikei, where my predecessor, Mr. F. L. G. Crossley, came on board and accompanied me to Daro, which station I took over on the same day. We left Daro that evening, arriving in Matu at a late hour. The following day I took charge of the district.
The Officer-in-Charge of Land Office. Sibu, Mr. T. E. Parker, visited the district from the 15th to the 20th. Land inspector Martin Igoh was appointed to Matu on the 15th, and since his arrival has been dealing with a great deal of outstanding work, and has now commenced his survey.
On the 20th the Divisional Forest Officer. Mr. B. J. C. Spurway, arrived at Matu and checked the Forestry books. While at Matu he took the opportunity of walking along the Bruan rentis with a view to reporting on the possibilities of virgin jelutong reservation. Apparently there were only a few old trees and these had been completely tapped out. On the 24th he visited the Ulu Jemoreng where he discovered very good forest carrying good stands of semayur and other good-class timbers in proportion.
Exemption tax had been coming in very well towards the end of the month.
Court. -A large amount of accumulated work was cleared up during the month. No cases, however, are worthy of mention. Fines amounted to $14.14 and fees to $36.25.
P.W.D. -Prisoners were engaged on the general upkeep of roads and padangs.
I inspected the Bruan Rentis, and finding no call for its further development decided to abandon any additional construction.
Dairy Farm. -Owing to the sparseness of grass on the bungalow cattle ground, as a result of the recent floods, it was found necessary to transfer eight head of cattle to K. Matu.

Fourth Division News.
MIRI.
March, 1932.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports for March, 1932, by Mr. F. G. Carpenter, Acting Resident: -
Court. -One hundred and thirty four writs were issued of which 29 were in the Criminal and 105 were in the Civil Courts. One hundred and thirty-three cases were heard comprising 33 criminal and 100 civil suits. In Criminal actions 30 convictions were obtained. Claims amounted to $3,806 and fines and fees in all matters to $278 and $377 respectively. The total Court revenue was $1,899. $2,068 was received into Court deposits and $2,117 was paid out.
In the District Court Chiew Kiaw was sentenced to 6 months’ imprisonment and fined $100 under Order No. 0-4.
Health. -Two blocks of public latrines were built in Kampong China for the benefit of the poorer people who are unable to pay conservancy fees.
Forty-six trade licences were issued under new Municipal Regulations, these people having already complied with the requirements of the health authorities.
Two prosecutions were brought by the department, both of which resulted in convictions.
Twenty-five vaccinations were undertaken by the Sanitary Inspector.
Immigration and Emigration. -New arrivals and arrivals on old passports numbered 127, while emigrants totalled 253.
Lands. -At Miri six applications were received for 16 acres of pepper and 14 1/2 acres of coconuts. Five gardens were demarcated comprising 3 acres of rubber, 12 of pepper and 8 of coconuts.
Assistant Inspector Ng Ah Chak was still engaged on bringing the old Miri register up to date.
At Sibuti Assistant Inspector Jaini demarcated 25 gardens consisting of 113 acres, mostly planted with rubber.
Medical. -At the Government Dispensary 169 out patients made 506 attendances for treatment, while 4 patients were transferred to the Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd.’s, hospital.
Three N.A.B. injections were given for yaws.
The table of diseases Heated shows 10 cases of beriberi.
Meteorological: -
Municipal. -Work on the fish market progressed most satisfactorily and a supply of filtered waler has been laid on to each selling bay.
Water traps for the sewage plant having failed to arrive from Singapore, the order was cancelled and these are now being made locally. It is hoped to start the scheme on May 1st.
Outstations. -Native Officer, Awang Hitam, and the Dyak Tuai Tuai of Niah were called to Miri during the month to discuss boundaries with the Resident. These were arranged to everyone’s satisfaction and the party returned on the 17th.
The Sibuti Dyaks at Mamut were visited by Native Officer Awang Hitam.
Reports of the padi harvest are good from all districts, it being estimated that the supply will be sufficient for the coming year.
A report from Sibuti that a new school has just been opened there is being looked into, as apparently no registration has been requested.
Prison. -The daily average was 31; but the gang, consisting of eight men, was divided into two sections, one of which was employed at Tanjong Lobang and the other in the clerks’ compound.
The health of the prisoners was good.
Public Works. -To make room for the new proposed police station, the old P.W.D. garage was pulled down and a new one was erected on a new site to house both Government vehicles.
Seventeen water meters in the bazaar and kampongs were repaired.
Minor repairs were effected to a number of old buildings.
Staff. -I took over the affairs of the Fourth Division on the 18th from Mr. H. D. Aplin who proceeded on home furlough on the same day.
Mr. Morice was permanently transferred to Bintulu.
General. -The Resident proceeded to Baram on the 3rd, returning again with Mr. W. V. Hanson on the 5th.
Messrs. Hannigan and Reynolds arrived on the 8th to discuss new constabulary arrangements, and returned to Kuching again on the 11th,
The Resident and Mrs. Aplin proceeded to Singapore per s.s. Darvel on the 18th en route to England.
An application was received from Sin Wha Heng to erect a jelutong refining factory near the Wireless Station. He has been told to find a suitable piece of land.
The offices were closed during the Easter holidays from the 25th to 28th.
On the 29th the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak arrived from Kuching during the course of a visit to his diocese.
By the same boat Messrs. Morice, Field and Sochon returned from their visits to Kuching in connection with the examination.

BINTULU.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. W. H. C. C. Morice, reports: -
Court. -Fines imposed for the month amounted to $5. Litigation was light.
Prison. -Prisoners numbered 20 at the end of the month and were employed on the general upkeep of the station. Average health of prisoners was good.
P.W.D. -The pipe line is in good order.
Prisoners were engaged on general upkeep of the station.
The Government, carpenter was employed on the Datus quarters cud general repairs to Government quarters.
Police. -The Police numbered fourteen at the end of the month (Including Village Constables). L.C. Awang was granted two weeks’ local leave and resumed duty on 26th. All police have been drilled daily morning and evening, during the month for a period of an hour at a time.
Medical. -The health of the station has been fair during the month.
Five lepers by name Juntang, Empian, Blaleh, Rumah and Mancho have been returned to Kuching, having been here on parole. This was owing to a recurrence of the disease.
Trade and Customs. -Trade statistics for the month were as under: -
Land. -On the 9th Land Inspector Jana proceeded to Pandan to demarcate land of Tun Kampong Berasap (Punan).
Quit Rents are slow in coming in.
Miscellaneous. -On the 17th I left for Kuching, and was still away at the end of the month.
On the 2nd I left for Sebauh and found many things there to be attended to. On the 4th I left for Pandan. I visited the proposed site for Tua Kampong Berasap’s new house. Although the land belongs to him, people having gardens adjoining were trying to make trouble, chiefly I think with a view to making money out of him. I have settled this matter and had the boundaries of his land demarcated.
The same day I left for Tubau, stopping for a short time at Labang on the way.
On the 5th I returned to Sebauh via the Foochow Concession where I inspected the proposed new road. The road was suggested by the Foochows themselves. They also suggested that Government should pay for it. As the road will serve no really useful purpose when made, and as Government moreover have already built them roads through the concession quite sufficient for their needs. I said that I would not contemplate building another, -at any rate at the moment.
On the 6th I returned to Bintulu.
I have allowed ex-Lance-Corporal Skalai, to move to the Silas (13 doors). I do not think there is room for any more Dyaks to come into this territory. Once they arrive they fondly imagine that they own the place, oblivious of the fact that there me also Milanos, Malays, Punans and Kayans who also want land.
The padi seems to be doing fairly well this year.

Fifth Division News.
LIMBANG.
April, 1932.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports for April, 1932, by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident: -
General. -Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas, who has been appointed to do duty in Limbang, arrived from the Second Division on the 20th and assumed his duties immediately.
The 18th, Hari Raya Haji, was observed as a public holiday, and all offices were closed.
Mrs. F. H. Kortright left for home via Labuan on the 14th.
Visitors to the station were Dr. and Mrs. Martindell and F. B. Giffening from Brunei, and Mr. Kimpster of the Sarawak Steamship Company. On the occasion of the semi-final of the McKerron Football Shield a party of eleven Europeans and about fifty Natives came over from Brunei.
P.W.D. -Prisoners, averaging 10. were employed mainly on the Brunei road. The contract work on the section beyond Pandam continues steadily, and should be completed by the end of next month, after which the road may be opened for traffic right through to Brunei. A car has already been driven through to within 1 1/2 miles of the town.
Agriculture. -A power driven wheel for pulverising the billing mulong, ingenious, though perhaps crude in construction, has been introduced and installed in the factory of Towkay Teo Chiok Sia at Limbang.
The principal feature is a wooden disc of about 3’ 6’’ diameter studded with what appear to be oversize gramophone needles. This is spun at about 600 R.P M. The machine will completely pulverize two whole palms in less than an hour, whereas by the old hand-grating process it would take two menat least a day to pulverise as much as one. I understand such plants driven by old car engines are numerous around Java.
Medical and Health. -Dr. E. W. Martindell paid his usual monthly visit, and reported everything satisfactory.
There were no patients admitted to hospital but seventy-one out-patients were treated for various ailments.
Rainfall amounted to 16.88 inches.
Trade and Shipping: -
Foreign exports include: -
Coasting exports: -
Shipping arrivals: -

LAWAS.
April, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports: -
Judicial. -During the month Court work was light, and no cases call for special mention.
General. -I made the usual visits to all outstations, concentrating on the collection of land rent outstanding for 1930 and 1931. Payments by instalments were arranged, which, if adhered to, will result in settlement of all rent due by the end of this year.
The padi crop seems to have been a success in all districts, the bazaar price for padi at Trusan being 20 gantangs for $1.
The Brunei Malays complained that as they were no longer able to trade with the Muruts up river at Trusan it was difficult to find a living, and it has therefore been arranged that a market will be opened twice a month in Trusan, where the Muruts can bring their produce, and sell to the Brunei Malays. This should also have the desired effect of brightening up the Trusan bazaar, which at present is asleep. Should this prove successful the market may be opened every week.
The Vamco Timber Company at Tagai has been working all out during the month, which is a very good thing for local labour. I am informed that new machinery is on its way out for the manufacture of three-ply wood; experiments have been made at home with the local woods, and proved very satisfactory.
P.W.D. -Maintenance work as usual was carried out on the roads.
A buffalo and cart was purchased for the transport of timber. This has been used by the prisoners, and it proves a great success.
Agriculture. -The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Ltd., exported 42,560 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
Rainfall. -The following rainfall was recorded during the month: -

Air Mail.
Mr. B. Trechman informs us that he posted a letter in Kuching by Air Mail on 12th March, and received a reply on 15th April by Air Mail which had actually arrived in Singapore on the 11th April. The goods ordered in the original letter arrived in Kuching on 6th May per freight. This must, we think, be a record for Sarawak, and goes to prove that, granted good connections between Kuching and Singapore, a very real saving in transit time can be effected by despatching mail by air.



























































