VOL. LXII.
No. 946.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Friday, July 1st, 1932.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette
FRIDAY, JULY 1st, 1932.

Birth.
TRECHMAN. -On June 28th at the General Hospital, Kuching, to Mr. and Mrs. B. A. Trechman, a son.

Local and Personal.
June.
His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by Dayang Anne, left for Miri per H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on 23rd, returning to Kuching on 28th. We understand that their Highnesses were the guests of Mr. and Mrs. Noble of the Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd.

His Majesty King George’s birthday was observed as a public holiday. A salute of 21 guns was fired from Fort Margherita.

We hear that the Min Teck School, Kuching, is rehearsing a concert consisting of Chinese, English and Malay items. A temporary building is being erected, behind the Government Printing Office, to house the large audiences this entertainment should attract. The concert will be held on three successive nights from 15th to 17th July.

During the month Dr. and Mrs. Webster of Miri, accompanied by Miss Jane Webster, visited Kuching and were the guests of Mr. and Mrs. Trechman.

Captain R. E. Le Sueur returned from Simanggang on the 3rd where he had been temporarily appointed District Officer, and resumed his appointment as District Officer, Kuching.

Dr. E. M. Marjoribanks, Principal Medical Officer, visited Miri on official business during the month, returning on 18th.

Mr. E. H. Elam, Acting Assistant District Officer, Lundu, returned from short leave per s.s. Darvel on 13th June.
By this same vessel arrived Mr. D. C. White who has recently joined the Sarawak Civil Service. Mr. D. C. White is doing duty in the District Office, Kuching.

We understand a small cinema theatre, for silent films, is to be opened at the 15th mile Penrissen Road.

In connection with a notice in the columns of our last issue, concerning the visit of Mr. Lester Maynard, the American Consul-General at Singapore, it might be inferred that Mr. Maynard had retired from the Foreign Service of the United States. This is not correct. Mr. Maynard will probably remain in Singapore for some time before being transferred elsewhere.

His Majesty’s Trade Commissioner at Singapore, Mr. R. Boulter, C.M.G., visited Kuching, arriving on Saturday, the 25th. Mr. Boulter was the guest of Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division.

Mr. H. B. Crocker arrived from Sibu on 22nd per s.l. Chamois for medical treatment. Mr. Crocker is now in the General Hospital. We are glad to report that he is progressing favourably.

At a meeting of the Sarawak Turf Club on Friday the 24th, it was decided to raise the prize money for Division I and II ponies to $50 for first prizes and $25 for second prizes. As insufficient applications have been received for a new batch of griffins, it was decided to purchase picked ponies from British North Borneo, which will classify in Division I, vide rules 14 and 15 of the Sarawak Turf Club. These ponies will be sold to subscribers at $100 each and will be drawn for. All applications should be made to the Honorary Secretary, Sarawak Turf Club. It is proposed that the next race meeting will be held on 24th and 26th September.

It is with regret we have to report the death of Mr. E. A. W. Cox, late of the Sarawak Civil Service, on the 3rd May, 1932.

We welcome to Kuching Mr. and Mrs. Price. We understand Mr. Price is taking charge of the Brooke Dock and Workshops, Kuching.

We note that our local Traffic Police have adopted rattan wings similar to those used in Singapore, with the hope of inculcating road sense into motor-car drivers, cyclists, rick-shaw-pullers and other forms of traffic congesting the main roads of the town.

Messrs. D. V. Murphy, J. J. Hill and A. Macpherson returned from leave per m.v. Marudu on 27th June.

At the General Hospital, Kuching, to Mr. and Mrs. B. A. Trechman, a boy. We offer our congratulations to the parents and welcome to the new arrival.

Obituary.
It is with very deep regret that we have to report the death of Mr. E, A. W. Cox of the Sarawak Civil Service who died suddenly after an operation, on the 3rd May.
Mr. Cox joined the service in 1885. He spent eight years at Trusan and was the first officer to be appointed in charge of Lawas. He retired on pension in 1908.

Two Airmen Killed.
Flying Officer D. S. McDougal and Flying Officer N. E. White were killed yesterday afternoon when their machines became interlocked in mid-air, crashed into a field, and burst into flames within sight of motorists and others on the Great North road at Wittering, near Peterborough.
People who saw the tragedy told a Daily Mail reporter that the airmen had no chance to use their parachutes.
One of the bodies was pulled clear before the fire was extinguished, but the other could not be recovered.
It is stated that at the time five machines were practising for the Royal Air Force pageant at Hendon in June. -Daily Mail.
Mr. D. S. McDougal joined the Sarawak Civil Service on 8th October, 1924, and resigned on 2nd June, 1927. It is with deep regret that we have to record his death.
To his parents we extend our heartfelt sympathy in their great loss.
MCDOUGALL. -On May 6, at Wittering Northants, as the result of a collision in the air, Duncan Shimwell McDougall, Flg. Off., R.A.F.
Mr. McDougall entered the R.A.F. with a short, service commission in September 1928. After a course of flying training at No. 5 F.T.S., Sealand, he was posted to No. 23 (Fighter) Squadron, Kenley. He was promoted to Flying Officer in March 1930 and in December of that year he was appointed to the staff of the R.A.F. College, Cranwell, He was appointed to the Staff of the Central Flying School in September 1931.
A brother officer writes of him: -
His colleagues in 23 Squadron, his pupils at Cranwell and C.F.S. and his brother instructors will have their personal grief lessened by the knowledge that he was killed at the moment of impact in the air.
The Service has lost an outstanding figure. “Mac” has had an enviable reputation since his fledgling days. Those of us who knew him personally realised that he was a man whose nature and outlook mattered as much as or more than his ability as a pilot.
His was great-heartedness of the valuable sort. He never criticised without sincerity and fairness. He combined exemplary self-respect with complete absence of vanity. His keenness was such that to those who only knew him superficially he may have seemed obsessed by flying. The son of a notable father he knew men and loved them as they loved him. I am glad that, if die he must, he should die actually flying and in exactly such a way as he would have chosen.

The Late Datu Tuanku Haji Abdulrahman.
The sad news of the death on the 8th June of the Datu Tuanku Haji Abdulrahman, who had been in failing health for some months and had been unable to attend Office since November last, will be received with great regret. Thus in the short space of eight days the Baram District has lost both its Senior Native Officer and its Senior Penghulu.
Born in Simanggang on 11th May, 1870, the son of Tuanku Zin and grandson of Tuanku Ismail who served at Skrang with Abang Aing, Tuanku Drahman originally came to Baram as a trader and went into partnership with the late Datu Sarip Hamid who was then Government Agent at Long Lobang in the Tinjar. Shortly afterwards, in 1902, Datu Sarip Hamid was appointed Native Officer, Baram, and Tuanku Drahman was appointed Government Agent in his stead. This post he held until 1917 when he was appointed second Native Officer, Baram, becoming Senior Native Officer on the retirement of Datu Sarip Hamid, and being appointed Datu and sworn a member of the Council Negri in 1928, in which year he also received the Long Service Decoration. He made the pilgrimage to Mecca in 1926.
On two occasions the Tuanku was in charge of the force assembled to repel a threatened Dyak attack-once in the Silat and once in the. Tinjar-and he was on several occasions left in charge of the District during the absence of a European Officer, but it is chiefly for his work in the Tinjar that he will be remembered; he was held in the highest esteem by the people of that river and his knowledge of them, their customs and languages was quite unrivalled.
Extraordinarily clear sighted, he always had the courage of his convictions and was never afraid to act on his own initiative or to give an opinion, which was always worth having, without waiting to be asked. His name will undoubtedly rank high on the list of those who have faithfully and devotedly served the State.
He leaves a widow, two sons and three daughters, his elder son having been appointed Native Officer Baram in 1926.

The Late Penghulu Tama Wan Baya.
With the greatest regret we have to record the death in tragic circumstances of Penghulu Tama Wan Baya of Baram. The Penghulu had been down for the Regatta and was staying in the Kayan Rest House, where, he was speared in his sleep by another man from his house, early in the morning of the 1st June, the day he proposed to return up river. Another man named Kilah Imang who attempted to disarm the murderer was fatally injured and the murderer was eventually shot dead resisting arrest.
The deceased Penghulu was an Uma Poh Kayan and was appointed Penghulu in March, 1905, on the death of his brother Tama Usong. He accompanied Mr. Douglas on his first trip to the Kelabit Country in October, 1908, when the Kelabits first acknowledged the Sarawak Government. In 1922 he accompanied Mr. Adams to Singapore for the Malaya-Borneo Exhibition and received the Prince of Wales’ Medal. In 1928 he received the Long Service Decoration from His Highness the Rajah in Kuching.
Tama Wan Baya was about 65 years of age and, though not so active as formerly, might have been expected to live for many more years. He had tremendous influence in the district and being a staunch supporter of the Government, he was in-valuable as Penghulu and his place will be very hard to fill. No one who met him could fail to be struck by his cheerful and kindly manner, while those who knew him and worked with him, will feel that they have lost a real friend. He lost consciousness within five minutes of being struck, his only words during that time being instructions to his people to call the District Officer, the dresser, the police, and the other Penghulus-typical of the man.

B. N. B.
The best thing about British North Borneo is its stamps, but even then the traveller is disappointed at not finding the orang utan nesting in the row of trees, specially provided in the main boulevard of Jesselton, or the tapir wallowing in the muddy stretches by Kudat race-course or a former Sultan of Sulu’s pet elephants, now turned wild, not trumpeting through the streets of Sandakan.
Perhaps I am wrong even in my nomenclature as the modern official tendency is to call the country North Borneo, pure and simple, but it would behove the North Bornean Government to take to heart the lesson of the British Facisti, who failed to achieve greatness merely through an unfortunate combination of initials.
The flag of North Borneo after the confusing multiplicity of ensigns in Malaya is easily recognizable, being the Union Jack with, on close inspection, a lion couchant in the centre symbolic of the reserve strength of the country.
To anyone in Singapore in need of a fortnight’s thorough rest, ample fare, and sea air, at a remarkably cheap rate, I would advise the round trip to Sandakan by one of the comfortable boats of the
Straits Steamship Company between the months of April and September, but not, as you value the delicate mechanism of your stomach, during the North East Monsoon.
A tip and run trip up the Kuching river and a tantalizing view of the hills of Sarawak with Santubong. showing a clear profile of the first White Raja, is all that the voyager will see of Sarawak, except for a few hours when lying in the open roadstead of Miri, where even the sea exudes oil, and the tanks and refineries at Lutong further up the coast appear like a white cloud against their lonely forest setting.
At dawn on the fourth day the steamer noses its way past green islets into the pretty little sheltered harbour of Labuan; the tiny, island Settlement, which forms part of the Colony and is within cannonshot of the territories of the Chartered Company on the mainland.
A smart launch flying the Brunei flag is waiting for the mails, and any stray passenger, who is desirous of visiting the famous pile town, the residence of the Sultan of Brunei and the capital of all that remains of a once powerful State now is in treaty relations with the British Crown, and holding a position very similar to that of the Unfederated Malay States.
A guide to the various water lanes of the town is unnecessary, provided one has purchased the local postage stamp, which supplies a photographic birds eye view of this immense kampong, but it would be a decided improvement if the more noticeable public buildings and stores were thrown into greater prominence.
Once more Borneo proves elusive for to reach Brunei takes five hours in the launch, so that a visit would entail a week’s detention until the following steamer for the sake of this interesting side trip, a period which the ordinary holiday maker can ill afford.
As the vessel lies alongside the wharf at Labuan. the cool morning air invites a stroll through the two parallel streets of old fashioned shophouses inhabited by Chinese merchants, which constitutes this tiny township, which Rip van Winkle would have recognized at first glance, so stationary have remained the hands of the little clock tower of Time on the water front.
Also the hopes of this island harbour becoming an emporium for the trade of the Bornean coast, and the scene of naval and mercantile activity have been sadly dashed; the coal-mines lie de-serted, and except for the presence of the cable station, there would hardly appear to be any reason for the presence of Europeans on the island, because it is dead, dead as the proverbial doornail.
Leaving Labuan at breakfast time the tourist could take his tea at ease in the spacious, but empty rooms, of the Jesselton Terminal Railway Hotel, without fear of interruption from vulgar and fussy trains, which in this well ordered community only run on alternate days in the week.
Jesselton itself is a pleasant enough place, the Chinese town of wood and red-painted iron roofs nestling on a narrow strip of land between a ridge and the seashore, whilst the harbour is protected by Gaya island, the original home of the infant settlement.
The European houses are dotted on the surrounding hills, and here of late has been established a Carmelite convent to pray for the souls of the local community, the tale of whose enormities had reached the ears of Catholic Europe.
The native kampong is built on piles along the water front, and here one gets the first glimpse of the Bajaus, a type of Proto-Malay sea gypsy. and perhaps an odd Dusun or two. To observe the latter in their own homes, however, it advisable to take a trip in a hire car as far as Tuaran, some twenty miles distant, the present terminus of the coastal road, where the pawnshop is a brassmine of gongs and kettles, and swivel guns, the Lela of Malay pirates. En route will be passed groups of Dusuns, the women many of whom have Chinese features owing to intermarriage, wearing a short blue coat and sarong, and the men noticeable for their handsome palm leaf hats.
The following morning as the steamer leaves the harbour, the early riser will be rewarded with his first view of Mount Kinabalu, which shows its serrated summit, like the teeth of some gigantic circular saw over the intervening hills. Before long the immense mass of this 13,000 foot colossus will be revealed and remain in view until Kudat is reached soon after noon. The hamlet of Kudat can be taken in at a glance from the ship’s deck, but the hinterland in the immediate vicinity is served by a network of roads, and is settled by immigrant Hakkas engaged in mixed farming. Once more the departure is timed for dawn, so that the dangerous reefs and channels off the East Coast may be threaded by daylight and towards afternoon the appearance of several separate shoulders of land having the effect of battleships proceeding in line ahead to sea betokens the approach to Sandakan.
As the vessel passes close under the high rock of the island on which is situated the Quarantine Station and Leper settlement, the magnificent harbour unfolds itself to the view, biting deep into the land and surrounded with low hills, more noticeable on the starboard bow, where the roots of Sandakan, the capital of the State crowd along the shore.
The harbour front is clean and bunded, with the new reclamation showing as a bare patch, beyond which lies the native pile village, and the sawmills representing the lumber industry, an asset of incalculable value where so much else appears to be tottering.
The town which is purely Chinese and well laid out impinges almost immediately on the hill slopes, on which lie the various Government Offices, the Club and a distinctly old fashioned but passable Hotel whilst a zigzag road mounts through a gap in the hill to the European bungalows perched on all available sites, and escapes finally into the flat land beyond to die fifteen miles away in the jungle past the golf course and the Government Experimental Plantation.
Sandakan, though isolated, is definitely a nice little town with an atmosphere of its own and though most of the buildings including the clock tower are constructed of timber-the fine church being an exception-there are few places in Malaya where one could live more pleasantly and none that excel it in the warmth of its hospitality. -Singapore Free Press.

Who Laughs Last.
The august gentleman who penned the last F.M.S official report will be shocked to learn that some eagle-eyed busybody has sent a passage from it to Punch to be held up to the ribaldry of that journal’s readers. We were unaware that anyone waded through these reports save the writers, and the various people concerned in the printing of them but whoever did so in this instance struck the following gem for his pains:
“The depression in the two staple industries of the country seriously affected the classes who were dependent for their livelihood on the custom of mining and planting coolies.”
If such a barbarous custom still prevails up-country, it is not difficult to see why there has been such a rush among coolies for repatriation during the past months. But Punch’s comment on the passage is either unnecessarily subtle or too clever by half. It reads:
“The resultant coolie-tree is the African equivalent of the punkah.”
The F.M.S in Africa! O, Mr. Punch, was that intentional or have you, of all people, “thrown a brick”? -Straits Times.

Nudism in Hong Kong.
The President of the Hong Kong Nudist Society, in a letter to the Editor of the China Mail professes himself to be well satisfied with the progress of his Society. They now possess, he says, very excellent Nudist Grounds and fields with a large fresh water river frontage providing excellent bathing and swimming facilities; the site is uninhabited and secluded, accessible from a motor road on one side but surrounded by steep and gently rising mountains on the other three sides. It contains opportunities for laying out tennis grounds and all sport activities, swimming, running, air and sun baths, besides space for matsheds and other structures without encroaching on the open air space. As this paradise comprises only about one and a quarter acres, the Society seems to have solved all the difficulties of attempting the multum in parvo. Some groundwork, the President adds, is still necessary to free the site of some shrubs on the water front and to give the site a smooth surface. Naturally. It would never do for Nature to go clothed in verdure where the Nudist practices his creed; no harbour-age or material should remain for an impertinent robin who might mistake a sun bather for one of the Children in the Wood; trees, especially all those of the genus Ficus, should be rigidly exterminated, but might not a single apple be left in one corner, a reminder of that earlier Nudist’s garden and a warning-or an encouragement-to eat more fruit? -B.N.B. Herald.

Bicycles.
Owing to the large number of bicycles which are stolen and not recoverable, it has been decided by the Municipal Department that all bicycles are to have a distinguishing number and registration card. Owners will be given a registration card showing all details which would help to identify their bicycle should it be lost or stolen. All bicycles should be brought to the Municipal Office where they will be stamped.

OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 43 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
Price SATURDAY, 1ST JUNE, 1889. 10 cents.
According to the report of the Hon’ble the Resident, in the Lundu district a bad system of opening gardens is in vague, a system which is bad all round, doing good to neither Towkay nor coolie and eventually ending in the loss of the garden opened up.
The system is based on what is the invariable custom in the cast, i.e., the advance of wages and other sums of money before any work has been done to warrant such payment. In this way any broken down coolie can relieve his immediate wants by clearing a few fathoms of jungle, putting in young pepper vines and then borrowing money on the security of his garden, with a promise to sell all his crop to the mortgages at a price considerably below market value, the mortgages in the meantime supplying him with food till the vines bear. By this time he is hopelessly in debt on account of his original advance, now swelled by the value of the provisions he has meanwhile been supplied with by the Towkay.
Probably the Towkay is not in a position to exercise supervision over the garden and so the coolie in charge does a minimum of work on it, taking day wages at the same time for working on some neighbouring plantation. In this way the garden does not produce sufficient crop to pay off the debt on it and after some time there is nothing more to be done than for the Towkay to write off the amount from his books as beyond recovery and for the coolie to spend some time in jail as a debtor. This unfortunate state of affairs is to a great extent brought about by the reckless manner in which small Towkays, through trade jealousy, try to get small planters into their power in order to try and make sure of monopolizing the produce of a district, and are willing to take great risks in furtherance of their desire to excel their fellow traders in the amount of pepper, &e., each can export and so draw greater profits. Apparently in the Lundu district one or more Towkay has overreacted himself and the harm of this not only affects himself but also the district, by unsettling a part of its population and laying them open to great temptation to dishonestly in the way of fraudulently selling crop to those who are not entitled to it, from which it is but a step to robbery and other crime. Coolies also, when in a despondent frame of mind have a tendency to go bad altogether, spending their last cent on opium or gambling and finally putting an end to a wretched existence by suspending themselves to the rafters of their Bangsal.
The small coolie planters are invariably squatters, settled here and there in the jungle and it is not easy to make an inspection of what is going on. except with the proprietor as a guide to the spot. Even were there such an appointment as Inspector of plantations but a tithe of the smaller gardens could come under his notice, so that interference with the planter is almost an impossibility. These irregular proceedings can only be stopped by direct interference with the Towkay’s prospect of getting his money back, and to do this will necessitate considerable alteration in the laws relating to the recovery of debts incurred as advances, to planters with insufficient capital.

Sarawak Library.
The following books have been purchased by the Committee: -

First Division News.
RESIDENT’S OFFICE.
May, 1932.
Extracts from the. Divisional Reports by Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division: -
Resident’s Court. -Two civil and two criminal cases came before the Court during the month.
General. -I regret to report the death of Mr. P. H. Hayward, which occurred at the General Hospital, Singapore, on the 19th.
His Highness the Tuan Muda and Mr. E Banks, Curator. Sarawak Museum, paid a visit to Baram by H.H.M.Y. Maimunah.
During the month a short visit to Kuching was paid by Mr. and Mrs. Lester Maynard, Consul-General for U.S.A.
I left for Singapore on the 2nd for a short visit and returned on the 9th.
Sadong was visited towards the end of the month.
Proclamation Day on the 24th was observed as a public holiday and the offices were closed.

DISTRICT OFFICE.
May, 1932.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. P. Murray-Scott, reports: -
General. -On 22nd May, 1932, a Chinese owned prahu was swamped during a squall near the buoy off Muaratebas. Of its four occupants, two, Hiew Joon Fah and Chew Mook Lian, were picked up two and a half hours later by the m.l. Chin Hoe Guan, bound for Simanggang. The Juragan of this launch searched for over an hour, but the other two, Koong Foong (the owner) and Chia Ah Pet, are still missing and must be presumed drowned.

LUNDU.
May, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H Elam, reports: -
General. -On the 5th Native Officer, Abang Mustapha and Lance-Corporal 198 Bodol returned from Sambas after delivering a warrant to the Resident there for the arrest of one Liew Cboon, who is wanted for the murder of Ho Loi, late of Simunin, Lundu, on 4th January, 1932.
Mr. T. M. Griffiths of the Land Department, Kuching, and two new Assistant Land Inspectors arrived in the La Follette on the 7th. Assistant Land Inspector Sujang also returned from leave by the same boat.
On the 11th the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam and Mr. T. M Griffiths left for Kuching by the La Follette. The former proceeded on local leave and was still away at the end of the month.
Proclamation Day fell on 24th and offices were closed on that day.
On the 26th Mr. D. L. Leach of the Survey Department, Kuching, arrived in m.l. Mermaid from Sempadi, and returned to Kuching overland via Bau early the following morning.
Dyak Affairs. -Although all the Tuai Rumahs were told to inform people in their respective villages to pay head tax before the end of June, so far only a few have paid.
Trade, Shipping and Customs. -Returns for the month as compared with the corresponding month of last year are as follows: -
The following vessels entered the port during the month: -
Rainfall. - Rainfall for the month was 3.57 inches. Highest recorded in 24 hours .85 inches.

SADONG.
May, 1932.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J G. Anderson, reports: -
Staff. -Native Officer Abang Samsudin returned to Tebekang having been relieved by Native Officer Abang Zamhari.
Agriculture. -Mr. Dare visited the station and superintended the harvesting of the Bugis Padi Settlement at Sungei Apin. 2,287 gantangs of padi were collected.
This area was demarcated by Land Office inspectors as an Agricultural Reserve.
Twenty-three head of cattle and thirty-four of buffaloes were transferred from the Mines Area to Kuching.
Land. -I met Mr. Pascoe, the Acting Superintendent of Lands, at Srian on I7th, to discuss alienation of land along the Simanggang Road. It. was agreed that in view of the numerous applications for land in this area (due to reduction of premia) alienation could be better effected from Kuching, which is just over one hour distant by road, than from this office which has no regular communication and is too far for practical purposes, for constant journeys to this area.
It was decided to allow no alienation of land beyond the Sadong river at present or in any other land on the road which is likely to be required by the Dyaks for farming. Dyak farming reserves, however, are all laid down as far as the river but not yet beyond it.
It was decided to carry out the plan immediately, with the Resident’s approval.
General. -Proclamation Day, the 24th instant was observed as a holiday.
The Resident visited the station on the 27th and dealt with all outstanding matters.
Mr. W. Harnack, Acting Superintendent of Surveys, visited the station on the 14th.
Rainfall. -Amounted to 10.23 inches.
Trade and Customs. -Comparative trade returns are as follows: -
During the month three vessels entered and cleared the port.

Second Division News.
April, 1932.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports by Mr. J. B. Archer. Resident: -
I left for Engkilili on the 1st, accompanied by Data Haji Dulrashid, stopping at Bukit Tedong for some hours. The water was high and there was heavy rain.
The Capitan China told me that pepper disease was bad, and that the gardeners had been unable to obtain any more of the nicotine preventative. The Agricultural Officer, Mr. G M. Goodall, informed me that he had ordered this but Kuching stocks were exhausted, and they were waiting for a supply from Singapore.
I arranged a time limit in which to rebuild the block of shops which were destroyed by fire two years ago. At the same time, owing to a demand for more building sites, I bought out a squatter’s house in the middle of the bazaar. This site will be available for new shops.
The Gold Kongsi is still working on the preliminary blasting, and there is a general hope that the venture will be a success.
Penghulu Imong came down but had nothing to report. I returned to Simanggang on the 3rd.
The Acting Assistant District Officer of Simanggang, Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas, and Abang Abu-Talip, left for, the Skrang on the 1st.
On the 4th Mr. O’Hara, Assistant Forest Officer, returned from a tour of the Kalaka District.
On the 5th Mr. N. Mace took overcharge of the Survey Department in this Division from Mr. W. Harnack, who later left for Kuching on transfer.
I left for Betong on the 8th, walking via Nanga Tisak. The road is in very fair condition except the Tisak end. The Datu accompanied me. In Betong I found Mr. J. R. Combe, who had arrived from Lawas to take over the Saribas District from Mr. R. L. Daubeny, who is proceding on home furlough.
The same day Mr. Ditmas, Abang Abu-Talip and party arrived in Betong unexpectedly, having come through from the Ulu Skrang. They walked back to Simanggang, via Tisak, on the 10th.
There was little to do in Betong, as most people were on their farms. I visited the Mission and Chinese Schools. The Reverend Sparrow has arrived to join the Mission Staff and the Reverend Linton has gone on home leave. On the day before I left Abang Bunsu, Native Officer, arrived from the Ulu Layar with his ex-Rangers. I returned to Simanggang on the 12th, together with Mr. Daubeny.
Mr. G. M. Goodall passed through on the 13th on his way to the Third Division for temporary duty there.
Messrs. Daubeny and Ditmas sailed for Kuching on the 16th; the former for home leave, and the latter on transfer to Limbang.
The m.l. Mermaid arrived on the 15th with Mr. J. C. B. Fisher, Mr. and Mrs. Harding and Miss P. Scott. Mr. Fisher has been appointed to Simanggang for duty, whilst Mr. Harding had brought a party to move the wireless station to the new offices. This latter was completed on the 20th. The wireless set and machinery is now in the Post Office, whilst the two clumsy wooden masts have been replaced by graceful steel ones at each end of the parade ground. I am told that messages are received more clearly since the move.
The Land Officer, Mr. B. Summers, left for a tour of the Kalaka and Saribas Districts on the 16th.
On the 19th the Mermaid arrived again with Messrs. P. M. Adams and R. E. Le Sueur. The latter has been gazetted as temporary District Officer at Simanggang. The next day Dyak affairs were discussed and Mr. Adams left the following morning together with Mr. and Mrs. Harding and Miss Scott.
During the month Thiam Kui, Court Writer of Sebuyow. was arrested by Mr. Fisher. Mr. Le Sueur proceeded to Engkilili on the 22nd in connection with this matter. A new clerk arrived from Kuching for duty in the Division.
I left for the Kalaka District on the 25th and met the Acting Assistant District Officer, Kalaka, Mr. L. K. Morse, in Kabong. The next day we proceeded to Saratok, where I stayed until the end of the month.
Trade was very bad and Dyaks said that they were unable to pay their tax in money as their padi was unsaleable in the bazaar. I met Pengarah Nyalu and Penghulu Undom who reported fair harvests.
The Malay Government School is much improved and the Chinese School, in spite of hindrance by several objectionable Chinese, still continues to remain open and is well conducted.
I inquired about the sago trade and was told that at present the price of a sago palm of between 7 or 8 krat is only valued 20 or 25 cents. It is not so many years ago that it was considered disastrous if sago palms fell as low as $1.50 each.
I sat in Resident’s Court in Saratok and sentenced a Chinese for robbery with force, and a Chinese woman for perjury in the same case. This is, I believe, the first time a person has been convicted summarily in this Division under the Oaths and Affirmations Order. I also inquired into an alleged kidnapping case and found it to be a case of simple adultery between a Chinese man and the fiancée of another Chinese. I am sorry to say that the pretentious Mosque at Saratok, which was begun two and a half years ago with a handsome present from Government, has not reached any further stage than the framework and roof, and seem. likely to remain as it is for ever.
On my return from Saratok I found that Mr. S. G. Hansom, Officer-in-Charge of Engkilili, had returned from the Ulu Ai and was waiting in Simanggang to see me.
The only Resident’s Court case during the month in Simanggang was an appeal from the District Court, Simanggang. The appeal was upheld and the judgment of the lower Court reversed.
I had to fine Penghulu Sail of the Skrang one month’s pay for gross disobedience of orders.
The Memaloh Dyaks, under Senada, were again in Simanggang asking Government to punish the murderers of their relation Luat. I called down Tuai Rumah Janen and other Skrang, but there is no shadow of evidence against them and I am inclined to believe that Luat was killed accidently by his own people in a begau. The Memalohs made absurd demand, and finally it seemed that all they wanted was pati nyawa from someone. After considerable discussion I sent the Skrangs home and the Memalohs are returning to Dutch Territory.
Affairs in the Ulu Ai are unsatisfactory, and Mr. Hansom’s trip was unsuccessful in inducing certain chief, to come down. A full report has been made under separate cover.
Since the withdrawal of the patrol, from the Skrang disturbances there have ceased, and I have no doubt that the alleged stone throwing was a put-up show, and the stories of parties of strange Dyaks wandering round were quite untrue, likewise Penghulu Sait’s tale of the attack made upon his person.
There were rumours of Asun being in the Division again, but they were not confirmed.
Throughout the month most people were harvesting and good crop, are reported.
Mr. Barcroft was given the power, of a District Court Magistrate on the departure of Mr. Ditmas, and Mr. J. C. B. Fisher took over charge of Police and Prisons at Simanggang.

May, 1932.
On the 7th Mr. Le Sueur proceeded up river, accompanied by Abang Abu Tulip, Native Officer, and party. He made a semi-permanent comp at Nanga Mepi, and returned again to Simanggang on the 28th, leaving Abang Abu Talip behind. Penghulu Sambau of the Delok and Tuai Rumah Ranggau arrived a well. These chiefs, were allowed to go to Kuching to see His Highness the Tuan Muda. Whilst there Mr. Le Sueur visited Penghulu Kana and other Dyaks. The former promised to be in Simanggang on a certain date but refused to accompany Mr. Le Sueur. As this Penghulu has done this before I doubt if much reliance can be placed upon this promise.
Various Penghulus were in during the month and door tax is being paid slowly. Down river Dyaks are clamouring to work telephone posts for Government and a large number of posts have been purchased from them. Harvesting still continues, but in many cases has finished and the usual celebrations begun.
I left for down rivet on the 23rd, accompanied by Mr. Barcroft. We called at Lingga and Banting. At the latter place we saw Penghulu Angkon who, in spite of the slump, is building a new racing boat. I hear that others are doing the same, and all expect a regatta. It is difficult to convince them that there is little money for prizes in these days, and as they refuse to paddle for the sport of the thing, I am afraid that their labour is wasted.
The next day we visited Sebuyow and Maludam and spent the night at the latter place.
Maludam is a place in which for six months of the year there is a big Malay population, all engaged in the fishing industry. The small river was full of boats and the village was very crowded. I was much struck with the large number of children, all of whom seemed about the same age. Certainly in proportion to the adults there I have never seen so many children before.
The small bazaar there is now hemmed in on both sides by Malay houses and it will be necessary in the future to demarcate a site for a new bazaar.
In the past few years numbers of Malays have permanently settled in the village the whole year round, and have taken to padi farming. This has been the cause of a dispute between them and certain Balau Dyaks, who claim land almost right up to the edge of the Malay Kampong. It seems, to me that the Malays must be given room to plant, and the Balaus are not always reasonable. We returned to Simanggang on the 25th.
A clerk on remand, C. Thiam Kui, escaped from Engkilili jail under remarkable circumstances, and a version of this affair will be found in extract, from the Engkilili Report.
Lucas Chuat, Dyak Native Officer, reported for duty on the 9th, and left on the 19th for Engkilili to replace Abang Sedek, Native Officer, who was returned to Simanggang ill. It will be interesting to watch how Lucas Chuat succeeds in his new appointment as sole Native Officer at Engkilili, in place of the usual Malay Native Officer. Abang Sedek was sent to hospital where he still remained at the end of the month.
During the month the Reverend A. W. Stonton, of the S.P.G. Mission, opened a small station below Engkilili. I understand, however, that lack of funds will impede any permanent buildings being built for some time.
Mr. G. M. Goodall of the Agricultural Department returned to this Division on the 12th after temporary duty in the Third Division. On the 31st Mr. Dare arrived in m.l. Para to take over Agricultural Affairs from Mr. Goodall and at the end of the month was still in the Division. By the same launch the Acting Conservator of Forests, Mr. T. Corson, arrived on an official visit.
The Acting Assistant District Officers of Kalaka and Saribas, Messrs. L. K. Morse and J. R. Combo respectively, made official visits to Simanggang during the month.
Two new clerks arrived in the Division to replace one invalided to Kuching, and one dismissed.
A small motor launch, presented to the S.P.G. Mission in Simanggang by the Parish of St. Mary Stafford, England, arrived on the 10th.

SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
April, 1932.
The Cadet Officer, Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, reports: -
On the 1st Mr. Ditmas left for the Ulu Skrang.
On the 7th a new clerk arrived from Kuching; it is to be regretted that nearly all the present Simanggang clerks are young and inexperienced, and office efficiency has greatly suffered.
I proceeded down river to Lingga and Sebuyow to supervise a transfer of clerks, and returned to Simanggang on the 10th, to find that Mr. Ditmas had returned from the Skrang and had resumed his duties in the District Office.
On the 14th I took over the District Office from Mr. Ditmas who left on the 16th on transfer to Limbang.
On the 24th Mr. Fisher proceeded to Sebuyow and arrested Thiam Kui, Court Writer, for criminal breach of trust at Sebuyow. Mr. Fisher returned the following day.
On the 27th I left for Lingga and Sebuyow on monthly visit to those stations, and was still away from Simanggang at the end of the month.
More favourable reports have been received of the Balau and Lingga padi crops and it is thought that the Sebuyow failure has been exaggerated. Nevertheless it is felt that many Dyaks, and indeed Malays, will experience real difficulty in finding the “ready” cash necessary for the payment of taxes.
Medical: -
Trade: -
The Officer-in-Charge of Constabulary and Prisons, Mr. J. C. B. Fisher, reports: -
Police. -(a) Personnel. -On the 11th fifteen constables arrived at Simanggang by Chinese boat from Kuching. On the 13th eleven Simanggang constables went down to Kuching (or training by the Chinese boat Hong Heng Huat. All the new draft from Kuching seem to be moderately efficient, but every effort is being made to raise the standard of smartness, etc., throughout the force.
(b) Drill and training. -The work of training the force has been going on very satisfactorily, and a distinct improvement is noticeable in all forms of drill. The force is being trained in musketry, extended order drill, and elementary bayonet fighting. It would appear that ordinary arms drill has reached a very satisfactory point of efficiency. Parades were held five times a week throughout the month.
Prisons: -
Prisoners were employed on mowing, ditching, bridge repairing and other routine work.
The health of the jail was satisfactory.

May, 1932.
On the 2nd I returned from visited Lingga and Sebuyow.
Mr. R. E. Le Sueur left to take over Dyak affairs in the Engkilili District on the 7th.
On the 13th I left in the m.l. Anne for Engkilili to sit on a Courts-martial on Lance-Corporal Kim Khoon and P.C. Ajat; I returned to Simanggang the following day, calling at Nanga Tisak to pick up Mr. Combe who had walked over from Betong.
I accompanied Resident, Second Division, on a visit to Lingga, Sebuyow and Maludam; we returned to Simanggang on the morning of the 25th.
The volume of trade in the Simanggang bazaar continues to decrease and difficulty is being experienced in collecting shophouse loans and other debts due to Government.
Numerous petty thefts have been reported by Chinese gardeners in the Brayun and Sabu road.
No special P.W.D. work was put in hand this month and naturally the drastic reduction of votes will seriously affect our programme for the future.
On the 26th Abang Draup, Native Officer, and Forester Mohamad proceeded to Maludam for inspection duty, they returned to the station on the 30th with various collections.
Trade: -
The Officer-in-Charge of Constabulary and Prison, reports: -
Two Dyaks have been recruited and I am still endeavouring to find a suitable third. Both these men are ex-Rangers and show every promise of being excellent constables.
Very little crime has been reported during the month only one or two isolated cases of petty theft being recorded.
Prisons. -Daily average of prisoners 57.
Prisoners were employed on mowing, ditching, repairing bridges and other routine work.

ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
April, 1932.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports: -
Three criminal cases were heard in the Lower Courts, in which two convictions were obtained. There were no cases which call for special mention.
Travelling. -I have travelled in the Engkari and Batang Ai, and have been absent from the station for the greater part of the month. At the beginning of April, the party of ex-Rangers who had been patrolling the Lamanak were withdrawn, and these men accompanied me up river from Engkilili, on the 9th instant. I was also accompanied by Abang Omar, Native Officer, Lubok Antu, and Penghulu Sambau from the Delok.
Travelling was very difficult and slow owing to high water. I reached the last house in the Ulu Engkari on the 16th after spending a night with Penghulu Nanang and at various other houses. Penghulu Nanang accompanied me up the Engkari.
I reached Rumah Penghulu Ramba on the 24th and returned to Lubok Antu the following day.
Of the results of this trip, a separate report has been made, but briefly, there are signs of considerable unrest both in the Engkari and Batang Ai. I spent four days in the Ulu Engkari, during which time a party was sent to Bukit Lanjak, which is one day’s journey overland from Rumah Langar, in order to endeavour to establish communication with Asun, if he was there, and to persuade him, if possible, to return with me down river. The party returned and stated that they could find no sign of any people at Bukit Lanjak, hut that there were indications that Dyaks had been living there a short time ago. Later I received information, which appears to be fairly well founded, that Asun is now living in the Ulu Ai, and that he had actually been seen in Penghulu Kana’s house.
It is very noticeable that every house in both Ulus has been completely stripped of all articles of value, which have presumably been hidden in the jungle. There are no jars or gongs to be seen, cooking utensils only having been retained. It would also appear that the bulk of the padi harvest has been concealed, as only very small quantities are stored in the houses. It is also noticeable that considerable numbers of new war spears and shields have been, and are still being manufactured in every house.
I am of the opinion that the Ulu Dyaks of both the Engkari and Batang Ai are prepared to resist Government in any expedition or other steps that may later be taken against Asun, of whose whereabouts they are without doubt, universally aware, but that, apart from this, they would not be likely to take any offensive steps.
At the same time, it is becoming increasingly difficult to administer these Dyaks, and during my recent trip I found it to be practically impossible to deal with the usual routine matters which call for attention. There is still a proportion of Door and Gun tax for 1931 outstanding, and none whatever yet paid for the current year, in connection with which there will, no doubt, be considerable difficulty later.
At the conclusion of the trip. I went down to Simanggang to report my observations, and returned to Engkilili two days later.
Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident, Second Division, visited the station at the beginning of the month, accompanied by Datu Abang Haji Dulraschid and Mr. B. Summers, Land Officer.
During the month Yap Joon Sang, Court Writer, Engkilili, was discharged, being relieved by Lee Ah Fui. The second clerk, Chen Thiam Khni was transferred to Sebuyow, being relieved by Yeo Cheng Seang, who will act as Court Writer.
After Thiam Khui’s departure, and during my absence up river, various Chinese complained that they had paid various sums of money to this clerk on account of registration of deeds for which they had not received receipts, and the deeds had not been prepared. Mr. R. E. Le Sueur. District Officer, Simanggang, visited Engkilili on the 22nd, to inquire into this matter, and Chen Thiam Khui was later arrested at Sebuyow. The Chinese concerned have, of course, only themselves to blame if they are sufficiently foolish to pay their money to a clerk without obtaining a receipt. The exact amount involved is not yet known, but claims totaling over $100 have already been made, and there are no records of these in the books or in deeds prepared.
Steps are to be taken to prevent large numbers of unemployed persons from Kuching from entering this district, for whom work cannot possibly be available in the pepper gardens, and who become vagrants and “hangers on,” which results in the large number of petty thefts and other misdemeanors which are reported daily.
Prison. -Prisoners were engaged on the usual routine and Public Works.

May, 1932.
There have been a fair number of cases in Court during the month. Eight criminal cases were heard in the Lower Courts. P.C. Salau was sentenced to imprisonment under section 223 I.P.C. for negligence resulting in the escape of a person under remand.
On the 2nd instant I returned to Engkilili from Simanggang. On the 7th instant, Mr. R. E. Le Sueur arrived here en route for the Ulu Batang Ai where he was to do temporary duty in connection with the recent disaffection and unsettled condition of Ulu Dyaks. Mr. Le Sueur proceeded up river the following day, with the object of establishing a permanent camp at Nanga Mepi. This has been done, and I understand that substantial quarters for a European and Native Officer and accommodation for several police has been provided. Those will without doubt be valuable in the future, as Nanga Mepi is a natural halting place when travelling in the ulu, being at the confluence of the Engkari and the Batang Lupar.
I understand that Mr. Le Sueur made several trips up river from this camp, and met Penghulus Kana and Ramba, who promised definitely to appear at Simanggang by a certain date.
Mr. Le Sueur returned to Engkilili on the 27th instant, and went down to Simanggang the following day per m.l. Rubberneck. Abang Abu Talip, Native Officer, still remains up river.
Abang Sedek, Native Officer, became sick during the month, and was sent to Simanggang Hospital for treatment. He was replaced by one Lucas Chuat, a Dyak Native Officer on probation, who, so far as I can judge to date, will make a conscientious and capable Native Officer, for Dyak districts, when he has had more experience.
The Reverend A. W. Stonton has visited the district several times during the month. A site was finally chosen at Lobok Tedong, near the gardens of the Agricultural Department, for the erection of an S.P.G. School. A temporary school building has already been erected, and provided with a schoolmaster. It is understood that a number of Dyak school-boys have been enrolled and are attending daily.
At the beginning of the month Chen Thiam Chui, who had previously worked as second clerk at Engkilili, and was held here in custody pending the investigation of alleged irregularities, escaped from custody, through the negligence or connivance of the constable on duty in the fort. A reward was offered for the recapture of this man, but it is thought that he succeeded in escaping over the frontier into Dutch Territory.
I visited the gold workings at Marup on the 29th instant. Blasting is still in progress, and no gold will be obtainable until this operation is completed. The object of the blasting is to lead water through a large swampy “pocket” which is known to contain gold, and which is a natural draining point from the surrounding hills. Samples taken from various depths in this “pocket” have been washed, and give promise of a satisfactory yield as soon as the necessary water supply is available.
A site for four new shops in Engkilili Bazaar has been cleared for demarcation, and its soon as the necessary permission has been obtained, allotment of the sites, will be made, and building will commence.
Rain fell on six days, when a total of 8.45 inches was recorded.

SARIBAS DISRICT.
April, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe, reports: -
The majority of cases heard during the month dealt with non-payment of exemption tax and fines.
The substations were visited from 25th to 28th when books were checked and a few minor affairs attended to. There was a request by the Dyaks from the Ulu Rimbas to move forty doors to Niah, Fourth Division. Their ideas as to plans for this move appeared very vague, and I suggested the various Tuai should meet me on my next visit, and the matter be gone into thoroughly, as the suggestion was put before me by anembiak only.
Some fifteen Chinese from Debak bazaar applied to farm padi in the Debak Municipal Area, and as Mr. Summers was present at the time, he said he would take the matter up through the Resident, Second Division.
Abang Bunsu, Native Officer, together with Penghulu Jabieng and some ex-Rangers returned from the Ulu Layar on the 11th. All was quiet in the Ulu Spak and Layar, and no cause for alarm was felt.
Mr. Ditmas, Acting Assistant District Officer, Simanggang, came down the Ulu Layer from the Skrang, and gave a favourable report on up river conditions.
On the face of the reports of Mr. Ditmas and Native Officer Abang Bunsu, it rather leads one to believe that a lot of the previous scares in this district were mythical and were brought down from up river merely to bring the bearer of such news into the limelight.
I took over from Mr. R. L. Daubeny on the 4th instant, the latter leaving the station on the 12th for home leave. The Resident, Mr. J. B. Archer, paid a visit to the station on the 8th, arriving overland, and left by m.l. Anne for Simanggang on the 12th instant, Mr. Summers was in the district from 25th to 1st May, 1932.
Five police constables were sent down to Kuching for training on the 26th instant and were relieved by five others from Kuching. All the old type of rifles were returned to Kuching and have been replaced by modern service .303 rifles.
Trade: -
Six motor vessels entered and cleared during the month.

May, 1932.
Court Work. -At Debak the District Court case dealing with counterfeit coin under section 242 I.P.C. was appealed against.
Prisoners averaged 19 for the month and were employed in the general upkeep of Government grounds. Health was good.
I left for Debak overland on the 23rd arriving on the same day. On the 25th I left Debak overland for Saratok in order to see Mr. L. K. Morse. Acting Assistant District Officer, Saratok, on the question of the clearing and maintenance of the Debak-Saratok telephone rentis.
I left on the 27th accompanied by Mr. Morse, the latter en route for Simanggang.
Mr. W. H. Avery visited the station on the 8th, but I was unfortunately away up river and he had already left on my return. Mr. T. Corson, Acting Conservator of Forests, passed through on his way to Saratok.
Native Officer Abang Haji Sapi’ee was absent for some ten days in Kuching on sick leave.
I was away in Simanggang from the 14th to 17th in order to see the Resident about up river affairs.
Nine motor vessels entered and cleared during the month.

KALAKA DISTRICT.
April, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. L. K. Morse, reports: - Sekolah Abang Leman, Kabong, and Sekolah Abang Abdul Rahman, Saratok, were twice visited by the Assistant District Officer, and once by the Resident, Second Division, during the month.
The affairs of the Ming Sing School were fully discussed during the Resident’s visit.
A supply of .303 S.M.L.E. rifles were received from Kuching, and issued to the men, the .303 carbines being returned to headquarters.
Permission to recruit four local ex-Rangers to bring the detachment up to strength was obtained, and three of the four had been taken on by the end of the month.
Mr. B. Summers. Land Officer, Second Division, visited Saratok and Roban during the month. A full account of his visit will be found in the Divisional Land Office report.
The Resident, Second Division, the Land Officer, Second Division, and the Assistant Forest Officer, Second Division visited the district during the month.
Roban and Kabong were visited by the Acting Assistant District Officer during the month. There was a noticeable improvement in the appearance of the former station.
The Pengrih catch at Kabong is reported to be exceptionally good, but the price is poor.
It is reported from Kabong that Haji Bakri. Contractor, arrived there at the end of the month to make certain alterations to the new school as ordered by the Director of Public Works.
Pengarah Nyalu and Penghulu Undom visited the station during the month; they report all quiet upriver.
The Kabong herd numbered approximately 87 head at the end of the month. I understand that the Director of Agriculture has made arrangements for the removal of part of the herd in May.
The centre bazaar road was levelled off and repaired by the prison gang during the month.
The Chinese at Rohan have at long last begun the reconstruction of the old bazaar there.

May, 1932.
Two persons were convicted in the District Court for offences under the Hawker’s Regulations.
An inquiry was held into the death of Mahlie bin Haji Salleh; verdict, accidental death.
S.S. L’ Aubaine arrived at Kabong on the 12th and having loaded thirty-four head of cattle, sailed again for Kuching on the 13th. She again arrived on the 16th and loaded a further thirty head for the same destination. At the end of the month the herd numbered twenty-one head.
The death of Haji Ali, Tua Kampong of Kupang, was reported early in the month. I visited Kupang twice during the month in connection with the election of a new Tua Kampong. Ahim bin Haji Sanyut was finally chosen and appointed.
Dresser Susut arrived from Kuching on the 7th instant and relieved Dresser Senada who returned to Kuching on the 10th.
I visited Kabong from the 11th to the 14th of May to arrange for the collection and despatch of the cattle to Kuching. Several minor cases were brought up for hearing during my visit. The Assistant District Officer, Saribas. Mr. J. R, Combe, arrived from Debak on the 25th instant. I accompanied Mr. Combe to Betong on his return, from thence I proceeded overland to Simanggang to discuss official matters with the Resident and was still away at the end of the month.
Malay Exemption Tax and Dyak Door Tax continues to come in slowly. The shortage of ready cash in the bazaar makes it difficult for Dyaks and Malays to sell their produce, although they can exchange it for tobacco, cloth, matches, etc., without any trouble.
An application for a site to build a sago factory at Saratok was made by Towkay Ah Tha of Kuching. The land will be examined and submitted for approval.
The prisoners were engaged during the month in clearing the swamp between the clerk’s quarters and the hospital, and in making a path round the edge of the swamp.
Trade returns for the month are appended.

LAND OFFICE.
April, 1932.
The Divisional Land Officer, Mr. B. Summers, reports: -
On the 16th instant I proceeded by launch to Saratok; Lingga and Sebuyow were visited en route. The usual routine was carried out. examining books, registers, etc., and certain points explained.
At Saratok all books, etc., were checked, also recent inspections in Roban District, so that some sixty occupation tickets are ready for issue, mostly for rubber, but great difficulty is experienced in collecting the premium for these, whether it is a young or old garden.
Total assessment collected to date amounts to 33%, as the majority of the people were still harvesting, or had only just finished; it is expected that the collections will increase after the harvest.
At Roban very little assessment has been collected up to date, about 10% in all.
Fifteen new occupation tickets were issued in exchange for old titles, the remaining forty-five being ready for issue directly the planters come to collect them.
One application was made for panning gold up river.
At 5.30 a.m. on Monday the 25th I left Saratok via Pengkalan Abu for Debak arriving there at 12.30 noon; the following day the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. Combe, arrived.
At this station just as at Rohan, very little assessment has been collected, 13% in all, due to the shortage of money, and the harvest not yet being finished.
A list of twenty-seven gardens, all pepper applications, was handed to the inspector; directly these have been inspected occupation tickets will be issued.
On the morning of the 27th Mr. Combe and I left for Pusa. Here again very little assessment has been collected, about 10% only; this is always a difficult station, with the majority of gardens owned by Malays, who apparently have no money at all.
On the 28th Mr. Combe and I left for Betong, arriving about noon.
All books and registers were checked as usual, also new occupation tickets signed up ready for issue.
It was noted that 30% of the garden assessment has been paid up to date, but it is exported that the collection will show a large increase after the harvest.
On the 1st May I returned to Simanggang.
Throughout my recent visit in the Krian and Saribas, at all stations, Native Officers, Tua Kampongs and Penghulus were informed as to when assessment, etc., was due, so that there would be no excuse for the people who have not paid or attempted to pay by the 30th of June.
Much difficulty is experienced in issuing new occupation tickets, because the people have not sufficient money to pay premia, whether the garden is in bearing or not. I would suggest that premia on new occupation tickets issued in exchange for permits to plant, or application slips (both of which are very numerous in this Division) for gardens already bearing, be postponed indefinitely or until such time as there is an improvement in the rubber trade. At the present time a great number of rubber gardens in bearing are only covered by an application slip, whereas if occupation tickets were issued instead, without paying premia, but rent only collected, then the revenue should show an increase, as the greater majority of natives know that they are supposed to pay rent when the garden is in bearing; whereas in most cases nothing is being collected because of this difficulty.

May, 1932.
On the 9th, Abang Omar proceeded down river to Bijat, to measure up Government padi land, on the same lines as other lands in that district, preliminary to being divided up for farming this year.
On the 11th and 12th. many garden titles were handed in, for gardens within the Simanggang Kampong areas.
For the remainder of the month, work in office was of routine nature.
Both inspectors were given sufficient work in the field to the end of the month.
On the morning of the 16th instant, accompanied by one Land Inspector, I started off overland to the Ulu Lingga, stopping the night at Melugu.
On the 18th and 19th instant, the original rentis cut by Moyan’s men was inspected, and belian boundary marks planted where necessary.
This piece of farming land situated between Gua and Ran Ulu Lingga, consisting of some 600 acres, originally reverted to Government.
On the 22nd we moved to Rumah Empati at Bait, when I had arranged to meet Penghulu Linang, the object of this visit being to try and settle a common boundary on farming land to prevent future disputes between Rumah Empati and Rumah Jimbai; Bukit Ketman was mentioned by the Acting Resident. Mr. Bruce as the suitable boundary for the other parcel of land.
On the morning of the 23rd, the matter was thoroughly explained, and threshed out, by both the Penghulu and myself. That same day we returned as far as Slepong, the next day to Melugu; walking was very difficult owing to the heavy rain, in parts the path being from three to four feet under water.
On the morning of the 25th we returned to Simanggang. Throughout this trip, at every house visited, the occupants were informed when assessment and rent was due, also certain Land Routine as far as possible explained to them; most of these houses appear to be satisfied with the recent harvest.
It is expected that very little pepper assessment or rent will be forthcoming before the end of July, as few gardens will be ripe before then, after that date a marked increase in the monthly collection should shew.

Fourth Division News.
Miri.
April, 1932.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports by Mr. F. G. Carpenter, Acting Resident: -
Courts. -Few cases were dealt with during the month.
The principal cases concerned offences under the Opium and Vagrancy Orders.
There were two matters brought before the Coroner and one in the Bankruptcy Court.
Health. -The department was generally occupied in antimalarial work at Tanjong Lobang, together with which work the collection of entomological specimens from the same area was undertaken.
Forty-two vaccinations were performed by the Sanitary Inspector.
Immigration and Emigration. -New arrivals and arrivals on Old Passports numbered 166, while emigrants totalled 188.
Land. -Eight applications were received for new lands, 5 of which were for 19 acres of pepper, 2 for 23 acres of coconuts and 1 for 180 acres of cattle grazing land.
Regarding the latter there is nothing in the fared Order regulating grafting grounds; but the Land Office intimate that a subsidiary Order is shortly to be published, and that the present charge would be 50 cents per acre unless the cattle are gracing on communal land. It is to be hoped that any new regulations to be enforced will not be, such as to render dairy farming unattractive. In newly-opened areas such as Kuala Baram there can be no communal gracing ground as the district is all jungle.
Medical. -At the Government dispensary 153 out-patients made 481 attendances for treatment. Five cases were transferred to the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, hospital.
Municipal. -At a meeting of the Board held on the 1st the matter of street lighting by electricity and extension of the scheme to the Kampong areas was discussed in the light of estimates received from the Company. The scheme was unanimously agreed upon and the Company have been requested to proceed with the work.
Outstations. -These were not visited during the month; but reports shew that Exemption tax was being received satisfactorily and that the padi harvest was everywhere good.
At Andam’s new house at Niah 16 families attempted to break away and make a separate house under their own Tuai. The parties, together with Native Officer Awang Itam, were called to Miri and given the opportunity of remaining in Niah under T.R. Andam or returning to their own country, after twenty-four hours they decided on the former.
General. -The Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak proceeded to British North Borneo on the 5th.
House registration in the various kampongs was started during the month, and had made excellent progress.
On the 25th a serious robbery occurred at Lopeng when a Chinese woman was bound and gagged in her own house by four Chinese. Three of the assailants have been caught, two of whom were arrested near Sibuti. It is expected that the fourth, who is suspected of being the ringleader, will be apprehended shortly.

May, 1932.
Meteorological: -
Municipal. -The lighting contractor «u given three months’ notice to terminate his agreement. It is hoped that street lighting in the bazaar and kampong areas will be entirely by electricity from the beginning of August.
At a meeting of the Municipal Board held early in the month, the rates to be charged in the kampong area for street lighting were settled.
Prisons. -Warder Jaginda Singh returned from Indian furlough on the 17th.
Word was received from the Assistant Resident, Kuala Belait, that a Dyak named Nyalambai was undergoing a short sentence in the Belait gaol. This man has since been identified as the Dyak who escaped from Miri gaol on 14th January, 1932.
Prisoners averaged 41 during the month and the gangs were employed mostly at Tanjong Lobang.
Staff. -Mr. E. M. Selous arrived for duty on the 21st.
Lee Kon Fah was transferred to Bintulu as Chief Clerk on the 27th vice L. Mang Fook.
Robert Than was transferred to Municipality on the 27th vice Lim Bachi who has taken over Lee Kon Fah’s duties.
General. -Chop Kim Guan intends to mill and polish local padi and rice, and retail the finished products at much lower rates than those ruling for the imported varieties. His machine has arrived.
On the 10th Mr. Maynard, American Consul-General at Singapore, accompanied by his wife, came ashore for a few hours en route to British North Borneo.
On the 24th His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by Mr. E. S. Holl, came ashore while on his way from Baram to Kuching.
The 24th, being the anniversary of Proclamation Day, was observed as a holiday.

BARAM.
March, 1932.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
Court. -In the Resident’s Court Teng Khen, Lai Ai and Lai Leong were sentenced under section 394. No other cases call for mention.
Travelling. -Accompanied by Galan and Wan Ahmat I left on 8th to meet Penans and visit the Kelabits. After meeting the Penans at L. Melinau we left for L. Lama where the new birdsnests cave regulations were explained. Galan and I left L. Lama on 16th, Wan Ahmat remaining till 22nd to superintend the collecting of nests after which he left to visit the Tinjar. We were still away at the end of the month.

April, 1932.
Crime. -Three Chinese were arrested and committed for trial under section 457. The arrest reflects the greatest credit on Native Officer Wan Taha.
Travelling. -I returned from up river on 26th having visited all houses in the Baram, Tutoh and Akah as well as the Kelabit country. Wan Ahmat returned from the Tinjar on 5th. Apart from the rumours of Dyaks mentioned below all is quiet up river.
Native Affairs. -Rumours of Dyaks are current in the Ulu Silat and also in the Dapoi, Tinjar. The matter has been taken up with the authorities in the Third Division and the District Officer, Bintulu. Though the reports as to numbers are doubtless exaggerated, there is I think no doubt that some Dyaks are working in this district.
Agriculture. -The padi harvest is good though not phenomenal. Padi is selling at from 1 1/2 to 2 pasus per dollar and rice at from 5-6 gantangs per dollar.
Shipping. -The s.s. Gladys made one trip during the month.
Trade. -The upriver people are all busy working rotan sega which according to the Singapore quotations is fetching a remarkably good price.

May, 1932.
Travelling. -His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by Mr. E. S. Holl, visited the station from 21st to 24th when various matters were brought before His Highness. Mr. E. Banks, Curator, arrived on 21st in connection with the forthcoming Oxford Expedition to Mount Dulit, and was still here at the end of the month.
General. -The Regatta was held on 2rd, His Highness the Tuan Muda’s cup being won by a mixed crew from Kampong Dagang and Kampong Narom using a Berawan boat-a magnificent race, the Muriks, last year winners, being beaten on the post by six feet. In spite of hard times there was a large and representative gathering present, the only notable absentee being P. Aban Tingang Saong who is ill. Visitors for the Regatta were, Mrs. Carpenter, Mr. and Mrs. R. R. Hamilton, Mrs. Webster, Rev. Father Jansen, Mr. and Mrs. R. H. W. Hamilton and Messrs. Weigall and Notley.
Public Works. -The floods have at last subsided. The road on the hill has been remade and it is hoped to start on the bazaar roads later.
Trade. -A quantity of rotan was brought down at the Regatta but only fetched $1.50 per picul; quotations from Miri being no higher. This was a great disappointment to the upriver people who had relied on much higher prices.
Trade returns are as under: -

BINTULU.
April, 1932.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. W. H. C. C. Morice, reports: -
General. -On the 8th I gave ex-Lance-Corporal Skalai permission to build a house of 13 doors on the right bank of Sungei Silas.
On the 12th I left for Tatau, cleared up all Court work there and returned on the 14th.
The Kampong people have been slow in paying their head tax. In many cases I have given them further time owing to the fact that they are very hard up.
On the 30th I hold a coroner’s inquiry into the death of one Kadah bin Magai of Kampong Seman. The finding of the Court was accidental death through injuries sustained from falling from a tree. At the time he was collecting fruit.

May, 1932.
Prison. -Prisoners averaged 17 daily and were employed on cleaning drains and ground around Government quarters.
A number of cases of mild fever were reported. Otherwise health was good.
P.W.D. -The pipe line is in good condition. Water was laid on to the Bintulu Recreation Club. The Government Carpenter was employed painting and whitewashing the Port and Police quarters.
Police. -Numbered 14 at the end of the month, comprising 5 members of the Sarawak Constabulary and 9 Village Constables.
Trade and Customs. -The trade statistics for the month are as under: -
The principal exports during the month were as follows: -
Shipping. -Arrivals 13 and Departures 13.
General. -On 17th of the month the coroner’s jury decided to commit Lambong, Sumin and Liho to the Resident’s Court on a charge of murder.
On 20th Mr. Hannigan and Mr. Reynolds, A.C.P. arrived on their way north.
On 21st Penghulu Ovat Mereng arrived from Tubau to discuss Kayan affairs.
On 31st Lee Kon Fah took over the Treasury work from Lee Mang Fook, the latter having been dismissed from the Government Service.
The Dyaks have been giving a certain amount of trouble in Sungei Spadok, opening padi farms on Malay land. I have had all people before me and held the matter over pending the arrival of Resident. The affairs of this station have been running smoothly during the past month.
Mr. Youngberg of the S.D.A. Mission is asking for more land adjoining his house in the Tatau river. I have held the matter over until I can investigate the matter personally and see what is required.


















































