VOL. LXII.
No. 948.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Thursday, September 1st, 1932.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette
THURSDAY, SEPTEMBER 1st, 1932.

Acknowledgement.
Mr. Ha Buey Hon is deeply grateful to all relatives and friends for their kind messages of sympathy, floral wreaths and attendances at the funeral of the late Mrs. Ha Buey Hon, on the 8th August, 1932.

Local and Personal.
August.
Monday, 8th August, being His Highness the Tuan Muda’s birthday, the Government Offices were closed. At 8 a.m. a salute was fired from Fort Margherita. During the afternoon football matches were arranged in honour of His Highness’ birthday by the Chinese and Malay communities. An account of these appear in our columns.

Mr. C. F. C. Macaskie is due to arrive from British North Borneo by m.v. Marudu on 10th September. His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Mr. Macaskie as Government Secretary.

Monday, 26th September, being the birthday of His Highness the Rajah, the Government Offices will be closed. At 8 a.m. His Highness the Tuan Muda will present Long Service Decorations at the Court House.

Mr. A. H. Noble. Manager, Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, and Mrs. Noble, arrived from Miri on 20th and returned on 29th. During their stay in Kuching Mr. and Mrs. Noble were the guests of His Highness the Tuan Muda.

The six new racing ponies purchased by the Sarawak Turf Club from British North Borneo arrived in Kuching during the month, they were duly drawn for and taken over by their owners.

A meeting of the Sarawak Turf Club will be held on 24th and 26th September. The attention of our readers is drawn to the Traffic Regulations published in this issue.

With deep regret we record the death of Capt. W. R. B. Gifford, Sarawak Civil Service, in our columns. Capt. Gifford, who had retired on pension, will be remembered by many as a very popular officer and good friend.

The Race-course was opened, on 13th August, for training for the forthcoming Turf Club Meeting.

We are informed that “Summer Time” will commence as from midnight 13th and 14th September when clocks will be advanced 20 minutes. This time will continue until midnight 13th and 14th December when clocks will be put back again to normal.

In the finals of the St. Michael’s Catholic Club Tennis Tournament, Mr. Joe Lim-30 beat E. Van Houten scr. 6-4, 7-5. The cups for this tournament were presented by Messrs. Chong and Brothers.
The result of the Billiards Handicap was E. Thian Loke (winner), F. Shui Lian (runner-up), and R. Koo (winner of the highest break). The cups were presented by Rev. Father Hofgartner.

Mr. and Mrs. Corson returned to Kuching per s.s. Vyner Brooke on 1st August. Mr. and Mrs. Corson have been spending their honeymoon at Brastagi.

Mr. C. S. Griffiths returned from home furlough by s.s. Kudat, arriving in Kuching, on 15th August.

During the month visitors to Kuching were Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident. Third Division, and Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident, Second Division.
Mr. S. G. Hansom took over Sadong District from Mr. J. G. Anderson, who proceeded to Bintulu where he has been appointed.

Mr. Harley Clarke, dentist, of Singapore, is due to arrive in Kuching on 23rd September and will probably return to Singapore on 1st October. During Mr. Clarke’s stay in Kuching his studio will be situated at the Rest House, Rock Road.

During the month the Headquarters and depot of the Sarawak Constabulary was moved across river, to the old military area formerly occupied by the Sarawak Rangers. The Central Police Station, Kuching, now serves as Divisional Headquarters.

The temporary vegetable market in the Customs Godown, Main Bazaar, has been closed. Vegetables are now sold on the site of the old vegetable market.

HIS HIGHNESS THE TUAN MUDA’S BIRTHDAY.
Monday, 8th August, being His Highness the Tuan Muda’s Birthday, the Government Offices were closed. At 8 a.m. a salute was fired from Fort Margherita and all ships in port were dressed. During the afternoon two football matches were held in honour of His Highness’ birthday. One at the Padungan recreation ground and the other at the Kuching Football Club ground. The game at Padungan was between the Chinese Veterans and Chinese Odds and Ends, competing for a Silver Cup presented by the Committee of the Sarawak Chinese Football Association. The ground was gaily decorated with flags and there was a considerable crowd of spectators.
At the conclusion of the game. Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division, representing His Highness the Tuan Muda, presented the cup to the winning team.
Mr. Tan Sum Guan asked the Resident to convey the hearty greetings of the Chinese Community who wished His Highness the Tuan Muda many happy returns of the day. Three cheers were then called for His Highness the Tuan Muda and three for the Resident. Result of the game Odds and Ends 4, Veterans 3.
At the Kuching Football Club ground a match had been arranged by the Dato Amar, Abang Sulieman bin Haji Taha, between the Sarawak Malays and St. Joseph’s School. The ground was decorated and a large crowd was in attendance. Musical items were rendered by the Kampong Bandarsah and the Kampong Tanjong Bands.
Mr. P. M. Adams, Secretary for Native Affairs, represented His Highness the Tuan Muda and presented medals, donated by the Dato Amar, to the players at the end of the game. The Dato Amar requested Mr. P. M. Adams to convey to His Highness the Tuan Muda the wish of all present for many happy returns of the day. The proceedings then closed with three rousing cheers for His Highness the Tuan Muda. The result of the game was Sarawak Malays 2, St. Joseph’s 0.

Obituary.
It is with deep regret we have to report the death of Captain Walter Robert Barry Gifford who died suddenly on the morning of the 22nd July.
Captain Gifford was taken seriously ill on the 16th July. After making an improvement he became suddenly worse on 22nd July and passed away before noon. The body was cremated on the 26th July at Golders’ Green.
Captain Gifford joined the Sarawak Service as a Cadet in 1910, doing duty at Limbang and Oya, but was allowed to resign his appointment in 1915, when he rejoined his old Regiment (the Middlesex) for active service. He was wounded at Ypres and later promoted to Lieutenant in the Royal Flying Corps. He was promoted to Captain in 1917, and Flight Commander during the same year. He then proceeded to East Africa where he was mentioned in Despatches. In 1919 he was Adjutant at the Artillery Observation School, Egypt.
He rejoined the Sarawak Service in 1919 and in 1920 was appointed A.D.C. to His Highness the Rajah, retiring on pension in July, 1929.
To his mother and widow we extend our heartfelt sympathy in their great loss.
Among those present at the funeral were: -
Her Highness the Ranee, Mrs. Gifford (Mother), Mr. G. M Gifford. Miss Nota Gifford, Lady Gallwey (Aunt), Mrs. Buck, Mr. F. F. Boult, Mr. E. O. Bruce, Mr. J. A. Smith, Mr. Dick Holmes, Mr. E. S. Howland, and Mr. F. Reed.
Wreaths were received from: -
Her Highness the Ranee, Mrs. Barry Gifford, Mrs. Gifford, Mr. G. M. Gifford, Professor W. E. Le Gros Clark, Mrs. Ashton Duke, Mrs. Rachel Crespigny, Mr. Howland, and Mrs. Anderson.

Sarawak’s Distinction.
AUG. 24.
Sarawak enjoys the distinction of being the only State under the rule of a while Rajah. It probably, enjoys another distinction, almost as unique, and one on which it has equal reason to congratulate itself-freedom from the efforts of seditionists who, always active in Malaya and in other countries of the East, have, apparently, not turned their attention to Rajah Brooke’s territory. In Malaya during the last few months there seems to have been a recrudescence of seditious activity. While our Government is concerning itself with the introduction of expensive measures to secure control of the agents of sedition by means of registration of the alien population, Sarawak is able to report that during 1931 the strict censorship of postal matter carried out by the Secretariat for Chinese Affairs failed to bring to light a single seditious document. Chinese in Malaya are being urged by the agents of Moscow to unite against the imperialist. Chinese in Sarawak are permitted to cany on their ordinary activities as 
settlers without this distraction. The clash between Nanking and Canton and the Sino-Japanese dispute, repercussions of which have been fell strongly in Malaya, have created little anxiety among Sarawak’s officials charged with the maintenance of order, and it is possible to report that there has been no direct evidence of the existence of any dangerous society in the State.
Unrest there has been, among a section of the Dyaks, but this discontent may be traced to economic causes, and not to fostered antagonism to a form of Government which has always distinguished itself by consideration for the well-being of the natives of the Country, the development of its resources, and the maintenance of settled conditions in which the Chinese settlers can carry on business. For many years, as owners or workers on rubber gardens, the Dyaks have enjoyed considerable prosperity, in contrast to which the present comparative poverty occasioned by the fall in rubber prices may be difficult to understand among a people unappreciative of the uncontrollable causes which have contributed to the position.
Sarawak, in short, seems to have every reason to look upon the condition of some of its neighbours and feel thankful, without any Pharisaical self-satisfaction, that they are not as others are. True, trade has declined with the increasing gravity of the economic depression by something more than thirty per cent, from over $41 millions to less than $28 millions. Plantation rubber exports, for example, declined in value to $1,907,000 from $4,061,000, although the quantity exported was very much the same, while oil. which is the State’s principal export, also shows a very heavy decline, the value of benzine exports alone having fallen from nearly $9 millions to just under $5 millions. There is, however, in spite of these big declines, a balance in favour of exports of more than $7 millions, which is more than can be claimed for Malaya and for a large number of other countries at the present time.
The slump in trade is inevitably reflected in Government revenue, which has fallen from $5 1/2 millions to less than $4 1/2 millions, but the position in 1931 was actually better than in 1930, the deficit being something like $400,000 less. The State has a surplus of assets over liabilities of nearly $4 1/2 millions with which to weather whatever financial troubles lie ahead should the economic depression persist for very much longer than we all hope it will. The Government has taken very stringent measures in the interests of economy. The railway has been closed down Sadong Colliery closed, the Chief Secretaryship abolished, various departments have been amalgamated, the Sarawak Rangers Band, which had been in existence for over forty years, has disappeared, and the Sarawak Rangers and Police have been merged into one force. Sarawak can, therefore, look to the future without any very great anxiety as to its ability to come through the slump, with its capacity for further development undiminished. -Singapore Free Press.

Sarawak Association.
The Sarawak Association dinner was held at the Trocadero Restaurant on 6th July, 1932. Sir Percy Cunynghame, in the absence of His Highness the Rajah, took the chair. He proposed the toasts of the King, the Rajah, and the Honorary Members. The latter was replied to by Mr. G. J. F. Tomlinson, of the Colonial Office, who is a Trustee of the “Rajah of Sarawak Fund.” Forty-four sat down to an excellent dinner and a very cheery evening.
LIST OF MEMBERS PRESENT AT DINNER.
Lt.-Col. Sir Percy Cunynghame, Bart., O.B.R., (in the chair), Mr. H. C. P. Adams, Mr. R. Y. Ames, Mr. H. D. Aplin, Mr. J. R. Barnes. Mr. J. K. Beasley. Mr. R. D. Binnie, Mr. C. F. Birt, Mr. F. Osmond Blagg, Mr. F. F. Boult, Mr. E. O. Bruce, Squadron Leader D. V. Carnegie. R.A.F., Mr. W. Shaw Cotterill, Mr. D. B. Crane, Mr. W. F. Dick, Mr. R. S. Douglas, Mr. R L. Daubeny, Mr. A. M. Forrest, Mr. P. H. Flood-Page, Dr. C. O. Gange, Mr. G. C. Gillan, Mr. C. S. Griffiths, Sir Gilbert Grindle, K.C.M.G., C.B., Sir Laurence Guillemard, G.C.M.G., K.C.B., Lt.-Commander A. M. Hughes, R.N., Mr. C. Willes Johnson, Mr. H. C. Brooke Johnson, Dr. W. Kusel. Mr. S. R. Maw, Mr. N. A. Middlemas, Captain J. C. W. MacBryan, Commander P. E. E. Maxwell, R.N., Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner, Engineer Commander L. R. Rickinson, R.N., Mr. H. E. Saker, Major H. W. V. Scott, Mr. W. F. de V. Skrine, Mr. J. A. Smith, Mr. W. H. Smith, Mr. G. Beresford Stooke, Mr. P. J. Stewart, Mr. G. J. F. Tomlinson, Mr. G. J. D. Walters, and Mr. A. B. Ward.

British Air Mail.
EXTENSION TO SINGAPORE OFFERED.
Melbourne, Aug. 12.
Imperial Airways has offered to extend the India air mail service to Singapore provided Australia will undertake to complete the service to Australia.
A report on the subject is being forwarded to the Cabinet by the British and Australian Air Mail Departmental Committee. -Straits Times.

Life at Sarawak.
PORTSMOUTH MAN AS SULTAN’S LEGAL ADVISER.
TALK TO ROTARIANS.
Some interesting sidelights on life and conditions prevailing at Sarawak, on the north-west coast of Borneo, were given by Mr. F. Osmond Blagg to the members of the Portsmouth and Southsea Rotary Club after their luncheon at Southsea yesterday.
The speaker holds the position of legal adviser to H.H. the Sultan of Sarawak, and is the son of a former President of the Club.
Mr. Blagg said that the State consisted of about 80,000 square miles, and owing to its proximity to the equator had an extremely hot climate with a heavy rainfall. A curious fact about Borneo in general was that it was unlike the neighbouring islands in that it was not volcanic, and this detracted from the fertility of its soil. When there was an eruption in Java ten years ago, the ashes were blown 300 miles and the natives of Sarawak thought the end of the world had come.
With reference to the products of the State, the speaker said that it was the policy of the Sultan to withdraw from international barter. The natural resources existed for the benefit of the native and not for the white man. Mr. Blagg related how Sir James Brook had settled in Sarawak and finally became the Sultan in 1840, the present ruler being his descendant.
Rotarians had a laugh at the expense of their professional brethren, when the lecturer said, “Doctors manage to get their money in Sarawak, but lawyers have to offer their services for nothing.”
The President, the Rev. W. J. Dennis. M.A., was in the chair, and on the proposition of Rotarian D. Gammans a hearty vote of thanks was accorded to Mr. Blagg. -Portsmouth Evening News.

The Dog Hook.
Practically the whole of Penang’s not inconsiderable trade in rice and copra is handled at every stage of transport and shipment by that destructive steel implement known as the dog-hook. It is understood that traders have always regarded the use of this hook with disfavour, but in the past labour has insisted on the continuance of this alleged aid to handling. The hook levies heavy toll on grain bags, and in the course of a year many piculs must be lost on the quayside and elsewhere as a result of torn hags.
And apart from the damage they do, these books in the hands of irresponsible people have more than once been turned into weapons of attack.
Now that labour is losing its ascendancy and the employer is again coming into his own-handling charges have been lowered appreciably recently-why cannot a definite stand be made against the wasteful practice of tearing sacks and losing grain? -Straits Times.

More New Uses.
The news that the traffic police of Paris have done something to help Malaya’s chief industry by installing rubber traffic posts has already been chronicled. It remained for a New York “columnist” to appreciate the invention at its full value, as indicated by the following extract from the New York Daily Mirror: -
Here’s the greatest news our cock-eyed, flask nibbling, reckless-driving auto drivers can ever hope to hear during the rest of their wild and rummy lives. Cops over in Paris have invented a traffic post made of rubber! If you smash into it, it gently bends, kisses your car sweetly on the radiator without doing the slightest damage, your car bounces back into the middle of the road and the post bounces up into its original upright position. Then you may go on your way to the next roadhouse, or whatever they call those places over there.
It seems that the cops of Paris got rather sick and tired picking up the remains of broken iron traffic posts together with the remains of the Fiat. So, a genius thought of making use of rubber, and now, if we take a hint, we may have the solution of one of our own great problems, next, of course, to balancing the budget, granting the bonus, lowering taxes, abolishing prohibition, cutting down foreign debts, eliminating racketeers, lowering the high tariff, selecting a new President, avoiding more bank failures and a number of other minor things.
Inasmuch as we usually improve on every idea we hear about it might be a good plan not only to have rubber traffic posts but rubber lamp posts. This would help prevent pretty little show girls from getting their pretty little features all cut up early in the morning when riding home with the boy friends.
Rubber lamp posts in the middle of the road would have a definite value in Singapore, for there are certain standards which are demolished with almost monotonous regularity at holiday time. -Straits Times.

OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 45 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
1887.] THURSDAY, 12TH MAY, 1887. [Price 10 cents.
HOMING PIGEONS IN SARAWAK.
Communicated.
A great impetus has of late been given to the fancy at Simanggang, the Resident having caused to be constructed a spacious loft and all that is now wanted is a few thorough-bred birds to put inside it.
Possibly a few accounts of the doings of some of our present birds may prove of interest to some of the many readers of the Sarawak Gazette.
The first attempt, at training these birds, took place last month (March). Three birds were liberated at 5 p.m. one mile from Fort Alice, near Mr. Jim Liong’s country seat on the Braicun highway. The following birds were then liberated, 1st a red chequer male (registered name Red Rover), 2nd a blue hen, and 3rd a half bred cock brother to No. 2, by name the White Squall owing to white being its predominating color. These birds on being tossed took most erratic courses and seemed to be altogether off their heads, this was probably to their having been most of their lives born and bred inside their house or left. However, that night one the Red Rover came in, and at daybreak the White Squall appeared, while its sister the half bred blue female never showed itself, nor has it done so since up to date (20-4-87, 8.45 p.m.). However, if it has any time between the present and the next two years.
The two survivors then began a regular course of training having been flown from Simbauts, Entulang, Timalen, Pamutus, Situmbin and Stero. On their return from the latter place they were overtaken by a storm and did not return until late in the afternoon, the thoroughbred coming in half an hour before the half bred (a Homer crossed with common bazaar bird).
The next place they flew from was from Stero. Here the birds were tossed at 11 a.m. they were soon after, overtaken by a storm and did not get on their home course until 11.45 a.m. which showed they were unacquainted with the surrounding country, and could not at first get their Simanggang bearings. Thus they continued to hover round at a great height in the air until lost to view. At Simanggang the weather was piping hot, the sky being fairly clear, but slightly hazy, while the heat was intense. From midday and upwards we were expecting the voyageurs, but were doomed to disappointment until 3.30 p.m., when in rushed old Jassim the gardener, announcing that the White Squall had arrived, having seen it a long distance off, a mere speck in the sky, over the point; to cut the matter short we were kept in suspense until 5 p.m. when in flew the Red Rover settling on the fort foot none the worse for his long outing. In conclusion it is to be hoped that next time he flies from any similar place, he will exert 
himself to return a little quicker to his home, and that he will attain the rate of speed of 900 to 1,000 yards a minute, as his ancestors before him have nobly acquired.
A. FANCIER.

Sarawak Library.
The following books have been kindly presented by His Highness the Rajah: -
Mr. A. L. McLaine: -
Mr. William Wong: -
Purchased by the Committee: -

First Division News.
RESIDENT’S OFFICE.
July, 1932.
Extracts from the Divisional Reports by Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division: -
Resident’s Court. -One criminal and five civil cases came before the Court.
Lee Ah Hiang, a Foochow Chinese, was sentenced under section 235A. I.P.C., for being in possession of instruments and materials for the purpose of counterfeiting Sarawak coins.
General. -I left for Singapore on the 4th and returned on the 11th.
Sadong was visited during the latter part of the month.
On 16th the leaders of the Oxford Expedition under Mr. Harrisson arrived at Kuching previous to their departure to Miri.

UPPER SARAWAK, BAU.
July, 1932.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports: -
Judicial-Supreme Court. -An appeal by Tonggat anak Duim from the Resident’s Court was heard by the Chief Justice and the charge of murder was reduced to one of culpable homicide not amounting to murder.
Coroner’s Court. -One inquisition was held during the month on the body of one Ng Kok, a Kheh Chinese who was found slabbed in the garden of a house on the Bidi Road. A verdict of wilful murder against some person or persons unknown was returned.
General. -Visitors to the station during the month included the Chief Justice Mr. T. S. Boyd, and Messrs. Hansom, Hockaday, Kennedy, Munson, Owen, Reid, Sinclair and White.
I took over the affairs of the district from Mr. W. S. B. Buck on the 13th and the latter left next day for Kuching and Europe.
On the 20th, in the early hours of the morning, a stabbing affray took place at a house on the Bidi Road wherein a Kheh Chinese named Ng Kok died from wounds received and another Kheh Chinese named Choo Nyiat Ming was wounded. The matter is still being investigated.
Gold Mining. -Twenty-six applications for Exclusive Prospecting Licences and one for a Mining Lease were received during the month.
359.70 and 106.17 ounces of actual gold were obtained by the Bidi Gold Mining Company and the Bau Gold Mining Syndicate respectively for the month of June, 1932, and 9 ounces was obtained by the Sarawak Mining Syndicate, Limited, for the months of May and June, 1932.

LUNDU.
July, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
General. -Border passes to Netherlands India territory were allowed again after 15th, as investigations proved there were no more cases of smallpox in Aruk.
I reached Sempadi on 27th where about thirty Sea Dyaks under ex.-Sergeant Sambang have settled down. As yet they have no house but are going to make a temporary one next month.
T.K. Haji Brahim of Sempadi returned from Kuching on 25th where he had been for ten days for medical treatment.
Practically all the exemption tax for 1932 has been collected, the Dyaks from up country following their old custom of paying all tax in July.
An epidemic of thefts of pepper has started to break out; two Chinese who were caught were severely dealt with by the Courts. The upriver Dyaks are the worst offenders and the most difficult to catch.
The Kadaong Road was repaired, and the road across Tanjong Purun to Kampong Stunggang was raised in parts, and small drains made, but not sufficient to keep it dry as the natives say the last time large drains were dug their padi crop on the tanjong failed through lack of water. This pathway is very little used so only the former small ditches were opened.
The Auditor visited the station on 19th and audited the books up to 31st December, 1931.
The Revd. Father Staal and Father de Vos arrived by m.l. La Follette on 27th and proceeded to Sambas via Biawak the next morning.
Lands. -Srayan (Chinese area), Simatan (with Sungei Kilong, Puguk), Bagak and part of Kedaong were demarcated during the month. Occupation Tickets were issued to all gardeners at Prigi and Sembawang. Very satisfactory progress has been made lately and all four Land Inspectors are working very well. All the Chinese-owned gardens have now been demarcated except a few at Skambal towards the sea, and quit rent will be collected next month and in September.
Forest. -Work on the cleaning of Sempadi and Gunong Gadin Forest Reserve boundary was stopped on 4th, as this was considered unnecessary.
There seems to be insufficient supervision of the Rambongan district as a number of men have been caught working wood without licences and even making charcoal. This has been reported to the Conservator of Forests.
Trade. -The total returns for the month and for comparison with those for the corresponding month of last year were as follows: -

SADONG.
July, 1932.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports: -
Court. -Several farming disputes were settled, also the usual number of minor cases.
Agriculture. -The Director of Agriculture, Mr. J. S. W. Bean, and Mr. Dare, arrived in m.l. Para on 14th, and having visited the Bugis Colony and various local gardens proceeded to Paloh on 15th.
P.W.D. -Mr. J Scott, of Sibu Laut, arrived on the 31st with a tongkang and selected a boiler and various other metal goods from the mine, which he is arranging to purchase from the Public Works Department, Kuching.
General. -The Resident visited the station on the 21st and having attended to all outstanding matters, returned on the 24th.
On 27th Mr. S. G. Hansom arrived here with instructions to take over the duties of this district.
Trade and Customs. -Comparative trade returns are as follows: -

Chinese Affairs.
July, 1932.
Extracts from the Report of The Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Mr. C. D. Le Gros Clark: -
The Secretary for Chinese Affairs toured the Third Division from 18th to 29th of the month, visiting Sarikei, Binatang, Kanowit, Song, Kapit and Sibu districts.
Information was received of a Secret Society operating in the Sungei Sareh-Selalang district, and as a result of a series of night-raids, about 25 arrests were made. Perhaps the most important discovery during these raids was a Code Book which, it is hoped, may solve several problems in connexion with the Secret Societies in the Third Division of the past four years. The Secret Society in question was definitely found to be a branch of the 1929 Secret Society, the main headquarters of which had already been broken up.
By the end of the month, investigations were still proceeding, including an analytical examination of certain correspondence discovered, including the important Code Book mentioned above.

Kuching Football League.
Owing to Saturday, 24th September, being a Race Day, matches originally fixed for that date will now be played on Thursday, 22nd September.

St. Theresa’s Convent, Kuching.
The sale held on the 1st and 2nd of this month passed off with great success, financially and from every other point of view. Mother Helen and the Sisters wish to thank everyone who helped to bring this about.
The first night, His Highness the Tuan Muda and Dayang Anne graced US with their presence and patronized every stall, mostly for the childrens’ benefit.
Special thanks are due to those who gave their services with such great alacrity. Mr. G. Salosa and his orchestra gave many a merry strain during both nights of the sale. Mrs. Chater and Mrs. Tait who presided at their different stalls with much success. Mrs. Day’s “surprise” stall aroused great curiosity and attention. The Fish Pond with Mr. J. Low drew crowds of fishers both great and small. Mrs. Boon Siew provided and sold dainty teas, while Mr. Day and Mr. Tait attended to the wants of the gentlemen.
Mr. Merrels and his fellow auctioneer Shiw Lian provided plenty of amusement in selling off things that did not find ready sale.
Altogether, in spite, of the gloomy times and the fears of the Sisters, the whole thing was a real pleasure and success.
The Prizes for the Raffle were won by well-known local people.

Traffic Regulations.
AUTUMN RACE MEETING, 1932.
1. After the hour of 11 a.m. on the 24th and 26th September, 1932, all Motor Vehicles, must proceed to the Race-course via Padungan Road or Ban Hok Road only, and up to the hour of 7 p.m. on these days, must return by the Sekama Road only.
Exceptions: -
1. His Highness the Rajah’s Cars.
2. The Government Secretary.
3. The Resident, First Division.
4. The Principal Medical Officer.
5. The Honorary Secretary, Sarawak Turf Club.
6. In cases of extreme urgency permission may be obtained on the Course for other cars to return via Ban Hok Road.

2. After depositing passengers at the Grandstand, vehicles will line up on the extreme left- hand side of the Grandstand road, one behind the other, and within three yards of each other, facing away from the Grandstand.
3. Rickshaws and bicycles may proceed to the Race-course at any time, and by any road, and must park on the Bandstand plot. They will not be allowed to remain on any part of the road leading to the Grandstand or roads leading to the Racecourse.
4. All vehicles must move to their parking grounds without delay. as directed by the Police.
WARNING: -
5. The driver of any vehicle
(a) endeavouring to turn in Grandstand road or,
(b) stopping to pick up passengers in Grandstand road,
will be prosecuted for causing an obstruction.

Kuching Football Club.
At the Animal General Meeting held on Sunday, 21st August, 1932, the following list of Officers was elected for the season 1932-1933.
President. -Mr. G. T. Bates.
Captain. -Mr. R. E. Edwards.
Committee. -Messrs. F. Harding, W. H. Kelley, A. L. McLaine, and W. J. Chater.

Second Division News.
July, 1932.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident: -
I left for Engkilili on the 8th, accompanied by Mr. J. C. B. Fisher. The next day I walked out to Marup to inspect the gold workings there. The Manager very kindly showed us round and explained the methods by which he hopes to obtain gold. Blasting has been going on for some months and it was hoped that another month would see this work finished. A deep gully has been made through the solid rock by which it is proposed to drain a swamp wherein the gold is expected to lie. The Manager showed us samples of gold, already obtained, and bits of rocks showing signs of not only gold but other metals.
On the 10th, accompanied by Messrs. S. G. Hansom and J. C. B. Fisher, I left for Lubok Antu. We walked as far as Penghulu Imong’s house where we embarked in boats. The river was in full flood and the road beyond was impassable. That evening we reached Ngang’s house at Sungei Bulo, where we stayed the night. The next morning the river had risen to such an extent that further progress was impossible and we had to return to Engkilili, proceeding to Simanggang the next day.
Mr. A. Macpherson arrived on the 11th, to do duty as Travelling Assistant District Officer, Second Division, and proceeded to Engkilili on the 14th, where he will make his headquarters. Mr. S. G. Hansom left Simanggang on the 22nd on transfer.

SARIBAS.
July, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe, reports: -
The Right Reverend the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak paid a visit to the district during the month, visiting Betong, Pusa and Debak.
Mr. Summers, Divisional Land Officer, was also here from the 14th to the 17th.
The Resident, Second Division, Mr. J. B. Archer, arrived here on the 27th, returning to Simanggang on the 31st, after visiting Pusa.
Trade: -

KALAKA.
July, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. L. K. Morse, reports: -
No cases of importance came before the Courts.
The Divisional Land Officer, Mr. B. Summers arrived at Saratok on the 10th and left again for Betong on the 14th.
The Tua Kampong Paloh, Abang Metalli, is reported to be very ill and unable to perform his duty.
Penghulu Entri of the Seblak returned from leave during the month. He is much impressed with the farming methods he saw in the Dutch East Indies.
Trade: -

SIMANGGANG.
July, 1932.
The Officer-in-Charge of Police and Prisons, Mr. J. C. B. Fisher, reports: -
Police. -Several cases of petty theft were reported during the month, but nothing of serious nature occurred.

LAND OFFICE.
July, 1932.
The Land Officer, Mr. B. Summers, reports: -
By the 4th of the month all inspectors had completed their plotting of previous month’s work and were out in the field.
On this same date I proceeded to Maludam to make alterations to the Malay-Dyak farming land boundary. Certain Dyaks in the Batang Lupar seem to think it their right to go annually to Maludam to farm on this land, in spite of the fact that they have plenty of land in their own districts.
On the morning of the 6th Pusa was reached, and in the afternoon I accompanied Mr. Combe to Debak.
Betong. -On the morning of the 14th, I proceeded to Betong arriving there at 1 p.m.
At this station the usual routine was gone through, with regard to books, etc.
The local Malays had reported to the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. Combe, that they were very short of padi land, but that there was a very large area of Government land at Telok Sungei Antu being made use of by a down river kampong; this area has now been inspected and consists of about 200 acres of good farming land.
I returned to Simanggang on the 17th instant.
Gold. -The Marup Gold Mining Syndicate, I am informed, expects to start their work in about three weeks’ time.

SURVEY DEPARTMENT.
July, 1932.
The Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Mr. N. Mace reports: -
The Acting Superintendent arrived at Simanggang on the 14th in the s.l. Lucille., picking me up at Sebuyau, where I arrived overland at the end of June.
The Acting Superintendent inspected the office work and discussed several matters, and returned to Kuching on the 9th.
Gardens have been demarcated between Silantek and Rumah Penghulu Linang, at Sebuyau above S. Sago, and in the Ulu Sebuyow.
The reconnaissance rentis for the telephone line to Engkilili had reached Sungei Pungkong by the 26th, and should be soon completed.
Practically all streams of the Undup Valley, except the Klassen are now on the huge scale cadastral sheets. This will be completed in August, and the work reduced on to the one mile topographical sheets.

Third Division News.
July, 1932.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident: -
Court. -Umut anak Ibik, a Melano, was sentenced under section 307 I.P.C. for attempting to murder a Dyak by name Sandar.
General. -Traveling District Officer Mr. Cutfield left with a force of Constabulary, and some fifty Dyaks under Ajah of Binatang, for the Ulus Kanowit and Entabai on the 5th instant, and was followed on the 8th instant by 500 down-river Dyaks under Penghulus Ikau, Kendawang, Tuan and Kaya. All the latter returning again on the 27th instant.
I visited Kapit on the 17th and 18th July and met all the Dyak Penghulus and the Tua Kampong Kayans but the Penghulus had not arrived. Dyak Penghulu Jugah reported that all Dyaks working in the headquarters of the Baloi in the near vicinity of the Fourth Division border are returning, but it will take some time owing to the produce being damar which has to be carried.
Kayan Penghulu Tama Usun Hang and fifty-nine followers visited Sibu from the 28th until the 30th instant.
The Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Captain C. D. Le Gros Clark, visited all stations in the main Rejang River.

SIBU.
July, 1932.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports: - 
General. -Captain C. D. Le Gros Clark, Secretary for Chinese Affairs visited the station on the 21st and held an inquire into a secret society which had its headquarters at Sarih. Some thirty-two arrests were made.
Other visitors to the station were Mr. A. Macpherson on temporary duty, Mr. Bateman of the Sarawak Electricity Supply Company, Mr. and Mrs. J. Kidd and Miss Kidd of the Tanah Estate, and Mr. Harrop of the United Engineers, Limited.
I arrived on temporary duty from Kuching on the 5th instant and took over the District Office from Mr. A. Macpherson who proceeded to Kuching on the 7th instant.
An expedition under Mr. Cutfield, Travelling District Officer, left for Kanowit by s.l. Chamois on the 5th. They had not returned at the end of the month.
Kayan, who was under sentence of death on a charge of murder, escaped from the Sibu Prison on the night of the 6th instant. An inquiry was held and resulted in P.C. No. 8 Rajak being prosecuted under section 222 I.P.C.
A severe thunderstorm was experienced on the morning of the 22nd. The Government School in the Kampong Ilir was struck by lightning and caught fire. The police soon had the fire under control and little damage was done.

MUKAH AND OYA.
July, 1932.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. E. M. Woodward, reports: -
General. -The Acting Assistant District Officer, Oya and Dalat, Mr. N. E. Hughes, visited Mukah from the 22nd to 26th instant. Mr. Hughes walked from the Ulu Ud, Dalat, to Mukah with a view to investigating the possibility of constructing a road between Dalat and Mukah and thereby improving the communications and opening up the country between the two stations. He reported that most of the way there is no track or path, the land being nothing but swamp and jungle, and it would be impossible to make a road between the two stations owing to the swampy and low-lying nature of the ground.
Constabulary. -The Acting Commissioner, Mr. L. N. Reynolds, accompanied by the Adviser, Sarawak Constabulary, Mr. C. Hannigan, arrived on the 4th instant on a visit of inspection. Details regarding the proposed future strength of the detachment and it’s duties were discussed, Messrs. Reynolds and Hannigan leaving for Matu the following day.
P.W.D. -The installation of new waterworks pumping engine was completed during the month and the new engine, which stands on a reinforced concrete foundation, was nearly in working order by the end of the month. The alacrity with which this work has been completed reflects great credit on Mr. Forsyth and his men who only started the job on the 4th instant.
Surveys. -During the month the survey of gardens was carried on in the Petanak-Ulu Tellian-Bedangs area. Approximately 857 gardens were surveyed during the month, making a total of about 2,485 as at 31st July. All gardens in the Petanak district have now been surveyed but considerable trouble has been experienced with garden owners in the Tellian area, who are con-tinually quarrelling amongst themselves over a few feet of land, thus hindering the work of the surveyors.
Medical and Health. -The Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. A. D. Hutchison, arrived on the 4th instant on a visit of inspection. A scheme for the improvement of the sanitary condition of the bazaar was discussed and will be put into operation as soon as possible. Dr. Hutchison left for Matu the following day.
Balingian. -Repairs were carried out on the Government wharf
Trade. -The price of raw sago averaged twenty-five cents per passu during the month, which is a further decrease of two cents on the average price last month.
Mukah trade returns for the mouth as compared to those for the corresponding month last year were as follows: -

OYA AND DALAT.
July, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports: -
General. -Visitors to the station included Mr. L N. Reynolds, Acting Commissioner of Sarawak Constabulary, Mr. C. Hannigan, Adviser to the Sarawak Constabulary, and Dr. A. D. Hutchison, Divisional Medical Officer.
As a result of discussion between the District Officer Mukah and the Acting Commissioner of Sarawak Constabulary regarding the possibility of improving communications in the district, the proposal was made that it might be worthwhile to open up the existing track between Dalat and Sungei Petanak with the object of eventually making a proper road. Accordingly, at the suggestion of the District Officer, Mukah, I traversed this route on July 22nd.
Leaving Dalat at 7.30 a.m., I paddled for about half-an-hour up S. Hud then struck off through some sago gardens into what proved to be virgin swamp. Mukah was reached at 5 p.m. the same evening. There is no firm ground between S. Hud and S. Petanak, and for most of the way there is not even an attempt at a track. Fortunately, the weather had been dry for some time, otherwise the route would have been impassable. It is quite certain that the construction of a road here, although desirable, is out of the question.
Constabulary. -On July 2nd Mr. L. N. Reynolds, Acting Commissioner of Sarawak Constabulary, and Mr. C. Hannigan, Adviser to the Sarawak Constabulary, arrived at Oya and examined all affairs in connection with the local squads of Constabulary. I accompanied them to Dalat on July 3rd and they left for Mukah on the following day.
In the course of this visit it was suggested that a police post in S. Kut Connected to Dalat by telephone would be of material assistance to the district, and would enable the present post at Igan to be abolished. It is hoped that that proposal will mature, since such a post is rendered very necessary by the recent rapid increase in trade at S. Kut. Further, during the landas, S. Kut is the only means of communication between Sibu and the coast and the establishment of such a post would much facilitate work.
P.W.D. -The main work of the month was the raising to above high water level of the Bakong Road from Oya to Day’s Road.
The bridges in this stretch had subsided considerably during the last few years and this subsidence was hastened by the January floods. All bridges were dismantled and raised, and the road was raised where necessary.
Native Affairs. -Exemption Tax receipts on June 30th totalled $3,344.50 as against $3,090.50 in 1931. Only ten men living in the district had not paid by that date.

SARIKEI, BINATANG AND REJANG.
July, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. F. L. G. Crossley, reports: -
Coroner. -An inquest was held on the body of Wong Chai ling, drowned near Sarikei on the 6th July when his prau was upset by the wash of the m.l. Hock Ang. A verdict of accidental death was returned.
Unemployment. -There is no longer any unemployment in the district, a large amount of work having been provided in harvesting the pepper crop.
General. -Messrs. Reynolds and Hannigan visited the district on the 6th instant in connection with the new Constabulary organization. I accompanied them to Rejang and Selalang on the following day.
The Sarikei cattle were sent down to Kuching by the s.s. L’ Aubaine on the 10th, the Rejang herd having been similarly transferred in June.
Capt. C. D. Le Gros Clark paid his annual visit to the district from the 19th to the 21st.
Trade and Customs. -The pepper crop has much improved the trade figures, and given a much-needed fillip to both local and foreign trade.
Foreign exports and imports for the month are appended below: -

KAPIT.
July, 1932.
The Court Writer, Mr. Law Ah Kui, reports: -
Court. -Courts were held by the Resident, Third Division, on his visit on the 18th instant.
Native Affairs. -On the 4th instant, a party of seven Dyaks from Rumah Nyalong, Poi, travelling up river without passes, were arrested and sent to Kanowit under escort of P.C. Gani, to be dealt with there.
The Resident. Third Division, arrived on the 17th instant in connection with the closing down of the Belaga station.
General. -The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hudden, was still sway in the Ulu Katibas at the end of the month.
Other visitors to the station during the month included Messrs. J. W. Whiteside, G. H. Daly, Capt. Le Gros Clark, Secretary for Chinese Affairs.

MATU AND DARO.
June, 1932.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. G. F. J. Pegler, reports: -
P.W.D. -Prison labour was utilized for the construction of a bridle path to the Kuala and rapid progress is being made.

July, 1933.
General. -The Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. A. D. Hutchison, the Adviser to the Sarawak Constabulary, Mr. C. Hannigan, and the Acting Commissioner of Sarawak Constabulary, Mr. L. N. Reynolds, visited the district on the 5th and 6th instant.
Land Inspector Martin Egoh proceeded to the Batang Kedang to do duty under the Divisional Agricultural Field Officer.
On the 26th instant I proceeded to the Batang Lhasa and after visiting each Dyak house returned to Daro on the 27th inst. A report concerning this visit has been sent to the Resident, Third Division, under separate cover.
Prison. -Prisoners were occupied for the most part on the bridle path to the Kuala. The path has now reached Kampong Halud.

Fourth Division News.
June, 1932.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports by Mr. F. G. Carpenter, Acting Resident: -
Courts. -Two serious gang robbery cases were heard in the Resident’s Court. Convictions were obtained in each case.
Obituary. -It is with deep regret that I have to record the deaths of two well-known and highly respected Government servants in the Baram district.
The first of these occurred on the 1st when Penghulu Tama Wan Baya was fatally speared in the Kayan Rest House at Marudi by one of his own people. His loss will be keenly fell not only by the whole Kayan population of the Baram, by whom he was regarded as chief, father and friend, but also by Government on account of his implicit honesty and trustworthiness.
The second sad occurrence was, if possible, a deeper loss. Datu Tuanku Haji Drahman passed away on the 8th after months of illness from tuberculosis. The Datu had not been expected to live for some lime, and his indomitable pluck and stamina were shewn in the way he fought his ailment. The Datu’s loss will be felt not only in the Baram district but by his friends throughout the country.
General. -I visited Baram on the 4th and returned to Miri on the 7th. Few matters there required attention.
Mr. E. M. Selous was granted District Court powers on the 13th.
On the 14th Dr. E. M. Marjoribanks and Mr. P. M. Adams arrived from Kuching, the former in connection with Tanjong Lobang health matters, and the latter to look into the requirements of the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, concerning an extension to the existing Concession boundary. They returned to Kuching on the 17th.
His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by the Dayang Anne, paid a short visit from the 24th to the 27th, when they were the guests of Mr. and Mrs. A. H. Noble. 
During his visit His Highness authorized a scheme for the settling, in the Tinjar River, of Dyaks from outside Divisions.

July, 1932.
Accompanied by the Divisional Treasurer, Mr. W. V. Hanson, I left for Bintulu on the 3rd, arriving there on the same day.
A deputation of Bazaar Chinese requested that assessment on shophouses be lowered, but on looking through the figures it was noticed that Bintulu assessment rates are remarkably low. No revision was authorized.
It was laid down that Dyaks moving to the Bintulu district from other Divisions shall not be allowed to use any land below Kualas Spadok and Silas, which area is now reserved for the Bintulu townspeople.
I returned to Miri on the 8th.
Mr. H. Beard was appointed Deputy Chairman and Secretary of the Miri Municipal Board vice Mr. A. D. Crowther who proceeded on furlough.
Members of an Oxford University entomological expedition to Gunong Dulit stayed in Miri a few days before proceeding to Baram on the 23rd. They were accompanied by Mr. E. Banks, Curator, Sarawak Museum, and Mr. D. S. McLeod, of the Forestry Department.
Mr. D. C. White, who has been appointed for duty at Baram, accompanied the expedition to Marudi.

MIRI.
June, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. M. Selous, reports: -
At a meeting of the Municipal Board plans were discussed for enlarging the shop area at Lutong, the final decision being postponed pending a survey of the suggested site. Fire regulations for Miri Bazaar were also drawn up.
General. -His Highness the Tuan Muda, together with the Dayang Anne, arrived in Miri on the 24th, and on the following day attended a short but most enjoyable regatta, at which the Dayang Anne kindly consented to give away the prizes.
Other visitors included the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak, Dr. Marjoribanks, and Mr. P. M. Adams.
The Acting Resident paid a short visit to Baram during the month.
The 3rd, being the birthday of His Majesty The King, was observed as a public holiday.

July, 1932.
Municipal. -The lighting contract for the bazaar and kampongs ceased on the 31st July and at the time of writing the electric lighting, carried out by the Sarawak Oilfields. Limited, is proving very satisfactory.
The proposed shop area at Lutong was inspected, during the month by members of the Municipal Board, and at a meeting of the Board a new tariff of taxi fares was introduced and approved.
Outstations. -I visited Niah on the 18th and Sibuti on the 20th of the month and carried out the usual routine work in both stations.
On the 24th, at Niah, Ho Jin Shin, a Kheh vegetable planter, was found murdered in his garden, and on the 28th the Assistant Superintendent of Police, Mr. Sochon, proceeded there to make inquiries.
General. -Visitors to the station included the Oxford Expedition who made a short stay end then proceeded to Mt. Dulit, in company with Messrs. Banks and McLeod.

BARAM.
June, 1932.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
Crime. -On 1st June P. Tama Wan Baya and Kilah Imang were fatally speared by Boi Lah Ajang. The murderer was shot dead resisting arrest. Wan Taha held an inquest and inquiry, the jury returning a verdict that the Penghulu and Kilah Imang were wilfully murdered by Boi Lah who was justifiably shot. The jury’s verdict was later confirmed from Kuching.
Obituary. -With the greatest regret I have to record the deaths of Penghulu Tama Wan Baya on 1st June and of the Datu Tuanku Haji Abdulrahman on 8th. The loss to the district is inestimable.
Staff. -Native Officer Tuanku Mohamed arrived on the 19th on appointment as Senior Native Officer here.
Travelling. -On 2nd I left for Miri with Mr. Banks, Curator, returning on 4th with Mr. F. G. Carpenter, Acting Resident, who returned to Miri on 7th. I was in Miri again from 24th to 29th.

July, 1932.
Staff. -Mr. D. C. White, Cadet appointed for duty in the district, reported his arrival on 23rd.
Travelling. -On 1st, accompanied by Native Officer Wan Suror, I left to visit the Dyaks in the Bakong, going first to L. Kapah to superintend the building of houses for the Oxford Expedition and thence to the ulu Bakong. All houses in the Bakong were visited, Kuala Bakong being reached on 14th. Owing to the shortage of ready money many Dyaks have been allowed to pay tax in padi.
Mr. Sochon, Acting Superintendent of Police, Miri, visited the district from 15th to 19th.
General. -Mr. E. Banks. Curator, Sarawak Museum, Mr. D. S. McLeod, D.F.O., with Messrs. Harrisson, Hartley Hobby, Ford, Moore, Richards, Shackleton and Synge of the Oxford University Expedition arrived on 23rd, and left for L. Kapah in two parties on 26th and 30th.
Trade. -The trade returns are as follows: -

BINTULU.
July, 1932.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. W. H. C. C. Morice, reports: -
P.W.D. -The pipe-line is in good condition. One of the bridges near the Nyabau was damaged during a heavy rainstorm and a new one has been constructed.
Work on the new Native Officer’s house is progressing favourably and should be finished by the end of the month.
Trade and Customs. -The trade statistics for the month as under: -
General. -On the 3rd of the month the Resident, Fourth Division, and Divisional Treasurer arrived from Miri, returning on the 8th.
On the 12th I left for Tatau.

Fifth Division News.
LIMBANG.
July, 1932.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident: -
General. -Eleven doors of Tagals who had been permitted to settle in the Lubai, moved in from the Merapok and took up their abode at Bukit Malau.
The Kim Chin Seng came from Kuching with another party of Dyaks moving in from the Second Division, forty-eight under Tua Rumah Jampi, and sixteen the advance guard of those under Tua Rumah Sanggoh Labong. After collecting their boats, they all moved up river to take up occupation of the land allotted to them.
P.W.D. -Work on raising a portion of the Brunei road at Singkarai is still in progress, and when complete will be well above flood-tide level and have a remarkable firm and smooth surface.
Trade: -

LAWAS.
July, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports: -
General. -On 9th instant, Mr. Whitten, British Resident Labuan, Mr. O’Reilley, Harbour Master, Labuan, and Mr. Stamford, of the Eastern Telegraph Company, Labuan, paid a visit to Lawas, returning on the 11th.
On 10th instant the Acting Assistant District Officer proceeded up river on a visit to Bah and Ulu Trusan Districts returning via Ulu Limbang, and was still away at the end of the month.









































