
VOL. LVIL

THE
No. 882.
Sarawak Gazette
PRICE	KUCHING, Tuesday, March 1st, 1927.	20 CENTS.
Contents.
Notes ...	...
H. H. the Ranee's Birthday Dartmoor Link 
with Borneo The Ancient Order ot Horn 
Blowers Retirement of Firemaster Sad am ...
Pag*.
.. 58
.. 54
Rugby in Sarawak
Clnb News
Kuching Football Clnb-Final of the "Black A White 
Trophy...
Sarawak Club-Bowling Averages for January, 1927 ..
Bowling Handicap for January, 1927 .. 
Bowling
New Club-Bridge Tournament...
Sarawak Union-Tenma Tournament
Correspondence :-Chinese New Year ... 	
                    Sarawak Association, Singapore
Pasal Bebini	...	_ ...	...	
Monthly Reporta:-Sadong Colliery	...
                     Second Division
                     Coast Division	...
                     Fifth Division	...
Kuching Trade Returns	...	...	
Passengers
Miri Trade Returns ...
Kuching Market Price List ...	...
Kuching Shipping
Miri Shipping
Kuching Shipping Returns "	...
Rainfall
Meteorological Returns
55
65
56
56
56
57
67
57
57
68
59
60
67
70
71
72
78
74
75
76
77
78
The Sarawak Gazette
  THE entire European community together with 
Malay and Chinese notables assembled on board 
s.s. Kuching on Saturday morning the 26th 
instant to say good-bye to Her Highness the 
Ranee and the Dayang Leonora who are 
travelling Home. We hope that they will soon 
return to us.
  ON Tuesday the 22nd instant a large party of 
Malay notabilities assembled at the Residency to 
offer Her Highness the Ranee their 
congratulations on the occasion of her birthday 
and to wish her and Dayang Leonora a pleasant 
voyage to Europe.
  After a curry dinner a fine display of dancing 
was given after which valedictory speeches were 
made by Abang Suleiman, Mr. Crocker and the 
Datu Bandar.
  The Dayangs and other Malay ladies present, 
to the number of more than a hundred, were then 
entertained at dinner, and so finished a very 
pleasant evening.
  CHINESE New Year was celebrated in the 
customary fashion with a salute from the Fort 
and a general holiday. The leading Chinese 
merchants were "At Home" to their friends.
TUESDAY, MARCH 1, 1927.
NOTES.
(February.)
  THURSDAY the 24th instant, being Her 
Highness the Ranee's birthday, was celebrated 
by a salute of 21 guns and a general holiday. 
Many people took advantage of this to visit the 
Astana to wish Her Highness "Many Happy 
Returns." In the evening Their Highnesses gave a 
most enjoyable dinner and dance which was well 
attended.
  REV. W. G. Illingworth, L.Th., lately Curate of 
Betong, Sarawak, has been appointed Chaplain of 
St. Giles's Homes, East Hanningfield, Essex.
  MR. K. H. Gillan who is in the Grange 
Hospital with influenza is now much better and is 
proceeding on furlough by the s.s. Angby on the 
5th March. Mr. D. Y. Proudfoot is also travelling 
by same boat on sick leave.
  MRS. Marjoribanks left for England by the s.s. 
Kuching, accompanied by Dr. Marjoribanks as 
far as Singapore. We hope to welcome her back 
at an early date.



54
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH, 1, 1927.
MR. E. O. Bruce also was a passenger to 
Singapore where he has had a slight operation on 
his leg which has been quite successful.
WE are informed that s.s. Kuching recently made 
a record run from Singapore of 39.5 hours. She 
was helped by a strong set from Eastward and a 
calm sea. No other vessel was sighted.
THE guests of Mr. Law Chen Hiang, on the 
occasion of the wedding of his daughter in 
January last, have received copies of the pho-
tograph taken on that occasion. These will be 
pleasant mementoes of the ceremony and 
entertainment provided.
MRS. St. Vincent B. Down returned from a visit 
to Java by the s.s. Angby on the 1st instant.
BY the s.s. Kuching on the 6th instant Messrs. R. 
L. Daubeny, and J. K. Beasley returned from 
Europe and Mr. J. W. Whiteside from Australia 
where he has been on local leave.
MRS. and Miss Bengtsson arrived by the s.s. 
Kuching on 21st February. We offer them a 
hearty welcome to Sarawak.
LIEUT. T. H. Lindsay, R.E., of the Johore Survey, 
visited Kuching in connection with enlisting 
Dyak coolies and left again by the same steamer.
MRS. J. S. Fenwick who had been acting as 
matron of the Grange Hospital during Miss 
Tait's absence on leave has had to relinquish her 
appointment at the General Hospital owing to ill-
health. Her departure will s regretted by all who 
experienced her unselfish efforts at the Grange 
and we hope that a cool climate will soon restore 
her to health.
MR W. F. de V. Skrine is staying in Kuching for 
a few days.
THE Resident Third Division, accompanied by 
Mr. E. V. Andreini, is on a visit to Pontianak to 
interview the Resident of Western Borneo in 
connection with Border affairs.
THE Government have opened a new Rest House 
at Tabuan, the building being that occupied by 
the late Social Club. In comparison with the New 
Rest House it should be in great request as it has 
an airy situation and has been newly furnished. 
The charges are the same as at the more familiar 
edifice.
MR. G. J. D. Walters has arrived from Sadong 
where he has been suffering from malaria and 
influenza. We wish him a speedy recovery.
  MR. R. H. P. Langton who arrived from 
Simanggang on the 12th instant suffering from a 
broken collar bone returned to his station after a 
stay of about 10 days.
Her Highness the Ranee's 
Birthday.
   On Her Highness the Ranee's Birthday, His Highness 
the Rajah gave a delightful dinner and dance, at which a 
large number of guests assembled to wish Her Highness 
"very many happy returns."
   During dinner this toast was enthusiastically drunk with 
musical honours.
   A great effort followed given by the "A.O.F.B.'s," 
whose pipes, ably tuned and lubricated by the Chief 
Blaster, emitted a very powerful volume of song to 
celebrate the occasion.
   It was difficult, even with Carnival spirit in the air, to 
banish the sad thought that this was also, in a sense, a 
farewell party, knowing that Her Highness the Ranee and 
the Dayang Leonora were about to leave us.
   However, we managed to console ourselves with the 
knowledge that they have both promised to come back 
again in a few mouths' time.
   After a most cheery evening the gathering very 
reluctantly dispersed, ail in very good shape.
   Was it the " Gentle Zephyrs " we heard giving tongue 
on their way home across the river ?
Dartmoor Link with Borneo.
   We are indebted to the Rev. Alexander Sharpe, late 
Archdeacon of this Diocese, for the following extracts 
from an article by him appearing is "The Western Morning 
News and Mercury" of Plymouth.
   "Beginning by the sacred Ganges and ending in lonely 
little Sheepstor, what a life of adventure and achievement 
it was. Among even the greatest men of action of the 
Victorian Age James Brooke stands conspicuous.
   "Devon may be proud that this Empire-builder, the 
founder of the State of Sarawak, Borneo, chose it for his 
home and his last resting-place, as did the founder of that 
great province in the West, Ontario, in Canada.
   "The east window in Sheepstor Church is in memory of 
the Rajah, and its subject is significant, the exaltation of 
Joseph in Egypt. The inscription is:-'To the glory of God, 
and in affectionate remembrance of His Highness James 
Brooke, C.B., D.C.L., Rajah of Sarawak.' In the window 
are also represented the flag of Sarawak and the Brooke 
arms, with the motto 'Dum spiro spero.'
   "The second Rajah's grave is alongside that of the first, 
covered by a heavy grey granite stone, with the inscription 
:-In memory of Sir Charles Brooke, G.C.M.G., second 
Rajah of Sarawak. Born 1828, died 1917.' His son, 
Charles Vyner Brooke, is now the third Rajah. Sheepstor, 
then, is not the least among the Empire shrines of Devon."



THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1927
65
The Ancient Order of Horn Blowers.
Extract from review of a book in The Times Weekly, dated 
30th December, 1926.
     Bo Motori clamitabo
     Ne Motore caedar a Bo. . .
Thus I sang; and still anigh Came in Hordes 
Motores Bi, Et complebat omne forum Copia 
Motorum Borum How shall wretches live like us 
Cincti Bis Motoribus?
Domine defende nos Contra hos Motores Bos!
Retirement of Firemaster Sadam.
Firemaster Sadam who has just retired on pension has had 
nearly 36 years' service under Government, first in the 
Police and latterly in the Fire Brigade. We hope chat he 
may long enjoy his well-earned leisure.
Rugby in Sarawak.
    "Spreading the Gospel Among the Savages.''
          DUKE'S BREAK NEW GROUND.
The following amusing account of the visit of the Duke's 
Rugby XV to Sarawak a little while ago appears in the 
latest number of the "Iron Duke."
In a recent copy of "The Field" there is to be found a photo 
of a rugby football match between the 2nd Battalion The 
Duke of Wellington's Regiment and Miri, an oilfield in 
Sarawak. This, as far as is known, was the first rugby 
match ever played in Borneo. The following is an account 
of the journey undertaken to spread the gospel of rugby 
football amongst the savages. Should it seem lacking in 
dangers and hardships proper for pioneers among wild 
men and head hunters it is unfortunate, but cannot be 
helped. The Truth will out.
On Tuesday morning, the 4th May, we embarked on s.s. 
Min, and having introduced ourselves to the officers, 
proceeded to settle in. The Min was loading her cargo, 
which, being composed of flints, was not calculated to 
inspire confidence in the hearts of the more timorous 
voyagers. However, for better or worse, the cargo was 
eventually loaded, and we were ready for the voyage. Still 
we did not start. On inquiry we were told that the beer had 
not arrived, and, of course, it was unthinkable that we 
embark on a three day voyage without beer. Soon a launch 
was seen hurrying towards us, and amid scenes of great 
enthusiasm the beer was brought on board. However, we 
were not to start yet, for it was now discovered that the 
sodawater had been forgotten. The apologetic Chinaman 
was, therefore appropriately reviled and sent back to fetch 
it, the while we possessed our souls in patience. Eventually 
the sodawater also arrived, and about 2 p.m., the bar 
having been inspected and found correct, we steamed out 
of the harbour.
EATING AND SLEEPING.
The weather during the voyage was favourable, though at 
first a slight swell made some of the less offensively 
robust sailors wish they had stayed quietly at home. We 
passed our time chiefly sleeping and eating. In our spare 
moments we played bridge or watched the sea. There was 
plenty to be seen. We saw sharks and porpoises, and even 
a turtle, though as this was seen at the end of dinner by the 
chief engineer, it is not vouched for. Thousands of flying 
fish fled away at our approach, evil looking sea-snakes 
wriggled lazily on the surface, while shoals of bonito leapt 
in the air with ceaseless and amazing energy. Inspired by 
so much activity in the sea we slung a line over the stern 
of the ship, and in spite of the pessimitic prophecies of the 
chief officer, succeeded in landing four fat barracootas, 
some thirty-two pounds of fish, which made an excellent 
breakfast.
Meanwhile the Min pursued a steady, if not particularly 
speedy course towards Sarawak. The only delay occurred 
when, in view of the approaching match, we attempted 
passing, practice on the forward deck. In the excitement of 
the moment the ball left the ship and came to rest on the 
calm surface of the China Sea. However, nothing daunted, 
the skipper put about, in a short while the ball was safely 
on board again. We did not, however, repeat the 
experiment. Instead, the ship's quartermaster, a cheerful 
Chinese gentleman with a startling cloth cap, fashioned us 
a medicine ball. Unfortunately this suffered the same fate 
as the rugby ball, and sank before it could be recovered.
Eventually, at 4 a.m. on Saturday morning, we were 
awakened by a most exciting flow of language from the 
bridge. One gathered that we had arrived, and that the 
anchor on being dropped had stuck. The cheerful 
quartermaster proceeded to the locker to discover the 
cause of the trouble, and in turn became entangled with 
the anchor chain, making confusion worse confounded. 
However, matters were eventually righted and we returned 
to sleep.
On waking we found ourselves anchored in a large bay, 
with a pleasantly wooded coastline. Tn front of us on the 
shore and on the ridge behind, were the houses of Miri.
RUGGER AND SOCCER.
Everywhere among the houses and trees rose tall wooden 
oil rigs, and away on the left were the works and oil tanks 
of the refinery.
Out in the bay a tanker was taking her oil from a line of 
pipes. Miri is built on the banks of the Miri or Red River, 
but while the river is navigable for some way, the bay is so 
shallow that we had to anchor some way out, and were 
taken into the landing stage by launch.
On arrival we were taken to the company offices and 
introduced to Major Benjamin, the Tuan Besar, and Major 
Richards, his second in command. We were then taken to 
our various homes, and at once sampled the wonderful 
hospitality in store for us.
The rugger match was fixed for that evening. Miri had 
some good players, but their team had never had the 
opportunity of playing together, so their combination was 
naturally weak, and it was this which eventually enabled 
us to scrape home by a narrow margin. It was a most 
enjoyable game. The first half was even, and though there 
were exciting moments in both teams' "twenty-fives," 
neither side managed to score. Half-time brought a very 
welcome innovation in the form of a block



56
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1927.
of ice, which was passed round for cooling purposes. 
When we started again our combination was slightly 
better, but it was not until well on in the second half that 
Lance-Corporal Lloyd scored from a pass from Lieut. 
Miles, thus giving us a win of three- nil.
   It was felt by all that we must have a return match, so 
on Monday we took the field again. Our side seemed to 
have weathered the rather hectic week-end which 
intervened between the two games better than our hosts, 
and we recovered, to some extent, the dash which has been 
so noticeably lacking since we left Cairo. The forwards in 
particular played a very good game. So, although it was by 
no means a walk over, we managed to defeat the Miri side 
by six tries to one (18-3), though, as the score shows, we 
have still to find someone capable of kicking even the 
simplest goal.
   On the last day Miri decided to avenge themselves on 
the soccer field. As none of our side knew anything much 
about soccer, we came on to the field prepared for a very 
severe beating. However, our completely unconventional 
tactics so bewildered our opponents that we gained a lucky 
win by three goals to one.
   The teams were as follows :-
    Kuching Police.-Junit (goal), Abang, Bujang, Kadir, 
Sujan, Mohd. Kawi, S. T. Ennion (Capt.), Bodol, Pa-ee, 
Annis, Pe-ee.
    Customs, Workshop & Government Store.-Bujang 
(goal), P. Stewart (Capt.), E. H. P. Bengtsson, Abang, 
Sindu. Sabok, Pet, Janting, Rakawi, Kim Leong, Matassan.
FIRST ROUND.
1	Customs, Work- \
      shop and Store' Cuttoms, Workshop
2	. Forest	f and Store 4-1
     Match on 16.11.26)
8.	Print. *r:d Survey i
9.	P.W.D., Electric ' P.W.D. and Electric 
Department f Dept. 4-0 
Match on 9.11.96/
10.	Sarawak Rangers .	\
11.	Divisional, Land [ Drawn Game 1-1' Divisional, Land and
   In the First Round the following teams drew byes:-
European Merchants, Kuching Police, Darusalwa, Medical 
Department.
SECOND ROUND,
Club News.
I Kuropesu)
2. Dartisahra ^Bp0'7n" Match 
out
Kuching Football Club.
        Final of the "Black & White" Trophy.
   The match was played on Saturday, the 5th February, 
by teams of the Kuching Police v. Customs, Workshop and 
Government Store, resulting in a win by 2 goals to nil for 
the Police.
   There had been rain earlier in the day which rendered 
the ground slippery, and a greasy ball did not tend towards 
accurate shooting.
   The Dayang Leonora kicked off and the first half was 
fast but somewhat ragged, no score being registered by 
either side.
   In the second half the Police seemed to "get together" 
and played a very good game, Pa-ee scoring in the first 10 
minutes with a beautiful low shot.
   From then on the Police did not look back and the game 
became a succession of rushes where time and time again 
scoring was only prevented by the good work of Messrs. 
Stewart and Bengtsson. In spite of their efforts, however, 
Pa-ee managed to register another goal.
   On several occasions it seemed certain that the 
Customs, Workshop and Store team must score but the 
condition of the ball did not help them and the shooting 
was somewhat erratic.
   The final score was 2 goals to nil in favour of the 
Police.
   Her Highness the Ranee kindly presented the Cup, the 
gift of Messrs. J. Buchanan and Co., Ltd., and the medals, 
donated by the Right Reverend the Bishop and Mr. J. P. 
Mead, to the winners and the runners up.
   The Bishop in a short speech referred to the benefit 
which the Football Club was to the community and called 
for 3 cheers for both Her Highness the Ranee and the 
Dayang Leonora both of which were given with Tigers and 
clearest evidences of pleasure at the interest taken by the 
Rajah and Ranee in this the newest club in Kuching.
8. Customs, Workshop) Mid Store
4. P.W.D. sod Electric þ Customs, Workshop and
    Department I Store	6-1
    Match ou 7.19.96 I
6.	Kuching Police
7.	Divisional, Land.aud 1
    Treasury
    Match on 4.12.96 j
8.	Chinese Merchants i
S. Medical Department'
    Match ou 9.12.26 I
-Kuching Police 8-0
- Medical Dept. 2-0
SEMI-FINALS AND FINAL.
1.	Customs, Workshop 
and Store
2.	Medical Department 
Match on 27.1.27
Customs, Workshop' 
and Store 1-0
European
Merc bant i
3.	Kuching Police
4.	European Merchat
    Match on 29.1.27
þ Kuching Police 1-0
Final played 5.2.27
Kuching Police 9-0
8. T. ENNION, 
Honorary Secretary.
Sarawak Club.
BOWLING AVERAGES FOR JANUARY, 1927.
Name.
No. of Games.
Average.
N. A. Middlemas
       5
   142.0
R. V. Carr
11
   140.2
J. P. Baird
14
   134.3
H. D. Aplin
10
   132.6
G. T. Bates
       5
   126.6
A. M. Bathurst
17
   124.2
L. Gregory
16
   113.1
R. E. Le Sueur
7
   113.0
R. D. Binnie
8
   108.6
A E. Lawrence
5
   106.6
J. S. W. Bean
10
   104.8
A. M. Forrest
5
96.6



THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1927.
57
BOWLINO HANDICAP FOB JANUABY, 1927.
Name.
   Score.
H'cap.
Total.
L. Gregory (Winner) 330
J. S. W. Bean	...	264
   58
   74
388
338
R. V. Carr
    293
4 
297
R. D. Binnie
    231
   66
297
R. E. Le Sueur
    236
   58
294
A. M. Forrest
    198
   90
288
G. T. Bates
    249
   30
279
N. A. Middleman
    263
Scr.
263
A. M. Bathurst
    226
   36
262
BOWLING.
Dayang Leonora
Mrs. Fenwick
    93
    79
Mrs Danson
97
Miss Tait
    72
Mrs. Forrest
67
L. Gregory
    91
O. Lang
168
              Total ..
    335
               Total ..
332

  -


G. T. BATHS, for Hon. 
Secretary.
SECOND ROUND.
Ho Hong SOON, scr., beat Wee Kheng Chiang, scr., 6.2, 
6.1.
Ong Eng Bin, scr., beat Ong Liow Sian, minus 15.3, (walk 
over).
L. K. L. Chan, scr., beat Lim Cheng Soon, scr., 6.4, 6.2.
SEMI-FINAL.
Ong Eng Hin, scr., beat Ho Hong Soon, minus 15.3, 7.6, 
6.2, 6.3.
L. K. L. Chan, minus 15.3, beat Lim Soon Kow, scr., 6.0, 
6.0.
FINAL.
Winner. L. K. L. Chan, minus 15.3, beat Runner-up, Ong 
Eng Hin, scr., 6.1, 6.2.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor it not responsible for the opinions of 
Correspondents.
Chinese New Year.
New Club.
BRIDGE TOUBNAMBNT.
The American Bridge
Tournament started on
January 10th has been concluded the results 
below.
appearing
    1 Mra. Clark	i
       Mr. Forrest
        Pointe
16.768
    2 Mrs. Forrest	l
       Mr. H. Smith
          do.
14,346
    8 Mn. Carr	1
       Mr. B. C. Kay	|
          do.
14.162
    4 Mrs. Aplin	"
       Mr. J. P. Baird	f
          do.
14,141
    6 Mrs. Bean	)
       Major 8. Cunynghame j
          do.
18,698
    6 Mn. Smith	?
       Mr. G. T. Bates	1
          do
12,900
    7 Mrs. Baird	)
       H. H. the Rajah	)
          do.
12,465
    8 Mias Tait	)
       Mr. Carr
..	do.
11.681
    9 Mn. Danson	>
       Mr. E. S. Holl	f
          do.
11.296
10 Mrs. A. S. Lows - - 1 Mr. H. C P. 
Adams )
..	do
11.093
11 Mn. C. Fenwick	i
       Capt. Lowe	f
..	do.
10,166
Sarawak Union.
A Tennis Tournament (singles) has recently been 
completed on the court of the Club for Prizes presented by 
the Law Kiaw Association.
RESULTS	FIRST ROUND.
Byes. Ong Liow Sian ... Scr.
        Lim Lim Soon 	
        Lim Cheng Soon . .	"
Ho Hong Soon, minus 15.6, beat Rev. F. 8. Hollis, scr., 
6.3, 6.2.
Wee Kheng Chiang, scr., beat Ah Thiam, scr., 6.0, 6.1.
Ong Eng Hin, scr., beat Tan Sum Guan. scr. (walk over).
L. K. L. Chan, minus 15.6, beat Ong Kwan Hin, scr., 6.4, 
6.3.
Lim Soon Kow, minus 15.3, beat Chau Weng Yen, scr., 
7.5, 9.7.
KUCHING,
                         18th February, 1927. To
The Editor,
    Sarawak Gazette,
DEAR SIR,
    If you will kindly allow me a little space I should 
like to express some sentiments on the great manner in 
which the amenities of Chinese New Year were carried 
out and amongst others would refer to the cheery bombs 
and crackers fired off between the hours of 1 and 5 a.m. 
Now it should be obvious to us not so employed at those 
hours that there were many attendant advantages to be 
gathered of which only a few need be mentioned, for 
instance, one would have great opportunities (there being 
nothing else to do under the circumstances) to think out 
any project or scheme one had in mind, one also might be 
taught the great art of self-restraint, then again that 
excellent practice if early rising would be thoroughly 
inculcated, and finally the cheery bombs and crackers 
would be (doubtless were) quite a refreshing change after 
days which had been merry with one continuous blast of 
motor horns, klaxons, buzzers and gramophones wafting 
airs from Chinese Opera Bouffe and American Jazz and 
all without exception about equally tuneful and elevating. 
(Jazz must have some very close affinity to buzzer as both 
are spelt with double "z".)
The number of motor buses and taxis on the main roads 
carrying New Year revellers must have surpassed even the 
traffic on the North Bridge Road in Singapore, and us the 
drivers thereof tootled lustily all the time (with the 
exception of a few moments just when turning corners), 
whether out of sheer delight at the New Year or with the 
idea of blowing off the road and incidentally into the ditch 
any stray objects such as dogs, goats, or pedestrians, I do 
not know, but any way it seems to have added greatly to 
the fun.
It is probable that the horn blowing ceased at the corners 
in order to admit of more attention being applied to the 
wheel owing to the high speed maintained, but be that as 
it may there was at least a momentary cessation of the 
born which was something gained. Even at Chinese New 
Year I suppose there are limits to good things.



58
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1927.
Judging by the number and loudness of the bombs the air 
in some localities must have been of a fine celestial 
colour. In the writer's, and I bear in many other houses, it 
took a much deeper hue. This, however, was due to quite 
different causes, one of which was Morpheus finding it no 
place for him left suddenly and was not returning till after 
Chinese New Year which naturally would cause a 
thickness of atmosphere.
New Years that are inaugurated with so much eclat and 
cacaphony (I mean harmony) should really be prosperous 
and we hope this one will be and we shall look forward to 
a merrier one next year. The Western New Year is quite a 
dull and lugubrious affair in comparison, so we miss a 
great deal. Whilst thanking you Mr. Editor I can only sign 
myself,
Yours faithfully,
A WOULD-BE CELESTIAL.
          Sarawak Association, Singapore.
58, DESKER ROAD,
Singapore. 17th February, 1927.
To
The Editor,
    Sarawak Gazette,
      Kuching.
DEAR SIR,
    At the annual general meeting of the Sarawak 
Association. Singapore, held on the 13th February, 1927, 
at 24-B, East Coast Road, the following gentlemen were 
elected office bearers for the ensuing year:-President, 
Mr. Su Hai Seng; Vice President, Mr. J. S. Than ; 
Honorary Secretary, Mr. Song Lian Siong; Honorary 
Assistant Secretary, Mr. J. S. Chong; Honorary Treasurer, 
Mr. Kang Guan Leong; Honorary Auditor, Mr. Thomas O. 
Lim; Committee:-Messrs. Song Teck Ghee. J. Louis 
Lim, A. J. Geikie and Henry Tie.
Yours faithfully,
S. LIAN SIONG.
Pasal Bebini.
Udah begari lalu bejalai, Indu dulu samoa ti tuai, Ti dara tengah belaboh 
lundai, Ti lelaki dudi megai penambai.
Datai di rumah lalu niki, Tama ka bilik dudok mipi; Beguai orang nyurong 
ka kandi. Jako randan rami beuti.
Barang ti lelaki dudok di ruai. Berandau sida maioh diruntai;
Bejako ka pasal penyadi siduai, Runding sabaka sama sa jalai.
Indu beradu pen udah sedia, Ngepan dikena pen pemadu iya;
Bejalai sida sama serta, Indu ti diambi bejalai sama.
Datai di tanah betaboh baru, Takut tedinga ka burong jelu; Indu ti diambi 
tengah salalu, Megai payong serta biru.
Apin jauh sida ti bejalai.
Ninga ti dulu udah mengkakai;
Lalu dipeda orang serba datai.
Ngarok sida rantau jalai.
Lari sida nadai betagang, Ngagai prauh kamudi jungkang; Barang datai 
masok ka ruang, Udah sampal lalu bekejang.
Undor sida lalu bekayoh, Indu ti diambi dudok jenoh; Orang ti tengah 
rami betaboh, Kekepai penambai nyampau pemaioh.
Pengrami sida pemadu iya, Andal kadiri bulih mensia;
Orang dipansa nanya samoa, Sida nyaut nadai belepa.
Orang ti di rumah tedinga ka taboh, Belawa anembiak penyampal tuboh;
Ngagai pengkalan baka disioh, Datai di tebing dudok jenoh.
Agi jauh sida ti mrauh, Atap nyata bejajang kumbu;
Sida meda pemadu rindu, Gaga ka mensia nambah siko.
Lelaki ti jadi ka indu nya. Lari ka tanah malu bepeda; Ngumbai diri 
ngagai temuda, Ngambi sirih ka diempa sida.
Adat Daya betanya bini, Pinggai mangkok ka 
tanda jadi; Enti indu deka lalu didudi, Pulai sida 
besemaia hari.
Datai di rumah lalu bejako, Ngasohlelaki ngaga 
prauh;
Digaga iya samoa tembu, Tajok sedia kajang 
kumbu.
Pemaioh tuboh ukai chechamang, Ngambi bini 
ka rumah orang;
Gendang dididit sangkut ka chanang; Tekong 
engkrumong tawak ditenchang.
Peneras prauh pemadu iya, Kekapai penambai 
maioh mendira; Betragis sida nadai belepa, 
Takut ka bunyi burong didinga.
Tepansa sida ka pengkalan orang.
Diarok mensia enda betagang; Gari kamah nadai 
belapang, Tuboh gatal dilaban miang.
Berumban sida sakali beruntu, Datai di 
penyangkai lalu ngetu; Mandi dulu berunsut 
tentu, Pulai ka pantai gari betuku.
Datai sida lalu besangkai, Udah mandi 
bermasin pulai; Indu ti diambi sama bejulai, 
Diasoh tama di bilik bukai.
Sida pen udah makai lemai, Lalu nganjong 
indu bejalai; Ka bilik lelaki ti enggau begulai, 
Tama sida dudok berimbai.
Tama lelaki dianjong ka bujang, Pegai di jari 
irit ka di brang;
Datai di bilik diasoh bedenjang, Rami katawa 
samoa orang.
Manok dianjong sida anembiak, Dibiau ka 
indu ti pisit beranak;
Neladan pisang dikalingi tambak, Nunda 
kaladi dilulong anak.
Udah bebiau manok dibunoh, Besengkelan 
sida panyampal tuboh; Pulai orang lalu 
nyeruboh, Laki iya pansut serta orang maioh.
Jako pen tembu ambis jerita, Bebai tindok 
sama serta; Takut ka bunyi burong didinga. 
Megai penyimat bebri basa.



TILE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1927.
59
Daya bebini jarang ti entap, Indu belaki jarang ti 
rat; Maioh tegal jako sembuat, Ngirau ka pangan 
jako selabat.
Baru jadi dua tiga hari, Bisi tedinga ka brita 
mati; Bebuka dulu nyarak kadiri, Besemaia agi 
bebai jadi.
Bisi ti tengan mansang nemuai, Tedinga ka 
papau di rantau jalai; Ka penagang sida jadi 
begulai, Burong enda nemu diri pulai ka tuai.
Betenah kadiri jai mimpi, Antu nagang enda 
ngasoh jadi; Enggaika parai takut ka mati, Jako 
petenah sembuat diri.
Maioh ti sarak ngaga penyalah, Nadai meniti ka 
Prentah Allah; Pemalat ukum enda ulih sema, 
Ninggang samoa orang di api naraka.
Enggaika pangan enda betagang, Penyai dipadah 
ka tiap;
Bisi ti sarak udah betimbang, Agi sajalai saum 
sa ruang.
Bejai pangan nadai betagang, Enggaika pangan 
ti tau tepang;
Saja pia barang ti matang, Nadai bcrundiug ka 
bansa orang.
Enti herutang sa buah irun, Enda tebayar lalu ka 
ulun: Dalai ka puris turun menurun, Diklaong ka 
orang jadi berangkun.
Bisi orang ti jadi kran, Enda meniti ka jako 
pangan; Bulih utai timbang sa labuan, Udah 
ditebus pulaika pangan.
Jako tu buai ka blakang, Adat salah anang 
ngemansang; Bekundas niri ngasoh ka tumbang, 
Olih tosat bejalai petang.
Ajar pasal bebini tu dinga olih kita. Ajar ti dia-
iya patut dikena;
Disimpan di ati taroh di pala, Diingat ka salalu 
anang dilupa.
Belaki bebini patut dipragam, Udah jadi busong 
beduan;
Asoh pendiau lurus enggau pangan, Begulai 
jimat anang ngaga leman.
Patut jadi datai ka mati, Ator pendiau badas 
berari; Tetap ka ati mali beseni, Tentu salamat 
udah mati.
Patut kena belajar macha, Ka pengingat ati ka 
saup mats; Utai dirunding kena samoa, Enti tau 
lupa surat ngenyata.
Samoa orang ti nemu nyurat, Barang ti mar ulih 
diingat; Ngerunding utai pen tau jampat, Mata 
ngelala jari tau napat.
Enti deka mansang bedagang, Nadai wang dulu 
tau ngutang; Datai ka sa duit dirunding enda 
ilang, Rerga tan ditulis pasal samoa barang.
Bekayoh kuli mudah dibai, Samoa rumah bla tau 
ditiki;
Orang ka ngutang tau aja dibri, Tau ditulis nama 
sida ti ngambi.
Utai pen udah ambis dijual.
Undor tau rerga diputar;
Orang pen ngadang samoa mayar, Rerga ti udah 
nadai disangkal.
        Ti cndang rerga dianjong pulai,
        Ngagai China ti empu utai;
Untong ti bisi ka stiar kitai, Ti laloh bayar kuli hari dirintai.
    Bisi ti nyadi jurutulis,
    Gari dikena umbas penglengis;
Mansang ka kubu bekasut putis, Ngena ka payong setra mipis.
Bisi ti bekerja nyadi pengajar, Dudok di krusi tuboh disandar; 
Ngemata ka anembiak ngansak belajar, Mujor ka skola naka 
pemendar.
Bisi ti nyadi pengajar Injil, Megai randau dalam pikir; Madah 
ka orang adat salah dibungkir, Adat Allah dipegai enda 
teklinchir.
Barang anembiak ti udah nemu, Nulis macha beguna salalu;
Tambah mega olih sam ati pen tentu, Nadai agi kabat dalam 
kerja digemparu.
Jalai penglantang udah dipeda, Penyamai orang ti megai 
pengawa;
Ujan, panas, enda ditemu sida, Kerja lempong dudok dedunga.
W. H.
MONTHLY REPORTS.

SADONG COLLIERY.
January, 1927.
  The output, export, local consumption, conversion to coke 
and coal stock figures for the month were as follows:-
1st January stock balance	...	497.04 Tons.
     " gross output	...	1,463.07 "
Total 1,960.11	"
Shipped	1,077.00 Tons.
Consumed by boilers
and converted into coke 380.16	"	1,457.16
Stock balance	502.15	,,
   The working coal-face at the Upper Seam Mine passed 
through a down-throw fault disturbance, and had struck a normal 
seam again by mid-month, when the miners were placed on 
piece-work.
   Conditions below ground in No. 8, No. 9, and the new mines, 
remained unchanged.
   A regrettable accident occurred at No. 9 Mine on the evening 
shift of the 5th, about 7.30 p.m., the lower end of the main deep, 
when one Phang Piew a Chinese miner was crushed. He died 
shortly afterwards.
   An all-round increase of pay, ranging from 10% to 25%, was 
given to the lahour force as from the 1st of the month, in 
accordance with suggestions made by the Committee appointed 
by His Highness the Tuan Muda to inquire into conditions of 
service at the colliery and sanctioned by His Highness the Rajah.
   Dr. E. M. Marjoribanks, P.M.O., Mrs. Marjoribanks, and Mr. 
Spurway visited the mines on the 7th instant.
   The rainfall for the month was 14.69 inches.
J. W. EVANS.
Manager.



60
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1927.
SECOND DIVISION.
-I
                       Simanggang.
December, 1926.
   Resident's Court.-Jeliboh vs. Thian Ho, land 
dispute. Decision of Lower Court altered in reland 
   held by defendant for over five years and no 
cultivation started. Land reverts to Government.
   Magistrate's Court.-Civil and Criminal. There 
were numerous cases but none call for special men- 
tion.
   Fines and fees for the Batang Lupar amounted to 
$1,042.51.
   General.-On the 2nd Mr. J. A. H. Hardie, Com- 
missioner of Trade and Customs, Mr. E. S. Holl, 
Director of Agriculture, and Mr. G. M. Allman, 
Superintendent of Rubber Improvement Fund, 
arrived from Kuching. Their visit was in connection 
with the improvement of pepper. Next day they 
left for Engkilili in m.l. One returning again on the 
4th, and on the 6tb they returned to Kuching in the 
a.l. Lucile via Lingga.
   Mr. Martin Chan of the Treasury Department, 
Kuching, visited this station during the month in 
order to bring the Divisional Accounts up to date 
and in proper order.
   Under Mandor Sambau two hundred and sixty
Ulu Ai Dyaks were despatched to Miri to work as 
coolies for the Sarawak Oilfield.
   On the 11th Mr. R. H. P. Langton arrived from 
Kuching. He has been appointed to do duty in this 
station.
   Messrs. A. L. Honore and G. R. H. Arundell in- 
spected the Entulang road on the 12th, going as 
far as Penghulu Ingkas's house. The Penghulu 
was warned about the bad condition of same, and 
ordered to have the road remade at once.
   Penghulu Embuas from above Lubok Antu arrived 
during the month in order to obtain young rubber 
stumps. The Ulu Ai Dyaks have at last started to 
plant para rubber. This is a move in the right direction, 
for when the trees are tappable there will not be so 
many Dyaks looking for work in other Divisions. 
In the head waters of the Batang Lupar there is 
very little jangle produce left, and for this reason the 
Ulu Ai Dyaks are continually seeking work elsewhere.
   On the 15th Penghulu Mekoi of Lower Undup 
reported the death of a Chinese trader by drowning. 
The trader attempted to shoot the Padong Rapids, 
his boat capsized and he was sucked underneath by 
a whirlpool.
   The Native Officer, Engkilili, reported the death 
of Penghulu Awan of Kumpang after a short illness.
   I left for Kuching on the 21st and was still away 
at end of the month.
   Public Works.- The prisoners averaged 50.77. 
The prison gang were employed on weeding roads 
and ditches, also remaking the road to landing 
stage.
   Carpenter Matsalleh, with prison labour, nearly 
completed the building of second bungalow for clerks' 
quarters.
   The contractor has completed the building of 
Native Officer's quarters, Sebuyow, for the sum of 
$600.
   Agriculture.-Ninety-five permits to plant para 
rubber, seventeen to plant pepper, and one sago, 
were issued during the month.
   The Ballau Dyaks complain of the pest called 
empangau (stink bug) which is doing considerable 
damage to their padi. They state that syringing 
disinfectant has prove successful.
   Cattle- The Simanggaug herd number 85 head 
and Lubok Antu 45 head.
Forest.- Mr. P. J. Johnson, Forest Ranger, Special 
Class, reports as follows:-The work all through 
the month was of a routine nature. The Forest 
Ranger, Special Class, visited and did a general round 
up of Betong, Spaoh, Debak, Pusa, and Kabong.
Medical.-A total of 145 persons were treated in 
hospital during the month as follows:-Chinese 12, 
Malays 25, Dyaks 107, Tamil 1.
Ninety-six cases of N.A.B. injection for yaws, etc., 
were given during the month.
Shipping.-Eleven motor launches and ten bandongs 
arrived and twelve motor launches and ten 
bandongs cleared during the mouth.
Trade.-The principal exports were:-
Gutta Jelutong 875 piculs valued at $10,089 Pepper 
White	154	,,	,,	10,526
       Black	35	"	"	1,346
Para Rubber	119	"	"	6,584
" Scrap	54	,.	"	1,855
Raw Sago 210	"	.,	570
December, 1926
1925
Imports.
$48,074
41,595
Exports. 
$39,865 
77,728
January, 1927.
   Resident's Court.-Chop Chin Kiat of Kuching vs. 
Chop Ho Lee of Betong, defendant was charged 
with falsification of books and swindling. Case was 
adjourned for inquiries to be made at Betong and 
for examination of accounts. Buja, Undup, vs. 
Lagan, Undup. land dispute. Defendant was fined 
for clearing land under control of plain tiff and was 
informed he could not make use of the land for a 
rubber garden, the land in question being farming 
land. Lagan appealed but decision of the Magistrate's 
Court was upheld, Lagan losing his appeal fee. 
There was one other appeal from the Magistrate's 
Court.
   District Court.-Chang Fah Joon of Engkilili was 
sentenced to one year's R.I. for making out false 
accounts in order to swindle one Liew Hong of Chop 
Hiap Shin of Engkilili. Ah Seng for absconding 
from Betong was arrested at Kabong on board a 
bandong about to sail for Kuching, for this he was 
sentenced to one year's R.I.
   Magistrate's Court, Civil and Criminal.-There 
were numerous cases but none call for special mention. 
Fines and fees for the Batang Lupar amounted 
to $910.80.
   General.-I returned from Kuching on the 4th and 
Mr. A. L. Honore reported all well during my absence.
   On the 12th, accompanied by Datu Abang Haji 
Buassan and Abang Abu Talip, I left for Engkilili 
in m.l. One. stopping at Sada in order to pick up 
Penghulu Renang. Engkilili was reached at 3.45 
p.tn.
   Next morning I held Court and a land dispute 
concerning Dyaks of Lower Lemanak was settled. 
Penghulu Suel was in Court.
   Imong, son of late Penghulu Awan, was appointed 
Penghulu in his father's place. This appointment to await 
the sanction of His Highness the 
Rajah.
I returned to Simanggang the following day.
   Abang Zin, N.O. Sebuyow, visited Simanggang 
during the month in re various matters which he 
brought for reference to me.
   On the 20th Mr. Honore left for Betong via 
Pengkalan Jungkong. Mr. Honore will be permanently 
stationed in the Upper Saribas as Office-in- 
Charge until further notice. The Natives and 
Chinese have for some considerable time asked that 
a European Officer be stationed at Betong.



THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1927.
61
Mr. Hurst of the Rubber Improvement Fund arrived 
here on the 21st from Kabong. Next day be visited ex 
Sergeant Jinggan's rubber plantation in the Undup, 
and on the 22nd left for the Saribas overland.
Tuanku Ibrahim, N.O,, left for the Entulang on the 
25th in order to make a census of Dyaks due for 
door-tax under Penghulu Ingkas and was still away 
at end of the month.
Abang Abu Talip, N.O. Saratok, returned to Saratok 
via Sebuyow on the 25th.
Abang Madaut, N.O. Lingga, was away most of the 
month visiting Dyaks in the Strap and Klauh, and 
numerous Dyaks were fined for planting rubber 
without taking permits to do so.
The rebuilding of old bazaar was nearly completed at 
end of the month and the cement drain running along 
the five-font-way was completed. The new bazaar 
along river bank is going ahead and when finished 
will consist of 15 shophouses and four of these will 
belong to Dyaks.
Mr. Johnson, F.R., S.C., was ordered to return to 
headquarters on account of his insolent behaviour to 
the Resident.
Public Works -The prisoners averaged 45.42, and 
the prison gang under Mandor Mohamad Ali were 
mostly employed in raising the level of bazaar road, 
a long and tedious business, as the earth required for 
this is some way off. Numerous prisoners were 
employed in the upkeep of ornamental grounds.
Carpenter Salleh completed the second Clerk's 
Quarters and commenced squaring timber for the 
Forest Clerk's Quarters.
Medical - A total of 218 persons were treated in 
hospital during the month as follows:-Chinese 24, 
Dyaks 164, European one, Javanese one, Malays 28.
185 cases of N.A.B. injection for yaws, etc., were 
given during the month.
Cattle - The Simanggang herd number 86 head and 
Lubok Antu 44 head.
Agriculture.-159 permits to plant para rubber and 
13 to plant pepper were issued during the month.
Shipping.-Seven motor launches and ten bandongs 
arrived and eight motor launches and ten bandongs 
cleared during the month.
Trade.-The principal exports were :-
Gutta Jelutong
1,131 piculs valued at
$ 9,923
Pepper White
140	"
   9,313
Pepper Black
31
   1,185
Para Rubber
202
12,729
Para Scrap
56
   2,038
Raw Sago
160 koyans "
440
Damar
840 piculs ,,
   2,181

    Imports.
Exports.
January, 192.7
     $33,433
$59,382
January, 1926
     26,663
50,942
Betong.
December, 1926.
The Court Writer, Betong, reports:-
Court.-In the Native Court, Sahari was sentenced to 
three months' imprisonment for contempt of Court; 
Chong Shak Khooi to two months' R.I. for 
absconding under advances, and Rajau to one month 
for assault in the bazaar when drunk ; Abang Olah 
and Bebi (f.) were fined $44.28 each for adultery, 
and Jandan, Landak, Sulang, and Modah, were fined 
$14.40 each for adultery. Three Spaoh Chinese were 
fined $10 each for breach of Rubber Garden 
Regulations.
Fines and fees for the month amounted to $368.39.
General.-Kweh Chuang Seng, when trading in the 
Paku District, absconded to Kalaka with over $2,000 
worth of jewellery belonging to a towkay. A wireless 
message was at once sent to Saratok, and he
was eventually arrested at Kabong, when on his way 
to Kuching. He was forwarded to Simanggang to be 
dealt with there. Inche Bujang, who was wanted by 
Sarikei Court, was arrested and forwarded to Sarikei 
via Kuching in charge of P. C. Gallan on the 16th.
Mr. R. W. Hurst and the rubber improvement staff 
having completed their work here removed to 
Saratok on the 23rd.
Ngeng Ah Soon, dentist, and two other Foochow 
Chinese left for Seruai on the 19th, and their boat 
was capsized at the month of the Paku river by the 
bore, and Ngeng Ah Soon was drowned.
P.C Entri left for Kuching on 23rd, escorting a mad 
man named Lanchang for medical treatment.
Mr. P. J. Johnson. Forest Ranger, arrived from 
Simanggang on the 16th, and remained till the 27th, 
when he left for Kabong and Pusa.
Linggi, a Dyak of Anyut, who attempted to commit 
suicide by stabbing himself last month, died from 
blood poisoning on the 11th.
The contractors have completed the building of the 
Native Officer's quarters during the mouth, and they 
are now building the barracks.
The Saribas Gambling, Arrack and Spirit Farm was 
let to Chop Seng Lee from 1st January, 1927, for 
rental of $2,150 per mensem, a rise of $900 per 
mensem on old rental.
The sum of $500 was paid out on letters of credit 
from Kuching during the month.
Agriculture - There were 85 permits to plant rubber 
issued during the month.
Trade and Shipping. -Eleven motor boats arrived 
and ten motor boats cleared the port during the 
month, and the trade returns are as follows :-
The principal exports were:-
Pepper White 24 piculs valued at $ 1,560
"	Black	2	"	"	15
Para rubber
      (Smoked)	257	"	"	18,040
Para rubber
      (Unsmoked)	95	"	"	5,421
    Imports. Exports.
December, 1926	$30,401	$	30,664
    "	1925	69,703	121,817
January, 1927.
Mr. A. L. Honore, Officer-in-Charge, reports:-
Court- Two appeals from Native Court were 
heard and in both cases the Order of the Courts 
were modified. Fam Chong and Liew Fet Chins, 
rubber tappers, were each sentenced to one year's 
R.I. for theft.
Ah Sow was prosecuted on a charge of voluntarily 
causing hurt and fined $100; Gundi to one month 
for interfering with Government servant while 
suppressing an affray ; Kenoon was fined $50 for 
felling jelutong. Fines and fees for the month 
amounted to $348.18.
   Prisoners.-These numbered three on my arrival 
on the 20th and have since increased to seven. 
 Apart from general work on the Government 
grounds 
they have been employed in ditching round the new 
building and making paths.
 P.W.D-Work is now approaching completions 
on the new barracks of the three rooms.
General.-I arrived here for duty on the 20th. On the 
23rd Mr. Hurst came overland from Simanggang. On 
the 27th the Rev. W. Linton returned from a visit to 
Saratok.
After a certain number of objections in one form and 
another from the towkays against the new bazaar 
site, 26 sites for shophouses were sold on the 3lst, 
and another the next day. All sites went for $100 but 
the allotting of the sites will be done



62
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1927.
by auction when the land has been cleared and  
demarcated, and the towkays can see what they are 
buying.
The towkays persist in asking for extended tune 
in which to build the shops, pleading inability either 
to raise the necessary funds themselves or to persuade 
their towkays in Kuching to go security for 
them to borrow from the Government.
   Shipping.-Calls were made by the following 
motor boats during the month in addition to the 
bandongs.
   M.S. Lang Endang four times, m.s Bintang Trang 
four times, m.s Hap Soon Ann four times.
   Trade returns for the month and for comparison 
with last year are:-
Imports.          Exports.
January, 1927	$25,161	$56,108
January, 1926	57,719	48,102
The principal exports are:-
   Para Rubber (Smoked) 413 piculs valued at $31,047 
Para " (Unsmoked) 267	"	"	17,378
Pepper White	4	"	"	200
Para Rubber Scrap	140	"	,.	5.630
Nipa Sugar	200	tins	"	400	|
Pusa.
December, 1926.
The Court Writer, Pusa, reports :-
   Court-Not many cases cases came up for hearing 
during the month. Fees and fines amounted to 
$322.18.
   Pusa Native Court.-Sujai (f.) for giving false 
evidence in Court was fined 10 reals.
   Debak Native Court. -Chops Sin Teck Heng and 
Thye Kee were each fined $10 and costs for breach 
of Para Rubber Regulations ; Peng Kwong, a gold-smith, 
was fined $5 for working without a licence; 
Chia Ah Wee and Law Fong for assault fined seven 
and fifteen reals respectively.
The following fines were reported by P. Mon:-
   Saga was fined the usual Dyak divorce fine, and 
for leaving his wife without the knowledge of his 
parent-in-law was fined another ten catties ; Mangka 
and Andon (f.) for defamation of character were each fined 
five catties ; Lana and Mujah were each fined twenty 
catties for adultery: Gambling and Sindon (f.) for minor 
incest were each fined twenty and ten catties respectively, 
the woman's fine reverts to Dyaks as plasi menoa.
Haji Matair, Tua Kampong Beladin, fined Sa-onah 
(f.) for divorce thirty reals and three sukus.
   General.- I left for Betong, remitting November 
Cash balance, on the 3rd. Cash transferred to 
Betong Treasury amounted to $2,162.02; returned 
on the 6th.
  Mr. C. S. Griffiths, Chief Land Officer, arrived 
from Betong during my absence on the 3rd. His 
visit is in connection with forming a land policy in 
this Division.
  Mr. R. W. Hurst, Supervisor of Rubber Exports, 
arrived here on the 23rd and proceeded to Kabong 
with his rubber instructors the same evening.
   I left for Debak on the 12th, and after settling 
clerical work and checking the timbers for new 
buildings, returned sgain on the 19th
 Kueh Teck Seng, who absconded from Betong, 
was arrested at Kabong and was sent here in custody 
of police. This man was sent up to Betong to 
answer his charge.
   Health.-The health of the district during the 
month was good. Twenty-two births and four deaths 
were reported.
   Agriculture.-No permits were issued during the 
month.
P.W.D.-The landing stage has been completed. 
The usual manual labour carried out by the police in 
clearing the compound.
Trade and Shipping.-Eighteen bandongs cleared 
and fourteen bandougs entered.
Chief Exports.-
Gutta Jelutong 
Para Rubber 
Rubber iscrap 
Raw Sago 
Nipa Salt 
Kajangs
December, 1926
1925
241 piculs valued at $ 2,410
158	"	"	11,040
54	"	"	1,615
2,960	"	"	7,400
6,708 garis	"	173
7,050 pieces	"	705
Imports.	Exports.
     $23,979	$27,634
24,220	51,469
January, 1927.
The Court Writer, Pusa, reports:-
   Court.-Ranggi and Mundo (f.) Dyak Undai, for 
criminal incest, were sent to Kabong to be dealt 
with by the Acting District Officer. Ranggi was then 
sentenced to two years' R.I., and Mundo (f.) fined, 
half her fine reverting to Dyaks as plasi menoa. 
Lee Khay Beng was also sent to Kabong for theft. 
He was sentenced to six months' R.I.
   Native Court, Pusa.-Lepit, for breach of promise 
of marriage, was fined 30 reals and 3 sukus, and to
pay the usual brian of $50; Jantan, Dyak Undai, for 
breach of Forest Regulations was fined $10; Lemin 
(f.) and Ando (f.) for quarrelling and interfering 
fined 15 and 10 reals respectively ; Tulip was fined 10 
reals in connection with a farming fence dispute; Lar 
and Amit were each fined $5 for assault; Chebo, for 
refusing to turn out an express coolie, was fined $5 
and for contempt of Court fined another $5 ; Leman 
was also fined for the same offence $5.
   Native Court, Debak.-Ma Leong Kee, and Chow 
Hoon Way, silk traders, were each fined $10 for 
trading without a hawker's licence; Kechi (f. ) for 
slander fined 5 reals; Ka Bak was also fined 5 reals 
for the same offence; Naong, for trespass, fined 5 
catties ; Ulas (f.) fined 10 catties for false accusation 
and Inot (f.) 5 catties for false evidence.
   The following fines reported by Penghulu Mon : 
Lawa (f.) and Unjah for berangkat fined 30 catties 
each; Inyan and Umang (f.), Chundi and Sindun 
(f. ), both cases for minor incest; Inyau,and Chundi 
were each fined 20 catties and the women each 10 
catties and the women's fines reverting as plasi 
menoa.
   Fines and fees during the month amounted to 
$376.57.
   General.- I left for Betong on the 31st of December, 
remitting December cash, etc , returning on the 5th. 
I left for Debak on the 15th and returned on the 
23rd.
   My time at Debak was fully occupied in attending 
to the annual verification of weights and measures,
and also gun-licences. Re the verification of weights and 
measures, there is no proper record kept, and stamping 
numbers are not in running order, at Pusa also the same. 
All these numbers were started afresh.
The Dyaks have cleared the Saratok-Debak road.
   The Kampong Malays at Pusa have just turned out to 
raise, enlarge, and gravel the Government and Kampong 
road; this road is muddy and filthy, especially during this 
season.
   Health - The health of the district was good during the 
month.
   Agriculture.-The Natives down river (Malays) have 
just started reaping their padi, and all report that a good 
crop will be expected this year.
   P. W.D.-The boat-shed was built under contract for 
$80 with the following dimensions 8 by 4 fathoms, and is 
now completed. The contract including materials 
amounted to $100.



THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1927.
63
   Trade and Shipping.-Cleared, nineteen bandongs 
and three motor schooners; entered, nineteen bandongs 
and four motor schooners.
Imports.	Exports.
    1927	...	$18.560	$34,143
    1926	...	29,460	31,500
Chief Exports.-
Para Rubber 264 piculs valued at $17,644 
,, Scrap	66	,,	,,	2,363
Raw Sago	77 koyans	,,	,,	7,942
Jelutong	123 piculs	,,	,,	1,250
Nipa Salt	6,280	"	,,	175
Damar	45	"	,.	380
Kalaka.
December, 1926.
   Mr. H. E. Cutfield, Acting District Officer, re- 
ports :-
   Court.-Court work has been very light during 
the mouth. In the Resident's Court a case which 
was forwarded from Saratok was settled in which 
Karrim, a Malay, was sentenced to two years for incest 
and five years for rape.
   In the Magistrate's Court, P.C. Samat, of Saratok, 
was sentenced to six months' R.l. and dismissed the 
force for committing adultery with Siot (f.), a 
prisoner, who was also given six months extra and 
to serve her sentence in Kuching. This is the 
second time she has received six months for this 
offence. No other cases call for special mention.
   General.-I was still away at the beginning of the 
month at Saratok and returned by m.l. Nam Hoi of 
Rejang to Kabong on the 4th. On the following 
Saturday I received a letter from Mr. Griffiths, Chief 
Land Officer, written at Debak on the 8th, saying 
he was proceeded to Saratok. I left the next day, 
Sunday, by the M.S. Hap Soon Aun for Saratok.
   As the Dyaks were tinware of my arrival the place 
was very different to the usual crowd which gathers 
during my visits.
   Mr. Griffiths was busy in the office and also examined 
the land round Saratok and interviewed the 
Malays working sago.
   On the 14th I accompanied Mr. Griffiths to Roban 
by overland route, where the old pepper gardens 
were examined and the land lying between the 
Krian and Seblak rivers observed. We returned 
again to Saratok on the 16th, and left at midnight 
for Kabong by boat. Kabong being reached at 9.30 
a.m on the 17th.
   On Sunday night, the 19th, I left Kabong at 11 
p.m., walking along the sands of Pasir Hukum to 
meet the District Officer. Lower Rejang, with reference 
to the boundary between the Second and 
Third Divisions.
   Owing to a very high tide I had to stay at Alit in 
the early morning and wait for the tide to go out ao 
as to go past Sungei Bubus. I proceeded again at 
7.30 and reached Pasir Hukum at 10.30 a.m. Mr. 
Swayne, District Officer, Rejang, arrived in the s.l. 
Mermaid in the early afternoon and I went aboard, 
taking three represent a live Dyaks from the Nyabor 
District with me. We then left for Selalang where 
the night was spent.
   The following morning an inquiry was made by 
Mr. Swayne into the boundary question and I afterwards 
accompanied him to Rejang.
   Mr. Swayne kindly lent me the s.l. Mermaid 
which took me to Nyabor village next morning and 
immediately returned to Rejang. Nothing was 
definitely fixed about the boundary but I have 
promised to make another excursion this month 
when the boundary will have been cleared.
  A few small cases were settled, and the usual 
questions answered, the night of my arrival at Nyabor. 
The following morning, 23rd, I left for Kabong
along the sands via Alit. On departure to Nyabor 
Mr. Griffiths was still at Kabong but the H.H.M.Y. 
Maimuna arrived in the evening of the 20th to fetch 
him and $20,000 in cash for the Treasury from this 
district.
    The H.H.M.Y Maimuna left the next morning for
Kuching via Lingga.
   Tan Eng Chong, Court Writer, Kabong, visited 
Roban from the 14lh to 19th when fines were 
collected, some permits issued, and an examination 
of weights and measures was commenced by Tan, 
Eng Chong and P.C. Kassim.
   A crew of thirty men were sent down at the end, 
of the month to man Mr. Bruce's boat for the Kuching 
Regatta.
   Cattle.-The Kabong herd number thirty-six head 
and the Saratok eleven head. Two calves of the 
Kabong herd died during the month, chiefly, I think, 
through lack of nourishment, and the sale of milk 
has consequently been stopped for the time being so 
that the calves should get the full amount of milk.
   The Saratok herd is greatly improved and seems 
well looked after by the prisoner Jemat, an ex-policeman.
   P.W.D.-The prisoners, averaging 16.34, were 
employed, with the exception of two, at Saratok mov- 
ing the belian attaps from near the Native Officer's 
quarters to the godown under the gaol. Gleaning 
up in the bazaar, enlarging ditches and levelling and 
making a surface to the road behind the bazaar. At 
first, after the prisoners removal from Kabong to 
Saratok, they seemed to suffer considerably from 
various ailments but are better now. The two at 
Kabong were employed, one as tukang ayer and 
gardener and one, after making the seven small 
bridges over the ditches on the new inland road, 
continued as mower.
   A contract was made out for $15 for the building 
of a bridge over the Ulu Undut on the new road 
which runs from the old Hilir road between the 
Undut and Numbu streams until it crosses the 
Undut, and about 0.5 to 0.75 of a mile further on meets 
the sands. The posts used for this were the old 
belian posts of a former bridge that used to be in 
existence near this spot in the late Mr. Bailey's 
time. The posts were in good condition and were 
dug out of the ground, where they were still standing 
in thick jungle and nipah swamp, by six coolies 
in half a day.
   The planks were some left over from the rebuilding 
of the Roban dapor and were worked by Dyaks.
   Trade.- The statistics for the month were as
follows :-
Imports.
December, 1926	$38,643
       "	1925	74,350
Exports. 
$32,018 
74,598
The principal exports being as under :-
    Fish salted 
Gutta Jelutong 
Para Rubber 
Para Scrap 
Pepper White 
Pepper Black 
Raw Sago 
Timber
82 jars valued at $  piculs 
,, 286 piculs
291	,
40
10
5
1,640
271
8,035
17,635
1,108
788
180
4,100
2,479

Shipping.-During the month the statistics were as 
follows:-
Entered 1 motor yacht, 7 motor schooners, and 12 
bandongs. Cleared 1 motor yacht, 7 motor schooners, and 
9 bandongs.
The following are the trade returns for the Second Division 
:-
December, 1926
Total to 31,12.26
    "   31,12.25
Imports. Exports. 
$ 141,097.00 $ 130,181.00 
1,602,160.00	2,145,154.56
1.687,090.70        2,553,982.00



64
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1927.
January, 1927.
   Mr. H. E. Cutfield, Assistant District Officer, 
reports
   Court.-A number of cases were before the 
Courts during the month, one Dyak was sentenced 
to two years' R.I., and a woman fined two piculs for 
incest; a Chinaman from Debak was sentenced to 
six months' for theft; Yias, Malay, was sentenced 
to nine months' R.I. for theft, having had a previous 
conviction ; two Chinese were sentenced to one year 
and six months' R.I. respectively and both fined $50 
for fraudulent use of weights and measures. Ah 
Check, towkay of Saratok, was fined $100 under 
section 193 Penal Code, one Dyak was fined a picul 
for the same offence; Jimbun, Malay of Debak, 
sentenced to three months' RI. for theft. Kong 
Kong, a former rubber instructor, was sentenced to 
three months' R.I. for theft and one Chinaman and 
one Dyak were fined $15 and $5 respectively for 
assault. Merali, Malay, Kabong, was sentenced to 
one month for contempt of Court and three months 
for non-payment of fine.
   There were the usual number of land disputes and 
several debt cases settled. No other cases call for
special mention. Over 200 people were fined for 
planting Para rubber without permits.
   Fines and fees amounted to a total of $1,526.56 
and $316.25 respectively.
   General.-The first, being New Year's Day, the 
Offices were closed.
   On the 11th, I left for Saratok where there was a 
considerable amount of work as usual. Abang 
Bujang and Abang Abu Bakar accompanied me and 
both the Saratok Penghulus were present.
   Mr. Hurst of the Rubber Improvement Fund was 
present at Saratok during most of my visit there and 
he informed me that the instruction was finished in 
this district and that he was withdrawing all his 
men except two who were to remain to work on the 
bad rubber as it came in. I returned to Kabong on 
the 19th.
   L.-Corporal Janting was transferred to Raban in 
place of Corporal Remat who left at the end of the 
year. P.C. Kaasim is temporarily acting in Janting's 
place pending appointment by the Resident.
   Abang Abu Talip returned to Saratok and resumed 
his duties as Native Officer after being under treatment
for some mouths in Simanggang.
   P.W.D.--The prison gang, altogether averaging 
17, has been employed at Saratok working on the 
surfacing of the new road at the back of the bazaar. 
With the assistance of the towkay Ah Pong's trolley, 
laid on belian timber, the earth was easily carried 
from the hill by the Native Officer's quarters and 
the work was completed before the end of the month. 
They also commenced on the draining of the swampy 
part of the cattle ground at the foot of the hill on 
which the cattle shed is situated.
   Three men were brought down temporarily to 
increase the gang here on the work of filling in the 
old ditch on the Hilir road near the Sungei Numbu 
and making a new one further inland, as the road 
is always being eaten away by the rush of the water 
from the new road. This is a much longer job than 
I expected and they were still employed on this at 
the end of the month.
   Timber was being brought in at Saratok for the 
new clerk's quarters, for the building of which a 
contract was made out.
   Cattle.-The Kabong herd is in a bad condition 
and another calf died at the beginning of the month 
from lack of nourishment and partly owing to 
neglect. The whole herd were turned out and the 
sale of milk stopped. The Saratok herd is doing 
very well.
Trade.-The trade statistics for the month were
as follows:- 
Imports.	Exports.
          1927	...	$31,649	$33,244
1926	...	32,602	36,620
    The principal exports were as under:-
    Fish salted 100 jars valued at $	305
       Gutta Jelutong 185 piculs "	2,073
    Para Rubber	234	,.	17,440
,. Scrap 51 ,,	"	1,590
    Raw Sago	34	koyans	,,	3,370
	Sugar Nipa	145	tins	,,	290
      Timber	.,	2,444
Shipping.-During the month the statistics were 
as follows:-
Entered, seven motor schooners and four bandongs; 
cleared, six motor schooners and eight bandongs.
The following are the trade returns for the Second 
Division:-
Imports.	Exports.
    January, 1927	...	$108,803	$182,877
       "	1926	146,444	167,164
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER,
Resident, Second Division.
           COAST DIVISION.
Mukah and Belingian.
December, 1926.
    General -Owing to the rough sea I left on a visit 
' to Balingian by overland route on 16th, accompanied 
by Native Officers Datu Awang Udin, Awang Juli, 
Dresser James Hon, Forester Abu, and P.C. Nor in 
charge of the luggage carriers. We proceeded up 
the Mukah river to Siteng Kuala Kenyana, where the 
night was spent in Ho Peng's shop.
    Having obtained some small boats from the 
neighbouring Dyaks we paddled up the Kenyana 
stream through jelutong jungle for five hours, reaching 
solid ground at midday; here we left the boats 
and proceeded on foot to the long Dyak house of 
Selan, situated in the source of the Kenyana stream, 
which we reached after three hours' walking through 
old jungle, padi clearings, and occasional swamp.
    The following day we crossed the watershed 
between the Mukah and Balingian streams at roughly 
500 feet above the sea level, and reached the Bakau 
stream, a tributary of the Bawan stream, at 10 a.m. 
here some small boats were obtained and we proceeded 
on to the house of a Saribas Dyak, named 
Unchi, where we lunched.
    The Datu left immediately with a view to reaching 
Balingian the same night. I followed later in a 
boat supplied by Unchi in which we were unable to 
make much headway owing to the water reeds which 
choke the Bawan stream in many places ; as it was 
getting dark and raining heavily we decided to stop 
at a jelutong tapper's hut for the night, having failed 
to catch up the main party with the provisions, but 
the Dyaks in this jelutong hut kindly provided us 
with food and drink..
    The following day we proceeded down stream 
reaching the Balingian river at 9 a.m. and Balingian 
station at midday where the Datu reported having 
arrived a few hours previously after paddling all 
night.
    On arrival I dismissed P.C. Nor for having failed 
to keep in touch with me, and fined Forester Abu 
for proceeding to Balingian direct without permission.



THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1927.
65
The Wireless Station had been completed and was in 
running order just before my arrival so I was able to 
communicate with Mukah immediately, and deal with 
various matters which had cropped up during my absence.
I held Court at Balingian the following day and dealt with 
all cases in which both plaintiff and defendant could be 
got together in time. I afterwards inspected the bazaar 
reconstruction work, and settled several shop-site 
disputes.
 I inspected the kampongs and station grounds and found 
the roads considerably improved since these have been 
re-surfaced with gravel. I also selected a site for the 
Native Officer's house, and inspected the repairs to the 
Court house and kitchen.
1 left again on the night of the 20th for Kuala Balingian, 
the Datu having decided to return by the overland route. 
After spending the night in Tua Kampong Serudin's 
house at Kuala Balingian we attempted to proceed by boat 
to Belingan but, owing to the rough sea, were obliged to 
give it up and carry everything along the beach the whole 
way to Mukah. We reached Belingan on the evening of 
21st and leaving before dawn reached Mukah late the 
following afternoon after a very hot and tiring journey on 
a hard sandy beach of an approximate total distance of 40 
miles.
The District Officer, Oya and Dalat, left for Sibu on the 
23rd to attend the Christmas and New Year festivities 
there. Christmas Day and Boxing Day were observed as 
public holidays.
During Christmas the R.C. Mission School boys staged a 
play entitled "The Triumph of the Cross" which was 
splendidly acted under the able management of the Rev. 
Father Quadekker.
At Balingian one Ho Eng Hoi disappeared on 24th ; his 
body was found floating down river three days later, and 
examined by the Court Writer, leading Chinese, and 
Native Chiefs who were of the unanimous opinion that Ho 
Eng Hoi had met his death by misadventure.
Tua Kampoug Mut, of Teh, Tabe, and Siteng, was 
permitted to resign on account of old age and inability to 
deal with the affairs of his widely separated kampongs. 
Additional Chiefs will be appointed to Tabe and Siteng as 
soon as possible.
Judical.-Courts District, Criminal and Civil.-A case of 
incest was reported by the Tua Kampoug of Bunut, but 
owing to insufficient evidence was dismissed on the 
parties concerned swearing in the Mosque that they had 
never co-habited ; V. G. Bandong was sentenced to six 
months' imprisonment for voluntarily causing grevious 
hurt to one Indun (f) with whom he was living; Dira bin 
Kemah and Buang anak Lupi were imprisoned for three 
months for non-payment of brian as ordered by the Native 
Court; Musa bin Ahmat was sentenced to three mouths' 
imprisonment for flagrant breach of contract; Lim Teck 
Kin was fined and ordered to pay compensation to one 
Dayang Raliah (f.) whom he accidently injured when 
throwing a clothes hook at some fowls; Oi Ah Siong was 
fined for letting his pigs stray in the bazaar ; Muhim bin 
Jalil was fined for attempting to prevent others tapping 
jelutong in a path which he no longer used, and many 
others were fined for damaging jelutong trees by bad 
tapping; Lipiah (f.) was fined for purchasing a sago 
garden without registering the transaction ; Awang 
Samsudin was ordered to pay compensation for felling 
sago palms in the garden of one Tijah (f.), and was 
cautioned for attempting to open up a case which had 
already been settled in 1917 ; one Piot bin Karim was 
detained for brawling and petty larceny in the bazaar and 
has since been sent to Sibu for medical observation ; Jais 
bin Angei was fined for failing to answer a summons 
served on him many months ago.
   Health.-Dresser James Hon arrived on the 1st to 
relieve Dresser Jong Tong who left for headquarters via 
Oya on 6th instant. The dresser visited Balingian and 
performed a number of N.A.B. injections; large numbers 
of Dyaks applied for injections but the supply quickly ran 
out.
   Verv little sickness was discovered at Balingian apart 
from yaws and rheumatism, but two more lepers (Dyaks) 
were found, both in a very advanced stage of the disease 
so little could be done for them. These men are living 
alone in a small hut in the jungle and are fed by their 
relatives.
   The chief ailments treated during the month were 
measles, bronchitis, dysentery, influenza, and beri-beri. 
Measles spread through the kampongs and caused the 
death of a number of small children. Thirty-one N.A.B. 
injections were given during the month chiefly to Dyaks.
   Public Works (Local).~Sufficient timber having been 
collected work was commenced on the construction of 
new clerk's quarters, and the erection of a temporary 
hospital and dispensary ; this building is urgently requited 
in order to get the dispensary out of the Fort as soon as 
possible, and it is hoped that the more serious cases will 
remain under treatment instead of merely receiving 
medicine and returning to the kampong as heretofore.
   The Tamil labour force, averaging 17.12 persons, was 
employed on the upkeep of the roads around the station, 
clearing around the new buildings, and repairing the 
bazaar road which has been eroding badly.
   The prison gang, averaging 16.15 persons, was 
employed carrying timber for the carpenters, and on the 
general upkeep of the station grounds.
   Public Works Department, Kuching.-The Divisional 
Engineer, Mr. R. D Binnie, accompanied by Mr. R. E. 
Edwards, his relief, visited the district on the 7th, and 
inspected the waterworks and viewed the progress made 
by the Kuching contractor on the new Government 
Vernacular School buildings; they left for Sibu via Dalat 
on the 9th.
   At Balingian the Government grounds extension was 
levelled and drained, the Court house repaired, and a new 
kitchen and gaol erected. Dyaks continued to bring down 
gravel for re-surfacing the station paths, and the kampong 
people assisted in the setting up of the wireless masts.
   Telegraphs and Telephones.-Mr. Tait and Mr. Cox 
reached Balingian on 15th in the m.s. Mas de Goebilt. and 
immediately commenced setting up the wireless masts 
with the aid of the kampong people. They installed the 
machinery the following day and were able to 
communicate with Kuching on the 18th from which date 
the station has been opened to traffic.
   Magistrate's Court -The usual number of debt claims 
were dealt with, the majority being at once admitted and 
judgment given for plaintiffs.
   Native Courts.- In the Datu's Courts two cases were 
dealt with and $88.56 fines imposed. In the Tua Tua 
Kampongs Courts, Islam and Pagan, seven cases were 
dealt with and $56.94 fines imposed.
   At Balingian.-All outstanding cases in which the 
plaintiffs and defendants could be got together in time 
were heard, the majority being debt claims, breach of 
agreement cases, sago garden ownership disputes, and 
domestic cases unsettled by the Tua Tua Kampongs 
Courts, and many persons were fined for breach of the 
Forest Regulations.
   Trade and Shipping.-The trade returns for the month 
are as follows
           Coasting Imports. Coasting Exports.
Mukah	... $24,700	$13,364
Balingian ...	18,242	5,240



66
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1927.
The principal imports and exports are as follows :- 
Coasting Imports. Coasting Exports.
Mukah.-
Rice $4,075 Raw sago 47 koyans $5,640
Clothing 3,900 G. jelutong 344 piculs 3,720
Balingian -
Rice $1,026 G. jelutong 335 piculs $5,140
Clothing 1,500
Shipping.-Entered three schooners and two motor 
schooners; cleared four schooners and two motor 
schooners.
The sea remained calm except for a few days and there is 
no indication that the landas has begun.
Prisoners.-Average 10.93 and were employed on the 
usual upkeep of the station.
Trade.-115 piculs of jelutong and 11 piculs and 80 
catties of para rubber and 126 koyans of raw sago were 
shipped to Kuching.
Returns.-
One motor schooner, seven schooners, and six bandongs 
entered with tonnage of 419 tons, and one motor schooner, 
two schooners and five bandongs cleared the port of Mukah 
with tonnage of 186 tons during the month.
The rainfall recorded shows 18.57 inches.
Exports. Import*.
                $29,037.58	$23,873.60
Oya and Dalat.
December, 1926-
The District Officer, Mr.P. M. Adams, reports:- Court.- 
Several Chinese hawkers were fined for not moving their 
boats in accordance with the Order. They have since 
petitioned against the Order. Other cases were of minor 
importance.
General.-Messrs. Binnie and Edwards passed through 
the station on their way to and from Mukah. A deputation 
of Igan people, backed by the Tua Kampong, went to Sibu 
to request that their village should revert to the jurisdiction 
of the Third Division. Their object being to avoid paying 
quit rent on their rubber gardens. They were suitably dealt 
with and returned crestfallen.
I went to Sibu via Kut on the 23rd for Christmas and New 
Year.
Land and Survey. -Surveyors have not yet arrived but 
maps of rectangular plots for the planting of sago were 
made by police. A holder of three rubber occupation 
tickets at Igan surrendered one of his tickets as he is 
unable to look after all the land, the total acreage being 
less than three acres. It is probable that many more will 
follow suit as one man cannot by himself cultivate three 
acres of rubber unless it is included in one plot.
P.W.D.-The old Court House at Oya was pulled down 
and it is proposed to build the new bungalow on the same 
site. A great deal of the timber can be used in the new 
building and for repairing bridges.
Most of the belian timbers ordered from the Dyaks have 
been delivered and planks and rengs are on order.
The sea has encroached to the edge of the Mukah road so 
that it became necessary to build a belian wall. The road 
and bridge opposite the Native Officer's house will 
eventually have to be moved inland.
Travelling.-I spent ten days at Dalat during the month.
Marine - The m.l. Nellie was in constant use during the 
month. The Oya lighthouse keepers' quarters may have to 
be built on a site farther inland, owing to erosion. of the 
seashore. It is hoped the light mast will survive this landas 
but a new position should be fixed in case it has to be 
moved in a hurry.
Bintulu.
December, 1926.
Mr. H. H. Kortright, District Officer of Bintulu, reports :
Courts. -The following are the principal cases heard here 
during the month. Swee Ghim, of Pandan. was fined $50 
for being in possession of a false passu measure ; one 
Panyan, $15 for wrongly chinking he owned a certain fruit 
tree ; Matzin, three months for theft of one piece of 
jelutong; Seo'k, fined $25 for wrongly claiming a fruit 
land belonging to Jabai (f.); Ah Yiew, a Chinese of Tubau 
who had borrowed $100 from Penghulu Jatin's father-in-
law without making a document or giving security, was 
ordered to repay the money at once. There was a case 
concerning ownership of a few rubber trees planted a 
dozen years ago, also a land case between Dyaks and 
Malays in Sungei Selezu, where both parties claim to have 
planted identical sago palms and fruit trees ; this case is 
still unsettled.
General.- I visited Tatau from 1st to 3rd to make the 
necessary final arrangements and have everything ready 
for the work party who were due to arrive from Kuching 
to erect the wireless masts and instal the plant. They 
required various things to do this, viz., 18 2-inch belian 
planks to make boxes in which to step the masts, gravel 
and sand for concrete for bedding same, sheer legs, 
various sized poles and a great deal of labour to raise the 
masts. Mr. Tait and-crew arrived by m.s. Chaya Mas de 
Goebilt on the 9th, and the first message received here 
from Tatau came through on the afternoon of the 14th.
Mr F. J. Wright, Forest Ranger, Special Class, arrived on 
the 10th from Sibu by s. s. Sulong to Kedurong. He has 
been reappointed to do duty in this district. I regret, 
however, that Mr. Wright, towards the end of the month 
was far from well, suffering, according to the Dresser, 
from intermittent fever and anaemia and it was deemed 
advisable to send him to Kuching for proper medical 
treatment.
The weather has been very wet and stormy most of the 
month, the sea has also been very rough and there have 
been some of the highest tides known for years.
Captain C. P. Lowe and Mr. D. MacLeod arrived here on 
the 18th on s.s. Auby en route from Limbang to Kuching 
and Mr. E. Parnell on s.s. Gladys on the 30th.



THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1927.
   Trade and Shipping.-The price of jelutong at the 
beginning of the month had dropped to $12 per picul, at 
the middle of the month to $10.50 and towards the end to 
$9.50 per picul. On account of this, the workers and also 
the traders did not ship all they had in stock; nevertheless 
2,216 piculs were exported. 305,850 pieces of belian 
attaps and 203 tons of belian timber were also exported.
   The s.s. Gladys arrived on the 4th and s.s. Auby on the 
18th. The s.s. Sulong dropped mails at Kedurong 
northbound on the 10th but, did not call on her return. The 
s.s. Angas made one trip to load Government timber for 
Kuching.
   The value of the exports and imports for the month are 
as follows:-
                1926.	1925.	1924.
Exports	$44,363.89 $73,222.96 $30,449.11
Imports 41,555.44	74,127.79	25,011.50
   Six steamers entered and cleared the port daring the 
month.
W. F. DE V. SKRINE, 
Acting Divisional Officer.
FIFTH DIVISION.
Limbang.
December, 1926.
   District Court Crimnal.-A charge of theft of buffaloes 
brought by Tujoh against Kudi and Kaduit, known buffalo 
thieves, had to he dismissed, the evidence being entirely 
circumstantial.
   Bakir and Tua, youthful sons of Haji Taha, were each 
sentenced to eight months' detention for theft of buffaloes. 
They will be sent to the Government Malay Vernacular 
School in the mornings, and found useful occupation of an 
afternoon. They are too young to associate with the other 
prisoners.
   The case in which one Haji Abdullah summoned 
Anggang, a Dyak, for cheating with regard to the 
adulteration of camphor, adjourned last August, was, on 
the strength of the expert evidence, dismissed. Anggang 
was simply ordered to refund the price Haji Abdullah had 
paid him for the camphor.
   General.-Dr. Furnivall inspected, the Limbang 
Hospital during his visit from the 1st to 3rd.
   Mr. R. Grant.  Acting Resident, Labuan, was here on a 
visit from the 3rd to 6th and Mr. Venables, British 
Resident in Brunei, came over for the week end of the 
11th to 13th.
   The tracing of the southern boundary of His Highness 
the Rajah's Concession at Muara, Brunei, has been sent to 
the British Resident, Brunei, for inspection and approval.
   Capt. Lowe, Commissioner of Public Works, arrived 
by H.H.M.Y Maimuna on 13th. He came
up to inspect the new dam at Bukit Hitam and the 
Limbang water scheme generally. He returned to Kuching 
by the Auby on the 16th. Mr. A. Macpherson, Cadet, was a 
passenger by the same vessel and has been appointed to do 
duty in this Division.
   Messrs. McLeod and Anderson sat for their Malay 
Examination, Standard I, on the 6th and 7th.
   Mr. Horton, Superintendent of Customs, returned to 
Miri by the Auby on the 16th and Mr. McLeod took 
passage by her to Kuching.
   An old man was seized by a crocodile on the 26th at 
Limpaku Pinang. His body has not yet been recovered.
   Messrs. Pollard, Cook, and Sharp, arrived on the 24th 
from Lawas for the Christmas holiday. Mr. Sharp returned 
on the 28th, and Mr. and Mrs. Clifford with two children 
and Mr. Bruce-Porter came over on the 31st for the New 
Year.
The rainfall recorded amounted to 22.57 inches.
   Public Works.-The prison gang were employed 
chiefly in mowing on the golf course The number of 
prisoners is so small that no men can now be permanently 
spared for this work. They started raising the road to the 
main wharf and were also employed repairing holes in the 
bazaar road and in weeding the paths and ditches around 
the station.
   The road coolies repaired the earthwork breaking away 
in front of the bazaar culverts and opened up one on the 
3rd mile road. They also continued to build up the road to 
the new oil store.
   By the end of the month 9,000 feet of trench had been 
cut for laying the pipes and 7,650 feet of piping had been 
fitted and caulked. Seven fire hydrants were connected in 
the town area and two air valves were placed in position. 
All sluice and scour valves were joined up.
   The Page fencing for the Customs enclosure was 
finished.
   The Brooketon coolies started dismantling the main 
colliery wharf.
   The following special expenditure sanctioned for 
Limbang for 1926 was not completed by the end of the 
year:- Customs Examination shed, two Customs Officers' 
quaters, main bazaar wharf and coal wharf. The two 
former were delayed owing to the non-arrival of the timber 
from up river, due to the drought a few months back, and 
the latter are still awaiting the arrival of belian planks from 
Bintulu.
   Trade and Shipping. Fifty-two head of buffalo were 
shipped to Kuching.
   Shipping.-(Inward).-S.S. Auby made one trip from 
Singapore via Kuching and ports, s s. Sulung one trip from 
Kuching via ports. m.l. Adele two trips, m.l. Peter Duff 
one trip, m.l. Kwong Yick one trip from Labuan via Brunei, 
and m.l. Edmee one trip from Lawas.
The trade returns for the month are:- 
Foreign 
Coasting
Exports.
$20,595
   6,056
Imports. 
$39,145 
4,596
Brought forward
$ 26,651 
421,237
$ 43,741
372,314
Total to date 
1925
$447,888
383,300 '
.416,055 
344,531



68
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1927.
                January, 1927.	
   Court.-A number of traders were summoned for breach 
of the Weights and Measures Order, under section 266 of 
the Penal Code. These cases have, however, since been 
withdrawn as it was found that the Government method of 
checking with regard to the yard-sticks had been faulty.
   The Alaman dispute between the Pengkalan Tarap and 
Sengkarai people has been settled, at any-rate for a time. 
These alaman cases arise periodically, and are as difficult 
of settlement as the land Dyak cases in the ulu Sadong.
   Travelling.-I was away at Lawas from the 23rd to 27th. 
During my visit I inspected the Sulai and the Gaya roads; 
work on these has progressed very well indeed. They will 
pass through some very promising planting land. 
Accompanied by the Acting Assistant District Officer, I 
viewed with the Manager of the Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber 
Estates the hundred and fifty acres of rubber planted last 
year, and the newly-cleared 300 acres ready for planting up 
immediately. This latter is certainly a very fine piece of 
land. We also made a trip to Merapok where Mr. Cook 
showed us the site for his new project. A large portion of 
the area applied for has already been felled. Messrs. The 
Vamco Timber Company's new site on the main Lawas 
river, where they are transferring their mill, and hope to 
have it going in about eight months' time, has been felled 
and cleared. An imposing block of coolie quarters, on quite 
modern lines, has already been erected. I inspected the 
wireless station and Chinese school, the latter is a most 
spacious and pretentious building ; both of these have been 
erected since my last visit.
   General-The Annual Regatta and illuminations were 
held on New Year's Day. The sports took place the 
following morning. The usual crowd of natives poured in 
from the surrounding country. The weather conditions were 
excellent.
   Two Javanese prisoners, by name Joyo and Rabun, 
made good their escape on New Year's Day. All 
substations in the Division and the Brunei Government 
were warned. On the 21st I received official information 
from the British Resident in Brunei that Rabun bad been 
killed whilst resisting arrest in the ulu Temburong. It is 
thought that the prisoner, Joyo, has died of starvation in the 
jungle. Joyo escaped from Limbang about a year ago, and 
only a few days before he made off the second time had 
had his irons removed.
   Mr. G. Allman of the Board of Trade Department 
arrived by the Alice Lorraine on the 1st. He has come up in 
connection with the Rubber Improvement Scheme, and was 
still in the Division at the end of the month. The relief 
squads of Rangers for Limbang and Trusan also arrived by 
the boat, the old squads returning by her on the 3rd.
   Mr. Nappali, the new clerk for Trusan, also came-up by 
the Alice Lorraine. He remained at Limbang until the 16th 
to get some insight into the work before going on to 
Trusan.
   There has been and is an abnormal amount of sickness 
about. The malady would appear to be influenza. Many of 
the staff have been off duly, including Europeans.
The total rainfall for the month was 15.01 inches.
   Public Works.-Limbang Water Scheme. A site for the 
balance tank was levelled off, and the tank raised into 
position. Some 586 cubic yards of trench were excavated, 
making a total in all of 1,127 cubic yards, leaving 300 yet 
to be done. The 3-inch sections of the pipe-line leading to 
the balance tank, sago factory, and around the kampong 
have all been placed into position, caulked and buried. On 
the 14th the penstock door and valve were fitted up and the 
dam was filled, and this stood the strain satisfactorily. 
However, on the 19th the penstock control pedestal 
cracked, while the water was being let out. This will have 
to be renewed with reinforced concrete.
   At the end of the month the Sulong brought up a further 
consignment of pipes and fittings.
   Owing to the dearth of prison labour, there are now no 
mowers on the golf course, which is seriously in danger of 
returning to jungle. The road mowers cannot be spared for 
this work.
   The Custom's Examination Shed started last year is 
finished, but for completion of the two wharves belian 
planks are urgently needed.
   Trade and Shipping.-Seventy-six head of buffalo were 
shipped to Kuching and fourteen to Bintulu.
   Shipping.-(Inward) S.S. Auby made two trips from 
Singapore via Kuching, s.s. Sulong two trips from Kuching 
via ports, s.s. Alice Lorriane one trip from Kuching via 
ports, s.l. Kwong Yick two trips from Labuan via Brunei, 
s.l. The Datu one trip from Bruinei, m.l. Peter Duff two 
trips from Labuan via Brunei, m.l. Adele two trips from 
Labuan via Brunei.
   The trade returns for the month are:-
Foreign
Exports.
... $35,061
Imports.
$27,07.6
Coasting
... 13,566
8,724
Total
...	48,627
35,800
1926
...	28,234
24,728
LAWAS and Trusan.
January, 1927.
Court.-In the District Court Criminal Talal Lemawan 
was sentenced to two years' R. I. for causing hurt under 
section 324.



THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 1, 1927.
69
   There were a number of Civil cases but none call for 
mention.
   Tan Sui was handed over to the B.N.B. authorities on a 
charge of murder and Udin and Suleiman were extradited 
to Brunei charged with theft.
   Crime.-I am glad to be able to report that Lallong 
Ballang and Sawai Baugau, wanted for the murder of the 
Dyak Grisah in 1922, were brought down on 4th. These 
men were captured by Murang Sibal who volunteered his 
assistance last January and to whom much credit is due. In 
view of the unrest mentioned in my last report the capture 
has been effected at a very opportune moment Talal Lema- 
wan was brought in to Merapok by Tagals on 9th. On 6th a 
telegram was received from Jesselton requesting assistance 
in arresting a fugitive murderer Tan Sui. The description 
pointed to a Chinaman who, under the name Lee Kuai, was 
serving a term of imprisonment for travelling without a 
pass. The B.N.B. Government were duly informed and on 
16th Captain Pearson, Senior Superintendent of Police, 
arrived with identifiers and witnesses. On instructions from 
the Resident, Fifth Division, Lee Kuai, who was proved to 
be the wanted man. was duly handed over.
   Travelling.-On 2nd, accompanied by Mr. D. S. 
McLeod, A. C. F., I went over to Trusan by launch, calling 
at Kayangaran, Kuala Lawas, Awat-Awat and Sundar. On 
3rd the launch took Mr. McLeod to Limbang, returning on 
4th with Mr. Horton, Superintendent of Customs. On 6th 
we went down to Sundar, returning to Lawas on 7th. On 
10th we visited Merapok, sleeping on board the launch at 
Kuala Lawas and going on to Punang next morning 
whence Mr. Horton left for Limbang and I came back to 
Lawas by road. On 24th I left for Limbang to spend 
Christmas and New Year with the Resident and Mrs. 
Boult.
   Prisoners.-The prisoners averaged 5.8 during the 
month. They were employed in the general upkeep of the 
station and also removing a landslide at the back of the 
Fort dapor.
   Public Works.-Haji Taip signed the contract for the 
Sualai Road and by the end of the month about 30 chains 
had been roughly made. Work over the first half mile will 
necessarily be slow owing to the amount of rock to be cut 
away. Guan Soon took over the contract for the Gaya Road 
from Ah Kui who could not find sufficient coolies. On 6th 
Mr. Cook went out to Siang Siang to start erecting the new 
suspension bridge. The jail repairs were completed, the 
carpenter Kow Nui doing excellent work. The work of 
removing the Trusan telephone dine to the roadside 
progressed satisfactorily.
The heavy rain of the last two months has wrought havoc 
with the roads. I am glad to be able to report that the new 
bridges have so far stood up to the floods very 
satisfactorily. I have hopes of getting coral from Bukit 
Sari next year for use on the kampong roads where the 
traffic is greatest.
General.-On 7th Mr. E.H. Cave, Officer-in-Charge of 
Sipitang, B.N.B., came over on a visit, returning on 9th. 
Mr McLeod, A.C.F. left for Kuching by s.s. Sulong on 
15th.
Agriculture.-The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estate, Ltd., 
exported 30,344 lbs. of dry rubber to Labuan during the 
month. The padi is reported to be doing well but 
considerable damage is being done by rats which would 
appear to be very numerous this year.
Rainfall.-The rainfall recorded was as under :-
    Lawas	25.62 inches
    Lawas Estate	23.63
    Trusan	23.65	"
Shipping.-S.S. Sulong called once at Kayangaran for 
timber and m.l. Edmee made five trips to Labuan during 
the month. On 28th m.l. Senang, the new Chinese launch, 
arrived, having been towed from Singapore by s.s. Auby. 
She is owned by a kongsi, three of the parties being in 
Lawas, two in Labuan and one at Sundar, and will run 
from Labuan to Lawas and Trusan alternately. This should 
encourage trade in the Trusan river.
Trade.-The trade returns are as follows:-
FOREIGN.
Lawas:-
    Imports.
Exports.
December, 1926
... $20,852
$46,492
      "	1925
...	40,051
    88,046
Trusan: -


December, 1926
       7,276
    12,729
      ,.	1925
       7,733
    21,281

COASTING.

Lawas
    Imports.
Exports.
December, 1926
... $2,336
    $3,294
      ,,	1925
       -
868
Trusan


December, 1926
       1,497
2,035
1925
       2,540
     2,713
F. F. BOULT, 
Resilient, Fifth, Division.

