
VOL. LVII.
No. 883.

THE
Sarawak Gazette.
PRICE
KUCHING, Friday, April 1st, 1927.
20 CENTS.
               Contents.
NOTES.
      The Sarawak Gazette
      FRIDAY, APRIL 1, 1917.
Birth.
JOHN CHAN.-On the 18th February, 1927. at Kampong Jawa Road, 
Kuching, to Mr. and Mrs. John Chan, the gift of a son.
(Mareh.)
  His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by 
Major S. Cunynghame and Mr. J. A. H. 
Hardie, left on the 9th in H.H.M.Y. 
Maimuna for a visit to the Second Division, 
returning on the 18th.
  His Highness the Tuan Muda sailed from 
Europe on the 25th for Sarawak.
  SIR Hugh Clifford has been appointed 
Governor of the Straits Settlements, and 
High Commissioner of Malaya.
  "ONE way traffic" is now enforced in the 
areas enclosed by Main Bazaar and Carpenter 
Street, between the hours of 6 a.m. and 
6 p.m.
  13 is now the Telephone number of the 
Kuching Fire Brigade Station.
  THE Netherlands Indies Government steamer 
arrived in Kuching from Pontianak on the 12th 
with Mijnheer B. van Duren, 
Controleur, Pontianak, accompanied by De 
Heeren L. H. Krol, Ingr. 1 kl. b/d Dienst. 
v/d Mijnborg, P. Hoedemaker, Manager, 
Borneo Sumatra Trading Company, and B. 
Vegter, Agent. K.P.M. Pontianak. The 
party returned on the 14th, Mijnheer Krol 
remaining in Sarawak to pursue his research 
work in the district.
  THE final play for the Elphinstone Golf Cup at 
Jesselton resulted as follows:-
  H. E. the Governor beat Hill ... 4 and 3.
  Pretty beat Maccaw	... 7 and 6.
  In the final H.E. the Governor beat Pretty by 4 
and 3.
Birth-John Chan	...	...	...	...	79
Notes	...	...	...	...	79
M. L. Para...	...	...	...	...	81
Six Lives Saved at Sea	...	... 81
Beards for Women	...	...	...	...	H)
Patents	...	...	...	...	si
Traffic Control -Spring Race Meeting 1927 ...	... 8j
Sarawak Library Accounts for the year ending 31st
   December, 1926	...	...	...	... 81
Correspondence :-Chinese New Year Celebration ... 82 
Club News:-
Sarawak Club-Bowling Averages for February, 1927 ... 82
 Bowling Handicap for February, 1927 ... 82 
Race Week Bowls Tournament,
                     (Handicap) ...	...	... 88
                   Race Week Optional Pool Tournament.
                     (Handicap) ... 	...	... 88
                   Race Week Tennis Tournament,
                     (Handicap) ...	...	83
                   Bowling Handicap for March 1927	... 88
Sarawak Turf Club-Spring Meeting, 1927- Provisional 
Programme
Ajar Pasul Jalai Pengarap
Monthly Reports:-First Division
Sadong Colliery 
Second Division 
Third Division 
Coast Division 
Fourth Division 
Fifth Division
Kuching Trade Returns
Passengers
Miri Trade Returns ...
Kuching Market price List
Kuching Shipping
Miri Shipping
Kuching Shipping Returns
Rainfall
Meteorological Returns



80
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. APRIL 1, 1927
  MR. E. O. Bruce returned from the General 
Hospital, Singapore, on the 14th, and has since 
resumed his duties.
  THE Sarawak Government Gazette includes the 
following appointments:-
  Mr. A. E. Lawrence to be Resident. Fifth 
Division; Mr. H. H. Kortright to be Acting 
District Officer. Coast Division; Mr. P. M. Adams 
to be District Officer, Sibu; Mr. C. S. Griffiths to 
be temporary Acting District Officer, Oya and 
Dalat; Mr. R. L. Daubeny to be Acting District 
Officer. Bintulu; Mr. J. G. Anderson to do duty at 
Mukah; Mr. R. D. Horton to be Acting Collector 
of Customs, Fourth and Fifth Divisions; Mr. H. 
M. Calvert to be Acting Postmaster-General; Mr. 
W. W. Duncan to be Controller of Government 
Monopolies; Mr. C. E. Pascoe to be Divisional 
Land Officer Third Division.
  MR. W. F. de V. Skrine, Acting Divisional 
Officer. Coast Division, returned to Mukah on the 
3rd after a short visit to Kuching. We understand 
he was unable to land owing to the heavy sea, so 
continued his journey to Miri, ultimately arriving 
at his station via Kuching again.
  Sarawak Government Gazette, dated 16th 
contains details of the improved conditions of 
Service for the Government Clerical Staff. These 
include a Provident Fund scheme in lieu of 
pensions, and examination before promotion to 
the higher grades.
  MR. E. Parnell. Managing Director of the 
Sarawak Steamship Company, Limited, left by the 
s.s. Angby on the 19th on home leave. Mr. A. D. 
Taylor is acting for him.
  ABANG Hamdan, Native Officer. Sundar, Fifth 
Division, has been appointed a member of the 
Council Negri with effect from 1st March.
  MRS. R. V. Carr sailed for Europe by s.s. 
Mantua and will shortly be followed by her 
husband, a Director of Messrs. Sarawak Trading 
Company. Limited. Mr. Kay will assume control 
of the Company's business in Kuching.
  YET another disastrous fire has occurred, Batu 
Kawa bazaar was burnt to the ground, on the 13th. 
The cause of the outbreak is still unknown.
  MRS. C. Fenwick, wife of the Manager of The 
Borneo Company, Limited, Kuching, left with her 
child for a visit to Europe on the 12th.
  MR. J. G. Barraclough, Manager of Messrs. 
McDougall and Robertson, Limited, Killing, 
returned on the 8th after a short trip to Singapore.
  THE Revd. Father Morris left by the s.s. Rajah 
of Sarawak on the 21st on leave to Europe, after a 
spell of fourteen years in Sarawak.
  RAPID progress is now noticeable with the 
imposing structure for the new Club house. The 
new General Hospital building is also
  MR. G. T. M. MacBryan paid a visit to 
Kuching from the F.M.S. on the 21st. returning on 
the 26th.
  THE Rent Restriction Committee, Kuching, has 
been dissolved, its powers being delegated to the 
Municipal Commissioner as from 1st February, 
1927.
  KUCHING Race Course was opened for training 
purposes on the 12th.
  THE Sarawak Gazette will issue a Race Week 
Pamphlet on the 15th April, giving official 
weights for the first day, together with notes by 
"Centaur'' on the training to date.
  The Provisional Programme appears in another 
column.
  MESSRS. R. V. Palfreman and J. G. Sampson 
have resigned their appointments in the Service, 
on medical advice we understand.
  MR. H. L. Owen, Resident of the Third 
Division, and Capt. E. V. Andreini. Acting 
District Officer, Kapit, left Sibu on the 24tn 
February bound for Pontianak. They called at 
Kuching on the 1st on their return and sailed for 
Sibu on the 3rd March.
  MISS R. Silcock, who is taking up an 
appointment as Assistant Matron, European 
Government Hospital, sailed on the 10th for 
Kuching on board s.s. Khiva.
  MR. J. K. Henderson, a director of Messrs. The 
Borneo Company, Limited. London, arrived from 
Singapore on the 21st March, accompanied by 
Mr. O. M. Peineger, who, it will be remembered, 
was stationed here for several months about ten 
years ago. They have been making a tour of 
inspection of the Company's branches in Malaya 
and Siam and whilst here paid a visit to Sungei 
Tengah Estate.
  MRS. C. P. Lowe, wife of the Commissioner of 
Public Works, returned on the 20th looking very 
fit after her visit to Europe.
  WE also offer our greetings to Miss F. R. 
James, a friend of Mrs. A. S. Lowe, who arrived 
by the same boat.
  Grand National Result:-1 Sprig 8 to 1, a 
length; 2 Bovril 100/1, a length: 3 Brights boy 
100/7. 37 ran.
  Rugby:-Scotland beat England at Edinburgh 
by 21 points to 13.



THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1927.
81
M.L. "Para."
Patents.
   The Committee of the Board of Trade Rubber Exports 
Improvement Fund have purchased from John I. 
Thornycroft and Company, Limited. Singapore, the m.l. 
Para for use in Sarawak. She is 52'6" O.A. x 10'6" x 3', 
Speed 10 m.p.h. with a 50 B.H.P. Thornycroft engine. She 
is well built of teak with attractive lines and has 
comfortable and airy accommodation for four Europeans, 
if necessary, and a crew of five. Her fittings include 
electric lights and fans run from an auxiliary Stuart 
Lighting Plant and reserve accumulator; a convenient 
chart room with navigating controls, cook's galley. 
Paterson cowls and adequate deck space are points which 
are also noticeable in this compact and serviceable boat.
   We understand that the launch has been allotted to Mr. 
G. M. Allman for his tours of inspection.
Activity on the part of the inventor is said to be a sure 
sign of a forthcoming revival in trade, and it is said there 
is a marked revival in the business of members of the 
Institute of Patentees. Many ingenious inventions are 
coming to hand from all parts of the country, while 
manufacturers are inquiring daily for good patents to 
exploit for the market. Supply and demand both are 
increasing, with the result that the patent agents already 
are experiencing a foretaste of a trade boom.-(S.E.)
Traffic Control.
Six Lives Saved at Sea.
I
Jamhari, Nakoda of bandong Kim Hiok, has been 
presented with a letter from His Highness 
the Rajah commending him for his behaviour at sea 
on the 7th ultimo when he rescued six persons from 
the sunken bandong Burong Wali off the mouth of 
the Saribas River.
In heavy seas and a N.E. wind Jamhari noted 
that the sails of the Burong Wali, some distance 
away, had disappeared. He therefore approached 
with all speed, launched his small boat and eventually
took off the survivors from the wrecked boat 
which had foundered owing to the springing of the 
stern planks.
Unfortunately Haji Sidek of Pusa and one of his 
daughters were drowned. The Kim Hiok herself 
was damaged by the stern, several planks being 
sprung and the rudder smashed.
It is believed that bronze or silver medals are 
being struck for presentation under similar circumstances.
Spring Race Meeting 1997.
After the hour of 11 a.m. on 26th and 28tb April, 
all cars, motor lorries, and carriages, etc., except 
those authorized to carry a red flag, may only proceed 
to the Race Course via the Sekama Road.
After depositing their passengers at the Grand 
Stand, curs must be turned round and parked in the 
Grand Stand Road facing away from the Grand 
Stand on the extreme left-hand side of the road, 
each car must draw up to within four yards of the 
car ahead. Red flag cars, where space permits, may 
park outside the Grand Stand, otherwise they must 
be parked in the same manner as other cars.
No VEHICLES ARE TO PARK ON
THE RACE COURSE.
Rickshaws and Pedal Bicycles may proceed at 
any time via Padungan and Ban Hock Road, using 
the road to the Grand Stand and parking on the 
cleared space on the left-hand side of the road on 
entering. They are not allowed to remain on any 
part of this toad and must move off to their parking 
ground without delay.
Sarawak Library.
Income and Expenditure Account for the 
Year ending 31st December, 1926.
Beards for Women.
The following appears in the current issue of the "British 
Medical Journal":
"Dr. F. P. Joscelvne (British North Borneo) writes to praise 
the fashion among women for shingled hair, and continues:
   There may, however, be another aspect of this great 
sanitary movement among women. In some of the 
villages of Java and Borneo the custom prevails 
among men of allowing the hair to grow long; they 
have practically no moustache. In other villages the 
hair is cut short, and there moustaches are quite 
common.
 "He makes the dreadful suggestion that the European 
women who are now following the prevailing fashion may 
be laying the foundations of a future generation of 
moustached and bearded females."

W. COTTERILL, 
Acting Honorary Treasurer.



82
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1927
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor it not responsible for the opinions of
Correspondents.
           "Chinese New Year Celebration."
SINGAPORE,
10th March, 1927.
The Editor,
    Sarawak Gazette,
        Kuching, Sarawak.
SIR.
    It is with some satisfaction one reads "A Would-be 
Celestial's" letter of 18th February, about our Chinese 
New Year, which appeared in your March issue.
The question of cracker firing or bomb blasting if you like 
to call, has been raised here lately and some of the papers 
have even permitted the publication of criticisms against 
our centuries old custom of making use of fireworks and 
crackers on the occasion of the dawn of the New Year 
day, and in connection with the celebration of Chap Goh 
Meh.
In one occasion I have come across an unsigned 
communication published in one of the journals, in which 
the belief is expressed that every respectable citizen will 
heave a sigh of relief when the Chinese annual 
celebrations come to an end.
Somehow or other, a delicious touch of humour is greatly 
added to the whole affair by the following correspondence 
which I would like you to read and digest: -
  "(Sir Yesterday night me blong velly happy for to 
leed your noospaper talking on filing clekkers. Oncee 
more you show your paper hab got plenty savee and 
muchee common sense.
    "Pinang Gazette" all time blong my No. 1 paper. 
Anything long you dam, anything lite you clap hand 
and show apliciation.
  Me no can savee why for Mister Ole Lesident 
thinkee clekker-filing blong dam nuisance. Don't you 
English people fire clekkers duling your 
Clismastime. All same thing. Maybe Chinamen's 
clekkers makee leettle bit more noise, but what 
harm? One time one year Chinamen makee happy 
and let off clekkers Chinamen let off clekker, Mister 
Ole Lesident let off one big DA M. Not blong fair-
play, eh, Mr. Editor. All year lound Chinamen makee 
washes clothes for Mister Ole Lesident, makee 
cookee good cully for him, pull leekshaw for to him 
go office, and why for one time one year he no can 
shut eye and ear to poor Chinamen makee 
jollification and lettee off clekker Soorly, must blong 
bad glace to gludge Chinamen happy one time one 
year.
    So leng long time Englishmen never say I Dam to 
Chinamen's clekkers. Why for now say it? Me makee 
velly velly sad to see Englishmen and Chinamen now 
not blong velly good fiend in China. Me velly solly for 
this for me all time think velly much of Englishmen, 
and me think you will soorly join with me to play that 
our Tuapeh-kong will help Englishmen and Chinamen 
to fix up all their tlubbles, pack them up in their kit 
bags, and again become jolly good fiend all same 
before.
    Mr. Editor, you no think so clekker filing blong 
No. 1 thing for to clear the air of Beach Street for the 
bad stink of Weld Quay? Me think so blong No. 1 good 
disinfectant. Last night me hab takee dlive down Beach 
Street nine clock. No can smell Weld Quay, but can 
smell clekkers. But clekkers smell more better Weld 
Quay smell.
    For to conclude, Dear Mr. Editor, me wanchee 
shakee you by the hand and chin chin you. and call 
upon our Tuapeh-kong to give you plenty long life to 
write your noospaper in order to let off your big DAM 
to all things that not blong ploper, and to fight for 
eblybody's lites especially those of poor.- John 
Chinaman.)"
Thanking you for the space given
Yours faithfully,
K. G. LEONG.
Club News.



THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1927.
83
RACE WEEK BOWLS TOURNAMENT 
(HANDICAP.)
Kuching Entries close Saturday, 16th April, at
7 p.m.
Kuching Members to roll off on Monday and Tuesday, 
18th and 19th April, at 6 p.m.
Outstation Entries close Saturday, 23rd April, at 7 p.m
Outstation Members to roll off on Wednesday, 27th, and 
Friday, 29th April, at 6 p.m. sharp.
Ballot for Handicappers, 7th, 8th, and 9th April.
Entries (from Outstations to be notified to the Honorary 
Secretary by post, if possible) $1 each.
Sarawak Turf Club.

Spring Meeting,  1927.
Tuesday. April 26th. and Thursday, 
April 28th, 1927.
Provisional Programme.
RACE WEEK OPTIONAL POOL TOURNAMENT, 
(Men's Doubles- Draw for Partners.) 
(HANDICAP.)
Kuching Entries close Saturday, 9th April.
Kuching Draw and Handicaps published Monday, 11th 
April, at noon.
Kuching Members to play off by Saturday, 23rd April.
Outstation Entries close Saturday, 23rd April, at 7 p.m.
Outstation Draw and Handicaps published
Sunday, 24th April, at noon.
Outstation Members to play off by Thursday, 28th April.
Final between Kuching and Outstation Members on 
Friday, 29th April.
Ballot for Handicappers, 7th, 8th, and 9th April.
Entries (from Outstations to be notified to the Honorary 
Secretary by post, if possible) $1 each.
RACE WEEK TENNIS TOURNAMENT. 
(Doubles-Draw for Partners.)
(Ladies, Members of the New Club, eligible 
for entry. After each lady has drawn 
a man as partner, men will be 
drawn together.)
(HANDICAP.)
Kuching Entries close Saturday, 9th April, at 7 p.m.
Kuching Draw and Handicaps published Monday, 11th 
April, at noon.
Kuching Members to play off by Saturday, 23rd April.
Outstation Entries close Saturday, 23rd April, at 7 p.m.
Outstation Draw and Handicaps published Sunday, 24th 
April, at noon.
Outstation Members to play off by Friday, 29th April.
Final between Kuching and Outstation Members on 
Saturday, 30th April.
Ballot for Hadicappers, 7th. 8th, and 9th April.
Entries (from Outstations to be notified to the Honorary 
Secretary by post, if possible) $1 each.
      BOWLING HANDICAP FOR MARCH, 1927.
Owing to Monday, 4th April, being Hari Raya the 
Bowling handicap for March will take place on Tuesday, 
5th April.
J. A. H. HARDIE, 
Honorary Secretary.
First Day.
THE TUAN MUDA'S CUP.




THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1927.
85
E. S. HOLL, 
Official Handicapper.
J. A. H. HARDIE.
Honorary Secretary.
    Ajar Pasal Jalai Pengarap.
Jako tu patut didinga, Simpan di ati taroh di dada; Utai ti pemadu 
besai guna. Ari atas intan sa kayu menoa.
Giga bendar Petara ti amai, Ti ngaga dunya sampai ka kitai; 
Bulan, mata-hari, tau bejalai, Malam, siang, salalu datai.
Tu Allah ti endang Petara, Utai digagu lya ulih samoa; Pemesai 
tasik enda ulih kelala, Malik ka langit rapas mata.
Jalai pemati anang ngelupa, Pemulai kita enda ulih tegah;
Dulu sembah Allah ti ngaga, Ngambika samengat enda marinsa.
Betuai ka Allah anang emplita, Megai pengarap anang bebula;
Barang mungkir penyalah dima, Naraka sedia ka pendiau sida.
Macham pemali buai samoa, Bunyi binatang anang dibina;
Sambeyang salalu ngagai Greja. Ngampun ka penyalah udah 
dikerja.
Sambeyang seruran taroh di ati, Tawas, malam, salalu bri puji;
Megai pengarap anang ngelemunyi, Datai ka takar umor pemati.
Pemali ti bendar. anang nglupai, Ti diator Allah ka samoa kitai ; 
Barang tesat padah ka jalai, Ngambika sida nitih begadai.
Letak Allah patut disimpan, Taroh di ati dalam penyuan; Ngerja 
pengawa samoa macham. Ari Hari Satu ngagai Hari Anam.
Hari ka tujoh anang bekerja, Endang letak ator Allah;
Laban nyuan pengelu Iya, Leboh Iya ngajeh ngaga dunya.
Hari ka tujoh disebut Minggo, Jelan pengawa Kristian ngetu;
Hari nya kemesai ka salalu, Ngampun penyalah, ngesal tentu.
Allah Petara udah besemaia. Madah ka joko ngagai mensia;
Hari Kiamat lya nurun ka dunya, Ka bechara lain ngabas samoa.
Leboh datai Hari Kiamat, Orang ti mati samoa angkat; Dunya 
bernyang pemadu penapat, Penakut mensia ukai agi balat.
Isa datai ari mata hari tumboh, Megai pedang bepampang tujoh; 
Malikat enggau, pemadu maioh. Suling ditebah trumpit ditaboh.
   Tsa datai ka dalam dunya,
   Nembu ka bechara samoa mensia;
Orang mati, idup, nunga samoa, Ninga ka ukum. letak semaia.
   Orang ti manah pulai ka serga.
Orang ti jai tinggal di dunya; Sida ti manah pemadu pengaga, 
Sida ti jai pemadu pemarinsa.
Sabak ti jai nadai betagang, Tuai, biak, penyampal orang: Taun, 
bulan, enda bulih bilang, Pemarinsa sida seruran mengkang.
Sida di serga pemadu lantang, Nadai jako enggau kitai ngenang; 
Pengrami orang seruran mengkang, Begulai euggau Malikat Allah 
dipangkang.
W. H.

MONTHLY REPORTS.
FIRST DIVISION.
--
Kuching.
November. 1926.
   Resident's Court. Six criminal and five civil cases were 
adjudged in this Court.
   Basic, Javanese, of Dahan Rubber Estate, was sen-
tenced to 10 years' imprisonment under section 326 P.C.; 
Sin Hap Hin of Lundu six months for fraud, Lim Boon 
Say of Monopolies I8 months under section 381 P.C. No 
other case call for mention.
   General. News of the death of His Highness the Tuan 
Bunsu; was received with deep regret by all communities 
in Kuching on the 12th. Government Offices were closed 
on Saturday the 13th and all flagstaffs half-masted.
   The 11th being Armistice Day was observed as a 
Public Holiday and the Offices closed.
   The Datus Bandar, Hakim, and Sudin, Native Officer, 
Samarahan, proceeded to Sambier on the 4th by m.l. 
Ranger to inquire into affairs in connection with the 
mosque and an application by the Sambier people to open 
a school.
   I proceeded to Upper Sarawak on the I9th, returning on 
the 23rd.
   Mr. H. D. Aplin returned from Sibu to Kuching on the 
25th having been appointed Divisional Officer, First 
Division, and I handed over the Divisional Office to him 
on the 30th. Mr. Walters, A.A.D.O., Sadong, returned to 
his station on the 18th after sitting for the senior 
examination for Government Officers.
   Mr. Loh Fay Sien was appointed a Chinese Court 
Interpreter on 12 months' probation from the 1st inst.
   Land Office. The following leases, squatter's licence 
and occupation tickets were issued during the month
A. R. P.
   3 Leases for Rubber and Coconuts ... 66. 3. 12.
   1 Squatter's Licence for Rubber ...	2, 0. 07.
   111 Occupation Tickets for Rubber
and Coconuts	... 697. 3. 07.



86
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1927.
Spuani was appointed as Land Inspector as from the 
1st instant, having been transferred from the Survey 
Department.
DISTRICT Office.
The Acting District Officer. Mr. E. O. Bruce, 
reports: -
District Court. Sixty-eight cases were heard, 51 
of which were criminal and seventeen civil. Of the 
fifty-one criminal cases thirty convictions, nineteen 
acquittals and two eases transferred to Resident's 
Court were adjudged. There were nine cases of 
assault, three theft, two for cheating, two for breach 
of Municipal By-laws, one for broach of Customs 
Shipping Regulations, mid thirty -four other offences.
Fines imposed amounted to $247 and fees collected 
totalled $79. The civil claims involved amounts 
totalling $4,753.66, while fees amounted to $117.75.
Magistrate's Court. 113 civil suits were brought 
for hearing for which fees of $208.75 were collected.
The total value of claims was $2,489.20.
   Police Court. Forty-five summary case were 
brought before the COURT. Forty-one convictions 
and three acquittals were obtained and one case 
transferred to Resident's Court. The principal 
charges were assault five, theft six, contempt of 
Court two, for breach of Municipal By-laws eight, 
and twenty-four minor cases. A total amount of 
$262 was imposed in fines and $21.75 was collected 
in fees.
   Courts General. Omar sentenced to one month 
and Karia two weeks for contempt of Court; Tan 
Seng Hong and Pundok to three months each for 
theft; Silimin. Javanese, sentenced to six months 
for theft and two months for absconding under 
agreement; Ah Tio to two months for buying stolen 
property; Chia Ah Voon, alias Lim Seng, to six 
months for theft and one dozen strokes (third 
offence) and three months for pawning stolen property
In false name; Mohamad, Javanese, to one 
month and Supen to one week for absconding under 
agreement; Tan Ah Ha to six months for breach 
of Opium Monopolies Order No. XVIII. 1924, 
section I; Ex-P.C. Eli to four months for selling a
pair of uniform trousers to a civilian; Mohamad 
Amit, Javanese, to six months, Thai Lee to six  
months and Voon Now to two months for theft; 
Hong Ah Heng to one mouth for reckless driving ;  
Bujang, prisoner, to one mouth extra for assault;  
Ismail, Tamil, to fifteen days imprisonment for 
breach of contract; Hussein bin Mat fined $10 for 
breach of Notification No. XXIV, 1924: Alip bin , 
Buasan to three months' R.I. for fraudulent use of  
advances; Ah Kow, Chinese, was fined $50 for using 
a false daching (I.P.C., section 264) and $25 for 
breach of Municipal Regulations.
December, 1926.
Supreme Court. Three cases were settled in the Civil
Court of which one was an appeal from the Resident's 
Court by defendant in the suit Tan Boon Siew vs. Chop 
Wah Bee, in which the decision of the Resident's Court 
was upheld.
Resident's Court (Criminal)-Seven cases with five 
convictions and two acquittals. These include a case heard 
at Bau when Bassir, Javanese, was found guilty of 
culpable homicide not amounting to murder and sentenced 
to five years' imprisonment.
Civil.- Four cases, claims amounting to $1,917.72 and 
fees to $20. Messrs. Ong Ewe Hai appealed against the 
rates at which their property had been assessed by the 
Municipal Board, the Court deciding that the assessment 
was excessive. This has been further appealed against by 
the Municipal Board to the Supreme Court.
General.-Her Highness the Ranee and Dayang Leonora 
arrived from Europe on the morning of the 13th.
   The Batu Kawa Pork Farm for 1927 was sold to Chop 
Shoon Shin for $900. This is a huge decrease on last 
year but it was decided not to include Sungei Moyan 
Estate, this estate agreeing to pay $1 per head per 
mensem for each pig killed for consumption by their 
employees.
	The matter of new site for Batu Kawa bazaar has not
. been settled as the best land is held under grant by
Siang Hak Whatt.
   It came to notice of the Government that suspicious 
meetings were being held in the house of Adi, Kampong 
Lintang, under the directorship of Abang Sa-ee, Dutch 
Malay. The police are still making inquiries.
   The Lanchang and Tarad Dyaks complained against 
the change of their boundaries. The Lanchangs complaint 
was groundless but the Tarad-Rayang boundary 
will be investigated by the District Officer of Kuching 
and District Officer of Sadong, as it is not clear on the 
maps where the different points of the boundaries are.
   I visited Bau on the 29th for the purpose of re-hearing 
the case against Bassir, Javanese, for the murder of 
another Javanese at Dahan Estate last March. In the
former case the assessors brought in a verdict of murder 
but this was not confirmed by the Supreme Court. This 
time the assessors, after hearing the medical evidence 
and some other evidence, changed their verdict to one of 
culpable homicide not amounting to murder. Bassir was 
then sentenced to five years' imprisonment.
   I gave instructions that the Land Order of 1920 was 
to be followed in Upper Sarawak and Lundu and land 
owners to lie encouraged to exchange their old permits 
for new ones under this Order.
The Offices were closed on 25th and 27th.
   The death of Haji Fadel, Tua Kampong of Kampong 
Tanjong, occurred on the night of the 17th. He had 
served Government for 23 years.
   Mr. R. E. Le Sueur was appointed Acting District 
Officer vice Mr. E. O. Bruce.
   Land Office -The following leases, squatter licences, 
and occupation tickets were issued during the month :-
A. R. P.
   6 Leases for Rubber and Coconuts 67. 0. 24.
   S Squatter Licences for Rubber 24. 3. 14.
   63 Occupation Tickets for Rubber.
       Coconuts and fruit	541. 1. 10.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
   The Acting District Officer, Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, 
reports :-
   District Court.-Forty-five cases were heard, 
thirty-four of which were criminal and eleven civil. 
Of the thirty-four criminal cases twenty-nine convictions 
and five acquittals were adjudged. There 
were eight cases of assault, one theft, one for cheating, 
one for contempt of Court and twenty-three other 
offences.
   Fines imposed amounted to $128.80 and fees 
collected totalled $51.75. The civil claims involved 
amounts totalling $2,203.51, while fees amounted
to $94.25.
   Magistrate's Court. Ninety-three civil suits were 
brought for hearing for which fees of $174.95 were 
collected. The total value of claims was $1,705.22.
   Police Court.-Thirty-five summary cases were 
brought before the Court. Twenty-eight convictions 
and five acquittals were obtained, and one case 
transferred to Resident's Court and one to Sibu Court. 
The principal charges were theft three, possession of 
stolen property one. Contempt of Court three, offences 
against Municipal By-laws three, and twenty-five 
other offences. A total amount of $267 was imposed 
in fines and $38.50 was collected in fees.
   Courts General -Boon Vui sentenced to two 
months. Sementara and Mersait of Sungei Tengah 
each to six months, Merjan to three months and 
Joon Hian to nine months, all for theft; Seh Tang, 
alias Tang Ah Mong, to six months; Kueh Jee Jak 
and Kim Yok to three months each for cheating; 
Mulok, Dyuk, to one month for contempt of Court;



THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1927.
87
Jong Kok and Jong Nyak San each to two weeks 
for absconding under agreement; Satem to one week 
for breach of contract; Chiew Pak to two mouths 
for attempting to commit suicide; Janis to fourteen 
Jays cell in police station for being absent fourteen 
hours from fire station; Nong, Malay, to three 
months for contempt of Court; Beisa (f.) was fined 
$5 for breach of contract.
January, 1927.
   Resident's Court.-(Criminal).-Two cases with 
two convictions. Ali, wireless operator at Binatang, 
was imprisoned for three months for criminal breach 
of trust in respect of Government monies in his 
charge.
   In the Civil Court there were four cases with 
claims amounting to $7,041.45. Chua Boon Khian, 
of Chop Hong Kiat, made repeated applications to 
be allowed to carry on the business as sole trustee 
owing to the absence of Chua Boon Choa the other 
trustee. The matter was referred to the Supreme 
Court who advised that as there were considerable 
funds laid aside in this business for the purposes of 
ancestral worship, the beneficiaries under the will of 
the late Chua Moh Choon should meet together and 
appoint another trustee in the place Chua Boon 
Choa.
   Loo Siong Moh and Tiong Hui Eng, of Chop 
Chuan Kheng, were reported to have absconded after 
having issued drafts amounting to $23,450 on firms 
in Singapore, which have been returned, the firms 
refusing payment. They have since been arrested 
in Singapore and the case is proceeding.
     Datu's Court.-Fines amounted to $137.84 and
fees $19.50.
   General. -The annual regatta was held on New 
Year's Day.
   His Highness the Rajah was pleased to revise the 
scale of pay for Tua Kampongs in Kuching. The new 
scale of pay will be in proportion to the amount of 
tax paid by each kampong at the rate of 5% p.m., 
with a minimum of $5 p.m., and a maximum of $15 
p.m. Kampong Jawa No. 1 and Kampong Batu 
Kinyang were fixed at $15 p.m. Togoh, Tua Kampong, 
Sempadi. asked to be allowed to resign on the 
grounds of ill-health. He was sent before the P.M.O., 
who reported him unfit for duty. The matter was 
then referred to the Acting Assistant District Officer, 
Lundu, with the suggestion that his resignation 
should be accepted as reports on his conduct have 
not been at all good.
   Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, Acting District Officer, visited 
all Dyak villages from 21st mile back to Kuap. He 
had nothing very much to report but suggested that 
the proposed 20-acre lots along the railway line 
between 13th and 15th miles should be reserved for 
Dyaks owing to the proximity of the line to the 
Shrak village. The lots on this side of the line will 
be cut down to 10 acres.
   He also visited ulu Samarahan from the 18th to 
26th. He was to meet the Acting Assistant District 
Officer, Sadong at Tabekang and to settle the 
boundaries between Ris-Lanchangs and Tarad-Tenggahs 
once and for all. He reported that this had 
been done. The site for the new Court house has 
been levelled and the building should now be completed 
very shortly. A pathway is to be opened up 
between the Court house and Mugok which can be 
reached by the m.l. Ranger. Mr. McDougall, Acting 
Assistant District Officer, Upper Sarawak and Lundu, 
passed through Kuching on 31st on his way back 
from Lundu. He had come along the coast to Sibu 
Laut as it was impossible to return to Bau by the 
overland route owing to a heavy flood in the Lundu 
river.
   Land.-After consultation with the Chief Land 
Officer it was decided that Notification No. LXII, 
1925, should be cancelled as the wording was ambi-
guous and not intended to apply to robber gardens, 
and a new Notification should be issued applying 
only to pepper, coconut and sago gardens.
   The following grant, leases, squatter licences and 
occupation tickets were issued during the month:-
A. R. P.
    1 Grant for Cultivation	427. 1. 00
    2 Leases for Coconut plantations 40. 0. 37.
    6 Squatter Licences for Rubber
        and Coconuts	13. 1. 25.
   61 Occupation Tickets for Rubber,
        Coconuts and Fruit	285. 0. 00.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
   The Acting District Officer, Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, 
reports:-
   District Court - Fifty cases were heard, 44 of 
which were criminal and ten civil. Of the forty- 
four criminal cases twenty-five convictions, sixteen 
acquittals, and three cases transferred to other 
Courts were adjudged. There were nine cases of 
assault, one for theft, three for contempt of Court, 
one for breach of Municipal By-Laws and thirty 
other offences.	
   Fines imposed amounted to $163 and fees collected 
totalled $66.75.
   The civil claims involved amounts totalling 
$1,943.05 while fees amounted to $119.25.
   Magistrate's Court-One hundred and six civil 
suits were brought for hearing for which fees of 
$178.50 were collected.
   The total value of claims was $2,270.03.
   Police Court. Fifty-five summary cases were 
brought before the Court. Forty-six convictions and 
seven acquittals were obtained, one case transferred 
to Betong Court and one to N. I. Government. The
principal charges were assault twelve, theft eleven, 
cheating two, contempt of Court one, for breach 
of Municipal By-Laws five and twenty-four minor 
cases. A total amount of $351 was imposed in fines 
andi $29.25 was collected in fees.
   Courts. General. Amirkhan, Sepoy, sentenced to 
three months, Arumogom, Tamil, to two months, 
Ng Siong to six months, Boon See and Kong Nee 
each to two months, Ho Kim to one month, Satem, 
Malay, to three months all for theft; Law Ah See 
to six months for theft and one month for having
no visible means of subsistence; Law Teng Lai and 
Tai Jin each to fourteen days for assault and Bong 
Siew Choon to six months for assault with a knife; 
Eng Thiam ami Jee Tee both to fourteen days and 
Pardi to one week for broach of contract; Choo 
Song, prisoner, to three months extra and six strokes 
with rattan for quarrelling and fighting in jail; Ngo 
Chip Too to seven day and Pridi. Dyak, to six cuts 
with a rattan for cheating; Sia Haw Cheng, Ho Ah 
Gan, Pardi. Sumantara and Basil, prisoners, each 
sentenced to one month extra for quarrelling and 
fighting in the jail; Cher Singh, jaga of 13th mile 
Leper Camp, to two months under I.P.C., section 
269; Maiku and Ashpar, warders, to three months 
each for false charge of offence made with intent to 
injure; Kundang to seven days for being absent 
from fire station and refusing to drill.
   Travelling.- During the month the Kuap, Sentah, 
Segu, Ulu Samarahan, aud Sadong districts were 
visited.
February, 1997.
   Supreme Court. Messrs. McDougall & Robertson, 
Ltd., vs Lai Chin. This was an appeal from the 
District Court in which plaintiffs had brought an 
action for breach of contract. The case in the 
District Court was dismissed, but this Court upheld 
the appeal as they considered that as defendant had 
signed in the contract that he would provide 
plaintiffs with tuba by a certain date, he must fulfil 
this obligation, though they could not enforce the 
first part of the contract wherein defendant had 
promised to plant up a certain area with tuba.



88
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1927.
  Resident's Court. There were six cases in the 
Criminal Court and two in the Civil. Chong Chai 
Sin and Ho Tet Eu, two S.P.G. schoolboys, were 
sentenced to a whipping for housebreaking and theft 
Sa-ee, Abu Bakar and Pozi, Dutch Malays, were 
banished and deported to Pontianak for attempting 
to start a secret society amongst the Malays in the 
First Division, the society going under the names of 
"Spring duablas," "Main duablas," or "Mam pukol 
duablas." Several creditors prosecuted Chop Chuan 
Kheng under I.P.C., section 420. This case was 
settled by the creditors coming to an arrangement in 
which the chop agreed to pay 35% of their debts.
  Datu's Court. Fines amounted to $91.62 and 
fees $21.90.
  The offices were closed on the 2nd for Chinese 
New Year and again on the 24th for the birthday of 
Her Highness the Ranee.
  Mr. Miller-Hallett visited Sambir in connection 
with land disputes. The few Dyaks that live in the 
Moyan cause a great deal of trouble over ownership 
of land in that district. It was decided that Dyaks 
can open gardens in lots on the lower side of the 
Government ditch to the left bank of Sungei Moyan 
Rajak will be sent down to point out each man's 
area for him. Opening up of gardens in other spots 
will be discouraged amongst the Dyaks and Malays 
in this district.
  Lieut. Lindsay, RE., of the Colonial Survey 
Section, Johore, arrived in Kuching to recruit Dyak 
labour. He was successful in recruiting 41 Dyaks 
from Simanggang and at another date a further 33 
were sent over.
  It was reported from Sadong by wireless that the 
bandong Burong Walli from Saribas for Kuching 
had foundered off P. Burong on 7th. Haji Sedik and 
his daughter were reported drowned. Four sailors 
and one other passenger were rescued by bandong 
Kim Hiok which put into Sebangan in a damaged 
condition. The matter was reported to the Shipping 
Office. The Saga Dyaks, an offshoot of Singghi,  
reported that the S. Moyan Estate was encroaching 
on their land. The matter is being investigated.
  I was away at Santubong from 1st to 6th and 
made examination of the gardens in that district. 
Notices are being issued ordering owners of gardens 
to clear them. Some of the Malay coconut gardens 
are in a bad state. Haji Ahmat complained of the 
Malays planting coconuts in the kampong and in the
cemetery. He was told to see that they did not do so.
  Mr. McDougall passed through here on the 1st on 
his return from Lundu. Owing to floods in the 
Lundu river he was unable to return by the overland 
route. He was again down in Kuching on the 13th 
to report that he had effected the arrest of Takom, 
a Tebia Dyak, who was said to have murdered his 
father. Whilst he was in Kuching it was reported 
that Liew Miaw had shot another Chinaman, Liew 
Shok, at Tondong. and locked himself in his house and 
threatened to shoot anyone who went within range. 
The following day Mr. McDougall returned to Bau 
and reported that, whilst attempting to arrest Liew 
Miaw, P. C Jaya Singh had been severely wounded. 
Later he was able to report that he had arrested 
Liew Miaw who, after having expended all his 
cartridges, 20 rounds, calmly walked out and gave 
himself up. 
He was armed with a single barrel breech- 
loading gun. Liew Shok has since been discharged 
from hospital and I . C. Jaya Singh is said to be 
progressing favourably.
  On 15th I visited Ban for the purpose of hearing 
cases, returning again on 18th. I again went to Bau 
on the 26th to hear the case Government vs. Takom 
for murder.
  The assessors brought in a verdict of manslaughter 
not amounting to murder. Takom was sentenced to 
seven years' imprisonment.
   As there have been so many shooting accidents 
amongst Dyaks in the Upper Sarawak and Lundu 
districts, it was decided to prohibit the purchasing 
of guns by Dyaks for the next six months.
   Land Office. The following leases, squatter 
licences and occupation tickets were issued during 
the month : -
A. h. P.
   11 Leases for Coconuts and Rubber 129 0 32
3 Squatter Licences for Coconuts 
and Rubber	...	... 8 
0 24
   52 Occupation Tickets for Coconuts
       and Rubber	...	...371 0 21
DISTRICT OFFICE.
   The Acting District Officer, Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, 
reports:-
   District Court. 45 cases were heard, 36 of which 
were criminal and 9 civil. Of the 36 criminal cases, 
31 convictions, 4 acquittals and 1 case referred to 
Resident's Court were adjudged. There were 5 cases 
of assault, 1 for theft, 2 for breach of Municipal 
By-Laws and 28 other offences. Fines imposed 
amounted to $137 and fees collected totalled $46.25.
   The civil claims involved amounts totalling 
$2,085.33 while fees amounted to $99.75.
   Magistrate's Court 75 civil suits were brought 
for hearing for which fees of $176 were collected 
The total value of claims was $1,691.67.
   Police Court. 71 summary cases were brought 
before the Court. 68 convictions and 2 acquittals 
were obtained and 1 case referred to Magistrate's 
Court. The principal charges were assault 5, theft 
11, cheating 1, possession of stolen property 1, 
contempt of Court 1, breach of Municipal By-Laws 6, 
and 46 minor cases. A total amount of $583 was 
imposed in fines and $12.50 was collected in fees.
   Courts, General. Liong Loo and Hua Leng each 
sentenced to 14 days, Lee Choi, Segon, Manan, 
Dyak, and Sarnia, Javanese, each to three months, 
Tahir to two months, Yeo Ah Ek and Kudang to one 
mouth each and Jolhi, office boy, Municipal Depart- 
ment, to 14 days, all for theft; Lee Phan, Cantonese, 
to two months and Yeo Siew Phang to one month 
in default of fines; Krishnan to one month for 
contempt of Court; Chai King to six strokes with 
rattan for cheating ; Tay Boh Kiah to one month for 
breach of Opium Order No. XVI of 1925; Surpadi, 
Javanese, to one month for attempting to cause hurt 
by dangerous weapons; Goh Ah Kong to one month 
for attempting to dispose of stolen property; Yu
 Siang Chua, Fah Tung, Chen Kee and Lim Ah 
Hiang to one month each for vagrancy; See Ah 
Chow, alias See Hiap, to one year for lurking house 
trespass, I.P.C., section 454. and vagrancy.
Sadong.
November, 1926.
  The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. G. J. D. 
Walters, reports:-
  Court. In the Magistrate's Court, Gapor was sentenced 
to three months' imprisonment for contempt of Court; 
Duso fined $5 for assault; five persons were fined $2 
each for breach of Arms Order. Fines for breach of Forest 
Rules amounted to $65. No other cases call for special 
mention.
  Prisoners. The daily average number of prisoners was 
11.4. The prison gang was employed on the general 
upkeep of the station and weeding the Railway Road.
  P.W.D. The coolie gang was employed on clearing the 
ditches on the Kalaka and Lintang Roads.
  Repairs were carried out to the Forest Checking 
Station at a total cost of $20.



THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1927.
89
   Medical. At the dispensary a total of ninety eight 
patients were treated as follows:-Chinese nineteen, 
Malays twenty-six, Dyaks forty-seven, Tamils three, 
Europeans two, and Sikhs one.
   There were 18 admissions into the hospital, the number 
of patients at the beginning of the month being 9, making 
a total of 27, of which 20 were discharged cured, leaving 7 
still under treatment.
   Sixty-four N.A.B. injections were given in the 
dispensary for yaws, "muli," syphilis, etc.
   Thirty-four pigs were inspected and slaughtered for 
sale.
   General. I returned from Kuching on the 18th, 
accompanied by Dr. T. E. Walsh, who inspected the 
hospital and dispensary. Dr. Walsh returned to Kuching on 
the 20th.
   Treasury Clerk Mr. Soon Thai Low arrived on the 18th 
in connection with the station accounts, and was still here 
at the end of the month.
   Sites were allotted in the bazaar for four new shops the 
applicants agreeing to carry out certain necessary 
alterations to the bazaar road and bridge to the 
Government's satisfaction.
   During the month two permits to plant coconuts and 16 
permits to plant rubber were issued.
The rainfall recorded amounted to 13.53 inches.
   Shipping. The following vessels entered the port:-S.J. 
Sri Sadong five times, s.l. I.'Aubaine twice, m.s. 
Muaratebas once. s.l. Lucile once.
   Trade. The trade returns for comparison with last year 
are as follows:
Imports. Exports.
     November, 1926 ... $28,324	$11,363
November. 1925 ... 26,466	24,141
December, 1926.
   Court --In the Magistrate's Court, Bong Shin was fined 
$20 for breach of Land Orders: Salleh was imprisoned for 
one month for breach of contract; Manjong fined $3 for 
breach of Arms Order; Gapor was sentenced to six 
months' imprisonment for misappropriation of property 
and three months for contempt of Court, the sentences to 
run consecutively. Fines for breach of Forest Regulations 
amounted to $60.
   Prisoners.-The daily average number of prisoners was 
9. The prison gang was employed on weeding the Railway 
Road and the general upkeep of the station.
   The coolie gang cleared ditches on the Sageug and 
Kalaka Roads.
   Medical.-At the dispensary 77 patients were treated as 
follows:-Chinese twenty-one, Malays twenty-one, Dyaks 
twenty-five, Bugis four, Europeans two, and Tamils four.
   There were fourteen admissions to the hospital. The 
patients remaining from last month being seven, making a 
total of twenty-one, out of which eight were discharged 
cared, thirteen being still in hospital at the end of the 
month.
   Forty-one N.A.B. injections were given in the 
dispensary for yaws, muli, syphilis, etc. Forty pigs were 
inspected and slaughtered for sale.
   On the 28th instant Jong Chiap, Mandor, was sent to 
the hospital suffering from a gaping wound on the right 
shoulder, which was successfully treated.
   General.-At the beginning of the month I paid a short 
visit to Jaie to settle a dispute between the local Malays 
over a piece of lane contiguous to the Bugis area.
   During the month a great many Dyaks arrived from the 
ulu Simunjan asking for permits to plant rubber, which 
were granted. On the 9th I left the station for Tabekang 
arriving the following day.
Various affairs were inquired into and settled. The Ris-
Lanchang buundary was again inspected at G. Merigan, at 
which place the boundary was fixed.
Further inquiries were also made into the land under 
dispute at the foot of G. Bom, between Tarad and Rayang 
Dyaks. I returned to the station on the 14th. On the 23rd I 
left for Kuching and was still away at the end of the 
month.
During the month 101 occupation tickets to plant rubber 
and 15 occupation tickets to plant coconuts were issued.
The rainfall recorded during the month amounted to 10.97 
inches.
Shipping.- The following vessels entered the port:-
S.L. L'Aubaine four times, s.j. Sri Sadong four times, m.s. 
Muaratebas three times and m.s. Chaya Mas de Goebilt 
once.
Trade. - Trade returns for comparison with last year are 
as follows :-
Imports.	Exports.
    December 1926	$15,008.50	$15,217.62
       "	1925	41,310.00	51,433.80
January, 1927,
Court - In the Magistrate's Court, Chong Sam was fined 
$5 for breach of Weights and Measures Order; eight Dyaks 
were sentenced to ten days' imprisonment each for arriving 
at Tabekaug from Dutch Territory without being in 
possession of passes; Ah Heng, Arrack Farmer, was fined 
$39 for selling adulterated arrack at the Colliery bazaar; 
Pengiran Mumin was sentenced to one month's 
imprisonment for breach of contract; two Malays were 
fined $5 for planting rubber without being in possession of 
permits; Gojeb was fined $10 for cheating; fines for breach 
of Forest Rules amounted to $20.
Prisoners.-The daily average number of prisoners was 
11. The prison gang was employed on clearing the roads 
and ditches round the station.
The coolie gang cleared ditches on the Sageng and Kalaka 
roads.
Medical.	Dresser Joon Bin was relieved by Dresser
Benjamin Franklin, Joon Hin returning to Kuching. At the 
beginning of the month the Principal Medical Officer 
visited the hospital and, on his instructions, five of the 
patients then in hospital were sent to Kuching for treat-
ment.
The Dresser-in-Charge reports:-
There were seventeen admissions into the hospital, the 
number of patients at the beginning of the month being 
thirteen, thus making a total of thirty patients treated, of 
which sixteen were discharged as cured, five sent to 
Kuching for treatment, leaving nine still under treatment at 
the end of the month.
At the dispensary a total of eighty patients were treated. 
Thirty-four N.A.B. injections were given chiefly for yaws, 
both at the dispensary and at Tabekang.
There were two eases of accidents during the month, one 
being a crushed foot and the other a ease of fractured ribs 
and a gaping wound on the forehead, the result of a bridge 
collapsing while under repair. The ribs were fixed, the 
bleeding being stopped by ligatures and several sutures 
applied.
General.-Accompanied by the Principal Medical Officer, 
Dr. E. M. Marjoribanks, and Mr. Spurway, I left Kuching 
on the 3rd instant, arriving at Munggu Babi Pancha in the 
evening. The following day we walked to Tabekang, 
returning by boat to Sadong on the 6th. On the 7th I 
accompanied Dr. Marjoribanks on a visit to the hospital. 
The following evening Dr. and Mrs. Marjoribanks and Mr. 
Spurway returned to Kuching by s.l. L'Aubaine.
On the 19th I left the station for Tabekang, where I met Mr 
R. E. Le Sueur who had walked overland from Kuching. 
The Ris-Lanchang and Tarad-Tenggah boundary disputes 
were finally settled, I returned to the station on the 22nd. 
During the month, 152 occupation tickets to plant rubber, 
three occupation tickets to plant coconuts and one permit 
to plant sago were issued.



90
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL I, 1927.
  The rainfall recorded during the month amounted to 
13.48 inches.
  Shipping.-The following vessels entered the port:- 
S.L, L'Anbaine four times, s.s Alice Lorraine three times, 
s.j. Sri Sadong once and m.s. Muaratebas once.
  Trade-The trade returns for companion with last year 
are as follows:-
Upper Sarawak.
November, 1926.
  The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. S. 
McDougall, reports:-
  Court. In the Criminal Court Chai Kow was 
sentenced to one month in jail for violently resisting 
arrest by the police. Lee Fan was fined $10 for 
breach of Opium Regulations. The case of Nyuk 
Chin (f.) vs. Jong Choon for maltreatment was 
dismissed for lack of evidence. The case of Police 
vs. Khiew Chow Jiew for arson was beard by the 
Divisional Officer, Mr. C. Ermen, and dismissed 
for lack of evidence. Choo Soo brought a case 
against Chong Chon of Paku for theft but his only 
evidence was that he claimed to have recognized the 
defendant's footprints on the floor of his house. He 
was asked to point out the defendant's footprint 
amongst several others and, on his failing to do so, 
the case was dismissed. In the ease of Abang vs. 
Anis for assault the defendant was fined $5 and 
costs. Chop Nyau Hin warranted Chiew Ho for 
breach of contract and the defendant was found 
guilty and sentenced to two months in jail and to 
repay the advances and costs on his release. The
case Tong Shie vs. Chiaw Ho for theft of rubber 
was twice adjourned for witnesses. In the end the  
defendant was sentenced to six months for theft. 
Diong, a Dyak of Singghi, was sentenced to four 
months' R.I. for moving a lawfully placed boundary 
peg. Lee Khoi was brought up by the police for 
having stolen seventy cents in silver from his 
towkay. He was sentenced to three strokes with 
the rattan.
  The driver of Trojan lorry No. 9 was fined $5 and 
costs for using the back road to Paku and the driver 
of motor car No. 3 was fined $5 and costs for running 
over closed roads, knowing them to be closed.
  There were several land disputes and the usual 
debt cases.
  P. W. D. Work was finished on the cement dam 
at Seniawan.
  The prisoners then cleared up the garden at the 
Krian Bungalow. Pipe-fitter Madris was discharged 
as there is no further need for him now that the 
Ban water main has been completed.
  General. I arrived from Lundu on the 2nd. On 
the 11th the offices were closed for Armistice Day. 
On the 13th the offices were closed again and the 
flag flown at half-mast in respect of the death of 
His Highness the Tuan Bunsu.
  The Divisional Officer, Mr. C. Ermen, visited the 
station on the 19th, returning on the21st. He made 
further inquiries into the murder case at Dahan and 
examined the various works in progress at Seniawan.
  The Director of Education, Mr. A. E. Lawrence, 
visited the station on the 23rd in connection with 
school matters. He returned the next day.
  The Acting Conservator of Forest, Mr. D. E. 
Culver, arrived on the 26th. He examined the
Forest Department accounts, Checking Station, etc.,
and returned on the 29th.
  Mr. and Mrs. Carr of Kuching visited the Krian 
from the 27th to the 30th.
December, 1926
   Court -Several cases were brought before the Court 
in which coolies were charged with leaving work under 
advances and two men were sentenced to fifteen days each 
and ordered to repay their advances and costs. There were 
a few land disputes and the usual debt cases but on the 
whole there was very little litigation dining the month. 
Basir, Javanese, was sentenced to five years' R.I. for 
culpable homicide by the Divisional Officer.
   General. I went to Kuching on the 2nd to see the 
Divisional Officer. Lim Kim Han, Court Writer, took six 
weeks' leave from the 9th. James Law returned from leave 
on the 9th.
   The Divisional Officer visited the station on the 29th 
by m.l. Young Harry and car from Seniawan. He returned 
the same day.
   Jua, Land Dyak of Simuti, came down on the 3rd and 
was told to carry on and settle small disputes until a new 
Tua Kampong can be appointed at Bedut to Lake the place 
of the present man, who is far too old to even take an 
interest in things.
   Orang Kaya Rasseh of Sennah was also down and 
appeared anxious to re-open the old dispute about land and 
bees' nests between Kampong Sennah and Temak.
   Saturday 25th and Monday 27th were observed as 
Public Holidays and the Offices closed.
   P.W.D.-Prisoners averaged eighteen men and worked 
on the road between Buan and Paku all the month. The 
Trojan lorry brought gravel from a new pit at Buan and 
good progress was made. A new drain was made with 24-
inch pipes from the old gold works.
   Madris, pipefitter, was dismissed as his services are no 
longer required.
 Fifty piculs of lime were delivered to the Government 
Store.
   The trail from Stungkor to Bau has now been 
cleared all the way with the exception of Grogo 
Kampong.
Chop Chin Thai were given permission to move 
their wharf at Buso to a more favourable location 
since at its present position it is constantly under 
water and not available for use.
Several shopowners at Buso were warned to be 
quicker with re-building of their shops.
   Mr. Seng Chai of Seniawan built a new concrete 
wharf which will no doubt be of great service to the 
public.
   The roads were closed several times on account of 
heavy rain.
   I visited Lundu from the 11th to the 20th going 
by s.l. Lucile and returning overland.
Court.-There were the usual debt cases to be 
settled. In the Criminal Court, Merim, Malay, 
brought an action against Piang Bong and Tirhi for 
theft of cash $100. The plaintiff is a trader and 
when his boat was sunk in a storm some time ago a 
suit-case full of clothes mid some money were lost 
with the other goods. The suit-case was found by 
the defendants who denied there was a roll of notes 
value $100 in it. There was some other money 
amounting to $20 in the case and this they found 
and returned to the plaintiff. The case was dismissed.
Bugoi, Dyak, was sentenced to one year's R.I. 
under section 304A. of the Indian Penal Code for 
shooting his son whom he mistook for a pig. This 
offence is very common with the Dyaks here.
In the case Chop Hiap Thai vs. Ah Miaw, theft 
of rubber, the defendant was found guilty and 
sentenced to six months for theft.
Chop Hiap Thai also summoned Ah Choo under 
section 411 of the Indian Penal Code for receiving 
rubber stolen by Ah Miaw in the above case but the 
case was dismissed for lack of evidence.



THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1927.
91
   Haji Sut brought a case against Usop. a Malay, under 
Order No, XII, 1902 Usup had taken advances to work 
timber and then run away to Dutch Borneo. He was 
sentenced to one year's R.I. under this Order and ordered 
to repay the advances on his release. This man is also 
wanted by the Dutch authorities for a similar offence 
committed in Dutch Borneo.	,
   General. The six prisoners were used in cleaning the 
ditches around the station. One of them was put on to 
painting work in the Fort.
   The Government boat is now under construction and 
should be completed by the end of the month.
   P. C. No. 7, Itui, asked to be allowed to resign and a 
satisfactory substitute having been found, permission was 
given to him to do so.
   Rainfall amounted to 28.48 inches. Rainfall at Dahan 
amounted to 14.57 inches. Rubber harvested at Dahan 
Estate was 38,500 pounds.
January, 1927.
   Court.- There was little Court work during the month. 
There were live land disputes in the Court all of which 
were settled. One Rangi, a Dyak, was fined $25 for 
contempt of Court in not pulliug up his rubber when 
ordered to do so. He had planted it on swamp padi land. A 
Chinese, Hak Kee, was fined $100 for offering a bribe of 
$10 to the police in connection with the counting of a 
rubber garden for assessment of sales tax. He gave notice 
of appeal. There were no other cases of interest.
   Prisoners-Averaged seventeen men for the month and 
were employed widening the road between Buan and 
Paku.
   Roads.- The Trojan lorry was used in carrying gravel 
for patching the soft places. The roads were closed to all 
traffic for several days during the month on account of 
heavy rain.
   General.- The 1st, being Regatta Day, the Offices 
were closed. On the 6th I visited Singghi and made the 
round of the various kampongs there.
   I regret to report that much good padi land has been 
made unusable by isolated rubber gardens being scattered 
about in it.
   On the 20th 1 left for Lundu by overland route and boat 
from Stungkor and arrived at Lundu at 9.30 p.m. on 
Friday. The Orang Kaya Baja has recovered from his 
serious illness. On the 23rd I walked to Simatan by the 
seaside route returning via Serayan on the 25th. I regret to 
report that some of the pepper gardens in the Serayan and 
Selarat district have now become diseased. This is serious 
for the traders living at Simatan as they depend entirely on 
the pepper for their livelihood.
   The cows now numbered eighteen head and are very 
healthy.
   There were the usual debt cases at Lundu. Three Dyaks 
were summoned for cheating by a trader. Ah Chang, who 
accused them of having put earth in bundles of tuba root to 
increase the weight. However, Ah Chang had bought large 
quantities of tuba from other Dyaks and he was not able to 
prove that the false bundles had been bought from the 
accused men and not from others. The case was therefore 
dismissed.
   I returned via Sempadi, Sibu Laut and Kuching on the 
30th.
   Rubber produced at Dahan Rubber Estate during 1926 
was 406,420 pounds and the production for this mouth 
36,000 pounds.
   Rainfall for the month was 28.88 inches.
February, 1927.
   Court. Court works was unusually heavy during the 
month. There were a number of cases of theft. Chong Ket 
Tiow, a juvenile, was sentenced to three strokes with the 
rattan for stealing a silver belt from one Fat Jiew Chai; Ah 
Moh was also sentenced to nine strokes with the rattan for 
stealing money from Liew Hon Chin. In the case Hin 
Siong vs. Voon Nyoon for theft of a gold ring the 
defendant was found
guilty and sentenced to six months' imprisonment. In the 
case brought by Tasminah (f.) against Matrais, under 
section 426 of the Indian Penal Code, the defendant was 
accused of having attempted to set light to the plaintiff's 
pillow and mosquito net which he bad soaked in kerosene 
oil. He was caught in the act, and the Court found him 
guilty of deliberate mischief and he was sentenced to two 
months' imprisonment.
   Rangi, a Dyak of Singghi, who was fined $25 on 10th 
January for contempt of Court in not pulling up his rubber 
(see January report) was summoned again and sentenced 
to two mouths' imprisonment for contempt of Court in 
having again refused to pull up the rubber. Jong Sa, 
Chinese, was sentenced to one month's imprisonment for 
the same offence. There were a number of cases of assault. 
Ah Khian brought a case against Ah Ngo for this and the 
defendant was found guilty and sentenced to todays' 
imprisonment.
   Assan, a Malay taxi driver, committed a brutal assault 
on another driver, Ah Lak. Assan was sentenced to one 
month's R.I.
   Resident's Court. The case of His Highness the Rajah 
vs. Takom for murder was tried by the Divisional Officer, 
assisted by a jury consisting of two Chinese and three 
Dyaks. The jury considered that the man. Akang, had died 
of wounds caused by the accused. Takom was sentenced 
to seven years' imprisonment for manslaughter not 
amounting to murder. The man Takom, who lived with his 
father Akang in Knmpong Tebia, attacked his father in a 
fit of temper and at once ran off to hide in the jungle. He 
was arrested near the Dutch border, after a long hunt.
   An appeal by Chop Hak Kee of Kuching against the 
decision of the District Court in fining him $100 or one 
year's imprisonment in default, for an offence under the 
Indian Penal Code, section 165, in offering a bribe to the 
police was heard by the Divisional Officer. The decision 
of the District Court was upheld in the matter of the fine 
but imprisonment by default was reduced to three months.
   A preliminary inquiry into the shooting of Liew Shok 
by Liew Miaw, and into the matter of Liew Miaw's 
resistance of arrest by the police, was also heard by the 
Divisional Officer, who ordered that Liew Miaw be sent to 
Kuching to be medically I examined as to his sanity.
   Native Court. The only case of importance was that 
which was brought by Abdulrahman against Adon and 
Subiah under sections 47 and 51 of the Malay Undang 
Undang. The defendants were fined $50 under section 47 
and in addition, for carrying off Subiah who was the wife 
of the plaintiff, Adon was sentenced to one year's 
imprisonment and Subiah to six months in default of fine.
   Prisoners. Averaged 22 men for the month and were 
employed on the main road at Buan, except on wet days 
when they were used in filling lime into bags for delivery 
to the Government Store. Prisoner Tan Ah Siew, Luichew, 
died in the jail at 7 a.m. on the 2nd. He had reported to the 
Dresser the previous afternoon complaining that he had 
been constipated for four days. He was given medicine but 
this was not effective and he died quietly. The Dresser 
reported that the symptoms indicated an acute intestinal 
obstruction giving rise to violent vomiting and finally 
heart failure.
   P.W.D. The roads were closed several times during the 
month on account of rain and floods. The Trojan lorry was 
in the workshop for about a week for extensive repairs. 
The dam at Seniawan had to lie repaired since it was 
found that the water had cut a channel underneath it and 
this was filled up with stones. Work was completed on 
repairs to the remand jail. The whole roof was renewed. 
Work was also started on building a five-strand barbed 
wire fence around the cow pasture.



92
THE SARAWAK GAZZETE. APRIL 1, 1927.
    Travelling. On the 10th I left fur Tebia to arrest 
the man Takom who had murdered his father and 
was hiding in the jungle. I went on foot with one 
policeman and, by taking a direct overland route via 
the headwaters of Sungei Poak. I reached Kampong 
Sungoh the first night and Kampong Keding by the 
evening of the second day. Here I learnt that 
Takom had already been arrested by Police Lance- 
Corporal Janting and his three constables. I joined 
them at midday next day and a start was made for 
down river at once. With the high water very good 
time was made and we reached Batu Kitang at 
6 p.m. and thence on foot to Seniawan and by taxi 
to Bau.
    On the 25th I visited the headwaters of Sungei 
Moyan to investigate a complaint by Singghi and 
Sungei Pinang Dyaks to the effect that the Chinese 
are encroaching on their fanning land. This was 
found to the true but, since these Chinese have taken 
permits to plant rubber in Kuching, the matter 
could not be settled at once and was referred to the 
Divisional Officer.
General. The 2nd, being Chinese New Year, was 
observed as a Public Holiday and the Offices closed. 
The 24th, being Her Highness the Ranee's Birthday 
and a Public Holidays the Offices were closed again 
and the flagstaff dressed.
   The Divisional Officer arrived in the evening of
the 15th. On the 16th he held Court all day. On 
the 17th he went into the matter of guns and decided 
that the issue of guns should be temporarily arrested 
for the next six months. He also went into various 
office matters. In the afternoon he visited the 
place at the Selalang river where the shooting 
of Liew Shok and the subsequent arrest of Liew 
Miaw took place. He left by m.l Young Harry 
from Seniawan on the evening of the 18th. The 
Divisional Officer paid a second visit to the station 
on the 26th to hold the ease against Takom, Dyak, 
for murder. He returned the same day.
   A female Javanese coolie was drowned at Dahan 
Rubber Estate while bathing in the river which was 
swollen by floods. The body was recovered the 
next day.
   Visitors to the station during the month were 
Mrs Aplin, Mrs. Fenwick, Mr. D. E. Calver, and 
Mr. J. K. Beasley.
Lundu was not visited during the month.
Rainfall for the month amounted to 22.49 inches,
C. ERMEN.
Acting Divsional Officer.
SADONG COLLIERY.
February, 1927.
   The output, export, local consumption, conversion 
to coke and coal stock figures for the month were 
as follows:-
1st February stock balance	502.15	 Tons
           gross output	992.11
Total	1,495.06	..
Shipped	... 1,052.00 Tons.
Consumed by boilers and 
converted into coke 337.09 "	1,389.09
Stock balance ...	...	105.17 Tons.
   Underground conditions remain unchanged with 
the exception of the New Mines, where the scam 
section has again dropped to a thickness of one foot, 
or slightly over, in places.
In accordance with Order XXVII, 1926, the further 
registration of new opium smokers ceased at the end of 
the month.
The present number of opium smokers, comprising 153 
men, is just over one-half of our Chinese labour force, 
and those employed below ground have, with few 
exceptions, been transferred from the various mines to 
No. 8 and 9 lines, where they are kept under better 
observation and apart from all the rest who are non-
smokers.
The mines resumed work at 3 a.m. on the 9th, which was 
said to be the first auspicious date after Chinese New 
Year holidays.
A mild epidemic form of flu was prevalent during the 
early part of the month, but without any fatal results.
The rainfall for the month was 8.51 inches only.
J. W. EVANS,
Manager.
         SECOND DIVISION.
 
Simanggang. 
February, 1927.
   Court. Court work during the mouth was light, no
cases calling for comment. Fines and fees for the
Batang Lupar amounted $567.19.
   General. The 2nd, being Chinese New Year, was 
 observed as a Public Holiday.
   One Kang Sai, of the bazaar, was reported missing 
on the 3rd. His body was found floating in the river 
near Tawang by Dyaks. Kang Sai is said to have 
committed suicide on account of his numerous debts.
   On the 11th, Mr. R. H. P. Langton was sent to 
 Kuching. He having fallen off the Astana verandah
and broken his collar bone. The roil of the verandah 
on which he was sitting gave away. He returned to 
Simanggang on the 24th.
   The m.l. One returned from Kuching on the 14th, 
having been thoroughly overhauled and necessary 
repairs done. She took nine and half hours to reach 
Simanggang and consumed 20 gallons of fuel.
   Mr. R. W. Hurst, Assistant Superintendent of Rubber 
Exports, arrived from Kabong on the 15th. He will be 
stationed here for some time in order to supervise the 
improvement of sheet rubber.
   On the 21st I left in m.l. One for Lingga and 
Sebuyow, 
I also visited Kabong; the Acting District Officer was 
away. I returned again to Simanggang on the 24th.
   The 24th. being the birthday of Her Highness the 
Ranee, the Offices were closed and flagstaff dressed.
   The following Penghulus visited this station during 
the 
month, viz., Mekoi of Lower Undup, Mumin of Lower 
Skrang, Jaul of Saduku.
   Fifty-six Dyak coolies and Mandor Ngadun left for 
Johore during the month in order to work for the Colonial 
Survey Department.
   Public Works. The prisoners averaged 45.32 and the 
gang were employed on raising the bazaar rood, also 
weeding the Sabu and Brayun roads. Work was held
  up continually on account of rain. Carpenter Matsalleh 
  with three prisoners were employed squaring timber for 
  the Forest Clerks quarters. The rest of the prisoners
  were employed on upkeep of ornamental grounds.
  Cattle. The Simanggang herd number eighty-four 
head and Lubok Anui forty-four head.
   Medical. A total of 238 persons were treated in 
hospital during the month as follows: Chinese 17, 
Dyaks 198, Malays 22, Tamil one.
   163 cases of N. A B. injection for yaws, etc., were 
given 
during the month.
   Agriculture. 179 permits to plant para rubber, and 66 
to plant pepper were issued during the month.
   Shipping. Seven motor launches and three bandongs 
arrive  and seven motor launches and five bandongs 
cleared during the month.



THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1927.

Saribas.
February, 1927.
   Mr. A. L. Honore, Officer-in-Charge, reports:	
   Court Abang Indut, former Native Officer, was fined for 
contempt of Court; Ah Chang and Kim On were  given 
terms of jail for contempt of Court regarding payment of 
debts. Several Paku Chinese hawkers were fined for breach 
of regulations regarding time allowed them at one 
pangkalan, and the building of huts on river banks. Several 
debt claims and property disputes came before the Court. 
Fines and fees amounted to  $794.90.
   Prisoners. The average number was 5.18. They were  
employed in the general upkeep of roads and grounds.
   P.W.D. The new barracks were completed by the month, 
together with an improved bathroom below the house, for 
temporary use as Officers' quarters.
   General. Forty-two shop sites in the new bazaar have 
now been bought. The making of the roads to the 
pangkalans promises to be an expensive business, but as 
yet no arrangement has been made.
    On the 12th I left for Spaoh and the Pakn, returning on 
the 18th. I went primarily to settle the division of the 
common property of a Dyak and his divorced wife.
   A Dyak named Saing has now started a motor-boat 
service between Kuching and Tanjong in the Paku.
   It was found that Chinese hawkers have consistently 
been disregarding Government Orders regarding the extent 
to which they can carry their trading, and many complaints 
were received that they are continually trading in Dyak 
houses.
   Agriculture. There were 26 permits to plant rubber and 
five permits to plant sago issued during the month.
   Shipping. Calls were made during the month by motor-
ships as follows:-M.L. Lang Endang 4 trips, m.l. Bintang 
Trang 4 trips, m.l. Hap Soon Ann 4 trips.
The Court Writer, Pusa, reports:-
  Court. Native Court Pusa fined Linang and Munan, 
both of Kampong Beladin, for contempt of T. R.'s order, 
five and ten reals respectively; Sadam (f.), of Kampong 
Tambak, fined 60 reals and six sukus for divorce, and 
for leaving alone her husband, who was seriously ill.
  The following fines were imposed by the Acting 
District Officer during his visit here. Puasa, of Beladin, 
for trading and opening shop at Beladin without 
permission fined $25 and for evading verification of 
weights and measures for 1926 fined another $5 with 
costs.
  Bakir, of Pusa, re sago boundary dispute, loses his 
pledge of $30; Naong, Dyak Undai, sentenced to two 
weeks' R.I. for non-payment of five katis fine; Luit and 
Lemih (f.) for incest. Case adjourned. Luit was 
sent to Kabong to be kept on remand, and Lemih was 
allowed on bail with a security of $100 on account of 
having a small child.
  Dunging appealed against the decision of P. Mon 
re tembawai dispute. Penghulu's decision upheld. 
Plaintiff fined 30 catties and to lose his appeal fee.
  Lembang, T.R., fined five catties re land dispute. 
Jawa, T.R., for refusing to clear his division of the 
Government roads as ordered by P. Mon was fined 
10 catties.	
  General. On the 2nd, being Chinese New Year, 
Office was closed.
  I left for Betong on the 4th, transferring January 
cash balance, and returned on the 8th.
  On the 11th, Chebu, Juragan of bandong Burong 
Wali, owned by "Mui Kee," Pusa, reported that the 
bandong was sunk between Sadong and Puloh, Burong 
on midday of the 7th instant with her cargo valued 
about $1,000. Two passengers were drowned, Haji 
Sedik and his daughter aged 12 years. Juragan, four crew 
and one passenger were saved by another bandong 
which at the time was sailing close by. The accident 
was caused by planks becoming loose at the stern part 
of the bandong. The total loss of the bandong and the 
cargo estimated at $3,000.
  Mohamed Ali, Malay School Inspector, arriving from 
Sapoh on the 15th, on his way to Kabong and Saratok, 
left for Kabong on the next day.
  The Acting District Officer arrived from Kabong on 
the 17th and proceeded to Debak on the 20th, thence 
to Saratok on the 23rd. I also accompanied him, on 
four days' leave.
  While the Acting District Officer was at Debak four 
applications to build shops were asked for and allowed.
  One Gelanggang states he wishes to build another 
shop where his living house is, but is now unable to do 
so being short of funds. He is told his living house can 
remain as it is for one year, after which time he is can 
pull it down and build a shophouse on the site. This 
will not hold up anyone who wishes to build now, and 
a good gap will be left as a preventive against fire.
  Abang Sedik, N. O. Debak, was granted three weeks' 
leave for the year 1926 as from 29th January.
  Health. The health of the district was good. Births 
six and deaths one were reported during the month.
  P. W.D.- The police kitchen was repaired for $20. 
Five small bridges crossing the ditches were also repaired 
at a cost of $9.60.
  As there are not sufficient planks for the new 
buildings, 
the Dyaks were ordered to work another 600 pieces.
  Notices were also given out for the tender to build 
three new buildings.
  Trade and Shipping. 18 bandongs cleared and 17 
entered and one motor launch cleared and two entered.
  Kalaka.
  February, 1927.
  Mr. H. E. Cutfield, Acting District Officer, reports;-
  General. The first half of the month was spent at 
Kabong endeavouring to make arrangements with the 
District Officer, Rejang, to meet for a settlement of the 
boundary question.
  On, the 17th I left for a visit to the Lower Saribas 
and Saratok, returning again to Kabong on the last day 
of the month.
  A number of cases were settled at Pusa, most of which 
were brought up by Court Writer Jerah.
  The Government boat-shed has been completed and 
the police dapor raised, also a pangkalan built by the 
Court Writer and policemen.
  All Pusa and neighbouring kampongs have shared the 
work of the building up and repairing the roads. From 
the pangkalan to the Fort and flagstaff, and right up



94
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1927.
past the bazaar and kampongs to the far end of Kampong 
Ulu, the road has been raised about 1 1/2 feet, straightened 
and broadened. About nine inches or a foot from each 
edge of the road planks have been placed on edge and the 
centre of the road filled with fine gravel to a depth of 
about six inches. This prevents the road from any- 
where being flooded during high water and rain has  
practically no effect on it, as it drains through the 
gravel immediately.
   Timber for new clerks' quarters has been brought in  
and stacked neatly under the Fort.
   A site for six new shophouses was marked out. A 
general improvement of the place was very noticeable.
   On Sunday the 20th I left by boat for Debak, which 
was reached the same evening. A large number of 
Dyaks were present and an average number of cases 
attended to.
   The Chinese applied to make, a deduction of a small 
percentage from goods sold and bought in the bazaar 
which should go to the building of a Topeh-kong and 
Chinese School but this was not allowed as it was re-  
cognized that the price of goods, bought and sold, would 
be affected by the deduction with result that the money 
would be raised at the expense of the natives.
   There were six applications for shop sites and these 
were measured and marked out from the Hilir end of 
Gelanggang's living house, a space being reserved as a 
preventive against fire.
   Gelanggang made arrangements and was given time 
to erect a shophouse on the site of living house, or to 
move elsewhere.
   The Chinese have got a wayang, consisting entirely 
of local talent, and give public shows with great success.
   On the 23rd I went to Saratok by the overland route, 
accompanied by Penghulu Mon of Rimbas. Both Peng- 
hulu Nyalu and Penghulu Undom were present and 
a number of cases came before the Court.
   I returned to Kabong on the 1st day of the month. 
Eleven Malays left Saratok to go on the pilgrimage.
   Court. A Malay, Bujang Kop, was sentenced to three 
months' R.I. for gross contempt of Court; Adam, Malay, 
to three months for non-payment of line and one month 
for contempt of Court; Gormat and Salleh six weeks 
each for misappropriation of property.
   A long serious case of incest among Malays was  
investigated at Pusa in which it would seem that a 
general attempt has been made to hide the offence. The 
case was referred to the Resident's Court. Puasa, a 
Malay, was fined $25 for trading from his house in 
Kampong Beladin.
   Several people were prosecuted at Pusa for being in 
possession of incorrect weights and measures. Gaong, 
Dyak, was sentenced to two weeks, at PUSA, for non- 
payment of fine. A Dyak was fined 30 catties for in- 
subordination to Penghulu Mon and Tuai Rumah Jawa 
fined 10 catties for refusing to work the division of the 
Government road allotted him by the Penghulu.
   An inquiry was held into the loss of $100 Government 
cash in Saratok and the case referred to the Resident's  
Court.
   Simot (f.) took action against her husband, the junior  
clerk at Saratok, for adultery, which was admitted, but 
as they were married by Civil Marriage Certificate the  
case was referred to the Supreme Court, Kuching
   Enjawan, Dyak, was sentenced to three years and  
Lai (f.). wife of P.C. Gundi Kabong, 1 1/2 years for incest.  
An average number of land and debt cases were before 
the Court and some more people fined for planting Para 
rubber without permits.
   Tan Eng Chong, Court Writer, visited Roban during 
the month but reported nothing of importance. Fines 
and fees amounted to $602.40 and $89.60 respectively.
   P.W. D. The prisoners, averaging 22.99 in number, 
have been employed both at Saratok and Kabong. The 
gang at Kabong completed the filling in of the ditch near 
Sungei Numbu and raising the road there. The two 
mowers completed the mowing of the inland road through 
the padi fields to the waterworks and Kampong Ulu 
and commenced on the new Hilir road running between 
the Numbu and Undut. The remainder were employed 
cleaning out the ditches of the inland road up to the 
waterworks and repairing places ravaged by pigs, then 
putting sand on soft places; and the general upkeep 
of the station.
  At Saratok the gang was employed putting a final 
surface on the new road at the back of the bazaar, 
making three ditches through the swampy ground at the 
foot of the cattle plain, building a shed for the contractor 
of the Fort and new quarters to work in and the general 
upkeep of the grounds and cattle.
  Agriculture. The Dyaks and Malays all seem very 
satisfied with their crops but as there was absolutely no 
fruit this year the pigs are more trouble than usual.
  Cattle. The Kabong herd was still kept out during 
the month and no milk was obtained but they are im- 
proving slightly, in health, in consequence. One calf 
was born. The Saratok herd is still satisfactory.
  Health. There has been a lot of illness both at 
Kabong and Saratok, but it is most noticeable at 
Sessang, and it is hoped that the dresser from Betong 
will soon visit the district. No dresser has been round
since 1925.
  Shipping. Seven bandongs entered and ten bandongs 
cleared and six motor schooners entered and six motor 
schooners cleared.
  
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER,_
 Resident, Second Division.
THIRD DIVISION.
Sibu.
February, 1927.
  Court.- In the Resident's Court a Sut Dyak was 
sentenced to three years' R.I. under I.P.C. 377.
  A decision was given in an outstanding appeal case 
concerning the interpretation of a document transferring a 
shophouse in Sibu bazaar.
  General.- I left for Kanowit on the 5th instant, 
meeting the Acting District Officer of Kapit there.
  A number of difficulties had arisen in connection with 
the demarcation of Rejang Plantations Company, 
Limited, land near Sungei Bawan. Accompanied by the 
Penghulu. I walked some distance up the Bawan and on 
the following day met all the Dyaks who were protesting 
against their farming land being interfered with. At my 
request Mr. Pascoe met me at Kanowit on my return from 
Kapit and remained there for some days. At the time of 
visiting most of the difficulties appear to have been over-
come. The Fort at Kanowit was in a very dilapidated 
state, the Officers' quarters being practically 
uninhabitable. I left instructions for new attap to be put on 
and this was done within a week.
  The new bazaar at Kanowit is going up rapidly, roads 
ami bridges require some attention. A new Customs 
godown is in course of construction.
  I was at Kapit from the 8th to the 12th, meeting all the 
Penghulu there. On arrival at Song news was received 
that a number of Poi Dyaks had left for the upper Kupuas 
without permission.



THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1927.
95
   The Acting District Officer of Kapit went up the 
Katibas and Bengkit and succeeded in arresting another 
party of six Julau Dyaks who were also on their way over 
the frontier.
   Whilst at Kapit I visited Penghnlu Mata Hari at his 
house at N. Sut. The old man is in very low spirits, 
suffering from some sort of growth on one side of his face. 
Tile Divisional Medical Officer kindly went up to see him 
later on but nothing can be done. I may mention that the 
trip from Kapit to N. Sut was done in a long boat driven by 
a 2 1/2 horse- power outboard motor. The return journey, 
which would take over three hours paddling, was done in 
just over the hour. The Acting District Officer of Kapit 
informs me that he finds this motor exceedingly useful.
   The station at Kapit was exceedingly well kept and the 
Acting District Officer is very wisely reserving areas of 
land around the station.
   On my return down river I brought with me a young 
Dyak who is presumed to be a leper. He was exceedingly 
indignant and strenuously denied the charge. I am glad to 
say that the Divisional Medical Officer upheld him after 
examination.
   I spent a night at Kanowit, on my return meeting the 
Manager of Rejang Plantations, Limited, and Messrs. 
Griffiths and Pascoe, all of who left the following day for 
Ulu Bawan.
   On the 8th I went down to Binatang taking with me 
Abang Dulatip who relieves Abang Hadji Metair as Native 
Officer. There was nothing much to attend to with the 
exception of a number of complaints from Dyaks about 
Chinese encroachment. In the majority of cases the Dyaks 
themselves are to blame.
   The Officers' quarters at Binatang require repairs.
   Accompanied by the Acting District Officer of Kapit, I 
left Sibu by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 24th and was still 
away at the end of the month.
   On the 21st Mr. E M. Woodward, accompanied by 
Abang Enjah, left for Kanowit to visit the Poi, Ngemah, 
and other rivers. Mr. Woodward was still away at the end 
of the month.
   Another outboard motor was purchased for used while 
visiting these rivers and a good deal of Lime and labour 
should be saved thereby.
   The Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. L. B. Haye, 
reports:-
   Dining the month 73 in-patients were treated in 
hospital, 62 of them being new in-patients. 517 outpatients 
were also treated, 232 of them being new 118 N.A.B. 
injections were given and 123 vaccinations. Immigrants 
still continue to arrive and during the month 406 
passengers were inspected, 90 of them vaccinated, and 21 
detained in hospital for various reasons.
   Twelve deaths occurred during the month due to the 
following causes: -One from burn, second degree with 
shock ; one from meningitis ; two from beri-beri; two from 
lobar pneumonia; two from bronchopneumonia; one from 
acute appendicitis ; one from cerebral haemorrhage; one 
from mirasmus and congenital syphilis.
   Of these five died within a few minutes of admission.
Eight lepers were admitted into the Kadjang hut during the 
month, undergoing treatment while waiting their 
transference to Kuching.
Only eight operations were performed, four being under 
general anaesthesia.
An inquest was held on the 22nd on the body of a drowned 
Chinese. I was absent from Sibu for the greater part of 
month, being on a visit to the Coast from the 3rd to the 
15th and from the 21st to the 23rd on a trip to Kapit, by 
request of the Resident.
   The District Officer of Sibu, Mr. J. B. Archer, 
reports:-
   District Office.-I was away in Mukah and Oya from 
the 3rd until the 20th, which time Mr. Woodward was in 
charge of the district.
   Her Highness the Ranee's Birthday and Chinese New 
Year were observed as holidays. On the first-named date 
the police paraded at 8. a.m., and on the second-named a 
salute of fourteen guns was fired from the battery in front 
of Fort Brooke.
   The Resident was away visiting Kapit and other upriver 
stations from the 5th to the 12th.
   Mr. Wood ward left for Kanowit on the 21st for 
temporary duty in that district and was still away at the end 
of the month.
   Abang Abu Seman has relieved Abang Latip as Native 
Officer at Kanowit, and the latter proceeded to Binatang 
where he relieved Abang Hadji Metair who retired on 
pension at the end of the month.
   Mention should be made in this report of the long and 
valuable service Abang Hadji Metair has rendered to the 
State. He was made a Member of the Council Negri in 
1915 and has spent all his service as Native Officer in 
Binatang. His retirement is on account of advancing years 
but he still retains the post of Tua Kampong of Binatang.
   Two Dyaks were killed by falling trees during the 
month. A Foochow was drowned near Lebaan and the 
inquest proved it to be one of many similar casea- 
inability to swim and a total ignorance of river knowledge.
   The Resident and the Acting District Officer of Kapit, 
accompanied by Abang Aboi, Native Officer, and some 
Sibu and Kapit Chiefs, left for Pontianak on the 24th in 
H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on special business.
   Mr. J. A. H. Hardie, Commissioner of Trade, and 
Customs, passed through Sibu during the month.
   The Binatang-Sarikei telephone line was cleared but 
the rentis is far too narrow.
   Mr. Whiteside arrived to relieve Mr. D. E. Edwards as 
Divisional Engineer.
   A meeting of the Sibu Municipal Board was held on 
the 28th.
   Mr. Pollock, of the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, was in 
Sibu for a couple of days and has proceeded up the 
Saraikei prospecting for oil.
   The Gambling and Arrack Farm tenders were opened 
on the 27th.
   Messrs. Griffiths and Pascoe were in Kanowit and S. 
Assan districts on land business for part of the month.
   The number of scholars in Chinese Schools qualifying 
for the $1 capitation grant is increasing and it is thought 
that the estimates for 1927 will be greatly exceeded.
   An old Sibu inhabitant, Hadji Matnor, well known to 
all Europeans who have been stationed in Sibu, died during 
the month.
   Chinese New Year passed off quietly but the present 
wealth of nearly all the Chinese was reflected by the luxury 
with which all classes kept the holiday.
   A wireless station is to be erected in Kanowit and a 
piece of land has been purchased behind Fort Emma as no 
other land was available.
   Court, District Court.-The usual number of cases 
came before this Court and eight persons were sentenced to 
various terms of imprisonment varying from two years to 
three months.
   Menan, a Matu Melanau, was fined $200 or two years 
imprisonment for abducting the daughter of Tuanku 
Hussein who was living at the time with her uncle Tuanku 
Hamid. Menan chose to serve the sentence. Three Chinese 
were fined $100 each for contravention of the Opium 
Monopolies Order and a Cantonese from Binatang $50 for 
failing to report the death of his wife. A number of other 
persons were fined for minor offences.



THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1927.
96
  Civil cases look up much of the time of the Court but 
none call for special mention except a case in which the 
Sarawak Steamship Co., Ltd., sued the firm of Lam Aik 
for breach of agreement. The case was given in favour of 
defendants and the Sarawak Steamship Co., Ltd., have 
given notice, of appeal. This case has aroused much 
interest amongst local traders, many of whom are under 
the same agreement with the Company.
  Magistrate's and Police Courts.-No cases of 
particular interest came before these Courts.
  Fines and fees, excluding sub-stations. amounted to 
$2,210.51. Sixty-one deeds were registered in the Sibu 
Court.
  Police.-Three recruits joined dining the month but the 
force is still under strength. New bugles have at last been 
obtained and the Corporal Bugler is now able to give 
lessons. The strength at Kanowit was increased from four 
to six men.
  The usual parades were carried out and the men 
supplied gun crews for the salute on Chinese New Year.
  Prisons. Nine persons were imprisoned during the 
month:-Foochows four, Melanaus three, Hokkien one, 
Dyak one, and 39 men remained in jail at the end of the 
month. This is far below the usual number and it has been 
found difficult to supply enough men for the ordinary 
routine labour. The average number during the month was 
only 87.2. One man died in hospital. The daily average of 
sick was 1.2
Kapit.
February, 1927.
   The Acting District Officer, Mr. E. V. Andreini, 
reports: -
   The Resident visited Kapit from the 8th to 12th and 
met all Penghulus and mata. I accompanied him to Song 
where the Katibas Dyak Chiefs were waiting. I also spent 
from 3rd to 7th at Kanowit, accompanying the Resident to 
Bawan and the Rejang Plantation Concession in 
connection with boundary disputes.
   Whilst in Kapit the only thing of importance brought 
before the Resident was the question of the Chinese 
Cemetery extension which was settled finally.
   Later in the month I visited the Katibas and Banket 
rivers, going up the latter as far as the path to the Ulu 
Kanyan where I was able to catch up a party of six Julau 
Dyaks who had started some time previously, without 
passes, for Dutch territory and who had deliberately 
refused to return when ordered to do so by Government. 
These Dyaks I took back to Kapit and are now in Kapit 
jail.
   Abang Abdul Gapor, Native Officer, visited the Kapit 
Dyaks, going up as far as Bukit Guram.
   As arrangements have now been made to visit 
Pontianak my visit to Long Nawang was postponed and I 
sent the Native Officer, Belaga, to Long Nawang with a 
letter explaining my own appearance as arranged and 
stating that should the Uma Badang wish to return they 
could live at present in the Belaga river and that the 
Native Officer, Belaga, who was the bearer of the letter, 
could arrange for their reception. I left Kapit by the 
Chamois on the 23rd en route for Sibu and Pontianak and 
was still away at the end of the month.
   Land.- Large numbers of Dyaks took out occupation 
tickets and several applications by Chinese and others for 
land were dealt with, the land first being renticed and 
inspected.
   P.W.D.- Prisoners were engaged on dealing and 
levelling the jail site and on the usual upkeep of the 
station at Kapit, whilst at Song the bathroom in the Fort 
was cemented and various repairs done.
   Court-Ex Penghulu Angup of the Katibas was 
sentenced to three months' imprisonment for assault on a 
sick man who afterwards died, but it was not thought that 
the assault caused his death. No other cases call for 
comment.
   Health.-The Divisional Medical Officer visited Kapit 
on the 22nd and I accompanied him to the Sut where he 
examined Penghulu Matahari who had been suffering for 
some years.
   In the Banket river there are several lepers and I am 
trying to get them sent down. There was the usual demand 
for medicine in the Song district and I have asked that a 
stock of drugs may be kept there now that there is a clerk 
stationed at Song.
   Education.-Dyaks are continually asking for schools, 
both at Kapit and Song.
   Trade. Shipping of Customs.-Ten launches made trips 
to Kapit. Customs duties amounting to $1,364.13 were 
collected.
   Forestry. I noticed a Forest Official in the Fort on the 
21st and understand royalties amounting to $80 were 
collected, there having been no visit by this department in 
January.
Lower Rejang.
February, 1927.
   The District Officer, Mr. J. C. Swayne, reports:- The 
2nd, Chinese New Year's day, and the 24th, Her Highness 
the Ranee's birthday, were observed as public holidays. 
For the first time for several years the Chinese celebrated 
the New Year with a dragon procession.
   A site for the proposed wireless station has been 
chosen on the river front and Penghulu Ambu has 
promised to find suitable timber for masts.
   No Court cases require mention. The prisoners have 
been employed on the Government grounds.
   S.S. Alice Lorraine put in for small repairs on the 11th 
and Mr. Middlemas came ashore for a short time.
   I left for Daro and Matu on the 19th and was away at 
the end of the month. At Daro I noticed the new sawmill is 
finished and should be working next month; a football 
field has been cleared and a match played at Daro for the 
first time on Chinese New Year's day. Some attempt has 
been made to clean the bazaar which always presents an 
untidy appearance. The only case of importance is with 
regard to the ownership of some cattle. This is still under 
investigation, as the real owner is hard to trace.
   At Matu four lepers reported for treatment and are 
being sent, via Binatang. to Kuching. No criminal cases 
came before the Court. The usual number of civil claims 
were dealt with; in addition there were two cases 
concerning land and three about cattle.
   I spent the 24th at Jemureng, an upriver kampong. 
where there is still one of the old Melanau houses, the only 
one left in this district and, unless those at Medong exist, 
probably the only one in the country. It is in fair repair and 
fully inhabited.
   The temporary bazaar is complete andi almost as large 
as the old one. The traders now express a wish to build 
where they are and I have asked the assistance of the 
Survey Department to measure out the site.
   During the floods four feet of water was registered 
under the wireless station and three and a half under the 
new Court House.
H. L. OWEN, 
Resident, Third Division.



THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1927.
97
COAST DIVISION.
Mukah and Balingian.
January, 1927.
   Administration. General. New Year's day was observed 
as a public holiday and all offices closed.
   The District Officer, Oya and Dalat, reported his return 
from Sibu on the 5th instant.
   Datu Awang Udin left for Siteng on the 6th on a visit to 
the upper river kampongs to superintend the election of a 
new Chief for Kampong Teh, in place of Mut resigned; 
and to select Chiefs for the villages of Tabo and Siteng 
which were formerly under the control of the Tua of Teh.
   During the month one Dullah bin Ano, representing 
Messrs. The Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, recruited a 
number of Melanaus for service in the Company as sailors.
   I accompanied Datu Awang Udin on a visit to the 
upriver villages on the 23rd to formally instal, on 
probation, the Chiefs he had selected as Tua of Kampongs 
Teh, Tabo, and Siteng. I also inspected Penakup Bazaar in 
which a number of new shophouses are being erected, and 
called on the Assistant Conservator of Forests who was 
staying in a Dyak house at Sekoyan while carrying out the 
survey of the Sungei Sekei Forest Reserve. We returned 
the same evening, having chartered a local Chinese-owned 
motor launch for the trip.
   Native Officers Abang Haji Mohidin and Awang Juli 
proceeded to Balingian on the 23rd, via the coast route, to 
hear a number of outstanding cases, to select a site for the 
lighthouse, and to arrange the constructing of quarters for 
the keeper at Kuala Balingian; they were still away at end 
of the month. All weights and measures both here and at 
Balingian were checked and re-registered during the 
month.
   Throughout the month the sea was rough and the 
weather squally. The rainfall recorded amounted to 27.14 
inches.
   Judicial. Courts District, Criminals Civil. Lubin bin 
Salleh convicted of cattle maiming and sentenced to six 
months' imprisonment; an inquiry into a case of incest was 
held but was dismissed for lack of evidence; Jais bin 
Angei was imprisoned for non-payment of a fine imposed 
for failing to answer a summons; Salleh bin Ibrahim was 
fined for failing to answer a surat panggil; Said bin Kula 
and Chow Baba were imprisoned for non-payment of fines 
imposed by the Native Court; Imah (f.) was fined for 
erecting a hut in the Government cattle ground and was 
ordered to move cut in one month's time. Several persons 
were fined for mortgaging sago gardens without 
registering the transaction.
   Tua Kampong Haji Rioh of Punut was again cautioned 
for failing to report cases held by him and for withholding 
the fines imposed. Several persons were fined for breach 
of the Forest Regulations. A number of sago garden 
boundary disputes were dealt with and two Melanau 
property disputes settled.
   Magistrate's Court. A large number of debt claims 
were dealt with the majority being at once admitted and 
judgment given for plaintiffs.
   At Balingian. Court was held by Native Officers Abang 
Haji Mohidin and Awang Juli, and many outstanding cases 
dealt with ; Tan Boon Ann was fined for a breach of the 
Port Regulations; Kayong bin Haji Merais was fined for 
breach of agreement; several Dyaks were fined for 
travelling without passes, and a large number of persons 
fined for breaches of the Forest Regulations, chiefly cases 
of ringing jelutong trees and tapping jelutong without 
licences to do so.
   Many outstanding debt cases were heard and judgments 
to pay an average of $4 per month given.
   Native Courts. Malay Datu's Court. In the Datu's Court 
one case was dealt with and the case was dismissed. In the 
Tua Tua Kampongs Courts Islam and Pagan five cases 
were dealt with and $43.74 fines imposed.
   Public Works (Local). Carpenters continued work on 
the construction of new Native Officer's quarters, clerk's 
quarters, and hospital and dispensary; the latter building 
was completed before the end of the month.
   The Tamil labourers, averaging 17.16 persons, were 
employed clearing the grounds around the new clerk's 
quarters, and on the general upkeep of the roads around the 
station.
   The prison gang, averaging 18.21 persons, white-
washed the new hospital and dispensary and new Tamil 
lines, repaired the river bank, near the Government oil 
store, which had been eroding badly, and cleared up the 
grounds around the station.
   At Balingian the kampong people finished removing 
stumps from the Government grounds extension, and two 
mowers were engaged to keep the station grounds in 
proper order.
   Public Works Department, Kuching. The waterworks 
were inspected during the month and work comm need on 
the shoring up of the intake boiler.
   The piling of the ground under the new Government 
Vernacular School building was let to a local contractor 
who had finished the job at the end of the month.
   Health.-The Dresser James Hon, at the request of the 
District Officer, visited Oya and Dalat three times during 
the month, attended a number of cases of dysentery.
   There was much sickness in the villages, chiefly fever 
and colds of an influenza nature, and the usual stomach 
troubles inevitable during the fruit season; 169 patients 
were treated during the month, the chief ailments being 
dysentery, influenza, bronchitis, pneumonia, rheumatism, 
and yaws.
   Thirty N A B. injections were given, mostly to Dyaks 
suffering from yaws.



98
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1927.
   FOREST. The Asistant Conservator of Forests, Mr. T. 
Curson, arrived from Sibu on 12th, and proceeded upriver 
a few days later to survey the new forest reserve at Sungei 
Sekei. He was still in the district at the end of the month.
   One Peter Claver Boo was installed as Divisional 
Forest Clerk as from the 12th, and took charge of all 
forest accounts from Dalat to Balingian.
   Cattle. At the beginning of the month the herd of 
Government cattle stood at 24 head, composed of one 
bull, hired locally pending the arrival of a new bull from 
Bintulu, thirteen cows, three bull calves, and seven cow 
calves.
   One motor schooner and one bandong entered with 
tonnage of 106 tons, and six schooners. one motor 
schooner, and four bandongs cleared the Port of Mukah 
with tonnage of 373 tons during the month.
Oya and Dalat.
January. 1927.
   The District Officer, Mr. P. M. Adams, reports:-
   Court. There is nothing special to report under this 
heading.
   General. I returned from Sibu on the 5th. The clerks 
were kept busy collecting quit rent, assessment, etc. P. C. 
Merad resigned the force, also P. C. Takip. Two recruits 
were engaged to replace them. The caretaker of Dalat was 
dismissed and a new man engaged. Mr Corson passed 
through on his wav to Mukah
   P.W.D. All the belian posts for the new bungalow 
have now been delivered, and planks and reng are on 
order.
   Owing to heavy rains a landslide occurred in the 
boatshed. This was filled in by the kampong people.
   Cattle. A bull was hired locally to try and improve the 
breed as the herd is becoming too inbred.
   Clerical. Cleric Spurah was off duty for a few days 
owing to a slight attack of dysentery.
   Health. Several cases of dysentery were reported and 
seven deaths occurred in Sg. Hud Dalat.
   Weather. Towards the end of the month the first real 
signs of the landas were noticed. Heavy rain and high 
winds prevailed and the sea was very rough.
   Land and Survey. A few plots were mapped for 
cultivation of sago. The surveyors have not yet arrived 
and Awang Annu is still in Kuching undergoing a survey 
course.
   Travelling. Dalat was visited twice during the month.
   Prisoners. Averaged 6.77 and were employed on 
general upkeep of the station.
   Shipping. Two motor schooners entered and one motor 
schooner cleared during the month.
   Trade Returns 469 piculs of jelutong and 121 piculs 
20 catties of para rubber and 69 koyans of raw sago were 
shipped to Kuching,
   Exports $23,469.80; Imports $26,658.95.
Bintulu.
January, 1927.
   Mr. H. H. Kortright. District Officer of Bintulu, 
reports:-
   Courts. A case between Dyaks and Malays living in S. 
Seleza, and concerning the ownership of sago and fruit 
trees was settled. Both parties had been using the same 
pengkalan for the lust fifteen years and both had 
doubtless planted sago and fruit in its vicinity. Owner of 
the former was proved, but in the case of the fruit both 
parties claimed it all. Neither, however, could prove 
having planted it, nor would either party agree to a 
division. The fruit, of little value, was therefore declared 
to be wild fruit and so common property. This case arose 
from an objection, by the Malays, to Dyaks making 
further use of a burial ground, which is apparently close 
to the same pengkalan. The Dyaks have agreed to bury 
elsewhere in the future.
   Two sailors from s s. Gladys were sentenced to four 
months each for stealing articles of clothing from 
Foochows while on the ship travelling from Sibu. The 
Managing Director of Sarawak Steamship Company has 
now issued very strict orders to Maters of the Company's 
vessels winch will probably prevent any more of this 
robbing of Foochow colonists.
   There were two sago garden boundary disputes and 
one ease concerning ownership of rubber trees. A case 
brought by the new Arrack Farmer against a Labang 
Chinese for illegal sale of arrack is still adjourned. Eight 
persons were fined for breach of Forest Regulations. Kri 
was imprisoned for six months for gross contempt of 
Court. Police Constable Kria was dismissed the force and 
sentenced to SIX months' imprisonment for taking a hat 
out of the Fort and claiming ownership of same, this, after 
having been warned by the Fortman on guard that the hat 
had been left there by mistake by a Chinese from the 
bazaar. One Chiap Hai got three months under section 
417 P.C.



THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1927.
99
   P.W.D-A contract has been left for $2,100 
to build a school-house 36 feet wide by 72 feet 
long, also two suitable houses for the two school- 
masters. Most of the timber has now been as- 
sembled and work has started.
   The prisoners were employed the whole month 
at Sebauh, where they are making an 18 feet road 
from Sungei Sebangat through the bazaar and 
station grounds, to the kampong. From there the 
kampong people are carrying it on through their  
gardens to the edge of the Foochow Reserve, when 
the Foochows will continue it as far as Sungei 
Sebungan.
   General.-M r. E. Parnell who arrived by s.s. 
Gladys on 30tb December left again for Kuching 
by same vessel on the 4th. We paid a visit to 
Sebauh on the 2nd and I visited that place again on 
the 20th and the 27th in connection with the making 
of the road above mentioned.
   On the 15th the Bintulu Sawmill owner Mohd. 
Akbar Khan, was opened and in a short time should 
be operating in earnest. About a year ago when 
sanction for this enterprise was granted a firm at 
Tatau also applied for and received permission to 
set up a sawmill at that place. They stated at the 
time that they would have their buildings up within 
three months; later on they applied for an ex- 
tension of three months, but up to date nothing 
appears to have been done at all.
   Clerk J. Mang Fook was moved from Tatau to 
Bintulu, his place being taken by L. Boon Swee.
   The new guard of Rangers under Corporal Ubam 
arrived by s.s. Auby on 30th. The old guard under 
Lance-Corporal Ingai returned to headquarters by 
same vessel.
   Trade. The price of jelutong has remained at 
about $9 per picul. Of this commodity 1,801 piculs 
has been exported and most of this direct to 
Singapore. 212,400 pieces of belian attaps and 80 1/2  
piculs of sago flour were also exported during the 
month.
FOURTH DIVISION.
Miri.
January, 1927.
Court. A large number of cases were brought before the 
various Courts during the month. The following were the 
principal convictions:- Junit and Chow Tek, three 
months and four mouths respectively for gross contempt; 
Smail Pulo, six months, cheating; Syed and Seman, four 
months each, breach of contract and absconding; six 
Malays fined $60 each for breach of Jelutong Regulations. 
Some fines were inflicted for breach of Quarantine 
Regulations and some opium cases were dealt with by 
lines ranging from $50 to $150.
On the 18th a Chinese coolie named Han Kim Long was 
murdered by a number of his associates. The inquest on 
deceased's body was opened on the 25th and after a 
hearing lasting six days a verdict of murder against seven 
persons was recorded.
P.W.D. In the absence of approved estimates very little 
was undertaken under this heading. Repairs were effected 
in Government Opium Divan in the bazaar. A policy for 
the reconstruction and sanitation of Kampong Dagang was 
formed.
The prisoners were employed levelling the new bungalow 
site on the peninsula and on the general upkeep of various 
Government compounds and roads.
General. The 1st being New Year's Day was observed as a 
holiday and the Offices closed.
On the 2nd the body of a Chinese was washed up at 
Tanjong Lobang. No information regarding the deceased 
has been obtained.
A fire occurred in one of the dapors of the Rangers' 
Barracks on the night of the 11th. Fortunately the outbreak 
was quickly subdued before much damage was done.
I proceeded to Baram with Messrs. Cotterill and Trechman 
on the 23rd and was still away at the end of the month.
   Shipping. The following vessels entered and cleared 
the port during the month:
    S.S. Auby twice on 9th and 30th.
    S.S. Gladys twice on 2nd and 20th.
S.S. Alice Lorraine dropped mails at Kidurong on the 
5th and s.s. Sulong on the 6th and 27th.
The rainfall was 12.34 inches.
W. F. DE V. SKRINE, 
Acting Divisional Officer.
Ba ria in,
January, 1927.
   Court. Sirat one month for obtaining goods under false 
pretences; T. T. Anie and four others, heads of houses at 
L. Palai, fined for a deliberate breach of local orders re 
birdsnests; several Chinese traders fined for selling diluted 
acetic acid as full strength; several Kayans and Dyaks 
fined for ringing jelutong trees.
   Fines and fees for the month amounted to $692.25.
   General. I went to Bakong on the 7th on my way to 
Karap river to clear out kumpai grass which completely 
blocks up the river at different places. This work was 
undertaken in conjunction with the Manager of the 
Bakong Sawmili and with the help of s.l. La Follette and 
Baby and two outboard motors. Quite a long stretch of 
river was cleared during the four days' spent there.



100
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 1, 1927.
  The work on the Miri-Riam road was completed by the 
end of December but the Dyaks did not return to Baram 
until the 6th of this month as the Sarawak Oilfields 
Limited could not provide transport back for them as 
promised, and they had to walk back.
  The Acting Resident arrived on the morning of the 24th 
instant, accompanied by Messrs. Cotterill and Trechman. 
Various matters in connection with the accounts were put 
right by Mr. Cotterill. The Resident, Mr. Hill and I, 
accompanied by Wan Taha, Native Officer, left on the 
25th for Long Malinau to meet the Punans. We arrived at 
Long Malinau at 1 p.m. on the 27th instant, having 
travelled up all gravel beds by outboard motor with 
occasional help by Kayans poling where the water was too 
swift for the motor alone. A total of 131 Punans turned up 
at Malinau; there would have been more but for the fact 
that Penghulu Tama Lawai's people did not turn up owing 
to their having apparently forgotten to untie some of the 
knots on their tembuku. 63 of them arrived to within a 
day's walk of Malinau on the day we left. The Punans paid 
in their tax in rubber, and Mr. Hill gave medicine to those 
who required it. The traders who came up to barter with 
the Punans disposed of all their wares and could have got 
rid of more.
  We left again on the 30th and Penghulu Tama Belulok 
of the Punans accompanied Wan Taha on his trip up the 
Apoh river thence to the Patah, Akar, Selungan rivers to 
Lio Matu to meet Punans at different places. We arrived 
back at Baram on the 31st instant.
  The rainfall for the mouth was 4.53 inches
  P.W.D. and Prison- The Contractor putting up 
the new Arrack Distillery completed the work before 
the expiration of the contract time, except for put- 
ting in the expanded metal round the building. 
This was owing to the fact that the expanded metal 
ordered had not arrived in time.
  The average number of prisoners was 16 men.
  Medical. Five patients were admitted to hospital 
during the month of whom one died of pneumonia 
within a few hours of admission. 75 out-patients 
were treated and 21 N.A.B. injections given. 
145 upriver people were treated free, from the Fund 
provided by Professor Harrison Smith ; this number 
includes 36 N.A.B. injections.
  Wireless and Telephones. 153 messages were 
received and 128 messages despatched by the Wire- 
less Station. The Baram-Bakong telephone line 
gave no trouble during the month.
  Trade and Shipping. The m.l. Kim made two 
trips during the month, import and export figures 
being as under:-
FIFTH DIVISION.
Limbang.
February, 1927.
  Court. In the Resident's Court Bak Chua, head opium 
divan salesman, was sentenced to three years' 
imprisonment under section 408. His frauds were traced 
as far back as the end of June 1926.
  Travelling. I was away at Brooketon from the 4th to 
7th and went down there again for the day on the 26th.
  Land. Mr. Middlemas, Superintendent of Surveys, 
arrived by the Auby on the 17th, returning to Kuching via 
Labuan and Miri on the 24th.
  Treasury. Mr Cotterill also arrived on the 17th and left 
for Miri on the 24th. He was able to get out the trial 
balance to the 31st December and a summary of accounts 
for the Division.
  General. Mr. G. M. Allman of the Board of Trade 
Department returned to the District from Lawas on the 
14th and left for the Fourth Division by the Auby on the 
18th.
  The Reverend C. J. Collis was here from the 14th to 
the 16th.
  The rainfall recorded was 13.68 inches.
    Public Works. Limbang Water Scheme. The pen-
stock pedestal was rebuilt with reinforced concrete. A 
consignment of 178 six-inch pipes was received, making 
6,065 feet of main which had been laid by the end of the 
month. A contract was signed for the erection of concrete 
tiers, pillars and anchor blocks to carry the pipe from the 
dam down the hill and over the stream at its base, this 
work is proceeding satisfactorily.
 The prison gang were employed in painting the 
wireless masts and building with jodelite, and erecting 
telephones from Court House to hospital and wireless 
station. They had practically finished the annual 
whitewashing by the end of the month.
   The road coolies finished their work on the 3rd mile 
round and are well on with the 7th.
   Wong Kiau signed the following contracts for 1927. 
To concrete underneath the Junior Officer's bungalow 
and make a concrete drain all round. To build a house 
for the Native Officer, two clerks' quarters, and a new 
market, to extend the bazaar drains to the river, to 
build two public latrines, and paint the roofs of the 
wireless station, Customs examination shed, oil store, 
and boat-shed with non-corrosive paint.
   Nobody has as yet come forward to contract for 
metalling the bazaar road.
   Trade and Shipping. Forty-five head of buffalo were 
shipped to Kuching and five to Bintulu.
   Shipping. (Inward). S. S. Auby made one trip from 
Singapore via Kuching and ports, s.s. Sulong one trip 
from Kuching via ports, m.1. Peter Duff made two trips, 
m.l. Adele two trips, and s.l. Kwong Yick three trips, 
from Labuan via Brunei.
C. ERMEN,
Acting Resident. Fourth Division
F. F. BOULT,
Resident Fifth 
Division.

