KUCHING, Thursday, January 2nd, 1930. The Sarawak Gazette is usually published at an awkward tune. Witness this number. It is too late for Christmas and too late for the Sarawak Regatta Readers get peevish when a well-meaning Editor wishes them a Merry Christmas fully a week after the event. Nor are they less peevish at reading an account of the Regatta one month and a few days old.Unfortunate backers, who are trying to forget their losses, are naturally annoyed when they see the names of their selections in the races stating at them amongst the “also rans” three weeks later.People have compared this paper with a Parish Magazine as simply a publication containing all the state parochial tittle-tattle but with just the point of the story omitted every time. At the same time these critics like to see the Gazette on their office table at the beginning of each month. It gives an air of respectability, and provides a quick bolt-hole when the heavy steps of the U.S. are heard outside and, alas, the office tables just as bare as it could be I. Now and again will be taken home for-the Mems to see the Kuching Market Price List. It does not really matter that the Mems know quite well that nothing is to be purchased at the prices mentioned. We once attempted this pin pricking dodge. Shutting our eyes we stuck a pin three times into the list. It alighted on capons, per catty 70 cents, buffalo, meat only, per catty 35 cents and radish, per catty 14 cents. The capons offered peculiar difficulties. Primed with Wilkinson we explained our wants to a Chinese fowl seller. He offered us skinny-looking manok saigon, diminutive Dyak birds, a basket full of ducklings, a goose, what appeared to be an aged fighting cock and several score of itek serati. A crowd collected, and luckily an interpreter arrived. We told him in English what was required—and he understood—and so did the crowd when he told them in one word, and we departed amidst rude laughter. The 35 cents buffalo meat with no bones was even more difficult. There was plenty of it—and plenty of bone too—and the two would not be separated. Several odd-shaped joints were offered to us. Joints which would have broken the heart of a butcher— As a last resource, we tried the radish—not even the interpreter could get this through although a remarkable assortment of roots, bulbs and stringy things were offered instead. However, we seem to be just as far away from our object as when we started. After all this rigmarole we repeat what we wrote at the beginning that owing to the peculiar circumstances it is impossible for us to wish our readers all happiness this Christmas. Perhaps many people in these days merely regard Christmas as one of the various holidays which are spread throughout the year. To them it is merely a day on which one does not work. If one talks to them about Dingley Dell, the Fat Boy, or Arabella they will look at you in a pitying way, and suggest turning on ‘'You’re the cream in my coffee 1” or some similar gem of music It is said that. Dickens made Christmas. Nowadays it is the fashion to criticize this great humanist. He is "mawkish,” “treacly,” "bathos without pathos,” “falsely sentimental,” and so on. Only the other day we read in a literary review “no one reads Dickens nowadays—and the present generation of children would be puzzled if you asked them who Mr. Pickwick was.” We do not agree with this critic. As long as Christmas is observed—so long then will Dickens be remembered—and whatever scoffers of to-day may say, Dicken’s sentiment was wholesome, if occasionally a little cloying in its sweetness. Bead the immortal “Christmas Carol” if you want to breathe the spirit of Christmas. It may lack the rankness of some of the modern novels and it has no complex—but it expresses all that is beautiful and best at this festival. Here’s to our readers—the wish is rather late, but none the worse for that. And lastly (this will confirm your suspicions that this leader is indeed a sermon!) this number is the last we shall edit. We know, in fact we have been reminded forcibly at times, that our imagination is apt to run away with itself. Perfectly reasonable matters become distorted, nothing is sacred from our vitriolic pen. Lest there be any rankling, therefore, let us say at this last opportunity that if anyone’s feelings have been hurt, it was not our intention to do so. We cannot all think alike. The jest which amuses us so much may be indeed, poison to the other man. We are sometimes called “The Optimistic Fiddler” —and you must be getting tired of our amateur caterwaulings. Yet somebody has to try and make a noise, and if any small part of our writings have amused you or interested you, then we are quite satisfied. THE EDITOR.
December. OUR congratulations to Mr. and Mrs. F. O. Blagg on the birth of a son on Sunday the 22nd.MR. and Mrs. Spurway arrived from Sibu on the 20th. We are sorry to say that Mrs. Spurway is suffering from influenza. MESSRS. J. C. Swayne, F. G. Carpenter and P. H. Flood-Page were visitors to Kuching for Christmas. MR. E. H. P. Bengtsson sailed on the 28th on home furlough. We wish him a good time. THE first pile of the new Police barracks near the Kuching Football Club’s field was driven on the 27th. MR. E. M. Selous arrived on the 2nd by s.s. Vyner Brooke to join the Sarawak Civil Service as a Cadet. He has been attached the Chinese Secretariat. Two bodies of Chinese, an adult male and an infant male, were found in the Kuching river during the month. Neither of them has been identified.	AT midnight 18th—19th the clocks were put back twenty minutes, and we are thus in exactly the same position as we were just before midnight October 31st—November 1st. MR. F. G. Day asks us to mention that letters addressed to him which are not of an urgent nature should be sent to or left with Mr. Ujita, 11 Khoo Hun Yeang Street. MR. G. H. Daly arrived from Singapore on the 10th to join the Sarawak Steamship Company, Limited. He is at present in the Head Office but will eventually take charge of the firm’s interests at Sibu. MR. F. O. Blagg is to take over the Honorary Secretaryship of the Turf Club when Mr. J. B. Archer leaves Kuching. It is probable that the Spring Meeting will be on the 19th and 21st of next April. A large number of guests were entertained by Haji Apet, Native Officer of Upper Sara-wak, on the 21st and 22nd at his residence in Kampong Patingan, on the occasion of the marriage of his son Malian. A subscription dance was held at the Sarawak Club on Boxing Night, when dancers, gamblers and others were catered for. The Sarawak Ranger’s Band was in attendance. THE Secretariat for Native Affairs is moving to the buildings now used by the Datus4 Court.There are now sixteen departments housed outside the main block of Government Offices. Miss M. A. S. Law was a passenger by the Vyner Brooke on the 16th. Miss Law, who is matron of the Singapore General Hospital, is a sister of Mr. H. R. S. Law who was a cadet in the Sarawak Civil Service from 1912 —1915. THERE was a big gathering of children at the St. Michael’s Catholic Club on Innocents Day when the members organized a Christmas tree. The party was a very gay one and was kept up until a late hour. THE Commissioner of Police asks us to say that there are a number of old firearms w have been lying in his Office for several years. There are no records to show to whom belong. He wishes to give notice that unless they are claimed within three months, they will be confiscated and disposed of. ANOTHER paper chase took place on the 15th when ten riders turned out. Messrs. Tait and Blagg were the hares and gave the pack a good run. Mr. Culver was absent owing to a small boxing match which he and “Kismet” had a couple of days previously. What appeared therefore to be a tonsure was merely a mark that “Kismet” had got one in first! ON the arrival of the s.s. Vyner Brooke in Kuching on 2nd, Captain Benfield reported that a Malay quartermaster named Seri bin Diaman had died suddenly at six o’clock the previous evening. The body had been brought to Kuching pending the orders of the Coroner. Later, the Coroner having viewed the body, gave permission for burial, no inquest being necessary. Amongst the passengers from Singapore by the Vyner Brooke on the 16th were Mrs. Hayward, who has returned to Sarawak after taking her son home; and Mr. C. E. L. Blagg. We are glad to hear that Mrs. Hayward’s little boy is quite fit again. Mr. Blagg is a brother of Mr. F. O. Blagg and has come out to join the Legal Department. Messrs. Tan Sum Guan and Son of 61, Ewe Hai Street, Kuching, have just installed a modern Refrigerator Cabinet on their premises, where cold storage meat, cheese, butter and fruit is offered at moderate prices. We were shown over the plant by Mr. Tan Kui Choon, and customers may feel assured that the methods employed are modern and the quality of the articles offered up to standard. The Chinese Secretariat and Labour Protectorate have moved into the old Trade and Customs offices, half of which are to be used by the Chinese Chamber of Commerce. The Education Department, which is now without a roof to its head, is to occupy half the present Secretariat, and the latter Department moves into the present Registration Office. The Registrar moves to the late Chinese Secretariat. During the past years there has been an almost annual general post in the old block Government offices. In fact at the present time not one single department occupies the office it did when the writer arrived in 1912. Thirteen riders turned out on the 8th for a pepper chase. The hares, Messrs. Archer and Buck, gave held a good run, and incidentally brought to one or two of the more ardent followers. It was agreed generally that the hares adopted a mean and deceptive plan by going back on their own trail and hiding behind hedges. False trials are also quite unfair and the practice of bribing yokels to misdirect the hounds is one of which we cannot but condemn as disgusting. By these tactics the hares escaped capture and not even Mrs. Blagg’s welcome “shandies” altogether dispelled the air of mistrust which Messrs. Archer and Buck were accorded. A thirty yards range has been recently opened in the Military area, Fort Margherita. This range is of War Office pattern, and is suited to all classes of range practices. It is possible to fire practices up to six hundred yards by means of representative targets; that is to’ say targets are reduced to such size as they would appear to a firer at various ranges on a full-sized classification range. The service rifle and service ammunition are used. The old full-sized range in the Military area has been condemned as it does not conform with War Office safety conditions, which insist on a large area being reserved behind the targets as a danger zone. The convenience of the 30 yards War Office pattern range is that it requires no danger area, and in fact the protection is considerably greater than that afforded by the normal one of a classification range. The object of the 30 yards range is for the preliminary training of recruits. Arrangements are being made to find a suitable spot for a full-sized range. 
Arrival of His Highness the Tuan Muda and the Dayang Anne. On New Year’s Eve the S.S. Vyner Brooke arrived in Kuching about 4 p.m. with His Highness the Tuan Muda and the Dayang Anne on board. As the ship passed the Fort a salute of 21 guns was fired. The Resident First Division and the Treasurer of Sarawak went on board to meet His Highness and the Dayang, who landed at the Astana steps, where they were met by His Highness the Rajah. His Highness the Tuan Muda then proceeded to inspect the guard of honour furnished by the Sarawak Rangers under the command of Captain Le Sueur. The party then proceeded to the Astana where the heads of Government Departments, the Datus and several unofficial were waiting, including Mrs. Boult. The Right Rev. the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak proposed the health of His Highness and the Dayang, which toast was drunk by all. We are only too glad to see His Highness out in Sarawak again after an absence of more than two years. We thought His Highness was looking remarkably fit although thinner than he was. The Dayang Anne was looking very well.
Mr. J. L. Humphreys Dead. A GREAT LOSS. We regret to announce the death of Mr. J. L. Humphreys, C.M.G., C.B.E, which occurred in China from heart failure following pneumonia. Mr. Humphreys was touring China, and barely a fortnight ago won the amateur golf championship of that Country. The Straits Settlements and Federated Malay States papers have long columns regarding Mr. Humphreys’ brilliant career in Malaya and British North Borneo. For his services in Trengganu he was awarded the C.M.G. in 1925 and the C.B.E in 1928; and it was the general opinion that very high honours awaited Mr. Humphreys in the near future. Born in 1881, his death at the early age of 48 is a disaster. Mr. Humphreys paid an unofficial visit to Kuching a few months ago. and was keenly interested in all he saw—and those who had the honour of conversing with him will remember his interesting views on tie administration of Native States. 
A Fragment of Old Sarawak. A BOOK OF AMUSING SKETCHINGS. There are quite a number of books on Sarawak, or dealing partly with Sarawak, perhaps more than the average reader would think Most of these are written in a serious vein and are accounts of the beginning and gradual formation of the Brooke rule. We were shown the other day, however, a book on Sarawak, or rather a book of illustrations, which must be extremely rare. In fact only one hundred and a few copies were printed, and the book was published in Sarawak. It is entitled “A Short Trip to Sarawak and the Dyaks," and consists of twenty pen and ink sketches and a frontispiece all done by Thomas Skipworth Chapman, and published in 1870. Mr. Chapman was in the Sarawak Civil Service from 1864—1876, and spent all his service in the Kalaka district. He became well acquainted with the Dyaks there, and his amusing drawings are the result of first-hand knowledge. The sketches represent an imaginary tourist’s trip to Sarawak and back again to Singapore. In a foreword the author says: I beg to state that owing to the peculiar process by which this scries of sket hes is lithographed, I have only been able to obtain one hundred and a few copies. The original sketches are destroyed. The Dyaks introduced are a clan lining in the Kalakah, they may be better known as Sarebas. The sketch of the Resident is not meant to caricature any ocher in the Sarawak service, and that of the fort is not meant to represent that of any outstation in particular. The process of transferring the sketches (originally etched with a common steel pen upon lithographic transfer piper) to the stone, appears to blur then sadly and I feel that beyond their originality they possess little to recommend them. The first sketch shows the tourist arriving off Santubong in the Singapore steamer. A bottle, glass and a Schweppes soda alongside him on the seat show that our customs do not differ materially the passage of time. The next page shows the tourist fast asleep on the seat, the bottles empty and a couple of geese nibbling at his coat. This, is described as overcame by the influence of the scenery he falls asleep. "Royalist" in meantime arrives at Sarawak. The bewhiskered and rather tousel headed visitor is now touted by a servant with a letter from the Rajah, who is just starting in the gunboat “Heartsease" for the outstations, and will be happy to give him a passage to any of them. Arriving at an outstation, he is welcomed by the Resident. Here is a typical fort of the old days Racks of rifles, and a fierce-looking sentry. The Resident, wishing to give his guest a good time has a few Malay friends to coffee in the evening, who inquire after the health of Queen Victoria. Tourist thin is them affable. The Re-sident and the tourist are smoking enormous cigars and drinking wine. The tourist now experiences a variety of entertainments arranged for him by his good-hearted host Two Malays perform a sword dance with Residents band in the foreground (a set of krumong, a tawak and a couple of gendang). A trip to the Dyaks in a Long boat, the interior of which is shown separately (square face bottle and glasses in evidence). Tourist climbing up a notched pole to the Dyak house and reception in the house by a chief. In the middle of the night Tourist witnesses a procession of Dyak ladies going to feed the pigs destined to be killed for the feast. Then follow pictures of the feast, showing the gradual working up into an orgy. Dyak girls present him with a bowl of toddy, whilst the climax is reached in a full page illustration where inebriat on is only too evident. Rows of Dyaks are leaning over the side of the house in the pangs of nausea and tourist thinks it lime to go!  We then see the tourist calling on the Dyak ladies, shooting rapids and generally having a thoroughly good time of it. The last sketch shows tourist having returned to Singapore with a tolerable collection at arms and Dyak curious—seek the solitude of his bedchamber, and performing war dance before a looking glass in full wear dress, bids you adieu.
Race Meeting at Jesselton. A GREAT SUCCESS. The British North Borneo Herald gives an account of the Autumn Meeting of the Jesselton Turf Club which was held on 16th November. Our contemporary mentions that the attendance was large and the totalizator put through a profit of about $800 for the club. It was pointed out that the club has retrieved itself and ought to show a large enough profit to enable further repairs to be effected to the course. The public's confidence in the favourites was not misplaced; on four occasions he caught the judge's eye. while in the other four races the second favourite scored. The weather was fine but the going was soft. A feature of the meeting was the starting and judging, there being no flaws of any kind. The Native Races were a decided attraction. The winners were: The Civil Service Cup— Mr. E H. Cave’s Tid'apu -(Wahap) 7.0. Native Scurry-Le Buati’s Kumis (Iaganjak). The Farmers’ Cup—Mr. Lo Tian Yin's Moonshine (Datum) 8.7. The Ny Kook Purse—Mr R. D. Hoffman’s Putatan (Asin) 8.7. Native Scurry—Le Buati’s Kumis (Ingjawah). Tay Bee Chuan Cup —Mr. Lo Tian Yin’s Moonshine 8.7. The Planters’ Purse—Mr. R. D. Hoffman’s Putatan (Asin) 8.0. The President’s Cup—Mr. H. M. Ince’s Polo (Wales) 120. Dividends on the tote were, of necessity, small, but good sport was shown, and we congratulate the Jesselton Turf Club on their revival, and with them many more successful meetings. 
From the Sarawak Gazette 50 Years Ago. THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. Tues., 30TH DEC., 1879. The number of crazy people, especially women who infest the bazaar, and European houses, is becoming a serious nuisance. There are at least three women who march about perfectly insane, and who may at any moment become dangerous. Mischievous they always are and in one case lately, one has entered a house and committed petty theft. It is high time that some steps are taken to put these poor creatures under some restraint.
A New Editor. In this, our last issue, we have much pleasure in asking our readers to welcome Dr. Gilbert E. Brooke, who takes up the duties of Editor of this paper on New Year’s Day. With his permission we hope to be allowed to see this number out. Dr. Brooke needs no introduction. He is well-known all over this part of the East, and it is fortunate, that the Gazette will have as an Editor a man of his literary achievements. THE EDITOR.
Mainly About Nothing. Harry Kemis in the Malaya Tribune tells us of the activities of a Mr. Carveth Wells. He says:— “I have had previous occasion to draw your attention to the remarkable lectures on Malaya being given by a Mr. Carveth Wells, who entertains audiences all over the United Kingdom with the dissertation on his “Six Years in the Jungles of Malay.” I hear that a polite letter was sent some little time ago to Mr. Wells' lecture-agents by Malaya House, suggesting that he might at least, get correctly the name of the country he is talking about, to which in due course came an equally polite reply to the effect that Mr. Wells was aware of the error, but could not see his way to correcting it, as that would involve reprinting his stationery! Here is an extract from a report of one lecture:—‘Mr. Carveth Wells described the Malay jungle as a kind of topsy-turvy land, where everything is wrong. There were no seasons, no winter or summer, no dry seasons or wet season; with the result that nature, was completely upset. Birds could be seen nesting in one tree and moulting in another’” Well, well, we all look at things in different lights. Everyone has heard the old chestnut about the famous spotted dog of Kuala Lumpur. Old numbers of the Gazette testify to perfectly law-abiding citizens stepping over brilliantly-hued reptiles on their way home from the Club, whilst & pair of Australian sheep of a particularly odd design nearly converted a slightly inebriated D.O. Anyway we have Mr. Wells’ word for it, and look forward to more accounts of his rambles through the topsy-turvy jungles of Malay where such phenomena as the whiflow bird should be quite common. “....Petticoat Lane, a market where they pinch your which as you enter....” Local Cinema Hall Circular. Now, now, boys! Keep the fun clean!. Detroit. Spencer Livensky of Los Angeles defeated Marcel Camp of Detroit 125 to 119 in to-day's play of the world’s-championship-pocket billiards tournament. The game lasted 41 innings. Wireless News. This is a very ordinary amusement, but perhaps, they do it differently in America. Anyway young Marcel did not give in without a struggle. No wonder they say that all the lunatic asylum’s there are full. Hylam servants are not usually gifted with much originality. There is a sameness about the cook’s menu, which doubtless many of us know. Nothing, however, has struck us so much as the compliment paid the other day to his master by a Hylam “boy.” No doubt remembering the season and wishing to be appropriate, the faithful lad, failing the proper ingredients, cooked his master's topi in the oven, and served it up. nicely browned (albeit a little had been lost in the cooking) with a sauce of leather hat-band. We are informed by creditable witnesses that the boys of a well-known school in Kuching much, appreciated the devotion of the ecclesiastic who, devoted to duty to the last, essayed to dive headlong through the stage window after his knock-about- comedian stunt with the pedagogue. They tell us that in spite of frantic encores and shouts of “s’kali lagi, Tuan” the act was not repeated. Quite correct, we believe, according to modern stage etiquette, but at Christmas time why grudge the bairns a little extra amusement? A correspondent writes to say that the fine new Residency at Miri has been, or is about to be, evacuated owing to the inroads made by the sea, which at high tide now washes under the house. The Residency, which is only two or three years old, was built at the point of the “Peninsular” where it was thought the land was making. This appeared to be so for a time, but unfortunately erosions have taken place recently and there is no doubt now that the house is doomed. There use to be an old saying amongst worried outstation officers that if you wanted the river bank to go, you only had to build a Government station there! The land in front of Fort Brooke, Sibu, had been falling in for a long time, and during the last twenty years at least 100 yards has disappeared. A few years ago, however, when alarm was being felt for the safety of the Residency and Fort, the erosion suddenly stopped without apparent rhyme or reason. What complicated defences had failed to conquer, nature apparently stepped in and did the trick. Again, take the case of Fort Burdett, Mukah. Round about 1910 and 1911 the Fort was moved to its present site owing to the alarming rate at which the bank was falling in. Yet directly the Fort was finished in its new position, the bank, as it were, pulled a long nose at the disgruntled staff who had been put to the utmost trouble, and since then not an inch has been lost! Sadong is losing a considerable amount of bank every year. Yet, mark my word, directly the bungalow is moved, the erosion will stop. An expensive bridge was built across the Petanak River, near Mukah. One landas, soon after, the river began to dry up—and in three or four weeks one could ride a pony across on perfectly hard sand! On the other hand some places silt up. Take Sibu. The “Adeh” used to steam round the Island as far as the old “long bridge.” Kampongs were built on the edge of the stream, which served for bathing and drinking. Nowadays there is generally a wide expanse of glistening mud between the two banks, down the middle of this expanse trickles a little stream. Log after log have been added, and now the bathers and the water carriers have to walk up and down many yards of slippery log in order to reach the miserable trickle in the middle. To revert to our original theme, the Resident at Miri has our sympathy, as this is about the third Residency in ten years. Even if the land does hold, oil is found right underneath the dining-room. There is some evil spirit working against the Miri Residency, and the only suggestion we can offer is to move back to Baram again!!
Errata. In our last issue we said, when mentioning & wedding in Chinese Society, that Mr. Tan Kui Seng was Chief Inspector of the Kuching District Court. This is of course a mistake in printing. Mr. Tan Kui Seng is the well-known Chief Interpreter of the Kuching District Court, and the error is regretted.
Fancy Dress Dinner and Ball at Astana. A BRILLIANT SPECTACLE. His Highness the Rajah was at-home on New Year’s Eve when all the Europeans in Kuching were invited to a dinner and ball at the Astana. Owing to the fact that we are just going to press it is impossible to give a detailed account of a scene where beauty and originality vied with each other in producing the best collection of fancy dresses that has been seen in Sarawak for many years. The dining tables were decorated with a colour scheme of green, and the Sarawak Rangers Band played familiar airs during dinner. Amidst such a galaxy of pretty ladies it would be unwise of us to make distinctions. We remember Spanish ladies with fascinating mantillas, demure puritans, dainty ladies in poudre, wonderful headgear of the fourteenth century, pierrettes in ultra modern attire, little-bo-peeps, Dolly Vardens, gypsies, Welch lassies—and so on—so much that our memory fails us in describing the many really beautiful and clever dresses with which the ladies delighted our eyes. The men are possibly easier to describe, as many of them had very hazy ideas what they were themselves. Father Time, Little-bo-Peep, savage (race uncertain) Indian Potentate (a very nasty looking customer), skeleton, old-fashioned cricketer, Spaniard, fox hunter, poudre, The Cross Gartered Knight (or nearly so), Chinese Mandarin, Turkish sailor, villians, scoundrels and other cut-throats were easily recognised. Others, however, were difficult to distinguish. For instance one gentleman 'whose lower half was encased in butcher boots and hunting spurs, but whose upper was apparently a mixture of pierrot, jazz and Montenegrin puzzled us. Again another in a musical comedy matador costume which would have scared any decent bull from the arena thought fit to complete his costume with a hat the size of a bass drum, and just about as ugly. The United States were represented by a mob of rubber-necked tourists; so true to life, that in spite of prohibition they spent all the evening demanding “high balls” from the astonished and disgusted servants. As usual crime was present, and a number of depraved individuals who were wise to conceal their identity adopted the klu klnx klan uniform, a cheap and airy costume. At midnight a huge circle was formed and grave and gay, beautiful and ridiculous, sang Auld Lanng Syne and wished each other a Happy New Year— which, sentiment we now wish all our readers.
Malay Gymnastics. A CHANCE FOR LOCAL POETASTERS. Wasn’t it Lord Asquith who spent his spare time translating Kipling's poems into Greek—and wasn’t there a brute of an examiner who invited Straits Settlements cadets to put Fitz Gerald’s charming Omar Khayyam into Malay? Impossible. you say -and perhaps it is—but anyway Lord Asquith made a very good attempt; and the cadets apparently satisfied the brute. In an idle moment the other day a jingle of our youth came back to us. It was something like this:- Up to eighteen we fight with fears. And deal with matters grave and weighty. And smile our smiles and weep our tears, Just as we do in after years, From eighteen up to eighty! We put the question to a keen young officer, who takes an interest in Malay. He took a copy of the jingle and next morning produced the following: ‘Yes," said his friend when we showed it to him “Understandable, but doggy. How about this?" Encouraged by their rivalry we racked our brains for further tests. Oh yes, what was that one that goes : — Take care of yourself, dull boorish elf. Though Prudent and safe you seem, Your pitcher will break on the musty shelf, And mine—by the dazzling stream! A couple of hours labour brought our two friends back again. What do you think of their efforts? Well, yes. It might do, but only just. The other scholar produced: The author of this however, admitted having used a dictionary. Both asked for one more rhyme. The only ones which came into our head were indecent limericks—perhaps the more easily translated for that! —but our friends were youthful and we refrained from befouling their ears. Oh yes—some absurd jingle about a little boy and an apple. What was it? A green little boy in a green little way, A green little apple devoured one day. The green little grasses now tenderly wave, O'er the green little apple boy’s green little grave. The dictionary-less one hurried off to his table, and in a short while produced the following:— The writer explained, in answer to our mute inquiry, that the only thing that reminded him of a greenhorn in this country was a sengkeh!! The other poet returned after some hours with a worried brow and the following neatly typed by his clerk:— “What awful rubbish,” I hear you say, “really, if Archer can’t think of anything better than this to put in the Gazette, it’s a good thing he's going to Simanggang!” However, it has filled up a lot of space and perhaps Europeans who live in a country where Malay is the State language may possibly, just possibly, be interested in the language. Perhaps the others might like to try. It is not so easy as it looks. We will offer a prize of $5 for the best translation of:— Our ship shall be of sandal built, Like ships of old world tales; Woven of cunning art and gilt. And winged with scented sails. Of silver silk whereon the red great gladioli burn, A rainbow flag at her mast head, a rose flag at her stern. Answers to be sent to the Editor, Sarawak Gazette, before the end of January. Our two friends have already received a mark of our appreciation of their work (three stengahs please, boy !).
International Rivalry. ENGLAND BEATS SCOTLAND AT THEIR OWN GAME. A golf tournament was played on the 7th, 8th and 9th between teams representing England and Scotland. It was a severe struggle, and many of the Saturday morning beer drinkers, stoutly resisted their habit of wandering Clubwards in order to be in better trim for the event. As is ever the case some of the "dead certainties” came to grief, and some of the "absolutely impossibles" ploughed and hacked their way to victory. Woodward gave the local Cyril Tolley a good game but realized the difficulty of competing against a golf machine like McLaine. Bean and Baird had a close tussle, and but for a lost ball the match might have ended differently. Lowe’s amazing steadiness pulverized Carpenter, but Rennie countered by beating Boult. The three Scots ladies went down gallantly. The hero of the tournament, however, was Forrest who, when 4 down and 4 to play, managed to halve the match with Archer, who played the last four holes as if he was ferreting. The tennis was played during the week preceding St Andrew's Day. Several matches were scratched owing to illness and other causes, and the decision rested on the results of the following matches in which the games ended as follows:- As will be seen from the above the success of Scotland was due to the gallant fight put up by the ladies (the darlings!). We have not yet received the results of the other international competitions. Slippery Sam, Push The Ace and Happy Families.
Cricket. KEEN CONTEST ON BOXING DAY. An important match was played on Boxing Day between teams captained by Messrs. Fenwick and Archer. Losing the toss, Mr. Archer led his team into the arena, fourteen strong, where they grouped themselves as fancy pleased them. Boult achieved fame immediately by sending the first ball down to Barraclough, who with left-handed agility scooped it into the hands of the spare square leg. A stand was made, however, by McLaine and Reid, who flogged the pill all over the field. Many changes of bowling were made, but the standard was poor, daisy cutters, sneaks and no-balls being frequent. The fielding was weak, several easy catches being bungled, especially one which fell at the feet of a competitor who forgot, in the excitement of the moment, whether he was the umpire or silly point. At 64 Mr. Fenwick had lost his thirteen wickets and, after an interval for shandies and aspirins, Mr. Archer's team opened their innings with Griffiths (Cyril) and Flood-Page. Attired in old-world costume these two gentlemen supported the spirit of cricket nobly; their running being particularly commended. In these days of hurry and bustle, it is pleasant to notice the little courtesies of the game, and not once did either player omit to raise his top-hat to his companion before running, and to his eternal credit, not once did his companion forget to acknowledge the compliment. Hats in hand these sportsmen ran between the wickets pluckily playing on the tip-and-run-system. The fast googlie-sneaks of Banks and Reid’s leg breaks, however, demoralised the batsmen who, it maybe, found the shandies rather a handicap. Calvert made a good stand, and Summers (Bowen) with his famous leg-over-arm stroke attempted to repel the invasion but it was not until Baughan went in that the rot really stopped. Attired in rather (to our mind) violently-hued camibockers, he caused a sensation by using a new style of bat. Beautiful cutting and driving was the order of the day, and in spite of frequent changes of bowling the score mounted by tuppences and thruppences. Owing to the heat and the consequent fatigue brought on by the spirit of Christmas, the batsman was compelled to ask for a chair. This, however, made little difference, and even the grouping of the field in sections, half sections and platoons, failed to stop the elusive leather punched so huskily by the willow wielder. With 24 runs to make the last man, Archer, never seemed likely to shape well—and, as most of us expected, the skipper hit his own wickets at the third ball and incidentally the umpire’s hat which that absent-minded official had hung over the bails. Sir. Fenwick’s fifteen therefore won by 23 runs, 24 wides, 17 no-balls, 73 flukes and 2 shandies. It was a sporting game—clean-lived players upholding the spirit of cricket (we can't get rid of this term).
His Highness the Rajah’s Visit to Singapore and the Fifth Division. His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Mr. G. T. M. MacBryan, Private Secretary, and Mr. and Mrs. K. H. Gillan, left Kuching for Singapore on the 9th November. His Highness, after spending a few days in Singapore, sailed for Miri in the m.s. Marudu. At Miri His Highness went ashore and, having lunched with the Resident arid Mrs. Aplin, left again for Labuan where H.H.S. Maimuna was waiting. Accompanied by the Resident Fifth Division, His Highness proceeded to Limbang where he spent six days, during which time he visited Brunei and lunched with the British Resident. His Highness then paid a visit to Lawas where he saw the Lawas Rubber Estate, and Mr. Sam Cook's Sawmills. He also visited Mr. Sam Cook's experimental gardens, where Mr. Taylor is in charge. After this His Highness visited Trusan and Sundar. This is the first occasion of His Highness visit to Trusan since the expedition there of 1900. Having completed his tour of the Fifth Division His Highness returned to Singapore in the Marudu via Labuan. A few days were spent in Singapore and His Highness and Mr. MacBryan returned to Kuching on the 10th. Mr. and Mrs. Gillan returned direct to Kuching by the Maimuna from Labuan. We are informed that His Highness has disposed of his property at Labuan known as “Coolfin” to Mr. H. Doughty.
Robing the Obvious. Naming a house at any time is rather a facer and originality' is difficult. “Lakesides,” “Melroses” and “Laburnum Villas” are all-very much hackneyed and overdone. Taking a short cut to the Club the other evening I saw a board bearing the following inscription in black letters on a white ground “JUDGE’S HOUSE.” It occurred to me that a new line was being opened op if a house was to bear a name relating to the particular calling of the occupant, and if this was so a little more subtlety might be introduced. “JUDGE'S HOUSE”—just like that seemed a bit blatant. “Legal View" gives the passer-by or the caller a chance of exercising his intelligence. If this form of naming houses took on, newcomers might be introduced to a new game of spotting the occupant, and what a difference such a small direction might make to that formidable and dreary round of “ first Calls." In case the idea takes on, these things sometimes happen, a few suggestions are given below:— But what would the caller do when he came to ‘Swallow Cottage"?— [Newmarket.]
All In A Day’s Work. “Does anyone know if the “Lulong" has brought in any stores?” enquired the Government Medical Officer bursting into the little club where four other ten were sitting round, idly throwing for minute stakes. “Yes,” replied the District Officer, passing on the dice box to his left-hand neighbour. “A lot of booming water pipes for the P.W.D. and what looks like the contents of a furniture-on-the-installment-system shop. Thank goodness the young fellows will now be satisfied with their bungalows furnished complete with champagne glasses-and a grand piano!” “You miserable old blighter!” said the Treasurer. “Just because you boast of having come out East about the year one, you must pour out that things-are-not-what-they-used-to-be-when- I-was-a-lad story!” The District Officer laughed. “Well! Well! I supposed we all have our own particular growse." "I should jolly well think we have," exclaimed the doctor. “These boats are the absolute limit. The P.M.O. wrote ages ago to say that my medical stores had been sent off, but nothing ever arrives. We have just half a dozen needles in stock, and this lovely climate would mess up anything." The young Police Officer slowly drained his long glass. "You fellows may talk,” he drawled, "but what about me? They keep on shouting for more police and expect to get the pick of the State with rubber the price it is!” “I don’t know," said Burney of the P.W.D., “the bobbies seem a pretty decent lot of men." “H’m,” answered the’ Police Officer. “Did you see that marvellous specimen we took on about three months ago? Face like an agitated mayas and about the same intelligence!” “Less of that young fellow!”  said the; doctor. “If you are speaking of the man I’m thinking of, I may as well tell you that he is just about as fit as any man could be!” “Spoken like a Kensitas advertisement!” put in the Treasurer. “Well, it's a fact,” said the doctor; “and besides, brains are hardly necessary in the Police!” “Oh! shut up for goodness Sake," growled the District Officer, when the friendly rough and tumble had partially subsided. “Don’t make us all hot by messing about there. No one is ever satisfied. The doc here has no needles; Woodrow clamours for recruits; Burney can’t mess up our roads any more because he has no stone. The only satisfied one is Jameson who holds the keys of the safes. Nothing worries him as long as the Treasury has enough at the end of the month to pay out our pay!” “Well! Of all the ungrateful Old sinners,” exclaimed Jameson, “Here am I ......" “Sorry, old man, nothing intended," interrupted the District Officer. “What I mean is that its all in a day's work and ......" “Oh, cut it out!” said the doctor. ‘'Here, Boy, tanya tuan semua.” Lidam squatted on the floor of his room in the Police barracks and chewed betel nut with a depressed air. Not a very prepossessing specimen for a Dyak. When he had enlisted the doctor had hesitated before passing him fit for service. On the top of a remarkably strong body was an almost repulsively ugly face, partially covered by a weak and straggling beard—a most rare occurrence in men of his race. Slow of speech was Lidam and incredibly unkempt. The Police force however, was much below strength and Lidam was eventually passed as fit and reported for duty. Presently Lidam was handed over to the Malay Sub-inspector, Abang Abu Bakar, who eyed his new recruited critically. “It is true, Tuan,” said Abang, in conversation with the District Officer some days later, “that we want men badly, but Lidam! He dosen’t seem to understand anything. Yes, he is married, Tuan, his wife is coming down river to join him at once.” “What is his wife like?” said the District Officer with a chuckle. "Who knows,” replied Abang, and made a wry face. “But surely no one very pretty would marry a man like that. Nevertheless he seems very fond of her.” Poor Lidam. He certainly was a bad bargain. Up and down, up and down the parade ground the harassed drill instructors chivied the unfortunate man. Other recruits seemed to learn the difference between left and right. Lidam never did. The rest of the squad would move off leaving him stranded and looking helplessly round. Threats or encouragement seemed to have no effect. His uniform was always dirty and a rifle in Lidam’s ungainly hands seemed to assume the proportions of a small cannon. His saluting, was a source of constant joy to the other Dyak recruits. Lidam never, seemed to realize his inefficiency. He would return to his room and solemnly munch the food prepared by his wife—a thin and uninteresting girl. After some months Lidam was sent to a small sub-station, where he and a companion, together with a Malay native officer, were the sole representatives of the law. Here Lidam was seen at his best. His duties were n ot arduous, and most days saw him clothed simply in his native loin cloth fishing off the little pengkallan, or tramping through the jungle armed with an ancient muzzle-loader in search of pig. For a time he was tolerably happy. Almost forgotten were those hateful unintelligible orders barked at him by irascible Sikh corporals. Why should he be herded along with a lot of other men performing idiotic movements such as “form fours?” For a few months Lidam lived an almost ideal life. His plain-featured wife provided him with sufficient food and at an amazingly small cost. It is true that his companion, a smart young Malay constable, endeavoured to smarten him up at ill-chosen moments. These Malays, however, were always apt to take too much upon themselves—besides, strict obedience was seldom rigorously enforced. At intervals that meddlesome District Officer would drop in, and for a day or two Lidam would submit to tiresome discipline with a cow-like air. Not that he disliked his superiors. Bather he looked upon them as a nuisance, but apparently necessary, and therefore to be obeyed. Lidam's wife Nila, however, saw things differently. Forced to associate with the young wife of the Malay policeman, she had got into the habit of comparing her husband with other men, sadly to his detriment. Minah had pretty clothes, which she displayed with a coquettish air before poor Nila. “Why don’t you ask your husband for new clothes?” said Minah with a turn of her pretty head. “Men are so easily persuaded. Look at me!” And Minah would get up and disappear round a corner of the Fort with a soft tinkle of silver anklets and a swift turn of her body, making her gaily coloured sarong give that fascinating swish which she knew was simply irresistible. “Bah ! What do you want with anklets?” Lidam would say as he sat after dark whittling down rotan to mend his fish traps with; “These Malays are always wanting something. Besides, didn’t I buy you a silver bangle two years ago?” Nila would return to her cooking, and later husband and wife would squat down and silently consume their uninteresting meal of rice, salt and bits of baked river fish and jungle vegetables. The day came, however, when the sub-inspector remembered Lidam and thought it was high time he returned to headquarters. Lidam reported himself some days later and again resumed those wearisome duties. Nila, on the other hand, was glad to leave, and quickly settled down in the long line of barracks where each evening such delightful gossip was exchanged on the common verandahs.There were other reasons, too, which Nila began to realize. The young Dyak bachelor Police were in the habit of coming over to the married quarters in the cool of the evening and she had imagined that the fascinating Nyanggau had looked at her with more than an accustomed glance. What a difference, she thought, between poor Lidam and Nyanggau! Nyanggau of the youthful figure, straight as an arrow. Beneath his bronze skin she could see the rippling muscles, one moment standing out like whipcord and then relaxing, leaving a soft copper gleam. Nyanggau with the sleek black hair worn long and thrown back frog his brow. Had she not heard a rumour that he was in the running for the next stripe? Poor Nila! Had she known it she might well have spared her imagination. Nyanggau had merely looked at her as he looked on every woman of marriageable age. He, run after such a worn out old slut as that!! No, Nyanggau had bigger game than that in view and he had never given Nila a second thought. In spite of Lidam’s stupidity he had more than once caught his wife making sheep’s eyes at Nyanggau. He pondered over the matter and became grumpier than ever. Other matters, too, were getting on Lidam's nerves. Inattention on parade, dirty kit and so on were met with punishment. Extra drill in the grilling heat of a Sarabang afternoon; marching up and down with, the delinquents at the mercy of a bored and peevish corporal. The day had been overbearingly hot. Returning from barracks in the forenoon Lidam had found his wife out and merely a pot of cold rice left for his meal. “Where was Nila?” he had asked. “In the bazaar,” was the reply of another woman. “What was she doing there?” “Who knows, men could not expect their wives to stay in and slave all day; besides, had not the Bombay cloth merchant arrived. Possibly Nila was inspecting his stock,” and so on. Lidam eat the unappetising food and threw himself on his mat to sleep. “Bat-tat-tat,” on the door. A voice calling, "Wake up, Lidam. The Sergeant-Major wants you to go down to the Police Station at once and take the place of a man in the guard there who has got fever.” Sleepily Lidam got up, put on his uniform and walked down to the station through the baking bazaar. Chinese were stretched out asleep on the covered verandahs outside the shops. The heat seemed to make dancing waves before his eyes. What was of all this bother about guards? What was the use of anything? Trouble, trouble everywhere! Why could they not let him sleep in peace. How he longed for the gentle swirl of the great cool river or the peaceful shade of the green jungle. The day wore to a close. The great red sun was sinking in a mass of purple and magenta sky. The baked earth was once more cooling beneath his feet, and a gentle breeze was nodding the great soap palms which lined the roads like sentinels. Away in the kampong he could hear the shrill falsetto voice calling from the mosque, whilst from the direction of the Fort were wafted the melancholy notes of the “retreat.” With relief, Lidam realized that in a few minutes the new guard would be marching down and that he would soon be free to rest again. Back in his room, Lidam found an excited Nila displaying a gaudy cloth to her friends. “These Bombay merchants were always so trusting to wives of Government servants,” she was explaining. Of course, Lidam would pay at the end of the month all the other husbands did.” “Is the food ready?” asked Lidam. Nila, with many grumblings, slipped out to the kitchen and tried angrily to get the wood fire going again. "Men were all alike,” she muttered, "always thinking of food, and anyway how was she to boil rice if her husband would not even bring in firewood.” With a sulky air she carried in the half-cooked rice. Lidam gulped down great mouthfuls in silence and threw himself down to sleep again. For Lidam, however, sleep was wrought with grange dreams. Interwoven with fantastic visions of his everyday life were familiar dreams somehow secerned with his wild Dyak life. He could see cool jungle paths winding through the dense vegetation and coming out upon rolling sunlit hills where on the tender green shoots of the padi were jest appearing amidst the tangle of logs which littered the slopes. Further on a long Dyak house nestling beneath a great hill covered in a mass of peen jungle. Below the house ran a swift stream wring over the smooth boulders and disappearing wand a wall of solid rock. Round the house were sail patches of sugar cane and tapioca. At the water's edge boats were lying drawn up on the shining mud bank. Down into the water sloped two notched logs along which chattering women and girls ran carrying gourds to fill with water. In the stream itself men, women and children were bathing, splashing the water in brilliant drops over their copper skins. Up in the house he saw a vista of the long communal verandah. Knots of men were sitting round talking, whilst ever passed persons engaged on all kinds of work. Dogs ran in and out amongst the people, and stray tils flew noisily up from below. Underneath, the pigs searched for scraps of food thrown through the floor. Everywhere was a scene of lazy hustle. Each one’s business was everybody's business, and yet through all there was an air of peace. And yet again the dream progressed. What were those dark things hanging over the fire? Lidam knew! Heads, human heads blackened by ages of smoke. Gaping jaws and empty eye sockets. Teeth sticking out giving the face a kind of sickly grin. Little tufts of hair still adhering to the shiny cranium! Those were the days! When Dyaks, real Dyaks, not dressed up puppets, engaged in their national pastime. A head! Why, no man was a man until he had taken a head! No matter whose. A young defenseless girl or a little child was just as good. The visions drifted into horrible spectres of his companions laughing at him; always laughing at him. And last of all appeared Nila. Nila with a mocking smile; and over her shoulder the grinning face of Nyanggau. She seemed to fade away gradually leaving Nyanggau, now in full figure, advancing with a threatening gait. He was coming nearer! he was about to spring! With a start Lidam awoke, his face bathed in a cold perspiration. The gong from the Fort suddenly struck nine times. All was dark in the room save for the light of a little oil dip which shone a feeble light on near objects. Putting his hand out cautiously he felt for his wife who slept by his side. His hand found nothing. Where was Nila? If she was only there to keep him company in his object fear. What did these dreams mean? Were they only dreams? Fool! Fool! of course not. They were real!! Exultation shook his frame! At fast the bandage was lifted from his eyes:	With a quick silent movement Lidam crept to the wall where his parang hung. Oh! he had always kept that sharp and clean! They may have punished him for having a dirty rifle, but his parang! No one had ever accused him of neglecting that. Quickly he drew it from its ornamented sheath and crept out of the room. Emerging from the compound he made for the bazaar. The usual gathering of men were seated round the bridge table in the club verandah. The last rubber had ended an hour ago, and the pool players from the billiard room had joined the circle. The conversation was almost a replica of the night before, or for the matter of that, any night in the year. Scraps of “shop,” sport, smoking-room stories and local gossip. "If only something would happen,” complained, Burney, “something really exciting.” “What! Don’t you find enough to do?” said Colson of the Forests, who was young, Scotch and took life very seriously. “I should have thought that the present quagmires you call roads would have given you enough.” “Shop!” interrupted Jameson. “For goodness sake don’t start a wrangle.” The doctor interposed. “It’s all very well for you chaps, but what about me? My work never ends. Isn’t that so,” he said turning to the District Officer. “Yes. that’s right enough,”, replied the District Officer. “No trade union hours in Sarabang! We’re all sorts of jacks-of-all trades. Personally, I should hate to do the doc’s work. But you never know, I remember....". “T’r’r’ing.” “You are wanted on the telephone, Tuan,” interrupted one of the club boys. "There you are; talking of the devil,” grumbled the District Officer hastily finishing his drink and going to the telephone. “What is that? Where? In the bazaar!! All right, I’m coming now.” With a clatter he banged the receiver down and made for the door. “Here is your excitement, Burney,” he shouted as he ran down the steps. "One of the ‘bobbies’ has gone amok and is carving up people in the bazaar.” In the crowded bazaar-things were very much alive. Down the main street, lighted by street lamps and the glare of a hundred shops, ran a fearsomely hideous Dyak, naked except for a loin cloth. With swift, silent steps the madman loped along slashing right and left at all he met. His face had assumed the mask of a mayas. Calmly and methodically the apparition did its gruesome work. The eyes were expressionless and looked straight ahead with a glazed look. No clumsiness this time; each cut ended in soft yielding flesh. Down the street the terrified Chinese fought each other to get into their shops, and old and feeble persons were ruthlessly pushed aside. With a-soft “thud, thud” of his bare feet upon the planking Lidam ran on to the long covered way. “Swish,” went the parang and yellow bodies fell to the ground. An old Chinese, woman hammered vainly at a barred door impjoring to be let in. A moment later she sank to the ground and remained quiet. In the road bodies could be dimly seen lying, very still, whilst a wounded man dragged himself to the edge of the ditch and slowly rolled himself over the side into the stagnant water. A drunken man lurched forward, his wits bemused with drink. One snick, and the unfortunate wretch subsided to the ground, his hands feebly feeling for his ripped open stomach. Further on a wizened old man was rocking himself to and fro on the ground, with his almost severed head buried his hands. One by one the lighted houses were plunged into darkness, and the street lamps gave but an intermittent light on the now deserted street. Lidam ran on, passing a sentry, who was too petrified with fear to attempt attack. A batch of hastily-armed police ran along, but the maniac had disappeared into the shadows. A few minutes of nerve-wracking waiting and Lidam suddenly appeared again. As in a dream he paced along with those horrible silent steps, his parang flashing in the feeble light. Out darts a big Malay constable and, rushing to where he sees a long carrying pole dropped by an escaping Chinese coolie, seizes the weapon and calmly waits for the madman to pass. Like a cat the Malay steps back a pace into the shadows and then springs. The pole crashes down across the back of Lidam’s head and he falls to the ground, the parang falling a few paces away with a soft tinkle on the hard road. In a moment he is seized and handcuffed. There is no need for any more force, however, Lidam’s mania has passed. He submits quietly to his captors and stares stupidly around. Chelaka benar, curses the Malay Sub-inspector, running up, “what do you want to kill people for like this? Are you mad, Lidam?” “I don’t know, Abang,” gasps Lidam, a puzzled look coming into this eyes. “What is all this fuss about? What are you talking about killing? I’ve killed nobody!!” Satan! says a sergeant, “I don’t think he knows what he’s done!” Lidam looked round vacantly. "Do you want me any more, Abang? As if you don’t I want to go back to the barracks to sleep.” “Certainly it must be an evil spirit,” says Abang slowly, looking at a dead body lying a yard or two away. “Come on, Sergeant-Major, detail a squad to find the dead and wounded.” “Well, I think we have all earned a drink!” said the doctor, at four in the morning, as he wiped a sweating face with a gory hand, “I make it five killed outright and twenty-five wounded. This hospital was not intended for such an inrush but I think we have done all we can.” “It was good of you chaps to lend a hand. Sewing up gaping tummies by the light of an old lamp held over the patient is ticklish work. Plucky old fellow that Chink with the gash in the neck! Wouldn’t have chloroform and never made a sound. I am afraid he has lost half his ear for good. You did marvels in regulating the traffic, Jameson, what with the patients and their relatives there was hardly room to move. Those blessed needles, too, towards the end they were so blunt that I couldn’t get them through." “I expect you fellows are feeling a bit squeamish. Not quite in your line—eh? but you all helped like Britons. Come over to my bungalow and let’s see if we find any brandy.” “Good Lord!” exclaimed the District Officer, "I’ve just realized that I’ve had nothing to eat since tiffin yesterday!” "Eat!” said Burney. “If you felt as ill as I do, and had been as ill as I have, you wouldn’t talk, of eating!” Ten minutes later they were assembled round a table in the doctor’s bungalow. “I don’t know what you feel like," said Burney, “but I’m just about to fall off to sleep!” “Same here,” replied the Police Officer, looking at his hands, “I feel I shall never get them clean again. Who'd be a doctor as long as there is still & crossing to sweep?” The District Officer sleepily lifted his glass to his lips. “Here’s luck,-Doc! I'll be sending round for some carbolic, if I may, in the morning. Fact is I stink like a mortuary!” “Morning!” said Jameson, “do you know it's nearly five o’clock!” “Oh well!” The District Officer got up and yawned. “Remember what we were talking about in the club last night? Jacks-of-all trades! I should jolly well think we are. I suppose the correct thing to say. is it’s all in a day’s work” Another long yawn—"Good-night!" 
Seaplanes in Sarawak. How THEY LANDED IN FLOODED MINES. In The Aeroplane, a well-known weekly paper entirely set apart for aircraft, we find the following paragraph :- Gipsy Moth Seaplanes to Sarawak. “Two Gipsy Moth seaplanes were last year supplied to the Government of Sarawak for patrol and other duties. At the same time a pilot went out from England. He is now home on his first leave and from him comes the naturally expected statement that the seaplanes have given every satisfaction. One of them was unfortunately written off not long ago by being flown into, some telegraph wires of which the pilot was unaware, and although there were two people in the machine nobody was hurt. “The Sarawak Government thought that Moth seaplanes would only be able to alight on large stretches of water and that, therefore, their usefulness would be limited. Soon after his arrival in Sarawak, however, the pilot found that the country abounds in disused and flooded mines. He alighted successfully on the first which he found and then proceeded to discover similar mines dotted over the country, nearly all of which are perfectly suitable for alighting and taking-off with a Gipsy Moth. “The Government were duly impressed with the unexpected handiness of the outfit. Reliability has been extremely good and repairs have been confined to a few odd details which, as the pilot remarked, was just as well, seeing that repair facilities were of the most primitive.” It is a pity that the Editor did not take the trouble to verify his facts before publishing such a misleading and inaccurate article. In fact, about the only statement with bears any semblance to the truth is that which says that the machines gave every satisfaction. As our readers will know the Government Air Service had a short career. Owing to lack of safe landing places, the lightness of the machines and the uncertain weather, it was found unprofitable and therefore inadvisable to retain the Service. The remaining machine was therefore presented, after only a few months’ use, to the pilot and the hangar dismantled. The other machine, after having done a considerable amount of local flying, crashed on her first long distance flight. The statement that this was the result of being flown into some telegraph wires of which the pilot was unaware is entirely incorrect. It will be, indeed, news to us in Sarawak that the pilot "found that the country abounds in disused and flooded mines," and that “he alighted on the first which he found." If he did so it was a most wonderful achievement at concealing his movements, seeing that there are only two flooded mines in the country; one is bang in front of the bungalow of the District Officer of Bau and the other about quarter of a mile away! The former is studied with limestone pinnacles, and the latter is of such small dimensions, and so surrounded by hills that nothing bigger than a penny steamboat would be safe! It is not quite correct to say that "the Government were duly impressed with the unexpected handiness of the outfit.” As very light machines they were all that one could expect—but they proved to be unsuitable for the work required of them—hence the end of the service. And before we stop perhaps the pilot might modify the statement that "repair facilities were of the most primitive." He had the services of a fully qualified Air Engineer Licensed by the Air Ministry, who joined the R.F.C. in 1913, who retired in 1921, and who served in France, Belgium and North Russia. Under this officer, with the help of one of the P.W.D. officers, himself an ex-R.A.F. man, facilities were afforded for during all the usual minor repairs. Indeed, we have it on food authority that there were sufficient new spares and tools to keep both machines in service for one year. Naturally, however, a crash which, very nearly cost the life of the other occupant of the machine, would be rather a job to tackle!
The Hygiene of the Swimming Bath. Some of the European community in Kuching have advocated the necessity of a swimming bath to be constructed and kept up by the Sarawak Club. There was considerable speculation as to the cost of construction and of the subsequent upkeep. In this conection, therefore, the following extracts from a very able article by Dr. J. Alison Glover in The Listener may be of interest to those Club Members who agreed to disagree! Dr. Glover says, "At the same time the possibility of the transmission of disease by polluted water in swimming baths, though remote, does exist, and to prevent this possibility it is now the accepted policy of the Ministry of Health that all artificial public swimming baths should be filled with water which is not only clear, sparkling and attractive, but is also practically free from germs of disease or bacteria of excremental origin. I would have you note particularly that these words only apply artificially constructed baths. “The fill and empty system which was the only only one in vogue during the nineteenth century, and which is still the system used in nearly half the baths in London and a much larger proportion in the provinces consists in emptying, scrubbing down, washing out and refilling the bath with fresh water from the mains. The system affords delightful water for the fortunate bathers who use it within the first few hours after refilling, but the system has many disadvantages. The depreciation of the water is rapid, each successive bather adding his quota of contamination, and the expense of refilling and the time that the operation takes, prevent the bath from being, refilled often enough. Rarely, refilling is done daily, sometimes every second day, and sometimes, weekly, but the usual practice is for the appearance of the water to be the criterion as to the necessity for refilling, and this is often deceptive as regards bacterial purity. Practical difficulties are the cost of the water, which in a bath containing 100,000 gallons may easily amount to £5 for each fill. “In many places the heavy draw on the water supply involved in daily emptying of swimming baths is undesirable in times of water shortage; that is, at the same time as the maximum use of the bath. Dr. Alexander, the Medical Officer of Health for Poplar, in 1900 suggested that this ‘fill and empty’ system might be supplemented by the addition of electrolytic fluid to the bath water in such a strength as to yield half a part of free chlorine per million to the water. This is a ready method of prolonging the useful life of the water, and Dr. Alexander deserves great credit for demonstrating that an appreciable amount of free chlorine can be present in the pool water without ill-effect."
CORRESPONDENCE. “Fame That Is Noised Abroad.” The Editor, Sarawak Gazette, 6th November, 1929 Kuching. Dear Sir, In addition to the British Warships appearing in your article in the Gazette of 3rd September, the following should be noted :— 1917- Fame, torpedo-boat destroyer. Lieut. Commander Marshal. December 15th to January 2nd, 1918. Fame made the longest stay of any warship in Kuching but, owing to war conditions, her presence in Sarawak waters was not reported in the Gazette. Yours faithfully, A. B. WARD. We thank our correspondent for pointing out the omission. The writer of the article- was not in Sarawak during the War, and bad to rely plainly on the Gazette tor his information.—Ed. S.G.] 
General Hospital. KUCHING, 10th December, 1929. The Editor, Sarawak Gazette, Kuching. Dear Sir, Attention is drawn to the visiting hours at the General Hospital which are as follows:- 12 noon to 12.45 p.m, and 4 p.m. to 6 p.m. daily. Visiting outside these hours is strictly forbidden except, with the express permission of the Principal Medical Officer, or Medical Officer-in-Charge of the Hospital. It is hoped that the European community will take the lead in maintaining this point of Hospital discipline. I have the honour to be, Sir, Your obedient servant, E. M. MARJORIBANKS, Principal Medical Officer, Sarawak. A Chinese in Singapore.—Apparently you do not know the invariable rule amongst newspapers that correspondents who wish to conceal their identity must nevertheless divulge their names to the Editors, who treats them in confidence. In any case, however, your anonymous letter went straight into the W.P.B. You must remember Mr. Chinese from Singapore (I have taken it for granted that you are a male. The ladies, God bless ’em, seldom worry about such arguments as you bring forward!) that mere abuse is not argument. Rudeness does not replace sense; crude personalities convince no one.— [Ed. S.G.] 
A Football League for Kuching. KUCHING, 13th December, 1929. The Editor, Sarawak Gazette, Kuching. SIR, Now the close season is here I would like to suggest, that the Kuching Football Club, who seem to be the ruling football body in Kuching, should take spine steps towards the formation of a football league. I myself could name at least six teams which would be only too willing to join. Yours faithfully, “INTERESTED.”
Prize Essay Competition. KUCHING, 23rd December, 1929. The Editor, Sarawak Gazette, Kuching. SIR, With reference to the Essay Competition you were good enough to announce in your columns a while ago, I have to ask your further indulgence in advising that the adjudicators award the prize to Goh Kheng Ley, age 17, a pupil of St. Thomas’ School, Kuching. His work is enclosed for publication should you think such would be of interest. Some twenty-four candidates, including several girls, entered for the Competition and the work produced reached a high standard. The Essays written by Ong Kee Hui and Sim Cha Kong deserve mention. I am, Sir, Your obedient servant, H. JACQURS, Director of Education. [The Essay is printed on another page.—Ed. S.G.]
The Children of China. They are everywhere. Every doorway has its cluster of noisy little figures, every street vendor a throng of small purchasers. They play on the temple steps, in the courtyards and roadways and in the dusty waste places among the pecking chickens. One meets them far afield— babies of three or four—picking bamboo shoots with solemn concentration, gathering twigs and dried leaves to carry home for the fire, or coming from the market laden with leaf-wrapped bundles of meat and vegetable. Here is a small girl vainly trying to persuade her tiny sister to carry the fish she has just purchased: but the fish, hanging by a string has goggling eyes and gaping mouth,—a frightening object when it is nearly as big as oneself! She demurs with moonface puckered, and hands behind her back. No TOYS. The Chinese children have few toys but they never lack playthings. Shiny green beetles caught napping on some sheltered and delectable leaf, awake to find themselves deftly shackled by a thread, and able but to fly in exasperating circles about the persons of their captors; zealously pursued crickets are housed in cages of bamboo,—surely a trial this solitary confinement, but a torment with a quarrelsome room-mate!—and the least bellicose of cockroaches is placed in the arena of a wash-tub there to fight his kith and kin. Failing these, there is always a garden to be made in the dust, stuck with leaves and languid flowers, hedged with broken crockery; or, if one is not the opulent owner of a paper kite one can at least assist at the flying, of someone else's. There are, too, any number of craftsmen to watch and worry in spare moments. Then they have so many brothers and sisters to look after; dolls are of little consequence to the small maid who carries her youngest brother slung in a cloth from, her narrow shoulders. THE LITTLE BOYS. A fine fellow he is in his patchwork cap with its two furry ears, and fragment of looking glass to scare away the prowling devils with a glimpse of their own frightfulness. But he is early destined to discard this protection in favour of the next arrival, and as soon as his brown legs have learned to carry him he will play about all summer probably clad only in a little apron and a couple of bracelets—a quaint elfin figure with a single tuft of hair bound so tightly with red cotton that it stands upright on his shorn pate. If he is a handsome boy likely to attract the envious eyes of gods and evil spirits alike, he will hire a girl’s name, and wear a silver earring to complete the illusion—for no one would want to steal a female child! He will go to school, run his errands and feed the baby. On feast days and holidays he will attend the interminable plays acted in an open field or temple courtyard. No ticket need he have to be in the front row of spectators; only sharp elbows and a talent for wriggling through the closely packed crowd. Once there, he will thrill at the exploits of the hero, loudly decry the villain,—an easily distinguishable rogue with his black and white painted face;—and, in the interval, spend time and ore upon the investing of his one cent piece at the stalls of itinerant vendors, choosing among the tantalizing display of syrupy fruits impaled on sticks with remarkable business acumen. At FRESCO THEATRES. We visited one such play, held on a plot of waste ground. The bare stage rose from the throng. The actors robed, disrobed, and painted their faces jostled on all sides by interested admirers. The players declaimed, hawkers advertized their wares, the audience laughed and talked : the noise was deafening. Our advent at first caused but a mild interest among our immediate neighbours, but when a camera was produced and a delighted stage “beauty” posed for his portrait as he completed his complexion, heads were craned from every direction, and a forest of small upturned faces appeared at our waists. POPULARITY OF THE CAMERA. The news of the picture-making-box spread from mouth to mouth. The actors stopped reciting and, eager not to miss such an opportunity, peered down from the edge of the stage to see the performance. No one resented the impromptu interlude. We walked away leaving a trail of small urchins clutching the discarded red and black papers of the film-pack, breathlessly waiting for the pictures they felt sure would magically appear.... As each year goes by there is more work and less play, an ever increasing part to play in the struggle for existence; but each year there is a new brood of unsteadily balanced babies, playing the same games in the dust and keeping the streets cheerful with their laughter.
Government Gazette. NEW APPOINTMENTS. January 1st, 1930, will see some important changes in the Government service. Mr. F. F. Boult becomes Chief Secretary on that date, Vacating the position of Resident, First Division, in which appointment Mr. J. C. Swayne will act. Mr. J. B. Archer will be Deputy Resident, Second Division, and proceeds to Simanggang. He ceases to be Chairman of the Board of Examiners for Government officers and is replaced by Mr. J. G. Swayne, but retains his seat on the Board. Mr. Justice Boyd and Mr. G. T. M. MacBryan are appointed new members. Mr. C. E. L. Blagg is appointed Assistant Legal Adviser. Dr. G. E. Brooke becomes Editor, Sarawak Gazette, vice Mr. J. B. Archer; Mr. E. M. Woodward takes the Government Gazette in place of Mr. G. T. M. MacBryan, and the former is also appointed Acting Assistant Secretary. Dr. W. Hutchison is appointed Senior Assistant Medical Officer. Mr. G. C. Gillan is to act as Special Commissioner for Sarawak in England. 
“Things are Different in Sarawak.” The Man who invented this remark should either be shot or else he should receive a stupendous decoration, and the choice of award depends on the view-point. Uttered by myself, it constitutes a satisfying finale to the argument, and one that shatters my wordy antagonist as nothing else can. It is devastating because it is unanswerable. Sometimes the victim makes an effort beginning with “Yes! but...”, but he never gets any farther. Hence, you see, I award the decoration to the inventor, while my verbose friend hands out the buck-shit. The maximum voltage of the phrase is developed when it is discharged at one new to the country. I used it myself in these circumstances very recently. The discussion which it was intended to terminate on this occasion was really of considerable interest, but as my protagonist had already made some very telling points and looked quite capable of making several more, I began to cast about for some means of turning the tables. The conversation really had no bearing whatever on Sarawak, but increasingly it became obvious that something had to be done about it, so I discharged the deadly phrase. Instantaneously the effect was apparent. Death-like pallor, an expression of utter bewilderment followed by another of dismay, a violent twitching of the ears and marked strepitation of the left knee-cap all bore witness to the paralysing effect of the remark. When the victim had partially recovered, he favoured me with a look which intimated very plainly that while he realized to the full that I was a trifle too senile to permit of his telling me that I was a dam fool, yet that was his precise opinion. I am not sure that he was wrong, either; but really I had to do something about it. Anyhow, I wish him a happy New Year. Mind you, I do not deny that the phrase expresses a very great truth, and, surprising though it may he, it is even known to things mechanical. A magneto used it on me the other day, and this was the way of it. The engine of a launch which I was about to travel refused to function and the mechanic began the unsuccessful struggle that is usual in such circumstances. After a furious 10 minutes he announced that “dia punya winding sudah broken didalam-lah.” I told him to turn her over (very technical, this) and picked up one of the high tension leads. Immediately I was very severely bitten and nearly thrown overboard. Admittedly, my knowledge of motors and their methods is sketchy, but I cannot believe that in any other country in the world would a magneto whose winding is broken didalam-lah be able to bite so infernally deep as did this one. So, you see, even a wretched mechanical gadget like a magneto knows that it is different in Sarawak and, as a certain prominent member of the Sarawak Club might put it, "not very similar either". THE LYRIC.
Stories for the Bairns. A MERRY CHRISTMAS. Now once upon a time there was a man who said “I don’t know about all this Christmas business and I think I shall stay at home by myself this year because it always costs such a lot of money to go out and besides it makes my headache.” So he decided he would stay at home and save his money and not go out to dinner like all the other people. So he called his boy and told him to cook just an ordinary sort of dinner because he said it will be cheaper like that but you can give me some prawns if you like because I like prawns for dinner. Now his boy was very fed up about this because he said if we go out to dinner I shan't have to cook anything and I will be able to get all the scraps cheap. Which will probably do for two or three days, and perhaps I might manage to get hold of a bottle of brandy afterwards too. But he was a boy so he had to do as he was told, but he said I will cook his dinner first and then go to somebody’s house and see if I can't get something out of this. So he hurried down to the bazaar to buy some prawns, but as he was going down he met a man coming back with some so he said to him, I want some prawns too. And the other man said you can have these because they are rather stale and smelly and I don't like prawns anyway so you can have them cheap. So he took the prawns which saved him nearly ten cents and he said, never mind about them being smelly because I’m not going to eat them myself and its getting very late. So he took the prawns home and cooked them with mustard sauce so that you couldn’t tell that they were cheap ones and gave them to his master. And his master said, hurry up with my dinner because I’m hungry and you know I always like my dinner at eight o’clock. So he ate all the prawns and his boy went out to dinner by himself. And in the middle of the night he had a very bad pain in his tummy and he said I think I ate too many prawns and perhaps they have disagreed with me and I’m sorry now I did not go out to dinner like everybody else because I probably should not have eaten any prawns then. And he was very very ill and he nearly died, and he didn’t save any money either because he had to pay his doctor lots of money and his boy drank all his brandy whilst he was in bed. So he said next year l will go out and just get a headache like everybody else. IRON DUKE.
Rugger. COLOURS (6) vs. WHITES (0). A game of rugger was played on the 28th on the Kuching Football Club ground under favourable condition and before a large crowd of spectators. There was little to choose between the sides and Colours were perhaps a trifle fortunate in securing a victory of 6 points to till. These were obtained from a dropped goal by Collier and a try, far cut, by Chater which McGinn failed to convert. A number of Malays watched with obvious interest this new game of rubby which seems to be becoming increasingly popular among the Europeans. As a game it fell far short of some previously played, being for the most part scrappy. The White forwards were, on the whole, more successful than their rivals; but their backs were handicapped by the fact that the ball seldom got past the back line of the scrum. As a result the game was seldom opened up and McLaine and Baughan did not get any opportunity of displaying their prowess. On the other hand it must be remembered that had Reid been playing at three-quarter instead of back, the score against Whites may have been less as he had too little to do in his position. Chief amongst the forwards we noticed Hockaday, who, we understand, was playing his first game of “rugger," and Mansell who made his first appearance in Kuching. Conspicuous amongst the backs were Middleman, who played his usual stolid game; Birt, whose, turn of speed was unfortunately of little avail owing to the scrappiness of the game, and Pereira who was always in the right place at the right time. Coming as it did, however, in the middle of a strenuous week, we must congratulate every player on his effort and thank both teams for providing the spectators with an enjoyable afternoon.
Funeral of Dr. Charles Hose. The funeral of Dr. Charles Hose, of Redleaf, Riddlesdown-road, Parley, formerly Divisional Resident and a member of the Supreme Council of Sarawak, took place yesterday afternoon. The service was at St. Mark's Church, Woodcote, Purley, and was conducted by the Rev. E. A. Shattock (vicar). The coffin was covered by the flag of the State of Sarawak. The chief mourners were Mrs. Charles Hose (widow), Mr. H. R. Hose (son), Mr. W. Hose and Mr. Ernest Hose (brothers), Mrs. R. J. Dewing (sister), Mr. Edward Shaw Hose (cousin), Miss Gertrude Hose (cousin), Mrs. Edwardson (cousin), the Tuan Muda of Sarawak, Mr. Arthur Gray (Master, Jesus College, Cambridge), the Rev. Frank Stephenson (Headmaster, Felsted School), Mr. Raymond Young, and Dr. Duckworth (Cambridge). Others present were:— Mr. C. Tate Regan (Director, Natural History Museum), Mr. P. R Wilson, Mr. B. A. Blakiston, and Mr. H. J. Chetwood (representing the. Old Felstedian Society), Mr. and Mrs. Oscar Cook, Mr. E. J. Rimmer, Mr. and Mrs. S. D. Payne, Mrs. H. Carey, Mrs. C. Carey, Mrs. Weigall, Mr. Stanley M. Church, Dr. J. Henderson Bulcock, Miss Tilldesley, Sir. Laurence E. Stade, and Mr. J. S. Corbett (representing the Empire Forestry Association). The burial took place in Bandon Hill Cemetery. Mrs. Hose received a message of sympathy from the Rajah of Sarawak. Flags were flown at half-mast throughout Sarawak as a token of the great respect felt for Dr. Charles Hose.—(Times) Wreaths were sent from the Sarawak Government Offices, Her Highness the Ranee Margaret, and Mr. W. Cotterill.
Prize Essay Competition. WON BY A ST. THOMAS’ SCHOOLBOY. THE GIRLS NOT FAR BEHIND. WHO WILL GIVE THEM A PRIZE?. Our readers will remember that some time ago gentleman, who desires to remain anonymous, offered a prize of ten dollars for the best essay on Sarawak by a schoolboy or schoolgirl. Some twenty-four essays were sent in, including about ten submitted by girls of St. Mary’s School. The standard was remarkably high, although it is evident that many of the essays were the result of a good memory for the wording of the text books used. Curiously enough the Samarahan, Lundu and Sampadi rivers were thought by many of the girls to be the most important ones in the country. Possibly this is the same spirit which makes an Aberdonian think that there is no place like Aberdeen, or the easterner, Hull.
In some ways the girls’ essays were more original and it is a pity there is no prize for them. Their average age was younger than that of the boys’, and had their English been slightly better it was on the cards that one of them would have wiped the eyes of their brothers. We print below the prize essay. G. Kheng Ley is to be congratulated on sending in a neatly written and concise paper. Perhaps someone else will give a prize for the led girl's paper. The Editor will see that it is given to the girl adjudicated as the best. SARAWAK. BY G. KHENG LEY—Form VII. ST. THOMAS SCHOOL. Sarawak is an Independent State under British Protection, situated on the north-west coast of the island of Borneo. It is divided up into five divisions and their respective chief towns are Kuching, which is the capital, Simanggang, Sibu, Miri and Limbang. Its area is about 55,000 square miles, extending from Cape Datu to the Lawas District, there it touches the boundary of the British North Borneo. Its population comprises Chinese, Dyaks, Indians, Mohamedans and other European immigrants. The aborigines, i.e., the Dyaks, are again divided into 6 races, viz., Kayans, Sea Dyaks, Kenyahs, Kelmantans, Muruts and Punans. The rivers of Sarawak are numerous but the most important ones are Sarawak River, Batang Lupar, Rejang and Baram River. The history of Sarawak begins when James Brooke first set foot in Kuching in 1839. Prior to this event, the country was under the government of the Sultan of Brunei, who sent one of his chief officers to Kuching to be governor of Sarawak. This man was called Pangiran Makota and he was if in unscrupulous character, and instead of ruling the country properly, he used his power and position to oppress the inhabitants, the Malays and Land Dyaks, who were peaceful and law-abiding citizens. His oppression was intolerable and lasted for a long time and at last the people could bear it no longer and they burst into open revolt, proclaiming their dependence of Brunei. The Sultan of Brunei, hearing this terrifying piece of information, sent his uncle Rajah Muda Hassim to Kuching to pacify the country but his mission proved fruitless because he did not dispose Pangiran Makota from his office. It was in this state of chaos and upheaval in the country that James Brooke arrived in Kuching. He was born at Secrore, Benares, in April, 1803, and was educated in England at Reigate and Bath. He took part in the Burmese War in 1824—1825, where he was wounded and invalided home. Five years later, he visited China and the Malay Archipelago, in whose development he played an important part. Later on at the death of his father, Thomas Brooke, he inherited a small fortune and resolved to purchase a boat for exploration. He bought the yacht “Royalist” of 140 tons and set sail for the Far East from Devonport in December, 1838, reaching Singapore in May, 1839. Hearing that Rajah Muda Hassim was kind and favourable to Europeans, he started for Kuching, where he was cordially welcomed and received by the above-mentioned Rajah, whom he described as, “a remarkable short man and slightly built; about 45 years of age; active and intelligent but little inclined to business.” During his two months' stay in Kuching, before setting forth on his four months’ cruise to Celebes, he visited Lundu, Samarahan and Sadong and was able to glean much information respecting the natives. On his second visit to Kuching the Rajah Muda Hassim besought him earnestly to quell the rebellion and offered him in return the government of Sarawak, which was finally handed over to him in September, 1841, an act which was ratified by the Sultan of Brunei. In August, 1842, he was proclaimed Rajah at Brunei and his territory extended from Cape Datu to Samarahan River. Rajah Brooke had an awful hard task before him in introducing laws and regulations; his policy was to destroy the slave-trade and exterminate the practice of piracy. The inhabitants of Sarawak, especially the Malays and Land-Dyaks, were of an unwarlike disposition but the Sea-Dyaks of Skrang and Saribas were notorious for their savage and merciless cruelties. Their activities were eventually put to an end by Rajah Brooke with the assistance of a British squadron at Batang Maru. H.M.S. Nemesis and Albatross took active part in this expedition. The Sultan of Brunei did not favour the Rajah’s policy of suppressing piracy and he was angry with his uncle for helping the Rajah to do so. The upshot of this was that Rajah Muda Hassim, his brother, Badrudin, and every member of the Royal Family were foully assassinated by the henchmen of the Sultan. For this inhuman and outrageous act, Brunei was attacked and the defences destroyed resulting in the flight of the Sultan, who, however, was allowed to return and unconditionally reconfirmed Rajah Brooke’s possession of Sarawak. By this time the health of H. H. the Rajah was running down rapidly and so he was compelled to return to his motherland to recuperate. In England he was received with honour and respect and created a K.C.B. [in 1847] and appointed Govenor of Labuan, an island which was taken by the British Government in the previous year. In 1848, the national flag of Sarawak was hoisted and in 1850, Sarawak was recognized by United States of America as an Independent State; in 1803 by Great Britain and the first British Consul appointed. There was a serious Insurrection on the part of the Chinese in Kuching previous to the Indian Mutiny in 1857, and it was quelled after much bloodshed and loss of property by Sir James Brooke with the help of a small force of Malays and Dyaks. Before the death of Sir James Brooke, which took place in 1868, a second cession of the coast district extending from Sadong River to Kedurong point was obtained from the Sultan. The second Rajah of Sarawak was Sir Charles Brooke, G.C.M.G., who was born near Burnham, Somerest in 1829. Before he joined the Sarawak Service he had served in the Navy but resigned at the age of 23. He ascended to the throne of Sarawak on October, 1870; his policy was to encourage education and agriculture. During his government the people enjoyed peace and the country had also progressed much. Slavery was destroyed by him in 1872. He enlarged his dominion, which only extended to Kedurong Point at the time of his uncle’s reign, by different-cessions to the Lawas District, where it stands to these days. In 1884 there was a great conflagration in Kuching and it did considerable damage to the property of the inhabitants. In 1902 a reservoir was built at the foot of Mount Matang some ten miles from Kuching because a terrible cholera had broken out, indicating that a sufficient supply of water was needed. Other events of importance in the evolution of Sarawak was the founding of Mission schools, the opening of Sarawak Museum, installation of a wireless telegraphy in Kuching, the building of Brooke Dock and the construction of a railway, which radiates from Kuching for a distance of ten miles. In future it is hoped that it will be extended to the Simanggang District. Sir Charles Brooke breathed his last at the age of 87 on May 17th 1917 and he was buried by the side of his uncle at Sheepstore. He was succeeded by Sir Charles Vyner Brooke, G.C.M.G., who is his third but eldest surviving son. His Highness the third Rajah of Sarawak was born in London 1874 and was educated at Cambridge. He joined the Sarawak Service at the age of 23 and was stationed at Simanggang where he took part in an expedition against some of the Dyak-chiefs in that district for a series of raids on the neighbouring villages. The Heir Presumptive to the throne of Sarawak is H. H. the Tuan Muda, Captain Bertram Brooke who was born in 1876. Last of all before I conclude my essay. I should like very much to say that Sarawak is a very good country to live in. The reasons for this are:— (i) Livings are cheap and earnings easy. (ii) There is no winter but practically summer all the year round. (iii) There are no volcanoes in this country as Japan has, because they cause terrible disaster to the people. (iv) There are no internecine strifes as China has. [With the exception of a few minor spelling mistakes we have printed this essay at it was received. Perhaps G. Kheng Ley will not object to a few comments. First of all it is not generally considered that the Dyaks are the aborigines of Sarawak; nor are Kayans, the Kenyahs and the Kelemantans(?) subdivisions of the Dyaks. This is, however, a very common mistake made even by Chinese who have lived in Sarawak for a considerable time. They are apt to class all such tribes as “la kia.” Again, it is a pity the essayist did not give any information about the products and trade of the State. There is also 110 description of the nature of the country. It would be more correct to style this essay “The Reigns of Three Rajahs of Sarawak.”— Ed. S.G.]
St. Thomas’ School. ANNUAL PRIZE GIVING. In spite of the somewhat inclement weather a considerable number of visitors came to the School on the 23rd December to the Prize Giving held in the Assembly Hall, when Mrs. Boult kindly gave away the prizes. The Principal reported on a happy year at school and explained that owing to the change started this year it was eighteen months since the last examinations. On the whole the results had been good and in individual cases some surprising marks had been obtained. The following are the names of those who obtained prizes:— SCRIPTURE. Special drawing prizes presented by Mr. En Hyuk. (1) Jun Choi, (2) Wui Onn. Special sining prize presented by Mr. John Muda. Joe. Special price for Religious Knowledge presented by the Archdeacon. Beng Lee. The Bishop, on asking Mrs. Boult to present the prizes, referred to the many improvements in the school of recent years, and paid tribute to the Government for its interest in education and for, the help rendered in carrying on scholas tic work in the country. He hoped that the fact that Kuching had been made a centre for the Cambridge Examinations would prove an incentive for more candidates to enter for the examinations, and thereby raise the standard of proficiency in this and other schools. The Archdeacon proposed a vote of thanks to Mrs. Boult for so kindly interesting herself in the school and coming to give away the prizes, and pointed out that in future we should welcome her no longer as the wife of the Resident of the First Division, but as the wife of the Chief Secretary of Sarawak, and congratulated Mrs. F. F. Boulton his appointment. Amongst those present were Mr. Justice Boyd, Messrs. Sam Guan and Teo Kwan, members of the Board of Management, Mr. Jacques, Director of Education, Mrs. Pitt-Hardacre, the entire staff of the school, other members of the Mission, many friends and Mr. S. M Collier, who is taking over from the present Principal Mr. Hollis at the end of the year when he goes on furlough. A letter from Mr. Archer apologizing for not being able to be present owing to pressure of duties, expressed his good wishes for the school, of which he said the authorities might well be proud.—(Contributed.)
Distribution of Prizes at Astana. HIS HIGHNESS THE RAJAH ENTERTAINS MALAY SCHOOLBOYS. On Monday the 23rd, on the invitation of His Highness the Rajah, some 120 Malay schoolboys assembled at Astana to receive prizes. The affair was held in the big dining room. His Highness was sup[>orted by the Resident and Mrs. Boult, the Director of Education, the Private Secretary, the principal Malay Chiefs and their wives and others. The usual complimentary speeches and songs were delivered by the lads, who gave three hearty cheers for His Highness. After the prize-giving the boys were entertained to a curry dinner. The following is a list of prize winners:— PRIZES for GOVERNMENT LAY SCHOOL. English Subjects. 
Standard III. 1st ... Sowpi. 2nd ... Hassan Wani. Standard II. 1st ... Hassan. 2nd ... Yulaihi. Standard I. 1st	... Zen minor. 2nd ... Yusup minor. Infant A. 1st ... Kiprawi. 2nd ... Turkey. 2nd ... Bohari. Infant B. 1st ... Joli minor. 2nd ... Dasri. Malay Subjects. Standard JR. 1st ... Hassan Waini. 1st ... Johari. 2nd ... Wan Nawawi. Standard III. 1st ... Yusup. 2nd ... Omar. Standard IIA. 1st	... Yusup minor. 2nd ... Pawi. Standard IIB. 1st ... Bol Hassan. 2nd ... Kiprawi. Standard IA. 1st ... Mohamad Jamel. 2nd ... Joli minor. Standard IB. 1st ... Oni. 2nd ... Narawi. Good conduct ... Pawi. Good conduct ... Yan. Regular attendance ...	Goll. Regular attendance ... Mohamad Jamel. KAMPONG GERSIK SCHOOL. English Subjects. Standard IIA. 1st ... Ahmat Zunaidia. 2nd ... Jaya. Standard IIB.	1st ... Awang Ebrahim. 2nd ... Ahmad. Standard I. 1st ... Awang Bakri. 2nd ... Dollah. 2nd ... Bador. Infant A. 1st ... Abang Kak. 2nd ... Replay. Infant B. 1st ... Adam. 2nd ... Bujang quintus. Malay Subjects. Standard IV.	1st ... Ahmat Zunaidie. 2nd ... Jaya. Standard III. 1st ... Awee. 2nd ... Awang Ebrahim. Standard II. 1st ... Putit. 2nd	... Dollah. Standard I.	1st ... Amair. 2nd ... Marsidi. Infant A. 1st ... Hassim. 2nd ... Awang Hassan. Infant B. 1st ... Mohd. Hud. 2nd ... Awang Gani. Infant C. 1st ... Ahmat Anuar. 2nd ... M. Jaya minor. Good conduct ...	Wan Mostapa. Regular attendance ... Awang Mat. KAMPONG JAWA SCHOOL. Standard IV. 1st ... Mohd. Zen. 2nd	... Suaaidi. Standard III. 1st ... Hassaini. 2nd ... Hassan. Standard IIA. 1st ... Boyeng. 2nd ... Dan. 2nd ... Buang. Standard IIB. 1st ... Apit. 2nd ... Som. 2nd ...	Wasli. Standard IA. 1st	... Mon. 2nd ... Sobeng. Standard IB. 1st ... Ariff. 2nd ... Junih. Infant. 1st ... Yahya. 2nd ... Taim. Good conduct ... Zawawi. Regular attendance ... Boyeng. 
Club News. Sarawak Club. BOWLING AVERAGES FOR NOVEMBER, 1929. BOWLING HANDICAP FOR NOVEMBER, 1929. Island Club, Sibu. OPTIONAL POOL TOURNAMENT. An optional pool tournament has just been concluded for the “Kidold Cup” presented by Messrs. Kidd and Cobbold. In the final Mr. A. D. Taylor (scratch) beat Mr. R. N. Baron (rec. 150) by 414 to 364. A selling sweep was held on the tournament being value $195.75. The winner was drawn by Mr. Lowry and bought by Mr. Anderson. BOWLING AVERAGES FOR NOVEMBER, 1929. BOWLING HANDICAP FOR November, 1929.
Sarawak Library. Kindly presented by His Highness the Rajah:— Kindly presented by Mrs. F. F. Boult:— Purchased by the Committee:-
Sarawak Regatta. Wednesday, 1st January, 1930. As we go to press the Honorary Secretary sends us the results. The weather was good the whole day with the exception. of a heavy rain squall just as the first event of the afternoon was to be paddled. This did not last long, and a most enjoyable day was spent. Their Highnesses the Rajab and Tuan Muda, and the Dayang Anne were present. The Datu Imam’s Lang Laut actually passed the post first in the Rajah’s Cup, but was disqualified for fouling. Programme and Results. Patron :—His Highness the Rajah. Judges :—Mr. F. F. Boult, Mr. A. A. Rennie, Capt. C. P. Lowe. Mr. H. M. Calvert, Mr. C. Fenwick, Mr. Tan Sam Guan, Mr. Chan Kee Ong, Mr. Ong Beow Sim, The Datu Shah Bandar, The Datu Amar, The Data Imam Tua, The Datu Imam, The Datu Hakim, The Datu Mentri, The Datu Bintara, The Tuan Imam, and The Tuan Khatib. Umpires :—Mr. J. B. Archer, Capt. R. E. Le Sueur. Starters:—Mr. R. E. Edwards, Mr. R. C. Kay, Mr. C. S. Griffiths, Mr. E. M. Woodward, Mr. L. N. Reynolds, Mr. C. F. Birt, The Datu Shah Bandar, Datu Haji Abang Abdul Rasid, The Datu Amar, The Datu Mentri, Abang Haji Fadil, and Mr. Mohamad Arbi. Stewards:—Mr. Justice Stirling Boyd, Dr. E. M. Marjoribanks, Mr. P. H. Flood-Page, Mr. Ong Chip Yau, Mr. Wee Kheng Chiang, Mr. Law Chin Hiang, Mr. Ana Suleiman, The Tuan Belal, and Mr. Anasalam. Clerks of the Course :—Mr. R. W. Chater, Mr. A. C. Street, Mr. T. W. Goodban, and Mr. G. T. Yeatts. Totalizator:—Mr. A. P. Merrells. In Charge of Refreshments :—Mr. G. T. Bates. Sideshows :—Mr. E. W. Howell, Abang Haji Hipni, and Haji Bol Hassan. Honorary Treasurer :—Mr. H. C. P. Adams. Honorary Secretary Mr. C. Pitt-Hardacre. 1st Race, 8 a.m.—The CHINESE BANKERS’ STAKES.—Value $75. Presented by the Sarawak Chinese Bank, The Kwong Lee Bank and Bian Chiang Bank. 2nd prize $30. 3rd prize $10. 1st prize to crew $40. 2nd prize to crew $15. 3rd prize to crew $10. Open to boats limited to crews of 30 paddles, one flagman and one bailer may be carried in addition, but these must not use paddles. From Ulu Tanjong Patingan to Stone Wharf. NAME OF BOAT. OWNER. 1—Moan Rasa ... Haji Suleiman and Abdul Raoh. 2—Nasib Baik Siti Sara ... Haji Mohamad Ali. 3—Kilat Sri Delima ... Haji Bojeng. 2nd Race, 8.30 a.m.—THE NIPPON STAKES.— For boats with crews limited to eight (8) men. Value $30. Presented by Nissa Shokai, Limited, 1st prize $20 2nd prize $10. From Muara Sungei Sinjan to Stone Wharf. NAME OF BOAT. OWNERS. 1—Ice Cream ... Sejili bin Inchi Omar. 2—Kumbang Melarie	... Ayup Tupong. 3rd Race, 9 a.m.— SHIPS’ GIGS.— 1st prize $10.2nd prize $5. Limited to four oars and one paddle. From Muara Sungei Sinjau to Stone Wharf. 1—Chin Teak Su. 2—Chin Ann. 4th Race, 9.30 a.m.—LAW BROTHERS’ CUP.— Value $50. Presented by Law Brothers. 2nd prize $15. 1st prize to crew $15. 2nd prize to crew $8. Open to any description of boat with crew limited to 15 men. From Ulu Tanjong Patingan to Stone Wharf. NAME OF BOAT. OWNER. 1—Siti Haridja ... Haji Amin and Haji Mohamad 2—Note Bahru Sarawak ... Datu Bintara. 5th Race, 10 a.m.—H. H. THE RANEE’S CUP.— A Cup Value $100. Presented by Her Highness the Ranee. 2nd prize $40. 3rd prize $15. 1st prize to crew $50. 2nd prize to crew $20. 3rd prize to crew $10. Open to boats limited to crews of 30 paddles, one flagman and one bailer may be carried in addition, but these must not use paddles. From Ulu Tanjong Patingan to Stone Wharf. NAME OF BOAT. OWNER. 1—Burong Banggan ...	E. Banks and Haji Omar. 2—Snipe	... H. B. Crocker and Sudin. 3—Dayang Mas Diah ... Datu Bintara. 6th Race, 10.30 a.m.—ARMY, POLICE AND STEAMERS.— Crews limited to 15 men. Mixed crews from steamers will not be allowed, each steamer must have a boat containing members of its crew who are signed on before 1st January, 1930. 1st prize $30. 2nd prize $15. From Tanjong Patingan to Stone Wharf. 1—Sri Mukah. 2—Kim Chin Seng. 7th Race, 11 a.m.—THE ONO EWE HAI CUP— Value $75. Presented by Messrs. Ong Ewe Hai & Co. 2nd prize $25. 1st prize to crew $20. 2nd prize to crew $10. 3rd prize to crew $7. Open to boats finishing 1st, 2nd or 3rd in Races Nos. 1 and 5, limited to 30 paddlers. From Ulu Tanjong Patingan to Stone Wharf. NAME OF BOAT. OWNER. 1—Nasib Baik Siti Sara ... Haji Mohamad Ali. 2—Muan Rasa ... Haji Suleiman and Abdul Raoh. 3—Snipe ... H. B. Crocker and Budin. 8th Race, 11.20 a.m.—OFFICES’ RACE.—The Yamashita Stakes. Value $30. Presented by the Yamashita Rubber Estates, Ltd., $20. Regatta Fund $10. Limited to employees in Government and Mercantile Offices whose names, as being in receipt of monthly wages, appear on the pay sheet of any such Office for December. 1929. Limited to crews of 12 men in each boat. 1st prize $20. 2nd prize $10. From Sungei Sinjan to Stone Wharf. NAME OF BOAT. OWNER. 1—Note Bahru Sarawak ... Telephone Department. 2—Chahaya Bulan ... Survey Office. 9th Race, 2 p.m.— THE DATOS' STAKES.- Value $125. Presented by Kuching Datus’ Court $100. Regatta Fund $25. 2nd prize $30. 1st prize to crew $50. 2nd prize to crew $25. 3rd prize to crew $15. Open to any make of tool unlimited in size or number of crew. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf. NAME OF BOAT. OWNER. 1—Chaya Inchi Abu Bakar ... Dayang Rabiah Istri Datu Shah Bandar. 2—Batang Branyut ... H. B. Crocker and Sudin. 10th Race, 2.20 p.m.—THE INDIA STAKES — Value $50. Presented by the Indian Community. 2nd prize $15. 1st prize to crew $15. 2nd prize to crew $8. Open to any description of boat with crew limited to 15 men. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf. NAME OF BOAT. OWNER. 1—Siling Sarawak ... Datu Bintara. 2—Murah Malaiyau ... Mohd. Sayid. 11th Race, 3 p.m.—H. H. THE RAJAH'S CUP.— A cup value $200. Presented by His Highness the Rajah. 2nd prize $65. 3rd prize $20. 1st prize to crew $80. 2nd prize to crew $40. 3rd prize to crew $20. Open to any make of boat unlimited in size or number of crew. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf. NAME OF BOAT. OWNER. 1—Chaya Inchi Abu Bakar ... Dayang Rabiah Istri Datu Shah Bandar. 2—Maharaja Kaya ... Datu Shah Bandar. 12th Race, 3.30 p.m—THE DAYANG MAS DIAH STAKES. —Value $50. Presented by Datu Bintara. 2nd prize $15. A Consolation Race.—For boats which have not finished first in Races Ros. 4 or 10. From Godown Ban Seng to Stone Wharf. NAME OF BOAT. OWNER. 1 — Murah Malaiyan. 2 — Dayang Masbah Nasib Baik ... Mohd. Sayid Hj. Mohd. Ali. 13th Race, 4 p.m.—THE KUCHING STAKES.— Value $75. Presented by the Regatta Fund. prize $25. A Consolation Race.—For boats which have not finished first in Races Nos. 1 or 5. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf. NAME OF BOAT. OWNER. 1—Singa Nerais ... E. O. Bruce. 2—Dayang Mas Diah ... Datu Bintara. 14th Race, 4.30 p.m.—THE CONSOLATIONS STAKES—Value $125. Presented by the Sarawak Steamship Co., $50. The Borneo Co., $50, and Messrs. Sime, Darby & Co., $25. 2nd prize $25. A Consolation Race.— For boats which have not finished first in Races Nos. 9 or 11. From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf. NAME OF BOAT. OWNER. 1—Batang Branyut ... H. B. Crocker and Sudin. 
Extracts from Monthly Reports. First Division. The Resilient, Mr. F. F. Boult, reports;— Two appeals from the District Court were dismissed.
Abang Haji Halel. the Datu Imam, on the advice of the Medical Board has been granted sick leave for an indefinite period; he has been in poor health for some time. DISTRICT OFFICE. November, 1929. The District Officer, Mr. J. B. Archer, reports;— On the 2nd Mr. W. S. B. Back took over the Cities of Acting Assistant District Officer vice Mr. E. M. Woodward, transferred to the Secretariat. Accompanied by Mr. G. St. V. Dare, I visited the neighbourhood of Sungei Subi, Sambir, on tbe 7th. We were able to settle a stupid drainage dispute which had been occupying and wasting the time of the Court for some time. We walked from there to Kampong Tambirat. The Government drain has filly justified its cost, and there should be no difficulty in improving the present inadequate drainage system of many of the gardens. Coconuts tree looking well, but many of the gardens are badly kept. I visited Batu Kawa on the 13tb, and caught a number of Chinese using the pork market as a gambling stall, with its usual filthy accompaniments. THE offenders dispersed, but three who were caught were duly punished. The only criminal cases of importance were those of Ripin, a Malay, convicted on two counts for theft and criminal misappropriation, sentenced to one year's imprisonment and six strokes with the rottan on each count; and Ho Ah Tun, a prominent Heng-bus trader, sentenced to one year's imprisonment for attempting to bribe a Government servant. Usop, a Malay contractor, has appealed against an order of the Civil Court. LAND OFFICE. November 1929. The Superintendent of Lands, Mr. C. S. Griffiths, reports;— The matter of the boundary between Bau and Kuching districts was raised during the month by the Superintendent of Surveys. Very little has been done in the past in the way of defining inter-district and inter-divisional boundaries and it is a matter which will become of increasing importance as time goes on. In this particular case a beginning has been made. Mr. T. M. Griffiths continued work on the Simanggang Road during the month and it is satisfactory to be able to report that solid progress is at last being made. Work in this connection has been of an uphill nature in the past, with the result that the tangible results have been somewhat meagre. This may be increasable to three sources. The first of these is the fact that our own knowledge is to the ownership of certain of the lands was somewhat tenuous and difficulties were encountered in their investigation. In the second place, the absence of some of the claimants to lands hampered efforts to recover titles. Thirdly, the natural disinclination of owners, in some cases amounting almost to obstruction, to afford information which might result in their dispossession of the whole, or part, of their lauds, even though they bad totally failed to fulfil the conditions under which they held them. These difficulties, however, are gradually being overcome, and it is hoped that next month it will be possible to report that a considerable area of the reserve has been thoroughly investigated and that no more work on it will be necessary. UPPER SARAWAK, BAU. November, 1929. The District Officer, Mr. J. C. Swayne, reports;— I regret to report two drowning accidents occurred at Seniawan on the 4th and 15th, Ah Voon who fell from a boat while crossing the river, and Cheng Wha who was bathing near the bazaar. At this time of year when the water is high and the current strong there is considerable danger for those who cannot swim. The Director of Public Works visited the station during the month and inspected the bazaar water-pipe, with a view to eventual replacement. He noticed two leaks in the dam which it is hoped may be permanently repaired. Thanks to the courtesy of the Acting Superintendent of Telegraphs, fitters overhauled the electrical plant and replaced a burnt-out switch. At the present time the plant is working well. The gold output of the Upper Sarawak Gold Mining Syndicate for October and November amounted to 99 ozs. and of the Bidi Gold Mining Company for October to 132 ozs. LUNDU. November, 1929. An inquiry was held concerning an amok in which Bikok, a Land Dyak, was killed and two others slightly wounded. Naiken who was responsible for this crime committed suicide. Native Officer Abang Zamhari proceeded to Sabiris immediately on receipt of the news and with his evidence it was possible to prove that the murderer had been in an unbalanced state of mind for some time previous to this. As no Officer had visited the station since July there was a considerable arrears of Court and other work. A contract to rebuild the Police Barracks was signed and immediate steps taken to start the work. In view of the very adverse report of the Health Office I inspected the bazaar and asked the Chinese to co-operate in trying to bring about an improvement. It appears that the shophouses to some extent are owned by Malays and the present tenants do not wish to undertake any expense. I hope the matter will be dealt with during the New Year. SADONG. November, 1929. The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports:— On the 5th Abang Hamdan arrived to do duty here as Native Officer, vice Abang Haji Spi-ee who has proceeded to Kuching. Mr. H. E. Davidson arrived from the Ulu on the 3rd and reported hopeful conglomerate formation towards the Ulu Sarawak. Accompanied by Mr. H. E. Davidson, Native Officer, Abang Hamdan and Penghulu Buda, I left on a visit to the Ulu Simujan and Melikin Districts and was still away at the end of the month. The most striking feature of the visit was the number of new houses which have been built and are in course of construction. This is resultant from my orders of last year when it was found that about a third of the Iban population were living in padi huts. A pleasing innovation was the fact that some of the Sea-Dyaks are keen on planting pepper, and some very creditable efforts were noticed at Kepayang, Gayaw and Sungei Pinang. Tuai Rumah Gimang and his followers were fined $800 for building a new house on the Ensabang River, which is in Melikin territory. They had been previously warned against doing this, and had been fined before that for the same offence. Tuai Rumah Juti and his followers were fined $66 for farming in Melikin territory; and they were told that when they build a new house it must be built on the Simunjan side, and further away from the Barai. 
Sadong Colliery. November, 1929. The Manager, Mr. J. W. Evans, reports:— A connection was made below ground between No. 8 Mine and the Buffalo Mine workings early in the month. Both mines are now adequately ventilated, and the large coal-pillars remaining unworked between these mines will be extracted at full pressure as soon as new labourers are available inefficient numbers.
Second Division. BATANG LUPAR. October, 1929. The Resident, Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner, reports:— General.—Penghulu Suel of Lemanak arrived early in the month. His visit was in connection with a boundary dispute between himself and the Meriu Dyaks. He reported a sad fatality, a young Dyak girl whilst bathing was taken by a crocodile and a few days after a part of her body enclosed in the Dyak brass stays was discovered. On the 7th I visited Engkilili. At present there is a Chinese Wayang, consisting of seventy artists, performing. In consequence a great number of Chinese have arrived from Kuching and Upper Sarawak. Towards the end of this month two gang robberies took place during the early hours of the morning and the robbers got away with a good deal of property from two shophouses. Two other attempts were frustrated as the inmates of shophouses were keeping guard. On the 26th Mr. J. 8. W. Bean, Director of Agriculture, arrived in the m.l. Para and proceeded to Engkilili in connection with the Marup garden which contains young coffee, pepper and other plants which are for distribution to those who wish to plant. Mr. J. S. W. Bean returned to Kuching on the 30th. The Chinese boys and girls of the Fah Kian School, Lingga, visited Simanggang and gave a display on the football field of physical drill and acrobatic feats. The headmaster, through an interpreter, informed me that the school had only been started ten months ago and most of the children then could not talk Chinese, but talked Dyak. The school children also played a bugle, drum and fife band. SARIBAS. October, 1929. The Court Writer, Betong, reports:— On the 16th Messrs. Reid and Birt of P. W. D. arrived from Kuching by m.l. Elizabeth in order to arrange the building of arrack distillery and bazaar drains. They returned to Kuching on the 18th instant. KALAKA. October, 1929. Mr. G. B. H. Arundell, Acting Assistant District Officer, reports:— The Resident, Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner, reports:— On Monday 4th Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas, accompanied by Abang Bunsu, Native Officer, left for Sebuyow. On Friday morning he left for up river, with Pangiran Azit, Abang Bunsu and Sadji. He visited almost all of the houses in the Ulu Sebuyow and tributaries. The Tuai Rumahs of all those not visited, came to the various houses where he spent the nights. There are very few pepper gardens in the Sebuyow river but some are about to be started. On the whole the rubber gardens seemed fairly well looked after. In Sebuyow river, tributaries, and teblu. Since my last visit to Engkilili there have been no more robberies. This is accounted for by one Noon Tet Choon being sentenced to jail and fine imposed under section 143 I. P. C. Mr. G. K. H. Arundell, accompanied by Penghulu Nyalu and Pengarah Isek, arrived from the Ulu Lemanak on the 13th. Their intention was to walk to the headwaters of the Engkari and so on to the Ulu Batang Ai but they found this impossible on account of the heavy rains and floods. Mr. G. R. H. Arundell returned next day to Saratok via Betong. The following Penghulus visited this station during the month. Lambai of Undup, Suel of Lemanak, Renang of Sada, Linang of Sanjau Lingga, Jaul of Seduku, Sait of Skraug and Angkon of Banting. The Malays and Dyaks have nearly finished planting out their young padi plants and up to date the condition of padi is good. The early planters will start harvesting next month. The new-bazaar shophouses are nearly completed, and it is hoped that building of same will be completed by end of this year. SARIBAS. November, 1929. Mr. R. L. Daubeny, Assistant District Officer, reports:— During the latter part of the month the gang was employed on the extension of the oil palm road, the future settlement for the poorer class of Chinese. Work on the new bazaar is progressing. Tenders were called for clearing around the new distillery. KALAKA. November, 1929. Mr, G. R. H. Arundell, Acting Assistant District Officer, reports:— On 2nd I walked to Penghulu Nyalu’s house by way of Ulu Sebetam and Tuga Prin and stayed the night to. One or two small cases were settled there. The next day we walked to Ulu Kabo and spent fee night in Blaweng's house there. Leaving this house rather late, next morning we went on to Penghulu Undom’s house in the Ulu Krian. A considerable number of people were awaiting me there for various purposes and one or two minor cases were settled. I spent two nights at this Penghulu’s house in order to let a “tongkat” go on to the Layar, Spak, Skrang, etc., to warn people of my coming. On the 6th we left the Krian for the Layar and after walking up the Grinjang we climbed Bukit Medang and dropped down to the Ulu Paku at Nanga Mroh. A great deal of standing billian— nearly all dead — was passed on this road and the Dyaks informed me that there was more than twice the amount fallen to the ground and still unworked. After an early lunch at Mroh we went on and after a short climb came to the boundary of the Paku and Sungei Langit. We arrived at R. Abut in the Sungei Langit at about 2 p.m. and stayed there the night as a feast was in progress “Gawai mali Umai.” The next day, after following the Sungei Langit down stream to its mouth, we crossed the Layar to Lumbong a short way up stream from Nanga Sungei Langit and after crossing a low range of hills dropped down to the Pengirit, a tributary of the Layar. This stream we followed up to a Dyak house from which we climbed to high ridge which we descended to the Ulu Nyelutong—tributary of the Spak and spent the night at the house of Mandal Chaing at Krapa. Here we were told a rather peculiar thing. Apparently a few weeks previously, this house and that at Batu Pesok; and one other had had a very bad omen- “di tinggang bras kuning." 'This necessitated a “Gawai Burong.” This peculiar incident occurred about midday, and as stated above the "bras kuning” tell on three separate houses. It would be rather interesting to know what this really was. The Dyaks themselves say it was caused by the powerful curses of the “munsuh” who are still “pedis ati.” The next night was spent at Penghulu Unji’a house, and the day after we walked to ex-Pcnghulu Labang’s house at N. Plok where we were entertained with the thorough-going hospitality usually found in that river. On the 10th we walked to the Ulu Lemanak from Nanga Entalan. Here bad weather set in and all the rivers came into flood, making the road on to the Engkari impossible, as it consists largely of wading up and down fast running streams. I waited at Nanga Uyau in the Lemanak until the 12th, hoping that the water would go down but was told that to go on was hopeless. I therefore boated down to Engkilili and on 13th reached Simanggang. I arrived back at Saratok on 17th and picked up Mr. Humphreys at Kabong. Mr. Humphreys, after making a thorough examination of the electric light plant here, left again on the 19th, From his remarks hopes may be entertained that Government will take over this plant.
Fourth Division. October, 1929. The Resident, Mr. H. D. Aplin, reports:— I held a meeting of all the Miri tuah-tuah and tried to impress on them the importance of planting padi. In former years the whole of the Pojut plain was under padi, but in recent years only a very little has been planted, the majority of the people preferring to get work with the Sarawak Oil-fields, Limited, and buying their rice in the bazaar. It is too late to do anything this year but an attempt will be made next year to try and persuade the people to make more extensive farms. The erosion by the sea in front of the Residency became very serious during the month and it was decided that the Residency should be moved to Brighton. However, since then, the N.E. monsoon has broken and it has been thought advisable before moving, to see what further action is going to take place. The point on which the Residency is built has been making for years and it is thought that the erosion has been caused by the extraordinary violence and number of S.W. gales that have been experienced this year. From observations that have been made it is thought that under normal conditions, the point should begin to make up again. MIRI. October, 1929. The District Officer, Mr. E. O. Bruce, reports:— Electric light was installed throughout new barracks, and parade ground in front was levelled off. A site has been cleared and levelled for the erection of Municipal garage for hackney cars, which are at present accommodated in shop premises Owing to lack of space. BARAM. October, 1929. The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports:— On 7th I left for Linai overland spending the night in the Dyak house at Brit and reaching Linai on 8th, where the launch was waiting with Wan Taha. On 9th we left for Long Palai and on 10th visited the birdsnest caves at Long Kejin, returning in the afternoon to Long Lama. The Long Pulai people agreed to build a new house at Long Laput if the land was pronounced suitable by the Penghulus, and deposits were placed in the Fort at Long Lama as security. On 28th, accompanied by Wan Taha and Penghulus Tama Wan Baya and Oyong Jok, I left for Long Lama. Next day the Penghulus inspected the land at Long Laput and pronounced it eminently suitable for the new house. The Long Palai people have agreed to build there after the harvest and should they again fail their deposits will be forfeited. It is now four years since they were ordered to build a new house. The birdsnest caves at Long Palai were opened during the month and 151 catties and 9 tahils were collected. From reports received there appear to be excellent prospects of another heavy engkabang crop next year and plans are being considered to ensure its proper collection. BINTULU. October, 1929. The Acting District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports:— I regret to report the death of the late Penghulu Passu's wife during the month. She, like her late husband, was a well-known character in this district. Datu Abang Haji Mohidin was transferred to Sibu and succeeded by Datu Abang Haji Suhaili from that Station. November, 1929. The Resident, Mr. H. D. Aplin, reports:— Mr. S. G. Hansom arrived on the 1st to take up his appointment as Cadet, Miri. All tenders received for the 1930 farms of the Division were forwarded to the Controller of Government Monopolies. They show slight increases on the present rates, with the exception of the Baram gambling which is down by $775. I visited Baram from 11th to 14th and it was reported to me that there was a very good chance of heavy crops of engkabang from the Lunai, Apoh, Tinjar and Baram rivers. Native Officer Wan Taha has been ordered up river and to make a report liter on the prospects. His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Mr. and Mrs. K. H. Gillan, arrived on the 19th by the Straits Steamship Company’s steamer Marudu. His Highness landed at the Residency and proceeded in the evening to Labuan for Limbang. His Highness called in on the 29th for a few hours on his return to Singapore by the same boat, when I went on board to discuss certain matters, principally my proposal that all Government Officers’ quarters should be moved on to the top of the cliffs at Tajong Lobang. Very high tides and heavy seas were experienced during the month and considerable erosion further took place in front of the Residency and Mr. Horton’s bungalow. High water mark is now only two yards from the end of the Residency and at kid 30 yards of the brick path from the porch to. He shore has been washed away and to those who know it, the sun-dial is no more. This has definitely decided the necessity of removing the Residency to another site. On the 5th slight earth tremors were felt in the Miri and Baram districts at 5 p.m. and again at 11.30 p.m. They were not alarming but sufficient to wake most people up. On the 11th submarines L.15 and L.19, under the command of Lieut.-Commanders Meazres and Merniman, arrived for the purpose of bunkering at Lutong. The sea was much too rough to do this and they left for Singapore the same day. I had been notified that four others were coming on different days but owing to the state of the sea, I was informed that they had proceeded direct to Singapore. Captain and Mrs. Le Gros Clark passed through Miri on their way to Limbang and Baram. Whilst at Miri it was reported to him that certain Chinese, mostly fitters employed by the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, were forming an unlawful society under the disguise of learning Wayang performances. Captain Le Gros Clark raided their premises and took away literature to examine and, on receiving his report, proceedings will be taken against those concerned. The District Officer, Mr. E. O. Bruce, reports:- Various improvements and fittings were effected in the new Barracks, which were occupied during the month. The old married quartets will be demolished and form a site on the river bank for proposed new Treasury and Customs Offices. The parade ground was levelled off, and a fence and bridges are being made. The new meat market is completed. BINTULU. November, 1929. The Acting District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports:— General.— Early in the month Messrs. Birt and Reid of the Public Works Department arrived from Kuching. The former came with regard to the erection of waterworks here. The S. Nyabau, beyond Tanjong Batu, was selected and the S. Nigu rejected on the grounds of thre being insufficient water. The S. Nyabau should prove very satisfactory. Mr. Reid came to erect a new light on the mast at Kedurong. A lamphouse was erected on top of the mast and new oil lamp put in but this, however, if not permanent as it is intended to replace this with a Telley lamp. The price of jelutong dropped down from $9 to $8 during the month and 1,357.26 piculs of this commodity were shipped. BARAM. November, 1929. The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports:— On 11th the Resident, Fourth Division, visited the station, returning to Miri on 14th. During his visit, plans were discussed to ensure the proper collection of the expected engkabang crop. Owing to the erosion of the river bank the Native Court house was in danger of falling into the river. It was therefore taken down and is being re-erected at the junction of the Ridan and Kampong Dagang Roads.
Fifth Division. LIMBANG. October, 1929. The Resident, Mr. F. H. Kortright, reports:— The Superintendent of Lands, Mr. C. S. Griffiths, accompanied by Mrs. Griffiths, paid a visit of inspection of his department. This visit was very much appreciated as hitherto, the various land regulations have not been fully understood. The Resident of Brunei paid a visit, when numerous matters were discussed. A contract was inside for the first mile of the proposed road to Brunei, this following to bank of the river to Limpanong, where the old coal wharf will be cut down to form a ferry approach. LAWAS. October, 1929. The Assistant District Officer, Mr. H. L, Daubeny, reports:— Abang Hamdan, Native Officer Sundar, was appointed to Sadong and left by s.s. Margaret.
Kuching Market Price List.