The Sarawak Gazette
SATURDAY. NOVEMBER 1st. 1930.
Marriages.
BLACK—CUNNINGHAM. The marriage took place on Saturday, 4th October at the Presbyterian Church, the Rev. Stephen Band officiating, between Mr. Charles Munro Black, of Miri, Sarawak, youngest son of Mr. Joseph Black, Senior, of Saddill St., Campbeltown, Argyll, N.B., and Miss Jennie Haddon Cunningham, eldest daughter of Mr. and Mrs. R.Y. Cunningham of Bleak House, Campbeltown, Argyll, N.B.
MACKINNON—CUNNINGHAM. The marriage took place on Saturday, 4th October at the Presbyterian Church, the Rev. Stephen Band officiating, between Mr. Donald MacKinnon, of Miri, Sarawak, second son of the late Mr. A. MacKinnon and Mrs. MacKinnon of Campbeltown, Argyll, N.B., and Miss Margarate Cunningham, fourth daughter of Mr. and Mrs. R.Y. Cunningham of Bleak House, Campbeltown, Argyll, N.B.
BATEMAN—REUTENS. On the 14th October, 1930, at St. Joseph's Church, Kuching, Mr. George Harry Bateman, son of Mr. Harry Bateman, to Ernestine Georgina Reutens, daughter of Mr. JOS. P. Reutens.
Deaths.
OWEN.—On 10th September, 1930, at Kuala Lumpur from pneumonia Philip R. Tudor Owen, Assistant-Commissioner of Police, F.M.S., and Straits Settlements Police Service, son of the late Dr. Holgate Owen Manchester, and of Mrs. Owen, 136, Elm Park-mansions, Chelsea, S.W. 10.
SMITH.—At Penang, on 26th October, en route to London from Singapore, William James Haye Smith, Master Mariner, until lately Captain of s.s. Kuching, Sarawak Steampship Co., Ltd.
Local and Personal.
October.
The demolition of the old Police station is at present proceeding. The Customs Department have moved to their new premises, and the Police are temporarily housed in the old jail.
The water front of Kuching now presents a striking appearance, the change during the last year or eighteen months being very marked. During this period "Venice,"— picturesque if insanitary—has disappeared, three new concrete Customs godowns, an imposing Customs Office, and new godowns for Sarawak Steamship Co., have been built on the river embankment; the river wall has been extended, and a large new Government store and concrete coal-bunkering wharf have been constructed on the Gambier Road frontage. Soon the only familiar landmark left in this section will be the old jail and guard-room,— certainly the view as one comes up river would surprise anyone returning to Sarawak after an absence of a year or two.
It has been decided that in future Rejang and district shall be administered from Sarikei. The title of the District Officer, Lower Rejang, has therefore been changed to "District Officer, Matu and Daro," and Mr. J.O. Gilbert, Assistant District Officer, Sarikei, has been appointed to act as Assistant District Officer, Rejang, in addition to his other duties.
The change-over was effected early in the month.
Mr. and Mrs. R. E. Edwards returned from Home leave on October 6th by s.s. Vyner Brooke. Mr. J.D. Girling arrived by the same boat to take up an appointment in the Forestry Department.
Mr. P. Johnson, of Messrs. Perry & Co., is at present in Kuching in charge of the constructional work now proceeding, the contract for which has been undertaken by his firm. It is estimated that the work will be finally completed in a year's time.
At the suggestion of the Datu Shahbandar, the school which is shortly to be built at Ulu Sungei Bedil is to be named "Inche Boyong Malay School." Inche Boyong, a Menangkabu Malay, came to Sarawak in the early days of the Brooke dynasty, and was employed as a Government clerk. He lived at Ulu Sungei Bedil and was always a staunch friend and supporter of the first Rajah's Government. During the Chinese Rebellion, Sir James Brooke took refuge in Inche Boyong's house when forced to fly from the Astana.
We regret to have to announce the death on September 10th last of Mr. Philip R. Tudor Owen, Assistant, Commissioner of Police, F.M.S. and Straits Settlements Police Service.
Older residents in Sarawak will no doubt remember that Mr. Tudor Owen worked at one period for five years on Dahan Estate. During the war Mr. Tudor Owen served with the Buffs and was severely wounded.
We publish this month the first of a series of accounts of Sea Dyak customs taken from the notes of the Very Rev. Mgr. Dunn, Prefect Apostolic, who has kindly consented to allow his writings, the results of years of observation, to be used for the purpose.
Owing to the wide distribution of Sea Dyaks throughout the State, these articles should prove of interest to every student of the folklore of Sarawak. The notes gain an additional value from the fact that they have been compiled by one so eminently well qualified to undertake the task; Mgr. Dunn is generally admitted to be one of the leading authorities on Sea Dyaks, their language and their customs.
Mgr. Dunn, who has worked in Sarawak for fifty years, served for twenty-three years in the Rejang River, mostly at Kanowit, where he first arrived as long ago as 1881.
At this time Mr. Hugh Brooke Low was Resident at Sibu with one assistant. Mr. Domingo, a Eurasian, was in charge at Kapit, and an Indian exile and pardoned mutineer named Abit was in charge of the fort at Kanowit.
Mgr. Dunn was the first missionary to settle in the Rejang.
Dr. E. M. Marjoribanks, Miss M. Tait and Mr. J.R. Combe returned to Sarawak in the s.s. Kuching on October 13th. Dr. Maf- joribanks and Miss Tait both return from England, Miss Tait from furlough and Dr. Marjoribanks from special duty leave. Mr. Combe returns from a spell of convalescent leave spent partly at Brastagi and partly at Fraser's Hill.
Race-week closed on October 2nd with a ball at the Residency, to which the Chief Secretary and Mrs. Boult invited over 140 guests. The Residency gardens were charmingly illuminated, and the band of the Sarawak Rangers played for the dancing.
The ball proceeded well on into the small hours of Friday morning, and provided a fitting close to a very enjoyable race week. Saturday saw the departure of the last outstation visitors, and Kuching resumed its wonted calm.
We hear that owing to the prevailing Trade depression, it has been decided that neither the Regatta nor the Land Sports will be held at Sibu this year.
From Britannia and Ere for August, 1930, the following passage occurs in an article on "Adventure" by Lady Drummond Hay:— "For seven years a Swedish Naturalist, Dr. Eric Mjoberg, lived with dread Dyaks in their primeval jungle haunts."
The part about living with Dyaks may, for all we know, be correct, but we are rather surprised to hear the commodious Museum, Bungalow referred to as a "primeval jungle haunt." Ah, well, we live and learn: in the meantime, three cheers for Brighter Journalism!
The rumour, which we mentioned last month, that Sibu will shortly produce a paper of its own, proves to have been well-founded. We are informed that the first number of this publication, which is provisionally named "Flood Tide," is expected to be out by Christmas, and from, all accounts subscriptions should prove a good investment.
A further announcement in this connection appears on another page.
The Merpati Jepang Malay School at Jalan Patinggi Ali was opened on October 14th with an enrolment of ninety pupils, none of whom had previously attended school.
Mr. H.B. Crocker left for Sibu on October 14th. Mr. Crocker previously spent some days with Mr. G.M. Allman, Acting Director of Agriculture, investigating the possibilities of planting wet padi in the Lundu and Simatan districts. We understand that prospects of opening up padi planting on a large scale in this area appear distinctly favourable.
On October 17th Captain R.E. Borton, late of the s.s. Rajah of Sarawak, arrived in Kuching to take over the command of the s.s. Kuching from Captain W.J.H. Smith.
There have lately been a number of transfers in the staff of the Sarawak Steamship Company. Mr. A. Quinn, who went to the Angby when the Rajah of Sarawak was laid up, is now in the Auby as Second Engineer. Mr. D.F. Mathieson, until lately in command of the Margaret, is now Chief Officer of the Vyner Brooke vice Mr. Everingham, who has gone home on special leave. Mr. Mugg, Second Officer of the Vyner Brooke, has taken charge of the Rajah of Sarawak at Sibu.
We hear that all the parits on Sibu Island are to be filled in.
Comment seems superfluous.
Will the bamboo hedges be cut down, though? Or are the authorities reckoning to save money by relying on the staff of the Roman Catholic Mission to break them down by degrees?	
Mr. and Mrs. Nadig left Sarawak for good by the s.s. Kuching on October 15th. They will both be badly missed at Sibu, where they have lived, with one break, for two and a half years, Mr. Nadig being in charge of the building operations undertaken by Messrs. Gammons Limited.
A farewell makan besar in Mr. and Mrs. Nadig's honour was given at the Island Club, Sibu, on October 15th. Over thirty guests were present, and a most enjoyable evening was spent. The grounds of the club were illuminated and the building itself decorated with flags and coloured bunting. Dancing continued until a late hour,—from what we can gather it continued for some time after the ladies had left! Community singing concluded a very cheery evening.
On October 19th Mr. P.M. Adams arrived in Kuching to take over the affairs of the First Division from Mr. J.C. Swayne, who has been appointed to act as Chief Secretary during Mr. F.F. Boult's absence on furlough. Mr. Boult is due to leave Singapore by the Hector, sailing oh 4th November.
We must congratulate Mr. Swayne on his appointment.
A kind of general post is in progress at the moment among officers of the Administrative Service. Mr. Macpherson is temporarily at Mukah, having taken over there from Mr. P.M. Adams. He will in due course hand over the station to Mr. Bruce, as soon as Mr. Bruce is relieved at Limbang by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident, 5th Division, who is due to return from furlough on November 3rd. Mr. Field, of the Customs Department, proceeded to Miri by the Maimuna on October 23rd, and his arrival will release Mr. Aikman, who will revert to the Administrative Service and will go to Kapit as Acting Assistant District Officer in place of Mr. Macpherson. We hear also that Mr. Carpenter, whose leave expires shortly, will, on his return to Sarawak, take over the duties of District Officer, Miri, from Mr. J.G. Anderson, who is due for furlough on December 12th.
Mr. E. Banks, Curator of the Sarawak Museum, left Kuching on October 14th for a collecting expedition in the Batang Lupar and Ulu Ai. Mr. Banks expects to be away for about six weeks and hopes eventually to cross to the Batang Rejang, possibly by way of the Ulu Katibas, which he will reach by an overland walk from the Ulu Ai.
We understand that Mr. Banks' hopes of finding the ruins of any ancient cities during his present trip are not particularly high. However, as we all know, it is possible to see a good many non-existent objects on the morning after a begawai, and if Mr. Banks is lucky enough to strike a good Dyak feast he may yet make a most unexpected contribution to the science of archaeology!
The Administration Report for the State for the year 1929, which was published last month, has now been distributed to all outstations.
The Report makes interesting reading, and records a year of very satisfactory progress in the face of adverse trade conditions.
Mr. A.N. Noble, General Manager of the Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., Mrs. Noble and Miss Jill Noble arrived in Kuching by the Maimuna on October 13th. Mr. and Mrs. Noble, after staying at the Residency and the Astana, left again for Miri by the Maimuna on October 24th.
We understand that this was Mr. Noble's first visit to Kuching; it is seldom enough that we see any members of the staff of the Sarawak Oilfields down here, and we hope, that Mr. and Mrs. Noble may prove to be the first of a long line of visitors from Miri.
Messrs. W. Lowry and B.A. Trechman returned from Home leave by the Vyner Brooke on October 20th. Mr. H. Linton arrived by the same boat to take up an appointment as Quartermaster in the Sarawak Rangers.
Both Mr. Lowry and Mr. Trechman are, we hear, to be stationed in Kuching for the present.
The Beauvais Disaster.
Early on October 5th the news reached us of the appalling disaster to the British Airship R 101. It is not for us to enlarge on this terrible catastrophe, but we are sure that everyone in Sarawak will join with us in paying homage to the many gallant men who met such a tragic death, and in expressing the deepest sympathy with their bereaved relatives.
A tragedy so dreadful and so sudden brings home to each one of us a sense of deep personal loss. Those who died in the R 101 join the countless throng of pioneer Britons whose graves mark the path of progress in every corner of the world. Their liyes were not wasted, and their memory lives for ever.
Obituary.
It is with the greatest regret that we have to record the death of Captain William James Hayes Smith, late of s.s. Kuching which took place on tile night of Sunday, 26th October, in Penang. The news of Captain Smith's death was received as the Gazette was actually going to press, and at the moment, although full, details are not yet available, it is believed that he succumbed to a sudden attack of ptomaine poisoning. Captain Smith's death is the more tragic since he had only recently married and was on his way home on long leave accompanied by Mrs. Smith, who herself has lately been in poor health.
Captain Smith, who was born at Freemantle, Western Australia, on 8th August, 1898, joined the Sarawak Steamship Company Ltd., in April 1926 as Chief Officer of the s.s. Auby. He was promoted to Master of the Auby on 27th March, and was transferred as Master of the Rajah of Sarawak in May of the same year. In March 1928 he was appointed Master of the Kuching, and he remained in that vessel until Captain R.E. Borton took over the command from him on 23rd October, 1930.
Captain Smith's universal popularity needs no com-ment, and his generosity and kindness of heart were known personally to each one of us. The fact that he reached such a high place in his profession at such an early age is sufficient indication of his ability. In Captain Smith we lose not only an officer who was possibly the finest navigator we have ever had in Sarawak, but also a gentleman—and the word is used in its finest sense—whose outstanding qualities were appreciated by everyone with whom he came in contact; Captain Smith's loyalty to his employers was unbounded, and his professional reputation stood everywhere extremely high.
We extend our most sincere condolences both to Captain Smith's widow and to Captain Smith's relations in Australia in their great loss.
As a tribute to Captain Smith's memory the Kuching flaw her flag at half mast on the day on which the news was received.
Clothes and the Woman.
Our Malay correspondent the other day called attention to the interest which is being shown in Malay circles, by a discussion in the Malay papers, in the matter of suggested changes in the clothing of Malay women. Very naturally the opposition to this is considerable and might even become heated were there a real possibility of the change being brought about. It might not be out of the way, therefore, if a contribution of European opinion on the subject were made, a contribution we are more than willing to make since it may help to prevent the extension of one of the features of modern western civilization which all right thinking men and women deplore. Unless it be the results of disease or drink, no more shocking change has been wrought by the West upon the East than that embodied in the introduction of western clothing in eastern lands. The fell conception which has substituted for the kimono in Japan, or the graceful tunic and full trousers in China, our appalling stovepipe trousers and tight jackets—generally in the drabbest and most sordid of colours—which has placed upon the heads of millions those unparalleled monstrosities, the bowler hat or the peaky blinder cap in lieu of traditional head dressing or covering customs, is one of the features of Western civili-zation which constantly remind us that whatever virtues we may have, we have faults so appalling as almost to place us beyond the pale.
Before the Westerner, especially the modern Westerner, came East the Eastern lands were the repository of artistic drapery daily exemplified in the covering and adornment of their peoples, illustrating that inherent principle in beauty—the principle of the flowing line. But during most of our existence we in the west have deliberately set about to destroy, check or maim that principle, the hatred of it reaching its height in the Victorian era, which for morals and clothes was possibly the ugliest period any great people has been doomed to live through. Those awful clothes, and to an extent those more terrible morals, we in due time took with us on our wanderings and placed before an unwitting, unrealizing, imitative East.
If the women of Malaya are desirous of copying the women of the West we implore them ere they cast aside their graceful robes and simple adornments, to search out at our libraries and museums those pictures of western femininity—and indeed masculinity, for in these matters we are all to blame—which show the height of fashion twenty-five and fifty years ago. And, as they contemplate with a shudder those grotesque hourglass, pinched in and puffed out, insanitary, over-adorned and pork-pie halted figures, let them resolve once for all that the copying of Western clothes shall be their last resort before race suicide. There has been for us one gleam of hope. The women of to day have cast aside so many clothing conventions that they have approached a condition of natural beauty. It has been a revolution and it might yet have saved us but already, alas, there are rumours and signs of a gradual abandonment of the ground won by daring and determined fight and of a hankering for those shackles which so sadly      married their mothers' and grandmothers' lives.  Still, we appeal to them to do what they can to preserve the women of Malaya from the curse of Western clothing. We have done many wrongs as a people, oftentimes from the best of motives; let us refrain from this ultimate disgrace, so that when the swing of the pendulum puts the East again on the top and the West again underneath, our successors will at least not have it hurled in their teeth that they debauched to the last limit the fine appreciation in the human mind of the beauty of draperies. —Singapore Free Press.
‘Hands Off the Great Open Spaces, Please!'
The news that there is shortly to be a series of talks entitled ‘Edges of the World' has caused quite a flutter of apprehension in the Ladies' Section of the I.N.K. Club. You all know the I.N.K. Club, at which novelists meet over weak coffee and pink cakes in a Bloomsbury basement to praise each other's work.
The news that men who really live and work in the Great Open Spaces are coming to the microphone to describe what lite is actually like there, reads, to some of the members of the I.N.K., like the writing on the wall. For the ladies of the club (and several of the gentlemen, too) have for years looked upon these same Open Spaces as their particular property. For years and years they have written about them without ever having been there, and now the real experts are going to crop up and knock the bottom out of the market. Well, you see what I mean!
I have never been to the Edges of the World but I have, in railway trains, read a number of novels and magazine stories written by lady members of the I.N.K. Club which had these Edges for their setting. I have loved and hated, suffered and rejoiced, sweated and taken my esse with the lean- jawed, clean-limbed, well-tubbed pukka sahib* with simple^ninds, whose daily lives form their subject. After reading several hundreds of these yarns, I drew up, in a fanciful moment, a sort of time-table-cum-diary for the use of a pukka sahib.
A nice full day, you see, for an empire Builder, but I am afraid that with the rest of the fiction-reading public I am doomed, by the forthcoming series of talks, to be disappointed. 
The schedule outlined above is, I admit, not very stimulating. It is even depressing and probably implies that the lease of the Great Open Spaces, so long held by the Sex Novelists, should now be assigned to the Realists. These Realists form another strong section of the I.N.K. Club. They have a permanently blighted outlook on life (which they call Life) and can make even a Bank Holiday crowd seem grey, sordid, and uninspiring. I believe the Realists would welcome a slap at the Spaces. They have done their best with Chelsea, the Slums, and the War—just let them get at the Coral Island and the Jungle, they'll make all the palm-trees sickly and diseased, strew the foreshore and the nullah with empty salmon-tins, and sprinkle the Beautiful but Foolish English Girl with warts and crowsfeet. They'll see to it that the pukka sahibs become consumptive and lose their tan, that the once lean jaws grow puffy, and everyone's motives deteriorate.
The whole situation is fraught with tragic possibilities. Is the B.B.C. doing the right thing in broadcasting the unalloyed truth about the Great Open Spaces? Savoy Hill is generally so scrupulous —too scrupulous, some might say—about hurting the feelings of the listening public—and now it proposes, with a series of rough blows, to shatter the dreams of twelve million avid readers of fiction. 
People —and here a tear trembles in my voice! people loved the Great Open Spaces as they encountered them in the pages of ‘Desert Sweethearts,' ‘Jungle Honeymoon,' ‘Stark Courtship,' and ‘Her Tiger Man'—loved them vicariously, it must be said, for, although it might be all very well on paper, it was a bit rough; some of the things that went on there would have been considered rather outré in Cheltenham. Something must be done to give them back their dreams. The talks are arranged and in print so there's nothing to be done there. The best thing to do—aye, and do quickly—would be to remove from their control of the Great Open Spaces, the quiet, unemotional, Edgar Wallace-reading men who carry on our Empire and substitute instantly, perhaps from the ‘crowds' who haunt our film studios a complete new set of lean-jawed, clean-limbed, well- tubbed pukka sahibs, with veined hands and primitive eyes, supply them with few beautiful but foolish English girls to make a havoc of their lives, and then let them come home and talk about it every Saturday night until further notice. These talks would prove either the making or the ruin of our broadcasting system.—J. B. Harker, Radio Times.
The Rejang Rampant. AN OLD-TIMER'S EPIC.
The Old Salt sat in the Island Club, and wagged his hoary head,
"Those were the days, Sir, those were. (Hic) Those were the days," he said.
His eye was dim, his throat was moist, a tear stole down his cheek,
"I could spin you a yarn of the Rejang, Sir,"—he blew his mottled beak,
"I could spin you a yarn of the Rejang that would lift the hair from your pate.
Another whisky? Thank you, yes, if it's not too late."
"Do you think I could tell a lie, Sir?—'Cos I can't," said the grand old man.
"I know the Rejang River from Sarikei to Bukit Lan.
From Bukit Lan to Song, Sir, and the shoals round Kapit, too.
I know the seas you can get there, of these I'm telling you.
Oh, we left Sibu in the morning, Sir (the Agent was on board),
With a ‘Yeo-heave-ho and cheerily lads,—let go!' the bosun roared.
The weather looked bad down river, the Igan was all a-chop,
As I touched the telegraph handle, Sir, there were icicles on the top.
There was snow on Monkey's Island, and hoarfrost on the glass,
And loose on the wheel-house floor—things had come to such a pass
—was the mercury running wild, Sir, lapping the gunner's feet,
The weather was blowing up so bad that it had the barometer beat.
By the time we got to Durin we were rolling thirty-eight,
So we battened down the passengers and jettisoned half the freight.
The Agent we put in irons just inside the Fo'c'sle head,
His language was that ghastly, Sir, it turned me white and red,
What?—How could it blow so hard, you ask, a hundred miles from the sea?
Just half a moment: who's spinning this yarn?— You, is it, or me?
I've sailed the South Pacific, Sir, and I know what combers are,
But I've never seen anything like the waves we met at Tanjong Pah.
We were making half a knot against a current of twenty-two,
The coal was getting very low and would hardly see us through,
The storm still furiously raged, the clouds were low and black,
And a flash of lightning shattered our mizzen and set the fore-royal aback.
I've never seen such weather, Sir, not even off Cape Horn,
The Mate, the Cook, the crew and the cat were wishing they'd never been born.
Aloud I conned the ship, Sir, and faced the raging gale,
Alone I brailed the fore clue-garnets, reefed and took in sail.
Alone I stoked the furnaces and watched the engines, too,
Alone I braved the elements and brought the good ship through.
At last we made Kanowit, and I'm telling you the truth, Half the bazaar and the Court Writer were up on the Courthouse roof. We could not land our passengers, nor even drop the mails, Why, one of the local launches was lifted right over our rails! Dumped upon our deck, it was, abaft the galley door, It squashed the cook and crushed the cat and injured many more. We ploughed for five hours full ahead, with every ounce of steam, Yet when I took a bearing, Kanowit was still abeam. I dropped three hooks for a breather; the bearings were running hot, And the Engineers were drink or dead, all the blinking lot, But when we started off again, we found our rudder gone, So I spliced some planks to the bosun's bed and we went rolling on. We crawled past Song on Sunday night (we sailed on Tuesday morning) And anchored safe in Kapit lake as Wednesday was dawning." The Old Salt sat in the Island Club and piped his boozy eye, "Those were the good days" (hie) he said, "The good old days gone by. The old breed vanished with the ships, you don't find such men to-day. And seamanship is dead, Sir.—Another whisky, did you say?" Clothes and the Man.
In another column we reprint a leading article from the Singapore Free Press on the subject of "modernizing" ugh! the graceful clothes now worn by Malay ladies. We also print a letter on the subject of men's clothes which has been received from a local correspondent.
Any attempt to tackle this problem is likely to be met with a concerted groan and a cry of "Oh, Lord! the old, old, story! When the Editor can't think of anything else, he starts some fatuous argument on the reform of men's dress!" That the argument for reform in men's dress in the tropics is not fatuous will be apparent to everyone who on a sweltering evening has solemnly had to clothe himself in thick black trousers, a board-like shirt, stiff collar and possibly even a black coat, and all for the joy of eating at someone else's table. The pleasures of social intercourse are for many bachelors far outweighed by the martydom of clothes which must at present accompany them, and we know of several gentlemen who make a point of declining almost all evening invitations for this special reason.
The arguments put forward by our correspondent merit serious consideration, and if his letter, which goes fully into the subject, succeeds in making any impression at all, then the Gazette's space and his own time will not have been wasted. And even our most hostile critics can scarcely accuse us of starting a "silly season" topic, since it might be argued with a good deal of truth that in any tropical country which countenances the wearing of such absurd and insanitary garments silliness is not confined to any special season. We are silly all the time.
Hawkers.
For some time now there has been a campaign is Singapore condemning street hawkers, and urging that some notion should be taken to abolish hawking licences. The chief reason put forward for this recommendation is the fact that street food-stalls are a menace to public health; the question of the din created by hawkers' cries is also brought forward, however, and that this latter complaint is no trivial one will be heartily endorsed by all who are unfortunate enough to work in any of the Government Offices in Kuching, abutting Court House Road. The Singapore Free Press, in a leading article, roundly states that hawkers in residential districts are "a most damnable nuisance," and this view has our complete concurrence.
There is another type of hawker, though, who is just as much a nuisance as the itinerant food vendor and just as great a danger to the health of the community. This is the person who steps, across the five-foot-way is you are passing, "hawks" raucously and with gusto and then proceeds to spit vigorously on the pavement. The prevalence of this beastly habit among certain classes of Asiatics is very distressing; those who have occasion to make frequent journeys in Chinese launches, in which they sit cheek-by-jowl with Chinese coolies for several hours on end, will testify to the real annoyance caused by this most unpleasant sound. Such a journey can well be made a martyrdom by "hawking" alone.
Expectoration, when necessary, can always be performed quietly and noiselessly. Apparently, though, the Asiatics of the cooly class get no fun out of spitting unless the action is accompanied by a vigorous and prolonged "hawk," and it is this which makes the habit such a loathsome one. The dangers of spitting in public places need not be enlarged upon, — they ate the subject of propaganda on the part of Health Departments all over the world. "Hawking," though, in this sense is quite as damnable a nuisance as the noises complained in the Free Press, but alas! It cannot be cured by the mere withdrawal or abolition of a licence. Rabelais describes Master Janotus de Bragmardo as clearing his throat in the following manner:—"Hem, hem, hem! Haikhash. hem! hashchehhawksash. Qzrchremhemhash!" Not bad effort, certainly; but Master Janotus could have learnt a lot from any Chinese cooly.
"Flood Tide."
PUBLICATION OF A SIBU JOURNAL.
"We have been informed that it has been decided to publish a paper from Sibu provisionally named "Flood Tide." The Editor—who incidentally will be an Editress—wishes to appeal for contributions and has forwarded the following announcement:—
Contributions of a scurrilous nature will be given preference; though the journal, while providing any amount of moral sympathy, does not guarantee financial assistance in case of actions for libel.
All contributions will be published anonymously, but should always be accompanied by a card or whatnot giving the name and address of the contributor.'
We scorn dates and refuse to be tied to conventions. Hence, this journal will be no weekly, monthly or quarterly effusion, but will appear whenever the Editor thinks fit.
Further particulars will be promulgated later. For the present, contributions, applications for advertisement space, etc., should be addressed to Mr. W. F. Dick, Sibu.
More Bilge about the East.
THOSE TRAGIC WIVES AGAIN!
By a careful study of the Home Press the oldest European resident of Malaya can always learn new facts about the country of his adoption. Thus, if he chanced to read an article by Mr. William. J. Makin, described as Novelist and Traveller, he would learn that in the "City of Despair," which is none other than our old friend Singapore—"the most desperate of all are the White women. A holiday in England every other year is a necessity to women who have all the blood sucked out of them in the steaming heat of the tropics. Their faces, as pallid as a sheet of paper, tell their own tale. And nerves have been frayed almost to hysteria in that heat." These, surely, are our old friends the Tragic Wives again. "One will see them," says Mr. Makin, "Rolling in rickshas and being taken to the inevitable ten party. There they will gossip with their kind, all indulging in pathetic pretence." The pretence is because that in a time of rubber slump—when "Singapore is the most mournful city in the world" — the white men and   their wives do not find it possible to get away. "They will." says Mr. Makin, "be sitting in Raffles Hotel drinking gin pahits and gazing wistfully across the bay to where the lean liners with steam up are fluttering the Blue Peter and ready to sail for Home. Another gin pahit. When rubber goes down the consumption of gin goes up in Singapore."—Straits Times.
Shorts.
Shorts versus Longs is an old, old story. It sounds a little mysterious, but, being interpreted, it just means Shorts versus long trousers.
The point is apt to be argued anywhere and under any conditions. Ought Shorts to be worn at tennis, for instance? There was quite a furore when the first bold spirit appealed on the tennis courts of the Sarawak Club so-clad.
That was some years ago and times and opinions change, but those particular Shorts were very unpopular. The fact that they were blue serge Shorts, and not white ones, probably had a good deal to do with the fact that they were not accepted as haut ton.
Now-a-days, Shorts on the tennis court are as much a la mode, as any old Shorts have become on board the P. & O. ships. But Heavens, what a change! Fancy anyone appearing on the deck of the old "Moldavia" twenty years ago in Shorts!
Shorts for tennis have much to recommend them; and, accompanied by snappy white stockings with that cute little red tassel coyly lurking under the turnover at a dollar something in the bazaar, all in they might be worse. And, breath it softly, they are very much cheaper in the long run than the long ‘uns.

But after all, it is no so much their use in the more civilized regions that forms the subject of most of the discussion, nor is it in Kuching that this particular war rages the most furiously. No, it is in the Outstations where the respective merits of Shorts and Longs are argued to conclusion. The fact that the conclusion is usually forgotten next morning matters nothing.
Usually, it is he of the Shorts who begins the argument. He goes through all the well-known points in which the truncated are reputed to have the advantage over the untruncated.
"Much cooler, y'know; air blowing about you all the time, eh; far more hygienic, too, what. Y'get more freedom about your knees, ha! Freedom. By Jove, that's the word; freedom! Striding through the boundless, gigantic jungle, untrammelled by those long wet trammelling extensions flapping around your ankles, trammelling every step you take. No, No; Give me freedom of limb in the boundless gigantic jungle!Boy!!"
An enthusiast, obviously, with a touch of the poetical about him, though his vocabulary is a trifle limited.
The other party to the argument, somewhat dazed by this totally unexpected bombardment of eloquence, is only revived by the last word of the panegyric.
They look at one another, and nod.
"S' rupa tadi, boy."
Then, after a long pause, the protagonist of the trousers begins to state his case.
"That's all very well, but what about the sun if you happen to be travelling in an open boat? How about the long lush blades of "lalang" that slash your untrammelled knees like so many razhor blades? What about the untrammelled mosquito, and all that, who goes for the only places on your untrammelled knees that the dam lush "lalang" has left alone? Oh, hang it! Rott! You and your boundlesh gigantic ankles, and your long wet travelling jungle flapping around your confounded untrammelled shorts. Besides, wha' th' deush does Treasury wallah know 'bout jungles, eh?"
"Knows s'much as bloomin' Shipping bloke, I sh'pose! Boy!!
"Jush one f' th' road, ol' filer?
Mainly About Nothing.
We are asked to contradict the rumour that the Chief Health Officer is to be appointed Keeper of the Swans.
When the Swans for the Museum gardens eventually arrive, will the picturesque annual ceremony of '‘Swan-upping," as practised on the Thames, be instituted in Kuching? In this case, who will be the official Swan-uppers? In England, as far as we recollect, they are certain officers of His Majesty's household, assisted by some Thames watermen: and if we are not mistaken, the Dean of St. John's College, Oxford, has some traditional connection with the ceremony.
Apparently the Commissioner of Police, among others, has changed his title, though we cannot remember any notification in the Government Gazette to this effect. 
DEAR SIR, Before anything I plead you to forgive my boldness but beeing a stamp collector as I am, I knew you maybe could take the trouble of sending me some of that Nation.
I have not to said that if yourself or any of your friends wish to have some stamps from here I shall be very hight honoret to send then.
Well Sir I now want to thank you and respectfully be retired,
CRISTOBAL RODRIGUEZ SANCHEZ.
No doubt the Jefe is "bight honoret" at this most unexpected promotion. We can but hope that it is not the prelude to his respectfully being retired !
While on the subject of "the Force," it is curious to reflect on the universal appeal which a Policeman's headgear has for those who are, well; in a slightly merry condition. Doubtless there is a real if undefinable attraction in the London Bobby's helmet; it is large, solid, conspicuous, and at a pinch makes a very tolerable substitute for a Rugger ball. And its capture is an act calling for considerable skill and daring. In fact, it has most of the elements of a desirable prize. But it must be admitted that the news that the turbans of Sarawak constables also possess these peculiar attributes came as a distinct surprise.
At midnight on October 9th an elderly and usually respectable Chinese gentleman, who had obviously been looking on the wine when it was very red indeed, approached a sepoy constable on duty and without more ado snatched off his turban and made off with it. He was duly captured and arrested, and in Court next day when asked the reason for his action, pleaded complete oblivion. With a happy smile on his face he paid up his fine, no doubt reflecting that his exploit had been well worth the money.
Well, well, East and West are not so very different after all. We would like to know whether the police will go batless on the night of the next Kuching Regatta; since this is our local boat-race night, it would seem to be a reasonable precaution !
A correspondent sends us the following advertisement which appeared in a motoring journal:—
30.98 O.H.V., f.w.b., 2-seater torpedo with flared wings, special well-base wheels, oversize tyres, just repainted scarlet, has not been over driven, starter and lights working well, Triplex V screen, Sex-appeal of exhaust note alone well worth the money, price 185 guineas; terms or exchanges.
That's nothing, he goes on to say. You ought to hear the exhaust note of my 60.110 H.P. "Fairy" model Freud coupe'!
On another page we reproduce half a column of balderdash which the Straits Times discovered in an English newspaper. It is an account of conditions in Malaya written by a gentleman who describes himself as a "traveller and novelist," but who might more aptly have written under the nom-de-plume of Ananias. Now the astounding part about such drivel is that not only do a certain class of people at home avidly gulp it down, but that some periodicals, being wise to this fact, actually pay good money for the stuff! Not a very flattering tribute to our intelligence as a race. However, since some of our readers may care to profit by this chance of making a little easy cash, we are submitting below the beginning of a story which might start them off in the right direction:—
"The Resident stepped ashore from his smart, white-painted launch onto the crazy' iron-wood wharf. Followed by a guard of Dyak police he walked straight to the house of Bartlett, his District Officer. As he climbed the stairs lending to the verandah his sensitive nose wrinkled in a grimace of disgust and he brought out a silk handkerchief fragrant with eau-de-cologne, which he pressed to his face. For a moment he hesitated, flicking one shining riding- boot with his whip  ; then, his finely-chiselled lips set in a grim line, his eyes hard, he strode into Bartlett's room.
"The place was furnished with only the barest necessities, and bad obviously not been dusted that morning. On a mat stood a sewing-machine and some strips of gaily-coloured cloth; beside these lay an open accordion, and there were traces on the surrounding planks of a plentiful use of betel-nut. On the deal table in the middle of the room a bottle of square-face gin lay on its side, the liquor dripping onto the floor, where it had formed a little pool.  And stretched in a long chair, clad only in a sarong, unshaved, unwashed even, his trembling fingers clutching an empty glass, lay Bartlett, the District Officer of Sepak Bantat. From outside came the thud of tom-toms and the thin wail of a Malay chant, mid the house was suddenly flooded with the sickly-sweet smell of Melati blossoms. A whiflow bird piped harshly to its mate, and the snarls of an orang-utan resounded in the nearby trees. The surrounding jungle—poisonous, dark, mysterious, was alive with noises.
"In spite of himself the Resident shuddered. He contemplated the prostrate figure in the chair. So this was what the solitude and monotony of an outstation had brought Bartlett down to. This was what the rotten East had made of the smart, clean-limbed young Englishman who had come here straight from Home two years ago.
And so on, and so on, ad nauseam. Only pile it on thick enough and the tripe is bound to sell. No, we make no charge for this hint to budding "novelists and travellers." They are welcome to it gratis.
Old Sarawak.
FROM THE CASE BOOK, 14TH OCTOBER, 1849.
No. 2, MR. PARR V. DOBY RAMAT.
Mr. Parr states that about a fortnight ago he met Doby Ramat at the Ledah Tanah road going out shooting and wearing one of his (Mr. Parr's) flannels.
Doby Ramat acknowledged the fault but said in his defence that on the morning in question his own jackets were all wet and he therefore put on Mr. Parr's.
The Court pointed out to Ramat the seriousness of the offence, and decided that Ramat should pay a fine of ten rupees.
8TH AUGUST, 1851.
Threatening to knock his teeth down his throat, and abusive language. 
Proved, and defendant ordered to pay 3 reals.
From THE COURT MINUTES, 28TH JULY, 1852
On proposal of Captain B, Brooke, Charles Antony Johnson, Esq. (H. H. the late Rajah—Ed.) was requested to undertake the duties of a Magistrate and was accordingly appointed and sworn this day.
J. Fox George Ruppell.
FROM THE DIARY OF Sir CHARLES BROOKE,
AUGUST, 1854.
As has already been mentioned, the most influential and distinguished of the Lingga population were two old Malay ladies, who had held the government there for many years. When I first arrived they paid me frequent visits, and their powers of conversation were so hopelessly unlimited as to become extremely disagreeable and tedious; occasional naps being the only relief during their stay. On re-awaking every time, their tongues were invariably moving; and whether awake or asleep, it was quite immaterial to them.
Their remarks generally had reference to the people on the coast, on whom they made sweeping claims as slaves and followers, to the number of many thousands. In fact, they led one to suppose the whole country belonged to them, with every one in it. These old lasses, however, were not without some sterling qualities besides the tongue; for on more than one occasion, when the Saribas forces had been making an attack on Banting, they were to be seen dressed in men's clothes, with sword and spears in hand, commanding the people, and working as hard as any of them. But they were only endurable while such disturbed times lasted.
Sea-Dyak Customs.
THE CHANTING OF THE MENGAP.

The Mengap Bungai Taun, the "Chant of the Flowers of the year," is a sacred chant used by the Sea-Dyaks on the occasion of, a sacrificial feast in order to invoke a blessing on the harvest. It covers the whole field of Sea-Dyak mythology and introduces almost all the Sea-Dyak gods; its chief value from an ethnographical point of view is that it touches upon and sometimes minutely describes the religious and social customs of the race.
It is chanted by four men on the eve of a begawai (feast), one acting as leader, the remainder as chorus. It commences towards evening and lasts throughout the night, and often far into the following morning.
The performers are generally dressed in long, flowing robes and carry staves in their hand. The chant commences in a private room of a long house, but after a while the chanters emerge into the ruai, or common hall, where all the guests are seated; with measured tread they continue the chant; beating time with their staves on the flood and walking slowly round and round the pagar api. This consists of pole with a basket of charms at its foot, the whole being covered in with a woven blanket.
The subject of the mengap is the first coming of Sengalang Burong and other gods to a feast celebrated in the dim past by the first Sea-Dyaks; Sengalang Burong, it may be mentioned, is the ancestor of the Dyak war god, and also of the omen birds. A fine white and brown hawk bears his name.
The chant is lengthened out by continued repetitions and minute descriptions of fabulous countries in the sky and earth through which the ghostly travellers, Sengalang Burong and his fellow gods, pass on their way to and from the feast.
The first section of the mengap, which is reproduced below in English and Romanized Dyak, contains a description of twilight falling, and is an excellent example of the real poetry of nature that seems to be inborn in the Sea-Dyaks.
First Division News.
September, 1930.
Extracts from the First Divisional Reports for September, 1930, by Mr. J.C. Swayne, Acting Resident:—
Six criminal and three civil cases came before the Court. Three cases were concerned with illegal trafficking in opium and in each case the accused were convicted. A serious case of house-breaking by night was heard and three men were sentenced to terms of imprisonment.
The 26th, His Highness the Rajah's birthday, was observed as a public holiday and the offices were closed. A ceremonial parade was held at Fort Margherita at which His Highness the Tuan Muda took the salute. Long Service medals and other decorations were presented after the parade. The Autumn Meeting of the Sarawak Turf Club took place on the 27th and 29th of the month and was attended by the majority of outstation officers.
A meeting of the Regatta Committee was held on the 5th and arrangements were made to hold a Regatta on 1st January, 1931. Mr. W.S. B. Buck was appointed Honorary Secretory and Mr. W.J. Chater Honorary Treasurer.
H.M.S. Herald paid her final visit to Kuching for this year on 7th September and the landing party who have been engaged in surveying the river rejoined the ship.
The Board of Visitors inspected the jail, hospital, leper and pauper, camps, and reported they were satisfied with the conditions seen.
A meeting of Padungan landlords, who appear to have difficulty in recovering rents, was held in this office and the Court procedure explained. I paid the usual routine visits to Bau and Sadong during the month. Simanggang road has now reached the banks of the Sadong river and motor cars have already driven through.	
I regret to report the death of Haji Yoh daughter of Datu Bentara occurred on the 15th of the month.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
September, 1930.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. W.S.B. Buck, reports:—
Judicial.—There were only two criminal cases which call for comment in the District Court this month, both  cases of theft by old offenders. Sentences of one year and six months' imprisonment were imposed. Civil claims maintained their high overage.
A meeting was called to discuss the question of distress for rent on the 23rd instant, a number of Chinese landlords haying petitioned for the question to be clarified.
Staff.— Mr. P. Murray-Scott left Kuching to take up his appointment at Bau on the 15th instant.
District Court clerk Aboi returned from leave on 28th.
A short trip was made early in the month to Kampong Baroh in company with the Director of Public Works, Captain Lowe, and the Executive Engineer, Simanggang Road Construction, Mr. Binnie.
Opportunity did not permit of Batu Kawa being visited during the month but is hoped that a visit will be made shortly.
Coroner's Inquests.—An unknown Chinese was found dead on 18th and burial ordered, there being no signs of foul play.
On 28th the Police reported a Chinese male having been found hanging at the 12½  mile and inquiries were made resulting in a verdict of suicide.
LAND OFFICE.
September, 1930.
The Land Officer, Mr. A.K. Brown, reports:—
A suggestion was received from the Secretary for Chinese Affairs that a reserve might be demarcated in the Samarahan district for padi planting by Chinese; the possibility of this is now being investigated by the Land Officer at the Simanggang Road.
With regard to the Simanggang Road Land Reserves the following is the gist of Mr. T.M. Griffiths' reports:  A pepper reserve containing 68 lots of approximately 6 acres each has been rentised and pegged at the 23rd mile, and a beginning has been made in the work of demarcating a padi reserve at Sungei Serin for Chinese.
The land through which the road passes from the 22nd mile to the 40th mile (Sadong River) appears to be admirably suited for pepper and it is proposed to establish another reserve at Bukit Keroh (30th mile).
As there is a section of the inhabitants of this region who profess a desire to plant coffee, a reserve will be made at the 23rd mile to accommodate them.
Shop lots have been laid out both at the 15th mile and at Sungei Serin, and will be alienated in due course. These shop lots are 18 feet wide by 100 feet long.
Upper SARAWAK.
September, 1930.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. P. Murray-Scott, reports:—
General.—On the 15th I arrived from Kuching to relieve Mr. Arundell. I took over Lundu on the 19th having left for that station on the 17th. We returned on the 20th and I took over Bau on the following Monday. At both stations the books, cash, and opium stocks were correct.
Courts.—Only two criminal cases were heard in the Magistrate's Court, and none in the District Court. Both resulted in convictions, Voon Miaw being sentenced to eight days' imprisonment for making a false claim in Court, and Sman, Javanese, to threemonths under section 379 I.P.C, for theft of two bicycles. There were several civil claims.
Prisons.—Prisoners averaged 32.3 and were employed on the general upkeep of the station.
Health.—Bucket system latrines are now in use in Lundu, removal being carried out by contract as from 8th September.
Rainfall.—Highest recorded within 24 hours— 1.08 inches on 17th September. Total for the month— 5.86 inches.
Gold Returns.—137.34 ounces of actual gold were obtained by The Bidi Gold Mining Company for the month of August, 1930.
SADONG. September, 1930.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports:—
Courts.—In the Lower Court very few cases were heard during the month and only two call for mention. Bujang bin Tambi was fined $20 under section 352 and Sebli bin Kumbang was sentenced to three months' imprisonment in default of payment of $50 brians as ordered by the Native Court.
P.W.D.—The contractors of the Gunong Ngili- Saging Road report that the road is now completed. Owing, however, to my having been away since the 17th of the month a final inspection has not yet been carried out.
Native Officer Abang Samsudin reports that he has found an easier way over Bukit Tenabar on the proposed Tabekang-Simanggang Road. I propose to inspect this part of the road on my next trip up river.
The whole area of the new padang on the down river side has now been tebassed and is now being cleared of logs and stumps.
Medical.—At the Government Hospital four patients were admitted and seven discharged.
At the Dispensary 130 out-patients made 250 attendances for treatment.
Twenty-three N.A.B. injections were given of which sixteen were for yaws, six for muli and one for syphilis.
The accounts show revenue $156.50 and expenditure, including salaries mid rations, $212.06.
Travelling.— On the 17th, accompanied by Mr. R.D. Binnie, Executive Engineer, P.W.D.; I left by m.l. Vava for Ampungan. I had not returned at the end of the month.
Agriculture — Mr. G.St.F. Dare visited the station on the I5th, staying only a few hours.
Prison.—The health of the prisoners was good. The prison gang averaging 12.2 was employed on general upkeep.
General.—On the 15th Mr. J.C. Swayne, Acting Resident, First Division, accompanied by Mr. R.D. Binnie, arrived from Kuching by the m.1. Lucile. All outstanding matters were given attention and the Acting Resident left for Kuching on the 17th instant.
Sadong Collieries Report.
September, 1930.
The Blacksmith Mine was completely worked out and dismantled on the 2.5th. The Buffalo Mine, which was its return air outlet, is now the sole inlet for. No. 8 Mine, which are ventilated together mechanically, and will both be exhausted of coal towards the end of next year
The rainfall for the month was 2.67 inches.
Cricket.
KUCHING vs. THE OUTSTATIONS.
If the above match, which took place on Sunday, 28th September, proved a trifle one-sided, it was possibly none the less enjoyable on that account. The Kuching side was about the best available, but the absence of several bright particular stars sadly handicapped those stalwarts who represented the hinterland.
His Highness the Tuan Muda, who led the Outstation team, performed a captain's first duty to his side by winning the toss, and elected to bat.
Barcroft and Andreini opened the innings but were both dismissed when the total had reached 11, Andreini being beaten all the way by a fine ball from Banks. P.M. Adams then helped Aplin to add 20 before being caught. Daly failed but Summers stayed with Aplin to raise the score to 65. The "tail" failed to wag, however, and the side was out for a total of 70.
Aplin was by far the highest scorer with 27, and he made his runs in excellent style.
When the Outstations took the field the barrenness of the land speedily became evident, for the side was disastrously short of bowlers.
Bates, who opened the innings with Moir, managed to get himself out to a ball that bounced twice before trickling onto his wicket, but Moir, Mace and Reid soon put the issue beyond doubt and the innings closed for 112.
Mention should be made of Andreini's good fielding and especially of his fine running catch on the boundary, which disposed of Mace; a notable effort.
Mention must also be made of the hero who, standing at point, risked life and limb to stop a particularly hot one which came to him direct from the bowler's hand; nor must we omit all notice of the wily trundler who completely disconcerted the batsman facing him by bowling four consecutive wides. There is no doubt at all that surprise is one of the most valuable weapons in a bowler's armament.
Perhaps the most important result of the game was that everybody had a bang with the bat and more than half the people taking part in the match had a try with the ball, so it is to be hoped that everyone was happy.
Before the game began His Highness the Tuan Muda stated that this was to be his very last appearance on the field of cricket. We can only hope that when the time comes we may be able to persuade His Highness to reverse his decision.
The Sarawak Chinese Athletic Meeting 1930.
A NOTABLE DAY'S SIGHT...
On Saturday, the 11th October, a Sports Meeting open to all Chinese resident in Sarawak was held for the first time on the Police Parade ground in Kuching. The field was tastefully decorated with flags and bunting, while a full-length programme of popular music selections was rendered by the Hokien School Band in conjunction with the Midnight Syncopated Wanderers, the latter with their jazz instruments. In the early part of the afternoon it rained heavily, but fortunately it stopped just before the time when the sports were scheduled to commence. In spite of the soft ground the meeting was a great success, and competition in all the events was very keen throughout. Besides the thousands of interested spectators a great number of Europeans and most of the Datus responded to the invitations of the Organizing Committee; The spectator's included the Dayang Anne, the Chief Secretary and Mrs. Boult, the Chief Justice, the Acting Resident, the Secretary for Chinese Affairs and other Heads of Government Departments. The Dayang Anne kindly distributed the prizes to the respective winners, after which Mr. Tan Sum Guan, speaking on behalf of the Organizing Committee, thanked the Dayang for gracing the function with her presence and also for being kind enough to give away the prizes. Mr. Tan Sum Guan announced that it is the intention of the Organizing Committee to hold this Athletic Meeting annually in future. Cheers were then called for His Highness the Rajah, His Highness the Tuan Muda and the Dayang Anne, after which the programme of the day was brought to a close.
Music PROGRAMME.
Kindly rendered by Hokien School Band.
The Organizing Committee acknowledge with grateful thanks the receipt of various presents of Drinks, Biscuits, Cigarettes, etc., from the following firms, viz.:-
Messrs. The Borneo Company, Ltd., Sime, Darby & Co., Ltd., Kwong Leo Banking Co., Tan Sum Guan & Son, Tan Kah Kee, Syn Kim Eng, Chong Kim Eng, Ho Siang Teng, Ban Jui Long, Sim Hong Joo, Bin Seng, Mr. Jong Nyok Chin and Chop Chin Chiang, and the Committee also tender their thanks to the Acting Commissioner of Police for the use of the Police Ground; the Acting Superintendent of Government Stores for flags and bunting and the Rev. Father S.M. Collier for Sports Requisites.
Sarawak Regatta.
Thursday, 1st January, 1931.
Entries close midday, Tuesday,
16th December, 1930.
Turf Club Notes.
Below will be found a statement showing the financial details of the recent Autumn Meeting. Taking into consideration the fact that the prizes were augmented by fully $1,000 the Committee has every reason to congratulate itself on the result—an excess of Revenue over Expenditure of some $2,600.
It is proposed to alter the rules and close off the Books at 31st December next. This date will then coincide with the fiscal year so far as Club Subscriptions, etc., are concerned. In future the Accounts will show the result of the Spring and Autumn Meetings of each calendar year, and there will be no overlapping as at present.
Race Week Festivities in Kuching.
DANCE AT THE CLUB.
On the evening of 30th September, a most successful dance was held at the Sarawak Club. The decorations, which were, very striking, were designed and carried out by Miss Scott and Mrs. Harding, and the business of catering and providing refreshments was ably undertaken by Mrs. Baird.
The band of the Sarawak Rangers played for the dancers, and for those who did not care to shake a numble foot there were the joys of bridge and poker—and, of course, the bar!
The Committee of the Sarawak Club and all who helped to make the dance the success it was deserve our thanks for a delightful evening.
Second Division News. 
September, 1930
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports for September, 1930, by Mr. J.B. Archer, Resident:—
I left Sebuyow on the 1st and proceeded to Kuching for medical treatment, returning to Simanggang on the afternoon of the 5th. Whilst in Kuching I was informed by wireless that one block of eight shophouses in Engkilili Bazaar had been destroyed by fire on the morning of the 3rd. The fire broke out suddenly and burnt with such rapidity that several persons had narrow escapes from being burnt alive. Mainly owing to the efforts of the Police and Dyaks the fire was stopped from reaching the other blocks, but the trees on the opposite side of the river were singed. Later on in the month an inquiry was held but no conclusion was arrived at, although personally, I strongly suspect arson; None of the houses were insured, which fact seems strange considering the two disastrous fires at Simanggang and Belong in recent years.
Mr. C.S. Griffiths, Superintendent of Lands, and Captain C.D. Le Gros Clark, Secretary for Chinese Affairs, made a short visit to Simanggang. The latter also spent two days at Engkilili. Mr. R. L. Daubeny, Assistant District Officer, Saribas, came over from Betong on the 19th in order to discuss official matters, and left again on the 21st. 
On the 19th Datu Haji Dulrashid and Abang Omar left for Kuching to attend the races, together with several Government servants who were to receive Long Service Decorations and Medals.
Abang Bunsu, Probationary Native Officer, was sent to Satok to relieve Abang Zin who proceeded to Kuching on leave.
On the 19th I inspected the contingent of police at Simanggang. The arms drill was good and the appearance of the men was clean and smart. Marching, however, was poor, but as there was a large proportion of recruits in the ranks, the parade was satisfactory.
At Simanggang work was begun on a house for another Forest clerk and most of the bridges on the Sabu Road were remade. Two new bridges were constructed on the now road joining Simanggang Bazaar and the main Sabu Road.
The framework of the Saratok and Engkilili bungalows and Astana at Simanggang was erected, but the alterations to the Residency had come to a standstill. The state of trade throughout the Division still continues, and rubber tapping has practically ceased.
The average price of rubber was 7 cents a kati.
As far as can be ascertained the unemployment situation is not causing anxiety, although it is likely that in a month or two steps will have to be taken to relieve those who have no work. Many Chinese have left the Division, apparently for Kuching.
Malays and Dyaks were clearing, burning and planting all the month. Many rubber gardens were burnt in the process.
The weather during the month was very hot, with occasional violent thunderstorms and squalls.
SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
Extract from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Simanggang, Mr. D. C. Hudden:—
In the District Court there were 4 criminal cases resulting in fines amounting $42, and one civil claim for $821.69.
In the Magistrate's Court there were three criminal cases resulting in one sentence of five months for theft under section 379 I.P.C., one case dismissed, and one fine of $20.
There were civil claims amounting to $111.47.
The Court Writer, Lingga, reports that in the Ulu Lingga there are 250 planters, and that owing to the present low price of rubber and pepper many labourers were engaged for a few dollars a month, with free food and lodging, and still they are well contented and peaceful.
ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Engkilili, Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas.
I returned to Engkilili from Simanggang on 3rd.
At about 3 a.m. early the same morning a fire broke out in a block of shophouses, Nos. 13 to 20. The block was entirely destroyed, the arrack farm being one of the shops in the block.
An inquiry was held but the cause of the outbreak has not yet been ascertained.
On Tuesday the 9th Captain G. D. Le Gros Clark, Secretary for Chinese Affairs, arrived from Simaggang to look into Chinese affairs here.
Dresser Austin Reggie, who was sent up from Kuching about the dysentery epidemic in the Ulu Ai on 17th August, reports that the epidemic has now abated.
Total number of deaths from dysentery were 44.
There were four criminal cases in the Magistrates Court, two being discharged, one being settled by a fine of $10. Two persons were sentenced to three months' R.I for breach of Opium Regulations.
There was one civil claim amounting to $83.59.
There were two criminal cases in the District Court, one sentence of two weeks' R.L under section 354 I.P.C.; and a sentence of eighteen months' R.I. under section 324 I.P.C.
There were four civil claims amounting to $2,367,54.
SARIBAS DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Assistant District Officer, Saribas, Mr. R. L. Daubeny.
The following sentences and fines were imposed during the month. Ah Toon fined $35 for breach of Rubber Export Regulations XXII, 1924; Bungin fined $5 and costs under section 403 I.P.C., misappropriation of property; Mahali sentenced to two months for non-payment of fine; Abang Ladi sentenced to three months for non-payment of brian; Wang Seng fined $50 for committing a public nuisance, section 290 I.P.C.; Kueh Tsing Yong fined $10 and costs for breach of Registration Order, section 1, subsections 9 and 10. Various civil claims were beard during the month but none of any importance.
The prison gang has been employed on the usual routine work during the month, including the gravelling and re-laying of the paths round the Fort.
The substations were visited from 12th—14th and again from 26th—29th. I was away at Simanggang from 19th—21st. 
On 13th instant an inquiry was held at Debak into the corpse of a male child, aged about fifteen days, found floating in the river at Debak. A verdict of death from natural causes was brought in, the father Kueh Tsing Yong being prosecuted under Registration Order R—1 for not reporting the birth and death of the child, and one Wang Seng being prosecuted for committing a public nuisance, section 290 I.P.O., for throwing the corpse into the river instead of burying it at the Chinese cementry.
On 4th instant at 2 p.m. an exceptionally heavy rain-storm occurred. Pitch darkness developed and work was held up in the office for three quarters of an hour while the rain swept half way across the upper part of the Fort.
Shipping.—Eight motor vessels entered and cleared during the month.
KALAKA DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Kalaka, Mr. L. K. Morse.
I proceeded to Kuching via Lingga on short leave on the 20th and was still away at the end of the month.
Abang Bujang, Native Officer, Kabong, also proceeded to Kuching in order to receive a Long Service Decoration on the Birthday of His Highness the Rajah.
A contract for the upkeep of the Saratok-Roban Road was made out and approved and the contractor has started work.
The M.L. One returned from dock on the 19th. She was sent to the Saribas District on duty and was still away at the end of the month.
Abang Zin, Native Officer proceeded on leave on the 21st instant, Abang Bunsu from Simanggang taking his place here.
The cattle at Kabong numbered seventy-nine head at the beginning of the month.
Trade Kalaka. It will be noted that there is a big drop in the export and import figures for the month.
LAND OFFICE.
Extracts from the report of the Land Officer, Second Division, Mr. B. Summers.
On the 8th, the Superintendent of the Lands arrived from Kuching, returning on the 10th instant. The purpose of this visit being the drawing up of Estimates for 1931.
The new S.JP.G. Mission land was also examined; tins comprises an area of twenty-two acres.
Third Division News.
September, 1930.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports for September, 1930, by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident:—
Resident's Court.—Criminal: one case was heard and resulted in conviction, and in one appeal case the decision was reversed. Civil: one case was heard and two appeal cases, one of which was upheld and the other reversed. Claims amounted to $1,512.33 and fees to $36.25.
General.—On the 1st the Director of Public Works and the Divisional Engineer visited Sarikei and Binatang.
On the 4th instant I left for Mukah to meet His Highness the Tuan Muda, who visited Mukah, Oya and Dalat on the 6th and 7th inst., returning to Kuching the next day.
On leaving Oya I visited Matu and from there, accompanied by the District Officer, Lower Rejang, I visited Daro, Paloh, Belawai, Selalang and Rejang, also Sarikei on my way back to Sibu, arriving on the 13th inst.
The Divisional Land Officer was instructed to send a Land Inspector to Rejang, Belawai and Paloh to mark out kampong reserves. These people all live too close to one another at present, and the head or rich men usually use the land in close proximity to plant fruit, coconuts and rubber, so that at a future date there will be no land for extension.
The Chinese at Matu, Belawai and Paloh, who are building a new Bazaar on an approved Government plan, have been ordered to complete building or they must cease trading in the old shops.
Dr. Kroll, Head Geologist, N.E.I., arrived down the Batang Rejang on the 14th inst. and left for Kuching on the 18th inst.
SIBU.
The District Officer, Sibu, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports: —
Courts.—Lim Beng Tong, a bill collector working for the Sarawak Steamship Co., Ltd., was sentenced to 3 months under section 406 I.P.C. Three Foochows were sentenced to 2 years each under section 414 I.P.C. and one man 6 months under section 379 I.P.C. Fines and fees amounted to $585.
General.—There are constant reports of thefts each day but it is seldom possible to get sufficient evidence to charge anyone. The Foochow Schools Committee were told that the grant for the Ensurai School would be renewed on condition that a signed statement was put in, certifying that there were no books to which the Government objected in use in the school; this condition was complied with. Abang Elijah, Native Officer, reported on 18th that a Dyak woman was struck by lightning while on her farm at Kanowit, and killed.
Another deputation of unemployed came to the office asking for food and work and were told that Government bad no work to give out at present.
A party of Japanese engineers and scientists arrived on 10th and left on 11th for Kapit.
The dead body of a new-born male child was found floating in the Igan on 24th and an inquest held, the jury returned a verdict of murder against some person or persons unknown. A similar occurrence was reported in August but in spite of careful inquiries nothing has been discovered.
A police patrol bits been put on the Lanang, Telephone and Race Course roads, and the police beats on the Island extended past the European bungalows in consequence of the constant reports of thefts.
District Court Martial was held on 22nd when P.O- Bantan and Suret were charged with gross neglect of duty, when in charge of Government moneys in transit from Song to Kapit. P.C. Banian was sentenced to six months and Suret warned about his conduct.
The Divisional Laud Officer, Mr. C. E. Pascoe, reports:—	
Staff.—Bruce Than, Clerk Grade III, who was sent to Kuching in July for treatment, died on the morning of the 1st September in the Kuching General Hospital. 
Quit Rent Payment's.—Many more demand notes were sent out and about one hundred and sixty summonses issued for non-payment of quit rents. The amount collected was about the same as in the previous month, namely two thousand three hundred dollars, this does not include outstations.
Padi Planting.—Fooohows particularly have seen the necessity for planting padi, and have responded well to the efforts made earlier in the year to induce them to take it up. The padi generally looks rather dry—but the natives predict a good crop.
Sungei Merah.— This river has been partially cleaned of overgrowth and logs for some miles from the month, and the gardeners applied for Government assistance in clearing further up the ulu as far as the gardens extend. This was allowed, and the work is in hand at the moment.
Demarcation of proposed roadways.—Two proposed roadways were demarcated—one from the main Lanang road lending into Bukit Lima Forest Reserve at its nearest point, and one from the main Aup road leading to the ulu Aup and running through the Henghua Reserve. This latter road will, if made, form the commencement of the main thoroughfare to ulu Pasai, and possibly at a later date link up with Oya, Dalat and Mukah.
SARIKEI AND BINATANG.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Sarikei and Binatang, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports :—
Judicial.—During the month many civil claims were settled.
General.—The only thing of note during the month was the increase of unemployment at Sarikei and Binatang. As yet this is confined to Foochows, the Cantonese still have work to do on their pepper gardens.
On the 12th the Resident and Division Medical
Officer visited the station; one appeal case was heard.
Padi planting throughout the whole district is becoming more extensive than in previous years.
P.W.D.—Work on the construction of both new wharves has proceeded at great speed, the godown at Binatang was almost completed by the end of the month, and the wharf at Sarikei was completed, the godown is only short of the roofing.
The Kropok road at Binatang has been extended towards Tanjong Genting. This is now 16 feet wide and its complete length is about 6½  miles, leaving 2 miles of swamp to Tanjong Genting, which it is hoped will be completed this year.
During the month the Kwang Chien School was opened at Sarikei. This is a well-made building, on cement pillars, complete with football grounds, badminton courts and facilities for other outside names.
Customs.—Pepper has been pouring into the bazaar, in spite of the low price; the quality is not good;this is probably still due to the drought at the beginning of August.
The Land Officer, Sarikei and Binatang, Mr. T.E. Parker, reports :—
The month was marked by activity on the part of the Chinese and Dyaks in the planting of padi, and the inspectors had many fruitless journeys in the course of their work.
On the 4th—6th, in company with the Acting Assistant District Officer, I completed a tour of the Mador, Tulai and Nerasit lots, passing by boat down the Sungei Tulai in the part where the Chinese have cleared the river. A report on this work will be forwarded in due course.
There are 355 applications of 1929 and 263 of 1930 outstanding at this station, which, given one extra Land Inspector, should-be dealt with by the end of the year, after which the Land Office will be in a stronger position to deal with those persons who plant without permits.
The Electrical Engineer, Mr. W. L. Clark, reports:—
I visited Sarikei on the 22nd, taking down with me two wiremen for the installation of electrical wiring in the two Government bungalows, in connection with Ah Pong's lighting scheme, returning again the next day. The two bungalows were completed on the 27th.
The Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Mr.I. S. Hammond, reports :— Tanah Estates, Limited.—The final survey of the Tanah Estates, Limited concession has been completed, and results have been forwarded to headquarters.
General—Garden surveys along the Rejang and Kanowit progressed very favourably during September, and, in order to give the office staff a chance to plot and chart the results, the main centre of operations has been removed to Sarikei. With sufficiently close co-operation between the Land Officer and myself, it is hoped that the previous trouble experienced there will not recur.
KAPIT.
General.—On 3rd P.O. Bantau of Song lost $500 of Government money from his charge while bringing a remittance from Song to Kapit. He was court martialled in Sibu. The money has not been traced to date. The Divisional Treasurer paid a visit on 8th spending two nights. Dr. Kroll of N.E.I. Survey Department arrived on 10th, leaving on 14th. A party of Japanese gentlemen arrived on 11th and proceeded to Ulu Pila on 15th, accompanied by Abang Aboi. On 16th Dr. ter Brugge of N.E.I Survey Department return to N.E.I. Territory. Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Sibu, paid a visit on 11th. Native Officer Awang Samsudin arrived from Belaga on 21st, leaving for Belaga on 30th. Penghulu Taman Usun Hang came down also. On 27th Penghulus Temmonggong Koh and Grinang came down to allege that a Dyak called Ajai had killed another Dyak called Kamarau in the Putai. The Court Writer wired to Sibu and Abang Aboi left for the Balleh to arrest Ajai. I proceeded to Kapit on 28th and met Abang who returned that day. Ajai was 
placed on remand pending further inquiries. A preliminary inquiry was held on 29th.
LOWER REJANG.
The District Officer, Lower Rejang, Mr. E. V. Andreini, reports :—
The principal event of the month was the visit of the Resident, Third Division, who arrived at Matu on the 8th. On the 9th he met the Native Officer and Tua Kampongs and went round, the Government buildings and bazaar. Nothing of importance was brought up except that the Chinese and others who had not applied for shop lots were told once more that they would have to cease trading unless able to build or trade as hawkers.
The question of whereabouts of small Chinese dwelling-houses was discussed and a site decided upon, there have been thirty-five applications for dwelling- houses.	
Agriculture.—The people of Jerijeh were pursuaded to try padi planting and a Land Inspector sent to mark out suitable land. They will plant sugar cane and melons this year and start padi growing next year.
Staff.—T.K. Ahmat, of Belawni, died on the 5th after a short illness from dysentery. He had only been T.K for a year. Abang bin Haji Assim, Imam of Belawai, was suggested as his successor.
The Divisional Engineer, Mr. J. W. Whiteside, reports:—
Sibu Buildings.—The five shops in Channel Road are almost completed. The reinforced concrete framework to the ground floor of the Chinese School is completed. Eight dressers' quarters near the hospital are still in progress. The Sanitary Inspector's house in Green Road is completed. The Arrack Factory building is completed, the floor and dapor yet remain to be undertaken. The whole of the concrete drains to the Sibu bazaar so far as it has been built upon are now completed.
Wharves.—The galvanized wire fencing to the wharves is almost completed.
Roads.—Mission road widening is completed. The widening of the road from the Fort to Long Bridge and along Kampong Pulo is in progress.
Waterworks.—Repairs and slight alterations to the pumping plant are being carried out at the waterworks. The old steam pump has been shipped to Mukah.
Sarikei and Binatang.—The Sarikei wharf is almost completed and one godown is nearly finished. The foundations to the Binatang godown are completed.
Daro, Matu, Rejang —The three wells at Rejang are completed. Repairs have been carried out to the roof of District Officer's bungalow. The jail at Matu is completed. The dapor is not yet erected. The police barracks at Daro have been repaired.
Kapit.—Native Officers quarters are being erected at Kapit.
MUKAH AND OYA.
The District Officer, Mukah and Oya, Mr. P. M. Adams, reports:—
General.—His Highness the Tuan Muda and the Dayang Anne, accompanied by the Chief Secretary and Mrs. Boult, and Mr. and Mrs. Baird, visited Mukah on the 6th. The Resident arrived from Sibu the previous day to meet His Highness. Land owners asked His Highness to either reduce or abolish quit rent owing to the low price of sago. His Highness promised to give the matter his consideration.
A complaint was put forward by one Brahim who declared lie had tried for years to obtain justice in connection with an inheritance claim, but he had always been refused a summons. I have inquired fully into the circumstances and find his story to be a tissue of lies.
Dyaks — A policeman was sent up river with a number of old summonses and warrants against Dyaks who have for a long time ignored orders to attend Court. He managed to collect three people and others promised to appear in a few days, but of course have never done so, whilst a few flatly refused to come down. Now that the padi planting should be finished these people must be compelled to come in.
Land.—The demarcation of land in Balingian has been held up by the Arip Dyaks, headed by the Penghulu, refusing to have their rubber gardens surveyed except under conditions which they dictate. Abang Moss, Native Officer, was sent over to warn them that any such resistance will be severely dealt with.
Judicial.—In the District Court four cases of breach of the Opium Regulations were heard. One case of assault was heard and both plaintiff and defendant were ordered to place $10 in deposits. Against this decision the plaintiff has registered an appeal.	
Prison —The prison gang, averaging 46.5, were employed in taking coal to the waterworks, cleaning the cattle ground and in the general upkeep of the station.
Prison discipline has not been good, three prisoners incurring extra sentences for breach of regulations. Nine prisoners arrived from Sibu; the police have been warned to keep a very strict guard over them.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam; reports;—
On the 7th His Highness the Tuan Muda, together with the Dayang Anne, Mr. and Mrs. Boult snd Mr. and Mrs. Baird, paid a visit to the station, the Resident of Sibu and the District Officer Mukah and Oya being also present. The Maimuna arrived at Dalat at 10 a.m. and His Highness proceeded straight to the Court House, where the Chinese petitioned that the old rule debarring them from buying old sago lands should be abolished. The Tua Kampongs petitioned that the payment of quit rent for sago gardens should be abolished, but that if Government could not see their way to the total abolition, then gardens should only be paid for from the time of demarcation and not from 1929 as heretofore. This latter petition was put up at Mukah the day before and is now under consideration in Kuching. His Highness then proceeded to the Roman Catholic Mission and, after inspecting the new electric light installation and spending a short time there, returned to the Maimuna and sailed for Oya.
During the month two cases of drowning occurred, one in the Oya river at Kampong Teh when a small child fell in the river and was drowned, the other in the Igan when the boat in which a man and his wife were paddling, overturned in a sudden squall. The woman got safely to shore but the man's body was found three days later with his left hand bitten off and his stomach eaten away by a crocodile.
Dalat was visited from the 15th to the 20th and Mukah from the 22nd to the 27th. The District Officer proceeded to Kuching for the Races.
Judicial.—There were no cases worthy of mention either at Oya or Dalat.
Rainfall.—The total rainfall for the month was 9.09 inches, the greatest fall in any one day being 2.65 inches.
Sibu Regatta and Sports not to Take Place.
At a meeting at Sibu of the Regatta Committee and the Land Sports and Football Committees, it was decided that owing to the prevailing trade depression, the Regatta and Sports would have to to be cancelled. These will therefore not take place this year.
Race Week in Sibu.
FANCY DRESS BALL.
Perhaps the most notable feature in the Sibu Race Week festivities, writes our Sibu correspondent, was a Fancy Dress Ball given at Mr. McGinn's house. Mrs. Nadig and Mrs. Beedon, the only two European ladies left on the island, were hard put to it to cope with the demands for assistance in making costumes, most of which were highly original. Major Beedon as a two- years-old baby complete with bottle (only one?— Ed.) and Father Halder ("apai") as Father Christmas were undoubtedly the hits of the evening, though Mr. Gilbert did his best to make up for the shortage of ladies by appearing as a Malay girl. Father Halder, inspired perhaps by the fact that all attempts to set his beard on fire were unsuccessful, astonished everyone by distributing wonderfully appropriate gifts to all present.
Another enjoyable entertainment was a musical party given by Mr. and Mrs. Nadig, the success of which can be gauged from the fact that although the volunteer bartender mistook sherry for whisky and poured out round after round of sherry stengahs, nobody noticed his error! The music was supplied by weird and wonderful jazz instruments played by the guests, and dancing continued until a late hour.
FOOTBALL MATCH BETWEEN EUROPEANS AND THE REST.
EUROPEANS VICTORIOUS AFTER CLOSE STRUGGLE. '
On 27th September, the European Community beat the Rest of Sibu by two goals to one, both goals being scored by Crossley. Gilbert played a' rousing game, and both Nadig at back and Hammond in goal are deserving of praise.
Razali and Kim Seng were conspicuous in attack and defence for the Rest.
Outstation Race week visitors to Sibu were
Mr. A- Macpherson, from Kapit, Mr. Wren of Tanah Estates, Limited, from Kanowit, and Messrs. J. O. Gilbert and T. E. Parker from Sarikei. 
Miri Rowing Club.
The following paragraph on the subject of the Miri Rowing Club's visit to Singapore appeared in the Straits Times
INTERPORT ROWING.
MIRI R.C. TO VISIT SINGAPORE. 
ON Thursday, 23rd October, the Miri Rowing Club will compete against the Royal Singapore Yacht Club rowing section for the interport rowing trophy.
Since the Singapore Rowing Club amalgamated with the Yacht Club there has been only one interport race, and that was a couple of years ago when Malacca paid a visit to Singapore. On that occasion Singapore won without being very hard pressed; but this time, if rumour is to be believed, the local crew will have to face a really seriously-trained opposition.
Ono hears that at a recent regatta, Miri turned out four "fours" and some of their material was first class. Their crew is in the capable hands of R. H.W. Hamilton, a Cambridge "trial cap," and is sure to render a good account of itself.
The Singapore crew will be chosen from:-
A. R. Anderson, J. P. Biddulph, J. T. Haydon, R. Phelps, A. J. Rycroft, and the coaching will be mainly in charge of the captain of boats, T. H. Stone.
After the regatta the club will hold a dinner and dance in honour of the visitors. Members are asked to make a note of the date.
Owing to the fact that the Gazette closed unusually early this month, the result of the race was not known at the time of going to press. On October 23rd, His Highness the Tuan Muda addressed a telegram to the crow wishing them good luck; we can only echo most heartily His Highness' message.
STOP PRESS.—As we go to press we hear that the Miri crew were victorious in their match against the Singapore Rowing Club, winning the race by 4 feet, their time being five minutes, one second.
We append herewith an account of the race taken from the Malaya Tribune, and we must extend our heartiest congratulations to the Miri crew on their splendid effort. It should be noted that their time over the course creates a record for Singapore.
KEEN FINISH IN INTERPORT
Miri DEFEAT SINOAPOBE.
After much doubt during the day about the weather conditions, the rowing event between Singapore and Miri took place on calm water yesterday over a mile course inside the breakwater. It was the first interport race between the R.S.Y.C. and the Miri Club. The crews were well matched but Singapore had a slightly heavier crew. In the still water, to which they are accustomed, Miri had the advantage and started favourites. Singapore took the lead, however, with a powerful stroke. But Miri's was faster—40 to36— and gained a slight lead after a minute. Halfway Singapore again went ahead, pulling strongly and a keen finish was promised.
The strain told on Singapore and they lost rhythm Miri, rowing together beautifully, went a length ahead. Then Singapore pulled themselves together for a last spurt. They found their rhythm again but it was just too late. Miri won by a few feet.
H. E. the O. A. G. Mr. John Scott, Mrs. Scott and Mr. Boden Kloss (Commodore of the R.S.Y.C.) watched the race from the Government launch, "Princess Mary." The crews were:
Singapore: T. H. Stone 11st. 6 Bow, J. P. Biddulph 12.92, A. J. Rycroft 12.43, J. T. Haydon 12.5 Stroke, C.B. Bowman 8.7 Cox.
Miri: H. G. M. Smith 10 st. 4, N. G. Bateheller 11.4, T. H. Whiting 14.2, R. H. W. Hamilton 12.3, F. Clarke 9.
Stone captained the Singapore crew and Hamilton the Miri crew.
The starter and umpire was Mr. R. M. Williams, the judge Mr. K. G. A. Dohoo; and the timekeepers were Messrs. R. Phelps and R. L. King.
Miri made a record time, for rowing at Singapore, of 5 mins, 1 sec.
Fifth Division News.
September, 1930.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports for September, 1930, by Mr. E. O. Bruce, Acting Resident:—
General.—On the 5th I returned from a visit of inspection to Lawas, Trusan and Sundar districts, having dealt with all matters outstanding.
The Chief Health Officer, Dr. G. E. Brooke, arrived on the 10th and discussed arrangements for the census next year, health matters in general, and malaria prevention at Lawas in particular. He sailed next morning.
The Judicial Commissioner, Mr. T. S. Boyd, also visited Limbang for a few days, leaving for Kuching on the 20th.
Rainfall registered.at Limbang during the month was 11.45 inches.
Court. — A normal number of eases was dealt with. After a long trial Hassan bin Ahmed, alias Mohidm, alias Bakar, a Ceylonese, was convicted of burglary, and criminal intimidation in the bazaar, and sentenced to 5 years' R.I. under I.P.C. sections 457, 506 and 193. Two other suspects of theft in the bazaar also were discharged, there being insufficient evidence to convict. Ahat bin Dullah was convicted of criminal misappropriation of private property belonging to one of the missionaries, stolen from the Rest House. These convictions appear to have checked thieving for the time being, which was becoming prevalent, probably owing to unemployment and the general trade depression. A case, of incest between father and daughter was reported at Sundar, last month, but the present whereabouts of the offenders, Brunei Malays, is still unknown.
Prisons.— Average daily number of prisoners was 26; health and discipline were good.
Land and Agriculture.—Two Land Inspectors arrived from Kuching on the 10th, enabling a definite start to be made with the proper organization of the Land Office here, the results of which should be very noticeable next year, when arrears of demarcation have been dealt with.
It will be found that many gardens have been opened without registration or payment of any quit rent whatsover. It is intended to demarcate, in the near future, a large area in the Sungei Kubong as another Pepper Reserve, where a few gardens have already been commenced. Twenty-seven gardens in the reserve at 7 ½  mile Penderuan are now being demarcated. There is a very noticeable increase in the amount of padi already sown this year. An experimental patch of Government Land is also being planted with the help of prison labour, and if successful should suffice for several months prisoners' rations. I am informed by members of the Borneo Evangelical Mission, who have recently visited the Ulu Medalam, between Gunong Batu Tarikan and Gunong Buda, a day or two's journey above their Sungei Prangga Station, that the river winds through many miles of excellent agricultural land, plains and undulating, without sign of human habitation. A rough sketch of the country is being prepared. In the Ulu Madibit there is said to be segregated community of about a thousand Kalabits who are not recorded in the Exemption Tax Register. This, however, needs confirmation, and the negotiation of that particular river is apparently no easy matter during the greater part of the year. 36,933 lbs. of dry rubber were exported by the Lawas Rubber Estates, Ltd., during the month. 
Medical and Health.—Limbang reports have been normal, but fever continues to be prevalent in Lawas District, where Clerk K. Shak Kim lost a child and P.C. Jimudin two twin children. P.C. Usman's wife and three chidren also died at Trusan, as well as several others in the kampong. A case of smallpox was reported at Lawas Rubber Estate on the 2nd; adequate precautions were immediately taken and the patient recovered, there being no further outbreak.
On the 30th, Dr. Swapp, Medical Officer, Brunei, paid his first visit to Limbang for several months.
With the assistance of the Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Mr. R. N. Baron, a good site for a fresh-water reservoir was located about a mile and a half from Lawas Station. Estimates 1931 therefore include provision for an impounding dam and pipe line, which should considerably diminish the prevalence of dysentery there.
CORRESPONDENCE
The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.
Evening Dress in the Tropics.
The Editor, Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
Sir, I would be much obliged if you would permit me to take up some of your valuable space in order to enter an impassioned plea for the rationalization of men's dress' in the tropics. Collars and ties are bad enough in this climate, for which open shirts and shorts are surely the appropriate costume, but they can at a pinch be borne. However, when it comes to boiled shirts, hard collars and black trousers for evening wear, surely the limit of human endurance has been reached, and also the limit of human imbecility. The idea of putting on this fantastic and insanitary garb just because one is going to eat one's dinner at somebody else's table instead of one's own is so ludicrous as to be almost incredible. And when it comes to actually dancing in this abominable get-up!—why, words fail me, and I should think that they fail the ladies who have to dance with their wretched and melting partners.
It is unncessary to stress the fact that black clothes out here are hopelessly insanitary,—how many of us would think of wearing a white suit for eight or ten days running, especially if we had been taking fairly strenuous exercise while wearing it? Yet how many men send their black evening clothes to be cleaned in Singapore or elsewhere more than once in two or three years? Very few, I am prepared to bet. And this, mind you, is quite apart from the fact that such clothes are horribly uncomfortable, so much so that for many of us they destroy all pleasure in going to a party! Can there be any argument for their retention?
I would like to suggest that in future the five- button white tunic and white trousers should be the standardized dress for any but the biggest official functions. This costume is not only comfortable but looks extremely neat; which looks better, a clean, fresh, white tunic with a cool person inside it or a melted collar and crumpled shirt containing a miserable, perspiring, wreck? It would be interesting indeed to find out why people continue to wear this most unsuitable form of clothing; is it, possibly, because the ladies like to see them in it and feel affronted if men turn up to their parties in any other kit?—If this is so, then I challenge any lady to put on man's dress and dance in it for ten consecutive minutes! Only ignorance could condemn men to the torture they suffer at every evening function, and it is surely time that a common-sense view of the whole problem was taken. Evening dress at home in a temperate climate is one thing, out here it is very much another.
Air Mails.
NEW FACILITIES.
The Postmaster-General informs us that, through the courtesy of the Federated Malay States and Straits Settlements Postal Authorities, correspondence for Great Britain, Europe and North America may be despatched from Sarawak, through Singapore for transmission by the fortnightly Bangkok-Amsterdam Air Service, which was inaugurated on Sunday, 19th October, 1930.
Letters, postcards, printed, commercial and mixed packets may be sent by this mail and may be registered but cannot be insured.
Every packet intended for transmission by this Air Mail, besides conforming to the ordinary postal regulations, should bear a special Blue Air Mail Label obtainable at all Post Offices affixed to the top left-hand corner of the packet, and the packet should in addition be inscribed "By Air Mail Medan-Amsterdam."
The air mail fee for this service is 75 cents per half ounce or part thereof, in addition to the ordinary postage and (if the packet is registered) registration fees.		
If the air mail fees are not fully paid in stamps the packet will not be forwarded by Air Mail.
The flight is expected to take 9 days from Bangkok to Amsterdam and correspondence, etc., posted at Kuching, Sibu or Miri should arrive in London approximately 17 to 18 days after the departure of the outward mail steamer from Sarawak.