The Sarawak Gazatte. TUESDAY. JULY 1st. 1930.
Death. CHAN HOCK SOON.—At “Winnie Villa,” passed away at 11.30 a.m. on Saturday, the 14th June, at the age of 63. He leaves behind a widow, 4 sons, L.K.L. Chan, Martin Chan, Chan Kim Siang and Chan Kim Hin, 2 daughters and 23 grandchildren to mourn his loss.
Acknowledgment. Mr. Chan Hock Soon and family are deeply grateful to all relatives and friends for their kind messages of sympathy, floral tributes and attendances at the funeral of the late Mr. Chan Hock Soon.
Suara Sarawak. June. His Highness the Tuan Muda left Kuching, in the Yacht Maimuna, on June 10th, accompanied by the Dayang Anne, the Chief Secretary, and Mrs. Boult. Sibu was reached early on the following day, His Highness being met by the Resident, Mr. C. D. Adams, Datu Haji Mohidin, and most of the European and other residents. The following day was spent in a Tuba-fishing, starting from Durin—but the presence of a slight “fresh,” militated against a big catch. On the Friday His Highness proceeded to Kapit, with the Resident and Mr. Crocker; and on the following day the party left direct for Sarikei. On Sunday, 15th June, His Highness with Mr. Boult and Mr. Crocker, walked about seven miles along the new road to Repok, returning in the evening and sailing for Kuching, which was reached on the following day.
On June 2nd the Dayang Anne and Mrs. Gilbert Brooke returned from a short visit to Singapore.	
Mr. Murray-Scott came up from Sibu this month; also Mr. W. V. Hanson of Miri, who returned from some weeks’ sick leave spent, at Brastagi; also Mr. Hughes transferred from Sarikei.
Mr. and Mrs. Harding arrived on June 16th on appointment to the Department of Telegraphs and Telephones.
Mr. R. G. Aikman has taken over the duties of Superintendent of Customs and of Shipping at Miri, as from June 14th.
Mrs. C. S. Griffiths left for home on June 21st; and Dr. Marjoribanks by s.s. Vyner Brooke. We wish them gentle treatment by the S.W. Monsoon.
We welcome back Dr. and Mrs. Gange on transfer from Sibu. Dr. A. D. Hutchison takes their place at the latter station.
We hear that Mr. G. J. D. Walters is proceeding to England from Singapore, and we trust that news of improved health will be received in due course.
News has been received that six shops in the Lawas bazaar were burnt out on June 21st. Fortunately no casualties were reported, and the Acting Resident has gone to investigate.
The Honorary Secretary of the Sarawak Club gives us the following information with regard to the Club Derby Sweep:-
1st Prize $1,994.00 .. Blenheim .. Ticket 1903. 
2nd Prize 797.00 .. Iliad .. Ticket 1853. 
3rd Prize 398.80 .. Diolite .. Ticket 3466.
Payment will be made on presentation of the winning ticket to the Hon. Secretary.
Payment of the placed horses (as above) may be made now; pay-ment for other starters, as soon as the official list is received from home, which should be in a few days’ time.
THOUGHT FOR THE MONTH. The best way to look at life is with a little humour, a lot of pity, a ceaseless curiosity, a love of beauty, and a sense of comradeship with all men, women, and beasts. With a touch of courage (hard to get) and a little secret shrine of faith— a man or woman can face life as not too grim in its adventure.—Sir Philip Gibbs, in a newspaper article.
BELLES-LETTRES, ETC. May 1930 Best Sellers. The following list of “best sellers” has been compiled from information kindly supplied by a number of well-known booksellers:—
Fiction.—Henry Williamson’s “The Patriot’s Progress” (Bles, 10s. 6d.)”, Derek Welker Smith's “Out of Step” (Gollanez. 7s. 6d.); Cynthia Stockley’s “Tagati” (Constable, 7s. 6d.)”, J. D. Beresford's “Seven Bobsworth” (Faber and Faber, 7s.); Geoffrey Moss’s “Little Green Apples” (Hutchinson, 7s. 6d.); Edna Ferber’s “Cimarron" (Heinemane, 7s. 6d.); Myron Brinig’s “Singermann” (Gobden-Sanderson, 8s. 6d.); Jean-Richard Bloch’s “………& Co.” (Gollanez, 8s. 6d.); Joseph Hergesheimer’s “The Party Dress” (Knopf, 7s. 6d.); Upton Sinclair's “Mountain City” (Werner Laurie, 7s. 6d.); Fawler Wright’s “Dawn” (Harrap, 7s. 6d.); Pamela Wynne’s “A Little Flat in the Temple” (Philip Allan, 7s. 6d.).
Miscellaneous:-- H. J. Laski's “The Dangers of Obedience" (Harper, 10s. 6d.); M. Goldsmith and F. Voigt's “Hindenburg” (Faber and Faber, 12s. 6d.); Walter de la Mare’s “Desert Islands” (Faber and Faber, 21s.); "The Private Letter Books of Sir Walter Scott," edited by Wilfred Partington (Hodder and Stoughton, 80s.); Major-General Sir Wyndham Child's “Episodes and Reflections” (Cassell, 18s.); Thomas M. Johnson’s “Secret War" (Jerrolds, 10s. 6d.); Robert Bridges's “Testament of Beauty" (Oxford University Press, 7s. 6d.); Roy Campbell's “Adamastor” (Faber and Faber, 5s.); Florence Emily Hardy’s “The Later Years of Thomas Hardy” Macmillan, 18s); T. S. Eliot's “Ash Wednesday” (Faber and Faber, 5s.); R. D. Blumenfeld's “R.D.B.'s Diary” (Heinemann. 8s. 6d.); “Letters of Prince von Bulow,” edited by Frederic Whyte (Hutchinson, 24s).
Pompei. Here Death pervades like an incelise 
And loud-voiced Present laughs no more;
Here, rushing chariots of terror
Upon the sad stones left their score;
And living feet that are travelling
To silence, pause upon their quest 
Among these arrogant columns.
Herethrobs the earth’s fierce, sun-urged breast
Vesuvius, passionate mountain, 
The black sweat of whose agony 
Has drowned thee, drowned thee, Pompei
Immortalized thy purgatory! J.M.B.
The Dream of a Mahjongg Fiend. Mahjongg in moderate doses is delightful, but it be overdone. 
I had indulged in the ancient game all the morning, and on repairing to the Club after tennis, was asked to play again. “Sorry, I can’t this evening,” I had replied, "I'm dining out.”
“Oh, come for awhile. We can't get a fourth. You can stop as early as you like," was the persuasive reply. 
At quarter to eight, after several previous attempts, always met with “one hand more." or “just finish up the West wind,” I was permitted to get away.
Two hours later, as the men joined us in the drawing room, my hostess told me I was to play mahjongg.
By the time I was in bed, somewhere in “the wee same hours," tiles were dancing before my tired eyes—winds and dragons—bamboos, balls and "cracks".
I’m playing too much mahjongg was my last con-scious thought.
Suddenly I opened my eyes. They rested on bright green baize. I was frankly astonished. Only a few moments before I had certainly tucked myself between two white sheets.
My astonishment grew greater when I gradually became aware of the fact that I was lying on a baize coveted table, surrounded by mahjongg tiles, and then—Oh, Horrors! —a large white hand—several hands—descended upon us and we were shaken about, turned ignominiously over, and I realized the terrible truth, that I had become a mahjongg tile myself!
I had no time to wonder how it had happened, for, after spinning dizzily about the table. I was grasped firmly and placed on top of a fellow tile, and our heads banged against a board. (I shall remember to deal gently with them hereafter.
I was fortunate to lie on top but of course that wouldn’t always be my luck, and I wondered whether, when you were only a tile yourself, it felt very heavy to have another on top of you.
Soon my companion and myself were moved again. —this time to the rack where we were stood correctly on our feet—if tiles have feet, —and my companion was moved away from me— apparently we were not a pair.
And that caused me to wonder "What was I”?
Never had it occurred to me before that there might be snobbishness amongst tiles! But now I found myself hoping I was a “bunga”!
“Bungas” must surely be the aristocracy of a Mahjong Set.
They were removed at once from the comman herd, exclaimed over, and placed in the best position on top of the rack.
However, I soon realized I was not one of that select company. Failing this, perhaps I was fortunate enough to be an honour. Yes, I would quite like that. An honour is always wanted, and that's such a comforting feeling. Also it’s usually kept until the last in hopes of another, and when it must be discarded, it is done so regretfully. Winds are only useful to the rightful owner, but honours score for all.
I did hope I was an honour, —not a white one though. I would hate to be called "soap" or “Saturday night.” besides, it has such a blank expression. No, I wished to be one of the others—it didn’t matter which. Both were equally desirable.
I stood alone for a bit, which made me think I might be an honour, for tiles to the right of me, and tiles to the left of me were being pitched into the arena.
And then one was placed beside me. Were we to become a “pung” or a “chow”? Of course, preferably the former—a little more snobbishness. Better to count a little than not at all. A "Chow” certainly was the lowest in the social scale.
If, however, I was an honour, and somehow I felt more and more convinced that I was, then I could only form a "pung.”
I thought I caught a glimpse of green as my companion was placed next to me, and began to swell with pride. I was a green honour. I felt certain of it now. Hadn't I been kept when I was only a single one? I would be guarded carefully in whatever hand I found myself, greeted with pleasure when I appeared. I preened myself.
I hoped the third one would torn up soon. We weren't much use as only a pair. I quite looked forward to hearing my owner say “and double for green dragons.”
“Mahjongg,” the voice above me exclaimed as another tile dropped into place alongside of me.
Then our owner proceeded to place his tiles on top of the rack. We were the last to go.
“A hidden pung,” he remarked, as he moved as up. Raising one tile, be turned it face downwards to indicate the fact, and I caught sight of my triple self.
“Good Heavens! Skinny Lizzy!”
I gave a loud majonic wail of protest.
“My dear—wake up." My husband prodded me gently—“you must be having a nightmare.”
Thank goodness it’s only a dream,” I murmured as I turned over—"I really must play less Mahjongg. X Y.Z.
A Trip to the South Natuna Islands. There is usually a certain amount of anxiety in one's first sail in a hired craft, especially if it involves cruising in strange waters and amongst strange islands.
One knows, of course, from experience, that before starting out it is always advisable to collect as much information as possible from fishermen who frequent these waters, and to discover the peculiarities of the type of craft under sail.
In the present case the acquisition was of the Bandong Merantor class, measuring 32 feet on the water line with a 6 feet beam and a draft of 23 inches, her canvas was the familiar ketch rig with a Bermuda mizzen, and the total men was in the region of 300 square feet, she was decked 4 feet fore and afc and had what we would term a “Canoe stern,” the upper end terminating at a very acute angle. That canoe stern always hurt me. Perhaps, I am unduly sensitive in the matter, but it always did, and you will sympathize with me when I tell you that I was thrown back on the apex of that acute angle many a time during the trip.
SANTUBONG. A few days were spent at this place in getting the boat ready. As I watched the three men I had chosen to accompany me loading ballast and preparing the sailing gear, I wondered how she would handle in the sea that was then running outside.
All was now ready and we were eager to commence the cruise. The boat was boarded at 12 noon mid the lads were ordered to the sails and the “Walimuda" commenced her interesting cruise. A course was set for Sempadi Island which was reached after a pleasant run of six hours, dating which time two fish were caught by means of a towline.
Sempadi Island. Unfortunately for us the next morning two fishing vessels put into the buy and reported strong north-westerly winds mid heavy seas. The sky was very overcast and threatening, which was disappointing after the ideal weather which had prevailed since our departure from Santubong, and we did not feel inclined to put out to sea- until the weather moderated, if only for the sake of our personal comfort. This was paiticularly unfortunate as Sempadi Island was something of a bugbear to us who had made its acquaintance before.
The next day it was still blowing hard but we decided to risk it and managed to get a considerable distance from the Island, but the sea ran so high that we deemed discretion to be the better part of valour, and turned back to the Island to spend another night at anchor until such time as the weather moderated.
Nothing is so trying to the patience as to sit kicking one’s heels at anchor while waiting for fine weather, but patience is a quality that must be cultivated when it is a question of setting out in a small boat. Through not exercising that virtue on "a previous occasion, I let myself in for a very uncomfortable, time.
SEMPADI ISLAND TO PIRATE BAY. On the next morning at 11a.m. the “Walimuda” finally left Sempadi; a line run was obtained up to the large Tallang Tallang Island where we anchored to take in fresh water before making for Pirate Bay, which we eventually reached at 1 p.m., here we anchored till daybreak.
An early start was then made for Tanjong Datu. From Pirate Bay the water becomes very shallow and swift, much care and local knowledge of the coast is essential to navigate a boat close in. On approaching Datu Point the swiftest part of the current race is met and, without a good wind, it is impossible to make any headway whatsoever. At about midday we brought up at a sheltered spot under Datu, locally known as Telok Malacca. The nature of the bay makes it a very uncomfortable anchorage at high titles as the wind blows in practically every direction. We decided to remain here for the night to prepare for our next run out to sea to the Natuna Islands, as to look for a better shelter where "wind find wave" could reasonably be forgotten meant going back on our course some considerable way.
The following morning saw us under way again, heading for Sirasan Island, “one of the South Natuna group.” Unfortunately for us, during the night the weather had undergone a decided change for the worse. A moderate sea was running outside and as soon as we left the shadows of Datu and beaded round the point we learned one thing—that our boat could roll. We clung to all things immovable and handy, the crockery and cooking utensils made frantic attempts to break loose and, as I watched one of the lads put his head over the side. I began to wonder whether the breakfast of salted “trubok" and rice I had had was really the best meal to consume before dashing out.
By dusk the weather had moderated somewhat, but there was wind enough to make a reef in the mainsail advisable. At 1 a.m. we were in the Api passage, and very much out of our course, the weather being still unpleasant. The easy movement that satisfied me gave the crew neither ease nor satisfaction, but the contrary, and they watched the bows as it seemed climbing up into the sky with no feelings of admiration. They were prevented from mournfully ruminating on the subject any further by a gurgling sound somewhere in bowels of the boat, and a glance under the boards revealed the reason, which was not obscure. It did not require Sherlock Holmes to see that the caulking round the wooden plug, which is the sea-cock in these boats, had come adrift, and was letting in water like a fountain, further inspection in the cramped smelly hull, at a temperature that approached that of the nether world, revealed another leak by the stempost. Temporary repairs jveie hurriedly put in hand mid in due course the job was finished. By noon the breeze freshened and we had to reef the mainsail in a hurry. Towards dusk hasty squalls were encountered with the wind dead ahead, blowing in our teeth with great violence. Our sturdy sails drove us through it in clouds of spray. The seas were short, but had not time to be sleep. Out by the islands the weather is treacherous in the extreme and, although the day may break with a cloudless sky and a dead calm sea, within a few hours it may be blowing a living hurricane, and a boat caught unprepared, or on a lee shore, in one of these storms, stands a poor chance of coming out of it unscratched, if at all. The force and suddenness of these revolving storms is well known to the Natura Islanders and Traders. The next morning at daybreak we could faintly distinguish the hills of Serasan. We were by this time well across the Api passage, with a course set to take us past the west side of Perhantuan Island. In locating our position at 8 a.m. I was very much relieved to find we were in the Serasan passage and a good way past the Sambunei and Malu reefs, while at Pirate Bay I had been warned of the danger of getting a slack breeze mid drifting with the Current Race on to one of them.
By 11 noon we were off Perhantuan Island and 5.30 p.m. found us making the channel to the Royalist Harbour anchorage under the shadow of Serasan Island. This island is entirely surrounded by coral reefs and, as there were no boats in the bay to guide us, some considerable time was spent in locating a suitable spot to anchor.
SERASAN ISLAND. The Customs Official’s domestic affairs I imagine were in order and his cigars palatable. He housed us early the next morning with a deep low voice which sounded very much as if he had a rusted nutmeg grater concealed down his throat. After inquiring our business at the island he amused himself for half an hour between the ribs, ballast and water jars and departed after a final cigar.
For a desciption of the island I will quote the China Sea Pilot: —
“Pulo Serasan, the southermost point of which, Park Point (Lat. 2° 20’ N., Long. 109° 01’ E.) is situated 13 ¼ miles north-east wand of South Haycock islet, is 9 miles in length in an east-south-east and opposite direction, and has a breadth varying from half a mile to three miles; it is hilly in the southern part, where it attains an elevation of 1,447 feet (441° 0)."
After we had looked round the island, a short visit to the shops to replenish the store box completed our interest in Serasan.
The following evening we left our moorings and headed for the chain of islets which extends for, nearly eight miles in a north-north-easterly direction from the north-east point of Serasan.
A few days were spent cruising amongst these islands, the majority of which are uninhabited and difficult to approach. We soon got tired of this, set a course for the Subi group and arrived at Kerdau Island two days later, having experienced great difficulty in the Koti passage with slack winds and the swift current race which runs at a speed of approximately 2½ knots. After spending a few days sailing about the adjacent islands we turned our nose in the direction of Tebeian Kechil, where we took in water and the next day sailed for Tebeian Besar.
TEBEIAN ISLAND. We spent a pleasant week on this island, which I think is, on the whole, the most attractive of the group we visited. The “Daun Attap” huts fringing the shores of the little bay are grouped together amongst straggling coconut palms in a very picturesque manner. The network of poles on which fishing nets rested to dry; the shanties in which the fishermen mended their nets and salted their fish were all delightful to the eye, but would be a shock to the nerves of our Director of Public Works and Municipal Commissioner.
At this island we acquired a newly-completed sailing boat, measuring 25 feet on the water line and with a beam of 9 feet, just down from the building shed. This type of vessel has great advantages over the usual coasting craft. They are built for deep-sea work, their high bows with their big flare enable them to ride out the worst gales without fear of shipping dangerous water. There are boats which, like certain human beings, seem born to adventure. Originally built for one trade, fate, in which adversity usually plays a big part, drives them to another. They change their names and appearance; they appear in divers waters under different flags. They are even sometimes arrested for debt, and sold up like tbe bankrupt in everyday life. Such I hope will not be the fate of the "Grace a’ Dare,” alius “Roabianee.”
On a bright sunny morning, after having provisioned the two boats and divided up the crew, we set out side by side for Midin Island. On the wav to this island we happened to meet a Dutch Controlleur on his round of visits to the various islands of which he is in charge. Tho following day we were back again at Tebeian Besar preparing the two boats for our run to Sarawak.
Punctually at 3 o'clock the next morning we extricated ourselves with considerable reluctance from our blankets and, after securing all loose articles and making a cup of cocoa, we started for Sarawak waters. Sea calm; light airs, variable; visibility good. Making a small offing, it course was laid for Prantuan Island, the white light of which was sighted as soon as we were outside the bay, while the flickering village lamps blinked at us astern. Soon the lights of fishing craft anchored off Prantuan Island came into view, and then the dawn began to lighten in the East. The sun rose just as we were passing the island, which looked very pretty in the morning sunlight. Although we had not visited the place owing to its very difficult approach, I should think that a binding on the bright-looking stores would amply repay the difficulties of overcoming its tricky back-door rocky entrance, but we were taking to risks.	
At 5 p.m. we had Sempadi Island (Dutch) abeam and altered course to Tanjong Datu, which we reached at 2 a.m. the following morning. After passing Datu point wo altered course half a point to Port for Tallang Tallang Island. By 3.30 a.m. we were abreast of the entrance to Telok Sarabang. A stiff breeze from the north-east had sprung up and we were terribly tired for want of sleep but determined to carry on until Tallang Tallang was reached, for such a grand morning for making the run was not to be thrown away at this uncertain time of the year. By 6.30 a.m. we were abreast of Tallang Tallang, and closing, in towards the shore we were soon snugly anchored in a sheltered spot. Two hours later the “Walimuda" was seen struggling towards Tallang Kechil where she put in. We spent two days here before heading for Sempadi (Sarawak). After leaving Sempadi Island we soon found ourselves making the Santuboug entrance where the “Walimuda” and the “Grace a’ Dare” entered to end the voyage in the shadow of the mountain.
The whole trip took just under six weeks. W.L.C.
Competition. [An anonymous Correspondent sends us 20 quotations and offers a prize of $20 for 4'ail right” and a second prize of $5 for 18 correct answers. Two months allowed.—Editor.]
(1) Upon the marbled-statued Zeus, Doc. Marcus called but yesterday, Though Lord of gods, and made of stone, His funeral takes place to-day.
(2) Though the Earth sigh for thee, here, even here, my Heliodora! Tears of my fond regret, tears of affection for thee. Bitterly, bitterly still, but in vain, grieves on ... Thou art among the dead; Acheron heeds not my woe! Where is the flower that I loved? They have torn it away in its Springtime, Torn it away, and the dust stains the fair leaves in their bloom! Genial Earth be it shine, at the mourner's humble entreaty, Gently to hold in Thy arms her whom I ever deplore.
(3) Humano capiti cervicem pictor equinam, Jungere, si velis, et varies inducere plumas, Undique collatis membris, ut turpiter atrum, Destinat in piscem, mulier fonnosa superne.
(4) Omnium concensu dignum imperii, nisi imperasset.
(5) Ou sont les neiges d’antan.
(6) Faites, Reino Immortelle! lui dit il en partant, Que j'aime la plus belle, et sois le plus vaillant.
(7) Build high your castles, sing your love song, Let Youth’s swift river bear you along, Drain deep the sweet glass held in your hands, Journey unchanged through sweet summer lands. Count not your kisses, let passion flow, Take it while with you, let it not go, Look on your love’s face while there is light, Youth is the Morning, Age is the Night.
(8) Oh I hear me sing! If Youth but knew The glory of his April day, Would He not cast tho World away For one more dawn of dream and dew? Would He the ceaseless moons pursue? Not rather with the Spring delay, Crowned with its leaf?  If Youth but knew The glory of his April day. For what shall unto Ago acrue If Youth from joyanco turn and stray? Autumn is but the leaves grown grey, The harvest roses mixed with rue: If Youth but knew ! If Youth but knew.
(9) Question not, but live and labour,	Til yon goal be won. Helping every feeble neighbour, Seeking help from none. Life is mostly froth and bubble, Two things stand like stone, KINDNESS in another's trouble, COURAGE in your own.
(10) The glass of the years is brittle, wherein we gaze for a span, And a little soul, for a little, bears this corpse, which is man, So long we endure, no longer, nor laugh not again neither weep: There is no God found stronger than Death; and Death is a sleep.
(11) Somebody said that the Summer was coming, Touched my strong arms with an infinite grace, Caught the refrain of the song I was humming, “Love changeth not with the change of the face," Hers was the hand that in Life's high beginning Lay like a lily in mine that was fire,  She saw the sin, not the shame of our sinning, Poured the sweet incense of Love on Desire. Tangle of grass, and the perfume of clover, Music of leaves wh»ra the boughs interlace, Summer, and southern the winds that have brought Her, Summer I but Winter in heirt and in face.
(12) To feel the strong soul stricken, Through fleshly pulses quicken, Beneath swift sighs that thicken, Soft hands and lips that smite: Lips that no love can tire, And hands that sting like fire, Weaving the web Desire To snare the bird Delight.
(13) Marriage was tolerated as a defect.
(14) The soul, doubtless, is immortal, where a soul can be discerned.
(15) Nothing could stop that astonishing infantry. No sudden burst of undisciplined valour, no nervous enthusiasm, weakened the stability of their order.
(16) I have had my share of pastime, I have done my share of toil; And Life is short; the longest life a span, And I care not how to tarry for the corn, nor for the oil, Nor the Wine that maketh glad the heart of Man. For good undone, for gifts misspent, for resolutions vain,'Tis somewhat late to trouble. This I know, I would live the same life over, if I had to live again, And the chances are I go where most men go.
(17) Thou that seest Universal Nature robed in Universal Mind, Thou majestic in thy sadness at the doubtful doom of Human kind.
(18) What wouldn’t I give to feel a lady’s hand again: They used to glad to see me once, they might have been to day, But we never know the worth of a thing, until we have thrown it away.
(19) And there shall be no land, say Fish.
(20) Whatever else they say of me they'll never be able to say I was one of the little blighters who so briliantly betray the tough old England that made us and in them is rotting away. I'd betray the middle classes and money and industry and the intellectual asses and cash Christianity, but not the England that made me the stuff of a man, the old England that doesn't upbraid me, nor put me under a ban.
First Division News. KUCHING METGOROLOGICAL RETURNS FOR JUNE, 1930. Note.—The Kuching Meteorological Station it situated at Latitude 1.33.29 North ; and Longitude 110.20.31 East. The height above Mean Tide Level is 29.5 feet.
We imagine that almost a meteorological record for Sarawak must have occurred at Kuching on the night of June 30th. The grass minimum thermometer registered as low as 66 °F.
Divisional Reports. Extract from First Division Report for April, 1930, by Mr. J. C. Swayne, Acting Resident:—
During the Easter Holidays, 18th to 20th April, the Government Offices were closed; advantage was taken of this opportunity by must Government officials to leave Kuching.
Visits were paid to the Leper Camp, Jail, Hospital and Pauper Camp during the month by the Board of Visitors; conditions were everywhere found to be satisfactory; a full report is being rent to you under another cover.
Messrs. Crossley, W. H. C. C. Morice and G. F. J. Pegler, Cadets, arrived on 21st April and were attached to this office prior to subsequent appointments. Mr. T. E. Parker, of the Land Office, arrived by the same boat.
On the 24th H.M S. Herald arrived from Singapore and sailed again on the 27th, after leaving a landing party to continue the river survey.
Two meetings were held during the month at Kampong Sinjan to select a Tua Kampong in place of Haji Dris; a majority were in favour of his eldest son Saji, but as he is not present in Government employment at Simanggang no appointment has been recommended, and the affairs of the Kamnong are, for the time being, administered by the Tuan Imam of Kampong Sinjan.
The Indian community having petitioned the Government for assistance in rebuilding the Hindu Temple in Ban Hock Road, several meetings were held in this office and a Government donation was promised on certain conditions. It is hoped that a smaller, but more substantial, building will be erected in the course of the next three months.
District OFFICE. The Acting District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports:—
Judicial.—Important ceres during the month included the conviction of S. V. Arumugam, an educated Ceylonese, under section 419 I.P.O. This mail had been going round Kuching for some months impersonating various officials and imposing on a number of local hotels and shop-keepers. His deportation is recommended. Another serious case was the conviction of ex-Corporal Archer Singh for theft of opium. The accused man was a guard in the packing rooms and used his position of trust for criminal purposes. Be received a sentence of two years' imprisonment in view of the seriousness of the offence. A conviction was registered against Ten Choi, an immigrant, who had anscanded from hospital while he was being detained suffering from an infections disease. Accused was committed for theft of hospital clothes, an offence that is almost a daily occurence and one that it is exceedingly difficult to bring home to offenders. Kashadi bin Hassan, a Javanese, was sentenced to two months’ imprisonment for an assault on Rezak, Chief Fire-Master in the Kuching Fire Brigade. The accused had received a certain amount of provocation, which account a for the lightness of his sentence.
Coroner's Court.—Inquests were held on the bodies of:—
(a) Tan Ah Meo (Foochow) who was killed on 8th instant. Deceased was demolishing the Wayang Street public baths when a wall fell on him crushing him. A verdict of accidental death was entered.
(b) Oh Sin, Cantonese, who fell dead on 14th instant in 76. Ewe Hai Street. Death being due to natural causes.
Public Mortuary.— The erection of a Public Mortuary was sanctioned by His Highness the Rajah, and a site has now being selected near the Septic Tanks at Padungan, passed by the Town Planning Committee, and approved by His Highness the Tuan Muda. The question has now been referred to the Public Works Department.
General.—His Highness the Tuan Muda, having granted a public holiday on the 19th, offices were closed from 18th—21st for the Easter holiday. A new sampan was acquired during the month for Government Ferry Service and, having been passed by the Harbour Master, will be put into commission alternatively with the old one. The Commandant of Sarawak Rangers, Captain R. E. Le Sueur, has kindly granted facilities for laying up the boat, during the intervals, in the Rangers boat-house.
Travelling.—On the 11th I rode out to Sungei Maung to inspect a garden over which there was a dispute.	__
Batu Kawa was visited, in company with Assistant Superintendent of Police, Mr. Sochon, on 25th, and the bazaar inspected, and again on the 29th with Mr. Reid of the Public Works Department, with a view to settling the question of concrete drains from shopbouses to the river. It was agreed that the original parit scheme could be greatly amended and a report will be banded to you in due course. Arriving on a wet day I found the bazaar in a very muddy condition all over, and it would be of advantage if the area could be surfaced with gravel which is easily and cheaply obtainable from the river there. A turning place and parking ground for cars has now been made at the road end and adds really to amenities of the bazaar. On the 8th I went out to 6th mile to look into the case of a motor bus, which had overturned on the road, being completely shattered and injuring one person.
LAND OFFICE. The Land Officer, Mr. B. Summers, reports:—  Mr. T. E. Parker arrived from England on the 21st to take his appointment in this Department.
Demand Notes in connection with arrears of quit rent are now being issued.
On Wednesday the 23rd I went to Bukit Pam (24½ mile, Simanggang Road), accompanied by one Assistant Land Inspector and two Apprentice Inspectors, to make an inspection of all land in and adjoining the territory applied for by Messrs. Nissa Shokai.
I visited three kampongs and made arrangements with the Dyaks for cutting of rentis in readiness for the Inspector to examine the land. On Friday 25th I returned to Kuching.
The investigations that me being made by Mr. T. M. Griffiths into the titles, etc., of holdings within the Simanggang Road Land Reserves are now completed as far as the 15th mile. They have resulted in the reversion to Government of some 1,260 acres of land.
Upper SARAWAK, BAU. The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, reports :—
General.—The first few days of the month were engaged in the usual functions of clearing up the last month’s reports and accounts.
On the 4th I went to BUSO in the morning to choose a site for an oil and benzene store. A suitable site was found and orders given for the erection in as short a time as possible. The gaol was inspected and found in good order.
For the next few days nothing of importance occurred. On the 9th I inspected all the bridges on the Dahan road and gave orders for their re-construction, as some of them seem to be suffering from the effects of the recent floods, and the soft wood planks have given way very rapidly. I had arranged to go to Lundu about the middle of the month, and His Highness the Tuan Muda, having made similar plant suggested that I should go with him in H.H.S.Y Maimuna, starting from Kuching on Tuesday 15th I accordingly left for Kuching on 14th and we sailed the next day. With His Highness were the Dayang Anne, Capt. and Mrs. Le Sueur, Mr. Rennie, and Mr. and Mrs. Forrest.
Leaving Kuching at 9 a.m. on the 15th we reached Lundu the same evening and a very hearty welcome was accorded to their Highnesses. An arch decked with flags was erected on the Pengkallan and another inscribed with messages of welcome was over the entrance to the road to the Fort. A large and representative crowd headed by Abang Zamhari N.O., Orang Kaya Jumat and Abang Merali, were waiting on the Pengkallan ready to greet His Highness. His Highness went straight to the Fort and sat down and spoke to the chief men and also listened to several requests. An address was read on behalf of the Malay community.	
The next day His Highness sat in Court and listened to various requests—chiefly the usual ones for money and to be let off tax. It need hardly be mentioned that requests for sural senapang were included. A request to fell old jungle for farming purposes was held in abeyance by His Highness for further inquiries about the matter. The Treasurer checked the cash and books and found all in order.
The next day we sailed to Simatan and found the Court Writer Leman somewhat overcome by the sudden visit. The Tua Kampong was absent on our arrival, but arrived later from Lundu on s.v. Ulu. The cash was again checked at Simatan and appeared all right. After spending a few hours at Simatan we sailed to Talang Talang Islands where two nights were spent. While at Talang Talang Mr. W. Clark appeared in a small boat in which he had sailed from the Natunas.
From Talang Talang Lundu was again visited and two nights spent there. Their Highnesses, accompanied by Mr. Rennie and myself, walked down Kampong Stunggang to the Mission. This was an occasion for two more addresses and for the refreshment of the party. A visit was also paid to Orang Kaya Jumat’s house, much to the satisfaction of the Dyak community who wished their Highnesses could have stayed longer. A football match and some dancing was also arranged on the football field the next afternoon. The gathering to watch this was almost entirely Dyak.
Sunday 20th and part of Monday were spent at Satang, from which island we returned to Kuching after a very enjoyable trip.
On Tuesday I returned to Bau.
Nothing further of importance occurred during the month.
Public World.—Contracts for the building of a Dispensary, a Native Officer's quarters and a dresser's quarters, under the estimates for this year, have been entered into, and also for an extension to the male gaol. These contracts are all within the estimates. During the month the Principal Medical Officer paid a visit and expressed satisfaction with what had been done.
The bridges on the Dahan road are being repaired where necessary, and this road is being raised as Jambusan where it is flooded with the slightest drop of rain. In addition to this ditches are being made to let the water off and a large hole has been found right through the rocky hill there by which the water can be drained through. I feel I ought to add that these improvements are being carried out by the Dahan Rubber Estates with their own labour force.
Prisons—The prisoners have averaged 41.66 during the month and have been occupied on the general upkeep of the station.
Agriculture.—The harvest is now over and it has proved in this district very satisfactory, especially when the land Dyaks farming methods are taken into account. The number of Pepper Occupation Tickets issued were four and Rubber Occupation Ticket one.
Court.—Court work has been fairly heavy during the month.
Rainfall.—The rainfall recorded for the month was 6.39 inches.
SADONG. The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports:—
Court.—In the Lower Court numerous cases were heard but these were mostly trivial.
A Coroner’s inquest was held on the body of Jijah (f). The body was found in the river near the wharf and on inspection wounds were found on the body and a stab wound in the neck. A verdict of murder was found against her husband Tambi Kassim. The preliminary inquiry into the case of His Highness the Rajah vs. Tambi Kassim was held and Tambi Kassim was remanded for trial.
P.W.D.—The Government Carpenter has been at work on the extension to the store which is now completed.
The contractor on the new Kampong Saging Colliery Road has now completed some two hundred fathoms.  Orders have been given him to make the road base 20 feet broad tapering to 17 feet on its surface. This should help to strengthen the road tnd also prevent it from falling into the ditches. At the present time its base and surface are vertical.
The new contract bridge over the Simunjan River is nearing completion.
Road surfacing this year will be greatly impeded as the Colliery have only a small quantity of shale available. The question of gravel from up river was looked into but it was found that the cost would be prohibitive.
The trace for the Tabekang-Kuching Road has now been made and the length is approximately 7.86 miles over undulating country.
Medical.—On the l0th a Dyak from Ensika, Ulu Sebangan, reported that nine people had accidentally eaten rat poison. The Dresser was immediately ordered to proceed to the place. On his arrival the death of one woman by name Umboon was reported, the remaining eight cases were treated and have all survived. An inquiry, was held and it was found that accidentally rat poison was used instead of flour in the making of some cakes.
Dresser Suhaili, arrived on the 10th to relieve Dresser Ho Ah Khiew, who returned on the 18th to Kuching.
Travelling.—On the 7th Native Officer Abang Hamdan proceeded to Kuala Sadong to find the correct channel. He returned on the 9th.
On the 29th I left for the Sebangan, accompanied by Native Officer, Abang Hamdan, and had not returned at the end of the month.
Agriculture.— Mr. Goodall arrived on the 4th and. left the same day. Messrs. Allman and Dare arrived on the 5th on an inspection of coconut gardens and also the Sedilo padi area.		
General.—I took over the Station from Mr. F. G. Carpenter on the 19th. Mr. Carpenter left for Kuching on the 21st by s.s. Alice Lorraine. Mr. S. W. Harris arrived back from Kuching on the 22nd to resume his duties at the Colliery.
Messrs. R. G. Aikman and H. C. P. Adams visited the Station during the month.
Sadong Collieries Report. May, 1930. Report on Sadong Mines for May, 1930, by Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager. The fine weather continued throughout the month. This had a salutary effect on output mined from the shallow workings.
I left for Kuching on duty on the 21st and Singapore on the 24th, and I was still away at the end of the month.
One “Chong Mee,” an old Chinese employee, died at the local hospital on the 18th.
One “Konapakari," an old Tamil employee, died on the 20th.	
“Tan Ah Yong,” a recent recruit from Kuching, had a fatal fall from a coconut tree at Yong Chiap’s garden and died on the 28th.
The rainfall for the month was 3.87 inches.
Kuching Rifle Club. The next Monthly Handicap will take place on Thursday and Sunday, 3rd and 6th July, at 4.30 p.m.
The third Thursday in each month will, in future, include Rapid and Snapshooting practices.
The Sarawak Chinese Recreation Club. BADMINTON. The Badminton Tournament open to all comers, which commenced early in June, has made considerable progress. Some very keen and exciting contests were seen, notably those of Wee Ah Chiew and Lee Cheng Liong vs. Lee Yeng Tak and Lim Ho Siong, in the Doubles, and Chua Teck Hee vs. John Chen, in the Singles.
There were not a very large number of entries but nearly all the Badminton parties are represented. The draw and the results up to date are as follows:—
Men's Singles. 1st Round.—Wee Leng Geng (Watt Hua B.P.) beat Low Khiok How (S.C.R.C.) w.o.; Lee Yeng Nam (Watt Hua B.P.) vs. Chua Tin Chiong (Watt Hua B.P.) to play. 2nd Round.—Wee Leng Geng beat John Ong (Government quarters) 13—7, 15—11; Lee Yeng Tak (Watt Hun B.P.) beat K. P. Yap (Chinese Inst.) Deuce 3—0, 1—15, and 15—8; Wee Ah Chiew (Sarawak Union)beat Matthew Chai (Haji Taha Road B.P.) 15—1, 15—5; Ong Seh Kaw (Watt Hua B.P.) beat Lee Swee Hock (Government quarters B.P.) 15—8, 15—5, Lim Ho Siong (Watt Hua) beat Lee Kwi Yu (Sarawak Union) Deuce 3—2, 15—6; Wee Peng Kai (Watt Hua) beat P. Nadarajah (Sarawak Union) 15—7, 15—2; Chua Teck Hee (Sarawak Union) beat John Chen (St. Joseph’s School) 15—7, 7—15 and 15—12; T. Ek Seng vs. winner of Lee Yeng Nam vs. C. Tin Chiang to play.
Men's Doubles. 1st Round.—Wan Agus and Ibrahim (Kampong Gersik B.P.) beat A. M. Kassim and Mohd. Habib (Kampong Masjid B.P.) 21—17, 21—12; T. Ek Seng and L. Khiok How (S.C.R.C) beat Henton Tan and K. K. Law (S.C.R. C.) 21—4, 21—6; Jobli and Mat (Kampong Gersik B.P.) beat T. Choon Eng and C. Nit Joon (Padungan B.P.), 21—7, 21—4; John Chen and Francis Chen (St. Joseph’s School) beat T. Teo Hin and L. Soo Hock (Padungan B.P.) 21—7, 21—9; Wee Ah Chiew and Lee Cheng Liong (Watt Hua) beat L. Ho Siong and Yeng Tak (Watt Hua) 21—15, 21—17.
2nd Round.—Wan Agus and Ibrahim beat C. Ah Khong and John Ong (Government quarters) Deuce 3 —0, Deuce 2—3, 21—17 ; Yeng Nam and Seh Kaw (Watt Hua) beat Ek Seng and Khiok How (S.C.R.C.) 21—6, 21—5; Jobli and Mat beat Bol Hassan and Suleiman (Sarawak Malay Tennis Club) 21—3, 21—6; Wee Peng Kai and Tin Chiang (Watt Hua) beat Kui Yu and Kok Yun (St. Thomas’ School) 21—6, 21—11; Leng Gong and Kim Fah (Watt Hua) beat Yau Tang and Cheng Mok (S. C.R.C.) 21—2, 21—6; Morgan Chai and P. Chai (Haji Taha Road B.P.) beat Nadarajah and Teck Hak (Sarawak Union) 21—9, 21—14; John Chen and Francis Chen beat Lai Watt and Matthew Chai (Haji Taha Road B.P.) 21—10, 21—7; Ah Chiew and Cheng Liong beat Kuang Suah and Yam Thong (Min Teck School) 21—8, 21—0.
3rd Round.—Yeng Nam and Seh Kaw beat Wan Agus and Ibrahim 21—4, 21—5; Peng Kai and Tin Chiang beat Jobli and Mat 21—4, 21—12 ; Leng Geng and Kim Fah vs. M. Chai and P. Chai to play, John Chen and Francis Chen vs. Ah Chew and Cheng Liong to play.
PING-PONG. Messrs. Law Brothers have promised to present a Silver Cup and a Medal for a Ping-Pong Competition open to all, should there be a sufficient number of entries. Players intending to enter in the Competition are requested to communicate with the Hon. Secretary, Sarawak Chinese Recreation Club, as early as possible. If sufficient entries are forthcoming arrangements for the draw and matches will be made at an early date.
CHINESE FOOTBALL LEAGUE. It is proposed to hold a football League Competition open to Chinese Teams in Kuching, for a Cup to be presented by Messrs. Law Brothers. All those who are interested are requested to communicate with Mr. C. P. Law and arrangements will be made at an early date.
The Sarawak Malay Tennis Club. A pleasant little function took place on Saturday afternoon the 7th June, when the Club entertained the members and friends at a tea party. Amongst those present were Mrs. Boult, Mr. Gillan, Datu Shahbandar and Datu Amar (President of the Club). Soon after this, the final of the singles tennis tournament between Marican (scr.) and Rakawi (+15) was played off, resulting in a win for the former in two straight sets 6—1,6—1. Marican was in his top form, played very carefully and steadily throughout the match only to allow his opponent to have the fourth game in the first set and the second came in the last set.
The sodden court, due to a heavy downpour of rain a couple of hours before tho match started, was partly responsible for the heavy defeat. Both players deserved congratulations. A fairly big crowd turned up to wit-ness the interesting and keenly contested match.
Thanks are due to Mr. C. S. Lim for umpiring.
The prizes were distributed by Mrs. Boult, who congratulated the winner and runner-up on being recompensed for their achievements.	
Tea was served on the lawn, suitably decorated with bunting and flowers for the purpose. Ali bin Hj. Hassan and Abang Suhai were in charge of refreshments.
In a short speech in Malay, Datu Amar thanked Mrs. Boult for having so kindly distributed the prizes, was pleased to see the members are very keen at game of tennis and much appreciated the improvment shown by the players. He would like, at any time when there be an open tennis tournament in Kuching, this club be represented.	
The club was indebted to Mr. L. K. L. Chan or kindness in allowing this function to be held at his premises, and the tournament played off on his private tennis court.	
RAKAWl BIN USOP, Honorary Secretary.
Kuching Football Club. At the Annual General Meeting held on 28th June, 1930, the following Officers were elected for 1930-1931:— President, J. P. Baird; Captain, H. Mackay ; Vice-Captain, T. A. Reid; Treasurer, W. J. Chater; Secretary, W. H. Kelley; Cricket Captain, C. S. Griffiths.
Club News. The game between the Kuching Football Club and Highness the Tuan Muda's Outstation team, played during Race Week on 4th May, was probably the best game seen since the revival of cricket in Kuching.
The Tuan Muda’s team batted first and Hudden and Crossley wasted no time in getting going. Both men batted well and the score had reached 67 before the former was run out. Crossley followed shortly afterwards. Barcroft failed, but Arundell and P. M. Adams quickly added 50 and the innings was declared closed with the score at 129 for four wickets.
Moir and Bates opened the Club's innings and put on 21 before the latter left. Each of the succeeding batsmen made a few runs, but with six men out for 92 the prospect did not look too rosy. Boult and Middlemas then became associated and, though Hudden and Crossley were both bowling well, the score slowly mounted to within 4 of the Outstation total, when the former was dismissed for an invaluable 11.
It then became a fight against time as well as against the total of the other side, but eventually, amid tremendous excitement, the winning hit was made during the last over of the day. Immediately afterwards Arundell, fielding at cover, brought off a terrific left-handed catch to send Barraclough back and the game, which will long be remembered alike by players and spectators, was over.
KUCHING FOOTBALL CLUB VS. THE NONDESCRIPTS. A match between these two sides was played on 11th May, the Nondescripts winning easily. Nadarajah and Fernando each scored 25 by excellent cricket, the latter being not out at the end of the innings.
KUCHING FOOTBALL CLUB VS. THE NONDESCRIPTS. These two sides met again on 1st June, when the Club was again defeated, though not so badly as on the previous occasion.
A feature of the game was that Fernando and Philip Soo Foo bowled unchanged throughout the Club's innings. Both men bowled well, the latter taking 7 wickets for 23 runs.
KUCHING FOOTBALL CLUB vs. H.M.S. Herald, SHORE PARTY. This match, played on the 8th June, will be remembered by all who witnessed or took part in it, for the very remarkable performance of R. L. Moir, for the Club. 
The Club batted first and made 117 for 7 wickets and declared at that score. Of these Moir obtained 52 before retiring.
The Shore Party started well, the first wicket falling at 23 and the second at 42. There was no further addition to the score, however, before the whole side was out. Moir was almost entirely responsible for this extraordinary debacle.
When the second wicket fell at 43 he had already bowled one over, a maiden. The first three balls of his second over yielded neither runs nor wickets, but the last three each disposed of a batsman, the stumps being hit on each occasion. Barraclough then bowled a maiden over in which he took a wicket.
Moir opened his third over by taking a wicket with each of the first three balls, the first and third victims being clean bowled while the second was taken in the slips by Bates. Barraclough followed with another maiden over and Moir finished off the innings by clean bowling the last batsman with the first ball of his fourth over.
He thus took 7 wickets with his last ten balls, six of which were with consecutive balls, and hit the stumps six times out of the seven. His full analysis was as follows:-
Balls, 19; Wickets, 7; Runs, Nil.
The innings thus closed for 42, of which Petty Officer Kendall, who played sound cricket, was responsible for 30.
Turf Club Notes. As the financial year ended on 30th June, the Hon. Secretary will be glad to have a note of any bills not as yet settled. He will also esteem it a favour if members and others who may happen to owe the Club for Subscriptions, Entrance Fees, etc., will settle these as soon as possible.
The Autumn Meeting has been fixed provisionally, for 27th and 29th September next and, so that the Committee can get an idea as to “fields," owners and/or "trainers" will oblige by informing the Hon. Secretary of ponies which definitely will not compete.
There is now no time to import new blood, and our indefatigable handicapper will just have to content himself with a re-shuffle.
Come along the dark horses, or, as the cadet put it, “Bawa kudah bulat”! 
Second Division News. Divisional Reports. May, 1930. Extract from Second Division Report for May, 1930, by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident:—
I returned to Simanggang on the 9th when Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas reported nothing of much importance. Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft accompanied me from Kuching to take up his appointment as Cadet in Simanggang. Mr. R. L. Daubeny and Mr. D. C. Hudden returned to their respective districts at the same time.
Mr. W. Sochon, Assistant Superintendent of Police, arrived from Kuching on the 14th in order to prosecute in a case wherein Tan Gek Cheng, Court Writer of Lingga, was charged with tampering with registered letter. On the next day the accused was tried and found guilty and sentenced to three years' imprisonment. Mr. Sochon returned to Kuching on the 16th.
On the 23rd, accompanied by Datu Haji Dulrashid, I left for the Saribas, stopping the first night at Sebuyow. Betong was reached on the next day. Pengarah Isek tad Penghulu Ijau had little, to say, except to complain of the poor harvest and the shortage of good farming land. It was pointed out that large areas of old farming land had been planted with rubber by the Dyaks themselves. It seems as if the time is coming when more exact and painstaking methods of padi farming will have to be adopted by the natives if rubber remains at a low price and they rely on their padi for existence. Much empty land is said to be unsuitable for padi planting and is left entirely uncultivated. It would be interesting to know if this is really so, or whether scientific methods and a certain amount of hard labour would result in making this despised land profitable. Whilst in Betong I called a meeting of the principal Malays with regard to reopening the Government Vernacular School there. A report has been sent in to the Director of Education. The school building is in a good state of repair and is used as a Malay Court.	
I visited St. Augustine's Mission, where the Revd. W. Linton kindly showed me over the buildings. It was noticed that hand weaving is still taught in the Dyak girls' school there. This is an encouraging sign, as from all reports the art of weaving amongst the Saribas women is in danger of dying out.
Whilst at Pangarah lsek's house, the proposal to make a road to Pengkallan Plasok, ulu Skrang, was mooted. At present a good road runs from the Fort to the Pangarah’s house, a distance of about 3 miles.
With regard to certain questions about Malay farming land, it was laid down that the previous ruling that the land at Blah, Sesak and Bikut should be farmed by the Spaoh Malays was to be upheld.
On the 28th, accompanied by the Assistant District Officer. Mr. R. L. Daubeny, I went to Debak, after calling in at Pusa for a while. Penghulu Sujang was there, and a large number of Dyaks. There were no cases of importance except a property dispute between Belenyun and her former husband Gelanggang, a well-known Dyak. The matter was postponed pending a possible settlement out of Court.
The Capitan China resigned and a new man will be elected in due course. Several Chinese traders asked Government to finance their pepper gardens. An attempt was made to reopen the old Malay-Dyak land squabble which was settled many years ago.
Whilst in Debak I reserved a piece of land for the S.P.G. Mission there. At present the buildings are of a temporary nature only.
I noticed a very creditable attempt to encourage agriculture had been made by a Chinese who is, I understand, a connection of Mr. Tan Sum Guan. Coffee had been planted and carefully looked after, and all the plants were looking well. Vegetables of all kinds were being tried, and a large fish pond constructed and stocked with Chinese carp. It is these go-ahead methods by a few energetic Chinese themselves that have influence and bear weight with their fellow Chinese gardeners, and induce them to follow the example set.
I left Debak on the 30th, dropping Mr. Daubeny at Pusa, and went right through to Simanggang the same day.
At Pusa an inspection of the Mosque was made and it was found to be in a dangerous state of repair.
A contract was signed for the erection of a bungalow for the Assistant District Officer at Saratok. Building operations are going on in Simanggang and Saratok, and 4 site has been prepared for the Astana at Simanggang. 
I called in at Lingga on the 9th, and the question came up again regarding the request by certain Chinese to build a bazaar at Tanjong Embawang in the Lingga. I told the Capitan China, Lingga, and the head of the petitioners to come to Simanggang. The latter failed to appear at the time agreed upon, so nothing further has been done in the matter.
A Malay was engaged as an Assistant Land Inspector and sent to Kuching for training, and another lad was sent to be trained as a teacher.
Appended are extracts from the reports of Simanggang (Mr. Ditmas), Saribas (Mr. Daubeny, Assistant District Officer), Kalaka (Mr. Morse, Acting Assistant District Officer), and Police and Prisons, Simanggang (Mr. Bareroft).
Simanggang.-On the 8th the Rubberneck was sent down from Engkilili by. Mr. Goodall with a Chinese girl who had been accidentally shot at very close range with a shot gun, her left upper arm was shattered and there were wounds in her back. The girl is the daughter of Liew Swee On, and she had been shot by a man called Liew San, who, it seems, was playing with the gun, and as usual thought it to be unloaded. Liew San, immediately after the shooting, ran off, and has not yet been found, the police have been searching for him with a warrant. Since the dresser could not do much for her, the girl was sent to Kuching hospital the next day.
On the 18th it was reported that a Dyak aged about 35, of R. Kuma, Sila, fell from the padong of the house, while fetching something, and died about two hours later. The dresser saw the body later, and said that the death was caused by internal injuries.
The 24th was a Public holiday.
On the 28th Jeragan of the m.v. Mas Jaya, which arrived from Kuching, reported that the m.v. Hong Soon Huat was made fast to the river bank, at Skra, with a large hole in the hull. The cargo had been removed to the bank. The Hong Soon Huat left here for Kuching on 27th.
Saribas.- Court work has been light during the month.
The prison gang has been employed on the usual routine work during the month. Coolies have also been engaged for clearing the site of the old bazaar, which work has now been completed.
Captain and Mrs. Le Gros Clark arrived here in the s.s. Lucile on 14th and left for Kuching again on 15th.
On 23rd the body of a Chinese was found floating in the river at Betong opposite the kampong. The deceased was recognized as the tinsmith in the bazaar, by name Jong Ten, and at an inquest held the same day a verdict of death by drowning was brought in.
Kalaka.—Penghulu Nyalu reported that a Malay, who called himself Abang Gapor, was selling silver chains in the Awek River. On examination it was found that these chains were not silver. A warrant was issued, but Gapor could not be found.
Penghulu Undom brought down a party of Chinese who were suspected of counterfeiting, but there was not enough evidence, and the case was dismissed.
Complaints were made about Chinese and others, trading up river. On investigation being made it was found that the regulations regarding up river traders had fallen into disuse. They have now been renewed. Several Tuai Rumah complained that these traders open shop on the ruai and live in the long house at the expense of the Dyaks.
I left for Kabong and Roban from the 11th and returned to Saratok on 19th May.
The election of a Tua Kampong for Kampong Ulu was well under way at the end of the month.
I spent five days at Kabong during the month. During my stay the contract for the schoolmaster's house, Kabong, was signed and the contractor had begun to collect materials when I left. The old stables at Kabong have been turned into temporary quarters for a policeman. All the whitewashing and tarring of the Government buildings was finished at the end of the month,
Work on the Saratok Bazaar road continued until the end of the month. The road has been raised with earth, and stopped with stone. Nothing has been done to the drain on the river side, as any digging there would only encourage land slides, while the drain on the inside has only been cleared of grass and logs.
A contract for the continuation of the Sebetan-Roban road was signed and the contractor had started work at the end of the month. I am now endeavouring to get a contract for the upkeep of the road from Saratok to Sebetan which is in a very bad state.
The cattle shed was demolished and removed by the prisoners and the site prepared for the erection of the District Officer's Bungalow.
The roof and flooring of the schoolmaster's house at Saratok was completed during the month, and the contractor had started on the walling at the end of the month.
Saratok Mosque affairs are in a sorry condition. Tenders were asked for the completion of the new building, but no tender has been sent in as yet. The grounds round the Mosque are in a disgraceful condition and, although the Tuan linam has been ordered to have it cleaned up, nothing has beeu done. The people do not seem to take any interest in it whatsoever.
Sgt. Ipan, who has been seconded from Kuching as instructor, is expected to remain in Simanggaug for two or three weeks more until Cpl. Dani returns from his course at Kuching.
At the beginning of the month the substation Police were re-stationed. In future the Police will be moved every three months.
On the 1st May the new scale of pay, as per General Order No. 24 of 1st March, 1930, was brought into force in the Second Division.
At the end of the month a slight improvement was noticed in the drill and general smartness of the Police; the barracks were clean and in good repair. This month there were only four defaulters.
Prisoners daily average for May 60.70.
During this month the prisoners were employed as usual.
SARIBAS. April, 1930. Court work has been light during the month.
David Chulo, Assistant Land Inspector, arrived here to do duty in the Saribas in place of Abang Dondang, who has returned to Kuching for his examinations.
The prison gang have been employed on the usual routine work during the month.
A contract was made out for the repair of Court Writer’s quarters, Betong.
Coolies were engaged to clear and burn all the rubbish on the old attap bazaar sites and the work was not yet finished at the end of the month.
Good Friday, Saturday and Easter Monday, were public holidays and the offices were closed. The Right Rev. the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak arrived in in m.l. Santosa on the 4th, and left for Saratok, accompanied by Rev. W. Linton, on the 7th instant.
Mr. R. L. Daubeny, Assistant District Officer, left by m.s. Kedurong for Kuching on the 25th to attend race-week, and was still away at end of the month.
Mr. G. M. Allman, of the Agricultural Department, arrived here in m.l. Para on the 27th. After having a short discussion with the rubber instructor he left again for Sebuyow.	
The dresser visited substations from 13th to 17th instant.	
Thirteen motor ships entered and cleared during the month.
Third Division News. Divisional Reports. May, 1930. Extract from Third Division Report for May, 1930, by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident:—
Resident's Court.— Criminal, three cases heard and three convictions; civil cases, three heard claims amounting to $5,320.63. Fees $73.25.
I returned from Kuching from attending Race Week on the 9th instant.
Mr. Wren arrived to take up appointment as an assistant to Rejang Plantations, Limited, on 13th instant.
I visited Sarikei from 16th to 18th instant and settled up outstanding Resident Court cases and appeals.
The position of new wharf was chosen, and the Malays in that vicinity ordered to remove to Kampong Reserve down river.
Assistant Surveyor spent most of the month at Kanowit in connection with the remaining area required by Rejang Plantations, Limited.
R.A.F. Flying Boats, attached to Singapore Base. S1419 and S 149, arrived from Kuching on the 30th instant and left the same day direct for Miri after delivering mails.
Mr. A. Macpherson, on behalf of District Officer, Sibu, reports:-
Courts.— In the District Court twenty criminal eases heard with six convictions, twenty-four civil cases, claims amounting to $7,652.73. In the Magistrate's Court three criminal cases heard with two convictions, sixty-seven civil cases, claims amounting to $1,94850.
General.— The Resident was still away at the beginning of the month. On the 6th Mr A. Macpherson came down from Kapit to take over the duties of the District Officer, Mr. W F. Dick, who proceeded on two months’ leave on the 10th.
The Resident, accompanied by the District Officer, Mukah, and Mr. and Mrs. Spurway, returned from Kuching on 9th.
Two inquests were held on bodies of 1. A Foochow woman named Wong Ah Kiew; 2. A Foochow named Woh Chieng Tuong; verdicts of death by misadventure were brought in on both cases.
The Resident left for Sarikei on 15th, returning on 18th.	
Mr. C P. Lowe, Director Public Works, arrived at Sibu on 21st, leaving the following day.
Other visitors to the station included Mr. Gilbert, Dr. and Mrs. Hutchison, Capt. Smith, Mr. Parnell, Mr. McTavish and Mr. Hughes.
The District Officer, Lower Rejang, Mr. E. V. Andreini, reports:—
The Datu Shahbandar’s herd of eighty-six cattle was purchased by Government, together with rights over the land between Kuala Matu and Bruan.
Padi has been planted over a large part of this area, mostly by people who formerly farmed at a great distance from their homes. It would appear to be also very suitable for coconuts, sugarcane, etc.
A system of irrigation at Matu and Daro would open up immense possibilities as an agricultural district.
P.W.D-, etc., Daro.—The contractor started work on the new Daro Court ,House and quarters.
Belawai. — The new bazaar was commenced.
Selalang.— The new bazaar is now finished and occupied.
General.— I accompanied Capt. C. D. Le Gros Clark, Protector of Labour and Secretary for Chinese Affairs, to Rejang, Belawai, Jerijeh and Selalang, where various matters connected with his department were discussed and arranged.
Capt. Le Gros Clark met most of the principal Chinese at these places.
Tuanku Mohamat, Native Officer, Rejang, proceeded on two months' leave, Abang Haji Gapor from Sibu is acting for him.
Health.—The dresser from Rejang was transferred to Matu and a small dispensary started there.
A female leper named Rami was sent to Kuching.
Vaccination was carried out at Kuala Matu.
Wireless.— A wireless mechanic examined the wireless plant and effected various repairs.
The Divisional Land Officer, Mr. C. E. Pascoe, reports:—
Mr. N. E. Hughes, Land Officer, Binatang and Sarikei, was absent on leave until the 21st of the month, when he returned via Kuching to resume charge of these stations.
I paid a visit, with Mr. Hammond, Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, to Kanowit, and together we made a running survey of the Sungei Wok as well as examining the river frontage between Sungei Sengayang and Sungei Wok. It was found that by running a line from Bukit Kali to the Nanga Wok, more than 400 acres of land, approximately the amount required to make up the Rejang Plantations deficiency in area, would be available. The land included in this area consists largely of Dyak clearings and farming land; We visited two houses in the Wok and two on the Batang-Rejang frontage.
Shortly after returning from Kanowit, Sarikei was visited and all accumulated office work attended to. The site for the new Sarikei Bazaar was inspected, as well as the new kampong lots on the down river side of the Repok Road. Most of these have already been taken up, the Kampong people showing distinct keeness in each householder having his own separate plot.
White ants are playing havoc among the Bugis Colony’s coconut plantations at Sarikei.
Crocodiles.—Forty-four crocodiles were brought in by Tair Udin of Leba-an and rewards were paid to him. 
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Kapit, Mr, A. Macpherson, reports:— 
Courts— No cases of importance were heard.
Dairy Farm-—Kribang is still being fed to thin cattle with excellent results. Three cow calves were born, making the herd forty-four head at the end of the month. 
Prison.— One man admitted and four men released during the month. Twenty-five men remained at end of month. Health was poor.
Song.—I visited on my way down to Sibu.
General — Dyaks are busy on their farms. I left Kapit on 6th for Sibu to take over the District Officer’s duties there. I was still away at the end of the month. Visitors to the Station including Divisional Treasurer and Superintendent of Customs.
Wireless.—One new mast was put up on 9th.
The Land Officer, Sarikei and Binatang, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports for April:-
Sarikei.—Land payments at this station totalled $745 but there is still a lot of quit rent outstanding.
On the 13th I visited the Sungei Jakar Peninjau district in company with the Divisional Land Officer and the Superintendent of Surveys, Sibu, we made a complete tour of the pepper gardens in this locality and obtained a good idea of the general lie of the land.
Binatang.— On the 4th I left for the ulu Binatang to look for a site for the proposed Cantonese Pepper Reserve. I was accompanied by the Tua Kampong, Binatang, who acted as guide, and we walked through the Raya, ulu Raya and Ensurai areas, where there are already a large number of Cantonese pepper gardens in bearing.
The Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. C. O. Gange, reports: —
The total rainfall recorded during the month was 6. 89.
Two hundred and twenty-seven various specimens were examined during May for pathological work.
On the 13th I left for Sarikei and Binatang investigating the water supply, returning to Sibu on the 15th.	 _
Dresser Mohamad Bauk was away on the 3rd to the 12th May, doing vaccinations at Oya, Mukah, Balingian, Kuala Balingian and Igan. returning on the 12th instant.
On the 15th instant Assistant Surgeon Charles Mason left for Rejang to supervise the transfer of Rejang Dispensary to Matu, returning on the 19th May, 1930.	
During the month the alterations to the two main hospital wards were completed. The interiors were repainted, twelve louvered windows and asbestos ceiling were placed in each ward. Additional electric light fittings were put in all the wards as well as in the store and mortuary. The kitchen and a small laundry are in the process of construction by the Public Works Department.
Work will shortly commence upon the isolation ward.	
Concreting beneath the drug store and widening of its roof was finished before the beginning of the month.
The health of the European community still re-mains good
The District Officer, Mukah and Oya, Mr. P. M. Adams, reports:—
General.—I returned from Kuching on the 11th Mr. Elam had been over from Oya and attended to outstanding affairs during my absence. The Malay Bangsawan has wandered back from Oya and there seems no way to get rid of these people who are a nuisance. The month has been excessively hot and dry.
Court.—Ah Tong, an ex-prisoner, was sentenced to one year for aiding in the disposal of the District Officer's clothes which were stolen last month. Two Dyaks were imprisoned to one and six months, respectively in lieu of incest fines.
Health —A severe type of flu has been prevalent producing high fever, cough and weakness.
Marine.—The lighthouse keeper's quarters has been erected on the new site at Balingian and a new mast is ready to be erected when surveyors have fixed the position.
Travelling.—I visited Balingian from 18th to 20th.
Dyaks.-Two guns were confiscated from Dyaks who had moved up river beyond the spot laid down some years ago.
Obituary.—The wife of Awang Juli, Native Officer, Balingian, died on the 14th after a long illness. Abang Mustapha has temporarily taken over Awang Juli's duties.
P.W.D.—The Electrical Barracks were completed and light installed. The annual whitewashing was begun. Mower Abang was discharged for slackness. The contractor has prepared most of his timbers for the Balingian Police Barracks. Owing to the drought it has been more difficult than ever to keep up the supply of coal to the waterworks. The high level tanks were cleaned and painted.
Trade.—One hundred and ten piculs of jelutong and 731 koyans of raw sago were shipped to Kuching. 
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Oya and Dalat, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports:—
General —At the beginning of the month Father Epping illuminated the Mission at Dalat with electric light. Since his arrival from Europe he has been working at wiring the school house and installing the engine, the whole of which he has done entirely by himself. A serious accident was narrowly escaped when the Revd. Father fell from the top of the church while wiring it, fortunately he fell clear of the pews and only sprained his back. The light is obtained from the batteries which need charging only once in ten days. The Fathers from Mukah were not able to be present for the opening but came over later in the month to celebrate.
The Bangsawan from Miri left half way through the month, most of the profits having been wasted owing to internal dissensions and Court cases. One of the members is still in the Oya jail.	
The health of the district has not been too good, most of the kampongs being down with an acute fever which appears to effect the eyes and back chiefly.
The Milanaus at Dalat continue to lease their rubber gardens to Chinese in order to obtain ready money, in spite of it being pointed out to them that they are losing considerably in the long run by so doing.
Court.-In the Oya Courts there were no cases worthy of mention. At Dalat two men were sentenced to one month jail for contempt of court and on release to pay their exemption tax from 1928 doubled.
Prison.—The prison gang averaging 12.83 were employed in whitewashing all Government buildings at Oya and also Dalat.
P.W.D.—Work on Day's road continued very satisfactorily. Further rentising was done and about another 250 fathoms raised. Only another 200 fathoms now remain to the outskirts of the jungle, 100 of which, however, are very swampy, and it will have to be examined properly to see if one long bridge would not be better and cheaper than raising it.
Estate.—During the month five estates were finished off at Dalat. These have all been waiting for many months owing to the fact that there is only one Land Inspector for the whole district. This department must naturally suffer since no estate can be finished off till all the gardens have been marked up, occupation tickets issued, and the fees paid.
Rainfall.—The total rainfall recorded during the month was 4.40 inches; the greatest fall in any one day being 1.20 inches.
Shipping.—Six motor schooners and 6 schooners entered and 7 motor schooners and 9 schooners cleared.
Trade— Four hundred and fifty-nine koyans raw sago, 38 pikuls jelutong and 51 pikuls rubber para were shipped to Kuching.
The Divisional Engineer, Mr. J. W. Whiteside reports:—
Sibu Buildings.—The ten shophouses in Market Road, being erected by Messrs. Gammon, Ltd., are approaching completion.
The walls to the remaining eleven houses in Channel Road being erected by this firm are being filled in with brick and are expected to be completed two months hence.
Work is continuing on the five brick shops being erected by local merchants in Channel Road.
The walls of the European Bungalow being erected near the Residency are being filled with expanded metal and plaster and will be completed one month hence.
Alterations and repairs have been carried out to the District Officer's bungalow. Minor repairs have been carried out to other Government Buildings.
Two clerks' quarters are being erected at the Green Road site, and work has commenced on the erection of quarters for the Sanitary Inspector.
Earth filling and the laying of concrete drains to Government quarters has been continued during the month. A few buildings only now remain to be drained.
A series of concrete tables have been erected in the market for the use of stall-holders.
Wharves.—Work on the billian wharf is proceeding satisfactorily but slowly.
Waterworks.—A nine-horse-power pump has been installed on the Island Road 3-inch main to increase the pressure during the daylight hours to the services on that line.
The third filter tank has been connected. Water services are being laid to the newly completed shops in the bazaar.
Roads.-Earth filling to the bazaar has been  continued as the buildings are completed Concrete drains have been laid in Cross Road and Blacksmith Road.
Outstations.-Sarikei and Binatang.—Good progress is being made on the concrete wharf being erected at Binatang. The erection of staging at the proposed Sarikei wharf has commenced and good progress is being made. The gravelling and forming and widening of the inland roads at Sarikei and Binatang has been continued.
Daro and Matu.—The framework of the new Court house at Daro has been erected. Five of the owners of sites in the new bazaar at Matu have let contracts for the erection of shophouses and work is about to commence. No actual progress has been made with the new jail at Matu, the contractor at present being engaged on the purchase and assembly of his materials.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Sarikei and Binatang, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports:—
General.—The Divisional Medical Officer visited the Station on 8th instant, in order to take two samples of water from Ulu Meradong, re proposed water supply. Mr. Nadig visited both stations frequently to supervise work proceeding on new wharves.
On 15th instant the Resident, Third Division, arrived in order to hear two appeal cases, and to see about compensation, etc., caused by building of new wharf. Resident returned on 18th.
Divisional Land Officer arrived 17th to look into land affairs in the absence of Mr. Hughes. Mr. Cobbold arrived on 17th to see if it was possible to buy pepper in Sarikei for B.C.L., the idea being that if they shipped direct to some firm in Singapore, they might probably be able to give a better price. Divisional Engineer also visited the station the same day.
On 21st Captain C. P. Lowe arrived from Kuching to inspect progress made by the wharves at both stations.
Mr. Hughes returned from local leave on 21st per m.s. Sri Mukah.
P.W.D., Local.—At Binatang, contracts have been given out to complete the road as far as Sungei Jabai, a distance of about five miles from the bazaar, this road is not yet gravelled for any distance.
The football ground at Binatang is nearly completed.
Prison.—Prisoners have been employed on filling in a small football ground just below the Methodist Church, also in filling in front of the Fort getting earth from upper river, at the same time getting water for Mr. Nadig, the river water now been salt and no use for cement work. They have also been employed in gravelling the Ropok Road.
Trade and Customs.—Trade as everywhere else was slack, rumours referring to the pepper crop are not reliable, one towkay will say it is going to be a bumper another that it is badly diseased. Towkays are asking that the pepper should be graded with a tax on the inferior quality.
The pepper should begin to come into the bazaar about the end of next month.
Fourth Division News. Divisional Reports. April, 1930.
Extracts from Fourth Division Report for April, 1930, by Mr. H. D. Aplin. Resident:—
General.— By an arrangement with the British Resident at Brunei, cars for hire may run between Miri and Kuala Belait miller certain conditions.
I proceeded to Binlulu by s.s. Auby on the 20th, returning to Miri by the s.s. Keppel on the 25th. This latter vessel should prove it very useful addition to the Sarawak Steamship Company's fleet, especially as a means of communication between stations in this Division.	.
No matters of great importance were brought before me. The Foochows complained that they were badly off at present as they could find no work. A great number have been employed in working timber but, owing to the bad times, the sawmills refuse to increase their stocks. Most of the jelutong roads are being worked already. I was able to give them temporary work on clearing the padang, and suggested that work might be found for them on opening a bench road from Kidurong towards Niah.
They all promised that this year they would plant padi, and the District Officer will make arrangements to choose a site for them.
Very good reports of the recent harvest have been received from Niah and Suai and, on the whole, the reports from other parts of Division are fair.
Mr. E.  O. Bruce, District Officer, Miri, left for Limbang by Straits boat on 1st to take up his appoinment as Acting Resident. Fifth Division Mr. J. G. Anderson was appointed Acting District Officer in his place and arrived on 7th.
Capt. C. P. Lowe. Director of Public Works, Mrs. Lowe, arrived from Singapore on 15th, sailing for Kuching on the 20th. During his visit he was able to advise on several works, principally the suggested drainage scheme of the Sarawak Oilfields Limited, for the kampongs and the water supply. 
The Director of Public Works advised that the present Tanjong Lobang lighthouse should be removed further back from the cliff edge owing to land-slides and this will be carried out. He was also able to arrange the charter of the s. s. Burong, belonging to the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, to make two trips to Kuching to bring up material for different works.
A matter of considerable local interest occurred when the wife of Lau Ah Meng, Towkay of Chop “Kim Guan” died, her funeral being a big affair.
The Offices were closed from 18th to 21st inclusive for the Easter holidays.
Mr. F. H. Pollard again arrived from Baram and the Senior Medical Officer was able to certify that he was suffering from malaria. After a few days he was able to return to his district.
Mr. J. G. Anderson was granted leave from 28th to attend the races in Kuching.
Pangiran Pemancha of Brunei landed from Straits boat on 29th and called on me.
The Acting District Officer Miri, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports as follows for the months of March and April, 1930:—
March, 1930.
Court.—There were a large number of cases before the Courts but none of any importance.
Travelling —Suai and Sibuti were visited from 1st to 4th. T. K. Haji Mahmut died on the 20th of February.
Municipal.—A meeting of the Sanitary and Municipal Advisory Board was held on the 14th.
Dr. Schneider submitted a scheme for Kampong drainage. Minutes of meeting have been submitted under separate cover.
P. W. D.—Old Rangers barracks behind Police Office pulled down. Clearing work was still in progress on bungalow site at Tanjong Lobang.
Two enrpentets on daily wages proceeded to Nish to erect a now Com t H< u-e.
Medical, Goverment Dispensary.—There were 89 patients treated during the month, these being mostly Malay and Sikh Police.
Immigration.— There were 250 Chinese immigrants during the month.
Prisoners.—Averaged 27 and were employed on sanitary and general work for P.W.D.
April, 1930.
Inquest.— Held on body of Ong Sam found hanging by the neck in room in Pajut Road. Senior Medical Officer gave his opinion that it was one of suicide. Court gave verdict to this effect.
General.— I arrived from Sibu on 7th April to act as District Officer vice Mr. E. O. Bruce, who had already proceeded to Limbing to act as Resident, Fifth Division.
The affairs of this office were handed over to me by the Resident, Fourth Division, Mr. H. D. Aplin.
I left for Kuching Races on 27th.
Municipal.- Assessment for Kampong Daggang houses was started and valuation carried out. 
Assessment will be levied at rate of 2½% i.e., half bazaar rate.
Hawkers.—Were confined to School Road and Cross Street, owing to their causing obstruction in the bazaar.	
Visitors.—Capt. C. P. Lowe, Director of P.W.D., and Mrs. Lowe, visited the station for it fewdays on 15th April. 
Mr. Pollard, District Officer, Baram, arrived from Baram ill on the 15th and returned on the 19th, and was again brought down ill to Kuala Baram by the Dresser, and was still in hospital with malaria at end of month.
Medical —Dresser Chong On gave three months' notice to leave service as from 26th.
Sixty-two new patients in addition to repetition trere treated in the Dispensary.
Prisoners.—Averaged 33 during the month and were employed in cleaning and levelling site of old Rangers barracks, cleaning ditches on Peninsula, mowing, sanitary and other routine work.
P. W.D.—Capt. Lowe, D.P.W., Kuching, accompanied by the General Manager, Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, Senior Medical Officer, Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, and myself, inspected the kampong areas which come under the proposed new drainage scheme. It was decided to carry out Dr. Schneider’s schema, and ditching for this has already been started in the Company's area.
A contractor started to paint the Goverment Offices. Work on Salome Stream, stone-pitching and reclamation, was proceeding favourably.
The Acting District Officer, Baram. Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports as follows for March and April:—
March, 1930.
Court.—There were five convictions under section 255. No other cises c all f >r mention.
C'im*.—On 17th a Javanese named Kerta, employed at the sawmill at B ikong, fatally wounded a woman named M.tyang and afterwards stabbed himself. An inquest was held by Mr. E. O. Biuce, District Otiicer, Mui, and verdicts of murder am) tuicide W"ie leturned.
Traveling —On 3rd, accompanied by the Curator, Mr. E. Banks. I left for Miri, returning on 7th. On 7th Galan returned from up river. On 9th, accompanied by the Curator, Mr. E. Banks, and Native Officers Galan and Wan Suror and Dresser Laz __, I left to attend the Penan meetings and to visit the Kelabit country. Long Melinau was reached on llth. The meeting was fairly well attended, fifty-seven men paying tax. The Long Kesih Penans were met on 15th, fifteen men paying tax. We reached Long Akah on 17th. On the evening of 18th, having been laid up with fever since leaving Long Kesih, I decided to return. Baram was reached on the evening of 19th, and the following morning I left for Miri by m.l. Doreen, Mr. Banks who had brought me down returning up river. I returned from Miri on 25th by s.l. La Follette. The Resident, Mr. H. D. Aplin, and the Divisional Treasurer, Mr. A. L. McBaine, visited Baram from 25th to 28th. On 30th I left for up river and was still away at the end of the month. Wan Taha, Native Officer, accompanied me as far as Long Kelima whence he returned to Lama to superintend the collection of birdsnests.
P. W. D.—The contractors for the Long Akah Fort started work during the month. No other works of importance were undertaken.
Prisoners.—The prisoners were employed on the general upkeep of the station and adjacent roads.
S.L. La Follette.—Repairs to the engine were carried out at Miri and the launch handed over on 23rd. On the way up from Kuala Baram the slide valve broke, but the engineer was able to effect temporary repairs.
BARAM.
April, 1930.
Court.—Rahan Krayan, Kelabit of Fa Bengar, was sentenced to six months' imprisonment for spreading a false report, and Penghulu Ballang Ratu was fined $50 and reprimanded lor not having reported the matter. No other cases call for mention.
Travelling.—I reached Long Akah on 2nd, where I found Native Officer Galan waiting with the Kelabits. Having settled the Kelabit affairs and pegged out the site for the new Fort, I left for the Kelabit country via the Akali on 6th, the Curator, Mr. Banks, having already left from Lio Matu. Unfortunately, I was again compelled to return suffering from fever, and proceeded to Miri on 14th, returning to Baram via Bakong on 20th. Having been laid up again with fever I left on 23rd for Miri where I was admitted to hospital. I was still at Miri at the end of the month.	
P. W. D.—The Government carpenter was employed on repairs to the Fort quarters which are being converted into offices, the present office being required as a store. The annual whitewashing of Government buildings was completed during the month.
Prisoners.—The prison gang, averaging 22.6, was employed on the general upkeep of the station and on whitewashing buildings.
Rain fall.—The rain fall recorded duriug the month was 3.29 inches.	
Shipping.—S.S. Gladys made two trips during the month.
The Acting District Officer, Bintulu, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports as follows for the month of April, 1930:—
Court.—Few cases were before the Courts during the month.
General.—The s. s. Margaret was damaged and unable to proceed to Miri on the 3rd, and had to remain at Bintulu until the s.s. Gladys came to tow her away. Passengers by her on this trip were Messrs. Anderson, Hanson, Baron, and W. J. Chater: The three former proceed to Miri by s.s. Keppel on the 6th and Mr. Chater returned to Kuching by s.s. Sarawak on the 5th.
Mr. Corson was in the district from the beginning of the month until 14th when he returned to Miri. During his stay an examination was made of the S. Rassan area, and his report of the billian there was very satisfactory. He also examined the Forest Reserve in the Sebekai.
A man and his wife were travelling in a small boat near Pandan while some wild pig were crossing the river, the man stood up in the bows of the boat to spear a pig and as he did so a crocodile snatched his wife out of the back of the boat. The man immediately leapt into the water which apparently startled the crocodile so that it let go of the woman and her husband managed to get her back into the boat. She was, however, badly mauled. 
Good Friday 18th, Saturday the 19th, and Monday the 21st were observed as holidays and the offices closed. 
The Resident, Fourth Division, Mr. H. D. Aplin, arrived on the 21st on a visit to this station and returned to Miri again by the s.s. Keppel on the 24th.
On the 29th I left by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna to attend the races in Kuching and was still away at the end of the month.
P. W. D.—The prisoners averaged 23.2 for the month. The gang was employed at the beginning of the month round the Fort.
At the end of the month they were employed on the whitewashing and tarring of Government buildings.
Prisoners were also employed with Carpenter Mamoh on the buildings of the Datu’s quarters, as mowers and in the general upkeep of the station.
Some cheap contracts were made with Foocbows for the clearing of the cattle plain and the rentis along the telephone line to Tanjong Batu, to facilitate the laying of the pipe for the waterworks.
A contract for sleepers for this line was also made out. Some standpipes were received from the Public Works Department.
Rainfall.—Amounted to only 8.07 during the month and it is to be hoped that there will be some more rain in the near future, a 4½  months’ drought having been experienced as there has been practically no rain since the middle of December, 1929.
Fifth Division News. Divisional Deports. April, 1930.
Extract from the Fifth Division Report for April,. 1930, by Mr. E. O. Bruce, Acting Resident;—
General.—Prior to proceeding on home leave on the 7th, Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident, Fifth Division, handed over the affairs of the Division, and I assumed acting duty as from 5th. A long spell of dry weather broke on the 6th. The Acting Assistant District Officer and I proceeded to Trusan overland on the 15th, thence to Sundar, returning to Limbang on the 17th. At the invitation of British Resident, I visited Brunei on the 18th for Easter week end; a few local matters were discussed. Mr. Southwell, of the Borneo Evangelical Mission, arrived from up river, and one or two matters were talked over. My time has been fully occupied with local inspections, checking books, etc., and getting, acquainted with people and affairs generally. A visit was made to Brooketon on the 27th, and I sailed thence the following morning for Kuching. Monthly rainfall registered at Limbang was 9.02 inches.
Court.—There was a normal number of cases, none of which calls for special mention. One appeal case was dealt with at Lawas.
P.W.D.—Timber having arrived from Vamco Sawmill, rapid progress has been made by carpenters with the new building by the river, which is replacing the present Club House, to be used as Land and Forest Department Offices. Work has also commenced with new bungalows for Land and Forest Officers. The contractor has now completed the raising of earth below Customs Officers’ bungalows. Work on the Limbang-Pandam road has been temporarily held up at one point owing to ravages of buffaloes from adjacent alaman. Those concerned have been called up and warned regarding fencing regulations previously issued.
Prison.—The average daily number of prisoners was 24.07. They have been employed with the road routine duties, and general P.W.D. labour. The jail, a fairly old building, has been thoroughly treated with insecticide. This has apparently ensured the inmates more sleep at nights. 
Land—On completion of the new building it is hoped to inaugurate the Land Office routine on proper lines. Inspectors are undergoing the necessary training in Kuching. The new roads have opened several good areas, of which immigrant pepper gardeners are taking advantage. Only one Occupation Ticket was applied for during the month at Limbang.
Medical and Health.—Five patients were admitted at Hospital and five discharged. Two remain. Eighty-five out-patients were treated, mostly for C. Yaws, T. Imbricata and Ulcers. Dr. Veerasinghun paid his usual monthly visit, but I have not yet seen his report.
Monopolies.— 6,257 packets of chandu were issued in Limbang. I inspected the divan and checked contents. It does not appear to be frequented much by smokers. 
LAWAS.
April. 1930.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe, reports:—
Court.—Court this month has been heavy, but no cases of any importance.
Prison.—The prison gang, averaging thirteen, was employed on upkeep of grounds.
P.W.D.—The work on the Trusan Road is professing satisfactorily, over two miles being completed, and coolies are working out as far us the 7th mile.
The walls in the Court and office were pulled and renewed with simpilor timber. It was decided to move the Survey Office to underneath the Fort, this has been completed and Mr. R. N. Baron hopes to move in within a few days.
General.—The Acting Resident paid a visit to the District on the 14th. After one night at Trusan we visited Sundar for one night and from there proceeded to Limbang.
I spent Easter week end in Brunei at the invitation of the Resident, Brunei, returning to Lawas on the 22nd.
On the 10th Mr. R. N. Baron, of the Survey Department, arrived in s.s. Keppel to relieve Mr. W. E--ck, the latter proceeded to Kuching in the Auby which left Lawas on the 18th.
Surveys—The Survey Department this month have measured 3.770 chains. Prismatic compass demarcations 2,267 at an average cost of eighteen cents per chain and theodolite, road traverses controls and State Boundary 1,503 at an average cost of eighty cents per chain.
Agriculture.—The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber ESTATES, Limited, exported 34,832 lbs. of rubber during the month.
ECHOES FROM THE WORLD OUTSIDE. The Peking Skull. EARLY MAN IN CHINA. Sending to "The Times'’ (in which it was reproduced) a photograph of the right side of the brain-case of the wonderful skull of the fossil man of Peking, which was shown at the meeting of the Geological Society of China on March 29, Professor G. Elliott Smith, in a letter to the editor soys: —
The documents which have just arrived are an amazing revelation. The skull found at Choukoutien on Dec. 2 is the most impressive, and probably the most important, contribution to our knowledge of early Pleistocene Man that has yet been made. From time to time during the last three years reports have been issued in the scientfic and public Press of the progress of the recovery of fragments of it new member of the human family, to which, nearly three years, ago, the distinguishing name Sinanthropus was given. The discovery, in November, 1928, of fragments of two jaws revealing features which hitherto were unknown in any other member of the human family except the Piltdown Man, suggested the idea that there had been found in the extreme east of the great Eur-Asiatic continent, a type of early Pleistocene Man akin to his contemporary in the extreme west of that great landmass. Some support was given to this idea by the fact that the jaws were associated with fragments of a brain-case which obviously was roomier than that of the earliest and most primitive humans of man so far discovered, the Pleistocene fossil from Java, Pithecanthropus, which was found 30 years ago. The relative thinness of the skull found in China, however, suggested that there was a profound difference between the Piltdown Man and the Man of Peking.
The discovery last December of an almost complete brain-case of Sinanthropus, an event which is unique in the history of these researches in human paleontology, showed at once that the fossil man of Peking differed far more from the Piltdown Man than had previously been subtracted. It revealed a form so closely resembling Pithecanthropus as to suggest the possibility that after all the newly discovered fossil from China might be simply another member of that genus.
The newly discovered fossil was embedded in very hard stone (travertine), and the laborious process of clearing it from this matrix has required great patience and skill. “The Times’’ Correspondent reported the official statement given at the annual meeting of the Geological Society of China on March 29, and announced that Professor Davidson Black had succeeded in the difficult task of freeing the interesting fossil from its stony matrix. With the published copies of the preliminary notice of this skull by Professor Davidson Black, as well as the report by Father Teilhard de Chardin and Mr. C. C. Young on the fossils found in association with the skull at Choukoutien, there has come from Dr. Davidson Black a photograph taken after the public report was issued showing this unique skull completely free from its investment.
Now that the skull is cleared, there is revealed for the first time the whole brain-case of an early Pleistecene Man. This thrilling experience provides us with much more definite information concerning the type of one of our remote ancestors than most of us dared hope ever to obtain. The whole architecture of the part of the skull surrounding the ear differs profoundly from the most primitive human condition hitherto known—namely, that revealed in the Piltdown skull. In Sinanthropus we have a condition of affairs which much more closely resembles that found in the gorilla and the chimpanzee than in any known human skull, the evidence provided by this skull, in fact, adds yet one more very emphatic demonstration of the close affinity of the human family to the African anthropoid apes.
The cleaning of the skull also enables us to correct certain misconceptions which arose from the incomplete evidence we had last year. Reference has already been made to the feet that the brain-case is very much thinner than that of Piltdown Man. The recovery of the complete skull of Sinanthropus shows that the thickness of the skull varies in different regions, but it is definitely thicker than that of modern man, although it does not attain the phenomenal thickness of the skull of the Piltdown Man.
To sum up the evidence revealed by this most startling discovery in the whole history of human paleontology, we can say that, while Peking Man presents features analogous to those of Pithecanthropus and Neanderthal Man, he belongs to a genus which is definitely distinct from both, but approximates more nearly to his Javan contemporary Pithecanthropus than to his relatively recent successor Neanderthal Man. His brain-case is definitely bigger than that of Pithecanthropus. but the features of the base of the skull (which unfortunately are unknown in the case of Pithecanthropus) display startlingly similar characters which suggest a close affinity between the most primitive members of the human family and the anthropoid apes of Africa.
Dr. Davidson Black is to be congratulated on the skill and insight he has shown in taking advantage of his great opportunity. The detailed investigation of the fossil will be awaited with particular interest because it promises to shed a brilliant day of light upon the nature of our earliest human ancestry.
Values of Favourite Dishes. Discussing the question of food values for workers, Industrial Welfare makes an interesting reference to a recent brochure of the Encyclopedia of Hygiene, Pathology and Social Welfare, issued by the International Labour Office. It gives the result of researches which have recently been made in the matter by Professor E. P. Cathcart, of Glasgow. 
SHIPPING INTELLIGENCE. LIST OF FIRST-CLASS PASSENGERS.
By B.S. Vyner Brooke to Singapore on 24th May:- Dayang Anne, Mrs. Brooke, Dr. P. T. A. Chette, Messrs. J. W. Evans, McTavish, 8. S. Tang, Lao Ah Yam.
By s.s. Kuching from Singapore on 26th May:— Messrs. M. H. L. Dejuine, L. Perkins, Teo Choon Hian, Mr. and Mrs. Yup Ah Bee, Messrs. Ali bin Dollah, Ana Suleiman, Master Mohd Osen.
By s.s. Kuching to Singapore on 31st May:— Mrs. McDonald, Mrs. N. A. Midillemns, Messrs. M. H. L. Dejuine, Ten Choon Hean, G. B. Youngberg, McDonald, L. Perkins, Mr. and Mrs. Chaim Guan Foo, Master Chaim Toon Suan, Mr. Chaim Heng Jeck, Mrs. Chia Kwang Hang, Mrs. Lim Mui Chye.
By s.s. Vyner Brooke from Singapore on 2nd June:- Dayang Anne, Mrs. Brooke, Messrs. H. Reley, J. W. Evans, L. Niven, F. L. Pemelow, Mr. and Mrs. Solasa, Miss B. Bay, Madam Chua Suat Neo, Messrs. W. Chan, Chan Kui Chong, Chan Kui Cho, Tay Boi Kia.
By s.s. Vyner Brooke to Singapore on 7th June:— Mr. and Mrs. Ohunatsu, Mr. and Mrs. E. Howell and child, Mr. Tan Soon Kim, Mr. and Mrs. Wee Kheng Chiang, Messrs. H. Relay, Ong Hap Leong, Chua Bak Hin, Kho Hood Poh, Ong Seng Hin, Madam Ong Geek Lian, Misses Tun Choon Kee, Wee Bee Siok, Lim Joo Phek.
By s.s. Kuching to Singapore on 13th June: — Messrs. E. Parnell, Tan Soon Tye, Nam Yuk Wee.
By s.s. Vyner Brooke from Singapore on I6th June:— Mr. and Mrs. McDonald, Mr. and Mrs. Harding, Messrs. Law Ah Yam, Tan Choon Seng, Abang Gobel, Dayang Masdia, Dayang Manuna.
By S.S. Vyner Brooke to Singapore on 2lst June:- Dr. E. M. Marjoribanks, Mrs. C. S. Griffiths, Mrs. J. R. Smith, Mr. Stirling, Master Tan Yew Nguan, Mr. Tan Choon Seng, Madam Chew Kim Lau, Madam Ong Geok Lian.
By s.s. Kuching from Singapore on 26th June:—
Messrs. E. Parnell. T. E. Young, Madam Tan Siew Kim, Mrs. A. F. Law, Mrs. Lim Huan Hoe, Mrs. Lim, Messrs. Ong Hap Leong, Ong Seng Hiu, Wee Kheng Chiang, Lim Hian Hoe, Tan Soon Thy, Chua Bak Hin, Khoo Hooi Poh, Mrs. Wee Khen Chiang, Madam Ong Geok Liau, Misses Tan Choo Kee, Wee Bee Siok, Lim Joo Pheh.
By s.s. Auby from Miri on 4thJune:— Mr. H. C. P. Adams.
By s.s. Gladys from Miri on 17th June:— Captain Le Sueur, Tuanku Mohamad, Datu Drahman and wife.
By m.v, Sri Mukah from Sibu on 20th June:— Dr. and Mrs. Gauge, Messrs. N. E. Hughes, P. M. Scotts, Tan Ah Chin, Madam Tai Eng Neo.
By m.v. Sri Mnkah from Sibu on 27th June.— Messrs. H. C. P. Adams, A. A. Rennie, Ng Sia Ngee, Song Ah See, Mrs. Song Ah See, Mr. Amit bin Sapong, Mrs. Amit and children, Messrs. Wee Swe Guan, Teo Ah Yao.
Port of Miri. Per s.s. Darvel to Singapore, 2nd May:— Mr. and Mrs. E. W. Edwards, Messrs. Q. M. McCall, F. G. Cluckey, E. V. Dallimore, and Mr. and Mrs. H. G. P. Mullen and family.
Per s.s. Kulmerland to Singapore, 3rd May:— Mr. B. de L. Bullock.
Per m.v. Marudu from Singapore, 5th May:— Mr. D. Ross, Capt. G. Steele, Mr. E. C. Taylor, Miss Surman.
Per m.v. Marudu to Singapore, 9th May:— Mrs. M. McGowan and children, Mr. and Mrs. F. O. Pierce, Mr. and Mrs. R. E. Norelius and family, Messrs. W. E. Eliason, W. J. Young, R. Hamilton, C. V. North, and G. Malone, Jr.
Per s.s. Darvel from Singapore, 13th May:— Messrs. G. C. Bryson, R. J. Bell.
Per s.s. Katong from Singapore, 20th May:— Mr. and Mrs. Pollock, Mr. Bulman, Mr. and Mrs. Johnson and child, Mr. and Mrs. Gason, Mr. and Mrs. Tyrrel and infant, Messrs. E. B. Owen and Q. M. McCall.
Per s.s. Kajang from Singapore, 27th May:— Mr. and Mrs. C. V. North and Mr. and Mrs. E. W. Edwards.
Per s.s. Katong to Singapore, 30th May:— Mr. and Mrs. W. C. Welton.
SAILINGS TO EUROPE. P. AND O. COMPANY. (Passenger Agents—Borneo Co., Ltd.) (Freight Agents--Sarawak Steamship Co.)
BLUB FUNNEL LINE. (Agents—Borneo Company, Ltd.) 
NIPPON YUSEN KAISHA. Calling at Aden, Naples, Marseilles, Gibraltar and London. Passenger Agents — Sarawak Steamship Co., Ltd. (Freight Agents—Borneo Co., Ltd.) [The tonnage of the fleet is not given by the Agents. —Editor.]
NETHERLAND STEAMSHIP CO. (Agents — Borneo Co., Ltd.)
Calling at Balawan, Sabang, Genoa, Algiers and Southampton.
EAST ASIATIC CO., LTD. (Agents—Borneo Co., Ltd.) These vessels sail from Bangkok, calling at Singapore, Penang and London. •All doable cabins have gat private bathroom, Doctor and Stewardess are carried.
P. & O. NOTICE. New interchange arrangements have been made between the Blue Funnel Line mid the P. & O. S.N. Co.
Blue Funnel Line or P. & O. S.N. Co. ticket holders may, over the Far Eastern routes, utilise their tickets, subject to any small adjustment of fares that may be necessary, for travel in a vessel or vessels of the other Company. Both single and return tickets are interchangeable.
Official and Semi-Official Announcements. APPOINTMENTS. His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, Cadet, to do duty at Simanggang, with effect from 9th May, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. W. H. C. C. Morice, Cadet, to do duty at Limbang, with effect from 10th May, 1939, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Miss G. E. Collinson to be Matron, Child Welfare Branch, Health Department, with effect from 19th May, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to delegate the powers of a District Court Magistrate, under Order No. XXX, 1922, to Mr. G. R. H. Arundell within the limits of the First Division, with effect from 30th May, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to delegate the powers of a District Court Magistrate, under Order No. XXX, 1922, to Mr. J. J. Hill within the limits of the First Division, with effect from 30th May, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to delegate the powers of a District Court Magistrate, under Order No. XXX, 1922, to Mr. A. Macpherson within the limits of the Third Division, with effect from 31st May, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to delegate the powers of a District Court Magistrate, under Order No. XXX, 1922, to Mr. R. L. Daubeny within the limits of the Second Division, with effect from 1st June, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to delegate the powers of a District Court Magistrate, under Order No. XXX, 1922, to Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas within the limits of the Second Division, with effect from 1st June, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to delegate the powers of a District Court Magistrate, Under Order No. XXX, 1922, to Mr. D. C. Hudden within the limits of the Second Division, with effect from 1st June, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to delegate the powers of a District Court Magistrate, under Order No. XXX, 1922, to Mr. K. H. Elam within the limits of the Third Division, with effect from 1st June, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan-Muda has been, pleased to delegate the powers of a District Court Magistrate, under Order No. XXX, 1922, to Mr. J. O. Gilbert within the limits of the Third Division, with effect from 1st June, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to delegate the powers of a District Court Magistrate, under Order No. XXX, 1922, to Mr. P. Murray-Scott within the limits of tbe Third Division, with effect from 1st June, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to delegate the powers of a District Court Magistrate, under Order No. XXX, 1922, to Mr. J. R. Combe within the limits of the Fifth Division, with effect from 1st June, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. W. P. N. Ditmas to act as Assistant District Officer, Engkilili, with effect from 5th June, 1930, inclusive.
His IIighness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. D. C. Hudden to act as Assistant District Officer, Simanggang, with effect from 5th June, 1930, inclusive.	
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Dr. A. D. Hutchison to he Divisional Medical Officer, Third Division, with effect from 9th June, 1930, inclusive.
LEAVE.
Mr. N. E. Hughes, Land Officer, Sarikei and Binatang, has been granted one month’s vacation leave on full pay, with effect from 19th April, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident, Third Division, has been granted seven days’ vacation leave on full pay, with effect from 24th April, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. P. M. Adams, District. Officer, Mukah and Oya, has been granted seven days’ vacation leave on full pay, with effect from 24th April, 1930, inclusive 
Mr. J. B. C. Spurway, Divisional Forest Officer, Third Division, has been granted seven days’ vacation leave on full pay, with effect from 24th April 1930, inclusive.	
Mr. W. J. Chater, Assistant Accountant, Public Works Department, has been granted four days’ sick leave on full pay, with effect from 20th Mav 1930, inclusive.	
Mr. A. Hamphreys, Superintendent of Electricity Department, lifts been granted one month and six days’ sick leave, on full pay, with effect from 2nd May, 1930, inclusive.
Notice. The following books have not been returned to the Sarawak Library for some time. Will those subscribing who hold them, kindly return them as soon as possible. If the book is made into a parcel with the sender’s name enclosed, and addressed to Mrs. J. P. Baird, Acting Honorary Secretary, Sarawak Library, Kuching, it can then be posted free of charge, and notice of receipt will be promptly acknowledged.
Notice. DAYLIGHT SAVING. From midnight September 20th/2lst till midnight December 13th/14th Sarawak time will be advanced twenty minutes.
Clocks should therefore be put on twenty minutes at midnight September 20th/2lst and put back twenty minutes at midnight December 13th/14th. N. A. MIDDLEMAS, Superintendent of Surveys, Sarawak. Kuching, 28th June, 1930.
CORRESPONDENCE. [The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.] Life’s Lighter Side. April 14, 1930. To	, Esq., Madras.
Honoured and Illustrious Sir, —You will please remember me as 5th Grade Clerk in this Office, for which there is no scope to inflate, and after all my education in Madras University, where I passed B.A. in two sittings.
Now this mental effort demands greater area for abilities, but forsooth am doomed with unlucky star in firmament, and still serve unceasingly in grade 33.50, less income tax. This, Honoured Sir, can never be with qualifications, which are unbounded, must flow into mid-stream, where brains are measured by Rs. a. p.
 I have learned much, August Sir, and with tribulation, acquired arts knowing in sciences, such as “the apple must fall to the ground” (Isaac Newton). I am also sitting this long time in spare evening vacation acquiring the glorious defunct languages in Latin—viz., Abba Father and so forth.
Now, Reverend Sir, I am, what dog says to rat, in tight corner, for domestic troubles come in plural and sometimes triplicate, causing slight earthquakes in Heavenly household when there is shortage of coin, and to add to this my wife doth bring me in annual incremental successions, to the ramification of this generation, and by the Lord there's no end to this mischief.
You will therefore take notice, Noble Sir, and give me appointment in your office, where I shall show all things, including my abilities, which are drooping, and winch will wither like fragile plant unless watered by your kind patronage in better job carrying more lucre.
Reply favourably to your humble petitioner, who is straining on beam end, and in duty bound I shall ever pray for long life on your honour's head.!
I have the honour to remain. Honoured and Illustrious Sir, your most obedient servant.
The Editor, Sarawak Gazette, Kuching. KUCHING, 26th June, 1930. DEAR SIR,
ON thy return this month from the Second Division, there was found in the ml. Jean, a mattress about 6’ x 2½ ', of which the owner cannot be located.
The mattress is now in the Forest Office and I shall be glad to hand it over on application. Yours truly, D. E. CALVER.