THE Sarawak Gazette.
Suara Sarawak.
August.
At the marriage at St. Margaret's, Westminster, on July 3rd, of the Earl of Ava and Miss Maureen Guinness, daughter of the Hon. Ernest and Mrs. Guinness, the eleven bridesmaids included Miss Eleanora Brooke, and Miss Elizabeth Brooke, daughters of the Ranee of Sarawak. They wore close-fitting gowns of white tulle, with full skirts, which were embroidered in gold and silver, outlined with finely pleated tulle. Their head-dresses were of pale gold crystal, and they carried posies of gold and silver crystal flowers edged with tulle.
The Prince of Wales has sent a donation towards the memorial to Sir Patrick Manson, to which the Duke of York has already subscribed. Miss Mildred Wenyon, secretary of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, writes that just over £8,200 has been subscribed to the fund to perpetuate) the memory of the father of modern tropical medicine to whom we are all, directly or indirectly, so much indebted, and further donations will be very gratefully acknow-ledged by the president of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 11, Chandos-street, Cavendish-square, W.l.
We are gratified to receive a note from the Prefecture Apostolic of Sarawak, informing us that, on the occasion of the 45th anniversary of Mother Helen's arrival in Borneo the Holy Father, Pius XI, sent her a congratulatory message through his Secretary of State-Cardinal Pacelli. As this letter will be of great interest to the, innumerable friends of Mother Helen, in the East, we have pleasure in reproducing the well-deserved tribute to the self-sacrificing and devoted of service of the benevolent Mother to whom we take the We are gratified to receive a note from the Prefecture Apostolic of Sarawak, informing us that, on the occasion of the 45th anniversary of Mother Helen's arrival in Borneo the Holy Father, Pius XI, sent her a congratulatory message through his Secretary of State -Cardinal Pacelli. As this letter will be of great interest to the, innumerable friends of Mother Helen, in the East, we have pleasure in reproducing the well-deserved tribute to the self-sacrificing and devoted of service of the benevolent Mother to whom we take the opportunity of adding our quota of congratulation:- "Very Revd. Father,
His Holiness has been informed of the Sand laborious works which Mother Helen, Superior of the Franciscan Missionary Sisters of St. Joseph, has accomplished in your Apostolic Prefecture and at the completion of the forty-five years during which she has spent her fruitful endeavours there, the Holy Father wishes her to receive from him a word praise and congratulation.
Under the circumstances he cannot help remembering the praise bestowed by the Apostle on those pious women who had worked with him for the good of the Gospel, and addressing them now to Mother Helen and her companions, he trusts that the Divine rewards will crown the noble work performed for the triumph of the Gospel, and confirms these his sentiments by sending her his Apostolic Blessing.
E. Cardinal Pacelli."
We have had news, from Sibu Laut, that Willie Service, son of Mr. William Service, M.I.M.E., M.I.MECH.E. formerly Superintendent Engineer here, and Mrs. Service, passed his final medical examinations at Edinburgh, in July. Congratulations to Dr.Service and his parents, who will be remembered by many people in this part of the world.
The lack of rainfall continues throughout the whole country. In Kuching there have been only 16 days on which rain fell during 10 weeks, with a total of 9.49 inches. Reports from outstations show a similar state of affairs.
After this long spell of drought, it is almost certain that mosquitoes will frequent the houses in large numbers when the rains begin. Such is envitable, notwithstanding the continued efforts of the anti-mosquito section of the Health Department, but much may be done to obviate the biting of these pests by the use of a spray (in a Flit Sprayer) known by the name of Bamber Oil. Nothing will bite you for hours thereafter. The Borneo Co., or any Chemist, would probably make up this best of all sprays which has a formula as follows:-
The Sixth Annual Report of the Sarawak Association for 1929-30 has been forwarded to us. The Annual General Meeting was held on 10th July, 1929, with Lt.Col. Sir Percy Cunynghame, Bart., O.B.E., in the Chair. Mr. C. Willes Johnson was reelected Hon. Secretary and Treasurer for the ensuing year.
The Seventh Annual Dinner of the Sarawak Association took place at the Trocadero Restaurant, in London on 9th July, 1930, His Highness the Rajah being in the Chair. If was attended by 43 members and was a great success. The toast of the King was given by the Rajah; that of the Rajah by Mr. Willes Johnson; that of the Hon. Members by Sir Percy Cunynghame-replied to by Sir Laurence Guillemard, Sir Gilbert Grindle and Mr. A. M. Pountney.
A GOLF STORY."What about this one?"A man was playing golf for the first time.He went out alone, and was out a fairly considerable time. " 'Yes,' said the other, 'and I'm trying the second hole tomorrow.
The dysentery epidemic at Rejang is slowly abating. A visit was paid to the kampong during the month by the Chief Health Officer.
On July 4th a six-year-old boy was taken by a crocodile at Stumbong, Sebuyow, while bathing from a boat with a companion, his body being never recovered. During that month 80 crocodiles were caught in the Sebuyow River, including a sixteen foot man-eater.
H.M.S. Herald paid a one day visit to Kuching on Tuesday, August 26th. We are glad to hear that Capt. Maxwell has much improved after his recent indisposition. Mrs. Maxwell has been staying at the Astana and at the Chief Secretary's Bungalow.
S.S. Vyner Brooke which left Kuching on August 2nd, developed some-trouble in her internal economy which delayed her return until August 25th.
MOTTO FOR THE MONTH. "Be no longer a Chaos, but a World, or even a Worldkin. Produce! Produce! were it but the pitifullest' infinitesimal fraction of a Product, produce it, in God's name! 'Tis the utmost thou hast in thee; out with it then. Up, up! Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy whole might. Work while it is called To-day; for the Night cometh, wherein no man can work."-Carlyle.
Those who know Mr. S. R. Ratnam, who worked for 18 years in the Sarawak Rubber Estates, Ltd., at Sungei Tengah and retired in the year 1929, will be glad to hear that the Governor in Council (Madras) is pleased to appoint him as Honorary Magistrate of Patakkottai in the District of Tanjore for a term of three years with effect from 4th July, 1930.
The Bishops of Kobe, and of Labuan and Sarawak took part in the discussions on the report of the fifth committee of the Lambeth Conference dealing with the ministry of the Church.
Referring in a humorous aside to the Lambeth Conference, Dr. Gwynne, Bishop of Egypt, said that a rhyme of Dean Swift's might suitably be adapted to express the feelings of the waitresses at Lambeth Palace do they have waitresses there? who had to look after them : "Bishops hot and bishops cold,  Bishops young and bishops old,  Bishops tender, bishops rough, 'Pon my word I've had enough!"
The following Officers visited Kuching during the month:- Mr. J. J. Hill from Sadong; Mr. J. O. Gilbert from Sarikei; Mr. E. H. Elam from Oya; Mr. J. S. Hammond from Sibu; and Mr. S. G. Hansom from Miri. The above Officers were to sit for their Examination. Mr. J. W. White-side was up from Sibu on duty, and Mr. J. R. Combe on sick leave from Lawas.
The Visit of Their Excellencies Sir Cecil and Lady Clementi.
The Visit of His Excellency the British Agent for North Borneo and Sarawak and Ladv Clementi was duly paid on the 4th and 5th of August. His Excellency arrived in the Yacht Seabelle II on schedule time, and the provisional programme, as given in our last issue, was closely adhered to His Excellency Sir Cecil Clementi, and Lady Clementi, must have been able to get quite a good idea of the local amenities and environment even in the short time at their disposal. Under the kindly aegis of His Highness the Tuan Muda and the Dayang Anne, they were introduced to the official and social life of the capital and its inhabitants. Favoured with fine (if somewhat hot) weather, the whole population united in extending a most cordial welcome to the distinguished visitors. The Chinese population erected quite a number of tasteful arches throughout the town, of which special mention should be made of the very graceful arch at the Pengkalan Batu landing place. The Indian Community put up a long decorative pergola over a    considerable part of Gambier Road- which came in for a just share of enthusiasm. The Malay Community responded splendidly to the occasion-the decoration of the kampongs making a veritable fairy land through which the visitors drove on their first evening.
On Tuesday evening the Sarawak Rangers gave a torchlight tattoo and a display of Dyak dancing on the parade ground, which was witnessed by the Astana party and the Datus.
At a given signal all lights were switched off and a bugler sounded the "Advance," and a party of Dyaks in full war kit came rushing on to the accompaniment of the sound of Kromong. The Dyak orchestra formed up behind them and the dancers went through an excellent programme. Perhaps the most amusing dances were the Ajat Puar Kesah, the Ajat Munyiet and the Ajat Timbang Anak.
At the close of the entertainment His Excellency .and party, accompanied by His Highness the Tuan Muda and the Dayang Anne, embarked in launches at the Fort Pengkalan to go to Pending, where the Seabelle II was lying.
As the launches, proceeded down river the Sarawak Rangers, each man carrying a torch, spread out in single file along the Fort Hill, while the Sarawak Rangers' Band played Auld Lang Syne. As the party passed the Fort the Rangers raised a spontaneous shout of farewell, which was maintained until the launches were out of sight.
We trust that the fleeting visit of their Excellencies will not be their only one during their sojourn in Malaya.
His Highness the Tuan Muda left Kuching on Wednesday, 6th August on board H H.M.Y. Maimuna, with the Dayang Anne, the Chief Secretary, Mrs. Boult and Mr. Hughes. Miri was reached on Friday morning 8th August, where the Dayang Anne and Mrs. Boult disembarked. The Maimuna then proceeded to Brooketon where they were met by the Acting Resident, Fifth Division (Mr. Bruce). On Saturday morning the Seabelle II arrived from Brunei, and His Excellency then boarded the Maimuna. Later a conference was held on the Seabelle II, of His Highness the Tuan Muda, His Excellency, the Chief Secretary, the British Resident of Brunei, and the Acting Resident, Fifth Division. A luncheon party was then given on the Seabelle, after which a visit to Limbang was made by His Highness, the Chief Secretary, and Mr. Hughes. On Sunday morning, His Excellency and Lady Clementi with the British Resident of Brunei visited Limbang.
On 12th August, the Maimuna left Limbang, calling at Miri, and returned to Kuching on the 14th.
Death of Mrs. E. L. Evelyn.
From the Wilts and Gloucestershire Standard of 5th July, 1930, we cull the following obituary notice, of so much interest to the State of Sarawak.
As recorded in our obituary column lost week, the death occurred on Friday last of Mrs. Emma Lucy Evelyn, of Worcester House, Cirencester.
The youngest daughter of the late Rev. Francis Charles Johnson, vicar of White Lickington, Somerset, Mrs. Evelyn was born on 13th August, 1832, and was therefore within a few weeks of the completion of her ninety-eighth year. She was a sister of the late Rajah of Sarawak, Sir Charles Johnson Brooke (who assumed the name Brooke at the request of his uncle, the first Rajah), being his junior by three years, and she was therefore aunt to the present Rajah, Sir Charles Vyner Brooke.
She married in 1857 the late Rev. Edmund Boscawen Evelyn, who a year previously had returned to England after serving as a chaplain to the British Forces in the Crimean War. In that year Mr. Evelyn became rector of Wotton, Surrey, remaining there till 1875, when he retired to his property in Kent. Mr. Evelyn was a personal friend of Miss Florence Nightingale. 
In later years Mr. and Mrs. Evelyn came to reside at Worcester House, where Mr. Evelyn died in September, 1904, at the age of 75 years, and was buried in Cirencester Cemetery.
During her long residence in Cirencester Mrs. Evelyn was closely identified with Holy Trinity Church, Watermoor, and she took a keen interest in local church work. Missions of all kinds also excited her active interest, in particular missions connected with Sarawak, while us recently as last Christmas she was engaged in knitting scarves for the Mission to Seamen.
Mrs. Evelyn retained her mental and physical faculties in a remarkable degree till, a year or so ago, she had a fall which resulted in a broken limb, but even after this she was often seen abroad in a wheel chair. Some months ago, however, her health gave signs of failing and, gradually declining, she died on Friday morning.
Mrs. Evelyn was buried with her husband in Cirencester Cemetery, in the same grave, the funeral, which took place on Monday afternoon, being, in accordance with her own expressed wish, of as simple a character as possible.	
The Rev. A. H. Longley, vicar of North Nibley, and until recently priest-in-charge at Holy Trinity Church, Cirencester, officiated.
The mourners were Mr. Hope Brooke (nephew), and the Hon. Mrs. Hope Brooke, H. H. the Rajah of Sarawak, Miss Leonora Brooke, Mrs. Evelyn Pollard (niece), and Miss Pollard. Mr. C. Willes Johnson (nephew), Mrs. Brooke Johnson (niece), the Dowager Lady Page-Wood (niece), Captain Ralph Stuart Johnson, M.C. (nephew), Mr. John Evelyn, of Wotton (great-nephew), Mrs. Edmund Wyndham Bailey (niece), and Mr. J. Bailey.
Others present included Mr. Thomas Kingscote, C.V.O., Mr. and Mrs. Miles Beale, Miss B. Mildred, Miss Lawrence, and the members of Mrs. Evelyn's household staff, Miss F. Edwards, Miss H. Harris, Mr. F. Larner and Nurse Boulding.
BELLESLETTRES, ETC.
Books of the Month.COMPILED FROM BOOKSELLERS'INFORMATION.
FICTION.-A. P. Herbert's "Water Gipsies'' (Methuen, 7s. 6d.); Dornford Yates's "Fire Below" (Hodder and Stoughton, 7s. 6d.); Maurice Baring's "Robert Peckham" (Heinemann, 7s. 6d.); P. Romanof's "Without Sherry Blossom" (Benn, 7s. 6d.); P. G. Wodehouse's "Very Good, Jeeves" (Jenkins, 7s. 6d.); E. H. Young's "Miss Mole" (Cape, 7s. 6d.); J. Jefferson Farjeon's "The Person Called 'Z' " (Collins, 7s. 6d.); Gay Taylor's "No Goodness in the Worm" (Gollancz, 7s. Cd.); Gilbert Frankan's "Martin Make-Believe" (Hutchinson, 7s. Cd.); Dornford Yates's "Fire Below" (Hodder and Stoughton, 7s. 6.1.); Panait Istrati's "Kyra, My Sister" (Toulmin, 7s.' 6d.); Ronald Fraser's "Rose Anstey" (Cape, 7s. 6d.). 
MISCELLANEOUS.-Frank Kendon's "The Small Years" (Cambridge University Press, 6s.); Arnold Bennett's "journal, 1929" (Cassell, 7s. 6d.); Ethel Mannin's "Confessions and Impressions" (Jarrolds, 10s. 6d.);  "Norman Douglas's "How About Europe?" (Chatto and Windus, 7s. 6d.); Hamilton Fyfe's "Northcliffe" (Allen and Unwin, 16s.); Leonard Barnes's "Caliban in Africa" (Gollancz, 10s. 6d.); Capt. J. R. White's "Misfit" (Cape, 10s. 6d.); "Great Sea Stories of All Nations," selected by H. M. Tomlinson (Harrap, 8s. 6d.); A. P. Graves's "To Return to All That" (Cape, 7s. 6d.); Boyden Sparkes and S. T. Moore's "Hetty Green" (Heinemann, 10s. 6d.); Rene Fulop-Miller's "The Power and Secret of the Jesuits" (Putnam, 21a); "Great Sea Stories," edited by H. M. Tomlinson (Harrap, 8s. 6d.).
Jot Down Three Squares-The Answer.
"Dark is the day for any of us when we become absolutely contented with the life we live and the place we fill, with the thoughts we think and the deeds we do," writes Dr. S. Parkes Cadman in the Evening News of London.
"Jot down on a sheet or paper three squares. Let the first stand for emotions, the second for brain force; the third for will power. Then trace out your actions, mental and moral. Which of these squares will contain the largest number of motivations for these actions? There is but one answer: that representing the emotions. Far too many of these are random outbreaks of feeling, uninstructed impulses.
"Get all the information obtainable from biographies, general literature, social intercourse, illustrious personalities, and from that treasury, the Bible. Then arrange your own code and make it a part of yourself. Put caution against hope, that hope may not be premature, and hope against caution, that caution may not degenerate into cowardice. Avoid the insolence of ill-founded ex-pectations, but keep a vigilant gaze on opportunities. Station sound sense and good judgment at the throttle, and do riot allow either recklessness or lingering on the road.
"If you will do this, you will no longer tolerate the gigantic error of asking too little of life. For a man's reach is higher than his grasp-or what is Heaven for?"
A Striking New Research Development.
"Alice in Wonderland was able by eating a cake or drinking from a bottle or nibbling one side or other of a mushroom to increase or diminish her stature at will. As Sir Edward Sharpey-Schafer remarked, it might be thought that nothing could be more fantastic or more improbable. And yet once again fact has proved even stranger than fiction.	
"The functions of the endocrine glands are only now in process of being discovered, and they are found to be as fascinating in their way as anything invented by the fertile imagination of Lewis Carroll. This is one of the romances of science."-The SCOTSMAN.
"A notable event in the history of the University of Edinburgh and of the development of physiological science took place when the new Department of Animal Genetics at King's Buildings was formally opened by Sir Edward Sharpey-Shafer," says the Scottman.
"Dedicated 'to the advancement of science and to the service of mankind,' the new building is largely the result of the beneficence of Mr. T. B. Macaulay, President of the Sun Life Assurance Company of Canada, and an ardent Scot of Highland extraction, on whom the honorary degree of Doctor of Laws was appropriately conferred by the University."
Sir Edward Sharpey-Schafer, F.R.S., in the course of his opening speech, said:-
"I do not know whether people nowadays read stories so old-fashioned as 'Alice in Wonderland.' but I dare say some of my audience are familiar with that part of the narrative where Alice is able by eating a small cake, or drinking the contents of a bottle, or nibbling one side or the other of a mushroom, to increase or diminish her stature at will. I suppose no part of that charming and fantastic tale commends itself as more fantastic and more improbable than this particular episode.
"And yet we now know that something of the kind really does happen in nature. If wo do not actually devour the pituitary body, we nevertheless take its secretion into our blood and it circulates through all our organs. And the effect it produces is to promote their growth. If it is yielded to the blood in undue proportion growth may be so much stimulated that a giant is produced. On the other hand, if from any cause this internal secretion of the pituitary body is not passed into the blood or not in sufficient amount, growth will be arrested.
"In confirmation of this, the feeding of young animals with this part of the pituitary has been found to increase their size above normal, whereas destruction of the same part arrests growth and produces dwarfs. Whether there is also a material in the internal secretion of this or some other gland which actively prevents growth is not determined, but is not altogether improbable. The internal secretion of the gland in question not only influences the general growth of the body, but especially the growth and maturation of the generative organs."-(Public Opinion).
Colour Schemes Disliked by the House-Fly.
"A man who wondered why the flies on his dining room lampshade never settled on the window curtains has given science a clue which may revolutionize the war against insect pests," says the Sunday Express.
"He reported his armchair musings to a scientific laboratory, and from their experiments springs this remarkable discovery:- " 'Flier hate red and yellow ;They lore blue and green.'
"That is the finding of the Liverpool School of Tropical Medicine.
"It is argued that if you decorate your home with red curtains, yellow ceilings and orange wall-paper the house-fly flies-straight out of the window.
"The tests which followed the amateur's observations were thus described to a Sunday Express representative by Professor W. Patton, the well-known entomologist:-
"The layman noted that flies seemed to be attracted by one range of colours and to shun another set of colours used in household decoration.
"This led to systematic investigation by scientists, which produced results of great value.
"It was found that flies showed a marked antipathy for the red range of colours. If any other colour was in sight they settled on it instantly. Blue drew them like magnet. The fly is attracted by violet, blue, green. The fly is repelled by red, orange, yellow.
"Data already collected would suggest that if there were a national campaign to guide the decoration of hospital wards, kitchen, larders, schoolrooms, and other interiors, the menace of germ-carrying flies would be substantially reduced.
"The difficulty would be to get the whole population to adopt red-yellow colour schemes for house decoration."- (Public Opinion).
The Legend of St. Swithun.
"Everybody knows that the fifteenth of July is Saint Swithin's day, and that forty days of rain or sunshine are supposed to commence on this day," writes the Rev. J. S. Badcock, in the Sunday at Home.
"Swithun was a West Countryman, born of noble parents about the year 805. He was educated in the monastery at Winchester. King Egbert, impressed by his piety and learning, made him tutor to his son, Ethelwulf. In 832, Ethelwulf having succeeded to the Throne, Swithun was made Bishop of Winchester, the royal city. He was a holy man and a good bishop, he built many churches and was a great friend to the poor. He also built a bridge over the Itchen at Winchester.
"When he died, in 852, he expressed a wish to be buried not in a grand sepulchre but in a mean place outside the north door of his cathedral. Another reason for his being laid to rest outside the walls of his church, is that a year before he died, Winchester had been sacked by the Danes and its cathedral was probably still in a state of ruin.
"A century after his decease, when the cathedral was rebuilt, it was decided to translate his remains and place them in a shrine at the east end of the new building. On July 15, 971, while his body was being transferred to its new-resting place, there was a violent, rain-storm, and this was taken to be a sign that Swithun objected to his body being removed.
"A later story says that it rained so hard for forty days that the Saint's body had to be left outside for that period. People said that the rain was the good man's protest against an honour which his humility disliked. He had asked to be buried where passers by might tread on his grave and where the rain might fall on it. As time on the legend grew up that if it rains on the Translation of St. Swithun it will rain for forty days after. Meteorological records, however, do not, we believe, agree with the old saying."
First Division News.
KUCHING METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS FOR AUGUST, 1930.
Note.-The Kuching Meteorological Station is situated at Latitude 1.33.29 North; and Longitude 110.20.31 East. The height above Mean Tide Level is 29.6 feet.
Divisional Reports. June, 1930.
Extracts from the First Divisional Reports for June and July; 1930, by Mr. J. C. Swayne, Acting Resident:-
The birthday of H.M. King George was observed as a public holiday and the offices closed.
I accompanied His Highness the Tuan Muds, Dayang Anne, the Chief Secretary and Mrs. Boult on a visit to Pengarah James' House. The Pengarah is a man who has travelled very widely in the East and his Kampong is a striking example of what a Land Dyak village should be.
I paid two visits to Bau and one to Sadong during the month. At the latter place an inspection of the proposed secondary road from Tabekang to meet the Simanggang Road was made; it is proposed, if a supplementary vote can be obtained, to peg out a hundred foot reserve and maintain a bridle-path until a road can be made.
On the 25th H.M.S. Herald paid a visit to Kuching from Singapore.
DISTRICT OFFICE. June, 1930.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports:-
Judicial.-An outstanding case of the month was the hearing of a charge of kidnapping brought against Alwin Dolilkan, Eurasian, and Nobert Fernando, Cingalese, by E. V, Goonetilleke. After a hearing of six days the accused were discharged, there being, in the opinion of the Court, insufficient evidence of a prima facie case against accused to warrant sending accused for trial.
The only other case of importance was brought against Lim Ah Ob, opium packer in the Monopolies Department, by the Assistant Controller. Accused was charged under section 879 I.P.C. with theft opium by a servant and was convicted and sentenced to two years' R.I.
Staff.- Mr. P. Murray-Scott arrived from Oya and was appointed to do duty in the District Office as from the 20th June, with powers of Magistrate's Court Magistrate.
Travelling.-Batu Kawa was visited on 6th instant when the road was in rather a bad state. It would be of advantage if the Municipal Commissioner could loan the dog shooter to this district for a few days, since dogs abound everywhere, particularly about the pork market, and are in very bad condition with kurap and appear to have no owners. There is a third table in the pork market which should be covered with zinc for cleanliness as are the other two. The contract for drains is now nearing com-pletion, the drains having been laid but the side walls have yet to be built. In this connection it would be of advantage if the drain at the back of the bazaar could be extended to the clerk's house, which at present is in an extremely insanitary state underneath and should be cemented. I am communicating with the Director of Public Works with regard to this point.
Coroner's Court.-Inquests were held during the month on the bodies of Hoh Hee Liat and Tan Ewe Peng. A verdict of wilful murder was brought in the case of the former. A verdict of felo de se was brought in the case of Tan Ewe Peng.
LAND OFFICE. June, 1930.
The Land Officer, Mr. T. E. Parker, reports: -
The investigation of the ownership and boundaries of properties comprising the bazaar is proceeding, and blocks 2 and 3 are now completed. A large number of these properties are held under very old grants from which it is exceedingly difficult to determine the position of the properties or their actual areas. In spite of this, however, surprisingly close agreement has been obtained, and large overlaps and gaps are few and far between. On the completion of this stage it will be necessary to make a house-to-house inspection to get details of the actual walls and boundaries on each property and to obtain the agreement of the owners as to their boundaries. The tracings of these blocks and the data collected related to each property will then be handed to the Superintendent of Surveys to serve as a guide for a re-survey of the whole area, following which it is hoped that a new grant may be issued to each owner and the old grant cancelled.
The issue of demand notes has been completed during the month and the response has been gratifying, though in many cases it has been found necessary to sanction payment by instalments. Some difficulty is being experienced in the delivery of the demand notes to the Chinese in the outlying districts, owing to the Tua Kampongs being unable to find the owners when they call.
Mr. B. Summers left Kuching for duty at Simanggang on the 24th, and Mr. A. K. Brown, the newly-appointed Land Officer, arrived on the 30th.
UPPER SARAWAK, BAU. June, 1930.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, reports:-
For the first few days of the month there is little of importance to report. Good progress appeared to have been made with the new buildings during my absence at Lundu.
On the 6th the Resident came up to look into two appeal cases.
On the 9th the Resident again came up.
On the 10th I started up the Left-Hand Branch for Pangkalan Ampat; the river was in flood and running very fast, consequently we had to paddle up river most of the day instead of poling. Progress was slow as a result.
The Dyak house af Boyan was reached about 4 p.m. and the night spent there.
On the llth I went up to Danau and spent the night there. On the 12th we reached Pangkalan Ampat and stayed there until the 15th, collecting tax and listening to many questions and requests.
While at Pangkalan Ampat Orang Kayas of Sennah, Brang, Bengoh and Tebia came to meet me and bring in the tax for their respective kampongs.
Orang Kaya Rasi of Sennah appeared to be by far the most sensible and efficient man in the river. I should like to suggest that the same system be adopted amongst the Land Dyaks of this district as has been in force amongst the Sea Dyaks for many years. To do this it would be necessary to make a head man-Penghulu of the whole river. That is to say one in the Left-Hand Branch and possibly two in the Right-Hand Branch. All the Tua Tua Kampong would be given the right to settle smaller cases in their kampongs, such as adultery, divorce, and buntin, and be allowed to inflict the recognized fines for these offences provided that no one fine exceed say $15. The Tua Kampong would pay any fines inflicted to the Government and be given 10% commission. Any appeal would have to be taken before the Penghulu for settlement before being brought to Court. To appeal against a Penghulu's decision would necessitate paying a fee of five reals or $3.60 into Court. I think this system would not only save trouble but also have a good effect on the people themselves and give the chiefs a certain amount of influence over their people.
On the 15th 1 walked to Sennah and spent the night there, returning on the 16th to Pangkalan Ampat, where I stayed until the 17th.
On the morning of the 17th I started down river to Batu Kitang which I reached about 2 p.m.
On the 20th Mr. Middlemas came up to look at the work done by his surveyors in this district and left again on Sunday 22nd.
On Saturday 21st Dr. and Mrs. Hutchison came up and went through to Dahan. Dr. Hutchison looked at the new dispensary and dresser's quarters and expressed satisfaction on their workmanship.
On the 24th Messrs. Banks and Griffiths arrived. Mr. Griffiths went through the land books and returned to Kuching the same day. Mr. Banks went to Singghi on 24th to look for a tiger's skull alleged to be there, but was unsuccessful.
On Tuesday night 24th a Chinese named Loh Khiun was badly wounded at Tundong. Investigations are being made as to who was the culprit. The victim had four deep wounds and was sent to Kuching Hospital the same night by car.
P.W.D.-The roads have all been in good condition during the month.
The new Native Officer's quarters, the dresser's quarters and the dispensary are now completed and the extension to the gaol is making good progress.
Agriculture.-Applications for planting pepper have been four in number during the month.
Dyaks have started clearing for farming and some have finished tebasing and others are now tebasing. It is to be hoped that an early start will result in a good harvest.
Gold returns.-230.29 ounces of actual gold were obtained by the Bidi Gold Mining Company for the month of May, 1930.
Rainfall.-The rainfall recorded for the month was 5.74 inches.
SADONG. June, 1930.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports;- Court.-In the Lower Courts a number of cases were heard but these were mostly trivial. _ On the 19th Tambi Kassim was executed for murder.
P.W.D.-The Government Carpenter repaired thesaw-mill budge and has been making platforms forthe Saging water supply hydrants.
The contract for the widening of the saw-mill-Gunong Road was completed on the 23rd instant.
This road is now used as the main road from thebazaar to the Gunong.
The Government pipe-fitter was employed on the extension of the Kampong Saging water supply.
No new contracts were made during the month. Medical.-At the Government Hospital three patients were admitted, three were discharged, and one was sent to the General Hospital, Kuching, leaving one remaining at the end of the month.
At the dispensary 129 out-patients made 246attendances for treatment.
The accounts show Revenue $189.70 and Expendi-ture, including salaries and rations, $288.77.
Forest.-On the 17th Mr. Caroll, Extra Deputy Conservator of Forests, arrived per m.l. Elizabeth.He inspected the jelutong in the Sedilo Forest Reserve, taking mesurements of girths, etc., with a view to a future Government Monopoly of jelutong in this area.
Travelling.-On the 19th I accompanied the Resident, First Division, Mr. J. C. Swayne and party, up to Tebekang. The proposed Tebekang-Simanggang road was inspected. The party returned on the 21st to Sadong.
On the 25th I left for the Ulu Simunjan and Gedong districts and had not returned at the end of the month.
Agriculture.-Mr. G. St. F. Dare paid a short visit from the 23rd to the 27th, in connection with the Government Controlled Coconut Garden. The garden, which was to have been of some twenty acres in size, has now been cut down to ten acres, as it appears the owner is incapable of looking after more.
The Sea and Land Dyaks have now completed their harvesting and it would appear that, on the whole, a bad year has been experienced. Rats and empangau in the main accounting for the crop failure. Most houses have, however, enough padi to see them through the first six months of the year.
Prison.-The health of the prisoners was fair. During the month seven prisoners were received from Kuching.
The prison gang, averaging 6.77, was employed onthe general upkeep of the station.
General.-The 3rd, being H. M. King George's Birthday, the offices were closed.
On the 4th Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager, Sadong Colliery, arrived back from Kuching by s.s. Alice Lorraine.
On Sunday the 7th I attended, accompanied by Native Officer, Abang Hamdan, a tuba fishing in the Ulu Simunjan. Owing to rain in the Ulu the water rose some three feet, and on account of this poor sport was experienced.
On the 18th, the Resident. First Division. Mr. J. C. Swayne, accompanied by Lieutenant-Commander Collins and Messrs R. D. Binnie and P. H. Flood- Page, arrived from Kuching by m.l. Rentis.
The Resident and party left for Kuching on 22nd instant.
July, 1930.
The two flying boats of the Royal Air Force revisited Kuching on the 4th and left again on the 6th. By the courtesy of the squadron leader one of the boats was anchored, off Astana and an opportunity made for the Senior Native Officers to inspect the vessel.
H.M.S. Herald paid a short visit to the port during the month, arriving on the 16th.
Two trips were paid to Bau and various cases were heard in the Resident's Court.
DISTRICT OFFICER.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. .W. S. B. Buck, reports
Judicial.-The Court work during the month has been very light, there being no important cases other than a preliminary inquiry under section 377 I.P.C., the minutes of which were passed to the higher Court.
Traveling.-A visit was paid to Kampong Santubong where a number of Malay petitioners were met and a discussion took place relative to the centralization of the Santubong bazaar. A report on this matter has already been handed to you.
Batu Kawa was visited on 2nd, 9th, 18th, 22nd with Mr. T. A. Reid of the Public Works Department, and again on the 25th with Drs. G. Brooke and J. W. Hutchinson.
Batu Kawa.-The main drainage scheme at this bazaar is now complete but a few subsidiary drains have yet to be laid. It was suggested that the clerk's house should be cemented underneath and I understand from the Public Works Department that this also is going ahead, together with the levelling up of the old parit.
A new zinc covered table is being put into the pork market to replace the only remaining wooden one which is in an insanitary condition.
The Chief Health Officer visited the station with regard to the proposed night-soil collection and disposal scheme which has yet to be approved. With regard to this scheme I should like to suggest that a suitable estimate be made next year for the building of a small lock-up at Batu Kawa for persons under warrant, where say, two short term prisoners could be kept. These men could be found plenty of work round the bazaar and could, if necessary, deal with the disposal of night-soil, the cost of maintaining them to be defrayed by a night- soil collection fee of $1 per door, which would be more than sufficient.
General.-I would like to suggest that a four feet strip of rubber be laid round that block of offices composing His Highness the Tuan Muda's office, Courts and District Offices in order to reduce the noise of persons using the verandah's during the Sitting of the Courts. This is very necessary at times and the cost at present would be very small. The strip might be carried through the Court also in front of the Bench.
BAU, UPPER SARAWAK.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, reports:- 
The contractor for the new gaol was paid off and given a fresh contract to re-roof the old gaol, which is leaky and rotten in several places. On the 14th I started for Lundu via Kuching and sailed from Kuching on 15th by Sarawak Steamship Coy.'s s.v. Ulu. I arrived at Lundu about 5.30 a.m. on the 16th and found everything well. The drought had then already been going on for about six weeks and the water problem was getting acute. The only well with water left fit for consumption was the big Government well in the Fort grounds, and this was so only because it is less used than the others and looked upon as a reserve. I consider that a water- works would be a great improvement to Lundu from a health point of view (an epidemic of dysentery was being treated while 1 was there), and I am sure that this could be put in at a very small cost and would cost next to nothing in upkeep-in fact I think it would more than pay for itself. The water which would be taken is first class in quality. I do not think it would be  necessary to go up the Lundu stream as far as the waterfall. I followed the course of the stream myself all the way up to the waterfall and found two suitable pools to supply the pipe. I had the distance from the lowest and nearest pool to the Fort measured. The distance is about 1 ½ miles. I should think that the height is sufficient to give the required head of water. If it is not, a further climb of about 4 of n mile would certainly do so, and there is at that point an equally good pool. The damming would present no difficulties as large granite boulders already lie across the foot of tbe pool.
On 21st I walked to Serayan and Sebaku to look for low-lying ground for the proposed irrigation padi fanning. I returned to Lundu by way of Simatan where I checked the cash and settled one or two cases. Reaching Lundu about mid-day, 26th. I sailed on s.v. Ulu at midday and arrived at Kuching about midday 27th.
Court.-The chief case heard at Lundu was Government versus Nawab Khan (Habib), charged under section 170 I.P.C.
During the month the Acting Resident paid a visit to Bau to settle three cases. One was settled but the other two adjourned for further evidence.
Court work has been light during the month. One or two assault cases have been brought up and the inquiry into the wounding of Loh Khiun at Tundong on 24th June, is still going on without much success.
Rainfall.-The drought has now been going on this district for about seven weeks. I understand this the longest drought remembered here since 1914. The lake has dropped over four feet.
Rainfall for the month was 1.43 inches.
Gold Returns.- 186.54 ounces of actual gold were obtained by the Bidi Gold Mining Company for the month of June, 1930.
SADONG.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports:-
Court.-Court work has been above the normal during the month although most of the cases were of trivial nature. Chong Hin was sentenced to two weeks' imprisonment for contempt of Court and numerous Dyaks were fined for breach of Forest Regulations.
The contract for the Gunong Ngili-Saging Road is still going along satisfactorily and should be completed in some two months.
The Kampong Saging road, which was raised earlier in the year, is, in places, showing signs of falling into the ditches on either side. As a temporary measure a number of piles were driven in to support it.	
On the 11th Dyaks and Malays, numbering some 250 persons, were called out to clear the Sebangan river, which was finished on the 15th. This should be a great benefit to both Dyaks and Malays as I am led to understand valuable stands of billian are located in the upper reaches of this river which until now have been inaccessible owing to the overg-round state of the main stream.
On the 12th, in conjunction with the Manager, Sadong Colliery, the waterwork dam was repaired, four largo leaks were found in the retaining wall and it was estimated that 25% of the water in the dam was running away through these leaks.
The supply to the dam is obtained from two small streams which flow into the dam at a rate of 90 gallons a minute. I would also mention that this figure was obtained after three weeks drought.
Medical.-At the Government Hospital nine patients were admitted two were discharged, three were transferred to the Leper Camp Kuching and one absconded, leaving four remaining at the end of the month.
At the dispensary 156 out-patients made 305 attendances for treatment; 21 N.A.B. injections were given of which 20 were for yaws and 1 for muli.
Travelling.-1 arrived back from a trip into the Ulu Simunjan and Gedong districts on the 8th. Great difficulty was experienced owing to the low water in the rivers.
On the 18th I proceeded, accompanied by Mr. G. St. F. Dare, on an inspection of the Bugis concession at Jaie. The gardens are examples of what can be done by anyone who is willing to work hard. Besides the main crop, i.e., coconuts, the following subsidiary crops were seen:-Coffee, pineapples, tapioca, semanka, pisang, chillis, tuba and papaya.
I returned to Sadong on the 19th.
Agriculture.-Mr. G. St. F. Dare visited the station twice during the month and inspected Sahari's garden.
Prison.-The health of the prisoners was good. The prison gang averaging 12.8 was employed on general upkeep of the station.
During the month twelve vessels entered and eleven cleared the port.
Sadong Collieries Report. July, 1930.
Advantage was taken of the fine weather prevailing throughout the month to mine coal underlying an area of soft ground in the lower seam at the old Blacksmith's Mine.
With the continuation of the present dry weather it is hoped to complete the extraction of this coal so that the Mine can be abandoned with the arrival of the wet monsoon.
There were ample supplies of water available, and the overflow from the reservoirs very nearly equalled the quantity consumed.
The Pansi watershed, which was reported to have failed during last year's drought, was examined.
The Officer-in-Charge and myself attended to the clearing of the streams, and the large leakages found in the dam, on the 12th. The actual quantity of water flowing into the dam on that date was 90 gallons per minute.
Two-thirds of the mine buildings were white-washed during the month. Owing to the heavy stocks carried at the wharf 200 tons of coal was stored away at the Buffalo Mino entrance.
The rainfall for the month was 2.96 inches.
Black and White Trophy.
DRAW FOR SEMI-FINAL.
Wireless and Telephones vs. Land and Survey, 9th August Merchants vs. Bangers, 12th August.
The Wireless and Telephones vs. Treasury, Municipal and Customs was played on the 5th. There was very little team work displayed, but the Wireless were slightly better in combination, although MacLaine in goal and Andrew Hon at centre half for the Treasury, were the outstanding players on the held. The Treasury forwards dallied too long with the ball and nearly always lost it, but the greatest weakness was the right half, who appeared to hold a roving commission, which lead to collisions with his own men as well as leaving the Wireless left wing unwatched. Both keepers got plenty to do and MacLaine was unlucky in his attempt to stop a penalty, the ball going in the opposite direction to his dive. It was a clever bit a work by Tait, who from the line hooked the ball over bis head into an empty goal for Ah Yaw to net Johnny Ho scored the other goal for the Wireless, and Jawa and Chin Ee were responsible for the Treasury goals. It was a fairly, even game all through, but a better conception of the game on the part of the Wireless forwards pulled them through. Harding at centre forward distributed the ball well, giving his inside men many openings and judicious passes.
The other semi-final did not produce the expected high standard of play, but it was quite a good game with the Rangers superior in every department. The Merchants were the first to score through on individual effort by Moir who finished by placing the ball into the corner of the net out of the goal keeper's reach. The lead was only held for a minute or two, however, as a concentrated movement by the Rangers front rank was crowned by Osumin beating the goalkeeper. Shortly after this Freddy Lim gave the Rangers the lead by lobbing the ball over the keeper's head when he rushed out to stop a shot. The Merchants tried hard to get the equalizer, but Moir was sandwiched every time he got the ball, and the others had not the speed to enable them to make much progress. Half time was called with the score at 2-1 in the Rangers favour. In the second half the Rangers pressed nearly all the time, and the Merchants keeper was kept busy, but very few shots went near the other goal. The third goal was scored by Ismail.   After this the Merchants had one or two tries but no further score was forthcoming, although shots by Moir and Chaplin gave the Rangers some qualms The Rangers played a good game throughout and thoroughly deserved their win.
The final was well patronized and before the start of the game the spectators were 4 or 5 deep all round. The Land and Survey got the choice of goals and took the one nearest the town. From the kick off Rangers started pressing but they did not get it all their own way, and Mace sent the forwards off after some good work by the defence. For the first twenty minutes the game was fairly even with Rangers doing more pressing, but the Land and Survey defence proved capable of holding them off and, although many shots were sent in. Middlemas dealt with them all confidently. Rangers came very near to scoring various times. The first goal came from Ismail who, when Parker missed a header, nipped in and headed into the net.
The second goal came shortly after when Stephen Harry placed a hard low drive through a bunch of players right into the corner of the net. The Land and Survey woke up a bit and did some pressing, but the Rangers were taking no chances and cleared their lines strenuously. Half time was called with the score standing at 2-0 in favour of Rangers.
On resumption the Land and Survey started pressing, but they could not make much impression on the Rangers defence. The whole of the Rangers team were equally good and worked well together, and their pace was a trifle too fast for their opponents
At the conclusion of the game His Highness the Tuan Muda presented the cup and medals to the winners, and medals for the runners up, and congratulated both teams for the clean display they had given.
This is the second year in succession the Rangers have won the tournament and, unless some of the departments can produce considerably better teams next year, there appears to be nothing to stop the Rangers from winning again, unless a handicap of 10 goals down is placed on them. Why not start an innovation in football, a handicap tournament? The following looks rather well, Rangers -10 goals, medical-2, New World scr., Treasury + 15, Steamship Co. + 20, European Merchants + 25 !!! (we can't use any more valuable space, and after looking over the foregoing we are afraid some people may consider it libellous).
The Chinese Inter-Stature Football League.
A Chinese Football League is being run in Kuching for the first time, thanks to the untiring efforts of an indefatigable committee consisting of Messrs. Reynolds, Sochen, Kelley, C. P. Law. Law Chen Hiang, Choo Ah Hian and other gentlemen, and to the ready response by the players and public alike. The Commissioner of Police has kindly given the use of the Police Ground and Messrs. Law Brothers have presented a Cup. It is hoped to make the League an annual event.
The object of this League is to promote sportsmanship and goodwill amongst the various Chinese communities of Kuching, by having representatives of every community in each team.
The first match between the "Thin" Team and the "Fat" Team, played on Wednesday, 20th August, ended in a win for the "Fats" by an only goal, scored by Teck Hak before the interval. The "Thins" were seriously handicapped by the absence of Kheng Hai and Yu Siong and, although they at no time looked like winning, they did very well to hold up against their heavier opponents.
Mr. W. H. Kelley refereed and the teams lined up as follows:,-
"Fat" Team :-George Lim, Khin Choon, Ah Chew, Andrew Hon, Khee Chin, Tet En, Shin Sen, John Lim, Kui Choon, Teck Hak and Yaw Soon.
"Thin" Team:-Ah Kan, Kam Chin, Mah Khiok, Cheng Khoon, Chiang Khoon, Choon Onn, Ah Kaw, Chee Ghim, Seng Chye, Po Long, and Beng Siang.
THURSDAY, 2IST AUGUST, 1930.
The "Short" Team created a surprise in their match against the "Medium" Team on Thursday, and excitement was keyed up right to the end. Throughout the match the exchanges were fast and well contested and, although their short passing method caused the "Medium" defenders a lot of trouble, they lacked finish and missed many opportunities in front of the goal, and were able to score only one goal, before the interval, through Teck Hee.	
The "Mediums" made every effort to equalize, but the "Shorts" defence was equal to all demands, and half time found the "Mediums" still a goal behind.
The "Shorts" had the misfortune to lose the service of Eddy Jolly soon after the resumption of play, haying to retire with serious cut on the knee. The "Mediums" made desperate efforts and were able equalize through Chui Chua. The "Shorts," although playing with only ten men, attacked as often as the rivals and the final whistle still found the play ranging from end to end and the honours even.
Mr. G. T. Bates referred and the teams lined up as
follows:- "Short" Team:-"Weng Shoon, Francis Tan, Yet Chong, Ah Tai, Choo Ban, Eddy Jolly, Chin Fall, Thiam Hee, Aug Chong, Teck Hee and Ah Poon.
"Medium" Team :-Leng Geng, Ah Siong, Kim Hin, Chin Siew, W. S. Shu, C. Ah Kaw, L. Ah Bee, Chui Choon, Freddy Lim, Yaw Joo and Eng Hin.
MONDAY, 25TH AUGUST, 1930.
The match between the "Thin" Team and the "O. & S." Team, played on Monday, ended in a one goal draw. Although the "Thin" again had to take the field without the services of Kheng Hai and Yu Siong, they managed to draw first blood by a hard shot from Seng Chye, which slipped through Hok Hoi's hands. The "O. & S." equalized soon afterwards through John Goh. The "O. & S." did more attacking and half time found the honours even.
On the resumption of play the "O. & S." continued to have the better of matters. Towards the end play was confined for the most part to the "Thins" area, and the final whistle still found the "O. & S." pressing very hard.
Mr. W. H. Kelley refereed and the teams were as follows:-
"Thin" Team .-Ah Kan, Mah Khiok, Kam Chin, Beng Siang, Chee Ghim, Chiang Khoon, Seng Chye, Ah Hiong, Ah Yaw, Po Long and Choon Omi.
"O. & S." Team :-Hock Hoi, Edmund Ho, Kia Hui. Ah Ten, Arthur Then, Henton Tan, Anthony Wee, John Goh, L. K. L. Chan, Nyuk Chang and Chui Choon.
League Table.
Turf Club Notes.
AUTUMN MEETING, 27TH AND 29TH SEPTEMBER.
With the exception that Race No. 7, Second Day, is open only to Divisions II and III (and not I and II as suited) the programme will be in accordance with that published in last month's Gazette.
Prizes.-No Second Prize will be awarded if there are less than 3 runners and no Third Prize if less than 5.
Totalizators and Cash Sweeps.- Through a slip it was staled that 20% of the Totalizators goes to the Club. This should have read " 20% of the Cash and Unlimited Sweep."
Only 10% of the Totalizators will go to the Club as formerly.
Unlimited Sweep.-Those who have been good enough to dispose of Tickets are reminded that Sold and Unsold Counterfoils, together with full remittance, must reach the Hon. Secretary not later than 20th September.
The course opened for training on the morning of 14th August when some 15 ponies turned out for their first real gallop of the season.
On account of the prolonged drought the going on the hard side, but at the end of the month the course was in excellent order.
Owing to slight indisposition our racing correspondent is not in a position to favour us with the usual selections, but we have no doubt but that on the receipt of a remittance of $10 a sealed envelope will be forthcoming. Entries at time of going to press are fairly good.
Accounts to 30th June, 1930.
These have now been audited by Mr. McLaine and found correct. A copy of the Auditor's Certificate will be incorporated in the statements will be sent to members in due course.
Golf.
A Golf Gymkana was held on Friday and Saturday the 8th and 9th instant, His Highness the Tuan Muda's birthday week end.
Quite a number of Members had taken advantage of the long week end to get away from Kuching for a few days, and the entry for each event was naturally limited.
However, a very interesting programme wascarried through smoothly and enthusiastically by all who competed.
The Gymkana, which is quite an innovation in Kuching, was based on the same lines as those organized by the Gymkana Club, Miri, and consisted of the following three competitions :-
1.Approach and put from roughly 30 yards the 9th pin.
2.Long driving (Ladies receiving an allowance of 2 yards for every stroke of their handicap).
3.Tombstone foursomes (on handicap). Honours were very evenly distributed, and one of the most gratifying results was the win of Mrs. Fenwick (the only lady competitor) and her partner Mr. Moir in the tombstone event. This should surely encourage larger entries from the fair sex in future Gymkanas, and we hope to bold another during His Highness the Rajah's birthday week.
The following is a summary of the results:-
1.Approaching and putting competition. Winner. Mr. E. M. Woodward. Runners up. Messrs. Forrest, Allan and McLaine (the replay has not yet been decided).
2.Long driving. Winner. Mr. A. L. McLaine. Runner up. Mrs. C. Fenwick (Handicap 28 yards).
3.Tombstone Competition. Winners. Mrs. C Fenwick and Mr. R. L. Moir. Runners up. Capt. C. P. Lowe and Mr. G. T. Bates. Mrs. Fenwick amt Mr. Moir "expired" on the eighth green while the seventh was peppered with the tombstones of all the remaining competitors.-R.I.P.
The August monthly medal, played on the 10th instant, was won by Capt. C. P. Lowe with the excellent score of 44 less 7=37 net.
Mr. Woodward wo hear holed out the 7th in a somewhat modest 10 in this competition. His stupendous efforts at this hole were closely watched by three Chinese gentlemen, who seemed to think, that the great game was either a blasphemous "Talkie" or a really humorous pastime-in any case they acted accordingly.-McL.
Sarawak Club Derby Sweep 1930.
"The Midnight Wanderers" will fill in the gaps with orchestral selections.
We congratulate all the performers; and the headmaster's personation of the Judge was excellent. The Dayang Amie, and the Chief Secretary and Mrs. Boult supported the Archdeacon and Mrs. Champion; and a number of prominent residents as well as friends and parents of the pupils viewed the proceedings with interested Attention.
The Feast of St. Helen.
On August 17th, being the Eve of the Feast of St, Helen, the pupils of St. Theresa's Convent were en fete, it being the Feast Day of the Reverend Mother Provincial.
The celebrations began with the singing of the hymn of St. Helen by the pupils, and then two of the tiniest toddlers presented a bouquet of roses and a programme of the evening's entertainment to the Reverend Mother.
Miss Patsie Were then read the following address from the pupils:- "FEAST OF ST. HELEN, August, 1930.
"DEAR MOTHER PROVINCIAL,
"We are very glad to come here this evening to tender our loving wishes on the occasion of your feast day.
We have sent many prayers heavenward to the Sacred Heart of Our dear Lord for every blessing to you and your many works.
Please accept our little gifts as a small token of our sincere gratitude to you for all you do for us.
We cannot help dear Mother on this day also to express our great joy, when we were told that Our Holy Father Pius XI. had sent you his Apostolic Blessing, and a letter of Appreciation of the great work you have done in Borneo for the poor little heathen children.
She then banded an artistically designed copy of the address to Mother Helen and more songs followed.
The Very Reverend Monsignor Dunn gave a short address complimenting Mother Helen on having com-pleted her 70th year which includes 45 years' service in the Borneo Mission. He mentioned having received a letter from His Holiness the Pope, a copy of which appears elsewhere in our issue.
Mother Helen's many friends will join in congra-tulating her on the signal honour paid her by the Holy Father and in wishing her many Happy Returns of her Feast Day.
Beautifully worked gifts from the sisters and pupils of the Convent were displayed in the hall.
The Reverend Mother wishes to thank her many kind friends who contributed congratulations and gifts on her Feast Day.
May it be the echo of the eternal reward which awaits you is the loving and fervent wish of the GIRLS OF ST. THERESA'S, Kuching."
She then banded an artistically designed copy of the address to Mother Helen and more songs followed.
The Very Reverend Monsignor Dunn gave a short address complimenting Mother Helen on having com-pleted her 70th year which includes 45 years' service in the Borneo Mission. He mentioned having received a letter from His Holiness the Pope, a copy of which appears elsewhere in our issue.
Mother Helen's many friends will join in congra-tulating her on the signal honour paid her by the Holy Father and in wishing her many Happy Returns of her Feast Day.
Beautifully worked gifts from the sisters and pupils of the Convent were displayed in the hall.
The Reverend Mother wishes to thank her many kind friends who contributed congratulations and gifts on her Feast Day.
Club News.
Sarawak Club- BOWLING AVERAGES FOR JULY, 1930.
BOWLING HANDICAP FOR AUGUST, 1930.
Cricket. Sunday, 20th July, 1930.
Second Division News.
METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS.
Divisional Reports.June, 1930.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports for June and July, 1930, by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident:-
On the 5th Mr. W. P.N. L. Dilmas left for Engkilili to act as Assistant District Officer of a new Administrative district which has been formed out of the old sub-districts of Engkilili and Lubok Antu. It is hoped that the new appointment will be a convenience to Dyaks and Chinese, who previously had to come long distances to make their complaints or have their cases heard.
On the same date Mr. D. C. Hudden was gazetted to act as Assistant District Officer, Simanggang.
Messrs. R. L. Daubeny, W. P. N. L. Ditmas and D. C. Hudden were given the powers of a District Court Magistrate. 
The Conservator of Forests, Mr. D. E. Calver, arrived in Simanggang on the 5th, and left again on the 10th for Saribas and Kalaka. During his stay here, many matters were discussed, including the vexed question of felling billian, engkabang or ketio on bona fide farming land. The question, too, of the local custom in the Lingga of imposing severe fines on persons felling billian without permission was considered.
Mr. D. K. Morse, Acting Assistant District Officer of Kalaka, arrived on the 13th and returned to hit district on the 18th.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Simanggang, Mr. D. C. Hudden, visited Lingga and Sebuyow during the month.
On the 25th Mr. B. Summers arrived in Simanggang to do duty as Land Officer, Second Division. 
Mr. C. Fenwick, of the B.C.L., and Mr. F. L. Pentelow, of the A.P.C., were in Simanggang from the 6th to the 8th. Unfortunately m.l. Rentis kept on breaking down and they were prevented from going up to Engkilili
I visited Engkilili on the 28th, where I found that many improvements had been made by Mr. Ditmas.
Sixty Ulu Ai Dyaks were sent to Johore during the month to work for the Colonial Survey Section, Royal Engineers. There was immense competition amongst Dyaks for the sixty places.
The harvest having been collected, most of the Dyaks are now busy holding "begawai" and starting land cases in the Courts.
The S.P.G. Mission have made a start on the clearing of their new site at Bukit Sabun.
Rumah Ringgi, in the Ulu Sebuyow, was recently burnt whilst nearly all the adults were on their farms. This house has since been exempted from tax for this year.
The Native Officer, Lingga, reports that almost everyone in the kampong is asking for a Malay School.
Engkilili.-On the 5th June, I arrived from Simanggang to take over the duties of Acting Assistant District Officer.
On the 7th I started walking to Lubok Antu, stopped the night at Penghulu Imong's house, Kumpang, reaching Lubok Antu the next day, at 3.30 p.m. The road approaching Lubok Antu was overgrown with grass and weeds; it evidently had not been cleared for months, the grass in places was more than 5 feet high. The Fort paths, and lawns were all overgrown. I checked all the books for the month and gave orders about collecting some of the very many outstanding fines, totalling over $500.
The Police have now had their Snider Carbines exchanged for soma in better condition from Simanggang, and also new ammunition has been sent.
Mr. Reutens, F.R.S.C., arrived on the 19th to inspect the new Forest Checking Station, which is now complete.
The Chinese have agreed to re-make, where necessary, the Murup road; Dyaks have been called to clear the sides of the road, and fell any trees overhanging it. The Chinese begin work when the Dyaks have finished.
The path to Lubok Tedong to the Agricultural Departments Central Nurseries is important, since it also serves a large number of pepper gardens at Spengal, across river, and other places.
A new road is to be made following the general direction of the old path. The Chinese and Dyaks also have agreed to make this. Here again the Dyaks are doing the felling, and the Chinese will make the road.
SARIBAS.
The substations were visited from 20th to 24th instant. Various matters were seen to, but nothing of importance arose. The influenza epidemic is bad at Debak, several deaths having occurred. I returned to Betong on 24th, overland via Semambu and Spaoh, leaving Debak at 7 a.m. and arriving here at 3 p.m.
Ten motor vessels entered and cleared the port during the month.
KALAKA.
There were very few cases in either the Civil or Criminal Courts during the month.
Mr. D. E. Calver, Conservator of Forests, accompanied by Mr. F. P. Reutens, Forest Ranger S.C., Simanggang, arrived from Simanggang on the 10th instant per m.l. Jean. During his stay Mr. Calver demarcated a small piece of land on the Sebetan-Roban road which he intends to reserve for a jelutong plantation.
On the 2nd instant 1 walked over to Sebetan and inspected and measured the 1st mile of the new road, and the 2nd mile was nearly finished at the end of the month. The contractor reports that he is now within two and a half miles of Roban.
Work on the bazaar road was held up during the month owing to the land being covered with timber belonging to the Chinese; this has now been removed and work has again started.
I visited the Vernacular School during the month; there are now thirty boys in the school.
The death of Ayeng, Tua Kampong, Kampong Hilir, took place on the 7th. Deceased had worked for the Government for some thirty years, but for the last few years he was confined to his house owing to an illness which eventually caused his death.
Land Office.-Office space is lather confined, but quite sufficient at present until an increase in staff; by that time it is expected the new office will be ready.
An addition to the staff by a loan from the Resident of one Abang Draup, Native Officer, has been greatly appreciated, this man acting as Interpreter, writer of Surats Panggil, and sometimes acting in the capacity of Land inspector examining Dyak disputes.
Police and Prisons, Simanggang.-Three shops in the bazaar, suspected of harbouring unregistered opium smokers, were raided and two arrests were made. The success of the raid was chiefly due to A.S.I. Abang Mostapa, who had previously kept the shops under careful observation.
July. 1930.


In the Resident's Court Tan Geek Cheng, prisoner, late of the Government Subordinate Service, was convicted of criminal breach of trust and forgery in his capacity of a Government Servant, and sentenced to six months' R.I. on each charge, sentences to run consecutively, but concurrently with his present sentence of three years' R.I.
Messrs. T. A. Reid, of P.W.D., and Kelley, A.S.P., arrived from Kuching on the 2nd instant, and proceeded to Engkilili on the 4th.
I left for Engkilili on the 16th, accompanied by Mr. B. Summers, Land Officer, and returned to Simanggang on the 20th.
During my stay I walked through many pepper gardens near Engkilili, and I was surprised at the appearance of several well kept gardens owned and worked by Malays and Dyaks. The drought, however, was having an effect on the vines, and the low price of pepper is not attractive.
The proposed road from Bukit Tedong to Engkilili has not progressed at all, as the Chinese do not seem ready to start work as they promised to do, directly the Dyaks had cleared the rentis.
The appearance of Engkilili Bazaar has much improved since an European Officer has been stationed there, and when the concrete drains are finished it should compare well with any Bazaar of its size in the State. The site for the new bungalow had been cleared and levelled and most of the framework is ready in Simanggang to be taken up there.
Mr. G. M. Goodall, Agricultural Field Officer, Second Division, passed through Simanggang on his way to Kuching on the 29th.
On the 23rd Mr. H. C. P. Adams, of the Government Monopolies Department, arrived in Simanggang on inspection duty and returned to Kuching on the 25tb.
A new motor vessel belonging to the Sarawak Steamship Co. Ltd., the True, arrived at Simanggang on the ,30th on her maiden voyage. She is a vast improvement on the Lang Nyambar, which, I hear, is to be put on to another run.
On the 25th work was begun on demolishing the Astana at Simanggang.
The old house, however, will not be entirely destroyed as it is being re-erected, with many improvements, on another site nearer the Residency. The old site will be used for the new Government offices.
The new bungalow for the A.D.O., Simanggang, was completed and occupied during the month, and a new road joining the main Sabu Road and Simanggang Bazaar was started.
All Government Schools in the Division were examined towards the end of the month.
A Dyak named Bindi of Ganja's house, Entulang, was killed by a falling tree.
Ex-C. S.M. Barrat, S.R., was permitted to move 21 doors of Second Division Dyaks to Sibuti, having obtained sanction from His Highness the Tuan Muda.
The drought has been felt all over the Division, and in many places drinking water, and even bathing water, is scarce. Saratok traders are buying water from the Awek, and unless there is rain soon matters will become very serious.
Office hours throughout the whole Division were altered to suit present day requirements.
The contractor has started on the preparation of timber for the new bungalows at Saratok and Engkilili; and a certain amount of minor building in the various districts was done locally.
Owing to the drought and the oppressive beat, many persons suffered from a kind of influenza, but the general health of the Division was good.
Malays and Dyaks are clearing their farms and burning. As is usual at these times, many complaints were made regarding rubber gradens, coconut palms and other trees being destroyed by fire. In most cases lack of care was evident on both sides.
Appended are extracts from the reports of the Acting Assistant District Officer of Simanggang (Mr. D. C. Hudden), The Acting Assistant District Officer of Engkilili (Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas), the Assistant District Officer of Saribas (Mr. R. L. Daubeny), the Acting Assistant District Officer of Kalaka (Mr. L K. Morse), the Officer-in-Charge of Police and Prisons, Simanggang (Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft), and the Land Officer, Second Division (Mr. B. Summers).	
Simanggang.-In the District Court there were four criminal charges and one civil case, a land dispute. Of the former, one was dismissed and the remainder resulted in fines amounting to $224.40.
In the Magistrates' Court there were five criminal cases and twenty-six civil, of which two were land disputes and the remainder claims amounting, to $323.60. Four of the criminal charges were dismissed, and the fifth resulted in a sentence of five weeks for non-payment of fine.	
On the fourth a small boy, about six years old, was taken by a crocodile at Stumbong, Sebuyow.
A few day's later a sixteen foot man-eater was caught and the father of the boy gave $20 to the Malay who had baited it.
The Court Writer reports that during the month eighty crocodiles were caught in the Sebuyow river.
Engkilili.-On the 4th of July Mr. Reid, P.W.D., and Mr. Kelley, A.S.P., arrived from Simanggang.
On Saturday the 5th, Messrs. Reid and Kelley accompanied me to Lubok Antu, the Agricultural Department's motor launch Rubberneck was lent by Mr. Goodall, and R. P. Imong was reached about 5p.m.
On the 9th Messrs. Kelley and Reid left in the m.l. Elisabeth.
There were nine criminal cases in the Magistrate's Court and civil claims amounting to $84.38.
In the District Court were four criminal cases. Fines amounting to $30 and one sentence of four months under section 304a I.P.C. Total civil claims amounted to $1,252.76.

SARIBAS.
Saribas.-A District Court inquiry was held into a charge against F. G. Abang Beng of falsification of accounts, the minutes of same being passed on to the Resident's Court, Simanggang.
Towards the end of the month the contractor arrived and started work on the Fort and new jail at Betong. An old rubber garden had been purchased from Lawat and has now been cleared and stumped in readiness for the new clerk's quarters.
The substations were visited twice during the month, once in company with Messrs. Reid and Kelley on an inspection of the police, and again later in the month.
Twelve motor vessels entered and cleared during the month.

Kalaka.-Mr. W. Kelley, A.S.P., accompanied by Mr. Reid, of the P.W.D., arrived at Saratok on the 15th instant. I accompanied them to Kabong on the 17th instant.
I departed for Roban on the 20th instant, and arrived back at Saratok on the 23rd instant.
The m.l. One was lent to the A.D.O., Betong, from the 24th to the 30th instant.
There has been very little rain in Saratok during the month, and the water shortage is now a serious matter, in other parts of the district heavy rain has fallen.
Drahman, Inspector of Schools, visited the district during the month and, after conducting the examinations, returned to Simanggang, taking the Saratok schoolmaster with him.
Mr. Wah Thau Kui, of the Education Department, visited Saratok in connection with the Ming Sing School, which it seems, has not been registered.
Police and Prisions, Simanggang.-The total strength of police was increased to eighty-six. Sergeant Ipan continued to do duty at Simanggang.
During the month the police made very satisfactory progress both in their drill and general efficiency, and it is hoped that in one month's time the standard of efficiency obtained at Simanggang will be quite satisfactory for an outstation. Musketry instruction was continued during the month, and now nearly all the force here have completed their course.
Simanggang Prison.-Prisoners daily average for July was 56.96, nine prisoners released during July, eight prisoners taken on during July (seven from Kuching).
The District Officer, Mukah, reported capture of escaped prisoner Abul.
Land Office.-On the 9th of the month Tan Choon Eng arrived to do duty in Simanggang, accompanied by Assistant Inspector Abang Dundang, the latter having completed his course of training in the Survey.
On the 11th Abang Dundang was transferred to Betong, and David Chulo to Simanggang.
Engkilili.-On the 16th of the month I accompanied the Resident in the motor launch Anne to Engkilili, taking with me Wee Swee Cheng. Affairs of the Land Office were found in good order, with the exception of one or two minor details.
Applications.-All applications have been examined up to date, and the correct number of the Occupation Tickets entered in the space allotted in the Application Book.
Occupation Tickets.-Occupation Tickets have been issued up to date, and plan of garden entered on the back of each, but without any details of adjoining gardens or land marks, etc., this is now being remedied.
The Pepper Garden Assessment Book was found correct.
Rubber Garden Register.-This Register has only the names of the title holders entered, with absolutely no other details. This can only be remedied by time.
Pepper Gardens.-The majority of pepper gardens have no jungle reserve, in fact many gardens are alongside one another with no jungle near them. If suitable land can be found, and with the cooperation of the Agricultural Officer, I think the easiest way to rectify this is to divide the land into lots for gardens with the suitable amount of jungle attached.
Sale of Land by Dyaks.-It was brought to my knowledge that many Dyaks sell land (to which they have no title or right) to pepper gardeners, for a certain sum of money. The transactions took place in the office (without any deeds) in the form of a gift. On the Permit to Plant was written as follows "I	do make over this piece of land as a gift to -''with the Dyak's thumb print attached, as signature.
It is hoped to put a stop to this kind of transaction, which is very difficult to trace and prove.
Quit Rent.-Arrears of quit rent are of a very minor quantity.
Titles.-The following shows the approximate number of titles, issued and examined, and not examined.
Third Division News.
METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS.Rainfall for July, 1930.
Divisional Reports. July, J930.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports for July, 1930, by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident.
Resident's Court.-No criminal cases came up for hearing. Civil cases five claims $6,819.79. Fines and fees $198.75. Two appeals were heard, one being upheld and the other dismissed.	
General.-Flying boats arrived from Bintulu and Mukah on the 2nd inst. and left for Kuching on the 4th inst.
Datu Haji Tuanku Drahman, senior Native Officer at Baram, arrived on the 7th inst. on leave.
The District Officer returned from special leave on 9th inst. also Judicial Commissioner and the Secretary Chinese Affairs, the former returning to Kuching on the 10th inst.	
On the 11th inst. a meeting of Head of Areas with Secretary Chinese Affairs was held and (1) unemployment (2) financial assistance to plant padi were discussed. The Chinese were informed that arrangements are being made to give work to the unemployed on roads, and that for the present no immigration permits will be allowed; the second request was refused.
Mr. Andreini returned to Matu on the 16th inst.
The Secretary for Chinese Affairs visited S. Merah District, Binatang and Sarikei, returning to Kuching on 17th inst.
I visited Sarikei with Supt. of Customs to meet the Director of Agriculture in order to discuss matter concerning pepper. The Director of Agriculture returned to Kuching on 20th inst.
Supt. of Lands arrived on the 13th inst., and on 18th inst. visited Binatang, Sarikei and Rejang, returning to Kuching by m.l. Irene.
Mr. Clark arrived on the 23rd inst. and took over the Electrical Station from Mr. Strong, who proceeded to Kuching for duty on the 24th inst.
Towkays Law Ka Tu and Wong Sui Ing were severely reprimanded for interfering in areas not under their jurisdiction.
Revd. Hoover paid a visit to the north during the month.
The Conservator of Forests passed through from the north on the 27th inst.
Mr. Monseigneur the Right Revd. Father Wachter of B.N.B. arrived on a visit on the 30th inst.
Mr. Crossley arrived on the 30th inst. to do duty as Cadet.
KAPIT.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Kapit, Mr. A. Macpherson, reports:-
June Courts.-Nyangon and Langkih (f.) were fined $100 and $50 respectively for incest.
Dairy Farm.-The herd is thin owing to the long drought. One cow calf was born and one died of dysentery. The herd numbered 44 head at the end of the month.
Prison.-Health was very poor.
Song.-I visited Song on the 19th, returning on 10th.
General.-His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by the Dayang Anne, the Chief Secretary, Mrs. Boult, the Resident and Mr. Crocker, spent the night of the 13th at Kapit, leaving for Sibu at 10 a.m. the next morning. Various matters were brought to His Highness notice, the general tone being one of complaint against trade depression and poverty.
Dyaks are busy on their farms. I returned from Sibu on 3rd and left to do duty at Oya on 16th, and was still away at the end of the month.
The river was in flood during the month for 4 days. One Dyak prisoner escaped and was recaptured after 3 nights by Sut Dyaks.	
Travelling.-Abang Aboi returned from Mujong on 4th.
Courts.-Untol aud Ula (f.) were fined 1 picul and ½ picul respectively for harbouring an escaped prisoner. Kueh Boh Geh and Egok (f.) were each sentenced to six months for non-payment of adultery fine. A Malay, Situ, was imprisoned for 3 months for cheating.
Dairy Farm.-One steer died of diarrhoea. The general condition is fair. The herd numbered 44 at the end of the month, one bull calf being born.
Prison.-Health was fair.
Song.-I visited Song on 19th, staying 2 nights.
General.-I returned from Oya on 15th. The white-washing and tarring of Government buildings was completed during the month. Charles Engkassan, 2nd Clerk, Kapit, proceeded to Song on 5th to take over the Court Writer's duties from Nibong, who is temporarily transferred to Daro. Wee Tao Ping took over the former's duties on I6th. Fifty Uma Bakong and Uma Baka arrived from Long Nawang on 8th and stayed some time, trading mats and parang bilang for salt.
Penghulus Grinang and Jugah proceeded on 10th to Jalangai to received D.E.I. survey party.
It has been very hot this month, the drought lasting for 28 days.
Mr. Walter Goodfellow arrived on 16th and proceeded to Tiau on 18th to collect Natural History Specimens. Wan Hussien, 3rd Native Officer, took 3 weeks' leave on 16th. A telephone linesman arrived on 30th to put the lines in order. Valentino Law, wireless operator, was relieved by Chai Lian Siong on 30th.
The hills round the station wore completely cleared and burnt during the mouth.
Dyaks.-Very few people were down as they are busy farming. Good burns have been reported. A large number of coolies returned from Miri. Rumah Sintu, 11 doors, was burnt out in the Katibas.
Tho Electrical Engineer, Mr. W. L. Clark, reports:-
Station.- Units generated 26,456.
Engine Boom.-There were no breakdowns during the month.
The Officer-in-Charge of Police and Prisons, Mr. F. L. Crossley, reports:-
Crocodiles.-During the month 68 crocodiles were brought by various persons and rewards were paid to them.
General.-On the 25th a Sadong Dyak named Ngelai, alias Tungga, Drahman, Mohamat and Brahim, was arrested by police for teaching Silat, i.e., how-to fight, and Manang, i.e., supplying ubat to cure any Dyaks and Melanoes in this Division. On the 27th he was sent the Acting Resident, First Division, with a report from the District Officer, Sibu, as it is feared that he will cause trouble later if he is left at large.
Health.-The daily average of prisoners admitted to hospital was 9.26 during the month.
The Divisional Laud Officer, Mr. C. E. Pascoe, reports:-
Binatang and Sarikei were visited by the Divisional Land Officer, and three days spent in the office of each place. All books were checked, Land Inspectors work was examined, and everything was signed up to date. There were a number of prepared occupation tickets on hand, and the leading pepper towkays were advised that these must be cleared. During this visit no complaints about inability to have their affairs attended to through lack of Bluff were forthcoming from either Foochows or Cantonese.
On Sunday, the 13th inst., the Supt. of Lands arrived in the Station on a visit of inspection. Unfortunately the Divisional Land Officer, while out at Salim examining the results of a garden fire on the morning of this date, had a full, breaking a bone in the left ankle. This necessitated lying up for a fortnight, but work was carried on during this period in the house. The Superintendent also visited Binatang, Sarikei and Rejang during this trip, returning to Kuching having inspected these three stations.
There were a number of transfers and mortgages during the month, but generally speaking there was a lack of activity as compared with former times. This, of course, was only to be expected. 
The District Officer, Sibu, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports: -
Court.-There has been a large number of debt claims before the courts during the month, the only criminal cases worthy of mention were Law Yew Choon six months under section 324; Tan Ah Chaw three months under the same section; and Ling Teck King three months under section 406.
General.-Three police were commended for their promptness in jumping into the river after a would be suicide, and suitably rewarded by the Court.
A daring attempt was made to rob the gambling farm on the night of 29th. The cashier of the farm has to cross a back lane with the night's takings to get to the safe next door, so two men laid in wait for him and stabbed at him as he came out; fortunately, though, the cashier was not badly injured, and no money was stolen. The two men are now on remand in connection with the affair.
On the 4th Mr. Elam went on a tour of the Foochow Colony, accompanied by Native Officer Abang Haji Gapor, and returned on the 7th. Abang Indih, junior Native Officer, went on a tour of P. Sureng's district on the 9th to check up the number of doors paying tax.
I took over the District Office from Mr. Andreini on the 14th inst., and on 16th Mr. Andreini left for Matu.
A mysterious death was reported on 21st of one Tiong Ka Eu, the cause of death was found to be poisoning by some virulent acid and, after exhaustive inquiries had been made, an open verdict was returned.
The Government grant to the Ensurai School was stopped in consequence of prohibited books having been found at the school when visited by the Secretary for Chinese Affairs.
Visitors to the station during the month included Mr. Stirling Boyd, Capt. Le Gros Clark, Mr. C. S. Griffiths, Mr. G. M. Allman, Mr. Bomfrey of the Island Trading Co., Ltd., and the Rev. Amstutz of the Methodist Mission.
The District Officer, Mukah and Oya, Mr. P. M. Adams, reports:-
General.-The most interesting event of the month was the visit of the flying boats, which landed at Mukah on the morning on the 2nd and left the same day for Sibu. Mr. Macpherson came over from Oya to assist in entertaining the Officers and crew. The strange report mentioned last month of the death of a Mukah Dyak who went to Sibu was further investigated, and the District Officer, Sibu, has been asked to make inquiries, as it seems almost certain that the man in question must still be alive. The General Manager of the Sarawak Oilfields kindly sent copies of the Miri tide charts, and the local tides have been compared with them, dating, from 6th August. So far as can be gathered the highest water occurs here roughly five hours earlier than at Miri, but I cannot guarantee that this will hold good throughout any appreciable period. In fact it seems safe to say that it will not, as locally, during the period of comparison, we have had pasang anak which did not occur at Miri.
Messrs. Spurway and McGinn arrived on 11th in connection with their respective departments. Both visited Balingian. The accounts were checked and found correct.
Abul, an escaped prisoner from Simanggang, was arrested in Kampong Petanak, where he had apparently been hiding for about a month. Several people in this village have been fined and imprisoned for harbouring him. His presence in the district was only disclosed when the house of Haji Uteh (f.) was burgled and over $500 worth of cash, jewellery and clothes stolen. This led to his arrest and he was duly convicted and sentenced to three years. He has been sent to Simanggang.	
Mr. Elam came over on 25th to assist in clearing up arrears of office work, and returned to Oya on 29th.
Mr. Temple Waite, of the Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., came down from the interior on his way back to Miri, mid inspected gas-seeps at Judan and Pen at.
Travelling.-I visited Balingian from 13th to 15th and Oya from 18th to 20th.
Dyaks--A party of Dyaks under one Kilat, who arrived from Sibu last year and were ordered to report at Mukah within one month, were eventually discovered at Bedengan working jelutong under assumed names. These pepole had been to Bintulu, Tatau and Balingian without passes, and were deliberately defying the passport regulations. They were imprisoned, but led by Kilat they refused to work at first but later decided to do so except for Kilat himself, who will be sent to Sibu in irons as it is not considered safe to keep him here.
Dyaks still arrive here with passes to work jelutong and, having came so far, invariably refuse to obey orders to return. Every effort is being made to comb out all kampar Dyaks and send them back to their own districts as ordered by His Highness the Rajah. Probationer N. O. Dan visited Penipah district and reports progress is being made with the building of long house. The same is reported from Ulu Mukah. Probationer N. O. Abang Moss is now in that district on a protracted tour.
The swamp in front of the Fort and District Officer's bungalow was cleared, giving an uninterrupted view of the sea and river.
Education.-Examinations were held and results seem fairly satisfactory. The school has closed down until the end of August.	
Agriculture.-Indian corn seeds were handed to various people whose names have been taken, and they were requested to bring in samples later on and report on same. The cattle ground is being gradually dug up in patches in the hope that better grass may replace the coarse variety. The head of department has been asked to supply grass seeds.
Marine.-The m.l. Leonora was extensively used and went to Sibu, returning via Matu and Balingian, after which trip she had to be docked. Inspected the new light mast and keeper's quarters at Balingian, which is a great improvement on the old site and building.
Monopolies.-Nearly all the local opium smokers were reduced in their daily rations, as they have not been taking more than half of the original quantity allowed.
Prisoners.-Averaged 33.25 and were employed on the usual upkeep of roads and grounds.
Obituary.-I regret to report the death of Penghulu
Andeng of Ulu Balingian.
Trade.-Remains in a hopeless condition. 165 piculs of gutta jelutong and 288 koyans of raw sago were shipped to Kuching. The returns for the month and for comparison with that of the same month last year are as follows:-
Military.-287 rounds of ammunition were allowed, and 6 ½  lbs. of fine gunpowder.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Oya and Dalat, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports:-
General.-I returned from Sibu with the Deputy Conservator of Forests and Divisional Treasurer in the Bujang Rimba on the 8th, and took over the station from Mr. Macpherson next day, who returned to Kapit via Dalat and the Ulu Oya on the 10th.
The Treasurer's audit of the accounts found them all correct.
The District Officer, Mukah, visited the station on I8th and checked the Oya and Dalat 1931 estimates, returning next day by pony.
I went to Mukah on 24th to help with the accumulated office work there, and returned on the 29th.	
Other visitors to the station during the month were Father Delaney from Kuching, and Sisters Alphonsus and Lucilla from Mukah.
Prison.-Six long sentence prisoners arrived from Sibu via Mukah on 24th, making a total of sixteen in jail at the end of the month. The prison gang, averaging 11.5, were employed on the cleaning of Days Road ditches and the general upkeep of the station.
P.W.D.-A small contract was made with Takong of Dalat for repairing the Court clerk's quarters at Dalat. A similar one was given to another contractor at Oya to repair the Court Writer's house. 
Rainfall.-The total rainfall recorded during the month was 2.12 inches, the greatest fall in any one day being 1.10 inches.
Trade.-Owing to the fall in price of raw sago to 20 cents a pasu, only ninety-seven koyans were exported for the month. No motor schooner entered the port after the 6th, there being no cargoes. The trade returns for the month and for comparison with that of the same month last year are as follows:-
The Sanitary Inspector Sibu, Mr. Tan Poh Seong, reports:-
I arrived in Sibu on the 2nd instant and proceeded to Rejang on the 3rd, after reporting myself to the Resident, Third Division.
I have submitted report of my work in Rejang re the dysentery there, but I also made a sanitary survey of that place.
The water supply of Rejang village on the whole is bad, except the water from the well behind the European Bungalow, which is quite good. The amount of water is quite insufficient for the needs oi the village. Besides the well mentioned, there are several other earth wells jotted about the kampong, and these wells are responsible for the recent outbreak of dysentery in Rejang, though flies may be the culprits in some eases.
The following species of mosquitoes were collected and identified.
In my recent report on dysentery at Rejang I suggested that a proper brick well be constructed and pit latrines be introduced. As regards disposal of refuse, I suggest that an incinerator be constructed, and two or more prisoners allotted to do the sweeping and collecting of the refuse and transporting it in hand-carts, to be finally disposed of in the incinerator.
Sarikei.-On the 14th instant at 1 p.m. I left Rejang for Sarikei and, during my short stay there, I made a sanitary survey of the place.
Sarikei Old Razaar.-The sanitation of this place is bad, the two rows of houses facing each other are built on tide-affected area. The back of one of these is built over the river bank. Most of these houses are dilapidated, and I understand that the Resident has given them 21 months' time to demolish and shift to the sites allotted near the new bazaar.
The night-soil diposal of the people in this section is chiefly the river, though in some houses crude bucket type latrines exist. The main road here is under water in high tides; the drain and the river for those houses with their backs towards it are being used as n means of disposal of refuse.
Since the houses are soon to be demolished, I think it is not necessary to improve the area. New Bazaar.-It consists of three blocks of six houses on each side of the road. The road here is wider and the drain by its sides more adequate.
The night-soil from this area is collected in wooden buckets and disposed of by dumping into the river on the further end.	
These houses are quite sanitary except that no back lanes or back lane drains are provided, consequently water from the kitchen and the bathroom accumulate in pools under the house, breeding innumerous mosquitoes.
Kampong.-Like all Malay Kampongs the sanitation of this one is bad. In high tide the place is floods, though it brings in mud from the river yet it helps scavenge the rubbish, etc., from under these houses and the roadside.	
The inhabitants of this section use, the river as a means of disposal of their night-soil.
The clerks and police quarters are at the higher end of the river. The sanitation of this place is better, though it is affected by the tide in some months of the year. The night-soil is collected in bucket type latrines.
Water Supply.-The inhabitants collect rain-water for drinking purposes, and in time of drought they have to go miles away in their tongkangs to get water from the wells. Water is being transported in earthernware jars or billion tubs.
General.-The oiling is being carried on by the Health Coolie once a week. I suggest that an incinerator be constructed to deal with the refuse and the night-soil; and that a few coolies be engaged next year to do the scavenging and the general health work.
Binatang.-I was in Binatang from 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. on the I6th instant. During the short stay there I made a sanitary survey of the place and found the following:-
Old Bazaar.-This section of the town is bad in sani-tation. The plank houses are built in tide affected area. The back portion of these houses is strewn with rubbish and empty tins, and in some pigs and poultry are reared.	
Most of the houses have nor latrines and those that possess any are of the insanitary type.
No scavenging or conservancy is done here, the high tide acts occasionally as the scavenger and the river bank is also used for the disposal of night-soil.
New Bazaar-The new bazaar is composed of twenty- four houses all in a row facing the river. The sanitation is good here except that the houses are not provided with latrines yet. Only three of these were occupied when I was there.
The sanitation of the kampong is more or less the same as that of the kampong at Sarikei.
Sibu.-I arrived in Sibu on I6th instant and reported my arrival to the Resident.
An area of 14' x 20' in the police station is partitioned off for the use of the office. With the consent of the Resident I have engaged two rat catchers and two mosquito collectors and oilers on the 19th.
Rat Campaign.-During the 13 days of the month rats were caught, of which sixty-five were infected with 11 cystertims and 108 proved to be healthy. Ninety-eight leas and seventy-five ticks were combed from the live rats caught.
Anti-Mosquito Campaign.-Nothing much can be done in this branch just now as both the sprayer and A. M. Mixture have not arrived, except a mosquito survey made of the town and the neighbouring kampongs. The in mosquitoes collected and identified proved to be the following:-
Markets.-The market consists of one small building for pork stalls, and one other which is four times the size of the other for meat, fish, vegetables and hawkers of food and fruits.
The market is well designed, being opened on all sides, thereby having plenty of light and ventilation. The general sanitation is also good except (1) a few more covered drains should be constructed to carry away the waste water from the centre of the market; (2) that Permanent stalls should replace the existing wooden ones. There are eighteen stalls in the pork market, which is congested, and since only seven of these are used, I suggest that only twelve should be allowed to remain and the rest taken away.	
There are two stalls for mongers of fresh-water fish and two for salt water fish.
The fresh-water fish are wholesome, but the salt water fish, which is transported from Rejang, is in some cases decomposed, as ice is sparingly used for the preservation, and the fish is sometimes kept as long as three days in Sibu before being sold. I have, however, condemned some of the decomposed fish which the owner willingly disposed off in the incinerator. I also warned them not to repeat the offence again.
Dairies.-There is only one dairy in Sibu, and it is situated about miles away from the bazaar.
House to House Inspection.-The houses in the bazaar are permanent brick buildings. The cubicles in some of them are not so very well lighted and ventilated, the bath room on the ground floor is in some cases used as a living room, the small back-yard in some houses are dirty and packed with odds and ends.
Food Selling Premises.-I made regular visits to the food premises and found that the sanitary conditions are quite good except that the owners prepare the food and coffee in the shop and under the staircases instead of at the back, however, none of them have spittons, which I have asked to be provided.
Scavenging and Conservancy.-Both of these are under contract with a Chinese. The scavenging is done once in the morning and once in the evening. The refuse is collected from the dust bins, etc., and carried to be disposed of in the incinerator.
Meteorology.-The existing meteorological instruments seem to register incorrectly, but as soon as the maximum and minimum thermometer arrives from Kuching I shall take over the readings myself.
Shipping.- The Divisional Medical Officer instructed me to re-inspect the boats coming in from Singapore. During the last fortnight in July I inspected the Kuranda and the Rajah of Sarawak, and performed the vaccinations as already stated.
I am also vaccinating all passengers leaving Sibu for Singapore, and issuing a vaccination certificate to that effect. Later I shall also record all passengers leaving and coming to Sibu from other ports than Singapore.
Conclusion.-In concluding my summary report I would wish to mention the difficulty in impressing the public, the majority of whom are illiterate, the importance of sanitation. A suggestion for improving the insanitary conditions, even put in the kindest way, comes to them in the nature of a surprise, unaccustomed ns they are to innovation and progressive ideas. Greatest tact should be exercised in dealing with these ignorant masses and with them progress must inevitably be slow.
The Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. Alex. D. Hutchison, reports:-
There were 270 new out-patients and their repetition 248. making a total of 518 in all.
The total number of out-patients treated at the jail during the month, including new and repeated, totals 128 in all.
The total number of in-patients treated during the month amounted in all to seventy-three, new admissions forty-one and thirty-two were transferred from 30th June, 1930. Amongst these four deaths occurred at the hospital due to the following causes:-
One from amoebic dysentery, ono gastric ulcer, one pulmonary tuberculosis, one coccyngeal abscess folio wed by septicaemia.
Six lepers were transferred to Kuching Leper Camp during the month, and one lunatic, Paw Pik Chin, Foo-chow, was also sent to Kuching Asylum.
Forty-six N.A.B. injections were given during the month.
Six operations were performed during the month, one under general anaesthetic and five under local anaesthesia.
The total rainfall recorded during the month was 4.57 inches.
One hundred and forty-one various specimens were examined during the month for pathological work.
From 22nd June to 8th July, 1930, dresser Bank was at Rejang treating patients who were infected with dysentery.
On 4th July, 1930, I was away at Sarikei and Rejang on medical inspection, returning on the tth July, 1930.
On 23rd July, 1930, I left for Selalang on medical inspection, returning on 25th instant.
The health of the European community remains good.
The District Officer Lower Rejang, Mr. E. V. Andreini, reports:-:
I returned from doing duty at Sibu on the 17th, having stopped one night at Daro on the way and seen to out-standing affairs there.
A large smokehouse belonging to Sin Guan Huat, containing twelve piculs of rubber, was entirely destroyed by fire on the 23rd. Native Officer Tuanku Mohamed visited Paloh and Jerijeh during the month. I visited Tekajong on 30th and on 31st walked over three miles of new pathway connecting this village with Penyipa. The dresser, Gregory Sami, accompanied me on this trip.
I am glad to say that the low price of rubber and sago has not been without its good effect, as a considerably larger number of people are planting padi this year in all the coast villages.
The contractor for Matu Bazaar arrived and some half a dozen shops are now in progress of building, and several more will shortly be started.
Over fifty crocodiles were caught in Daro District during the month.
P.W.D.-Prisoners were engaged on road and grounds, draining swamps, and on bazaar site at Matu, and on grounds at Rejang.
A start was made on the new jail at Matu. Progress was continued on Daro Court House. Matu bazaar started.
Health.-Considerable sickness was prevalent all along the coast. At Rejang there were thirty-one deaths in all from the epidemic of dysentery.
Sanitary Inspector Ali Omar and Tan Poh Seong visited Rejang in connection with their work.
Trade.-An Agriculture inspector visited Matu.
Prices in sago and rubber ruled very low, only thirteen cents being paid per catty unsmoked rubber, whilst sago flour was bought as low as four passus for a dollar.
Education.-A school-house was started by the Paloh people, application having been made for a schoolmaster there.
Attendances at Matu averaged eighty-seven boys daily.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Sarikei and Binatang, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports:-
General.-Mr. Hammond, Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, has been visiting Sarikei frequently this month, his men having started surveying the pepper districts of Bukit Peninjau and Sungei Jakar, a traverse has been made round this district, and about 150 gardens were surveyed last month.
Captain Le Gros Clark, Protector of Chinese, visited Sarikei and Binatang between 15th and 17th.
On 3rd Native Officer Abong Abu Bakar reported the body of a Foochow had been found by the side of the Gemuan Road near Sungei Jabai; a garden adjoining the road here had just been burnt; it was later proved that a tree had fallen on deceased while he was looking after the burn and he was trapped, dying either from concussion or from suffocation.
There was a big fire in the telephone rentis on the 11th, which did considerable damage to some rubber and tuba gardens.
P.W.D.-During the month work has continued satisfactorily with the 70-foot roads in the new bazaar scheme; in a month or so this should be completed. Work has been done on the extension of Repok road to Sungei Jakar, this is proving difficult on account of the gradients. During the month a rentis from proposed site of waterworks in Meradong was cut to the telephone rentis, by the Survey Department; it proved a shorter distance than had been anticipated, some four miles or so. On 30th, together with Mr. Whiteside, Divisional Engineer, I inspected the top portion of this rentis. Mr. Whiteside expressed the opinion that the scheme was leasable, and the country not too difficult for the pipe line.
Trade and Customs.-As usual, on account of the slump, very little rubber was exported.
A fair amount of pepper went out this month. The quality was good, but only a few bags were up to the Canadian requirements.
The price is very discouraging, and on account of there only being a few dollars difference between black and white pepper, some gardeners are trying to pass very inferior white pepper off as good black pepper.
Agriculture.-The Foochows at Binatang and Sarike are taking up land to plant padi seriously. Formerly they said that this district was no good for padi. Mr. Dare, Coconut Field Officer, visited the Bugis coconut concession this month and expressed the opinion that the soil was probably sour, on account of the bad drainage; also the rotten wood lying about is harbouring white ants.
Mr. Allman, Acting Director of Agriculture, arrived on the 11th in order to make personal tour of all the pepper districts round Sarikei, in order to find out exactly what were the difficulties the gardeners in this district had to overcome to produce real white pepper. At this time there had been a drought lasting over three weeks, and so the shortage of water was the main difficulty.
The Divisional Engineer, Mr. J. W. Whiteside, re-ports:-
Sibu Buildings.-The walls and roofing to the five shophouses being erected in Channel Road are completed. The European Bungalow near the Residency is completed and ready for occupation. The alterations to the District Office are almost complete. Quarters for the Sanitary Inspector are being erected in Green Road. The foundations to the now arrack factory are piled and ready for concreting. Contracts have been let for eight dressers quarters and one Eurasian quarters. Minor repairs have been carried out to a number of Government quarters.
Wharves.-Tho billian wharf is completed.
Roads.-Earth filling and drainage has been carried out to the completed houses in the neighbourhood of Market road. Contracts have been left for widening the road from the Fort to the Long Bridge and from there along Kampong Pulo to Cross Road. Mission Road from the bridge to Lanang Road is also being widened.
Sarikei and Binatang.-Good progress is being made on the Sarikei wharf. The wharf at Binatang is completed. Earth filling to the new Sarikei Bazaar roads is proceeding.
Daro and Matu.-Tile framework to the Court House at Daro building completed and a two rooms extension to Police Barracks is being erected. The foundation for the new jail at Matu are completed.
Island Club, Sibu.
Fourth Division News.
Chamber of Commerce, Miri.
A welcome speech delivered by Mr. C. H. Sung, the headmaster of Chung Hua School, Miri, on behalf of Captain (Chinese) Chong Ewe Sing, at a tiffin given in honour of His Highness the Tuan Muda at noon on the 18th July, 1930, at the Chinese Chamber of Commerce, Miri.
YOUR HIGHNESS, LADIES AND GENTLEMEN.
The Committee and members of the local Chinese Chamber of Commerce consider it a very great honour indeed to welcome Your Highness in our midst to-day, and we have much pleasure to entertain Your Highness and some of your excellent officers and the representatives of Sarawak Oilfields, Limited.
Last year we had the honour of welcoming His Highness the Rajah during his official visit to this place, and now once more we would take this opportunity to express to Your Highness our loyalty to the Throne of Sarawak.
At the present moment when almost every country in the world has some sort of trouble or other, it is most gratifying to see that in Sarawak we enjoy perfect peace, which is no doubt largely due to the wise rule of Your Highness and His Highness the Rajah jointly, and the co-operation of all the capable European Government Officers throughout the State.
In conclusion, we pray that The Almighty will bless Sarawak with continued prosperity and peacefulness.
Now, Ladies and Gentlemen and Towkay Towkay, let us drink to the health of His Highness the Tuan Muda.
Divisional Reports.July, 1930 
Extracts from Fourth Divisional Reports for July, 1930, by Mr. Aplin, Resident:-
General.-His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by the Chief Secretary, Mr. F. F. Boult, arrived at Miri in His Highness Yacht Maimuna on the 17th.
His Highness landed at the Customs pier and met Government Officers and the Assistant General Manager Mr. Marriott and other Officials of the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, also the principal Malays and Chinese.
After inspecting the guard of honour under Mr. Murphy, His Highness sat in Court and interviewed those who wished to see him. His Highness specially spoke to the Malays on the subject of padi planting, and exhorted them not to abandon their farms.
The oilfield and refinery at Lutong were also visited.
The Chinese invited His Highness and the Chief Secretary to a tiffin party at the Chinese Chamber of Commerce. In a speech, proposing His Highness' health, Chan Ewe Seng, Kapitan China, mentioned how glad that they were to be living, in Sarawak and the benefits they received. His Highness replied and thanked them for their loyalty to His Highness the Rajah.
His Highness and the Chief Secretary returned to Kuching on the 20th.
On the 2nd I went to Bintulu, travelling by the s.s, Margaret.
The District Officer, Mr. H. E. Outfield, reported to me that he had been able to allot the Foochows about 600 acres of land for the purpose of planting padi this year. In this connection, I am putting forward under separate coyer a suggestion that a small loan may be granted to these people to help them, which they will repay, when they have com-pleted their work on the padi farms, by building a road through their colony to join up with the present road from Sebauh.
The District Officer had been able to help these people to a certain extent by giving them work on cleaning the padang and raising the bazaar road.
I took the opportunity of visiting all the up-river stations to Tubau, but nothing of importance was brought to my notice.
The hospital and school at Bintulu were inspected.
There are 117 pupils at the school.
I left Bintulu on the 5th, picking up the Gladys off Kidurong, arriving at Miri the following morning.
On the 9th Dr. Schneider, Sarawak Oilfields Limited, Health Officer, reported that he had been informed that there was a case of smallpox at Labuan. The necessary precautions were taken.
An arrangement was made with the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, by which they will undertake the maintenance and supply of water to the bazaar and kampongs.
On the 29th I visited Sibuti, returning the same day to settle the case in which Haji Mat, Tua Kampong, was accused of breach of trust in connection with exemption tax monies. The case was dismissed.
I regret to have to report the death of Mr. A.V. T. Clancy, with occurred in the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, hospital on 22nd. He was buried in the cemetery attached to the Miri Church on the 23rd.
The General Manager, Mr. A. H. Noble, slipped on a derrick and broke his ankle and has been laid up in hospital.
Flying boats S1419 and S1149 arrived here from Brunei on the morning of the 1st and left the same day for Bintulu.
Visitors to the station included Mr. D. Calver, Conservator of Forests, who was making a tour of the Division.
Lieut. Yeatts, S.R., arrived on inspection duty.
M.r. E. O. Bruce arrived by the overland route from Limbang via Brunei and Belait on a private visit, returning by the Straits boat on 15th.
The District Officer, Bintulu, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports:-
General.-On the 1st the two Royal Air Force Flying boats S1149 and S1419, under command of Flight-Commander Livock, arrived from Brunei via Miri. They caused a great amount of interest amongst the natives here. They left again the next day for Mukah and Sibu.
On the 3rd the Resident, Fourth Division, arrived per s. s. Margaret. I accompanied the Resident to Tubau, Labang and Sebauh on the 4th, returning to Bintulu again on the 5th. The Resident returned to Miri per s. s. Gladys via Kedurong on the 8th.
The Revd. J. M. Hoover was a visitor per s. s. Margaret on the 15th to 16th, and again on 24th to 25th on her return.
On both occasions he visited his Mission amongst the Foochows at Sebauh.
The prisoners averaged 17.5 during the month.
The gang was employed in the rebuilding of the road behind the bazaar and the demolition and re-erection of the fence along the side of this road.
They were also employed on the mowing and general upkeep of the station.
Rainfall.-The total rainfall for the month was 4.96 inches. Another very dry and very hot month was experienced, and much sickness has been cause in the kampongs on account of the shortage of water.
The Acting District Officer, Miri, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports:- 
Magistrate's Court.-No case of importance.
Number of. cases heard 54. Fines and eesf $602.63. Mr. S. G. Hansom, Cadet, was granted Magistrate's Court Powers.
Prisoners.-Averaged 30 during the month and were engaged on the usual routine work of the station.
P.W.D.-The new marine barracks were completed by the contractor and are now occupied. The Government pipe fitter was engaged in installing meters in the bazaar, and these will now be put into use as from 1st September last quarter.
There appears to be a large percentage of vegetable matter in the water supplied by the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, and this had the effect of stopping the house supply by collecting in the meters.
The Government is now taking over the collection of all water rate in bazaar and kampongs, and new pipes have been laid and house installations are being fitted to those who apply.
Standpipes at convenient points have also been erected, and a test pipe with meter has been installed to determine a recoverable water rate to be levied on all those who do not pay for water supplied to houses through meters.
A set of New Clerks' Quarters was nearing completion and Customs Quarters at Kuala Baram were started.
The New Police station at Kuala Baram was completed satisfactorily.
Municipal.-An extra sanitary inspector has been applied for to assist Pereiia.
A meeting of the Miri Municipal and Sanitary Advisory Board was held on the 14th, minutes of which have been submitted already. The business discussed was chiefly the question of water rate already reported under P.W.D.
The District Officer, Baram. F. H. Pollard, reports as follows for the months of June and July:-
June, 1930.
Crime.-On 21st it was reported that a Dyak named Achang, of Gana's house Tru, had been murdered the night before. Next morning I left up river with Wan Taha and police to investigate. The murderer, Tambib, surrendered himself and was detained pending trail by the Resident's Court.
Travelling.-On 3rd, accompanied by Mr. T. Corson, D.C.F., and Paymaster Commander A. G. Bath, R.N., I left for Long Akah to inspect the work on the new Fort there. We returned to Baram on 12th, Mr. Corson and Paymaster Commander Bath returning to Miri next day.
On 22nd, accompanied by Wan Taha and M. Lazaroo, dresser, I left for the Tinjar and Ulu Baram, calling at Long Tru to inquire into the murder of Achang.
P.W.D.-The posts of L. Akah Fort were erected during the month and a start made laying the attaps.
Usual maintenance work was carried out at Baram during the month.	
Prisoners.-Prisoners averaging 22.4 were employed in the general upkeep of the station.
Medical.-135 out-patients were treated during the month, and total number of N.A.B. injections given in hospital and up river was 94.
Shipping.-S.S. Gladys made two trips during the month.
Rainfall.-The rainfall recorded during the month was 5.08 inches.
July, 1930.
Court.-The Dyaks of Poyut and Sabatang were fined $5 per door for tuba fishing without permission. No other cases call for mention.
Travelling.-On 2nd I crossed over from the Tinjar to Long Pawan. Galau arrived shortly afterwards and reported all well in the Tutoh and lower Baram.
Next day we left for L. Akah where we met the Penans, leaving on 6th for Lio Matu to meet Penans and collect Kelabit tax. We waited at Lio Matu from 9th till 15th but only the Lelang and L. Kluah Kelabits arrived. The Badangs agreed to build a house across river above the Fort but cleared first on the forbidden land opposite the Fort and met a bad omen. They then asked to be allowed to move across river below the Fort, but were told to build a new house on the old site and on the expiry of six years must try again above the Fort. They were first ordered to move there about five years ago and have always made excuses.
Long Akah was reached on the return journey on 17th, where more Penans were waiting. The night of 20th was spent at Long Laput, where the Long Palai people have started building, and Baram was reached on 21st.
The sum of $599 was collected during the trip, most of the Kelabit tax being still outstanding.
The river was very dry during the month, and great difficulty was experienced in getting the boat down. Old men say that they can never remember having seen the water so low-the river opposite L. Akah Fort could be crossed without the water rising to one's knees.
P.W.D.-L. Akah Fort is proceeding satisfactorily and should be an imposing structure when completed.
Prisoners.-The prisoners, averaging twenty-six, were employed in the general upkeep of the station and in digging out the floor of the boat shed.
Medical.-131 out-patients and three in-patients were treated during the month. The total number of N.A.B. injections given up river was 99.
Ham fail.-The rainfall recorded during the month was 62 inches.
Shipping.-8.8. Gladys made two trips during the month.
Fifth Division News.
Divisional Reports. July, 1930.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional reports for July, 1930, by Mr. E. O. Bruce, Acting Resident:- 
General.-Nothing of unusual interest occurred during the month. On the 11th I took the opportunity offered by the British Resident, Brunei, to make the complete overland journey to Miri. Points discussed during our recent flight over the frontier and road area were confirmed on the ground, and at Miri matters regarding the Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., retail agency at Limbang, were also discussed. When the road connection between the three townships is complete, there will no doubt be a great increase  in the number of motor vehicles here. On the 16th Mr. J. R. Combe, Acting Assistant District Officer, Lawas, was ordered to hospital by the Medical Officer, Brunei. Unhappily the diagnosis showed sub-tertian malaria and amoebic dysentery, but Mr. J. R. Combe was reported to be making satisfactory progress at the end of the month. On the 18th. the Conservator and Assistant Conservator of  Forest, Messrs..Calver and Corson, visited the Division.
Mr. J. Hoover, of the American Methodist Mission, Sibu, also arrived by the same boat. I understand  that this was his first visit to the Division during his many years in the country, and that he was agreeably surprised at the agricultural prospects, especially the pepper gardening. Messrs. Tipson and Ashtown, of the Borneo Evangelical Mission, paid a visit to Sungei Prangga. They returned to Singapore a few days later. The Chief Police Officer, Brunei, paid me a visit on the 22nd and discussed various matters of importance to both States.
I visited Lawas, Trusan and Sundar Districts on the 23rd, and returned via Brooketon on the 27th. Mrs. Mckerron, Messrs. Bell and Charlsworth, visited Limbang from Brunei on the 29th, also Mr. Davidson, from the Mission Station up river, who reported that a large column of flame and smoke, apparently gaseous, had been continuously visible for several days in the proximity of the foothills  of Mt. Mulu, some thirty miles distant from Sungei  Prangga. Mr. Aikman, Superintendent of Customs,  arrived on the 30th on a visit of inspection  to all substations. A severe drought was experienced practically the whole month, the Sungei Poyan  catchment reservoir being completely dried up. The opportunity was taken to have it cleaned out with prison labour, and work was commenced on the small impounding dam below, which will ensure the  conservation of a slow but unfailing supply of spring water. Total rainfall registered during the month was 3.92 inches.
Court.-There were no cases worthy of particular mention, except, perhaps, that regarding the death of a Murut named Abai Padan, who was shot by his brother-in-law Asai Kalat in the Ulu Trusan, while out pig hunting. The Coroners's Jury returned a verdict of death by misadventure, and Asai Kalat was punished for causing death by a rash act, and his gun confiscated.
A Chinese Christian matrimonial dispute was also dealt with, and the wife ordered to return to her husband, failing which they were informed that they could petition for divorce. The usual complicated buffaloe theft cases were in evidence this month, and several small burglaries were reported, necessitating police night patrol in the bazaar for a period.
Mr. Morice, Cadet, made an overland visit to Danau on the 2nd, returning by prahu on the 5th.
P.W.D.-The usual routine work has been carried out with prison labour. The raising, metalling, and rolling of the river terminus of the Pandam Road was completed for a distance of four chains. Seven of the bridges were improved and repaired. The  spring water impounding dam below Sungei Poyan reservoir is rapidly nearing completion. It was noticeable that this supply, though not voluminous was constant throughout the recent severe drought The new Limbang Recreation Club building was completed and in occupation at the beginning of the month.
The new hard tennis court on the golfcourse was completed and the posts fixed with cement. The sifted laterite surfacing, however, needs further rolling. The ten odd miles of glass roads were inspected and their condition found satisfactory.
Prisons.-Average daily number of prisoners was 26.2. They were partly employed with usual routine work, but mostly with P.W.D. Health was good, and discipline satisfactory, except in a few minor instances. The gang mandor was continually off duty sick.
Land and Agriculture.-I understand that two land demarcators are due in the near future. Office and quarters are ready, and there will be plenty to occupy their attention. I am strongly of the opinion that simple co-operation in the field between demarcators and forest guards would be of great benefit, especially in the up-river areas. There have been a few applications for laud to plant coffee. The local market rate for smoked rubber remains about 12 cents only per catty, and very little tapping is being done by small holders.
Forestry.-The Conservator of Forests reports upon his annual inspection of the Division as follows:- 
There was little office work to be done here, as the forest ledgers are kept in Lawas. The new forest office and ranger's quarters were inspected, and both promise to be very satisfactory for the purposes in view. The Deputy Conservator, Fourth and Fifth Divisions, will carry out the move of forest headquarters. Fifth Division, from Lawas to Limbang,  as soon as the accommodation is ready. The principal matter at Lawas was an examination and revision of the forest ledgers from 1st January onwards.
Medical and Health.-Dr. Swapp, Medical Officer, Brunei, specially visited Lawas to make a mosquito survey, on account of the recurrence of malaria. Fortunately he was present when the Acting Assistant District Officer Mr. Combe, who was still suffering from an attack, went down with dysentery also on the 16th.	
He was still confined to hospital at the end of the month. On the 15th Mr. Brodie, Sanitary Inspector, arrived at Limbang from the Health Department, Kuching, complete with equipment for a malarial survey,
After dealing with Limbang area he proceeded to Lawas, thence overland to Trusan and Sundar. Relative reports have been forwarded to headquarters under separate cover. One patient was admitted to Limbang Hospital, and one discharged after treatment for haematemesis. 154 out-patients were treated, mostly Murut, for C. yaws, ulcers, and rheumatics. The usual weekly sanitation inspections of the bazaar, open markets and cattle for slaughter were made. A weekly medical inspection of school children, was also inaugurated.
Monopolies.- Five thousand nine hundred, and seven packets of chandu were issued at Limbang during the month. ' The trade depression does not appear greatly to diminish the purchasing power of registered smokers, although most are not well-to-do.
ECHOES FROM THE WORLD OUTSIDE.
Malayan June Rubber Statistics.
An official cable from Singapore to the Malayan Information Agency gives the following figures regarding rubber for the month of June, 1930:-
Shipments from Malaya for the month of June are 35,657 tons, against 49,059 tons in May and 40,396 tons during June last. For the first six months of this year total shipments are 278,175 tons, against 284,091 tons is 1929, or a reduction of about 6,000 tons. During the first six months of 1929, however, the balance of the surplus rubber accumulated during 1928, computed to be between 20,090 to 30,009 tons, was shipped.
THE POSITION OF TIN.
Sufficient support for the Tin Producers' Association's Policy of suspending production for two out of the next three months has been obtained to ensure Billiton the leading Bolivian producers carrying out their conditional undertakings to restrict, while the Nigerian producers have also undertaken to curtail their output for the next three months to one-third of normal. It is understood therefore that very shortly the Association will publish a list of' assents to the plan which it is estimated will mean curtailment of production by 20,000 tons in the period June to December this year. Special arrangements have been made for keeping the labour supply of the various companies together during the stoppage. Meanwhile the June statistics emphasize the seriousness of the position. Supplies exceeded deliveries by 2,323 tons, at 12,831 tons, and the total visible supply at the end of the month had risen to 42,156 tons. Some indication, however, is given of the effect of restriction as so far practised, in the 
fact that supplies decreased from 14,696 tons in April to 13,789 tons in May, and to 12,831 tons in June. Another fact worth noting is the falling tendency in the amount carried over m the Straits Settlements from 5,664 tons in April and 4,532 tons in May to 4,229 tons in June. Without restriction the position is controlled by the decrease in consumption, deliveries in the twelve months to June 33 having fallen from. 139,470 tons to 131,640 tons, while in the same period supplies have increased from 146,951 tons to 149,860 tons.
American and British Income Tax Compared.
"The recent reduction of the American income tax brought it near to the vanishing point for persons of average income. Even for those of fairly comfortable income it is not a heavy item -considerably less than a month's rent until the income is well above $10,000," says the Christian Century. "It may help Americans to appreciate the situation of their British brethren if they compare the rates of income tax in the two countries.
"There is total exemption for married men in the United States for incomes up to $3,500; in England, up to $1,125. The minimum British rate is four shillings in the pound, or twenty per cent. The Budget recently introduced would raise this to twenty-two and one-half per cent. There are various exceptions and allowances for earned income in both cases, but what it comes down to is about this:
"A married man with an income of $3,500 in the United States pays nothing; in Great Britain, at least $360. On $10,000, here about $50; there at least $1,400. In the higher categories, where the initial exemptions count for less and the rates are more nearly equal, the disparity is less striking, but even for the largest incomes our maximum is 20 per cent, theirs approximately 47 per cent.-aside from possible increases under the new Budget. In Great Britain about 4,600,000 persons pay income tax, or one in ten of the po-pulation; here,  2,500,000, or one in forty-four.
"More impressive and significant than comparisons of total taxes collected or average rates is the fact that in the United States income tax has ceased to be an appreciable factor in the annual Budget of persons of moderate income, while in Great Britain it is a heavy item of expense even for those of very modest resources, together with the fact that theirs is going up while ours is coming down. These statistics are not a basis for self-congratulation, But for sym-pathetic consideration."
Utility of Older Men,
"Older men should never quit. The world needs their experience. I prefer to have a good part of my employees not young men. Men thirty-five to sixty-and in some jobs even older -are more desirable. Not only are they more dependable than the average young fellow, but they are able to set the younger ones an example and pass on their experience to them. If all the men over fifty got out of the world, there would not be enough experience left to run it." -MR. HENRY FORD.
Football Extraordinary.
The following alarming account of a Football Semi-final at Geneva, is reported by our contemporary -the Overseas Mail-and should point a salutary warning against abuse of the fine traditions of this great game.
"Deplorable incidents marred the semi-final of the International football tournament for the Coupe des Nations, in which rival professional clubs from Vienna (Austria) and Slavia (Czecho-Slovakia) figured.
In the first five minutes two players were carried off the field on stretcher's. Later both sides deliberately kicked their opponents instead of the ball.
"While Mr. Patrick, the English referee, was admonishing a Czech forward, the latter was felled by a blow from a Vienna player.
By this time half the men on the field were limping. The Czech goalkeeper was kicked in the face while on the ground and lost several teeth.
Infuriated by the failure of their favourites, the Vienna men, to win, a section of the crowd poured on to the field and play was suspended while the referee tried to restore calm.
On the resumption of the game, one of the Czech backs was seriously hurt by a stone thrown by a spectator and was carried off unconscious. Appeals for fair play, made through a loud-speaker, were unavailing, and the match ended in indescribable tumult Slavia won by three goals to one.
"Ujpest (Hungary) beat Slavia by 3 goals to nil in the final."
SHIPPING INTELLIGENCE.
Port of Kuching.
Port of Miri.
SAILINGS TO EUROPE.
P. and O. Company.
Passenger Agents-Borneo Co., Ltd.
Freight Agents-Sarawak Steamship Co.
P. & O. NOTICE.
New interchange arrangements have been made between the Blue Funnel Line and the P. & O. S.N. Co.
Blue Funnel Line or P. & O. S.N. Co. ticket holders may, over the Far Eastern routes, utilise their tickets, subject to any small adjustment of fares that may be necessary, for travel in a vessel or vessels of the other Company. Both single and return tickets are interchangeable.
Blue Funnel Line,
Agents-Borneo Co., Ltd.
S. S. ANCHISES.
We have pleasure in announcing that the Blue Funnel Dine "A" class passenger steamer Anchises has now been scheduled to leave Singapore for Marseilles and London on or about 28th April, 1931, one week after the departure of the regular April "A" class Bailing.
A considerable amount of extra accommodation is thus made available at the busiest time of the home ward season
Netherland Steamship Co.
Agents-Borneo Co., Ltd.
Calling at Balawan, Sabang, Genoa, Algiers and Southampton.
East Asiatic Co., Ltd.
Agents-Borneo Co., Ltd.
These vessels sail from Bangkok, calling at Singapore, Penang and London.
Glen Line Limited.
Agents-Borneo Co., Limited.
Nippon Yusen Kaisha.
Two gigantic motor liners, the Terukuni Maru and the Yasukuni Maru at the N.Y.K. Line, are now being built by the Mitsubishi Shipbuilding and Engineering Company, Limited, at their Nagasaki establishment, which recently turned out the Asama Mani and Tatsuta Mani, two of the N.Y.K.'s new motor liners for the trans-Pacific service.
The Terukuni Maru, which was launched on the 19th December, 1929, is to be delivered to the company on 31st May next and to sail from Yokohama for Europe on 30th June.
The Yasukuni Maru, was, launched on the 16th February. She is to be delivered to the company on 31st August, and to start for her maiden voyage to Europe leaving Yokohama on 22nd September.
These vessels of 11,800 gross tonnage are specially designed and equipped for the European service of the company, and there can be little doubt that the new liners will play an important part in the further development of the traffic service between Europe and the Orient,
The First Class State-Rooms are distributed over A and B decks, and also on the forward part of C deck. The number of rooms and of passengers accommodated therein are as follows:-
The Suite de Luxe is situated on the starboard side and at the front part of A deck. It comprises a sitting-room a bedroom a private bath, etc.
Except the rooms for 3 persons which have two beds and one pullman berth, all the rooms are equipped with beds of the land type with Simmons "Beautyrest" mattresses. The decoration of the rooms is neat and most pleasing. 
Official and Semi-Official, Announcements.
APPOINTMENTS.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Dr. W. J. Hutchinson to be Assistant Health Officer, with effect from 14th July, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. W. L. Clark to act as Electrical Engineer, Sibu, with effect from 24th July, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to transfer Mr. G. T. M. MacBryan as his Private Secretary to the staff of the Sarawak Government Offices, London, with effect from 1st August, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. N. E. Hughes to be his Aide-de-Camp during the visit to Sarawak of His Excellency the British Agent for North Borneo and Sarawak.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. F. L. Crossley, Cadet, to do duty at Sibu, with effect from 31st July, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. H. C. Strong to act as Superintendent of Electricity Department, with effect from 6th August, 1930, inclusive.
APPOINTMENTS VACATED
His Highness the Rajab has been pleased to permit Mr. G. T. M. MacBryan to resign his appointment as Secretary for Native Affairs, with effect from 1st August, 1980, inclusive.
Mr. G. Taylor ceases to act as Superintendent Engineer and as Surveyor of Ships, with effect from 1st August, 1930, inclusive.
RESIGNATION.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to permit Miss G. E. Collinson, Matron, Child Welfare Branch of the Health Department, to resign her appointment in the Sarawak Government Service, with effect from 13th July, 1930, inclusive.
LEAVE.
Mr. W. V. Hanson, Acting Divisional Treasurer, Fourth Division, has been granted two months and four days' sick leave on full pay, with effect from 22nd April, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. W. L. Clark, Assistant Electrical Engineer, Kuching, has been granted eighteen days' vacation leave on full pay, with effect from 1st July, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. E. Banks, Curator, Sarawak Museum, has been granted six days' sick leave, on full pay. with effect from 22nd July, 1930, inclusive.
Dr. C. O. Gauge, Acting Chief Assistant Medical Officer, has been granted four days' sick leave on full pay, with effect from 23rd July, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. E. H. P. Bengtsson, Superintendent Engineer, reported his arrival at Singapore from leave of absence on 26th July, 1930, and resumed duty on 1st August, 1930, inclusive.
Kuching Market Price List.
CORRESPONDENCE.
The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.
The Editor The Sarawak Gazette,Kuching.KUCHING, 29th August, 1930.                         
Yours faithfully,Sgd. E. PARNELL.
Notice.
Notice is hereby given, that the Kanowit Works, property of the R. C. Mission, Sarawak, closed down by the 3lst of July, 1930.
Anyone having claims against the above named Works, has to give notice and to establish his claims to the undersigned before 1st October, 1930.
Anyone who owes to the above named Works has to pay forthwith, or make arrangements regarding pay with the undersigned.
Sgd. A. HAIDEGGER,
Procurator of R.C. Mission,
Sarawak.




