Sarawak Gazette.
WEDNESDAY, OCTOBER 1st. 1930.
Marriage.
HAMILTON—GIRDWOOD. At St. Leonard's Parish Churchy, Ayr, on the 9th September Robert Ramage Hamilton, Bakong, Sarawak, to Jean Kilgour, younger daughter of J. Girdwood, Esq., Glenmuir. Ayr.
Local and Personal.
September.
His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by the Dayang Anne, Mr. and Mrs. Boult and Mr. and Mrs. Baird, paid a visit to the coast stations of Bintulu, Mukah and Oya, leaving Kuching on September 4th and returning on the 9th.
Early in the month Tuanku Haji Ali paid a short visit to Kuching on his way through from Simanggang to Sibu, following a spell of vacation leave. Datu Tuanku Haji Drahman of Baram also visited Kuching, leaving again for Baram by the Gladys on the 14th.
On September 1st a party of Japanese gentlemen, headed by Mr. K. Oseki, Managing Agricultural Director of Messrs. Nissa Shokai, Ltd., arrived by the s.s. Kuching. The party subsequently left for Sibu by the Sri Mukah, accompanied by three members of the staff of Samarahan Estate. We understand that they are proceeding to the Ulu Rejang, there to continue the prospecting and exploratory work which they started last year in connection with coal mining and padi planting above the Pelagus rapids.
The mention of the Kuching reminds us that "Mrs. Bill," the bride of the Kuchina's cheery skipper, has for the present decided to remain in Singapore. Mrs. Smith left after much too short a stay with us, and we are looking forward to welcoming her on her return, the date of which is at present indefinite.
Yes, thank you, H.M.S. Herald got clear away at zero hour on September 8th. An account of the ceremonies accompanying her departure will be found in another column.
No arrests have yet been made.
We must congratulate Messrs. P. Murray-Scott, J. O. Gilbert, E. H. Elam and W. J. Chater on successfully passing the Malay Examination, Standard II; and Messrs. J. J. Hill., S. G. Hansom, W. H. Kelley and W. L. P. Sochon for passing the Standard I Examination.
Can anyone please tell us the Malay for a flower-pot—with bevelled edges? Curiously enough this question did not appear in the vocabulary paper of either examination.
Captain W. Barry Gifford, until recently A.D.C. to His Highness the Rajah and now retired on pension, was on August 7th married at Hemel Hempstead register office to Miss Ivy Duke, the film artist. Captain Barry Gifford's many friends in Sarawak will join with us in congratulating him on his marriage and in wishing both him and his bride the best of everything in the future.
On August 30th, Mr. E. M. Woodward left by the Vyner Brooke to proceed on seven months' European furlough. With him travelled Mr. J. R. Combe, who is taking some convalescent leave in which to recover from the effects of his recent serious illness. We understand that Brastagi is Mr. Combe's destination, and from all accounts he would be hard put to it to choose a better place for his purpose.
Incidentally, we must congratulate Mr. Woodward on his promotion to Class III of the Sarawak Civil Service, notification of which appeared in the mid-month Government Gazette.
We hear it rumoured that Sibu may shortly be producing a journal of its own. This will indeed be a welcome innovation,—apart from the Mirage, the current number of which is reviewed in another column, the Sarawak Gazette remains the only Sarawak paper, and usually contains little enough that is of interest to outstation readers. This in the nature of things is rather hard to avoid, seeing that the Editor is always stationed in Kuching, but the answer is, of course,— contributions, and as many of them as possible. In the meantime, good luck and long life to the new effort!
Mention of Sibu reminds us of Mr. W. H Avery's recent statement that though he had before now visited the place, it didn't "take"! Mr. Avery was in Kuching during the latter part of August as the guest of Mr. Sam Cook, returning with the Examination party by s.s. Margaret. We understand that he was more fortunate on the return trip!
The Geographical Journal publishes the obituary notice of Mr. Frank Burnett, LL.D., a celebrated traveller and author of several books on the tropics, including "Through Tropic Seas" (1910) and "Summer Isles of Eden" (1923). Older residents will perhaps remember that Mr. Burnett spent some months in the Third Division in 1917, penetrating as far as Belaga in the Ulu Rejang.
On Monday, September 15th, the Kuching Police changed over into their new khaki uniforms. These are a great improvement on the old blue serge, which must have been very hot and uncomfortable and which was certainly not as practical as could be desired. This is witnessed by the fact that the out-station police seldom if ever took more than their fezes with them on up-river trips!
The present uniform consists of a khaki jacket and shorts, black fez, black boots and dark blue puttees, and is both smart and eminently suited to its purpose. The old bandolier has been done away with, and a leather belt and pouch substituted in its place.
We hear that the change-over in outstations will take place as soon as the necessary uniforms are ready for distribution.
News of an unfortunate fire at Engkilili reached us early in the month. During the night of September 3rd, a fire broke out in the Engkilili bazaar which completely destroyed a block of eight shophouses. So rapid was the progress of the fire that little property could be saved, indeed some occupants of the houses only just had time to put on their clothes and make good their escape from the burning buildings.
Precautions were taken which successfully prevented the fire from spreading, and the Assistant District Officer subsequently held an inquiry into the causes of the outbreak. Little light, however, has so far been thrown on the natter.
On September 15th, Mr. P. Murray-Scott went to Bau to take over that district from Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, the Assistant District Officer there. Mr. Arundell left for home on long leave by the s.s. Vyner Brooke on the 27th, and so was just unable to attend the first day's races. We wish him a pleasant voyage home and good hunting during his furlough, and we must congratulate him on his promotion to Class III of the Sarawak Civil Service.
The first Race Week arrivals were Messrs. C. D. Adams, J. W. Whiteside, L. D. Kennedy, H. B. Crocker and P. Cobbold, all of whom arrived by the Sri Mukah on Friday, September 19th. The Second Division contingent arrived on the following Monday, and the remaining visitors travelled by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna, reaching Kuching on the 24th. With them came the Judicial Commissioner, who had been away on a trip to the North.
In order to improve the roadways at the junction of Ewe Hai Street and Wayang Street, the wayang is going to be dismantled and set back sixty feet. To enable this to be done Messrs. Ong Ewe Hai have transferred a piece of their land at the back of the present site of the wayang, and are devoting the purchase price to charity.
The Ranger's Band returned to Kuching early in the month after a most successful visit to Miri. We hear that they were much appreciated there and that their performances drew large audiences.
Their final programme was enlivened by a torchlight tattoo of Sarawak Rangers and Police and a display of native dancing by Dyaks, Malays and Javanese.
Mr. R. F. Sinclair arrived by s.s. Vyner Brooke on September 22nd to take up an appointment in the Department of Trade and Customs. We understand that Mr. Sinclair served for several years in the Chinese Maritime Customs, being stationed at various times in Shanghai, Manchuria and Wuhu. the longest period of his service being spent in Shanghai.
Professor L. H. Krol, the well-known Geologist, arrived in Kuching from Sibu on September 19th leaving for Singapore by the Kuching on the following day.
Professor Krol started from Pontianak early in June with a Dutch Assistant and two survey parties on an expedition through the interior of Borneo. He travelled up the Kapuas and Ulahakam Rivers, reaching the Sarawak border near Bukit Lasantojan, whence he proceeded to the Dutch Government station at Long Nawang. This part of the journey took fifteen days, during the whole of which period Professor Krol subsisted entirely on wild sago and other jungle foods, being unable even to obtain rice. From Long Nawang he made his way to the Ulu Baloi, and thence to Kapit and Sibu.
Professor Krol's many friends in Kuching were disappointed to see so little of him.
After editing the Sarawak Gazette for several months, Doctor G. E. Brooke has been compelled, owing to the pressure of other and more important duties, to give up the Editorial chair.
Dr. Brooke deserves our thanks for the scholarly publication, produced during his term of Editorship. He has informed us unofficially that while no longer Editor, he will continue to take an interest in the Gazette as a contributor. We are all familiar with Dr. Brooke's writings and are indeed fortunate to be able to retain his services on the paper.
BIRTHDAY OF HIS HIGHNESS THE RAJAH.
Review of Sarawak Rangers.
PRESENTATION OF MEDALS AND DECORATIONS BY HIS HIGHNESS THE TUAN MUDA.
A parade of the Sarawak Rangers took place at 8 a.m. on the Parade Ground, which was thrown open to the public especially for the event.
At 7.55 a.m. His Highness the Tuan Muds, accompanied by Mr. N. E. Hughes, A.D.C., arrived at the Parade Ground, where His Highness was met by Capt. R. E. Le Sueur, Acting Commandant, Sarawak Rangers. The troops were drawn up in two ranks in the middle of the ground with the band on their right; as His Highness passed the band the Royal Salute was given, after which His Highness inspected the battalion and walked to the saluting base on the orderly-room hill.
A salute of twenty-one guns was then fired from the battery of 7-pounders in groups of seven rounds, the battalion giving a feu-de-joie of three rounds of blank cartridge in the intervals. The salute was followed by three cheers for His Highness the Rajah.
The battalion then formed up and marched past the saluting base in column, His Highness the Tuan Muda taking the salute. They returned in close column, and then formed up in three sides of a hollow square for the presentation of decorations. A table was placed in the centre the square and, on their names being called out, the recipients of medals advanced to receive their decorations from His Highness the Tuan Muda.
CONSPICUOUS BRAVERY MEDALS.
Abang Ahmat, Native Officer at Kapit, and Jais, Juragan of m.l. Anne, both received medals for conspicuous bravery, the former for capturing a dangerous lunatic single-handed, and the latter for diving fully-clothed into the Batang Lupar, where a strong tide was running, and saving two Chinese from drowning.
Usop bin Daut. a Melanau of Pandan, Bintulu, also receives a medal for conspicuous bravery, but since he was unfortunately unable to be present the medal will be sent to him at Bintulu. He was been awarded the decoration for jumping into the river and rescuing his wife from a crocodile which had actually taken her out of the stern of his boat while Usop was spearing a swimming pig from the bows. The brute released Usop's wife, who, though badly mauled and in a critical condition, managed to survive her ordeal. Sho owes her life entirely to her husband's brave and prompt action.
LONG SERVICE, MILITARY AND POLICE MEDALS.
A complete list of all.recipients of medals is published in the Government Gazette. Notable recipients were Datu Haji Mohideen and Abang Adeng, Probationary Inspector of Police, both of Sibu, Abang Bujang, Native Officer at Kabong, and Abang Madaut, Native Officer at Lubok Antu.
When the presentation was completed, His Highness the Tuan Muda returned to the saluting base. The battalion formed up at the far end of the parade ground and marched past in review order, after which the Acting Commandant, with His Highness' permission, dismissed the parade. The Regimental Sergeant-Major took command and the troops marched off in close column.
His Highness the Tuan Muda then entered the balcony of the orderly room, where were assembled the European spectators, the Datus and the leading members of all communities. The Chief Secretary in a short speech proposed the health of His Highness the Rajah which was drunk by all present, who then left to go across river.
COLOURFUL SCENE.
The whole review was a scene which will not easily be forgotten. The officers, non-commissioned officers and men are to be congratulated on the smartness of the arms drill and the precision with which all movements were carried out; it was admitted by all present that the standard of smartness had enormously improved in the last year or two, and those qualified to judge stated that the Sarawak Rangers were thoroughly capable of holding their own with any Native troops in the East or elsewhere, and that the battalion had nothing to fear even from the smartest Indian Regiments. Incidentally, it was noted that the Rangers adopt the "slow-time" method of sloping and presenting arms favoured by the Royal Marines, and very effective it is. The display as a whole reflected the greatest credit on those responsible for the training of the men, —there is no doubt that the Sea Dyak is a born soldier, but we understand that betakes a certain amount of licking into shape! Certainly it was curious to reflect that most of those smart, white-clad, motionless figures had not so very long ago been roaming the jungle dressed only in a chawat and equipped with a sumpit and a parang, or perhaps with an ancient muzzle-loading musket! It seems a far cry from up-river rapids, jungle rice clearings and the daily search for deer and pig, to uniforms, squad drill, and the blare of bugles, yet the troops themselves seem perfectly at home in the comparative civilization of Kuching. Some of them, we bear, are actually going to hospital to have their pierced ears sewn up, looking on such signs of their old life as thoroughly démodé! Whatever next?
The parade ground was lined with dense crowds of Malays and Chinese, and the orderly room itself was transformed into a flag-hung pavilion. All officers of the Administrative Service and all Datus were in uniform, and the white clothes of the men admirably set off the charming dresses of the ladies.
For the first time, for various reasons, the Police did not parade with the Sarawak Rangers; lack of space on the ground was one consideration, as also was the fact that at present the Police are actively engaged in moving from the old police station to their temporary quarters in the newly-vacated Customs building. The parade ground, however, was lined with Police, and all Police officers were present as spectators.
One special word for the Band of the Sarawak Rangers: we are accustomed to a high standard of excellence from the band—which has proved itself, indeed, second to none in the Far East,—but on this occasion even old residents in Kuching who had witnessed many Birthday parades confessed themselves astonished at the quality of their performance.
We owe a hearty vote of thanks to Capt. R. E. Le Sueur, Acting Commandant, Sarawak Rangers, for affording us all the opportunity of witnessing a very excellent display.
Football Match between the Chinese Community and the Kuching Football Club.
VICTORY FOR THE CHINESE.
One or two of the leaders of the Chinese community who take an interest in football have generously presented a cup to go to the winner of an annual game between teams representing the European and the Chinese communities in Kuching.
The first game was played on the afternoon of His Highness the Rajah's birthday and resulted in a victory for the Chinese team by the large score of six goals to one. It was really a better game than the score indicates, since well into the second half the Europeans were still keeping their end up, and it was only in the last ten minutes or so that the goals were piled up against them. The majority of the team were not able to cope with their faster moving opponents, who formed a very well-balanced team. The Europeans were weak in some positions, thereby putting too much work on others, with the result that they cracked up before the finish.
As it was His Highness the Rajah's birthday and a holiday, we suppose that there was every excuse for this!
CUP PRESENTED BY THE DAYANG ANNE.
In a speech at the conclusion of the game Mr. Tan Sum Guan complimented both teams on the clean display of football and hoped that next year as interesting a game would be forthcoming. The Dayang Anne was then asked to present the cup and the proceedings closed with cheers for His Highness the Rajah, His Highness the Tuan Muda and the Dayang Anne.
There are now two cups up for competition in Kuching, and as we hear a rumour of an association being formed to look after the interests of the game, we hope that they will be able to inaugurate a league and that some generous supporter of the game will come forward with a trophy for the league winners. One of the main drawbacks to the promotion of a league is the lack of fields, but we are told that it will not be long before the public field at Padungan is opened. This field should do much to improve the standard of play, since good football cannot be played on bad ground.
BALL AT THE  ASTANA.DINNER TO 120 GUESTS
At 8.15 His Highness the Tuan Muda gave a banquet to which 120 guests had the honour of being invited. Dinner was served at two long tables on the ground floor of the Astana, the tables being charmingly decorated.
After His Highness the Tuan Muda had pro-posed the health of His Highness the Rajah the guests adjourned upstairs, where the amusements included cards and dancing, the band of the Sarawak Rangers playing for the dancers.
All the arrangements were perfectly carried out, dinner being, served with clockwork-like punctuality. In this connection mention must be made of the name of Mr. E. S. Holl who was responsible for the work of organization.
The guests left the Astana at midnight after spending a most enjoyable evening.
We are sure that the whole population of Sarawak joins with us in echoing the many good wishes expressed for His Highness the Rajah during the celebrations.
"Menjaring Angin."
Nothing could be more futile in appearance than the Malay Jaring or row of nooses suspended in the Jungle with the intention of snaring any Rusa or Barking Deer (Kijang) that can be driven against them; the Jaring certainly lives up to its looks, for in some recent efforts to catch a Kijang in this way nothing was taken save an Argus Pheasant and a very indignant dog! There is no reason, though, why this method should not prove efficient in the hands of an expert.
Jaring rusa and the Dyak Jaring babi may often take place in thick secondary growth where the use of dogs is essential, but this method was not attempted on this occasion. Kijang lie up during the day in open jungle on some hillside, and dogs are by no means essential in driving for them,—in fact the average untrained Asu is apt to be a nuisance, shooting off at a tangent, starting before he is wanted, failing to pass through the snares as does the little Mouse Deer he is pursuing. Also it appears that for some obscure reason most Malay and some Land Dyak dogs are trained not to hunt Barking Deer, with whom they will hardly stop to pass the time of day in the jungle.
A Jaring for Kijang consists of an 'Arris, a long string of plaited rotan which apparently need not be of any special kind so long as it not too thick and heavy. Altogether the total length of the several Jarings needs to be about 100 yards, anything less is a nuisance since all the animals go round the ends; probably 200 yards would give better results. Making the mata jaring or snares is a laborious business, for immense quantities of the thin rotan jangut have to be collected from hillsides and each circular snare, about eighteen inches in diameter and made of two twisted strands, has to be suspended from the 'arris so as to overlap adjacent snares; thicker rotan is of little use since if it is too hard the snares don't close tight round the animal's neck. It is no use splitting thicker rotans owing to the fact that they are apt to break on the impact of a Barking Deer, who weighs about 30 lbs. and struggles like the devil.
The next thing is to choose suitable ground for a drive. This may be either old jungle adjacent to cultivation where the animals have been feeding, or else some hillside or tanjong between two streams that will give the beaters their direction. Early morning is perhaps the best time, but is not essential nor is it absolutely necessary to put the Jaring out over night. Betting the jaring is a dreadful business, and here the expert would no doubt scarp over the novice; roughly speaking the bottom of the nooses should be about one jenkal—the span between thumb and little finger—off the ground to allow for the Kijang's head and neck to go through. Irregularities and hollows can be filled up with brushwood, in fact it is a good idea to lay cut leaves as far as possible all the way along to discourage the Kijang from going underneath: if driving up-hill the snares should be lower, almost touching the ground, if down-hill they must be set higher, for the Barking Deer is distinctly good " over tho leps," if they aro not too high. Mistakes are most easily made in the attachment of the 'arris to the surrounding jungle, for the theory is that the faring must give way once the Kijang is noosed and not hold him strung up tight, when the strain on the thin rotan becomes too great; the ends of the ‘arris are fastened securely, but it should be stretched to pass behind and not in front of large trees, and any notches made to hold it up should be on the reverse and not the forward side of the trunk: thin sticks with a slight fork can be used at internals to hold up the whole contrivance, but it is essential that everything should come away on the slightest impact.
Ten or a dozen men are needed for the drive, which should not be for less than one hour; a man is stationed at each end of the jaring and three or four more some ten yards or so in front of the snares; these latter people stand quietly behind a tree and face the nooses— as soon as a Kijang goes softly by they address his stern view in any loud way that suits their fancy, the theory being that the animal starts forward the last few yards and doesn't notice the jaring in its excitement: actually, of course, the Kijang normally walks with his head middling high just abort right for the jaring, but once startled down goes his head till his chin almost touches the ground (like a Pelandok), up goes his little white scut and the nooses flap vainly about his ears as he pisses underneath.	
Such is menjaring Kijang, normally a futile proceeding but with distinct possibilities in the hands of experts, who, with any luck, should take three or four head in a day.
A not unprofitable source of amusement is to sit behind the jaring, for as the beaters approach, monkeys, squirrels, hornbills and mainy birds go skating through the trees; occasional Pelandok go by muttering to themselves, Kijang of course are well to the fore, and sometimes a rusa and often a few pigs pass along, so that one might have a splendid shoot if it were not for spoiling the drive.
Malay Wedding in Simanggang.
Marriage of Awang Sepudin, son of Pangeran Azit, to Dayang Hajah Ukah, daughter of Datu Haji Dulrashid.
Man bites a Dog.
CROWD ASTONISHED ON SEA FRONT.
A visitor to Herne Bay astonished people on the sea front recently by picking up his fox terrier and biting it. The dog gave a startled yelp, ran after his master, bit him—then followed docilely at his heels.
"The dog is continually snapping at people, but I do not think it will bite anyone else for a time," the man said afterwards.
"I have tried all kinds of things to break the dog of the habit, but everything has failed up till now. I do not want to get rid of the dog. so something had to be done to keep it quiet."—Straits Times.
On Writing a Personal Column.
BY THE UNFORTUNATE EDITOR.
Opinions vary as to the best means of compiling and editing the personal column of a periodical such as the Sarawak Gazette. There are so many little fads which must be humoured, so many susceptibilities which should not be offended, so many toes on which one must avoid treading.—more especially if the owner of the toes happens to be considerably senior to the Editor!
Mr. Blank, for example, is furious if he does not see his name in print in every issue of the Gazette; Mrs. Dash, who, as we all know, is completely devoid of any sense of humour, goes up in smoke if any mention (however good-tempered) is made of her many little foibles. Our old friend Asterisk likes a full report of all his activities and is snotty if he doesn't get it; and so on, ad infinitum, until the legs of the Editorial chair creak with the Editor's agony of soul.
Here, for instance, is an example of the kind of thing that definitely would not do. It is in vogue among certain editors in the Western States of America, and may be called the direct or very personal method:—
" Gip Callahan and bunch of other cheap skates were to town last night on their usual booze hoist. We take this opportunity of again informing Gip that he is a skunk, a blackguard and a liar. " In Sarawak, this style carries with it the disadvantage that to-day's victim might quite possibly be appointed Editor to-morrow, and then the balloon really would go up! At the other extreme we have the kind of bilge that is published in certain Sunday papers above some such num-de-plume as "Mr. Chatterbox," "Miss Gossip" or "Molly Mayfair," of which this is a fair specimen:—
" Last night I happened to drop in on Lady Batu Kawa to see how her party was progressing. Among those present I noticed the Earl of Bau and the Hon. E. M. "Leouard" Woodward, who was showing Lady Batu Kawa how to mix a "Sibu Soul Searcher," which is of course just the very latest thing in apperitifs: it was invented, so one hears, by Ali, the popular bar-tender at the Island Club, where midnight pool tournaments are now becoming so fashionable.
"It was quite a small party and broke up early, the hostess insisting on all her guests leaving the house sober, an innovation that has attracted a good deal of attention. Lady Batu Kawa told me that she makes a practice of standing on her head for seven hours a day in order to take the weight off her feet. This is the latest health fad, so she says, and its effects are enormously beneficial,— already her cranium has been flattened two inches. She also has a Tibetan boar-hound which sings Lithuanian folk songs, and a canary which has been to prison for using bad language in a nursing-home. One of her elbows is sharper than the other and she has no bone in her right ankle. She never eats sand."
Well no, perhaps not. Hardly suitable. I suppose that after all we shall have to fall back on the prosaic simplicity of certain monthly Divisional reports:—
"On 18th Mr. Bootle arrived also Capt. Skite same departed next day 19th called meeting discuss question of free supply of boot-polish same refused Mr. Bootle sailed Kuching 20th number of prisoners seventeen health good heard two appeals same not allowed 22nd Capt. Skite returned."
It really is a little difficult. Apparently one must strike a sort of happy medium between the blunt rudeness of the first method, the imbecility of the second and the terseness of the third. Or wouldn't it be easier— yes, dash it all, it would. Why have any personal column at all?
Ornamental Trees.
The forest Department has recently issued circulars giving lists of Ornamental Trees in the nursery in Kuching available for distribution free of charge, together with some notes on planting.
Supplies of seed have been sent to Divisional Forest Officers, in order that similar trees may be available in outstations.
Bungalow compounds, especially where the land has been cleared for new construction, can be greatly improved by a few attractive trees.
Trees are easily planted, and once established, they require little or no attention. With regard to soil it may be said generally. that trees are not exacting in their requirements.
The soil in Sarawak is usually a silt. All this needs is the addition of organic matter such as cow dung, leaf mould, rotted grass, kitchen slops, etc.
A waterlogged soil is unsatisfactory for most trees: it can be improved by surface draining and digging over.
Peaty soil is generally waterlogged, and excessively acid: it can be improved by draining and digging in lime.
Tree planting on pure sea sand is rather a special problem—a common sense plan is to select trees which are observed to be growing naturally on such soil, e.g., coconut and betel-nut paline (the latter is a graceful tree in its early stages) and the conifers ru and sempilor.
Harmful Films*
Sir Hesketh Bell, the well-known Colonial administrator and writer, performed a service when, addressing the British Empire Film Institute at the House of Commons on 28th July, he directed attention to the immense harm done by the cinema among the native races of the world, notably in the tropics. Some weeks before, in a letter to "The Times," Sir Hesketh made a plea for safeguarding the 35,000,000 British protected subjects of Africa from the mischievous influence which, by exposing the very worst features of life in civilization, has dealt a blow at the prestige of the white man and done more than anything else to conduce to the general revolt of the coloured races against the government of the European. The cinema film, usually of a cheap and deplorable type, mode its appearance in the Fur East some fifteen or twenty years ago, and almost irremediable harm has resulted. It is not too late though to prevent the exhibition of the objectionable type of film among the natives of our African possessions, there being as yet no important vested interests, and the local Governments being still in a position to act forcibly in such matters.—(China Express & Telegraph).
Baram Regatta
MARUDI, 16th May, 1930.
It is strange how the name of a place one has never seen can excite a longing to visit it or a desire to avoid it. For some reason the name Marudi conjured up for me a vision of verdancy and placidness; certainly of a place to go to, not a spot to avoid. I was not disappointed.
Marudi, Claudetown, or Baram, used to be the capital of the Fourth Division, and it is here that the up-country' people meet to hold their Regatta under the auspices of the Resident and the District Officer. On this particular occasion Marudi was honoured by the presence of His Highness the Tuan Muda, and the Dayang Anne, who were accompanied by the Chief Secretary Mr. F. F. Boult and Mrs. Boult.
After covering sixty odd miles from the mouth of the broad and winding Baram river, a river whose banks are seemingly devoid of all bird or animal life, the Government buildings of Marudi are seen perched on a hillock which rises almost perpendicularly from the river. Seen towards the close of day it gave a feeling of restfulness. That feeling however passed before the Angas drew up alongside the Jetty. Scores of sampans of every description, and racing boats, lined the river, bank. Hundreds of excited natives thronged the jetty approach, and the road leading to the top of the hillock was crowded. Many of them had travelled hundreds of miles to be present at the Regatta and all were now waiting to welcome the Tuan Muda and the Dayang Anne, who were coming on the Maimuna.	
The first race of the Regatta was timed to start at 7.30 on the morning of the 16th. Long before this hour the covered stands erected on the hill-top overlooking the river were packed, and the hillside and river bank were thronged with gaily bedecked natives in holiday mood. The native ladies had their own grand-stand, where they sat looking like a brilliant jewelled necklace on a velvet-dark background. The Dyak ladies comported themselves with all the dignity of English ladies at Ascot! Proud of their elongated ears and the masses of heavy copper ear-rings, the Kayan and Kenyah ladies watched the races with the keenest interest, but very rarely were seen to smile.
Headgear was wonderful and varied, more so among the men than the women. The latter, except for those who wore brilliant filagree silver ornaments in their hair, were content with bare heads and sunshades. The men's headgear ranged from feathers to felt hats; one dandy was actually wearing what used to be known as a "donkey's breakfast" (or as the hatter's term it a ''gentleman's boater"), the now rapidly disappearing straw hat. Sarongs and bajus of all hues, costumes covered with silver coins, which made a pleasant jingle, added to the gaiety of the scene, and caused the constant clicking of the visitors' cameras.
The view of the river with the Maimuna and Angas beflagged for the occasion, anchored in mid-river, and the seething activity at the jetty, preparation for the races, or the disembarking of crews who had just finished racing, was well worth while watching without the added excitement of the races themselves. Perfect weather prevailed the whole time and although when the breeze dropped the sun seemed to be doing its best to make us all uncomfortable, we were thankful the beer was cold!
The course of the long races was four and a half miles, of which only about two miles were visible owing to a sharp bend of the river. Our first intimation that a race was in progress was the excited shout of "Here they come!" (or words to that effect) as the boats were seen to turn the bend. The small specks rapidly grew larger and very soon the spectators on the hill-top had a splendid view of each thrilling race.
There were eight races on the programme. Some were for boats of 15 paddlers, some for boats of 30, a short distance race for toys, and the consolation race; but the big race of the day was for boats of unlimited numbers of paddlers. Two of these boats measured over 90 feet in length, and held crews of 60 to 70 men. The other boats ranged from between forty to seventy feet in length with crews of 30 to 60 paddlers. Thirty-eight boats started in this race but only 37 finished as one boat was swamped and sank. The excitement of getting these long boats into position, and giving each boat a number was almost as exciting as the race itself. Imagine a four and a half mile race with 38 competitors, which means that well over a thousand men were taking part! What a riot this would cause between Putney and Mortlake! And the noise they made! It was a mystery to me to know where they got the breath to paddle at such a terrific speed and at the same time make such a din! The speed which these boats attain is really 
amazing. It was not possible to get the time for the course owing to the fact that the starting gun could not be heard. It would, however, be interesting to know how a varsity eight would fare against one of these long boats. It was unfortunate that a Miri four did not have the opportunity of competing against them over a short distance. Perhaps this can be arranged on a future occasion. The fact was ascertained that the winning boat at the end of 41 miles was paddling 75 to 80 to the minute!
The leader of each boat, who gives the time, and stands in the middle of the boat with a flag in each hand, must have been hoarse for days! They certainly made their crews work. The strong rhythmic paddling, which made each carved and painted prau appear to leap from the water at every down stroke, was fascinating to watch. The sporting instinct seemed to be very strong in all the natives who took part. They cared little about the prizes to be won but just paddled for the joy of the race itself and the pride of the house. As each winning crew, after passing the post, returned up-stream, they were heartily cheered by all the other contestants, who frantically waved their paddles.
It was a thoroughly enjoyable and thrilling morning's sport. The organization was perfect and must have entailed many weeks of arduous work. The notable success of the Regatta was chiefly due to the indefatigable labours of Mr. Pollard, the District Officer, and Mr. Tiedemann. The fact that so many hundreds of competitors from widely separated districts took part in the Regatta in itself speaks volumes for the worrying task these two gentlemen had and the many difficulties they so successfully overcome.
Sports of all kinds had been arranged for the afternoon and a huge crowd gathered on the football ground where the sports were held. The Chief Secretary, the Resident, and Messrs. Pollard and Corson worked in the sun all the afternoon and certainly did their share in making the Sports such a success. Except for the fact that H. H. the Tuan Muda, the Dayang Anne, Mrs. Boult and Mrs. Aplin, were almost reduced to grease spots while sitting in the grand-stand, the programme went through without a hitch! The tug-of-war between teams of Dyaks and Ulus was probably the most amusing event of the afternoon.
In the evening the grounds surrounding the District Officer's bungalow were transformed into a veritable fairyland.—Hundreds of varicolored paper lanterns were dotted everywhere. The pathways, lighted by more lanterns, were packed with people on their way to the place appointed for the native dancing which had been arranged in honour of H. H. the Tuan Muda and the Dayang Anne.
In the patch of light made by two solitary flares, which lent a touch of eeriness to the scene, various dancers gave most remarkable displays of agility and gracefulness. What amazing skill these people have! They almost made their arms and bodies speak.
And what a scene! The whisperings of the huge crowd, unseen except those fringing the oval space of light, their hoarse shots as each dance finished, the still tropic night with heaven's floor "thick inlaid with pattins of bright gold," till suddenly the moon rose above the trees revealing a sea of eager faces. And still the dancers continued their whirling to the accompaniment of a softly-played stringed instrument.
Jars of Arak were provided for the refreshment of the native guests, and as the evening draw to a close, they came, house by house, to pledge the Tuan Muda and their host. The drinking songs are beautiful, deep and musical oven to European ears, quite different from what seems to us the high, discordant whine of most Asiatics. An unforgettable night.
Nor must we forget the display of pyrotechnics so ably conducted by Mr. Corson. We believe he almost blew himself up once! But all ended without any casualties although most of us did not get to bed until the early hours!
Waving farewell to those on the Maimuna as we passed her on the Angas next morning, we took leave of Marudi—Marudi of pleasant memories.—(The Mirage)
Commentary of the Month.
Mr	a	retired undertaker, has mastered the saxophone at the age of 83. Why? 
Reply by small schoolboy, asked to define the word "almshouses." "Places where the indignant poor live." A fine specimen of the species "LETTIOPPILUS JAVANICUS, " or common stork, has arrived in Kuching, causing, we hear, consternation in certain circles. The attacks of this bird need not be feared, however, if care is taken to close all chimney-pots at dusk. Should the bird approach the house, it is said that a small piece of wood, firmly grasped in the hand, will avert all danger.
A Fashion-writer asks—"Have you seen the now 1930 colour-shade "Portsmouth Blue"? No, but we know "Plymouth Pink" so well. H.M.S. "Herald." FAREWELL TO KUCHING.
A well-known Singapore golf club has adopted the slogan—"It is easier to replace the turf than to re-turf the place. "
Ah! but they havn't seen our new spade-niblick!
We read that six citizens of Moscow have been charged with "pernicious speculation" and sentenced to death. It is interesting to conjecture the maximum penalty for "culpable thrift."
After floating in the sea for about 15 years, a large mine has been found, near Folkestone, on the rooks. We also have heard of several mines whose shareholders are similiarly situated!
Only seven calls were received by the London Fire Brigade during 24 hours ending 0 a.m. Tuesday.
The presumption is that it could not have been Race-Week.
We read in our esteemed contemporary, Punch, that a gang of road-menders in Africa have discovered alluvial gold.
Will this cause more International complications? And has Washington been notified?
From a Seedsman's Catalogue :—"We can supply flower-pots at rates which defy competition—"
We know several young officers who would gladly enter any competition in connection with flower-pots.
An advertiser announces:—"Superflous Hair permanently removed from faces without electricity—"
For faces without electricity, the old process of removing the face from the hair by steam-hammer is still de rigeur.
News reaches us of the gallant rescue of a topee from the river at Pending, during the recent visit of H.M.S. Herald. Some doubt was expressed at the time as to whether the rescuer had had sufficient recent practice in swimming to remain afloat. 
However, once a swimmer, always a swimmer, and all ended happily.
A fine specimen of the species "LETTIOPPILUS JAVANICUS, " or common stork, has arrived in Kuching, causing, we hear, consternation in certain circles. The attacks of this bird need not be feared, however, if care is taken to close all chimney-pots at dusk.
Should the bird approach the house, it is said that a small piece of wood, firmly grasped in the hand, will avert all danger.
H.M.S. "Herald."
FAREWELL TO KUCHING.
H.M.S. Herald arrived at Pending, from Singapore, on 5th September, and sailed early on Monday 8th for Miri.
On the evening of Friday 5th numerous residents of Kuching accepted the kind invitation of the Wardroom Officers to dinner on board. After dinner, the Silent Service for once belied its name and after many songs and choruses, the rival merits of the piano and the "squeeze-box" were tested simultaneously. The effect of a super-jazz tune played as an accompaniment to the sonorous booming of a sea-shanty on the harmonium has to be heard to be appreciated! It was generally conceded, however, that the piano won on points! It is unnecessary to add that a very enjoyable evening was spent.
On Sunday morning, Capt. Maxwell and Officers were at Home to Members of the Sarawak Club, and a large number of guests were entertained.
The weather, for once, was kind, and a bright, cool morning added to the enjoyment of a very memorable occasion.
This is, we understand, the last visit of H.M.S. Herald to Kuching during the present season and we would take this opportunity to wish them all "bon voyage," a pleasant trip to Hong Kong and a speedy return to Sarawak in the coming year
Yet Another Policeman.
NEW RECRUIT FOR THE FORCE.
The personnel of the Sarawak police was augmented on 8th August last by the arrival of Peter Gordon Reynolds.
From all accounts, Master Peter seems to be  enjoying his new surroundings.
Mainly About Nothing.
Applications for accommodation in the Swan House, Museum Gardens, should be addressed to the Resident, First Division. Senior officers will of course be given preference.
Applications for accommodation in the Bug-house, however, should be addressed to the Principal Medical Officer, Kuching.  Senior officers will of course be given .... Oh, I beg your pardon,—I'm getting a bit muddled!
Alas for the decline of boxing! Following the news of Phil Scott's recent fiascos with Sharkey and Boy Scribling, we now learn that a recent fight between two Tamil collies in Kuching was not free from the suspicion of deliberate fouling by one of the contestants. "The defendant knocked me down, Tuan," complained the injured party in court, "and then bit me in the eye! "
"Hit you in the eye, you mean," corrected the Magistrate.
"No, BIT me in the eye, Tuan," reiterated the plaintiff, unveiling the damaged organ to the gaze of an astonished court. And sure enough, bitten in the eye he had been, as his Medical certificate proved!
This seems to be one up on the recent lout-weight contest between ‘Biter' Bloom and ‘Gonger' Gecko so admirably reported in "Punch." What are attacks on the pituitary gland compared to this? Who now would horsewhip his prostrate opponent or kick him in the stomach when he could make his teeth meet in the other chap's eye-ball? Really, it almost seems as though we ought to bring this to the notice of the body controlling American boxing, the members of which have just decided to remove the veto on fouls.
From now onwards it will be essential for prize- fighters to enter the ring wearing padded eye-guards in addition to all the other paraphernalia designed to protect various delicate portions of the human frame. And the eye-pad would seem to have one definite advantage,—the fighters would be unable to see each other, so lout-weight and similar contests would automatically become impossible!
From the China Express and Telegraph we learn that an Austrian Professor, Herr Mitter, and a companion, are "walking" down the river Rhine' on sets of inflated rubber skis. When they have finished with the Rhine they propose to take a stroll across the English Channel, and we can only hope that their project will not share the fate of a similar attempt made, if we remember right, on the Mukah River some years ago. On this occasion empty kerosene tins were employed in place of rubber skis with disastrous—and, as Kai Lung would put it— gravity-removing results!
The same journal remarks that a correspondent states in a letter to the Times that when he was in Shanghai dining the seventies of the last century be frequently heard "Shenandoah" and "Sally Brown" sung at sunrise by the crews of American clippers leaving port.
No mention, we notice, is made of the fact that these self-same shanties have been heard in the Sarawak Club at gin-rise, and quite recently too! Here surely is a chance for some earnest student of sea-lore to make a name for himself in research circles: possibly, though, the Curator of the Sarawak Museum has already compiled a few notes on the phenomenon, though there is nothing about it in the current issue of the Museum Journal.
In one of the circulars issued by the Bangsawan of British Malaya, until recently delighting Kuching with its sparkling performances, the public is informed that—"From start to finish the story will elude the patrons!" While this is hardly an inducement to any earnest student of the drama to cough up the price of a seat, it has been noticed that certain occupants of the front rows seem often to be more concerned with the contents of mysterious baskets under the chairs than with the unfolding of the plot. Perhaps, then, it was these gentlemen whom the announcement was designed to attract.
Exactly what the contents of these curious baskets are has never been ascertained, but the clink of glasses has sometimes been heard in conjunction with sounds suspiciously resembling the opening of soda water bottles. Taken in conjunction, these two clues should almost be obvious enough to penetrate the skulls of our keen-witted C.1.D.,— Yes, Walter, yon got it first time,—-yours is the jelutong medal!
While we are on the subject, we had great hopes, of publishing a series of articles on the Bangsawan from the pen of a celebrated dramatic critic now resident in Kuching. But, alas and alack! Pressure of work and the cares of office rendered this impossible. Uneasy lies the head that wears a toupet.
Welfare asked to contradict the rumour that the Museum gardens are going to be turned into a second "Lansbury's Lido." It is not proposed to permit mixed bathing in the Swan Pond, nor will alcoholic refreshment be on sale at the aviary,—or is it the Chinese Temple? Poker patties in the Whale House, too, are discouraged.
Old Sarawak.
FROM THE JOURNAL OF SIR JAMES BROOKE, 14TH JANUARY, 1842.
"18th.—A Chinese boat with four men was chased into the river by four Dyak prahus, and escaped with difficulty. On the intelligence reaching me, I, with some trouble, mustered three canoes, and we proceeded down, about one o'clock in the morning, in search of the enemy. After rowing in the dark for some hours, we discovered a light gliding up the river, and gave chase, but did not succeed; and at daybreak returned, wet and tired, without seeing anything more, when we learnt that the chase was a Sarawak boat, which, mistaking us for Dyaks as we did them, pulled with all speed home, and gave the alarm of being nearly captured.
" In the evening I ordered a fine boat to be prepared for the war with Sarebus and Sakarran, which appears to me inevitable; as it is impossible, laying all motives of humanity aside, to allow these piratical tribes to continue their depredations, which are inconsistent with safety, and a bar to all trade along the coast. Eighty prahus of Sarebus and Sakarran are reported, to be ready, and waiting for further reinforcements before putting to sea.
"19th.—Information of three more of my Dyaks being cut off in the interids by the predatory tribes.
FROM THE CASE BOOK, 1849—1856.
The Board of Magistrates, 21st March, 1849.
Sir James Brooke 
Captain Brooke Brooke 
Robt. Hentig, Esquire. 
George Ruppell, Esquire 
Revd. Francis MacDougall Harington Parr, Esquire.
Proposed by R. Hentig, Esquire: That Wednesday at 12 o'clock be fixed for a weekly meeting of the Bench of Magistrates. Carried unanimously.Proposed by G. Ruppell, Esquire: That a fee of one rupee shall be paid to the court on every summons which sum is to be charged to the loser of the case. Carried unanimously.
The Board then proceeded to try the following cases. viz. CASE 1.
Fikir Midem tailor claims seven and a half dollars from Mr. Brereton for work done.
Mr. Parr and Mr. Ruppell decided that Mr. Brereton was liable for six dollars and a quarter.
Capt. Brooke and Revd. MacDougall decided that Mr. Brereton was liable for only five dollars which he had previously tendered. Sir J. Brooke and Mr. Hentig held Mr. Brereton liable for the whole claim, and Sir J. Brooke as Chairman gave his casting vote to that effect.	
Decided that Mr. Brereton to pay Fikir Midem seven dollars and a half for work done
CASE 2.
Fikir Midem claimed D.G. $7.88 wages for attendance at the Rajah's house, which sum had been deducted by Mr. Crookshank.
Unanimously decided that he should be paid up to the time he was discharged.
Signed J. Brooke Chairman
J. Brooke Brooke 
Harrington W. Parr 
R. Hentig
George Ruppell
F. T. MacDougall.
However, Fikir Midem does not appear to have benefited unduly from the two judgments in his favour, for some months later we find the following.—Ed .
17TH OCTOBHR, 1849..
Fcikir Medin tailor. Sold up.
On Monday the house was sold at public auction for the sum of twenty-five Spanish dollars.
17TH OCTOBHR, 1849..
Fcikir Medin tailor. Sold up.
On Monday the house was sold at public auction for the sum of twenty-five Spanish dollars.
The board of Magistrates assembled to try these cases was the first such board to be convened in Sarawak, or at least the first of which any record exists. It is interesting to note the inclusion of the names of Sir James Brooke, first Rajah of Sarawak, and the Rev. F. T. MacDougall, first Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak.—Ed..
A Melanau Vocabulary.
The annual issue of the Sarawak Museum Journal is now available. While naturally its contents are mostly highly technical and therefore of interest chiefly to scientists, it contains one item that deserves special mention. This is a vocabulary of Mukah Melanau compiled by the late Father Bernard Mulder of Dalat, Father Anthony Mulder of Mukah and Mr. A. E. Lawrence, until recently an officer in the Sarawak Civil Service and now retired on pension.
There is probably no one better acquainted with the Melanaus, their customs, their language and different dialects than the Reverend Fathers of the Roman Catholic Missions at Mukah, Oya and Dalat. Father Bernard Mulder, who died suddenly at Dalat on 9th March, 1928, spent twenty-three years among the Melanaus of Dalat and its neighbouring kampongs and obtained an unequalled knowledge of the people among whom he worked. Father Anthony Mulder is at present at Mukah, where he has been stationed for many years, and a large proportion of Mr. A. E. Lawrence's service was spent in the coast districts.
This vocabulary is very comprehensive and should undoubtedly prove of the utmost value to all Government officers who are stationed or are likely to be stationed anywhere in the Melanau country, since it greatly facilitates the study of the language spoken by the folk with whom they have to deal. In addition to this, bound to be of considerable interest to any students of ethnology both within Sarawak and outside the State is indeed a valuable contribution to our knowledge of the various native races of Borneo.
"The Mirage."
The July number of the Mirage is now available, and well maintains its previous standard of excellence. Reviewing the Mirage is a pleasant task, but it is apt to turn the reviewer just the least bit green with envy. For a cheery, topical, interesting and thoroughly readable publication it is surely unequalled in the field of amateur journalism. Those remarks overheard in the club, for instance—:
In this number we have short stories and articles to suit every taste, reproductions of photographs, and some excellent pen-and-ink sketches. Especially interesting to us in Kuching is an account of the Baram Regatta, which is printed elsewhere in this issue. Now, contributors and potential contributors please note,—we have to rely entirely on the kindness of the staff of the Mirage for any news at all of this important event which took place in May, mark you, last May—four months ago! Until reading about it in the Mirage many of us in Kuching were completely ignorant of the fact that a regatta had taken place at Baram at all. What a pity we can't invite special correspondents from Miri to attend the coming Kuching and Sibu regattas and write them up for us!
Sibu regatta is probably every bit as colourful and picturesque as Baram Regatta—perhaps even more so, owing to the presence last New Year's Day of our Rich Uncle from Australia, and the two tramp cyclists!—but what account of it appeared in the Gazette? Not a column, not a paragraph, not one single solitary line! And Kuching Regatta?—the same. Surely this should bring a blush of shame to the cheek of even the most callous arid hardboiled Sarawakian!
Well, well, there it is. Until contributors rouse themselves we can only thank the producers of the Mirage for their courtesy in allowing us to reprint their articles. And in the meantime, of course, we obtain both entertainment and information from the best periodical in Borneo; a jolly good dollar's worth.
On the Road to Simanggang.
HIGHWAY REACHES THE SADONG RIVER.
An interesting event in the history of inter-communication in the State occurred on 24th September, when Mr. R. D. Binnie (Executive Engineer in charge of the Kuching-Simanggang Road construction arrived in Kuching by motorcar direct from the banks of the Sadong River. Mr. Binnie had previously proceeded to Simunjan by launch and thence, in company with Mr. J. J. Hill (Officer-in-Charge, Sadong district), to the Ampungan district, where the new road meets the river.
The run of 39 miles between the Sadong and Kuching principally through interesting country of a hilly nature, was comfortably completed in one and three-quarter hours. 
First Division News
August, 1930.	
Extracts from the First Divisional Reports for August, 1930, by Mr. J. C. Swayne, Acting Resident:— 
Court work was light during the month, three criminal and four civil cases coming up for hearing.
His Highness the Tuan Muda's birthday occurred on the 8th and the Government Offices were closed on the afternoon of that day and the following morning.
His Excellency Sir Cecil and Lady Clementi, Governor of the Straits Settlements and British Agent of Sarawak, paid a visit to Kuching on August the 4th and left again on the 6th. His Excellency made a tour of the Government Offices and Departments, and on the evening of the 5th, was driven through the town and kampongs which, were illuminated for the occassion.
Owing to an unfortunate accident to s.s. Vyner Brooke the ship was late in arrival and there was some delay in receiving mails.
H.M.S. Herald paid a short visit to the port on the 26th.
I went to Bau on the 27th on ordinary routine duty.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
August, 1930.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports:—
Seven criminal cases were heard, but these were of no importance, being chiefly cases of alleged assault.
Civil claims were fairly heavy as compared with the previous month, about sixty being contested, while many more were admitted.
On the 11th the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. P. Murray-Scott, proceeded to Slabat and Tambirat in connection with two land disputes, returning on the 12th, and from the 19th to the 23rd he was absent while sitting for the Government examination.
Judicial.—I am glad to be able to report that criminal cases made a low record for this year. Civil cases number about average.
Coroner's Court.—Inquest was held on the body of He Oh Gu and a verdict of death from drowning returned.
Three other deaths occurred during the month into which inquiries were made.
Travelling.—Batu Kawa was visited three times during the month. The station is in a satisfactory condition.
LAND OFFICE. July, 1930.
The Land Officer, Mr. A. K. Brown, reports:—
One Assistant Land Inspector was transferred from Survey Department.
During the visit of the two Royal Air Force flying boats, Squadron Leader Livock and Flight Lieutenant Nicholetts; accompanied by the Superintendent of Lands, viewed a proposed site of the 12th mile Simanggang Road, for the establishment of an aerodrome, if such is found to be necessary. Flight Lieutenant Nicholetts later inspected the site from the air.
As the applications outstanding have been reduced to a reasonable number, it will be possible in the near future to commence the checking of boundaries on the four-chain sheets.
August, 1930.
The Land Officer, Mr. A. K. Brown, reports:- 
A notable feature of this month has been the number of fires on gardens, due to the dry weather. As many of the owners will not take the trouble to keep their gardens properly cleared, these are in many cases overgrown with lalang and jerami. The result is that when a neighbour fells the jungle and commences to burn, the fire spreads very easily into neighbouring gardens. A number of examinations have been made, both as Land Office matters and on behalf of the Court. As the owners will not admit any fault in letting their gardens become overgrown, very few of these cases are settled out of Court.
A large amount of quit rent is still owing, for both the present and previous years; and, as most of the holders of small gardens have very little money, considerable difficulty is being experienced in collecting this. Also, the response to notices of completion of title has been very small, the owners not being able to pay the premia. The result is that a large number of completed titles are still on our hands.
His Excellency the British Agent for Sarawak made a short visit to this office on Tuesday the 5th.
Mr. T. E. Parker left Kuching for duty at Sarikei on the 19th of the month.
Mr. T. M. Griffiths was taken ill about the 25th and has been in his house at Kuching since then.
UPPER SARAWAK, BAU. August, 1930.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. G. B. H. Arundell, report :—
On 7th of the month I went to Kuching on my way to Lundu with Messrs. Allman and Middlemas to see the land in the Ulu Simatan and Sebakau for the proposed padi irrigation scheme. We left Kuching on the afternoon of the 7th and, after spending the night at Santubong, sailed for Lundu early on the morning of the 8th, arriving there about 11 a.m. A walk has taken to see the swamp land in the neighourhood, but all the swamp close to Lundu itself is regularly farmed and a certain amount of irrigation is practised there by the Sebuyow Dyaks. A curious instrument which I believe is never used by any other Sea Dyaks was noticed. This is a weapon something after the fashion of a parang bengkok, being on a long handle and wielded in the same way. The actual blade, however, is straight and broad. It was used by a Sebuyow Dyak to prepare land for padi. It obviously is a labour-saving device, since instead of first tebassing and then chopping up the land after burning, this weapon turns over the land in one action. The 
Dyaks at Lundu call it a taja and it is, I believe, well known in B.N.B.
On the evening of the 8th a visit was paid to the intake pool for the proposed water supply for Lundu. It was judged to be about 200 feet up and is roughly 1 ½ miles from the Fort. At the time there had been a drought at Lundu for nearly, if not quite, three months, and there was still a big head of water coming down—it was thought to be plenty to fill a 4-inch pipe.
On the 9th we walked round the hill to Serayan by way of Sedemak, but the land there is fairly well populated and too undulating for easy irrigation. We boated down to the mouth of the Sebaku. On the 10th we walked up the Sebaku to Paoh and from there to the Ulu Temaga where the best land lies.
On the 11th a large swamp up the Poi stream was visited. This swamp is regularly farmed by the Selakau Dyaks there who irrigate it quite efficiently. From Poi we returned to Kuching which was reached about 4 p.m.
On 14th a young Chinese girl, aged about 13, was reported to have been taken by a crocodile while she was bathing in the river at Tanjong Durian. The body, which was recovered next day, had no wounds on it and was examined by the Acting Assistant District Officer, the Dresser and Police Sergeant Gapar. It was considered that it was a case of drowning and nothing to do with a crocodile. The body had queer white patches on it like those occasioned by panau, and this caused Malays to state the belief that the girl had been taken by a mambang (or antu ayer), which beast apparently always leaves such marks on its victims.
On 18th a request was made by Ong Khee Hin to work gold near Tai parit and to use the overflow of the Engkajang lake to wash it. The request is being considered.
Agriculture.—All the farmers are now busy and few Land Dyaks visit the Court-house. All the hill land has been cleared and burnt—in many cases far more than the actual farms have been burnt, including numbers of rubber gardens. The whole country side shows signs of forest fires, which were reported to be so bad that the Conservator of Forests came up to look into the matter.
Engkabang trees in this district are reported to be flowering heavily. It is to be hoped that they will fruit accordingly in due course and fetch a good price.
Public Works Department.—The roads are now in excellent condition this side of Batu Kitang, and three new bridges have been put in, one on the Jugan road and two on the Buan-Dahan road. One more on this latter road is still to be done.
Rainfall.—The long drought has at last broken and rainfall for the month has been 2.91 inches.
Gold Returns.—174.91 ounces of actual gold were obtained by The Bidi Gold Mining Company for the month of July, 1930.
SADONG. August, 1930.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports:—
Court.—In the District Court Udin bin Sadam was sentenced to two years' imprisonment for incest. No other cases of importance were held during the month.
P.W.D.—The Government carpenter was employed on repairs to the bazaar—sawmill bridge, the prison and, latterly, on the main bazaar bridge.
On the 27th, together with Mr. Binnie, Executive Engineer P.W.D., I walked over the proposed route of the secondary road from the main Simanggang Road to Tebekang. Native Officer Abang Samsudin was instructed to try and find an easier way over Bukit Tenabar before the route is finally settled.
On the 15th, accompanied by Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager, Sadong Colliery, I inspected the bank of the Sadong river from the new padang on the down river side to the Simunjan river on the up river side. The bank appears to be going rapidly and unless some measures are taken in the near future the boatshed and wharfs will be in the river within the year.
Travelling.—On the 16th I left for Kuching by s.s. L'Aubaine. I returned via the Simanggang Road, arriving at Sadong on the 28th instant.
Agriculture.—Mr. G. St. F. Dare visited the station twice during the month in connection with the new Bugis padi planting scheme at Tanjong Brangan and the Government Controlled Coconut Garden.
Six experienced Bugis padi planters, under the direction of Hadji Abu Bakar, of Jaie, have started clearing at Sungei Apin with the object of demonstrating their methods of sawah planting. I understand that if their efforts are successful, and approved of by the Agricultural Department, they will be offered the same terms as were offered to the Javanese.
Prison. - The health of the prisoners was fair. The prison gang averaging 12.2 was employed on general upkeep of the station.
Sadong Collieries Report.
August, 1930.
Extracts from the Sadong Collieries Reports for August, 1930, by Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager:—
The gross output for the month was 1,536.04 tons, which is the highest production since March, 1927.
The excellent progress made with the extraction of coal underlying soft and shallow ground near the surface outcrops of the lower seam at the old Black-smiths' Mine and No. 9 Mine respectively, was  retarded with the advent of rains following the drought during the third week.
The dry spell which had commenced on 20th June had definitely broken on 21st August, when 1.38 inches of rain was recorded.
During this drought period—60 days—only 3.38 inches of rain fell on the mine area, and nearly all the wells and small streams had dried up. Nevertheless, the watershed of the Pansi held out magnificently, and there was an abundant supply of water available for colliery and domestic purposes.
The lowest recorded inflow at the reservoir at the end of the dry period was 3,120 gallons an hour, as agaist 5,400 gallons per hour during the first week of the drought. The Officer-in-Charge and myself examined the whole of the river bank from the old Simunjan entrance to the end of the Padang downstream, and found that erosion had taken place on an unprecedented scale, and that immediate reclamation is necessary in order to protect the jetty and other Government property from further serious damage during the approaching wet monsoon season.
The rainfall for the month was 6.29 inches.
SARAWAK TURF CLUB AUTUMN MEETING.
The Meeting was held on Saturday. September 27th instant and Monday the 29th instant. H. H. the Tuan Muda, the Dayang Anne and the Astana party were present on both days, H. H. the Tuan Muda kindly presenting the prizes on the Course.
The weather was ideal. Perhaps it was a little on the hot side on the first day, but rain on Sunday might cooled things down and the weather was overcast and cool for Monday's racing. There was a shower during the afternoon, but it was so slight that it passed almost unnoticed. Our Racing experts inform us that the going was good on the first day, if anything on the dry side, but on Monday after the rain it was perfect. This is borne out by the times, which are remarkably good. Special mention should be made at Flying FOX in the mile, where he broke his own previous revord by two seconds.  Adil broke the record for five furlongs pas up by Akal, and Kismet broke Azab's record for the Round the Course Race also Several records were equalled. Flying Fox was well inside the new record put up by Kismet, which shows him to be an exceptionally fine pony. His win in the mile on the first day will long be remembered.
We were treated to some very close finishes; in the second race on the first day there was only a neck between the first four ponies past the judge.
Mr. Ong Eng Hin captured the Champion Cup with September. Mr. W. S. B Buek has a coming pony in Adil, and Workman's win in the Rajah's colours was popular, since His Highness stable has not been lucky at the last few meetings. The Course and Offices do credit Ong Hup Leong, the Ground Secretary and Clerk of the Course. The paddock looked well cared for and the finishing off of the surrounding buildings has put the final touches to
Mrs. Chater as usual presided over the tea rooms and this is sufficient in itself to ensure capable handling in every detail.
The Totes and Cash Sweeps were well patronized in spite of the general slackness in trade and shortage of money.
We would like to take this opportunity of thanking that small band of stalwarts who, meeting after meeting, contribute a good deal of their time and much hard work towards making Turf Club meetings the successes which they invariably are. Race weeks have always been the chief social events in the Sarawak calendar and seem likely to remain so.
Lohor was champion jockey, having to his credit four wins and two seconds.
OTHER DETAILS.
Totalizators.—The turnover was as follows:—
Cash Sweeps.—The winning tickets were all presented on the Course, and there are none outstanding. Commission to the Club was $2,315.70 nett.
Annual General Meeting.—This took place on 30th September. With the exception of Mr. Buck who takes the place of Mr. F. O. Blagg, the previous Committee was re-elected in tote. The accounts to 30th June were accepted and passed.
Accounts.—A statement of Receipts and Expenditure pertaining to the Autumn Meeting will be published at an early date. Suffice it. to state here that the Club has had a very good meeting and is in quite a health condition financially. The Membership at date is about 100 and, as yet, there is no "waiting list."
The Committee will welcome further Members, and the Stewards will greet with open arms a few more "Owners ".	.
Roll up the Merchant Princes, Towkays, Orang Kaya and Nabobs!
RESULTS.
First Day.
Saturday, 27th September, 1930.
RACE I.—THE SEKAMA STAKES. 4 furlongs.
DIVISIONS II AND III.
Pengarah went off with a burst of speed leading Workman, Beaver, September and Mudahan. At the road Pengarah dropped back and Beaver's saddle slipped, putting him out of the race. September then took command and the issue was never in doubt. September's jockey was up before the Stewards after the race for loose riding and was fined $5 and warned that a further offence would mean suspension. 
RACE 2.—THE TUAN MUDA'S CUP. 6 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
The field came into view at the five furlong mark with Ol' Man River and Happy Boy in the lead followed by Kismet and Flying Fox. At the road Happy Boy was leading. After entering the straight Kismet and Ol' Man River came up on the stand side and drew level with Happy Boy. Flying Fox then came up and challenged on the outside. These four then raced neck and neck. Happy Boy came again to win by a short head. O1' Man River and Kismet dead-heated for second honours with Flying Fox a short head behind. This was one of the best finishes seen for many meetings, and must have given the Judge a bad few seconds, and the Handicapper much satisfaction.	
BACK 3.—THE SATOK STAKES. 5 furlongs. DIVISION II.
Nugget and Water Polo had the race between them all the way, the former took the lead coming into the straight and was never headed.

RACE 4.—THE PADUNGAN PLATE. 6 furlongs. DIVISION III
Gruda led from September and Mudahan at the five furlong post, but surrendered to the former soon afterwards, and September won comfortably in spite of his penalty.
RACE 5— THE B.C.D. BOUNTY. 3 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
A delayed start, O1' Man River giving a lot of trouble. The field was finally let away with Kim Mah in the lead with a flying start. As usual with such a large field there was a scrimmage at the road out of which came Adil on the stand side followed by Talisman, Kim Mah, Happy Boy, Adham and Flying Fox. They finished in this order, Adil hanging on to this advantage.
RACE 6.—THB CHIEF SECRETARY'S CUP. 4 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
Water Polo jumped off in front on the inside, Beaver getting away slowly on the outside, Workman, Apa Kena, and Nugget racing together in the centre. Just before the road Water Polo dropped back, and Walkman raced to the front on entering the straight, and stayed there. He was never troubled further. Trima Kaseh last.
RACE 7 —THE PENDING PLATE. 3 Furlongs.
DIVISION III.
Also ran:—Beaver 9.7 Carrie, Nugget 9.0 Lohor, Sisit 8.7 Assan, Trima Kaseh 8.4 Wakijan.
Two and a half lengths, one length.
Time—1 minute 4 1/5 seconds.
Totes: $10, $5.50.
DIVISION II.
RACE 6.—THB CHIEF SECRETARY'S CUP. 4 furlongs.
Half length, half length.
Time—46 3/5 seconds.
Also ran:~Flying Fox 10.11Mr. Spurway
White Knight 9.9 Usop, Akal 9.4 Wakijan,
Happy Boy 9.3 Bakar, Azab 8.6 Biloi, 
Ol' Man River 8.2 Salleh, Adham 8.0 Rajak.	
DIVISION III. 
RACE 8.—THE RANEE'S CUP. 1 Mile
DIVISION I, II. & III.
The field appeared at the five furlong post with Talisman out by himself in front followed by Flying Fox. Talisman still had a long lead at the road and did not look like being caught. Entering straight Flying Fox started decreasing Talisman's lead and drew level in the last hundred yards win by three parts of a length. A very fast-run race Flying Fox beat his own record by two seconds.
Second Day
Monday, 29th September, 1930.
RACE 1
THE
STEAMSHIP STAKES. 5 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
Happy Boy, Adil and Flying Fox went off in front in that order. Azab and Akai started very slowly.
Happy Boy gave way to Adil at the road. Happy
Boy challenged again, but Adil hung on to his lead and won pluckily, Flying Fox taking third honours.
RACE 2.—THE COUNTRY CUP. 6 furlongs
DIVISION II.
Pengarah jumped off in front and established a big lead, the rest of the field racing together. In the straight Pengarah was still racing in front but September and Mudahan challenged, September disposing with Mudahan went up to Pengarah and matched the race from him on the post by a short head.
Race 4.—The Turf Club Stakes. 4 furlongs
DIVISION I.
A bunched field to the road, where Adil raced to the front closely followed by Happy Boy. Kim Mah was pulled right across the rest of the field on to the opposite side of the course, interfering with Flying Fox, and racing after the leaders but was caught on the post and divested of third honours by Flying Fox. Happy Boy appeared to be rolling on to Adil in the last hundred yards, but Adil resisted Happy Boy's challenge. Kim Mah's jockey was up before the stewards for his riding at the road and fined $5 and warned that a further offence would mean suspension.
RACE 5.—THE STATE SPRINT. 3 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
A very level start and anybody's race though Apa Kena was always prominent. Salleh kept him going and resisting Workman's challenge pulled a surprise. A very fast run race, the time equalling the record for Division I, for the distance.
RACE 6.—THE TOWN TRAY. 4 furlongs.
DIVISION III
Pengarah again jumped off in front and made all the running, but was almost caught by Bagaimana who finished very strongly.
RACE 7.—THE COMMITTEE'S CONSOLATION. 3 furlongs.
DIVISIONS II AND III. 
Bagaimana in spite of being pulled out again after a hard race just before, made all the running from Mudahan and won comfortably.
RACE 8.—THE RAJAH'S CUP Round the Course, (about 1| miles )
DIVISIONS I, II AND III.
Talisman made the running almost immediately from Flying Fox, Kismet and Azab. This was the order at Sekama Gate. When the field came to view again at the five-furlong post Talisman still maintained his lead from Flying Fox. Azab came up to Flying Fox at the four furlong post but dropped away again. Flying Fox had wrested the lead from Talisman just before the road but he was then joined by Kismet. These, two raced together until half way home, when Kismet began to forge ahead. Flying Fox made a very gallant effort and was coming up again at the finish the weight and fresh condition of Kismet enabled the latter to stall off his challenge to win by half a length.
Autumn Race Week Bowls Competition 1930.
KUCHING SECTION.
IBS SARAWAK OAZEl'Tii, OClOMB 1, 1930.
Second Division News.
August, 1930.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports for August, 1930, by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident:—
On the 1st, accompanied by Mr. Summers, Lane Officer, I left Simanggang for a tour of the Kalaka and Saribas Districts. Owing to the drought the odours emitted by the big Malay Kampong at Kabong were most offensive. The bazaar was practically empty end that, in conjunction with the slump in the fishing industry, had a depressing effect. We reached Saratok on the 2nd, and found that the drought had diminished the water supply to such an extent that drinking water was being, fetched from the Awek for sale. Practically all the wells were dry and bathing became a difficult business. I sent m.l. One to Pusa for Datu Haji Dulrashid, who arrived in Saratok on the 3rd.
The state of trade was of course bad and little rubber is being tapped. Many shops in the bazaar are in urgent need of repair, but at present Government will not enforce this being done. The new bazaar road is a great improvement. Arrangements are being made to build a proper dispensary and to rebuild tire Government School.
On the 6th, we went to Roban where there was nothing of importance to do. We walked some distance along the new Roban-Saratok Road. The gradients are too steep in some places and there may be slips of earth when the rains come. Bridges are required. This road is between 12 and 14 miles long, and is already used by many people. When trade improves it may be possible to make land reserves and open up much good country.
Abang Mohamed, Native Officer, keeps his kampong very clean. On the 7th, we left Roban, calling in at Kabong and Pusa where trivial matters were discussed with the respective Native Officers. We reached Betong the same evening. At Betong the bazaar reflected the bad state of trade and the Arrack and Gambling Farmer told me that his monthly rent was now practically a complete loss.
The contractor was doing very good work on Fort Lili, and the alterations will be completed shortly.
Several Dyaks, who had pledges totalling $3,000 with Government in respect of the murder of a Chinese named Ah Seng last year, asked that these should be returned. In view of the complete absence of any proof of guilt against these men their request was allowed.
Mr. Summers, who had remained at Betong when I left, returned in m.l. who had remained on the 14th, having visited Debak.
Visitors to Simanggang during the month were The Venerable tbe Archdeacon of Sarawak and Mrs. Champion, Datu Tuanku Haji Drahman, Tuanku Haji Ali and Abang Haji Mentair of Binatang.
The Acting Assistant District Officer of Engkilili, Mr. Ditmas, having reported a supposed epidemic of dysentery in the Ulu Ai, an extra dresser was obtained from Kuching and started for Engkilili on the 18th. At the end of the month he was still away in the Dyak country and no news had come  in.
Ten deaths had been reported previously.
Owing to the excessive drought the water problem in Simanggang became acute, and on the 19th the pond (known as dhobie's pond) which had by good fortune been enlarged and cleaned out about two months before, was made a drinking water reserve and guarded by police, day and night. All Government servants were rationed and by these means the situation was eased. Towards the end of the month, however, the rains came, but for a time the situated was serious.
All over the the Division reports have come in about the drought, and many people had to go long distances in order to fetch inferior water.
Abang Haji Sapiee arrived on the 26th in order to do duty as a Native Officer in this Division, and on the 28th left for Betong to do duty there vice Abang Latip transferred to Simanggang.
On the night of the 28th—29th, a daring burglary at the Post Office, Simanggang, took place. A mail bag was opened and all the registered packets opened and their contents abstracted. There is no clue as yet.
Mr. G. M. Goodall, Agricultural Field Officer, Second Division, returned from the Fourth Division on the 25th, where he had been on special duty.
A contractor visited Simanggang during the month in connection with the new Government Offices, but at the end of the month no decision had been made by the Public Works Department.
A wedding of considerable importance and interest took place at Simanggang on the 22nd and following days when Awang Sipudin, eldest son of Pangeran Azit, Native Officer, was married to Dayang Haji Ukah, eldest daughter of Datu Haji Dulrashid. Guests to the number of 700 arrived from all parts of the Division and from Kuching. The ceremonies were carried out with much magnificence and boundless hospitality.
I was compelled to leave for Kuching on the 3lst for medical treatment.
Throughout the whole month the extreme dryness of the weather hindered the padi planters. Naturally the burns were good, but the young plants had little chance of surviving. There are rumours of pepper disease up the Skrang and other places, but there is no confirmation from the Agricultural Department, so I hope the rumours are exaggerated. Rubber tapping has stopped in many places.
Work continued during the month on the new Bungalows at Engkilili and Saratok.
SIMANGGANG.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hadden : —
In the District Court there were four criminal cases resulting in one sentence of four months under section 170 I.P.C. and fines amounting to $80.
In the Magistrate's Court there were four criminal cases and ten civil, claims amounting to $114.75. One criminal case was dismissed, two resulted in fines of $10 and the remaining one in a sentence of twenty-one days for non-payment of fine.
On the 9th, a Skrang Dyak, who had previously reported his father missing, came in with the information that a fresh head had been found a short way up river. The Dresser went up investigate and on his report there is reason to infer that the skull is that of the missing man. The latter was last seen in the company of five Dyaks, believed to be from the Ulu Ai, and the Acting Assistant District Officer, Engkilili, has the investigation in hand.
On the 31st, a public Tuba Fishing took place in the Batang Ai.

ENGKILILI.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Engkilili, Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas:—
On the 3lst of July, I left Engkilili at 6 a.m. and walked to Ulu Kaoug. The latter part of the path was rather overgrown, but it is only a Dyak track and is used sometimes by Dyaks from the Ulu as a short cut to Engkilili.
Lobok Antu was reached at 1.15 p.m.
In the afternoon the police fired a practise at 100 yards, five rounds per man, with Snider Carbines. The highest and only score was four marks, by one hit. The old carbines are in such a state of disrepair that it would be unfair to judge this as the standard of shooting.
On the 20th Mr. G. M. Goodall, Agricultural Field Officer, returned to Lubok Tedong after his visit to the Third and Fourth Divisions.
On the 2nd, a Dyak house of fourteen doors in the Ulu Kumpang was destroyed completely by fire.
There were two criminal cases in the Magistrate's Court, one being dismissed and the other being settled by a fine of $5.
There were nine civil cases and claims amounting to $677.81.
In the District Court there was one criminal case, and a sentence of three months' R.I., under section 324 I.P.C. There was one civil claim amounting to $220.
SARIBAS.
Extracts from the report of the Assistant District Officer, Betong, Mr. R. L. Daubeny:—
The following cases were heard during the month. Ah Pong fined $10 and cost for insulting behaviour to a woman, section 609 I.P.C. Ipit and Kawi sentenced to three months each for non-payment of brian $50.
The prison gang was employed on routine work during the month.
The substations were visited from 22nd to 27th, various small cases being settled and outstanding matters seen to. Spaoh was visited for one night on 5th in connection with a dispute between the Malays and Dyaks of Baku at Sungei Pengan.
Abang Haji Sapiee, Native Officer, arrived here on 28th to take over from Abang Latip who was transferred to Simanggang on 29th.
I regret to report the death of Abang Indut, late Native Officer here for many years, who passed away on the night of the 10th after an illness which had lasted for some years.
The trade depression is hitting the district very hardly, relying as it does almost solely on its export of rubber. Both traders and producers are finding it hard to make both ends meet.
Nine motor vessels entered and cleared during the month.
KALAKA.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Saratok, Mr. L. K. Morse:
Trade generally in the district is in a very depress state, most rubber gardeners have ceased to tap, with the result that numbers of coolies are put of work. There has also been a great failing off in number of up-river traders.	
Reports from other districts indicate a rice shortage, but in Kalaka, as yet, this is not the case, urged the Malays to plant as much padi as they can to avoid a shortage next year.
Thieves broke into the shop of Chop ‘‘Tong Ek" in Saratok Bazaar on the night of the 24th instant, and removed cloth, silver and footstuff to the value at $150. Evidence points to Chinese thieves, but no arrests have been made. An attempt to enter another shop was also reported.
The long drought finally broke on the 22nd instant, and since that date there has been heavy rain daily.
There were numerous claims made in the Courts during the month for damages to rubber gardens. In the criminal Courts no cases call for remarks.
The Divisional Field Officers visited the District during the month, and visited various pepper gardens and the smokehouse.
It is reported from up river that the engkabang is in bloom, and that a good crop may be expected. However, it is too early yet to form any opinion on this. Should the crop be a good one, it will greatly benefit the local traders, who are in a very bad way it present owing to the low price of rubber.
LAND OFFICE.
Extracts from the report of the Land Office, Second Division, Mr. B. Summers: —
Land Inspector, Mohd. Shablee was dismissed for laziness, having been warned previously.
Gardens in the immediate vicinity of Simanggang are being examined.
The work of the office for the month was of a purely routine nature.
Krian, Kabong.— On the 1st of the month I and Wee Swee Cheng (clerk) left Simanggang for Kabong in the m.l. Anne with the Resident, arriving there about 6 p.m. On the morning of the 2nd I examined all Land Office books; it was found that there were only thirty garden certificates issued, and that very little rent had been paid in, so instructions were issued for the calling up of all defaulters.
Saratok.—At 8 a.m. on the 2nd left Kabong and arrived at Saratok 11 a.m.
I was informed that all Chinese who require gardens, paid to the Dyaks a sum of $5 for land. This practice, of course, is very difficukt to stop, and the only way, if possible, is to fine the delinquents.
Betong.—Leaving Pusa 1.15 p.m. arrived at Betong 6 p.m.
All Registration and Assessment books appeared to be catered correctly.	
Slight alterations were made in the Quit Rent books and Mortgage and Transfer book written up to date.
The result of my recent visit to the Krian and Saribas has shown me how necessary it is for a clerk to be stationed at Betong, and from there to visit all stations alternate months in both districts.
In a district such as Betong, with a large number of gardens and, it is to be hoped, a large increase of staff in the new year, it would be quite impossible for an Administration Clerk to carry out Land Office work as well as his own.
Total number of gardens in the two districts amounts to over 6,000, therefore a large staff will be required to contend with this.
It is my intention with an increased staff to attach an inspector temporarily to each substation and with a competent Land Office clerk, to issue the work to these men and also to report regularly to Officers-in-Charge and myself.
It was noted that nearly all gardens in the Krian and Saribas are rubber, with the exception of a number of sago gardens up the Krian.
Police.—The total police strength remained the same last month being 87 in the whole Divisions including 30 at Simanggang.
Third Division News. 
August, 1930.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports for August, 1930, by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident:—
Resident's Court.—Criminal: no cases came up for hearing. Civil: three cases, claims amounting to $5,330.62.	
General.—S.S. Rajah of Sarawak arrived on the 3rd inst. and was laid up across river owing to the trade slump.
A Committee of twelve Chinese women were appointed to inspect women and children immigrants.
I visited Mukah, Oya and Dalat from the 6th to 12th instant.
The Chief Health Officer and Mrs. Brooke arrived on the 13th inst., returning again to Kuching on 20th inst. Dr. Brooke visited all Stations on the Rejang River.
Mr. D'Arcy Weatherbe arrived on the 13th instant, having made a trip through the interior of Borneo.
Mr. Parker arrived on the 20th instant, having been appointed Land Officer, Sarikei and Binatang.
The Director of Public Works and Mrs. Lowe arrived on 30th instant and were still here at end of the month.
LOWER REJANG AND MATU.
The District Officer, Lower Rejang and Matu, Mr. E. V. Andreini, reports:—
Court.—Chan Soon was sentenced to 9 months for theft, Lee Kin $25 breach of Weights and Measures Order, Gregory Samy $22.14 Native Court fine. These were principal cases.
Land.—The Divisional Land Officer visited the district from the 15th to 21st and I accompanied him to various substations. At Paloh he measured out the bazaar lots and assessed the value of the land and compensation for Malay houses to be pulled down.
P.W.D.—Progress continued on the Matu Bazaar and seven shops are now in the course of erection.
A back road was made for the Daro Bazaar.
A start was made to connect the villages of Saie and Kort by means of a jungle path. Nanga and Tian have already been connected and the path is now constantly in use.
Health.—Dr. Brooke, Chief Health Officer, Sarawak, visited Rejang from 20th to 21st and Dr. Hutchinson, Assistant Health Officer, from 26th to 28th in connection with the epidemic of dysentery that so far has resulted in sixty-six deaths. It was decided that the drinking wells were affected and that Government should build three wells for the inhabitants' use. 
The drought now having broken the epidemic appears to be dying out.
Agriculture, etc.—Two more cows were sold, one slaughtered, and one died from the herd bought from the Datu Shahbandar.
During the drought three calves died at Matu from the Government herd.
SIBU.
The Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Sibu, Mr. I. S. Hammond, reports:—
General.—The worst possible time was struck for the survey of the Sarikei pepper gardens. Garden owners gave so little assistance in the remising that it was decided to move the parties elsewhere until a more favourable time presented itself. This to a large extent accounts for the drop in chainaga and increase in costs for the past month. It is as yet uncertain how much work there is to be done along the Rejang to Kanowit and at Kanowit itself, but from what one is able to gather of the extent of the gardens there seems to be no particular reason why the work there should not be completed by the end of the year. Demarcations between Sibu and Sarikei are nearly finished, most gardens as yet unsurveyed being disjointed and small plots on the outskirts of the surveyed area.
The Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. Alex. D. Hutchison, reports:-
There were 275 new out-patients and their repetition 821, making a total of 596 in all.
The total number of out-patients treated at the jail during the month, including new and repeated, totals 125 in all.
The total number of in-patients treated during the month amounted in all to 75, new admissions 45, and 30 were transferred from 31st July, 1930. Amongst these 5 deaths occurred at the hospital due to the following causes:—1 Typhoid, 1 Burn complicated by shock (2nd Degree), 1 Septic Myocarditis, 2 Pulmonary Tuberculosis.
Three lepers were transferred to Kuching during the month for admittance into the Kuching Leper Camp.	
Forty-six N.A.B. injections were given during the month.
One hundred and thirty-two various specimens were recorded during the month for examination for pathological work.
On 6th August, 1930, I was away at Mukah and Oya on medical inspection, returning to Sibu on 12th August, 1930.
The health of the European community remains good.
KAPIT.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Kapit, Mr. A. Macpherson, reports:—
Courts.—Ten Ukits under Linn were imprisoned for one month for being without passes and shooting 5 rhinoceroses, intending to take the horns back to N.E.I. without leave.
Dairy Farm.—Two stot were sold during the month. The herd numbered 42 on 31st.
Prison.—41 seperate report on work done is attached. Health was poor.
Mr. Weatherbe arrived on the 10th from Long Iran and proceeded to Sibu on 13th. Rh. Manggoi of 29 doors at N. Pila was burnt to the ground on 8th.
D.E.I. Native Surveyor Natasaputra arrived on 14th.
Mr. Goodfellow returned on 16th and left for Singapore on 21st.
The Chief Health Officer and District Officer, Sibu, arrived on 17th in connection with 1,931 Census, returning on 18th. Rh. Igieng at N. Sama caught fire again, six doors were burnt out this time.
Five Dyak Penghulus were down during the month.
I was away from the 1st to 29th visiting Belaga. I went to Long Sai and got the Badang on tho move to Long Linau. Trade is very bad in Beluga owing to low price of damar, large quantities of which are coming down, however, and the bazaar has good stocks of trade goods.
Dr. Ter Bruggen, of Dr. Kroll's party, arrived on 31st.
POLICE AMD PRISONS.
The Officer-in-Charge of Police and Prisons, Mr. F. L. Crossley, reports:—
General.—On the 8th, being His Highness the Tuan Muda's Birthday, the police parade took place at 8 a.m. under command of Inspector of Police.
On the 12th at about 7 a.m. the corpse of a male child was found by one Rajak, of Kampong Datu, floating at the mouth of Sungei Bakong. The body was taken to the hospital. This matter has been reported to the Coroner who held an inquest.
On the 14th a male child was found at the door of R.C. Church. It was still alive, and was taken by Revd. Mother Mary Peter to the Convent.
Crocodiles.—During the month 115 crocodiles and 116 eggs were brought by various persons and rewards have been paid to them.
Prison.—There were four men imprisoned during the month and eighteen prisoners released. There were sixty-nine prisoners serving their sentences in jail at the end of the month, the daily average of whom working was 60—28.
SARIKEI AND BINATANG.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Sarikei and Binatang, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports:—
Court.—Mostly consisted of Cantonese land cases, concerning their boundaries for Tanah Masak.
In the Court Chong Hok Keh and Eu Ong were found guilty of negligence, causing a fire among the gardens in telephone rentis. Claims will be over $2,000.
There were two cases of suicide during the month, one at Sarikei and one at Binatang. Chong Ngong Kieng male, and Aik Choon Hee (f.) respectively, both hanged themselves. In both cases a verdict of suicide while unsound mind was passed.
During the first part of the month the drought still held, and motor tongkang Big Bill was making daily trips up to Bukit Lan, to supply water for the station. Towards the end of the month the drought broke.
There have many fires that started on their own accord but very little damage was done on the whole.
P.W.D.—Repok Road, gravelling, bridging, etc., has been continued during the month.
Bazaar Road.—The present now Bazaar Road was widened during the month, and the 70-feet road for new planning is nearly completed.
The prisoners have been employed for most of the month in making a dam up the Sungei Meradong in view of the Meradong water supply for both stations. They were also employed on the Repok Road.
Trade and Customs.—As usual very little rubber was exported, but a fair amount of pepper was exported during the month, in spite of the low price, the following are the returns for the month.
At Binatang a little pepper was exported but not more than 100 bags or so. Trade here at present relies on the price of rubber.
The Divisional Land Officer, Mr. C. E. Pascoe, reports:-
Mr. Parker, Land Officer, arrived for duty in Binatang and Sarikei on the 21st inst., was met at Sarikei by the Divisional Land Officer on that date, and took over charge of Sarikei and Binatang Districts.
Outstation.—Matu, Daro, Rejang, Paloh, Belawai and Selalang were visited during the month by the Divisional Land Officer. The matter of outstanding quit rent was gone into, and demand notes issued.
It was interesting to note that padi is being planted this year on either side of Mate River practically from the Kuala to Scan, and also along the coast from the Kuala to Bruan Mapal.
Very little new sago is being planted and many complaints of the damage to young trees by bears were made. The introduction of a Government reward for the destruction of this pest, which by all accounts is on the increase, might help to encourage the people in this district to keep the industry of sago going.
Padi Growing.—Every encouragement is being given Chinese to plant padi, and they are responding much more thoroughly than has been the case in the last five years here at any rate. As far as one can tell at present the crop should be a good one.
The Chinese are working in many places, side by side with Dyaks and Malays, but care has been taken to see that their allotments are defined in the presence of the persons whose land they are borrowing before they move in.
It is hoped that both Dyaks and Malays may learn something about working the land instead of scratching it, in this way,—and that a lasting benefit will result from this year's arrangement.
BINATANG AND SARIKEI
The Land Officer, Binatang and Sarikei, Mr. T. E. Parker, reports.—
The number of outstanding applications at Binatang seems fairly great, but as at Sarikei no reliable figures are yet obtainable.
Demand notes for the outstanding quit rent have now been prepared and represent about $860.
There are a number of occupation tickets at this station awaiting delivery and it is proposed to issue completion of title notices as soon as possible next month.
SARIKEI.
There was a large amount of inspectors work awaiting examination, which took some considerable time owing to the lack of plans in the office.
The use of the new daily end monthly application sheets on trial at this station appears to be well understood, and the results give at a glance very useful statistics.
There are some 150 occupation tickets-awaiting delivery, but it is anticipated that the delivery of completion of title notices, now being prepared, will reduce this number during next month.
SIBU.
The Sanitary Inspector, Sibu, Mr. Tan Poh Seong, reports:—	
General.—The Chief Health Officer visited Sibu on the 13th and departed on the 16th to Kanowit, Song and Kapit. He returned on the 18th and departed again on the 19th to Binatang. I accompanied him in the down-river trip and we inspected the sanitary conditions of Binatang, Sarikei and Rejang. On the 21st I was back in Sibu.
The health estimates for the Third Division were prepared and sent to the Resident for approval.
There were 106 immigrants to the Third Division and 81 emigrants from Sibu, according to vaccination certificates issued.
One passenger from Singapore suffering from fever was sent to hospital on arrival.
MUKAH AND OYA.
The District Officer, Mukah and Oya, Mr. P. M. Adams, reports:-
Mr. Waite and thirty coolies returned to Miri. He has left a surveyor and a few coolies in the Ulu and expects to return shortly.
The Resident, accompanied by Messrs. Crocker, Cobbold and the Divisional Medical Officer, arrived from Sibu on the 7th and I accompanied them to Oya on the 11th.
Travelling.— I visited Balingian for a few days towards the end of the month. Abang Mos, probationer Native Officer, visited the Dyaks in Ulu Mukah and reports with few exceptions Dyaks have built and are building long houses. Penghulu Umpoh was ordered to build his house at Nanga Tisok and no houses will be allowed above his.
Land.—Kisun, Land Inspector, went to Balingian in the middle of the month and has commenced demarcating gardens in that district.
P.W.D.—Employment was given to about 250 coolies at 50 cents per day to raise the Bazaar Kampong Road above flooded level, making a new road from the ornamental grounds to seashore to take the place of the old one, which is fast disappearing owing to the eorosion of the river bank. Another gang cut, burnt and weeded the rank grass from a large area of the cattle field, and the Petanak people cut a rentis from the end of the road to the waterworks. The distance is only 500 fathoms but, owing to the approaching rainy season, it was decided not to start making the proposed road. About $2,500 is being circulated in this way and the amount is covered by the 1930 Votes.
Health.—Owing to the cold weather immediately following the long drought there was a certain amount of fever about.
Waterworks.—Owing to the drought and the precarious state of the pumping machinery, rules had to be strictly enforced to prevent wastage of water. The foreman was continually reporting breakdowns but somehow or other a supply of water, though meagre, was maintained. Fifty tons of coal arrived from Sadong by s.s. L'Aubaine.
Prison.—Prisoners averaged 42.1 and were employed on the cattle ground and usual upkeep of grounds, etc.
Naweng escaped on the 24th but was recaptured the same day at Judan and received the usual punishment.
Weather.—The drought broke before the end of the month which was a great relief.
Electrical.—The accounts were in such a state of chaos that a clerk was sent from Sibu to look into them. Certain adjustments have been made but even now the accounting is much too complicated and out of all proportion to what was originally arranged. The Divisional Electrical Engineer, Mr. Clark, visited the Station on the 5th and apparently was just in time to prevent the fly wheel from dropping off. Since then the engine has given no trouble.
Trade.—Continues hopeless but it is reported that there is every likelihood of a large engkabang crop. I intend to apply to the Forest Department to assist in verifying this and in regulating the collection of the nuts in order to avoid the deplorable waste which invariable occurs.
Trade Returns.—Two hundred and sixty-five piculs of gutta jelutong and 260 koyans of raw sago were shipped to Kuching.
OYA AND DALAT.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Oya and Dalat, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports:-
General.—On the 12th the Resident, together with Mr. Crocker, Dr. Hutchison and Mr. Cobbold of the Borneo Company, visited the station.
Mr. W. L. Clark passed through on his way back from Mukah, going up to Dalat on m.s. Kim Chin Soon, on which was the Revd. Father Epping returning from Kuching after being away for three weeks.
Court.—There were no cases during the month at Oya. At Dalat, however, an appeal was registered against the District Court, and coming before the Resident's Court the fine of $122.14 was reduced to $72.14. No other cases are worthy of mention.
Land — Many gardens were marked up during the month both at Oya and Dalat, but the payments for demarcation and quit rent have been very few since, owing to the exceptionally low price of sago, the people find it quite beyond their powers to pay unless they auction a garden and hope that one of the few rich people will make a bid for it.
Marine.—The Government wharf was repaired for $30, this work being necessary owing to erosion by the river. M.L. Nellie has been in good running order.
Rainfall.—The total rainfall for the month was 6. 05 inches, this fall being confined to four consecutive days at the end of the month.
Shipping.—Two motor schooners and four schooners entered and two motor schooners and five schooners cleared during the month.
Trade.—One hundred and twenty-six and a half koyans raw sago, 230 piculs jelutong and 50 piculs para rubber were shipped to Kuching.
The District Officer, Sibu, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports:—
Courts.—Court work during the month has been fairly heavy, most of the cases being Civil claims. There were several cases of breach of Opium Regulations.
Teo Ah Seo was sentenced to nine months' imprisonment under sections 109 and 324, l.P.C.
There were numerous claims for compensation for damage to rubber gardens through burning. No other cases call for comment.
General.—Cases of petty theft are reported to the police every day, but it is very difficult to obtain proof and convict in any of these cases.
During the month a large number of Dyaks have been paying in tax which is very much overdue. Heads of areas reported having large numbers of unemployed in their respective areas and on 30th instant, a demonstration of unemployed took place before the Government Offices.
The demonstrators were well fed and well clothed and gave no indication of being in want. Most of them refused such work as was offered and no more has been heard of them to date.
The alterations to the offices were completed during the month and the new arrangements have proved entirely satisfactory.
Reports of a heavy illipe nut crop in the Kanowit and Julau have been received. Natives are very optimistic and anticipate a good crop.
The Divisional Engineer, Third Division, Mr. J, W. Whiteside, reports:-
Sibu Buildings.—The five new shophouses in Channel Road are approaching completion and drains are being laid to them.
The alterations to the District Office are completed. The quarters for the sanitary inspector in Green Road are nearly completed. A block of eight dressers' quarters are being erected near the hospital.
The foundations, framework and galvanized iron roof and walls to the new arrack factory are almost completed.
Wharves.—The Chamois Wharf has been damaged by ships larger than it was designed for and is now being repaired. A galvanized iron wire mesh fence is being erected along the whole wharf front.
Roads.—The widening of Mission Road is nearly completed. The widening and raising of the road from the Fort to the Long Bridge and the Kampong Pulo Road is in progress.
Daro, Matu, Rejang.—The New Court House and quarters at Daro is completed and repairs are being carried out to the police barracks.
The large wells are being constructed at Rejang for the Health Department.
The Matu Jail is approaching completion.
Our Sibu Letter.
SIBU,
20th September, 1930.
DEAR EUSTACE,
The approach of Race Week has affected the Station in the usual way. Everyone has been sitting up and talking horses, and our candidates have nearly all left for training. Local owners here seem very optimistic, but by this time Eustace, dear old boy, you'll know more than they do, realizing, as I do, your terrible habit of early rising in order to sneak off to the course and study form. Keep the real dark one up your sleeve, though, so that we can land a wad together.
To change the subject, there have been lots of alterations to the roads on the Island just lately, and people are complaining that it is now more difficult to get home from the Club o'nights than it used to be. The well-worn tracks and land marks have been altered; where before was a ditch is now hard ground, and one either bites one's tongue with the jolt or else nearly breaks one's neck finding a ditch were all was safe before. Sic volvere Pacurs as the Latin poet said, and I bet they did spin round him now and again as he went home late from the Palatine Arms. Talking of Ancient Rome, have you heard the one about the Pro-Consul who turned up at an Eight-day banquet without his feather? No! not here, Eustace! The P.M.G. might be shocked. I'll tell you in a quiet corner of the Club over a ginger ale in Race Week.
The outstanding event of the month has been the re-opening of the Bowling Alley. The Club was very dead during the close season while the alterations were being made, and the Secretary and Treasurer got really worried over under-consumption. However, the alley is now open again and all is well. Now, they tell me, it is practically the same length as yours in Kuching, Eustace, the difference being only a matter or inches. The foot-fault rule has been introduce and we are all at present very self-conscious about our feet. Honestly, when I went to face the music felt as though my beetle-crushers reached to Kanowit. One has to go for it now, Eustace. The old pins take some pushing off their balance. No doubles off the back wall. Watch us in the Race Week bowling handicap!
I am not going to waste any more time on you now as 1 shall be seeing you so soon.
Cheers, old horse, RUPERT.
P.S.—Our local omithologist sighted the first Snipe of the season on September 13th, and I immediately expelled the mason bees out of the old musket in readiness for the coming season. Hope they'll be sporting and fly a bit slower this year. Toodle oo.—R.
Fourth Division News.
August, 1930.
Extracts from Fourth Divisional Reports for August, 1930. by Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident:—
General.—On the morning of the 8th the S.Y. Seabelle II anchored in Miri roads with His Excellency the British Agent for Sarawak, Sir Cecil Clementi and Lady Clementi on board. At 3 a.m., Mr. P. A. B. Me Kerron, British Resident, Brunei, Mr. F. F. Marriot, Assistant General Manager, Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, and myself went on board. His Excellency, accompanied by his Private Secretary, Mr. A. Hyde, immediately landed at the Customs Wharf where he was met by Government Officers, Mr. A. H. Noble, General Manager of Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, other principal Malays and Chinese Towkays. His Excellency then inspected the Guard of Honour of Sarawak Rangers under Mr. D. A. Murphy, Assistant Superintendent of Police, Miri. His Excellency was then shown round the Field by Messrs. Marriot and Haley and proceeded to Lutong where he was shown over the Refinery by Messrs. Wood and Pracy.
1 then took leave of His Excellency who proceeded by car to Kuala Belait, accompanied by the British Resident, Brunei, with the intention of making the journey to Brunei by car in one day.
Lady Clementi and Aide-de-Camp Captain Sillitoe, R.M., also landed at Miri and were shown round the Field by the District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson and Mrs. Aplin. Lady Clementi stayed for lunch at the Residency, returning to the Seabelle at 2 p.m., when she set sail for Brunei.
Early in the morning of the 9th H.H.M.Y. Maimuna arrived with His Highness the Tuan Muda, the Chief Secretary, Mr. F. F. Boult, the Dayang Anne and Mrs. Boult on board. 
The two latter landed for a short stay in Miri and left again for Kuching by the Maimuna, which returned from Limbang on the 13th.
I proceeded to Baram on the 1st for the trial of Tambik, a Dyak from the Tru, for the murder of Achang of the same house. The assessors pronounced a verdict of guilty which was later confirmed by the Supreme Court. The execution was carried out later on in the month by a squad of Sarawak Rangers under the Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson.
Jamaludin, a Malay, was sentenced to 3 years under two charges of Courts Order, Section 457.
I returned to Miri on 4th inspecting the new Police and Customs Stations at Kuala Baram on the way. These two stations should considerably lessen the chances of unauthorized persons pro-ceeding to and from Miri and Belait.
All padi planters have taken advantage of the fine weather to burn, and there were one or two alarms of fire in the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, Concession area. 
From everywhere I hear that the engkabang is blossoming very profusely and in some districts the fruit has formed and has been collected. The quantity is negligible and will be used by the natives for their own domestic purposes.
According to the natives the signs for a bumper crop at the beginning of next year are very propitious.
The Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Captain C. D Le Gros Clark, and Mrs. Clark, arrived by the Auby on the 19th returning to Kuching again on 24th. Captain Le Gros Clark looked into all matters concerning Labour and Chinese Affairs.
By the same boat Mr. D'Arcy Weatherbe arrived hoping to catch the Kajang for B.N.B., but for the first time in a thousand the Kajang sailed for north just as the Auby was arriving. I was able to communicate with the Resident, Fifth Division, to allow him the use of the Government launch from Lawas to Weston, and so Mr. D'Arcy Weatherbe proceeded by the Auby on the following day, and I have since heard that he caught the Kajang at Jesselton by ten minutes.
The District Officer, Bintulu, reports that he has loaned to the Foochows the sum of $3,700 and that they have commenced work on their farms. They have signed a contract to repay this loan by building a road through their Concession at the rate of 50 cents a fathom.
The Brunei Police reported that they had arrested a Chinese answering to the description of an escaped prisoner. This was later confirmed and he has been handed over to the Police at Miri. This man is suspected of being concerned in several burglaries in which Lee Man Choi was arrested and convicted and also suspected of being armed.
The Band of the Sarawak Rangers, which His Highness the Tuan Muda has kindly allowed to visit Miri, has been playing to crowded audiences at the clubs and cinema.	
Wan Taha reports from Baram that two prisoners escaped whilst working in the gang, but one was captured the following night. Unfortunately Then Chen Hen (Sambas), who was recently transferred here from Sibu is still at large and the latest reports of him are that he has gone over into Brunei.
Wan Taha proceeded to Long Lama to supervise the collecting of the birdsnests. He reports that the ravages to the nests by bats is becoming serious. The total weight of collection in April was 203 catties whilst on August it only amounted to 80 catties. I cannot think of any way of destroying these pests, but have suggested that the whole village of Long Palai should turn out together with sticks and nets and make war on them. Thefts of birdsnests still continue and there is a case pending where some nests were found in a Chinese trading boat, which were received by the trader before permission was given to make the collection.
BINTULU.
The District Officer, Bintulu, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports:—
Courts.—Court work was light during the month.
Noh was charged by his wife under section 336 I.P.C. and the case was adjourned for reference to the Resident owing to its unusual nature.
Mambang, Dyak, was sentenced to 3 months R.L under section 337 I.P.C. Tuai Rumah Jangu was fined one picul for breach of local order re tuba fishing.
No other cases call for special mention. 
General.—Mr. Goodall, of the Agricultural Department, arrived by s.s. Margaret on 5th and proceeded to Sebauh. I went to Sebauh the following day when the head Foochows were interviewed and their proposed farming lands examined and pointed out to Mr. Goodall, and a meeting of Foochows was held that night. 
The next morning some of the concession gardens were examined and I left for Bintulu the same afternoon, Mr. Goodall remaining at Sebauh.
A Chinese prisoner, Lee Man Choi, in irons, who was formerly sent from Miri made good his escape but was-later recaptured.
Mr. Birt, of the Public Works Department, who arrived here in July in conjunction with the Water-works Scheme returned to Kuching per s.s. Auby on 26th. Other visitors to the station during the month were Mr. Hanson on 13th—14th and again on 26th —27th. Mrs. Borton on 26th—27th. Captain and Mrs. Le Gros Clark on 18th—19th and 25th—26th. Mr. D'Arcy Weatherbe on 18th—19th and Mr. Nadig on 26th. The latter making agreement with the Bintulu Sawmill for delivery of billian to Messrs. Gammons at Singapore.
Public Works Department.—The prisoners averaged 15.73 during the month.
The gang was first employed on the Tanjong Batu road and the ditches, etc., in the Government compound. The second half of the month they were employed at Kedurong with carpenter Mamoh demolishing the old lighthouse and quarters and passengers Rest House, and building new quarters for the lighthouse keepers. This work was almost completed by the end of the month.
The Waterworks Scheme is progressing favourably and a further 500 lengths of pipe and joints were received per s.s. Auby and delivered at Nyabau to be stretched out from the site of dam towards Tanjong Batu. The masons completed the foundation of the dam and cuttings and tunnelling progressed satisfactory. The pipe fitters were kept busy and tire surveyors were employed making the line for the pipe, etc. The tank fitters on complection of the tank returned to Kuching. A considerable amount of local labour has been required and employed.
Rainfall.—'The first part of the month the drought which has lasted since the middle of December still held out but towards the end of the month the weather broke and a considerable amount of rain fell. This was a great relief. Total rainfall for the month amounted to 13.44.
Miri.
The Acting District Officer, Miri, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports:—
Courts.—There were no cases worthy of special mention.	
District Court.—Criminal eight cases heard. Civil ten cases heard. Fines and fees amounted to $229.50.
Magistrate's Court.—Criminal 29 cases heard. Civil 25 cases heard. Fines and fees amounted to $457.50. 	
Prisoners.—Averaged 32 during the month and were engaged on mowing and sanitary Work, etc.
Municipal.—The new kampong water supply for standpipes and house supply was turned on from the 1st and a test meter erected on a pipe to determine water rate.
A rough census was also taken of the kampong population and it was found that the consumption of water for the month per head was about two tons. This will probably increase if wells are closed as well water was being used in addition to the pipe water.
Nyok Foh, assistant sanitary inspector, arrived on the 19th.
Fifth Division News.
August, 1930.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports for August, 1930, by Mr. E. O. Bruce, Acting Resident:—
General.—Local unemployment, though not great, has probably been the cause of increase in number of thefts reported. The police patrols in the bazaar at night were inaugurated for a period, with good effect. Weekly instruction has been given to Sarawak Rangers and Police Squads in target practise, snapping, etc. Messrs. Tregaskis and Southwell arrived from Sungei Prangga, Mission Station on the 6th.
I proceeded that evening to Brooketon to meet His Highness the Tuan Muda, who arrived in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna, accompanied by Chief Secretary Mr. F. F. Boult and Air. N. E. Hughes. The following morning His Excellency the High Commissioner. Sir Cecil Clementi and Staff arrived from Brunei, and a conference regarding certain Inter-State questions took place on board His Excellency's S.Y. Seabelle II. His Highness the Tuan Muda and party then proceeded to Limbang, where His Highness received a very warm welcome. On 10th His Excellency and Lady Clementi and Staff together with British Resident, Brunei, Mr. P. A. B. McKerron, paid an informal visit to Limbang. returning to Brunei the same day. His Highness the Tuan Muda and party sailed on the 12th for Kuching via Miri, after paying an informal visit to Brunei en route. Messrs. J. R. Combe, Acting Assistant District Officer, and R. G. Aikman, Superintendent of Customs, Fourth and Fifth Divisions, also sailed, the formation sick leave, the latter returning to Miri having completed a tour of inspection of the Divisional Customs Stations. A stock of Pyrene Fire Extinguishers hits been procured and installed in main Government buildings.
A Brunei Police football team were invited on Sunday the 17th and routed the local team. It is hoped to turn the tables on them in the near future. Mr. R. N. Baron, Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, visited Limbang from Lawns in connection with new road trace to Brunei. I regret to report that Usop bin Jong Kong, of the Survey Department, died of fever, on the 2nd at Trusan. Mr. Morice, Cadet, accompanied by Datu Haji Muasili, left on the 23rd for a visit of inspection up the Panderuan river. They were unable to proceed beyond Penghulu Bat's house owing to scarcity of water, and prevalence of logs. Mr. Hutton, Public Works Department, Brunei, arrived on the 25th and new road trace matters were discussed:
There has recently been a good deal of sickness from fever among the Wireless Department at Lawas, causing considerable inconvenience. On 27th I proceeded to Lawns, Trusan and Sundar
Districts and was still away at the end of the month. En route I identified another escaped Chinese prisoner from Miri, who had been arrested by Brunei Police. Lawas Bazaar shopkeepers complained of the present trade slump, and inquired if Government would consider loans at interest, on the security of their premises. I did not hold out much hope, but requested a written petition in detail, which has not been forthcoming.
Captain Matheson, s.s. Margaret, reported on the 30th that he had sounded a small uncharted coral reef on the true right bank of the Kuala Limbang. He is submitting his report direct to headquarters. Total rainfall registered during the month was 5.92 inches.
Court.—Theft reports continued frequently during the month, and clues point to some habitual and well-practised offender. A suspected foreigner is mm on remand pending further investigations. A case of arson was reported from up river by Belulok and Tuai Rumah Bantar, and writs were issued. Balan, a Dyak from Third Division, was banished by the Brunei Government from the Temburong District, where he had been asserting himself. He was returned to Sibu via Kuching, together with his family. Cases at Lawas, Trusan and Sundar were dealt with during my visit. An apparent case of incest occured between a Malay and his daughter at Sundar, but they absconded when summoned, and their whereabouts is at present unknown. A search is therefore being made.
P. W. D.—The usual routine work has been carried out by the prisoner gang. The spring water inpending dam below Sungei Poyan reservoir was put in use at beginning of the month. Widening and surfacing of Sungei Poyan Road continues satisfactorily, as also the building of the Forest Ranger's new bungalow. The latter should be occupied within a month, when the Forest Department Staff transfers from Lawas. For the first time I was able to drive a small car the whole length of the Pandam Road, on the 18th, a distance of 8 ¼ miles.	
A severe landslide at the back of the bazaar was averted just in time. Heavy rain after the recent drought had filtered through several deep vertical cracks, and a fall was imminent. Work progresses with the Lawas-Trusan Road, but the contractor is experiencing difficulty with the steep gradient at the 9th mile.	
Prisons.—The average daily number of prisoners was 26. Health was good, and work satisfactory though slow.
I.and and Agriculture.—Attempts at land grabbing in Ulu Panderuan were dealt with, also land disputes between some of the subsidised pepper planters on Panderuan Road Reserve. The quarrels immediately subsided when the mandor's authority was upheld and the mischief makers threatened with return to the Division whence they came.
In view of the probability of a prolonged rubber depression, natives were warned to increase their padi planting activities. It is gratifying to note that considerably larger areas than last year are now being prepared for the purpose. An important agreement was reached on the 10th between the Sarawak and Brunei Governments regarding the Limau Manis line,—the Inter-State Boundary, which crosses padi and buffaloe-raising areas. It is interesting to note that Dusun tobacco, in preference to the Siamese or Chinese variety, is largely imported into this Division. $1,000 revenue was realised during the second quarter 1930, by import duty on the former.
Medical and Health.—Fever has been prevalent in Lawas and Trusan, also a certain amount of dysentery, no doubt owing to the recent drought, otherwise reports have been normal.
Limbang Dispensary.—Nominal register of patients 75. Attendances during the month 110.
Monopolies.-—5,655 packets of chandu were issued in Limbang during the month.