SATURDAY, FEBRUARY 1st, 1930. Births. FENWICK.—At “B.M.K.," Kuching, on the 19th instant, to Mr. and Mrs. Charles Fenwick, a daughter. MIDDLEMAS.—At the General Hospital, Kuching, on the 23rd instant, to Mr. and Mrs. N. A. Middlemas, a daughter.
Suara Sarawak. January. WE much regret to record the death, on the 8th instant in the General Hospital Singapore, of Mr. R. H. P. Langton—a member of the Sarawak Civil Service. An obituary notice will be found in another of our columns. ON Wednesday, 8th January, an At Home was given by the Seventh Day Adventist Mission at their school at the 3rd mile Rock Road, when His Highness the Tuan Muda, the Dayang Anne, the Director of Education, and a number of friends, and relatives of the pupils assembled in the school hall where an interesting programme of seventeen items was presented by the pupils of the school. The school which was originally opened in 1926 has now 3 teachers and 84 pupils. The grounds were tastefully decorated with Chinese lanterns. The Annual Report of their Mission will be found in another part of our issue. ON the 11th instant, Mr. and Mrs. Tait entertained, with cheery hospitality, a party of over twenty of the tiny tots from the Convent. Seated on floor cushions around the room, each furnished with a paper bag in which to secrete those of the luscious morsels with which “Little Mary” was unable to deal, the small guests enjoyed themselves vastly. After a photograph taken in the garden, a move was made to a darkened room in which an artistic Christmas tree, covered with multicoloured lights and weighted with many gifts, brought the fun to an end and doubtless left an aftermath of pleasant recollections. EIGHTY-EIGHT years ago (1842), on 10th January, the first Code of Laws in Sarawak was promulgated by Sir James Brooke. THE 79th Anniversary occurred on the 22nd instant, of the consecration of St. Thomas’ Church, Kuching (1851), by the Rt. Rev. Daniel Wilson, D.D., Bishop of Calcutta and Metropolitan of India. Five years later Dr. Wilson consecrated the present Cathedral in Singapore. This is an interesting link with our Reigning House for Dr. Wilson who was consecrated, in 1832 and died in 1858—was a second cousin of Sir James Brooke, since his grandmother Ann, who was married to Daniel West (a trustee of Whitefield) was the eldest sister of Capt. Robert Brooke, the grandfather of Sir James. DURING the year 1929, there were 5,482 Chinese arrivals at, and 4,768 departures from Kuching. ONE would have thought that the romantic State of Sarawak, dreaming out its days in the lap of Bornean circumstance, would have been too far from the beaten track to have frequent distant connexions with the world outside. But the tentacles of fate stretch far, and we hear that Major Arthur H. Bathurst—who with Mrs. Bathurst spent a month in Kuching about a year ago, on a visit to their son in the Borneo Company—has been appointed Military Secretary to his brother, Lord Bledisloe, who takes up the appointment of Governor-General of New Zealand. Congratulations and good wishes to the charming couple. We have also to felicitate the Head of St. Thomas’ School— the Rev. Father Hollis—whose brother Sir Alfred C. Hollis, K.C.M.G., C.B.E., formerly British Resident at Zanzibar, has just been appointed Governor and Commander in Chief of Trinidad and Tobago. The Rev. Father will have started on home leave before we go to press—a pleasant holiday to him. WE note that a 4th and much enlarged edition of the Orders and Regulations relating to Ports and Shipping, and Trade and Customs, is now in the press. This volume, which can be procured for $2, will be of very great convenience to the public in that it renders accessible many scattered sources—a feat on which Mr. H. M. Calvert the Commissioner of Trade and Customs, is to be congratulated. MR. R. E. Holttum, the Director of the Botanic Gardens at Singapore, paid a short visit to Kuching on the 20th instant, accompanied by his wife. He is advising on the various trees, shrubs, and other plants which have yet to be installed in the Museum Grounds, in order to convert them into a small Botanic Garden of interest both to local residents and to our visitors. WORK in the Museum Gardens progresses steadily. The private road through the grounds for the convenience of visitors, and for the parking of residents’ cars on days of the band, will be finished about the end of the month. The whale has been comfortably housed in her new quarters up the hill. The Chinese Refreshment Kiosk is well advanced, and the exterior decoration, and paving of the parterre, should be finished by the end of February. The Sociable Circle, and the Japanese Bridge, are completed. The foundations and approaches of the Aquarium building are finished. The Aviary is half completed. There only remain :—the Fountain; the Swan-pond; the Children’s Shelter; the rebuilding of the Band-stand; and the fencing of the property, some of which items, are already in progress. A school concert was held at St. Teresa’s Convent on Monday, 20th January, and Tuesday, 21st January. An interesting and well performed programme of 7 items of vocal and instrumental music, and wand drill followed by an Operetta in Three Acts (Beauty and the Beast), were presented to a large and appreciative audience of friends and well wishers amongst whom we noticed. His Highness the Tuan Muda, the Dayang Anne, the Chief Secretary and Mrs. Boult, Mrs. Kortright, etc. Mother Helen and the school staff are to be congratulated on the results obtained. THE Government Education Department started a new lease of life at the beginning of January, when Mr. Jacques became a whole--time Director. Signs of activity are already obvious, which augur well for the future of this important department, under a very keen and sympathetic Director such as Mr. Jacques. KUCHING has been in the grip of an epidemic, for the past month or two, which does not yet show signs of abating. The cases seem to have been confined to the ladies of the immunity; but the Health and Medical authorities do not view the situation with any alarm. OUR congratulations to Mr. and Mrs. C. Fenwick on the birth of a daughter on the 19th instant. Congratulations also to Mr. and Mrs. Middlemas to whom a daughter was born on the 23rd instant, and to Mr. and Mrs. B. J. C. Spurway to whom a son was born on the 27th instant: and to Mr. and Mrs. Howard Smith to whom a son was born on the 1st February. Long life and happiness to the new wee pilgrims. Mr. E. H. P. Bengtsson has been granted long leave from 3rd January; and Mr. G. M. Allman and Mr. J. W. Whiteside reported their return from long leave on the 6th and 13th instant respectively. WE are informed that the Chinese community of Kuching is contemplating the inauguration of a Chinese General Chamber of Commerce, for which purpose they will occupy the building formerly used as the Chinese Court, which has been graciously granted them by His Highness the Rajah. We also understand that the number of members will exceed 100. We wish them every success. THE Health Museum at the Health Office continues to interest the public. It was opened on 9th November, 1929, and, by the end of the year, 490 visitors had inspected it, of whom 270 were Chinese, and 174 Malays. Miss G. M. Looker left on 25th January, after a fortnight’s visit to her niece Mrs. Hayward. We understand that she shortly hopes to pay a visit to Java. OUR congratulations to our Miri friends on safely tiding over the first year of life of the Mirage and issuing their fifth number this month which admirably maintains its standard of excellence. An autograph letter from His Highness the Rajah forms an appreciative and stimulating addition to its contents. THE prize giving of St. Alary’s School took place on 24th January, at the Sarawak Union Club building in McDougall Road. The chair was taken by the Right Rev. Bishop Danson, and the proceedings began by the reading of a report by the Principal Miss Andrews on the work of the school for the last fifteen months. After a few appropriate remarks by the Bishop, the Dayang Anne gracefully gave away the prizes, and received thereafter a bouquet presented by a small scholar. Thanks were returned by the Ven. the Archdeacon and acknowledged happily by the Dayang Anne after which the proceedings terminated. The prize essay won by Voon Khiuk Kiong will be found in another part of our issue. FROM Sibu we are creditably informed that a local Mission school examination was responsible for the question: “Why is it that the sun never sets on the British Empire,” to which one canny pupil responded: “Because they cannot be trusted in the dark!” Another scholar was of the opinion that a man could not marry his godmother because she would be too old! KUCHING can also produce a story for, when transcribing a recent examination paper in Hygiene dealing with weekly anti annual birth-rates, etc., the amanuensis was responsible for causing the examiner to say: “What is the difference between a weekly birth rate and an awkward birth rate!” WE wish the recent genial Editor of this Gazette a pleasant time in his new appointment. Already, when the Printing Office is somewhat insistently calling for “copy,” we have devoutly wished that the Simanggang Road were completed!! May our readers forgive many future deficiencies! REUTER, of the 23rd instant, announces the death of Lord Esher in his 78th year. All the inhabitants of the State of Sarawak, and the personal friends of Her Highness the Ranee will offer their sympathy to Her Highness on the loss of her father. THE Medical Department would like to express its thanks to the kind friends who have sent welcome gifts of flowers, books and magazines to the General Hospital. 
Obituary. It is with great regret that we have to record the death of Mr. Roger Hugh Pakenham Langton on Tuesday, 7th January, at the General Hospital, Singapore. Mr. Langton, who was born on 24th March, 1905, was the only child of the Rev. Hugh Banastre Langton, Vicar of Rolvenden, Cranbrook, Kent. He was educated at Charterhouse, and later took his B.A. at Jesus College, Cambridge. Appointed as a Cadet in the Sarawak Civil Service on 30th November, 1926, he was drafted to the Second Division in the following month, and all his service was spent at Simanggang. Unfortunately he contracted typhoid fever, and was admitted to the General Hospital at Kuching in the middle of September. After a long illness borne with characteristic fortitude, his passage was booked for home by the ss. Rajputana, due to leave Singapore on the 9th January. Dr. Hutchison, Jnr., went with him to Singapore, and Miss Tait was to have accompanied him home, but, unfortunately he succumbed to heart complications at the Singapore General Hospital and died on Tuesday, 7th January, being buried at Bidadari Cemetery on the 8th instant at 8 a.m. Wreaths were sent by His Highness the Rajah, by the parents of the deceased, and by the Officers of the Civil Service. Our deep sympathy is extended to his parents in their sorrow; and the Sarawak Service is the poorer for the loss of an officer of the best type—conscientious clean-living, and intelligent—who had endeared himself to all those with whom he came in contact. 
Death of Lord Esher. The death was announced by Reuter on the 23rd instant of the 2nd Viscount Esher, P C., G.C.B., G.C.V O., in his 78th year. He was born on 30th June, 1852, and succeeded to the title in 1899. He was the son of the 1st Baron and Viscount—a former Solicitor-General, a Lord Justice of Appeal, and Master of the Rolls. Lord Esher was a D. L. for Berkshire; Deputy Constable and Lieutenant-Governor of Windsor; and sat in the House, of Commons from 1880 — 1885. He was a close personal friend of Queen Victoria, King Edward and King George. He was an intimate of Lord Kitchener during War and the diary he kept in those years is stated to contain information of the highest historical importance. It has been deposited at the British Museum and is not to be opened until 1981. His literary work included the Joint Editorship of Queen Victoria's Letters. In 1879, he married Eleanor Frances Weston, R.R.C.—a Lady of Justice of Saint John of Jerusalem—who was the daughter of the late Sylvain Van de Weyer, the Belgian Minister at the Court of Saint James. His family consisted of two sons and two daughters—one of the latter being married to His Highness the Rajah in 1911, and for our Ranee, much sympathy will be felt. He is succeeded in the Peerage by his elder son—the Honorable Oliver Sylvain Baliol Brett, who was born in 1881; and married in 1912 Antoinette, daughter of August Heckscher of New York; and the heir to the peerage now, becomes the new Peer’s son—the Honorable Lionel Gordon Baliol Brett—who was born in 1913. 
Notes on Tropical Gardening No. 1. INTRODUCTORY REMARKS. “A Garden is a lovesome thing, God wot! Rose plot, Fringed pool, Ferned grot- The veriest school Of peace; and yet the fool ‘Contends that God it not- Not God! in Gardens! when the eve is cool? Nay, but I have a sign; 'Tis very sure God walks in mine.” (THOMAS EDWARD BROWN.) A good many years ago, the writer’s son—then a youngster at a preparatory school in Bath— brought home with some interest an acorn rooted in a small bottle of water, which had been given him by his schoolmistress. The future oak was duly planted in the garden and its career was watched with attention; but ten years later, it was only about six or seven feet high! On the other hand, about three years ago, I planted a little seedling of an Albizzia tree in my garden at Singapore; and, on returning from leave ten months later, lo! a fine sturdy tree nearly 18 feet high! This is but an example of nature’s generosity in the tropics, compared with that in temperate climates. This wonderful vitality and cell proliferation in the vegetable world is one of the marvels of the tropics, and is, to the garden lover, a source of continual joy. You sow seeds and in three or four days they come up, and in three or four weeks they are in bloom! There is of course another side to the picture! Where plants grow quickly, there also do weeds and vegetable parasites grow just as quickly, and we also have to contend with animal pests such as: white-ants, centipedes, scorpions, and many beetles, wire-worms and caterpillars which do not loom on the horticultural horizon in the lands of the gentle wood-louse and earwig and aphis. The object of this series of short practical papers is to try and help the amateur gardener in an environment about which literary help is sadly deficient; and perhaps also to encourage those to whom gardening is a sealed book, and who are thus deprived of one of the most fascinating pleasures in the world which gives even more healthy exercise than does the chasing of an elusive ball, and confers the richest rewards in a feast of form, and colour, and perfume, which can brighten the entire outlook on life. BOOKS ON GARDENING. These are as numerous as are cockroaches in most ice-chests; but, unfortunately, the great majority deal with the culture of flowers, vegetable, fruit, as applicable to temperate climates. The really indispensable book for the Tropical Amateur Gardener who takes the thing seriously is a book called "Tropical Gardening and Planting” written by H. F. Macmillan, the Superintendent of the Royal Botanic Gardens in Ceylon. It is published by the “Times of Ceylon Co., Ltd.,” Colombo. It might aptly be called the “Tropical Horticulturalist’s Bible” for it gives botanical names of, and notes on, almost every flower, vegetable, fruits, shrubs, and trees which grow in these parts of Asia and is profusely illustrated. The third edition was published in 1925; but unfortunately the price (25 Rupees) is high—though it is well worth it. Another book that came out a year or two ago is called: "A Garden Book for Malaya" written by Kathleen Gough, wife of Major Gough—a planter for some years at Kajang, near Kuala Lumpur. It is published by H. F. & G. Witherby of London, and is rather highly priced at 16/-. It contains much useful information written by a true garden lover, who knew what she was writing about. It is illustrated by about a dozen full-page photographs of pretty garden scenes and arrangement of beds, but has no series of individual plates intended for identification purposes, nor is it detailed enough (in most instances) to give an amateur a guide to what he should do in everyday circumstances, nor when and how he should do it. There is a small and cheaper book, for the rather less ambitious gardener, and that is: "Gardening in Malaya" by E. St. Clair Morford, of Sungei Siput, Perak. It is a short collection of notes that appeared at different times in the Times of Malaya and was published in 1926 by Charles Grenier & Co., Ltd., of Ipoh, Perak. Although rather sketchy occasionally, it is quite a useful volume, from which many valuable and practical hints can be culled. The standard book on Indian horticulture is: "Firminger's Gardening in India." I have not got a copy of this book, but I understand that it is still a standard book, after a healthy life of 60 years or more, but it should be remembered that, being nearer the equator, our seasons are not as marked as in India. The seedsmen Messrs. Sutton & Sons, publish a book entitled: “Vegetables and Flowers from Seeds in Tropical and Subtropical Countries." It is somewhat universal for local use. A short time ago it was out of print but presumably will be republished. Subsidiary to these kind of textbooks are articles which appear from time to time in the Malaya Agricultural Bulletins, as, for instance:—An article by A. W. Anderson, on Ornamental Climbers, which appeared in April, 1911; on the Growing of Vegetables in Malaya, by Lewton Brain—October, 1911; Lambourue’s Ornamental Flowering Shrubs (August, 1912), and Ornamental Climbing Plants by the same author (April—May, 1913); Notes on Terrestrial Orchids of Malaya, by J. M. Milson—July, 1918, etc. PERIODICALS. A number of weekly journals devoted to gardening are published in England; but unfortunately the point of view is largely that of a cold climate rather than of the tropics. Amongst others we have:— Garden Life 13s. per annum. Gardening 13s. per annum. The Gardener’s Chronicle 30s. 4d. per annum. Garden Work 8s. l0d. per annum. Amateur Gardening 13s. 6d. per annum. If it is wished to subscribe to a weekly garden paper, and the above journals are not known to our trader, I would suggest that one copy of each be secured through a home newsagent, before deciding. There used also to be an excellent paper called The Garden published by the "Country Life” people. This has now, however, been incorporated with that delightful monthly magazine, Homes and Gardens. SEEDSMEN. One of the great problems for the tropical amateur in this part of the world, is to know where and when to get the seeds which are going to beautify their gardens. It is most useful to have a collection of Catalogues from the leading seedsmen, which they are always, glad to supply free of charge. There are, of course, seedsmen innumerable, but I propose only to give the names of those who are most widely known or most useful to residents out here. Great Britain. Sutton & Sons, Beading. Their annual Abridged Horticultural Catalogue is always useful. Carters of Raynes Park, London, S.W. 20; with branches at 134, Regent Sreet, W. 1; and 129, High Holboru, W.C. 1; and 115, Cheapside, E.C. 2; and 53A, Queen Victoria Street, E.C.4. Ryder & Son of St. Albans, who, in addition to their annual catalogues, publish from time to time superb coloured reproductions of Miss Winifred Walker’s academy pictures of floral subjects, at 2/6 each. Two of these—“Wall-flowers” and “The Pewter Pot”—are exquisitely beautiful studies well worthy of framing. Barr & Sons of King Street, Convent Garden, W.C.2, who have their seed trial grounds at Taplow, Bucks. Italy. The best known seedsman is:—M. Herb, via Trivio, 24—36, Naples, whose catalogue will often prove useful. The private paradise of a garden at La Mortola, near Ventimiglia at the junction of the French and Italian Rivieras, gvies free seeds by the courtesy of the owner—Mr. Cecil Hanbury, M.P., F.L.S. An annual list of the seeds collected is issued for Private Circulation only and the list may be had from my friend, Mr. S. W. McLeod Braggins, who is the Superintendent of this wonderful garden. Holland. One of the many Dutch bulb growers, who always gives satisfaction is:—John Telkamp whose botanic gardens are at Hillegom, Holland. Australia. The annual catalogue of Arthur Yates & Co., Ltd., of 184, Sussex Street, Sidney, N.S.W., is always a welcome visitor. U.S.A. Henry A. Dreer of 1306, (Spring Garden Street, Philadelphia, Pa., has issued an immense Annual “Garden Book” for the past 91 years. It is beautifully illustrated and very full. India. The Globe Nursery—proprietors Roy Bros. & Co., of 6/5, Ramdhone Mitter Lane, Shyambazar, Calcutta, very well known for their flower and vegetable seeds. So also are Messrs. Seth & Co., of the Fernia Nursery, Calcutta. For orchid catalogues in the East we have those of :— William & Richard of the Alexandra Gardens, Colombo; and the Chandra Nursery at Sikkim, Bengal. AUTHORITIES. One of the most celebrated of societies whose business deals with garden matters, is: the “Royal Horticultural Society,” of which the Exhibition Hall and Offices are at Vincent Square, Westminster, and their gardens and school at Wisley, Ripley, Surrey. Their wonderful exhibitions at various appropriate times of the year should never be missed by any flower lover who may be able to attend. The Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew are, of course, World-famed, and much can be learnt from their officials, who are at all times glad to give their assistance and advice. It is always well, however, to seek the advice of any Botanic Garden authority nearer home, if diagnosis or help is required. Our nearest garden is that at Singapore, where the Director, Mr. Holttum, will always be glad to help. He publishes lists at intervals, of seeds and plants which the gardens have for sale. This must close our brief introductory article. It is hoped to include each month an article on some different subject connected with the garden. Inquiries will be welcomed; and contributions of the experiences of our readers, both successes and failures, are solicited. F.R.H.S. 
Dulce Ridentem. Across the years—so slowly fled— Dainty Pierrette, I see the curls which framed your head— Dear rippling waves about your head, Pierrette, Dreamy with gold, gleaming with red— Play in a breeze long dead, Long dead, Pierrette. Your laughter floats across the years, Joyous Pierrette- Above the clamour of the years— From two red lips that laughed at fears, Pierrette. And two blue eyes that knew no tears Shine through the mist which clears,  Sometimes, Pierrette! In that fair garden where you lie So still, Pierrette, Where roses bloom and roses die, My heart lies buried: but I try— Pierrette— Ah! can you tell how much I try— Bravely to wait till I See my Pierrette. 
Wanted: A Tree Sense. A most interesting article on this subject appeared in a recent Spectator over the name Richard St. Barbe Baker. The matter is of such general importance to every country that we quote extracts at some length:- “In olden days the necessity of trees was more obvious than it is to-day. Oaks were in demand to provide the wooden walls of old England, and even before those times a kind of Income Tax was assessed by the pannage provided from the acorns of the oak. "When oak was in demand for the Navy it was regarded as the patriotic thing to grow trees as a national defence, and retired admirals would take their country walks with pockets full of acorns which they proudly planted in the hedgerows of the countryside in the hope that they would grow into trees worthy of providing bulwarks of defence. “In the Great War, when ships were urgently wanted to import foodstuffs, we were driven back upon our own woodlands, which were often ruthlessly sacrificed to meet the pressing need of timber for war purposes and provide our mines with pit props when oilier sources of supply were curtailed. The War has taught our sylviculturists that in future tree-planting must be done as a national insurance. But the fact is that the world’s supply of softwoods is dwindling, and the few remaining virgin forests, are becoming more and more inaccessible. The cost of timber is largely controlled by the cost of transport, and as the timber exploiters have to go further afield for supplies prices will obviously soar. “Again, timber is wanted as never before. For every substitute for wood such as steel for doors or office filling furniture about ten new uses are found for forest products. Few people realize the enormous toll made upon forests by the increasing use of cellulose for clothing, and pulp for paper. “I have just returned from America where I have been studying the forest situation. In conference with the government forestry offices at Washington I learnt something of the colossal destruction of the forests which are being seriously overcut to supply pulp for the enormous editions of newspaper. One New York Sunday edition requires twenty-five acres of forest every week. In the United States six times as much timber is being cut as is grown each year. Seven-eighths of the virgin forests of America have been cut over. Per head of population America consumes 330 cubic feet a year compared with Europe’s 30 cubic feet. This is the Age of Paper. Our present civilization is largely based on the use of paper and the relative quantity of paper used by different countries gives some idea of the degree of civilization attained. Although certain grades of paper are still made from other materials, wood is the cheapest and best for most purposes, and will provide the greatest volume on a given area at the lowest cost. “In Great Britain we have millions of acres below the standard of agriculture which might be profitably planted with trees, thus providing labour for thousands of our unemployed and lasting benefit to the country. Generally speaking, the soil and situation are such that the wood increment obtained is as great as that in some of the best forests of Germany. The situation calls for concerted action on the part of both Government and private, in-dividuals who are land-owners, and there should be clear definition as to lands which might be made available for tree-planting. “We are not only dependent upon trees to supply us with timber for buildings and furniture, paper for journals and books, cellulose for clothing fabrics and a thousand and one other things in daily use, but trees affect climate and temperature. Forest have an equalizing effect on extremes of temperature. Records show that in wooded districts maximum temperatures are lower, and minimum temperatures higher than in adjoining deforested tracts “Vast areas in the world to-day which formerly only held game have now been brought under agriculture, and still further tracts of forest have been cut down and sacrificed to provide land for growing food. The rapid disappearance of the forests is now having an adverse effect upon agriculture with a consequent failure of crops. It is, therefore, coming to be thought that the man who plants trees is rendering as great a service to his country as the man who grows food. “Apart from all the above reasons for which trees should he grown, there is the aesthetic contribution that they make to the world. What would England be without trees? Picture in your mind your favourite forest retreat destroyed by fire or ruthless cutting and decide if it is worth saving. “The construction of new arterial roads is providing fresh opportunities for tree-planting. The Road Beautifying Association, of which I am one of the directors, has made itself responsible for road beautification by tree-planting. While it is important ‘to keep the character of the country by planting the trees which belong to the country,’ in certain districts fruit-bearing trees might be planted along the arterial roads. These would provide a wealth of blossom in the spring and then, in the autumn of the year, a crop of fruit which could be harvested by adjoining land-owners. When I first proposed to plant fruit trees on the Kingston by-pass I was told that this would be dangerous, and upon my asking the question why, the reply was ‘Boys picking the fruit fearing detection and running away would get run over by motor-cars.' “There was also the more serious objection that these trees, if not properly cared for, would provide harbour for disease which might spread to adjoining orchards. However, I hope that both risks may be obviated and that we may see fruit trees planted along side of our arterial roads as they are by the waysides of Europe. Groups of trees might be planted at certain places which would grow to timber and provide an emergency supply in the event of a national crisis. In France a considerable revenue is reaped by Government from the plane trees grown on State roads. It will be noticed on the Kingston by-pass that Lombardy poplars have been planted on the cross roads. This has been done with the object of providing a warning to motorists. The character of these trees differs conspicuously and slows up clearly in the landscape. It will be good, where possible, to plant silver birch on the bends so that their white stems may show up at night ” Besides the national, economic, and aesthetic aspects to which Mr. St. Barbe Baker so pertinently refers, there are also other aspects connected with Public Health which should not be overlooked, especially in tropical climates, and which provide additional justification for the policy of tree cultivation which he advocates. Not only does the form of a tree appeal to the aesthetic sense, and its shade to personal comfort and coolness, but its colour has an extraordinarily soothing effect in mitigating the results of tropical glare; moreover, it is one of Nature's Great Health Officers, for it absorbs the world’s chief waste product — Carbonic acid— and exhales the life-giving Oxygen by which we all live. This is the great value of sylviculture in towns—in fact no compound or street should be complete without their modicum of trees, as long as they are not planted so closely that the circulation of air is hindered. It is strange, that trees are so seldom planted near hospitals where they would be of use par excellence. 
A Lift in the Car. MUTTERINGS BY AN OLD GENTLEMAN WHO DOES NOT WANT ONE. I KNOW your cars— With what speed you move beneath the stars. Or on a summer’s day Flash through old villages, And make the countryside appear a blur; Whilst on soft cushions, but with cramped knees, You watch the endless ribbon of a road Vanish under your radiator. No doubt 'tis luxury divine to move so fast, Always to get away from where you are: But when you see me ambling down the road Take no proud pity on my leisured pace; Leave me to move as pleases my desires; Insist not that I join your game of speed; If you like it, play it, play it, but For God’s sake let me walk. A.W.K. [Note.—This does not emanate from Kuching, but was originally contributed to the Bournville Works Magazine.] 
Quo Vadis? [This short essay is an attempt to state in brief compass some current ideas in the world to-day which appear likely to affect the world of to-morrow. No originality is claimed—the general argument will be familiar to readers of recent works of H.G. Wells, and contributions have also been taken from Dean Inge and Lothrop Stoddart.] There are certain substances known in chemistry as "catalysts.” Their presence, even in minute quantities, in otherwise inert mixtures, has the effect of producing changes involving profound transformations of matter and energy. Sometimes the reaction is so rapid, that an explosion occurs. Ideas are the catalysts of human affairs. Imponderable things themselves, they are yet capable of producing the most fundamental and far-reaching changes in the material world. Sometime these changes may come more quickly than our expectation. It is possible to describe the story of mankind in terms of an increasingly successful struggle for needed freedoms. The rough outlines of that story are now known to the majority of intelligent people. Human life dawned on the earth some sixty thousand years ago, and the dawn came gradually through countless slow centuries of brutish existence. It was a dreary and driven life—the life of an animal species scarcely differentiated yet from its fellow ape-like creatures. Obsessed by the terror of more powerful beasts, harrowed by hunger and cold, and lit only by the brief satisfactions of appetite and sex; short memories and scant imagination; no past and no future; slaves of circumstance, knowing no freedom. Presently, those hands grasped sticks and stones and fashioned them into weapons; slowly the first gleams of thought and prevision began to occupy those brutish minds. Weapons gave some freedom from the terror by day, fire from the terror by night. Speech was born, and a man's ideas need no longer die with him: the accumulation of knowledge began. Then came agriculture and freedom flora the recurrent hungers of the hunting stage —bought at a price indeed of a new routine of toil, but still, freedom. Writing made knowledge permanent and independent of its individual transmittors: money freed mankind from the limitations of barter and exchange: with the horse and the ship came an unwonted freedom of travel and movement. But alongside all this growth of freedom and security came another and opposing development— the burden of civilization. Freed from the fangs of beasts, from hunger and the callousness of nature, man fell under the whips of the slave-drivers, the coercions of kings and chiefs, the superstitions of priest and temple, and the cold greed of the money-makers. The motif of history is largely the struggle of men—common men—to maintain and increase their freedom against the efforts of a powerful few to impose restraints and compulsions upon them. How do we stand to-day? Over large parts of the earth the common man possesses powers and freedom beyond the wildest dreams of by-gone emperors. His person is safe from assault; his property from capricious confiscation. He is clothed comfortably (if not beautifully!), he does not know the meaning of real hunger. Education hands him the key of the vast literature of discussion and ideas, science puts the powers of nature in his hand, and modern industry offers, in exchange for his labour, an immense variety of comforts, satisfactions and interests. His life is about a third longer than it used to be, and is increasingly free from disease and frustration. It is amazing that science is still sometimes charged with giving a degrading story of human life. Surely it is rather the most thrilling spectacle of conquest over circumstance—the rise, not the fall, of man. And all this is but a beginning. Geologically speaking, human life is a very, very recent thing on earth. For millions of years that stagger the imagination, our earth spun round, a lifeless mass of flaming gas and liquid matter; for millions more, life slowly evolved from the green scum of the early seas, through crustacean, fish, amphibian, reptile, on to mammals and man. All of man’s story is certainly comprised within a mere hundred thousand years, and most of it, within a few centuries—a mere speck in time. Geologists tell us with increasing assurance that our earth has many million more years to look forward to, ere the cooling of the sun deprives us of the light and heat without which no life than we can imagine can exist. So we have plenty of time for our adventure. Adventure—that is the word. For there is no certainty of progress, only the intriguing possibility. We may falter and fail, regress and disappear front the pageant, as thousands of other animal species have done before us. But no other species ever attained to anything like the possibilities now clearly open to man. It is safe to say that no other ever became remotely conscious of the possibility of deciding its own destiny. What freedoms, then, do we most need to-day, to set our adventure aright? First and most fundamental of all, we need to be freed from the monstrous dangers of excessive populations. Unlimited breeding is an inheritance from our animal ancestry. It is one of nature’s ways of survival—and it is inevitably countered by nature's checks—war, pestilence and famine. Enormous fertility is characteristic of low-grade life. A microbe can produce literally millions of its within a round of the clock, and even so comparatively highly organized an animal as a codfish spawns about six million eggs at a time. Man has travelled far from this vast wastefulness, but his natural rate of increase is still greatly in excess of what the available food resources can support. Thus we are faced with an alternative which cannot be circumvented—either man must put the curb on or nature will. “Natural” methods of population control are wasteful, cruel and dysgenic; rational methods are economic, humane and constructive. Secondly, and closely allied to the foregoing, we need an improvement in quality as well as a limitation of numbers. We need to be freed—particularlv in countries of the Atlantic civilization— from the terrible drag of the ill-born—the congenitally insane and feeble-minded and criminal classes, the proliferating sediment of society, who absorb so much of the surplus energy of humanity in providing police, jails, hospitals and asylums for their control; and who, by sheer force of numbers, threaten to swamp not only the small minority of high quality individuals, who are the leaders and instigators of progress, but even the much larger body of fairly intelligent and moderately efficient citizens. Eugenics shows the way, and a small but hopeful start has been made. Thirdly, perhaps more immediate, but not more fundamental than the above, we need to be freed from the imminent menace of war. This can never be done with absolute finality until some measure of population control has been achieved, but a great deal could be done almost at once, to restrain and limit the likelihood of war and to make it highly dangerous for any nation to start it. Probably no nation at the present time actually wants war, but none is prepared to make the one indispensable step to avoid it —namely, the surrender of sovereign rights. Yet an increasing number of individuals in many nations are advocating just such a pooling of power, and strange revolutions may be wrought in a short space of time. Fourthly, on the economic side, we need a great, development of co-operative effort, both national and international, to replace the present haphazard and dangerous scramble in the utilization of the world’s natural resources. The first crystallizations of these ideas are with us already in such bodies as the League of Nations, the International Labour Bureau, the Permanent Court, and the International Institute of Agriculture. Big businesses grow bigger and tend to coalesce; their operations overstep flags and frontiers. Isolated nations, concerns and individuals are anachronisms in this modern world. As the instrument of a saner economics, it is clear that we must devise a stable form of money, which can be safeguarded against the manipulations of financial groups and political experimenters. Lastly, we need better social ethics. In religion, freedom from the superstitious priest and blood-sacrifice, of hell-fire and harp; inmorals, less compulsion and more in education, a great broadening of basic instruction, to include the presentment of history as the continuous and increasing adventure of than mankind, and a treatment of biology at least sufficient to its implications for human affairs. DELTA. 
St. Mary’s Girls School, Kuching, Prize Essay by Voon Khiuk Kiong Aged 16. SARAWAK. Sarawak is part of the island in Borneo, which is supposed to be the third largest island in the world. It is situated near the equater. It is bounded in the north and west by the China Sea and east by the Celebes Sea. The people of Sarawak are chiefly consists of Malays, Land and Sea Dyaks, Kayans, Muruts and Milanos. The vegetable products of exports are:—Rubber, gambier, jelutong, coconuts, sago, etc. The imports are:—Wine, cloth, provisions, raids, etc. Sarawak is divided into five divisions Kuching. Simanggang, Sibu, Miri and Limbang. SIR JAMES BROOKE. Sir James Brooke first Rajah of Sarawak was born in Secroe in the year 1803. He lived in India for twelve years. At the age of twelve he went and lived with his grandmother at Reigate, there he entered a gramma school for two years only. After this his parents returned and settled at Combe. A tutor came to educate James. The teacher said to him one day “Do you want to know how a country is made?” But he answered “No, I would rather make a country of my own.” This afterward proved to be correct for he did make a country of his own when he came to Sarawak. When his father died he elected a small Fortune and brought for himself tract called “Royalist.” During 1838 he took with him his nephew John Brooke Johnson and his greatest friend John Templer to Singapore. They came later to Sarawak, where they found the Rajah Muda Hassim helpless because the Malays had broken into revolt. He helped Muda Hassim to put down the rebellion, so the Sultan made him Rajah of Sarawak. In 1857 a few months before the great Mutiny in India came the Chinese Rebellion, in which the Rajah took part. The Astana and his little town were burnt down and he escaped by swimming across the river. By the way when they came to the villages, the people supplied him and his party with clothes and food. After all James Brooke saw how much of his work had been worthwhile. He gave up his work to his heir and nephew and himself retired to England. On 11th June, 1868, James Brooke died and was buried in the Church-yard of Sheepstor. CHARLES ANTHONI JOHNSON BROOKE. Charles Anthoni Johnson Brooke was born at Berrow near Burnham, Somerset, in 1829. He was the son of Father Charles Brooke and Emma Francis Brooke sister of the first Rajah. There is nothing to be said about the boyhood of Charles Brooks as far as history is concerned. He married Margaret De Windt in 1869. Charles Brooke's reign of progress well be called a reign of progress for so far he did improve the country his uncle had begun. There was a great fire in Kuching in 1884, although his was not so serious as the Chinese Insurrection nevertheless the damage was great. Eighteen years later Great Britain by a Treaty acknowledged him the lawful ruler of Sarawak. The state is now under the protection of Great Britain. He divided the country into districts and set European Officers by degrees made all the countries at peace. The last expedition against head-hunting was in 1915 under a small force led by Mr. Gifford Resident of Kapit, this at last turned out to be successful. Sir Charles Brooke was proclaimed Rajah on 3rd of August the same year when his uncle died. During his last year's reign he brought wireless into Sarawak and he also abolished slavery in Sarawak. Sir Charles Brooke made a railway to ten miles, which helps the people to sell the produce in their gardens. Education and agriculture were the things he set his mind on. His idea was the country for the people and not for himself. In 1917 he died and was buried by the side of his uncle in the Churchyard of Sheepstor. So his son Vyner Brooke reigns in his stead. CHARLES VYNER BROOKE. Charles Vyner Brooke was born in London in 1874. His first visit to Sarawak was at the age of two. He visited Sarawak the second time accompanied by both his brothers the Tuan Muda and Bunsu. His third visit to Sarawak was at seventeen years old, after which he did not return until some years later. He was educated at Winchester and Cambridge. When he was twenty-three years old he came to Simanggang, where he acted as a clerk such as sticking stamps on people’s letters giving out castor oil or vaccinating Dyak babies. Charles Vyner Brooke now carries on loyally the Brooke policy. 
FIRST DIVISION. Some 1929 Meteorological Returns for Kuching. Kuching Meteorological Returns for January, 1930. Note.—The Height of the Meteorological Station is 29.5 feet above M.T.L. Sarawak Library. Kindly presented by His Highness the Rajah. Kindly presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda. Purchased by the Committee. Cold Storage Food Supplies for Kuching. It is said by the older residents of Singapore and the Malay Peninsula that the general health of the average European has undergone a vast improvement during the last 20 years and that this is due in a very large measure to the fact that suitable imported European food has been available there. Previously only the usual local food obtainable in tropical countries was to be had and this cannot of course, be expected to contain the same nutritions value as that to which newcomers are accustomed. With a view to providing the Europeans stationed here with that good and wholesome food to which those in other places in the tropics owe so much. Messrs. Tan Sum Guan & Son have been importing various kinds of frozen produce for some time, but until recently, this could only be done once a week, Since the middle of December, however they have completed the installation of a modern mechanical refrigerator in which frozen goods can be stored and kept fresh in the same way as in the large cold stores in various parts of the world. Consequently, the choicest of Australian beef, mutton, lamb, butter and English fish, etc., can now be supplied everyday of the year instead of only on the arrival of the steamers from Singapore as formerly. New P.W.D. Quarry Plant. An interesting event took place on 25th January, when His Highness the Rajah kindly consented to start the newly-installed stone crushing plant at the 7th mile. The ceremony, which was of simple nature, went off without hitch. His Highness, accompanied by the Director of Public Works, was met at the quarry by P.W.D. officers and by Mr. William Tan, Manager of the quarry. After a short inspection, His Highness put the plant into operation by opening a small wheel valve. After a few preliminary “coughs," the engine gathered speed and within a few moments the whole of the machinery was working. A further inspection of the plant in operation enabled His Highness, to follow the mechanical progress of the stone now the quarry “face” to the railway trucks awaiting the finished product. The plant, supplied by Messrs. H. R. Marsden, is driven by a 90-H.P. "National” semi-diesel engine and is capable of producing 800 tons of crushed stone per day. The stone is conveyed from the quarry “face” in mechanically drawn tip-trucks on rail and is delivered, in selected grades, to railway trucks from elevated hoppers. Annual Report of the Seventh-Day Adventist School, 3rd Mile, Kuching (1929.) The Seventh-Day Adventist School Kuching was founded by the Seventh-Day Adventists the purpose of training young people of Sarawak, for the three-fold development of the physical, mental and moral powers. The school was opened in the year 1926 with one master and eleven pupils. Since that year 7 enrolment has steadily grown. In the year there were two masters and one mistress and eighty-four pupils. The standards taught were up to the sixth. It is endeavoured that the staff will be reinforced and that the seventh standard will be added to the school in 1930. As the number of pupils grows larger, the present, school building becomes smaller and, in view of the new enrolments to come, the need is felt for another and bigger class-room building and separate dormitories for the girls and the boys. A campaign is proposed to be launched during 1930 in all the main centres of Sarawak and that the proceeds will be used towards the building fund. We are very grateful to the Government for the Grant-in-Aid which was granted to us since 1929. Without this we do not know how the school could ever carry on. We would like also to thank His Highness the Rajah for so kindly giving us a piece of land, just it the front of the school, for a playground. It is hoped that ere long the land might be levelled for its purpose. The school is hoping to do even greater service to the masses in the line of education during the year 1930, as careful attention will be given to reserve symmetrical educational values as well as to provide necessary mental discipline. As our school is the youngest among the schools here in Kuching, we really need the help of the Government and its people. We really realize the responsibility of the school, for the future prosperity of Sarawak rests with the education of its youth. In conclusion, I would like to mention that Messrs. Law Chen Hiang, Hwang Chee Yong, C. P. Law and C. M. Law, who, being interested in educational work, kindly presented handsome prizes to some of the pupils of the school, who took part in the programme held on Sunday, the 12th January, 1930. (Signed) T. Y. TAN, Headmaster. S.P.G. vs. K.F.C. SOCCER MATCH. On Saturday, the 18th, we saw possibly the best June of the last two years, when the Kuching Football Club were opposed to the S.P.G. Old Boys, the thankless task of referee being very kindly overtaken by Mr. MacDonald. In the first half, McGinn was undoubtedly the rest player of the European side. His centering was the best we have seen on the Club field. If he can learn to lift his corner-kicks into the goal area insistently, there will be no difficulty in filling the right position. There was constant combination in the European side, a thing essential to a winning side but rarely seen hitherto. Scott fitted in well with the forward line, which caused considerable anxiety to the S.P.G. defence. Moir, as usual, played a strenuous game in both attack and defence. The wing halves did well, but might have followed up the forwards a little more closely. The backs were reliable, Stirling breaking up many dangerous movements. The danger spot in the S.P.G. side was the right wing, ably supported by Freddy Lim and the half back line. Although the K.F.C. were having the better of the exchanges in the early stages of the game, the S.P.G. scored first with a fast low shot from Kheng Hai in the corner of the net. Soon afterwards, Mace, from a pass from the right wing, screwed the ball into the net to equalize. This was the score at half-time. In the second half, the Club mid-day sitting came into its own. This disadvantage was emphasized by a surprising change of positions. McGinn went to right half, Reid to right-back, Chater to centre-half, and Moir to right wing. Although the K.F.C. were occasionally dangerous, and Moir did not receive the success he deserved from a great drive, their speed and combination fell off. The S.P.G. were quick to take advantage, and put in three more goals, two from Freddy Lim and one from Kheng Hai, after good movements which had left the K.F.C. defence well out of position. The S.P.G. had an able defence in Weng Seng, whose first time kicking and direct tackling gave the Europeans little opportunity of penetrating to the goal area. Yau Joo distributed his passes well, and did good defensive work. Towards the end of the game, the S.P.G. were much the better side and certainly deserved their victory. Teams. K.F.C.—J. P. Baird, W. J. Chater, R. Stirling, T. A. Reid, R. L. Moir, W. L. Sochon, D. O’C. McGinn, D. Scott, N. Mace, G. T. Bates, W. G. Tait. S.P.G.—Leng Seng, Eddy Jolly, Weng Seng, Beng Siang, Jaw Joo, S. Shu, Kheng Hai, Freddy Lim, Joo Thin, Yu Siong and Harry Brodie. All holders of Kuching Football Club Debentures, who have not yet been reimbursed and have not withdrawn their claim, are requested to notify the Honorary Secretary and to send in their Debentures before 31st March, 1930. 
First Division Reports. December, 1929. The Acting Resident, Mr. J.C. Swayne, reports:— There were seven cases heard before the Resident's Court of which two were criminal and five civil, these included an appeal from the District Court, Kuching. Kousin, a Javanese, stood charged with the attempted murder of one Arpi and was convicted under section 307A of the Indian Penal Code. Lim Kong Boon was fined $500 for illegal trafficking in opium and opium dross under Order XLVII, 1924. The appeal of Usop, a Malay contractor, against the judgment of the District Court for the sum of $595.02 to be paid by him to Chop Chuan Hup was dismissed with costs. The appellant has since appealed to the Supreme Court. The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports :— District Court.—32 cases were heard, 9 of which were criminal and 23 civil. Of the 9 criminal cases, allure convictions were adjudged. There were 1 case of assault or use of criminal force to a woman with intent to outrage modesty, 5 of contempt of Court, 1 breach of Municipal By-law and 2 other offences. Fines imposed amounted to $630 and fees collected totalled $9. The civil claims involved amounts totalling $6,208.68, while fees amounted to $213.25. Magistrate’s Court.—78 cases were heard, 19 of which were criminal and 59 civil. Of the 19 criminal cases, 16 convictions and 3 acquittals were adjudged. There were 9 cases of assault, 1 of cheating, 5 contempt of Court, 3 breach of Municipal By-laws and 1 breach of Customs and Shipping Regulations. Fines imposed amounted to $429.77 fees collected $38.25. The civil claims involved amounts totalling $2,419.64, for which fees collected amounted to $184.78. Police Court.—32 summary cases were brought before the Court. 29 convictions and 3 acquittals were obtained. The principal charges were 12 of theft, 4 of assault, 1 of cheating, 10 breach of Municipal By-laws and 5 other offences. A total amount of $103 was paid in fines. In addition 78 judgment summons cases were dealt with during the month. Court's General.—Akup bin Beah, Yaw Ah Lam and Ho Ah Hong were sentenced to 6 months each, Sim Choon Seng to 4 months, Lam Thian Teck, Slatan (Dyak), Chan Hock, Yap Ngee and Ali to 3 months each, all for theft, under I.P.C. sections 379; Osman bin Ali to 18 months, for voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapon or means, under I.P.C. section 324; Ismail bin Japar to 3 months, for cheating, under I.P.C. section 417; Mohamat bin Salleh to one month, for dishonestly receiving stolen property, under I.P.C. section 411; Han bin Unang to one month, for voluntarily causing hurt with dangerous weapon, under I.P.O. 324 ; Koh Yaw Eng to 3 months, for assault or'use of criminal force to a woman with intent to outrage her modesty, under I.P.C. section 354; and the Kong Hui Siow Kongsi is fined $500 for contravention of Kuching Municipal Order 1922, section 43 (ii), and that he made a false assessment return to the Municipality, thus cheating Government of $65. General.—Notable cases during the month in the District Court were:—(1) The Municipal Commissioner vs. the Kong Hui Siow Kongsi, who were fined $500 for sending in a false assessment return thus defrauding Government—an offence that is becoming far too common and is very difficult to bring to light. (2) Voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons in which a Javanese Osman bin Ali was sentenced to 18 months' imprisonment. (3) Use of criminial force to a woman with intent to outrage her modesty in which Koh Yaw Eng was sentenced to 3 months' imprisonment. Coroner’s inquiries were held on the bodies of three persons during the month, two male Chinese infants, and the Malay quartermaster of the s.s. Vyner Brooke, who died on the voyage across from Singapore. On the 31st Mr. J. B. Archer ceased to be District Officer, Kuching, Editor of Sarawak Gazette, Coroner and Chairman of Board of Examiners, upon taking up his appointment as Deputy Resident, Second Division. 
LAND OFFICE. December, 1929. The Land Officer, Mr. B. Summers, reports:—  Three new Apprentice Land Inspectors joined the department early in the month. One new clerk was also engaged. By the orders of His Highness the Rajah, land occupied by Chinese, situated south of the 15th mile Penrissen Road, was examined at a prevention of further encroachment into Dyak lands there. It was found that these Chinese occupied larger areas than were originally issued to them. A notice board was erected at the 15th mile post, prohibiting the settlement of further Chinese south of a line drawn east and west through that point. Most of those already settled in the area are married to Dyak women and the land is actually held in the names of the wives. Fewer occupation tickets were issued this month than during the previous month, caused through the length of time elapsing before the applicants come to office to receive their occupation tickets. There was an increase in the number of applications for pepper lands over the previous month. 
UPPER SARAWAK, BAU. December, I92S. The District Officer, Mr. J. C. Swayne, reports:- Court.—A case of attempted murder and one of a disputed will came up for trial before the Resident's Court. No other cases of special interest were heard. Native Officer, Haji Apet, was absent for two weeks’ leave. Necessary repairs were made to the Busa wharf, which had been damaged by recent high water; and the old flag-staff at that station was replaced by a steel mast. Minor repairs were done on the Astana bungalow roof. All roads were inspected and, considering the heavy rain during the month, were in good repair. On the 31st I left Bau on transfer to Kuching, and Mr. G. R. H. Arundell was appointed to do duty in Upper Sarawak. The following visited Bau during the month on official business: — Mr. W. G. Tait, Superintendent of Government Telegraphs, Dr. E. M. Marjoribanks, Principal Medical Officer, Mr. C. S. Griffith, Superintendent of Lands, Dr. G. E. Brooke, Chief Health Officer, and Mr. N. Mace, of the Survey Department. 
LUNDU. December, 1929. The District Officer, Mr. J. C. Swayne, reports:- Court. — Only one civil Court case was dealt with during the month. Phang Ngee wns arrested on the 19th under local D.U. warrant for contempt of Court and was released on bail of $200 on 20th. Badok warranted by Chop Hiap Thai for theft of a lamp and was arrested and put on remand. Sadan was arrested on the 21st on Kuching warrant No. 3800 and was sent to Kuching. Fees collected during the month amounted to $13. General.—Tua Kampong Abang Merali Orang Kaya Jumat went to Blungie on the 4th to examine land applied for by the Chinese at Blungie cemetery. Orang Kaya Jumat, accompanied by P.C.5 Busri, proceeded to Kampong Raso on the 14th to elect a Pengarah there in place of late Pengarah Nyo-eng who had recently died. Orang Kaya Jumat returned on the 19th and reported that, in accordance with the wishes of the villagers, One Awang Pa-Nogeng was elected as Pengarah. I regret to record the death of a Malay woman named Remah, who was drowned in the Lundu river the 5th, when she and two other women, Mahibah and Tai were returning from the “Uma.” Every effort was made to find Remah, but she was not found until the 7th, when her body was found drifting near Kampong Stunggang, about a mile away from the place where the accident occurred. The body was examined and found to bear no signs of violence. Abang Zambari proceeded to Kuching on the 18th in accordance with instructions received from the Resident, First Division. Public Works.—The erection of 5 doors Police Barracks and 7 kitchens were completed on the 19th. Minor repairs were made to the wharf by the prisoners. The nibong posts have been replaced with billian. Prisons.—Prisoner Jumat was released on the 12th as his term of sentence had expired. Monopolies.—In accordance with instructions received from the Assistant Controller, all Opium Pass-Books having no photographs were withdrawn and forwarded to him, and the owners informed that they could claim them from him on presentation of their photographs. Rainfall.—The rainfall recorded for the month is 7.15 inches as compared with 18.77 inches recorded in the corresponding month of last year. Shipping.—The s.s. Maleng and m.v. Lundu made  5 and 4 trips each respectively during the month.
SADONG. December, 1929. The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports:— Court.—Few cases were heard during the month and the principal conviction was a sentence of one year’s imprisonment passed on Lanchang for threatening to assault with a parang. A number of forestry minor offences were dealt with. The Magistrate continued the inquiry into the ease of Mit and Tuah who stand indicted on a charge of robbery with violence. The Deputy Coroner, Abang Hamdan, held an inquest on the body of a Chinese coolie who hanged himself in hospital. P.W.D.—Four lengths of new fire hose were received from the Municipal Commissioner, and a housing for this was immediately put in hand. As the housing was not finished by the end of the month the hose has not yet been tested. Repairs were effected to the second clerk’s house, and extensions were started to the house occupied by the sanitary inspector. Minor repairs were carried out on all kampong bridges where necessary. Medical.—Eleven persons were admitted, twelve are discharged and one died, leaving three remaining at the end of the month. The cause of death was suicidal hanging. At the dispensary 120 out-patients made 169 attendances for treatment. Twenty-four N.A.B. injections were administered, all being for yaws. The accounts show revenue $425.95 and expenditure, including salaries and rations, $205.80. Staff.—Abang Abdillah bin Abang Ali Kunin was appointed Tua Kampong at Gedong as from the 1st. Clerk Peter Law was transferred to this station from Simanggang, arriving here on the 18th, vice Heng Yeo Khoon, who proceeded to Simanggang on the 21st. General.—I returned  from a visit to the Ulu Simunjan and Krang districts on the 2nd. On the 4th I proceeded to Kuching for dental treatment, returning again on the 11th. $22,500 in new notes were received from the Sarawak Treasury, and $10,888 in old notes were shipped by return. On the 23rd I proceeded to Kuching and was still away at the end of the month. 16 vessels entered and cleared.
Sadong Colliery. December, 1929. The Manager, Mr. J. W. Evans, reports:— The output, export, local consumption, conversion into coke and coal stock figures for the month were as follows:— Reduced production was mainly caused by falls of roof in the shallow workings, and subsidences due to rainfall. Further extensions were made to the buffalo grazing land, and an additional paddock was fenced in for the protection of females whose calves are too young and delicate to follow the herd. The cattle herd has noticeably improved in condition during the past month. A young cow and buffalo were shipped to Kuching for the Astana Farm during the month, and one young bull was slaughtered here during the Christmas week. Mr. and Mrs. D. Evans left for Kuching on the 28th and were still away at the end of the month. The rainfall for the month was 20.80 inches.
Club News. Sarawak Club. BOWLING AVERAGES FOR DECEMBER, 1929. BOWLING HANDICAP FOR DECEMBER, 1929. At an Annual General Meeting of the Sarawak Malay Tennis Club, the following were elected to constitute Office-bearers for the ensuing year :— Datu Amar Abang Sulieman, President; Rakawi bin Usop, Hon. Secretary; D. Suhaili, Hon. Treasurer; Zen bin Malek, Hon. Auditor; Abdul Kadir Marican, Tennis Captain; Hasbie bin Abu Bakar and Sirat bin Haji Sa-at, Committee Members.
Kuching Regatta 1930. The following accounts are handed to us bv the Honorary Treasurer for publication. Kuching, 24th January, 1930, examined, compared with the vouchers and found correct. D. O’C. MCGINN, Auditor. 
ANAYLSIS OF RECEIPTS 1930. ANALYSIS OF EXPENDITURE 1930. H. C. P. ADAMS, Hon. Treasurer, Sarawak Regatta.
Second Division Reports.
BATANG LUPAR. December, 1929. The Resident. Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner, reports:— Courts.—The Court work was normal, in the District Court. Thirteen cases were tried. The usual number of cases came up before the Magistrate's and Police Courts, and two cases were heard in the Resident’s Court. General.—Prisoners Ah Kau and Budin escaped on the 1st whilst fetching firewood for the jail. On the 7th I received news that they had been captured by Dyaks in the Lingga district. On the 9th, Cadet Officers Mr. L. K. Morse and Mr. D. C. Hudden returned from Lubok Antu, bring settled a number of cases which had been adjourned by the Native Officer. They checked all books at Lubok Antu and Engkilili and reported came correct and up to date. Mr. A. L. MacLaine and Mr. F. L. Mansel, of the Treasury Department, Kuching, arrived on the 12th, bringing $60,000 of the new Sarawak Notes circulation in place of the old Sarawak Notes and Straits Settlements currency. On the 15th they left for the Saribas and Kalaka in m.l. Anne. Datu Abang Haji Dulrasid and Abang Haji Dulgapar, Tuan Imam, left, for Kabong and Saratok on the 12th in order to arrange about the building of new Mosque at Saratok, over which there has been some difficulty. They both returned on the 22nd. Towards the middle of the month boat loads of Malays arrived from the coast stations, their object being to make “durian” preserves (Inok and Teni-puyak) in the Batang Ayer and Skrang. In former years the famous durian fruit could be obtained in the bazaar at one cent apiece, and in the Dyak country at rate of 300 for a dollar. Now the durian fruit fetches from 3 cents to 10 cents apiece. On the 24th Mr. B. L. Daubeny arrived from Betong and Mr. G. M. Goodall from Engkilili in order to spend Christmas at Simanggang. They both returned to their homes on the 27th. Abang Abu-Talip, Native Officer, left for Engkilili on the 30th to take over duties of Native Officer in place of Abang Omar who returned to Simanggang. Dyaks and Malays complain of the bug called empangau which they report is doing much damage to the young padi plants. The Director of Agriculture has sent a leaflet describing the method employed by the Malays of Kuala Pilah, Negri Sembilan, to destroy padi bugs. I am afraid natives of this country will not make use of method described unless actual demonstrations are given by the Agriculture Department. I am sure if natives were assisted and shown the method to destroy the bug called empangau they would then at a future time make use of the method, and in consequence would reap a very considerable percentage of padi. Public Works.—A Malay contractor started preparing timber for the new Native Officers’ quarters. The latrines for Police were completed. Prisoners averaging 72.41, this includes all substations in the Batang Lupar, were employed on ditching and preparing site of new Native Officers’ Quarters, and general upkeep of roads and grounds. Medical.—A total of 259 persons were treated in hospital during the month as follows:—Chinese 52, Dyaks 174, Sikhs 2, Malays 31. 152 cases of N. A. B. injection for yaws, etc., were given; 26 head of pigs were inspected and slaughtered for sale during the month.  Cattle.—Simanggang herd numbered 75 head. Land.—12 occupation tickets were issued at Engkilili during the month. Shipping.—26 motor vessels and 1 sailing vessel cleared during the month.
SARIBAS. December, 1929. Mr. R. L. Daubeny, Assistant District Officer, reports: — Court.—The following cases were heard during the month: Pasai sentenced to one month under section 336 I.P.C., Wan Ismail sentenced to six weeks for non-payment of brian. A civil claim to the value of $228 was also settled, judgment being given in favour of plaintiff. There were also various other small cases. Prison.—The prison gang, averaging 10.39 in number, have been employed on road works during the month, clearing at the back of the A.D.O.’s bungalow, and shifting timber from under the police barracks to the stables. Public Works.—Haji Ali, the contractor for the bazaar drains, had not appeared by the end of the month and his coolies have now ceased work. Information as to his movements has been asked for from the Public Works, Kuching. The bazaar square levelling has been completed and a further small contract made out for levelling the road reserve has been given out. Coolies were called out on the Bungalow Road extension leading to the police ground, but this work was later given out on contract, a reasonable figure having been tendered by Abang Okeng. Good progress had been made by the end of the month. Yaman, carpenter, has also made some alterations to the bungalow, enlarging the main bedroom and puttying the gaps in the flooring. The Simanggang Road has been cleared during the month by the Dyaks. A site for the Chinese School and playground has also been cleared and Chinese labour is now busy stumping there. Travelling.—I visited the substations during the month but found very little to do. At Debak an inquest was held into the death of a Dyak boy, by name Barau, who was discovered lying in the water half submerged in the mouth of the Sungei Suri. A verdict of death by misadventure was brought in. Repairs to the Fort, Debak. are proceeding well and should be completed very shortly. I left here on 6th and returned again on 11th. General.—Mr. Reid, of the P.W.D., Kuching, arrived here on 4th in connection with the arrack distillery and bazaar drains, and left for Kuching again on 6th. Messrs. MacLaine and Mansel arrived here in the m.l. Anne from Simanggang on 16th in connection with Treasury matters and left for Pusa on 17th. I was away at Simanggang from 24th to 28th. Shipping.—Eight motor vessels entered and cleared during the month. Trade.—The principal exports were :— Medical.—A total of fifty-seven persons were treated in hospital during the month as follows: Malays thirteen, Chinese two, Dyaks forty-two. Twenty cases of N. A. B. injection for yaws, etc., were given of which nine were children and eleven adults.
LOWER SARIBAS. December, 1929. E. Jerah, Court Writer, Saratok, reports :— General.—On the 7th the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, left for Debak by overland route in order to investigate into the death of a Dyak boy who was found dead in a stream at Suri. The m.l. "One" proceed to Debak on the 9th in order to take the Acting Assistant District Officer to Kabong and Roban. Probationers Clerk Ghin Kwong Choo arrived here on the 17th from Kuching in place of Harry Sulong, Monopoly Clerk, who has retired on account of ill health. Messrs. A. L. MacLaine and F. L. Mansel arrived here from Pusa on the 17th in order to look into the accounts, and give instructions as to the use of new receipt check books. They returning on the 19th. Datu Abang Haji Dulrasid arrived from Pusa on 17th. His visit was in connection with the building of the new Malay Mosques, etc., returning to Simanggang on the 19th by m.s. Kim Chin Thong, via Sebuyow. Instructions having been received that the Acting Assistant District Officer was to be transferred to Upper Sarawak, he left by m.l. "One" on the 25th. A sum of thirty thousand dollars of Sarawak new notes were received on 24th, by registered parcel post. P. C. Kiroh from Debak was transferred back here on the 24th. P. C. Bujang from Pusa took over his place and P. C. Rajak from Kabong to Pusa. Court.—An average number of cases were before the Court during the month:—Mohamed Shablee, Land Inspector, and Ayang were each fined 30 reals and 3 sukus for misconduct, section 39, Malay Undang Undang, and Pruji was fined 30 reals and 3 sukus as per Malay Undang Undang No. 34. Chua Ah Boot for assault was fined $25; Lujang, Dyak, Deraw, Krian, was fined $50 under I. P. C. section 336; Kang Ah Oi, Roban, for gross contempt of Court fined $25; Ah Ba and Ah Beng fined $15 and $5 respectively under I. P. C. section 160; Kho Liew Hiew for breach of Forest Regulations fined $25; and these with various smaller fines and fees amounted to $578.30. Prison.—The prisoners have been engaged in general work round the station during the month, averaged 11.9. Two prisoners were sent back to Kuching for release during the month, leaving only 10.
Third Division Reports.
SIBU. December, 1929. The Resident, Mr. C. D. Adams, reports:— Resident's Court.—One Criminal case came up for hearing, Kong Foo Tek, Kong Mok Lim and Chiew Moi (f.) sentenced to death for murder subject to confirmation from Supreme Court. Civil.— Two cases, claims amounted to $2,855.60. General.—The Registrar, Mr. H. B. Crocker, and Abang Enjah, Native Officer, left for Pasai to make further inquiries into the death of Sambai (f.). I paid a visit to Sarikei and Binatang from the 5th inst. to 9th inst. The Chinese at each place informed of the new Town Planning Scheme and the position of the new wharf to be constructed during 1930. From Sarikei to Binatang I proceeded overland, accompanied by Officer-in-Charge, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, Start was made at 6.45 a.m. and Binatang only missed arriving by one hour, haying to stay in a Chinaman’s house at 7.30 p.m. owing to darkness and a very bad road. The Registrar, Mr. H. B. Crocker, left for Sungei Mulong to investigate the scene of murder of Fong Ng. Owing to rumours of Dyaks being reported on the war-path I proceeded to Kapit on the 12th inst. Seven Dyak youths had been brought down from the Balleh it being proved they were up to no good. They were imprisoned for 6 months. There being no foundation to rumours of a big force collecting in the Bauh to attack the Punan Busang, the Penghulus and Tuais informed that to make absolutely certain they must visit their districts, and until they can make a clean report no guns or ammunition will be issued. I returned on the 13th with the seven prisoners and a Dyak lunatic who had cut up another Dyak very severely. This man had only just returned Kuching where he had been under observation. The Divisional Land Officer, Mr. C. E. J. Pascoe, left for Binatang and Sarikei to meet the Superintendent of Land, Mr. C. S. Griffiths, who was arriving from Kuching. By the end of the month the half-yearly installment on the first 41 shops had been paid. The Acting District Officer, Sibu, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports:—  District Court.—Wong Sey Ling 6 months' R.I. for fraudulent land dealing. This man has long been in the habit of taking money from immigrants, etc., for land which they could easily obtain through the Land Office. In this case, the plaintiff was given a piece of land thirteen acres short and defendant refused to refund the money paid for same. Defendant was supported by several specially chosen witnesses who were obviously saying exactly what they had been told to by defendant. One of these was sentenced to one month for perjury. P. Imai reported that two Tuais in his district were on the war-path with about 40 of their men. The reason given for this was that someone had told these people that an enemy was after them. Those concerned were brought down and their guns were confiscated and Giang was fined $100, T.R. Landa 1 picul, and Ungki 1 picul. Ong Kee Toh, who has concession to work jelutong in the Batang Lassa and Kemah, summoned a large number of Dyaks for breach of agreement. These Dyaks are under advances to him and have their licenses paid. They were accused of selling their jelutong to other Chinese, which they admitted doing. They were undoubtedly in the wrong and were ordered to merely repay the advances, in view of the fact that they all appeared to be under the impression that they could not work jelutong for any other Chinese in this district and that plaintiff has a monopoly—this was undoubtedly impressed on them by plaintiff’s mandor, one Haji Dahlan. A Dyak named Nepok was brought down from Kapit with a serious head wound inflicted by a madman, Sumok, recently discharged from Kuching hospital as sane. Nepok is expected to recover. T.R. Yot of ulu Poi was found shot in the jungle — very inadequate reports have been sent in by the Native Officer, Kanowit, Abang Abu Seman, and the matter has not yet been cleared up. About $2,000 was stolen from the Gambling Farm at Kanowit. It is strongly suspected that this was stolen by one of the occupants of the house, as the safe was opened with a key and several articles of value belonging to the manager were not taken. Mr. J. J Hill Officer-in-Charge of Police, went up and made a report but further inquiries are still being made. Haji Urai, T.K. Igan, was reported to have fined a Chinese dentist and a Malay woman $44.14 each and not paid in the fine since February. Haji Urai when sent for admitted this and produced the money. An inquiry was held and Haji Urai was committed for trial for breach of trust Resident’s Court. On the 24th I proceeded to Igan to search the T.K.’s house and make inquiries. His accounts and books were also examined, but revealed no further defalcations. The Igan people said that they had nothing to complain of respecting the Tua Knmpong. General. — Dr. Gauge, Divisional Medical Officer, and Mrs. Gauge, Mr. Spurway, Divisional Forest Officer, and Mrs. Spurway and Mr. Flood-Page, Acting Divisional Engineer, left for Kuching on the 19th and Messrs. Macpherson, Acting Assistant District Officer, Kapit, J. O. Gilbert, Officer-in-Charge, Binatang and Sarikei, and B. A. Trechman, Acting Divisional Treasurer and Divisional Postmaster, 3rd Division left for Limbang and Miri on leave on the 23rd. Messrs. P. M. Adams, District Officer, Mukah and Oya, E. H. Andreini, District Officer, Lower Rejang, and E. H. Elam, Officer-in-Charge, Oya and Dalat, arrived on the 24th for the New Year. Mr. W. B. Drummond, of Gammon, left for Singapore and Mr. A. J. Nadig returned. The Assistant Electrical Engineer, Mr. W. L. Clark, reports:— Station.—Units generated 20.681, units consumed in Power Station 2,795, useful units 17,886, lubricating oil consumed 408 gallons, liquid fuel consumed 2,011 gallons. Repairs and Breakdowns.— (Engine room). There were no breakdowns during the month. Both high level fuel tanks were given a coating of bitumastic, also water cooling tower. Water tanks were drained, cleaned and refilled with fresh water. The Officer-in-Charge of Police and Prisons, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports :— Police.—Three men were taken on in the force on one month probation each, two men resigned and four men have signed agreements and received bonuses during the month. Prisons.—Fifteen men were imprisoned during the month, including seven Dyaks sentenced at Kapit and transferred here and eighteen men released. Eighty-nine prisoners remained at the jail at the end of the month. The daily average of prisoners working were 74.12 men during the month. Health.—The daily average of prisoners admitted in the hospital were six men during the month and 1.12 men were treated in the jail. Conduct.— Prisoners Chong On and Ee Ngee Yang were each sentenced to two weeks and one month extra imprisonment respectively for breach of opium regulations, and prisoner Ewe Cheng Teh to one month extra imprisonment and 12 strokes with the rattan for escaping from jail. General.—Two prisoners, Kousin and Budin, arrived from Kuching on 8th and 18th inst. to serve their sentences in Sibu. Prison mandor Yio was granted seventeen days’ leave from 30th inst. Prisoners were employed on various jobs. The Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. C. O. Gauge, reports:— There were 207 out-patients and their repetition, making a total of 434 in all. Eighty-one in-patients were treated during the month, thirty-six being new admissions and forty-five transferred from 31st November, 1929. Amongst these four deaths occurred at the hospital due to the following causes:—One from amoebic dysentery, one typhoid, one fever of unknown origin, one retention of urine. Eighty-one N.A.B. injections were given during the month. 247 passengers were inspected on the Singapore boats. 144 vaccinations were performed. On the 4th, Dresser Abdul Ghanie arrived replacing Dresser Abu Bakar. I was away at Suugei Pasai on the 18th December, to 20th December, re-exhuming the dead body of a female Dyak again, which was first exhumed on the 2nd November last, and a post-mortem was performed. The incinerator at the hospital is now complete and working. The wholemeal bread was started again and Goh Meng Thong, Hylam, a permanent baker, has taken up this trade and hopes to be able to supply permanently. I was away on annual leave from the 19th December, 1929, and returned on the 6th January, 1930. 
OYA AND DALAT. The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports:— Judicial.—In the Magistrate’s Court criminal at Dalat five cases were heard, three of which were for contempt of Court. Two of the defendants were fined $5 each and costs while the other was imprisoned for six weeks. One case of cruelty to an animal was heard and defendant ordered to pay compensation $4 to the owner of the dog. One case of breach of Weights and Measures Orders was heard (W 2 Section 4 (iii)) and defendant fined $25 and costs, this being his second offence. At Oya one case of theft was heard and defendant ordered to return the stolen property, and also two contempt of Court cases for non-payment of fine. P.W.D.— The new Sungei Buloh road was finished on 21st December, for the total cost of $320. Two small bridges were made on the Mukah side and the long bridge on the Oya side was thoroughly repaired. The telephone line was moved from the old road, six new posts being necessitated and new wire put up. Work on the reconditioning of Day’s Road had progressed very satisfactorily. A wide rentis has now been cut the whole way to the sea and the ditch on both sides cleaned and deepened, about 700 fathoms of the road have been raised already but great difficulty will be experienced towards the sea owing to swamp and lack of good soil. New blats were put in Dalat Bungalow at the end of the month, and the main posts of the bungalow were all judilited. General.—The District Officer, Mr. P. M. Adams, Mukah and Oya, came over on 21st and we proceeded to Dalat the next day where the District Officer, Mr. P. M. Adams, Mukah and Oya, settled the few outstanding larger affairs. We proceeded to Sibu on the 23rd. Education.—The new school has made very rapid progress this month, the average attendance being seventy-seven in comparison with twenty-seven the month before. Rainfall.—The total rainfall recorded during the month was 12.89 inches the greatest tall in any one day being 3.30 inches. Shipping.—Three motor schooners and three schooners entered and the same number cleared. Trade.—251 koyans of raw sago, three piculs of gutta jangkar and twenty-five piculs of gutta para were shipped to Kuching. The District Officer, Mukah and Oya, Mr. P. M. Adams, reports:— Court.—Jugi, a Milano, was imprisoned one month for contempt of Court. Nineteen persons were summoned for non-payment of water rate for 1929. They were all given time up to 31st; failing payment they will be fined in addition to double the tax. General.—Abang Mohd. Solek again attempts to re-open his imaginary claim against two Chinese firms. The matter was thoroughly gone into and referred to the Resident, who ruled that Abang Solek has no grounds for taking any further action. Fines amounting to $175 were imposed on heirs to Estate Siti for withholding properties from probate and $122.07 collected for probate. It appears that there is reason to believe that reports made last month concerning thefts bazaar shops were false as the owners of the shops have absconded. The Dyaks in Sungei Arip, Balingian, where a Chinese trader was murdered last August, object to traders entering that river in future. P.W.D.—New boiler tubes arrived for the waterworks pump and are being installed by boilmakers from Kuching. The cost of the materials is not yet known, but in any case the vote for this heading already been overspent. There is, however a large surplus remaining under the heading of roads and bridges which will cover this expenditure. Pumping had to be stopped whilst the repairs were being executed. The bazaar road in Pasar Lintang was raised. Electrical.—Wiring still continues. There is a shortage of meters and many of those in use at resent are unreliable, being secondhand and of a type already condemned. The main wires in the bazaar were changed as they were too small to take the load. Prisons.—The prisoners averaged 29.70 and were employed carrying coal, raising the bazaar road and general upkeep of roads. The Tamil mandor who promised to take up the vacancy as prison mandor went to Kuching for one trip of the motor schooner but has not returned. Forestry.—On my trip to Balingian the Dyaks complained about the difficulties of working jelutong. They contend that every tree is dying and that it is impossible to find trees undamaged according to forest standards. If they tap any tree they are inevitably fined $5 per tree, which kills any profit they can make. I have for a long time suspected that this is the case and consider that certain areas should be thoroughly inspected and the jelutong workers be allowed to tap such trees without fear of being fined. Rainfall for the month was 13.57 inches. The Acting Divisional Engineer, Mr. P. H. Flood-Page, reports:— Sibu Buildings in Progress.—Female lunatic ward completed and handed over for occupation. Private enterprise buildings progressing satisfactorily. Repairs to Public Buildings.—Repairs and alterations have been carried out during the month to the following buildings: — (a) Bungalow No. 6 re-roofing, (b) Court House— alterations and additions ; (c) Bungalow No. 8 —repairs. Roads and Bridges.—  (a) Tender accepted for 670 feet extension to Court Road and work put in hand. Two concrete culverts (3' dia. and 2' dia.) have been constructed under this road during the month; (b) Minor repairs to roads as necessary have been completed. Wharves, etc.—(a) Work upon second instalment of new Customs wharf commenced; (b) Piling for new concrete wharf is proceeding. Waterworks.—Various service pipes have been laid is necessary.	 Plant.—All satisfactory. Outstations, Sarikei and Binatang.—(a) No. 2 Bungalow, Sarikei, approaching completion; (b) Jail, Sarikei, progressing satisfactorily. One motor lighter has been stationed at Sarikei for transporting earth filling at Sarikei.
LOWER REJANG. December, 1929. The District Officer, Mr. E. V. Andreini, Lower Rejang, reports :— General.—I visited Daro on the 7th and 8th and inquired into a theft of jewellery and other goods from a shophouse. It would appear that the thief or thieves got in through some rotten planking of the side of the house and only took the most valuable objects whilst the towkay's son was sleeping within a few feet of the cases which were rifled. No trace of the thief or goods has yet been found, but suspicion points to it being a put-up job of somebody in the shop. Rubber Inspector Brahim visited a few gardens at Matu, but returned before his visit would have any useful result and I hope he will be able to come again shortly. The site below the Court House for a new bazaar was cleared and the shopkeepers given notice that they would be required to build within nine months from 1st January, 1930. Various small traders near the Kuala were ordered to join up with the Kuala Bazaar. The controlled price of fish was abolished. Tuanku Mohamat, Native Officer, Rejang, visited Paloh, Belawai, Jerijeh and Barong. P.W.D.—Cattle sheds at Rejang and Matu were re-roofed. Various repairs to buildings and bridges effected and bungalow bathroom cemented. The Land Officer, Mr. N. E. Hughes, Sarikei and Binatang, reports:— On Sunday, 8th December, the Resident, Mr. C. D. Adams, arrived at Binatang, having walked overland from Sarikei, and on the following day the Dyaks from Sungei Bakong assembled in the fort to discuss with him the proposed pepper reserve in the ulu Bakong district. The Resident went into the whole question with them and an agreement was arrived at. Consequently Foochow applications for land in this area were accepted at the Land Office. A notice was posted defining the reserve and a Land Inspector was immediately sent to measure up all land applied for. With reference to this pepper reserve, a certain amount of trouble has arisen in connection with Cantonese planters. There were four old gardens already planted inside the reserve boundaries; these of course, will have to remain, so an area of approximately five acres was pegged out adjoining each garden, and the gardeners were told that in future they would not be allowed to extend beyond this. Five acres is a generous allowance for a pepper gar-den and should provide more than enough timber for making tanah masak. Apart from these old gardens, however, various other problems will have to be dealt with and will necessitate a personal visit to the area in the near future. The Cantonese here are in a great minority to the Foochows, and are apparently very jealous of them; certainly, as far as land is concerned, they never miss an opportunity of kachau-ing the Foochows and they are beginning to become a bit of a nuisance. Also, they are in almost every case the hardest people to bring into line over the Land Regulations, since they usually contest any innovation bitterly. For instance, Land Inspectors have before now been threatened with assault merely for carrying out their duties in the management of gardens; if this kind of thing continues serious steps will have to be taken to deal with the offenders. Earlier in the month I received a letter from the Resident, Mr. C. D. Adams, containing instructions for the new town-planning scheme at Sarikei. On the 11th three Land Inspectors came down from Sibu to demarcate the new shop lots, the wharf reserve and the new road from the present bazaar down to Nielong. This was done, and clearing and building can commence whenever necessary. A new kampong reserve will also have to be marked out in house lots to accommodate the Malays from Kampong Ulu, who have, been told to vacate their present houses. On the 17th the Divisional Land Officer, Mr. C. E. J. Pascoe, arrived at Binatang from Sibu, and on the 18th the Superintendent of Lands, Mr. C. S. Griffiths, arrived from Kuching. The Superintendent discussed fully all land affairs both at Sarikei and Binatang and left on the following day. The Divisional Land Officer, Mr. C. E. J. Pascoe, reports:— Staff.—Semuni bin Suleiman was appointed Assistant Land Inspector on and from the 1st December, and Benedict Epo on and from 10th December. Epo proceeded for duty in Binatang. Wan Drus, head clerk, returned from leave on the 5th December. Sub-Stations.— During the month Kanowit, Bina- tang and Sarikei were visited. Kanowit requires more attention than it is getting and, with an increase in field staff, this deficiency will be rectified. The Superintendent paid a flying visit to Sarikei and Binatang and went thoroughly into land affairs at these stations. It was decided that separate Land Officers will shortly be essential at both stations, and an arrangement was arrived at whereby an extra clerk will be lent from Sibu in the New Year to assist with the quit rent collections. The new Sarikei bazaar lay out was demarcated during the month and one chain blue prints prepared. Sibu New Town.—The stipulated three months' notice for removal of wooden buildings elapsed on the 21th December, and steps were taken to enforce the demolition of all houses owned by persons who were not either potential builders or lessees of stone shophouses. The issue of new titles and all payments having now been completed, work in this direction eased up considerably. Revenue and Expenditure.—Revenue for the year reached a higher figure than ever before, i.e., over $90,000, and the expenditure will be considerably less than in the previous year. Exact amounts are not yet to hand as all outstations vouchers are not yet forwarded.
Island Club, Sibu. BOWLING AVERAGES FOR DECEMBER, 1929. BOWLING HANDICAP FOR DECEMBER, 1929.
Sibu New Year Regatta and Sports. An unexpected spell of fine weather continued over Christmas and New Year and large crowds in from all parts of the Division for this time-honoured event. The New Year celebrations opened with sport, the padang at 2 p.m., the unusual dryness of a ground (except in the immediate vicinity of the refreshment tent) together with the excellent organization of Messrs. Pascoe and Baron were responsible for the successful completion of all the items on the programme considerably before scheduled time. Darkness having at length fallen upon the scene there was a dispaly of assorted fireworks and bombs upon which was written the motto “after igniting the fuse it is best to quickly depart,” we are glad to say that the bombing committee were quick to appreciate the wisdom of these words and suffered no casualties. An excellent cold supper in the Island Club assisted the weary to see the New Year in. It was eventually seen in properly after the old year had been seen off by Bugler Corporal Dullah with the assistance of the customary noggin of Old Tom. The following morning was nearly split in half by the detonation of a cannon which roused the sluggish from their beds at 5 a.m. By 7 a.m. the regatta was in full blast, bugles blowing and shouts in seven tongues announcing the start of the first race. The “Tote” was closed and the man with a last minute hunch had to creep along to the next tent to drown his sorrows in an early morning glass of arrack. The noise increased when eventually the favourite, the redoubtable Sri Bulan Perak, came up to win in a canter, its sixty odd jockeys yelling enough to bring the sky down After the luncheon interval there took place an experimental event about which the committee state they felt they had bitten off more than they could chew. This was the outboard or “motor-pit" race. There, were eight entries received but only six started. The chief difficulty lay in the handicapping, as this type of motor is notoriously capricious and sometimes proceeds at N miles per hour but more often at N-N miles per hour except when in the hands of one who knows and loves them. The highest handicapped entry was that of Mr. Lamplough of Selalang. This gadget appeared to consist of a four-cylinder aeroplane engine on to the front of which was fixed a small box with the lid ripped off, in which the pilot sits muttering suitable prayers for those at sea. This machine started just as the winner and runner up were about to win and run up respectively, and finished a close 3rd at an average speed of 30 m.p.h. over a course of 6 miles. The difficulty of handicapping such a race was shown in the case of the winner, an upriver dealer, whose time in the race was eight minutes faster than his handicap return. It is to be feared that the elasticity of his engine performance was only equalled by the elasticity his conscience. In the long boat races there were fortunately no objections or hitches and to everyone’s surprise the dreaded Milano bedas were absolutely nowhere, all the races being won by Dyak crews and boats, hope this will encourage more Dyaks to enter next year.At the conclusion of the races the football final was played off. This resulted in a win for the Blue Shirts by 7 to nil. This team won the cup with ease last year, and again this year no other team even gave them a game, as they consist of all the best Sibu players, whereas all the other teams were representative of either a Government Office or a Kampong. More entries would come in and closer matches would be seen if it was made a rule in the future teams must be representative of some kampong or office, etc. At the conclusion of the match Mrs. Pascoe kindly presented the prizes. For those interested the following are the results of the boat races. Race No. 1-—Bong Boats. Unlimited crews (excluding bedas). First prize, cup value $75. Cash Second prize $50. Race No. 2.—Penghulus Race (Penghulu in boat) 15 paddlers. First prize, cup presented by the Resident and cash $30. Second prize $ 15. Race No. 3.—School Boys Race—15 paddlers. First prize, cup presented by Chop Soon Bee of Singapore. Second prize cash $8. Race No 4.—30 Paddlers. Bedas allowed. First prize, cup value $50 and cash $30. Second prize $30. Race No. 5.—Offices and Ships’ Crew (Govt.) 8 paddlers. First prize $24. Second prize $8. Race No. 6.—25 Paddlers. First prize, cup value $40 and cash $25. Second prize $25. Race No. 7.—Tua Kampongs’ Race (T.K. in Boat) 15 paddlers. First prize, cup value $30. Second prize $15. Race No. 8.—Launch Race—Class III. Any out-board motor boat. First prize, cup value $30. Second prize $15. Race No. 9.—Unlimited open race. Open to bedas. First prize, cup value $75 and cash $50. Second prize $50. Race No. 10.—Consolation Race. Open to any entrants (including bedss) that have not won a race, First prize $50. Second prize $25.
Fifth Division Reports. November, 1929. Court.—There was one conviction for buffalo stealing, other cases were of little importance. General.—The chief event was His Highness the Rajah’s visit to the Division. Arriving via Labuan, where the Maimuna was in readiness, His Highness first visited Limbang and, after a stay of 3 days during which Brunei war visited, proceeded to Trusan, transhipping from the Maimuna to the Sylvia at Kuala Trusan. A very warm reception greeted His Highness on arrival both at Sundar and Trusan, where he had not been since the Trusan expedition of 1900. The next day the Maimuna was rejoined and proceeded to Lawas from whence, after visiting the Lawas Estates, the Vamco Sawmill and Mr. Cook’s farm at Trusan, His Highness returned to Labuan in order to proceed to Singapore. The Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Capt. G. D. Le Gros Clark, accompanied by Mrs. Le Gros Clark, paid a visit of inspection and interviewed the Chinese at Limbang and Lawas, and Mr. N. A. Middlemas also paid a hurried visit to supervise the survey work which is being done in the Division. Mr. MacLaine, having completed the audit of the Division, returned to headquarters. Public Works Department.—The prisoners gang numbering 16 were engaged on raising the surface of the road to Limpaung, which was constantly being flooded at high tides. The lorry continued to carry stone and laterite to dress the surface of the Pandaruan Hoad. Medical.—There were eight patients admitted to the hospital and 91 out-patients treated for various ailments, and 36 injections given for yaws, etc. The rainfall amounted to 15.31 inches, of which 5.75 inches fell in one day. December, 1929. Court.—Was as usual very light, there being no cases of any importance. General.—An unfortunate drowning fatality occurred at the sago wharf, when a boat containing two Chinamen capsized, one managed to get ashore but the other disappeared, his body was found some four days later when subsequently an inquest was held and a verdict of drowning through misadventure returned. A child was taken by crocodile whilst bathing off a raft at Merasam . The professional crocodile catcher is away trapping in the Baram but as soon as he returns efforts will be made to secure this reptile. The first consignment ($75,000) of the new currency notes arrived by the s.s. Margaret. The new designs were much admired by all. Visitors to the Station were Messrs. Macpherson, Pollard, Walters, McLeod, Montgomery and Cook. P.W.D.—Work on the new road to Brunei, starting across river from Sijampak and heading for Kampong Pandam, was commenced under contract, and by the end of the month over a mile was completed and will be ready for traffic as soon as the moisture drains off. The prisoners, averaging 16 in number, were employed in re-making the road by Kampong Pamukat and in building the ferry ramps on both banks of the river. Medical.—Only two patients were admitted to hospital, one a case of compound fracture of the thigh, which was attended to by the M.O. of Brunei, who made a special visit for that purpose. 120 out-patients were treated for various complaints. The rainfall amounted to 3.22 inches only.
LAWAS. November, 1929. The Assistant District Officer, Mr. G. J. D. Walters, reports:— The chief event of the month was the visit of His Highness the Rajab to the district. His Highness, accompanied by the Resident, arrived at Sundar by m.l. Sylvia on Monday the 25th. His Highness interviewed all who wished to see him and afterwards walked through the bazaar. In the afternoon His Highness proceeded to Trusan, and on arrival interviewed a number of pepole in the Fort. His Highness later visited the bazaar and walked a short distance down the kampong road. Early on Tuesday the 26th, His Highness, accompanied by the Resident and myself, left Trusan in m.l. Sylvia and proceeded to H.H.M.Y Maimuna, anchored off Kuala Trusan, which was reached at 8 a.m. His Highness’ party on board Maimuna were the Resident and Mrs. Kortright, Mr. and Mrs. Gillan, Mr. J. R. Combe and myself. His Highness and party then proceeded by Maimuna to Lawas, calling in at the Vamco Sawmill at Tagai for a short time, where Messrs. C. J. Cook and J. S. Montgomery were met. Lawas was reached at 1 p.m., where His Highness landed and interviewed all who wished to see him in the Fort. His Highness then visited the bazaar and in the afternoon proceeded by Maimuna to the Lawas Rubber Estate, where His Highness was shown round by the Manager, Mr. G. F. W. Clifford. His Highness returned to Lawas in the Maimuna later in the afternoon. On Wednesday the 27th, His Highness and party the Assistant Conservator of Forests, Mr. D. S. McLeod, also accompanying, left in Maimuna for Tagai, which was reached at midday. His Highness was shown over the sawmill by the Managing Partner, Mr. C. J. Cook. In the afternoon, His Highness and party visited the farm at Erasan. His Highness was shown round by the Managing Partner, Mr. C. J. Taylor, and afterwards returned to Maimuna at Tagai. His Highness and party then proceeded by Maimuna to Kuala Lawas, where the night was spent. He turned to Lawas that evening with Mr. McLeod. At 9 a.m., Thursday the 28th. His Highness left Kuala Lawas in Maimuna for Labuan. I arrived at Lawas on the 3rd instant to take over the district from Mr. R. L. Daubeny, who left the following day by s.s. Auby. The Auditor, Mr. A. L. MacLaine, was in the district from the 4th to the 18th, when all the accounts for 1928 were audited. The Protector of Labour, Captain C. D. Le Gros Clark, accompanied by Mrs. Clark, visited Lawas from the 11th to the 14th. During his stay, Captain Clark visited the Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estate and the sawmill at Tagai. Captain Clark, in his capacity as Secretary for Chinese Affairs, also interviewed the local Chinese in the Lawas Bazaar. The Assistant Conservator of Forests, Mr. D. S. McLeod, arrived from Miri on the 15th and is now stationed here temporarily. At 8.30 p.m. on the 14th instant, a large smoke-house, situated on the river front and about twenty-yards in front of the bazaar, caught on fire. A big blaze resulted and the smoke-house was entirely destroyed. Several small sheds nearby also caught alight, but the fire was prevented from spreading further by the assistance of some people present. In accordance with instructions received, all flags throughout the district were half-masted in token of respect for the late Dr. Charles Hose. On the 23rd, I left for Trusan and Sundar to prepare for His Highness the Rajah’s visit. Court.—The usual number of civil cases and several minor criminal cases came before the Coutts dining the month, none of winch call for special mention. Prisoners.—The daily average number of prisoners in the gang was 8. The gang was employed on various works round the station. The work on the construction of the Native Officer’s quarters and 2nd Clerk’s quarters at Trusan, and the Native Officer's quarters at Sundar, has been proceeding satisfactorily. Entong proceeded with the repairs to bridges on the Punang-Road. Agriculture.—The Lawas (Sarawak) Robber Estates, Ltd., exported 22,400 lbs. of dry rubber during the month. December, 1929. Court —In the District Court, Fung Ah Tai was sentenced to one year’s imprisonment and received a whipping of twelve strokes, for theft, section 379. Tail was fined $25 for breach of Local Buffalo Regulations and Murah was fined $15 under section 156. Seven persons were fined various amounts for breach of Land Regulations and ordered to pay -ears of rent due. Prisoners.—The daily average number of prisoners was ten. They were employed on the usual routine and upkeep of the station. Public Works.—The second Clerk's quarters and Native Officer’s quarters at Trusan were completed. The buildings are awaiting final inspection before the contractor is paid off Mandor Entoug continued with the repairs to bridges on the Trusan Ltd. General.—At the beginning of the month I was at Trusan where a number of affairs were attended to. I returned to Lawas on the 6th. With reference to the Local Order dated 1910 by which the land opposite the Lawas Fort was made over to Datu Muda Tai (now deceased) for his sole use; in accordance with His Highness the Rajah’s instructions, when the matter was brought before His Highness during his recent visit, it was decided that the present occupants of this land, all of whom are Datu Muda Tai’s relations and who now own rubber gardens on this land, should be given occupation tickets for these gardens free of rent. The owners were therefore notified accordingly and occupation tickets were issued to each. On the 24th I left in the Saripah with Mr. C. J. Cook Christmas and New Year at Limbang, at the kind invitation of the Resident. Agriculture—The Lawas Sarawak Rubber Estates, Limited, exported 33,909 lbs. of dry rubber during the month. 
Limbang Regatta 1930. The usual Regatta and Sports were held at Limbang on New Year’s Day. An innovation was the introduction of a totalisator, which proved a great success, more than $600 passing through the hands of the enterprising clerks who volunteered to run it. The most popular events in the programme of Land Sports were the buffalo races; three in all, two for Natives and one for Europeans. There was an exceptional gathering of Europeans present, numbering 25, including past and present Residents of Brunei, Mr. E. E. F. Pretty and Mr. P. A. B. McKerron. Fireworks and a cinema show concluded a very Successful day.
ECHOES FROM THE WORLD OUTSIDE. The Thomson Lecturer Gives Aberdeen Some Amazing Facts. Dr. Ronald Campbell Macfie who recently delivered the Thomson Lectures, and in the course of their delivery made many interesting statements, is reported in the "Aberdeen Press." Dr. Macfie said:— Climax of Creation. “Life, we must all admit, is the climax of creation. The blossoming of life from the dust, whether the inevitable consequence of a series of chemical changes, whether due to the breath from the nostrils of God, was certainly, is certainly, one of the most marvellous phenomena the universe can show. “Flowers and trees, and birds, and beasts, and men are certainly to us more wonderful than any lifeless blazing sun, than any huge dead nebula, however vast. “It may well seem to us, the highest blossom on the tree of life, that life must in some mysterious way be the real meaning of everything. And yet think what an ultramicroscopic speck life is! “All the teeming life of our globe—all its forests and meadows and gardens, all its myriads of fishes, birds and beasts, is in material bulk so small that it might all be buried in the Pacific Ocean without appreciably raising the sea level; while if it were all made up into a ball and flung into the crater of a sunspot it would be licked up like a speck of dust in a roaring furnace. " Whirling Systems." “Not only are our blood corpuscles and our brain cells, and our eyes, and our hard bones, and our soft muscles nothing but whirling systems— that is extraordinary and incredible enough in all conscience—but we are mostly empty space, or what we call empty space, for the electrons and protons are as few in proportion to the apparent volume of our body as the stars are in proportion to space. “I, who stand before you now, clothed in flesh and "cloth—I, who look fairly solid—am really a hollow ghost, for though according to physics I consist of quadrillions and quadrillions and quadrillions of invisible, infinitesimal particles, yet they are so small in themselves that I am actually emptier than a vacuum tube. “If some terrific grasp were to squeeze the particles together as they have been squeezed together in some dead suns, they would not fill a split pea. A 160 lb. “Pea." “That is a conjuring feat—the kind that only a God of Miracles can perform, went on Dr. Macfie. A living man, brain, and eyes, and heart, and liver, and limbs and all that they imply, made simply by putting in motion certain particles that in bulk would not fill a pea! “How much do you think the half pea full of materiality would weigh? It would weigh about 160 pounds, and if you managed to lift it in your hands you could not throw it more than a few inches, and if you let it fall it would go through the floor. “That is what I am, declared Dr. Macfie, that is what matter is. A hundred tons of the only stuff matter contains could be packed into pocket-book—the rest is space and such stuff dreams are made of. Man's Composition. “If they analysed man’s body quantitatively they found in a man of medium size at least enough hydrogen to fill a ten-gallon barrel enough oxygen nearly to fill 900 nine-gallon barrels, enough carbon to make 10,000 lead pencils, enough phosphorus to make 9,000 boxes of matches, enough hydrogen to fill a balloon capable of lifting a man to the top of Ben Mac Dhui, enough iron to make five carpet tacks enough salt to fill six ordinary salt cellars, and four or five pounds of nitrogen. “Chemically, man was mostly gas and water."
Nobel Prize Winners Chosen. Winners of five of the Nobel prizes have recently been made public. Literature, 1929, Thomas Mann, German novelist, who wrote Buddenbrooks and The Magic Mountain. Physics, 1928. Professor Owen W. Richardson, of King’s College. London, discoverer of "Richardson's law’’ on the motion of electrons, which forms the basis of the radio tube. Physics, 1929, the Duc de Broglie of Paris, a research worker in the fields of electricity and the X-ray. Chemistry, 1929. divided between Dr. Arthur Harden, Professor of Biochemistry at London University, and Professor Hans von Euler-Chelpin, of Upsala University, Sweden, in recognition of their researches in the fermentation of sugars and the enzyme action in the process. Von Euler-Chelpin is a German who has long been associated with Swedish universities. The medicine prize was divided between Dr. Frederick Gowland Hopkins. Professor of Bio-chemistry at the University of Cambridge. England, and Dr. C. Sijkmann, of the University of Utrecht, Holland. Englishmen have thus placed their country in the forefront by winning one full award and sharing in two others. This year the academy chose in Thomas Mann, one of the most widely read and generally respected of modern novelists, a man who is almost as well-known abroad as at home. Other writer mentioned for the prize this year were John Galsworthy and Gilbert K. Chesterton in England. Sinclair Lewis and Thornton Wilder in1 United States. Guglielmo Ferrero in Italy. Erica Maria Remarque and Ricardo Huch in Germany and Maxim Gorky in Russia. Originally the Nobel prizes were worth about £8.000, that is, in 1901, but after the war they fell in value, and the figure was about £6.000 in 1923.The Nobel will decreed that the income of the estate should be divided equally among annual winners.
Chinese Men A Million Years Ago. PRODABLE ANCESTORS OF THE HUMAN RACE-BONES IN A CAVE NEAR PEKING. The discovery of the fossilised bones of ten men who lived, perhaps, a million years ago, is announced in a telegram from the Peking Correspondent of the “Daily telegraph," which was first with the news. "This find was made near that city, in a cave which has already yielded very valuable anthropological Ideal treasures. “The most important item is a perfect skull, examination of which, it is held, shows that at so remote a period of the world's history there existed on earth beings who had the power of thinking and who walked in an erect attitude. “According to the view taken by scientific authority at Peking, including the distinguished Canadian, Dr. Davidson Black, who made important earlier discoveries at the cave, the ‘Peking man' excels in antiquity all previous finds of the sort. “This‘Peking man,' in fact, is believed to be the direct ancestor of the present human family." —DAILY TELEGRAPH. “The petrified bones of ten men, who, it is estimated, lived a million years ago, have been found in a limestone cave in a field at Choukoutien, thirty miles from Peking," writes the Peking Correspondent of the Daily Telegraph. “This discovery was announced by a group of scientists representing the Rockefeller Foundation and Geological Survey of China. “Included in these paleontological treasures is a complete human skull comprising a perfect cranium and facial bones. This is described as a most remarkable and important contribution to the history of human development. “In the same limestone matrix the searchers, unearthed a prehistoric rhinoceros. A preliminary investigation of the skull which is now locked up in the safe of the Rockefeller Institute under the guardianship of Dr. Davidson Black, a Canadian paleontologist, confirms the deductions made by scientists from ether evidence as to man's ancestry, and relegates the Java Ape Man definitely into a minor position as a mere offshoot. The developed frontal cranium and the general measurements of the skull have convinced Dr. Black that the ‘Peking man’ was a thinking being, standing erect, dating to the beginning of the Ice Age. The ten fossilised skeletons lay huddled together in the small cave, indicating that they led a community life. “Officials of the Geological Survey with Dr. Black, Dr. Grabau and other experts, are busy compiling their first scientific statement for release to a convention which is to be held here on December 23. “Epochmaking." Every authority who has seen the skull unhesitatingly describes the discovery as epochmaking as outrivaling all previous discoveries. “That the Peking Man or ‘Sinanthropus Pekinensis” was direct ancestor of the present human family is the emphatic opinion advanced. “The first credit of recognising the importance of the find belongs to Mr. J. G. Andersson, a Swedish geologist, who, with Dr. Grainger, Paleontologist of the American Museum of Natural History surveyed the field in 1927. Continuing his investigation, Mr. Andersson, with another Swede, Dr. Bohlin, found the first tooth 'Peking Man.’ “Dr. Davidson Black persuaded the Chinese to permit sustained excavations, employing funds supplied by the Rockefeller Foundation. The Chinese insisted on the participation of a Chinese excavator named Peiwenchung, who actually exposed the matrix bearing the skull and the ten skeletons.” Dr. G. Elliot Smith was asked by a representative of the Daily Telegraph to state his views on the most recent find of the remains of primitive man. He said: “The announcement attributed to Professor Davidson Black of the discovery of the remains of ten examples of the Peking man must be regarded as the most important find of the remains of ancient man that has ever been made. “In the case of the Ape-Man (Pithecanthropus) in Java there was recovered simply the tantalising fragment of a skull with three teeth, and a thigh bone, with no certain knowledge that the leg bone was part of the same individual as the fragments of the skull. In the case of the Piltdown man there was simply a fragment of the skull and a piece of the Jaw. “Hence the discovery in China of the remains of on less than ten individuals belonging to a primitive type, which may be as old as the Piltdown man in England and the Ape-Man in Java, should make it possible to acquire a much fuller knowledge of the nature of the earliest known members of the human family than it seemed reasonable ever to expect.”
SHIPPING INTELLIGENCE. Port of Kuching. JANUARY ARRIVALS FROM SINGAPORE:
LISTS OF FIRST-CLASS PASSENGERS.
By s.s. Kuching on 6th January:— Messrs. E. Parnell, R. L. Moir, Lee Dye, Allman, N. Williams, Mr. and Mrs. G. B. Youngberg and four children, and Mr. Song Tui Choe.
By s.s. Vyner Brooke on 13th January :— Miss Tait, Miss G. M. Looker, Messrs. J. W. Whiteside, McMurry, Olden, Wainwright, Dr. Hutchison, Rev. G. D. Proctor and two children, Mr. and Mrs. Fernandez and baby, Mr. and Mrs. T. B. Cheng, Master Law Chong Kee, and Mr. Chew Boon Heng.
By s.s. Kuching on 20th January:— Mr. R. F. Palmer, Mr. and Mrs. R. E. Holttum, Mr. Chan Cheong Teng, Miss M. Brodie, Mr. Lau Shui Yong, and Mrs. Beh Ngee Chay.
By s.s. Vyner Brooke on 27th January:— Mr. Kong Chew Moh.
SAILINGS FROM SINGAPORE TO EUROPE.
P. AND O. COMPANY. (Agents—Sarawak Steamship Co., Ltd.) No Sailing dates furnished.)
BLUB FUNNEL LINE. (Agents—Borneo Company, Ltd.)
NIPPON YUSEN KAISHA. Calling at Aden, Naples, Marseilles, Gibraltar and London. (Agents—Sarawak Steamship Co., Ltd.)
It may be of interest to those homeward bound to know that the N.Y.K. are improving their Japan-Europe Service in 1930.	 With a view to bettering the service this Company is putting on two vessels of 11,800 tons each, the Terukuni Maru and the Yasukuni Maru. Both these vessels are motor driven and capable of attaining 17 knots. They have accommodation for 121 first class and 68 second class passengers. The Terukuni Maru commences her maiden voyage on 30th June, 1930, and the Yasukuni Maru on the 22nd September, 1930. After these vessels have been placed in commission the 8,000 tons class of steamer will be withdrawn. These comprise the vessels Kamo Maru, Kitano Maru and Atsuta Maru. According to the new schedule these vessels will arrive in Marseilles 22 days after leaving Singapore and will call at Naples en route.
GLEN AND SHIRE LINE. (Agents—Borneo Company, Ltd ) For London, Rotterdam and Hamburg.
THE ESAT ASIATIC COMPANY, LIMITED. (Agents—Borneo Company, Ltd.) In connection with sailing dates some time ahead it may be useful to our readers to know the date of the week on which the steamer is to leave Singapore in order to know the necessary time of departure from Kuching. We therefore take the liberty of inserting the useful Calendar which was published as a Supplement in the last number of our contemporary—The Mirage.
“MIRAGE” CALENDAR FOR 1930 and also for the 10 YEARS PAST AND THE COMING 10 YEARS. A CALENDAR FOR 21 YEARS 1920-1940. Compiled by A. S. Pillai. The above Calendar will enable you to discover on which dav of the week any date fell or will fall between the years 1920 and 1940. METHOD.—Say you wish to find out on which day of the week 27th March, 1926 fell: All you have to do is this: 1. Find the column marked 26. 2. Drop down three in that column and you are opposite March. 3. Add the figure you get (which in this case 1) to the date of the month you require (which in this case is 27) Total 28. 4. Divide the total by 7. If the remainder is NIL the day is Saturday.  So that 27th March, 1926, fell on a Saturday. N.B.—If the total is a number between 1 and 6 which cannot be divided by 7, the total must be taken as the remainder.  For instance if the total is 5 the day will be Thursday.
Kuching Market Price List. 31st January, 1930.
CORRESPONDENCE. [The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
KUCHING, 24th January, 1930. The Editor, Sarawak Gazette, Kuching. DEAR SIR, I should like to point out an omission from the list of Warships which have visited Kuching during the past sixty years as published in the Gazette of 2nd September, 1929, namely: the ships H.M.S. Fame and the Japanese cruiser Mogami. Mr. Ward has already referred to the Fame in your last issue. H.I.J.M. Mogami paid a second visit during the war (the date I cannot remember) and anchored at Pending on this occasion. Her Commander’s name was Mikami. Her first visit was in May, 1914, under Captain (now Admiral) Mimura. Yours faithfully, F. G. DAY.
The Editor, Sarawak Gazette, Kuching. DEAR SIR, May I ask you, through the medium of the Sarawak Gazette to inform your readers, that after twenty years' connexion with the International Correspondence Schools, I have given up this work from 31st December, 1929, with a view to developing my agencies for the publications of the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge, the Religious Tract Society, and other houses. Yours faithfully, GEO. C. DANIEL.
Acknowledgments. We record with thanks the receipt of the following Journals and Periodicals:- The Straits Budget; The Singapore Free Press; The Straits Echo; The British North Borneo Herald; The China Express and Telegraph; The Eastern Courier; The British and Colonial Printer and Stationer; The Printers’ Engineer. A wider exchange of journals would be welcome.