



Price KUCHING, FRIDAY, JANUARY 16 1920. 10cents
CONTENTS.
The Sarawak Gazette
Page.
The Past Year, 1919 	...	...	...	 ...	...        17
Birth:—Geikie	...	...	...	...	 20
Notes ...                   ...          ...                     ...                    ...                …       20
Clippings ...	...	...	...	…	21
Sarawak Regatta Subscription List	   ...	...       21
British Air Lines	...	...	...	...	 21
Correspondence	...	...	...	...	22
Bowling         ...	…	…	…	…	22
Monthly Reports: -           Sadong	...	...	...	22
                     Sibil —Oya ...	   ...	 ...       23
                     Mukah—Baram -Miri                ...	25
                     Brooketon Colliery—Limbang	...      26
Kuching Shipping                  ...	.,.                     …	...       28
Market Price List for the month of January 1920	...      29
Rainfall           ...	...	...	...	     29, 31
Almanac          ...	...	...	...	...	29
Meteorological Returns       …	  ...	  ...	31
Passengers	..t.	...		...	...	32
FRIDAY, JANUARY 16, 1920
THE PAST YEAR, 1919.
The Sarawak Gazette.
—•—

SUBSCRIPTIONS to the Gazette are as follows:
The Sarawak Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
Single copy	...	...	...	. 10 CENTS
Subscription for one year	...	                $2.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations                              2.25
Subscription including postage to all other
              Countries.                    ...	...	     2.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING—
     Subscription for one year (including postage abroad 5s. 10d.
The Sarawak Government Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY—
     Single copy	...	...	...      .05 cents
     Subscription for one year	...	...   $1.00
     Subscription including postage to Outstations                   1.25
     Subscription including postage to all other
                  Countries.                 …                           1.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING—
     Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 3s. 6d

   All subscriptions are payable in advance and must
commence from the 1st January in each year on which date they are renewable. All broken periods will be considered as full.
   Subscriptions will not be renewed unless notice of renewal given.
   Changes of Address should be notified to the Office in writing.
   We give below a summary of the chief events in this country’ during the past year.
   His Highness the Rajah left for Europe on January 30th arriving in England in the middle of March. During His Highness' absence the Government of the country was carried on by His Highness the Tuan Muda, while the Honble, the Resident of the First Division acted as deputy on such occasions as His Highness was absent from head-quarters. On December 11th His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by the Ranee and their three children, returned to Kuching, where their arrival was warmly welcomed by all classes of the community.
    A visit to Kuching was paid by H. E. the Honble. F. S. James, the Officer Administering the Straits Settlements, in September : unfortunately affairs of State made his stay a short one.
    From the high price of rice at the close of 1918 and from the warnings issued by all rice-exporting countries, it was obvious that the past year would be a critical one with regard to this essential article of diet and earnest efforts were made to increase the local production and also to stimulate the growth of rice-substitutes. Unfortunately- the year's harvest was a poor one and though high prices, no doubt, reduced consumption, it was certain that the State would be largely dependent on imported rice. In April an Order was published making excessive profit on the sale of rice and padi an offence. In June the expected occurred
when the Honble. H. B. Crocker was appointed Food Control Officer and the sale of rice became the business of the State. A system of rationing was introduced, applicable primarily to the First Division, but gradually adopted by outstations. Thanks to the co-operation of the Straits Government a supply of rice equal to the average based on the imports of the two proceeding years less 10% was promised, and it was possible for the Government to sell rice to the consumer at a not prohibitive figure. This entailed a loss, which, to the end of December, was estimated at $70,000; this is exclusive of special rice-allowances made to Government servants, which in Kuching alone
amounted to $5,000 a month. While so far the scheme


18
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 16, 19-20.
has acted well, save when lack of communication has made the supply to outstations an impossibility, it is certain that there can be no relaxation of control at present.
   With world-wide labour unrest it was unlikely that Sarawak would be immune, and two small disturbances were reported from Sadong and Miri. These it was possible to adjust by a sympathetic enquire into causes.
   The date for the Peace Celebrations was fixed for the 2nd and 4th of August, and these were attended by a large proportion of the Europeans in the State. A full account of the festivities was published in the Gazette. On other dates, in accordance with circumstances, Celebrations were held in all the outstations.
   In January Mr. W. B. E. Massey, at one time in the employ of the Sarawak Rubber Estates, arrived in Kuching, having come across Borneo from Banjermasin to Simanggang, a journey entailing considerable hardship.
   On June 12th the remains of His Highness the late Rajah Sir Charles Brooke were interred at Sheepstor, at no great distance from the last resting-place of Sir James Brooke, the first Rajah of this country.
   In the same month the Sarawak Steamship Company, Limited, with a capital of $1,100,000 took over the business of the Sarawak and Singapore Steamship Company, and Mr. E. Parnell, who was allowed to resign his position in the Government Service, became first managing director. The capital was over-subscribed and at present the Ordinary $100 shares stand at $106.
   A successful expedition in April, under His Highness the Tuan Muda, was led against the Ga’at Dayaks, who for some years passed had been causing trouble in the upper waters of the Balleh, a main tributary of the Rejang. With small loss of life a severe lesson was given to the rebels who fled to Dutch territory from where they were subsequently handed over to the Government and settled under more immediate supervision.
   The Kuching trade returns, from January to November 30th, are nearly double in value of those of the previous year. The increase, beyond that due to the rise in the cost of materials, is explained by an exceptional engkabang crop, and the high price maintained by sago flour, jelutong and pepper. Sago which in January 1919 stood at $11 rose to $14 in July and has since returned to $11.50. Jelutong has risen from $11.25 to the present price of $20, the highest point it has touched during the year, while white pepper is now quoted at $62.
   The foreign trade which passes through Kuching, for the period of eleven months, shows a total for Imports of $10,088,490 and for Exports $12,104,671, compared with $5,110,817 and $5,453,419 for a similar period in 1918.
   The figures for the Kuching Customs reflect this satisfactory state of trade.
   1919.	 1918.
     Imports ...                  $103,031	$ 88,049
     Exports ...	  537.232	212,462
     
   The Bau Cyaniding Works had an out-put of 21.539.6 oz. gold and 6,407.7 oz. silver (this includes the estimated yield for December), a decrease of 4, 291.3 oz. gold and 1,170.5 silver from the previous year.
   The Sarawak Rubber Estates at Sungei Tengah produced 665,800 lbs. of rubber (an increase of 115,800 lbs.), and at Dahan, where tapping was resumed in March, 131.305 lbs. were obtained.
   Figures for the Government Collieries are only complete for the first eleven months in the year, the gross out-put was 43,583.13 tons, of which 22,214.14 tons were from Brooketon and 21,367.19 from the Sadong mines.
   The rainfall recorded at the Museum amounted to 149.21 inches, and at Matang to 160.39; both figures are below the average.
   The health of the country has been on the whole good, though cholera at Singapore and neighbouring ports led to a strict enforcement of quarantine regulations.
   During March it was found that the subsidiary coinage was rapidly disappearing, and, as a result, both silver dollars and their paper equivalents were passing at a discount. The reason was found in a growing disposition to hoard coinage and in a natural reluctance on the part of natives to accept paper money for their produce ; the ripening of an exceptionally large engkabang crop helped to enhance this difficulty and an
Order was published forbidding the export of all subsidiary coinage from the First Division in excess of two dollars for each person, without, however, bettering the situation. On June 5th an Order was passed making Treasury notes of the denomination of ten cents legal tender in the State up to one dollar, and a further Order dated July 1st legalised the issue of twentv-five cents notes. Owing to a skilful forgery of the latter, these were withdrawn and not replaced, after $5,000 worth had been issued, while of the ten cents notes $43,400 were put into circulation before the end of the year. These notes were the work of the Government Printing Office, and though, after much use, they are incontestably dirty and difficult to handle, their ready absorption by the public showed that the need was urgent.
   Meanwhile the rapid rise in the price of silver led to the gradual withdrawal of the silver dollar, and, by the end of the year, the Straits note was the principal medium or exchange throughout the State.
   Among other notable events of the year was the formation of a Forestry Department, under the direction of Mr. J. P. Mead, which is the beginning of new policy with regard to the great natural wealth of timber in this country.
   Three other measures were passed, the result of which will not be obvious for some time to come, a new scale of pay for the Government subordinate service, the increase in the price of opium and the introduction of imperial weights and measures.
PERSONAL.
   The following are among those gazetted in the course of the year, W. R. T. Clement to Lavas and later Sibu, P. H. O’Nians to be Super intendent of Public Works, H. H. Kortright to be Resident, Second Class, at Sadong. taking the place of J. B. Archer who went to Ova. J. P. Mead to be Conservator of Forests, an entirely new appointment, H. A. Adams to be Registrar to the Supreme Court, while W. H. Jacques relieved C. B. Betts as Treasurer at Sibu.
   Five cadets arrived in the course of the year, W. F. Dick (Simanggang), E. S. Andreini (Baram), E. O. Bruce (Sibu), F. G. Carpenter and R. St. J. Horton, while P. H. Hayward came out on agreement to join the Treasury Department.
   A larger number than usual took their final leave of this country, some of whom were the older residents of the country, among them were Honble. E. L. and Mrs. Grove, Mr. and Mrs. Grahame-White, Mr. and Mrs. Hose. Mr. and Mrs.Young, Mrs. Greene and Messrs. E. Levy, H. Wyndham-Jones and J. Gebbie, whose departure leaves a large gap in the social life of the community.
   We hope to publish later the vital statistics relating to the European population in Sarawak.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 16, 1920.
19
 PUBLIC WORKS.
   The following summary lias been supplied by the Superintendent of Public Works & Surveys:-
   ROADS.-During the year town road metalling and up -keep were carried on with practically the same labour force; the former was stopped in September owing to the unexpected breakdown of the 7th mile crusher. The broken crusher part was replaced by a new one cast in Singapore which irreparably broke after two hours running. On the original breakdown taking place, a new part was cabled for from the makers in England and is expected during January or February 1920.
   Rock Road from Main Bazaar Road to the Police Station. Kling Street from Court House to Gambier Road, Carpenter Street. Ewe Hai Street. China Street, Old China Street and Lane, Bishop gate’s Street. Wayang Street from Main Bazaar Road to Sungei Kuching. Mosque Road and part of Market Street were thoroughly picked, the Sijinkat stone removed, and were remetalled and surfaced with 7th mile stone.
   Barrack Road was repaired from Pearl Street to Mosque Road for a length of 300 lineal feet.
   Reservoir Road from Cross Road to Ice Machine Road, Cross Road and Wayang Street from Cross Road to Tabuan Road were graded and surfaced.
   Ice Machine Road was graded, straightened and metalled with picked stone from the town roads for a distance of 323 feet and width 15 feet.
   Hill Road from the signboard near the bridge to the Hill was remetalled.
   Rock Road from 2nd mile to Batu Lintang Road, for a distance of 1,490 feel width 16 feet, was entirely remetalled and considerably raised on either side.
   Batu Lintang Road and from Rock Road towards New Road No. 3 for a distance of 2,594 width 16 feet was remetalled, of which 644 lineal feet still remains without bring surfaced with No. 1 stone. It was raised considerably on either side, the rest of the road being prepared sufficiently for remetalling.
   Pending Road was remetalled from the Saw Mill to Towkay Kee Hok’s house for a distance of 625 feet width 13 feet of which 275 lineal feet still requires to be surfaced with No. 1 stone.
   Depressions were attended to in Nanas Road.
   Rubber Road, Pisang Road and Green Road were metalled for the first time a width of 12 feet and lengths 2,450 feet. 1,917 feet and 1,525 feet respectively.
   New Road No. 3 foundation was laid, using Sijinkat stone, which had been piled for that purpose about six years ago (1,079 tons) and metalled with 7th mile stone a width of 15 feet a distance of 1,334 feet and 115 feet at either end, this work being done by Public Works’ labour. In order to hurry the metalling of this road as much as possible, the rest of the work was placed on contract. Owing to the breakdown of the crusher, the road still requires to be surfaced. Tile drains have been made on both sides of the banks of this road, by contract, to drain them. Dry stone drains were constructed wherever necessary. A crack 36 feet in length due to the sinking of the bank in one place gave considerable trouble. It has now been rectified by the use of piles. The growth of grass on the sides of banks and cuttings was encouraged and has proved successful in strengthening these.
   Minor repairs were effected as required on other roads.
   A small gang of coolies was engaged in making rubble drain walls in Mosque Road on either side to prevent tidal erosion of the sides of the road. This work totalled 340 lineal feet 3 feet high ; 510 lineal feet 4 feet high and 850 lineal feet 5 feet high. Four belian
culverts were reconstructed, one in Green Road, two in Batu Lintang Road, and one in New Road No. 3 entrance. Three concrete culverts were also constructed, one each in Carpenter Street, Main Bazaar and Central Road West
   A gang of coolies was engaged in widening, deepening, removing stumps and cleaning up the up-river Sungei Mahung to Penrissen Road 3 ¾ mile crossing the railway line, to prevent inundation during the landas: this work was completed.
   The roads and drains beyond the Municipal limits have been periodically weeded and cleaned. 
   At Penrissen Road, beyond the 15th mile, the crusher from Sijinkat. driven by the 12 ton roller, was kept busy at the 14½ mile quarry in metalling up to the 16th mile, leaving a distance of 378 feet without surfacing with No.1 and No.2 owing to shortage, this will be completed from the 16½ mile end. On completion of crushing up all the stone at 14½ mile quarry the crusher and the 12 ton roller were brought back to Kuching to be overhauled, which was effected. Two bridges were constructed with rubble abutments and belian floors covered with metal. 
   16½ mile new quarry started crushing stone on the 15th November 1919, and 1,030 lineal feet is already metalled towards 15th mile, an average width of 10 feet.
   7th mile stone used for road metalling work totalled 9,517 tons and Sijinkat stone for rubble work, etc., 918 tons.
   Penrissen Road bridges were considerably strengthened to earn- the steam roller.
   Sungei Gertak bridge was repaired and reinforced as several of the principal timbers were decayed.
   7th MILE CRUSHERS.-  The engine was overhauled and painted. The boiler tubes were drawn twice and the feed pumps repaired. The chimney was lined up to a certain height with fire-bricks.
   Various worn parts of both crushers were replaced and when the new lever is fitted, the whole will be in thorough working order.
:	16½ MILE CRUSHER. A new engine was purchased to take the place of the large steam roller which had been used to drive this crusher at 14½, mile. The crusher being overhauled, the whole has been running satisfactorily since November. The large steam roller has been disposed of.
   The P. W. D. plant is now in good condition with the exception of a number of the tongkangs.
   The Zahora gun has been mounted on a concrete emplacement built into the wall of the fort.
   The Adeh wharf which had sunk was raised to its correct level and some of the piles rein forced. Repairs were also executed to Ban Hok wharf which is still in a bad state.
   The interior of the public latrine by the markets was reconstructed and four other latrines on similar principles have been erected in various parts of the town.
   A two ton motor lorry has been purchased for the use of the department, principally for road metalling work. The construction of a brick garage to house three such lorries is nearing completion.
   Repairs and alterations to public buildings have been executed wherever necessary, Government Quarters No.1 being converted into a five room Rest house.
   WATER WORKS.- Regarding rainfall in August there was a practically four weeks drought. The pump being put in order, the Matang supply was augmented from the lower reservoir.
   To learn the stale of the main pipeline under the Sarawak river at Satok, a diver was engaged. Both pipes were found to be very much corroded. The numerous holes arc being patched, in the case of the upper line there 


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 16. 1920.                                21  
is already a saving of 3,000 gallons per hour.
   The total rainfall at Malang for the year was 160’30 inches, January being the highest 24’72 inches, August the lowest 2’85 inches.
   RAILWAY.-The regular service of trains has run without stoppage during the year.

Total train mileage was                       …                     …	36,500 miles
 …           passengers, exclusive of season 
                           ticket holders ...       185,732
Gross receipts	…                  …	        …	  $31,718.41
Average receipts per train mile          …	        …	‘87
Compared WITH THE VEAB 1918:—
     No. of passeugers decreased     …             …	…    2 %
     Goods receipts decreased         …	       …                …    5 %
     Gross      “        decreased         …              …               …  1/3 %
              “          “        per train mile decreased                     …   ¼ cent

   While the passenger receipts show an increase, the goods receipts show a decrease due to the breakdown of the 7th mile crusher thus stopping the stone traffic. The printing and stationery expenses show an increase due to the purchase of a large quantity of tickets and the maintenance of locomotives also an increase due to the purchase of a large number of necessary spare parts coming in this financial year.
   The carriages, waggons and trucks have been kept in repair.
   The permanent way has been lifted considerably, from Satok to 4th mile, in some parts to the extent of 18 inches, also another two miles between 7th and 10th mile stations also from 6 to18 inches.
   All drains have been periodically cleaned and the banks trimmed and weeded when necessary.
   The only accident on the line was a slight derailment at 7th mile station in July.

  S. S. Alice Lorraine arrived from Sadong on the 7th with passenger the Rev. W. Linton.
Birth.
—•—

GEIKIE. — November 27th: at Edinburg, wife of W. H. Geikie Sarawak, a son.
    HEAVY rains and floods have been the feature of the New Year. Many houses in the bazaar were flooded and the water on the 6th extended to the Bandstand in the ornamental grounds. For several days the black flag was flying from the Square Tower, which entitles tambang men to ask for double fares.
   S. S. Kuching left for Singapore on the 11th
with passengers Messrs. Fitzgerald, P. E. Cox, F. V. Boon, Ng Swee Ing, Sim Mok Yong. Tan Sia Kim, Kho Ah Ee, Joo Teck, Tan Tiam Kee, Sim Whai Ku, Wee Kim Thak and Mrs. and Mr. Ng Bak Choon.
    OUR readers will be sorry to learn that the Matron of the European Hospital has met with an accident, which might have led to serious consequences. While lighting a methylated spirit stove an explosion occurred and Miss Tait was burnt about the face. We are glad to say the injuries have proved to be slight and the patient is making a satisfactory recovery.
   
   H. H. S. Y. Zahora arrived from the North on the 9th with passengers Messrs. J. Hardie, McAlpine, Smart and Munnik de Jongh, we understand the latter have come from Miri in connection with the new Matang water-work proposals. Ari attempt to return on the 14th was fustrated by bad weather.
NOTES.
(January.)
  S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore on the 6th with passengers Messrs. W. Cotterill, | Humphries, H. G. Gray, Low Lock Choon and Lim Cheng Kia. Some anxiety was expressed regarding her arrival as she was a day overdue and on the previous afternoon s. s. Gladys had put into this port stating the weather was too bad for her to proceed to Singapore. Capt. Barton, on coming in, stated that the trip was the worst he had made on this run and the weather was of the real Atlantic order.
  We have to acknowledge with thanks the receipt of a copy of the supplement to the Official Gazette of the State of North Borneo containing the annual repoit. This imposing volume of over 300 pages gives a very complete review for the year 1918, and can be consulted at this office by any interested.
  8. S. Alice Lorraine left Sadong and Lingga on January 5th, with passengers Messrs. F. A. W. Page-Turner and Haldane.
   DRY rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah amounted to 69,500 tbs. and at Dahan to 18,000 tbs.
  S. S. Alice. Lorraine left for Sibu on the 12th with passengers Messrs. J. Hardie, F. G. Carpenter, R. St. J. Horton and W. Cotterill.
  An inquest was held on the 7th on the body of Pooi Sip, a Cantonese gardener. A verdict of suicide during temporary insanity was returned. The deceased, who was in poor circumstances, had been greatly depressed by the loss on the exchange in remitting money to China.
  Twelth Night was celebrated at the Ranee's Club by a children's fancy-dress party, at which a number of grown-ups also attended. The three principal guests appeared as Prince Charming (Leonora Brooke), an Eastern bride (Elizabeth Brooke) and a fairy (Patricia Adams) Games, including “Oranges and Lemons” and “Nuts in May", were followed by supper, while advantage was taken of the presence of the band to wind up with a few dances.
  Amongst those recognisable in fancy dress were Her Highness the Ranee (a Turkish Lady), Mrs. Adams (La Poupée), Mrs. Clark (A Spanish Lady), Miss Clark (Queen of Fairies), Mrs. Gillan (a Red Cross Nurse), Mrs. Mead (The White Rabbit), Mrs. P. Davis (A Magyar), Mrs. Service (The Union Jack) and Miss Tait (A Puritan Maid). Among the male impersonators were Mr. H. A.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 16, 1920.                                 21
Adams (Unde Sum), Mr. J. R. Barnes (a nigger boy), Rouble. F.G. Day (Mother Hubbard), Mr.C. Ermen (Little Boy Blue), Messrs. Hayward and Carpenter (Tramps), Mr. R. Horton (an albino golliwog), Mr. O. Lang (Little Jack Horner) and the Honble. A. B. Ward (a Pieman).
Clippings.
—•—
   News has been received that Mr. J. Gebbie, chief
engineer of the Kuching, who retired about three months ago owing to ill health, is at present in Sydney and has improved considerably. He has booked his passage by the White star liner Athenic, which leaves Sydney for home via New Zealand and Panama, sometime in February. Mr. Gebbie wishes to be remembered, as also does Captain MacDonell who left with him, and is paying a flying visit to the Fiji islands, to friends in Singapore.— (St. T.)
   The Hague : It is semi-officially stated that the report that Holland is about to cede Dutch Borneo to Great Britain is entirely without foundation.—(St. T.)
   Proposals are now under consideration for the establishment of aerial branch services throughout the Dutch East Indies to link up with the main aerial route from England to Australia which runs through Singapore, Batavia, Semarang and Sourabaya. As an earnest of their intention to develop aviation locally, the Netherlands East Indian Government have offered a prize of 10,000 guiders to the first Dutch pilot who succeeds in accomplishing the flight from Holland to Java in fourteen days. The competition is to hold good until Sept. 1. 1920. — (L. & C. E.)
Sarawak Regatta Subscription List.
Chin Anu & Co                ...	             ...	                ...      $ 45.01)
Ong Ewe Hai * Co.          ...                       ...	               …         25.00
Soon Guan Aim                ...                      …                     …         20.00
Hong Kiat    ...                 …	                    ...	                  ...	         20.00
Nam Soon    ...                 …	                     ...	                  ...	         15.00
Huah Hong  ...                   ...	                     ...	                  ...	         15.00
Ong Thing Swee, Yong Soon, Siang Hak	 Whatt.
    Sin Seng Hak, Tiang Seng Chan, Chin Chiang,
    Tong Hiii, Tong San, Eng Ann, Tan Thiam Joo.
    Syn Bin Leong and Siniawan Rubber Estate.
    $10 each        ...              ...                  ...	                   ...	      120.00
Kuching Drug Store. Sine Hak, Teek Hong, Kong 
    Seng. Chua Lee. Miang Mong. Biang Kheng,
    Kim Yong Nguan. Cheng Ewe, Khai Kee. Soon
    Nguan. Milling & Co., Peng Seng, Huah Heng.
    Joo Choon, Joo Seng. Khoon Hong. Soon Bee 
    Ann, Eng Huat, Chua Yak, Hap Long Seng. 
    Eng Hin, Sam Yik. Woh Sang. Ee Chiang. Kong 
    Chan, Ban Joo Long, Law Cheng Lak and
    Salleh Ruben, $5 each   …         ...      ...	                               145.00
Long Ngnan and Whai Joo, $4 each ...       ...	...      8.00
Hunt Hak, Thai Seng, Hong Long, Hoh Hong,
    Chiu Kiat. Hak Soon, Seng Ann, Abdul Karim
    and A. Mohd, Sharip, $3 each	...                        ...   27.00
Amounts under $3     ...                                  ...  ...                        186.00
                                                                                        Total     $626.00
British Air Lines.
   The claims of Egypt to be one of the lending aerial junctions of the future have been strongly urged lately. The position of Cairo on the "All Red" route to India and Australia, at a point where a line through Africa to the south may well break off,
appears very important, even if there did not exist already the fine aerodrome at Heliopolis, a legacy of the late war. But it is possible that the thousands already sunk on Heliopolis aerodrome and the "All Red" ideal have caused a natural bias of belief in the aerial future of this place. Apart from political considerations, it is not improbable that the unsuspecting have been misled by Mercator. The eminent geographer rendered a great service to the seafaring community by his well-known system of map projection, but therein he unconsciously
laid a trap for the airfaring communities of a later age. The Mercator projection is the sole method of map-making which does not disturb the compass-truth of a map, but this advantage is purchased at the cost of lineal distortion. Hence, the larger the district shown by a map, the greater the divergence between true distance and apparent (i. e., scaled) distance.
   Hitherto, the knowledge of this fact has been of practical utility in two ways only. When wide stretches of ocean have been spanned either by steamship or by submarine cable, the apparent direct line has been rejected in favour of the true direct line—at least, so far as other conditions (e. g., coaling stations) permit. The best-known instance of this is given by the England—New York route, which follows on Mercator’s projection a curved line roughly tangential to the American coast between New-foundland and Virginia. In general the principle involved is as follows : —The true shortest distance between two points is the circle on the earth's surface in  which the globe is cut by a plane through those two points and the centre of the globe. This circle is known as it great circle, and is drawn on Mercator’s projection as a curve bulging away from the equator and with a bulge in proportion to the distance from the equator.
   Since an aeroplane is free to pass over land and water alike, and only has contact with the surface at its fuel-stations, and since also the success of aerial transport is in its essence a question of speed of transit, it follows that the aerial routes of the future must tend to become parts of great circles modified possibly by prevailing weather conditions, but preferably indeed, imperatively unmodified by inconvenient location of fnel stations and depots.
   Having recognised this fundamental, it is now possible to examine the question of All Red routes. The great air-ways will tend to follow in general scheme the existing routes of surface traffic, simply because they will serve the same great commercial centres. For the present purpose, it will be desirable to select a few of the most important commercial centres and study their probable lines of communication. The following selection will be ample to illustrate the general outline:—London (for N. E., Europe), New York and San Franciso (for North America), Buenos Ayres and Valparaiso (for South America), Yokohama and HongKong (for the Far East), Bombay and Singapore (for Southern Asia), Melbourne (for Australia), and Cape Town (for South Africa).
   One outstanding fact that is apparent almost at once is that if London be reckoned as the route-centre, none of these routes involves the crossing of the Pacific, the biggest non-stop journey yet to be tackled by air. If, on the other hand. New York or San Francisco be the route-centre, then the Pacific must Lie conquered before the routes to Australia and the Far East are opened. In the light of the fierce commercial rivalry between Western Europe and North America, this fact may be one of extreme importance.
   A sconed fact which becomes evident on examination is that those routes which are classifiable as N, and S routes may lie regarded as straight lines on


22                                   THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 16, 1920.                                

Mercator's projection, whilst those routes which are classifiable as E. and W. routes repay the great circle treatment generously (e. g., London to Yokohama shows a 15 per cent, reduction). This reduction naturally becomes more effective the greater the mean distance from the equator, and for this reason is less marked on oblique routes, though even then well worth consideration (e. g., London to Singapore shows a 4 per cent, reduction).
   If, now, the routes between the above-mentioned cities are mapped out, we find that the following are desirable lines: — 
   Loudon—New York, direct.
   London—San Francisco, via S. Labrador and Winnipeg.
   London—Buenos Ayres. Via Cape Verde Islands.
   London—Valparaiso, via Azores and Para.
   London—Yokohama, via Archangel Irkutsk.
   London—Hongkong, via Riga and Omsk.
   London—Bombay, via Odessa.
   London—Singapore and Melbourne, via Astrakhan and Rangoon.
   London—Cape Town, via Marseilles and Tripoli.
   To some extent, the desirability of serving intermediate stations will render these routes untenable in practice. Also meteorological conditions may render modification desirable. But the broad outlines remain, and serve to raise an important question, that of location of fuel stations.
   Take, for example, the routes to China and Japan, and even, in a lesser degree, to Bombay and Singapore. The key to the success of these lines is the arrangement of fuel stations in Russian territory. The present political condition of that country bids fair to be an obstacle that may delay the operation of these routes for many years. In a certain sense, the nations of Western Europe have recognised the economic necessity of internal settlement in Russia, but the fact that Russia is not only a producer, but also a potentially great line of access to other producers, is a fact which cannot be over-emphasised.
   A further point of interest is that, with two exceptions— Eastern Canada on the route to Western America and Singapore us a jumping-off point for Australasia—the “All Red" ideal breaks down. The wonderful Colonial coaling-station system, in itself a wealth-producer and indirectly a source of great Imperial strength, was built up on the basis that a ship cannot cross dry land. Now that the time is drawing near when aerial traffic will be of an importance comparable with marine traffic, it becomes an urgent national question to what extent the “coaling stations" of the air will fall within British territory, and thus foster the growth of British air lines.— (Eastern Engineering.)

CORRESPONDENCE.
   The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of correspondents.
The Editor,
     The Sarawak Gazette.
DEAR SIR,
     If Sarawak were the happy land “Job" paints it be would not need a comforter: long before this a shop on the lines sketched by him would have been established, but——
   May I live to see the rush of customers at some store crowding to settle their accounts monthly without troubling to look at the prices charged: more especially at a store were no credit is given.
   When the community learns what "No credit given" means the prime mover in the matter will be,
Yours faithfully,
“OLD BIRD”.

  The usual monthly handicap took place on January 2nd.
                                           
                 Average.       Score.         H'cap.                 Total.
R. D. Horton       ...	        80.9	             255	     +   131.4         =        386.4
C. Fenwick           ...	      129.9	             313	     +    58.2          =        371.2
G. C. Gillan          ...      150.8             348    +	  22.9         =	370.9
C. E. A. Ermen    ...      	164.4	             361     +     ser.          =	361
F. G. Carpenter   ...	       93.6	              228	    +     127.5       =	355.5
P. C. Cobbold      ...	      124.7	              269    +	     74.8        =	343.8
P. H. Hayward    ...	      104.7	              214	  +	  118.1        =	332.1
J. C. Swayne        ...	      142.6	              266	    +     46           =	312
O. Lang        ...     ...      158.4               279    +	  13.4         =	292.4
H. B. Crocker      ...	      151.2	               243     +    31.5         =          277.5
F. G. Dav      ...     ...      157 
A. B. Ward   ...     ...      144.3       Did not compete.

   During 1919 the following have proved successful in the monthly competitions.
     C. E. A. Ermen                   ...	...         (3)
     J. C.    Swayne                    ...                   ...         (3)
     G. T.   Bates                        ...  	...	    (2)
     D. L.   Greene	...	...	    (2)
     F. G.    Day	...	...	    (1)
     E. L.    Grove	...	...	    (1)

MONTHLY REPORTS.

SADONG.

December, 1919.

   During the night of the 3rd two Dayak, brothers, were paddling near Meranti Blobong in the Simunjan river, when the younger, a boy of 18 years, was taken out of the stern of the boat by a crocodile, or so it is presumed. His brother in the bows heard nothing: and only when he noticed the boat was behaving in a queer way, looked around and found his brother was missing. The body has never been recovered.
   A Lingga Dayak was lost in the jungle near the ulu S'bangan for six days, but managed finally to find his way out at Stumbong in the ulu Seboyow.
   It was reported to me that there was small-pox at Ensengie. I sent the dresser to this place to make an examination, and he reported that there was no illness of any sort there.
   On the 4th Mr. J. R. Barnes. Superintendent of Wireless Telegraphs arrived, ami having overhauled the wireless plant returned to Kuching on the 6th. I gathered that the principal reason of the breakdown, was that a drum, said to contain benzine, contained a large proportion of kerosine also.
   By the s.s. Sarawak on the 16th en route for Sibu arrived Messrs. Hanton, Fitzgerald and the Rev. Father Jansen.
   Messrs. Evans and Haldane left on the 18th for S'bangan and meeting the s.s. Alice Lorraine there, proceeded to Kuching by her. Mr. Evans accompanied by his brother, who has come out to assist in the work at the Government Colliery arrived from Kuching on the 23rd.
   On the 20th a shop in the Colliery bazaar was burgled of about twenty tins of milk. The following day, being the eve of some Chinese feast day, some mine coolies demonstrated outside this same shop, and threatened to wreck it, unless the. owner would kill three pigs for the feast on the morrow. This was done.
   There is some sort of arrangement at the Colliery that the shopkeepers shall kill pork once a week for the benefit of the coolies: but as the price paid is only 32 cents per catty they are very loath to kill.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 16, 1920.                                     23
   The market price in the Simunjan bazaar is 48 cents per catty, and I have now set the price at the Colliery at 46 cents per catty.
   On the night of the 22nd the opium farm at the Colliery was burgled and some four hundred packets of opium, and about $60 were stolen.
   There was also a row in the gambling farm, and the Manager reports a lot of thieving of fowls, and garden produce.
   There was a shooting accident in the ulu Simunjan. One Dayak stalking deer in the jerami saw something which he thought was a deer, and fired. The object however proved to be another Dayak ; who was shot clean through the leg.
   There were 785 bags of rice distributed during the month.
   I hear that the padi crops of the people living at Jaie and S'bangan, and which are about to be harvested, have been attacked, and partially ruined by rats.
   The rainfall during the month was 17’54 inches.
   Eleven steamers and seven schooners entered and cleared the port during the month.
   Coal exported was 1,543 tons 6 cwt
             Imports.	Exports.
                       $39,509	$32,853.80
HENRY H. KORTRIGHT.
  		Resident 2nd Class.
SIBU.
November, 1919

   The Food Control Department was severely taxed to supply the population with rice during the month The irregularity of supplies arriving from Singapore was the chief cause of the difficulty.
   It was found necessary for the Government to take over the sale of rice to Dayaks as stocks were getting so low and at limes, during the month, it was necessary to substitute raw sago for rice.
   A large quantity of sago was purchased at Daro and shipped to Sibu in the Government launches and distributed as necessity arose.
   The Food Controller in Kuching forwarded 300 bags of rice by the s.s. Gladys, on the 7th, and further consignments, per H. H. S. Y. Zahora, on the 17th and 21st, which helped to tide over the difficulties until the arrival of the s.s. Gladys from Singapore, on the 24th.
   A further consignment of rice was received by the s.s Plevo, on the 30th, which rendered the situation normal.
   Mr. H. D. Aplin, in charge of the Food Control Department, and his clerk. A. Mowe, are to be congratulated on their tactful management of a difficult situation. The patience of the native population on considerably reduced rations was exemplary.
   In consequence of a message from His Majesty the King, forwarded by His Highness the Tuan Muda, requiring that all loyal subjects should at 11 a.m., on the 11th instant, set apart two minutes “to perpetuate the memory of that great deliverance and of those who laid down their lives to achieve it” a gun was fired from the Fort, at the appointed time, and all operations in the station ceased.
   Mr. G. M. Gifford arrived from Kapit on the 7th in order to discuss various Dayak and Kayan affairs and returned on the 13th.
   Mr W. R. Tudor Clement, having settled all outstanding cases at Matu and Rejang, returned to Sibu early in the month.
   On the 14th, a Malay named Mohamat was taken by a crocodile at tanjong Tekap, near Binatang. The relations and friends of deceased made every effort to
catch the reptile and were successful in securing it some fourteen days later.
   Subject to His Highness the Rajah's approval Pangeran Gusli Mohamat Yassim was appointed Tuah Kampong at Selalang. Previous to this appointment there had been no recognised Tuah Kampong at this village, but, owing to the numbers of Malays now settled at Selalang, it was found-necessary to have a native official representative.
   From the 15th to the 2lst I was absent from the station on a visit to Mukah and Oya.
   Mr. E. O. Bruce arrived per the H. H. S. Y. Zahora, on the 21st, having been appointed to do duty at Sibu.
   The Revd. Father Halder, Rector of Sibu, left for a well earned long leave, after eighteen years work in the Sarawak Mission. The whole community will look forward with pleasure to his return.
   A number of applications were made for a small piece of land, in the vicinity of the wharf, for the purpose of erecting a store.
   The land was auctioned and went to the highest bidder Messrs Soon Seng & Co. for $760.
   H. H. S. Y. Zahora made two trips to Sibu during the month.
   The s.s. Alice Lorraine called once bringing a cargo of coal for the use of the Government launches.
   The s.s. Flevo made the usual two trips to and from Singapore and the s.s. Gladys cleared twice, but only brought one cargo direct from Singapore.
   The trade returns for the past month show the following figures:
Imports.	Exports.
   Coasting                   ...	 $   67,023           $  26,576
   Foreign	...            ...           149,061	             271,485
$ 216,084	       $ 	298,061
   Brought  forward     ...     	   1,888,131          2,286,118
   Total to 30th Nov. 1919    $2,104,215        $2,581,179
             1918	...        $ 847,492        $ 952,712
   Immigrants:—
Men.     Women.    Children.
     Foo Chow	2              ...               ...
     Cantonese	...	4	 2
     Heng Wha            5	2	 1
                                                                  16= Total.
J. BARING-GOULD,
                  Resident 3rd Division
OYA.

October, 1919.
   
   General. — Mr. H. L. Owen arrived from Mukah on the 3rd and left again on the 11th.
   On the 6th I accompanied Mr. Owen to Dalat returning together to Oya on the 9th.
   Pangeran Mohamat, Native Officer, resumed his seat again on the bench on the 15th after an absence of over a month and a half.
   Penghulu Umpieng was in Oya towards the end of the month. He had nothing to say and had brought down no fines. His objects in coming down-river appeared to be to defend an action for debt brought against him in the Sibu Court of Requests and to try and purchase a dozen guns.
   I left for Dalat again on the 26th returning to Oya on the last day of the month.
   A tuba fishing took place at Dalat on the 30th and was continued on the following two days. There were over six hundred boats on the river and the natives kept the three days as a holiday.


24
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 16, 1920.
                November, 1919.
   General.—On the 15th of the month the Honble, the Resident 3rd Division arrived from Sibu, via Dalat, and left on the next day for Mukah along the sands making the journey on horseback. He returned to Oya again on the 20th and I accompanied him to Dalat the same day. He finally left for Sibu on the 21st. Mr. W. R. T. Clement arrived in Dalat on the 21st and proceeded to Oya en route for Mukah on the next day. I stayed in Dalat until the 27th being kept extremely busy in that station.
   I regret to report that owing to letters received from the Honble, the Treasurer and on examination of various books at Dalat I was obliged to recall Wee Hong Kee, the Court Writer there, who was on leave in Kuching. He had not appeared at the end of the month. Full particulars of this matter will be sent to the proper quarters later.
   Courts.—Very few cases were before the Oya Courts. Umad and Sulong (f) were sentenced to four months imprisonment each for theft.
   Penghulu Takim was down-river with some Dayaks wanted on a charge of incest. The charges were proved and the guilty parties duly fined. Several more eases of a similar nature were reported and the parties sent for.
   There were a considerable number of cases brought before meat Dalat. Ah Tuan, hawker was fined attempting to bribe the police and Liang Boo for living in a Melanau kampong. There were the usual number of land disputes and several attempts to re-open old cases settled many years back. A number of persons were imprisoned for breach of agreement and Bujeng, a Sibu Malay, to three months for theft.
   P. W. D., etc.— The prison gangs were employed on repairing the Mukah Road ami jeraya Lintang and on the usual up-keep of ornamental grounds.
   The boats were tarred all over as it is almost impossible to get paint.
   Abas, telephone linesman, was in the district during the month, but the service is still unsatisfactory.
   Food Control.—The Dalat people still continue to consume rice at an enormous race and it is difficult to prevent this as I have not sufficient staff to start a system of registration and rationing. I have, however, done as much as possible and appointed one man to sell rice only in Dalat. It is a pity that the local Chinese, who will lie the first to suffer if the rice gives out, entirely fail to grasp the situation and refuse to believe that no more rice will be obtained from Sibu during the landas.
   They have placed every obstacle in my way and think only of the present and the opportunity of exchanging rice for sago and jelutong.
   Trade.—The high price of sago still continues. In spite of this the Melanaus are not seizing their opportunity ami there will probably be a smaller export of raw sago than last year.
   The high price has also caused a great increase in the theft of sago palms.
   Ten schooners cleared during the month and nine entered the port.
   There were exported during the month.
Raw sago	  ...	 203 koyans
Jelutong	...	770 piculs
 Exports.	Imports.
     November, 1919	$ 60,149	$ 9,663
         Total to date         693,462             92,889
J. BEVILLE ARCHER,	
Resident 2nd Class.
   During the month $5,550 was transferred from the Dalat to the Oya Treasury. The weather has been extremely unpleasant and the sea rough.
   Courts. —A fair number of cases were brought Wore the Civil and Police Courts. Work in the Court of Requests was light. There have been many cases of theft of sago palms: not the usual attempts to cross the boundary but deliberate thefts on lands some distance away. Kalil, a Balau Melanau, was charged by a Chinaman with assault with a weapon. The case was adjourned for further evidence and on the prisoner promising to appear in two days I let him go. Unfortunately my trust was misplaced and up to date Kalil has disappeared. I find that he was imprisoned by Mr. Owen some three years ago for the same offence and hid for over three months. I am of opinion that the Balau people are sheltering him as they did in the former case. His ultimate arrest is, of course, only a matter of time.
   The following cases call for notice:—Rangkum, burglary (two previous convictions) one and a half years R. I. Rajab and Angong, theft of sago palms. Inag (female) theft. Radin, theft of sago palms. Kinya, Itam and Adeng, aiding and abetting the same. Semir, four months imprisonment (Native Court.) Tuey and Lijan, fined for felling mulong over their boundaries. Mulum, Tambi and Birut, fined for obtaining money under false pretences. Oya pawn farmer, lined $25 for breach of pawn farm regulations. Ngn Soon, hawker, fined for contempt of Court. Mut and Jirai, two Melanau boys were chatised for pulling down the telephone wire out of mischief. They were too young to imprison or fine and too big to let off altogether.
   Whilst at Dalat further enquiries were made into the matter of the murder of Chung Ee in August 1918. From certain information given it was decided to ask the Honble. Divisional Resident to arrest six Dayaks at present living in the Sibu district. At the time of writing I am informed that two of these men have been arrested and one in Sibu jail.
   There were the usual land disputes and many trivial cases.
   P. W. D.,etc.—The prison gangs have been mostly engaged on roads and ornamental grounds. One paid carpenter and four prison carpenters have done very good work on the Bakong Road bridges. All the five long bridges and three small ones were pulled down and entirely rebuilt with posts and rails and the flooring earthed over. At the end of the month only very little remained to be done. Almost all the timber was obtained from stock. The Oya prison dapor was completed. A clearing was made at the sea end of the Mukah Road and a sign-board erected. It was often extremely difficult to find the end of the road from the sands.
   Trade.—Raw sago is still high, but the Melanaus naturally work less than ever as very little exertion will bring them in enough money to last a month. Jelutong is being worked more.
   Food Control.—Towards the end of the month it became evident that the rice was being used quicker than it should be. Steps are being taken to remedy this.
   
Imports.	Exports.
$18,020	$ 58,479
        Total to date          60,412	 637,033

During the mouth the following was exported: —
                  Raw sago	...	209	 koyans
            Jelutong	...	320	piculs
            Para rubber	...	2	„
   Four schooners entered the port during the month
and nine cleared. 


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 16, 1920.                                   25
   Exports for the month (exclusive of Balingian) are as below :—
 1919.	1918.
Raw sago     ...      225 koyans             245 koyans
Jelutong       ...      642 piculs	    1,040 piculs
     Kayu laka               60     ,,                        ...
     Plantation    ..           4     „	   ... 
H. L. OWEN,
Resident 2nd Class
BARAM.
Nonember, 1919.
   Very few eases came before the Court, most of them being for petty theft and breach of contract. Oyong Arau Lnieng (f) and Oyong Lajeng Kawit were dealt with for infanticide. Defendants are Rayans of Long Palai.
   Fines and fees amounted to $870.62.
   I handed affairs of the station over to Capt. Andreini and left on a visit to the ulu Baram to collect outstanding revenue Mr. McAlpine of Messrs. Anglo Saxon-Petroleum Company, Miri, accompanied me and I was still away at end of month.
   Prisoners were engaged on clearing the Lobok Nibong Road and ornamental grounds.
   Tambu, a prisoner, was ordered to complete his sentence in Kuching. He has been three times before the Court for petty theft.
   Several deaths have occurred amongst Chinese in the bazaar; most of them were suffering from consumption.
   Rain fell on most days. The rainfall was 9’12 inches.
   Penghulus Aban Blaweng of Tutau and Lanting of Poyut paid a visit, but had nothing of importance to report.
            
                       Imports.	        Exports.
                         $3,213	       $12,328
C. D. ADAMS.
Resident 2nd Class.
MIRI.
November, 1919.

   On the night of the 1st another murderous assault took place: Captain Howard's bungalow being broken into and his wife badly cut about the head with a parang while asleep in bed. Unfortunately Mrs. Howard was unable to recognise her assailant, but several of their past and present servants have been detained pending investigations.
   Owing to signs of unrest amongst the Chinese community it was found necessary to wireless to headquarters for a guard of Rangers: these arrived in the s.s, Alice Lorraine on the 4th under the command of Lieutenant Clark. The same evening all Chinese kongsis including those at Pujut and Lutong were raided, with, it is hoped, a salutary effect.
   In the process of raiding No. 10, kongsi at Lu- tong a lamp burning benzine was accidently upset ; the flames set Lieutenant Clark's clothes a fire and badly burned his right forearm.
   Matters having quieted down in the meantime Lieutenant Clark returned to headquarters on the 11th, leaving Corporal Barat here in charge of eleven men for patrolling and sentry duties.
   On the 11th at 11 a.m. all work was stopped for two minutes and the flag half-masted in honour of those who fell in the war.
MUKAH.
October, 1919.
                  
   On the 3rd of the month I bicycled to Oya, and, after visiting Dalat, returned to Mukah on the 11th.
   P.S. Adeh stopped oil the month to pick up passengers on her way to Kuching twice during the month. It was unfortunate that on each occasion the telephone line to Sibu was out of action and the time of the steamer's sailing from Miri was not therefore known. On each occasion, however, a number of passengers were taken on board.
   A dozen schooners were held up in the river until the middle of the month. One vessel that managed to clear, sprung a leak while on her way down-coast and returned to Mukah having got rid of nearly $3,000 worth of raw sago in order to keep afloat.
   The Chinese wayang, which arrived here in August, left on the 28th, I am glad to say. The bazaar had been crowded with Milanoes every afternoon and night during the stay of this attraction.
   In consequence of the schooners being held up in the river, and of the presence of the theatrical company the consumption of rice for the month was very considerably above normal, and steps have now been taken to ensure a very considerable reduction for the. ensuing month.
   During the month Dato Awang Udin went up-river to collect tax. but was not particularly successful. He reports that the Dayaks living on the main river are in a bad way as regards food, and depend almost entirely on lemanta. Luckily the maize is now ripe, and this crop seems to have been a good one. The Selangau Dayaks still have sufficient of last year's padi to last them until the harvest, but they are by no means overfed.
   All reports of the padi farms are good so far, in fact some of the Dayaks on the main river say they have never seen such a good growth since they have lived here.
   Penguin Inteng came down to the station bringing some cases which he had been unable to settle. At his request I appointed a wakil for the ulu Kenyana and ulu Sikat district, who will settle petty disputes. A Dayak brought down on a charge of incest was imprisoned in lieu of fine.
   A certain number of land cases have been before the Court, and in one case, where a notoriously litigious land-grabber was concerned, a fine of $100 was imposed.
   In the Police Court and Court of Requests work has been slack. The price of raw sago remains firm, and in ordinary times the natives would be rolling in money. Bazaar prices, however, continue to rise, and the traders seem to lay in small stocks of necessaries, so that the continual shortage of such articles is made the excuse for piling on prices. As an example of ordinary prices at die present time, the following will suffice:—fowls 55 cents per katty, onions 34 cents per katty, sugar 40 cents per katty, eggs 5 cents each, coconuts 10 cents each, kerosine oil $3.80 per tin and blachu $1 per fathom.
   During the month a scare was raised that there would be a shortage of kerosine with the natural result that a shortage did occur, and kerosine was selling at $5.50 per tin.
   The same thing happened with tobacco and cigarettes, and I was told of a case where a native actually paid $5 for a tin of Three Castles tobacco (sek). A few years ago the price per tin was 48 cents.


26
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 16, l920.
   On the 17th I sailed for Niah in the m.l. Helen accompanied by the Native Officer: owing to the rough sea however she was unable to enter the Niah river, but succeeded in entering the Sibuti river arriving at the Court house in six hours from Miri.
   During my stay al Sibuti I settled all outstanding cases including that of Wan Mohamat alias Mat Botol charged with swindling, this man was at the request of the local chiefs ordered to remove to Miri.
   As instructed by the Honble. the Divisional Resident I appointed Janai bin O. K. Lubok probationary chief of the Sibuti’s in place of his father, deceased.
   I also arranged that the Chinese traders should begin building a new bazaar on the Court house side of the river.
I left for Bungai on foot on the 20th en route for I
Mui. visiting all the Kadayan villages, and inspecting their padi farms, which are looking very healthy.
   The Kadayan chief, Hj Abdulgapar, complained on behalf of his followers of the evil influence exerted
by one Rendah bin Sabtu, a Kadayan from Brunei, who is said to have the evil eye, they requested that this man lie removed from the district. I reached Miri on the 23rd.
   Among the cases heard in the Courts were those of Kram bin Udin and Gani alias Jelani sentenced to twelve and six months H. L. respectively for theft of jelutong. Yong Seng sentenced to six months H. L. for theft of a clock from Mr. Thornton's bungalow, this man together with another prisoner named Khong Sam afterwards escaped from custody, but both were recaptured a few days later and received the usual punishment. Many coolies were fined for wandering about without lights at night. Owing to his reactionary tendencies, it was found necessary to detain, pending deportation, Lee Yuan Lueh alias Lee Hong the schoolmaster of the local branch of the Chong Wah School.
   Another case of opium smuggling was detected by C P. Eng Wah, the culprit being Ng Chong, the carpenter of the oil tanker s.s. Natica, this man was heavily fined and the opium confiscated.
   During the month Mr. and Mrs. Blake, Mr. and Mrs. Wright and Messrs. Webb and Brownlee of the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Co.'s staff returned from leave and Messrs. Munniks de Jough and M. Joy arrived to join the staff of the Company.
   The s.s. War Hermit cleared for Suez on the 24th with a cargo of 7,900 tons fuel oil and passenger Mr. H. Wyndham Jones, late General Manager of the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Co., Ltd., who is proceeding to England on leave. The s.s. Suram, and the s.s. Haliotis. also cleared for Singapore with cargoes 1,577 tons, and 2,012 tons of kerosine oil respectively.
   The prisoners were employed on the general upkeep of the roads and ornamental grounds; and the carpenters finished fitting out No. 2 bungalow.
   The rainfall amounted 15’83 inches.
   The trade returns are as follows: —
             Imports	        Exports.
     Miri          $28,188	$372,150
     Niah             2,153                  13,220
     Sibuti              ...                       ...
W. F. DE V. SKRINE,
Resident 2nd Class.
BROOKETON COLLIERY.
November, 1919.
   The gross out-put of coal for the month was 2,187.5 tons; 595 tons were consumed by our boilers and the balance 1,592.5 tons was sent to wharf.
   Coal shipped amounted to 1,852.5 tons and made tip as follows:—
    To Labuan	...	...	716.5	  tons
    Manila        ...	...	...	    1,053.0   ..
    P. S Adeh, etc.	...	...	         83.0   ..
                                                   Total   1.852.5 tons
   Coal in stock at end of month was 140 tons.
   Good progress was made in the main Deep of the North Drive and new level was opened out.
   In the mechanical department the usual work of overhauling machinery and cleaning boilers was done at the beginning of the month and everything went smoothly.
  The locomotive “Rusa” belonging to Messrs the Labuan Exploration Company, the hire of which was sanctioned by His Highness, was brought over from Labuan towards the end of the month and we hope to have her running in a few days.
   The s.l. L’Aubaine was under repairs to her boiler, owing to a leakage in the back plate of the combustion chamber.
   Coal sales at Labuan amounted to 870.5 tons, 801.5 of which was taken by the Straits Steamship Co.'s steamers.
   The retimbering of the Buang Tawar oil level was continued throughout the month.
J. O. MADDOCKS.
                     Manager.
LIMBANG.
October, 1919.
   The British Resident, Mr. G. E. Cator. came over on the 5th to talk over the locust question. It is hoped that some not too expensive scheme may be devised by which the two Governments, sharing expenses, limy co-operate in the work of destruction of these pests should such become necessary.
   As far as I am aware there are as yet no locusts in the 5th Division. Although it is reported from British North Borneo that a large swarm crossed last month from Province Clarke to Lawns nothing has been heard of them on this side.
   There was no steamer from Kuching during the month.
   The s.s. Alice Lorraine sailed for Kuching on th 1st taking back the old squad of Rangers.
   The s. s. L'Aubaine arrived here from Brooketon on the 18th with news that the p. s. Adeh was expected there the following day, but was not coming on to Limbang. I left for Brooketon in s. s. L’Aubaine the next morning to get the mail and reply to any letters that might require an immediate answer.
   From Brooketon I went on in the m.l. Damit to visit Sundar and Trusan.
   On the 28th while returning from Sundar to Limbang and having got as far as the mouth of the Trusan river one of the cylinders of the m. l. Damit's engine burst, we changed our course for Brooketon and running on two cylinders arrived there for repairs.
   I reached Limbang on the 30lh and was met by a deputation of Chinese who told me that no steamer from Kuching with a cargo for this place had been here since August 13th.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 16, 1920.
27
   They were in consequence quite without rice and
a number of other less important commodities and at their request I telegraphed to the Honble, the Resident of the 1st Division informing him how urgently rice was required.
   The head clerk, Chia Jin Kwi, who has been suffering for some time past with a bad sore on his leg left for Labuan on the 31st to obtain medical treatment.
   There were no cases of importance in Court.
Fines and fees amounted to $76.98.
   P. W. D. —The coolies were employed on the Government padi farm, the Limpaki Road and trimming the bamboo hedges, the prisoners on the ornamental grounds and the Punga Poyan Road.
The following are the trade returns:—
Imports.         Exports.
Coasting	...        $1,367	$3,499
Foreign	...	     5,670               8,587
 The rainfall for the month was 12’63 inches.
Half a Column and under —
         First insertion            ...	...	... 2.00
         Second and third insertion each        	... 1.00
         Subsequent                do	do	... 0.50
A Column and under—
         First insertion each	...	... 4.00
         Second and third insertion each	... 2.00
         Subsequent               do	do	... 1.00
Special arrangements may be made for standing advertisement.

  All communications intended for insertion in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed to the Editor at the Government Printing Office, Kuching. They should be clearly written and should reach the Office at least two days before the publication of each issue.
  Letters and other contributions must be authenticated by writer’s name sent privately to the Editor.
November, 1919.
   The p. s. Adeh arrived here from Kuching on the
8th with a much needed cargo of rice and other commodities and passenger Mr. C. J. Cook. She sailed again on the 10th, Mr. Cook taking a passage by her as far as Brooketon en route for Lawas.
   I left here for Brooketon by the m. 1. Damit on the 13th and went on to Lawas by the s.s. L’Aubaine on the 15th where I found everything in order.
   Mr. G. M. Allman has returned from home leave
and has resumed the managership of the Lawas Planting Company.
   I have given permission to Mr. Cook to occupy as
a squatter, as soon as any claims which may be made for fruit trees and grazing rights have been settled, about 10 acres of land on the left bank of the Merapok river and there he intends to put up his machinery for refining jelutong.
   I returned here on the 23rd.
   The s. l. Peter Duff made two trips during the month and on both occasions took full cargoes of sago to Labuan.
   Court. —The cases settled were unimportant. Fines and fees amounted to $241.18.
   P. W. D.— The coolies were employed building a small granary and repairing the bridges and cleaning out the ditches on the Punga Poyan Road.
   The prisoners planted sweet potatoes and harvested what was left of the Government padi, the birds having taken the greater part of what would other-wise have been an excellent crop.
   The following are the trade returns:—
   Imports.	             Exports
Coasting	...	$9,111	$19,677
Foreign	...	5,870	14,058
The rainfall for the month was 14'95 inches.
                                       H. S. B. JOHNSON, 
                      Resident 5th Division.
The Sarawak Gazette
RATES OF ADVERTISEMENTS IN THE " SARAWAK GAZETTE"
                  Payable in Advance.
Quarter of a column and under— 
	First insertion .	...	.. $1.00
         Seoond and third insertion each         ...                     ...  0.50
         Subsequent           do                          do	 ... 0.25
   We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not inserting them.
   Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early intelligence of all matters of general interest in their respective neighbourhoods.
NOTICE.
ASTANA FARM.
THE Manager, of Astana Farm begs to inform the Public that he is unable to attend to Orders for milk after Office hours.

THE GOVERNMENT has for sale
    about 200 hand-made sarongs
        (RELIEF WORK). @ $6 each.
    Applications should be made to
    The Resident's Office, 1st Division.
NOTICE.
N
OTICE is hereby given that by a Deed Poll or
Power of Attorney executed by LAV KIONG NGHEE alias KIONG NGHEE of 31 Arab Street. Singapore, the 6th day of November 1919, the said LAU KIONG NGHEE appointed and constituted LAU CHENG CHOON, of 6 Main Bazaar, Kuching, Sarawak his lawful attorney and agent in Sarawak and that he also thereby absolutely revoked and cancel led the Deed Poll or Power of Attorney made by him the said LAU KIONG NGHEE in favour of TAN WEE JOO the 24th day of October 1913, and every power and authority expressed to la; given by the said letter deed-poll.
    Dated at Singapore this 6th day of November 1919.

 	                   A. de MELLO,
Solicitor for LAE KIONG NGHEE,
                  4, Cecil Street. Singapore,


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 16, 1920.
28
SYN HIN LEONG & CO.,
22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS.
Beer, Wine, Spirit & General Store Dealers.
SOLE AGENTS FOR :
FRASER & NEAVE'S ÆRATED WATERS
(The Bent throughout the East.)
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic
Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at
$1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 catties of dry rubber.
ACETIC ACID.
Fresh supplies of Stores are received regularly.
PRICES MODERATE.
Free delivery to customers in Kuching.
Free packing & shipping for Outstation
Orders.
|n. c.|
NOTICE.
GOVERNMENT STORE.
M
ATANG TEA is now obtainable at the
Government Store in 1 lb packets.
Price 50 cents.
Carriage to Outstations extra.
NOTICE.
NOTICE is hereby given that LIM EWE TENG Administrator of the Estate of List THIAN HAI (deceased) has sold, transferred and made over to LIM THIAN LAI, LIM THIAN HO and LIM CHENG SOON Administrator of Estate of LIM THIAN SANG on 30th September 1919 the whole of the deceased’s shares, rights, titles and interest whatsoever in Chops ENG WHATT and ENG HO and the aforesaid LIM EWE TENG has no further interest in the above firms nor will be responsible as from the above date for any debts incurred by the said business.
    An agreement has duly been registered in the Supreme Court. Kuching with regard to these matters.
(Sgd.) LIM THIAN 
           ,,      LAI LIM THIAN HO
           ,,      LIM CHENG SOON

ADMINISTRATOR OF ESTATE
LIM THIAN SANG.
[6—4]

Arrivals.
J cVhssr.r.’s NAMK.FI.AU J
AKI> llhi. C<UPTIANH OU ...
,. ..	r KOM.
NAKHODAS.  1Alice LorraineSnr. str. 140Jara ee	Sadong  1Hock H<>Brit. sob. 07Billing	Singapore  rKim Seng GuanSnr. .,	78Bak»r	linn.  ftSri Max Igan  ..	..	08IHBH	Sadong  0Sri Cliintirairaxih  ..	..	71Jolmri  6Sara leak  .. str. 40Awg. Bujang Sibu  7Alice Lorraine  .. .. 140•Iura-er	Sadong10PinghaBril. ..	78llollab	Singapore10MoralrbaxSar. ,.	02Rasul	Iti-jaug111Sarawak  ..	..	40Awg. Bujang Sadong11Kuching  ..	.. 908Barton	Singapore12Alice Lorraine  ,.	..	140Jnraee	Sadong10Sri Max Igan  ., sell OS1’sa18Alice Lorraine  ., str. 140Jara-ee	„19Moralebas  ..	..	02Hasui	Sibu19Sri Chimlraiiaxili  .. sch. 71.lobari	Sadong22Bunga Max S'wak  ..	..	66Bondeb	OvaSin Sian Ann  ..	,.	50Gani	Mntu22Satairak  .. str. 40Awg. Bujang Sibu•»Knelling  ..	,. 908Barton	Singapore23Kim Seng Guan  .. sch. 73Bakar	Oyu28Kim Hua A»a  .. .. «•'>Scmnn28Kim flock Ann  ..	..	70.lili24Alice Lorraine  .. str. 140Jara-ee	Sadong26Sri Chin lira icaxih  .. sch. 71Joban	„26Sri Max Igan  ..	..	08I san28Sarawak  ., str. 46Awg. Bujang Oya29Moratebax..	62Rasul	Sibu31Alice Lorraine  ..	.. 140Jara-ee	Sadong31Ghee Hong Ann  .. sell. 00•fin	OvaDepartures.
VKKSKL'S NAMK.Fl.AU Asn Um.CAPTAINS <>K	...
NAKHOUAS.1Sara icakSai. str.46Awg. Bujang SilmKuching  • • •«908Barton	Singiqaire2Kim Soon Lee  ., sell.67Budin	Mnkidi8Alice Lorraine  .. str.140Jara-ee	L:nggn9Sarawak    •t	««46Awg. Bujang SadongVKim Seng Guan  .. sch.78Bakar	Oxa9Sri Max Igan  .. ..68Issa	SadongfflAlice Lorraine  .. str.140Jara-ee	..10Sri Chiiulrawaxih  .. sch.71•lobnri18Kuchingstr.903Barton	Singap<»»16Alice Lorrainea.140Jam ee	Linggn1ftSara teak  .. • •46Awg. Bujang Silm18Sri Max loan  .. -cl:.68ISM	Sadong20Alice Lorraine  .. str.14<>Jara-ee	..Sri Chiuilruuaxili  „ sch.71Jolinri	..22Mora trimx  .. str.62Rai.di	Sibu tr.an<1'1.1112.1Su ra tea !t     .. ..46Awg. Bujang < ;V!‘24Sin Sian .Inn  .. sch.50Gani	M,‘l"26Ku ching  .. str.908Barton	Singapore27Sri Max Igan  .. sch.68Issa	Sadomi•>”Alice Lorraim   .• str.140Jara-ee	••29Hunga Max S'leak  .. sell.60Bondeh	*’?'»29Kim Seng Guan   •• •«78Bakar:soKim Hua Ann65Vain a	u ”31Moratebax   .. str62ICMHIII	(taebih81Sarawak   M	••46Awg. Bujang RejiuigNOTICE.
Gazette subscription and Printing 
Office bills.
  For the convenience of residents at Outstations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums but only the 1,2 and 3 cent values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that Money Order be sent if possible.
       J. C. SWAYNE,
Manager, Govt. Printing Oyice.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 16, 1920.
29
Market Price List for the month of
January 1920.

13th.Bums Long	|*r catty. a              a a      7Ito. French              a .     ?24Ito. Spr>»it*	„              * a      fiBnluboo do.	..              .a a     ISBrinjiils	„. a              • a      11Beef (Cow No. I	>,a «              a a        inIto. do. ., ‘2	?<              « •     30Ito- (Buffalo! No. 1     26Ito. do. .. '2 ... *         t a     22Ito. do.	.. 3 ..              a a     15-Caldmgc	.,• *     2HCapons	..              a aSI.10Celery	..     14Chillies Fresh	..a a     45Cucumber*	?»      •iCrab* <largei	each- a     1-2Ito. i medium) *a .      HDo. (email)	..a a      6Duck-	|wr catty              • •     '.10Ito. Egg" fresh (large* ••?ch              • •.Do. do. do. (sn>i»ll* ..              • *      6Do. do. (Salted*- •              • •      7Eggs Hen (large)         1      5Do. .. (email)	..              • •      4»I’ial* No. 1	per catty* '     36Ito. a-a              a a     •>Do. a              a a     14Fowl* i Cooks*	..              . a     70Do. (Cocke* elo ?• •     H5Ito. tHenal	?•a a     H5Ito. (Pullets 1	..a a    '95Do. Cock" ? Dj uh Breed ) 1"*r ratty      HfiDo (Cockerels* Ito.     HOIto. Hens'	Do.     HOIto. il’iilletsi	Do.     H5Ginger	l*r catty              - •      4tierrn;	M              • *     '.*0Gourd	»•• •      HPotatoes Sweet      4Prawns (Ftoahl	..     ?2HPumpkins	..              • •      4Pork No. 1	•>« •     72Ito. „ '2              « >     60Ito. „ 3	•»a a     5-2Pigeons Young per pair• -      HOHadisb	per catty* *     1-2Tnmips	<<              . a      5Yanis	«?. a      5Rainfall, September. 1919.
  DATE.Bttram.     1   Inches.     2   ?SO    a    —     4•42     />Ilk)     a    •06     7   ?23     8    •—     9    •49   10    —   11•24   12   ?70   13    •10   14(Ml   16    a—   16    —   17    •77   18    21   19    —1   201	—   91    —-   22    —   23    —   24•60   25    —   26     —-   07   28a   29    —-   >10   2-60Total9-12Rainfall, November, 1919.
DATB.I.‘bi*ng.Inches.1     •249      - -—-3     —4     —     •69ft    1-277     •348     —9     •1510     —11     •3212     —-13     •3414     —15     —16     •7H171H    1-5919     ——20- ?21     ——22     ——23     —21     •1826     *755a     •7828     ?1*429    80030    418Total.11 95The “Sarawak Gazette”
ALMANAC.
—?— 
JANUARY, 1920.
  En-Chi- Mo’Highglish-nese. dan.   MOON'S PHASES, ETC.	water at-*: *   nth lull moonO	Kuching.•— , at	at    13U1 Lust quarter >J J6 z = 2   21st New moon •	A. M. r. M.:
   2 51©sc*
2 “ z   2sih First unarter •
h. m.ih. in.Th; 11111“ 9Sarawak Regatta.	.. 11 51F 2  12S 10	 0	40 1 JIS 3, 13- 11	:	   1	58 2 26IS 4i 13< 2nd HttXlMY tm> rHBlKTMAH. a. Q 1() o Strikrl Uimtby IHAIH 1H56	.. 7	7 .7M 5?- 15-= 13	:	  4	13 4 32Tu 6i 16_= 14rcirnasv...	..	..5 4 5 30W 7=17 Z 15	   5	48 6 19Th 8S 18-g 16	 6	36 7 05F 9j 19X 17	1	 7	18 7 50S 10! 20	18	 7	59 8 32!S 112-21	19lat srstiAV arri.it M'it-ii.ixr. .. 8 41 9 13M 12“ 22	-20	 9	20 9 56Tu 113* 23 21	  10	310 40\V 14S 24 22	10	5411 18Th 15- 25 2311 50 —F 16  26 24	1	0 45 1 17S 17  27 25ttoallluf A.llolrsl Sir It. K^|.p»l, tUOt .. 2	4 2 20IS l>  1*28	262XI» RVNPAT AKTKa EHTHAXT. .. 3 13 3 36M 19  29l 27	 4	7 4 25Tu 20  30 28Cin*M fire M Knchlnx, 18BI.	!W 2112 1 29St.Agw...	..	.. 5 20 5 45Th 22   2-s 1	:	5 55 6 19F 23   3 j 2	 6	27 6 52S 24   4^ 3		 7	2 7 25SS 254? 3rd s( sun .srrnu n-irnixv. .. 7 qo u ?>
. Com«*i..ll St Paul.	°	-1M 26   62 5	 8	8 H 39Tn 27   7=6	 8	46 9 17W >28   s“ 7	 9	25 10 4Th 29   9	8	10	1510 56F 130  10	9	11	15 —S '31  11	10	1	0 4 0 37

30                                       THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 16, 1920.
THE ART OF SELF-
EXPRESSION.
T
HIS remarkable little book ex-plains exactly how YOU may
acquire in a very short time a facile command of language, both in writing and in speaking. It tells how you may make certain of success in life by developing your latent powers of clear thought and of forceful convincing expression.
  The self-conscious toungue-tied individual is seriously handicapped at every turn. Unable to impress favourably those with whom he domes into contact by his powers of expression, he is regarded—often unjustly—as a mere nonenity. On the other hand, the man who has learnt the all-important Art of Self-Expression moves on from success to success, aided immeasurably by his ability to marshall his thoughts quickly and with confidence, and to express them arresting and authoritatively. In business life he stands out among his fellows ; his ability is recognised; promotion awaits him. Socially, he is admired and sought after as a witty conversationalist and a fascinating companion.
  Whatever may be your station, or your profession in life, a knowledge of the Art of Self-Expression will help you enormously to achieve complete and lasting success. If you are ambitious to make your way in the world, write to-day for a copy (sent post-free) of “ The Art of Self-Expression ” to:
The Secretary, S. G.,
  The School of Self-Expression,
        57, Berners Street,
LONDON. W. I.
ENGLAND.
NOTICE.
—?—
SALE BY AUCTION
of all unredeemed pledges from YEK YEUN & Co., Pawn Farmers, No. 8, Sibu Bazaar, Sibu, will be held on the 15th September 1919 at 10 a.m. and quarterly from that date until further notice.
  Lists of all unredeemed pledges are on view at the Farmers' premises.
               LAW JEE THAI,
Authorised Auctioneers.
NOTICE.
—?—
NOTICE is hereby given that the partnership heretoforc existing between LIM OH LIEW. LIM OH PHIO, LIM THIAN LAI, LIM THIAN HO, LIM THIAN SANG, LIM THIAN KHAY and LIM OH CHAI carrying on business at No. 88, Main Bazaar, Kuching, under the style or firm of Chop ENG WHATT has been dissolved by mutual consent on 29th October 1919 and the aforesaid LIM OH LIEW retires from partnership and has no further interest in the firm nor will be responsible as from the above date for any debts incurred by the said business.
   An agreement to the above effect has duly been registered in the Supreme Court, Kuching and the undersigned, LIM OH PHIO, LIM THIAN LAI, LIM THIAN Ho, LIM THIAN SANG, LIM THIAN KHAY and LIM OH CHAI are now sole proprietors of Chop ENG WHATT.
(Sgd.) LIM OH PHIO
    ,,     LIM THIAN LAI
    ,,     LIM THIAN SANG
    ,,     LIM THIAN KHAY
    ,,     LIM OH CHAJ
    ,,     LIM THIAN HO      (Sgd.)       LIM OH LIEW 
           Sole Proprietors.	Retired Partner.
[6-4]
AUCTION SALE
OF
UNREDEEMED PLEDGES from Ex-Pawn
Broking Farm YEW CHEE &. Co., Chop Wo
SANG at No. 18 China Street on the follow-
ing Saturdays at 9 a. m.
June 1919
July Aug. Sept. Oct- Nov. Dec.
pledges	on	17	Jan. 1920
»	„	21	Feb.	,,
„	„	20	Mar.	„
„	„	17	April	„
„	„	15	May	,,
„	„	19	June	„
„	„	17	July	„
  A list of such unredeemed pledges may be inspected at the above address.
SYN BIN LEONG A Co., Authorised Auctioneers.


THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 16, 1920.
31
METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS.
GENERAL HOSPITAL.
Kuching, December, 1919.
HARO METER.T H E R M O M E T E R IN S H A 1) E .SOLAR MAXI MUM.Hours of Sunshine in 24 hrs.MUSEUM BAINFALL.IhTK.Al 8 A.M.Dry Bulb.Wet Bulb at 8 A.M.Maximum prev. 24 hrs.Minimum prev. 24 hits.Prev. 24 hours.in 24 hours.8 A. M.Koon.8 r. M.   129'97 inch   76'5  w   76     7 5     92'5     73        1541
    *15      •02   229'98 „ .   78  88-5   76'5     76     91'5 .     71        140-5| 3'45      •1<J   .329'99 „   78  88   79     74'5     93     73        150  3-2001   429'98 ..   78  86'51 *>     76     89     71        137  3'50      ?54   52999 ..   77  88'5   75     1 (>     93     71        154  1 50   629'99 .   80  865   74'5     76     89     70-5        150  6'50      •09   730'01   80  81-5   75     765     87*5     71        147  2'35      •21   829'98 ...   1  4 1   76-5     74     88'5     69        148  2'25      •45   929115 .,   78  8.J   76     76     87-5     71        144'5  3-10     3'88  1029"98   I 4  83'5   77     <;>     89        150  3'45      •02  1129'98   76-5  85   74'5      t »>     KI     i0'5        113'5    .25     T58  1229'98 ..   76-5  91   73'5     74     92'5     70'5        146'530      •91  1829'96 .,   75  89   75     74     90     70-5        148  4'40      •20  1429'98 .,   76  81   75      <?>     90     69-5        144  3'30  1529'95 ..   77 r,  ^5   74     UJ »     90     71        137  3 5517  1629'96 ..   77-5  H7   75     75     89-5     78        14!*1 '35      •71  17301)0 ..  I l  85   76     75'5     90     71        145'5  5'25      •74  1829'97 ..   79-5  85   74-5     76     89     70        144'5  3'35      •55  1930'01 ..   f «>'5  88   75     <4     90     71        141  2-30      •96  2029'99 ..   80  91   77     77     IM     72        158  4-40  2129'98 ..   81  89   77     78     90     71        153  8'26     1-09  2229'98 ..   77'5  87   76     76 •     90'5     72'5        145  6-40      ?60  2329'98 ..   79  76   74     76'5     8«     70 •        141 5  6-20      *55  2429'96 ..   76  841 9     74     92'5     7 ?_»        150  1 20      •65  2529'97 ..   76-5  87   79     70     94     i 3        146  3-45     1-43  263000 ..   79  87   77     76'5     95     73        1 10  510      ?53  *2729-99 ..   76  86   79     to     84-5     73        114'5  lit)      •31  2830'01 ..   75  87'5   76     74-5     98     71        151  3-20      •34  2980-00 ..   76  87'5   75     <;>     94     73        149  6-35      ?93  3080-00 ..   77'5  86   75*5     76     70'5     86        1 r-5  500     1'63   130-01 ..   74-5  83   78     73'5     90     73        149    —      ?78  Highest Barometric reading	30’01 inches.
Lowest           ,,           ,,                       29'95        ,,
Highest temperature (shade)	94 degrees.
Lowest            ,,              „	69	„
Longest Period of Sunshine in one day 6'40 hours.
 Total rainfall (Museum)	 29'49 inches.
Greatest rainfall in 24 hours                  3'83	„
  Height of Hospital above the sea level approximately 75 feet.
Rainfall, December, 1919.
DURING 24 HOURS.
  DATK.   Run.rii<- Vicni-sige. Kuching-Snilgci Tengu II.Nmjoug Hint's.    .nirl.Dahan Estates.Nn dong.   ' *Inches.    Inches.   Inches.   Inches.   Inches.1 nches.   Inches.    1   •54 .      •04     •70     •36TO    •10   •38   i 14     ?—     •88      —     •70    ?29 s    3    —     —     ?12      	     ?60    ?20    4   •92      *55     •80    3-96    2'80      18    188    5   •38       60     -96      96     *22     —.    6      ?09     —     •78    189      —    •73    7   •36       18     —        —?      —     . —    8   ?04      ?48     •20      —      —     T9     —    9   •02     3 64     —    2-87     TO      —    175   10     ——       05     ——     •11     •50      —'27   11  2 73     148     '45     •61      —1 28    •78   12    25      •82     ?80      —     •454 Xi   13   •65     05     •81    T87     —i   14   •12  .	-02     —     •40     •60     TO    ?28   15   •28      •27     •15     •91      —     •20    •56   16  1-29      .661'80     •36     •97     •93     44   17  115      •78     •75    4'38    T88    3-89   18   ?61      •55     15     •93        M•86   19    13      •91)     —     •42     •47     •44    •81   20   •06       —     •80      —      04   21   •44     117.     —    1 12    4-04    %>»?>   22   •78      •87    TOO      —     •0216     1	1   23    38       44     *25     *2»>    180     •97   24   *75      *55     •30     •24      —     ?24    •85   25    07     1-30     •20      —    1-37     T2   26  1-46      •53lull    2‘10    T32    2'35   27   •24      •80     20      —      —     TO    nu   28   •01      •32     •80     ?28      ——     •54    TO   29  3 20      •75     •20    240     ?321-84    1-.38   30   •56     1-55     •80      —-      96     —   31    16      •75     •80      —•46     —  Total17-97    19-97   11-0528-45    10-661902  17 54

32
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 16, 1920.

ARRIVALS.
PER s. s Kuching: — 6th January—  From Singapore— Messrs. Humphries, H. G. Gray. W. Cotterill, Low Lock Choon and Liiu Cheng Kia.
PER S. S. Alice Lorraine:—7th January—From Sadong
                                               Hcvd. W. Linton.
PER H. H. S. V. Zaliora:—9th January—From the North—
                 Messrs. J. Hardie, McAlpine. Smart
                 and Munnik de Jongh.
DEPARTURES.
PER S. S. Alice Lorraine: 5th January For Lingga and Sadong—Messrs. Page-Turner and Haldane.
PER S. S. Kuching:—11th January—For Singapore— Messrs.
                                  Fitzgerald, P. E. Cox, F, V. Boon, Ng Swee
                                  Ing, Sim Mok Yong, Tan Sia Kim, Koh Ah
                                  Ee, Joo Teck, Tan Tiani Kee, Sim Whai
                                  Ku, Wee Kim Thak and Mr. and Mrs. Ng
                                  Bak Choon.
PERS. s.s  Alice Lorraine: — 12th January- For Lingga and Sibu—Messrs.Hardie, Carpenter, Horton and Cotterill.
THE SARAWAK STUDIO
(REPRESENTATIVES OF MESSRS. KODAK LIMITED.)
THE BEST IN KUCHING
WHERE GOOD PORTRAITS CAN BE TAKEN AND VIEWS OF THE
NEIGHBOURHOOD PROCURED.
PHOTOS FOR PASSPORTS
AT SHORT NOTICE.
KODAKS, KODAK FILMS, PLATES, PAPERS, CHEMICALS
PHOTO PASTE AND ALL PHOTOGRAPHIC MATERIALS
SUPPLIED AT SINGAPORE CATALOGUE PRICES,	

AMATEURS’ FILMS & PLATES DEVELOPED, PRINTED &
ENLARGED AT REASONABLE CHARGES.
Free instructions given to Amateurs with pleasure.
C. M. LEE,
Manager.
21, COURT HOUSE ROAD, KUCHING.
24—17]

KUCHING: —Printed and Published by GHIN HENG SOON, Government Printer, at the Government Printing Office.
Barrack Road.

