
VOL. XXXVII.
No. 503.
Sarawak Gazette
Price	WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 4, 1907.	10 cents.
CONTENTS.
Nonce TO SUBECRIRERB
ORDERS:Export of BurkMunicipal Brunch P. W. D. to be responsible for scavenging arrangements in Bazaar	Contagious Disenses.
NOTIFICATIONS :Alterations in Postal rates (2)Insured parcels to China, etc.Tenders for lease of Rejang Gambling farm	Tenders for weeding etc.Tenders for Markets
1908Tenders for Clothing. Stores, etc.	Tenders for
Street lighting, etc.Rock Road under repairContract for Road repairs.
NOTICES:Missing Land Grant No. 128 of 10th Octol er 1889 Bankruptcy Court, SimanggangBankrupt Estate, Ban Bankrupt Estates. LunduBankruptcy Court, Kuching.
SUPREME COUNCILLEAVEPEACEMAKING IS THE UPPER REJANGNOTE ON AN ANTIQUE BEADTHK UNION JACK CLUB THE MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF COOLIKS IN MALAY A -SARAWAK REGATTAMONTHLY NOTES. HALF YEARLY REPORT:Police and Prisons.
MONTHLY REPORTS :KalakaTm#anPaknSimanggang Malang EstateOyaLltndu-SadongMukaSibu KapitBauBintulu.
ADVERTISEMENTSPASSENGERS-TRADE RETURNSSHIPPING -ALMANACMETEOROLOGICAL READINGS.
The Sarawak gazette
WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 4, 1907.
Notice to Subscriber*.
THE Editor begs to remind Subscribers that private subscriptions will not be renewed for the coining year unless notice of renewal is given.
Order.
No. VIII, 1907.
ORDER NO. IX, of 1st July 1905 relating to export of Mangrove Barks is hereby amended as follows:
Tengah and other Mangrove Barks may be exported from Santubong in 1st Division from date of this order.
There are no restrictions on the export of
Bark from other parts of Sarawak outside the 1st Division.
By Order of His Highness The Rajah Muda.
P. F. CUNYNGHAME,
Resident 1st Division.
Residents Office,
Sarawak, 1st November 1907. v
? ?
Order
No. IX. 1907.
FROM 1st November 1907 the Officer in Charge of Municipal Branch of Public Works Department will be in charge of and responsible for all arrangements made in connection with the general cleanliness and order of Houses and Streets within the Bazaar limits of Kuching and in future will have full authority to issue the necessary instructions and orders to insure that the above are kept in a satisfactory state.
By Order of His Highness The Rajah Muda.
P. F. CUNYNGHAME,
Resident 1st Division.
Residents Office, Kuching, 28th October, 1907.
Order.
No. X, 1907.
IT is hereby directed that on and after 1st January 1908 the application of the Contagious Diseases Ordinance of April 12th 1886 will be extended to Upper Sarawak.
By Order of His Highness The Rajah Muda.
P. F. CUNYNGHAME,
Resident 1st. Division.
Residents Office,
Sarawak, 4th December, 1907.
263
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 4, 1907.
Notice.
No. XXXV, 1907.
NOTICE is hereby given that a title deeTl to land at S. Moyan, Grant No. 128 of 10th October 1889 which was issued to Ee Hap Swee is missing. The land consisted of 19 acres 3 r. 36 p. and was at one time under gambier and pepper. By the will of Ee Hap Swee his pepper and gainbier gardens at S. Moyan were bequeathed to the late Ee Tek Guan and the gardens were by him separately transferred without any title to the land.
The said title. No. 128 of 10th October 1889 will be cancelled if not produced and the present ownership proved at the Land Office on or before the 31st December 1907.
M. G. BRADFORD.
Officer in Charge Municipal Branch P. H7. D.
Kuching. H 30th August, 1907.
Notice.
No. XXXVII, 1907.
IN THE BANKRUPTCY COURT. SIMANGGANG.
In re the goods of Go Tek Ee alias Ah Ba. (Saratok, Ka- laka).
.ILL creditors or other persons having any claims whatever against the Estate of the above are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned on or before the 31st of December 1907 after which date the assets of the said Go Tek Ee will be distributed amongst the parties entitled thereto, regard being had only to those claims of which notice shall have been given. And all moneys due to the abovementioned estate shall be paid to the undersigned forthwith.
H. L. OWEN, Jiesident.
Simanggang, 19th September, 1907.
Notification.
No. XL, 1907.
Upon 1st OCTOBER 1907 the following alterations in Postal Rates come into force:
Internal Postage
SARAWAK LETTER POSTAGE.
Letters.not exceeding oz	... 2 cents
Not exceeding 2 ... 3 For each additional 2 oz.
or fraction thereof 3 ,, Local Union.
Straits Settlements (i. e. Singapore, Penang, Malacca, Province Wellesley, The Bindings. Cocos Islands, Christmas Island and Labuan) Federated Malay States and Johore.
Letter .For 2 oz. or fraction
thereof 3 cents
Postcards.	...	... 1 Printed Papers.Pot 2 oz. or
fraction thereof 1 Local Newspapers within 7 days of publication.
Bor first 3 oz. ... 1 cent
For each additional 2 oz. 1 Commercial Papers.
Pot each 3 oz. ... I minimum $ cents Samples.
For each 2 oz. ... 1 cent
minimun 4 cents Parcels.
Not exceeding 3 tbs. 20 cents
Not exceeding 7 tbs.	40 Not exceeding 11 tbs.	60 BRITTISH POSSESSION, etc.
Great Britain, and the following Colonies, etc : Ascension, Bahamas, Barhadoes, Bermuda, British Honduras, British Central Africa, British East Africa, Canada, Cayman Islands, Ceylon, Cyprus, Falkland Islands, Fiji, Gambia Protectorate. Gibraltar, Gold Coast, Hong Kong, Jamaica, Leeward Islands, New Zealand, Nigeria Northern and Southern, St. Helena, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somaliland, Trinidad and Tobago, Turks Islands, Uganda and Windward Islands.
Letter postage for each ounce or fraction of an ounce, 4 cents (British Possessions not mentioned above i. c. Australia, India, South Africa, etc. remain as at present 4 cents per ounce).
Foreign Countries
Egypt and the Soudan Id. per oz.
For those Countries to which the rate is now 10 cents per half ounce the rate will be as follows:
For the first ounce, 10 cents. B'or each additional ounce or fraction thereof, 6 cents.
By order of
His Highness the Rajah Muda.
C. C. ROBISON.
Postmaster- General.
Kuching, 30th September, 1907.
Notification.
No. XLI, 1907.
NOTICE is hereby given that insured parcels may now be sent to Ceylon and Hongkong and the treaty ports of China i. e. Amoy, Canton, Chefoo, Foochow, Hankow, Hoihow, Kongmong, Kumchak, Liu-Kung-Too, (Wei- hai Wei) Ningpo, Pakhoi. Sumshui, Shanghai, Swatow, and Wuchow.
The limit of insurance is $1,000 and the insurance rate 35 cents per $100 or any fraction thereof. This is additional to the postage rates which remain as stated in the Postal Guide.
C. C. ROBISON,
Postmaster- General.
Kuching,
October 1st, 1907.
Notice-
No. XLII, 1907.
lie Tian Ngin On Chop On Shoon.
ALL creditors and other persons having any claims whatsoever against the Estate of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned within 3 months from date, after which date the assets of the above named will be divided
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 4, 1907.
264
amongst the parties entitled thereto, regard being had only to those claims of which notice shall have been given. And all monies owing to the said Estate shall be paid to the undersigned forthwith.
E. R. STILWELL,
Resident.
Bau,
15th October, 1907.
Notification.
No. XLIII, 1907.
NOTICE is hereby given that the letter postage to the undermentioned British Colonies etc., is 4 cents per ounce or fraction thereof:
Australian Commonwealth
British Gui ana	Fanning Islands Manritina
British North Borneo India includiit Aden) Newfoundland British South Africa Malta	Tristan d'Acunha
C. C. ROBISON, Post-master General.
Sarawak,
17th October, 1907.
Notification.
No. XLIV, 1907.
TENDERS will be received for the lease of the Gambling Farm for the whole of the Rejang district from January 1st next for the term of one year.
Separate tenders for two or more years may also be sent in.
Tenders should be addressed to the Resident, Sibu, and must be delivered not later than December 15th.
H. S. B. JOHNSON.
Resident 2nd Class.
Sibu,
22nd October, 19C7.
Notification.
No. XLV. 1907.
TENDERS will be received at the Municipal Offices up to 11 A. M. on 14th December, 1907, for the weeding, ditching and mowing, etc., of the Roads within the Kampong and Bazaar limits, in accordance with plan to be seen at the said Offices. For further information apply to the Officer in Charge, Municipal Branch. Public Works Department.
M. G. BRADFORD.
Kuching, 28th October, 1907.
Notification.
? ?
No. XLVI, 1907.
TENDERS will be received at the Residents Office up to 11 A. M. on the 15th day of
December 1907, for the renting of the following Markets for the year 1908
Fish.
Pork.
Vegetable, etc.
P. F. CUNYNGHAME, Resident 1st Division.
Kuching, October 29th, 1907.
Notification.
No. XLVII, 1907.
TENDERS will be received at the Residents Office up to 11 A. M. on the 15th day of December 1907, for the following contracts tor the year 1908.
Military Department.
(1) .The making up of white drill and blue serge uniforms as follows :
For the Band, Manila men (10) annually and Malays (22) half yearly; tnd Non-commissioned Officers and men (about 500 in number) half yearly: the contractor to supply badges of rank and good conducts; all other materials to be supplied by the Government.
(2) .The making and supply of uniform caps for the above, red for the Band and black for Noncommissioned Officers and men. All materials to be supplied by contractor, excepting the badges.
Naval Department.
(1) .The making up of blue serge and white drill uniforms, half yearly, for the crews of the following Government vessels, all materials to be supplied by Government:
H. H. S. Zahora
Kaka Adeh Young Harri) La Fee Lucille Gazelle LAubaine
(2) .The making and supply of white and blue caps for the above: all materials to be supplied by contractor, excepting ribbons.
(3) .The supply of rice for the first four of the above mentioned vessels.
(4) .The supply of salt fish for the same.
Medical Department.
The supply of rations and sundries for the General. Pauper, and Lock Hospitals and Government Dispensary.
Police and Prisons Department.
(1) .The making up of blue serge and indigo blue drill uniforms for the Non-commissioned Officers and constables (about 150 in number), and white uniforms for prisoner Maudors (3), also blue drill uniforms for Outstation Police (about 70 in number) half yearly; all material to be supplied by Government.
(2) .The supply of red Kasuraba cloth for turbans and waist cloths for the above.
(3) .The supply of prison rations and sundries as per schedule.
(4) .The supply of white drill for prison clothing.
(5) .The supply of working materials.
265
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 4, 1907.
Court and Offices.
(1) .The making up of the black perlas cloth uniforms for the Court peons half yearly; all material to be supplied by contractor.
(2) .The making up of blue flannel clothingjor Office Boys half yearly; all material to be supplied by contractor.
(3) .The making up of dungaree uniforms for Customs Peons half yearly; and the making and supplying of caps for the same.
Miscellaneous.
(1) .The supply of white drill for uniforms of Rangers, Sailors anti Stokers, and Prison Mandors.
(2) .The supply of indigo blue drill for uniforms of Police Force.
(3) .The supply of Kerosine Oil for the above Departments, also for Light-houses, Sadong and Brooketon Mines.
(4) .The supply of cocoanut oil for the above.
(5) .The supply of blacking, Bengal soap and coal-tar.
The articles mentioned in No. 5 can be tendered for separately.
All articles and schedules may be obtained aud samples seen on application at the Residents Office for Naval Department,*. to the Principal Medical Officer, to the Superintendent of Police and Prisons, to the Superintendent of Customs for their respective requirements and at the Residents Office for Court and Offices and Miscellaneous tenders.
Tenders must be sealed, and the name of the Department for which they are made should be endorsed on the cover.
The Government does not bind itself to accept the lowest or any tender.
P. F. CUNYNGHAME,
Resident 1st Division.
Resident's Office, October 29th, 1907.
Notification.
No. L, 1907.
TENOEBS will be received at the Municipal Office up to 11 A. M. ou 27th December 1907 for the Lighting. Upkeep and repair of Street Lamps in Kuching.
For further information apply to the Officer in Charge of Municipal Branch of Public Works Department.
M. G. BRADFORD, Officer in Charge Municipal Branch.
Kuching,
November. 1907.
Notice.
No. LI, 1907.
lie Lim See Hong (prisoner.) Pepper planter of Prigi, Simatan.
Re Ho Yu Choon (prisoner.) Pepper planter of Prigi, Simatan.
Re Lai Hang Joon (absconded.) Pepper planter of Salarat, Simatan.
Re Lob Ah Kong chop Kang Wat, ( absconded.) Pepper planter of Saraian, Simatan.
All creditors and other peisons having any
claim whatsoever against the Estates of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned within three months from date, after which date the assets of the above named will be divided amongst the parties entitled thereto regard being had only to those claims of which notice shall have been given. And all monies owing to the above Estates shall be paid to the undersigned forthwith.
F. F. BOULT, Assistant Resident, Lundu,
1st November, 1907.
Notice-
No. LU. 1907.
IN THE BANKRUPTCY COURT KUCHING.
In the goods of Hob Sun Loi, pepper planter of S. Loba.
. (Absconded).
In the goods of Tsen Tsin and Tsen Chong, pepper planters of Kranji. (Absconded).
In the goods of Bong Hin, pepper planter of S. Tapang. ( A bsconded).
In the goods of Chong Kai, pepper planter of S. Tapang. (Absconded).
In the goods of Jee Lee, pepper planter of Ranto Panjang. (Absconded).
In the goods of Chang Foi, pepper planter of 8. Tapang. (A bsconded).
In the goods of Jong Jee aud Jong Siew Tian, pepper planters of Paku. (Absconded).
In the goods of Bong Siak, pepper planter of 5th mile Rock Road. ( A bsconded).
In the goods of Cheng Ah Hong, Barber and Rickshaw owner of 11 Market Street. (Absconded.
In the goods of Wee Cheng Chua, Chop Kiam Ilok, boxmaker. (Absconded).
In the goods of Lee Bit, Ng Yah and Sian Phong, pepper planters of Paku. (Abscon-
In the goods of Lai Soon, pepper planter of Tan Teo Durian. (Absconded).
In the goods of Jong Hok Nam
and Jan Jong, pepper planters.
(Absconded).
In the goods of Law Ton, pep-
per planter of Paku. (Abs-
conded).
In the goods of Tsai Leong,
pepper planter of Paku. (A bs-
conded).
In the goods of Gwee Whong
Whong, pepper planter. (Abs-
conded) .
In the goods of Bun Jan. pep-
per planter. (Absconded).
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 4, 1907.
266
In the goods of Fam Sin Chia,
pepper planter of S. Pansi.
(Absconded).
In the goods of Chong Chen and
Chong Liong, pepper planters
of Skunyit. (Absconded).
In the goods of Jong Tin. pep-
per planter. (Absconded).
In the goods of Bong Thoong
and Teh Ah Wat, pepper plan-
ters, Chop Liang Keng of
Pakn. (Absconded).
In the goods of Chang Kim,
pepper planter of 5th mile
ROCK Road. (A bsconded).
In the goods of Liew Shin and
Liew Sheh, pepper planters
of 41 mile Rock Road.
condedf.
In the goods of Chang Chew and
Chang Chong, pepper planters
of S. Tengah. (Absconded).
In the gA)ds of Sim Eng Hong,
peppA- planter of Tan Teo
Durian, under going a term of
imprisonment.
In the goods of Choo Chong, pep-
per planter of Kranji. (Abs-
conded) .
In the goods of Tan Keng Siang,
alias Tang Koo Cheng licensed
Tambang man. (Absconded).
In the goods of Lee Ah Man,
barber of 13 Market Street.
(Absconded).
In the goods of (Chop) Koh
Tang Heng bubur seller of 82
Ewe Hai Street. (Absconded).
In the goods of Chin Jang,
pepper planter of Kranji Se-
brang. (Absconded).
In the goods of Ng Tai, pepper
planter of Kranji, undergoing
a term of imprisonment.
In the goods of Ten Miow and
Liew Kiow. pepper planters
of Paku. (A bsconded).
In the goods of Jee Jun Kiow,
pepper planter of Tabuan.
(Absconded).
In the goods of Low Chuan,
Tambang man. (A bsconded).
In the goods of Chin Man,
licensed Tambang man. fzlis-
conded).
In the goods of Eo Tee Siat,
pepper planter of Segobang
Hill. (Absconded).
ALL creditors and others persons having any 1
claim whatsoever against the Estates of the
above named are hereby requested to send
particulars thereof to the undersigned on or
before the 15th January, 1908, after which
date the assets of the above named will be
divided amongst the parties entitled thereto
regard being had only to those claims of which
notice shall have been given. And all monies
owing to the above Estates shall be paid to
the undersigned forthwith.
JOHN E. A. LEWIS, Resident '2nd Class.
Residents Office. 27th November, 1907.
Notification.
No. LIII, 1907.
ON and after the 1st December 1907, the Rock Road from the 9th to 10th mile will be closed to wheeled traffic while under repair.
H. F. CAREW GIBSON, Commissioner of Public If orA and Surveys.
Kuching, 26th November, 1907.
Notification.
No. LIV, 1907.
THE Contract now let for road repairs, weeding, ditching etc. expires on February 1st. 1908 after which date this work will be done by the Public Works Department and no further contract for such work will be let.
H. F. JCARE W-GIBSON,
Commissioner of
Public Works $ Surveys.
Kuching,
November 1907.
RESIDENTS OFFICE, 18th November, 1907. Present:
His HIGHNESS THE RAJAH MUDA.
The Resident o/f(Honble Sir Percy the 1st Division t Cunynghame, Bart.)
The Datu Bandar (AUng Mohamed I Kassim.)
The Datu Hakim .... ( Haji Mohamed Ali.)
The Datu Emaum .... (Haji Merais.) Crisek 0 011 (Inchek Mohamed Zin.) The Council was convened this day when no business of importance transpired.
F. H. DALLAS,
Recorder.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to grant F. F. Boult Esq. three months vacation leave to date from November 5th 1907.
Peace-making in the Upper Rejang.
2nd November, 1907.
RAJAH MUDA,1 have the honour to inform Your Highness that a successful peace making and pig killing was brought off last Wednesday the 30th ultimo between the different Kayan tribes and the Ula Ai Dyaks.
The following Dyaks among others were present
267
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 4, 1907.
at the ceremony and agreed tc -make peace.
Penghulu Meroom	Melintang
,, Narok	Inggu
Mataliari	Koh
Kanian	Kilau
J in)bun	Bawi
Ayom	Bala
Bair
Jalin Ajut Pilai Blikan
The diflerent up-river tribes were represented by
the following:
Laki Boh K
Abuu Batu ?
Abun. Skapan
Laing. Uma Lesong
Tama Ludu. Kajamau
Oyong Seng. Lahanau
Tuba. Punan Bah.
The Kay an pig was killed by Mereng Kulih and
the Dyak pig by Jalin brother of P. ?.Ieroom and
the livers of both pigs were reported to be quite
satisfactory.	*
Tn the evening a large gathering of both parties ]
was entertained at the fort when dancing and speech
making took place.
I am sending Jimbun to the Mckam to try and J
find out the perpetrators of the murders which took
place in the Ball eh a short time ago.
1 have the honour to lie,
Rajah Muda.
Your Highness most Obedient Servant,
n. S. B. JOHNSON,
Resident 2nd Class.
Note on antique bead.
IT has been known for many years that the Natives of Sarawak are in possession of antique beads concerning which they can give ns no information beyond that they are very eld and often treasured as heirlooms. Such beads were not made by their ancestors and it is ordinarily supposed that they were introduced to Borneo as objects of barter by the early traders. In only very few cases is there any certainty respecting their origin and accordingly a recent discovery on this point is worthy of record. Some months ago Mr. Collins picked up from the ground at Bau a large glassy bead of unusual and characteristic appearance. The ground colour is black and it is decorated with numerous white rings of circular or oval shape : these small rings are fairly regularly disposed on the surface and do not touch each other. A large number of the same kind of bead was taken in a garden at Bako in 1905 and the collection was acquired by H. II. The Rajab, the majority being now deposited in the Sarawak Museum and the rest in the Cirencester Museum. These beads, though ail of the same type, differ individually both in size and shape and also in the number and size of the white rings: that is to say each bead was separately made. They range about a diameter of one inch and are roughly spherical, a few being elongated. The bead found by Mr. Collins was sent by him to the British Museumafterwards he generously presented it to the national collectionwhence comes the information that it was made in Venice before the year 1,100 A. D. The bead is of great rarity and it was known to the British Museum only by a solitary specimen presented by H. H. The Ranee some years ago. In this country it is known also to the native bead col
lectors on the Barnin river and an influential Eayan lady, wife of Laki Batang, famed for her bead collection, states that this kind of bead is highly esteemed by Kenyah connoisseurs.
It is much to be desired that these and the other antiquities of this country should be properly investigated before the materials disappear for ever.
J. H.
The Union Jack Club
WK have just received and have much
pleasure in publishing the following Circular
on the subject of the Union Jack Club:
The Union Jack Chib, which was opened by His
Majesty the King on 1st July, has more than satis-
fied the hopes and aspirations of its promoters and
most ardent supporters. The Council are now able
to estimate the exteAt of its popularity with the
sailors and soldiers to whom it was presented, and
the result is most gratify ing and encouraging.
Over 13,000 men have occupied the bedrooms at
the Club since it was opened, tlw number of soldiers
being about equal to that of sailors and marines.
No further proof is therefore required that the Club
has met a real want, and is a great success. It is
much appreciated by the men of both Services, and
its popularity is assured. The Council have but
one regret, and that is their inability to provide
accommodation for all who, at every week-end, flock
to its doors from the naval and military stations.
The number of bedrooms now available is 20-1, yet
week after week not one of these rooms remains
unoccupied. Every effort is made, by temporary
makeshifts, to satisfy the demands of the men
anxious to live in their own club rather than sleep
at the indifferent lodging-houses which abound in
the neighbourhood, and are their only alternatives.
A limit, however, is reached when it becomes im-
possible to provide any further accommodation in
the Club, and consequently hundreds of men have
to make their own arrangements for the night else-
where. This is far from satisfactory, and the Council
earnestly desire that they should be able to obtain
the additional bedrooms which are so much needed.
This cun be done by building the extension, for
which a portion of the original site is still available.
I The effect would lx? an increase of 150 bedrooms. I Through the generosity of the public the Council ! already have in their possession a part of the requisite ! funds. With the object of providing, if possible, the whole of the balance, a scheme has been laid before them embodying the idea that a magazine containing stories, articles, and poems, profusely illustrated, should be produced for sale at a popular price next year. A large number of authors and authoresses, whose names will be subsequently announced, have already promised their practical and sympathetic support. It is hoped that many of our leading artists will generously assist with sketches and illustrations, and that various firms who are Able to produce the necessary munitions of war, such as paper, ink, blocks, &c., will be kind j enough to contribute towards the supply, while I others may be willing to help with the printing and ' binding. The Council also trust that one of our ! great and patriotic publishing firms will render assistance in the publishing of the magazine.
I The price of a copy will be such that every pur- I chaser, while supporting the Union Jack Club and
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 4, 1907.
helping towards the completion of this national memorial, will receive full and even overflowing measure of literary and artistic value in return for his payment.
All communications should be addressed to Major H. F. Trippel, at Onslow Hall, Richmond, Surrey, who is the originator of the idea, and will act for the Council of the Club as Honorary Editor-in-Chief.
The Medical management of coolies
in Malaya.
Bl' P, N. &ERRABD, M. I.
Whilst the cry of "Rubber! Rubber! and large profits" resounds throughout Ceylon and the Straits and is wafted abroad from these countries, may I be permitted, in the interest of both the capitalist and ihe coolie, to draw the attention of employers of labour to a few points which.seem to me to affect the future of the industry; certainly in this country, and probably in every country wherein a large amount of labour is employed.
Firstly, then, 1 would point out that all the wealth in the world will not profit a man broken down in health. Secondly, that a dead or broken down coolie is of no practical use on any estate. Thirdly, that unless due precautions be taken, both these lamentable eventualities are at least liable to occur, and indeed, as far as I have seen of the conditions under which the immigrant lives after importation to this country as an agricultural labourer, the failure of the coolie is quite probable.
As it is my purpose to deal principally w ith the conditions of life of the cooliethe pawn upon whom the question of profits must to a large extent depend it will probably be sufficient advice in dealing with my first point if I say to managers and assistants:
Build your houses on open, elevated, long-cleared land if possible, let them face the prevailing wind, that you may obtain the full benefit of the evening coolness; do not lie about in wet clothes; sleep under a mosquito net; eat and drink moderately; work hard, but dont overdo it unless absolute necessity demands; take every reasonable opportunity of getting away from the Estateespecially up a hilland when you get "played out" or really seedy look to it at once.
Remember that malaria, bowel-complaints, and severe colds, are serious diseases, and if undealt with frequently leave sequelae which neither money nor science can deal with. Lastly, wear flannel if you can.
There are four fundamental necessities for the establishment of healthy coolie lines:1. A pure water supply. 2. Adequate ventilation. 3. Some inexpensive but efficient system of Sanitation in and around the lines. 4. Sound drainage.
With regard to number 1, if the well system l e adopted of necessity, then remember that the "circle of influence" is at least 20 yards, and that sewage contamination has been traced to upwards of one mile, if the lines are permanent the wells should be bricked inside and surrounded by a raised coping and a cemented and graded circle of say ten feet from the coping all round, the water used for bathing or otherwise spilt should be run off to a distance, the well should be covered and all water drawn by a pump. A simple method of testing whether a well is contaminated by sewage in its vicinity is to pour a solution of fluorescence into the nearest drain or cesspit and observe whether any nuoresencec occurs in the well water after 24 hours.
All well and river water is the better for a passage through a clean dripstone filter, but these filters when used casually without cleaning are a danger
rather than a method of purification. They should be periodically boiled and scraped, as fungi are able to grow through their interstices and thus to con- ? laminate good water: the water, if any serious doubt exists about its purity, should be boiled, and stored in some clean place where dust cannot fall into it; the tank or jar must he covered.
Speaking generally the deeper the well the better, and if any hard stratum exist in hills in the vicinity, artesian water may perhaps be struck at a reasonable depth. Pure streams from the hills are probably the soundest water in this country; aqueducts of bamboo are cheap, and can be made over long distances satisfactorily. Always inspect the catchment area. All the rivers of this country are polluted to some degree, and if river water is the only possible source of supply it must be filtered and boiled. That portion of the river near the lines should be divided into three parts: (1) An upper reach for the drinking and cooking water; (2) A middle reach for watering cattle; (3) A lower reach for washing.
If rain water is the only source of supply it should be stored in large underground tanks, as at Gibraltar and other unfortunately situated stations. All Lacks and wells should be protected from the entrance of surface flood water, unless surface over which the water flows is above reproach. If on the addition of 4 ozs. of permanganate of potash to an ordinary-sized well, the water does not become and remain pink for about an hour, the v.at r must be looked upon as doubtful, and measures should be taken to further purify it or to have it analysed. The permanganate should be mixed in a bucket before being poured into the well.
2. Ventilation. The question of ventilation involves little extra expense, as obviously the less we place between ourselves and Gods good fresh air the less it will cost us in houses, and yet the better we shall be. The present kuchi is wrong in principleby the present kuchi, I mean the one which has a straight a I taped back, a short roof behind and a longer roof in front, under which is a verandah where cooking, etc., is performedits chief mistakes are:
(a) The roof is not high enough as a rule.
(b) There is not sufficient ventilation above nor below, in front nor behind the cubicles or sleeping rooms.
(c) The verandahs, being also kitchens, frequently are the receptacle for all sorts of rubbish.
After mature consideration and ample proof of its benefits I now believe that there is but one ideal type of lines which is advisable' in the best interests of both employer and coolie, namely the lines which consist of simple roof on supports, under which the cubicles are built, none ot the line partitions are over nine feet high, all cubicle floors are 3 ft. 6 in. from the ground and open underneath.
Of about 15 estates with which I am familiar, the healthiest is one on which the above type of lines are in occupation, and I believe I am correct when I state that the only type of disease which has affected that estate of recent years, has been epidemic in character and introduced from without. * As, however, on many estates the old-fashioned type of lines have been erected, I would suggest that they be altered as soon as possible, by the removal of the upper two layers of side attaps and the removal of the attaps which extend to the ground (and so close the space under the benches), and that they be replaced as soon as possible by one of those suggested.
An excessive height off the ground is almost as obnoxious as excessive proximity to the earth, because if the lines are too high the underneath will be used as a hen-house or store, in all human probability. Of the two forms of ventilationthe overhead and the underneaththe latter is perhaps the
269	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 4, 1907.
more to be insisted upon as we know that animal C Oa gas as exhaled, is most poisonous, and also that its specific gravity is greater than air, therefore, in the absence of draughts by under ventilation, it is obviously only a mutter of time and opportunity to become suffocated by it.
We now come to the question of Sanitation at the lines. Everyone who has had anything to do with the Tamil coolie is aware of his roaming habits under certain circumstances, his love of variety and the fields, or preferably the road or pathway, but that Tamil coolies or Chinese coolies or any other coolies cannot be gently but firmly educated 1 absolutely decline to believe.
Now under existing sanitaryperhaps I might indeed say insanitaryarrangements on the majority of estates' in this country, I submit that the unfortunate coolie who gets a tummyache at say 1 A. M., should not be blamed by the inspecting doctor or agent the next day, in the garish sunlight, for filthy habits; in other words until proper sanitary accomodation becomes a feature of every coolie lines in the country and a special coolie be detailed to look after the matter disease must continue to exist amongst the whole class.
The type of latrine to k? erected is of the simplest, an attap-roofed shed elevated above the surrounding ground level, with a trench for buckets or to be filled in with a mixture of dry earth and lime daily to a depth of about three inches, the trench protected from storm-water by means of ordinary earth drains around it, and sufficiently removed in its situation from the main water supply to prevent contaminationthis will suffice to prevent an enormous amount of illness.
Lines are generally, in myopinion, better without any open earth drains whatever, they only serve as receptacles for all sorts of filth and rubbish. The very fact of a convenient hole to throw things into running all round the lines, is quite sufficient inducement to create a bad habit amongst a much higher type of individual than the average coolie. My ideal surroundings for lines would be short-cropped grass, gravel, laterite, or coarse ashes, not very expensive luxuries any of them. I would run French drains at right angles, from the kuchis right round, in order to keep the immediate vicinity dry. Pools, if they occurred after rain, should be filled in or levelled. (French drains are made by digging first a graded trench, filling in the whole length of it with coarse rubble, then ever this fill in finer gravel, then sand or earth, and cover the whole with earth, gravel, or grass. Some sinking will, of course, occur, which must be dealt with, but the result is an enormous and cheap improvement.)
Brick drains round lines are, of course, charming, but they must be catefully graded and capable of dealingwith all flood-water, kept clean by frequent sweeping and disinfection, and, where they run deep, deep holes to carry off surface wrater should be made. Tidal drains, whether of earth or brick, unless properly controlled by water gates are in my opinion inadvisable. If thoroughly under control and regularly opened and the drains swept with the ebbing of the tide they may be made use of. If the watergates are opened at high tide and closed until low water then opened and the drains flushed out at a high velocity, with much sweeping, twice a week, then good'results may be expected.
Too much stress cannot be laid upon the system of facilitating all sanitariness amongst coolies, at present they are blamed as a classI believe quite wrongfullyfor being d:rty in their habits and altogether bestial, they have no opportunity of being otherwise unless the European places every convenience within their reach. Let a sanitary man- dore be appointed to every 100 coolies, erect a latrine
for every seventy-five individuals, punish defaulters, inform your coolies of the arrangements, post notices forthose who can read, and I shall deem it a personal favour if you will let me know the result at the end of six months. System must be the password, and every drainage and sanitary plan should be capable of extension to meet larger demands.The Tropical Agriculturist.
SARAWAK REGATTA.
Wednesday, 1st January, 1908.
Judges:His Highness the Rajah Muda, Sir Percy ? Cunynghame, Bart. Messrs. J. M. Bryan, John E. A. Lewis, Dr. A. J. G. Barker, C. C. Robison, and H. F. Carew Gibson, The Data Bcndar, The Datu Hakim, The Datu Imaumr
Starters: Messrs. G. ( Gillan, H. A. Adams, Stuart Cunynghame, The Tuan Belal and In chi Mahomat Zin.
Umpire:Mr. M. G. Bradford.
Stewards: The Honble F. H. Dallas and Messrs. F. G. Day, Dr. Wellington, Dr. Bruce Low, L. E. Slade, V. Harington, E. Parnell, J. H. Brodie. J. R. Barnes, Chan Kee Soon, Ong Tiang Swee. Yeo Guan Chow, Low Ngee Siang, and Khoo Siew Ghee.
Treasurer : Mr. E. Parnell.
Programme
1st Race, 9 a. m.--SHIPS GIGS.1st prize $6. 2nd prize $3. From Muara Padungan to the Stone Wharf.
2nd Race, 9.15 a. n.BANDONG RACE.For bond fide fishing boats. Crews limited to ten men. 1st prize $15. 2nd prize $10. From Muara Padungan to the Stone Wharf.
3rd Race, 9.30 a. m His HIGHNESS THE RAJAHS CUP.Value $130. 2nd prize $65. For boats with unlimited Crews. Entrance fee $2. 1st prize to Crew $50. 2nd prize to Crew $25. 3rd prize to Crew $15. From Batu Biliong to the Stone Whcrf.
4th Race, 10a. m.TAMBANGS.Open to all licensed Tambangs with one man in each. 1st prize $2. 2nd prize $1. 3rd prize 50 cents. From the Stone Wharf round H. H. S. Zahora and back to Stone Wharf.
5th Race, 10.15 a. m.THE CHAMBER OF COMMERCE CUP.Value $50. Presented by Messrs. Chan Kee Soon, Ong Tiang Swee and Yeo Guan Chow. For any description of boat with Crews limited to 15 men Entrance fee $1.50. 1st prize to Crew $15. 2nd prize to Crew $7.50. From Batu Biliong to the Stone Wharf.
6th Race 10.45 a. m.PRAHU TEGORA RACE. For Ixjats that have been bond fide carrying freight to Tegora or above Buso. Crews unlimited. 1st prize $20. 2nd prize $10. From Ban Sengs Sago factory to Stone Wharf.
7th Race, 11 a. m.ONE MAN RACE.1st prize $2. 2nd prize $1. 3rd prize 50 cents. From the Stone Wharf round H. H. S. Zahora and back to Stone Wharf,
Sth Race, 11.15 a. nt.ARMY, NAVY AND CONSTABULARY.Crews limited to 15 men. 1st prize $15. I 2nd prize $7. From Ban Seng's Sago factory to the I Stone Wharf
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 4, 1907.
270
INTERVAL.
Racing will be resumed at 1.30 p. m.
9th Race, 1.30p. m.THE CHAMPION CUP.Value
$100. Presented by The Opium Funner. Open to
all boats. Crews unlimited. Entrance fee $2. 1st
prize to crew $50. 2nd prize to crew $25. 3rd
prize to crew $15. From Batu Bilioug to Stone
Wharf.
10th Race, 2 p. m.FOH BOATS WITH CHEWS LI-
MITED TO EIGHT MEN. 1st prize $8. 2nd prize $4.
From Muara Padungan to Stone Wharf.
11th Race, 2.30p. m.FISHERMAN'S RACE.One
man sculling (Dayang Ikan.) 1st prize $2. 2nd
prize $1. 3rd prize 50 cents. From Stone Wharf
round H. H. 8. Zahora and back to Stone Wharf.
12th Race, 2.45 p. in.BANDONG RACE.For bond
fide fishing boats to be propelled by oars, steersman
only to use a paddle. Crews limited' to five men.
1st prize $7. 2nd prize $5. From Dayang Atuns
pengkallan to Stone Wharf. f
13th Race, 3 p. m.SCHOWI. BOYS' RACE.For
bond fide school boys only* Crews limited to 18
boys. 1st prize $12. 2nd'piize $4. From Dayang
Atuns pengkallan to Stone Wharf.
14th Race, 3.30p. m.BANDONG RACE.For bona
fide fishing boats. Crews limited to 15 men. 1st
prize $22.50. 2nd prize $15. From Haji Assim's
pengkallan to Stone Wharf.
15th Race, 4.0 p. w.For BOATS WITH CREWS
LIMITED TO 3 MEN.1st prize $3. 2nd prize $1.
From Stone Wharf round H. II. S. Zahora and
back to Stone Wharf.
16th Race, 4.15 p. m.FOK ANY DESCRIPTION OF
BOAT WITH CREWS LIMITED TO 15 MEN.Entrance
fee $1. Winner of the 5th nice to pull with 13
and 2nd in 5th race to pull with 14 paddles only.
1st prize $15 to owner and $15 to Crew. 2nd prize
to Crew $7. From Tanjong Patingan to Stone
Wharf.
17th Race, 4.45 p. nt THE CONSOLATION CUP.
Value $70. Open to all boats that have not won a
race at this meeting. Entrance fee $ 1. 1st prize
to Crew $25. 2nd prize to Crew $15. From Tan-
jong Patingan to Stone Wharf.
MONTHLY Notes
November.
THE p. s. Adch returned on the 4th from
Singapore, where she had been to dock. Mr.
P. Stewart came back with her.
S. S. llajah of Sarawak sailed for Singa-
pore on the 5th with passengers, Messrs.
F. F. Boult, F. S. Odom, and H. Hannay.
Mr. Boult has been granted three months
vacation leave which we understand he intends
spending in India; we wish him a pleasant
holiday. We were sorry to say goodbye to
Mr. Hannay who has left the service of the
Borneo Company at Bau and Bidi after over
three years spent out here.
THE new Fish Market on the River Wali '? just above the Vegetable Market was thrown I open for use on the 5th. arid the old market j is to be pulled down. The new market is a ! very great improvement and we hope that it I will be properly appreciated.
THE 7th, being Hari Raya, the first day of Shawal, was ushered in by a salute of guns from the Fort. The morning was occupied by the Mahomedan population in paying the customary complimentary visits.
S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore this day with the mails, but no European passengers.
ON Friday, the 8th, H. H. The Rajah Muda sailed for Lundu in p. s. Adeh. His Highness invited the Honble Sir Percy Cunynghame, Messrs. Bryan, Gillan and Crocker to accompany him. Fair sport was obtained with snipe, plover and pigeon. The Rajah Muda and nis guests returned to Kuching on the 10th.
P. S. Kaka returned from the North on the 8th with Mr. G. M. Allman who had taken a trip in her up the coast as far as Limbang.
THE 9th, being the birthday of King Edward VII, was observed as a public holiday and a salute of 21 guns was fired from the Fort battery.
S. S. Kuching sailed for Singapore on the 12th with passenger, the Revd. Mr. Woodd.
ON the 14th s. s. llajah of Sarawak arrived from Singapore. Passengers, Mr. R. Pawle and Mr. J. Scott. She sailed again on the 19th.
ON the 20th a Meeting was held in the
l Residents Office to consider the programme
; and appoint Officers for the Regatta to be held
as usual on New Years Day. The pro-
gramme will be found in another column. It
was decided not to have a Regatta Tiffin in
the Court House on this occasion.
This day p. s. Adeh arrived from Sibu with
passenger Sister Baptista, and p. s Kaka from
Limbang with passengers Messrs. E. Parnell
and S. Cunynghame.
S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore on
j 21st and sailed again for Singapore on the
20th. Of European passengers she had none
either inward or outward.
ON the 25th at St. Josephs Church, Kuching, Miss Mary Tai Fook Chong, daughter of Mr. Tai Fook Chong, Chief Clerk to the Court of Requests, Kuching, Sarawak, was married to Mr. Peter Wee Kim Hok, Government Clerk at Bau, Upper Sarawak. The ceremony was performed by the Revd. Father A. Haidegger, after which the friends of the bride and bridegroom were entertained to dinner at the house of the brides parents.
THE S. S. Rajah of Sarawak arrived from Singapore on the 23th. Passengers, Mr. W. Service, Superintendent Engineer to the Government, Mrs. Service and child. Mr.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 4, 1907.
and Mrs. Service have been spending a short holiday in Scotland and Australia.
ON Thursday and Friday afternoons, the 28th and 29th, a bazaar and sale of work was held in the grounds of the Vicarage in aid of the funds of the S. P. G. Mission Giris School. We do not know the exact sum realized by the sale, but believe it to be somewhere about 200.
His Lordship the Bishop and Miss Hose leave Sarawak for Singapore by the s. s. Kuching on Tuesday, the 10th December. Owing to failing health Bishop Hose has bad to send in his resignation and his retirement is only a matter of a few weeks. The Bishop and Miss Hose will be much missed in our small circle.
THE Editor will be pleased to hear from anyone who has for salt* a complete set of the Sarawak Gazettes for the years 1905 and 1906 (both or either)also from anyone who wishes to dispose of the Gazettes for any of the years from 1870 to and including 1884. Communications to be add res red to the Sarawak Gazette Office.
THE first motor-bicycle has made its appearance in Kuching. It has been imported by His Highness the Rajah Muda.
POLICE AND PRISON DEPT.,
Kuching, November 13th. 1907. i
Siu,I have the honour to forward the following
report on the Police and Prison Department for the
half year ending June 30th, 1907.
PRISON.
Crime.During the half year two hundred and five (205) persons were sentenced to terms of imprisonment as against two hundred and seventy- three (273) for the corresponding period in 1906.
Nationality of Criminals.Having regard to the nationality of criminals there were sentenced as under
Chinese	110
Malays	38
Klings	26
Dyaks	16
Javanese	8
Indians	4
Milanaus	3
205
Nature of Crime.The following table shows the
number of sentences under each head.
Theft	...	...	55
Contempt of Court	...	27
Military Offenders	...	24
Miscellaneous ...	...	23
Absconding under advances ...	20
Fighting	...	...	JI
Breach of Trust and Contract	8
Assault	...	...	8
Breach of Police and Prison Regulations 4
Burglary	...	...	4
Illicit sale of pepper	3
Obtaining money on false pretences	3
Swindling ...	...	2
Cutting and wounding	...	2
Non payment of fines	...	2
Gang Robbery ...	...	2
Breach of Opium and
Gambling Farms Regulations 2
Fraud	...	...	1
Trespass	...	1
Impersonation . )	1
Manslaughter	1
Embezzlement	...	...	1
205
Gaol State.
In Goal January 1st 1907 Criminals 139
Entered to dale	...	...	205
Recaptured	...	...	3
347
In Gaol June 30th 1907 Criminals 151
Discharged to date	...	190
Escaped 4, Died 2	...	6
347
Escaped Prisoners.Four prisoners effected their
escape during the half year. Of these, three escaped
from P. \V. D. and one from the Dispensary. Their
sentences were 3 months, 1 year. (5 months and 1
year respectively.
Recaptured Prisoners. Three prisoners were recaptured. Two of these being men who had escaped from the River Wall previously. The third had escaped from P. W. D. some three years before.
January to June. 1907.
Health of Prisoners.Daily grand average
of prisoners excluding those awaiting
trial ...	...	154.5
Daily grand everage of prisoners sick 34.2
Daily percentage ...	...	22.1
January to June. 1900.
Daily grand everage of prisoners excluding
those awaiting trial	..	147.60
Daily grand everage of prisoners sick 30.22
Daily percentage ...	...	20.46
Lunatics.The number of lunatics detained in
Gaol has been an average of over 20 daily during
the past half year. Throughout the day the Gaol
yard is cumbered with them and its lunatics they
add to the work of the Gaol warders and require
constant supervision. At night, they occupy nearly
j of the Gaol accommodation and entail crowding
of the prisoners.
Judicial Execution.There was no judicial execu-
tion during the half.year.
Conduct of Prisoners.Has called for no comment.
The usual petty offences against Gaol regulations
have been dealt with in the ordinary way. For those
working inside the Gaol, it would be an advantage
to devise some form of hard labour, as basket
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 4, 1907.
272
making is a light form of punishment and the long sentence criminal, who works inside spends a great part of his term in doing a form of labour, in no sense hard, and which merely occupies his time comfortably.
Profit and Loss A/c.The following.figures form a comparative statement of the value of prison labour, and sale of articles made in Gaol.
Dr.	Cr.
To valne of 17,302 men's Inbour	4
20 cents $3.478.40 By cost of Provisions
baskets sold 779.26	slid Medical comforts $3,180.31
..	pxwls sold 1.034.22 ,. cost of working materials 1/278.73
Gaol refuse sold 11-1.00 ,, Prison clothing 373.80 ., ., Gaol upkeep and
.. I Miters'diets recovered 266.00	white washing 157.94
.. Prison clothing issued 280.70 ..	Firewood	123.67
,,	Tolincoo and Roko 31.48
..	Kerosine oil	26.60
.,	Sundries	19.51
.,	Tin plates	7.70
,.	.,	CocoaTint oil	7.50
., Kujangi '	12.05
..	.,	Island Mats	4.90
.,	,.	Soap	4.08
..	..	JPaid labour	111.79
Debit balance 15-1.97	,,	aVnrdem' pay	,748.19
6107.55	4	$6,107 M
This represents the money paid out by Government at $3 a month to the wives aud families of working debtors.
The debit balance shewn here of $154.97 is more than counterbalanced by the fact that the stock of baskets in hand on the 1st July have a value of $1,003.04.
POLICE.
Strength of Force. -In the force January
1st 1907. 162
Enrolled during half year. 16
In the force June 30th 1907.
Dismissed the force
Discharge at own request
Discharged through ill health
178
160
5
10
3
178
Composition of Force.The composition of the force on June 30th was as under:
Sergeant Major	...	1
Sergeants	...	4
Lance Sergeants	...	4
Corporals	...	7
Lance Corporals	...	13
Constables	..	131
160
Disposition at Outstations.From the above
strength there were detailed for outstations as
under.
L. Sergi. Corp. L. Corp. Cwtables. Total.
Up. Sarawak Paku 1	...	2
,,	.. Bau 3
Sadong Mine	...	1
Sadong	*	J
Lundu	...	1
Batu Kawah	...	.	1
Santubong	I
Matang	...	"Matang Road 3rd mile 1	2	8
'leaving ninety-eight (98) available for duty at Headquarters.
Five (5) men in all have l een dismissed the Force during the half year, three (3) of them being Sikhs and two (2) Malays.
Conduct of the Force.Has been good throughout the half year. The Non-commissioned officers have been zealous in their work, and in some cases shew a keen desire to obtain further promotion. The senior sergeants, although of an age, in one or two cases, which will not permit of their being sent long
distances, are however capable of carrying out all that may be required of them in the township.
Of the police constables, there have been but few cases of misdemeanour, and the general tendency has been to show an interest in their work. The recruiting has fallen off amongst the Malays to a serious extent.
The rate of pay offered on first joining acts as a strong deterrent, since they can, under less strict supervision, with more regular hours, obtain nearly double the monthly wage as coolies elsewhere. The result of this being apparent in the quality of men who offer themselves for enrollment. During the half year 6 Malays joined the Police and 9 took their discharge.
Of the Sikhs and Indians the recruiting is fairly steady, and the oulv difficulty is that of obtaining Malays of a respectable class.
LICENSES REGISTRATIONS.
Alligators.One hundred and sixty-two (162) alligators and fifty (50) eggs were destroyed during the half year with a total measurement of 707'6" for which rewards were paid to the amount of two hundred and fifty-six dollars and twenty cents $256.20 as against seventy (70) measuring 322' 9" and costing one hundred a uni sixteen dollars aud nineteen cents $116.19 for the same period in 1906.
Tambangs.Three hundred and ninety-one (391) tambang licenses were issued during ths half year as against three hundred and ninety-one (391) for the same period in 1906.
Hawkers Three hundred (300) hawkers licenses were issued during the half year as against three hundred and sixty-two (362) for the same period in 1906.
Jinrickshaws.Two hundred and seventy-seven Jinrickshaw licenses were issued during the half year as against two hundred and ninety-six (296) for the same period during 1906.
Goldsmiths.Eighty-five (85) goldsmiths licenses were issued during the half year as against one hundred and twenty-eight (128) for the same period in 1906
Public Houses.Fifty (50) public bouse licenses were issued during the half year as against forty- two (42) for the same period during 1906.
Bullock Carts.Forty (40) bullock carts licenses were issued during the half year as against thirty- four (34) for the same period in 1906.
Hand Carts.Twenty (20) hand carts were registered during the half year as against two (2 1 for the same period in 1906.
Stall Holders.Forty-one (41) stall holders licenses were issued during the half year as against forty- nine (49) for the same period during 1906.
Dogs.No dog licenses were issued from the Police Station.
The aforementioned license having been transferred from this Department to that of the Municipal Department, Public Works, at the beginning of the year.
Police Court.There were 257 cases (including Summons cases) brought up in Court during the half year and 229 convictions obtained as against 444 cases and 394 convictions for the corresponding period lust year.
Prison Labour.Appended herewith I have the honour to furnish the usual return shewing the distribution of Prison labour during the half year.
I have the honour to be,
Sir,
Yours obedient servant,
H. A. ADAMS.
Superintendent of Police C- Prisons.
To
The Rouble The Resident
1st Division,
Kuching.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 4, 1907.
-.Isis
1V1O1
W1 -s *S
S -attoiplapj,
UM ' "H
V M I
I
83O
laqtut J,
S SnuaainSag I
H!K "VS ttmasnjj auuij spuxing
stioanvi.nijt I a M J I Ioi1S
s.aaantPnjj ,
.resaacisifl I
?sa[qws A	J A
*
-5
?'?s$igss
x S i
I
L
e pvioj,
-J Td
3 -Snip
uaj
i j 38338S
spw U ipuoK
3g ; 2
may have proceeded direct to Kuching as they are
not known there.
Five Chinese and a Malay arc willing to build per-
manent bilian shops at Saratok. No doubt the
building will commence on the next visit of an
Officer.
The dibbling is now in full swing, and the Malays
are still clearing for transplanting their paddy.
The weather has changed for wet, and the short-
age of water is now ended.
The hauls of the jungkat were still satisfactory
but about half of the workers have ceased working
as they are going to sell their salted fish either at
Oya or Mukah.
Three Fortmen were newly enlisted, viz.:
Private Dullah vice Nuga, Private Grijeh vice
Jugah and Private Rimong vice Girik.
The fines for the month amounted to $113.30.
The trade returns for the month are:
Imports.	Exports.
$8,70J	$9,004
I
October.
There is nothing of importance to report to Your
Highness for the past month.
In the middle of the month the Malay chief (Tuah
Kampong) of Roban brought down two Cantonese
Chinese who came overland from Binatang without
an overland pass-port. Their excuse was that they
did not know that they had to get a pass-port, but
all the same they were forwarded to Simanggang as
they were suspected of having broken Jaiifrom Sibu.
A few days later on a Sarawak Ranger, two Betoug
Fortmen and someDyaks arrived from Saratok with
two deserters who were arrested at Sabetan. These
deserters came over from Oya over a year ago. The
following day they left for Simanggang ria the
Saribas.
A Dyak ofKrangan Rusa, Upper Krian, was badly wounded on the leg by a bamboo spike (jerungkang) when giving chase to a wild pig near the house with seveial others. The spike was set up by a boy on the road to the paddy farms.
The Malays here have finished building the bilian bridge leading to the sands.
Bujang bin Sahet is now taken on as Cowman vice Tambi Gani dismissed for theft.
The weather has been very wet.
The fines for the month are $79.22.
The trade returns for the month are:
Imports.	Exports.
$11,750.	$17,950.
MONTHLY IMPORTS.
KALAKA.
September.
Ui Ah Jang of Ibus complained that his house was rifled by some one during his absence. His working tools, such as hoes, etc., were taken : later on Ui Ah Phau too complained that when he was carrying his pepper down to the landing place his box was broken into and cash $0 was stolen besides his Pepper Permit, etc. He suspects another man who was standing at the door of one of the huts when he passed by.
At the middle of the month I received information from the Resident that two long term prisoners had escaped from jail and that a sharp look-out was to be kept for these men, especially for one of them who came from the Ibus. No news or rumours of any sort have I received and it is unlikely that they
A. E. CHEYNE,
IFrifer.
TRUSAN.
September and October.
Nothing of any particular importance has taken place during these two months; only a few cases have been brought up and those were mostly in the Civil Court.
The Bisayas and Malays have all paid in their exemption tax and there are only some few of the Muruts whose tax is still outstanding owing to their being away working producethis will probably lie all collected before the end of the year.
The Muruts who have moved down from the far interior have been given time until after the next harvest to pay in their revenue, these people have
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 4, 1907.	. 274
apparently no property or means with which to pay.
The trade returns for the two months are as follows:
September Imports $1298 Exports $1,690.
October ,,	3,472.	,,	3,677.
by which it will be noticed that there was a considerable revival during the latter month in the trade.
The 2nd being the commencement of the puasa the usual salute was fired.
O. F. RICKETTS,
Resident.
UPPER SARAWAK. PAKU .
September and October.
General.The Court WriterTet Joongwho had been seriously ill for so/ie time, and consequently unable to attend to* his duties, finally resigned his position on the 7ni of October and his place has been taken by Ng Jong Sen who commenced work on the 22nd.
A squad of Rangers arrived on the 20th of September for special patrol duty and though they have as yet made no arrests yet the district seems quieter since their arrival.
Mr. Parnell arrived on the 18th to audit the accounts of the Station and returned to Kuching on the 24th.
On the 20th the station bull which was becoming unmanageable in its old agehaving gored 2 of the cows and done considerable damage to the cattle- shedwas slaughtered and the meat which was sold at 20 cents per kati had a ready sale and was much appreciated.
The 26th of September and 9th of October were observed as holidays being the birthdays of Your Highness and H. H. the Ranee.
Court.Fines and fees amounted to $379.53.
There have been fewer cases than usual in the Police Court and there were only four convictions for theft. A great deal of my time was taken up in September in enquiring into a charge of gang robbery made against one Lee Kon Shin of Musi. I believe this man to have been guilty but was forced to release him as there was not sufficient evidence for a conviction.
Prison.The prisoners (averaging 27.5) have been ?employed clearing the cattle ground and land at the hack of the Bazaar and also repairing the roads near by.
A prisoner named Phang Khira escaped on the ?20th of September at 10.30 A. M. and by great good luck was recaptured the same day at 2.30 P. M. He received thb usual punishment. At the time of his escajxs he was wearing no leg irons as they had been removed on account of sores on his ankles caused by the irons. The leg irons in use here are most cumbersome and almost invariably cause sores on the legs when they have to be removed at once or blood poisoning is the result.
The health of the prisoners has been anything but good and 11 have been in Hospital during the period under review.
Public I Korts.The house lately occupied by Tet Joong was in a very bad state and has been pulled
down and one Raub has contracted to build a new one on the same site for $60Government supplying all materials. This house should be completed by the end of November.
I have nothing further to report to Your Highness dn this occasion.
H. B. CROCKER,
Resident 2nd Class.
Simanggang.
-
October.
Ulu Ai affairs.Police Sergt. Samsudin whom I sent to Ulu Skarang with Penguin Sli to make inquiries concerning the massacre of the people of Kudis house by Gasah and nineteen men of Apai Bitis house states that Bamba was not concerned in these murders and tried to retaliate on Gasah's party, on their retreat, and succeeded in recovering two heads. Bamba is living in Maleng's house, just above Salleh's house, and the Dyaks there still fondly believe that having paid him the fines he demanded they ate safe from any Uln Ai attacks! However this may be Baurita bolted to the jungle when the Sergt. appeared. I find that the ever- crooked Salleh entertained and put up in his house those Dyaks who committed the murders in the Ulu Layer on August 28th. (Simpai of Apai Bitis house, called anak Sudara Ngumbang, was the leader.) His excuse for receiving them was that they had told him that they were going to hunt fo gutta in the Ulu Layer.
Whilst I was at Lubok Antu on the 1st the alarm broke out suddenly about 10.45 A. M. It appears that Nyanggai of Ajis house was farming on the N. Badau road, a short distance from the border and less than two miles from the Lubok Antu Fort, when he was unexpectedly attacked by two Ulu Ai Dyaks one of whom by name Bakat (the second son of Imba) dealt him a terrific slash over the right shoulder and back. The other Ulu Ai would be murderers, Bakats companions, were Regang (Imba's third son), Usit and Nyembongall anak btutli Bantin. These Orang Bukit had been put up the preceding day or two at Muntais house, N. Badau, and when they fled from the scene of the outrage followed the main road into the Netherlands India territory which leaves N. Badau on the right and passes Lengkougs and P. Sandums houses and leads to Kubu Guutul.
I complained to the Controleur. Mr. Theodore Volmering, Controlenr of Upper Kapnas, who is Acting Controleur of Smitau pro. temp, that Muntai had harboured these Orang Bukit and have received a very satisfactory explanation of the whole matter.
I had a very cordial meeting with Mr. Theodore Volmering at Lubok Antu when border affairs were discussed. As regards the raids made by the Ulu Ai rebels, the Sarawak Dyaks near Lubok Antu, and. the Empran Dyaks, on the Kantu people, no fines have yet been imposed. I have suggested that the Sarawak Government will impose certain fines on those Lubok Antu Dyaks who took part in those raids if H. M. Netherlands India Government will impose similar fines on the Empran Dyaks.
H. M. Netherlands India Government have moved the Kantu Dyaks to some distant locality in
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 4, 1907.
the Kapuas where they will be out of reach of the Baiang Lupar Dyaks. I may add that having gone into the matter of these Dyaks raiding the Kantu there was no shadow of right or justice in their
*
I returned to Sinianggang on the 18th October.
Miscellaneous matters. Mt. Parnell having finished the audit of the Batang Lupar accounts left for l.ingga on the 12th and returned by boat to Kuching.
Mr. Stuart Cunynghame (Commandant S. R.) visited Lubok Antn with Mr. Lang, who relieved me there on the 18th, and accompanied me back to Sinianggang, afterwards going to Lingga with Mr. ia Chard on the 22nd whence they caught the p. s. Kaka for Kuching on the 24th.
Mr. la Chard is under orders for the 3rd Division (Sibu).
The Birthday of H. II. The Ranee was observed at Sinianggang as usual and the Offices closed.
The Ramathan Month commenced on the afternoon of the 7ththe usual salute being fired.
Throughout the month the weather has been very wet with frequent bad squalls.
A Sinianggang trader by name Lehman had his boat overturned by one of these violent gales (she having struck a snag) and he lost all his money, brassware and jelutong cver $3tX). worth.
Two unusual deaths were reported. Atau of Marup died from falling from the top of a lofty beetree. Ganyangof the Upper Lingga died, apparently. from the after effects of a feast. He was found early the morning after, by his friends, stretched out stiff and cold on the sleeping-place when they came to arouse him to return home.
In spite of the wet the prison gang put through some useful work during October. The main ditches in the plain were cleared out, and a small cattle bridge put over the stable road; manure was likewise taken out and spread on the cattle lauds.
The palm oil trees were cleaned of ferns, etc.; and some two hundred young ones were planted out on the new clearing beyond the first mile on the Sabu road.
The orange plantation was cleaned and the trees attended to; there is a very good crop of oranges this season and a great local demand for them.
There appears to be every chance of a good fruit season shortly.
I have nothiug further to report to Your Highness for October.
D. J. 8. BAILEY,
Resident.
Matang estate.
- ? -
October.
During the month, weeding, gathering crops, supplying vacancies of coffee and repairing roads have been the general wotks on the Estate. Crops gathered for the month were 22 piculs parchment coffee and 308 lbs made tea.
During the month 33 piculs clean coffee and 590 tt s tea were despatched to the Borneo Company Limited.
Coolies were paid their wages for September on the 3rd instant by Mr. Harington.
J. M. GOMEZ,
Manager.
OyA.
October.
Court.There have been very few cases in either the Police Court or the Court of Requests, this is entirely due to the fact that October includes most of the Puasa month when there is usually very little to do.
Public. Il'orAs.The prisoners have been engaged in raising the floor of the cattle shed and cutting a ditch around the building, before this was done the cattle were often standing in a few inches of water after heavy rain. Part of the Bakong road has been cleared of grass and the paths near the Government grounds have been weeded. A patch of swampy and useless ground between the Government fence and the Malay Court has been cleared and planted, up with cocoanuts, some 150 nuts having been put in. This piece of ground is an ideal place for cocoa- nuts and the plants should do well here.
General.The s. c. Sarawak made one trip only during the month ay.iving from Bintuhi on tnc 4th and sailing again o ,the7th: Messrs. Pope and Johnson of the Borneo Company were passengers by her from Tatau to Kuching.
The weather has been uncertain and the rain that has fallen most welcome after the prolonged drought. There has been a good deal of sickness among the natives, mostly fever, and several deaths, have occurred.
The sea has been smooth and fish fairly plentiful. There was a very stiff gale blowing from the N. E. on the night of the 4th : but at other times the wind has been from every other quarter except the N. E. Schooners have had no difficulty in clearing for Kuching.
The Arrack Farm was sold by auction during the month so as to allow of the new Farmer being able to lay in his stocks for the Monsoon. The result of auctioning this Farm early instead of in January was that the price went up by a matter of $26.50- per mensem. This is of course exceedingly satisfactory.
The Export of raw sago for the month amounted to 328 coyans as compared with 249 coyans exported during October 1906.
DONALD A. OWEN.
Resident-
LUNDU
October
Little of importance has occurred this month.
The coming fruit season promises to be exceptionally good, if one may judge by the amount of fruit now on the trees. I hear there is any amount of buah engkabang ripening in the ulu. If this is so- trade may shortly be expected to go ahead a bit, as this district exports large quantities of engkabang nuts.
Haji Mat Salleh, the Imam here, complains that very few of the Malays pay him the accustomary Pitra and Zakat for services rendered to them and the Mosque. I told Haji Mat Salleh that this was a matter entirely affecting the consciences of the Malays and one over which I had no control. I therefore declined to interfere. There has before been slight friction between the Imam and Malays over this matter. If Haji Mat Salleh instead of spending half the year in Kuching spent more time amongst the Malays in this district performing the various rites required of his creed, I feel sure that alms would very readily be forthcoming.
Bit Chiang a Lui Chew and pepper planter of Prigi,. Simatan,was on the 10th sentenced to two years'
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 4, 1907.	276
imprisonment. Three* separate charges were brought against this man on all of which he was found guilty.
One Lahir a Malay escaped from the gang on 14th. "This was entirely owing to the' gross carelessness of P. C. No. 68 Lani who was prison mandor at the time.
T visited Simatan once during the month.
The following are this months trade returns:-
Export	Import
Lundu	$2,234	$7,554
Simatan	10,574	1,786
Total	$12,708	$9,340
This is all I have to report to Your Highness.
F. F. BOULT,
Assistant Resident.
October.
The Jong Dyaks lodged co jrlaintsagainst some sixteen Malays for practically appropriating their land about a mile in length along each side of the banks of the river.
Sometime ago my predecessor gave 4 Malays permission to only farm on this land and on no account to plant fruit trees, pinaiif/s etc.
1 paddled tip to the land and found that the condition on which the Malays were permitted to farm had not been adhered to in that numbers of them had planted cocoannts and pinangs, and from the substantial houses erected it is evident that their intention is to found a small kampong.
As the Jongs are willing to let the Malays have the land on both banks of the river below S. Painpait and a faint corresponding on the opposite bank I ordered the Malays to remove to this land after the 1908 harvest, failure in which will render them liable to heavy penalties.
Bulau Puasa was ushered in on the 8th ult. by the usual salute of 7 guns.
In this river there is some difference of opinion as to when Bamathan commences and ends: Hari Raya will be held on Thursday by some and Friday by others.
The Pipe-line has been partly relaid deeper down 1 foot) and will be completed as soon as the labour is at my disposal. I found it necessary to relay the line owing to the pipes being exposed in many places for several lengths of pipe which being thus exposed to the action of the weather will quickly deteriorate, besides the water is drawn tepid this end owing to the heating of the pipes by the sun.
A leak in the pipe-line wras located under some hundreds of tons of tips from No. 5 mine and therefore it was necessary to lay some 70 yards of new pipes over the tips" connecting on both sides with the old line. Numbers of the pipes thus left in the ground will be recovered as soon as possible, but several must be looked upon ns lost as to cut down through tons of tips would be a most expensive undertaking.
Up-river Affairs. Ulu Meliken and Smunjan. On the 25th I went up to the Ulu Kraang and on arri vingat Orang Kaya Daka's bouse, which is reached after a couple hours paddle up the Tampay and then half an hours walk in land. I sent back my coolies and boat as I purposed walking right across to the left branch of the Smunjan and down to the Station vid the Colliery.
Orang Kaya Daka asked the Government to prevent the Malays from Sabuyow, Sebaugan, Gedong etc. etc. coming and living in his house during the fruit season. They come with their families, expect
the Dyaks to allow them to use their water and firewood, also mats, and add insult to injury by entering their fruit preserves fenced off from the other part of the fruit grove and take the fruit for which, needless to say, they pay nil.
It has long been our custom to let the Malays have all fallen fruit outside the preserved area but
I they must erect langkaus on land set apart for them by us and not infringe our customs, Slid the Orang
I Kaya.
j In reply 1 told him that hk request was most I reasonaole and that the Malays should as far as i possible be ordered not to live in their (Dyaks) houses or enter the prohibited groves but to conduct them-
I selves in a proper manner and put up langkaus to live j in. Any Malay acting in contravention to this order would be severely dealt with and the Orang Kaya is to report anybody doing so.
' On my return to Simunjan I learnt from Abaug Man that the Malays had been cautioned many years
: ago about this very matter.
' In turn I visited the Amoon. Triboh, Areng and after a pleasant walk stopped for the night at Bed up. Several old men ask to be exempted from tax otherwise nothing is reported.
Go on next day to Eutayan ami Mirabau; at the landing place of the latteu n Malay has a large plantation of Gutta, Durian and fruit trees. He told me he had bought some fifteen para rubber plants of which only 5 were now living: they were planted in burnt earth.
Paddling up the Barri I noticed that both banks were timbered by the Perpat' tree, a valuable timl er of close grain said to bear a greater strain than bilian" and to resist the attacks of white-ant.
The Malays say it is only obtainable in this river and the Mirahan and nowhere else in Sarawak.
Leaving the Barn I walked to Gimangs house at Abit from which a good view of Klingkang mountain, no great distance away, is to be had.
From Abit walk to Tapang Paddi and thence to Padang Prnpok by boat. Spend the night here and . hear claims to some 1(5 Darian trees the ownership to which was in dispute in Mr. Crockers time but for various reasons was not settled.
It has been customary for the Malays, so Abang Mau informs me. to fish where they like throughout the District. The Dyaks now ask that the small rivers up which they live be reserved to themselves and that Malays be in future prevented from fishing with thepukat,jalla etc. in these stream, branches of the main rivers.
Next day paddle from Padang 1rapok toNgletack having stopped at Penassa on the way: the former house is situated close up to Klingkang Mountain at the opposite end from the Abits.
The former Ttiai having died his-clder son is elected to succeed him.
The last two houses are practically free from Kor.:p which is very prevalent throughout the Smunjan and Kraang rivers, whose inhabitants on the whole j do not seem to be very healthy.
? For a long time now the Ulu Smunjan has been without an Orang Kaya and during this visit 1 was acquainted with the very strong feeling the people have against Ali one of the two candidates for the postwhose decisions in certain small cases amongst themselves gave great dissatisfaction to all concerned and another reason and probably the stronger is that Ali is an Orang Kampar. Ou the other hand Nggah is the son of the much respected (late) Orang Kaya, and possesses the confidence of the other Tuais and the people generally. I deem it therefore advisable to promote Nggah to succeed his father in the Orang Kayasliip of the Ulu.
I returned to Smunjan on the 1st instant.
P. IF. D.The Neic Hospital contract has been
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 4, 1907.
278
A charge was brought against Lambong and Rin-
dnng, Skiat Dyaks, of theft of pepper from a garden
close by, they were released on bail pending the
charge being gone into on my return.
The prison carpenter Talip, who had been doing
some necessary repairs to His Highness The Rajah's
Bungalow, I regret to say absconded, and nothing
has been heard of him since.
Dr. Bruce Low was in the district on the 2nd, 3rd,
; 4th, 5th, 9th, 10th, lllh, 16th, 17th, 18th, 24th,
25th, 26th and 31st.
The prisoners have been employed on up-keep of
roads and grounds.
E. R. STILWELL,
Resident Upper Sarawak.
being some of the houses which he has attacked
Gani's, Unaus, 8. Duan and 8. Krobonj;; his record I
in the Batang Lnpar I am unformed is no better, j
I do not anticipate much ill-feeling on account of
this as all the Ulu Ai Dyaks I have asked about
the matter consider that he has only met with his
due reward.
Mr. .La Chard arrived here on the 30th to do
duty atrthis Station and on the following day took
over the Court of Requests work from the Assistant
Resident Mr. Cutfield.
I have nothing further to report to Your Highness
on this occasion.
H. 8. B. JOHNSON,
Resident 2nd Class.
KAPIT.
October.
From the 1st to 14th I w.$ still at Belaga, a * full report of my visit to lags has already been ' sent to Your Highness. 'yi
On the 15th Malintang arrived with Kilaw and ba who have been causing trouble by starting on f *the war path. Kilaw informed me that the whole of the force had returned. Your Highness when np here in September imposed a fine of one pikul on , the chief offenders, they were informed of this and that they would not get their jars back till their fine r wps paid.
On the 20th I left for Sibu per s. s. Alice Lorraine returning again on the 25th, the Resident also taking passage for Kapit.
On the 26th an express boat was sent off to call f down all Dyak Chiefs, who arrived on the 28th. Next day a meeting was held in the Fort before the Resident; this meeting was held to bring about an amicable feeling between Kayans and Dyaks; the Dyaks were given to understand that all old feuds between them and the Kayans had been settled; they agreed to this, and then went through the pig killing ceremony and peace was declared between these two tribes.
On the Dyak side Penghulus Merom, Matuliuri, Kainan and other minor chiefs were present.
On the Kayan side Laki Boh, Akam Laieug, A bun Matu, Abnn etc. were present.
In the evening dancing etc. took place in the Fort, and Kayans and Dyaks seemed on the best of terms.
On the 30th the Resident returned to Sibu, the Kayans and Dyaks likewise returning to their houses. ' I have nothing further to report to Your Highness-
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER,
Assistant Resident.
Upper Sarawak, bau .
October.
Agreements.70 were made during the month.
Stamp duties and fees amounted to $183.45.
, Court fines and fees amounted to $230.
There is very little to report for the past mouth.
1 was in Kuching from the 12th to end of month, having gone down to relieve Mr. Lewis who was going on short leave.
On the 2nd 5 men al Bidi were more or less * seriously injured, the tailing tip giving way and precipitating them together with some trucks into the heap below; there was also an accident at Bau, a man being caught in a machinery belt.
Bintulu
October.
I regret to report that Haji. Hassan who was for
many years a Native Oftiee of Bintulu died on the
5th instant, he is said to nave been about 80 years
old.
On the 4th Messrs. Johnston and Pope left by
s. s. Sarawak for Kuching having finished prospect-
ing in the Tatau.
I received a letter from the Tatau Clerk on the
7th reporting that a party of 40 Dyaks had left there
to go on a raid into the Rejang by the Pelagus route
and that another party had gone round by sea saying
they wished to get sotne of their relations to come
back to Tatau with them, there were 50 men in this
party.
Pengbulu Bair has since informed me that the
party which went overland had gone to meet Peng-
huln Kleng who they had heard had received per-
mission to attack the Batang Kayan.
The party which went round by sea. he said, had
gone to meet Penghulu Kleng also, to find out if it
was true that he had spread the report that Penghulu
Bair was keeping in his house the head of a Rejang
Dyak named Nglambong who has been missing for
some years and was supposed to have been killed.
That a few men from P. Bairs house went to
verify this yarn may be true, but the reason for
such a number going is certain to have been this
reported raid on Kayans.
The idea of a raid on Kayan territory has kept
this coast in a disturbed state for two years, since
the reverse of Bungans raid.
1 have written to His Highness the Rajah Muda
about these parties leaving Tatau and hope to be
able to fine the Tuahs" for leaving the district
without permission with intention of joining in a
raid.
The young bloods of Tatau are a truculent lot
and did some high talking when I last visited there
and informed them that if they did not stop this
talk of a raid they would be fined.
The usual number of cases have been before the
courts but all of a trivial character.
The exports have been good; 1,260 piculs of
jelutong and 59 of rubber, with a fair amount of
rattans and sago.
E. A. W. COX,
Resident 2nd Class.
279
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 4, 1907.
The Sarawak gazette
THE Subscription to the Sarawak Gazette is as follows.
Payable in local currency
Single number ...	...	... $0.10
Subscription for 1 year	...	... 1.00
Do including postage to Outstation ...I
Do	do	to Singapore ...1 1.60
Do	do	to England	...I
Payable in Sterling
For 1 year (including postage to places
in the Postal Union) ... 8s. Od.
All subscription payable in
advance.
Yearly subscriptions are renewable on tlTe
1st January.
Subscriptions will not be renewed unless
due notice is givens All broken periods will
be considered as full.
Subscribers are requested to notify changes
of address to the Editor in writing.
BATES OF ADVERTISEMENTS IN TSE "SARAWAK GAZETTE"
Ptiynblt in HdrnHCf.
Advertisement of 12 lines and nnder First insertion ...	...	... $1.00
Second and third insertion each	... 0.60
Subsequent do do	... 0.25
Advertisement of half a Column and under First insertion ...	...	... 2.00
Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
Subsequent do	do	... 0.50
Advertisement of a Column and under First insertion each	...	... 8.00
Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
Subsequent do do	... 0.75
Special arrangements may be made for standing adver tisements.
All communications intended for insertion in the Sarawak gazette must be directed to the Editor at the Government Printing Office, Kuching, and sent so as to reach the Office by the 26th of the month at latest or their publication will have to be deferred until the next issue.
Letters and other contributions must be authenticated by writer's name sent privately to the Editor.
We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not inserting them.
Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early intelligence of all matters of general interest in their respective neighbourhoods.
Notice-
?
ENTLEMEN are requested to pay all Gazette sub-
scriptions and Printing Office Bills io the undersigned
in future.
I For the convenience of those unable to send cheques,
1 Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of sums not over
$1.50bnt only the 2 and 4 cent values will be accepted.
Foreign subscribers to the Sarawak Gatetie are requested
to send remittances by Post Office Order " not by Postal
Order as the latter cannot be cashed in Sarawak.
F. G. DAY.
Notice.
* 4
Astana Far i Produce.
Termt jlonthly.
w
ILL be supplied to customers at the following
I rates
Milkper quaft pltlc	..	...	10 cents	-
Butterper lb	...	...	80
Eggseach .	...	...	Ij *
Orders, which should be addressed to the undersigned, at-4
tended to without delay.
.1. STAPLES,
Notice.
THE WELL KNOWN
Singer and Wheeler & Wilson Sewing Machines can be
purchased on easy terms. All we ask is 5 dollars down
and 3 dollars per month.
A liberal discount allowed for Cash.	Apply to
TAN BOON SIEW,
Agent,
SINGER SEWING MACHINE CO.,
C/o SYN HIN LEONG & Co
Kuching. Sarawak.
28lh March, 1907.
PASSENGERS.
ARRIVALS.
PKR p. s. Adeh From Singapore, 4th November, Mr. P. Stewart.
PKB p. s. Adeh:From Lnndu, 10th November, His Highness the Rajah Muda, The Hon'ble Sir Peres Cunynghame, Messrs. Bryan, Gillan and Crocker.
PER p. s. Kaka . From Limbang, Sth November. Mr. G. M. Allman.
PER S. S. llajah of Sarawak:From Singapore. 14th Novem her, Mr. R. Pawle and Mr. J. Scott.
PER p. 8. Adeh :From Sibu, 20th November. Sister Baptista.
PUB p. a. Kaka :From Limbang, Messrs. E. Parnell and 8. Cunynghame.
PER B. s. Rajah of Sara wait:From Singapore, 28th November, Mr. and Mrs. Service and child.
DEPABTUBKS-
1ER S. H. Rajah of Sarawak:For Singapore, 5th November. Messrs. F. F. Boult, F. S. Odom, aud H. Hannay
PKII p. s. Adeh: For I.undu, 8th November, His Highness the Raiah Mudu, The Honble Sir Percy Cunynghame, Messrs. Bryan, Gillan Imd Crocker.
PER S. S. Kuching: For Singapore, 12th November, The Revd. Mr. Woodd.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 4, 1907.	280
Kuching foreign trade return for the month of Oct. 1907.
IMPORTS.
1
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
Aerated Water ... Ammunition, ... Arrack, etc. ....... Biscuits Blachan	...	...
Blankets Beads... .9 Brass ft Copper-ware Boots ft Shoes ... Butter ft Cheese... Candles	...
?Canvas	...	Cement
Clocks and Watches Cloth
Cotton ...	...I
Silk Woollen
Clothing
HI RABon
Coke ...	...	...
...	...1
Coffee Liberian etc....
. tjM
-Coprah	...	...
Cotton Seed Crockery ft Glass-ware Curry stuffs & Sauce etc.
Dumir Drugs and Chemicals Eggs (salted) Exports Returned to Shippers Fire-arms Fire-works Fish Dried
* , oaBed	...
In tins	...
Flour ... - Fruit Fresh Drill In tins Furniture Ghee ... Gold ...	...	*
Grains
Beans and peas	...
Rice	...	...i
Other Sorts ... Gunnies new Do old Hams and Bacons Hats ... Ironware [ ... Japanese Curios ...
Joss Sticks ami Pa[ lrs
? Kerosine Oil Lard .. -Lamps Leather Live stock Cattle	...	....
* Poultry Swine Machinery Mats...	...
Matches	...
Maccaroni ft Vermicelli Milk Condensed ... Oils ...	...	,	...
Opium raw Paint. Varnish & Tar Papers Provisions Sundry
M Prawns
r Do Refuse liubber seeds and Plants Rickshaws
Rope
' Coir
"4s*	Majrila
Wire
caieR
piculs
asks
jr \
191	'
IB ' 1
.1
? 71
2.086 290
1,465 4,826
160 495
40 946 467 384 546 497 855 784
64.654 1,000
34
No.8
piculs
piculs
No.
picul*
piculs oz.
pienls picnla piculs piculs bales bundles
cases piculs
piculs
heads No. heads
cases
cases piculs chests
piculs
, piculs
coils coils coils
50 17.200
00
415
83,650
795
226
2,008
11
160
754
995
23.928
1.122
145
140 ?
6,492 229
25
4 444 151
154
442
495
20
57
6,967
110
8
17,665 280 925 600
1,500 182
8,280
5*671 2,500
465 5,039
678 379
87 2,108
11.556 1,922 1,455 5,858
1,811 3.319
595
2.458 580
5,400
4,887 1.990 107,548
2,778 14,055
1.651
233
781
15,254 2,560 2,152
17.011
5,507 1,002
1,608
300
262
8,260 6,652 1,274 8.197 2,157
8,775 8,675
18,750 2,508 3,146 1,720
1,887
21.554 525 106
1,771 15 42
Carry forward ...
419,446
I M PORTS.( Con fin iced.)
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
Brought forward
419,446
Sago Pearl or Raw
picul	5
45
Salt ...
piculs	1,398 1.939
Soap ...
1,652
Stationery and Books
1
Straw Shoes (Chinese)
263
Sugar	...	...1
pienls	2,402
14.390
Sundries
2.186
Tea in Bundles ...
boxes	299
3.236
Tea in Tins
320
Timber
4,415
Twine and Thread
4.129
Tobaccos
in tins Cigars ft Cigarettes
16.248
Chinese
cases	201
7.887
lbang Java ft S'robok etc.
piculs	222	734
Bad or Pepper
piculs
-
Treasure
46.982
Tuba ...	. ...	, 1,064
Vegetables
Fresh
8.801
Salted	'...
4.828	In tins
124
Wines and spirits
14.554
Zinc ...
4.036
TOTAL VALVK
8578.750
Brought forward	...
8,784.908
T -	1
Total Value to Date
4,808.658
1906
4715?,32
EXPORTS.
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
A nt-eater-skins ...
. picul	20
Betel-nuts
. piculs	4841
1.986
Be is-wax
. pienls	20 1.012
Birds-nests
piculs	72 9.649
Blachan
. piculs	28 158
Camphor
catties	8
850
Cattle	' ...
heads	5
2.200
Charcoal
. piculs	101 88
doth ...	...
203
Coffee (Liberian)...
piculs	88
700
Copmh
pieuls	560
4.800
Crockery-ware ...
252
Cutch
piculs	8404
1.656
Damar	...
piculs	723 2,254 Empties
1,4 53
Fish ...
pienls	400]
7.083
Gambier
piculs	2,009 14.269
Garrn-wood
picul	14 128
Gold ...
oz.s.	4,810
119,300
f,
tael	J
10
Gutta jangkai
pieuls	254]
3.694
do Jclotong ...	piculs 11,572]
56,128
do percha
piculs	55 4,898
Hides
piculs	29 685
Imports Returned to Shippers
2,962
India Rubber
piculs	321
35,940
Iron-ware	...	...
887
Kajangs
31
Kerosine Oil
cases	71
207
I. aka Wood
piculs	488]
1.430
Live stock	...	...
5.400
Matches
cases	4]
100
Mats ...
272
Machinery	...	- A.
150
N. H. Specimens...
83
Oils ...
piculs	10 182
Pepper (white) ...
piculs 12,278
260.906
Do (black) ...
piculs	694 9,028
Prawns (dried) ...	...
picul	20
Rattans No. 1 sega etc.
picnl	249
2.366
Rattans No. 2 temoi etc.
pieuls	1,789 5,180
Rice ...
piculs	208
1.014
Sago flour
piculs 35,448
107,790
Sugar...	...	...
picul	1
7
Sugar nipa
piculs	268 829
Sundries
2.628
Timber
70
Timber (manufactured)
19
Treasure	...	...
10.100
Wayaug effects ...
1.000
Zine
49
TOTAL VAI.UK
681.027
Brought forward
5.000,M7
Total Value to Date ...
5,681,674
1906
.-.6-,7.7; 0
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 4, 1907.
281
Kuching, Coasting We Returns for the month otjct. 1907'
IMPORTS.
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
Coal
...I tons
1,121*
8.970
Damar
...i piculs
399
880
Gntta Jiwgkar ...
... piculs
2771
2,817
Gutta Jclotong ...
... piculs
7.527 82,585
Gutta I'crcha
... piculs
85 252
4,805
India Rubber
...J piculs
22,726
Prawns Refuse ...
... piculs
10
80
Pepper iwhite) ...
... picnls
1.148
28.672
Jo (black)
... picnls
146*
2.058
Rattans No. 1 sega etc.
"... piculs
I.Illi
9,688
Do No. 2 temoi etc.
... piculs
779 2,881
Rice ...
... piculs
15
59
Sago flour
... piculs
1.420
4.270
Do raw
...! t'pins I
56.050
48.025
Sundries
18.468
Treasure
14,612
TOTAL VALVE
6195,986
Brought forward
1,716,585
Total Value to Date
19015
1.912.571
1 91.W9.674
EXPORTS.
Articles.
Quantity.
V olue.
Brass-ware	...
5
526
Iron-ware
1,157
Jars ...
... No
59
528
Oil Kerosine ... .
... cases
2,650
7,182
Opium
10,160
Rice ...
..J piculs
7,0991 1
84.618
Sundries
98.968
Treasure
...
19.965
TOTAL VALUE
$178,044
Brought forward
1,188,419
Total Value to Date
151L468
1906
91,274,745
C.
C. ROBISON.
Regietra
r of Trade.
Departures.
z
VESSELS NAME.
FLAG g AND Rio. CAPTAINS OR j
NAXODAS.
FOB.
1
4
6
6
8
8
8
11)
11
11
11
11
12
12
14
15
IC
19
20
21
22
23
25
25
25
20
28
29
80
Atm Seng Guan T. K. Batu Arang Sarawak
i Rafah of Sarawak Alice Lorraine
Soon Seng Waft-
j Kim Ilaft Arm Sri Marion
Adeh Kaka Sri 1rnibriiiii Kim Seng Guan Kim Chin Trek Sarawak Kuching
1 Sin Sian .4 rm Adeh Kaka
? Sri Marion
' Rajah of Sarawak ' Sarawak
Kian Moh Kim Seng Guan Adeh .Alice Lorraine T. K. Batu Arang Sri Marion Kuching
Sarawak
; Ktm Seng Guan
Sar.
?
sch. 73 ..	64
str. 46 892 .. 140 sch. 71 ..	67
80 str. 189 .. 222 schJ 79
3 str. 46 ..jlMKI sei 50 nly.189 222 sc... 80 str. 892 1 46 .sch. 66
4. 189 " ., 140 sch. 64'
str.! 908
,.	46
sch. 78 str. 222
Sait Allan Hj. A Mat ' Moxon Jani.ce ? A. Yatnan Hnain .Tahar Jennui Bandong Abj;. Sapc-cc Sait	1
Hj. Asstin Hj. A. Mat 1 Waddell* Gani Jeman Bandon" Jahur Moxon Hj. A. Mat Sc man Sait Jeman Jara-ee Allan .lahar Waddell Hj. A. Slat Suit Bandong
Sadong
1 Ova Singapore
Sadong Muka Sadong Ln nd ii Sadong
Muka
Oyo Singapore Ova Sil.u 1 diubaug Sadong Singapore , Bintulu
Ova
Sadong
! Sibu Sadong .
Singapore
? Sadong
iLimbang
THE Sium IK IIIZETTE
ALMANAC
Arrivals.
Z
VESSEL'S NAME.
FLAG, AND Rio.
CAPTAINS OR NACODAS.
FROM.
1
1 2
2
!
6 6
6
8
6
8
10
12
14
14
16
17
18
18 .19
20 20
21
21
23
24
26
26
26
27
28
36
' Kim Chin Soon Soon Seng Watt Kim Waft Aim Kim Chin Stang
i Alice Lorraine Adeh Sri Marion Sin Stan Ann Kim Seng Guan Kim Chin Teck
? Kuching Kaka
T. K. Batu Arang Sarawak Adeh Kaka
Rajah of Sarawak Sri Marion
Soon Seng Waft Sarawak
Kim Seng Guan Kian Moh Sri Pembrian Adeh Kaka Kuching Sri Marion Kim IFflft Arm Alice Lorraine Kim Chin Teck Adeh Sarawak
M. N. SriJcmpaka Sin Sian Ann
Kim Seng Guan i Rajah of Sarawak j Saraicak	1
Sar. sch.
1 ,, sch.
: t . sch. ? .. str.
sob. str. ' sch.
I str.
sir, ! sch. I	str,
1 ., scll-l
., str.
59 Hj. Sa-at
71 A. Yaman
67 Husin
54 Daud
140 Jara-ee
189. J email HO Jahar
' 50 Gaui
73 Sait
51 Hj. Assitu 903, Waddell 222 Bandong
64 Allan
46 Hj. Mat
189 Jeman
222 Bandong 892 Moxon
80 Jahar
? 71 A. Yaman
46 Hj. Mint 73' Sait
1 66 Seman
79 Abg. Sap ei 169 Jeman 222 Bandong 903 Waddell
F0 Jahar
67i Hnsin
' 140' Jara-ee
I 511 Hj. Aseim
' 189 Jeman
?10 Hj. Mat
73 Tku. Hassan
50 Gani
78 Sait
892 Moxon
46 Hj. Mat
Muka Sadong Muka
Sibil Singapore Sadong Oya Sadong Muka Singapore Lil n bang Sadong Oya Lundu Sadong Siugapore Sadong
Oya Sadong Oya Sadong Sibu Limlxmg Singapore Sadong .Mnka
Sibu Muku Sadong Bintulu Oya
,Sadong ; Singapore
Sadong ?
glish
\ ui- nese
AUU dan.
MOON'S PHASES, ETC. 5th New moont 12th First quarter p 20t)i Full moon O 28lh Last quarter nign water at Kuching.
s M Tu W Th F S s M Tu W Th F S
H M Tu W Th F S
S
V
1
j
i
*
Months.
Q
A M.
h. m,
F. M
h. m.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14 !15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
M
10
11
I
26 27
28
29
1
2
3
4
6
6
7
8
9
10
11
12 13
14
15 116
17
18
19 '20
21
22
23
to
Zil Ka-aedatL	Shawal.
25
26
27
28
29
11
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
i. HII. in Advent. Birth- [day of Queen Alexandra 1844.
1 16
2 18 3 12
3 57
4 39 5 22i 6 5
6 51
7 4G 8 30 9 24
10 25 11 29
0 4
1 17
2 21' 3 21
4 8 4 .53 5 32
6 7 l?i? I??
9 5
1 9 47 10 36 11 34
0 6
1 1 13
1 49 2 47
3 36
4 18
5 0.
5 43.
6 27
7 1,5-
8 5-
8 56 9 54
10 57
0 41
1 I 50 2 52 3 46
4 30
5 14
5 49
6 25
6 59 7 34
8 9 8 45
! 9 25* 10 11 ill 5
0 39
L1.47
St. Nichola*.
ii. nn. in Advent
Hi. Sun. inAdvent.
lioyaliit sailed From Devon port, [1838.
Suer Canal opened, 186'J.
St. Thomae. ..	..
iv.Snn. in Advent
w Th F 8
Tu
25
26
27
28
29
?1?
Christinas Ony
! St. Stephen.
J St. John	? Innocent*' Day.
i. Nun. after CliriMinas
1 Hogmanv. ..
283
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 4, 1907.
Arrivals.
DATE.
NAME OF VESSEL.
NAME OF CAPTAIN.
WHERE FROM.
CHTNEKE. .
j NATIVES., OF INDIA
WtU. Fttnslt
? OTHER I ASIATICS.]
i 1*o. .
1907.
Oct.
3
8. S. Rajah of Sarawak
E. T. Moxon
Singapore'
59
...
6 ...
7L'
5
S. S. Alice Lorraine
Jara-ep
Brookcton
2*
8
7
17
5
Boat
Arip
Pamangkat
1
1
3
10
S. S. Kuching
W. Waddell
Singapore
* 75 i
6 ...
7
88
14
Boat
Char
P. Mtxlai
... ..
2
2
17
S. 8. Rajah of Sarawak
E. T. Moxon
Singapore
in
"i;
3 ...
10
130
19
Pee. Fatahorrahman
Hj. Abdulrahman
Tringganu
1
22
P. S. Kaka,
Bandong
W. Waddell
Brookcton
i
G
22
S. S. Kuching
Labuan
1
f
24
Singapore
128
3
7
2
147
28
Bandong
Lai Leong Hin
Pamangkat
1
1
31
S. S. Rajah of Sarawak
E. T. Moxon
Singapore
120
*4
1 12*
137
1
498
13
59
9
602
Departures.
DATE.
NAME OF VESSEL.
NAME OP CAPTAIN.
WHITHER BOUND.
CHiNrifflU NATIVES AF INDIA.
' OTHER 'ASIATICS. tfaii Frwnlr.l
TOTAL.
U()k. J
1907.
Oct.
1
S. S. Kuching
W. Waddell
Singapore
P. Srasan
75
1
4
10
1
91
5
Bandong
Sitain
2
.
8
S. S. Rajah of Sarawak
E. T. Moxon
Singapore
152 '
*5
20
173
11
Boat
Hup. Abdul rani
Sambas
1
i
15
S. S. Kuching
W. Waddell
Singapore
109
3
23
137
15
P. S. Kaka	...
Band on g
Brooke ton
4
1
Q
21
Bandong
Arip
E. T. Moxon
Sambas
3
22
S. S. Rajah of Sarawak
Singapore
120
4
i
12
137
29
S. 8. Kuching
W. Waddell
Singapore
134
7
0
113
29
P. S. Kaka
Bandong
Brooke ton
6
0
i	596
6
20
1 85
?1
1	711
C. C. ROBISON.
a * *' -
w ?	*	*	&
KUCHING Printed and Published by GHIN HENG SOON, Government Printer, at the Sarawak Gcutlh Office, Nos. 19,20, and 21, Court House Road.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 4, 1907.	2? METEOROLOGICAL READINGS.
KUCHING OBSERVATORY.
Observations Taken Daily at S a. in. November, 1967.
TEMPERATURE.
a
e
1
1
Ot'ph
-IIIIUUIXU] Minimum.
Dry Bulb.	*B 1
Wet Minimum. j
Thermometer in the sun. Remarks at 8 A.
Sunshine in 24 1
q fz u! IPPPni
hrs. min.
1
30 07
88 2
.73 9
7- 'J
76 91
73-2
153 0 !
Fine
7-30
L
3b- W
,92
74 1
781
75 3
73-6
1589
do
4 10
1-04
3
1 29 97 i
I 76 1
751
72-2
? 113-9
rain
40
28
4
8UO3 ? 739
76-4
748
73 -2
160-2
Fino I
9 10
.- ' 3Q0fr\
1 736
806
76-a
73 2
156-6
do i	1
08
( 301'4 1
, 72 4
i 781
75-9
: 71-8
149 8
do
! 3-20
51
7
30-GC.
73-2
I 73-6
72-2
I 7S1
1408
do :
' 7-30
.WOO 1
90-1
: 73-7,
1 795
75-4
1 72-9
1556
do *'10
9
? 29-98 ,
8616
1 73 2'
' 76-8
75
733
153-2
* do I
1 3 50
0!
10
! 29-98 ?
Pi
' 73-8
78-3
.5 9 :
1 73-4
151-6
do I
i 3.30
02
11
I 29.97
71-2
791
76-6
x 71-0
143 2
do i
3 40
22
12 I
: 29-97 ,
89 0
72-7
1 7S* 1 1
1 75-4;
1 72-3
155-5
do
1 4-30
! .	19
13
I 30 00
85-7
72-1
7'3
75 6
7 IM
148-4
do 1
1 20
22
14
1 29-98 ?
86 9
' 71-8
; 778
1 74-8
1 713
159 2 do 1
1 110
14 15
1 29-94 1
87 8
72-9 1
73-2
72-5
72-3
147-8
do . . 410
12
16
29 98 I
91 1
72 9
78;1
76-3
72-4
1562
do
6-50 ?
83
17
j .30-02
87 G
73 0
701
74 I
72-2
141-4
do
5-10
04
18
30-08
90-.5
1 : '2
778
75-0
720
150 2
do
620
2v
19 ,
' 3010 1
88.2
1 778
/ UO
71 6 71-6
1 1534
do
9-00
1
20
I 30 06 , BIG
728
. 751
73-3
147-2
Dull
*'2 00
21
29-98
87 6
72-2
77 1
73-9
71 9,
! 1406
. Fine
410
1 82
22
1 29 98
80-2
72-4
1 73-7
724
72 1
115-4
Rain
1-10
23
' 2997
904
71-9
77.3
1 32
71-6
1 150-0-
Fine
6-40 ,
21
24
29'98 1
881
72-4
77 a
75-3
721'
' 155*5
do
Gift
29-98
88-9
72-5
! 78-3
74.8
72*3
151-2
do
44-00 '
1 13
26
1 30-00 f
88-3
72-6
78-3
76-7
72-3 151.4
dq. 5-20 F 1-1-2
07 ?
29-98 :
86-6
71-2,
1. 763
751
710
1553
. Cloudy
5-10
42
28 '
? 29-98 '
89-1
71-8,
760
? 74 6
71 1
149-2
Fine
610
29
29-98 i
90-4
72-3
75-9
743
721
1150 8
do *
7-40 1
2
30
29-93
87-9
725
78*9
76-5
72-3
15 6
do
8-40/
, 197 .
Highest temperature recorded 911 *F.
Lowest, 71-2 *F.	*
Total rainfall during the month 11.83 inches.
Height of observatory above sea level 100 feet approximately.
