
Sarawak gazette
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 4, 1907.	Went.
CONTENTS.
* - ORDERS:Ban link RoadPolice Pensions Begging for alms. NOTIFICATIONS	Insured Pat cels PostRates for Insurance of
Parcels. ..
NOTICES Bankrupt Estate, Bau Bankruptcy Court, Ku chingProbate Court. Lund uMissing Land Grant No. 12b of 1889.
APPOINTMENTS --RETIREMENTREJANG AFFAIRS- SUPREME COUNCILDEPARTURE OF H. H. THE 11 A.IAHSARAWAK LIBRARYBOWLING HANDICAPA VETERAN ANGLICAN CLERGYMAN RETIREMENT OF DR. HOSE THE POSTAGE STAMPS OF SARAWAK"A LANDDTAK MYTH MONTHLY NOTES.
MONTHLY REPORTS :Lawas KalakaKapitSinianggang
BauOy a SndongBarauiM a tang EstateMuka.
An VKRTISEMENTSALMANAC THADE RETURNSPASSENGERS
SH I PPINGMETEOROLOGH A i. REA DINGS.
The Sarawak gazette
WEDNESDAY, SEPTEMBER 4,1907.
Order-
No. V, 1907.
FROM this date it is hereby ordered that the
road lying in Section 15, of the Town of
Kuching, commencing at the Tabuan Road
and proceeding Easterly to the Central Road
East shall be known as BAN HOK ROAD and
such name shall be used in all Government
grants or leases.
C. BROOKE.
Rajah.
, Kuching,
June 19th, 1907.
Order.
forming the Inspector and his successors that those who have served their full time for pension will have to retire should they receive ? their pension.
The question of commuting of not will remajn with the Treasurer. If they remain physically lit for work, they peed not receive their pen- , sion till the Government requires them to do- I so and then they will retire for good.
( Under my hand and Seah C. BROOKE, ' this 13th day of duly, 1907J	Rajah.
Order.
No. VI f, 1907.
1 hereby direct that after this date ne Malays. Arabs and other strangers from Singapore will be allowed to beg for alms in the Kampongs, except with special permission from the Government.. Anyone in future acting contrary to this order will be liable to a heavy fine.
C. V. BROOKE,
Rajah Muda.
Kuching, Sarawak,
17th August, 1907.
y* 3 *	gjO
?	(S
A-J?I idiftj	t'oy yi
r&vl	.LMAM yl
U A-MJ i	j Kals,
lull J-sxi 'J	Jin yl
T' lj*.	lUsiy	A4I A
-No. VI, 190/.	c v BROOKE,
IN regard to a discrepancy which has been	Rajah Muda
followed without orders in the Police Regula
tions of pay, I now set the matter right by in- I 1907.	Sjl	17
'204
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 4, 1907.
Notification.
No. XXV, 1907.
FROM 1st July the Post Office will accept insured parcels for the Malay States except for places on the Eastern coast of Pahang.
The rates will be the same as for the Straits Settlements.
C. C. ROBISON,
Postmaster General. General Post Office,
Kuching, 10th June. 1907.
Notification.
No. XXVIII, 1907.
IASI REI) PARCELS POST.
NOTICE is hereby given that Insured Parcels may now be sent to the following countries:
India, including the Andaman Islands and Burma.
The Federated Malay States, except places ; on the Eastern Coast of Pahang.
By order.
C. C. ROBISON, : Postmaster General. ?
General Post Office,
Sarawak, 28th June, 1907.
Notice.
No. XXIX. 1907.
lie Koh Kia Lim, Chop Keug j Hap Kee, (A bsconded.) Trader in Shak Loong Mun.
All creditors and other persons having any ! claim whatsoever against the Estate of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned within three months from date, after which date the assets of the above named wiil be divided amongst the parlies entitled thereto regard being had only to those claims of which notice shall have been given. And ail monies owing to the above Estate shall be paid to the undersigned forthwith.
E. R. STILWELL.
Resident Upper Sarawak. Ban. Bau,
24th July, 1907.
Notice.
No. XXX, 1907.
IN THE BANKRUPTCY COURT, KUCHING.
In the goods of Tan Iliang and Choo Boo, pepper planters of Tanah Puteh. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Tong Tad Sam, Tinsmith of China Street. (A bsconded.)
In the goods of Bong Jun Ewa, pepper planter of Ranto Pan- jang. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Low Siang. pepper planter of Simungo. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Chang Sam and Bong (hit, chop Jit On, pepper planters of Paku. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Bong Lee Soon, pepper planter of S. Tapang. (A bsconded.)
In the goods of Lai Bun Lee, pepper planter of S. Tengah. (.1 bsconded.)
In the goods of Bong Cho and Bong N iuk, pepper planters of RantoPanjang. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Ng Hok Chia, pepper planter of Sitnungo. (A bsconded.)
In the goods of Chang Hen, pepper planter of Ranto Pan- jang. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Chang Toi, pepper planter of Ranto Panjang. (A bsconded.)
In the goods of Bong Khian, E?r planter of Tabuan (A bsconded).
All creditors and other persons having any claim whatsoever against the Estates of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned on or before the 14th September, 1907. after which date the assets of the above named will be divided amongst the parties entitled thereto regard being had only to those claims of which notice shall have been given. And all moneys owing to the above Estates shall be paid to the undersigned forthwith.
JOHN E. A. LEWIS, Resident 2nd Class. Residents Office,
30th July, 1J07.
Notification.
No. XXXII, 1907.
FROM 1st August the limit of insurance fur parcels sent to the United Kingdom or vid the United Kingdom to the undermentioned countries is raised to l4(X).
Antigua	Cameroon.
Austria Hungary Denmark 1iBahamaa) Nassau Dominica Belgium	Egypt
Bermuda	Faroe Islands
Bosnin Herzegovina Gambia British Guiana Germany British Somaliland Icelaud'
Sierra Leone Sweden Togoland Tnnidad Zanzibar
For Parcels to the United Kingdom the
Rate will be 30 cents for the first 1'12 of in-
sured value and 10 cents for each additional
1'12 or fraction thereof. Rates for other
countries will remain as quoted on page la of
the Postal Guide.
C. 0. ROBISON ,
Postmaster Gen al.
Kuching, Sarawak,
31st July, 1907.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 4, 1907.
205
Notice.
No. XXXIII, 1907.
He Thomas Hugh of Lundu, late Government Clerk at Lingga, (Deceased).
ALL creditors and other persons having any claim whatsoever against the Estate of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undermentioned on or before the 30th November 1907, after which date the assets of the above named will be divided amongst the parties entitled thereto regard being had only to those claims of which notice shall have been given. And all monies owing to the above Estate shall he paid to the undersigned forthwith.
F. F. BOULT.
Assistant Resident.
Probate Court,	Lundu, loth August, 1907. Notice-
No. XXXIV. 1907.
IN THE BANKRUPTCY COURT. KUCHING.
In the goods of Yeo Ann Hok, pepper planter of a mile. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Bong Tai Hin, pepper planter of Segobang. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Pang Seng, pepper planter of Tabuan. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Jee On, pepper planter ofSegobang. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Pang Piow, pepperplanter of 8. Loba. f.4Z .s- conded.)
In the goods of Lim Soo Liew, pepper planter of Segobang. (A bsconded.)
In the goods of Koh Chun Kim.
(A bsconded.)
In the goods of Sim. Chwee Thiam, pepper planter of Pa- ku. chop Liong Hoh. (Absconded.)
Tn the goods of Chin Iliong and Tian Chon, pepper planters of Tanjong Durian. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Ng Bun (Absconded) and Yong Soo Pee, (deceased) pepper planters of Jernang.
In the goods of Pang Mook Kim. pepper planter of S. Loba. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Lni Siew and Bong Chiam, pepper planters of S. Teugah. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Bong Seong, pepper planter of Baku, chop Chioong Shin. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Aug Pin, pepper planter of Lobok Boya. (Absconded.)
Tn the goods of Bun Tow, pepper planter of Simungo. ( A bsconded.)
ALL creditors and others persons having any
J claim whatsoever against the Estates of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned on or before the 26th October, 1907. after which date the assets of the above named will be divided amongst the parties entitled thereto regard being had only to those claims of which notice shall have been given. And all monies owing to the above Estates shall be paid to the undersigned forthwith.
JOHN E. A. LEWIS,
Resident 2nd Class.
Kuching,
August 28tb, 1907.
Notice.
No. XXXV, 1907.
NOTICE is hereby given that a title deed to land at S. Moyan, Grant No. 128 of 10th October 1889 which was issued to Ee Hap Swee is missing. The lad consisted of 19 acres 3 r. 36 p. and was at one time under gambier and pepper. By the will of Ee Hap Swee his pepper and gambier gardens at S. Moyan were bequeathed to the late Ee Tek Guan and the gardens were by him separately transferred without any title to the land.
The said title. No. 128 of 10th October 1889 will be cancelled if not produced and the present ownership proved at the Land Oflice on or before the 31st December 1907.
M. G. BRADFORD.
Officer in Charge
Municipal Branch P. IK. D.
Kuching.
30th August, 1907.
Appointment
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint J. Hardie, Esq. to be Agent in La- buan for the sale of Sarawak coal.
retirement
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to permit the Honble Charles Hose, D. Sc. to retire on pension to date from the 20th August 1907.
Rejang Affairs.
THE Honble Charles Hose- retiring on pension during the month of August I hereby make the following arrangements to provide for the Government of the Rejang districtMr. H. S. B. Johnson will be (pro. tern.) the head local Resident, but in order that more supervision should be kept over the inland tribes of Dyaks I have directed The Rajah Muda to visit and stay at Kapit or wherever needed to meet these Dyaks and keep them quiet as much as possible. H. H. The Rajah Muda, will not be absent more than about one month at a time, as it is of the greatest importance that the Supreme Council
206
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 4, 1907.
shall be assembled as regularly as possible in Kuching even if there are no important cases to bring before the meml ers. From two to three visits to Rejang during the year would be sufficientsay of a month to six weeks duration each time. The work at Sibu and in the lower country Js regular and scarcely requires any extra superintendence than it has at the present time.
C. BROOKE,
Rajah.
Kuching.
August 4th. 1907.
THE ASTANA, Kuching, 5th August. 1907.
Present.
His HIGHNESS THE RAJAH G. C. M. G.
HIS HIGHNESS THE RAJAH MUDA.
The Resident o//(Honble Sir Percy the 1st Division Cunynghame, Bart.J
The Dat,, Bandar ! (Abang Mohamad i Kassim.)
The Datu Hakim .... (Haji Mohamed Ali.) The Datu Emaum ...'. (Haji Merais.) Tua Kampong Grisek (Inchik Mahomat Zin ) Absent.
The Resident of ,u I n u	,
,,	(Hon ole C. Hose, 1). Sc.)
the 3rd Division	'
The Supreme Council was convened this fifth day of August when H. H. The Rajah presided in person previous to his departure to England, and laid before the Members the details of different events which had passed under his notice during the previous three months, almost all of which had been definitely settled.
The first was the Will of the late Datu Bandar about which he, the Rajah, had felt a great responsibility and he hoped it had been justly settled according to Mahomedan law and usage; he appealed to the Datus Bandar and Hakim, the sons of the late Datu Bandar, if the division had given them satisfaction and they replied that they were perfectly content with the administration of the estate.
The next event that took place was the meeting with the Dyak Chief named Bautin at Kapit, who had been causing trouble for some years past in the interior, when he tendered his submission and paid a fine as compensation to those whom he had plundered and in some cases murdered. Peace had been made by certain Dyak observances between Bantin anil the other tribes.
The next event was the settlement of the Lawas Chiefs who by certain intriguing influences had been kept away from a friendly disposition; they have now come in and have received their shares of the Royalty paid on the cession of this river.
Another important matter was the meeting in Court and the instalment of the Datu
Muda as Datu Bandar, Hj. Merais as Datu Imaum and Inchik Mohamat Zin as the fourth chief. At the same time His Highness would mention that new chiefs had been appointed in Simanggang Abang Haji Tamin as head, and Abang Abdul Rasit as second and Tuanku Rahman as third -to take the place of Sheriff Putra who died and Haji Chek retired in old age.
A smaller affair had been settled with the Opium Farmer in Lawas by our paying him compensation for the transfer of Lawas.
An important event for the town of Kuching was the supply of water from Matangthis has now been oueued and will it is to be hoped add to the health and general comfort of the place and will be extended to the Kampongs in course of time if needed.
His Highness touched briefly on the affairs of Brunei, and His Highness last statement was that in regard to the coastal carrying trade, he had not yet decided to keep it in Government liands or transfer it to a Company : this required mature consideration as political power was somewhat involved in this question.
After some conversation with the members and hearing their opinions on certain matters His Highness said that he now handed over the Supreme Council to his son and the members with every trust and confidence in them to do their best to guide the affairs of the Country with discretion, prudence and justice.
His Highness then retired, bidding them ail adieu, adding that his return depended on fate, health, and destiny, but wherever he was. so long as he had his senses, he would always have the Country and the Council first in his remembrance.
F. H. DALLAS.
Recorder of Supreme Council.
Departure of Elis Hilliness the Rajah.
His Highness the Rajah left Kuching for England on Thursday afternoon, the 8th August. H. H. Yacht Zalmra steamed down the river about 4 i*. M. soon after the arrival of the s. s. Rajah of Sarawak from Singapore with the home mails. The Yacht anchored for the night at Santubong and continued the voyage to Singapore at daylight on the 9th, arriving in the Singapore Roads on Friday evening, the 10th, just as it was getting dark. We hear the passage across was an exceedingly rough one, and that the waves broke over the vessel with such force that the binnacle ami compass were swept off the bridge and flashed on to the deck below and broken.
His Highness the Rajah Muda and the Honble Sir Perey Cunynghame journeyed as far as Santubong with the Rajah who is accompanied back to England by Mr. C. S. Pearse, ate Treasurer of Sarawak. The Rajah left Singapore on the 12th August by the French Mail.
11. H. the Rajahs stay in this Country has
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 4, 1907.
207
lasted exactly 3 months during which time I he has visited most of the Outstations along I the coast. Amongst the most important ' events which have occurred during His Highness stay have been the submission of Bautin, the rebel Dyak Chief; the'appointment of I Native Officers in succession to the late Datil Bandai and Data Imaum ; and the dispersion of the ill feeling of the Lawas Chiefs towards the Government: we may also mention the Matang water supply which was in working before His Highness left the Country.
1.112 In Varying Moods
Sarawak library.
?
The following new books have been added to the Library.
NewBook.
1.211 Joseph Vance
1.221 Just so stories
1,246 Kidnapped
1,248 Kim
1.290 Lady of Rome, A
1.359 Listeners Cure
1,385 Londoners, The
1.440 Many Inventions
1.509 Matrimonial Lottery, The
1,536 Merry Men. The
1,542 Mid the thick Arrows
1,562 Miss Bollards In-
Beat rice Harraden
W. de Morgan R. Kipling R. L. Stevenson II. Kipling Marion Crawford E. V. Lucas Robert Hichens R. Kipling
Miss Eccles R. L. Stevenson Max Pemberton
spiration W. I). Howells
1,586 Morals ot Marens
II.
150 [ From Midshipman t e
1511	Field Marshall
Sir Evelyn Wood
Ordeyne, The
1,613 M. 8. in a Red Box, The
1,726 Nymph, The
1,737 Old County. The
1,771 Open Question. The
1,789
W. T. Locke
B. F. Dickberry
Henry Newbolt
E. Robins
Out of a College Window A. C. Benson
195 The House of Quiet A. ('. Benson
234 Letters to Ivy from
the First Earl of Dudley S. H. Romilly
Mary ueeu 3cots F. II. Henderson
4771 Mrs. Fitzherbert and
1,928 Plough of Shame, The M. Bradford
Minting
1,956 Prince Otto	R. L. Stevenson
1.965 Puck oPooks Hill* R. Kipling
2.002 Rebecca of Sunnybrook
Farm Kate D. Wiggins
478i	George IV W. II. Williams
533 Queen of Indiscretions, A G. P. Cierici
556 Reminiscences of Daily Dorothy Nevill
641 Six years at the
Russian Court Eager
43 Affair at the Inn. The Kate I . M'iggifis
124 Arabian Nights, New II. L. Stevenson
132 Anny of a dream, The R. Kipling
214 Beloved Vagabond. The W. T. Locke.
218 Beyond the Rocks Elinor Glyn
222 Black Arrow, The R. L. Stevenson
2.012 Red othe Feud
2,019 Rejuvenation of Miss
Semaphore. The
2,030 Richard Hawkwood
2,045* Rise of Silas Lapham,
2,046j .	The
263 Bondsman, The
297 Brothers
Hall Caine Horace A.
Vachell
2,077 Rose of the World
2.080 Rose of the River
2,104 Sacrifice, The
Halliwell
Sutcliffe
Hal Godfrey
H. Neville Maughan
W. D. Howells
2,128 Scholar's Daughter, The
A. and E. Castle Kate D. Wiggins Alphonse Cour- lander
315 Call of the Blood, Tiie Robert Hichens 342 Cardinals Snuffbox.
The
356 Catriona
400 Chippinge
479 Confessions of a young man
689 Double Marriage. A
694 Drink
696 Dumpling, The
698 Dynamiter, The
Harry Harland R. L. Stevenson Stanley Meyman
George Moore Lucas Cleeve Hull Caine
Coulson
Kernehan
R. L. Stevenson and Fanny von dor Grift Steven-
719 Enemy's Camp, The
749 Face of Clay, The
778 Fifth Queen, The
796 Folly of Eustace, The
816 French Nan
827 Gadfly, The
990 Healers. The
1,05G House of a Thousand
Candles, The
1,059 House of Mirth, The
1,071 If Youth but Knew
1,081 Idle ideas of 1905
1,087 Imaginative Mun, An
1,088 Image in the Sand. The
son.
Sheri ngham and
Meakin
Horace A.
Vachell
T. M. Hueffer .
Robert Hichens !
A. and E. Castle I
E. L. Voynich i
Maarten
Maartens
Meredith Nichol-
son
Mrs. Wharton
A. and E. Castle
J. K. Jerome
Robert Hichens
E. F. Benson
2.188 Sin of George Warrener. The
2.189 Sir Nigel
2,190 Sir John Constantine
2,201 Slave. The
2.21 )8 Smiths of Surbiton, The
2,216 Some Irish Yesterdays
2.225 Sophy of Kravonia
2,248 Stalky and Co.
2.266 Story of Bawn, The
2.324 Tales and Fantasies
2.394 Traffics ami discoveries
2.1(H) Treasure Island, The
Beatrice
Harraden
Marie von Vorst Conan Doyle A. T. Quiller
Conch (Q Rulwt Hichens Keble Howard E. E. Somerville and Martin Ross Anthony Hope Rudyard Kipling Katherine Tynan R. L. Stevenson 11. Kipling R. L. Stevenson
2,401
2.405
2,498
2,560
2,562
2,631
Treasure of Heaven, The Marie Corelli
Trials of Commander
McTurk. The
Viper of Milan. The
M atchers, The
Whiph&nd, The
M'hispers alxnit women
Wrong Box, The
2.634 Yellow Crayon, The
II. 212 Philippine Islands 216 Royal Tragedy. A
223 Richard III
Cutliffe Hyne Marjorie Bowen A. E. Mason Keble Howard Leonard Merrick ILL. Stevenson & Lloyd Osbourne
E. P. Oppenheim
,1. Foreman
Chedonille
Mijatovick
Sir Clements
R. Markham
357 Tragedy of the Caesars S. Baring Gould
208
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 4, 1907.
2 Across the Plains
4 Art of Writing, The
14 British Malaya
60 Familiar Studies of
Men and Books
99 Malay Magic
109 Memoirs and Portraits
R. L. Stevenson R. L. Stevenson Frank
Swettenham
R. L. Stevenson Skeat
R. L. Stevenson
117 On the Government
of Dependencies Sir Geo. C. Lewis
1301 Pagan Races of the
131 j Malay Peninsula Skeat A- Blagdon
144 Reshaping of the
145,	Far East B. L. Putnam .
Weale
76 Barrack Room Ballads
159 Songs of travel
160 Lapsus Calami
161 Ballads
Rudyard Kipling
R. L. Stevenson
Stevens
R. L. Stevenson
14 Afghanistan
174 Essays of travel
205'
06 i Frolu sea 10 864
235 Inland voyage, An
238 In the South Sea
Augus Hamilton
R. L. Stevenson
Rudyard Kipling
R. L. Stevenson
R. L. Stevenson
308 Lhasa and its mysteries L. Austine
Waddell
374 On the Edge of the
Empire Jepon & Beams
458 Silverado Squatters, ,The R. L. Stevenson.
524 Travels of a Natura-
list in the Forests of
Borneo Beccari
527 Travels with a donkey R. L. Stevenson
Notice.
Sarawak Library.
Subscribers are requested to send to the Honorary Secretary lists of such books as they wish added to the Library.
H. A. ADAMS,
Acting Hon. Secretary.
Bowling Handicap at the Club.
Ox Saturday evening, 3rd August, a bowling handicap was decided at the Sarawak Club, the prizes for which, two in number, were kindly presented by H. H. The Rajah Muda.
The handicapping by request of His Highness was done bv Messrs. G. C. Gillan, G. M. Allman and F. G. Day.
The Competition consisted of 20 rolls, ten on each alley, and was commenced punctually at 9 p. M.
There were fourteen entries, but Mr. O. Lang was unfortunately obliged to scratch, leaving thirteen competitors whose handicaps were as follows:
J. E. A. Lewis ...;
E. L. Grove
scratch
G. C. Gillan	...J
G.M. Allman	...l
receive 50
J. Hewitt...	...i
F. G. Dav	... 70
H.B. Crocker
L. E. Slade	... 80
V. W. Harington ... F. F. Boult	...j
P. Gordon White ...j
A. J. Cutfield	...I
130
F. A. W. Page Turner j
The finish was a very close one, the result being
in doubt up to the last roil; in fact it was thought
that Mr. Grove had won, but the winner who had
done well in the first 10 rolls came on again in the last roll or two and just succeeded in annexing tho first prize.
The full scores are below.
1. G. M. Allman
350 +
50 400
2. E. L. Grove
391
scr. 391
3. G. C. Gillan
382
scr. 382
4. H. B. Crocker
293 +
70 363
5. F. G. Day
292 +
70 362
6. P. Gordon White
253 +
100 353
7. A. J. Cutfield
209 +
130 339
8. V. W. Harington
*2. ?	4-
80 337
9. F. A. W. Page Turner
189 +
130 319
10. J. Hewitt
266 +
50 316
11. F. F. Boult
212 +
100 312
12. J. E. A. Lewis
308
scr. 308
13. L. E. Slade
210 +
so 290
The winner was bought
by Mr.
Bryan in
the
selling sweep and put in a half claim, so he spent
a fairly profitable evening. The Handicappers had
no very easy task inasmuch as there were several
competitors from the Outstations who have only
rolled on their occasional visits to Kuching and it
was difficult to arrive at what they were capable
of doing, but the first five in order as above rolled
up to the form expected of them. Nos 1 and 2 being
a little over their points, and Nos 4 and 5 slightly
lielow, the scratch score set by the handicappers
being 380.
On the conclusion of the competition His High-
ness the Rajah Muda entertained the thirteen com-
petitors to supper in the Club, there l eing also
present the Honble Sir Percy Cunyngbame, the
Hon'ble F. H. Dallas, Messrs. Pearse, Bryan, Bailey,
Johnson, Lang and Carew-Gibson; an impromptu
concert which followed brought a particularly en-
joyable evening to a close.
A veteran Anglican Clergyman.
THE following is an extract from the Singa-
pore Free Press of the 14th August, 1907
His many friends will be interested to know that
the Veteran Colonial Chaplain, the Rev. C. A. Koch,
Incumbent of Holj Trinity Church, Colombo, closes
his 74th year to-day, having been born on 28th July,
1833. Our readers are familiar with the interesting
personality of this veteran clergj man by his contri-
butions to the press from time to time on a surpris-
ing variety of subjects, ranging from theology to
snake-bites. There will be many who will wish him
many more years of happiness. The Rev. Mr.
Koch had served eight years in Borneo in the
fifties" and experienced very exciting incidents dur-
ing the up-heaval and rebellion in the early stage of
the Sarawak Government. It is interesting also to
know that the present Rajah of Sarawak acted as
bestman at the wedding of the Rev. Mr. Koch, with
whose father the latter had spent several years in
England. The Rev. Mr. Koch had been two years
on leave in England, when he was coming out to
Borneo again in 1866, and was offered the Warden-
ship of St. Thomas College in 1866, but refused it
owing to a reluctance on his part to the sedentary
life involved. The Rev. Mr. Bacon, then in Ratua-
pura, was then offered the post by Bishop Claughton
and accepted it and Mr. Koch took his place at
Ratnapura where he remained for eight years. He
afterwards served some years in Jaffna. Mr. Koch
is now the senior member of the Anglican clergy in
Ceylon, although in point of age there is one minister,
the Rev. Mr. Solomon of Jaffna, who is his senior.
Mr. Koch has been 41 years in the Island, and if his
service abroad were taken into account he has served
in the ministry for over half a century.Times of
Ceylon.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 4, 1907.
209
Retirement of the llon'ble Charles
Hose. D. Sr.
IN this issue will be found gazetted the retirement from the Sarawak Service of the Hon'ble Charles Hose, D. Sc., Resident of the Hird Division.
Dr. Hose arrived in this country just over 23 years ago, imr. in April 1884. He was appointed to do duty in the Baram District which some two years previously had come under Sarawak rule, and in 1888 was placed in charge of that Station, being made Resident, 2nd Class, on 1st January 1891. He remained in Haram until April 1904 and was then promoted to be Divisional Resident of the 3rd Division on 1st June 1904. with residence al Sibu in the Rejang river, which appointment he held until his retirement. Between April and June 1904 Dr. Hose went to Belaga with a force of 200 Kayans on an expedition to attack the*Dyaks on Bukit Batu whom he routed. These people had been committing various murders on the weaker tribes for some 3 years.
During Dr. Hoses residence in Baram he travelled throughout the district constantly and on many occasions as far as the Dutch border. These journeys were made in small boats, frequently over dangerous rapids, and occupied five or six weeks at a time. His efforts were specially directed towards a study of the various tribes in the district, and travelling about in this way he succeeded in obtaining an intimate knowledge of the natives and their ways which tended to bring about friendly relations between himself and them and gave him an influence with them which was of enormous value in arranging peace-makings amongst the wild tribesas in the case of the Madangs from the far interior, and later the Bataug Kayans (subjects of the Dutch) who made i eaee with the people of the Baram river. It should here be mentioned that since this latter peace-making, 9 years ago, no bloodshed has taken place between the peoples of these enormous districts which comprise some 20,000 square miles and are inhabited by the wildest tribes in the island.
We may also point more recently to the surrender of Bantin and the disaffected tribes of the Empran, Engkari and Kanowit districts, due greatly to the efforts of Dr. Hose while in residency in the 3rd Division.
In March 1900 Dr. Hose read a paper before the Royal Geographical Society giving an account of his journey into the heart of the Madang Country. On this journey he was accompanied by certain Cambridge Anthropologists. This paper was published in the Geographical Journal for July, 1900, together with his map of the Baram district and we understand he is now engaged on a map of Sarawak which he hopes to complete during the next 18 months or so.
Dr. Hose was married in December, 1905, and Mrs. Hose during her stay in this Country' has accompanied her busband on many of his visits round the district, on one occasion travelling by boat up the Bali rivera tributary of the Rejang further inland than any lady has ever yet been.
It is with extreme diffidence that we approach the subject of Dr. Hose's scientific work in this country and in connection with which he had conferred on him the highest honour which can be conferred by Cambridge University, viz. Hon. Doctor of Science. We would refer our readers to the article on The Cause of Beri-Beri" which appeared in the Times, October 28th 1905 and was reprinted in the Gazette December 1905. Dr. Hose's theory that diet and more especially mouldy rice is the cause of beriberi" was discussed in that article, and we understand that from recent experiments this theory is likely to be upheld. During his furlough in England in 1905 he spent a considerable time in research work with Dr. Sims Woodhead in the Cambridge University Laboratory in connection with beri-heri and we hear that the result of their experiments, which are still being carried on, will be made known shortly.
Dr. Hose has made large collections of the flora and fauna of Sarawak, discovering many new species; he has explored the mountainous districts in the far interior of the Baram district and has presented to the British and other Museums collections of mammals, birds, insects, shells and every kind of animal to be found in this country. For his services to Science he has been decocted with the Order of Knight of the Prussian Crown. 3rd class, by the Emperor of Germany; he is a Knight of the White Falcon. 1st Class, of Saxe-Weimar, and has also received other orders and medals, both British and Foreign, besides having conferred on him, as already mentioned, the degree of Hon. D. Sc. of the University of Cambridge.
Dr. Hose's departure from Sibu was marked by various presentations from the different communities residing there. The Chinese Merchants presented him with an address enclosed in a silver casket; the Foo Chow colony with a gorgeous umbrella of silk in 3 colours with suitable inscriptions thereon iu Chinese, while the Dyaks were not behind with an illuminated address iu Romanised Dyak which was enclosed in a carved bamboo.
Dr. and Mrs. Hose arrived in Kuching from Sibu by the s. s. Alice Lorraine, on the IGth August and on the evening of the 19th were entertained to a farewell dinner at the Astana by H. H. the Muda, who, in a short speech proposed their healths and wished them all prosperity* in the future. They sailed for Singapore en route for England by the s. s. Kuching the following day.
The Postage Stamps of Sarawak. *
WE have received a small book dealing with the postage stamps of Sarawak, which should be of much use to philatelists who take an interest in the postage stamps of this Country.
The work commences with a short history of Sarawak, and the information as to the various issues of postage stamps seems fairly complete when the difficulty of collecting information about the earlier issues is considered. The various differences of the types of stamps of the same value in the issue of 1871 are carefully illustrated on full size collotype plates, as are all the stamps ever issued by the Postal Authorities.
There are also illustrations of the issue of 1895 surcharged in pence. These must have been manu-
210
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 4, 1907.
factored by some person in a pure spirit of fun as the possibility of changing the currency of Sarawak into sterling has never been considered by the Government nor is it ever likely to be until neighbouring countries, including China, adopt the English monetary standard in their mercantile dealings. The story of the sheet of inverted surcharge 2 cents on 12 cents (1871 issue) according to the Author varies with the telling but the Chinese gentleman who purchased the sheet in question informs ns that he used some of the stamps for postage purposes before the error was discoveicd and that he did not give up the stamps to the Post Office or to anyone, although asked to do so, but has a certaui number still in his possession, the balance having been given away at various times to his friends.
We recommend the work which is the subject of this article to all students of the history of postage in Sarawak: it is well printed in clear type, has eight excellent full page plates, and is altogether a neatly got up and interesting little volume.
i *Thc 1oxU c Surnijw of Sarawak," by Fred. .1. Melville, President London Junior Philatelic Society. Price, one shilling. Chas. Nissen & Co., Southampton Sheet London.*
A Land Dayak myth.
IN the beginning, many many years ago. there lived in this island of Kelemantan a man called Tenabi. His dwelling place was at the foot of the hills called Suit and Baru and here for a long time he lived absolutely alone. Did he desire flesh to eat. beasts were plentiful : of fish in the streams there was a never ending supply : and the fowl of the air provided for variety in his larder. In his garden there grew thepisan# and the sugar cane, the tapioca, the kladi and the sweet potato: but he had no rice.
After a long time, when even yet there was no other human being in existence, he married a female Kitupung (a woodpecker. Sasia abnormis) and she presented him with a son. But. alas, his newly found companions died and he found himself alone again. However, his loneliness was soon dispelled and that in a somewhat peculiar manner : for one day he noticed that the calf of his leg was swollen and the swelling increased so as to prevent him from walking until finally some months afterwards it burst and to his amazement there appeared a tiny girl. Delighted with the infant prodigy, our hero carefully nursed his charge feeding her on the juice of the sugar cane. In course of lime she grew up and became the wife of Tenabi.
Such is a short chapter in the story of the Land
Dayaks of Kuab (Quop) and Sentah concerning their
traditional ancestor, and to the Revd. \V. Nichols we
are indebted for the information.
In the new book by Skeat and Blagden on the
Pagan races of the Malay peninsula we meet with a
story curiously similar in its main point. The tra- i
dition is merely mentioned as The Jakun legend of '
the first woman, whose children were produced out ?
of the calves of her legs.
We do not wish to press too far the meaning of ?
this coincidence in a very remarkable story but we
think it fair to suppose that the two stories are of
the same origin : how far the relationship between
the Laud Dayaks of Sarawak and the Jakuns of the
Peninsula extends in other directions we cannot say
but it is not unlikely that some light may be thrown
on the past history of these and other Sarawak
natives by a comparative study of their fairy tales.
J. H.
ON the 1st s. s. Kuching arrived from Singapore with passenger, Mr. O. F. Ricketts.
S. S. Sarawak arrived this day from Muka.
ON tlie 2nd s. s. Alice Lorraine arrived from Sibu ria Lingga. Passengers. The Right Revd. Bishop Hose, Revd. and Mrs. Dexter Allen. Miss Victoria Hall and Revd. Father Keizer.
ON the 3rd Their Highnesses thp Rajah and Rajah Muda returned from Matangin H. H. S. Zahora.
In the evening a Bowling Handicap took place at the Club far prizes kindly presented by the Rajah Muda. . An account of the same will be found in another column.
His Highness the Rajah was At Home at the Astana on Monday afternoon, the 5th, when a large number of Europeans were present. His Highness took this opportunity of saying goodbye before his departure for Europe.
ON the (ith s. s Kitching sailed for Singapore witii passengers, Messrs. A. S. Hitchcock, E. H. Williams and Mrs. Waddell.
The same day the s. s. .4lice Lorrainr sailed for Sibu. ria Kalaka, with Messrs. D. J. S. Bailey. II. S. B. Johnson, A. J. Cutfield, F. A. W. Page-Turner and Revd. A. Hopfgart- ner.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Mr. C. S. Pearse, sailed for Singapore in 11. H. Yacht Zahora en-route for England on Thursday afternoon, the 8th. The Zahora anchored for the night at Santubong mouth and continued the journey next morning. H. H. the Rajah Muda and the Honble the Resident accompanied the Rajah as far as Santubong, returning in the launch Young Harry the following day.
ON the 8th the s. s. Rajah of Sarawak
arrived from Singapore. Passenger, Mr. Fraser.
The same day p. s. Arieh returned from Singa-
pore and p. s. Kaka sailed for Limbang with
Messrs. 0. F. Ricketts, A. B. Ward and Revd.
A. Keizer.
P. S. Arieh left for Limdu on the 10th with
Mr. E. Parnell who went to audit. The Arieh
returned on the 11th, and Mr. Parnell arrived
back by boat on the 12th.
S. S. Sara trak: sailed for Tata u via Oy a on
the 11th with passengers for Tatau, Messrs.
Pope and Johnston, of the Borneo Companys
service.
ON the 13th s. s. Rajah of Sara wak sailed for
Singapore with passenger, Mr. Fraser, and the
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 4. 1907.
211
A storm of unusual violence passed over
Kuching about 3.KO on Wednesday afternoon,
the 28th, which, although it lasted only about
half an hour, did in that short time a tremen-
dous amount of damage. Trees were blown
down everywhere and roofs of houses suffered
to a great extent, one house in course of con-
struction in the Data's Kampong being laid
flat like a cardhouse. Rock Road near the
Blacksmiths Road was blocked for a couple
of hours by a large tree in the ornamental
grounds which was uprooted and laid right
across the road; another large tree in the Es-
planade, opposite the Library, was also blown
down, but fell towards the bandstand. Tele-
phone wires in ail directions were broken and
altogether the Public Works Department has
been kept pretty busy ever since making good
the ravages of wind and rain.
THE s. s. Kuching arrived from Singapore
on the 29th with passengers, Mr. S. Tom-
linson M. i. c. E., Capt. Harrison and Messrs.
Hughes and Cropley.
Mr. Tomlinson came from Singapore by re-
quest of the Government to examine and re-
port upon the new Waterworks a* Mataug.
He returns to Singapore by the same steamer.
Monthly report
lawas
June.
Your Highness and His Highness the Rajah
Muda, accompanied by Mr. Ricketts. Resident of
the district, arrived at the Station on the 8th and
stayed nntil the 11th instant. Your Highness received the Pangerims Matassin
and Ismail when various matters were discussed, the
langerans eventually deciding to receive payment
rf the cession motiex awarded to them in 1905, amt
later they were paid up to, and inclusive of May
last.
Your Highness authorised the collection of the
usual poll tax from Brunei Malays and others living
at the Kampong Kuala.
Your Highness received a deputation of Chinese
from Merap k who desired the punishment of some
Tagals for the murder of four Chinese who dis-
appeared towards the end of last year. It was
pointed out to the Chinese deputation that it had
not been proved that their friends had been mur-
dered, or in what manner they had disappeared, and
that nothing could be done until there was proof.
The Dyaks who removed from Limbang to Luwas
in 1905, and at their own iequest were, the follow-
ing year, granted land in the Gaya valley which
they have not taken up, now applied to Your High-
ness for other land us that in the Gaya valley did
not contain sufficient old jungle. These Dyaks
were informed that all other lands were in the
occupation ol M units. and if the Dyaks were not
satisfied with the land they had chosen in the Gaya
valley, they might return to live in the Limbang
district.
I inquired into a case of detention of the persons
of two women slaves who had succeeded in escaping
from Pongeran Muaras home near Brooketon, ami
gaining the mouth of the Lawas river were met and
taken to the house of Haji Burnt, where one was
same day p. s. Adeh left for Baram with Mr.
E. Purnell, who went to audit the station 1
accounts.
P. S. Kaka arrived from Limbang and '
Brooketon on the 14th. Passengers, Mr. and ?
Miss Hogg, and the Revd. A. Mulder.
S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore on
the 15th with passenger, the Revd. Father
Heyden.
ON the 16th the Honble Dr. C. Hose, Mrs.
Hose and child arrived in Kuching from Sibu
by the s. s. Alice Lorraine.
P. S. Kaka sailed for Sadong on the Kith and returned with Mr. E. R. Naysmith on the i
17th.	ST. Thomas Church, Kuching, was on
Monday morning, the 19th, the scene of the i
marriage of Mr. E. R. Naysmith, Manager of
the Government Colleries at Sadong, to Miss
M. Hogg, daughter of Mr. Henry Hogg, for
many years Assistant Manager of the Brooke-
ton Collieries. The ceremony, which took !
place at a quarter past ten, was performed by
the Ven. Archdeacon Perham, assisted by the
Revd. Dexter Allen. The bride was con-
ducted to the altar by her father who gave her
-away, the bridegroom being supported ,by Mr.
H. W. Gregg. After the ceremony the wed-
ding party wen* entertained to tiffin by Captain 1
ami Mrs. Waddell at their bungalow in Pa-
dungan Road. Mr. ami Mrs. Naysmith left
for Sadong by the p. s. Kaka on the 22nd.
ON the 19th His Highness the Rajah Muda
who was accompanied by the Data Tmaum and
Inche Mohamed Zin paid a visit to the Kling
Mosque in Gambier Road. The Kling Com-
munity desire to record through these columns
their gratification and thanks for this kind visit
o their Mosque.
S. S. Kuching sailed for Singapore on the
'20th with passengers. Dr. and Mrs. Hose
-ami child who have left the country. A num-
ber of Europeans went on board to say good-
bye.
ON the 22nd p. s. Kaka sailed for Sadong,
Lingga and Sibu. Passengers. Revd. and Mrs.
Dexter Allen and MisS Hall for Lingga. and !
Mr. and Mrs. Naysmith and Mr. H. Hogg for
Sadong.
P. S. Adeh returned same day from Baram
with Mr. E. Parnell and the s. s. Rajah of
Sarawak came in from Singapore.
Ma. W. H. Geikie of Bidi left for Singapore
on his way home by the s. s. Rajah of Sarawak
which sailed on the 27th. He intends we nu- I
derstand to consult a specialist about his j
health, and although it appears uncertain (
whether he will return, his many friends hope ,
to see him out here again.
212	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 4, 1907.
re-taken by Pangeran Muara who arrived the following day. and but foil this detention would have escaped up-river. In the absence of sufficient evidence the case was dismissed. The remaining woman slave was informed she might live where she liked, and a day or two afterwards I heard she had married in the village.
I went to Limbang on the 15th instant, and on the 23rd instant I went to Trusan where I was engaged with Court and Office work until the 20th instant when I returned to Lawas.
The rainfall for the month was 12.05 inches, and for the half year 09.10 inches.
The Exports and Inports were $4,745. and $5,410. respectively.
1VONE KIRKPATRICK, Officer in Charge.
kALAKA.
July.
At the commencement of the month the Boban Malay Chief, Abang Ringgit, brought down a Cantonese whom he arrested in the billian sawyers huts for not having an overland pass from Rejang. Later it was found that this/?antonese was one of the three escaped prisoners from Sibn. He said that after their boat was capsized they landed at Alit. and there the Malays gave them food, after that they walked on to Kabong and passed the Fort at midnight. They went on to the beach and there seized a boat w hich they paddled up to Rohan, and lived there until arrested. His companions bolted with the sawyers who are Lew Chews and left him behind as he is not of the same clan. He has been sent over to Rejang and handed over to the Resident. Lower Rejang.
Two complaints have been made by pepper planters of their pepper having been stolen from their wells. The complainants are living at the back of the Boban Bazaar premises, and, as far as I can recollect, no pepper thefts had ever been reported. They can give no clue to the culprits.
P. Munan and some forty men and women arrived from Slbu to attend his brother's head feast in the Awik. He returned again on the 25th.
The Kampong Malays have not yet finished clearing the undergrowth below the cow house.
The road on the Metang" to the S. Lumbu bridge is now being made by the Sedi Dyaks and I think, if they came together the road would be made in a few days time.
Some Dyaks have cleared and some are still clearing their farming lands, and the Saratok Malays too are commencing to sow.
On three successive evenings strong south westerly gales blew but there was no rain. The weather has been sultry and hot and the want of water was keenly felt.
The Fortmen were kept busy in clearing around the plain.
The hauls of the jungkat fishing were satisfactory but the hauls of the pengireh were poor.
Several of the Kampong Malays have commenced to manufacture nipa sugar.
The amount of fines paid in for the month was $211.
Pepper tax on vines received for the past month was $178.30.
Six hundred dollars were transmitted to the Simanggang Treasury, and I cashed a letter of credit for one hundred and twenty dollars.
The trade returns for the month are :
Import- $11,350. Exports $11 ,644.
A. E. CHEYNE.
Writer.
K A PIT.
July.
During the early part of the month I was in the Balleh, as a large force of Dyaks had assembled at the mouth of Milirai to await a supposed force of Kayans, but after a few days the expedition returned to their homes.
On the 13th I left for Kuching via Sibu to attend the races, and was away for the rest of the month.
On the 26th the Honble the Resident paid a visit t this station, and settled some outstanding quarrels between the Kayans and Dyaks: the Honble the Resident returned to Sibn on the 30th.
The prison gang have been employed in clearing the cattle ground.
During the month very little jungle produce has come in, the Dyaks being busy preparing their farms for burning.
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER.
.	Assistant Resident.
July.
The event of the month was the visit Your Highness paid to the Batang Lupur on the 15th. Your Highness, accompanied by Dr. and Mrs. Wellington, armed at Simanggang early on the 16th. There were a number of Dyaks and most of their Chiefs present.
Your Highness was pleased to appoint Abang Haji Tamin as head Malay Chief at Simanggang. Abang Abdul Rasit (Dull as second Chief, and Tuanku Drahman as third Chief (the latter is new to the Government service and is in charge of the Kampong Lemanak.) Pensioner Dagang was directed to take turn and turn about with Abang Haji Bua Assan as chief Native Officer at Lubok Antu. each to hold office for six months at a time.
Your Highness received Abang Haji Mohamat Ali, Pr. Dagang, Penguin Baja and Semat, with reference to Ulu Ai affairs.
Owing to their success in passing boys through the Sabri School (who have eventually become Clerks in the Government Service) Your Highness was pleased to make an increase in the Grant to the Sabu School.
Sabu was visited by some of Y*our Higlinesss party on the 17th.
On the 19th Your Highness left for Kuching (oi i Sadong.) Mr. 0. Lang and I had the honour of being invited to Kuching for the Race week and accompanied Your Highness.
His Lordship the Bishop paid his yearly visitation to the Batang Lupar River during the month and after visiting Banting arrived at Simanggang on the 24th for the purpose of visiting the Sabu Mission.
The prison gangs were employed in clearing Hospital Hill, carrying and spreading manure on the cattle lands, and getting wood for the new boat-shed. The pond by the stables has been cleaned out and the road by it raised much higher.
The carpenter (Sam Jun) finished the necessary repairs to the roof of the Officers bed-room in the Fort on the ulu side.
Ulu Ai a ffairs.Mr. la Chard with the extra guard left for Lubok Antu on July 1st and Mr. 0. Lang returned from there on the evening of the 3rd after having handed over everything to Mr. la Chard.
P. Embuas, Chendan, Openg, and the other tuai. and their followers, who live above Lubok Antu. returned from following Ngumbang's force iuto Kantu on June 28th and all the force returned owing to 'bad omens. The tuai stated that they intended to-
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 4, 1907.	213
have their revenge upon Sempurai and the Kantu Dyaks and nothing should prevent them ! Upon hearing this (as I had recently lieen at Lubok Antu and had been assured by these Dyaks that all was quiet, and no trouble whatever was pending) I was much astonished at these people's duplicity and secretiveness, and being unable to go again to Lubok Antu sent up Abang Haji Tarnin with the following message:"That I had written to Your Highness and reported their, and Nguinbang's, raid (on June 28th) into the Kuntu district, and that they would presently hear Your Highness decision. That certain tuai, Embuas, Chandan. and Openg, were to put pledges for their own and their peoples good behaviour, for the future, into Lubok Antu Fortpending an answer from Your Highnessand that if in spite of these pledges they continued to raid the Kantu they would be liable to be attacked either when going or returning from theN. India territory both by our people and by the Dutch; and further, their houses would be liable to be attacked and their goods seized whilst they were absent on any raid.
In spite of this warning Emilias re-iterated their intention to raid tin- Kantu district, and declined to put the required pledges in Lubok Antu Fort.
Since then he, with certain other Lubok Antu Dyaks, and Einpran, has twice raided the Kantu Dyaks!
The Controlfcur of Smitau (writing on July 29th) has complained of these attacks Upon the houses of Sempurai and Pangarab Nata where one Kantu Dyak was killed and two wounded.
The Controleur says he hies not been able to ascertain the reason why these attacks Were made, and he asks that the Sarawak Government will do all that is possible to "call back the invaders and punish them severely. Of course the former is being done, and as regards the latter I am awaiting Your Highness' instructions:
I should add that I too have not been able to ascertain satisfactorily that our Dyaks have any just or recent cause for attacking the Kantu Dyaks.
I am informed that a number of Batang Ltipar Dyaks (followers of Murayang, Nyambong, and Sain, who moved from Sarawak territory to the Kantu district some 9 years ago) assisted our Dyaks to attack the Kantu. and are, now that the Netherlands India authorities are making inquiry in the Kantu, taking refuge in Sarawak territoryin short, have gone into hiding there! These persons will of course be mulcted in any fines that the N. India authorities put on them, and will not be able to shelter themselves in Sarawak territory for offences they have -committed across the Border.
D. J. S. BAILEY,
Resident.
Upper Sarawak Bau .
July.
Agreements.Four were made out during the month. Stamp duties and fees amounted to $26, Court fines and fees amounted to $106.
A considerable amount of my time has been taken up in keeping the Station accounts in consequence of the illness of the Court Writer Ah Nyuk.
Dyak Revenue has been paid in steadily and amounted to $1,186 and 588 gardens have paid up to date Vine tax amounting to $1,397.47; there are still 260 gardens which have not yet paid, but many of these it will be found, 1 fear, have gone out of cultivation.
The repairs to the Puak road were finished early in the month and the prisoners returned here.
Dr. Barker P. M. O. visited the Station from 17th to 19th, Dr. Bruce Low was in the district on the 3rd, 4th, 5th and 31st.
On the 22nd I left for Kuching on leave for the Annual Races. I there learnt with regret that His Highness the Rajah was unable to visit Upper Sarawak before leaving for Europe.
I returned here on the 31st and found nothing of importance to report upon.
E. R. STILWELL,
Resident.
OYA.
July.
Court.There have been but few cases at Oya but the whole of my time at Dalat was taken up with Court work, the Debt Court being very heavy there. Formerly a part of the summonses were taken out at Oya and the cases heard here while fewer visits were made to Dalat, but now Dalat being more frequently visited the traders take out no writs here but wait till the Court sits at Dalat. This of course makes the work at Dalat very heavy while there is practically ndlhing to do at Oya. Hundreds of writs are taken out at Dalat in a few days while those at Oya do not amount to scores.'
Public Jlorifi.The Bakong road is being raised from the Bazaar onwards and good progress has been made with this work. The road to the beach has also been raised and ditched in part, and the bridges at Pemutus, Buhl and Jalang etc: have lieen repaired and the approaches cleared. The Jalang ' and Bulu bridges were practically without planks, these having rotted and been washed away and passengers had to cross the streams on the beams.
The landing stage at Pengcran Prassie's house lias been rebuilt and new planks put on.
The road behind Kg- Snaw has been cleared and the padang at the Knala burntoff. The whole of the extensive plain from the Kg: Kuala to the Bazaar and Bakong road has been successfully burnt off. The grass here was over 8 feet long and very dry so that with a high wind driving the Hames the grass soon disappeared. The fin* went from the Boom road to the Chinese garden on the Bakong road. A number of men were out guarding the cocoanuts and consequently but little damage was done, the one or two burnt palms being replaced.
Unless the plain was burnt in this way some youth would most certainly have applied : rn tch when the wind happened to ire unsuitable and probably the whole of the cocoanuts w mid have been destroyed and damage done to property as well. I trust that some few snipes will find the cleared space a convenient feeding ground during the N. E. Monsoon so that there may be some shooting later on. which would not be the case were the grass left as it was before.
The big baeder known locally as liujany berendam, being in a very shaky condition and out of repair, has been taken to pieces and is being entirely rebuilt by a Tukang. The planks are in excellent condition but the other parts require to be renewed and the boat to be bassed, the plunking being f" apart in most places.
A few dollars only being offered for the old ban- dong I am having her taken to peices as some of the planks will be useful for something or other later on. She has seen considerable service being over 20 years old.
General.I went up to Dalat on the 5th: returning on the 16th.
214
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 4, 1907.
The Daiat. Hud and Medong people have worked wood for the Police Quarters there which are in want of repair. The posts and beams are alf of hard wood and are in good order but the other wood will have to be replaced. The building will l e removed to another site on the stream behind the football ground, the present one being no longer suitable. Tuah Kampong Luka has been permitted to build his house within 6 feet of the Govt: building so that there is considerable danger to either or both houses in case of fire. With Lukas house right up against theQuarters it is impossible to build the Dapors separate from the living rooms as I had intended to do, so I decided to remove the building elsewhere. The Court-house is in good order but requires new attaps, this is being done. There was some idea of moving the Station to a new site some way up-river on the other bank but the advantage to lie gained is not obvious. The present site is central and a convenient distance from the Bazaar, K. Hud and most of K. Daiat (by road), while the grounds have been laid out and planted. 1 understand that the main objection to the present site is that it is under-water sometimes during the N. E. Monsoon. So is the rest of the ground round Daiat though perhaps some less so than other. But this fact scarcely warrants the expenditure that would be incurred by the itemoval of the entire Station; Daiat is not the only Statin: where the grounds are covered with water at high tide during the N. E. Monsoon.
The grounds are well kepi and the roads in good order.
A number of natives from the Oya side now make gardens over in the Igaii river and spend a considerable part of their time there. This is a nuisance when summonses are to ! -erved on them, and I fancy that many remove temporarily to Igau on news of the probable arrival of the Court nt Daiat being received.
The s. s, Sarawak made trips to Oya on the 1st: and loth . taking away fnii cargoes. Towards the end of the month the stock of sago began to get low and the price at once rose to 60 cents a passu, the usual price being only 50 cents.
The weather till the 20th: of the month was wet and uncertain, since that it has been exceedingly hot, at times uncomfortably .
Numbers of people were suffering from fever during the early part of duly and there have been several deaths due to this, but with the advent of th 3 warm weather the sickness ceased.
Raw sage exported during the month:475 coyans.
Export during July of last year: 384 do
DONALD A. OWEN.
Resident.
SADong.
July.
The chief event of interest during the month was the arrival of Your Highness on the night of the 19th instant.
At 7.15 A. M. on the following morning Your Highness came off from the Yacht accompanied by Messrs. Bailey and Lang and Dr. Wellington.
The Malays of Kampong Simunjan were very anxious to have a bridge thrown across the Simunjan from about the centre . f the bazaar to the Kampong thus enabling the people to go to and from the bazaar and Kam pongs at will. At present only at high tide is this possible owing to the silting up of the river. Sanction has been given for the erection of the bridge, the cost of which will be partially borne by the Government.
1 The water now supplied by pipes from the Ngeli I hill was condemned by Your Highness when here;
but the unpleasant taste then experienced was probably due to the water having stood ail night in the pipes. If allowed to run for a little and then taken , that taste disappears. An analysis of the water has proved it to be good, the peculiar taste being due to ? tiie presence of iron.
I The real complaint about the water is that in the afternoon it is quite warm, alike unpleasant for batb- ing and drinking. Laying the pipes deeper in the ? ground would probably preclude tne heating of it by the sun.
Yonr Highness then expressed a wish to see the site of the new hospital. As to whether it has met with approval or not I cannot say as no orders have been conveyed to me yet.
After this the return was made to the Zahora \ which left at 9 oclock taking Mr. Naysmith and myself to Kuching at the kind request of Your Highness,
On the 10th instant. 3 Land Dyaks from Slabi ascending the river .near Gedong at night ran into a pangareh which, of course, from the nature of the j erection can hold no lights, and were capsized and 1 with difficulty managed to right their boat again: $12. I a gun. all their rice pots and pans etc. floated away or sunk. As the natives do a considerable part of their travelling in this river by night owing to the necessity of taking advantage of the tides, these pangareh are a source of great danger to the community, and ? moreover, cannot afford a living to those who own them up-river here, and may in fact be looked upon as a luxury. However, being under the impression that the staking of pangareh was an old custom or privilege I hesitated prohibiting their use until the opinions of the Chiefs and Tuahs were known. Since then I have seen -all the Chiefs and Tuahs who one and all expressed themselves as being strongly in favour of the prohibilibn being put in force from ami above Sungei Antu. This has therefore been done.
On Sunday 13th instant, a wharf cooly and two Chinese, the one hailing from Lingga and the other ? Sebangan, all Hokiens. absconded. Their capture I might have been effected if the Policeman told off to go in pursuit of them had obeyed orders; but seeing a schooner just about to leave the wharf he thought he would have an easy trip to Kuching instead of having to paddle a small boat and deli- lierataly delayed although the mutter was urgent.
Two Saribas Dyaks, Sidiek and Bau of Bating Layer, anem-biak of T. R. Bailing, were arrested by Orang Kaya Daha and brought down to me as being suspicious characters. Whilst on remand they managed to escape but were recaught and sent to Kuching for trial.
Colliery.- - Coal out-put is not all one could wish the Manager says, but Nos 8 and 9 mines are doing well.
Balance from June	468.14 tons.
Coal received at wharf in July 1,613.13	Balance in sheds at end of July 589.16 ,,
P. GORDON WHITE, Officer in Charge.
Baram.
July.
At the beginning of the month I was on my way up-river making arrangements for the working of antimony at Long Plutan, about which subject I have already written to Yonr Highness at greater length under another cover. The prospects appear to be fairly favourable, though one cannot say for
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 4, 1907.	215
'certain at present whether there is a sufficiently .large quantity of antimony to make it a remunerative work.
I left the antimony works on the 7th and reached Claudetown on the 9th spending one night at Long Manyin with Laid Bacang the Kayan Penghulu, who paid in some fines and discussed various matters of importance.
1 am glad to say that this chief though an old man has completely recovered from his recent severe illness. All the Kayans are hard at work farming at present.
Whilst up-river I heard a report concerning a Long Sibatu Kenyah by name Ludan, who died in December of last year in the Silat.
His death, which wras said to be due to his falling on a log of wood, was reported to the Resident Mr. Douglas on his visit to the Silat and as there were some suspicions of foul play Mr. Douglas was about to investigate the case, when the man suspected, one by name Lusat Atok a Leppa Aga, died the very night of his arrival, so further,enquiry was useless. However, the new report is that Ludan was killed not by falling on a log but by a gun fired by Lusat Atok at the commands of two other men. I have accordingly sent a trustworthy man to enquire into the matter and will inform Your Highness of the result of his enquiries.
Ou the 12th Tama Aping Billing, the Penghulu of the Upper Tinjar, arrived and paid in tax and tines.
Tama Aping states that the report that the Uma Lims were likely to cause trouble to anybody visiting the interior between the Flu Baram and the Bailing Kayan is false, but that it is the Uma Lanins living beyond the Batnug Kayan who are so hostile. 1 have therefore decided not to interfere with Sawa Kulleh's projected visit to the Nibun country.
Sawa Kulleh is a Kenyah chief living in the Lower Baram and is going to visit his relatives with a party ?of about 25 men.
On the 2lst I started on a visit to. the coast Stations. accompanied by the Orang Kaya Stia Rajab. Arriving off Miri on the 22nd. I went ashore and settled up everything the same day, there being very- few cases. The grounds round the bungalow were in first rate order and a credit to the Policeman who is stationed there.
On the 23rd we got into Sibuti and found a number of cases awaiting settlement, the most important one being a charge brought against a Kadayan by name Banga by the other Sibuti Kadayans for causing them annoyance by his magic and spells. I sentenced him to six months imprisonment and ?ordered him to return to Brunei on the expiration of his sentence, as he is a thoroughly bad character, having already been warned by' Dr. Hose when Resident of Baram and also expelled from Bintulu by a former Resident of that District.
I left for Niah on the 25th and found a few eases of no special note in Police and Debt Court. The new Tua Kampong Bujang bin Anchi appears to get on very well with the Niah people.
I returned to Claudetown on the 29th having stopped at Baram mouth to capture a bull for the herd up-river.
Court.There have been u fair number of cases in the Police Court during the month, mostly concerned with brawling in the bazaar which have all been severely dealt with.
P. IK. D.The prisoners have been working on the new road.
The coolies have been clearing and extending the cattle field and also mowing the roads.
Nanai. The s. 1. La Fee has made several trips during the month earning $141.25 (one hundred and forty one dollars and twenty-five cents.)
The p. s. Kaka made two trips to this station, on the 12th and 27th respectively.
The month has been a very dry one the rainfall being only 217 inches.
I have nothing further of importance to report to Your Highness.
T. S. KING, Assistant Resident.
MATANG ESTATE.
July.
During the month weeding, cleaning coffee, and gathering coffee and tea have been the general work.
A few coolies have been also employed in repairing roads throughout the Estate.
Weeding contracts are in good order.
Crops gathered during the mouth were 25$ piculs parchment coffee and 334 lbs. cured tea.
Mr. Greve paid the coolies' wages for June on the 5th instant.
J. M. GOMEZ,
'Manager.
Muka.
July.
General. Dawi. Tua Kampong of Lower Tillian, having died at the end of June a meeting of the principal people of that Kampong was held in Court on the 3rd, when a man named Abdiilhnmit. whose father preceded Dawi as Tua. was elected by them as his successor.
On the 12th Abg. Hj. Azhari, 1st Native Officer returned from Kuching where he had been on leave.
I went over to Oya once during the month, arriving there on the morning of the 21st and n iurning here at midday on the 24th.
P. C. Alohamat started up river on the 30th. He has gone to collect Dyuk door tux.
Court.There has been more work during tlie month in Police Court and less in Debt Court than is usual.
The cases heard have lieen almost exclusively the usual land or inheritance disputes, but there was one serious assault case, which has already been reported to Your Highness, in which the younger brother and the son. respectively named Hj. Taha and Hj. Yahya, of the late (). K. Setia Raja are implicated. Fines and fees totalled $313.20.
P. IF. D. The prisoners have cleared a track from the far end of the present cattle ground to Snqgei Ienakob Kubu. The old fencing will be pulled down on that side and put up along this track, thus taking all the old padi gardens, and a considerable tract of fresh pasture, into the Government cuttle ground. The prisoners and Fortmen have cleared these padi gardens ready for the fence to be opened up.
A track for a new road has also been made by the prison gang. It is to run through the large ?padang'* behind the back bazaar to a well in the jungle near Sungei Penakob Kubu. and will open up u large tract of good land for both Chinese and native gardens besides leading to 2 wells which should yield a sufficient water supply for the bazaar and Kampong Boyan in the hot weather.
The Kampong people are now making this rood, and already several plots have been marked out for gardens by natives and Chinese. As the road and bridges in Aw. Udin's Kampong need repairs, he has called out the people there to do what is necessary.
Trade - Twenty schooners entered the river during July, and 21 cleared (or Kuching. The s. s. Sarawak also made one trip here. The export
216
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 4, 1907.
of raw sago was 487 coyans and of jelutong gutta 260 piculs. In July 1906, 379, and in July 1905, 256 coyans of raw sago were exported. However,' the jelutong gutta exported in July of last year was 560 piculs, and in the same month of 1905, 925 piculs.
I have nothing further to report to Your Highness on this occasion.
A. E. LAWRENCE,
Resident 2nd Clans.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
THE Subscription to the Sarawak Gazette is as follows.
Payable in local currency
Single number ...	...	... $0.10
Subscription for 1 year	...	... 1.00
Do including postage to Outstation ...1 Do	do	to Singapore ... : 1.50
Do	do	to England	... I
Payable in Sterling
For 1 year (including postage to places
in tile Postal Union) ... 8s. 6d.
All subscription payable in
advance.
Yearly subscriptions are renewable on the 1st January.
Subscriptions will nett be renewed unless due notice is given. All broken periods will be considered as full.
Subscribers are requested to notify changes of address to the Editor in writing.
For the convenience of those unable to send cheques, Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of sums not over 1.50but only the 2 and 4 cent values will lie accepted.
Foreign subscriliers to the Sarawak Gazette are requested to send remittances by Post Office Order" not by Postal Order " as the latter cannot be cashed in Sarawak.
F. G. DAY.
Notice.
Astana Farm Produce.
Terms Monthly.
W ILL be supplied to customers at the followingrates :
Milkper quart bottle	..	... 10 cents
Butterper ft ...	...	...SO Eggseach ...	...	... 1J Orders, which should be addressed to the undersigned, attended to without delav.
.1. STAPLES,
Notice.
THE W ELL k\nw\
Singer and Wheeler & Wilson Sewing Machines can be purchased on easy terms. All we ask is 5 dollars down and 3 dollars per month.
A liberal discount allowed for Cash.
Apply to
TAN BOON SLEW,
Agent,
SINGER SEWING MACHINE CO.,
C/o SYN HIN LEONG A Co
Kuching, Sarawak.
28th March, 1907.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
RATZS 0? A5VERTISESSSTS IK THE "SARAWAK GAZETTE'
Payable in entrance.
Advertisement of 12 lines and under
First insertion ....
Second and third insertion each
Subsequent do	do
Advertisement of half n Column and under
First insertion
Second and third insertion each
Subsequent do	do
Advertisement of a Column and under
First insertion each
Second mid third insertion each
Subsequent do	do
Special arrangements may be made for
tisements.
ALMANAC.
september, 19O7.
All communications intended for insertion
in the * trfc (Juiftte must be directed
to the Editor at the Government Printing
Office, Kuching, and sent so as to reach the
Office by the 26th of the month at latest or
their publication will have to be deferred
until the next issue.
Letters and other contributions must be authenticated by writers name sent privately to the Editor.
We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not inserting them.
Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early intelligence of all matters of general interest in their respective neighbourhoods.
Notice-
/ ENTLEMEN arc requested to pay all Gazette sub- ' scriptions mid Printing Office Bills to the undersigned in future.
( hi*
St. Gilo.
Jewish New Year (JCfiHi com-
En-
glish.
Mo-1
MOONS PHASES, ETC.
Hth Newnuxm* 15th First quarter 2nd Full uioou Cl 29th Last quarter standing adv
28! 21
30
113
M
Muda H*sin finally deposed, 1841.
H. H. THE RAJAH MUDAS B DAY.
s
M 30
W
Th
23
24
25
26
Tu
W
Th
I St. Matthew
xvU. Sun. iilicr Trinity
28
29
W 18
Th 19
F 20
8 21
S i -2 2
High
water at
Kuching.
h. m. h. m.
11 17
1 12
2 31
3 35
ll 49
0 28
1 54
5 37
6 7
6 40
7 15
7 52
8 25
9 51
4 44
5 21
5 52
6 23
6 57
7 34
8 9
8 43
9 27
10 8
10 5011 24
0 52
2 22
0 5
1 39
3 2
17.
18 ,
19-
20
21
22.
4 30
5 15
5 56
6 35
7 13
7 49
5 35
6 16
6 54
7 31
8 7
xviii. Suu. after Trinity 9 42
10	32
8 23 8 41
8 59 9 20
10 4
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 4, 1907.
2:7
Kuching, Foreign Trade Returns For the month of July, 1907.
I M PORTS.(Continued.)
IMPORTS.
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
Brought forward
Salt ...
Silverware
Soap ...
Stationery and Books
Straw huts (Chinese)
Straw Shoes (Chinesei
Sugar
Sundries
Ten in Bundles ...	...
Tea in Tins
Timber
Twine and Thread
Tobaccos
in tins Cigars A Cigarettes
Chinese
P'biuig Java A Srobok etc.
Bad or Pepper
Treasure	...	...I
Trepang Tuba ...
Vegetables
Fresh
Salted
In tins
Wines and spirits Zinc ...
TOTAL VALUE
Brought forward
Total Value to Date
1906
piculs	1,781
piculs	1.567
boxes	146
cases	111	i
piculs	136
piculs	951 I
piculs	2
$289,141 2,280 309 1,046
560
79 9,851 1,812 1,531
268 2,779 4.836
9,767
?	5.541
8.612 2.670
65,654 60 792
1.007 2,880 41
12.668 1.450 $425,858 2.272,565
2,697,923 $2.622.653
Aerated Water ... Ammunition
Arrack. etc. ... ...
Biscuits Blachan Blankets Beads...
Brass A Copper-ware
Boots A Shoes ...
Butter A Cheese...
Candles Canvas ?Cement
Clocks and Watches Cloth
Cotton Silk
Clothing
Cotton Silk
Coke ...
Cocoimuts Coffee
Liberian etc....
Tn tins
Coprah
?Corrugated Iron ...
CottonSeed
Crockery & Glass-ware
Curry Stuffs A Sauce etc.
Damar
Drags and Chemicals
Eggs (salted Ex l ortK Returned to Shippers Fire-arms
Fire-works Fish
Dried
Salted In tins Flour ... Fruit Fresh Dried In tins Furniture Ghee ...
?Gold ...
Grains
Beans and peas Fadi ...
Rice
Other Sorts ...
-Gunnies new Do old
Hams nod Bacons
Hats ...
Iron-ware	...	...
Japanese Curios ...
Jar ...
Jewellery
Joss Sticks and Papers Kerosine Oil Lard ..
Lamps
Leather
Live stock
Poultry
Swine
Machinery Mats...	...	...
Matches
Maccaroni A Vermicelli Milk Condensed ...
Oils ...
Opium raw
Paint, Varnish A Tar
Papers
Provisions Sundry Prawns Refuse ... Rickshaws Rope
Coir Wire
Carryforward ...
cases	250
pienls	14
:::
casks	084
tons	5
No.	18,950
piculs	26
piculs	301
Xn.	1
:::
pienls	110
piculs	48
bags	1.718
piculs	10
os.	80
piculs	528
piculs	1,125
piculs	14.899
piculs	1,156
bales	138
bundles	63
No.	1
eases	3,584
piculs	128
pienls	9
No.	172
heads	107
cases	98
cases	301
pienls	461
chests	10
pienls	1,407
coils	98
coils	2
3
2,585
116
2,944
4,726
134 110
290 473
188 287
621
850
4,508
24
56,667
1.832
15.698
45 126 608
615
198
2.649
74 1,506 5,684 1.551
299
5,618
284
20 50
630
2.876
490
767
3.418
1,024 1,588
349
846
1,000
3,619
1.841
66,920
2,248
18,282
886 333
756
11,459
110
4
1,000
3.074
11.182
2,603 1,064
510
283 , 2,140 6,260 1,168 2,048
962
2,576
8,336
10,000
1,826
1,676 1,759 4,464
265
1,194
282
EXPORTS.
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
] Antimony
? Ant-eater-skins ...
Betel-nuts	...	...
Hees-wax Birds-nests
! Blachan
, Brass-wore
Camphor
Charcoal
1. Cloth ...
[ Coprah	...	...
Crockcry-ware ...
1 Cutch
Damar	...	...
Eggs (Turtle) Empties
Fish ...
Gambier	...
Garru-wood Gold ...
1 Gntta jangkar ...
do Jclotong ...
1	do percha ...	I
i Hides	...	...,
Imports Returned to Shippers India Rubber	...
?	Iron-ware	...
.	Jar ...	...	...
1	Kajangs	...
Kerosine Oil
;	Matches	...	...
Mats ...
N. H. Specimens
Oils ...	...	..J
Pearl Sago	...	...
Pepper (white?	...
Do (blacki	...
Prawns (dried)	...	...
Rattans No. 1 sega etc.
Rattans No. 2 temoi etc. ... Rice ...
Sago flour	...	...
Sult ...
Sugar...
Sugar nipa
Sundries	...	...'
Tea (Matang)	...	...!
Timber	...	...
Carry forward ... tons	947
picul	pienls	934
pienls	1)
piculs	2
picul	38)
cutties	4J
piculs	268	j
pienls	498
1 piculs	315
, piculs	307
No.	78.000
pienls	2621
pienls	1,831)
piculs	42)
ozs.	5.270
pienls	400 pienls	9,814)
piculs	120)
( pienls	29
pienls	458)
1
cases	101
cases	10.1
piculs	5
pienls	17)
pienls	8,491)
piculs	1,918.)
pienls	1)
pienls1	2.270)
piculs	2,678)
piculs	240)
pienls	37,379)
pienls	15
piculs	2)
pienls	37
boxes 16
10.057
10 4.296
56 737 ?240
70 217 224 292
4,560 608
1.534
3.472 507
2,104 4,409 10,623
47 118,400 52110 49,072 18.007
725 4.156 55,980
628
4
49 802 225 764
9.86 103
29 214,409 26,861
28 22,701 7,566 1.205
1 Oil,315 24 17
188 4.419
550 726
$289,141
$675-602
218
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 4, 1907,
EXPORTS(Con tin wed.)
Articles.
Quantity.
Value., '
Brought forward
5675.602
Tauber (manufactured!
52
Tobacco
Java
picul	,o
Treasure
8.000
Zinc	...
1	TOTAL VALUE
$688,705
Brought forward
8.010,878
Total Value to Date
3,604,083
1
1906
3,550,590
1
KwliiiE, M WB Retos for Ite month of July, 1907-
IMPORTS.
Articles.
Quantity.
VI	1
value.
Coal
tons	1,408
5	1
11,257
Damar
piculs	472
2,619
Gutta Jaugkar ...
piculs	4971
6.077
Gutta Jelotong ...
piculs	9,036
89.283
Gutta Porclm
piculs	66-j
6.679
India Rubber ...	' ...
piculs	396J
36.980
Prawns Refuse piculs	;I6
92
Pepper (white) ...
piculs	4564
10,951
do (black!
piculs	224 8.254
Rattans No. 1 sega etc.
piculs	1,538
11,748
Do No. 2 temoi etc.
piculs	2.0901
4,561
Rice ...	...
piculs	294
1.227
Sago flour
piculs 2.397 i
6,087
Do raw	tpins 133.540
66,770
Sundries
11.619
Treasure
11.777
TOTAL VALUE
5230,881
Brought forward
1.095399
Total Value to Date ...
...
_ 1.326.280
1906
1.1 1.379
EXPORTS.
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
I
Brass-ware
850
Iron-ware
1,130
JiH'H ...	...	,..
No.	127
915
Oil Kerosine
cases	1,524	!
4,025
Opium
5.490
Bice ...
piculs	2.214
11.084
Sundries	...	...
87,635
Treasure
26,544
TOTAL VALUE
5187,678
Brought forward
704,923
Total Value to Date ...
842.596
1906	...
5827,990
C. V. ROBISON.
Hegietrar of Trade.
ARRIVALS.
PER S. B. Kuching:From Singapore, 1st August. Mr. O. F. Ricketts.
PKU a. S. Alice Lor..tineFrom Sibn. ria Lingga, 2nd August. 1he Right Revd. Bishop Hose. Revd mid Mrs. Dexter Allen. Miss Victoria Hall and Revd. Father Keizer.
PER H. H. S. Zahora:From Mntang. 3rd August, H. H.The Rajah and H. H. The Rajah Muda.
PKU S. S. Hajah of Sarawak:From Singapore, Sth August, Mr. Fraser.
Uy boat Iron: Lnndn, 12th August, Mr. E. Parnell.
PER p. s. Kaka : From Limbang and Brooketon, 14th August,. Mr. and Miss Hogg, and The Revd. A. Mulder.
PER H. s. Kuching:From Singapore, 15th August, the Revd. Father Hoyden.
PKR S. S. Alice Lorraine;From Sibn. 16th August, the Honble Dr. and Mrs. Hose and child
PER p. s. Kaka: From Sudong. 17th August, Mr. E. R. Naysmith.
PER p. s. Adeh	From Ba ram, 22nd August, Mr. E. Parnell.
PER S. S. KuchingFrom Singapore. 29th August, Mr. Tomlinson, Capt. Harrison. Messrs, Hughes and Cropley.
DEPARTURES.
PER s. a. Kuching: For Singapore, 6th August, Messrs. A. S. Hitchcock, E. 11. Williams and Mrs. Waddell.
1ER s. s. Alice Lorraine:For Sibn. vid Kalaka. 6th August, Messrs. D. .1. S. Bailey. H. S. B. Johnson. A. J. Cutfield. F. A. W. Page-Turner and Revd. A. Hopfgartner.
PER H H. S. ZiJioro: For Singapore, 8th August. His Highness The Rajah and Mr. C. S. Pearse.
PER p. s Kaka : For Limbang. 8th August. Messrs. O. F. Ricketts, A. B. Ward and Revd. A. Keizer..
PER p. s. Adch: -For Lnndn, 10th August. Mr. E. Parnell.
PKR S. S. Sarawak:For Tntau. 11th August, Messrs. Pope and Johnston.
PER s. s. Hajah of Sarawak:For Singapore, 13th August, Mr. Fraser.
PERp. s. Adch : For Baraui, 13th August, Mr. E. Parnell.
PER S. S. KuchingFor Singapore, 20th August. Dr. and Mrs. Hose and cnild.
PER p S. Kaka : For Sadong, Lingga and Sibn, 22nd August, the Revd. and Mrs Dexter Allen and Miss Hall for Lingga. Mr. and Mr . Naysmith and Mr 11. Hogg for Sadong.
PER S. s. Hajah of Sarawak:For Sin gat Min-, 27 th August. Mr.. W. H. Geikie.
8HIPPI3F
Arrivals.
a VESSEL'S NAME.
F1.AU.
A.SP BIG.
CAPTAINS OR I NACO DAS.
FROM.
1
Kuching
Sar. str.
908
Waddell
Singapore
1
Sarawak
46 Hj. Mat
Muka
8
Alice Lorraine
140
Jara-ec
Sibn
A
Kim Chin Tech
sch.
51
Hj Assim
Matu
Soon Seng IFaff
71
A. Yam an
Sadong
5
Kaka
str.
222
Bandong
Baram
8
Adch
189
Jr mail
Singapore
8
Hajah of Sarawak
892
Moxon
8
Sarawak
46
Hj. Mat
Bintulu
10
T. K. Hata A rang
sell*
64
Allan
Sadong
12
Swec Hong Ann
68
Hj. Amin
12
Ad eh
TS str.
189
Jeman
Lundu
14
Kaka
222
Bandong
Limbang
14
Kim Watt Ann
, sells
67
Htmen
Muka
14
Kim Chin Siang
54
Daud
14
Sri Pcmbrian
79
Abg. Sap-oi
Sadong
14
Soon Seng Huff
71
A. Yaiimu
15
Kian Mon
Z 66
Seman
Oyii
15
Kim Seng Guan
78
Sait
Main
15
Kim Chin Soon
59
Hi. Sa-at
Muka
15
Kuching
,', str.
(03- Waddell
Singapore
16
Alice Lorraine
140
Jara- *e
Sibn
IC,
I'atahorruhnian
? BCIK
101
Hj. Husin
Oya
16
Sin Sian Ann
50
Gani
17
Kaka
str.
222
Bandong
Sadong
19
Sarawak
sch.
46
Hj. Mat
Oya
IB
Swre Hong .4)1)1
68
Hj, Amin
Sadong
21
T. K. Batu Araug
64
Allan
?
Kim Chiu Tech
51
Hj. Assim
Muka-
22
Hajah of Sarawak
str.
892
Moxon
Singapore
22
Adch
189
Jeman
Buriun
24
Af. N, Sri Jempaka
sch.
78
Tkn. Hassan
Daro
21
Soon Seng B'uff
71
A. Vaman
Sudong
26
Sarawak
., str-
46
Hj. Mal
Oya
27
Putri Dungun
sch.
5*2
Deli
Daro
28
Sri Pembrian
..
79
Abg. Sap*ei
Sadong
29
Kaka
str.
222
Baudong
Sibu
30
Kuching
..
903
Waddell
Singiqxire
220
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 4, 1907.
METEOROLOGICAL READINGS.
KUCHING OMSMLVATOBY.
Observations Taken Daily at 8 a. m. August, 1907.
TEMPERATURE.
1
I
I
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
3005 3008 3010 30.05
30 04
30 03
30 04 29-98 29-96
30 02 3002 3005
30 03 30-01
30 01
30 07 3005 30-06
30 01
30 06 3007
30 00 30 00 29-98
30 05 3004
30 05
30 05 3004
30 00 30-05
89-6 89-7 901 89-4 89-7 89-5 90-7 91-5 91-4 91-5 91-4 91.5 90-3 88-2 885
89-8 91-2 91-1 91-4 90 4 89-5 87-6 90-4 890 90-6 899 91-6 91-4 91-6 88.2
88-3
720 72'3 721 71-9 73'3 72-9 71-5 70.0 724 71'3 721 74-9 744 71-8 71-9 72-1 73-8 71-9 721 718 731 691 72-8 73 4 74-6 72-1 721 694 71-4 71'4 69'9
780 74-9 74.9 79-3 78'3 78-4 77-6 763 77-3 80-3 803 77-6 79-6 781 75-1
751 757 82-4 78-3 806 76-3 76-9 74-8 79-7 811 781 75'6 78-3 76-5 73-3 76-3
75-7 73-2 73-8
75-4 76-0 75-9 74-8 73-6
740 76-1 74-9
75 1
77 0 762
737 73-3
740 77-8 75-9 759
731 733 72-3 76-2 76-6 76-4 73-6 74-8
740 724 73-8
71-4 72-0 71-4 71-6 729 72-3
707 69.0 71-3 69-7 71-4
74 3 73'8
71 4 711 71-6
721 71 -4 717 706 71-8 68-6 72-5 73-0 74-3 70-3 701 69-5 72-5
711 69-3
1490
152-
1450
144-
142-4
1-5.5- 146-6 146-8 146-4 146.8 150 6
155*6 154-2 1463
146 1 151-2
1498 148-4
1463 I486
1440 142-6 145'8
15 9 0
156-4 1430
1494 1530 144-4 150-4
Fine Dull do
Fine do do do do ' do do do do do
Dull do do do
Fine do do do do do do do do
Dull
Fine
do
do
do
bra. min.
4-30
510
640
730
850
7-20
7.40
9 40
8-10
8-30
7 30
5-50
5'40
240
2-40 510 6-40 5'30 530
7 00 510 3-30 7-40 4-50 600 7-20 5-40 5-40 2-30 600 5'50
01
2-02
61
95
02
02
11
41
15
01
1-20
13
2-38
73
65
10
Highest recorded temperature 91-6 "F.
Lowest 69-1 *F.
Total rainfall during the month 9.50 inches.
Height of observatory above sea level 100 feet approximately.
KVCHINO Printed and Published by GHIN HEMO SOON. Government Printer, at the Sarawak ra*sle O.hce.
Nos. 20. and 21, Court House Road.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 4, 1907.
219
a J.
to
j.ir sHLhi
Oil shJhsi
: J
'	* S
r I a. rif I u 9 s s BP-S - - 2 s w e 2
ifl JI Jo o-JIa
JLllld'Mih
3 .A.A- a jfH ,-**? 5 3
SOI 3I ppPS 1 g P
Eb- s - X ;h z- s -5$ :-
1 I *
; i00
?II
; . .SS. SBC.SU ll
5, ooWssacoo M os ao-*: '
Arrivals.
DATE.	NAME OF VESSEL.
I NAME OF CAPTAIN.
WHERE FROM.
CHINESE.
NATIVES- OF INDIA- Male. FCIMI
OTHER ASIATICS. Mult. Fnuilr
TOTAL.
Male. J
1 r i t
1907. '
j
1	Juyl 4 S. S. Kuching
J W. Waddell
Singapore
92
1
9 ...
9 ...
Ill
8 Boat
... Amat B.unpeh
iPnnnmgk.it
2
6
..
. 8
10 ; Boat
.. Usar
P. Pjoug
I
1	...
4 i
5
11 S. S. Ra/ah of Sarawak
...IE. T. Moxon
. Singapore
55 i
? 3
: 2 ...
7 ...
67
11 P. S. Adch
... Jeman
Brooketon
1 10
1
4	1
9 ...
25
11 1 Boat
... nj. tsop
Pamangkat
1 ....
1
12 Boat
...I Chua Check Hec
?Vkawang
"a
2
18 S. S. Kuching
...1 W. Waddell
Singapore
123
6
3 ."
13
145
..	19 Boat
... Lai Ixjong Hin
i Sunbas
6
1
7
.,	21 P. S. Adeh
... Jeman
Brooketon
4
1
4 "i
9
22 Boat
... Chin Loong
Pontianak
1
1
24 Boat
... Tan Seng
8'kawang
1
1
25 S. S. Rajah of Sarawak
...[ E. T. Moxon
Singapor
210
1
5 ...
6 i
223
1 29 Boat
... Bnjang
Panvingkat
2 ...
2
1 506
20
23	1
55	2
607
Departures.
DATE.
NAME OF VESSEL.
NAME OF CAPTAIN.
WHITHER BOUND.
CHINESE.
NATIVES OF INDIA. Mutt. Ftmult.
OTHER ASIATICS. Mult. Ftnalt.
TOTAL.
Uult. 1
rrmalr.
1907.
July 2
S. S. Rajah of Sarawak
E. T. Moxon
Singapore
46
1 ...
13	7
67
4
P. S. Adeh
Jeman
Brooketon
2
'
1 ...
3
..	9
S. 8. Kuching	...
W. Waddell
Singapore
92
4 ...
9	2
111
13
Bdg. Tongkang	..J
nj. Mohamed
Sambas
2	1
3
..	15
P. S. Adeh
Jeman
Brooketon
7 ...
7
16
S. S. Rajah of Sarawak
E. T. Moxon
Singapore
102
4
5 ....
9 ...
120-
..	20
Jk: Keng Guan Seng
Lira Say Meng
Hainan
14
1
15
20
Pinnace
Hj. .-Uli
PuloSubi
i
1
20
Bdg. Tongkang
Amat Bampeh
Pamangkat
5
4
7	2
18
22
Bandong
Chua Cheok Hee
S'kawang
4
4
22
Tongkang
Hj. Usop
Sambas
2
2
23
S. S. Kuching
W. Waddell
Singapore
63
i
2 ...
5 ...
71
..	27
Bandong
Chin Loong
Pamangkat
4
2
6
27
Tongkang
Lai Leong Hin
Pamangkat
4	1
5
29
Bandung
I tarn
Pontianak
2 ...
31
Rajah of Sarawak
E. T. Moxon
Singapore
37
2.
i ...
5	3
48
369
18
13 ...
67 16
183
C. C. ROBISON.
