
VOL. XXXVII.
No. 50L
Price	. THURSDAY, OCTOBER 3, 1907.	Scents.
CONTENTS.
?
ORDERS:Police PensionsBegging for dins.
NOTIFICATIONS:I ti stir mice on PiucelsAlterations in Postal ' ratesInsured parcels to China, etc.
NOTICES : Bankrupt Estate (Ban)Probate Court (Lundul Bankruptcy Court, KuchingMissing Land Grant No. 128 of 10th October 1889Cnclaiiued Court Deposits (Kuching)Bankruptcy Court. SimanggungSale of House ! in Kg. Snngei Bodil Besar.
RETIREMENTSUPREME COUNCIL REPORT ON MATANO WATER WORKSPRIZE DAY AT S. P. G. MISSION SCHOOLS. P. G. MISSION SPORTS	SPAMPANIS CIRCUS IN KUCHING	ST.
MICHAELS CATHOLIC CLUBMONTHLY NOTES.
MONTHLY REPORTS :I A wasBintnluLimbang Paku- BintuluMukaKapit BaramMatang EstateOya Sinianggang.
ADVERTISEMEHTS-TRADE RETURNSPASSENGERSSHIPPING ALMANACMRTEOROLOGK AL REA DI NGS.
SARAWAK GAZETTE
THURSDAY, OCTOBER J, 1907.
ETHERIDGE-Ro WNK.OD August 14th, at St. Colan Church (Cornwall) by the Rev. C. J. L. J.avauchy, Vicar. HERBERT OSBOURNE SAGGAR ETHERIDGE, late of the Public Works Department, Kuching, Sarawak, to Louis.t MART only daughter of H. J. Rowse of Carworgie. St. Colurnb, Cornwall.
those who have served their full time for pen-
sion will have to retire should they receive
their pension.
The question of commuting or not will remain
with the Treasurer. If they remain physically
fit for work, they need not receive their pen-
sion till the Government requires them to do
so and then they will retire for good.
Under my hand and Seal] C. BROOKE,
this 13th day of July, 1907. i	Rajah.
Order.
No. VII, 1907.
I hereby direct that after this date nfr Malays, Arabs and other strangers from Singapore will be allowed to beg for alms in the Kampongs, except with special permission from the Government. Anyone in future acting contrary to this order will be liable to a heavy fine.
C. V. BROOKE,
Rajah Muda. Kuching, Sarawak,
17th August, 1907.
Notice to Subscriber*.
THE Editor begs to remind Subscribers that private subscriptions will not be renewed for the coming year unless notice of renewal is given.
Order.
No. VI, 1907.
IN regard to a discrepancy which has been followed without orders in the Police Regulations of pay, I now set the matter right by informing the Inspector and his successors that
ii.U) Poll
A-Jyj '*s t\yy yi t\yy (
gJuS A-iyJ	yl AJXc .1 oy 'JJlJ	CAAJIJ j_aJy	IAL J LAU,
(jJiu y yi
paly.	1 J Ajsly A-iyJ	ill J
* 1JI
C. V. BROOKE, Rajah Muda.
1907.	a.ty	1 ? Jpjly
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 3, 1907.
Notice.
No. XXIX. 1907.
lie Koh Kia Lim. Chop Keng Hap Kee, (A bsconded.) Trader in Shak Loong Mun.
All creditors and other persons having any claim whatsoever against the Estate of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned within three months from date, after which date the assets of the above named wiil be divided amongst the parties entitled thereto regard being had only to those claims of which notice shall have been given. And all monies owing to the above Estate shall be paid to the undersigned forthwith.
E. R. STILWELL, Resident Upper Sarawak, Ban.
Bau.	*
24th July, 1907.
Notification.
No. XXXII, 1907.
FROM 1st August the limit of insurance for
parcels sent to the United Kingdom or rid the
United Kingdom to the undermentioned coun-
tries is raised to 4'400.
Antigna	Cameroon*
Austria Hungary Denmark
I Bahamas! Nawum Dominica
Belgium	Egypt
Bermuda	Faroe Islands
Bosnia Herzegovina Gambia
British Guiana Germany
British Somaliland Iceland
Malta
Mauritius
Montserrat
New Zealand
Russia' St. Kitt*
Sierra Leone
Sucdun
Togo land
Trinidad
Zanzibar
For Parcels to the United Kingdom the
Rate will be 30 cents for the first 12 of in-
sured value and 10 cents for each additional
12 or fraction thereof. Rates for other
countries will remain as quoted on page 15 of
the Postal Guide.
C. C. ROBISON, Postmaster General.
Kuching. Sarawak,
31st July, 1907.
Notice.
No. XXXIII, 1907.
Re Thomas Hugh of Lupdu, late Government Clerk at Lingga, (Deceased).
ALL creditors and other persons having any claim whatsoever against the Estate of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned on or before the 30th November 1907, after which date the assets of the above named will be divided amongst the parties entitled thereto regard being had only to those claims of which notice shall have been given. And all monies owing to the above Estate shall be paid to the undersigned forthwith.
F. F. BOULT,
Assistant Resident.
Probate Court,
Lundu, 15th August, 1907.
Notice-
No. XXXIV, 1907.
IN THE BANKRUPTCY COURT. KUCHING.
In the goods of Yeo Ann Hok, pepper planter of 5 mile. (.4 bsconded.)
In the goods of Bong Tai Hin, pepper planter of Segobang. (A bsconded.)
In the goods of Pang Seng, pepper planter of Tabuan. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Jee On, pepper planter of Segobang. (Absconded. )
In the goods of Pang Piow, pepper planter of S. Loba. (Abs- conded.)
IL the goods of Lim Soo Liew, pepper planter of Segobang. (A bsconded.)
In the goods of Koh Chun Kim. (A bsconded.)
In the goods of Sim Chwee Thiam, pepper planter of Pa- ku. chop I Jong Hob (Absconded.)
In the goods of Chin Hiong and Tian Chon, pepper planters of Tanjong Durian. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Ng Bun (Absconded) and Yong Soo Pee, (deceased) pepper planters of Jernang.
In the goods of Pang Mook Kim. pepper planter of S. Loba. (A bsconded.)
In the goods of Lui Siew and Bong Chiam. pepper planters of S. Tengah. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Bong Seoug, pepper planter of Taku, chop Chioong Shin. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Aug Pin. pepper planter of Lobok Itoya. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Bun Tow, pepper planter of Sim ungo. (Absconded.)
ALL creditors and others persons having any claim whatsoever against the Estates of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned on or before the 26th October, 1907. after which date the assets of the above named will be divided amongst the parties entitled thereto regard being had only to those claims of which notice shall have been given. And all monies owing to the above Estates shall be paid to the undersigned forthwith.
JOHN E. A. LEWIS,
Resident 2nd (lass.
Kuching,
August 28th, 1907,
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 3, 1907.
223
Notice.
No. XXXV, 1907.
NOTICE is hereby given that a title deed to I land at S. Moyan, Grant No. 128 of 10th [ October 1889 which was issued to Ee Han ? Swee is missing. The land consisted of 19 ? acres 3 r. 36 p. and was at one time under gambier and pepper. By the will of Ee Hap Swee his pepper and gambier gardens at S. Moyan were bequeathed to the late Ee Tek Guan and the gardens were by him separately transferred without any title to the land.
The said title. No. 128 of 10th October 1889 will be cancelled if not produced and the present ownership proved at the Land Office on or before the 31st December 1907.
M. G BRADFORD.
Officer in Charge Municipal Branch P. IF. 1). Kuching.
30th August. 1907.
Notice.
No. XXXVI, 1907.
THE following sums in deposit in the Office of the Court will be paid into the Government Revenue if not claimed by the persons entitled thereto on or before the 23rd day of November 1907.
Ah Sah	Est.	Chuan Ek	$10.00
Ah Hoh	Est.	Lai Kei-	2.37
Ana Sheh Mahomad (Spore)	Est. T. Kanisah	.64
Ana Ismail Sah	(	)	..	-49
Ahmatsah	..	,,	.41
Alidulrahman
(Spore)
Est.T. Medin Pechay
36.62
Ah Lan
3.65
Ah Pen
7.53
Bun Tet
Est. Jong Niok Lee
4.80
Boon Joon
Bong Koon Sin
2.00
Baboo Marican
Est. T. Kanisah
4.90
Bana Saiboo
Est. T. Medin Pechay
30.20
Chin Tai
Est Hok Seng (Oyai
.84
Chin Phun
Bong Chin
1.00
Chin Moh
Est. Low Swee
6.57
Chin Cheng Sang
(Spore)
Est. Chuan Hak
32.65
Che Din.
(Natunas)
Est. Abang Saal
1.80
Eng Guan
(Spore)
Est. Chuan Hak
12.59
Eng Ann Teng
Est Tek Guan
.79
Fook Leong
Est. T. Kanisah
.31
Hoh Hap
(Spore)
Est. Chuan Hak
61.70
Hok Senn
Est. Tek Guan
2.17
Hj. Mahomad Syed
Est. T. Kanisah
5.39
Hi. Mahomad Sait
.08
Hj. Natassab
.08
Hoh Long
.22
Ibramsah
Est. T. Medin Pechay
90.81
Joo Moh
(Spore)
Est. Chuan Hak
16.82
Joo Seng
Est. Kanisah
2.70
Kaloin
Kahar
4.70
Koh Cheng
Chua Boli
1.00
Kim Watt Hin
Est. Tek Guan
7.25
Kavana Nana Mia (Spore
Est. T. Kanisah
22.50
Kavana Sheh Daut I .. )
11.00
Leong Sen
Inggris
1.00
Long Watt
(Spore) 1
Est. Chuan Hak
47.44
Lee Guan
( )
9.84
Liew Fatt
Est. Tian Niok Lee
12.50
Mok Ah Jiew
Mok Jin
1.00
Meeralli (ex P. C.)	Est. T. Kanisah
Muna Mahomad Alli (Spore) .39
4.08
Murugan Pillay	118.41
Mohamad Saiboo ( ,, ) Est. T. Medin Pechay
24.22
Munusami Narken	.97
Munusami	1.22
Neo Chiu Phin	Neo Sin Mah
.50
Natarsah	Est. Kanisah
117.00
Nina Mahomad Bros. (Spore) 8.81
Naraseu Nair	Est. T. Medin Pechay
10.33
Ofuji	Ah Jee
.50
Osizu	Matsumura
.50
Peng Soon	Est. Keng Chiang
15.84
Puna Muna Sultan (Spore) Est. T. Kanisah
10.43
Seng Hong	Est. Chin Pook
1.00
Shin Lee	Est. Kim Hap
14.15
Seng Tek	Est. Tek Guan
14.42
Sin Ghee Eng	28.86
Sam Hap Hin	18.41
Sina Tambi	Est. T. Kanisah
.95
Sena Yavana Suna	.,	.08
Tong Shun	Est. Eng Guan
1.66
Titiggal (Buntal)	Est. Chuan Ek
.07
Teh Ah Mee	Tan Ah Tui
Tana Yens Mahomad	*
.50
Abdul Kadir (S'porci Est. T. Kanisah
6.58.
Tana Mahomad Alli	,,	1.G3
Tambi Mohomat	,.
.25
Tambi Abdulrahman	.,
.69
Tambi Gani	.62
Voon Link	Jee Niuk
1.00
Verasami Kona (? Mataugi Est. T. Kanisah
2.74
Verasami	Est. T. Medin Pecha
y 7.29
Yow Liang Fong	Est. Soon Watt
.66
Yong Hap Seng (Spore) Est. Chuan Hak Yavana Sultan Abdul
26.98
Kadir (Spore) Est. T. Kanisah
31.08
JOHN E. A. LEWIS, Resident 2nd Class.
Notice.
No. XXXVII. 1907.
IN THE BANKRUPTCY COURT, SIMANGGANG.
In re the goods of Go Tek Ee alias Ah Ba. (Saratok, Kulaks).
ALL creditors or other persons having.any claims whatever against the Estate of the above are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned on or before the 31st of December 1907 after which date the assets of the said Go Tek Ee will be distributed amongst the parties entitled thereto, regard being had only to those claims of which notice shall have been given. And all moneys due to the abovementioned estate shall be paid to the undersigned forthwith.
H. L. OWEN,
Resident,
Simnuggang, 19th September, 1907.
224	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 3, 1907.
Notice-
No. XXXVIII, 1907.
THERE will be sold at the Court House Kuching at 9 A. M. on Monday the 14th October a plank dwelling house in Kg: Sungei Bedil Besar, formerly the property of Sulong of the Customs Dept: and presently occupied by Nandi.
The site of the dwelling will be held by the purchaser, who must be a Mahomedan, on the usual terms applying to Kampong lots.
JOHN E. A. LEWIS,
Resident 2nd Class. Residents Office.
27th September. 1907.
Notice.
No. XXXIX, 1907.
IN THE BANKRUPTCY COURT, KUCHING.
In the goods of Hoh Ngee and Jee Chin, pepper planters of S. Maung and Sekama Road. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Goh Liang Hah. pepper planter of 9th iuile Penrissen Road. (A bsconded.)
In the goods of Bong Phee, pepper planter of Musi, chop Ban Shin. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Tan See, Tan Tek Chow, Ng San Chiin and Bong Neo Chai, pepper planters of S. Moyan. (Abscond- .	ed.)
Tn the goods of Chang Chit, pepper planter of Kranji. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Chia Shak, pepper planter of Simungo. (A bsconded.)
In the goods of Lai Fook, pep- l er planter of Sungei Tengah. (A bsconded.)
In the goods of Kon Heyo, chop Ban Shoon, pepper planter of Tan Teo Durian. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Tsai Chion chop Sen Faw, pepper planter of Paku. (A bsconded.)
In the goods of Tsen Nyong, pepper planter and boat man (Tambang No. 302) of Jngan. (A bsconded.)
In the goods of Wee Poo, pepper planter of Slabat. (Absconded)
ALL creditors and others persons having any claim whatsoever against the Estates of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned on or before the 15th November, 1907, after which late the assets of the above named will be hided amongst the parties entitled thereto lard being had only to those claims of which
I notice shall have been given. And all monies
I owing to the above Estates shall be paid to
the undersigned forthwith.
JOHN E. A. LEWIS,
lies ideal 2nd Class.
Residents Office,
30th September, 1907.
Notification.
No. XL, 1907.
Upon 1st OCTOBER 1907 the following
alterations in Postal Rates come into force:
SARAWAK LETTER POSTAGE.
Letters.not exceeding oz	... 2 cents
Not exceeding 2 ,,	... 3 For each additional 2 oz.
or fraction thereof 3
Straits Settlements (*. e. Singapore. Penang, Malacca, Province Wellesley, The Bindings, Cocos Islands, Christmas Island and Labuan) Federated Malay States and Johore.
Letters.For 2 oz. or fraction
thereof 3 cents
Postcards.	...	... 1 Printed Papers - For 2 oz. or
fraction thereof 1 ,, Local Newspapers within 7 days of publication.
For first 3 oz. ... 1 cent
For each additional 2 oz. 1 Commercial Papers.
For each 3 oz. ... 1 minimum 8 cents Samples.
For each 2 oz. ... 1 cent
minimun 4 cents
Parcels. -
Not exceeding 3 lbs. 20 cents
Not exceeding 7 lbs.	40 ,,
Not exceeding 11 lbs.	60 .,
British Possessions, etc
Great Britain, and the following Colonies, etc Ascension, Bahamas, Barbadoes, Bermuda, British Honduras, British Central Africa, British East Africa, Canada, Cayman Islands, Ceylon, Cyprus, Falkland Islands, Fiji, Gambia Protectorate. Gibraltar, Gold Coast, Hong Kong. Jamaica, Leeward Islands, New Zealand. Nigeria Northern and Southern, St. Helena, Seychelles. Sierra Leone, Somaliland. Trinidad and Tobago, Turks Islands, Uganda and Windward Islands.
Leder postage for each ounce or fraction of an ounce, 4 cents (British Possessions not mentioned above i. e. Australia, India, South Africa, etc. remain as at present 4 cents per I ounce).
Countries.
Egypt and the Soudan Id. per oz.
For those Countries to which the rate is now 10 cents per half ounce the rate will be as follows:
For the first ounce, 10 cents. For each additional ounce or fraction thereof, 6 cents.
By order of
His Highness the Rujah Muda.
C. C. ROBISON.
Postmaster-General. Kuching,
30th September, 1907.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 3, 1907.
Notification.
No. XLI, 1907.
NOTICE is hereby given that insured parcels may now be sent to Ceylon and Hongkong and the treaty ports of China i. e. Amoy. Canton, Chefoo, Foochow. Hankow, Hoibow, Kongmong. Kumchak, Liu-Kung-Too, (Wei- hai Wei; Ningpo, Pakhoi, Sumshui, Shanghai, Swatow, and Wuchow.
The limit of insurance is $1,000 and the insurance rate 35 cents per $100 or any fraction thereof. This is additional to the postage rates which remain as stated in the Postal Guide.
C. C. ROBISON,
Postmaster- General.
Kuching,
October 1st, 1907.	*
RETIREMENT.
E. L. Grove Esq. A. M. I. C. E. Director of Special Works, on completion of his agreement, 3rd September, 1907.
RESIDENTS OFFICE, 4th September, 1907. Present:
His HIGHNESS THE RAJAH MUDA.
The. Resident o/i(Honble Sir Percy
the 1st Division ( Cunynghame, Bart.) The Data Bandar f (Abang Mohamad
( Kassim.)
The Datu Halim .... ( Haji Mohamed Ali.) The Datu Emaum .... (Haji Merais.) IZte TuaKampong	Mahomat Zin.)
Gnsek	tv	7
The Council was convened this day.
His Highness announced his departure for Kapit on the 6th instant.
Some discussion took place on the subject of the Mahometan marriage laws in Sarawak and His Highness informed the members that he would refer the matter to His Highness the Rajah.
No further business of importance transpired.
F. H. DALLAS,
Pec-order.
Report on Matang Water Work.
KUCHING,
2nd September. 1907. His Highness
The Rajah Muda,
Sarawak.
Yom HIGHNESS,In response to your call I arrived in Kuching on the 29th ultimo and accompanied by Mr. Gibson, Commissioner of Works and Surveys and Mr. Grove, Special Works Engineer, I have examined the works for the Water Supply of the Town.
2 .It appears desirable that I should submit my opinion on the pipes immediately, leaving to a further opportunity the matters with regard to which action is not urgently required.
3 .The pipe line is 10 miles long : the diameter of the pipes is 9 inches ; they were made by the Staveley Coal and Iron Company in 1905 and are marked K. W. 8. The number of pipes shipped was about 4,9002,865 being originally turned aud bored pipes each laying 12 feet, and 2,045 being plain spigot and socket pipes each laying 9 feet: these have been used for the greater part in the first 3 miles from the Reservoir and at the Kuching end. I have not seen any specification for the pipes, but in a letter dated 26th June 1905 from Mr. V. A. Lawson, Assoc : M. Inst. C. E., the Inspecting Engineer in England, reporting shipment of 1st consignment it is stated
The pipes ordered were guaranteed to 800 feet head but I saw some tested to 1,500 feet : the Staveley Company make a good pipe."
4 .The pipes were shipped, without any protecting bands or rings on the spigot ends, probably from Liverpool, and the next letter which bears on the question is one from Messrs. Woodhead and Company dated 9th February ]J 06 to the Hon'ble F. II. Dallas, in reply to a letter of the 14th November 1905 reporting that HS'pipes have arrived damaged. Messrs. Paterson Simons and Company having reported that only 20 pipes were damaged when they arrived in Singapore it is inferred in the letter that 93 were damaged between Singapore and Sarawak. The first 4 consignments appear to have been Consignment	on arrival in Singapore
No.	were found
1. 801 pipes Patroclus	2 pipes ends broken
2. 800 ,. Peleus	2	3. 656	Diomed	brok,
(2	,,	cracked
4. 642	Deucalion	brokel
14	cracked
Consignments 1 and 2 Mr. Grove informs me were plain S. and S. pipes 9 feet in length each : the remainder 12 feet lengths.
Messrs. Woodhead and Company add :
We observe on comparing the figures sent by Messrs. Paterson Simons and Company with those sent by Mr. Grove that the breakage of stock size 9 foot pipes was very small in fact less than we should have expected and that the breakage of the 12 foot pipes was rather excessive."
This would tend to shew that the experience of makers in preferring the 9 foot length to the 12 foot is borne out by the results of these shipments.
It also tends to shew that in the transhipment from Singapore to Kuching there was not so much care exercised as by the transit of the Ocean Steamer.
5.A letter from Mr. Grove to Mr. Lawson, dated 1st February 1906 reports the condition of the whole of the first order to be as follows :
9" plain spigot and socket9 foot lengths.
1,820 sound
10 broken
15 cracked
Total 1,845
9" turned and bored 8. and S. 12 foot lengths.
2,720 sound
17 broken
128 cracked
Total 2,865
26	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 3, 1907.
6 .A supplemental order of 200 9 foot pipes was placed and these on arrival were laid at the Kuching end from Java Road No. 1 to the High Level Service Reservoir.
7 .It will be uoted that the damaged pipes formed 1.3 % of the 9 foot lengths and 5% of the 12 foot lengths.
8 .On these reports we have the following approximate result:
Out of 1,845 9 foot lengthssay 5 were damaged on arrival in Singapore and 20 between Singapore and Kuching.
Out of 2,865 12 foot lengthsaccepting the proportion of the first two consignmentssay 35 were damaged on arrival in Singapore and 110 between Singapore and Kuching.
Mr. Grove informs me that the derricks of the s. s. Rajah of Sara teak were not long enough for clearing the 12 foot lengths of the hatchways ; this may account in part for the difference in the percentage of breakages of the 9 foot and the 12 foot pipes.
9 .Not many of the pipes were so broken as to be useless and on arrival at the Matang Road depot at the riverside, the pipes were examined and ail ends which were found damaged were cut off. An examination of these cuttings shews that the great majority of the defects was due to splits in the spigot end, not extending for more than 1 foot along the length of the pipe ; the cut pipes were used in she work as plain pipes with leaded joints.
10 .It cannot be stated with certainty how many times the pipes were handled between the foundry and Matang Road but it does not appear that it can have been less than 8 times and may have been more as follows :
1. Loading into railway waggons ex Foundry.
2. Unloading at Liverpool.
3. Loading into steamer at Liverpool.
4. & 5. Transhipment at Singapore.
6. Lauding at Kuching.
7. Putting into boats at Kuching.
8. Lauding at Mataug Road.
11 .From the riverside at Matang Road the pipes were carried along the line and at the time of laying each pipe was hammered to test its soundness, any pipe which was detected to be unsound was cut, the cut ends are lying on the side of the road and we counted between the River and Matang Reservoir 235 of such cut ends (a few may have been missed in counting or made use of: pieces due to repairs or fixing special castings were not included.) Some of the cracks are ven* small and practically all were at the spigot end, lengths of about 1 foot being cut off.
12 .Whilst driving home the turned and bored pipes a few were broken. Mr. Grove reports as follows:
Socket split whilst driving	...	1
Pipe open ...	2
13 .The laying of the pipes was completed in the early part of July last and as soon apparently as practicable the water was turned on from the Reservoir to the first sluice valve about one mile distance. Shortly afterwards to the second sluice valve at the 2nd mile.
The result was thatthe pressure being partial only on the sections filled5 bursts occurred. It became important to turn on the water to Kuching and the whole line of 10 miles was charged on the 23rd July; 9 bursts occurred on the very low head. Sub
sequently after repairs and each time a little more pressure being put on further defects appeared and the whole summarize as follows :
July 15	2 Part of line only open.
16 to 18 1
18 to 20 2
,,	23	9	Whole line open.
25 to 26 3
August 1	3
,;	4	2	Pressure	increased.
,,	16	4	Pressure increased	further.
,,	20	2 do	do
,,	25	2 Pressure from 26th to 29th
same as on 4th.
Total 30
In consequence of the supply of collars having run out it had been deemed expedient to postpone further increase of pressure.
14.The defects appear to have been almost entirely of one character;'an almost straight split of from 1 to 2 feet in length and generally towards the centre of the length of the pipe and more frequently at the top than at the sides or underneath, and were all such as might have been repaired by a strip bolted down by split rings and after the supply of collars gave out severalin fact 8of the pipes were treated in this manner and all except one were watertight on the 31st ultimo under the highest pressure yet applied.
Upon our arrival at Matang Reservoir on the 30th ultimo the supply to the Town was increased and the pressure rose much higher than ever before. On inspecting the line again on the 31st the only defects noticed were two joint leaks of no importance, and one leak from a pipe repaired with plate and rings.
The supply was therefore increased and this caused two failures : to repair these and the above defects the water was closed on the 1st instant; on the 31st ultimo the men engaged on the repair of the defects which had appeared in the repaired pipe closed a sluice valve which had the effect, it appears almost certainly, of bringing the highest pressure on the line between the 8 miles and the Reservoir, a distance of 11 miles. The pressure on the 30th and 31st towards the Town end was also approaching the normal working pressure with full supply, but was not up to the pressure which might possibly by accident or for some special reason be brought on the main if the flow of water into the high level Reservoir were shut off by closing the valve there, so that the pressure of the water throughout the whole line would be that due to the height of witter in the Matang Reservoir.
16 .The examination of the cut portions of the pipes shews that the standard thickness of the body of the pipe was apparently intended to lx? ths of an inch. Only one of the numerous measurements was under (&:]nds) and the highest was $ ths of an inch, the sockets are of course much thicker and there appears to have been a slight thickening allowed for towards the spigot end where the usual thickness I find is gth inch. Pipes of this thickness should bear the pressure to which these pipes are to be subjected and are about the thickness ordinarily specified for such pipes.
17 .Having regard to all the circumstances I am of opinion that it is not necessary to take any steps towards the strengthening of the pipes all along the line. What I anticipate will happen is the giving way of several more pipes as the full pressure is brought on to the main. From the experience so far perhaps 20 more failures might be expected. Incipient defects not visible to the eye, especially after
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 3, 1907.
227
the coating of the pipes, nor to the ear by hammering probably account for the greater portion of the failures which have taken place since the water was turned on. It is not unreasonable to expect that with the driving home of the turned and bored pipes some such defects should be increased. As the pressure increases the metal of the sound pipes may be put under a test of about 350 feet head say 150 lbs. per square inch and a few pipes in which there may be internal strain may burst.
18 .There are only some 27 spare pipes on a line of 10 miles in length; it is desirable to have pipes and collars at fairly frequent intervals so that no time may be lost in effecting repairs and allowing for this and for about 10 of the 27 being now required to replace the pipes held by clips which it may on the whole be better to replace by sound pipes, I advise that 50 more pipes and 30 collars snuable for them be obtained. These pipes should be plain spigot and socket pipes, thickness of metal laying length 9 feet, so that they may be sprung into the line where such pipes are now laid and used in place of turned and bored 12 foot pipes with a short double spigot piece as may be required and which will be obtained from the sound portions of pipes already here. The spigot ends of the 50 pipes should have either no bead or a very small one and over each spigot a wrought iron ring should be put on. such rings have proved very useful in preserving spigots from being cracked by the blows which they inevitably receive during long voyages and handling. These rings won hi remain on until the pipe is to be actually put in work at which time, if no difficulty arises in fitting, the ring may remain, should any difficulty arise it can be taken off. It may be years before all these pipes will be required and in the meantime they will be thus protected.
19 .So soon as a supply of collars has been received the main should gradually be put under the full pressure until all portions of it have been brought up to full working conditions. When this lias been done the further test up to static head so as to be satisfied that for fire or other special purposes the main may be partly or wholly shut down at the Reservoir end may be undertaken at a convenient time: such a test may of course be undertaken by sections starting from Matang Reservoir.
20 .Mr. Gibson will no doubt keep me informed as to the result of the periodical increase of pressure but I hope that nothing more serious than I have indicated will arise.
21 .As to the River crossing, each line of pipe should be tried so as to be as sure as possible that they are kept in good order. Mr. Grove informs me that they have been tested to 150 lbs per square inch which is the greatest steady pressure to which they will be subjected. At present nothing is required to lie done ut this place, so far as can be judged from an inspection at low water.
I have the honour to be,
Your Highness obedient Servant,
A. TOMLINSON.
M. INST. C. E., M. AM. SOC. C. E.,
M. AM. W. W. ASSOC.
Prize day at the S. P. G.
Mission School.
ON the 13th September at the S. P. G. School House the Honble the Resident Sir Percy Cunynghame, Bart, who Was accompanied by Lady Cunynghame, presented the prizes to the successful students at the annual School examinations. The Right Revd. The Bishop of Singapore and Sarawak presided,
and in the course of his speech gave an
account of the progress of the School and
pointed out the increase id the attendance
during the past year. His Lord ship com-
plimented the Head-master, Mr. Gregg, and
expressed his thanks to His Highness the
Rajah for so kindly giving the prize books every
year.
The Honble the Resident, after presenting
the prizes, addressed a few words of encourage-
ment to the boys urging upon them the neces-
sity and advantages of education, and he in-
formed them that they would soon have a
chance of trying for a bigger prize than had
yet been offered them. It was the intention
of the Government to give an opportunity in
the future to a clever and ambitious boy of
studying at the Medical College in Singapore
and of eventually qualifying as a Doctor. This
was a distinct step in advance and should be
an added inducement to them to work hard
and learn all they could.
Amongst others present in the hall were
the Venerable Archdeacon Perham and Mr.
J. E. A. Lewis, Inspector of Schools. It is
regrettable that more persons were not present
but there appears to have been some mistake
made in notifying residents, many of whom
did not know that the prize-day was to be
held that afternoon.
The list of prize winners is given below and
it is noteworthy that, with two exceptions, all
are Chinese.
II. II. the	rWate*.
Standard	I.Nyuk Poh
Seng Kee
Standard II.Kee Thai
Ah Chian
Shak Shin
Standard III.Kuan Hin
Sui Yong
Fook Chee
Standard IV.Chiin Swec
Soon Siew
Standard	V.Lim Wee Khoon
Miang Yang
Kim Nguan
Standard VI.Lee Nam Khoi
Chu Fong Hee
Standard VILSpencer Cheyne
Charles Engkasan
Additional Prize.Wee Leong Ah.
S. P*. G. Mission Sports.
The Annual Sports of the S. P. G. Mission School were held on Monday afternoon, the 16th September, on the School playground in somewhat unfavourable weather. About 3.30 p. M.- a heavy shower of rain unfortunately not only delayed the start for half an hour but made the ground very wet and in places swampy, but this, though it may have had an effect on the attendence of spectators, did not damp the ardour of the boys. His Lordship the Bishop and Miss Hose very kindly provided light refreshments which were much appreciated; Mr. J. M. Bryan and Mr. Gregg were indefatigable in their efforts as Umpire and Starter, and at the close of the proceedings Lady Cuuyughame presented the prizes to the successful competitors, whose names are given below.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 4, 1907.
given to one Ah Song whose tender for $830 although not the lowest (there was one for $800 un-reliable) was accepted. In all some seven tenders were sent in. the highest being $1,050.	*
The Wharf Mandors house will be the exact replica of the 2nd clerks house and, while costing the same, the materials nsed will be better.
Finding it impossible to get all the people of the kampongs to assist in the work of the new bridge as whilst some were willing to cut timber and erect it others refused to give any aid, but of course would be the very ones who would make most use of the bridge when once built, I considered it expedient to have it built by contract and to obtain a small payment from each taxpayer, thus everyone will contribute a certain amount.
The Chinese of the bazaar have generously offered considerable pecuniary assistance.
Coal Mines:
Balance in stock end of September 1,063. 9 tons Despatched in October	1,144. 4 ,,
Balance in stock end of October 1,459.18 ,,
P. GORDON WHITE,
Officer in Charge.
MUKA.
October.
General.During the month several barong loads of billian fencing for the new parts of the cattle ground have been brought over from Balingean. The Dyaks there have taken a good deal of trouble over working this wood, as they have squared all the posts instead of leaving them rough. This is a great advantage when it comes to loading them in boats, as squared posts do not take up anything like the room that rough ones would.
The Petanak and some of the Tillian people have dug a passage from the Petanak river to the head waters of Sungei Misan, a tributary of the Tillian, thus establishing communication by water between the Petanak and Mukah rivers during the wet monsoon. During the hot weather it will be dry, and traffic will be carried on by sea, as usual.
The cut is quite a small one, being only 6 ft. wide and from 3 to 4 ft. deep, but that suffices to give a passage for smaller boats bringing sago through to sell at Mukah bazaar, and it can always be enlarged if necessary.
During wet monsoons in the past, Petanak people have had to sell their sago locally at very low rates, because the traders had to store it there until the fine weather, and even then there was the risk of transport by sea. Partly liecause of this, Petanak is at present, and has been for some years, the worst Kampong in the district as regards debt, and this cut. which the people there were very eager to make, will I hope improve matters in that respect.
The p. s. Kaka called here on the 1st, and dropped the Revd. Father Jansen, who was a passenger on her from Baram.
On the 3rd P. C. Mobamat returned from up-river where he had been looking into a land dispute between Penghulu Intin and some of his people. They managed to settle the case among themselves without bringing it into Court.
The 9th, being Her Highness the Ranees birthday was observed as a holiday.
During the month Pangerau Juragan, son of Pang- eran Dipa. died, and Dayan g Napisab. wife of Abang Hj. Azhari, gave birth to a daughter.
The 2nd clerk, Chin Guan, who has been away on sick leave since August 21st, has not yet returned, nor have I heard when he is likely to be able to resume his duties.
Court.With regard to the complaints from Balingean (mentioned in last month's report) about the conduct of Drahman and Ajak, two sons of P. C. Mohamat, I received a letter from Your Highness on the 30th directing that these two men be ordered to leave Balingean and not return there. A letter has been sent to Balingean about this matter, and Drahman and Ajak will move over here within 7 days after hart raya.
No cases of importance have been brought before either the Police or Debt Court.
Fines and fees amounted to 299.41.
P. II. D.Excepting two days spent in clearing part of the cattle ground, and one day in getting rattans to tie up the Government landing stage, the prison gang has been working entirely on roads.
Between the front and back bazaars the road has been raised, as it used to be under water in several places after heavy rain. At present the road towards Oya is being attended to.
Trade.-In spite of the fasting month, and consequent disinclination among the Mohamedans to work more than is Absolutely necessary, 469 coyans of raw sago and 2iP piculs of jelutong gutta were exported during October.
Eighteen schooners entered the river and twenty- one cleared for Kuching. The s. s. Sarawak also made two journeys here, and I am told that the Chinese have applied to have her sent here once again before the landas.
There is nothing further of interest to report to Your Highness.
A. E. LAWRENCE,
Resident 2nd Class.
SIBU.
October.
Your Highness returned to Kuching in the Zahora on the 26th instant having been in this district since- the 7th ultimo.
Messrs. Kirkpatrick. MacPhee and Page-Turner paid visits to Your Highness during your stay at the station.
I paid two visits to Knpit during the month. On my first visit Kiiau, Bawi, Iba and Bunyau, Dyaks of Balleh, were fined 1 pikul each for making an abortive attempt to raise a force to attack the people of Mekam and they were informed that their jars would be detained in the fort until they had paid their fines and removed below Kapit fort. The other jars taken by Your Highness as pledges from the remainder of the party were, by Your Highness orders, returned.
The Assistant Resident Mr. Page-Turner returned to Kapit with me on my second visit and a peace making with the customary ceremony of killing pigs was held between the Ulu Ai Dyaks and the different tribes Kayans, Lma Lesougs, Skapans and others living in the neighbourhood of Belaga fort. On these occasions for the peace to be binding the pigs must be killed before mid-day and one Dyak (P. Narok) by the lengthiness of his oratory was, I imagine, try- ingtocarry on the talking until after this hour. His arguments were, however, satisfactorily answered before 11 A. st. and the pigs were killed immediately afterwards.
In the evening Kayans and Dyaks were entertained in the fort when speech-making and dancing took place.
On the 31st Jantieng of Julau arrived at Sibu and reported that he had killed Jala, alias Brangan Tingka, while the latter was on his way up the Kanowit with the avowed intention of murdering a Chinaman by name Au Chu. Jala has led many attacks on friendly Dyaks in this river, the following
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 3, 1907.
220
Sfffttmbfr.
P. S. Adeh arrived from Sibu with Mr. A. J. Cutfield on the 1st, and the same day Mr. and Mrs. Hewitt sailed for Baram in p. s. Kaka.
THE s. s. Kuching sailed for Singapore on the 3rd with passengers, Mr. S. Tomlinson, Mr. and Mrs. Grove, Miss Joyce Grove and Master Geoffery Grove.
Mr. and Mrs. Grove are leaving Sarawak on the termination of the formers agreement. A large number of friends went on board to say goodbye and wish them bon voyage. We hope that the sea journey will prove beneficial to Mrs. Grove whose health has been anything but good of late and we wish them good luck in the future.	t
ON the 4th s. s. Alice Lorraine arrived from Liinbang and Brooketon with passenger, the Revd. Father Smeele.
S. S. Rajah of Sarawak arrived from Singapore on the 5th. She brought no European passengers.
H. H. the Rajah Muda sailed for Sibu in H. H. S. Zahora on the 6th. His Highness also gave a passage to Sibu to Mr. A. J. Cutfield.
P. S. Adeh sailed for Sibu the same day.
ON the 9th p. s. Kaka returned from Baram.
THE s. s. Rajah of Sarawak sailed for Singapore on the 10th, and H. H. S. Zahora returned from Sibu the same day.
ON the 12th s. s. Kuching arrived from Singapore. Passengers, Mr. A. E. Lange, who some time ago retired from the post of Government Storekeeper.
The Annual Prize Day of the S. P. G. Mission School was held on the 13th at the School House. A list of prize winners will be found elsewhere.
ON the 14th s. s. Alice Lorraine sailed for Liinbang, vid Lingga and Brooketon. Passengers Alias Olver to Lingga, and Mr. H. Hogg to Brooketon.
THE S. P. G. Mission School Sports took place on Monday afternoon, the 16th on the School play ground; a list of the winners will be found in another column.
ON the 17th s. s. Kuching sailed for Singapore with passengersCapt. Harrison. Mr. A. E. Lange and Mrs. Waddell and child.
The same day p. s. Adeh returned from Sibu with the Very Revd. Father E. Dunn, and Revd. Father Jansen.
MR. and Mrs. Hewitt returned from Baram by p. s. Kaka on the 19th, and by s. s. Rajah
[ of Sarawak the same day there arrived the Revd. and Mrs. Woodd and Mr. and Mrs.
* Maddocks. Mr. and Mrs. Woodd are staying at Bishops House.
MR. O Lang, who has been laid up in Ku- ? cbiiig since August but is all right once more, we are glad to state, has returned to his duties in Simanggang, having been granted a passage in H. H. S. Zahora which sailed for Sibu, vid Lingga, on the 20th.
P. S. Adeh left for Sibu. vid Sadong. nn the 20th with Mr. and Mrs. Maddocks, passengers to Sadong.
BY the s. s. Alice Lorraine which came in from Liinbang and Brooketon on the 22nd there arrived Mr. I. Kirkpatrick from Lawas and Mr. H. Hogg from Brooketon. The latter is leaving the Country at the termination of his agreement. Mr. Kirkpatrick is down on short leave.	S. S. Rajah of Sarawak sailed for Singapore on the 24th. By hen Mr. J. H. Brodie, who, it will be remembered, met with a nasty accident on the Race Course in July last, took passage to Singapore where-, we understand, his leg is to be examined by the X-rays. Mr. Brodie was accompanied by Dr. Barker, P. M. 0. and Miss Hastie.
P. S. Kaka sailed for Baram on the 24th with passenger. Revd. Father Jansen
S. S. Kuching arrived on the 26th from Singapore. Passengers, Mr. R. Pawle, Mr. H. W. V. Scott (who has returned from leave) and Mr. and Mrs. Sparnpani.
The Kuching brought over H. H. The Rajah Mudas new Motor launch which ha been shipped to Sibu where His Highness is staying at present.
ON the 28th H. H. S, Zahora sailed for Sibu with the mail which arrived on the 26th. Mr. I. Kirkpatrick was granted a passage in the Zahora to Sibu where he will be the guest of H. H. the Rajah Muda.
S. S. Alice Lorraine left on the 28th for Brooketon and Limbang, vid Kidurong.
Spampanis Circus gave its first performance this same evening. Signor Sparnpani has met with very bad luck in Kuching so far, and the heavy rains have a good deal to answer for, but we trust things will improve all round before the date of his departure for Singapore. We also think he would do better as regards audiences if he were to lower his prices for admission.
Two weddings of importance in Malay- aristocratic circles have taken place during the month. The first of these was the marriage of
?230
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 3, 1907.
Abang Anis, son of the present Data Bandar Abang Mohd. Kassim. to Dayang Hanifa, daughter of Haji Metarip.
In the second case Abang Hj. Hipni, son of Hj. Amin, (deceased) iate Data Emanm, was married to Dayang Masta Aisa, daughter of Abang Arip, and great-grand-daughter of the late Datu Bandar Hj. Bui Assan.
L A W AS.
July.
I received a letter from Pangeran Bandahara of Brunei asking for rendition of a slave woman who had escaped from his house, or payment of her manumission. Later the woman said she ran away owing to bad treatment, and shewed a scalp wound and the marks of the stocks on her ankles.
I replied to the Pangeran Bandabara that the woman declined to return, and that I could not assist him in the matter.
Some Kadyans from Mangalang reported they had been fired upon by Tagah in the mountains while searching for gum damar. I directed the Corporal and some Rangers to visit the spot and their report confirmed the statement of the Kadyans.
It appears that some Tagah were on their way to fire at the house of Ukap, a Murut, inLawas waters and came across the Kadyans at whom they fired.
A few days later news was received that Ikap's son had been shot in the chest.
I received a visit from Pangeran Matusin with reference to the payment of Poll Tax by the people at the Kuala Kampong.
T left in the s. 1. Gazelle to visit Trusan on the 22nd instant returning to Lawas on the 27th instant.
The rainfall for the month amounted to 17.49 inches.
The exports and imports were $7,358 and $4,243 respectivelv.
IVONE KIRKPATRICK,
Officer in Charge.
Bintulu
The District has been very quiet, all the Dyaks
being at work on their paddy clearings.
There have also been few cases lierore the Courts,
Police or Debt.
I left here for Tatau on the 19th and was still
there at the end of the month; most of my time was
taken up with Dyak cases and in filling in the names
into a new Tax Book; the last of the Dyak tax was
paid in, and shewed an increase of nearly $400 over
last year.
In reference to the report that numbers of Dyaks
had gone over to Rejaug to join some expedition said
to be going to start from there, I found that only a
few had gone over as messengers, as a report had
been brought in that some Dyak Chiefs had gone to
meet His Highness The Rajah to try and get leave
to retalliate on Kayans for some murder of Dyaks :
there is no doubt that the Dyaks on this coast are
stili very restless on this subject and require a strict
watch being kept on them and one cannot convince
them that this is not a case for retalliation as the
Kayans were only defending their homes against a
Dyak raid and killed some of the attackers.
This was quite a record month in trade the Imports
amounting to $16,255 and Exports to $90,560.
1,760 piculs of Gutta Jelutong were exported, 611
of Rubber and 300 of Gutta Percha, besides rattans
CtC'	E. A. W. COX,
Resident.
Limbang.
July.
Mr. Ward returned from Bidang on the 2nd having gone up there at the end of last month. A large number of Court cases mostly civil were brought up during his visit there.
Orang Kaya Pomancha complained that .Tawa Dyak of Lubai had been cutting down young bilian trees in his the Orang Kayas land.
Enquiry was made into the case of Entabu late wife of Orang Kaya Langgar, she claiming a share of certain property accumulated whilst she lived with the Orang Kaya, the value of the property being about five hundred dollars. Orang Kaya Langgar refuses to give Entabu any share, his defence being that the property was all obtained by him previous to his marriage with her and not conjointly, the case has been adjourned for further, evidence.
On the 6th Hj. Mqhamat of Lubok Panggi made a statement to the Cojirt that the Pangeran Bandahara had sent messengers to one Bakar of Lisang on the Brunei border informing him that it was intended to sell his (Bakar's) wife to II j. Mariam. Bakar and his wife were presumably at one time slaves of the Bandahara; as however Lisang is in Limbang the Bandahara has no jurisdiction over any of the people there and they have been informed of this.
The two sago firms here have given information to the effect that the Labuan traders do not give correct declarations of their export cargoes of raw sago, but on enquiries being made there does not seem to be any evidence to support their statement.
Mr. Ward left on the 19th for Kuching in p. s. Kaka.
The Trade Returns for the half year ending June 30th are as follows and compared with the corresponding half year in 1906 show a nett increase of $15,897.
1907 Coasting Imports $35,170 Exports $44,789
1906	33,686	48,020
Increase $1,484 Decrease $3,231 1907 Foreign Imuorts $39,134 Exports $38,276 1906	30,341	29,425
Increase $8,793 Increase $8,851
The Rainfall for the month was 6.93 inches the heaviest fall in any one day being 2.45 inches.
O. F. RICKETTS, Beni dent.
Upper Sarawak, Paku.
July and August.
General.Mr. Day having been granted eight months' furlough handed over to me on the 1st of July and left for Kuching on the 5th.
The prisoners of whom there are now thirty have been employed cleaning the roads within easy distance of the Court House and have also drained the swamp at the back of the Bazaar.
During the month of July road tax amounting to $1,394.95 was paid in. the total for the year being $2,323.91 as against $2,895.16 for 1906, a decrease of nearly 20%. One hundred and fifty four gardens have been reported abandoned and there are several others which have not paid tax, a great proportion of which have probably been abandoned. Messrs, the Borneo Company Limited alone have abandoned eighty six gardens in this district.
It is worthy of note that during the same eriod only 16 new gardens have been registered and all of these are owned by Dayaks. Thirty four gardens were auctioned during July and August and in 15 cases the owners had absconded, and two traders have also
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 3, 1907.
absconded, one having previously applied to be made
a bankrupt. Fifteen eases of theft of pepper and
burglary were reported during the same period.
The Station is at present decidedly under-policed
and 1 have been forced to take men from Seniawan and Buso to make up the number here. I see that the employment of 8 extra men was sanctioned some (
?time back but it seems that they cannot now be spared from head-quarters.
It is a bad time for the pepper planter now as with 1
-pepper at its present price he can only earn a bare
living wage and in most cases even this means a loss
to the Towkay.
The majority of the gardeners now seem to lie
planting vegetables and in several cases they depdtid
solely on these for a living, having abandoned their
pepper vines. It is almost entirely due to the low
price of pepper that so much illicit buying and selling
goes on as only by this means is any profit to be made.
The method commonly employed is simple and is as
follows :The pepper to be sold is taken from the
mortgaged garden to a neighbouring garden which
is either not mortgaged or only rented and is sold as
pepper from the hitter garden, being first put into
bags bearing the (hop of that garden.
In four cases only during the last two months have
-convictions been obtained for this offence, which is
not easily detected. Messrs, the Borneo Company
Limited "and a great number of Chinese traders are
now renting their gardens for nominal sums and thus
cutting their 1 ss.
Court.Fines and fees for the two months
amounted to $860.40, and 22 persons were sentenced
to various terms of imprisonment, including two
women who were unable to pay their fines for adul-
tery and who were sent to Kuching gaol.
The chief cases worthy of notice were the follow-
ing L. C. Kala Singh versus Ah What on a charge
-of defamation, which was dismissed, and as a con-
sequence L. C. Kala Singh, who was found to have
improperly taken gratification, was sent to head-
quarters to be dealt with, his place at Seniawan
being taken by L. C. Bujang.
Phang Jow versus Phang Khim for theft of pep-
perDefendant was sentenced to nine months R. I.
Kuan Chon versus Bong Niat for bringing a false
-charge. The Defendant was sentenced to six months
R. I. on this count and to a further term of six
months for theft of pepper belonging to Messrs, the
Borneo Company Limited, Buso.
Law Nyuk versus Bong Niong Tziicausing griev-
?ous hurt. Judgment in this case was reserved
pending death or recovery of the injured man; the
defendant in the meantime is imprisoned for six
months for evading lawful arrest ami one Bun Chong
was also sentenced to one years R. I. in connection
with this case for rioting and, with others, forcibly
preventing police from arresting Bong Tzii.
The ease of Thai Moh versus Jong Khim and Jong
Fah on a charge of fraud was referred to The Honble
the Resident for judgment and each of the defendants
was fined $500, JongKhim was also ordered to make
good all losses incurred by the Plaintiff in connection
with this case.
One Lim Sam was sentenced to one years' R. I.
for housebreaking by night, and subsequently at-
tempted to commit suicide in gaol, after which he was
sent to Kuching to be dealt with.
Jee Kit Lee, Voon Hap, Bun Loi. Choong Mee,
Lai Kai, Lai Ng Shoug, Lai Ngit, Voon Khim,
Thian Khin, and Titian Chon Hap were also sen-
tenced to various terms of imprisonment for theft of
pepper and Messrs. Yong Hong and Co. of Kuching
and Lim Siong of Seniawan were fined for receiving
stolen pepper.
Lit Ah Lok and Peh Ah Heng were sentenced in
the Supreme Court, Kuching, to 15 years R. I. each
for the murder of Heng Long a pepper gardener of
Tan Teo Durian Sebrang. The murder was com-
mitted on the night of the 16th of August by a gang
of five men three of whom (Tai Long, Hak Kow anl
Bak Chin) have, I regret to say, so far evaded arrest.
A full report of this case has already been sent to the
Honble the Resident.
The weather here has been exceptionally hot until
a few days back and there have been a great many
cases of fever, in consequence.
I have nothing further to report to Your Highness
on this occasion.
H. B. CROCKER,
Resident 2nd Class.
Bintulu
A ugust.
I returned here from Tatau on the 5th and found
all going on well.
There have been the average number of cases in
the Debt Court, but few in the Police Court.
On the 7th some of the Kayan chiefs came down
from Tubau mostly to complain about two men. Je-
nut and Akam Luat, who had been defying. Jenut
I fined $15 and Akam Luat $10 and ordered them
to return to Baloi from whence they originally came,
several other small matters were brought up but
these I adjourned till I visit Tubau next month.
The new guard of Rangers arrived on the 27th
and the old left next day for Kidurong to embark on
the return of the Alice Lorraine from the North.
P. JI. D.The prisoners have been employed in
repairing the kampong roads. The Kidurong road
has also been cleared on a small contract.
General.The Tatau clerk left for Kuching on
the 7th on leave, he returned on the 27th.
On the 15th I received a letter from Tatau from
Mr. Johnson of the Borneo Company stating that
he and Mr. Pope were going to prospect for minerals
there and then go on to Belaga.
The Imports for the moiith amount to $6,626, the
Exports to $7,461.
E. A. W. COX,
Resident.
MUKA.
?
A ugust.
General P. C. Mohamat II arrived from Ba-
lingean on the 18th and returned on the 15th.
While here he reported various Dyak and Malay
Court cases and paid in fines and door-tax.
On the I4th P. C. Mohamat V came back from
the uiu Mukah. where he had been to collect door-
tax. and to tell the Dyaks to work some small biliarr
. posts which are wanted here for various purposes.
' Chin Guan, the 2nd clerk, started for Oy a on the
I 21st,- caught the s. s. Sarawak there, and went by
her to Kuching. He was sent there for medical
attention.
The Revd. Father Stotter came over from the Cut
mission, arriving on the 26th and leaving on the
28th.
On the 27th the s. s. Alice Lorraine arrived with
the relief squad of Rangers, who were brought
ashore in the barong.
The weather continues to be oppressively hot, and
the kumpong people have for some time now* been
getting their di inking water from Tutus, two or
three miles away, as all their own wells are either
dry or brackish.
Fever has been very prevalent in the district;
during the month.
232	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 3, 1907.
Court.No cases of special importance were heard in the Police Court, most of them being the usual disputes about boundaries of land. The Malay Court had a good many more cases than usual to decide.	*
Fines and fees amounted to $445.34.
P. IF. D.As this dry weather is the most suitable time for much work, a good many roads have been repaired during the month. Those leading through kampong Awang Udin, to the upper Tillian, and to Petanak. are now finished, and so is the new road from behind the back bazaar to the other ide of sungei Penakob Kubu. From the end of this road a footpath is being made alongside the cattle ground fence, connecting it with the Tillian road.
The prisoners have been employed on roads, on digging and boarding a well near the back bazaar, and on fencing in the new part of the cattle ground.
Trade.Owing to the drought it is impossible for many of the people to get sago palms out of their lands, and consequently the out-put of raw sago has been considerably less than usual, only 359 coyans being exported during the month. The export of jelutong gutta was 280 piculs.
I have nothing else to report to Your Highness on this occasion.
A. E. LAWRENCE, Resident 2nd Class.
K A PIT.
J ugust.
From August the 1st to the 11 th Iwas absent from this station.
Court.There have been no cases of importance during the month, but a number of cases connected with farming land.
On the 26th p. s. Kaka arrived with the Resident Mr. Johnson on board, also the relief squad of Fort- men. P. S. Kaka returned next day, taking back the old squad of Fortmeu.
The Dyaks in the Balleh are very restless, every few days a party of Dyaks start on the war-path causing a great deal of trouble and expense in getting them back again; until they are severely punished, this state of affairs will continue; the chiefs have no influence over their people, if they have they will not use it, but sit tight in their houses.
The trade here is practically at a stand still just now, and Dyaks find it hard to get rice, but still they prefer to go on the war path rather than work jungle produce or attend to their farms.
I have nothing further to report to Your Highness on this occasion.
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER.
Assistant Resident.
BA RAM.
August.
General.On the 5th Oyan Blaweng the Long Pata chief arrived to pay in his tax.
On the 7th Mr. Chynoweth paid a three days visit to the Dyaks in the Poyut, Sebatang and Malei rivers. He reported that nothing of importance was brought before him and that the Dyaks were busy burning their farms.
On the 10th Renggir the Penghulu of the Dyaks in Bakong arrived for the purpose of settling various cases. Amongst these there were two in which hjs judgments had been appealed against.
On the 12th 1 left to visit the antimony in the Ulu Plutan, I found that the coolies bad worked
very well indeed, having dug several large holes. It is however very hard to tell whether the antimony is to be found in large quantities or not. But even should there be a plentiful supply of it, it will probably cost a large sum of money to work. I have repotted further to Your Highness on this matter elsewhere.
On my way up-river I investigated a case of fighting amongst the Chinese at Long Lama Bazaar. As nearly all the Long Lama Chinese were mixed up in it, these five chief culprits were fined $20 (twenty dollars) each and informed that they would be put into gaol should they cause any further disturbance.
The Kayans are planting their paddi, their farms having burnt splendidly owing to the recent d nought.
I returned to Claudetown on the 20th. Mr. Chynoweth informed me that p s. Adeh had arrived on the 16th with the Auditor Mr. E. Parnell, who- audited the Treasury and Debt Court Deposit Book for the last twelve months. The Debt Court was about 50 cents short, and the Treasury four cents in excess. Considering the large amount of money which passes through Baram Treasury every year, I think that this is a great credit to the Treasury clerk Alfred Mowe.
The squad of Rangers stationed here was also relieved by this trip of the Adeh.
Court.- There have been several cases in the ! Police Court this month, the most important case being the one already referred to.
Farming. Bujang the Tua Kampong of Niah ; has persuaded the inhabitants of chat place to farm. : This is a great advantage as in previous years the Niahs have always bought their paddi at Sibuti, ; thereby greatly increasing their debts. This new arrangement should help to alleviate their troubles, as heretofore they have relied only on their caves, which are mostly mortgaged to the Chinese.
P. IF. D.The coolies have been mowing the roads, except two men who have built a small house ? for the third clerk.
i The prisoners have been employed in road con- * struction and making leaf attaps.
Shipping.The p. s. Adeh only paid one trip to this station during the month, returning to Kuching fully loaded.
As the North East Monsoon is now drawing near the outlook will not be a very bright one should communication by steamer to Kuching cease at the end of September, as it did last year.
The weather during the month has been for the most part very dry with the exception of one squall of wind, accompained by a heavy fall of rain, which did a great deal of damage.
The rainfall for the month has been 2.28 inches.
I have nothing further of importance to report to Your Highness.
T. S. KING,
Assistant Resident.
MATANG ESTATE.
August.
During the month coolies have l een employed inweeding, gathering coffee, plucking tea, clearing out drains, repairing roads and cleaning coffee.
Crops gathered during the month were 12 piculs parchment coffee and 265 lbs. tea.
During the month 72 piculs clean coffee and 800 ths. tea were despatched to the Borneo Company Limited.
Coolies have been paid their wages for July by Mr. Grove on the 6th instant.
J. M. GOMEZ,
Manager.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 3, 1907.
233
The new seine net has been used several timer
this is the only seine in Oya of any size now which
is in use and in consequence the Government people
have been enjoying a very fair supply of excellent
fish. Fish have been none too plentiful during the
month, the Panau hauls having been small and the
Rantau people having had but poor hauls also.
A fine comet has been visible in the East during
the latter part of the month. It has been at its
best just before dawn.
Weather.The drought has been quite extra-
ordinary and the effect has been felt throughout the
month. The water supply for the up-river Kam-
pongs is very bad indeed, it consisting mostly of a
few muddy water holes far away in the jungle. The
people collect around these early in the morning
and the late arrivals get nothing but wet mud as
their share. Al Oya itself the want of water has
. not made itself felt to such a degree as up-river, the
wells having been deepened giving a very fair
' supply.
The garden here has suffered considerably, all the
grass having shrivelled up to such an extent that
the mowers had to be taken off theie being nothing
to mow. The thermometer in the Bungalow at 8
A. M. has been mostly at 80	82; at 11 A. M. at
00 to 02 or 93, and the heat has been almost un-
bearable at times, latterly however tiiis has been
tempered with the strong S. \V. wind. A little rain
has fallen but not in sufficient quantity to do any
good at all. Everyone says that the lu-at has been
most exceptional.
!	Cattle.- The herd of cattle are in excellent con-
? dition and now number 42 head. Three times
I during the month the whole herd stampeded during
the night, breaking out from the shed and destroying
the fences in their rush. They went to the Kuala
and were only induced to return after much difficulty.
What has caused this stampede is a mystery as they
have been plentifully supplied with water during the
night: probably the intense heat has had something
to do with it.
Exports.The export of Haw Sago during the
month amounted to 441 coyans as against 373 coyana
exported during the corresponding month of last
year.
Health.The health of the District has not been
good, there having been a good deal of fever and
other sickness in all the Kampongs and several
deaths have resulted.
Of course this is due to the extraordinary heat
and failure of the water supply. However, it is to
be hoped that this drought will soon break up and
that a downpour of rain will restore the health of
the District to its former condition.
DONALD A. OWEN.
Resident.
SIMANGGANG
August.
I left Kuching for Kabong after the -Race week
festivities on August 6th in the s. s. Alice Lorraine,
Your Highness having kindly allowed me to proceed
by her in order to visit the Kalaka and Saribaa
rivers. The steamer left Kabong early the next
morning, on the 7th, for Sibu with Messrs. Johnson,
Page-Turner, and Cutfield.
The jungkat fishing season was in full swing at
Kabong and good hauls of Dueh, Bujang. aur-aur,
Tenggirch, and other inferior fish were invariably
made whilst 1 was there.
The prolonged drought caused much discomfort to
the people and as the across-river so-called wells
properly water holes for none of them are six.
OYA.
?
J UffUSt.
Court.As usual the heaviest Court work has
been at Dalat, there being but few cases either in the
Police or Debt Court at Oya. 1 was holding Court
at Dalat between the 7th and the 15th. None of the
cases from either Court call for special comment.
Public Morits.The Police Quarters at Dalat
have been rebuilt on the new site. This was done
?with very little expense as nearly all the timber from
the old building was good and with few exceptions
could be used in the construction of the new. Some
of the smaller wood, such as kassous and paks, had
to be renewed but these did not take very Fong to
obtain.
The prisoners at Oya have been employed in re-
pairing the road and in transforming the Malay
Court into a residence for Hj: Taha. He will live
here till his new house is completed as the house in
which he lives at present is in a dreadfully dilapi-
dated state and may collapse at Any moment.
A new Rest house has been built at Kuala Penat.
This was very necessary as the old one was in a bad
?state and not fit for use. The new one should be
much appreciated by Europeans going to and from
Mukah and Oya. It is built entirely of nibongsaiid
leaf attaps, and these were supplied by the people of
Judan and Penat.
General.A Chinese boy aged 10 was drowned at
Dalat on the 8th. He fell into the river between
the logs of a jelatong and apparently was suffocated
while jammed underneath them. The water was
18 feet deep under the jelatong and the body was
recovered there by In. Bujang A an hour after the
-accident.
The s. s. Sarawak made three trips to Oya during
the month taking away the usual cargoes. On one
occasion, coming down from Dalat, a large log "ot
foul of the propellor the result being considerable
damage to the engines; this accident delayed the
steamer a couple of days in the river.
Complaints are continually being made about the
price of raw sago in this river, the natives saj ing
that they were induced to work this very fine sago
by a promise being made to pay the high price of
$1 per passou for it. At first this was given but
the Chinese have gradually reduced the price to the
present 50 cents at which price it scarcely pays to
work at all.
Consequently, the natives are more heavily in
?debt than ever to the Chinese and sago lands are
finding their way into Chinese bands. If a large
number of lauds do belong to the Chinese I do not
?doubt but that coolies will be found to work the
lemantab (as a few of them are doing at present)
and that in the end the entire trade will be in
Chinese hands; of course the trade is now in their
hands and they are able to fix prices much as they
choose, but up to now they have not actually worked
the lemautah as they have commenced to do at
present.
The house of a tukang kabun at the end of the
Bazaar caught fire on the night of the 23rd: and was
completely destroyed in the course of I an hour.
Luckily the night was still, there being not a breath
of wind, or the entire Bazaar would have been in
danger of being destroyed as well, there being no
water available.
Considerable damage is reported to have been
done to the plantations in the Cut by a jungle fire.
The fire has been burning for some weeks in the
ground following the roots of the trees and it has
been impossible to put it out. Nadim is understood
to have been burning his clearing when the fire
spread and got beyond control.
234	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 3, 1907.
the Budo Dyaks believe the disease is still hanging
about in the Julau.
An inquiry was held in the Saratok Court con-
cerning the boundary between the farming land of
the Malays and Dyaks in the Awik river. Haji
Rusin, giandson of the former tua Kampong by name
Nakhoda Braim, raised the question and complained
that his farming marks had been pulled up by Ran-
tai on land which he claimed to hold as his own. on
both sides of the Awik above S. Malong up to 8.
Luan. Some eight years ago he started a garden at
8. Mitas and planted various fruit trees there without:,
any protest being made.
It was, of course, the duty of the Penguin to seo-
that no trespass was made on the Dyak lands if the
Dyaks .were afraid to protest. After going into the
matter the boundary is declared to be the mouth of
Malong stream and any Malays claiming or farming
land beyond this are liable to a fine of $50, ns how-
ever Haji Husins garden has been going for so many
years he is permitted to hold what he has planted up
and boundary posts were put up under the super-
vision of the Dyak and Malay Chiefs.
H. Husin then desired to raise the question of'
Malays owning durian or other fruit trees beyond the
boundary higher up the Awik. but no answer was
given him as I consider that if questions are raised
about the ownership of fruit trees further up river
they had best be settled each case on its own merits .
I left for Kabong on the 21st and after holding
Court there and settling certain matters went on to- '
Pusa on the 25th.
When I left Kabong the Kampong people wefe engaged in putting up the new Married Quarters for
the Fortmen and in one day had nearly done half*
the work (in theii- usual fashion)!
Court was held at Pusa on the 26th. Some
Chinese for making disturbances amongst them-
selves in the Pusa and Debak Bazaars weie fined.
The Government cocoanut plantation should have-
been clear of babas but I am sorry to say this was
not the case in spite of the advantageous weather
we are enjoying when all jungle growth should be
cleared and burned in every plantation.
I left Puss for Betong at 1.50 A. M. by moon-light
and in 5 hours 50 minutes arrived at Betong on
August 27th.
I found more Court work at Betong than I could
get through in the time I had allowed myself but
this was chiefly owing to the dilatory way in which
persons put off coming to Court for the first two
days of my visit, and yet all had been warned before-
hand.
Mr. Owen had fixed the Peace-making at L. Antu
for September 3rd, and I got together most of the
Saribas representatives to go to Simanggang with
me on August 30th. Pengulu Biju had to attend to
some pressing land cases so did not go but the
Peugulus Insul, Sang, Mollah, Sujang, and the
Abang-AbangLana, Ain, Sredin, etc., and their
followers went to Simanggang on the day I did.
I left Betong for Simanggang on the 30th at 3.15
A. M. on a very dark morning and reached Pengkalan
Jungkong in 4 hours after a wet and slippery walk.
Upon reaching Simanggang it was found that two
out of the six rolls of silver (each roll being $50)
which were to be sent from the Betong to the
Simanggang Treasury were missing and two rolls
of clay made up to resemble them had been sub-
stituted. I had injured my feet walking over and
was not in a condition to undertake the walk a
second time at such short notice but Mr. Owen
volunteered to go to Betong and make the necessary
inquiriesalthough he was to leave for Lubok Antu
on September 1st. Mr. Owen left at 9 r. M. on the-
3 Oth to hold an inquiry about the missing money at
feet deepgot lower and lower for want of rain the
water got more and more dirty and malodorous. I
took advantage of the unusually prolonged drought
to clear out the old well near the cattle-shed (which
so far as I know has not been cleared out since Mr.
Chapman's time), and repaired the bilian posts and
sides. I have given orders to put a padlocked door
to it so that persons cannot use it to bathe in and
the Government staff will be able to get drinking and
cooking water therethey have indeed no other
place on this side of the river whence they can obtain
water.
There were applications from several respectable
Malays to purchase guns to protect their young
cocoanut plantations from the wild pigs. There are
several new gardens across river at Kabong and up
the Sesang, near the mouth, on old me tang lands.
These metang are old sand banks left by the sea
receding some years ago. When the old j angle is
cleared off these places such fruits and vegetables as
bananas, cocoanuts, water-melons, sugar-cane, ubi,
kladium. etc., etc., so essential for the fish-eating
people of Kabong, flourish and do very well there.
Some of the planters have, I understand, taken up
their permanent residence in their gardens across
river and in my opinion every encouragement should
be given them by the Government.
I found the raised walk to the sands in a ven
neglected and dangerous state and this in spite of the
fact that the Chief had himself come to grief when
crossing by it a short time before! When I pointed
this out he had it repaired temporarily. I have now
given orders that it is to be built permanently before
October 7th.
A new house for the cowman was built on the road
to the cattle shed, the old house had not been occupied
for some years and was a ruin.
The Fortmens (married) Quarters are to be re-
built of leaf before the N. E. Monsoon; they are no
longer safe, having been very badly constructed when
put up before Xmas 1905 by the Kampong people.
It is a pity that no permanent quarters have ever
been built here for the Fort men and their Families.
I believe that a permanent bilian building (of seven
rooms with a verandah and a bath-room at each end)
could be built here for about $900 (building gets
more and more expensive every year but the expense
could be spread over a couple of years) and a
permanent building would save calling people out
for this work in future and be more satisfactoryboth
to the people concerned and to the Government.
Whilst I was at Kabong a Pusa Malay by name
Jin was taken by a crocodile at S. Samaludam and
the same day the Malays, owing, I presume, to the
dry weather, were able to surround the beast and
killed it with spears and swords; it measured 15 feet.
During the previous month a Chinaman was taken
by a crocodile at Roban.
The PeugulusEngkamat and Sumpingcame
down from the Sablak to Kabong to attend Court as
also did Abang Ringgit from Roban.
I left for Saratok on the 13th and did a good
passage (5 hours).
A case of small-pox broke out in Rantai's house
(Awik) just before the amalgamated Feast (Gawai
Enchabuarung and G. Tras) was held there by P.
Munan of Sibu, towards the end of July. The
ptftient was taken back to his house in the Budo
stream but died before he got there. This delayed
P. Dunggat and most of his people coming to Court
and they did not come until the 19th and I was dis-
appointed at the number of cases.
Court was held upon five occasions at Saratok. I
was surprised to hear from Dunggat that Penguin
Janting and thirty-seven of his house had died of
small-pox some time ago and it would appear as if
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 3, 1907.
235
Belong, and this will delay the Peace-making, I expect, one day.
During my absence from Sinianggang His Lordship the Bishop paid his usual visitation to the Missions at Banting and Sabu. His Lordship was in the Batang Lupar river from July 19th to August .3rd and I much regret having been away from /S.iTnanggang during his stay there. Mr. Owen how- -cVer had the pleasure of entertaining him.
' I,was glad to see on my return to my headquarters .that Mr. Owen had taken advantage of the dry Wtether to put through a good deal of burning work (old tree trunks etc.,) on the plain. The old leaf bokt-shed was entirely rebuilt (it had become very rotten.) the palm-oil plantation at the first mile was again cleared and portions of jungle on the outsides burned.
The new squad of 8. Rangers arrived on the -23rd.
D. J. S. BAILEY,
*	Resident.
The Sarawak Gazette
THE Subscription to the Sarawak Gazette is as follows.
Payable in local currency
' . Single number ...	...	... $0.10
Subscription for 1 year	...	... 1.00
y Do including postage to Outstation ... )
Do	do to Singapore ... 1.50
n Do	do to England ...I
Payable in Sterling
For 1 year (including postage to places
in the Postal Union) ... JIR. 6d.
All subscription payable in
advance.
Yearly subscriptions are renewable on the 1st January.
Subscriptions will wot be renewed unless ?due notice is given. All broken periods will be considered as full.
Subscribers are requested to notify changes of address to the Editor in writing.
RATES OP ADVERTISEMENTS in the Sarawak gazette
-?*
Paubale in afvance.
.Advertisement of 12 lines and under
First insertion ...	...	... $1.00
Second and third insertion each	... 0.50
Subsequent do	do	... 0.25 .
Advertisement of half a Column and under
First insertion ...	...	... 2.00
Second and thin! insertion each	... 1.00
Subsequent do	do	... 0.50
Advertisement of a Column and under
First insertion each	...	... 8.00
Second and third insertion each	... l.(X)
Subsequent do	do	... 0-75
Special arrangements may be mode for standing udver- tisemeuls.
All communications intended for insertion in the Sarawak gazette must be directed to the Editor at the Government Printing Office, Kuching, and sent so as to reach the Office by the 26th of the month at latest or their pubheation will have to be deferred until the next issue.
Letters and other contributions must be authenticated by writers name sent privately to the Editor.
We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not inserting them.
Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early intelligence of all matters of general interest in their respective neighbourhoods.
Notice*
/ ENTI.EMEN are requested to pay all Gazette nub- '? scriptions and Printing Office Bills to the undersigned in future.
For the convenience of those unable to send cheques. Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of stuns not over 11.50but only the 2 and 4 cent values will be accepted.
Foreign subscribers to the Sarawak (iaiette are requested to send remittances by Post Office Order " not by Postal Order as the latter cannot be cashed in Sarawak.
F. G. DAY.
Notice.*
Astana Farm Produce.
Terms Monthly.
ILL be supplied to customers at the following rates:
Milkper quart bottle	... 10 cents
Butterper lb ...	...	... SO Eggseach . ...	...	... 1 Orders, which should be addressed to the undersigned, attended to without delay.
J. STAPLES,
Notice.
THE WELL KXOHA
Singer and Wheeler & Wilson Sewing M...'Lines cun be purchased on easy terms. All we ask is 5 dollars down and 3 dollars per month.
A'liberal discount allowed for Cash.
Apply to
TAN BOON SIEW,
Aye nt,
SixtiEit SEWING MACHINE CO., C/O SYN HIN LEONG & Co
Kuching, Sarawak.
28th March, 1907.
NOTICE.
?	NOTICE is hereby given that a Share Certificate of the SARAWAK AND SINGAPORE STEAMSHIP COMPANY, LD. in the name of MOLASSAH MAHOMAT KASSLM Co. for five shares numbered 3,387 to 3,391 has been missing for some time past If this Certificate be not produced, within three months from date it will be accounted null and void and a new Certificate will be issued.
THE BORNEO COMPANY, LIMITED AGENTS FOR
THE SARAWAK AND SINGAPORE STEAMSHIP CO. LD.
Kuching, Sarawak, 30th September, 1907.
23G	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 3, 1907.
Kuching Foreign Trade Returns for We month of Aug. 1907.
IMPOSTS.
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
Aerated Water ...
cases
229
8 [2,510
Ammunition
92
Arrack, etc	1.115
Biscuits	...
3,229
Binchan
piculs
14
184
Blankets
1	95
Beads...
490
Brass * Copper-ware	...
1.299
Boots A Shoes ...	...
137
Butter A Cheese...
354
Caudles	...
768
Canvas	...	...
748
Cement
casks
607
2,786
Clocks and Watches	...
27
Cloth Cotton
54,604
Silk
520
Clothing Cotton
11,882
Silk
45
Cocoannts	...
Nt .
7,870
284
Coffee
Liberian etc....
piculs
80
738
In tins	...	...
' 185
Coprah	...	? ...
picnls
148
1,810
Cotton Seed
825
Crockery A Glass-ware
6.612
Curry stuffs A Sauce etc.
1,558
Cyanide etc.
cases
114
4,950
Damar	...	...
869
Drugs and Chemicals
6.385
Eggs (salted)
N CL
*15,005
307
Exports Returned to Shippers
100
Fire-arms
160
Fire-works
857
Fish
Dried
piculs
154
8.181
Salted
piculs
72
885
Xu tins	1,293
Flour ...
bags
2.848
5,784
Fruit
Fresh
2.084
Dried	...	...
3.298
In tins
687
Furniture
761
Ghee ...	...	...
piculs
10
414
Gold ...
ox.
49
1,650
Grains
Beans and peas	...
piculs
056
4 242
Padi	piculs
182
410
Rice
picnls
21,385
97,835
Other Sorts ...
piculs bales
2,060
4.221
Gunnies new
188
12,911
Do old
bundles
. 125
1,769
H :ims and Bacons
25
Bats ...	...	...
470
Iron-ware
13,317
Japanese Curios ...
610
Joss Sticks and Papers
5.014
Kerosine Oil
eases
4,146
12.985
Lard .. Lamps
piculs
228
5,322
741
Leather
picnls
15
890
Live stock
Poultry ...	...
No.
L215
762
Swine	...	...
heads
261
5.210
Machinery
4,047
Mats ...
1,045
Matches
cases
104
2,158
Miucaroui A Vermicelli
1.752
Milk Condensed ...
cases
280
2,405
Oils ...
piculs
562 10,311
Opium raw
chests
25
23,000
Paint, Varnish A Tar
2,842
Papers
8,895
Provisions Sundry
1,762
Prawns
piculs
11
245
Do Refuse
piculs
3,058
11.417
Rubber seeds and Plants
140
Rickshaws
293
Rope
Coir
coils
47
986
Manila
coils
10
295
Wire
coil
1
189
Carry forward ...
858,278
IMPORTS.(Continued./
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
Brought forward
358,278
Salt ...
piculs
8,258 4,200
Silverware
150
Soap ...
1.518
Stationery and Books
1.032
Straw hats (Chinese)
59
Straw Shoes (Chinese)
191
Sugar
picnls
* 2,188
12.777
Sundries
2.254
Tea in Bundles ...
boxes
270
8,588 ?
Tea in Tins
249
Timber
8.673
Twine and Thread
4,609
Tobaccos
in tins Cigars A Cigarettes
17,185
Chinese
cases
242
9.518
Pbang Java A S'robok etc.
picnls
191
11.864
Bad or Pepper
picnls
150 8,757
Treasure
87.859
Trepang
picul
1
50 Tuba ...
1,085-
Vegetables	f
Fresh
2,222
Salted
8.895
In tins
25
Wayang Effects ...
4,000-
Wines and spirits
8,564
Zinc ...
3.866
TOTAL VALUE
$545,916-
Brought forward
2,697.923
Total Value to Date
11
1906
3.204.784
EXPORTS.
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
Antimony
tons
131
6,458
Ant-eater-skins ...
picul
5
Betel-nuts
piculs
656)
3,019-
Becs-wax	...	...
picnls
4
208
Birds-nests
picul.
1
520
Bluchan
picnls
14
95
Brass-ware
475
Camphor
catties
804
Charcoal
picnls
78 48
Cloth ...
720
Coffee (Liberian) ...
picnls
50
1,000
Coprah
picnls
78
720
Crockery-ware ...
863
Cutch
piculs
793 3.868
Damar
picnls
518
1.204
Dynamite
CflMS
250
Eggs (Turtle)
No.
29,000
188
Empties
1.674
Fish ...
picnls
858 5.172
Gambier	...	...
piculs
812 4,954
Gold ...
ozs.
6.8:17
130.700
Galiga
taels
2
98
Gutta jaugkar ...	...
piculs
252 8,660
do Jelotoug ...
piculs
6,487
81.188
do percha
piculs
55 5,993
Hides
picnls
6 137
Imports Returned to Shippers
4.765
India Rnbber
piculs
231
28.542
Iron-ware	...	...
783
Kajangs
1
Kerosine Oil
cases
72 191
Matches
C'llhWS
14
304
Mats ...
452
Machinery
500
N. H. Specimens...
98-1
Oils ...
11111311 8
145
Paddy
piculs
8
18
Pearl Bago	...
piculs
1 7
Pepper (white) ...
piculs
10,5941
262,223
De (black) ...
picnls
1.024 14.856
Prawns (dried) ...
picul
I
10-
Rattans No. 1 sega etc.
piculs
97:
976
Rattans No. 2 temoi etc.
picnls
1,646
4.561
Rice ...
piculs
154 756
Sago Hour	...
piculs
91,280
Sugar...
piculs
6
42
Sugar nipa
picnls
261
72
Carry forward ...
...
614,874
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 3, 1907.
237
EXPORTS.(Continued.)
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
Brought forward
4614,874
Sundries
1,086
Tea (Matang)
boxes	12
too
Timber
:JO
Timber (manufactured)
23
Treasure	...	...
10,300
Wayang effects ...
2,000
Zinc
iM
TOTAL VALUE
$628,766
Brought forward
3,694,083
Total Value to Date
4,322.849
1906
44,223,995
Knelling, Coasting Trade Returns for the month of Ang. 1907.
IMPORTS. .
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
Coal	...
tons
1,139
9,185
Damar
piculs
368
718
Gutta Jangkar ...
piculs
289
8,075
Gutta Jelotoug ...
piculs
6,651.
29,609
Gutta Percha
piculs
70J
7.140
India Rubber ...	. ...
piculs
277 26.013
Pepper (white) ...
do (black) ...
piculs
?" :
20,172
piculs
231
3.077
Rattans No. 1 sega etc.
piculs
575 5,203
Do No. 2 temoi etc.
piculs
1,993 4.760
Rice ...
piculs
74
SOI
Sago flour
piculs
1,807
5,420
49,031
Do raw
t pms
98,062
Sundries
14,726
Treasure
11,057
TOTAL VALUE
9189,488
Brought forward
1,326,280
Total Value to Date ...
1,515,768
1906
41.360,299
EXPORTS.
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
Brass-ware Iron-ware Jars ...
Oil Kerosine
Opium Rice ... Sundries
'Treasure	...	...
TOTAL VALUE Brought forward
Total Value to Date ...
No. **	85
cases	1,338
piculs	3,112 920 1,009
700 3,563 5,210 15,009 72,671 30,945
1906	...
$130,027
842,596
972.623
4965,025
C. C. ROBISON, Uejittrar of Trade.
PASSENGERS.
ARRIVALS.
PER p. 8. Adeh:From Sibu, 1st September, Mr. A. J. Cutfield.
PER S. S. Alice Lorraine:From Limbang, 4th September, Revd. Father Smeele.
PER s. s. Rajah of Sarawak:From Singapore, 12th Sep-
tember, Mr. A. E. Lange.
PER p. 8. Adeh:From Sibu, 17th September, Very Revd. Father E. Dunn, and Revd. Father Jansen.
PER p. s. Kaka:From Baram, 19th September, Mr. and Mrs. Hewitt.
PEH S. s. llajah of Sarawak:From Singapore, 19th September, the Revd. and Mrs. Woodd ana Mr. and Mrs. Maddocks.
PER S. S. Alice Lorraine: -From Limbang. and Brookn- ton, 22nd September. Mr. I Kirkpatrick from Lawas and Mr. H. Hogg from Brooketon.
PER s. s. Kuching:From Singapore, 26th September, Mr. R. Pawle, Mr. H. W. V. Scott and Mr. and Mrs. Spampam.
DEPARTURES.
PER p. s. Kaka: For Baram, 1st September, Mr. and Mrs. Hewitt.
PERS.8. Kuching: For Singapore, 3rd September, Mr. S. Tomlinson, Mr. and Mrs. Grove, Miss Joyce Grove and Master Geoffery Grove.
PER H. H. S. Zuhora:For Sibu, 6th September. His Highness The Rajah Muda and Mr. A. J. Cutfield.
PER s. s. Alice Lorraine:14th September, Miss Olver for Lingga, and Mr. H. Hogg for Brooketon.
PER S. s. Kuching:For Singapore, 17th September, ( apt. Harrison, Mr. A. E. Lange and Mrs. Waddell and child.
PER H. H. S. Zahora:For Sibu, vid Lingga, 20th September, Mr. O Lang.
PER p. s. Adeh:For Sadong, 20th September, Mr. and Mrs. Maddocks.
PER S. S. Rajah of Sarawak:For Singapore. 24th September, Mr. J. H. Brodie, Dr. Barker and Miss Hastie.
PER p. s. Kaka:For Baram, 24th September, Rqvd. Father Jansen.
PER H. H. S. Zahora:For Sibu, 28th September, Mr. I. Kirkpatrick.
S H x P PIA .
Arrivals.
VESSELS NAME.
FLAG, AND Rio.
, CAPTAINS OR NAI ODAS.
FROM.
1
Adeh
Sar. str.
189
[ Jeman
Sibu
8j
T. K. Batu Arang Kim Seng Guan Sarawak
sch.
64
I Allan
Sadong
4
,
Sait
Saeh
4
str.
Hj. Mat
Oya
4
Alice Lorraine
..
140
Jara-ee
Limbang
llajah of Sarawak
892
Moxon
Singapore
.1
Kim Chin Siang
54
Daud
Muka
6
Sri Marion
Jahar
Labuan
6
Kim Chin Soon
,/J
Hj. Saat
Oya
6
Kim Watt .-Inn
67
Muka
6
Soon Seng Watt
1 71
A. Yiinmn
Sadong
9
Kim Chin Teck
1
Hj. Assim
Mat u
9
Kaka
str.
222
Bandoug
Baram
10
Sri Pembrian
sch.
79
Abg. Sap-ei
Sadong
11
Kian Moh
66
Seman
Oya
12
Kuching
str.
903
j Waddell i
Singapore
14
Sin Stan Ann
sch.
50
i .11. .
Oya
14
Sri Marion
80
Juhiir
Sadong 16
Sarawak
str.
46
! Hj. Mat
Rintulu
Adeh
sch.
189
1 Jeman
Sibu
18
Fatahorrahman
101
Hj. Husin '
Muka
18
M. N. Sri Jempaka
78
Tku. Hassan
Sibu
19
Jah Ranee
72
Hj. Ali
19
Soon Seng IVa/f
71
A. Yainan
Sadong
19
Rajah of Sarawak
str.
892
Moxon
Singapore
20
1utri Dungan
sch.
52
Deli
1 Daro
20
T. K. Batu Arang
61
Allan
Sadong
20
Kaka
222
Bandoug
Bar tun
Sarawak
46
Hj. Mat
Oya
22
Alice Lorraine
140
Jara-ee
Limbang
23
Kim Chin Slang
sch.
54
Daud
Muka
1
Kiu Watt .Inn
67
Husin
26;
Kuching
str.
903
' Waddoll
Singapore
27
Kim Chin Soon
sch.
MJ
Hj. Sa-at
Oya
28
Tong Kang
Tkg.
Tek
Lundu
28
Sri Pembrian
7'3
Abg. Sap-ei
Sadong
80[
Sarawak
str.
If.
Hj. Mat
Oya
238
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 3. 1907.
Departures.
1 way
VESSELS NARK.
FLAO I z AND Ria.1 CAPTAINS OR N'AKODAS.
FOR.
1
Kaka
Snr. str.i 222
Baiidoug
Bnram
Ka ta ho rra h i a i
sell. 101
i Hj. Husin
Mnka
2
.V. Srt Jinipaka
7
1 Tku. Hnssnn
'!
Sri Pembrian
79
Abg. Snpe-ee
Sadong
G
Kuching
str. 903
1 Waddell
Singapore
4
Put ri Dtingun
sell. 52
Deli
? Daro
ft
Adeh
str. 189
Jeninn
Sibu
9
SOON Seng Hu//
sch. 71
A. Ynninn
1 Sadong
II
auu Seng Guan
.. 1 73
, Snit
Matn
9
Sri Marion
..	80
1 .lahar
1Sadong
10
Ki n Chin Soon
..	59
Hj. Sn-at
Oya
10
Rajah of Sarawak
,. str. 892
Moxon
Singapore
Biutulu
11
Sarawak
..	46
Hj. A. Mat
111
Kim Chin Siang
sch. 54
Daud
Muka
12!
Kim Watt Ann
: ..	..	67
Jjitsiii
12
T. K. Batu Arang
..	..	64'
! Allan
Sadong
13.
Kaka
str. 222
1 Baiidong
Harun
1 i
Alice Lorraine 1 ..	.. 140
I Jara-ee
Limbang
14
Kiin Chin Tcck ,
sch. 61)
Hj. Assini
Muka
11.
Srt Marion
? -lahar
Sadong
17
Kian Moh
[ 66
Sema n
; Oya
Is
Kuching
Sarawak
.. str. 903
..	..	46
Waddell Hj. A Mat
Singapore
Ova
19;
Sri Pembrian
sell. 79
Ahg. Sap-ee
Sadong
util
Adeh
str. 189
Jeunui
Sibu
211
Sin Sian Ann
sell. 50
i
Oya
21 j
Katahorrahrnau
.. 101
Hj. Hnsin
Kaka
str. 222
Bandons 1
Barnin
ai Soon Seng H'atf 1
* scli 71
A. Yaiuan ;
Sadong
341
T. K. Batu 4rant) j
1
Allan
Singapore
24
Rajah of Sarawak
str. 892
Moxon
24
Hf. N. Sri Jempaka
sell. 73
Tku. Hassan
Oya
24
iifJidWdk
.. str. 4ft'
Hj. A. Mat
2H
Alice Lorraine
.. 140
Limbang
2H
Kim Chin Siang
sell. 54
Daud
Muka
Sri Marion
30
- f j t j1; 11
Sadong
30
Putri Jtungun
..	52
Deli
Daro
30
.Kiln Watt Ann
..	671
Hnsin
Muka
mi: "siiimik (iimr
ALMANAC.
rr BI 1007
Ell- 1 glish.
Chinese.
Mo'- dan.
J*
(y ! O
81
5 O rt
a
?!
J
- -.
Tu 1
8 24
s 23
W 2
25
J 24
Th 3
26
? 25
F 4
27
L 26'
c* I
X .7
*i 6
29
I 28
M 7
9 ]
1 IX1
Tu 8
1
W 9
3
. 2
Th 10
1
-
F 11
5
?3 4
H 13
?
Rani . iCL
M 14
8
*7
Tn 15
9
8
W 1G)
,10
'.i
Th 17
11
10
F .181
12
1 11
S 19
13
12
S 20
14
13 M !2h
15
14;
Tu 22
16
15;
W 23
17
16
Th 241
18
17
F '251
19
118
S 26
20
19
.
21
20
M 28
22
21
Tu )29
23
22
W ;30.
24
2;;
Tli 311
25
1241
St, Simon and St. Jttdr.
St. Luke.
MOON'S PHASES, ETC. 7th New moon* 14th First quarter j 21 st Full moon O 2Vth Last quarter Uniat: 1miM COmitieiieCH.
H. H. THE RANEE'S BIRTHDAY
High
water nt
Kuching.
11 39 0 211 1 10
I 52! 2 29
3 54 4 14
4 33; 4 51
6 12 6 30
9 3310 1
110 3611 16
111 59 0 51 1 36
. 2 161 2 53
4 13' 4 34
0 10 6 27
7 211 7 38
7 54 8 10
6 9 28
54 10 23
5611 33.
Arrivals.
DATE.
NAME OF VESSEL.
NAME OF CAITAIN.
WHERE FROM.
I CHINESE. NATIVES, OF INDIA-
1	ervum. Hale. Female
. OTHER ASIATICS.
TOTAL.
1907.
August	1
..	8
..	14
,,	15
,	22
1	24
i	29
S. S. Kuching
S. S. llajah of Sarawak
P. S. Kaka
\ S. S. Kuching
S. S. Rajah of Sarawak
Bandoug
Bdg. Mas Suit
S. 8. Kuching
.. W. Waddell
... E. T. Moxon
... Bandong
... W. Waddell
... E. T, Moxon
... Chua Check Hee
Sait Abdullah
... W. Waddell
Singapore Singapore Brooketon Singapore Singapore Skawang Pulo Tuju Singapore ;
89	3	4 ...
101	1	1	...
3 ...
59	5	4	...
:::
51	2	3	1.1
2
12 13 14
6
1 1
...
:::
101
105-
IB
82
51
3
62
_333 13 20 ...
53
2
421
Departures.
DATE.
NAME OF VESSEL.
NAME OF CAPTAIN.
WHITHER BOUND.
CHINESE.
NATIVES OF INDIA. Male. Female.
I OTHER 'ASIATICS. Female.
TOTAL.
Male. J
Female.
1907. I
Augusti 6
S. S. Kuching
W. Watldell
Singapore
67
3
10 ...
13 ? ...
92
.. P S. Kaka
Bandong
Brooketon
16
5	1
22
?. 9 .
Boat
Bujang
Sambas
... ..
3 I 1
4
13
S. S. Rajah of Sarawak ....
E. T. Moxon
Singapore
3 ...
21	4
103
13
Boat
Hj. Umar
Pumangkat
1 1 ...
1
19
Pee. S'wee Kong Long
Bujang
Pontianak.
4 ...
4
20;
S. S. Kuching	...J
W. Waddell
Singapore
128
3
3 ...
143
26
.Alice Lorraine
Jara-ee
Brooketon
28	5
33
.. 1 27
S. 8. Rajah of Sarawak
E. T. Moxon
Singapore
67
ii
10	4
92
.. Bandong
Chong Liong Po
Nanipawa
1
1
1
354
6
33 ...
87 15
495
C. C. BOBISON.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 3, 1907.
239
METEOROLOGICAL READINGS.
KUCHING OBSERVATORY.
Observations Taken Daily at S a. m. September, 1907.
TEMPERATURE.
3
3
a
Q
3?
2
3
6
8
9
10
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
26
27
28
29
30
3007 3004 3004
3001 29-99
30 00 30-04
30 07 .
30 05 1 30 06 30.06
3007 30 05
3006 3005
30 06 30 07
30 09 30-10 30-10
30 03 29-98
30 05 3007
3005 3002 30-00 29-97 29-98 30-02
90-1
89M
894
90-6
884
89-5
8H-3
90-4
91 4
935
925
91 9
90-4
893 88-3 87-2
8s (
89-9
88.7
89-1
89-7
89 1
766
90-4
850 90-7
853
91-6
88-3
88-4
70-8
71-6
731
71-1
721 72-2 73-3
70 2
721 731
731
71 6 72-2 721
723
70-9
729
73-9
731
740
74-2
73-2
73-6
74-7 70-3
ra-61 70-8
768
761
77-9
763
791
811
762
76-6
760
81-1
750
795
763
758
78-1
78-3
790
79-9
746
74 6
743
74 6 I
760
76*3
776'
70-5
70 4 71-6
7201
72-8
70-0
6 721
73-7
74-9
704
74-6
73 9
76-8
731
76-4
73-0
725
74-0
75-4
74-8
73-8
74-6
76-4
76-8
71-8 71-4 73 4 720 705
7IO
71-8
72-9
73-5
76-6 72-8 ]
74-8- 73-31
1520 150-8
1502 1520 136-8
1490 146-6 146'8 150-1)
1502 150 0 1520 1510 144-8 158-8 140-9 149-9 150 1 149-6 153-2
[030 147 6 137 2 154 0 139-4 1501 1520 145-8
Fine do do do
Dull Fine Dull do
Fme do do do
Dull Fine Dull do do
Fine Dull Fine do
Dull Fine Rain Fine do do
Dull Rain
hrs. inin. 3 10
500
600
5 00' 5-40 6-30 JOO 8.40
7 40 5*10
1-50
430
250
7 4 4 50 5-30 5-40
30
7 10 300 6-30
5-30
3-10
310
139
32
113
20
16
49
?40
01
10
31
?04
62
22
.06
13
03 05
Highest temperature recorded 93-5 F.
Lowest .,	,,	70 2 F.
Total rainfall during the month 10.71 inches.
Height of observatory above sea level 100 feet approximately.
KUCHING:Printed and Published by GHIX HE NO SON, Government Printer, at the Sarmo tk (/iit'ie rfi ee. Nos. 19. 21), and 21, Court House Road.
