
VOL. XXXVII.
No. 495.
Price	THURSDAY, APRIL 4, 1907.	10 cents.
CONTENTS.
BIIITH.
ORDERS:Sailors taking dischargeAdulteration of Gutta .IimgknrLeper CampFirearms.
NOTIFICATIONS :Outstation Money Orders-Postcards -Money Orders Advice of Payment.
NOTICES :- Bankruptcy Court (Kuching)Probate (Simang- gang)To Master? of vessels entering SadongBankruptcy (Bau)	Bankruptcy (Kabong)Sale of Land Grant No.
800Wanted, Land Grant No. 842 of 3rd March 1907 Sale of Land Grants 684 and 792.
STRAITS SETTLEMENTS COINAGE PROCLAMATIONAPPOINTMENTS SARAWAK RACKS. 1907 THE ADVANTAGES OF A GOLD COINAGE THE CHINESE INSTITUTECLAY PIGEON SHOOTING AT Smu Ova NOTES.
MONTHLY REPORTS:Lower Rejnng-Baram--Lundu- -Sadong Ma tang EstateBintnluBauKalakaSimanggang M ukaOyn LinibangIAiwasKapit.
ADVERTISEMENTSPASSENGER LISTTRADE RETURNS- SHIPPINGALMANACMETEOROLOGICAL READINGS.
The Sarawak Gazette.
THURSDAY, APRIL 4, 1007.
Birth.
WADDELLAt Cheriton," Singapore, on the 20th March, the wife of Capt. WADDELL, S. S. Kuching, of a daughter.
Order.
No. I, 1907.
SAILORS signing Articles for a year and working on board Government vessels are not allowed in future to take their discharge or elect substitutes without first makiug application at the Residents Office.
Certificates of discharge to sailors to be issued only by the Shipping Master.
See Order August 28th, 1899.
C. V. BROOKE.
Rajah Muda.
Kuching, Sarawak, 31st January, 1907.
Order.
No. II, 1907.
WHERLAS complaint has been made that Gutta Jangka is dicing brought into the market. adulterated with raw sago, clay and other foreign matter.
I hereby direct that any person or persons found guilty of the adulteration of Gutta Jangka or other jungle produce shall be punished by a fine nnt exceeding $100 or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, and the adulterated produce may be confiscated at the discretion of the Court.
17(7c Order re Adulteration of Gutta Jelutong, 15th April, 1902.
C. V. BROOKE,
Rajah Muda. Kuching, Sarawak,
31st January, 1907.
Order.
No. Ill, 1907.
I HEREBY direct that on and after the 1st proximo the Leper Camp at 5th mile shall be entirely under the superintendence of the Medical Department and not as hitherto of the Police. The Principal Medical Officer or his Deputy will therefore on and after that date be responsible for all arrangements connected with the supply of food for the Camp and will report whenever necessary on matters concerning it to the Honble the Resident 1st Division.
C. V. BROOKE.
Rajah Muda. Kuching, Sarawak,
13th March, 1907.
76
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 4, 1907.
Order-
No. IV, 1907.
THE following regulations regarding the import of Firearms into Sarawak are published for general information.
1 .Any person desirous of importing any Firearm into Sarawak must in first place obtain a 'Permit to do so from Resident's Office in Kuching and after the firearm in question has been imported it will be necessary for the owner to obtain a license to carry same. Europeans or others newly arriving in the Country and bringing in any firearms will have same detained in the Customs Department until production of the necessary Permit."
2 .The above mentioned Permits and Licenses are not transferable unless authority has been obtained authorizing the transfer and any person so offending will be liable to a fine not exceeding $ 100.
3 .Before importing ammunition it is also necessary to take out a Permit" and the ammunition imported is to be for personal use and not for sale or disposal otherwise except with special permission. The penalty for any iufringment of this regulation will be the same as for unauthorized transfer of firearms.
By order of His Highness The Rajah Muda.
P. F. CUNYNGHAME,
Resident 1st Division. Resident's Ofiice,
Kuching. Sarawak,
23rd March, 1907.
Notification.
No. LXIV, 1906.
No order may contain a fraction of a cent, of
ft penny or of an anna. Orders on or through**
the United Kingdom and India should be
calculated in accordance with the tables
supplied by the Post Office, and the commis-
sion added.
The cheques, accompanied by the special
printed application form (Outstation Money
Order application), should be drawn in favour
of, and forwarded to, the Postmaster General,
Kuching.
In the ease of Money Orders (1) on Kuching,
(2) on or through the United Kingdom and
(3) on the Strait Settlements, an actual form
of Money Order is issued for transmission to
the payee and in order to avoid delay, and
provided the application is accompanied by a
fully stamped and addressed envelope, the
Money Order will bte forwarded to him direct
by the Kuching Post Office at the remitters
risk; otherwise it will be sent to the Postal
Officer applying.
The envelope may contain the remitters
advice to the payee but the Post Office accepts
no responsibility in case of loss and it is ad-
visable to send it separately.
In the case of Money Orders on (4) the
, Federated Malay Statesand (5) on or through
India no form of Money Order is issued to
the remitter as the paying office issues and
j forwards a Money Order to the payee, and the
? above paragraph as to stamped and addressed
envelope does not therefore apply.
A form of acknowledgment will be forward-
ed by the Kuching office to the Postal Officer
applying, for transmission to the remitter-who
should retain same and advise the payee as
to remittance.
NOTIFICATION of 17th January 1906 is here-
by cancelled and the following regulations are
substituted and will come into force on 1st
January 1907.
After receipt of the amount of the money
-order required and the commission (2 cents
on every dollar or part of a dollar, with a
minimum of 10 cents) Officers in charge of
Outstations may issue cheques on the Sara-
wak Treasury for Money Orders on the follow-
ing places or countries.
1. Kuching (maximum $100).
* 2. United Kingdom (maximum 40) and
through the Inited Kingdom on various Bri-
tish Dependencies and Foreign coun-
tries. (For maximum and other particulars
see postal Guide.)
3. Straits Settlements maximum $100.)
4. Federated Malay States t maximum
$100.)
5. India and through India on Burma and
Ceylon ' maximum Rs. 600.)
1. These orders are intended for payment of small accounts only
and should not be issued to traders who may appear to be making use
of them for their usual trade remittances.
" 2. Orders issued through the United Kingdom are subject to the
following deductions in Loudon when being advised to the country of
payment.
For sums not exceeding 3	3d.
For every additional 3 or fraction thereof 3d.
By order of the Officer
Administering the Government.
C. C. ROBISON,
Postmaster-General.
j 1st January. 1907.
Notification.
No. LXVIII, 1906.
Post-Cards.
POST-CARDS impressed with a stamp of the value
of one cent, and double or reply-paid Post-Cards im-
pressed with a stamp of the value of one cent on
I each portion of them, may be transmitted between
places in Sarawak. These cards can be forwarded
to other places outside of Sarawak, if the additional
postage required is supplied by means of postage
stamps affixed to the cards.
I Post-Cards impressed with a stamp of the value of
4 cents and double or reply paid Post-Cards impress-
ed with a stamp of the value of 4 cents on each por-
tion of them, may be sent to all parts of the world.
Prhatr Post-Cards.
Private post-cards will be accepted Jby the Post
j Office in Sarawak for transmission under the follow-
ing conditions:
a) Private post-cards must be composed of ordinary canl-
' board, or paper sufficiently stont not to hinder their mauipnla-
j tion; they must not exceed a maximum size of 51 inches by
i inches, and the minimum size must not be less tlinn 4 inches
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 4, 1907.
77
by 2? inches. Prepayment of a private Post card addressed to any place in Sarawak, can bo effected by means of a one- cent Sarawak postage stamp affixed to it; and if addressed to any other destination prepayment can be effected bv means of a Sarawak postage stomp or stamps for 4 cents affixed to it.
fl ) Double or reply-paid private post-cards will be accepted, and postage can bo prepaid by stamps affixed as stated above ! to each half of the double card.
The inscription Post cards is not compulsory for single post-cards of private manufacture, but the reply halves of private double cards must bear the title Post-cards. In no case is any other heading prescribed/1
(d) A private Post-card posted without a postage stamp will be charged, on delivery, with double postage per single card or for each half of a reply card.
Rules Applying to Official and Private Post-Cards.
li Post-cards bearing written or printed communications on the left band half of the address side can be sent to all British Possessions to which penny postage applies and to certain other countries already notified. It is not compnlsory to affix the postage stamps to the address side, but the public is strongly urged to do so.';:
(2) Engravings or advertisements, provided they do not interfere in any way with the clear indication of the address or with the stamping or marking of the Postal Service, may appear on the front of a card, in addition to the name and address of the recipient in writing or on a gnmtnsd label not exceeding 2 inches by J inch, and the name andaoddress of the sender indicated in writing, or by means of a hand stamp, stamping machine or any other typographical process.
(3i In addition to stamp's for prepayment Post cards may bear address-labels as above described, and engravings, illustrations, drawings and photographs on very thin paper mav be affixed to the back or to the left hand half of the address side, provided they are completely adherent."
(41 A Post-Card must not be folded, cut or otherwise altered.
(5) Cards bedring the inscription Post-card arc allowed to go nt the reduced rate of pottage for prinleif matter, provided th eg conform to the general regulations respecting prinC ?/gape,*. If they are not in accordance with the regulations for printed papers or with the rules applicable to Port- cards they are treated a* letters.
(fl) The sender of a reply-paid Post-Card is recommended to write his name and address on the stamped side of the reply- portion of the double card- The reply halves of double Post Cortis are available for return to the country of origin, and to that country only. If addressed to other countries they are treated as unpaid Post-Cards
(7) Ordinary international Post-Cards of one country posted in another are treated as unpaid Post-Cards.
These regulations will apply to Post-Cards of all kinds whether addressed to places in the United Kingdom Sarawak, the Straits Settlements. Federated Malay States or Johore; but, although there is reason to believe that the same course will be generally adopted, no guarantee can at present be given that the same privileges will be allowed by the Post Offices of other Countries.
C. C. ROBISON,
Postmaster-General.
Notice,
No. II, 1907.
IN THE BANKRUPTCY COURT, KUCHING.
lu the goods of Lim Sam Kwi, pepper planter of 1J mile Rock Road. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Jong Nuik Lee, pepper planter of Sinmnggo. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Ng Pai, pepper planter of Shuunggo. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Wong Uh. Dhobi, of Kuching. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Tian Joo Fai, Chop Tian Nyuk Lee. shopkeeper and pepper planter of Sungie Moyan. (Fraudulent Bankrupt.)
In the goods of Kuan Kiew and Kuan Lin, pepper planters of Paku. (A bsconded.)
In the goods of Chong Peng, pepper planter of Sungie Tenga. (A bsconded.)
In the goods of Liew Hee Kwee, pepper planter of Samarahan. (Absconded.)
All creditors and other persons having any claim whatsoever against the Estates of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned on or before the 15th April, 1907, after which date the assets of the above named will be divided amongst the parties entitled thereto regard being had only to those claims of which notice shall have been given. And ail moneys owing to the above Estates shall be paid to the undersigned forthwith.
JOHN E. A. LEWIS,
Resident 2nd Class.
Bankruptcy Court, Kuching, 30th January, 1907.
Notice.
No. Ill, 1907.
Re Ngo Ah Hin. (Deceased.) Trader at Robau Bazaar, Kalaka.
ALL creditors and other persons having any claims whatsoever against the Estate of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned within three (3) months from date, after which date the assets of the above named will be divided amongst the parties entitled thereto regard being had only to those claims of which notice shall have been given. And all monies owing to the above Estate shall be paid to the undersigned forthwith.
J. BARING-GOULD.
Resident 2nd Class.
Simanggang, 7th February, 1907.
Notice.
No. VI, 1907.
To maaterai of Malliiijr veMHeh HIKI
HtemnerH eutei-iiifc Kadong.
THE remains of the old wharf are marked at night by a white light and the new wharf about 100 yards further up-river and directly below Kuala Simunjan by a red light.
The Simunjan River, having silted up, is not navigable for schooners or steamers except at high tide.
D. A. OWEN, Resident.
78
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 4, 1907.
Notice.
No. VII, 1907.
lit Liew Mooi and Lee Seb, chop Shin Hap. f.1 bscujuled.) Traderin Shak Loong Mun Bazaar. ALL creditors and other persons having any claim whatsoever against the Estate of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned within three (3) months from date, after which date the assets of the above named will be divided amongst the parties entitled thereto, regard being had only to those claims of which notice shall have been given. And all monies owing to the said Estate shall be paid to the undersigned forthwith.
E. R. STILWELL. Resident, Upper Sarawak.
Bau,
March 1st, 1907.
Notice-
No. VIII, 1907.
IN re Tau Ah Chafe (Kan Chew Chinese), a pepper planter in the Ibus stream, Kalaka, against whom a warrant was issued on December 9th, 1906, for absconding under ad rances, it is hereby notified that all creditors and other persons having any claims whatsoever against the Estate of the above are requested to send particulars to the undersigned within three months from date, after which date the assets of the above named will be divided amongst the parties entitled thereto.
By order of the Resident.
A. E. CHEYNE. Clerk io Court of Requests.
Kabong,
March 1st, 1907.
Notice.
No. IN, 1907.
Ue Taha (laki Sara) of Saratok, Kalaka, (said to have absconded to Singapore or Labuan during January 1907.
ALL creditors and other persons having any claims whatsoever against the Estate of the above must send in particulars of same to the undersigned within one Calendar month of this notice.
. A. E. CHEYNE.
'lerk to Court of Requests. Kabong.
7th March, 1907.
Notice-
No. X, 1907.
BY order of the Court there will be sold by Public Auction at the Court House, Kuching, at 9 A. M. on Monday the loth April all that land included in Grant No. 800 dated 1st September 1905, being lot No. 7 section 17 on the
South of the Blacksmiths Road and having an area of three roods or thereabouts. There is a dwelling house on the land built of plank with hili an frame and leaf at tap roof.
JOHN E. A. LEWIS,
Resident 2nd Class.
Kuching,
13th March, 1907.
Notice.
No. XI. 1907.
NOTICE is hereby given to all whom it may concern that grant No. 342 issued on March 3rd 1897 to one En Kon Fook for a piece of land containing about 1 acre 0 roods 32 perches situated on the Tabuan road, Simpang Tiga, is supposed to, have been lost or destroyed.	c ,
Any person holding said grant is required to present it t the Municipal Branch P. W. D. Office not later than 1st July 1907 otherwise grant No. 342 will be cancelled and a new grant issued.
M. G. BRADFORD,
Officer in Charge, Municipal Branch. 2nd April, 1907.
Notice.
No. XII, 1907.
THERE will be sold by public Auction on Monday the 15th April at the Court House Kuching the following land grants.
Grant No. 034 of 1901 being lot 2 section 22. having an area of 2 acres or thereabouts South of Central Road East.
Grant No. 792 of 1905 being lot No. 12 Section No. 23 having an area of 2.15 acres or thereabouts South of Tabuan Road.
JOHN E. A. LEWIS, Resident 2nd Class.
Kuching, 22nd March. 1907.
Notification.
No. XIII, 1907.
ADVICE OF PAYMENT.
FROM 1st April 1907 remitters of Money Orders to, or through, the United Kingdom may obtain an Advice of Payment" either at the time of application or at any time subsequent thereto.
The fee for such advice will be 10 cents (additional to the Commission.)
It is however pointed out that the Post Office undertakes only to pay the Order when duly signed in accordance with the application, but does not guarantee the genuineness of the Signature or the identity of the payee.
C. C. ROBISON, Postmaster-General.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 4, 1907.
79
Straits Settlements Coinage.
The remedy allowance for the Straits Settlements dollar shall be as follows :
THE following is pnblishcd for general information :
IN THE NAME OK HIS MAJESTY KING EDWARD. THE SEVENTH OE THAT NAME, BY THE GRACE OF GOD, OE THE UNITED KINGDOM OE GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND, AND OF THE BRITISH DOMINIONS BEYOND THE SEAS, DEFENDER OF THE FAITH, EMPEROR CF INDIA.
PKOCLAMATION
BY HIS EXCELLENCY SIR JOHN ANDERSON, KNIGHT COMMANDER OF THE MOST DISTINGUISHED ORDER OF SAINT MICHAEL AND SAINT GEORGE, GOVERNOR AND COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF OF THE STRAITS SETTLEMENTS.
ZjjjA JOHN ANDERSON,
\ * 2/ Governor and Commander-in-Chief.
WHEREAS by the Straits Settlements (Coinage) Order 1907, made the 11th day of February, 1907, it was among other things ordained and enacted by His Majesty King EDWARD the Seventh in Conncil that the Straits Settlements dollar coined under the provisions of the Straits Settlements (Coinage) Order 1903, should be of the metal, weight and fineness specified in the First Schedule to the aforesaid Order of 1907, subject to the remedy therein specified, and that the said First Schedule should as respects Coins issued after such date as might be fixed by the Governor of the Colony by proclamation be substituted for the Schedule to the aforesaid Order of 1903, and that article two of the Straits Settlements (Coinage) Order 1906, should be revoked.
Now, I, SIR JOHN ANDERSON. Knight Commander of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George, Governor and Commander.-iu- Chief of the Straits Settlements in exercise of the powers vested in me by the aforesaid Order of the 11th day of February, 1907, and of every power enabling me in that behalf as hereby proclaim that from and after the fourth day of March, 1907, the First Schedule to the Straits Settlements (Coinage) Order 1907, shall as respects Coins issued after the said fourth day of March. 1907, be substituted for the Schedule to the Straits Settlements (Coinage) Order 1903.
Given at Singapore, this Fourth day of March, in the year of our Lord One thousand nine hundred and seven.
By His Excellency's Command,
ARTHUR YOUNG, Colonial Secretary.
GOD SAVE THE KING !
The following is the First Schedule to the Straits Settlements (Coinage) Order 1907 referred to above :
STRAITS SETTLEMENTS DOLLAR.
Coin.
Metal.
Standard Weight. Millesimal
Gramme*.
Weight per Piece.
Grammes.
Millesimal Fineness.
1'6 O' 108 i Three thousandths.
APPOINTMENTS.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to make the following appointments : J. T. Chynoweth, Esq., Cadet, to do duty at Baram to date 18th March, 1907.
T. S. King, Esq., to be an Assistant Resideut to date from 1st January, 1907.
A. J. Cutfield, Esq., to be an Assistant Resident to date from 1st January, 1907.
SARAWAK RACES 1907.
Leaat Current
Weight.
Graina. Grammes
Straits
Settle-
Dollar
Silver.
Wn 812	20-217
SOH 19'958
AT a meeting held by Subscribers for Griffin ponies for the coming races, the classes in which the ponies are to run were drawn for with the following results:
Class A.
His Highness the Rajahs higher number.
Mr. J. M. Bryan's lower number.
Mr. R. Pawle.
Messrs. Tiang Swee and Kee Soon.
Mr. L, G. Attenborough.
Messrs. Slade, Allman and Gate.
Mr. K. Siew Jin.
Class B.
His Highness the Rajah's lower number.
His Highness the Rajah Muda.
Mr. J. M. Bryans higher number.
Messrs. H. 8. Young and C. Hose.
Messrs. Bailey, Cutfield and MacPhee.
Mr. C. C. Robison.
Sir Percy Cunynghame and Mr. J. E. A. Lewis.
A further drawing was made for the prizes to be run for by such class as follows:
1st Day. CLASS AThe Sarawak Cup.
BThe Civil Service Cup.
AThe Borneo Co. Ltd. Em
ployes Cup.
A ' Three cups to be provided p	( by the Race Funds.
2nd Day. CLASS B The Borneo Co. Ltds Cup.
A The Opium Farmers Cup.
CLASS A & BThe Towkays Cup.
AX BThe Steam Ship Co's. Cup.
A & B The Ladies Purse.
A detailed programme of the races will shortly be published and copies forwarded to Subscribers.
JOHN E. A. LEWIS, Honorary Secretary.
80
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 4, 1907.
The advantages of a Gold coinage
in Sarawak.
AT the present time when it i settled that
the Singapore dollar* is to be reduced more or
less to the standard of a token it seems that
it would be beneficial to the inhabitants of
Sarawak, and more especially to the Chinese
portion of them, were the Government to es-
tablish a mint and issue a gold coinage. The
crude material is ready at hand, more gold
being produced in this territory near Kuching
than would be required.
Of the advantages, apart from the senti-
mental one of any country being able to pro-
duce the gold for and to mint its own coins,
the two which would appeal most are the
greater convenience of being able to transport
money in the form of gold coins than as bulky
silver dollars, and, secondly, the convenience
and boon that it would be to Chinese returning
to their country to be able to take their savings
in gold, which would- have an approximate
value in China, to taking it in Straits dollars
which are growing smaller and have a ficti-
tious value in Sarawak and Singapore.
Against this might be urged that it would
be against the interest of the country were
its gold coinage exported, but it would be
necessary to make it of such a value that the
Government made a small profit on the coin-
age and therefore would regard the exportation
with equanimity.
Were the coinage debased too far it would *
be unpopular and sink to the level of a note
issue and the Government would probably j
regard itself obliged to keep a reserve to
guarantee it.
The great question to consider would be at what fineness and of what weight it would be I
financially sound to make a coin equal in ex-
change value to $10. in Straits dollars.
The problem is made easier by the fact
that gold is at a premium in Sarawak. In
Kuching pure gold (mas Shanghai) sells at
$4.50 a chee, while its home value is $4.33 or
a difference of some 2%. At some of the
outstations it is at 20%25% premium.
Again, gold is produced largely in Sarawak
and the producers who ship it home have to
pay heavily for freight and insurance which
items should enable the Government to pur-
chase gold from them at under its home value.
Against these two factors would have to be
set the expense of refining and coining and
loss due to wear, and on these figures would
depend the size and fineness of the ten dollar
piece. As the coin, on which it is essential
the Government should make no loss, would
probably be largely exported tq China and
used locally for jewellery, the alloy should be
one of gold and silver as used in the Aus-
tralian sovereign and not silver, gold, and
copper as used in England.
NUMISMATIST.
The Chinese Institute.
Ox Wednesday afternoon, the 20th March,
at 5 p. M. His Highness the Rajah Muda
opened the Chinese Institute at Nos. 29 and
30 Khoo Hun Yeang Street. The lecture room
of the Institute in which the ceremony took
place was crowded with members, and there
were also present some dozen or more Euro-
peans, half of whom were ladies.
The Ven. Archdeacon Sharp, who presided,
explained the objects of the Institute and in
drawing attention to the somewhat anomalous
position which he held as President of a
Chinese association pointed out that it was
more or less justified by the fact that he did
not belong to any particular clan and there-
fore was not likely to be biassed in any question
which might come up before the Committee.
His Highness the Rajah Muda in declaring
the Institute open said that he could foresee
that the principal difficulty they would have
to contend with was one of clanship, but that
with patience and tact on the part of the Com-
mittee he did not see why everything should
not work smoothly. His Highness in a short
speech wished the institute all success.
Both speeches were translated into. Chinese
by Mr. Hsu Ging Ung.
The Chinese Institute, formed at a General
Meeting held at the Book Depot on January
19th 1907, is an Association for the promotion
of educat on in the widest sense of the term
amongst Chinese of all dialects and classes.
Two houses, Nos. 29 and 30 Khoo Hun Yeang
Street, have been rented for the purposes of
the Institute. In these premises a general
Meeting Room, Library, Kindergarten day
school, class, lecture and tea rooms, and lodg-
ings for Members visiting Kuching have been
arranged for.
The Institute is open from 8 A. M. to 10 p. xr.
and serves the purposes of a Club us well as
for the- holding of classes and the giving of
lectures, occasional entertainments also being
allowed. His Highness the Rajah Muda is
patron of the Institute, the Committee being
as followsPresident, The Ven. Archdeacon
Sharp, Vice President, Mr. Khoo Siew Jin,
Treasurer, Mr. Lim Chn Chew, Secretary, Mr.
Hsu Ging Ung, and Members of Committee,
Mr. John Hewitt, Messrs. Yong Boon Bong,
Lan Gee Siaug, Choi Giek Cha, Tan Boon
Siew, and Kueh Ching Hing.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 4, 1907.
81
Sibu Clay Pigeon Shooting Match.
27th January, 1907.
STo
The Editor, Sarawak Gazette.
During Christmas week, when many of the
Officers of the 3rd Division foregathered at
Sibil, an interesting handicap was shot off.
The birds proved very strong on the wing
and the shooting at first was not of a very
high order but improved greatly towards the
finish.
The following are the scores and handicap
points.
Handicap.
Shots fired.
Hita.
Total.
F. A. W. Page-Turner rec'd. -1
12
1
r.
A. J. Cutfield.	4
12
6
A. E. Lawrence.	,,	-1
15
i;
H. S. B. Johnson.	,,	1
15
.)
3
N. MacPhee.	..	1
15
6
-
W. J. M. Shaw.	.. f
15
8
9
Dr. Hose.	scratch
1G
11
11
1st prize Dr. Hdse.
2nd prize Mr. Shaw.
Yours truly.
MVLONO.
G17.K BuGTKS.
.tpril.
ON the 1st p. s. Kaka sailed for Brooketon and Limbang. Passenger, Very Revd. Father E. Dunn.
ON tho2nd the s. s. Alice Lorraine returned from Sibu. Passengers, the Revd. Father Heyden and Revd. Father Jansen.
WE are informed that the Norwegian s. s. Falk, 1,380 tons register, Capt. Gundersen, left Rejang for Hongkong on the 3rd with a cargo of 1.400 tons of Timber, 20,000 billets of firewood and 200 pikuls of bark of kurong wood.
S. S. Sarawak sailed for Bintuhi on the 3rd.
ON the 5th the s. s. Alice Lorraine left for
Sibu with passengers, Mr. C. J. Wilson and
Dr. Low.
S. S. Kuching sailed the same day for Singa-
pore. Passengers, Mr. and Mrs. T. E. Gate,
Mr. Horne and Miss K. John.
ON the 7th p. s. Adeh sailed for Bararn and
p. s. Kaka returned from Limbang.
The same day the s. s. Rajah of Sarawak
arrived from Singapore. Passenger, Mrs. W.
Service, who, finding the steamer to Australia
not suitable, has returned to Kuching and
postponed her departure until Mr. Service is
able to obtain leave.
ON the 11th the s. s. A lice Lorra ine return-
ed from Sibu with Mr. C. J. Wilson and Dr.
Low.
S. 8. Sarawak also arrived back from Bin-
tuhi.
THE S. S. Rajah of Sarawak sailed for Sing-
apore on the 12th with passengerMr. C. J.
Wilson.
ON the 14th the s. s. Kuching arrived from Singapore; s.s. Alice Lorraine sailed torSadong and s. s. Sarawak for Matu.
P. S. Kaka left for Brooketon and Limbang on the 15th and p. s. Adeh the same day returned from Bararn.
ON the 10th s. s. Alice Lorraine returned from Sadqng and on the 18th s. s. Sarawak from Matu.
8. 8. Kuching sailed for Singapore on the 19th and p. s. ?lde7i the same day for Bararn. Passenger to Bararn, Mr. J. T. Chynoweth, who has been appointed to that Station.
ON the 20th s. s. Alite Lorraine left for Sibu. Passenger, the Revd. Father Jansen.
The Chinese Institute was this day opened by H.xH. The Rajah Muda.
ON the 21st the Rajah of Sarawak arrived from Singapore. Passengers, the Ven. Archdeacon Perham, Messrs. C. 8. Smith and V. L. Neubronner.
Archdeacon Perham, who retired from the East some years ago, has come out again to Sarawak for a year to relieve the Ven. Archdeacon Sharp who goes home on a well-earned holiday.
ON the 22nd p. s. Kaka returned from Limbang and Brooketon. Passengers, Mr. E. R. Naysmith from Brooketon.
THE launch Young Harry left for Sadong with Mr. Naysmith on the 23rd, returning to Kuching on the 24th.
THE S. S. Alice Lorraine arrived from Sibu
on the 24th. At the mouth of the river she
picked up Mr. A. E. Lawrence who had come
from Muka by schooner.
8. S. Sarawak returned from the Rejang
this day.
ON the 26th the s. s. Rajah of Sarawak
sailed for Singapore with passengers, the Ven.
Archdeacon and Mis. Sharp and two children,
Miss A. Cain, Messrs. Melville and V. L. Neu-
bronner.
Archdeacon and Mrs. Sharp are en-route for
England for a much needed holiday and well
earned rest. A large crowd of friends of all
denominations were on hoard to bid them
goodbye and wish them a pleasant time at
home.
The same day p. s. .1 deh arrived from Bararn.
82	THE SABA WAR GAZETTE, APRIL 4, 1907.
S. S. Sarawak sailed for Tatau on the 27th and on the 28tb the s. s. Kuching arrived from Singapore. Passengers from Singapore, Mr. and Mrs. J. M. Hoover.
THE 29th, being Good Friday, all offices were closed.
SATURDAY, the 30th, was declared a Public Holiday as on that day the Annual Tuba fishing took place as usual at the mouth of the Srait river.
The Government launch Young Harry was placed at the disposal of those wishing to attend the fishing and left, her moorings at 7.30 A. M. with a large party. His Highness the Rajah Muda entertained a goodly number of Europeans to tiffin on board the Borneo Companys Motor launch Astana kindly lent for the occasion by Mr. Bryan. Sport was again poor, fish being as scarce as in former years, and it would appear that it might be as well to try some other river another year.
FROM the B. N. B. Official Gazette we learn that His Excellency E. P. Gueritz, Governor of British North Borneo, has gone on leave and that Mr. Alexander Cook has been appointed Acting Governor during the formers absence.
IT is perhaps rather late to publish the sad news of the death, at the age of 8, of little Pat Harvey, as she was known to all in Sarawak, but we heard of it just too late for insertion in our last issue.
Edith Patricia Margaret, to give her her full name, was the only daughter of the late C. D. Harvey, for many years in the service of the Borneo Company in Sarawak, and of Mrs. Harvey, now residing at the Chestnuts, Min- chinhampton. We feel sure that ail who knew Mrs. Harvey in Sarawak will join us in the expression of deep sympathy which we extend to her in this the greatest of all losses that she could have sustained.
MONTHLY Report.
LOWER REJANG.
December, 1906.
I returned from Rejang on the 2nd after a month's absence on duty round the delta and have since been fully occupied with work which had accumulated here during that period.
On the afternoon of the 5th Gamieng T. K. of Daro, arrived with one Ah Tiam who had that morning committed a brutal assault on the wife of a Chinese shop-keeper from whose employ he. Ah Tiam, had some time ago been dismissed. On receipt of the news 1 immediately proceeded to Daro,
arriving at 3 A. M.. and found the victim had received some five ugly wounds on the head and back. All assistance possible was rendered hud I am glad to state that the woman has since been reported to be progressing favourably. Ah Tiam has been sent on to Sibn to await his trial there. He is an old man, a confirmed opium smoker, and I do not think was quite responsible for his actions when he made the assault.
On the 23rd I left to spend the Christmas holidays at Sibu, at the kind invitation of The Honble Divisional Resident.
Mr. H. S. B. Johnson visited the station during the month and returned to Sibu on the 23rd.
The rainfall during the month was exceptionally heavy and the station was several times under water.
The trade returns for December were as follows: Imports.	Exports.
$33,825.	$66,654.
NORMAN MACPHEE,
Resident of Lower Rejang.
KARAM.
January, 1907.
On the 4th I visited the Kayans and Kenyahs living in the Tutau and Apoh Rivers. All the people were hard at work harvesting their crops, which seemed to be fairly good this year.
At Long Tutau I was met by a ixiat of Uma Pawas from the Ulu Baram. They brought down a Dyak named Aban Sedin, a well known bad character in the Baram and Rejang Rivers, whom I had ordered them to arrest when I was up there in November last. The arrest of this man and Abcng will have cleared the upper Baram of such scoundrels and I hope the Kenyahs will not be troubled by such people again for some time.
At Batu Blah . I heard that two Bruneis named Sureng and Awang, who absconded to Balait some 5 years ago, had returned and were living with the Punans in the Tutau River, I made arrangements for their apprehension.
There were no matters of any importance brought before me up-river and I returned to the Fort again on the 9th.
On the 14th, accompanied by Mr. King, I paid a visit to the Kayans round Long Lama. I found Laki Batang still very ill, but I think he is slowly recovering. I enquired into a fight that had taken place in the Long Lama Bazaar and fined one Abun Jok $10 for causing annoyance and Lisang $30 for drawing a parang.
Tama Julan Tingang, the Lelak chief, came down tc the Fort on the 17th and paid in some fines collected by him.
On the 23rd Lampoh, the Orang Bukit chief, reported that whilst he was down at the Fort a few days ago about a case a Tutong man named Blaw- ing ran away with his wife Payoug. On discovery of her absence a party of his people set out to search for the run-aways, but, on striking their tracks, found that the path was thickly planted with *suda and two of them were wounded by these stakes, whilst the next day a Dyak returning from the jangle was also a sufferer.
I also received a letter from Tama Aping Bnlieng, Penghulu of the Upper Tinjar, informing me of the murder of a Leppu Annan named Sigi by Kading, one of his fellow tribesmen. The motive for the murder apparently was jealousy, as the murdered man had committed adultery with Kadings wife Leywan. Another man Ingan Lallo was wounded in trying to arrest the murderer, who immediately bolted into the jungle. Information was at once
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 4, 1907.
83
sent up the Baram and to Beluga and Bintnlii to
affect Kadings apprehension if possible. I have
written more fully to Your Highness on this matter
under separate cover.
Tama Lawai, the Kenyah Penghulu, arrived on
the 25th bringing the Kenyah and Punan tax.
Great difficulty was experienced in getting in this
tax which was all brought down in rubber, amount-
ing to about 8 pikuls, and rattans, as, being the end
of the landas, the Chinese in the Bazaar had not
sufficient money to buy up this quantity of stuff.
Eventually I had to advance them the sum of $300
from the Treasury which they promised to repay on
the arrival of the 2nd steamer from Kuching. On
the 27th I received in $500 in tax and $50 fines
from Tama Lawai.
I am glad to report that from appearances trade
should be very brisk this year and large quantities
of rattans, rubber and gutta percha are in the bazaar
awaiting shipment. It should have been better still
if it had not been for the extra length of time that a
steamer has not called at this port. Usually the
close time for Baram Mouth Jasts from 41 to 5
months, but this time it will be six months before we
get a steamer with the result that the Chinese have
run out of trade goods and cash and so are unable to
purchase the jungle produce which causes the up-
river people to cease working. On the food question
of course I need not dilate, it is like the Poor, always
with us'. I trust that this next season we shall have
a return to the shorter time of durance vile enforced
upon this District.
There have been a good number of cases in Court
this month. The most important being: A dispute between Kebing Avit and his slaves in
which the Court decided to free 6 of them on the
payment of the usual manumission fee.
Aban Sedin sentenced to 6 months imprisonment
for disobedience of Government Orders. Ah Khian,
6 months hard labour for dangerously assaulting
another Chinaman in the Bakong River.
During the last 3 months I have been making a
census of the population of this District and have
now obtained the complete returns.
The total population is 19,139 consisting of 10,251
males and 8,888 females, which taking this district
to have any area of 10,000 square miles shows a
Eilation of under 2 persons to the square mile.
Capital, Claudetown. contains 1,113 inhabi-
tants.
In classing the people into their various races we
find the following result:
Males
Females
Total
Malays
373
223
596
Chinese
398
124
522
Milanos
1,898
l,704i 1,828
3,525
Kayans
1.947
3,775
Kenyahs
2,689
2,572
5,261
Dayaks
1,275
685
1,960
Puuatis
750?
750 ?
1,500?
Kalabits
1,000?
1,000?
2,000?
The numbers of Punaus
and Kalabits,
owing to
their nomadic habit or distance into the interior, I
was unable to obtain exactly and these figures are
computed on the tax they pay in comparison to the
other races: whilst the presence of a large number
of Dayaks who solely work jungle produce, causes
the large predominance of males over females in
this race.
The actual population of the Baram River and
tributaries is 15,938 (8.552 males. 7,386 females) and
the Coast 3,201 (1,699 males, 1,502 females).
As matters of curiosity it was found that there
were 3,709 followers of the Mahomeddan religion in
the district and that the smallest tribe was the
Leppu Lutong Kenyahs consisting of 10 persons, 5
men and 5 women, whilst the largest was the Uma
Poh Kayans, 1,531,808 men and 723 women.
I regret to have to report the death of P. C. Jane on the 7th. Up to date I have been unable to obtain anyone to fill his place.
The prisoners have been engaged in re-ditching and raising the Jalan Darat, whilst the P. W. D. coolies have repaired and repainted all the bridges and cleared the Kampong and Ridan Roads.
The Lucile has made several trips up-river and t Baram Mouth to fetch jelutong and on the 24th the crew replaced the spar for hoisting the Signal Ball on the Lighthouse at Baram Mouth.
Mails were despatched to Kuching rid Brooketon on 13th and received on the 4th and 28th instants.
The rainfall for the month has amounted to 7.44 inches.
I have nothing further of importance to report to Your Highness.
R. S. DOUGLAS.
Resident.
Lundu
?
January.
Tenders for the Birds-nest Farm for the 3 years, ending 31st December 1909 were received on the 4th instant. The farm does not change hands but remains with chop Hiap Leong of Lnndu who tendered an increase of 57% on their last agreement.
Jamaug, a Landak now living at Jangkah with the Slakow Dyaks.'Was fined $50 for harbouring and assisting an absconder to evade arrest.
I regret again to have to report that at about 8 p. M. on the 17th instant one Akow, a Sebuyow of Stunggang, was taken by a crocodile at his pengka- lan. Deceased had just returned from work and must have been in the act of fastening up his boat when he was seized. It is reported he called out twice but assistance arrived too late, and the only remaining traces of Akow were a piece of the heart and some teeth found a day or so afterwards.
The Sijiring and Stunggang people have become so frightened at the frequent deaths from crocodiles near and about their Kampongs that they have now expressed their willingness to erect a bridge over the Stunggang river. 1 am allowing them to do this and hope to report its completion next month. It will now be possible to walk from Sijiring right down to the bazaar a distance of about 3 miles.
There being a spell of fine weather 1 left on the 18th instant fo: Gunong Poi vid Jangkah, arriving at the summit Gunong Rumput at 10 A. M. on the 20th instant. I started to return the same day and came down rid Sibakoh, spending one night at the head of the Sibakoh Falls. After a most enjoyable trip I reached the Court House, Lundu, at 10.30 A. M. on the 22nd instant. I had hoped to have ascertained the exact height of this mountain, but was unable to borrow the instruments in time. However, I shall make another ascent later on in the year when I trust I shall be able to find the correct altitude. Stanfords map gives the height of Poi as 6,000 feet.
This month the prisoners have been employed rebuilding and repairing the bridges. This job is now practically finished.
The Chinese have remade the ditches in front of their shops and have put sand and gravel down on the Bazaar Road to a depth of about 2 ". This was very badly needed.
The trade returns are as follows:
Exports. Imports.
Lundu $3,502.	$2,406.
Simatan 1,596.	1,946.
I have nothing further to report to Your Highness.
F. F. BOULT,
Assistant Resident.
84	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 4, 1907.
SADONG.
January.
Court. A contractor of No. 5 Mine having been
convicted of swindling the Government in respect of
some thousands of pit props was sentenced to 12
months hard labour in Kuching gaol. Lam Khan,
the contractor, has been in Government employ for
many years and has been trusted to a certain extent
hut it seems impossible to trust any Mine con-
tractors at all.
Several Simunjan Dyaks were fined for taking
fruit from and afterwards laying claim to durian
trees which were the properly ofr other Dyaks. The
fines were heavy in some cases as the ownership of
the trees had been most clearly pointed out by Mr.
Crocker. Tuahone of the most objectionable and
litigious Dyaks in the District was fined 20 kts.
for illegally fining Saribas Dyaks who refused to re-
move from their own district to his house. Tuahs
arguments jn his own defenceand they -were
manyavailed him nothing, and he paid the fine and
returned the fine he imposed and collected from the
Dyaks. He threatened to fine them a further 15 if
they reported the matter to me. Bong Chan, a coolie
who has recently been released from Kuching gaol
where he was serving paYt of a sentence of 3 years
for having attacked and severely wounded a mandor
at the Colliery named Kong Yew, again threatened
Kong Yew and is now serving a further sentence in
Sadong gaol at the termination of which he will lie
sent from the District. He is a troublesome man at
all times.
Public JForA-s.The prisoners have been employed
in filling round the coal sheds with stone, cleaning
up roads, ditches etc. and in generai work about the
Station.
one time not less than 12 vessels were sheltering at
the Kuala, being unable to reach Muaratebas. The
jurayan of the schooner Kian Ann reported passing,
the bodies of 3 Chinese floating out at sea.
February.
There was very little Court work during the
month. I went up to Tabekang on the 4th in order
to settle a boundary dispute between the Ris and
Bukar Dyaks. L returned on the 9th on which day
the p. s. Kaka arrived with Mr. May from Brooketon.
Mr. May inspected the Colliery and returned to
Brooketon by p. s. Kaka sailing on the 15th. He
was accompanied by Mr. Naysmith, the Manager of
Sadong Colliery, who has been unwell of late and
goes North for a change of air.
The schooner Banjar Hose, bound for Kuching
with a cargo of 87 tons of coal from Sadong, was
wrecked off Semra on the night of the 12th. The
schooner began to settle down in deep water and the
jurayan, crew and passenger left her in the sampan
losing all their belongings, thinking she was about to
sink, but she eventually drifted ashore on the top of
a high tide and stuck in the mud where she is likely
to remain. The last reports shew her to be breaking
UP-
The Chinese New Year passed off very quietly.
A few coolies tried to rush the gambling tables at
the Colliery and some 50 was lost. Three of the
men were arrested and sentenced to terrtis of impri-
sonment.
Several attempts have Ireen made to wreck the
' engines by wedging the points apart and placing
I wedges and other obstructions on the rails. Once
the engine and trucks left the metals owing to the
points having been meddled with, but in the other
cases the obstructions were observed and removed
Wharf.The new sheds are now completed and in
nse. The extension to the wharf is now in progress.
The German s. s. Flume, Capt. Wegler, arrived on
the 11th and took a cargo of 1,744 tons of coal to
Singapore on the 15th. This vessel remained along-
side the wharf during the bore and strong tides at
new moon and only snapped 2 wires and one large
rope. She dragged both anchors, each of which was
attached to 75 fathoms of cable, some 30 feet up-river
on the 15th. a strong 8 knot tide running at the time.
She left at the top of the flood, there being 40 feet of
water alongside the wharf and all the grounds flooded
by the tide.
tons cwt.
Coal received at Wharf during January. 1,284. 12.
do shipped from .,	,,	,,	2,564.	4.
do in stock at at end of 676.	19.
General.A Chinese coolie was drowned by the
np-setting of a boat at S. Jong on the 19th. The
body was recovered on the 21st.
The s. s. Alice Lorraine took 50 tons coal to Sibu
on the 22nd. I went round Nos. 4 and 5 Mines with
the Manager on the 26th. A fine seam of coal several
feet thick is showing in the face, but owing to one or
two narrow bands of dirt in the seam it is extremely
difficult to keep the coal absolutely clean. However,
very little dirt arrives at the wharf. The ventilation
was fairly good.
A very fine lunar eclipse was visible here on the
night of the 29th, it being full moon. There was a
beautifully clear and cloudless sky and the conditions
were perfect.
The p. s. Adch arrived at 4 p. M. on the 30th with
5.000 for the Treasury. PassengersThe Ven.
Archdeacon Sharp and Mr. H. La Chard for the Ba-
tang Lupar and Simanggang. She left at 5.30 the
same afternoon.
Early in the month the weather was rough and
unsettled. A heavy sea was reported outside and at
; in time to prevent accidents.
The p. s. Adch arrived on the 19th with the Prin-
cipal Medical Officer and Mr. Bradford. Dr. Barker
! inspected the Hospital and then the caolie lines at
the Colliery. He advised the removal of the Hospi-
lal to a site across river on the new Sdiloo Road.
On arrival of the plans from Kuching the erection
of the Hospital will be proceeded with. The present
position of the building is extremely inconvenient in
every way, but the site on the new road will be
isolated and yet within reasonable distance of Bazaar
and railway and close to the water supply.
I The p. s. Adeh left for Kuching at 5.30 A. M. on
' the 21st.
The prisoners have been employed in repairing the
surface of the Bazaar road and extending it up-river
and as far as the new sheds down-river, and in get-
ting stones and ashes from the Colliery for the new
road, the Manager kindly lending engine and trucks
on holidays or whenever there is no work at the
Colliery. I hope to make good progress with this
? road during the year.
The erection of a plant for washing the dirty coal
from No. 8 at the junction, with water drawn from
j the Ngli stream, has now been practically completed
1 and I understand that no more dirty coal will be
handled at the wharf after the 1st of March. The
steam pump is now in working order and only a few
? details remain to be fixed. The coolies at the wharf
I will in future have no work but that of loading
vessels and the number will have to be reduced in
consequence. Very many wish to go up to the
Mines where conditions are very much improved.
The month has been extraordinarily wet, fine
days being very few and far between, the advent
of Chinese New Year being the signal for a down- pour of rain as usual.
i Dyak paddy up-river is in anything but good
' condition and I am afraid their harvest will be a
* poor one. The Malay crop, on the other hand, is
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. APRIL 4. 1907.	85
looking exceedingly well and they are reaping a splendid harvest though imuiense damage has been dene by wiki pigs that swarm near the paddy fields. As usual, the Malays make but small clearings, and in many cases what they have planted they leave to the mercy of the pigs, while they take wives and families and paddle away to the ulu for the sake of a few durian fruit and jars of tampoyak (a kind of salted mess of crushed durian with a very offensive smell) all worth a fraction of what their paddy crop would have been had they remained down-river and looked after it.
Tn A DE RETURNS.
Imports Exports
January.	$17,615.00	$22,949.40
February. 9,566.00	10,265.55
DONALD A. OWEN,
Resident.
Matang ESTATE.
February.
Crops gathered during the month were 1!) piculs parchment coffee and 219 lbs tea.
The balance of last years tea 450 lbs were despatched to the Borneo Company Limited.
Weeding, pruning young coffee, gathering crops, repairing roads and cleaning coffee have been the general works during the month.
A few coolies hav $ been employed in attending rubber trees from the attacks of white ants.
Mr. Grove paid the coolies for January on the 5th instant.
J. M. GOMEZ,
Mana yer.
Bintulu .
February.
There have been about the average number of -cases in the Debt Court, but few in Police Court.
One Hoh Chua, a Chinese pedlar, was sentenced to six months imprisonment for theft of jelutong.
The exemption Tax has nearly all been paid in, but the Dyuk Tax will not be collected till after their paddy harvest which will be about May.
The Penghulus report all well up river.
Penghnln Gelani was granted permission to go to Simanggang as he said he wished to settle some family affairs in reference to the inheritance of some old jars; he left on the 27th by s. s. Sarawak.
The Sarawak made two trips here during the mouth and took out full cargoes of gutta and rattans. There are still several cargoes left in the bazaar.
The weather has been very wet and the sea rough, the fishing boats seldom being able to get out.
The prisoners have been employed in draining and levelling round the gaol.
The Imports amounted to $15,421 and the Exports to $21,755.
E. A. AV. COX.
Resident!
Upper Sarawak bau.
February.
Agreements. 20 have been made out during the month. Stamp duties and fees amounted to $35.81.
Planting Permits.2 of these were issued.
Court.Fines and fees amounted to $183.00.
There is not very much to report for the month ? of February
x Chinese New Year festivities passed off very
quietly; there was no AVayang this year and there was but little money bemg spent compared' with former years; a fairly large procession with some fine banners ended the festivities.
Mr. Stuart Cunynghame arrived here for a visit on the 11th and left for Paku on the 15th.
Dr. Bruce Lowe was in the district on the following days, 6th. 7th, 15th. 16th, 23rd, 27th, and 28th.
On the. 23rd I visited Kuching taking with me the rough plans already finished by the Native Surveyor and aiso some plans which Messrs. The Borneo Company have of Ban and Bidi. and which they have kindly lent. His Highness The Rajah Muda has sanctioned these ail being reduced to one scale and when finished there will be a complete map to scale of the district.
His Highness The Rajab Muda also sanctioned some alterations being made with regard to the education given at the Bau School. A sufficient number of Chinese have promised to pay fees to cover the expenses of obtaining a good Chinese Master capable of teaching by the new system as employed in the Government School, Kuching. A pupil teacher will also be engaged and also a junior master to teach Malay, the Chinese children here being very ignorant of that language; the Government will make the same grant as formerly and provide the School house and furniture for the School.
I may state that the Chinese have expressed their great satisfaction at these new arrangements, the parents of 24 children have already signed an agreement to send their children regularly to school, abide by regulations, and pay necessary fees, and at the [ date of writing I hear of 10 or 12 others who will be admitted on payment of a small fee or, when necessary. free; the payment of a fee where it can be afforded is, I am sure, a good thing, no one being inclined to value what he obtains for nothing as that which he has to pay for.
1 returned here on the 26th instant and found all well.
E. .R.STILWELL,
Resident.
KALAKA.
? -
February.
The Venerable the Archdeacon sharp arrived from Kuching per boat and met the Revd. F. AV. Nichols who was at Kabong for a change after his recent illness. By the same flood tide the Archdeacon left for Temudok and returned again on the 3rd. After a few hours stay the Archdeacon with the Revd. F. AV. Nichols left for Kuching.
I am informed that the Revd. F. AV. Nichols has now left this mission.
Uli, a Sibu Malay, was warranted for debt and sent in custody of I. C. Salleh overland via the Alit to Rejang; he had hidden himself at Ruban.
A Sarawak Natuna Malay, Saban by name, has cleared out of this Port direct to Singapore with a cargo of 94 pikuls of damar laut.
The Resident accompanied by Abang Dul arrived here on the 24th from Simanggang ri r the Saribas. At commencement of the month Ui Ah Seng of Ibus, pepper planter, came to report that his rice and other necessaries in his hut had been stolen during his absence working in the garden. He accused another old man of the same clan of the theft.
Tuah laki Nuri who was summoned by H. Metasan of Sadong for taking goods under false pretences is not here. He bad been away ahont two months in the Rejang delta working jelutong.
A few Kabong Malays have set their pengireh on the coast near S. Endut and the hauls are fair.
86
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 4, 1907.
I was fully occupied during the month in receiving the Exemption Tax, and the amount paid in was $1,040. There are not very many more persons to pay.
The harvest is now in full swing, and rice can be bought in the Saratok Bazaar at 3 and sometimes 4 gantangs a dollar and paddy 12 or 16 gantangs for a dollar. I am informed that this years crop will be a good one.
The sum of Five hundred dollars was drawn here by three Chinese on letters of credit from the Acting Treasurer of Sarawak.
The fines for the month only amounted to $37.91.
The Trade Returns for the month are:
Imports.	Exports.
$5,642.	$7,210.
A. E. CHEYNE.
TFrifer.
Simanggang.
February.
Ulu Ai news.Penguin Sli of Ulu Skarang informed me at Simanggang on February 12th that the Ulu Ai Dyaks who recently raided the Julau had brought back the small-pox with them and that numbers had been smitten with it; P. Sli said he had this information from the Engkari Dyaks of Jembaus house whom some of his people met planting sharpened bamboos to obstruct the paths leading towards their country.
It seems most probable that this report is true as later on in the month I received letters from Mr. Lang which corroborated the story and added that Jmbah (son-in-law of Ngumbang) his v ife. and child, had succumbed to this foul disease with several other hifii in the Ulu. It will be interesting to leatn, presently, how far the Kanawit and ulu Ai in Miki Pam- bar are affected with the spread of this dreaded epidemic.
On February 18th Mr. H. la Chard left Siinang- gaug for Lubok Autu. By his return boat (which brought down one bullock for Simanggang) I learnt that the three (S. S.) Chinese prisoners, whom I have had working at L. Antu for the last three months, had escaped when out getting fire-wood at mid-day. Up to date of writing I have not learnt that they have been capturedthey got away on February 17th from a place that I have always been accustomed to consider quite safe' (if ordinary precautions against escape be taken). Of course I am of opinion that these Chinese, ignorant ot the coun- try, with no resources, and strangers to both Chinese and Dyaks near, should, without difficulty, be speedily captured and duly punished.
Miscellaneous affairs.On February 1st I sent a Bong to Lingga with part of the Lingga crew which brought up Mr. la Chard in order to bring back the thirty-four Skarang and Saribas Dyaks who had been turned out of Bintulu. These men were duly fined and have all, or nearly all. paid the expenses incurred in sending them back.
For gross carelessness in shooting a Dyak woman mortally, and wounding another, the Dor Dyak by name Sajai was, by the orders of His Highness The Rajah Muda, sentenced to six months imprisonment, and to pay compensation, also his Snider rifle was confiscated.
Chan Choon Seng, a Clerk at Simanggang, was .sentenced to twelve months imprisonment for an impudent theft at the Fort. Advantage was taken of there being no one in the Bachelor's quarters for a few minutes to cut off all the silver coins (eight shillings' from an ornamented mat belonging to one of the S. Rangers, and Choon Seng was proved
to have passed two of these shillings at the Spirit Farmers in order to purchase a bottle of Whisky. His (Choon Seng's) explanation was that he won these coins gambling publicly in the Bazaar, from whom be could not say! He appeared to believe that it was quite consistent with his position of a Government Clerk (on probation only, and with no very good record) to gamble publicly in the Bazaar.
The Pusa Clerk reported that during the month of January there were no cases at all before the Pusa Native Court and so there were no fines.' This is certainly unusual.
By February 7th the prison gang at Simanggang had added over 500 seedlings to those already planted out in the Plantation nt the 1st mile on the Sabu road, and had cleared a further stretch of poor land where more can presently be planted. A number of glam trees were planted out on the sides of the stable-road near the cross-roads, but owing to a change [in the weather several will have to be replaced as the beat killed them.
The Revd. F. W. Nichols left the Temudok Mission, in the Kalaka river, early in February for Kuching (by Native boat.)
Accompanied by Abrfng Dul I left Simanggang for Saribas on the evening of February 15th, stopped the night at Nanga Tisak, and leaving there at 5.30 A. M., after a slow passage by sampan up the Tisak stream, reached the end of the Betong road at 7.49 A. M. and getting clear of the batangs and on to the made-road twenty minutes later arrived eventually, after a very hot and tiring walk, at Betong Fort Ire- fore eleven oclock. The made-road is in very fait- order and all that portion from Betong to Bukit Sangko is in better order than I have ever seen it. before.
During February cash $500 (silver) was transmitted from the Betong to the Simanggang Treasury.
The Betong Chiefs were present, with the exception of P. Dempi. Court was held on the 18th. 19th,. and 20th. The only case of importance was concerning the setting of a dangerous trap at Sipak whereby a woman was badly wounded. The usual fine was imposed and compensation paid. Concerning a Chinese shop-keeper of Betong, by name Tae Ah Sa, who was found to have concealed some of his property in order to swindle his creditors, I have detained the property until his creditors can be communicated with.
There are some half a dozen rafters in the Fort roof which must be replaced as they are eaten through. All the cook-house rafters must be renewed as the building is not now safe. I have given directions for this wood to be got and hope to renew- the roof in April.
I have had to condemn the new boat, said to have been purchased by Abang Lana, for Governmentwork at Betong, as it is quite unsuitable for the purpose.
On the 24th 1 left Betong at 4 A. M. (the tides in the day time not making at seasonable hours) and, of course, met the flood on the way down river and did not get to Pusa until about one oclock. Court was held at Pusa on the following day.
Libu, the head tttai of a house of some eight doors, was given three months time to move out of the Malay land on which he had settled himself below B. Likup. He came there and asked for permission to stop a short time only, and since, though told to return to his own land, has put off doing so with the intention, it is thought, of later on raising a claim to the land.
In the matter of a gambling quarrel, which caused some little excitement in Pusa Bazaar during the Chinese New Year, the decision was given in the Farmers favour and a gambler who tried to swindle him was fined.
86
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 4, 1907.
I was fully occupied during the month in receiving the Exemption Tax, and the amount paid in was $1,040. There are not very many more persons to pay.
The harvest is now in full swing, and nice can be bought in the Saratok Bazaar at 3 and sometimes 4 gantangs a dollar and paddy 12 or 10 gan tangs for a dollar. I am informed that this year's crop will be a good one.
The sum of Five hundred dollars was drawn here by three Chinese on letters of credit from the Acting Treasurer of Sarawak.
The fines for the month only amounted to $37.94.
The Trade Returns for the month are :
Imports.	Exports.
$5,642,	$7,210.
A. E. CHEYNE,
JFrfrer.
February.
Ulu Ai news.Pengulu Sli of Ulu Skaraug informed me at Simanggang on February 12th that the Ulu Ai Dyaks who recently raided the Julau had brought back the small-pox with them and that numbers had been smitten with it: P. Sli said he had this information from the Engkari Dyaks of Jembaus house whom some of his people met planting sharpened bamboos to obstruct the paths leading towards their country.
It seems most probable that this report is true as later on in the month I received letters from Mr. Lang which corroborated the story and added that Imbah (son-in-law of Ngumbang) his v ife. and child, had succumbed to this foul disease with several other tuai in the Ulu. It will be interesting to leaiu. presently, how far the Kanawit and ulu Ai in Miki Pam- bar are affected with the spread of this dreaded epidemic.
On February 18th Mr. H. la Chard left Simang- gang for Lnbok Antu. By bis return boat (which brought down one bullock for Simanggang) I learnt that the three (S. 8.) Chinese prisoners, whom 1 have had working at L. Antu for the last three months, had escaped when out getting fire-wood at mid-day. Up to date of writing 1 have not learnt that they have been capturedthey got away on February 17th from a place that I have always been accustomed to consider quite safe (if ordinary precautions against escape be taken). Of course I am of opinion that these Chinese, ignorant of the coun- try, with no resources, and strangers to both Chinese and Dyaks near, should, without difficulty, be speedily captured and duly punished.
Miscellaneous affairs.On February 1st I sent a Bong to Lingga with part of the Lingga crew which brought up Mr. la Chard in order to bring back the thirty-four Skaraug and Saribas Dyaks who had been turned out of Bintulu. These men were duly fined and have all, or nearly all. paid the expenses incurred in sending them back.
For gross carelessness in shooting a Dyak woman mortally, and wounding another, the Dor Dyak by name Sajai was, by the orders of His Highness The Ilajah Muda, sentenced to six months imprisonment, and to pay compensation, also his Snider rifle was confiscated.
Chan Choon Seng, a Clerk at Simanggang, was sentenced to twelve months imprisonment for an impudent theft at the Fort. Advantage was taken of there being no one in the Bachelor's quarters for a few minutes to cut off all the silver coins (eight shillings) from an ornamented mat belonging to one of the S. Rangers, and Choon Seng was proved
to have passed two of these shillings at the Spirit Farmers in order to purchase a bottle of Whisky. His (Choon Sengs) explanation was that he won these coins gambling publicly in the Bazaar, from whom he could not say! He appeared to believe that it was quite consistent with his position of a Government Clerk (on probation only, and with no very good record) to gamble publicly in the Bazaar.
The Pusa Clerk reported that during the month of January there were no cases at all before the Pusa Native Court and so there were no fines. This is certainly unusual.
By February 7th the prison gang at Simanggang had added over .' 00 seedlings to those already planted out in the Plantation at the 1st mile on the Sabu road, and had cleared a further stretch of poor land where more can presently be planted. A number of glam trees were planted out on the sides of the stable-road near the cross-roads, but owing to u change (in the weather several will have to be replaced as the heat killed them.
The Revd. F. W. Nichols left the Temudok Mission, in the Kalaka river, early in February lor Kuching (by Native boat.)
Accompanied by Abrfng Dul I left Simanggang for Saribas on the evening of February 15th, stopped the night at Nanga Tisak, and leaving there al 5.30 A. M., after a slow passage by sampan up the Tisak stream, reached the end of the Betong road at 7.40 A. M. and getting clear of the batangs and on to the made-rood twenty minutes later arrived eventually, after a very hot and tiring walk, at Betong Fort before eleven o'clock. The made-road is in very fair order and all that portion from Betong to Bukit Sangko is in better order than I have ever seen it . before.
During February cash $500 (silver) was transmitted from the Betong to the Simanggang Treasury.
The Betong Chiefs were present, with the exception of P. Dempi. Court was held on the 18th. 19tn, and 20th. The only case of importance was concerning the setting of a dangerous trap at Sipak whereby a woman was badly wounded. The usual fine was imposed and compensation paid. Concerning a Chinese shop-keeper of Betong, by name Toe Ah Sa, who was found to have concealed some of his property in order to swindle his creditors, I have detained the property until his creditors can be communicated with.
There are some half a dozen rafters in the Fort roof which must be replaced as they are eaten through. All the cook-house rafters must be renewed as the building is not now safe. I have given directions for this wood to be got and hope to renew the roof in April.
I have had to condemn the new boat, said to have been purchased by Abang Lana, for Government- work at Betong, as it is quite unsuitable for the purpose.
On the 24th I left Betong at 4 A. M. (the tides in the day time not making at seasonable hours) and, of course, met the flood on the way down river and did not get to Pusa until about one o'clock. Court was held at Pusa on the following day.
Libu, the head tuai of a house of some eight doors, was given three months time to move out of the Malay land on which he had settled himself below B. Likup. He came there and asked for permission to stop a short time only, and since, though told to return to his own land, has put off doing so with the intention, it is thought, of later on raising a claim to the land.
In the matter of a gambling quarrel, which caused some little excitement in Pusa Bazaar during the Chinese New Year, the decision was given in the Farmers favour and a gambler who tried to swindle him was fined.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. APRIL 4. 1907.	87
Haji. Mumin of Tanjoug Serabnng complained that for some years now, since he had settled on the inland part of the point and made plantations there with his own following, he never could get any of the paddy farming land at the end of the Tanjong allotted to him by Abang Junit (son ofAbangAli, deceased, the former Pusa chief.)
J have given instructions that Haji Mumin must receive the same share in the poddy lands that others do.
I was at Kabong on 26th. The people have their wood, etc. ready for setting the jungkat fish-traps but have not yet taken them out as they expect another storm before the calm season commences.
The Kampong goat-fence was, I found, in a neglected state and the goats all over the Government cleared land round the Court house. The bridge to the sands was in an unsafe condition, and so are the small bridges in the village and I noticed that the Fortmens Barracks (of leaf) were very badly built. The work of the Kampong people here, when for Government, is never satisfactory? and seems to me to be gradually getting worse with the rising generation which appears to think that any kind of scamped and scrambled make-shift work will do; for this their chiefs are responsible as they never attempt to superintend and over-look their people's work properly, and almost invariably call out the whole Kampong to undertake a work for which ten men would be ample.
I have nothing further to report to Your Highness for the month of February.
D. J. S. BAILEY,
Resident.
Muka
February.
Trade.The exports for the month amounted to -43 coyans of raw sago, 40 piculs of jelutong gutta, ;and 15 piculs of gntta perchaas compared with 1.33 coyans of raw sago for the corresponding month last year.
Three schooners cleared for Kuching and one entered.
P. IV. D.The prisoners (average 23.1) have been employed during the month in raising the paths in the compound, on the up-keep of roads and ditches, and also they were away up-river for a week, getting poles to indicate the channel on the bar and for repairing boat sheds etc.
Court.There have been a number of cases both in the Police Court and Court of Requests.
Fines and fees amounted to $309.06.
General.On the 1st an escaped prisoner from the *Oya jail was recaptured at Petanak; this is the second time he has escaped from that station : he was sent back to Oya in charge of an Oya police 'Constable next day.
The Revd. Fathers Dunn and Molder arrived on the 2nd from Oya. the former leaving again on the ? 6th for Oya.
On the 9th Pte. Bull S. R. arrived to do duty here in place of the Ranger who died last month.
The 13th, being Chinese New Years day, was observed as a general holiday; the festival passed off without any disturbance of any kind.
The Revd. Father Jansen, the Rector of the R. C. mission here, left for Kuching vid Oya on the 23rd.
The river bank in front of the Fort has been falling away considerably of late, the distance now being 21 feet 6 inches; as the landas is nearly over, I hope no more land slips will occur for some time.
The first schooner to arrive from Kaching thin year came in on the 25th with a much needed cargo of rice and other things.
I have nothing further to report to Your Highness on this occasion.
W. J. M. SHAW,
Resident.
OYA.
February.
General Finding that very little copper was being brought to the Oya Treasury I made enquiries and ascertained that owing to a rumour emanating from Kuching that the value of the new Straits Dollars was about to depreciate the people were refusing to change copper for silverwhich before they were only too glad to getand which they were getting rid of as fast as they could.
In the Bazaar the people have difficulty in changing silver; their requests generally being met by the reply I have no copper.
As no information has reached me from the Treasury, 1 am endeavouring by every means to reassure the people and steady the price of the dollar.
On the 12th instant Father Anthony reported the outbreak of small-poxa single casein the Cut School.
Considerable uneasiness and apprehension was entertained by the parents of those children at the School who were most anxious to remove their boys to their own houses; a request which the Rector wisely refused to comply with, as if any of them had contracted the disease it would have broken out in the Kain pongs again.
Owing to the excellent precautions taken by' the Rector, Father Stotter, the School is now free from infection; the boy who was ill having recovered, I am glad to say.
On the 24th instant the Divisional Resident arrived from Sibu at the 'Cut' to superintend the erection of the embankments, composed of biiian, of the dam in the centre of the Cut to facilitate its passage by boats which, in the dry season, have heretofore had to be dragged along for a great distance, thus making the journey through the Cut no light and easy undertaking.
Courts.Some six men were implicated in a daring case of the killing and theft of two pigs from their sty at the back of the Dalat Bazaar. Defendants were convicted and sentenced to heavy terms of imprisonment.
Tuanku Mat was arraigned on a charge of Extortion and Inoculation in connection with his vaccination of the Oya people during the small-pox scare; as no evidence substantiating his guilt was forthcoming he was acquitted, and at the same time ordered to refund $600 which represents the money received by him in excess of the lawful charge of 18 cents per capitum.
Tua Kampong Bujang being ill, it was not possible to continue investigations into the charges brought against him by the Medong people.
P. IV. D.Owing to the shortage of labour but slow progress is being made wjth the new cattle- shed.
Extensive and necessary repairs will have to be undertaken on most of the Government buildings as soon as the labour is available.
Trade.
Exports. Imports.
$2,146.20.	$3,205.50.
P. GORDON WHITE,
Officer in Charge.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 4, 1907.
LIMBAnG.
February.
Owing to Chinese New Year and the harvesting being in progress there has i een very*little doing during the month.
On the 1st instant I returned from Lawas. having gone there on the 24th of the previous month. On the 6th I left for Brooketon and from there proceeded to Trusan on the 9th, returning here again on the 15th. On the 18th I went to Brunei to hand over certain cession monies to H. B. Ms Resident, the receipts for which have been forwarded to the Acting Treasurer.
The s. 1. Gazelle made three trips to Labuan with sago flour during the mouth.
The Trade Returns are as follows.
Coasting Imports $3,333	Exports $5,131
Foreign do	. 5,564 do	7,030
Total $8,897	$12,161
The Rainfall for the month amounted to 12.47 inches which fell on 19 days, 1.63 inches being the heaviest fall in any twenty-four hours.
O. F. RICKETTS,
Resident.
Lawas.
February.
The Resident, Mr. Ricketts, left on the termination of his visit of inspection on the 1st instant in s. 1. Gazelle tor Limbang.
I went to Merapok on the 3rd instant and was engaged collecting revenue there until the 5th instant.
A burglary of a house, whose owners were sleeping away, took place in the Sloating Kampong on the 6th instant and everything in the house taken.
The following night a Mohamedan Chinaman named Amat disappeared with his Brunei wife under suspicious circumstances, but information was received too late to arrest this man before he left the district.
The s. 1. Gazelle arrived oi the 13th instant with despatches from the Resident.
The Chinese new year festivities passed off quietly.
I left the station for the Kuala on the 18th instant and oh the following day visited Tampaiaug Bulu river. There are some ten Brunei Malays and others working timber for the Brooketon mines; and a few families of Kadyans and Muruts living at a branch of the river named Malipat comprise the population.
On the 26th instant Tcomruenced to revise the Murut tax lists in the Lawas Damit but was unable to go far owing to heavy rains.
Further information of the deaths of persons killed by Tagala on the British North Borneo border reached me on the 25th instant. The list now includes six Chinese and a Ban jar Malay.
The Exports and Imports amounted to $9,190. and $5,964. respectively.
The rainfall for the month was 14.24 inches.
IVONE KIRKPATRICK, Officer in Charge.
KAPIT.
February.
I returned to this station on the 3rd having been away up-river.
On the 8th the s. s. Alice Lorraine arrived and returned again on the 10th taking a good cargo of rottans : Mr. Cutfield also returned by her to Sibu.
' The Chinese here have asked if the s. s. A lice Lor- I raine can run here, say, once a month, as the bazaar nowadays is full of rottans, and the s. s. La Fee
1 can only load say 300 to 400 bundles. The Chinese now have started making rafts on which to take down their rottans.
A number of Brunei Malays arrived hero during the month from Belaga; most of them had been away, in the jungle for nearly two years, and they were badly wanted in re their debts and other matters.
There have been about the average number of cases both in Police and Debt Court, but none of any importance.
The Dyaks are all busy harvesting, and I hear most of them have very good crops.
The weather has been very unsettled, heavy rain nearly every day, and river in heavy flood.
Fines amounting to $578.21 were paid in during the month.
I have nothing further to report to Your Highness.
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER,
Assistant Resident.
The Sarawak Gazette.
THE Subscription to the Sarawak Gazette is. as follows.
Payable in local currency
Single number ...	...	... $0.10
Subscription for 1 year	...	... 1.00
Do including postage to Outstation ...) Do	do	to Singapore ... 1.30
Do	do	to England	... I
Payable in Sterling
For 1 year (including postage to places
in the Postal Union) ... 8s. Gd.
All subscriptions payable in advanve.
Yearly subscriptions are renewable on th& 1st January.
Subscriptions will wof be renewed unless due notice is given. All broken periods will be considered as full.
Subscribers are requested to notify changes of address to the Editor in writing.
RATES OF ADVERTISEMENTS IN THE "SARAWAK GAZETTE'
Payable in luliaiirr.
Advertisement of 12 lines and under
First insertion ...	...	... $1.00
Second and third insertion each	... 0.50
Subsequent do do	... 0.25.
Advertisement of half a Column and under
First insertion ...	...	... 2.00
Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
Subsequent do	do	... 0.50
Advertisement of a Column and under
First insertion each	...	... 8.00
Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
Subsequent do do	... 0.75
Special arrangements may be made for standing advertisements.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 4, 1907.
89'
All communications intended for insertion in the .*** r At Gazette must be directed to the Editor at the Government Printing O fflce, Kuching, and sent so as to reach the Office by the 26th of the month at latest or their publication will have to be deferred until the next issue.
Letters and other contributions must be authenticated by writers name sent privately to the Editor.
We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not inserting them.
Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early intelligence of all matters of general interest in their respective neighbouvhoods.
Notice-
?
/ 1 ENTl.EMEN are requested to pay all Gazette snb- script ions and Printing Office Bills to the undersigned in future.
For the convenience of those unable to send cheques, -'Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of sums not over *1.50but only the 2 and 4 cent values will be accepted.
Foreign subscribers to the Sarawak Gatetie are requested to send remittances by Post Office Order " not by Postal ?Order " as the latter cannot be cashed in Sarawak.
F. G. DAY.
Notice.
?- Astana Farm Produce.
Terms Monthly.
W ILL be supplied to customers at the following rates
Milkper quart bottle	..	... 10 cents
Butterper lb ...	...	80 Eggseach ...	...	... 1 Orders, which should be addressed to the undersigned, attended to without delay.
J. STAPLES,
Notice.
XTTE, the undersigned, CHOP "SIN SENG IIAK & CO." NO. 10 ' T Main Bazaar, shipchandlers and dealers with the Sarawak Government etc. beg-tc inform the public that TEO CHIN KEE, late manager of CHOP SENO HAK, joined our firm on 26th November 1906 as managing partner and we authorize him to transact all business of our firm as from that date.
SIN SENG HAK A Co.
18th January, 1907.
Notice.
N
OTICE is hereby given that the undersigned TAN
BOON SIEW has from this date resigned from the
managership of the SARAWAK TRADING COMPANY,
and that he will hereafter carrv on business on his own
account, as well as for SYN HIN LUONG & CO., of No.
18 Main Bazaar, in which firm he is one of the senior
partners.
TAN BOON SIEW.
Kuching,
1st April. 1907.
Notice.
THE WELL hxowx
Singer and Wheeler A Wilson Sewing Machines can be purchased on easy terms. All wc ask is 5 dollars down and 3 dollars per month.
A liberal discount allowed for Cash.
Apply to
TAN BOON SIEW,
Agent,
SINGER SEWING MACHINE Co., C/o SYN HIN LEONG & Co
Kuching, Sarawak.
28th March, 1907.
Notice.
W
E the undersigned THE SARAWAK TRADING
COMPANY l)eg to inform thg Public that in con-
sequence of the resignation of TAN BOON SIEW our
Manager, we now appoint KUEH CHIN HIN to be our
present Manager and to transact all business of our firm
from date	(Sighed) YEO GUAN CHOW,
For SARAWAK TRADING Co.
Kuching,
1st April, 1907.
ARRIVALS.
PER S. s. Alice Lorraine:From Sibu, 2nd April, the Revd. Father Heyden and Revd. Father Jansen.
PER S. S. Rajah of Sarawak:From Singapore, 7th April, Mrs. W. Service.
PEB s. s. Alice Lorraine : From Sibu. 11th April. Mr. C. J. Wilson and Dr. Low.
PER S. S. Rajah of Sarawak :From Singapore, 21st April, the Ven. Archdeacon Perham, Messrs C. S. Smith and V. L. Nen- bronner.
PER p. s. Kaka From Brooketon, 22nd April, Mr. E.R. Naysmith.
PER S. 1. Young Harry :From Sadong. 24th April, Mr. E. K. Naysmith.
PER Schooner: From Muka, 24th April. Mr. A. E. Lawrence.
PER S. B. Kitching :From Singapore, 28th April, Mr. and Mrs. J. M. Hoover.
DEPARTURES.
PER p. s. ALi:For Brooketon and Limbang, 1st April, Very Revd. Father E. Dunn.
PER S. s. Alice Lorraine:Foi Sibu, Sth April, Mr. C.-J. Wilson and Dr. Low.
PERS. S. Kuching:For Singapore, 5th April, Mr. and Mrs. T. E. Gate, Mr. Horne and Miss K.John.
PER S. S. Rajah of Sarawak:For Singapore, 12th April, Mr. C. J. Wilson.
PER p. s. Adeh:For Baram, 19th April, Mr. J. T. Chynoweth.
PER S. s. Alice Lorraine:For Sibu. 20th April, the Revd. Father Jansen.
PER S. 1. Young Harry:For Sadong, 23rd April, Mr. Naysmith.
PER S. s. Rajah of Sarawak:For Singapore, 26th April, the Ven. Archdeacon and Mrs. Sharp and two children. Miss A. Gain, Messrs. Melville and V. L. Neubronner.
90
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 4, 1907
Knching, Foreign Trade Returns for the month of Fei), 1907.
IMPORTS.
IMPORTS.(ContinuctlJ
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
Brought forward Soap ...
Stationery and Books
Straw Shoes (Chinese)
Sugar
Sundries
Tea in Bundles ...
Tea in Tins
Timber
Twine and Thread
Tobacco
in tins Cigars A Cigarettes Chinese
Pbang Java A Srobok etc.
Bad or Pepper
Treasure
Tuba ...
V egetables
Fresh
Salted
In tins
Wines and spirits
Zinc ...	...	(
211,906
Afratcl Water ...
Ammunition
Biscuits	...
Blachan
Beads...
Brass A Copper-ware
Boots A Shoes ...
Butter A Cheese...
Caudles
Canvas
Cement
Clocks and Wntches
Cloth
Cotton
Silk
Clothing
Cotton
Silk
Coke ...
Coffee
Liberian etc....
In tins	...
Cotton Seed
Crockcry A Glass.ware
Cnrry Stuffs A Sauce etc. ..
Cvanidc etc	...	*..
piculs
casks
tons
piculs
121
17
411
SO
S
1,4?S
1.602
172
1	30
345
61 416 427 160
2,025 202
28.078 896
8,675
80 540
. piculs boxes
1 cases . piculs piculs
1.175
146
156J 111?
151j
696 808
52 7,001 1.4S9 1,578
80 2.478 8.485
18,761
6,448 7.818
4,558 8,186
352
8,475- 2.844
22
10,014
405
88
860
1,766
1,221
4,898
TOTAL VALCK
Brought forward
5282,568
885.975-
c&scs
160
Total Value to Date
668,538-
Damar
Drugs and Chemicals
Eggs (salted)
Exports Returned to Shippers Fire-arms Fire-works
Fish
Dried
Salted	...
In tins
Flour ... Fruit
" 21,280
292 148
1,273 I
258 1,149
427
1,891
5,931
2,530
945
2,529
1906
593,556.
piculs piculs
bags
EXHMtTS.
Fresh
Dried	...	...1
In tins	...	...1
Furniture Ghee ... Gold ... Grains
Beans and peas Fadi ...
Rice
Other Sorts...
Gunnies new Do old	...
Hams and Bacons Hats ...
Iron-ware
Japanese Cnrios ...
Joss Sticks and Papers Kerosine Oil Lard ..
Lumps Leather Live stock
Cat le Poultry Swine	...
Machinery Mats ... Matches Maccaroni A Vermicelli	...j
Milk Condensed ...	...1
Oils ...	...	..J
Opium raw
Paint. Varnish A Tar Papers
Provisions Sundry Prawns Do Refuse ...
Rubber seeds and plants Rickshaws Bope Coir Manila Wire
Salt ...
2,738
719
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
piculs
piculs piculs piculs piculs bales bundles
cases piculs
piculs
head No d
cases piculs chests
piculs piculs
coils coils coils piculs
10
548
203
14,305
849
21
34
4,2974
158
9
15
408
55
142
306
14
93
158
846 498 SCO
8.816 620 64.268
1.791
2,275 611
89 227
6,930 170
2,117 10.1S6
3.187
560
1,100
235 1,170 8,747
S61 1,167
871 1,443 5,653 14,000 2,606 1,600 1.271
427 849
700 144
1,394
Antimony Ant-eater skins ... Betel-nuts Birds-nests Cloth ...
Crockery-ware
Cutch	...	...
Damar
Dynamite
Empties Fish ...
Gambier Gold ... Gutta jaugkar do Jelotong ... do percha Hides
Imports Returned to Shippers India Rubber Iron-ware
Kajangs Kerosine Oil Mats ...
Machinery
N. H. Specimens...	...
Pepper (white) ...
Do (black) ...
Rattans No. 1 sega etc.
Rattans No. 2 temoi etc.
Sago Hour
Slag and Ashes ... Sundries Tea (Matang) Tengar-bark Timber do (manufactured!
Treasure
Trepang
tons picul piculs piculs
piculs piculs cases
piculs piculs- ozs. piculs piculs piculs piculs
piculs
case* piculs piculs piculs piculs piculs piculs
boxes piculs
picul
801
no;
12]
3.062* 586*
5
91 1,275 7,432 1,182 6,932*
88 88
807f
28
2,9011 975 52 1.8731 21.584*
71]
29*
18.698
15 1,088 4.071
UKI
18 15.680 4,562
250- 1,888
268 8,085 148,400 17,146 88.128
4.100.
645
2,155 37,493
265
10
78
100 20,000
1,210 73,258 14,633
500 5,748 58,614 14,200
88
90
60
106
11 8,000
2
6
1,091
100
120
1,685
TOTAL VAI.UK Brought forward
499,053
488,888
Carry forward ...
211.906
Total Value to Date
982,436
1
1906
906.882
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 4, 1907.
91
Kncbiug, Coasting Trade Relnrns for me month of Feb. 1907.
IMPORTS,
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
Cool
tons	795
5
5.88!
Damar
piculs	531
2,482
Gntta Jangkar ...
piculs	918!
10.729
Outtn Jclotong ...
piculs 5,685*
28,265
Gntta Percha
piculs	42?
4,065
Indid Rubber
piculs	281*
24,492
Pepper (white) ...
do (black) ...
piculs	10HJ
piculs	35,'
2,505 474
Rattans No. 1 sega etc.
piculs	548
4,890
Do No. 2 tcinoi etc.
piculs	1,084
2,927
Sago flour
piculs	634 J
1,855
Do raw	...
tpins 11,154
5,577
Sundries
10,731
Treasure
4,380
TOTAL VALVE
9107.213
Brought forward
111,984
Total Value to Date ...
...
I 9219.197
1906
1200 08
EXPORTS.
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
Brass-ware
589
Iron-ware	...	...
1,425
Jars ...
No.	82
344
Oil Kerosine
cases	1,293
3,289
?Opium
4,240
Rice ...	...	...
piculs	1,395
8,451
Sundries	...	...
85,411
Treasure
8,170
TOTAL VALVE
959,919
Brought forward
101,850
Total Value Co Dale ...
?9161.569
1900
S156,842
C. C. ROBISON, Registrar of Trade.
Departures.
MAK. ?
VESSEL'S NAME.
j FLAG
AND RIG.
1
CAPTAINS OR NACODAS.
FOR.
1
Kaka
Sar. str.
222
Bandong
Limbang
8
Sarawak
fl
46
Hj. A. Mat
Bintulu
-
Alice Lorraine
140
Jara-ee
Sibu
A
Kuching
"
903
Waddell
Singapore
6
Kim Chin Liong
1 ., sch.
61
Hj. Sait
Oya
7
Adeh
.. str.
189
Jeman
Bartun
8
Sri Pembrian
sch.
79
Abg. Sap-ee*
Sadong
8
M. K. Sri Jimpaka
73
Tku. Hassau
Muka
8
Sin Pook Lee.
C. Junk
70
F. H. Choon
S i ii tn
9
Sin Sian Antu
Sar. seh.
50
Gani
Oya
9
Sri Marion
..
80
Jahar
Sadong
12
Soon Seng Watt
71
A. Yaman
12
Rajah of Sarawak
str.
892
Moxon
Singapore
13
Swee Hong Ann
sch.!
68
Gejeh
Sadong
14
Sarawak
str.j
II,
Hj. A. Mat
Matu
14
Alice Lorraine
140
Jara-ee
Sadong
15
Kaka
Bandong
Limbang
15
Kim Chin Ted;
sch.
51
Hi. Assim
Oya
16
Putri Dungun
.. .
52
Deli
Daro
19
Sri Marion
80
Jahar
Sadong
19
Sri Pembrian
79
Abg. Sap-ee
Bnmm
19
Adeh
str.1
189
Jeman
19
Kuching
( sch.
903
Waddell
Singapo*
26
Kim Chin Siang
54
Daud
Muka r
26
Rajah of Sarawak
str.
892
Moxon
Singapore
27
Sarawak
sch.
46
Hj. A. Mat
Tatan
.7
Sri Marion
80
Jahar
Sadong
28
Ban Seng Watt
..
51
Hj. Dhnuui
Matu
THE sintwtK liizmt"
ALMANAC.
APH1E. 1907.
SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
VESSEL'S NAME.
1 FLAG.
AND Rio.
2
CAPTAINS on NAKODAS.
FROM.
1, Sarawak
Sar. str.
46
Hj. Mat
Bintulu
1 Sri pembrian
sch.
79
Abg. Sap-ee
Sadong
2 Alice Lorraine
.. str.
140
Jara-ee
Sibu
7 Kaka
222
Bandong
Limbang
7 Rajah of Sarawak
892
Moxon
Singapore
9 Soon Seng Watt.
sch.
71
A. Yaman
Sadong
11 A lire Lorraine.
str.
140
J arn-ee
Sibu
11 Swec Hong Ann
sch.
68
Gejeh
Sadong
12 Sarawak
... str.
46
Hj. Mat
Bintulu
12 Kim Chin Trek
sch.
n J
Hj. Assin
Matn
13 Ban Seng B'rtff
14 Kuching
., str.
903
Hj. D'hman Waddell
Singapore
14 Sri Marion
sch.
80
Jahar
Sadong
15 Sri Pembrian
79
Abg. Sap-ee
15 Adeh
; Str.
1S9
Jeman
Biinuii
16 Alice Lorraine
140
Jara-ee
Sadong
16 Kim Whatt Anri
sch.
67
Husiu
Muka
18 Kim Chin Siang
1 n it
54
Daud	1
TT
18 Sarawak
I str.
46
Hj. Mat
Matu
18 Soon Seng I Fuff
i ., sch.
71
A. Yaman
Sadong
20! Swen Hong Aww
68
Gejeh
21 Rajah of Sarawak
str.
892
Moxon
Singapore
22 Kaka
Bandong
Limbang
24 Sarawak
46
Hj. Mat
Sa-eh
24 Alice Lorraine
140
Jara-ee
Sibu
25 Sri Marion
sch.
80
Jahar
Sadong
26 Sin Sian Ann
50
Gani
Ova
20 M. N. Sri Jimpaka
73
Tku. Hassan
Muka
26 Adeh
str.
IS 1
Jeman
Bararn
28 Kuching
sch.
90:1
Waddell
Singapore
28 Sri Pembrian
79
Abg. Sap-ec
Sadong
28 Soon Seng IlaO
71
A. Yaman
M uka
28 Kiu Chin Soon
59
Hj. Sn-at
80 Kim Chin Teek
1 51
? Hj. Assim
? Oya
En- Chi- Mo'
glish. nesc. dan.
'eek.
5 1
S3) 11
suoo
1 c I
p-
a
M
1
2
19
17
Tu
2
20
-
18
\V
3
21
to
19
Th
4
22
20
F
5l
23
21
S
6
24
22
*4
25
23
M
26
?_4
Tu
9
27
25
W
10
28
26
Th
11
? F
12
30
2s:
S
13
3
1
29
14
2
1
M
15
3
-
Tu
16
4
A law
3
W
17
5
I
Th
?ISj
5
F
19
6
S
20
-
r
*?4
21
9
8
M
22
10
9
Tu
23
11
H)
W
24
12
11
Th
25
13
12
F
26
14
13
S
1 ,
15
[LI
*?4
28
16
15
M
29
17
116
Tu
30
18
3 7
MOON'S PHASES, ETC. 5th Last quarter ) 13th New moon 21st First quarter I 28th Full moon O
High
water at
Kuching.
A. st p. M.
h. m. h. m.
Straits SeltlenieitU a British [Colony 1867.
6 51 7 28!
8 8 8 51!
9 39!
10 38l 11 50
1 0 37
I 2 10!
J 3 24
0
5 38 6 13
j 6 48
j 7 22
1 7 53
! 8 25
9 1 9 44
10 35
111 43
1 0 23
1 50
, 2 57 3 47
4 28
5 8 5 46
j 6 25
7
7
8
9
10 11 1
1 3
4
5
5
6
7
7
8
8
9
10
11
I
3
4 I
Lou Sunday
Hindu New Year commences'. .. ii. Suu. after Ester.
iii. Easter .
St. George.
St. Mark.......
iv. Sun.nfter Easier
Sir. James Brooke bom, 1803. ..
9
48
29
14
6
12
27
48
52
89
19
9
42
22
8
7
10
25
24
8
48
27
5
40
92
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 4, 1907.
METEOROLOGICAL READINGS.
KUCHING OBSERVATORY.
Observations Talen Daily at 8 a. in. March, 1907.
TEMPERATURE.
2
5
s
o
C
o
flO
5
a
a
its
.E
QI a
s
a
2
i
' 1
i 5 s
a
3
a
s
-
&
PS
tc
hrs. min.
1
2997
871
73-3
75-6
74-2
72-3
153'7
Dull
3-50
1-22
2
29-98
84'4
71-9
75 6
74-3
715
145-8
Fine
2'30
2 0(1
3
30-00
83-5
73 3
75-3
73-8
72-9
152-6
Dull
1-40
06
4
3000
SOI
73-5
74-8
73-9
730
130-4
Rain
0-35
3.16
5
30 00
78-6
734
73-8
73-3
73-3
116.6
do 2-68
6
29-98
75-7
72 1
73-8
73-1
71-8
102.2
do
2-21
7
30'02
86-8
73-7
761
74-9
73-3
142-4
Fine
3-40
8
30.00
86-1
7-2.9
771
74'8
72-6
154-6
do
3-15
35
9
29-98
85-4
72-9
76.2
752
726
156-6
do
3-50
14
10
?2 9.5
83.7
73-8
78-1
75-6
73-5
155-5
do
1-25
1.27
11
29-91
79-1
730
75-1
74-6
7-2-9
118-4
Rain
1-00
19
12
29-94
82-7
70-9
i n-5
71-3
707
150-0
Dull
2-00
09
13
29.91
89-4
70-9
74-8
73-8
70-3J
153-5
Fine
7-20
14
29-94
88-7
740
741
73-4
73-4
158-0
do
8-00
__
15
3000
S8.4
73-9
77-8
76-2
73-6
152-5
do
2.30
5S
16
30-03
80.6
72-4
76-3
74-9
71-9
125.2
Dull
1-87
17
30-06
84-4
72-6
780
75-7
71 4
148-4
do
3-20
217
18
3001
841
73-6
7.-1-4
74-7
73-3
145-4
do
2-40
1-14
19
30-01
86-2
72-8
75-3
73'9
72-3
154-8
do
5-10
20
3007
87-2
72-4
751
74-2
72-3
150-8
do
4-40
21
30 05
862
72-3
76-8
75'2
71-8
1537
Fine
Unknown
22
3005
87-9
72-9
75-8
74-2
72 3
160-8
do
5-00
23
3002
866
73-8
76-9
750
73-5
157-6
do
1'00
2C
24
30 03
83-7
73-6
77-3
75-9
733
157-6
do
2-40
2-39
25
30-08
831
71'8
74-9
740
71-6
133-8
Dull
3-20
26
30 07
89-2
72-7
77-3
75-3
72-4
155-6
Fine
81
27
3001
87 1
73.5
78-5
76-8
73-3
155'4
do
610
28
3001
88-4
730
75-1
741
72-3
1555
Dull
7-30
29
3012
87.4
73-7
810
77-5
73-2
149-6
Fine
3-30
25
30
30 07
84-9
72-5
78-0
76-3
720
141-8
Rain
2-50
1-25
31
30 09
82-7
69-8
73-6
726
69-3
1251
do
3-20
1-10
Total rainfall during the month 25.17 inches.
Highest recorded temperature	89 4 *F.
Lowest ,,	,.	698 F.
Height of observatory above sea level approximately 100 feet.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 4, 1907.	93
Arrivals.
DATE.
NAME OF VESSEL.
NAME OF CAPTAIN.
W HERE FROM.
CHINESE.
NATIVES OF INDIA. Mair. Frnolr-
OTHER ASIATICS. Mair. Frnalr
TOTAL.
1907.
Feb. 7
S. 8. Rajah of Sarawak . .
E. T. Moxon
Singapore
46	2
5.1 ...
2 ...
55
9
P. S. Kaka
Bandong
Brooketon
1 ...
1 ...
2
14
8. 8. Kuching
W. Waddell
Singapore
27 ? ...
3 ...
30
15
J link Siu Fook Lee
Foo Hock Choon
Saigon
27 ...
27
21
8. S. Rajah of Sarawak
E. T. Moxon
Singapore
38 ...
3 ...
o ;
43
..	22
P.S.Kal.-a
Bandong
Brooketon
2	1
I ...
, 6 ...
10
25
Junk Tin Heng Lee
Tan Heng Hoon
Hainen
27 ...
27
,,	27
Sin Paw Seng
Tan Heng Soon
13 ...
13
28
8. 8. Kuching
W. Waddell
Singapore
35 ...
4 ...
1 ...
40
215	3 14 ...
15 j...
247
Departures.
DATE.
NAME OF VESSEL.*
YJAME OF CAPTAIN.
WHITHER BOUND.
CHINESE.
NATIVES OF INDIA. V, ?. Frmalr.
OTHER. ASIATICS. WUr. Frmolr.
TOTAL.
1907.
c
Feb. 1
P. 8. Kaka
Bandong
Brooketon
1
1
6 ...
8
8. S. Kuching
W. Waddell
Singapore
38
3 ...
5 ...
46
12
S. S. Rajah of Sarawak
E. T. Moxon
35
j
5	1
5 ...
47
19
S. 8. Kuching
W. Waddell'
61
...
2 ...
1 2
66
25
8. S. Rajah of Sarawak
E. T. Moxon
62
2
7 ...
3 ...
74
197
3 18	1
20	2
241
C. ROBISON.
KUCHING :Printed and Published by GHIN HENG SOON, Government Printer, at the Sarawak Gazette Office, Nos. 19, 20, and 21, Court House Road.
