
VOL. XXXVII.
No. 502.
Price
10 cents.
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 1907.
CONTENTS.
?
BIRTH.
NOTICE TO SUBSCRIBERS
ORDERS:Police PensionsBegging for almsExport of
Bark.
NOTIFICATIONS Alterations in Postal rates (2)lusdred par
eels to China, etc.Tenders for lease of Rejaug Gambling
farm	Tenders for weeding etc. -Tenders for Markets
1908Tenders for Clothing, Stores, ete.Tenders for pur-
chase of old Fish Market.
NOTICES:Probate Court, LunduMissing Land Grant No.
128 of 10th October 1889Unclaimed Court Deposits
Bankruptcy Court., SiiuanggangBankruptcy Court, Ku
chingBankrupt Estate, Bau.
APPOINTMENTTHE ESTIMATESREPORT ON BsuNa DYAK
AFFAIRSSUMMARY OP REVENUE AND EXI'ENDITCHEES-
TIMATES 1908.
CORRESPONDENCE : A CorrectionDoes the Native improve?
MONTHLY NOTES.
MONTHLY REPORTS :TnisanLnnduKalakaLimbang
SadongBau	LawasBaram	Siiuanggang- -Muka
BintuluOya.
ADVEKTISEMENTS-TRAIIK RETURNS-SHIPPINGPASSENGERS
METEOROLOGIC AL READINGSALMANAC.
The Sarawak Gazette
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 2, 1907.
Birth
On the anth August, 1907, at Algiers, the wife of MR. GEORGE HOURANT, formerly Inspector of Police, Kuching, Sarawak, and now of Algiers, of a daughter
Notice to Subscribers,
THE Editor begs to remind Subscribers that private subscriptions will not be renewed for the coming year unless notice of renewal is given.
Order.
No. VI, 1907.
IN regard to a discrepancy which has been followed without orders in the Police Regulations of pay, I now set the matter right by informing the Inspector and his successors that
those who have served their full time forpen-
! sion will have to retire should they receive
their pension.
The question of commuting or not will remain
with the Treasurer. If they remain physically
! fit for work, they need not receive their pen-
sion till the Government requires them to do
so and then they will retire for good.
Under my hand and Seal C. BROOKE,
this 13th day of July, 1907.1	Rajah.
Order.
No. VII, 1907.
I hereby direct that after this date no Malays. Arabs and other strangers from Singapore will be allowed to beg for alms in the Kampongs, except with special permission from the Government. Anyone in future acting contrary to this order will be liable to a heavy fine.
C. V. BROOKE,
Rajah Muda. Kuching, Sarawak,
17th August, 1907.
yl	SAL
d-i.k)	-9J -1
ULJI	rjy yi
A-yJ * .Lu-. yl ASA-s .Lu-. j j	dLsjy	huj
si a yi
J	J	d IAA	Ll
_ I JI d-kt-, .3
C. V. BROOKE, Rajah Muda.
1907.	1*17
'241
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 2, 1907.
Order.
No. VIII, 1907.
ORDER NO. IX, of 1st July 1905 relating to export of Mangrove Barks is hereby amended as follows:
Tengah and other Mangrove Barks may be exported from Santubong in 1st Division from date of this order.
There are no restrictions on the export of Bark from other parts of Sarawak outside the 1st Division.
By Order of His Highness The Rajah Muda.
P. F. CUNYNGHAME,
Resident Id Division. Residents Office.
Sarawak, 1st November 1907.
Notice.
No. XXXIII, 1907.
Re Thomas Hugh of Lundu, late Government Clerk at Lingga, (Deceased).
ALL creditors and other persons having any claim whatsoever against the Estate of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned on or before the 30th November 1907, after which date the assets of the above named will be divided amongst the parties entitled thereto regard being had only to those claims of which notice shall have been given. And all monies owing to the above Estate shall be paid to the undersigned forthwith.
F. F. BOULT,
Assistant Resident.
Probate Court, Lundu, 15th August, 1907.
Notice.
No. XXXV, 1907.
NOTICE is hereby given that a title deed to land at S. Moyan, Grant No. 128 of 10th October 1889 which was issued to Ee Hap Swee is missing. The land consisted of 19 acres 3 r. 36 p. and was at one time under gambier and pepper. By the will of Ee Hap Swee his pepper and gambier gardens at S. Moyan were bequeathed to the late Ee Tek Guan and the gardens were by him separately transferred without any title to the land.
The said title. No. 128 of 10th October 1889 will be cancelled if not produced and the present ownership proved at the Land Office on or before the 31st December 1907.
M. G. BRADFORD.
Officer in Charge Municipal Branch P. W. D.
Kuching, 30th August, 1907.
Notice.
No. XXXVI, 1907
THE following sums in deposit in the Office of the Court will be paid into the Government
Revenue if not claimed by the persons entitled thereto on or before the 23rd day of November 1907.
For	From	Amount.
Ah Sah
Est. Chuan Ek
$10.00
Ah Hoh
Est. Lai Kee
2.37
Ana Sheh Mahomad (Spore'
1 Est. T. Kanisah
.64
Ana Ismail Sail ( )
.49
Ahmatsah
Est. T. Medin Pechay
.41
Abdulrahman	(Spore)
36.62
Ah Lan
3.65
Ah Pen
7.53
Bun Tet
Est. Jong Niok Lee
4.80
Boon Joon
Bong Koon Sin
2.00
Baboo Marican
Est. T. Kanisah
4.90
Bana Saiboo
Est. T. Medin Pcchav 30.20
Chin Tai
Est. Hok Seng (Oya)
.84
Chin Phuu
Bong Chin
1.00
Chin Moh
Est. Low Swee
6.57
Chin Cheng Sang (Spore)
Est. Chuan Hak
32.65
Che Din.	(Natunas)
Est. Abang Saat
1.80
Eng Guan	(Sjpre)
Est. Chuan Hak
12.59
Eng Ann Teng
Est. Tek Guan
.79
Fook Leong
Est. T. Kanisah
.31
Hoh Hap	(Spore)
Est. Chuan Hak
61.70
Hok Seng
Est. Tek Guan
2.17
Hj. Mahomad Syed
Est. T. Kanisah
5.39
Hj. Mahomad Sait
.08
Hj. Natassah
.08
Hoh Long
Est. T. Medin Pechay
.22
Ibramsah
90.81
Joo Moh	(Spore)
Est. Chuan Hak
16.62
Joo Seng
Est. Kanisah
2.70
Kaloni
Kahar
4.70
Koh Cheng
Chua Boh
1.00
Kim Watt Hin
Est. Tek Guan
7.25
Havana Nana Mia (Spore'
Est. T. Kanisah
22.50
Kavana Sheh Daut ( )
11.00
Leong Sen
Inggris
1.00
Long Watt	(Spore) Est. Cbuan Hak
47.44
Lee Guan	( )
9.84
Liew Fatt
Est. Tian Niok Lee
12.50
Mok Ah Jiew
Mok Jin
1.00
Meeraili (ex P. C.)
Est. T. Kanisah
.39
Muna Mahomad Alli (Spore) ,,
4.08
Murugan Pillay ( )
113.41
Mohamad Saiboo ( )
Est. T. Medin Pechay
24.22
Munusami Narken
.97
Munusami
Neo Sin Mah
1.22
Neo Chin Pliiu
.50
Natarsah
Est. Kanisah
117.00
Nina Mahomad Bros. (Spore) 8.81
Narasen Nair
Est. T. Medin Pechay
10.33
Ofuji
Ah Jee
.50
Osizu
Matsumura
.50
Peng Soon
Est. Keng Chiang
15.84
Puna Muna Sultan (Spore)
Est. T. Kanisah
10.43
Seng Hong
Est. Chin Fook
1.00
Shin Lee
Est. Kim Hap
14.15
Seng Tek
Est. Tek Guan
14.42
Sin Ghee Eng
28.86
Sam Hap Hin
18.41
Sina Tambi
Est. T. Kanisah
.95
Sena Yavana Suna
Est. Eng Guan
.08
Tong Shun
1.66
Tinggal (Buntal)
Est. Chuan Ek
.07
Teh Ah Mee
Tan Ah Tui
.50
Tana Yena Mahomad
Abdul Kadir (Spore)
Est. T. Kpnisah
6.53
Tana Mahomad .Alli
1.63
Tambi Mohomat
.25
Tambi Abdulrahman
.69
Tambi Gani
Jee Niuk
.62
Voon Liuk
. 1.00
Vcrasami Kona (. Matang)
Est. T. Kanisah
2.74
Verasami
Est. T. Medin Pechay 7.29
Yow Liang Fong
Est. Soon Watt
.66
Yong Hap Seng (Spore)
Est. Chuan Hak
26.93
Yavana Sultan Alidul
Kadir (Spore)
Est. T. Kanisah
31.08
JOHN E. A. LEWIS, Resident 2nd Class.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 2, 1907.
242
date the assets of the above named will be
divided amongst the parties entitled thereto
regard being had only to those claims of which
notice shall have been given. And all monies
owing to the above Estates shall be paid to
the undersigned forthwith.
JOHN E. A. LEWIS,
Resident 2nd Class.
Residents Office,
30th September, 1907.
Notification.
No. XL, 1907.
Upon 1st OCTOBER 1907 the following
alterations in Postal Rates come into force:
Internal Postage.
SARAWAK LETTER POSTAGE.
Letters.not exceeding 1 oz	... 2 cents
Not exceeding 2 ,,	... 3 For each additional 2 oz.
or fraction thereof 3 ,,
Local Union.
Straits Settlements (i. e. Singapore, Penang, Ma-
lacca, Province Wellesley, The Bindings, Cocos
Islands, Christmas Island *and Labuan) Federated
Malay States and Johore.
Letters.For 2 oz. or fraction
thereof 3 cents
Postcards.	...	... 1 Printed Papers.For 2 oz. or
fraction thereof 1 ,,
Local Newspapers within 7 days of publication.
For first 3 oz. ... 1 cent
For each additional 2 oz. 1 Commercial Papers.
For each 3 oz. ... 1 ,,
minimum 8 cents
Samples.
For each 2 oz. ... 1 cent
minimun 4 cents
Parcels.
Not exceeding ? 3 lbs. 20 cents
Not exceeding 7 tbs. 40 Not exceeding 11 lbs. 60 ,,
British Possession, etc.
Great Britain, and the following Colonies, etc :
Ascension, Bahamas, Barbadoes. Bermuda, British
Honduras, British Central Africa, British East
Africa, Cauada, Cayman Islands, Ceylon, Cyprus,
Falkland Islands, Fiji, Gambia Protectorate. Gibral-
tar, Gold Coast. Hong Kong, Jamaica, Leeward
Islands, New Zealand, Nigeria Northern and South-
ern, St. Helena, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Soma-
liland, Trinidad and Tobago, Turks Islands, Uganda
and Windward Islands.
Letter postage for each ounce or fraction of an
ounce, 4 cents (British Possessions not mentioned
above i. e. Australia, India, South Africa, etc. remain
as at present 4 cents per ounce).
Foreign Countries.
Egypt and the Soudan Id. per oz.
For those Countries to which the rate is now IQ
cents per half ounce the rate will be as follows:
For the first ounce, 10 cents. For each addi-
tional ounce or fraction thereof, 6 cents.
Notice.
No. XXXVII, 1907.
IN THE BANKRUPTCY COURT, BIMANGGANG.
In re the goods of Go Tek Ee
alias Ah Ba. (Saratok, Ka-
laka).
ALL creditors or other persons having any
claims whatever against the Estate of the
above are hereby requested to send particulars
thereof to the undersigned on or before the
31st of December 1907 after which date the
assets of the said Go Tek Ee will be dis-
tributed amongst the parties entitled thereto,
regard being had only to those claims of which
notice shall have been given. And all moneys
due to the abovementioned estate shall be
paid to the undersigned forthwith.
H. L. OWEN,
Resident.
Simanggang,
19th September, 1907.
Notice.
No. XXXIX, 1907.
IN THE BANKRUPTCY COURT, KUCHING.
In the goods of Hoh Ngee and
Jee Chin, pepper planters of
S. Mauug and Sekama Road.
(A bacon ded.)
In the goods of Goh Liang Hah,
pepper planter of 9th rn'ile
Penrissen Road. (Abscond-
ed.)
In the goods of Bong Phee, pep-
per planter of Musi, chop Ban
Shin. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Tan See, Tan
Tek Chow, Ng San Chun and
Bong Neo Chai, pepper plant-
ers of S. Moyan. (Abscond-
ed.)
In the goods of Chang Chit, pep-
per planter of Kranji. (Abs-
conded.)
In the goods of Chia Shak, pep-
per planter of Simungo. f.lt.s-
conded.)
In the goods of Lai Fook, pep-
per planter of Sungei Tengah.
(Absconded.)
In the goods of Kon Heyo, chop
Ban Shoon, pepper planter of
Tan Teo Durian. (Abscond-
ed.)
In the goods of Tsai Chiou chop
Sen Faw, pepper planter of
Paku. (Absconded.)
In the goods of Tsen Nyong,
pepper planter and boat man
(Taiubang No. 302) of Jugan.
(A bsconded.)
In the goods of Wee Poo, pep-
per planter of Slabat. (Abs-
conded)
ALL creditors and others persons having any claim whatsoever against the Estates of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned on or before the 15th November, 1907, after which
Kuching,
30th September, 1907.
By order of
His Highness the Rajah Muda.
C. C. ROBISON.
Postmaster- General.
243
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 2, 1907.
Notification.
No. XLI, 1907-
NOTICE is hereby given that insured parcels
may now be sent to Ceylon and Hongkong
and the treaty ports of China i. e. Amoy, Can-
ton, Chefoo, Foochow, Hankow, Hoihow,
Kongmong, Kumchak, Liu-Kung-Too, (Wei-
hai Wei; Ningpo, Pakhoi, Sumshui, Shanghai,
Swatow, and Wuchow.
The limit of insurance is 1,000 and the
insurance rate 35 cents per 100 or any frac-
tion thereof. This is additional to the postage
rates which remain as stated in the Postal
Guide.
C. C. ROBISON,
Postmaster-General.
Kuching,
October 1st, 1907.	_
Notice-
No. XLII, 1907.
Be Tian Ngiu On Chop On
Shoon.
ALL creditors and other persons having any
claims whatsoever against the Estate of the
above named are hereby requested to send
particulars thereof to the undersigned within
3 months from date, after which date the
assets of the above named will be divided
amongst the parties entitled thereto, regard
being had only to those claims of which notice
shall have been given. And all monies owing :
to the said Estate shall be paid to the under- i
signed forthwith.
E. R. STILWELL,
Resident.
Bau,
15th October, 1907.
Notification.
No. XLIII, 1907.
NOTICE is hereby given that the letter post-
age to the undermentioned British Colonies
etc., is 4 cents per ounce or fraction thereof:
Australian Commonwealth
British Guiana	Fanning Inlands	Mauritius
British North Borneo India (including Aden) Newfoundland .
British South Africa Malta	Tristan dAcunha
C. C. ROBISON,
Postmaster General.
Sarawak,
17th October, 1907.
Notification.
No. XLIV, 1907.
TENDERS will be received for the lease of the
Gambling Farm for the whole of the Rejang
district from January 1st next for the term of
one year.
Separate tenders for two or more years may also be sent in.
Tenders should be addressed to the Resident, Sibu, and must be delivered not later than December 15th.
H. S. B. JOHNSON..
Resident 2nd Class.
Sibu, 22nd October. 19C7.
Notification.
No. XLV. 1907.
TENDERS will be received at the Municipal Offices up to 11 A. M. on 14th December, 1907, for the weeding, ditching and mowing, etc., of the Roads within the Kampong and Bazaar limits, in accordance with plan to be seen at the said Offices. For further information apply to the Officer in Charge, Municipal Branch, Public Works Department.
M. G. BRADFORD.
Kuching, 28th October, 1907.
Notification.
No. XL VI, 1907.
TENDERS will be received at the Residents
Office up to 11 A. M. on the 15th day of
December 1907, for the renting of the follow-
ing Markets for the year 1908 Fish.
Pork.
Vegetable, etc.
P. F. CUNYNGHAME,
Resident 1st Division.
Kuching,
October 29th, 1907.
Notification.
No. XLVII, 1907.
TENDERS will be received at the Residents
Office up to 11 A. M. on the 15th day of De-
cember 1907, for the following contracts tor
the year 1908.
Military Department.
(1).The making up of white drill and blue serge uniforms as follows :
For the Band, Manila men (10) annually and Malays (22) half yearly; and Non-commissioned Officers and men (about 500 in number) half yearly;
Notice-
No. XMX. 1907.
He Kee Chong, Chop Beng Kee, Pepper Farmer and Shopkeeper of Suri and Rejang village. (Absconded.)
ALL creditors and other persons having any claim whatsoever against the Estate of the above named are hereby requested to send particulars thereof to the undersigned on or before 31st December 1907, after which date the assets of the above named will be divided amongst the parties entitled thereto regard being had only to those claims of which notice shall have been given. And all monies owing to the above Estate shall be paid to the undersigned.
NORMAN MACPHEE.
Resident. Matu,
1st October, 1907.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 2, 1907.
244
the contractor to supply badges of rank and good [ conducts; all other materials to lie supplied by the Government.
(2).The making and supply of uniform caps for the above, red for the Band and black for Noncommissioned Officers and men. All materials to be supplied by contractor, excepting the badges.
Naval Department.
(1) .The making up of blue serge and white drill uniforms, half yearly, for the crews of the following Government vessels, all materials to be supplied by Government:
H. H. S. Zahora Kaka A deh Young Harry La Fee Lucille Gazelle L'Aubaine
(2) .The making and supply of white and blue caps for the above: all materials to be supplied by contractor, excepting ribbons.
(3) .The supply of rice for the first four of the above mentioned vessels.
(4) .The supply of salt fish for the same. Medical Department.
The supply of rations and sundries for the General, Pauper, and Lock Hospitals and Government Dispensary.
Police and Prisons Department.
(1) .The making up of blue serge and indigo blue drill uniforms for the Non-commissioned Officers and constables (about 150 in number), and white uniforms for prisoner Mandors (3), also blue drill uniforms for Outstation Police (about 70 in number) half yearly; all material to be supplied by Government.
(2) .The supply of red Kasumba cloth for turbans and waist cloths for the above.
(3) .The supply of prison rations and sundries as per schedule.
(4) .The supply of white drill for prison clothing.
(5) .The supply of working materials. Court and Offices.
(1) .The making up of the black perlas cloth uniforms for the Court peons half yearly; all material to be supplied by contractor.
(2) .The making up of blue flannel clothing for Office Boys half yearly; all material to be supplied by contractor.
(3) .The making up of dungaree uniforms for Customs Peons half yearly; and the making and supplying of caps for the same.
Miscellaneous.
(1) .The supply of white drill for uniforms of Rangers, Sailors and Stokers, and Prison Mandors.
(2) .The supply of indigo blue drill for uniforms of Police Force.
(3) .The supply of Kerosine Oil for the above Departments, also for Light-houses, Sadong and Brooketon Mines.
(4) .The supply of cocoanut oil for the above.
(5) .The supply of blacking, Bengal soap and coal-tar.
The articles mentioned in No. 5 can be tendered for separately.
All articles and schedules may be obtained and samples seen on application at the Residents Office for Naval Department, to the Principal Medical Officer, to the Superintendent of Police and Prisons, to the Superintendent of Customs for their respective requirements and at the Residents Office for Court and Offices and Miscellaneous tenders.
Tenders must be sealed, and the name of the Department for which they are made should be endorsed on the cover.
The Government does not bind itself to accept the lowest or any tender.
P. F. CUNYNGHAME,
Resident 1st Division. Residents Office,
October 29th, 1907.
Notification.
No. XLVIII, 1907.
Demolition of Old Fish Market
TENDERS may now be sent in to the Commissioner of Public Works and Surveys for the purchase of the present timber Fish Market including the steps and piles on which it stands, but not the fish tables which will be retained. For further particulars apply to the Commissioner of Public Works and Surveys.
H. F. CAREW-GIBSON, Commissioner of Public Works and Surveys.
APPOINTMENT.
His Highness the Rajah Muda has been pleased to appoint H. La Chard, Esq., to do duty in the Third Division to date from the 1st November 1907.
The Estimates.
?
THE estimates of revenue and expenditure show that a fairly prosperous year is expected by the Treasury. We notice that the estimated revenue from stamps is less by $3,000 than that for this year, a fact which is sufficiently explained by the condition of the pepper trade. Mining Royalties show a decrease mostly owing to the uncertainty regarding the output of gold at Bidi.
?245
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 2, 1907.
On the expenditure side the item of Public Works is responsible for 311,820 of which 45,000 is expected to be expended in Outstations and 14,270 by the Municipal Branch. The principal items of the 252,550 allotted to the Commissioners Department are River Wall $30,000 and New Mains $G5,000, while it is expected that some 46,000 are still required to complete the Matang water supply. Civil List shows an increase principally owing to the Prisons being included on this occasion and to certain pensions becoming payable next year. Otherwise the expenditure under that head remains nearly the same as for this year.
Report on Rejang Dyak Affairs.
RAJAH,1 have the honour to report to you on matters connected with Rejang affairs during my visit to the District from the beginning of September to the end of October.
Ulu Rejang.I made three trips to Kapit and one up the Baileh river as far as Nanga Gat. This river is the most thickly populated of any of the Dyak districts and I should say without exaggeration that the river could tuin out a force of something like 4,000 fighting men. In consequence of this excess of population farming land in a few years time will be very hard to get in the Baileh, and the Dyaks will be getting restless to move elsewhere. This will mean that they will want to get into the Mujong, the Gat or in the main Baileh above the Gat.
A Government Fort or outpost at Nanga Gat would be a great help in keeping the Baileh Dyaks in check and the position, a rising one situated on a tongue of land between the two rivers, is admirably situated for such a building- The laud I believe in the old days was a burial place for the Dugats, the ancient inhabitants of this part of the country. The BaJleh Dyaks are very anxious to procure and work wood for the building free of cost and when once this building is erected I have no doubt but that a bazaar will be built and Chinese and Malays will come and settle there.
On my visit to the Baileh I heard that a large party of Dyaks had gone off on the war path against some interior tribes but I am glad to say that I have heard recently that they have all returned without having done any mischief. Jars I collected in the Baileh, some3,000to 4,000 dollars worth, 1 will keep in Kapit Fort however till fines have been paid by the leaders of this abortive expedition.
There is only one matter to be cleared up amongst the Baileh Dyaks and that is to find the perpetrators of the murders of the 4 Dyaks in the Baileh river some 2 or 3 months ago. The Dyaks will be in a state of unrest till the perpetrators of these murders are brought to justice. I am making the fullest enquiries and hear that the murders were committed by an Uma Lesong by name Smukow.
On Mr. Page-Turners return from Belaga I shall hear if there is any truth in this rumour.
I have nothing further to- report on Ulu Ai" matters.
Kanowit.I have been up the Kanowit river as far as the Julow river and have selected a site for the Fort which has received Your Highness' sanction. The wood for the structure is being worked by the Dyaks and nearly all ready. The Kanowit Dyaks live in great poverty and are very short of rice as last year, owing to the continual inroads and forays of Miki Pambar Dyaks, they were too frightened to farm properly. Kana's surrender has brought no feeling of security to either the Kanowit or Julow Dyaks and there is more unrest than there was before owing to the number of Kampars" who came into the Kanowit and Julow rivers on the occasion of Kanas peacemaking. These strangers I have all ordered back to Miki Pambar and refuse to receive them unless they surrender at Sibu with their wives and families, when they will be allotted land down river on which to live, so as not to be any longer a menace to the Kanowit district.
I should suggest for the safety of the Kanowit and Ulu Julow rivers an outpost being erected at Nanga Entabai which would protect the whole of the Ulu Julow and also the Ulus of the Batang Lupar rivers, the Skrang and Saribas. This outpost if it receives Your Highness approval cannot be built, however, till the Fort at Julow is completed. This would only leave one road open to the Miki Pambars to the Kanowit and that is via the Matchan river. The mouth of this river, however, is guarded by a large Dyak bouse of over 50 doors, the t-uai rumah of which is a Dyak by name Entili and in whom I have the fullest confidence.
Kana was treated with great leniency during the peacemaking brought about by the late Resident. Neither Kana nor his anembiak" incurred any fines for their past misdeeds and on their return home to Miki Pambar demanded, in the name of Government, and received all kinds of presents in the shape of money, jars, and brassware.
Kana, I believe, has no intention of moving from Miki Pambar but I hear that Bantin wishes to move into the Katibas. Nyanggow, another Dyak Chief at Miki Pambar, has not yet surrendered to Government and has stated his intention of making another attack on the Julow river before doing so.
The outposts at Julow and Entabai will restore confidence to the Kanowit and the Julow and will bring in many Dyaks from Miki Pambar who are at present too frightened to move without Kana's permission from fear of being attacked by Kana at a later day. It would also bring back a number of Dyaks from the Baileh river.
I have nothing further to report on Dyak matters.
I have the honour to be,
Rajah,
Your obedient Servant.
C. V. BROOKE,
Rajah Muda.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 2, 1907.
24S
SUMMARY
OF
Revenue and Expenditure
ESTIMATES FOR 1908.
REVENUE.
EXPENDITURE.
$
$
FARMS
... 494,000
PUBLIC WORKS AND SURVEYS ...
311,820
CUSTOMS
... 350,000
MILITARY
115,048
DYAK ETC. REVENUE ...
...	38,000
LIGHT HOUSES
3,850
EXEMPTION TAX	/
...	30,000
CESSION MONEY
25,118
MINING ROYALTIES ...
...	77,143
MUSEUM
5,774
BUOY AND LIGHT DUES
3,800
COLLECTION OF REVENUE
14,318
POST AND SHIPPING OFFICE
5,140
IMMIGRATION
700
LAND REVENUE
9,500
BR00KET0N COLLIERY
70,000
STAMPS
6,000
SADONG COLLIERY' ...
50,000
ASSESSMENT ...
...	18,000
BAREMBANG OIL, ETC.
15,000
MISCELLANEOUS
...	20,100
PLANTATIONS
16,760
COURTS OF JUSTICE ...
...	60,300
CIVIL LIST ...
463,721
LOANS REPAID
3,000
NAVAL DEPARTMENT ...
123,504
INTEREST ON INVESTMENTS
10,000
MISCELLANEOUS
49,029
REIMBURSEMENTS
... 141,000
$1,264,642
$1,265,983
These Estimates have not yei received the sauctiou of His Highness the Rajah.
F. H. DALLAS.
Treasurer of Sarawak.
A Correction.
Kuching, 7 th October 1907.
SIR,
In your issue of September last containing a notice of the retirement from the Government service of Dr. C. Hose appears the statement that Mrs. Hose accompanying him on a trip up the Balleh river travelled farther inland than any lady has ever yet been.
Being acquainted with the locality I now write to remind you that in September 1895 Her Highness the Ranee passed a night among the Pelagus rapids
stopping short only of the farthest and largest rapid, Wong Sutan; and that Her Highness also stayed five days at Lubok Autu in the previous month of that year, attaining in both of these journeys a greater distance inland than the spot visited by Dr. and Mrs. Hose in the Balleh river.
In May 1893 also a lady accompanying Professor Emil Seienka travelled up the Kapuas river, and overland from Nanga Badau, the Netherlands India station, to Lubok Antu.
I am, Sir,
Yours faithfully,
IVONE KIRKPATRICK,
Resident.
247
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 2, 1907.
Does the native improve !
To
The Editor
of the Sarawak Gazette.	*
DEAB SIR.In the August number of the Gazette two letters by J. H. and Silly Season appeared in criticism of my article on the improvement of the Native. They both jumped at the conclusion that the natives of some small district of Sarawak were reterred to, whereas the remarks applied generally to the Fur East. Dyak and Kyans were only mentioned incidentally to distinguish interior from coast peopleJakuus and Sakais, Javanese and Malays of other places would have applied equally well.
Mr. J. EL, whose article I will take first, asks why natives should improve and seems to think that a high state of civilization was being advocated, whereas it was particularly stated by me that such was a mistake and unnecessary, then further on he changes his mind and thinks they might improve in some directions. He entirely begs the question by entering into a long dissertation on the happiness of the Dyak and the content and affluence of the Malay (which were never questioned) under the present conditions, thus going into the political aspect of the case with which my article had nothing to do, and confining the question to Sarawak natives who were not referred to in particular. He says the Malays have distinctly risen and are following the ordinary lines of civilization ; politically, no doubt, they are, the reasons for which ate obvious, but in their inner lives, that is when they are left entirely to their own devices, generally speaking they have not.
As Mr. J. H. wishes to specialize where I only generalized and he asks what is meant by improvement, I am ready to follow him and would ask him whether it is an improvement that most of the young Malays (and a good many Dyaks for that matter) now- a-days dress up in European clothes, collars, ties, shirts, etc., which do not in any way suit them, to say nothing of the necktie being haram' (forbidden) to Mohammedans. Did they not look infinitely better in their own dress which formerly consisted of the neatly tied head-handkerchief, the sahok (sarong tied round the waist), the open vest or coat with the high collar and often embroidered, all of which are rarely seen now except the sabok ?' We have at any rate to be thankful that the women have not taken to ordering their frocks from Paris, or rather Singapore, like their Turkish, Egyptian or Japanese sisters are doing from the former place. To continue, would it be no improvement if there was a little more order and cleanliness in their houses, examples of which are always before them could not the bringing up of their children be improved somewhat and the large infant mortality decreased? Could they not drink and bathe in cleaner water and many other things which would not be in any way altering their customs ?
Mr. J. II. says we cannot expect them to change their habits all at once, why then may it be asked have they already changed some of them ?but, unfortunately, for those that are neither useful nor good. Iurtber, that as there are only a handful of Europeans scattered over a wide area natives cannot be expected to learn much(note the change of tone for Mr. J. H. started by asking why they should improve)but I must again remind him that my article was not written about natives living far away from Europeans, but those who see them every day and who have to do with or work for Europeans in any capacity and these number tens of thousands. Take the native servant instance, who has been in closest touch with white people and who in many
cases has Been brought up with them so to speak, and who has been taught cleanliness and order in the house, has seen the way children are taken care of, and numberless other things, I would ask Mr. J. H. to go to that servants house and see how many of the things he has learnt to do in his masters house he does in his own. He is of course under no obligation to do any of them, neither is he under any obligation to wear shirts and ties, drink whisky and soda, use bad scent and turn his trousers up at the bottomwhich so many of them do. Are these some of the ordinary lines of civilization that Mr. J. H. refers to ? .
He then goes on to enquire why Dyaks should desert their own dukuns, it being quite natural that as they attribute their ills to evil spirits they should turn to them, but why does he except Kuching and Banting ? If Dyaks and other tribes like them do not desert their own dukuns, may it lie asked why they go to Malays and Chinese for medicines which they have to buy? What has the Malay or Chinaman done to inspire their confidence ? As regards Malays Mr. J. does not seem to be aware that they do not go to European doctors or hospitals unless made to do so, generally speaking, either in Kuching, Banting or anywhere else in the East.
As regards the shutting up of their houses, I am quite aware that our countrymen in certain classes do so and that they live in overcrowded and insanitary conditions, but the same reasons for such do not obtain in the tropics; England is raw and cold and there is a large surplus population for which there is no room combined with great poverty. In the East the conditions are just the reverse and there is no excuse for overcrowding when any native can build his house himself, the jungle supplying him with all the material for nothing, he has only to go and get themand he has as much land as he chooses to ask for.
Mr. J. H. enquires what has been done for natives, and apparently infers that because he has not seen anything done that little or nothing is done; he would do well to enquire from some of those who have been a long time in the country. l'urther, he remarks that natives look upon the Englishman as altogether a superior being and that therefore the force of his example alone does not induce them to copy him. Does he refer to Malays or the other tribes ? Because if the former 1 would beg leave to state that Malays do not consider Europeans superior to themselves, they think they are more clever but certainly not superiorthey would probably tell you so if one asked them but they do not think so.
Mr. J. H. in his concluding paragraph states that 1 am pessimistic because I have limited my view to one small district by which I take it he does not give me credit for being able to see beyond my own doorstep; the holding of a picture upside down he says might possibly obtain in the small district whieh he thinks I wrote about and is therefore not to be quite discarded as a fact, he is therefore evidently not aware that that is one of the thiugs that nearly everyone who has been anywhere in the East has observed before anything else, one might say, and commented uponit is as well known about all natives as that their skins are darkand why does he suppose that the natives of that one small district hold a hammer or look at pictures differently to other natives surrounding them, or in other words why should the Malays or Dyaks of the second division do things differently to those of the third? The inherent ideas are the same in both, and in fact in all natives of whatever tribe. Then Mr. J. II. says some exception might be taken to some of my facts, facts which are based on the observations of a good many years and which as regards the reverse mode of thought and action are matters of daily and hourly occurrence,
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 2, 1907.
248
and which might lead to the conclusion that such must be innate, and not confined to a few mechanical operations as Mr. J. H. calls them : in conclusion he does not think that natives have anything to learn from the examples I quotedhe might as well argue that if a vessel goes 5 knots an hour it is no use to anyone on this earth that she should go G ; that the native boat goes slow I think I uni better cognisant of than Mr. J. H. but it can move a little faster without running out into the sea of civilization when it would be swamped.
As to Silly Season,' it would seem that he has used up so much of his brain in the attempt to be facetious that he had none left over for any grasp of the situation. Like Mr. J. H.' he jumped at the conclusion that I wrote about some small outstation and could not see beyond itin fact his letter is one big jump nt conclusions.
The instances given of the reverse mode of thought and action are only a few out of thousands and. were to show the curious trait in the native character, the reason for which it would be interesting (at least to some people) to know.
His simile of the Englishman and Frenchman does not in the least apply to tiie case, but is quite in keeping with his signature. Eating two different articles of food is not eating in two opposite ways, and the frog is not the reverse of beef as far as I am aware.
As regards boats my observations were taken from those in which there were natives only, but it may interest Silly Season to know that even when there is a European in the boat and there is also plenty of room for them to sit back, they don't do so until told to and even then go forward at the first opportunity.
Will Silly Season' kindly give the solution, for he says, first, that natives used their boats long before we did and therefore should know all about them, (which is granted), then he states that I overlooked the fact of how much room a European takes up in a boat with his baggage, etc., so that the men must sit forward and put the head downin the one case the native does so of his own accord (because he knows all about his boat), in the other it is the fault of the European taking up too much room in the sternwho is the cause ? The size and shape of the native boat has nothing to do with the case as the greater the resistance the less the speed is a natural law, but perhaps this does not obtain in Silly Sea- Bon's district.
It may also interest him to know that 1 have asked natives why boats are so often trimmed in this manner, but whilst they have admitted the fact they have not been able to explain it.
In reference to medicines if Silly Season' had read my article a little more carefully he would have seen that doctors were mentioned and not outstation officers, and he also may be unaware of the well- known fact that Malays do not go to hospitals anywhere in the East and seldom to doctors if they can help it. As to other natives perhaps Silly Season' will say why they so often buy Malay ami Chinese medicines, are these latter people able to tell them what is tho matter with them'?
Among other conclusionsSilly Seasonhas jumped at is that as he takes no interest in the matter others do not, and having (judging from his letter) very little knowledge of the subject has attempted to pass it off by adopting a flippant style of writing. He has the last word in case he should again be tempted to commit the sin of envy at the facility with which I pour out words and ink.
If Mr. J. II. and Silly Season' had travelled in other countries in these parts or exchanged ideas with those who live in them they would see that my remarks applied to natives generally and not to any
particular tribe or district in Saratvak, and that I am by no means singular in my opinion.
In conclusion let it be understood that I do not advocate that pressure should in any way be put on natives to adopt any of our ways, but that I wrote to bring forward the fact that they do not adopt those that arc any good to them, although they have 1 had sufficient example and time (w'ith all due defer- f-nce to Mr. J. H.) to at least show signs of a beginning if one is going to be made.
Yours faithfully,
G. L. T.
MONTHLY Notes
October.
S. S. Kuching sailed on the 1st for Singapore with passenger, Mr. A. Cropley. The same day H. H. S. Zahora returned from Sibu.
Dr. Barker, Mr. J. H. Brodie, Miss Hasfie and Miss Black were passengers by the s. s. Rajah of Sarawak which arrived from Singapore on the 3rd.
THE Norwegian s. s. Orland, 917 tons, Captain T. G. Lie, v with a crew of 24 men arrived at Rejang on the 21st September from Hong-Kong to load timber. She brought specie $8,000 and goods value $380. She left for Hong-Kong on the 5th with a cargo of 1,059 tons of timber and 40,000 billets of firewood.
THE very Revd. Father E. Dunn left Kuching for Sibu on the Gth by p. s. Ad eh.
S. S. Rajah of Sarawak sailed for Singapore on the 8th with passenger, Mr. H. Hogg.
The same day Messrs. Johnson and Pope returned from Tatau, vid Bintulu, by s. s. Sarawak.
THE 9th, being Her Highness the Ranees birthday, was observed as a public holiday. A salute was fired from the Fort and all ships in the river were dressed.
S. S. Alice Lorraine sailed for Sibu, vid Sadong and Lingga on the 9th. Passenger for Lingga, Mr. S. Cunynghame.
ON the 10th s.s. Kuching arrived from Singapore.
ON the 13th Mr. I. Kirkpatrick returned to Kuching from a short visit to Sibu. He was granted a passage in II. H. S. Zahora.
S. S. Kuching left for Singapore on the 15th with passengers Mr, J. E. A. Lewis, on whort leave, and Mr. H. H. Everett who had business to attend to.
The same day p. s. Kaka sailed for Labuan direct and Limbang. She took up Spampanis
249
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 2, 1907.
Circus which was bound for Sandakan. Passengers. Mr. and Mrs. Spainpani and Mr. Burt.
S. S. Rajah of Sarawak arrived from Singapore on the 17th. Passengers, Mr. and Mrs. H. O. H. Etheridge who have just come out from home. Mr. Etheridge was formerly in the Public Works Department here.
P. S. Adeh sailed for Singapore on the 20th to undergo a docking. Mr. P. Stewart and Mr. C. Lange went across with her.
S. S. Rajah of Sarawak sailed for Singapore on the 22nd with passenger, Miss Black, who has been paying a short visit to Kuching as the guest of Miss Hastie.
BY p. s. Kaka which came in from Lingga on the 24th there arrived Messrs. S. Cunyng- hame, H. la Chard and the Revd. W. Howell.
Mr. la Chard is being transferred to the ITTrd Division.
S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore this day.
His Highness the Rajah Muda returned to Kuching from Sibu in H. H. S. Zahora. on the 26th. His Highness has been seven weeks in the Rejang attending to Dyak affairs.
Ox the 29th the s. s. Kuching sailed for Singapore.
The same day p. s. Kaka left .for Brooke ton and Limbang, vid Sibu, with passengers, Mr. H. la Chard for Sibu, Mr. R. Pawle and Mr. J. Scott for Labuan, vid Brooketon, Mr. 1. Kirkpatrick for Lawas, Messrs. S. Cuuyng- hame, E. Parnell and G. M. Allman for Limbang.
S. S. Rajah of Sarawak arrived from Singapore on the 31st. Passengers, Messrs. J. E. A. Lewis and H. H. Everett.
WE learn that the new Fish Market on the River wall is to be opened to the public on Tuesday, November 5th. The new building is entirely built of brick and concrete with a corrugated iron roof and is of very palatial proportions. The fish tables are of concrete with an arrangement of water pipes to enable them to be washed down by simply turning on a tap. The new Market should prove as useful an addition to the town buildings as it is handsome in appearance.
OUR congratulations to Monsieur Georges Hou rant.
Monthly reports
Trusan
July and August.
On the 23rd of July Mr. Kirkpatrick came from Lawas and visited the stationcash, customs duties etc. were taken over and such cases as were brought up in Court were settled.
Plandok, a Murut, made a complaint that some Malays had stolen two baskets of his Damar in the jungle but nothing could be done in the matter as he does not know who they are.
A Murut named Ending died from the effects of a wound on the head caused by a biliong which flew apart whilst he was working with it.
The trade returns for the month are:
July Imports $2,737	Exports $3,987
August ,,	4,869	2,757
During these two months the unmarried men's barracks have been entirely rebuilt and made smaller, so many rooms now not being required: so much of the timber was rotten Mat the buildings were not worth repairing; such of the material as was still sound was used in the new buildings.
Repairs have been carried out in the buildings at Sundar and the cattle and boat sheds at the station re-roofed. The fort barracks and other buildings have all been white-washed.
The Rainfall for the two months amounted to 12.14 inches.
The farming season having been in progress during these months very little of any importance has been going on and consequently there is little to report.
O. F. RICKETTS,
Resident.
Lundu
July and August.
Having obtained the sanction of His Highness the Rajah, I, early in July, called out the Stung* gang Malays to repair the road through their Kam- pong. This was completed within two days. The prisoners assisted. All the bridges were opened up and remade. As the road runs entirely through marshy land it will require attention every few years.
His Highness the Rajah having kindly granted me leave to attend the races I left for Kuching on July 14th.
On the 10th August I learned from Simatan that one Gob Ang Jit a Lewchew Chinaman, living at Saragan, had met his death at the hands of Yu Choon, Choon Kooi and Su Hap. Yu Choon and Choon Kooi were both arrested within a week of the assault, and forwarded to Kuching. Su Hap up to the present has not been heard of. My report on this affair was sent to the HonLle the Resident. The case came before a special Jury in the Supreme Court when Yn Choon was found guilty of the manslaughter of Goh Ang Jit and Choon Kooi was found not guilty and was discharged.
Mr. Parnell, who came to audit the Station accounts, arrived on 10th August per p. s. Adeh, returning on the 11th August at 9P. M. The p. s. Adeh returned at day-light that morning.
On the 24th to 29th August I visited the coast as far as Telok Snabang. Here one Jauh Ah Siu a Kheh Chinese and paddi planter at Mempawa Sambas applied for a permit to plant over 10,000 cocoa- nuts at Tanjoug Sakol, which is between Sungei Samunsam and Sungei Limo, quite uninhabited , land. Ah Sin will not be able to commence clear
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 2, 1907.	250
ing until end of next harvest, but I think he really means business. If granted the land he intends bringing over about 10 doors of Chinese for whose good behaviour he will be responsible. Further he was willing to place a deposit if I would issue a permit then and there, which would have reverted to Government in the event of his not appearing before the end of 3rd Chinese moon 1908. I have not granted the permit, but told Ah Sin I would do so on his arrival next year, if Government raised no objection. There is laud in these parts for many more who really mean serious planting.
On the 28th August I paid a few hours visit to the Talang Talang islands. I understand that the turtles this veer have not come up in such large numbers as they did last or even previous years. I am not surprised to hear this, and should imagine that probably in 25 years time, unless some precautions are taken, the turtles will come up in even lesser numbers. No provision whatsoever is made for keeping up the supply of young turtles, and this seems great pity. 1 wonder tliat the lessees to further their own interests do not agree to set apart a certain time each year for a ?lose seasonsay any three weeks between 31st May and 30th September. A million eggs were collected last year. This number is smaller than what I thought the islands capable of producing.
The prisoners have been employed in raising the road across river and in opening up the old road to the Tobacco Estate to its original size 24 feet in width. Owing to careless and indifferent mowing the babas had been allowed to grow up until the road measured scarcely 6 feet broad.
This is all I have to report to Your Highness on this occasion.
September.
The Government school was closed all this month for the annual holiday.
A very sad boating disaster occurred at Tulok Sra- baug on the 2nd when the occupants of a boat, three women and one man, all Malays, were precipitated into the water owing to their boat capsizing in a squall. The three women were drowned, but had they acted upon the advice of Jelani, the man with them, it is most probable that all would have been saved. Jelani ordered them to hang on to the up turned boat while he swam off in search of assistance. On reaching the shore he looked round, the women were nowhere to be seen although the boat was still visible. It is supposed that they tried to swim ashore also, but were overcome with fatigue. Two of the bodies were recovered a few hours after, but the third has never been seen again.
A beacon made in the Government workshop. Kuching, has been erected on Batu Mandi. This will be of the greatest assistance to vessels entering or leaving the river. It has been cemented well into the rock and is supported by three iron stays which are also cemented in. It should withstand the heaviest seas in the N. E. Monsoon. What I fear may possibly weaken or destroy it are the large pieces of timber and roots of nepah palm which are apt to get washed up against it. Il will be examined once a mouth.
I visited Simatan from the 23rd to 24th.
I regret to write that Ong Tai Tiong, one of the principal partners in the old and well established firm of Soon Hong of Simatan, died suddenly on the 11th instant. Deceased who was in a very prosperous way of business died intestate. As there are at least four reported claimants to his property the winding up of his estate will have to be brought before the Honble the Resident.
The trade returns are as under :
Exports. Imports.
Lmidu $7,161	$3,470
Simatan 12,362	4,479
Total $19,523	$7,949
This is all I have to report to Your Highness on this occasion.
F. F. BOULT,
Assistant Resident.
K ALA K A.
A ugust.
On the 6th the s. s. Alice Lorraine arrived from Kuching with the Resident and Abang Dul, and left again for Sibu the next morning.
On the 13th the Resident accompanied by the Native Officers.proceeded to Saratok, and on the 21st returned to Kabong. On the 25th he and Abang Dul returned to Simanggang via the Saribas.
The most important case that came up before the Saratok Court was a dispute concerning the boundary of the Malay and Dyak farming lands tn the Awik. The land in question was examined by H. Dullab and Abang Dul, and the Court now fixed the boundary from the Malong stream on both sides downwards to the mouth of the Awik stream is apportioned to the Malays: and all land above the Malong stream is apportioned to the Dyaks. Anyone infringing this order is liable to a heavy* penalty.
P. Dunggat was rather late in coming down to Saratok to meet the Resident, as one house in the Budu not far from his house was attacked by smallpox.
The assets of Taha (absconded) have been sold by auction and the amount realised was $49 only also the pepper garden of the late Si Thai i i the Ibus was sold for the sum of $192. The garden contains about 900 vines. There is a mortgage too on this garden.
The Malays were busily employed in clearing the undergrowth beyond the Cowhouse right down to the 8. Lumbu bridge, in cutting the stubs and making up the path. They also built the Cowmans house, and commenced to build the Fortmen's married quarters the old house being very dilapidated, and to rebuild the common bridge on to the sand.
As directed by the Resident I proceeded to Roban on the 27th to arrest a Lew Chew Chinaman in Ah Jews house. This was effected and the man sent to Simanggang.
Two Sessang Malays went out one night to fish each man in his own boat. After a time one of the men was suddenly knocked into the river by a crocodile. He grappled with the saurian and it sheered off. Luckily for the man it was a small one and he got off with a few scratches and none the worse for his immersion.
On the 23rd a Chinese pepper planter named Kho Chuan came to report that his pepper vines (some of which are bearing) about 1(M tuat had been destroyed by fire. Some Dyaks who are farming on the swamp set fire to their farms and on account of the drought and wind the fire went right up to the hill where his garden is.
The hauls of the jungkat were still satisfactory although on several evenings gales blew.
The fines for the month amounted to $190.54.
The Trade Returns for the month are:
Imports	Exports
$11,206	$11,221
A. E. CHEYNE,
Writer.
251
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 2, 1907,
LI MBANG.
August.
One Pangeran Mu min of Brunei requested to* be allowed to move into Limbang with all his people, about thirty men, women and children, and applied for land on the opposite hank to build a house and his request has been granted. In connection with this it may be mentioned that the number of houses on the opposite bank is increasing and will before long extend down to the corner.
Owing to continually recurring long spells of dry weather causing a shortage and often a complete lack of water in the kampong and bazaar it will be necessary to take some steps to procure a reserve of water, this can be done by making a small dam in the stream from which the supply is usually taken, and a pipe laid from there to the space close to the Joss house. I would respectfully suggest that the old pipes used at Brooketon be brought here for the purpose; the distance required for piping is about three hundred yards. The Chinese shopkeepers are willing to subscribe towards the cost of the wrork which should not much exceed one hundred and fifty dollars.
In the Court two men Burnt and Daud were sentenced to four months imprisonment for stealing a buffalo.
One Pangeran Assim of Brunei was brought up for illegal collection of taxes in Sarawak territory and intimidation, but sufficient evidence was wanting to convict . Other cases were in connection with disputes about land and fruit trees.
Pangeran Anak Jambdl and Matasan came with receipts for the Cession money; they were informed that the money could not be delivered until I had received a letter signed by all the claimants that they were satisfied with the division.
The Trade Returns for the month are as follows :
Coasting Imports $5,397. Exports $10,8.80.
Foreign 4,059.	,,	5,888.
The rainfall for the month was 345 inches which fell on seven days the heaviest fall being 62 inches in any twenty-four hours. There has consequently been a great shortage of water, small showers of half or three-fourths of inch l eing insufficient to start any of the streams.
September.
One Bakar of Batong laid a complaint before the Court to the effect that Pangeran Meriam of Brunei had sold his wife Javahir to another pangeran in Brunei for one hundred dollars and that the new owner had sent a man named Panggis to take her there; the applicant was told to on no account allow Javahir to be taken away and that if the people concerned in the sale had any grievance they could take their case to the proper authorities.
A letter was later received by the Native Officer Haji Halil from Pangeran Meriam offering him thirty dollars to get the matter put through here.
Oli the 12th a Bisaya named Bunsat war arrested up-river and brought down to the station by Namit of Awang who reported that the prisoner had run amok, having killed one boy and attempted the murder of a woman who was lying in a precarious state. Bunsat on arrival behaved like one insane but later on quieted down, though he appeared to be in a dazed condition. The trial took place on the 10th, a jury of twelve, six Malays and six Chinese, being empanelled. The charge of murder was not proved but though the presumption was strong against the prisoner, the evidence was purely circumstantial. The charge of attempted murder being proved the jury gave a verdict accordingly. The
prisoner was sent down to head-quarters for sentence but as there seemed a doubt about his sanity the Court recommended that he should be first medically examined and if necessary placed under observation.
A woman named Joya was accused by Sinudin of drowning his two children at Telabak, because she had called them to go down to the river and bathe there: the charge was not proved and from the evidence adduced there was no doubt it was a case of accidental death by drowning.
The sequel to the affair had nearly disastrous consequences as the people in the kampong seeing the unfortunate father rushing about with his parang when he heard of the death of his children, were under the impression he was about to amok, seized him and handled him somewhat roughly before matters were explained.
There were several other cases brought up during the month which do not call for any comment.
Several Pangerans, claimants for shares in the Punaug Cession money, have been here during the month each requesting that the matter should be settled here. They were informed that as the division is in the handsof the Pangeran Bandahara at Brunei they must abi le by his decision.
Tugang and another Dyak brought a letter from His Highness the Rajah giving them permission to move from Baram into Limbang, they however wish to settle at Medalam amougst the Tabuns where Dyaks are not allowed to live and they were informed that they could settle in Lubai or Paudaruan if they wished.
The trade returns for the month are as follows:
Coasting Imports $4,872 Exports $6,597
Foreign ,,	8,869	..	3,634
The rainfall for the month was 7.29 inches which fell on thirteen days, 2.90 inches being the heaviest fall in any twenty four hours.
O. F. RICKETTS,
It cs id ent-
S ADONG.
August and September.
Returning from Kuching on the 5th I found nothing of importance awaiting my attention.
Whilst in Office one day a man rushed in to say that many houses in the Kampong were on fire. I lost no time in paddling across the Simunjan as I was in dread that a general conflagration was about to take place as a strong wind was blowing. Two houses had caught adjoining that of Abang Man who- however had got the assistance of the Kampong people to throw water on the walls and attaps (bilian)- of his house thus checking the spread of the fire. In spite of willing aid the two houses referred to were burnt to the ground only a few bushels of paddy- being saved. The usual mystery attends the origin of the fire but from inquiries instituted it appears that two small children were playing near the'dapor and one dropped a lighted stick on the floor the flame of which caught the dry-as-tinder attaps and before- any of the property inside could be thrown out the place was ablaze. In the other house all the inmates were away farming.
Numbers of crocodiles have lieen caught here lately and some 50 eggs were brought in the other day. A sharp nosed crocodile measuring 10 6" was amongst the lot.
Court.At the Mines on every occasion numbers of cases were adjudicated on. Most of the cases Were the usual gambling kind. The Farm is only open on Saturday night and Sunday, the rest of the week closed at all hours. After his days or nights work the Chinese cooly has no recreation of any sort whatever to relieve the monotory of his existence
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 2, 1907.
252
and finds pleasure in a quiet gamble and a pipe of opium. It might be possible to so legislate as to permit the opening of the Fann more frequently and at the same time not incite the coolies to leave their work. At present the very prohibition is an incentive to illicit gambling.
I will make inquiries and report on this matter to Your Highness later on.
P. IF. 1). a(c.The Telephone system being out of order the Commissioner kindly sent round the Head Mandor to attend co it. It is now in thorough working order.
Tabekang and Ulu.T started from Simunjan 3.15 p. M. the 25th and reached Tabekang at 9 r. M. on the following day. Above Ainpungan the river was very low and a good deal of poling hod to be done.
Tongkat" reporting my arrival were sent out next day to the surrounding tribes whose Orang Kaya presented themselves in a few days and paid in some $3,274 tax. Owing to the terrible ravages made by small-pox in the houses of some I deemed it expedient to exempt such from this years (layment.
On the 4th inst:. accompanied by Orang Kayas Tusin and Piching and Tua Kampong Haji Usop, I walked over to Ris, where I was met by the Ris and Lanchangs, and examined the land in dispute. Every Officer who comes here is confronted with this never dying dispute. Therefore any local settlement will be durable for just so long as the Officer who settles it remains in charge of the District.
Being convinced of this I determined to forward ail papers, maps etc. relating tn the subject, at the same time giving my opinion of the matter, to the Honourable the Resident with a request to put the affair in the hands of H. H. the Rajah Muda, whose decision, along with a new map with the proper boundary plainly defined (and not that bogus one drawn by Abang Ulis and long since discarded by Your Highness, so I'm told) will be made known to the Ris and Lanchangs and copies of the map given to each party.
Having collected the tax and disposed of such cases as were brought up for hearing which occupied me for the first five days, I set out for Daha Entama at 7 A. M. having previously sent orders to the various Orang Kaya to clear their roads as I purposed walking from Krosen right across to the left branch i. c. S. Kedup.
On the whole the roads were in good order and could easily be ridden over were a little cutting into the slope of the hills side done in places.
The country round here presents no great difficulty to the cutting of good roads although the procuring of metal may not be attended with ease.
The Dyaks were all engaged on their farms in various stages of dibbling and sawing. At each house however a generous supply of cocoanuts and rice ptigang awaited our arrival.
Leaving Lobang Batu we climbed the intervening range of mountains fairly steep and descended into the valley of the Daha and arrived at Entama at 4.30 P. M. A wretched tumble-down house is the Entamas. However, we were soon comfortable in the panchar where the night was spent.
The Mupuhs Orang Kaya having arrived over night I made for the land which is the cause of the present dispute between the Mupuhs and Daha Entamas. Feeling ran high on both sides but after interminable delay I managed to get a few marks laid down but the portion in dispute is no small one and it would have taken me at least a day and a half to delimit the boundary properly and as this was more time than I could spare this visit as several other disputes in connection with the ownership of land require attention I deferred tire settlement to my next vicit in January.
Leaving this at 8.30 I walked vid Mupuh right on
the Dutch Boundary and at the foot of Mount Ka wen to Engklass lunched and taking boat here dropped down to Mentong for the night.
Up eariy and after a stiff climb reach the ridge which the Mayangs declare Mr. Williams settled as the line of demarcation between themselves and the Mentongs. But no document of any kind whatever was given them by Mr. Williams, who very probably never decided the boundary to be such as stated by them. The Mentongs showed me a Malay letter purporting to be Tua Kampong Abang Matlairs definition of the boundary (an exceedingly vague one as no marks are specified) in 1903, which up to date has not been disputed so far as I can find out. However, I listened to each side's complaint and the Mayangs admitting to the pulling up of a bilian boundary mark are told they will certainly be fined for taking the law into their own hands when I define the boundary and in the meantime they must each clear a path along their respective boundaries so that some idea can be obtained of its direction, which is impossible at present owing to thick jungle.
Return to Tabekang at 3.30 p. M. On my way down the Kidup meet a large boat poled by two Malays in the centre of winch is a quantity of stuff covered up with kadjangs. n enquiry am told by the owner that he is going deer hunting at Kuran. ' A likely story, and on my arrival at Tabekang I sent for the Orang Kaya Kuran and find out what deer hunting" means, i. e. trading without licenses.
After a day or two here adjudicating on several cases and visiting those Dyaks within easy range I go up river and at Retoo branch off up the Rubin to Kajang whose land is being seized by the Tasoh.
The Tasohs have no rightful claim to the land beyond that invested in them, so they declare, by the O. K. of Temong the original farmers, and the matter was quietly settled.
The following morning on my repairing to put in a bilian post or two, the S'mabaug's uddenly lay claim to the same farm.
Unfortunately the Temongs live a long way oft and it is impossible to get the Orang Kaya as a witness this time.
This is most exasperating as the Smabang Orang Kaya and Pangarah were noth present at the previous evening's discussion and never in any way even hinted at pretension to a claim on the disputed farm. It is but a move on the part of the Tasoha closely allied to the Smubangs to protract the demarcation knowing full well that the presence of the O. K. Temong must now lie essential to any settlement.
When at Daha Entama I investigated the matter of the non-payment of tax by certain youths. But as numbers of these were not present I informed the Orang Kaya that ail those who had paid tax for the time within the last two years and those who had not paid to present themselves at the Court House Tabekang on my next visit. 1 shall then be able to judge as to whether or no they have paid as they ought to have done.
P. GORDON WHITE, Officer in Charge.
UPPER SARAWAK. bau.
J ugnst.
Agreements.17 were made during the month, stamp duties and fees amounted to $27.
Court.Fines and fees amounted to $216.34.
A Head Master arrived for the Government School during the month. He is a young man but seems well educated and capable and I think the School should now progress in a satisfactory manner;
253	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 2, 1907.
he has one Chinese assistant Master, and also an assistant Master to teach Malay, who knows sufficient English to help in teaching elementary classes; the daily attendance ranges between 45 ana 50 hoys.
There is very little general news to be given, complaints of theft of pepper from the gardens are as usual at this time of year prevalent, but I have no doubt that in many cases the owner of the garden who lays the complaint has himself made off with the pepper, instead of bringing it in to the Towkay who has given him advances on the crop.
Hee Booi, a coolie, was drowned it is presumed while trying to wade the river at Tundong, as he was on his way to see some friends there, his body being found early in the morning near their Peng- kalan.
300 ft of 2 Pipes arrived for extension to the water works, this will allow a sufficient supply for a Prison bathing place and good flow at the Police Barracks.
A clerk, Harry Snlong, was engaged at the beginning of the month on three months trial to replace Ah Nyuk if he had not recovered his health by that time.
Dr. Bruce Low was in the district on the 1st, 2nd, 7th, 8th. 10th, 14th, 15th, 16th, 21st, 22nd, 24th, 29th, and 30th.
September.
Agreements.43 were made out during the month,
stamp duties and fees amounted to $43.
Court fines and fees amounted to $126.
Mr. Collins started on the 1st to collect Dyak
Revenue in the right hand branch; he returned on
the 8th with $1,473; he stayed at Serapro, P. Ampat,
Suma Danoh, and also visited Kru.
The tax on pepper vines collected for this year
amounts to $1,965 as against $2,248 for 1906, a
reduction of about 13%. 753 gardens not counting
new ones have paid tax as against 849 in 1906, a
reduction of nearly 12% only. 14 new gardens have
been registered, 12 cf which are owned byDyaks, the
total of vines being 2,400, as against 33 gardens in
l'.*06 with 6,555 vines.
A large portion of the water pipes were taken up
and having been thoroughly cleaned on the inside
and tarred on the outside were relaid, with the
addition of some 300 feet of new pipes: a good
supply of water has now been obtained at the
Government Quarters, Police Barracks, Prison
bathing place and Hospital, two fireplugs have also
been put in on the new line where it passes through
the bazaar.
The Tundong Police Barracks have been rebuilt
and also the ferry mans house at the same place;
the latter was blown down by a squall in August
and the former was nearly entirely rotten; this work
was done by P. C. Mujan and two prisoners.
A kadjang house for Kim Hock the 2nd clerk has
been erected during the month: this house is of the
same style as built by the Borneo Company here for
their clerks and is of a neat appearance; it has been
built in line with 3 others ana faces the end of the
Government and Hospital grounds; a supply of water
can also be obtained from the pipes at this and the
other houses.
Dr. Bruce Low was in the district from the 4th
to 7th, 11th to 14th, 18th to 20tb, 25th to 28th.
The prisoners have been employed on water
works and keeping the roads in repair, the gang is
smaller than it has been for many months.
E. R. STILWELL,
Resident Upper Sarawak.
LAwas.
A ugust.
I went to Brooketon on the 3rd instant where I
remained until the 10th instant to meet Mr. Ricketts.
A rough track has been cut through the secondary
growth from the bazaar to Pangaleh, upriver, which
will be useful to Muruts living there and in the
mountains who do not possess boats. The Chinese
contributed towards the small expenditure.
A shooting affray occurred at Udas in the upper
waters, a Lawas Murut being shot dead by some per-
sons unknown who fled in the direction of the upper
Trusan river. The relations of the deceased stated
their wish to avenge his death. The matter has
been referred to the Resident of the district who will
make inquiries in Trusan.
I visited Marapok station from the 25th to the
29th instant when the launch arrived there with
Mr. Ricketts and the relief guard, and I returned to'
Sloateng.
The launch left next morning for Brooketon with
the returning guard.,
The imports and exports were $4,359 and $3,910
respectively.
The rainfall for the month was 2.46 inches only.
IVONE KIRKPATRICK,
Officer in Charge.
September.
I arrived here by the s. 1. Gazelle on the 15th and
acting under instructions took over the cash and
books of the station from Mr. Kirkpatrick.
Mr. Kirkpatrick left for Brooketon on the 17 th
en-route for Kuching, having obtained short leave
of absence.
Mr. Ricketts, who was at the station for the early
part of the month, left for Limbang on the 3rd.
In the Court there were few cases demanding
special remark.
One Burut who eloped in July last from Punang
to Batu-Batu with his step daughter, returned to-
wards the beginning of the month. On the 10th be
was charged with the offence, and admitting his guilt,
was with the concurrence of the Native Officer Haji.
Usop fined 100.
Haji. Usop of Trusan visited the river during the
month to settle any Native Court matters that
might be brought forward.
On the 26th, the occasion of His Highness the-
Rajah Muda's birthday, the Offices were closed for
the day.
It has been impossible to progress much further
with the new road, the Malays and Kadyans refus-
ing to work for a daily wage, notwithstanding that
the rate of pay is higher here than in most places
in Sarawak. For contract work they demand an
exorbitant amount.
A small contract was however given out for the
cutting of a rentis for the whole length which the
proposed road will take round the cattle ground and
passing through the Kadyan village on the Sloateng
stieam.
A contract was made with a Chinese carpenter
to finish the new Police Barracks; they are to be
revdy for occupation by the end of October.
The month was particularly dry for the first half
and this following on the slight rainfall for August
caused the wells to run very low. The total fall for
the month was 10.33 inches.
The imports amounted to $4,579 and the exports
to $5,740.
A. B. WARD, Acting Officer in Charge.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 2, 1907.
254
BARAM.
September.
On the 3rd Mr. and Mrs. Hewitt arrived from Kuching in order to see the Kayans and Kenyahs in the Baram. Mr. Hewitt also collected a number of specimens of insects and plants, etc.
On the 6th Mr. Chynoweth, accompanied by Tuanku Hamid, started on a trip up the Tinjar. He went right up as far as the Long Pokun village in the Dapoi, and returned again to the Fort on the 20th, having heard several cases and collected outstanding tax, fines and debts amounting to about $500 (five hundred dollars.)
Mr. Chynoweth reported that all was quiet up the Tinjar, and that the people were still clearing their farms.
On the 12th Bulieng, the Leppu Aga chief, arrived from Silat. He reported that in accordance with the orders of the Resident Mr. Douglas, all the Leppu Agas have moved to the-mouth of the Silat, with the exception of a few people who have had bad omens and have therefore ut off their moving till after the harvest. He also gave me a detailed account of the death of Ludan, a Long Sibatu, who was killed by a gunshot wound in the Silat last December, about which I have written to Your Highness under another cover.
On the 13th I received news from Tama Kuleh Arran and Tama Uka Tanjit, Leppu Tan chiefs, to the effect that they had sent people to order Tama Itang Gaieng and the other Dayaks in the Ulu Silat to return down-river, as in accordance with Government instructions, but that the latter however refused to obey.
On the 20th P. C. Jupong left for the Silat with letters to the Kenyah chiefs telling them to assist him in bringing down to the Fort all the Dayaks in that river, as the standing orders are that on no pretext whatever are Dayaks allowed to go further up the Baram than the mouth of the Silat.
On the 24th the Revd. Father Jansen arrived to make arrangements about re-opening the mission, which event will probably take place at the end of the landas.
On the 27th Tuanku Hamid paid a short visit to Miri. He reports that the Miris will have the framework of the Mosque up in a day or two ami that nothing of importance was brought before him.
Court.There have been very few cases in either Police or Debt Court during the month.
P. IF. D.The prisoners have been employed in building a new cattleshed, the framework of which is nearly finished.
The coolies have been clearing out the ditches.
Shipping.P. 8. Kaka paid three much needed trips to this station during the month. In spite of this rice has already gone up in price and should we not have another trip of the steamer, it will soon be selling at exorbitant prices.
The rainfall for the month was 3.75 inches.
On the 20th I regret to report that news was brought to me of the death of Linggir, Penghulu of the Dayaks in the Bakong. Linggir was not very old and was only ill for a couple of days.
I have nothing further of importance to report to Your Highness.
T. 8. KING.
A ssistant Resident.
SIMAnggang.
September.
Mr. .H. L. Owen returned on the 1st from holding the inquiry into the theft of Government money at Fort Lili, Betong. He obtained sufficient evidence
to warrant the arrest of the Kuching Malay servant Abeng who was then remanded and eight days later tried and sentenced to two years R. I. Two Fortmen were dismissed from the Saribas force for carelessness and slackness in their duty. I regret that the money stolen ($100) ic not forthcoming.
Ulu Ai affairs.On the 2nd Mr. Owen left for Lubok Antu for the proposed Peace-making. On the same day. a few hours later. Penguin Dimpi arrived at Simanggang and reported the murder of two of his peoplea woman and her daughter, whose heads were takenin the ulu Layer, Saribas, on August 28tb. The raiding party, it is said, consisted of twelve Dyaks lead by Simpai (anak Jap, of Apai Biti's house) who is described as anak Sudara Ngumbang.
I asked P. Dimpi to go up to Lubok Antu after Mr. Owen so that he might meet Bantin and the other tuai and confront them with his story but he excused himself from doing so on the ground that his country was in a very disturbed state owing to the last two raids that had been made there.
Concerning the Peace-making I need only mention it concisely as Mr. Owen has written a special report to Your Highness. Bantin declared that he had permission from Your Highness to demand jars from the down-river Dyaks Which were to be paid him before the ceremony took place! Those Dyaks who were present indignantly refused to pay any such fines to Bantin, or to any Ulu Ai, but they consented to an exchange of jars (besundang) as has hitherto been their custom in this river.
Bantin stated that he had no intention of moving into the Rejang. There are a large number of Rejang Dyaks in the Ulu who have not expressed any desire to make peace or return to the Rejang.
The Peace-making having fallen through (owing entirely to Bautins statement) Mr. Owen returned to Simanggang on the 8th. Later on in the month on the 20thPenguin Sliof Ulu Skaang reported that Kudis house of 3 doors had been attacked by Galah of Delok Lalang and that 10 men, women, and children had been slain and their heads taken. The enemy lost two men.
Kudi, Salleh, and four other houses, were the p-ople who had paid the fines demanded from them by Kamba (who threatened them with Apai Biti's force) and no doubt they considered that they had purchased their immunity from the enemy.
These murders, which are said to have been carried out in a most treacherous manner, Galahs following actually living in the bouse of their victims and assisting them on their farm, took place whilst Bantin and the Ulu Ai Chiefs were meeting Mr. Owen and the down-river loyal Chiefs at Lubotc Antu. It seems hardly possible to suppose that the Ulu Ai Chiefs were ignorant that some of their head-hunting parties were out when they went to Lubok Antu to make peace.
I sent P. S. Samsudin up to Ulu Skarangto make inquiries about this last butchery together with P. Sh and also, if possible, to get hold of Ramba who is said to be still in the ulu Skarang and to have actually married there.
Ou the 25th 1 left for Lubok Antu in order to relieve Mr. la Chard who had been there upwards of 2 months.
Murder near Betong Saribas.Before I left for Lubok Antu the news of the murder of the Chinese pepper coolie See Cheng was brought and an inquiry opened at Betong on 23rd by Mr. Owen, whilst I interrogated at Simanggang a Dyak whom I had ordered to be arrested.
The murderers beat the unfortunate coolie to death and then burned his house on the top of him to hide all traces. However, the fire failed to do as.
255	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 2, 1907.
they desired and the body was not even singed so it was easy to see how he had been murdered.
The inquiry is being proceeded with and one man is under arrest.
Miscellaneous matters.Messrs. Lang and Patnell arrived at Simanggang on the 21st, the latter to audit.
I regret to report that on the night of the 12th during a very violent storm which drowned all other noises, the two Secret Society Chinese prisoners, Tan Man and Jee Koon Hee, made a most daring escape from Simanggang Jail by breaking through two bilian walls and one bilian outside fence. They stole the small Government beda and got clear away to sea, and have, I believe, made for Kuching. I sent P. C. Jinggan to Kuching in hopes of his being able to meet them.
An inquiry was held in the Simanggang Court concerning the death of a small Balau Dyak boy. It transpired that some small urchins were throwing spears at a marka tree stump of hard woodand one of the spears glanced off and wounded the boy standing a little distance away in the abdomen so badly that he died in a few hours. A peti nyawa was ordered to be paid the deceaseds father.
The Chinese Shop-keeper, Go Cheng Wha of Si- mauggang died some weeks ago in China and his Estate was valued for Probate.
The prisoners were employed chiefly in pulling enykudok on the cattle lands, and in cleaning and repairing the Sembanh road.
D. J. S. BAILEY.
Resident.
MUKA.
September.
General.The s. s. Alice Lorraine stopped outside the bar, far out to sea, at 6 A. M. on the 3rd. and the barong was sent out to her at once with the returning squad of Kongers for Kuching. The Alice Lorraine was so far away that the barong did not return to the Fort until 8.45 A. M.
Owing to an exceptionally long drought, there has been great scarcity of water here for some time now. but on the 14 th, after several cloudy days, heavy ram fell, and there has been more since, so that the wells are now filling up again. Fever also is not so prevalent now as it was while the drought continued.
The fruit season up river here has been particularly good this year.
The 26th was observed as a public holiday, and the flagstaff dressed, in honour of Your Highness' birthday.
Tua Kampong Abai of Balingean, and the Chinese traders there, complain of the overbearing conduct of two men named Drahman and Ajak, sons of P. C. Mohamat. Apparently neither T. K. Abai norP. C. Mohamat hasmuch control over these two men, who seem to do pretty well as they like at Balingean. Against P. C. Mohamat himself, who has been working there for about 18 years, there is no complaint whatever.
Chin Guan, the second clerk, who left here for Kuching on sick leave on August 21st, is not yet back, and I hear from him that he is not likely to be able to return to duty here for some time yet.
Court The Court of Bequests has not been very busy, but more cases than usual have been heard in the Police Court.
Fines, mostly inflicted in the Malay Court, together with fees amounted to $571.75.
P. IT. D.Work on roads has employed the prisoners during most of the month. They have raised and put in order the road from the Fort past the bazaar, and almost completed the path from S.
Tillian to the new road made last month behind the back bazaar. This opens up a lot more land, some suitable for fruit and cocoanut plantations, and some for padi.
The prison gang also made one new well, and deepened and cleaned the old ones. Their progress has Ijeen somewhat slow, as there were not many prisoners in jail, and the health of those that were there was not so good as it generally is.
Trade.Less sago than usual has been exported lately because of the drought. It is only within the last few days that there has been enough water in the side streams to float sago logs out of the jungle, and the traders are relying mostly on their reserve stores of sago for shipment to Kuching. However, now that the rain has come, more will soon be available.
Thirteen schooners entered the river during September, and 16 cleared. The export of raw sago was 300 coyans, and of jelutong gutta 370 piculs.
There is nothing else of interest to report to Your Highness for the past month.
A. E. LAWRENCE,
Hexident 2nd Class.
BINTULU.
September.
Court.The work has been lighter than usual there being fewer cases both in the Police and Debt Court and these mostly of a trivial nature.
General.It having been reported to me that some cattle were living on the coast at Sungei Mas I went there on the 11th and found tracks of about three head on the sands, they arc said to be very wild and only come out at night, and at daytime remain in the jungle which is exceptionally thick there.
These cattle may have got away from the Government herd when it was on that side of the river, but the people here say that a bull and a cow escaped from the herd of one Jeragan Usop 30 years ago and that these are their descendants.
The drought broke up on the 13th and since then it has rained daily.
The s. s. Sarawak came in on the 13th and left again on the 15th; she took out a cargo of 947 piculs of gutta jelutong and 64 of rubber : it was a blessing when the jelutong had gone as at night when the land breeze blew from the bazaar the smell was almost unbearable.
A large Tringanow prabu came in on the 22nd loaded with salt; her original intention had been to go to Kuching but she met heavy winds and was blown North of Labuan and had been a month at sea; she left again on the 28th having sold 8 tons of salt.
Messrs. Johnson and Pope arrived on the 36th from Tatau where they had been prospecting for minerals apparently with poor luck, they intend to return to Kuching by the first steamer.
Penghulu Merdan left here for Simanggang; he says his intention is to bring back his mother and her followers if allowed, he formerly had permission to do this.
P. IF. D.The prisoners have been employed in repairing the bazaar road and bridges.
E. A. W. COX,
Resident.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 2, 1907.
259
OYA.
September.
Court.There have been very few cases indeed in the Police Court either at Oya or Dal at but the work in the Court of liequests at Dalat has been as heavy as usual, while at Oya there has been practically nothing at all doing.
I went up-river to Dalat on the 11th returning on the 23rd, and during this time some 500 was paid into the Court of Requests; this was quite exceptional, and besides this a large number of payments were reported as having been made to creditors out of Court.
Some trouble was experienced in obtaining men from the Hud for the return journey owing to T. K. Taliaps refusing to turn out in the heavy rain at the time. We were kept waiting for a couple of hours and Taliap was subsequently fined for this.
Public Works.The gang of prisoners has been very small owing to sickness among the men. some seven to ten men being down with fever daily during the hot weather.	They have been employed in fulling down the old house until lately used by Hj. Taha and in stowing any of the wood that may be of any use later on. The house was in a very tumbledown condition. They have also laid in a stock of fire-wood and have been busy with the general up-keep of roads and grounds. The kadjang roof of the newtemoihas been lowered by about a foot it being much too high; the boat was consequently unsteady and, on wet days, driving rain swept through the boat from side to side soaking all the men who were paddling and making things generally uncomfortable. All the boats have been repaired and are being painted.
General.The s. s. Sarawak made two trips during the month taking away her usual cargoes of Raw Sago each time. On her last trip she brought a quantity of rice for Government. This rice is for distribution among the Government employees during the N. E. Monsoon thus rendering them entirely independent of the Bazaar supply which almost invariably runs short during the rough weather when prices are exorbitant. This arrangement gives general satisfaction.
The Government landing stage collapsed in part during the discharging of the steamer, the bi Ilian posts having been completely eaten through by the capang. This stage was built very many years ago and will require to be entirely rebuilt, so arrangements have been made for a supply of billian posts from Medong and the work will be put in hand as soon as they arrive.
The 26th being the anniversary of His Highness the Rajah Mudas Birthday the flagstaff was dressed and the Court and Offices closed.
An excellent supply of fish has been obtained with the Government seine net which is in constant use. Fish are plentiful along this coast and there being but few similar nets in the Kampongs the Government net obtains a very fair share.
Large numbers of gahat trees are being felled and cut into lengths which are afterwards formed into large rafts and anchored in rows extending for some miles in the lower reaches of the river. When, after some four weeks, the Temelok worm has worked its way into the wood the rafts are towed
away up-river to the fresh water where the wom.s fatten and finally, the logs being full of these worms, sink to just underneath the surface of the water. The logs are then removed as required and split, and the worms, which are in appearance not unlike boiled macaroni, shaken out. These worms are considered a luxury by the natives and are eaten both raw and with asarn. One finds them absolutely tasteless and cannot understand why they are so sought after by the natives of the District.
Weather.The prolonged drought broke up at last on the 10th and since then there has been heavy and continuous rain which has done an immense deal of good. Drinking water has been unobtainable in the up-river Kampongs and a good deal of sickness and several deaths have been the result. The advent of the rain at once put a stop to this. Towards the end of the month the salt water of the river at Dalat gave place to fresh and the vast collection of rubbish consisting of sago leaves, logs of both wood and sago, branches and filth which has been floating up and down the river past the Kampongs during the drought making boating both difficult and unpleasant was swept out to sea. The Hud stream, both banks of which are lined with the sago workers huts, etc., and where sago has of course been worked as regularly as usual, stunk horribly owing to the deposit of sago refuse which choked its course, and at low water it was almost impossible for a European to proceed owing to the fearful smell, five minutes exposure to which will turn ail silver, brass or white metal black. The downpour this month fortunately cleaned out this ditch most thoroughly.
The garden at Oya has now recovered from the effects of the unusual spell of hot weather though several of the Pinangs died off altogether and the grass is still bare in one or two places.
Cattle.The herd now number 43 head and are in excellent condition. One cow died during the month. The flock of sheep do not appear to do much good here, there are now 16 of them in all. They consume a considerable amount of paddy every month but do not seem to get at all fat on it.
Trade.Numbers of the natives are now busy working Gutta Serapat for which a very fair price is obtainable now. This Gutta appears to consist mostly of Jelutong mixed with other Guttas. The export of raw sago amounted to 377 coyans as against 3661 coyans during September of last year.
The total export of fine sago will probably exceed that of coarse sago which used to be worked some years ago.
Now, as one sago palm produced say 10 pasus of coarse sago it takes two palms of the same size to produce the same quantity of fine sago as worked at present, so it will be seen that practically double the number of palms are felled now in order to make the export equal in bulk that of 1902 when coarse sago was exported. Old plantations have been extended to a certain extent but unless new lands are soon planted either the price of sago will go up or the export will decrease in the next few years.
DONALD A. OWEN,
Resident*
257
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 2, 1907.
The Sarawak Gazette.
THE Subscription to the Sarawak Gazette is as follows .	*
Payable in local currency
Single number ...	...	... SO. 10
Subscription for 1 year	...	... 1.00
Do including postage to Outstation ...1
Do	do	to Singapore 1 1.50
Do	do	to England	... I
Payable in Sterling
For 1 year (including postage to places
in the Postal Union) ... 3s. fid.
All Subscription payable in
alliance.
Yearly subscriptions are renewable on the 1st January.
Subscriptions will not be renewed unless due notice is given. All broken periods will be considered as full.
Subscribers are requested to notify changes of address to the Editor in writing.
... S1.00
... 0.50
... 0.25
... 2.00
... 1.00
... 0.50
... 3.00
... 1.00
... 0.75
standing adver-
rates of advertisements in the Sarawak gazette"
?-
Payable in advanve
Advertisement of 12 lines and under
First insertion
Second and third insertion each
Subsequent do	do
Advertisement of half a Column and under
First insertion ...
Second and third insertion each
Subsequent do do
Advertisement of a Column and under
First insertion each
Second and third insertion each
Subsequent do	do
Special arrangements may be made for
tisements.
All communications intended for insertion
in the	O'wsrffr must be directed
to the Editor at the Government Printing
Office, Kuching, and sent so as to reach the
Office by the 26th of the month at latest or
their publication will have to be deferred
until the next issue.
Letters and other contributions must be
authenticated by writers name sent privately
to the Editor.
We cannot undertake to return rejected
communications, or to give reasons for not
inserting them.
Residents at the Outstations will confer an
obligation by forwarding to the Office early
intelligence of all matters of general interest
in their respective neighbourhoods.
Notice-
'
/ * ENTLEMEN ore requested to pay all Gazette sub- scriptions and Printing Office Bills to the undersigned in future.
For the convenience of those unable to send cheques, Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of sums not over $1.50but only the 2 and 4 cent values will bo accepted.
Foreign subscribers to the Sarawak Gatetie are requested to send remittances by Post Office Order not by Postal Order " as the latter cannot be cashed in Sarawak.
F. G. DAY.
Notice.
?
Astana Farm Produce.
Terms Monthly.
W ILL be supplied to customers at the following rates;
Milkper quart bottle ..	... 10 cent*
Butterper	...	... 80 Eggseach lj
Orders, which should be addressed to the undersigned, at tended to without delay.
J. STAPLES,
Notice.
THE WELL KAOWA
Singer and Wheeler fc Wilson Sewing Machines can be purchased on easy terms. All we ask is 5 dollars down and 8 dollars per mouth.
A liberal discount allowed for Cash.
Apply to
TAN BOON SIFAV,
Agent,
SINGER SEWING MACHINE Co., C/o SYN HIN LEONG & Co
Kuching, Sarawak.
28th March, 1907.
NOTICE.
?
NOTICE is hereby given that a Share Certificate of the SARAWAK AND SINGAPORE STEAMSHIP COMPANY, LD. in the name of MOLASSAH MAHOMAT KASSIM fc Co. for five shares numbered 3,387 to 3,391 has been missing for some time pastIf this Certificate be not produced within three months from date it will be accounted null and void and a new Certificate will be issued.
THF. BORNEO COMPANY, LIMITED
AGENTS FOR
THE SARAWAK AND SINGAPORE STEAMSHIP CO. LD.
Kuching, Sarawak, 30th September, 1907.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 2, 1907.
258
Knelling, Foreign Trade Returns for me month of Sept. 1907.
IMPORTS.
IMPORTS.(Continued.)
Articles,
Quantity.
Value.
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
Brought forward Prawns
piculs
66
9287,046
1.546
8
Do Refuse
picnls
2,679
9,519
Aerated Water ...
caseH
141
1,640
Rubber seeds and Plants
280
Ammunition
286
Rickshaws	...
21
Arrack, etc	410
Rope
Biscuits
5,781
Coir
.la
818
Blachan
piculs
11
111
Manila Wire
1 coils
6
320
Blankets
41
coils
a
920
Beads...
245
Sago Pearl or Raw
1 picul
1
12
Brass A Copper-ware
1,250
Salt ...
picnls
934 1,837
Boots A Shoes ...
239
Silver ware
450
Butter & Cheese...
386
Soap ...
1,210
Candles
496
Stationery and Books
1,600
Canvas
503
Straw hats (Chinese)
107
Cement
trt
270
1.264
Straw Shoes (Chinese)
86
Clocks and Watches
25
Sugar
piculs
1,581
9,628
Cloth
Sundries
1
Cotton
46.135
Tea in Bundles ...
boxes
191
2.090
Silk
1,310
Ten in Tins
256
Clothing
Timber
3.408
Cotton
9.800
Twine and Thread
1.906
Silk
A
125
Tobaccos
Coal ...
tons .
so
640
in tins Cigars A Cigarettes
18,791
Coke ...
tons
30
555
Chinese
cases
125
4,907
-'Cocoanuta
No.
17,170
..i is
Pbang Java A Srobok etc.
1 picnls
157
9,828
Coffee
Bad or Pepper
picnls
138J
8,470
Liberian etc....
piculs
49
1.193
Treasure
114,600
In Uns
48
Trepang
piculs
4
JOO
Coprah
piculs
558
4.460
Tuba ...
1.
374
Corrugated Iron ...
703
V cgetables
Cotton Seed
615
ITrcsH	?
1,837
Crockery & Glass-ware
6.791
1,402
Salted
I
8,136
Curry stuffs A Sauce etc.
In tins	...
SB
Damar
251
Wayang Effects ...
*
1,81X1
Drugs and Chemicals
8.274
Wines and spirits
11,794
Dynamite
Eggs (salted)
cases
2
100
Zinc ...
1	?
616
10,440
Exports Returned to Shippers
075
TOTAL VALUE
.$491,067
Eire-arms
1	77
Brought forward
8,248,841
Fire-works
585
.
Fish
Total Value to Date
3,734.908
Dried
piculs
157
8,148
1906 ?3.642.852
Salted
piculs
56
702
In tins
1,027
EXPORTS.
Flour...	...	...
Fruit
1.697
3,488
Articles.
Quantitx.
Value.
Fresh	...	...
1,207
Dried
3,132
In tins
521
Ant-eater-skins ...
piculs
It
68
Furniture
689
Betel-nuts
piculs
46H 1,920
Ghee ...
piculs
10
932
Bees-wax
piculs
" j
406
?Gold ...
oz.
36
1,200
Birds-nests
picnls
i
1.985
Grains
Blachan
piculs
15i
90
Beans and peas
piculs
486
8,167
Brass-ware	...
catties
846
ladi	piculs
1,341
2.449
Camphor
1 1-
2.545
Rice
piculs
18.571
84,328
Charcoal
picnls
418 296
Other Sorts...
piculs
1.395
2.800
Cloth ...
piculs
409
Gunnies new
bales
48
4,470
Coffee (Liberian) 47
940
Do old
bundles
152
1,649
Coprah
piculs
801
6,780
Hams and Bacons
86
Crockcry-ware ...
piculs
571
Hats ...	...	...
486
Cutch
420
2.045
Iron-ware
8,172
Damar
piculs
218 801
Japanese Curios ...
550
Eggs (Turtle)
No.
50,000
880
Jars ...
11
15
Empties
piculs
1,658
Jewellery
400
Fish ...
885 5,216 7.813
Joss Sticks and Papers
2,038
Gambier
piculs
1.183 Kerosine Oil
cases
4.6654
1 1. D S
Garrn-wood
picnl
1
28
Lard ..
picnls
140
3.481
Gold ...
ozs.
7,639
- 141.400
Lamps
780
Gutta jangkar
piculs
181 2,636
Leather
piculs
10
670
do Jelotong ...
piculs
7,258 86,292
Live stock
do percha
picnls
70 7,581
Cattle
heads
5
2.200
Hides
Imiiorts Returned to Shippers India Rubber
piculs
301
615
Poultry ...
No.
466
255
I .	2,779
heads
106
2,180
piculs
848 45,831
Other kinds...
11 :l 1 ii
7.080
Iron-ware	...	..J
560
Machinery
3,199
Kajangs	...	...1
78
81
Mats 1,548
Kerosine Oil
217
Matches
cases
137
2,863
Laka wood
picnls
392 1,295
Maccaroni A Vermicelli
1,189
Matches
cases
Hi
188
Milk Condensed ...
eases
225
1,946
Mats ...
873
Motor Launch ...
No.
1
2.500
Machinery
812
Oils ...
picnls
391
6.917
N. H. Specimens...
piculs
155
Opium raw	...	...
chests
10
9,500
Oils ...
65
Paint, Varnish A Tor
3,097
Pearl sago
picnl
3
Papers
2,419
Pepper (white) ...
Do (black) ...
picnls
12.722 295,804
Provisions Sundry
1,977
piculs
883
12,861
Carry forward ...
287,046
Carry forward ...
582,195
259
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 2, 1907
EXPORTS.(Contin tied.)
SHIPPING.
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
Arrivals.
Brought forward
Prawns (dried) ...
Battans No. 1 sega etc.
Rattans No. 2 temoi etc.
Rice ...
Sago flonr	...	...
Salt ...
Sugar...
Sugar nipa
Sundries
Timber
Timber (manufactured)
Tobacco
Java
Treasure
Trepang
W.iyang effects ...
Zinc
picul	j
picul	piculs	1,086
piculs	497
piculs 27,944 piculs	11
piculs	15 piculs	158 piculs	6]
piculs	8
5883,195 12
2,852 2.483
80,201 17
105 470
2,009
44
852
5.200 200
1,500 147
VESSEL'S NAME.
FLAG.
ANU Rio.
j
CAPTAINS on NACODAH.
FROM.
s
?
8
8
3
4
1
5
8
10
12
14
14
14
14
16
T. K. Batu Arang Kim Seng Guan Hajah of Sarawak Kaka
Soon Srng Haff Kian Moh
Sri Marion
Adch
Alice Lorraine Sarawak Kuching
1 Kaka Sarawak Kun Chin Trek
\ Sin Stan Ann
, Sri Pembrian Kim Chin Soon
Snr. sch.
str.
sob.
str.
sch.
64
73 892 222
71
66
HO 189 140
46
W8
46
51
50 79 59
Allan Sait Moxon Bandong A. Yanian Seman
Jcman Jara-ee	1
Hj. Mat Waddell Bandong Hj. Mat Hj. Assim
Abg. Sap-ei Hj. Sa-at
Sadong Mutu Singapore Baram Sadong Oya Sadong Sibu Liinbang Oya Singapore Baram M uka
Oya Sadong Muka
TOTAL VALOR
Brought forward
5677.798
4,822,849
Total Value to Date ...	...	5,000.647
16
' Kim Haff Ann
67
HO
Husin J ahar
Sadong
1906	...	... $4,928,816
17
17
17
18
18
18
21
21
21
22
24
25
27
28
28
29
81
batahorrahmaii Hajah of Sarawak
' Adeh
M. N. Sri Jempaka Kim Chin Siang Soon Seng B'aff
? T. K. Batu Arang Putri Dungun
? Sarawak
1 Kuching
1 Kaka
? Kian Moh
\ Sarawak . Sri Marion j Sri Pembrian ! Kim Seng Guan
Hajah of Sarawak
str.
sch.
str.
str.
sch.
,. str.
Hj. Husin Moxon .Ie man Tku. Hassan Daud A. Yanian Allan Deli Hj. Mat Bandong [ Waddell 1 Bandoug
Seman Hj. Mnt .Tahar Abg. Sap-ei Sait Moxon
? Oya Singapore
? Sibu i Oya ! Muka
Sadong
Daro Bintulu Limbang Singapore Lingga Oya
Tiuul Muka Sadong
Mutu Singapore-
Knching. Coasting TraOlnmsfor the month of Sept. 1907.
IMPORTS.
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
Coal
Damar	...	...
Gutta Jangkar ...
tons	1,011
piculs	537
picnls	127
$
8,08 1.916 1,249
Gutta Jelotong ... Gutta Percha India Rubber Penper Iwhite) ... do (black)
Rattans No. 1 sega etc.
Do No. 2 temoi etc.
Bice ...
Sago flour
Do raw
Sundries	...
Treasure
TOTAL VALVE Brought forward
piculs	9.231 piculs	964
piculs	284
picnls	1.081 piculs	120 piculs	715 picnls	758 picnls	100
piculs	1,747 t'pins 100,150
s s x s ? c -7 ?i
Departures.
z
VESSEL'S NAMK.
FLAG
AND RIG.
CAPTAINS OR NAKODAS.
FOR.
1 1
8
6
1 Kuching Sarawak Kun Chin Soon Kaka Adeh
a.im Seng Guan 1 Soon Seng IVaff . Sri Pembrian
Sar. str.
sch.
,, str.
sch.
903
46
59
189
78
71
79
Waddell Hj. A. Mat Hj. Sa-at Bandong Jeiuan
? Sait 1 A. Yanian
Abg. Sap-ee Jahar Moxon Jara-ee Allan Hj. A Mat Hj. Ali Seman
I Bandoug 1 Waddell 1 Hj. A. Mat Gani j Abg. Sapc-ee
J email Hj. Assim Daud Hj. Sa-at Husin A. Yonian Moxon B mdong Hj. A Mat Tku. Hassan Hj. Husin
Singapore Oya Muka Baram Sibu Matu Sadong
5200.817
1,515,768
Total Value to Date ...
1906
1,716,585
8
9
10
10
10
11
15
15
16
19
19
19
20
21
21
21
23
28
28
23
28
29
29
29
81
Sri Marion Hajah of Sarawak Alice Lorraine T. K. Batu Arang Sarawak Jah Hanee Kian Moh Kaka Kuching Sarawak Sin Sian Ann Sri Pembrian Sri Marion Adeh Kim Chin Tcck Kim Chin Siang Kim Chin Soon Kim Watt Ann Soon Seng Watt Hajah of Sarawak Kaka Sarawak M. N. Sri Jempaka batahorrahman Putri Dungun Kaka
Kuching Sri Marion Kian Moh
str.
sch. str. ,, sch.
str.
., sch.
str. sch.
str.
* sch.
str.
sch.
80 892 140
64 46
66 222 908
46 50
80 189
51
59 67
.-12 222
73 101
1 Singapore ' Lingga ' Sadong
Muka
1 Sibu
1 v"
I .unhang Singapore Bintulu Oya Sadong
Singapore Muka
Sadong
; Singapore Lingga Tatau Oya
Duro
I,ini bang Singapore .Sadong
Oya
$1,548,040
EXPORTS.
Articles.	Quantity.
Value.
Brass-ware Don-ware Jars ... Oil Kerosine
Opium
Sundries Treasure
TOTAL VALVE Brought forward
Total Value to Date ...
No.	113
cases	2,141
piculs	6,806 $
662 1,501 1,878 5,507 10,440 33.479 95.739 17,090
1906	... I
$165,796
972,628
1.188,419
222 Hiuidong
9074 Waddell 1
HO Jahar
66 Seman
$1,114,750
C. C. ROBISON, Begietrar of Trade.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 2, 1907.
SCO
Arrivals.
DATE.
NAME OF VESSEL.
NAME OF CAPTAIN.
WHERE FROM.
CHINESE.
NATIVES, OF INDIA- Halt. F.-valt
t OTHER ASIATICS.
TOTAL.
1 Auto- .
Malt.
Fetult-
1907. 1
Boat
Sulleh
P. Srasan
! 2
1
3
4
S. S. Alice Lo'iaine
Jara-ee
Brooketon
4
4G
1.,
63
1 5
S. S. llajah of Santwak
E. T. Moxon
Singapore
68
2
4 ...
8
1
83
5
Boat
Maii. L'sop
Skawang
1
1
Dol
P. B'guran
7
M	9
Item
Pamangkat
1
i
Bandong ,
Lee Chin Loong
Pamangkat
*3
3
..	13
I S. S. hitching
W. Waddell
Singapore
68
4
i
13
2
88
, 13
Bandong
Lai Leong Hin
Pamangkat
2
1
3
14
Bdg. Bandar Lane	...
Tan Seng
I'auiungkut
8
1 2
"2
1
8
.. 1 19
S. S. llajah. of Sarawak
E. T, Moxon
Singapore
60
1
"B
9
76
..	32
I S, S. .1/ c! Lorraine
Jara-na
Brookoton
2
2 ... ;
0
9
26
S. S. Kuching
W. Wiiddell
Singapore
74
G
19 . .
1 12
111
j 28
Bandung	...
Stam
P. S'rasan
: 2
?
_	1
284
16
32 ...
1 108
I 18
458
Departures.
DATE.
NAME OF VKSSA. a
BO VXD. CHINESE.
NATIVES OTHER OF INDIA.!ASIATICS. I
TOTAL.
JJ.,:.-	1
ruidtfc.
Male. Ftaatt.
Sept. 2
Bandong
... Chun Cheok Hee ] Skawang
K
1
6
J
S. S. Kitching
W. Waddell	Singapore
156
is :::
181
6
Bdg. Si I Bug man
... Matsi ?	P. Bguran
4 11
Q
7
,, Xornuihuiiicd
... Abliliidi	Skawang
1 ...1
1
10
S. S. llajah of Sarawak
.. E. T. Moxon	Singapore
96
"2
; :::
4
108
., i 12
Bo nt
.. Matus p	Pontianak
1 ...
14
S. S. Alice Lorraine
.. Jam - Brooketon
j
11:::
19 ...
1	22
17 1
, S. S. Kuching
\V. Waddell	: Singapore
97
"2
6 ...
13	1
118
,, 1 19 1 Boat
... Jibuti	? Sambas
2	1
3
:: las
1 Bandong
... Lee tnin Loong Pamaiigkati
... E. T. Moxon	Singapore
12
"3
15
..	24
1 S. S. llajah of Sarawak
1 4
6
15 ...
"7 2
134
.) 7
Bandung
S. S. Alice Lorraine.
... Lai L-- mg Hin Pamangkat
9
2
11
28
.. 1 Jara-ee	.	Brooketon
J
3 "*
8
130
Bdg. Bandar Lane
... Tan S-mg	Skawang (
-
2
488
1 19
81 ...
72 1 5
1	615
C. C. ROBISON.
i "'TV '/J-v-
ARRIVALS.
PER S. S. llajah of Sarawak:From Singapore. 3rd October. Dr. Barker, Mr. J. H. Brodie, Miss Hastie anti Miss Black.
PER 8. s. Sarawak: -From Tatau, Sth October, Messrs. .Johnson and Pope.
PER II. H. S. Zahora:From Sibu, 13th October, Mr. I. Kirkpatrick.
PER S. s. llajah of .Sarawak: From Singapore, 17th October, Mr. and Mrs. H. O. H. Etheridge and Mr. F. S. Odom.
PER p. s. Kaka:From Lingga, 24th October, Messrs. S. Cunynghame, H. la Chard and the Revd. W. Howe:!.
PER U. II. S. Zahora:From Sibu, 26th October, His Highness the Rajah Muda.
PER S. s. Rajah of Sarawak:- From Singapore, 31st October, Messrs. J. E. A. Lewis and H. H. Everett.
DEPARTURES.
PER s. 8. KuchingFor Singapore, 1st October, Mr. A, Cropley.
PER p. s. Adeh For Sibu, Gth October, Very Rcvd. Father E. Dunn.
PER S. s. llajah of Sarawak : --For Singapore, Sth October, Mr. H. Hogg.
PER S. S. Alice Lorraine .For Lingga, 9th October, Mr. S. Cunynghame.
PER S. S. KuchingFor Singapore, 15th October, Messrs. .1. E. A. Lewis and H. H. Everett.
PER p. s. Kaka :For Labuan, 15th October, Mr. and Mrs. Spampatii and Mr. Burt.
PER p. s. Adeh For Singapore, 20th October, Mr. P. Stewart and Mr. C. Lange.
PER S. S. llajah of Sarawak: -For Singapore, 22nd October, Miss Black.
PER p. s Kaka :For Brooketon and Limbang vid Sibu, 29th October, Mr. H. la Chard for Sibu, Mr. R Pawle and Mr. J. Scott for Labuan, Mr. I. Kirkpatrick for La was, Messrs. S. Cunynghame, E. Parnell and G. M. Allman for Limbang.
2G1
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 2, 1007.
METEOROLOGICAL READINGS.
KUCHING OBSEBVATOKY.
Observations Taken Daily al 8 a. in. October, 1907.
TEMPERATURE.	C
4	2
1 Date.
Barometer.
Maximum.
Minimum.
Q
Wet Bulb.
1
Wet Minimum.
Thermometer in the sun.
Remarks at 8 A.
?
, Rainfall in 24 ho
hrs. min.
1
30 04
87 6
71 1
79-3
, 772
70-3
140-9
Fine
3-30
33
2
86-06
85 4
721
754
746
71-7
154 G
Dull
. 5-20
3
30-03
887
73 I
80 4
; 770
724
148 1
Fine
8-50
. 348
4
3008
861
784
74 2
' 73-6
I 730
I486
rain
4 30
1	-05
o
30-07
82-1
731
1 ?? 753
726
1184
Dull
1 300
61
6
3010
87-2
721
77-9
71 9
1460
71o
5-30
35
7
30 07
87-3
731
I 731
72-4
72-3
154 0
du
7-30
8
30 04
84-7
721
758
74 0
71 7
131 4
do
1 4 10
07
9
30 05
87-4
719
1 796
75-9
71 5
? 150-6
Fine
7 00
15
10
3010
86 G
728
76 4
714
72-3
! 152-2
Dull
5.20
50
11
30.07
? 88-4
72 8
760
74 6
11 * 4
: 1638
do ?
4 40
1-20
12
3003
84 7
70.7
74-4
782
1 70-8
145-4
do
2-30
22
13
30 03
89-6
737
81 1
76 6
73-2
153 2
Fine
6-50
135
14
30 05
85-8
73-5
776
75-6
I 72-2
? 1422
Dull
6-30
03
15
30 03
88-4
70-4
76-6
74 4
! 70 3
153 0
Fine
4-40
406
16 I
29 98
89-5
734
76 3
74-6
: 72-3
158-0
do
5 10
1-45
17 1
3000
864
721
76-4
75-4
72-3
? 1364
Dull
400
18
30 03
85-5
73-4
77 3
75-2 1
1 73-3
157-3
Fine
3 10
15
19
30 05 :
87.2
737
77-8
75 4
733
153 8
do
4-50
20
30 02 ,
89-1
78-6
75-8
71-3
1 148-4
do
9 50
21
30 07
897
73-9
778
74-6
? 73 3
155 8
do
8 40
9Q
30 08
87-7
78 9
786
766
73 6
1501
do
5-20
23
3003 1
89 1
73 7 !
77.9
766
781
[ 155-6
Dull
7-30
24
30 00
86-7
741 !
78-2
75-6
7.3-8
153 8
Fine
400
30
25
30 03
83-5
71 4
77 3
756
? 70-8
144 7
Dull
4 30
26
30-07
89-5
731 ,
78-9
74 6
1 72-3
148.4
Fine
8-10
07
3010
84 3
741
SO G
i 766
73-7
150 4
do
5-10
11
28
30-07
881
726
80 8:
! 77 6
72 3,
146 3
do
310
08
29
30 07
88 4
730
76-6
74 9
' 72-5!
155 G
do
7-50
26
30
30-04
886
70-Q
78-8
75 4
72-6
154-8
do
6-30
10
31
30 02
85-7
73-4
79-1
764
731
1560
do
4-30
13
Highest temperature recorded 89 7 *F.
Ixiwest ,.	70 4 *F.
Total rainfall during the month 15.7 inches.
Height of observatory above sea level 100 feet approximately.
KVCHISG :Panted and Publish 1 by GUIN HEXO SOON. Government Print r, at the Sarawi'c Gui 3.to Office. No*. 19, 20, and 21, Court House Roa,.
