
VOL. XLIX.
No. 765.
Sarawak Gazette.
Price
KUCHING, MONDAY, MARCH 17, 1919. 10cents
CONTENTS.
Page.
Notes ...	...	... 66 The Silver Thimble" Fund ...	...	... 66
Tortoiseshell	....	...	...	... 66
The Rajah Charles Brooke Memorial Fund ...	... 67
Sarawak Library	...	...	...	67
Extracts from the Yearly Reports. (1918)	...	... 67
Bowls ...	...	67
Correspondence:Peace Celebrations	...	.. 67
Monthly Reports :SadongSadong CollierySibu	... 68 MukahBaran.	...	... 69
Passengers	...	...	...	... 71
Kuching Shipping	...	...	...	... 71
Miri Shipping	...	...	...	... 71
Almanac .,.	...	...	... 72
Rainfall ...	...	...	... 72,73
Meteorological Returns	...	...	... 73
SUBSCRIPTIONS to the Gazette are as follows:
The Sarawak Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
Single copy	...	...	...	.10 cents
Subscription lor one year	...	...	$2.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 2.25
Subscription including postage to all other
Countries.	...	...	2.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING
Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 5s. 10d
The Sarawak Government Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
Single copy	...	...	... .05 cents	Subscription for	one year	...	... $1.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 1.25
Subscription including postage to all other
Countries. 1.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING
Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 3s. 6d
Al) subscriptions are payable in advance and must
commence from the 1st January in each year on
which date they are renewable. All broken periods
will be considered as full.
Subscriptions will not lie renewed unless notice
of renewal given.
Changes of Address should be notified to the
Office in writing.
The Sarawak Gazette.
MONDAY, MARCH 17, 1919.
NOTES.
(March.)
S. S. Gladys left for Sibu on March 1st with passengers the Rev. Father Quadekker and Mr. T. A. Robarts.
S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore on March 6th. Passengers were the Honble. H. B. Crocker, the Rev. and Mrs. Hoover, the Rev. W. Linton, Miss A. Olver, Messrs, W. H, and J. S. Geikie, C. J. Cook and Lim Tee Chew,
The Rev. Linton is joining the staff of S. P. G. and later hopes to be stationed in the Second Division. Mr. Linton was at one time curate to the Venble. Archdeacon Sharp.
A European mail was brought.
S. S. Kuching left for Singapore on the 10th March. Passengers included the Venble. Archdeacon and Mrs. Small. Mrs. Swindell, Messrs. Lim Cheng Soon, Honda, Lim Tee Chew, Sim Keng Siak and Ng Swee Ing.
THE Rev. J. and Mrs. Hoover returned to Sibu on the 12th March by s. s. Alice Lorraine..
DRY rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah for the month of February amounted to 43,000 lbs.
IN future telegrams to and from Singapore will be transmitted at 3.35 p.m. instead of 4 p.m. as hitherto. Any telegrams received after this hour will be transmitted the next day.
ON April l0th an auction is to be held at Bruan, in the Matu district of some 200 head of cattle. Buyers will be allowed three months in which to remove their purchases.
66	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 17, 1919.
IT appears that forged five dollar notes are in circulation in this country and people should be on the look-out for them. They are very fair imitations and would easily deceive the unwary. The chief points of difference are to be found in the paper which has a different feel from the genuine article and the ink which is much lighter in colour in the forged note. Other minor points noticeable are the figures giving the number of the note which seem to be printed from smaller and defective type, the second E in the word Government is a full millimetre shorter than any ether letter in the word and the repeated phrase five dollars" in red seems to have been filled in by hand.
ON March 4th the Ladies of the Ranees dub were at home in the evening in their rejuvenated building. The proceedings, which started punctually at nine, were opened by an interesting display of conjuring and snake charming by some itinerant jugglers who have lately arrived in this country. The programme included the famous basket-trick, which was remarkably well done. The seance over, dancing and bridge were the order of the night, the former seeming to have the preference.
This most enjoyable party, which was in the nature of a farewell to the Honorary Secretary, terminated precisely at twelve to give the participants time to prepare for the rigours of Ash Wednesday.
The Silver Thimble Fund.
Already acknowledged
... $180 Dr. and Mrs. Greene
50
Miss Tait
10
Honble. G. C. Gillan
...	15
Mrs. Baring-Gould (for Sibu)
20
Miss Andrews
10
From Miri:
C. D. Adams
10
Dr. A. R. Andrew
10 1
Mrs. Andrew ...
10 1
J. J. Brooks
...	5 Dr. H. Cimino ...
10
Mrs. Cimino
10
Honble. R. S. Douglas
20
Mrs. Douglas ...
10
Capt. R. S. Gallien
10
Mrs. Gallien
10
H. Wyndham Jones
50
C. McAlpine
10
G. W. Roberts ...
10
G. R. Thomas ...
10
W. F. de V. Skrine
10
Total $480
Mrs. Kortright, Oya, Trinkets. Bishops House,
Kuching.
IRENE DANSON
Tortoiseshell.
?
The tortoiseshell of commerce consists of the
plates of the hawksbill turtle (Chelone imbricata),
at the present time a rare visitor to these coasts.
Not many years ago as many as forty or fifty shells
used to fall to the lot of the turtle-monopolists in
the course of a season, whereas at present the total
scarcely reaches double figures.
The islands of Talang-talang and Satang appear
to be this turtles favourite breeding-place, but its
capture has been reported further up the coast at
Mukah and Bintulu. It never reaches the size of
C. mydas, the common Sarawak turtle, and may be
readily recognised by its thirteen overlapping scales
which distinguish it from the smooth shell of the
latter.
The eggs, which are buried in the sand, are rather
smaller than the ordinary turtles eggs which are
sold in such quantities in the bazaars, but are
eagerly eaten by connoisseurs in such luxuries, a
fact which accounts for their increasing rarity.
As the shell becomes milky and cloudy (and so
valueless) if it is not immediately separated from
the carapace, the turtle is killed on capture and the
scutes (to give them their proper name) are re-
moved by immersing the whole shell in boiling water.
Another more cruel, expedient is first to rub the
shell with coconut oil and then to suspend the
beast over a slow fire made of coconut leaves; the
plates are then easily peeled off. The operation is
said to take little over a quarter of an hour and the
least heat possible is used. When this is finished
the unfortunate animal is coated with tar (as a
protection from sharks) and returned to its native
element. It is thought unlikely that the scutes are
ever renewed, hut no doubt the turtle continues to
propagate its kind.
As the local production is insufficient to meet
the demand shell is imported from the Natuna
Islands and from Dutch Borneo. By the custom
of the local market the whole thirteen plates, which
of course differ in size and colour, must be bought
together and no selection is allowed. The price
depends on the size, thickness and colour, and may
vary as much as from four dollars to thirty a katti.
A full sized shell brought to Kuching lately weighed
over three kattis, the largest scute being 12" by 8"
weighing 10 oz., and though not of particularly good
colour was sold for $40. A certain proportion of
weight is lost by keeping shell before it is manu-
factured.
The Malay workers have a definitely graded
scale by which they value the various colours. This
runs as follows:
ayer lilin	...	(waxen)
,,	laut	...	(sea-water)
,,	madu	...	(honey)
,,	tandok	...	(horn)
;,	pajar	...	(dawn)
,,	mega	...	(Puloh Malay, cloudy)
Shell having a high proportion of yellow is the
most in request.
The carvers, who are very skillful at their work,
mainly manufacture native combs, buttons and
brooches, which they dispose of to old women who
are the recognised middlemen of the kampong. A
good comb should be worth from one to two dollars.
Most of the workers in Kuching are to be found in
Kampong Kobor-kobor (Dato Bandar) where their
material is most easily obtained, though others are
to be found in out-stations and elsewhere.
Visitors to the Museum will find two complete,
but immature, shells of C. imbricata exhibited, and
also a native comb, said to-be ay er li Un. It would
be a great acquisition if a kind donor presented a
complete set of the various grades of colours, by
which intending purchasers in future could check
the too exuberant fancy of the tortoiseshell merchant.
L. B. R.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 17, 1919. 67
The Rajah Charles Brooke
Memorial Fund.
Amount already acknowledged	... $20,723.20
Chan Kee Ong ...	...	500.00
Chop Chin Ann ...	...	500.00
Chop Tong Ghee Ann ...	...	250.00
The Sungei Moyan Rubber Estate ...	250.00	$22,223.20 Sarawak
Library.
been added to
The following book
the Library :
M 351 Wilhelm Hohenz-
ollern A- Co.
H 350 A Short History
of England
S 137 A Naturalist in Borneo
M 142 India and the future
F 4202 Moonbeams from
the larger Lunacy
F 4696 Over Bemertons
M 99 Forty Years of Spy
F 3109 Lord Tony's Wife
F 4146 Missing
F 6481 Under the Hermes
M 7 An Airman's Outings
F 2792 The Kingdom of
Waste Lands
F 2821 Knights of Araby
F 966 Coelebs
M 146 Khaki Courage
M 320 As Tommy sees us
F 324 An Autumn Sowing
B 778 & 9 Recollections 2 Vols.
H 35 Diplomatic Diary
F 4886 Piccadilly Jim
F 6471 Unconquered
F 1677 Finished
F 1697 Five and Twenty
Turkeys, et
F 5444 Safety Candle
F 5565 Senlis
M 29 Besieged in Kut
F 551 Blue Flame
F 6117 Tasker Jevons
M 352 While Paris Mughe
by Lyell Fox
,, G. K. Chesterton
.. The late Robert
W. C. Shelford .. William Archer
.. Stephen Leacock
.. C. V. Lucas
,, Leslie Ward
,. Baroness Orczy
., Mrs Humphry Ward
,, Richard Dehan
,. Contact
,. Sydney C. Grier
,. Marmaduke Pickthall
.. F. E. Mills Young
Coningsby Dawson
.. Rev. A. Herbert Gray, M. A., c. f. (T).
., E. F. Benson
John Viscount Morley
Hugh Gibson
P. G. Wod house
,, Maud Diver
.. H. Rider Haggard
-. .. J. J. Bell
.. E. S, Stevens
., Cicely Hamilton
.. Major Charles
H. Barber
.. Hubert Wales
,. May Sinclair
,. Leonard Merrick
H. JACQUES, Honorary Secretary.
Extracts from the Yearly Reports. (1918)
Oya.
The sago industry in this river is rapidly failing,
and the sago palms are becoming scarcer and scarcer
and the industry is gradually going farther up-river,
until it will be worked out as far as an industry is
concerned. Between Oya and Tanam is almost worked out now, what is left of the sago is used
for home consumption.
Between Tanam and for some distance above
Medong there is still plenty left, but many of the
sago lauds are not properly looked after., and trees
and jungle are allowed to grow to the detriment of
the sago palms, the Melano owner being too lazy to
dear them away.
If some order could be made by which the owners
of sago lands be made to clear and keep them
planted up, instead of letting them revert to jungle,
it would, I think, revive the industry, and in four
or five years hence the export would have greatly
increased.
The gardens could be examined periodically by
the Government to see that they were being
cared for and planted up.
Sadong.
Messrs, the Sarawak Rubber Estates Limited and
the Malaysian Manufacturing Co. have opened
godowns at Simunjan, Gedong, Tabakang and
S'bangan for the collection of gutta rian leaves.
Owing to competition the price is steadily rising and
a bigger export is expected this year.
Bintulu.
During May the. Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Co. of
Miri took their first cargo of bilian timber from here
and their motor launch Miri has paid many visits to
Bintulu since, towing lighters for the same purpose.
Large quantities of bilian shingles have been exported
to Labuan and British North Borneo by various
schooners.
As to civil cases there were numerous inheritance
disputes in connection with fruit and sago lands.
There are often complicated and involve relation-
ships going back several generations so that it is
not always easy to reach a satisfactory decision,
especially as every litigant or witness comes to Court
resolved to tell the truth only in so far as it is to
his own advantage and to trust to fiction for the
rest. A system of Letters of Administration, as
carried out in the Kuching district, would in a short
lime almost entirely do away with such cases and
be a great advantage to the people as giving them a
better title to their plantations.
Bowls.
The usual monthly Bowling Handicap took place
at the Sarawak Club on the 1st March and resulted
as follows:
D. L. Greene...
E. L. Grove ...
C. E. A. Ermen J. C. Swavne... A. B. Ward ... G. T. Bates ...
Average. Score. Hcap.
...	183.9	473	+	scr.	...	179.3	457	+	5.4
...	170.2	382	+	23.1	...	169.5	340	+	28.6
150.2 Did not compete.
Total.
462 4
405 1
368-6
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of
correspondents.]
Peace Celebrations.
SIR,
Is it not time we thought of some method of
celebrating the signing of Peace and the Victory of
the Allies ? The full Peace Conference is to begin
in a few days time and it has been stated that
Peace will be made in June.
Could not a Memorial be erected to those from
Sarawak who have fallen in the War and a Public
Meeting be called to discuss plans for celebrating in
a worthy maimer such an important event as the
signing of Peace and the absolute defeat of the
Germans?
Yours faithfully,
D. L. GREENE.
68	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 17, 1919.
SADONG.
February.
I arrived in Sadong on the 3rd by s.l. La Follette from Sibu and took over charge of the district. On the next day the Court writer, Mr. Lau Loong Quee, handed over the cash and books of the station.
Court work has been light during the month, probably owing to the fact that most of the people are on their farms. A Malay, by name Jais, was sentenced to six months imprisonment for obtaining money under false pretences and breach of contract, whilst three Chinese received short terms of imprisonment for breach of Mine regulations.
An appeal from the Malay Court against the decision of Abang Bujang came before the Court. The case, a paternity one, showed rather peculiar circumstances and the minutes were sent to Kuching for an opinion.
There have been several robberies again m the bazaar and one in a Malay, kampong, in the latter the intruders made off with the family bedding and various articles of furniture. The Chinese cannot be induced to invest in proper iron safes and the extremely rickety boxes used for keeping cash in offer a great temptation to those in want of money.
Mr. Barnes arrived on the 22nd by s.s. Alice Lorraine to repair the wireless station which had been out of order for nearly a month, communication was opened again on the 25th; 1 understand from Mr. Barnes that the work of the engineer is far from satisfactory. Mr. Barnes, who was accompanied by Mr. Jacques, left again for Kuching on the 24th.
During the month I visited the reservoir which needs cleaning. Mr. Evans and I have arranged to have this done after the landas is over. Reports of the padi down-river are not very good, but upriver things appear to be better and a good crop is expected.
The prisoners have been engaged during the month in the usual up-keep of roads and ornamental grounds.
Considerable damage was done by the heavy rains during the night of the 14th; at 8 a.m. on the 15th no less than 865 inches of rain in the previous 24 hours was measured in the rain gauge which had actually overflowed.
On the 21st the long bridge over the Simunjan partially collapsed. Temporary repairs have been effected in the meanwhile. I have written to the Honble. the Resident under separate cover concerning the rebuilding of this bridge.
I understand that the bridge has collapsed several times before owing to the enormous strength of the tide which rushes up like a mill race. I hope to do away with the central arch which will relieve the pressure somewhat.
Mr. Evans has started filling up the left side of the railway line with a view to making a road big enough for pedestrian traffic. There is an abundance of rubbish from the Colliery and the trucks are emptied out along the line as the train makes her usual runs. I am doing a certain amount of filling up too from this end.
Five steamships and seven schooners entered and cleared during the month.
Coal shipped to Singapore	232 tons.
Sibu	110 .,
,,	,,	Kuching	718 Total	1,060 Imports.	Exports.
$19,838	$22,398
J. BE VILLE ARCHER,
Resident 2nd Class.
SADONG COLLIERY.
February.
The gross out-put of the mines during the month was 1,594.08 tons; 380 tons of this was consumed by our boilers and 1,264.08 tons were delivered to the wharf for export.
The months shipments were:
The Kuching Municipality ... 280.02 tons.
Sibu ...	...	... 60.00 ,,
Messrs. The Borneo Co.. Ltd.,
Kuching... 519.18 ,,
,, Paterson Simons & Co.,
Singapore 200.00 .. Total shipments $1,060.00 tons.
The balance of stock on the wharf at the end of the month was 1,866.19 tons.
The Chinese New Year holidays began on the 1st and work was not resumed again until the 8th, which was found to be the first auspicious date of their New Year (according to the Chinese calendar).
The upper panel workings of No. 9 mine were idle during the month ; the fall of roof on the double-parting of the lower panel, closing up the inside workings, will soon be cleared.
The coal pillar on the west side appears to be a very large block of excellent coal, expanding fan-wise to the dip.
There was a slight increase in the out-put from No. 8 and No. 11 mines and the upper seam mine produced one quarter of the total out-put for the month.
Little progress was made in the prospecting drift and the machinery and boilers were overhauled thoroughly during the Chinese New Year stoppage.
The filling in of the swamp in the vicinity of the Malay kampong was discontinued, owing to the boggy state of the ground due to heavy rains, and be available shale refuse was dumped beside the railway line, with the object of making a substantial hard road for pedestrian traffic between the mines and the wharf.
The usual ballasting and repairing was carried on at the wharf and the general health of the labour force was-good.
The rainfall for the month was 21'99 inches, 6'07 inches of this fell on the 14th.
J. W. EVANS.
Manager.
SIBI.
February.
Chinese New Year was observed as a public holiday on the 1st of the month and a salute of seven guns was fired from the fort. There were a few petty quarrels amongst Chinese, but on the whole the celebration passed off very quietly.
Mr. G. M. Gifford returned from Kuching on the 4th of the month and left for Kapit on the 7th, by s.l. Mermaid.
Mr. J. B. Archer left for Sadong, to which station he has been appointed, by s.l. La Follette on the 2nd. On the 4th a message was received from Kuching stating that the launch had put in at M. Tebas with a damaged rudder. She returned to Sibu, after being repaired, on the 13th.
The wireless operator, after having previously been warned, was sentenced to a term of imprisonment for assault, and later on to a further term for deliberately delaying the delivery of an important message. Another operator arrived from Kuching on the 13th.
A contract was signed on the 8th for the construction of the new Dispensary at Sibu, the Government supplying the hardwood required.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 17, 1919.
69
MUKAH.
December, 1918.
Dr. Luhn, Medical Officer at Sibu, arrived by s. l. La Follette on the 7th, returning via Oya and Dalat on the 11th.
Dr. Luhn inspected various sites for the proponed hospital and dresser's quarters. The corner of the grass road was selected as being the most suitable and will be reserved for that purpose unless a better is found.
Data Azahari has been absent from duty since the 11th, owing to ill health.
I left for Sibu on 21st, via Oya and the Cut.
Tukang Assan and prisoners have started reflooring the jail with bilian planks.
Raw sago is steadily rising in price.
The sea has been more or less calm.
Three schooners cleared for Kuching and five entered.
The principal exports are :
1917.	1918.
Raw sago	76 koyans 59 koyans
Jelutong	630 piculs	1,260 piculs
Yet another outrage by the Ga'at Dyaks was
reported from Kapit on the 8th. On this occasion
a party of Bukitans and Sians was attacked by
a force of Dyaks led by Kalat and Unyat. The
Bukitans lost four men killed and two wounded.
The Sians lost one man and three women killed and
one woman wounded and a child captured. Six of
the Gaat Dyaks were killed.
During the month the telephone line from Tan-
jong Jenalam. on the Igan, to Dalat has been over-
hauled by the linesman from Sibu. The mandor
from Kuching has inspected all instruments at Sibu
and worked through to Dalat and Mukah.
A Chinese was arrested on s. s. Flevo at Rejang by
the Customs Inspector being found in possession of
$900 worth of opium. Tie was sentenced to a term
of imprisonment in default of a fine of $2,700. The opium was confiscated. A further haul was made
at Rejang from the same steamer later on.in the
month, some of the opium being found inside a
length of piping concealed in a bunker.
The 24th. being the birthday of Her Highness the
Ranee, was observed as a public holiday.
In consequence of frequent quarrels between the
Igan. natives and the Chinese shop-keepers in the
village, the later have been warned that no shops
are to be repaired as the bazaar will be moved to
another site some distance from the native village.
During the month Mr. H. D. Aplin visited
Kanowit, Sarikei and Rejang, and was still away in
the Lower Rejang district at the end of the month.
The p. s. Adeh and Gladys each made one trip
from Kuching for cargo, and s. s., Alice Lorraine
brought a cargo of coal from Sadong on the 28th.
S. S. Flevo cleared for Singapore twice with full
cargoes. A large quantity of engkabang still remains
at Sibu and up-river awaiting shipment.
The death of the Khatib, Haji Anis, was reported
on the 27th. Haji Anis had held the post of Khatib
at Sibu for the past 30 years, and was much respected
by the Mohammedan community. He was of Kayan
and Lugat origin and was, as a child, captured by
the force which operated in the Kayan country un-
der His Highness the late Rajah in the year 1863.
On arrival at Sibu the child was put in charge of the
then Date Bandar of Sibu, Haji Usop, by whom he
was brought up and educated. When aged twelve
he accompanied Haji Usop to Mecca, but did not
reach Medina. Later on in life, however, he com-
pleted the pilgrimage. Haji Anis died at the age
of about 60.
The Exports for the month show a very large
increase as compared with the corresponding month
of the previous year. The principal export being
plantation rubber of which no less than 58 tons
were shipped. Over 500 piculs of engkabang nuts
were exported, and nearly 2.000 piculs jelutong.
'The total value of exports for the first two months
of the year was $266,886 as compared with $106,199
for the same period in 1918. The value of imports
for the same period has increased by $75,291.
Trade Returns for February 1919 -
January.
I was detained at Sibu the whole month, under
medical treatment, but was able to keep in touch
with the district by telephone.
Petty thefts continue to be numerous, twice
thieves visited the Residency kitchen, but nothing
valuable was taken.
The MukahSibu telephone line has been in
great request.
The number of wireless messages despatched and
received far exceed these for any month since the
wireless was opened. This is largely due to the
rapid and unprecedented rise in the price of raw
sago, which is fetching $1.30 a pasu in the kampongs.
The Mukah Treasury has cashed letters of credit
amounting to $3,60(1. Owing to shortage of money
all the demands could not be met, so I made arrange-
ments at Sibu that I should bring $10,000 with
me on my return, to assist the traders here.
Kim Nguan, dresser, has been appointed to do
duty at this station.
I left Sibu for Mukah on the 31st.
The prisoners have cleared the road and ditches
to Petanak, and the Petanak people the land between
the fort and the sea.
Raw sago exported amounted to 83 koyans and
jelutong to 970 piculs.
Five schooners cleared for Kuching and three
entered.
F. F. BOULT,
Acting Resident.
BARAM.
February.
Very few cases came before the Court and only
one of any importance, Chong and Sumbi (f.) Dyaks
of Ridan, nephew and aunt being fined for incest.
Fines and fees amounted to $493.44.
Owing to there being some misunderstanding of
the Honble. Resident's orders with reference to the
registering of fruit gardens, I sent Tuanku Drahman
Native Officer and forestry inspector Latip to Poyut
to inform all owners to lay out boundary marks and
register these in the fort within one month and also
to sell by auction all gardens ordered by the Court.
Coasting Foreign
Imports. $ 37,832 64,322
Exports. $ 16,737 145,410
Brought forward
$ 84,154 112,779
$162.1 17
104,739
Total
$1.96,933
$266,886
1918.
$121,642
$106,199
'Total of immigrants, 5 male Foo Chows.
J. BARING-GOULD,
Resident 3rd Division.
70
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 17, 1919.
Penghulu Lanting paid two visits during the
month and paid in some tines and also brought down
softie outstanding cases for settlement.
P. C. Mumin arrived from Lio Mato. He reports
having started with Bua Hassan wakil on a visit to
Kalabit country, but was taken ill. Bua Hassan re-
turned to Lio Matu and he has come down for
medical treatment. He left again for the ulu at end
of the month. He reported all quiet and that the
Kalabits are busy getting ready to pay in tax.
The Poyut Dyaks were ordered to work wood for
the new bungalow and fortmens quarters and most
of them brought down their share by the end of the
month.
Janggu and six followers (Dyaks) reported that
their jelutong, about 25 piculs, bad been stolen from
Logan Bunut in Tinjar and they suspected the
followers of Tama Langit. I sent P. C. Serudin to
make enquiries. He reports that the fence is very
rotten and that the jelutong must have floated away
during the floods.
The squad of Rangers have been giving consider-
able trouble lately. Corporal Ayom was severely
warned and Pte. Embuas returned to headquarters.
This man refused to obey any orders.
I sent letters to the chiefs of Baram and Tinjar
rivers ordering them to have their tax and outstand-
ing fines ready in two months when I will pay them
a visit.
Penghulu Tama Saging arrived from the Tutau
and paid in some fines. He reports that everyone
has had a very good harvest in this river.
Gumbang, Long - Kiput chief, came down with
reference to a relation of bis who has leprosy.
The new bazaar is progressing rapidly. At present
the Chinese have about 4,000 piculs of jelutong ready
for export and owing to the price of this produce
being high a large profit should lie made especially
as the greater part was bought for not more than
$1 per picul.
There was very little rain during the month and
the river has never been so low, the consequence
being a lot of sickness in the kampong. The same
reports come from the Dyaks and up-river people.
The rainfall was 184 inches.
Prisoners were engaged during the month in level-
ling the roads in the bazaar.
Exports,	Imports,
$8,265	$12,319
C, D. ADAMS,
Resident .2nd Class.
The Sarawak Gazette.
RATES OF ADVERTISEMENTS IN THE " SARAWAK GAZETTE"
Payable in advance.
Quarter of a column and under
First insertion .	... ...$1.00
Second and third insertion each	... 0.50
Subsequent do	do	... 0.25
Half a Column and under
First insertion ...	...	... 2.00
Second and third insertion each	.... 1.00
Subsequent do	do	... 0.50
A Column and under
First insertion each	...	... 4.00
Second and third insertion each	... 2.00
Subsequent do	do	... 1 00
Special arrangements may be made for standing adver-
tisements.
All communications intended for insertion
in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed
to the Editor at the Government Printing
Office, Kuching. They should be clearly
written and should reach the Office at least
one day before the publication of each issue-
Letters and other contributions must be
authenticated by writers name sent privately
to the Editor.
We cannot undertake to return rejected
communications, or to give reasons for not
inserting them.
Residents at the Outstations will confer an
obligation by forwarding to the Office early
intelligence of all matters of general interest
In their respective neighbourhoods.
NOTICE.
ASTANA FARM.
THE Manager of Astana Farm begs to
inform the Public that he is unable to
attend to Orders for milk after Office hours.
NOTICE.
?
Gazette subscriptions and Printing Office bills.
FOR the convenience of residents at Out-
stations Sarawak stamps will bp taken in pay-
ment of small sums bur. only the 1,2 and 3 cent
values will be accepted. It is requested, how-
ever, that Money Orders be sent if possible..
J. C. SWAYNE,
Manager, Govt. Printing Office.
NOTICE.
AUCTION SALE
of unredeemed pledges from Pawn Broking
Farm YEW CHEE & Co., Chop Wo SANG and
Chop LOON YEK of Bau at No. 18, China Street
on Saturdays of the following dates19th
April 1919, 17th May 1919 and 21st June
1919, at 9 a.m.
List of all such unredeemed pledges can be-
seen at the Pawn Farmers premises.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO.,
Authorised Auctioneers.
WANTED.
COURT INTERPRETER with a know-
ledge of Foo Chow (essential). Hok-kien
and Cantonese dialects and able to read and
write Chinese characters and understand
Chinese accounts.
Applicants please apply to Residents Office, Sibu, Sarawak.
[6-6]
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH- 17, 1919.
1
22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS.
Beer, Wine, Spirit & General Store Dealers.
: (O):	SOLE AGENTS FOR:
FRASER & NEAVE'S AERATED WATERS
(The Best throughout the East.)
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic
Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at
$1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 catties of dry rubber.
ASAHI BEER.
ACETIC ACID.
:(o):	Fresh supplies of Stores are received regularly.
PRICES MODERATE.
Free delivery to customers in Kuching.
Free packing & shipping for Outstation
Orders.
[u.c.]
72	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. MARCH 17, 1919.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
NOTICE.
ALMNAC
WE beg to notify our customers that our Town Office has been closed since
31st December 1918.
MARCH, 1919.
.
For the sale of our sawn timber locally we
have appointed Mr. YEO CHOO HONG of Chop-
SOON TECK of Jawa Street as Agent, who will
give his attention to all orders.
Prices for all timber delivered at our Works
at Sungei Priok will be 5% less than those for
town deliveries.
In future all communications should be
addressed to THE KWONG LEE BANKING Cd.,
our Financial Agents, and all monies due to
us should also be paid to them.
THE KUCHING STEAM SAW MILLS LIMITED.
[6-6]
THE KUCHING DRUG STORE.
KUCHING, SARAWAK
The place where you can always get:
PHOTOGRAPHIC CHEMICALS, SURGICAL APPLIANCES,
OPTICAL GOODS, PATENT MEDICINES, TOILET
REQUISITES AND THE LATEST NOVELS.
HOURS.
From 8 a.m. To 11.30 a.m.
1 p. m. 4.30 p. m.
PRICES MODERATE.
ORDERS PROMPTLY EXECUTED.
[1211]	#
A clean tooth never -decays.'
Rainfall, January, 1919.
H. OHNISHI D.D.S. (T.D.C.)
(Graduated. Tokyo Dental College)
Japanese Dentist
193-6, ORCHARD ROAD, SINGAPORE.
[12-6]
NOTICE.
THE KUCHING STEAM SAW MILLS LIMITED.
NOTICE is hereby given that Share Certificate dated 25th August 1913, issued by THE KUCHING STEAM SAW MILLS LIMITED, for 330 shares of $10 each fully paid bearing Nos. 971 to 1300 inclusive, and registered in the name of J. H. BRODIE, is alleged to have been lost or destroyed.
Any person holding the said Share Certificate is required to return it to the undersigned not later than 15th June 1919, otherwise the said Share Certificate will be cancelled and a new one issued.
TAN SUM GUAN,
Secretary. [6-1]
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. MARCH 17, 1919.	73
M E T E O R O L O G I C A L R E T U R N S.
GENERAL HOSPITAL.
74
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MARCH 17, 1919.
THE SARAWAK STUDIO
THE BEST IN KUCHING
WHERE GOOD PORTRAITS CAN BE TAKEN AND VIEWS OF THE
NEIGHBOURHOOD PROCURED.
VIEWS OF THE WANGKANG PROCESSION IN GREAT
VARIETY FOR SALE.
PHOTOS FOR PASSPORTS
AT SHORT NOTICE.
AMATEURS FILMS & PLATES DEVELOPED, PRINTED &
ENLARGED AT REASONABLE CHARGES.
FRESH KODAK FILMS CAN ALWAYS BE SUPPLIED.
Free instructions given to Amateurs with pleasure.
C. M. LEE,
Manager.
21, COURT HOUSE ROAD,	,
KUCHING.
RIDE A RIGID, RAPID, RELIABLE
THE ALL-STEEL BICYCLE
fitted with centra] pull brakes which give confidence, each brake being itself suffi- ciently powerful to hold the bicycle on any hill, however steep it may be
GUARANTEED FOR EVER
ALL THE WORLD OVER
Raleigh Cycle Co. Ld.
NOTTINGHAM. ENGLAND.
KUCHING:Printed and Published by GHIN HENG SOON. Government Printer, at the Government Printing Office. Barrack Road.
