
VOL. XLIX
No. 776.
Sarawak Gazette.
Price KUCHING, MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 1, 1919.	10 cents
CONTENTS.
Page.
Birth: Abang Adeng	...	231
Notes ...	...	231
The Rajah Charles Brooke Memorial Fund	232
Execution of Bau Murderers	...	...	232
Siam's Rice Exports ...	...	232
British North Borneo Chartered C .	232
Prize giving at Malay Schools	...	...	233
Spotted Odontoglossmns ...	233
Monthly Reports:Upper Sarawak Sadong	234
Sadong Colliery--Sibu	... 235
OyaMukah Brooketon Colliers 236
Trade Returns	...	...	...	238
Rainfall ...	...	...	...	239
Almanac...	...	...	239
Passengers	...	...	239
Kuching Shipping Returns	...	...	... 240
Miri Shipping ...	...	241
The Sarawak Gazette.
SUBSCRIPTIONS to the Gazette are as follows
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
Single copy	...	... .10 cents
Subscription for one year . .	... $2.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 2.25
Subscription including postage to all other
Countries. ... 2.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 5s. 10d
Th# Sarawak Government Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
Single copy	...	...	...	.05 cents
Subscription for one year	...	... $1.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 1.25
Subscription including postage to all other
Countries. 1.56
PAYABLE IN STERLING
Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 3s. 6il
All subscription are payable in advance and must
commence from the 1st January in each year on
which date they are renewable. All broken periods
will be considered as full.
Subscriptions will not be renewed unless notice
of renewal given.
Changes of Address should be notified to the
Office in writing.
The Sarawak Gazette.
MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 1, 1919.
Birth.
On the 26th August to the wife of ABANG ADENG. Sibu, a son.
NOTES.
(August.)
S. S. Rajah of Sarawak left for Singapore
on 19th August, passengers were Honble. A.
13. and Mrs Ward and children, Mr. and Mrs.
Owen and two children, Mr. and Mrs. Graham White and two children, Mr. and Mrs.
Skinner and child, Mrs. Greene, Rev. A. G.
Gamble, Mr. P. E. Cox and child, Messrs. I.
Shelton and Y. Takanobu.
WE understand Mrs. Ward. Mr. and Mrs.
Graham White, Mr. and Mrs. Skinner and
Mrs. Greene have booked passages on the
. P. A O. Egypt for home. Major and Mrs.
Moulton and Mr. and Mrs. Peiniger will also
join that ship at Singapore.
THE P. & O. liner Egypt is being refitted in
Singapore. Her accommodation will be in
the form of cots and berths.
ONE of the cows at the Batu Kinyang Farm
gave birth to two calves, still-born, on the
20th. An occurrence of this sort is said to be
? rare in this country.
WE understand that the Borneo Company
have opened a branch office in Penang and
have acquired temporary accommodation in
Beach Street. Mr. Adamson, who has been
on n visit here in connection with the above-
returned to Singapore yesterday.- (P. G.)
A new one cent post-card was issued from
the General Post Office on August 22nd.
232 THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1919.
The colour of the stamp is blue with a red
label bearing the value. The new issue is due,
we understand, to the fact that the new two
cent post-card is printed in green, the former
colour of the one cent card.
SUB-LIEUT. Frank L. Larkins was lost over-
board from submarine .12 in Carimata Strait
off the west-coast of Borneo on June 20.
The J2 was among the first batch of sub-
marines which visited Singapore on their way
to Australia early in June.(St. Echo.)
S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore on August 21st with passengers the Rev. Father Haidegger, Messrs. Holl, C. Kee Ong, Ng
Fai Nam and N. Sze Thong.
S. S. Sarawak arrived from Sadong on August 24th with passenger Mr. E. H. Haldane.
PASSENGERS to Sibu on the 25th were Mrs. Zinn and Miss Chapman by s.s. Sarawak.
S. S. Kuching left for Singapore on 26th
August with the following passengers Messrs.
S. Kia Hok. K. Ah Ee, K. Siew Kim, T. Joon
Teck, Ng Fai Nam. and L. Shin Fong, Mrs.
Chan Hong Sze. Miss M. Chan, Miss C. H.
Yew, Mrs. C. M. Lee, Mrs. S. Hoi Jeo and
Mr. and Mrs. O. Siaw Sian.
S. S. Rajah of Sarawak arrived from Singapore on August 29th, passengers were Mr. and Mrs. Philpott, Mr. L. Miang Yang, Messrs. G. Teng Chew and Lim Yit Pho.
Mr. and Mrs. Philpott left shortly for Sungei Tengah.
THE following appointments are notified in the Government Gazette. Mr. J. P. Mead to be Conservator of Forests for Sarawak, Mr. H. A. Adams to be Registrar, Supreme Court, and Mr. W. F. Dick to be a Cadet, doing duty at Simanggang.
MAILS arriving from home now take thirty- one days to reach Singapore.
A prolonged drought, which lasted over three weeks, broke towards the end of the month. The Matang water supply was affected and it was found necessary for several days to pump water from the Lower Reservoirs
Hori'EBs appeared in force near Penampang, Putatan district, on the Sth of the month. A force of four men was despatched by the Director of Agriculture to deal with them, and in three days 8$ million hoppers were reported as destroyed. Operations are still being carried on in the district, and vigorous steps are being taken to deal with the plague by the Police nearer Jesseiton.(B. N. B. Herald.)
At the end of the month it was reported to
the Treasury that forgeries of the new
twenty-five cent notes were in circulation and
several were produced in evidence. Whether
these are the work of local experts has not
yet been proved.
The printing is so badly done that it is not
likely they will deceive any but the most
ignorant. The top line especially is illegible
and the numbers are put in, apparently, by
hand. However as the paper is of good
quality and well cur. it is as well to examine
every note received.
The Rajah Charles Brooke
Memorial Fund.
Amount already acknowledged	...	$39,203.20
L. E, Currey ...	100.00
27th August, 1919.	$39,308.20
Execution of Bail Murderers.
The execution of Ngui Hee and Lim Thooi, who were found guilty of the murder of Choong Kui at Kranji, took place on August 16th, after sentence had been passed by the Supreme Court.
Siam's Rice Exports.
The report of the Financial Adviser on the Budget of Siam shows that the aggregate value of exports for the year 1918-19 was higher than last year by Tcs 38.2 millions, of which rice accounts for Tcs 34.2 millions, other goods Tcs 2.5 millions and re-exports Tcs 2 millions. Against these increases there is a reduction under the head Treasure of Tcs 700,000. The advance in the value of rice exported accounts for 89 per cent of the-total. The quantity exported (14.2 million piculs) was 4.5 millions less than in the previous year, and the lowest recorded in six years. The smallness of the export was due to the reduced quantities coming forward in the first eight months of the year (April to November, 1918), which was the last of the rice belonging to the crop which was damaged by the heavy Hoods of the previous October and November. From December 1918 to March 1919 the new seasons rice was being exported, and of this more than the usual proportion was sent out of the country during those months, in response to the enormously inflated prices offering.
The total value of all imports during 1918-19, viz.., Tcs. 103 millions, exceeded that of the previous twelve months by Tcs 6 millions, and constituted a record. This is the first time that the imports have been over the Tcs 100 million mark. The total increase of Tcs. 6 millions is considerably more than accounted for by the advance of Tcs 8.2 millions under goods chargeable with the general 3 per cent ad valorem duty.
British North Borneo Chartered Co.
?
The Hon. Mr. Pearson, C. M. G., Governor of British North Borneo, attended the meeting of the above company, held on the 22nd July at River Plate House, Finsbury Circus, E. C., with the Rt. Hon. Sir West Ridgeway in the chair.
Mr. Pearson said that the last three or four years had been full of problems and anxieties for the officers
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1919.
233
of the company, and he thought the Shareholders
might congratulate themselves on the way in which
North Borneo was emerging from the war. Neither
he nor any other responsible officer in Borneo would
have dared to predict, two or three years ago, such
a favourable outcome as had been already realised.
One of their greatest preoccupations during the war
was to maintain the internal peace of the country, and
he was glad to say except in two instancesand the
troubles were quickly overtheir efforts met with
entire success. The second problem which caused
grave anxiety was that of foodstuffs. In Borneo
they were dependent to a huge extent on imported
foodstuffs, and in this matter they owed a debt, of
gratitude to the Governor at Singapore and the Admiral on the China Station. North Borneo, as the
shareholders had often been told, was a magnificent country and full of possibilities. Its climate
was excellent and the soil remarkably fertile. The
one thing it needed was development, European
enterprise and population. Now that the war was
over they were able to take up the reins of progress
where the dropped them in 1914, and the only question war where to start on the long list of enterprises
that they hoped shortly to undertake. He had had
the opportunity of discussing the whole matter
with the President; the programme was cut and
dried, and it was hoped to make a start so soon
ns conditions permitted. After speaking of the
great, benefit which the railway had been to the
country, he remarked that up to the present they
had relied almost entirely on agriculture. but the
time had now come when they would exploit,
their forest resources. Beyond these, they had a
third string to their bow in oil and minerals.
The future of minerals might be uncertain, but as
regarded oil he could not help feeling confident that
their effort would meet with success They were
right, in the oil belt, and any day might bring the
great news which would mean so much to the State
In the meantime they could keep themselves fully
occupied by developing their certainties. In every
direction the future (or British North Borneo was
brighter than it had been at any time before during
his 22 year's service with the company, and the
revenue was steadily increasing.
The report and accounts were adopted, and a
dividend of 4 per vent for 1918 passed.(P. G.)
Prize-giving at Malay Schools.
The annual prize-giving to the Government Lay,
Kampong Gersik and Kampong Jawa schools took
place on Thursday 21st at the end of the school term
al the Lay School which was specially decorated for
the occasion. His Highness the Tuan Muda kindly
consented to distribute the prizes. When this had
been done His Highness spoken few words to the
boys, congratulating them on the work of the past
war and hiving stress upon the value of a sound
education in after life. He concluded by drawing
the attention of his audience to their heritage,
Malayan courtesy, a tradition they had received
intact' from their fathers and which they must
carry on in spite of the bad example of the few who
did not know its worth.
The customary speeches were then read by the
scholars and the usual songs given and the proceedings terminated with three cheers for His Highness the Tuan Muda.
The following is a list of prize winners.
GOVERNMENT LAY SCHOOL.
English Subjects.
Standard IV. Ebun
., III. Abang Wan
II. Fadel
I. Adnan
Infant A. Somalli
B. Mohd. Hashim
Regular Attendance
Good conduct
Annual Examination.
Standard
Malay Subjects.
Ebun Jumit Sirat Ponzi
.,	I. .1. Hanipah
,,	I. B. Abang Aboug
.. Mohd. Hashim
.. Abang Karim
English Subjects.
Standard IV. Ibrahim
.. III. Shadan
II. Ramli
I. Dim
Infant A. Mohamed
B. Hashim
Quarterly Examination.
Malay Subjects. Standard V.	Mohd. Alli
,,	IV.	Mat Rasid
III.	Wan Hamid
11.	Talun
,. I. A. Awi
I. B Mohd. Arbi
KAMPONG GERSIK SCHOOL.
Malay Subjects.
Standard TV. Yusuf
111. Ist Sahari
2nd Awg. Mohd. Juini
II 1st Awg. Salleh
1st Hamid Infant
2nd Ramli
I. 1st. Buang
2nd Gani
2nd Ilin
Good Conduct
Regular Attendance
Standard IV.
Malay Subjects.
Infant
English Subjects.
Standard III. Mohamad Kipl
II. Yusuf
Kebli
Abdul Rahim
A. Ibrahim
B Sawa]
lst. Bol Hassan
2nd Dobi
1st Bohari
2nd Ayub
1. 1st Mohamad
2nd Awg. Mohd. Juini
1. 1st Ramli
2nd Awang Gani
B. Awaug Dipa
Apui
Sulong
Kiplawi
Standard II.
I.
Infant .4.
English Subjects. B.
Adnan
Abdul Rahim Brahim Yahya
Good Conduct Regular Attendance Spotted Odontoglossnms.
Says a writer in The Field some twenty years
ago a Belgian nurseryman, M. Vuylshtcke, astonished
orchid fanciers with a collection of hybrid odonto-
glossums at an exhibition in Ghent which revealed
that by crossing the species with each other
combinations of colours and form of surprising
and delightful character could be artificially bred.
Before that event it was generally believed that
odontoglossums could not be bred by gardeners,
and that to obtain them they must be collected
in countries, where they grow wild, with the colours that nature gave them. The breeders art has
enabled him to outstrip nature in the making of new
forms, and with respect .to orchids, particularly
odontoglossums', he has worked wonders within the
last twenty years. When spotted odontoglossums
were discovered among wildlings they were highly
prized ; as for a scarlet-coloured one. that appeared
to be us impossible as a blue rose. Spots are now
as easy to get as plainseasier in factand reds are
quite plentiful. It became therefore necessary to
find some other character that would appeal to the
elite among fanciers, and the size, disposition, and
colour of the spots became important. We figure one
of the best of the spotted varieties of O. crispum, and,
for comparison, one of the most recent of the highly
prized laced varieties, raised by Messrs. Armstrong and
Brown, Hayward's Heath, who are among the most
successful breeders of orchids, particularly odontoglos-sums. In this variety, appropriately named Victory, as
it was exhibited at Chelsea this year and is moreover
a champion of its kind, the spots are all united and
cover the whole flowers, save the white margins,
with a rich brown colour. The difference between
this and the spotted varieties is not unlike that of
spangled and laced in the feathers of poultry, aud we
might therefore call odontoglossums of the Victory
pattern laced varieties. Whether these variegations
in the flowers, of odontoglossums are more beautiful
than the plain white of their progenitor, O. crispum,
is a matter of taste or fashion. Many good judges
prefer a good white crispum. to all other orchids.
Still the market value of one like Victory runs into
hundreds of guineas, whilst a white crispum can be
purchased for a guinea.
234
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1919.
MONTHLY REPORTS.
UPPER SARAWAK.
BAU AND PAKU.
July.
Court. - There have been a number of cases of
theft before the Court, a direct result of the high
prices prevailing at present. Two Chinese, Lee
Look and Lim San Moy, raided the gambling tables
at Siniawan and got away with a number of notes,
but were chased and caught and sentenced to a
term of imprisonment. Others who were sent to
gaol for various terms were,Rasihau for a serious
assault on his wife ; Ah Hok for causing a disturb-
ance in a kongsi at Siniawan and using a weapon ;
Chin Soon for trying to effect an entrance to a shop in Siniawan bazaar at night; Vun Sip Bun for theft; Lueng Jook also for theft; Jong Jat Poh for
breach of contract. Ban Chong, who escaped from
gaol last year and was recaptured, received the
usual sentence and was sent to Kuching gaol: Phang Fah Shin, wanted in Kuching for highway robbery and causing grievious hurt, was sent down
to Kuching after being arrested at Siniawan.
Other cases heard were not of any importance
and but few civil claims were brought up
Public Works.The prison gang have been weed-
ing and repairing roads and paths and generally
keeping the station dean
The old prison kitchen and latrine combined
was demolished, the latrine and bathing shed being
rebuilt on the same site and a new dapor built
on higher ground on the other side of the gaol
compound.
A contract was made for the remaking of a length
of the Poak road which has been badly damaged by
water.
The pipe-line carrying water to the Government
buildings was opened up for cleaning as the supply
of water was found to be short and the pipes were
so rotten that nothing could be done to them and a
new pipe-line will have to lie laid.
General.I returned from Ku chi tig and took over
the station from Mr. Swayne on the 3rd. Mr. Swayne
returning to Kuching the same day.
I left for Pengkallan Ampat by boat on the 15th
to collect the Dyak tax. The Dyaks had practically finished clearing and were waiting for the hot
weather to burn. Some of the kampongs had plenty of padi, but others were short, but they should have enough to carry them through to the next harvest
unless they are tempted by high prices to part with
any of it; which I doubt. They have made a few
poor efforts at planting tapioca and the like but they
all say that planting any quantity is impossible
owing to the ravages of porcupines, pigs and
monkeys. They cannot plant near their houses
owing to their domestic pigs or far from then, owing
to the wild ones.
The usual land disputes were brought up and the
orang orang kaya were told to settle them themselves
and anyone refusing to abide by their decision would
be dealt with by the Courts.
The Chinese at Pengkallan Ampat have very
nourishing gardens, and quantities of kribang and
such like have been planted. Their pepper also
looks well.
I went to Dahan Estate on the 28th and signed
on a large number of coolies. Complaints were
made by the Javanese of the conduct of the wakhil
Hakim there and these complaints being well
founded he was dismissed.
The pork farm was sold for $95 a month only, a
fall of $20. The price of live swine has risen to $38
a picul and pork is 68 cents a catty. It is becoming
increasingly difficult to procure swine and the sale
of pork is rapidly decreasing. As conditions may
possibly improve after the padi harvest I only sold
the farm for six months instead of twelve.
Towards the end of the month Dyaks were busy
burning their clearings and, as the heat has been
intense the burns were most successful.
The out-put from the Cyaniding Plant was gold
2,198.7 oz. and silver 446 oz.
DONALD A. OWEN,
Resident.
SADONG.
July.
General. -On the 2nd of the month I ordered the
guard of Sarawak Rangers to return to headquarters
as there did not appear to be any more trouble at
the mines
On the 12th Ah Bok, a trader of Padang, S.
Simunjan. reported that his coolie Ong Cheng, who
together with a Malay man and his wife, named
respectively Usen and Mai, who had left for
Simunjan some days ago had not returned. On
investigation it was found that Usen and Mai had
arrived in Simunjan without Ong Cheng, had sold
Ah Boks jelutong, and having collected the man's
brothers Omar and Bakri bad absconded over the
border. On the next day Ong Chengs body was found
near Muara Sageng horribly mutilated. The corpse
had been dragged ashore and hidden above high
water mark and was only found by the disagreeable
smell it emitted. The bead had been completely
severed and there were other injuries. Application
has been made to headquarters to have Usen, Mai,
Bakri and Omar extradited. They were last seen just
near the Dutch border in ulu Milikin and probably
went to Blitang. My search parties returned some
days later.
I left for Simanggang on the 15lh to attend the
Regatta there and returned on the 24th having been
delayed by contrary winds both ways. Whilst
attempting to make Lingga from Sebangan we
picked up the s. 1. Mermaid from Lingga bound for
Rejang. There was heavy rain and a choppy sea
and we had to pilot her into Sebangan as she dare
not proceed on her way and had lost her bearings.
On my return from Simanggang it was reported
that the wireless operator had left his post owing to
alleged illness without trying to inform Kuching of
his intentions. I understand that Mr. Barnes is
bolding an enquiry. This operator, Sayed Ahmat,
has not been very satisfactory and has been returned
to Kuching. There have been no disturbances at
the Colliery and during my periodical visits there the
coolies seen contented.
Courts.Noh and Mohamat were sentenced to
six months imprisonment each for extortion and
intimidating Dyaks. The former was fined $75 for
felling gutta rian trees some time ago and together
with Mohamat was trying to collect this sum from
Dyaks by means of intimidation.
The enquiry into the supposed murder of Ong
Cheng was conducted on the 14tb and 15th and the
minutes sent down to Kuching. The evidence,
against Usen and Mai is very strong. P. C
Suteh was dismissed the force for insubordination.
There were numerous cases of Malays ringing
jelutong trees and many fines imposed.
A case which has been going on for many months,
Lunjoh vs: Pulo was at last settled. No other cases
call for any special mention.
P. W. D.Prisoners, a big gang, were employed
on the new road and on the Government padi farm.
The former is progressing well and about 1 miles is
completed.
Food Control.The distribution of rice by the
Government appears to be working well, although
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1919.
235
there is still a shortage. I have written to the Food Control in Kuching about this matter. Attempts have been made to induce the Colliery hands to eat sago.
The Malays are beginning to plant at last but do not over work themselves.
Ten steamers and eight schooners entered and cleared the port during the month.
Coal shipped for Kuching 1,400 tons
,, Singapore 395 ,,
..	,,	Sibu	89	10	cwts.
Total ... 1,884 tons 10 cwts.
Exports.	Imports.
$27,999.60	$20,208
J. BEVILLE ARCHER,
Resident 2nd Class.
SADONG COLLIERY.
July
The out-put of coal predated by the mines during the month was 2,133.06 tons. 465 tons of this were ,
consumed by our boilers and 1,668.06 tons delivered
to the wharf for export.
The shipments for the month were as follows:
The Kuching Municipality	.. 268.00 tons
Messrs, the Borneo Co , Ltd.. Kuching 693.13
Sarawak Steamship Co. ...	139.16 .. .. British Malaysian Manu-
facturing Co . Goebilt 6.00 .,
,, Soon Seng & Co . Sibu ...	89.10 .,
,. Paterson Simons & Co.,
Singapore 294.00 .,
Total shipments 1,790.19 ..
Gur stock balance on tin- wharf at the end of the month was 975.16 tons.
No. 8 Mine.- A good mid regular out-put was obtained from this mine up to the time of the full on the main engine plane , which took place just before the end of the month. Tins was cleared and traffic resumed, when a second full estimated at about 2,200 tons of debris took place, completely and simultaneously breaking down twenty-one sets of the timber work.
No. 9 Mine.This mine produced well up to the last week of the month, when disturbed ground of a very barren nature was struck in the workings of the lower panel on the east side.
No. 11 Mine.-The coal pillars supporting the main deep of this mine were practically stoped out, but the yield was small owing to the disturbed state and thinness of the coal seam.
Advantage was taken of the dry weather to extract a block of coal which was situated on the crop where the average thickness of cover is about ten feet in the upper seam mines. This was successfully done with hardly any loss of coal during the process of extraction.
The machinery and boilers were kept in good working order. There was a shortage of water for the use of the boilers and washerv, but no stoppages took place on this account
The mid-month tides caused much damage to the wharf, which has sunk slightly in two places. The bank is also showing signs of further subsidence going to take place fairly soon.
A large quantity of rubbish was dumped on the swamp and the new road, and the surface labourers were employed clearing jungle and cleaning up land for padi crops.
Planting.The Malays have completed the planting up of their crops of rice substitutes, and a large tract of land situated on the Lepong side of the hill has been allotted to them again for padi farming.
The Colliery farming lands were extended and the crops are doing fairly well despite the hot weather; the months rainfall was 5 56 inches.
The Ranger guard returned co headquarters early in the month.
The Colliery employees and their dependants were registered as follows, and supplied with rice at the Government controlled rates.
The sympathy of Government in granting this on
account of abnormal living conditions was explained
to them and appreciated by all the labour force, ft
has already had a good effect, as those who had
applied for their discharge on account of their
applications for an increase of pay being refused,
changed then minds and decided to stay on.
July
W. EVANS, Manager.
SIBU.
The owners of the s. l. Hung Line obtained the
services of n Japanese diver from Singapore, but his
efforts m salving the launch up to the end of the
month have not as yet been successful.
Rice cards were issued to everybody in the Lower
Rejang. The work in this office has been particularly heavy as there have been a great number of
people to register and the staff at present only
consists of one clerk with the occasional help of
another when his other duties do not need him.
About 10.900 persons have been registered in
Sibu alone, which does not include Binatang,
Sarikei. Rejang or Kanowit The towkays and
natives are doing their best to help the Government
in keeping to the regulation ration and so far there
have been no causes for complaint.
The case Abang Seman vs: Abang Sip and Abang
Arip for incendiarism at Binatang was concluded.
There was not sufficient evidence to convict them on
the criminal charge. There were no other cases of
importance brought before the Court.
The Honble. the Resident Mr. J. Baring-Gould
visited Daro and Rejang from the 7th to 11th. He
was unable to get to Matu owing to there being no
water on the bar at Matu.
Mr. G. M. Gifford returned here by the s. 1. Lucile
on the 12th. This launch is to be stationed here in
the place of the s. 1. La Follette, which had orders to
proceed to Baram. She sailed for that place on
the 14th.
It was impossible to transmit messages by wire-
less towards the latter end of the month owing to a
breakage m the alternator. The broken part has
been sent to Kuching.	The Honble. and Mrs. Baring-Gould went to
Kuching by the s I. Lucile returning here in the
s.s. Alice Lorraine on the I8ch.
Peace celebrations were held here on the 21st
and 22ml on which days the offices were closed.
An attempt was made to tuba the main river from
below Kanowit, but owing to a heavy fresh this was
not a success. Fireworks were let off one night.
236
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1919.
OH the 30th the Honble. and Mrs. Baring-Gould
and child, Mr. G M. Gifford and myself accompanied
by about one hundred Dyaks from Kapit and Sibu
left to take part in the peace celebrations in Kuching.
Mr. Haldane of the Borneo Company arrived here
in connection with buying gutta leaves at Binatang
and Sarikei.
Mi. Coutts who had been here for some time in
connection with work for the British Malaysian
Manufacturing Company returned to Singapore on
the 8th.
The s. s Rajah of Sarawak made two trips,
s.s. Sarawak one, s.s. Batavia one and the s.s. Flevo
cleared once during the month.
The. trade returns are;
Imports. Exports.
$ 145,258	$ 127,138
Brought forward 1.249,436	1,580,711
$4,394,694	$1,687,849
1918 ...	516,459	601,677
H. D. APLIN,
Resident 2nd Class.
(HA.
July.
The high price realized from raw sago this year is
proving a great boon to the district, and will certainly
bear fruit in reviving the sago industry in this river.
Over ninety new sago gardens have been opened up
lately, and old ones are now being properly cared for.
Twice within the month the flag halyards on the
signalling staff at the quala have been stolen and in
each case this was a new rope. I have searched
everywhere from Igan to Penat for traces of this,
but without success. A theft of this sort has never
happened before, and I believe the light-house
keeper must be concerned in it, and am further
investigating.
Something went wrong with the telephone box at
Dalat on the 9th, and that together with a few breaks
along the line, prevented communication with Sibu ,
until the 14th.
S. S. Alice Lorraine arrived on the 18th and I left on her the following day for Kuching accompanied
by Mrs. Kortright mid children.
Kim Nguan, the dresser from Murali, arrived here
on the 23rd to vaccinate in the various kampongs in this river: he started work on the following day and vaccinated two hundred and eighty-one persons
altogether.
The Resident of Mukah and Oya passed through
Oya on the 25th on his return from Sibu.
Twenty-one schooners entered the river during the month and seventeen have cleared.
Four hundred and twenty-one coyans of sago wen- exported this month, as compared with one hundred and forty-nine in the same month last year, also four hundred and fifty piculs of engkabang, and one hundred and seventy piculs of jelutong.
HENRY H. KORTRIGHT, Resident 2nd Class. MUKAH
July.
The drought, which had lasted since the 9th June
was interrupted on the evening of the . 3rd by a
heavy storm from the south-east, which brought
about an hours rain and cooled the air considerably.
Rain continued to fail daily up to the middle of the
month when another hot spell set in.
S. S. Alice Lorraine arrived off the mouth on the 11th with a consignment of five hundred bags of rice from the Food Control Officer. By dint of hard work on the part of the entire Government staff this consignment was unloaded and stored by the
evening. Further consignments have since been
received by schooner at intervals.
Vaccination has been carried on in the up-river
kampongs, and the dresser has also visited Oya and
Dalat during the month. The Milanoes living in
the kampongs on the Mukah river do not as yet
appear to realise the value of vaccination for their
children.
The sum of $4,000 was remitted to Balingian to
pay for rice taken over from Chinese there. The
sum of $500 was remitted to Oya.
A prisoner, who has given a considerable amount
of trouble both here and in Kuching, escaped on the
15ch and was recaptured at Balingian on the 21st by
some natives living at the mouth of the river.
was at Dalat and Oya on the 24th nod 25th
returning to Mukah by barong.
Datu Udin, who had been sent to Miri and Sibuti
to try and purchase seed padi for Government, re-
turned on the 27th instant.
S. L. Lucile was expected here on the 29th, as
she left Sibu that morning, but did not arrive until
the following morning, having been held up in the
Igan with leaky tubes. On arrival another tube was
found to be leaking, so fires were drawn. I left by
her for Kuching on the 31st of the month.
The sago trade has done well during the month,
and prices remained high. In spite of the low water
in the side streams the out-put is well up to the
average. A lower out-put might have been expected
on account of the drought and also seeing that numbers of sago workers have been busy planting.
The principal exports for Mukah and Balingian
are as below :
1919.	1918.
Raw Sago	168	koyan	236	koyans
Jelutong	3,870	piculs	2,267	piculs
Engkabang	463	,.
Kayu Laka	80	,,
H. L. OWEN,
Resident 2nd Class.
BROOKETON COLLIERY.
July. The gross nut-put of coal for the month was 1,70.8
tons, 481 tons were consumed by our boilers and
the balance of 1,224 tons was sent to wharf. In
addition to the above, 153 tons of riddlings was
returned from stock at wharf, making a total boiler
consumption of 637 tons.
We shipped to Labuan 525 tons and sold locally
121.5 tons.
The stock at wharf at end of month amounted to
3,437 tons.
Good progress was made in the main deep of the
North Drive Mine. No. 7. level came to the end of
the seam on the south side and we are now driving
this level through the intervening strata to the 30
feet seam.
One of the out-crop workings was closed down
temporarily owing to fire.
Everything went smoothly in the mechanical department and the usual work of cleaning boilers,
etc., was done at the beginning of the month.
The work of repairing the office wharf at Labuan
was continued throughout the month.
The s.l. L'Aubaine's boiler was cleaned and one
of the lighters beached for repairs.
Mr. Harris went over to Labuan on the 14th to
inspect the locomotive, about which I approached
His Highness when at Brooketon. Mr. Harris
reported that the. locomotive, although not in good
condition would suit us as a standby.
The rainfall for the mouth was 13'56 inches,
J. O. MADDOCKS,
Manager.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1919.
237
The Sarawak Gazette.
RATES OF ADVERTISEMENTS IN THE SARAWAK GAZETTE"
Payable in advance.
Quartier of a column and under
First insertion .	... $1.00
Second and third insertion each ... 0.50
Subsequent do	do	0.25
'Hull Column and under
Firm insertion ...	...	2.00
Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
Subsequent do	do	. 0.50
A Column and under
First insertion each	...	... 4.00
Second and third insertion each	... 2.00	Subsequent do	do	... 1.00
'Special arrangements maybe made for standing advertisements.
All communications intended for insertion in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed
to the Editor at the Government Printing Office, Kuching. They should be clearly written and should reach the Office at least two days before the publication of each issue.
Letters and other contributions must be authenticated by writers name sent privately to the Editor.
We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not inserting them.
Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early
intelligence of all matters of general interest
in their respective neighbourhoods.
NOTICE.
ASTANA FARM.
THE Manager of Astana Harm begs to
inform the Public that he is unable to
attend to Orders for milk after Office hours. NOTICE.
?
Gazette subscriptions and Printing
Office Bills.
FOB the convenience of residents at Out-
stations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums but only the l, 2 and 3 cent
values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that. Money Orders be sent if possible.
J. C. SWAYNE,
Manager, Govt. Printing Office.
"GLORIA INCANDESCENT
LANTERNS.
800 Candie Power at Brilliant Light at a cost that is far cheaper than any other known method of producing artificial light.
Suitable for Indoor or Outdoor Illumination.
Will Burn Kerosene or Benzine
With Equal Facility.
Nothing to. wear out. break or get out of
order.
Made of heavy gauge brass, nickel plated, fitted with a reinforced mica chimney.
Price $20(Twenty Dollars) each.,
Complete with all fittings and one
spare Generator.
Spare Mantles $4.80 per dozen. Spare Generators 72 cents each.
Obtainable from
VANSCOLINA & COMPANY.
Sole Agents.
LABUAN, S. S.
NOTICE.
NOTICE is hereby given that the partnership here-tofore existing between, LIM OH LIEW, LIM OH PHIO, LIM THIAN SANG, LIM THIAN LAI, LIM THIAN HO, LIM THIAN KHAY, LIM OH CHAI, LIM THIAN HAI, LIM THIAN LIANG and LIM THIAN TECK, carrying on business, at No. 88 Main Bazaar. Kuching, under the style or firm of ENG WHATT has been dissolved by mutual con sent on the 26th July 1919 and the aforesaid LIM THIAN LIANG and LIM THIAN TECK retire from the partnership and have no further interest in the firm nor will be responsible as from the above date for any debts incurred by the said business.
An agreement to the above effect has duly been registered in the Supreme Court. Kuching, and the under signed, LIM OH LIEW, LIM OH PHIO, LIM THIAN SANG. LIM THIAN LAI, LIM THIAN HO, LIM THIAN KHAY. LIM On CHAI and LIM THIAN HAI are now sole proprietors of Chop ENG WHATT.
(Sgd.) LIM OH LIEW
,. LIM OH PHIO
.. LIM THIAN SANG
LIM THIAN LAI
., LIM THIAN HO (Sgd.) LIM TH IAN LIANG LIM THIAN KHAY LIM THIAN TECK LIM OH CHAI	Retired Partners.
., LIM THIAN HAI
Sole Proprietors.
Kuching, 11th August, 1919.
238	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1919.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1919. 239
Kuching, Coasting Trade Returns for the month of July, 1919.
IMPORTS.
F. G. DAY
Registrar of Trade.
Rainfall, July,
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
ALMANA.
SEPTEMBER, 1919.
ARRIVALS.
PER ", s. Kuching: 21st August- From SingaporeFr. A. Haidegger, Messrs. Holl, C. Kee Ong, Ng Fai Nam, N. SZE Thong and 1 Chinese lady.
PER s. s. Sarawak:- 24th August-From SadongMr. E. H. Haldane.
PER S. S. Rajah of Sarawak:29th AugustFrom Singapore -Mr. and Mis. Philpott, Mrs. L. Miang Yang, Mr. G. Teng Chew and Lim Yit Pho.
DEPARTURES
PER H - Rajah of Sarawak: -19th AugustFor Singapore -Mr. I. Shelton, Revd. A. G. Gamble, Mrs Greene, Mr. and Mrs. Skinner and child. Hon. A. B. and Mrs. Ward and 2 children, Mr. and Mrs Graham-White and 2 children, Mr. Y. Takanobu, Mr and Mrs. Owen and 2 children and Mr. P. E. Cox and child.
PER S.S. Sarawak- 25th August- For SibuMiss Chap-
man and Mrs Zinn.
PER S. S. Kuching26th August -For Singapore Messrs. S. Kia Hok, K. Ah Ee. K. Seiw Kim, Mrs. C. Hong Szo, Miss M. Chan, Miss C H. Yew, Mrs. C. M. Lee, Mrs S. Hoi Jeo. Messrs. T. Joon Teck, Ng Fai Nam, Mr. and Mrs. O. Siaw Sian and Mr. L Shin Fong.
240	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1919.
SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
Departures.
SYN BIN LEONG & CO.,
22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS.
Beer, Wine, Spirit & General Store Dealers.
:(o):	SOLE AGENTS FOR :
FRASER & NEAVES AERATED WATERS
(The Best throughout the East.)
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic
Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at
$1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 catties of dry rubber.
ASAHI BEER.
ACETIC ACID.
: (o):	Fresh supplies of Stores are received
regularly.
PRICES MODERATE.
Free delivery to customers in Kuching.
Free packing & shipping for Outstation Orders.
F. G. DAY.
Registrar of Trade.
NOTICE.
SALE BY AUCTION
of all unredeemed pledges from YEK YEUN & Co.. Pawn Farmers. No. 8. Sibu Bazaar Sibu, will be held on the 15th September 1919 at 10 a.m. and quarterly from that date until further notice.
Lists of all unredeemed pledges are on view at the Farmers premises.
LAW JEE THAI,
Authorised Auctioneers.
NOTICE.
AUCTION SALE
of unredeemed pledges from the Pawn Broking Farm YEW CHEE & Co., Chop Wo SANG at No. 18, China Street on Saturdays of the following dates :20th September 1919; 18th October 1919; 15th November 1919 and 20th December 1919 at 9 a. m.
List of nil such unredeemed pledges is on view at the Pawn Farmers premises.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO.,
Authorised Auctioneers.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 1, 1919. 241
THE SARAWAK STUDIO
(REPRESENTATIVES OF MESSRS, KODAK LIMITED.)
THE BEST IN KUCHING
WHERE GOOD PORTRAITS CAN BE TAKEN AND VIEWS OF THE
NEIGHBOURHOOD PROCURED.
PHOTOS FOR PASSPORTS
AT SHORT NOTICE.
KODAKS, KODAK FILMS, PLATES, PAPERS, CHEMICALS
PHOTO PASTE AND ALL PHOTOGRAPHIC MATERIALS
SUPPLIED AT SINGAPORE CATALOGUE PRICES.
AMATEURS FILMS & PLATES DEVELOPED, PRINTED &
ENLARGED AT REASONABLE CHARGES.
Free instructions given to Amateurs with pleasure.
21. COURT HOUSE ROAD.
C. M. LEE,
Manager.
242 THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER I, 1919.
PURE FOOD MEANS GOOD HEALTH
ALEXANDRIA CANNED MEATS
Every Tin Guaranteed under the New South Wales Pure Food Act. and packed under the constant and vigilant supervision of a Government Inspector.
ASK FOR ALEXANDRIA
Roast Beef
Corned Beef
Ox Cheek
Ox Tongues
Luncheon Tongues
Sheep Tongues
Extract of Beef
Roast Mutton Corned Mutton Spiced Mutton Mutton Chops Assorted Meats Minced Scollops Assorted Soups
Beef Sausage
Pork Sausage
Frankfurt Sausage
Beef Dripping
Pork and Beans
Irish Stew
Ox Tail Soup
As supplied in huge quantities to the Imperial and Indian
Governments for use by both the Army and Navy.
Sold by all Stores.
CHARLES BOWEN & CO.,
2 Castlereagh Street. SYDNEY, N.S.W.
ALEXANDRIA MEAT WORKS.
Distributors for the East:
Seremban General Agency, Ltd.
(Incorporated in F. M. S)
SINGAPORE .
Sub: Agents- BAN JUI LONG,
14 Carpenter Street,
KUCHING, SARAWAK.
and BAN JUI GUAN.
19411
MIRI, SARAWAK
KUCHING:Printed and Published by GHIN HENG SOON, Government Printer, at the Government Printing Office Barrack Read.
