
VOL. XLIX.
No. 773.
Sarawak Gazette.
Price KUCHING, WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1919. 10 cents
CONTENTS.
The Sarawak Gazette.
Marriage:-Day
Notes
The Rajah Charles Brooke Memorial Fund
War on the Weevil ...
Sweet Potatoes ...
The Rice Situation ...
Prize giving at St. Joseph's School
Sarawaking
The Postmarks of Sarawak
The Cost of laving
Correspondence
Bowls
Monthly Reports:Upper Sarawak
Sadong
Oya Miri
Brooketon Colliery
Kuching Shipping
Rainfall ...
Almanac ...
Passengers
Meteorological Returns
... 187
... 187
... 189
... 189
... 189
... 189
... 190
... 190
... 190
... 192
... 192
... 192
... 192
... 193
... 194
... 195
... 196
198, 200
... 198
... 198
... 200
WEDNESDAY, JULY 16, 1919.
AT the Cathedral of the Good Shepherd. Singapore, June , 24th. 1919, FREDERIC GEORGE DAY to MARY JOSEPHINE : OGAWA.
The Sarawak Gazette
NOTES.
(July.)
His Highness the Tuan Muda and Mr.
G. M. Gifford arrived from the North on the
7th by p. s. Adeh.
His Highness has returned from a trip
across Sarawak. Accompanied by Mr. Gifford
he left Kapit and went by boat as far as
practicable by the ulu Belaga. From there
the party walked across to the Tinjar where
they were met by Mr. C. D. Adams,
who escorted them to Baram. Owing to the
discomfort caused by jungle sores the original
intention of walking to the Limbang was
abandoned.
His Highness left for Singapore on the 13th
and will probably return before the end of the
month.
S. S. Rajah of Sarawak arrived from Singa-
pore on July 1st, leaving the next day for
Sibu. Passenger Mr. E. H. Haldane.
S. S. Kuching left for Singapore on July
2nd with passengers Capt. G. Galien, Mr. and
Mrs. William, Mr. and Mrs. Hee Khye, Mr.
and Mrs. Ang Cheng Thong and Mr. J.
Shelton.
A recent case in the Court of Requests
brought to light a novel industry in Kuching.
The plaintiff in the proceedings claimed a sum
of money from a Chinaman for sweepings from
the floor of a barbers shop which, after some
argument, the defendant admitted. During
SUBSCRIPTIONS to the Gazette are as follows
The Sarawak Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
Single copy	...	...	... .10 cents
Subscription for one year	...	... $2.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 2.25
Subscription including postage to all other
Countries. ...	... 2.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 3s. 6d
The Sarawak Government Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
Single copy	...	...	... .05 cents
Subscription for one year	...	... $1.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 1.25
Subscription including postage to all other
Countries. ... 1.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING
Subscription for one year (including postage, abroad) 3s. 6d
All subscriptions are payable in advance and must
commence from the 1st January in each year on
which date they are renewable. All broken periods
will be considered as full.
Subscriptions will not be renewed unless notice
of renewal given.
Changes of Address should be notified to the
Office in writing.
188
THE SAKA WAR GAZETTE, JULY 16, 1919.
the case it came out that human hair is regularly shipped from this country to China where it is sold at about six dollars a pikul as manure. It is, we understand, more especially used for potted plants and fur these it is even preferable to chickens feathers.
THE increased work in the Printing Office, due to exceptional circumstances, is causing some delay in dealing with indents received lately. The Manager would be obliged if orders for printed matter required at once were sent on separate forms marked immediate and limited to small amounts needed for present purposes.
S. S. Rajah of Sarawak left for Sibu on July 2nd with passengers Mr. H. Haldane and Mr. and Mrs. Ong Siow Sian.
MB. H. C. E. Zacharias, the retiring Secretary of the P. A. M., hopes to visit Sarawak this month as a guest of the Bishop of the Diocese.
MB. L. E. Currey, who we understand is to assist in the Church of England school here, is expected to arrived during the course of the month and not, as previously stated, in October.
S. S. Kuching left for Singapore on the 13th with passengers His Highness the Tuan Muda, Mr. Holl, the Rev. Father Haidegger, H. Ah Ee, Hong Kian, and Mdes. S. Teck Ghee and S. Keng Hai.
S. S. Rajah of Sarawak arrived from Sibu on the 13th with the Rev. Father Stotter, Mother Mary and Mr. and Mrs. Ong Siow Sian and left the next day for Singapore.
FOR a second time in the month on the 13th both the Companys big steamers were in Kuching together. S. S. Rajah of Sarawak called in here on her way from Sibu to pickup cargo shut out from the s. s. Kuching.
THE Postmaster-General requests that persons changing their addresses or going on leave and wishing to give instructions with regard to the forwarding of the mail will write him officially and not privately, as in the former case, in his absence, letters of instructions will be opened by the officer in charge of the Post Office, whereas, if privately addressed, such letters will remain unopened until his return.
Drv rubber harvested at S. Tengah amounted to 56,000 lbs. and at Dahan to 13,500 lbs. during the month of June.
S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore on the 10th with passengers Capt. and Mrs. Cunynghame and children, Mr. and Mrs. Griffiths, Mr. and Mrs. Chew Eng Hong, Messrs. F. Laikens, Cheong Peck Tee, Lim Mia Suah, Lim Teng Koon, J. P. Nyuk and Sim Whai Koo.
As no doubt many of our readers have seen Professor Harrison Smiths article, on Sarawak in the National Geographic Magazine we have great pleasure in publishing, in another column, his letter on the subject.
The article gives an interesting account of Professor Smiths experiences in this country and is illustrated, as might be expected, by photographs, excellent in themselves and in their variety.
The map. for which Professor Smith denies all responsibility, is another matter; in any paper it would be a matter for regret, but in a magazine whose professed object is the increase and diffusion of geographic knowledge it calls for both criticism and correction. This map, taken apparently from a thirty year old school atlas, shows nearly the whole of Borneo, about which the Sarawak boundary wanders in pleasing uncertainty. The whole of the state of Brunei is included therein and Labuan disappears entirely.
Should we be asked to limit ourselves to fourteen names to place on the map of Sarawak, the list, we imagine,, would contain Kuching, Lundu, Bau, Sadong, Simanggang, Rejaug, Sibu, Oya, Mukah, Bintulu, Miri, Marudi (or Claudetown), Brooketon and Limbang. The editor in this case mentions the following, Claudetown, Bungai, Bintula (Bintulu), Ba- linean (Balingean), Egan (Igan), Sibu, Kanowit, Fort Nymah, Sariki, Rejaug, Kobong (Kabong), Pembas, Batang and Kuching, but we doubt if even our oldest inhabitant could state with precision the whereabouts of some of these places or even whether they exist at all. Igan is placed twenty miles north of the river from which it takes its name, while Batang is, we suppose, the port of the river Lupar. But perhaps the unkindest cut of all is to find Sibu, printed in the smallest type, in a waterless plain while it position at the head of the Rejang delta is usurped by Sankei.
PROFESSOR Smiths many friends in this country will be glad to hear that he hopes to be in this country next autumn.
A Proclamation issued on the 10th fixes the 2nd and 4th of August as the days set apart for celebrations in honour of Peace and His Highness the Tuan Muda has decided that the official ceremony in recognition of the event shall take place on the 2nd August.
As far as has been arranged at present a parade of Rangers and Police and a number of school-children from the various schools of the town will be held on the Church of England Recreation Ground at 8.30 on the Saturday morning.
His Highness the Tuan Muda will take the salute and the proceedings are anticipated to occupy about an hour.
The special service of Thanksgiving to be held at the Pro-Cathedral will be at 5.30 p.m. on Sunday the 3rd.
Further particulars of other events, it is hoped, will be issued later.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 16, 1919.
189
The Rajah Charles Brooke
Memorial Fund.
Amount already acknowledged ... $34,103.20 The Sarawak & Singapore
S. S. Co.. Ltd. ...	5,000.00
14th July, 1919.	$39,103.20
War on the Weevil.
At the Royal institution Professor H. Maxwell Lefroy delighted the audience with a clear exposition of some of the chief types of destruction of food by insects and of the ways in which entomologists were helping to solve the problems.
The subject has a special interest to Malaya at this time in connection with the storing of reserve stocks of rice, wheat, etc.
A matter which had become very grave during the war, he said, was the destruction of wheat by weevil, the larvae of a number of species of harmless beetles. On account of the lack of transport, immense quantities of wheat had been held up in j Australia When the 1918 crop was coming in, there were already 220,000,000 bushels awaiting shipment. These were found to be undergoing rapid destruction by weevil, and he went to Australia on behalf of the Wheat Commission to study the causes and to suggest remedies.
The investigation divided itself into two questions the cleaning of infected grain, to prevent further damage and to make it fit for use, and the prevention of infection. It was found that the weevil trouble generally started with a defective stack. The weevil wanted wheat and moisture ; though it had wings it never used them. Breeding began in spilled wheat and afterwards the insect found its way into the sacks. Professor Lefroy gave an account of what he found at Enfield, outside Sydney. At one time at this place there were two million bags of wheat, practically in the open and in a damp climate. The bags were piled on railway sleepers and just roofed over with corrugated iron. Grain escaped in various ways and getting on the damp ground provided suitable conditions for the beetles to breed and a ready means of access from a contaminated to a new dump. The natural sagging of the dumps and the depredations of mice made the roof fall in and SO allowed the rain to enter.
Great success attended simple changes. The first step was to arrange the sleepers so that there should be ventilation; then a mixture of naphthalene and earth was put down so that if the wheat were spilled there was no chance of the weevil breeding. Next the roof was put up on poles before any wheat was slacked at all. When the sacks had been put in the sides were closed with cloth. In a letter received from the Wheat Commissioner in Australia it was stated that the system had proved a tremendous success, and that last year's wheat which had been stored was in tiptop condition. This solved the question of the new wheat.
The old wheat presented a different problem. They could get machinery to clean out all the insects except those inside the grain. Electrical treatment was tried. A current of 40,000 volts made the weevils stand on their tails, but failed to destroy them. Chemical treatment was also considered, but could not be employed because it tainted the wheat. Any chemist who could find a suitable chemical would still be welcomed, but in the absence of this they had to try other measures.
Eventually they resorted to beat. Grain could be subjected to a temperature of 158 deg. Fahrenheit without suffering injury, and they found that a temperature of 145 deg. applied for three minutes killed anything. One machine of the type now being used could destroy the insects and clean 20,000 bushels of wheat a day. They got a bucketful of weevils in two minutes. Up to the present no use for the insects had been found, but he thought their fat might be use for soap-making. In a letter just received from Australia it was stated that the system was a brilliant success, and that criticism had been completely silenced.(P. M. G.)
Sweet Potatoes.
The following useful hints are taken from the British North Borneo Herald and may be found of value to prospective growers.
1. Good strong cuttings from plants six weeks old should be selected.
2. Cuttings to be planted out the same afternoon that they are collected, preferably before or after heavy rain.
3. Never allow cuttings to be taken from your plants as this will reduce your crop or destroy it altogether. If necessary to take cuttings to plant a new area this should be done sparingly.
4. The mounds through time, heat and rain, will sink, while weeding they can be re-stacked with earth with advantage. Manure if necessary should be given at this stage.
5. Do not plant under shade. The yield, if any, will be small.
6. See that not too much green vegetation is buried in the centre of the moundsa small amount, however, is beneficial.
7. Standing water or flood is disastrous to the crop. Sweet potatoes will rot after a flood of more than one day. Drainage is essential.
8. When the crop is reaped never wash the potatoes in water except immediately before use. Water has a deteriorating effect.
9. Sweet potatoes do not last long unless sliced and dried. After 10 days from being gathered they gradually begin to rot. The peeled or damaged tubers to be consumed first as they rot earlier and may affect .the rest. The crops should be spread out on platforms and not heaped in a corner. Sufficient only for consumption should be dug at at time.
10. Potatoes when left undug for over 4 or 5 months will rot and become worm eaten, so that only an area sufficient for one mouth's consumption should be planted out at a time.
11. About once a fortnight, or oftener in wet weather, the shoots should be shifted from one position to another to prevent the suckers from striking root.
The Rice Situation.
The following figures in view of the present rice rationing will be found of interest to our readers.
The average imports of rice into Sarawak for the years 1917 and 1918 were 20,182 piculs a month. The Straits Government have taken these figures as a basis for rationing Sarawak and have reduced them by 10%. The monthly allowance for the whole of Sarawak is therefore 18,164 piculs. Of this the outstations will probably require 5,000 piculs.
190
THE. SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 16, 1919.
The following are the numbers already registered in Kuching under the Food Control Order.
Men
Women
Children over 12
M. F.
Children under 12
M. F.
Total.
16,831
7,173
2,893 2,745
3,732 3,849
37,223
Altogether 1,366 employers cards have been made out and 5,814 consumers. This means a consumption of over 10,000 piculs a month for Kuching on the present "rations. In addition there are 1,261 Government employees whose rations (including wives and children) amount to about 620 piculs.
Bau, we are informed, requires about 1,000 piculs. The Sungei Tengah Rubber Estate, which employs about 1,000 coolies, has not yet registered.
From these figures it does not seem likely that Sarawak will be able to do with much less rice than the full quantity allowed by the Straits Government, but possibly the high prices may result in a decreased consumption.
Why is a Brooke, with a few dozen Englishmen, able to rule Sarawak, and ensure, in spite of all the difficulties of years of war, a peaceful, happy, and contented population? In a recent article in TRUTH Scrutator as given the answer, though he did not ask the question. It is to be found in the guiding principle of the Brooke regimeSympathy ; real, live sympathy with the population. Scrutator has put it in a nutshell. What has been achieved on a small scale for the hist eighty years in Sarawak might surely be accomplished in the same way by the mighty power of British rule in India.
Rudyard Kipling in his story The man who would be King uses the same word which must have puzzled many of his readers who were not acquainted with the history of this country. Incidentally, by spelling it sarawhack, he makes no mystery as to where he would place the accent.
The Postmarks of Sarawak.
Prize giving at St. Josephs School.
On TuesdayJuly 8ththere was the annual distribution of prizes at St. Josephs School.
His Highness the Tuan Muda arrived at 4.30p.m. and kindly gave them away.
After a hearty greeting on his arrival, a short address was read by one of the school boys. Then Father Haidegger gave a brief account of the school and the years work. There were, he said, over 140 boys on the register, more than half of these being boarders. Five-sixths of the total presented themselves for the examination and about 80% passed. The conduct of the boys during the year had been satisfactory. The distribution of prizes then took place, after which His Highness spoke a few words of hearty encouragement to the boys.
The following are the prize winners:
Standard VII.Lim Tam Bee Standard III.Matthew Chong
VI.Shee Him	James Khoo
Thomas Ogawa	..	II_Alfred
V.Choon Joon	Ah Khog
Valentine Chong	.,	].Heng Yeo Khung
IV.G. Willie	James Chung
Sim Joo Hin	Infants.Andrew Bujang
Foo Koo Maru
There were three special prizes for Christian Doctrine and Good Conduct, these were won by Shock Fah, Choon Joon, and Johnnie.
Sarawaking.
The following extract from Truth is chiefly of interest in reintroducing the verb to Sarawak .
The late Rajahs views on the Government of the Soudan and other articles dealing with the matter were reprinted at this office as a pamphlet in 1884.
Many years ago, when Gordon had been sent to his ill-fated task on the Nile, the late W. T. Stead, after an interview with the veteran Rajah of Sarawak, headed an article in the Pall Mall Gazette Sarawak the Sudan. But to Sarawak a place it is first of all necessary to find the Rajah, and no Rajah was found for Mr. Steads scheme.
The maddest lunatic who ever walked this planet would hardly propose a scheme to Sarawak India. But knowing, as 1 do know, the natives of that little- known and model State, Sarawak, I venture to offer the suggestion that if the Sarawak note were introduced into the administration of India it would produce a pleasant harmony where there has lately been a discordant jazz of riot and insurrection.
Collecting is an unlimited amusement and from correspondence which sometimes reaches this office we learn that the gathering together of the postmarks of various countries is one of the refinements of philately. To those who are addicted to this hobby the following facts and figures, supplied by the courtesy of the various post-masters of the country, may be of assistance, whereby anyone can adduce h s chance of obtaining any desired cancellation by a simple mathematical calculation.
There have been we find thirty-one different post offices at one time in this country, but it is only fair to warn the collector that two of them have ceased to exist and of the others some names are entirely illegible, owing to the vigour with which postal clerks have wielded their stamps on unyielding bilian counters.
Balingean office is said to have been opened in 1910. No record of stamps sold has been kept. The mail as a rule is sent overland to Mukah or in the fine monsoon to Kuching direct by schooner. Stamps of low denominations are sold at the Court House.
Baram, at one time the head station of what are now the Fourth and Fifth Divisions, has lost much of its postal importance due to the opening of Miri. The first official letter we have seen is addressed Claude Town, Baram and bears the date 1882. Stamps to the value of $69.63 were sold in 1918.
Bau is an offshoot of the older gold-working Paku and the office was probably opened in 1899. All mails are carried free by the Borneo Companys launches who in return have the exceptional privilege of sending their mail direct to Kuching and not through the local post office. Stamps sold in 1918 were valued at $145. The cancellation is nearly illegible.
Betong (Saribas) dispatched 477 paid letters during 1918 and sold $13.46 worth of stamps. The postmark is entirely unreadable, it being impossible to make out a single letter. This may point to the age of the station, but we have no information on the point.
Binatang is one of the new Government stations on the Rejang for the opening of which we can give the definite date of 5th May 1916. A thriving trade seems to be done there as $62.85 worth of stamps were sold in 1918.
Bintulu is one of the older established stations, communicating with the outside world by a coasting steamer which drops a mail twice a month at Kidurong Point, a distance of some six miles from the Government station. In 1918 $56.63 worth of stamps were sold.
Brooketon was at one time managed postally by the Sarawak Government, but no doubt when Brunei first issued her own stamps in 1906 the
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 16, 1919.
191
chiefly famous for its export of birds'-nests. These
apparently are not sent by post as only two parcels
were despatched there in 1918. $17.16 worth of
stamps were sold in the same year.
Oya is also one of the older stations whose
importance is giving way to a more thriving town
up-river. It suffers from the same disabilities aa
Mukah with which place it is in telephonic com-
munication as well as with Sibu. Stamps sold there
in 1918 were $35.55.
Paku as a post office has ceased to exist though
a Government police station is still maintained.
The last postmark we remember to have seen bears
the date 1905.
Pusa is a small sub-station in the Second Division
about which we have no particulars.
Rejang at the mouth of the river of that name at
certain times is in direct communication with
Singapore and also Hong Kong, to where timber is
shipped in large quantities. At present, owing to
lack of shipping, this export has ceased. No details
of stamps sold are available.
Sadong is the coaling centre of Sarawak, com-
municating directly with Kuching and less regularly
with Singapore. Stamps to the value of $95.15-
were sold in 1918.
Sarikei is the last opened of the Sarawak post offices, being first used early in this year. As the
regular makers of postmarks appear to have been
employed on munition work the station so far has
had to content itself with a rubber stamp with the
date filled in by hand.
Sibu is now the head-quarters of the Third Divi-
sion and is in direct communication with Singapore
by the Sarawak Steamship Company and also a
Chinese line. The number of stamps sold in 1918
amounted to $1,023.45.
Sibuti is another of the Miri sub-stations and did
business in 1918 amounting to $5.45.
Simanggang is the head-quarters of the Second
Division and is less fortunately situated than any.
Communication with Kuching is maintained by
sailing-boats and is often interrupted by bail
weather. We are assured by the postmaster
that though he does not know at what time
the office was opened, it is never shut, as mails
arrive at all hours of the day and night. Stamps
sold in 1918 amounted to $90.54.
Simatan is a sub-station to Lundu where apparently all postal business is carried through. It is in
the unique position of having sold no stamps at all
in 1918.
Tatau is one of the sub-stations of Bintulu, and
though only twenty-six letters were despatched
during 1918, stamps to the value of $8.52 were sold, so-
it is possibly the home of some unknown philatelist.
Trusan, the last office on our list is stated to
have been opened on August 11, 1888 and the mails
are, we believe, despatched either overland to Lawas
or by boat to Limbang. Stamps to the value of
$19.79 were sold in 1918.
In conclusion we have to tender our heartiest
thanks to the Postmaster General and the post-
masters through the country for their kindness in
replying to our queries and to apologize for the in-
adequacy of this article which is partly flue to the
fact that notes based on some of their facts were
lost while travelling.
L. B. R.
office was taken over by the proper authorities.
Local Brunei stamps were issued in 1898, but, we
believe, were never sold at Brooketon.
Daro, in the Rejang Delta, opened a post office
in October 1911. During 1918 483 0. H. H. 8.
letters, 79 paid and 4 unpaid were despatched. The
number of stamps sold is not stated.
Kalaka is one of the older stations, but no figures
are obtainable. Not many stamps, we imagine, are
sold there.
Kanowit dates back a very long time, and was,
before the growing importance of Sibu, the head*
quarters of the Rejang river. Its importance how-
ever is more military than commercial and the chief
traders maintain their shops at the latter place.
Stamps sold in 1918 were $35.76.
Kapit is some sixty miles above Kanowit and was
opened at a much later date, we believe in the early
nineties; but we have no details of the business
done there.
Kuching, the capital of Sarawak, is the only town
with a fully equipped General Post Office where all
manner of postal business can be contracted. It
was by an Order in Council, dated January 12,
1869 and signed by the then Secretary to the Coun-
cil, Mr. W. M. Crocker, that the office was brought
into being from March 1st, 1869 The original can-
celling was done by writing S. P. O., Sarawak and the
date and also by two wooden stamps, one marked
Sarawak in block capitals and the other consisting
of thin parallel lines. These latter, we understand,
have been destroyed some time ago. A later stamp
is of the ordinary type with the word Sarawak
round the edge of the circle and the date; a special
stamp was reserved for registered letters with the
words "Sarawak Post Office, Registered Letter
and the date in three separate lines. A stamp for
local use consists of the word Kuching with the date. Stamps sold in 1918 amounted to $5,812.85. Limbang is the chief station in the Fifth Division and has direct communication both with Kuching
and Labuan. The annexation of this river in March
1890 is part of the history of Sarawak.
Lingga is another station dating back many years,
but has lost much of its old importance. Stamps
sold there in 1918 amounted to $10.92.
Lundu is, after Kuching, the oldest station in
Sarawak from which it is distant only half a day by
steamer. We have no record of the business done
there.
Matu is situated on a small isolated river in the
Rejang Delta. No particulars are to be had about
the Post Office. We assume there is some defect in the cancelling stamp as in the instance before us the figures showing the year are filled in by hand.
Miri, as the place where the oil comes from, has in
late years become of some importance. Direct com-
munication is held with Singapore and Kuching and
mails are sent direct there from London. The
office was opened in January 1911 and stamps
amounting to $949.89 were sold in 1911.
Mukah at onetime the head-quarters of the Third
Division, communicates direct with Kuching by
schooner some seven mouths in the year during the fine monsoon. At other times the mail is sent over-
land to Oya from where it is paddled to Sibu and
thence to Kuching. It is no uncommon occurrence,
when the bridges are carried away by flood, for the
mail-carriers to have to swim five rivers, often to the
detriment of their burdens.
Niah is a sub-station in the Miri district and is 192
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 16, 1919.
The Cost of Living.
A correspondent kindly forwards us the following figures which tend to prove that the cost of
CORRESPONDENCE.
The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of correspondents.
BOSTON, MASS,
24th April, 1919.
DEAR SIR,
I am sending you a copy of the National Geographic Magazine with what remains of an article of mine on Sarawak after the Editor bad arranged it to suit the taste of his readers. I wrote with a great deal of care a short historical sketch for the first part of the article; you can see what the Editor has left of it and he has put it at the end. Of course, this magazine is only a popular publication, but nevertheless it is a pity not to have had a more accurate map, which, by the way, was inserted not only without consulting me, but even without my knowing it was to be in. If the Editor bad consented to my expressed desire to spend a few days in Washington to assist in the preparation of the article and pictures for the press, this map would not have appeared and the first edition of the magazine would not have had the picture on page 166 labelled The native section of Kuching, Sarawak. When I received the first copy of the magazine, while I was in Florida, I telegraphed in distress to the Editor that all the drinks in Sarawak wouldn't enable me to square myself with my friends out there if that edition of the magazine was sent to them. The correct title of the picture is given in the magazine I am sending you, but it was too late to put in the picture of Kuching, which is a pity for it is a good picture.
I am writing you so that you may know that I am, at least, not wholly responsible for all the errors.
Very sincerely yours,
HARRISON W. SMITH.
[The picture to which Professor Smith refers is a view of the town of Brunei. ED. Sar. Gaz.]
DEAR SIR,
In your issue of June 2nd, Melrose, under the title Miri Notes makes a statement to the effect that he never saw the one lady performer in the
last concert, look sweeter than she did in her
widow's weeds.
That may possibly be the private opinion of your
mysterious Miri correspondent.
However, in spite of the fact that chivalry is decidedly unfashionable nowadays, a little forethought
should have led Melrose to the knowledge, that the
publication of this, his possibly private opinion, in
the columns of your paper cannot but cause a good
deal of embarrassment to the lady in question.
It is my personal opinion that Melrose might with
advantage take up a correspondence course in tact
and savoir faire if he has no opportunities in Miri to
acquire these delicate, and for a journalist, most
important attributes.
i Such a course would no doubt teach him to have
a little consideration for other peoples feelings.
I remain, dear Sir,
Faithfully yours,
THE LADY IN QUESTION.
Bowls.
The usual monthly Bowling Handicap took place
at the Sarawak Club on the 1st July and resulted
as follows:
MONTHLY REPORTS.
UPPER SARAWAK.
BAU AND PAKU.
June.
Court.As the pepper crop is still being picked a number of thefts have been reported from outlying gardens. Ng Pok, a Chinaman, caught red-handed stealing pepper at midnight, was sentenced to a years imprisonment. Another, Voon Poh, who was under advances, was convicted of selling his pepper to others ; the receiver was also sentenced. Lee Chook, who had recently taken over his brothers garden, had two bags of pepper stolen, which he vainly tried to trace for several days; the loss so preyed upon bis mind that he committed suicide by drinking tuba. A verdict to this effect was brought in by the jury. Without the co-operation of the planters it is impossible to check this form of theft. No other cases call for comment,
P. W. D.The prisoners have finished their work on the BuanBau road, which now presents a smooth surface suitable for any form of light traffic.
In the course of the mouth the main cross drain in the bazaar, which had silted up, was opened and cleaned. Six large bilian receptacles for refuse were erected at convenient intervals and it is hoped by their means to keep the bazaar in good order.
All roads under contracted labour were examined and found to be in good condition, with the exception of that between Kranji and Batu Kitang. Here the man in charge was dismissed and the whole road put under one contractor, by name Puteh.
One prisoner, who was to be sent to Kuching, escaped at the end of the month, but his early capture is expected.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. JULY 16, 1919.
193
Food Control.Information was received here on the 5th that a system of rationing was to be put in force in this district.
On the following Sunday I went to Kuching to make certain enquiries from the Officer Controlling Food and returned here on the 10th.
The following table will show the numbers already registered.
338 consumers cards have been issued and 58 to employers'. Twenty licenses to deal in rice have been signed.
General.I visited Dahan and Peak on the 21st 23rd and noticed the large tracts of land being planted up with rice substitutes for the Upper Sarawak Rubber Go., and the Cyaniding Works. The iron suspension bridge beyond Poak is still in existence, but the rottenness of the planking makes the walk across a matter of some danger.
An accident occurred at Tai Pant on the 20th when a coolie, named Liew Thong, was killed by a stone falling on him during blasting operations. He had ample warning that blasting was in progress, but instead of retiring to a safe distance turned to shelter behind a wagon where he received the injuries that resulted in his death.
The rainfall for the month amounted to 758 inches.
J. C. SWAYNE,
Resident 2nd Class.
SADONG.
June.
General.On the 4th of the month, acting on telegraphic news received from the Manager, I accompanied the Honble. the Resident back to Simunjan together with forty-two N. C. O.s and constables of the Kuching police, to investigate into an alleged riot at the Government Collieries there. On arrival we found that things had quieted down for the time being, but Mr, Evans reported that there had been considerable trouble when he bad tried to insist on the coolies planting rice substitutes. A number of men had made demonstrations outside the mine offices and had, amongst other things, demanded higher pay, threatening to use force unless their demands were acceded to.
On the next day I rode out to the Colliery accompanied by a force of thirty-eight armed police and made fifty-three arrests, none of the men showing light. The prisoners were put in trucks and sent down to the wharf. Later on in the day they were brought before the Honble. the Resident in Court. Seventeen of them were committed for trial in Kuching and thirty-six were ordered to receive six strokes with the rattan each. The men were then released. The Honble. the Resident left the next day taking the seventeen remaining prisoners with him. A guard was left to do garrison duty in the station. On the 8th the police were relieved by Sarawak Rangers under Sergeant Subing. On the 7th there was a little more trouble and I was obliged to flog one man and put another in irons, since then, however, things have been quiet. There is no doubt that the exhorbitant price of rice was the main cause of the trouble and it was difficult to instil into the
minds of the Chinese that they were being told to plant for their own good. With the removal of the ringleaders I hope that there will be no more disturbances.
On the 7th the s. s. Malacca, Captain Mackay, arrived from Singapore for coal and left the next day with a full cargo.
The Principal Medical Officer arrived on the 21st by s. 1. Lucile and on the next day inspected the hospital and examined suspected cases of leprosy. Only one leper, a Sikh, was found. He was returned to Kuching. The P. M. O. noticed many cases of ankylostomiasis and yaws. A number of sufferers from the latter complaint accompanied the launch back to Kuching to undergo the new treatment by injection.
A Malay lad, named Sip bin Drahman, had a narrow escape from death being drugged into midstream by a small crocodile at Muara Simunjan; here, however, the story becomes confused, but the boy seems to have escaped from the saurian and swum ashore, his injuries were slight. Talip, the notorious crocodile catcher, has again been trying his old dodge of claiming the bigger reward by producing lumps of hair which he asserts were found m the stomachs of the beasts he catches (vide former correspondence) I note that the Honble. Divisional Resident ruled that, unless some person had been taken in the vicinity within a month of the capture of the beast, no extra reward is to be paid. On this occasion Talip did not succeed in his claim.
Koh Siew Boon, having been appointed local agent for the farms, took over on the 30th at midnight.
The 30th being Hari Raya was observed as a general holiday. The usual visits were paid to the Residency in the morning and the Court House was lent for a Malay main in the evening. A salute was fired at 8 am.
Courts.There has been an unusual amount of work in the Courts during the month. Four, out of a gang of eight men, who were under old agreements to work bilian for the Government Collieries, and who had absconded under large advances, were arrested and sentenced to terms of imprisonment. Amongst others imprisoned were Omar, six months for gross contempt of Court; Anis, three months for obtaining goods under false pretences and Mit, three months for theft. I had occasion to fine Tui Rumah Nanggai of Sebangan heavily for irregular practices whilst acting as Tuai Rumah. He granted a divorce to a woman of his house from her husband who happened to be away in the jungle at the time in order that bis own son might become her paramour. The guilty parties were also fined for berangkat.
A number of the principal Chinese traders in the bazaar brought up certain charges against Ah Soon, a local Foochow goldsmith. On investigation it was found that the charges were entirely false and circumstances pointed to bribery of witnesses. It would seem that the charges were actuated by motives of jealousy and on account of Ah Soon's race. I have warned the Chinese, especially a man called Ah Bee who seems to be the ringleader. There were a great number of other cases heard, mostly dealing with Jelutong roads and gutta rian trees. Another large batch of men have been fined for felling the latter.
The agent of the Sarawak Rubber Estates, Ltd. at Sebangan was heavily fined for using the Company's godown as a shop. The British Malaysian Companys man at Muara Bari has also been summonsed for the same offence. It will be necessary to disallow these godowns if the practice continues. The usual number of thefts still take place and one man was held up on the main road and relieved of his possessionswhilst several houses have been burgled.
194
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 16, 1919.
In re Government versus (1) Kim Shin (2)
Nyit Kiow (f) Incest. By orders of the Divi-
sional Resident the charge was withdrawn, but an
enquiry is being held into the female defendants
actions with regard to the burial of her first child.
Food Control.Meetings were held during the
month and it was recommended to apply for an in-
crease in our allowance of rice. Particulars have
been forwarded under separate covers. Report says
that all the Tebekang shops are full of rice and padi.
I understand that the Chinese bought large quantities
of rice from the Dyaks at three gantangs for one
jamoh (a cloth worth about 75 cents). I notice that large tracts of land have been planted with padi and rice substitutes at the Colliery. The Manager
is to be congratulated on the results. The local
Malays have cleared small patches of ground each,
but all efforts to induce them to plant useful things
have failed. They prefer to plant a few pine-apples
mid then letting the grass grow over them again.
P. W. D.The prisoners, who are a bigger gang
than usual, have mostly been engaged in filling up
the new road and digging the ditches. A clearing
was also made for the proposed Government padi
farm.
Eight steamers and eleven schooners entered and
cleared during the month.
Coal shipped to Kuching 1,348 tons
Sibu 181 ,, Singapore 510 ,,
Imports.	Exports.
$46,772	$26,515
J. BEVILLE ARCHER,
Resident 2nd Class.
OYA.
June.
The Honble. J. Baring-Gould, Resident 3rd Division, and Mrs. Baring-Gould arrived from Mukah on the 3rd.
The Honble. the Resident heard appeal Court on the following day. There were four cases, three appeals were dismissed, and in the fourth, which I mentioned in a previous report, the fine and fee were refunded, but an order has been made by which in future any one who buys and marks sago palms standing on a land not belonging to the seller, will incur the same penalty as the seller. This will certainly prove a check to people purchasing sago palms from persons who have no right to them.
The Honble. the Resident and Mrs. Baring-Gould left in s.l. La Follette for Sibu on the 5th.
On the 6th acting on information received from Mr. H. L. Owen that a Mukah man had seen and recognised at Kampong Balau ; a Dyak named Adoh, alias Drahman, alias Bakar who was suspected of being an accomplice in the Muara Tuang murder, I had this man arrested and sent to Kuching and I have since heard from the Acting Supt. of Police that he is the man wanted.
Telephone communication with Sibu was entirely suspended between the 6th and 30th of the month. The line from Dalat to Tanjong Danalam has twice been carefully inspected, but there was no break or obstruction on the line as far as the Igan. This long breakdown has been a great nuisance and has prevented the dispatch of many important wireless messages from the Chinese and others of Mukah and Dalat.
I visited Dalat on the 17th, returning again on the 22nd. While there I met ail the Chinese and arranged with them that in future Government would have the control of all rice shipped to that
station, and would only sell to a few responsible-
traders, who might sell to the public in small quan-
tities only and at a price fixed by Government.
That no credit should be allowed for rice, that none
should be sold by the bandong traders in the various
kampungs, but must only he sold in the bazaar.
The same steps are being taken at Oya.
The 30th was Hari Haya, a large number of
people visited the bungalow during the morning;
m the evening there was dancing on the lawn in front
of the Court House, and later a main in the Court
lasting until nearly midnight.
There seemed to be many more people about this
year than last, and the fine clothes worn by the ma-
jority indicate that there is plenty of money about.
Sixteen schooners entered the river during the
month and thirteen cleared.	The exports are as follows :
1919.	1918.
Raw sago	264 coyans	228	coyans
Engkabang	1,303 piculs
Jelutong	305	555	piculs
Para rubber	12	HENRY H. FORTNIGHT,
Resident 2nd Class.
MIRI.
?
May.
Early in the mouth a meeting of the local native
chiefs was called and the rice situation explained to
them ; they were recommended to get their followers-
to plant rice substitutes as well as padi this year.
Native Officer Bujang came over from Niah on
the 5th and reported all well there ; after attending
to local Native Court affairs he sailed again a few
days later.
There was a good deal of Court work during the-
month, Dullah bin Buyu Rapit was sentenced to a
term of imprisonment for armed trespass and also
fined for committing adultery with Tahir's wife at
Niah. Voo Fook Seng was sentenced to three
months for theft. Thong Ngee was imprisoned for
assaulting and wounding Low Liew. Lee Fuk, a
Company coolie, was punished and sentenced to a
term of imprisonment for refusing to work and
inciting other coolies to strike Wong Teck Seng
was punished for attacking one of the Companys
mandors. Ho Man Fung and eight other coolies
were fined for being in unlawful possession of the
Companys coolie rations. Wong Foo was imprisoned
for lurking trespass in Pujut village by night and
several Sikhs were fined for being drunk and
disorderly.
A lunatic Chinese named Sim Ewe Teck, who
had been sent here for treatment by the Sibuti
Chinese, escaped from hospital on the night of the
13th, his body was found floating in the sea two
days later.
On the 14th another consignment of cold storage
meat from Singapore was destroyed by the orders of
Doctor Cimino; Messrs, the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum
Co., Ltd. have notified their desire to take pro-
ceedings against him.
The Very Revd. Father Dunn and Father Moulder
arrived in the p. s. Adeh on the 19th en route for the
north.	On the 25th I received news by telephone that
His Highness the Tuan Muda had reached Bar.im
with Mr. G. M. Gifford by the overland route from
Kapit, but owing to trouble with the line near
Bakong I was unable to communicate further.
Mr. N. Nisbet arrived from Canada on the 26th to join the staff of the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum. Co., Ltd.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 16, 1919.
195
A case of accidental poisoning took place at the Company's hospital early in the month, the deceased being a Chinese fitter named Ng Hoi, this I reported to Kuching and later received instructions to hold an enquiry. Assisted by Doctor A. R. Andrew and Mr. C. MacAlpine of the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Co., Ltd. 1 began this enquiry on the 28th, but had not concluded it by the end of the month.
During the month the prisoners were employed clearing the ornamental grounds extension, the road to the Wireless Station and on the general up-keep of the station.
The s. a. Haliotis cleared twice and the Nerite once during the month with full cargoes of crude oil and distillate for Soesoe.
The rainfall amounted to 8'37 inches.
The trade returns are as follows:
Imports.	Exports.
Miri	...	$41,152	$138,068
Niah	...	3,667	21,049
Sibuti	...	11,194	6,836
W. F. DE V. SKRINE,
Resident 2nd Class.
BROOKETON COLLIERY.
April.
Our out-put for the month amounted to 2,493 tons; 561 tons were used at the boilers and 1,932 tons were sent to the wharf to be sold. Our sales amounted to 667 tons, sold to Messrs the Straits Steamship Company and the local launches.
The rainfall for the month amounted to 1026 inches.
Everything went quite smoothly during the month, we advanced in our main drift and turned No. 9 level. We finished the dam closing the outbreak of gas and now not a trace is found. We lost one of our shallower workings through spontaneous combustion, we are now driving a new airway for this and will lie able to open it out again when the airway is through. Everything in the mechanical line went quite smoothly during the month. We cleaned one of our large Lancashire boilers and did minor repairs.
At Buang Tawar we advanced with the timbering in the oil level, the oil continues to run at its usual strength.
We did sundry repairs to the walling and the pillars of the coal sheds at the wharf, also some repairs to the wooden structure. The s.s. LAubaine and tongkangs are in good repair and continue to carry coal to Labuan. '1 he patch on LAubaines boiler has not given trouble during the month. The funnel of LAubaine is very thin and holed in many places. This will have to be changed as soon as possible.
There is nothing new to report at the Agency.
All workmen has been acquainted with the seriousness of the rice position and have been urged to plant padi and other foodstuffs. All available land is being taken up and they seem very much in earnest over it. The last crop here was very poor. The health of the coolies is good. No accident happened during the month. There has been a good supply of labour on hand.
THOS. LEWIS,
General Manager.
May.
The gross out-put for the month was 1,930 tons ; 562 tons was consumed by our boilers and the balance 1,368 tons was sent to wharf.
We shipped to Labuan 1,136 tons, and 8 tons were supplied to launches.
The balance of coal in stock at the end of the month was 1,945.5 tons.
The out-put from the North Drive Mine was a little lower than usual, partly owing to No. 5 level having worked to the end of the seam on the south side and partly owing to loss of time by hewers.
There is no drivage to report in the main deep, work having been suspended here until a connection is made between No. 9 level and the return airway.
Two coal hewers were injured owing to a fall of coal in No. 9 level, one slightly, and the other rather seriously.
The usual work of cleaning boilers and overhauling machinery was done at the beginning of the month.
The s.l. L'Aubaines boiler was cleaned and engine overhauled, and one of the lighters which was found to be leaking very badly was beached for repairs.
Mr. Lewis handed over the Agency to me on the 26th and at Brooketon on the 29th.
J. O. MADDOCKS,
Manager.
The Sarawak Gazette.
RATES OF ADVERTISEMENTS IN THE " SARAWAK GAZETTE"
Payable in advance.
Quarter of a column and tinder
First insertion ...	...	... 81.00
Second and third insertion each	... 0.50
Subsequent do	do	... 0.25
Half a Column and under
First insertion ...	...	... 2.00
Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
Subsequent do	do	... 0.50
A Column and under
First insertion each	...	... 4.00
Second and third insertion each	... 2.00
Subsequent do	do	... 100
Special arrangements may be made for standing advertisements.
All communications intended for insertion in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed to the Editor at the Government Printing Office, Kuching. They should be clearly written and should reach the Office at least one day before the publication of each issue-
Letters and other contributions must be authenticated by writers name sent privately to the Editor.
We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not inserting them.
Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early intelligence of all matters of general interest in their respective neighbourhoods.
NOTICE.
ASTANA FARM.
THE Manager of Astana Farm begs to
inform the Public that he is unable to
attend to Orders for milk after Office hours.
196
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 16, 1919.
AOBA & CO.,
HIGH CLASS JAPANESE PHOTOGRAPHIC ARTISTS.
(QUAD F I ED IN TOKYO.)
Will take outdoor photographs at any place and time. Night photographs can also be taken with the latest and safest flash light process. Best attention will be always given to patrons.
No. 32, KHOO HUN YEANG STREET,
KUCHING.
[66 ]
KUCHING SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
AOBA & CO.,
HIGH CLASS JAPANESE PHOTOGRAPHIC ARTISTS.
(QUAD F I ED IN TOKYO.)
Will take outdoor photographs at any place and time. Night photographs can also be taken with the latest and safest flash light process. Best attention will be always given to patrons.
No. 32, KHOO HUN YEANG STREET,
KUCHING.
[66 ]
Departures.
WANTED to purchase a second-hand Empire type-writer. Must be cheap and in good order. Please reply Box A.
C/o. The Editor, Sarawak Gazette.
[2-1]
NOTICE.
?
Cjrti otte MubHcriptloiiM and Prim
Office trill*.
FOR the convenience of residents at Outstations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums but only the 1, 2 and 3 cent values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that Money Orders be sent if possible.
J. C. SWAYNE,
Manager, Govt. Printing Office.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 16, 1919.
197
GLORIA INCANDESCENT
LANTERNS.
300 Candle Power of Brilliant Light at a cost that is far cheaper than any other known method of producing artificial light.
Suitable for Indoor or Outdoor Illumination.
PEACE, PEACE, PEACE.
FIREWORKS
for the forthcoming
PEACE CELEBRATIONS
Will Burn Kerosene or Benzine
With Equal Facility.
1st to 6th August.
No Noise.
No Smoke.
No Odour.
No Grease.
No Wicks to Trim.
No Trouble Whatever!
Nothing to wear out, break or get out of order.
Made of heavy gauge brass, nickel plated, fitted with a reinforced mica chimney.
Price $20. (Twenty Dollars) each.
Complete with all fittings and one spare Generator.
Spare Mantles $4.80 per dozen.
Spare Generators 72 cents each.
Obtainable from
VANSCOLINA & COMPANY,
Sole Agents,
L ABU AN, S. S.
[4-8]
NOTICE.
SALE BY AUCTION
of all unredeemed pledges from YEK YEUN & Co., Pawn Farmers, No. 8, Sibu Bazaar Sibu, will be held on the l-5th September 1919 at 10 a.m. and quarterly from that date until further notice.
Lists of all unredeemed pledges are on view at the Farmers premises.
LAW JEE THAI, Authorised Auctioneers.
I have in stock about 100,000 worth of fireworks of the best European made only, consisting of: Torch-lights (Bengal lights coloured also with Magnesium brilliant and pearl mosaic), one light gives 1000 candle-power lasting 15 minutes, for processions, Cannons-signal (mortars), flying pigeons, day and night bomb-shells in different sizes.
DO NOT WAIT TILL THE LAST
TO SEND IN YOUR
ORDERS
PLEASE SEND IN YOUR ORDERS
IMMEDIATELY
if you want to participate in this
National Event
to
Mr. Y. TAN,
Raffles Chambers,
SINGAPORE ,
who has various assortments to satisfy
EVERYBODY and ANYBODY.
Batavia Fireworks in cases containing full sets of assortments such as a large quantity of assorted rockets and Bengal lights (coloured and magnesium), balloon, golden rain, magnesium star, rosettes-wheels, sun, turning wheels, flower pots, flying pigeon, Roman Caudles, Neptunes whistles, magnesium-fountains, etc. etc., tine display for the use on Rubber Estates or Outstations. These can also be let off in your own compound allowing a space of 20 yards away from the house, attap houses included, these are not dangerous except set pieces, these go off easily themselves.
Prices from 200, $350 & $450, reduced 20% cost price. Full remittance to accompany Orders, and accompanied by an import permit from the C. P. O. at your city. Outstation orders plus $25 cost of transport by railway.
Do Not Delay.
198
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 16, 1919.
SYN H1N LEONG & CO.,
22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
ALMANAC.
Beer. Wine, Spirit & General Store Dealers.
:(o):	SOLE AGENTS FOR:
FRASER & NEAVE'S AERATED WATERS
(The Best throughout the East.)
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic
Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at
$1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 catties of dry rubber.
JULY, 1919.
ASAHI BEER.
ACETIC ACID.
:(o):	Fresh supplies of Stores are received regularly.
PRICES MODERATE.
Free delivery to customers in Kuching.
Free packing & shipping for Outstation Orders.
[u. c.]
Rainfall. May. 1919.
PASSENGERS.
ARRIVALS.
PER p.s. Adeh : 7th JulyFrom the NorthH. H. the Tuan Muda and Mr. Gifford.
PER s. s. Kuching :10th JulyFrom SingaporeCapt. and Mrs. Cunynghame and 2 children, Mr. and Mrs. Griffiths, Mr. and Mis. Chew Eng Hong, Messrs. F. Laikens, Cheong Peck Tee, lam Mia Suah, Lim Teng Koon, J. P. Nyuk and Sim Whai Koo.
PER S. s. Rajah of Sarawak:-11th July -From Sibu Mr. and Mrs. Ong Siow Sian. Fr. Stotter, Mother Mary and Mr. Coutts.
DEPARTURES.
PER s.s. Kuching:2nd JulyFor SingaporeCapt. R. G. Gallen, Mr. and Mrs. William, Mr. and Mrs. K. Hee Khye, Mr. and Mrs. Ang Cheng Khoy and Mr. J. Shelton.
PER s. S. Rajah of Sarawak:2nd JulyFor SibuMr. and Mrs. Ong Siow Sian and Mr. H. Haldane.
PER 8.8. Kuching:13th JulyFor SingaporeIT. H. the Tuan Muda, Messr Holl, K. Ah Ee and Hong Kiaw. Mrs. S. Teek Ghee, Mrs. S. Keng Hai and Rev. Fr. Haidegger.
PER e. s. Rajah of Sarawak:14th JulyFor Singapore Mr. Coutts.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 16, 1919.
199
NOTICE.
NOTICE.
In the matter of THE SARAWAK SINGAPORE STEAMSHIP COMPANY LIMITED.
AT an Extraordinary General Meeting of the above named Company duly convened and held at Kuching on Saturday the 29th March 1919 a resolution was passed by which the Company was to go into Liquidation in the event of the business being sold to a New Company then in course of formation and at a subsequent General Meeting of the Members of the said Company also duly convened and held at the same place on Tuesday die 16tn April 1919 the above resolution was duly confirmed as a special Resolution and at such last mentioned Meeting Messrs. J. M. BRYAN, ONG TIANG SWEE and CHAN KEE ONG were appointed Liquidators for the purpose of the winding up.
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that in accordance with the above Resolution and the sale having been completed, the said Company went into Liquidation as at 1st June 1919.
By Order of The Board.
(Sgd.) J. M. BRYAN.
Chairman. Kuching. Sarawak.
In the matter of THE SARAWAK & SINGAPORE STEAMSHIP COMPANY LIMITED. (In Liquidation.)
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that the creditors of the above named Company are required on or before the 30th day of September to send their names and addresses and particulars of their debts or claims to the undersigned, one of the Liquidators of the said Company, and if so required by notice in writing from the said Liquidator are personally or by their agents to come in and prove their said debts or claims at such time and place as shall be specified in such notice, or in default thereof they will lie excluded from the benefit of any distribution made before such debts or claims are proved.
Dated this 7th day of July 1919.
(Sgd.) J. M. BRYAN,
Liquidator.
THE SARAWAK STUDIO
(REPRESENTATIVES OF MESSRS. KODAK LIMITED.)
THE BEST IN KUCHING
WHERE GOOD PORTBAITS CAN BE TAKEN AND VIEWS OF THE
NEIGHBOURHOOD PROCURED.
PHOTOS FOR PASSPORTS
AT SHORT NOTICE.
KODAKS, KODAK FILMS, PLATES, PAPERS, CHEMICALS,
PHOTO PASTE AND ALL PHOTOGRAPHIC MATERIALS
SUPPLIED AT SINGAPORE CATALOGUE PRICES.
AMATEURS FILMS & PLATES DEVELOPED, PRINTED &
ENLARGED AT REASONABLE CHARGES.
Free instructions given to Amateurs with pleasure.
21, COURT HOUSE ROAD,
KUCHING.
C. M. LEE,
Manager.
[189]
200	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 16, 1919.
METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS.
GENERAL HOSPITAL.
Kuching, June, 1919.
Highest Barometer reading 3002 inches.
Lowest ,, ,, 2990 ,,
Highest temperature (shade) 1005 degrees.
Lowest	..	..	69
Highest	..	Sun	160
Longest Period of Sunshine in one day 1010 hours.
Total rainfall(Museum)	355 inches.
Greatest rainfall in 21 hours	103 .,
Height of Hospital above sea level approximately 75 feet.
Rainfall, June, 1919.
DURING 24 HOURS.
KUCHING -Printed and Published by GHIN HENG SOON. Government Printer, at the Government Printing Office.
Barrack Road.
