
VOL. XLIX.
No. 770
Sarawak Gazette
Price	KUCHING, MONDAY, JUNE 2, 1919.	10 cents
CONTENTS.
?
Notess
Miri Notes
Baptism
The King's Birthsday
Prickly Heat
Death of Yeo Gunn Chow
The Food Supply ...	...	Cultivation
Cultivation in the Rejang	...
Red Cross Finance ...
A visit to unknown Borneo
Simanggang Regatta
Monthly Reports: Simanggang
Sibu
MukahMiri
Miri Shipping
Trade Returns
Rainfall ...
Almanac ...
Passengers
Page.
135
137 138 138 138
138
138 139 140 140 141 145 145 147 147 148 149 150 150
151
The Sarawak Gazette.
MONDAY, JUNE 2, 1919.
SUBSCRIPTIONS to the Gazette are as follows::
NOTES.
(,May.)
The Times states that if peace has been
signed by then it is proposed to hold the
National Peace Celebrations in August 3rd,
4th and 5th .
If these dates have been fixed officially
celebrations all over the world will necessarily
have, to be held on the same date.
MR. P. M. Adams arrived from Pusa by
; boat on the 15th. After having obtained
medical advice he left for Lingga in the m. 1.
Sri Damai on the 17th.
THERE were no European passengers by the
s. s. Kuching either on her trip from Singapore
on the 13th or on her return on the 17th.
Mus. 4. Baring-Gould returned to Sibu by
the s. s. Alice Lorraine, on the 16th.
THE p. s. Adeh left for Miri and Baram on
the 17th. Passengers were the Bev. Father
Dunnwho accompanied by the Bev. A.
Mulder is going on a visit to the Mission
Stations in North Borneo via Miri and Labuan,
and Brother Simon who returns to the Mukah
Mission.
The Sarawak Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
Single copy	...	...	...	.10 cents
Subscription for one year	...	... $2.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 2.25 Subscription including postage to nil other
Countries. ...	...	2.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING
Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 5s. 10d
The Sarawak Government Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
Single copy	...	...	...	.05 cents
Subscription for one year	..	... $1.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 1.25 Subscription including postage to all other
Countries. ...	1.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING
Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 3s.6d
All subscriptions arc payable in advance and must commence from the 1st January in each year on which date they are renewable. All broken periods will be considered as full.
Subscriptions will not be renewed unless notice of renewal given.
Changes of Address should be notified to the Office in writing.
THE S. S. Rajah of Sarawak arrived late in
the afternoon of the 19th. Passengers by her
were the Honble. H. B. Crocker and Messrs.
Jas. Scott, Cobbold and Thomas, and Mr. and
Mrs. Ng Bak Choon.
Mr. Scott, whose trip out via Canada took
him nine weeks, returns to this country on a
short visit after an absence of two years, and
Messrs. Cobbold and Thomas have come out
to join the Borneo Company and the Sarawak
Rubber Estates respectively.
136
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 2, 1919.
THE s.l. Hong Linewhich has recently
been repaired in Kuching at considerable ex-
pensesank in 30 feet of water at Sibu on
the 29th.
She had a full cargo of illipe nuts and was
lashed to a fully laden lighter which she
carried down with her. No one was on board
at the time.
So far efforts to raise her have been un-
availing.
MB. Jacques, accountant, left for Sibu by
the s.l. Lucile on the 22nd to relieve Mr.
Betts the Treasurer there who is shortly
proceeding on home leave.
THE following letter was recently received
from a Malay at Lidah Tanahwe leave our
readers to try and discover its meaning
10th May, 1919.
Good Morning, Mr.-	Dear Sir,
I want to (Rattan) 500 seed only and can use
that house (godang Lidah Tanah) only.
Salvation Better
yours truly
from Carpenter Lidah Tanah
and your send boatmen
that (rattan) only.
MB. P. R. Tudor Owen and Miss Warrington.
The engagement is announced, and the
marriage will shortly take place, between
Philip R. Tudor Owen, late lieutenant, The
Buffs, son of the late Dr. Holgate Owen, of
Manchester, and Mrs. Holgate Owen, 33,
Addison-mansions, Kensington, W., and Rita
Ethel Mary, youngest daughter of the late
Major-General H. H. C. Warrington, Madras
Infantry.
MB. Owen was on the Dahan Estate when
war broke out. He went home, joined up, and
saw a considerable amount of Active Service
in France where he was twice woundedthe
second time seriously, and one of his legs is
permanently damaged.
We hear he has obtained a good billet in
Johore which he is now on his way out to
take up. The best wishes of his many friends
in Sarawak go with him.
MB. G. Peirsonwho also joined up from
Dahan is now a Staff Major on the Home War
Staff and may shortly get a foreign appoint-
ment.
THE blue funnel steamer Mentor which left
Liverpool on March 17th with a full cargo
and 61 first class passengers, arrived in Hong-
kong on April 19th33 days.
MB. J. M. Bryan went round the local
9 hole golf course recently in 34 which is five
under the bogie.
We believe this is a record out here.
ALTOGETHER 347 Victoria Crosses were awarded during the war.
IT is not expected in French circles that the Peace Treaty will be signed before the 7th of June.
THE S. s. Alice Lorraine brought Messrs. Archer and Haldane down from Sadong on the 24th.
A soap factory has been started at Batavia
with a daily capacity of 3,000 kilos: The
soap produced is said to be as good as and
cheaper than the European made product.
A S. S. Gazette notification fixes the maxi-
mum price of Australian wheat flour at $4.75
a bag containing 36 kati, or sold by the kati at 15 cents per kati. Nothing whatever shall
be added to the above prices except the actual
cost of transport approved by the Food Con-
troller.
THE Report and Statement of Accounts of
the United Malaysian Manufacturing Com-
pany to June 30th 1918 shews that the Com-
pany has made a nett profit of 20,110.13.10
compared with a nett loss of 14,421.16.1 the
year before.
As Karimon is not working this profit has
all been made at Goebilt with the exception
of a small percentage in Singapore.
We trust there is still a future in store for
Goebilt. Our congratulations to the energetic
Manager on the very satisfactory result of the
years working.
WHERE national economy is the watch-word
the value of the bicycle becomes most ap-
parent. As an inexpensive means of locomo-
tion it certainly has no equal As an illustra-
tion, Mr. T. W. Hilton, of 12, South View,
Bishop Auckland, states that he has ridden
his Raleigh for twelve years, summer and
winter, in all kinds of weather*and on all sorts
of roads, and except for new tyres and slight
adjustments the machine has never cost him
a penny. Is there any means of travel which
can compare with cycling in its cheapness,
as well as its pleasure and comfort and healthi-
ness ?
THE S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore
on the 25th with passengers Mr. Heap and
Mr. and Mrs. Chin Hee.
Mr. Heap came here at an interesting time
as he was enquiring into the possibility of this
country being able to produce certain qualities
of rice in the future. He went on to Sibu
on the 28th.
SIMANGGANG REGATTA.
A Regatta, football matches, etc., etc., will
take place at Simanggang on July 18th and
19th, 1919.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 2, 1919.
137
We are asked to state that entries for all races will be open to all comers and everyone is cordially invited.
The Program me will be found on page 145 of this issue.
A very heavy thunderstorm from the S. W. broke over Kuching at I oclock in the afternoon of the 28th n It: The rain was torrential, four and a half inches being the fall recorded, practically all of which fell in a little over an hour and a half. A somewhat similar storm, but not so heavy, broke over the district the next day a little earlier in the afternoon, but was kind enough to cease at 5 p.m. so permitting a few enthusiastic golfers to wade round the links.
Miri Notes
Other calls upon your correspondent's time have prevented any Notes being prepared recently.
The March and April Silver Buttons in the Golf Bogey Competitions were won by Dr. Andrew and Mr. Moffat, each with scores of 1 up; the May competition will take place on the 25th instant A sweep run in connection with the April competition realised $108.
At the Gymkhana Club, a Doubles Tennis Tournament is in full swing: the likely winners seem to be Dr. Andrew and Mr. Smart, but Messrs. Guerin and Skrine have yet to show their skill in combination.
A Billiards Tournament on the American System has been commenced at the Club, Miri, with 11 entrants. Capt. Gallien being the back-marker.
With all due respect to Mr. Wait and See the Miri Peace Celebrations Committee is going ahead with the programme detailed in the Gazette issue of December 16th last. One wonders what the Huns would have done to impress the Eastern peoples hud they been the Victors: there are times when the strictest economy should be practised, but there are others when policy dictates a loosening of the purse-strings.
On March 11th, Mrs. Head presented her husband with a daughter, and on April 7th Mr. and Mrs. Bromfield were the proud parents of a son ; both ladies and children are in the best of health.
Miri folk were very pleased to receive a visit, April 18th/30th, from Mr. and Mrs. A.G. Vanscolina of Labuan who for years have been very good friends to Miri Correspondents; in fact we often wondered how Mr. Vanscolina managed to do everything expected of him. It was a great pity that the Canteen, ordered from Home by Miri friends for Mr. Vanscolina as a memento of the. kindnesses received, did not arrive during the visit.
Kuching folk, with their goodly stocked markets, can perhaps not well appreciate our difficulties at Miri. and, when our efforts to improve the amenities of life come to naught as has recently happened owing to the condemnation of two Cold Storage shipments, conditions will at least be admitted to be difficult.
As in most other places there are many Miri people long overdue for home leave, and among
members of the staff of the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Co., Ltd., there are 12 due to go home, excluding Messrs. A. Brown, G. W. Roberts and A. Webb and Mr. and Mrs. Blake who left on leave during March. There is one lady shortly going home, Mrs. A. K. Andrewthe first resident lady in Miriwhom we shall all miss; it is perhaps safe to assert that she hardly ever misses an opportunity of helping along , any social activities, and without these life at Miri would indeed be miserable.
The Miri Musical and Dramatic Society broke up the monotony of the Easter week-end by presenting at the Club, Miri, a Farce and Variety Concert on the evening of 19th April.
The first part consisted of Harlan Thompson's Farce Trousers, and the Man", unusual in the fact that the caste with one exception is a male one.
As the purport of the argument is to demonstrate that a man is a useless sort of person unless accompanied by his trousers, it follows that the lady member of the caste had only a small part to play, but Mrs. Wydler played that part with her usual sweet verve. Mr. Moffat, as the old Jew proprietor of the clothes pressing establishment, had far the most difficult part to play; his make up alone was a work of art. and he lost his individuality entirely in that of the character.
The other four members of the caste, clients of the trousers presser, had parts more natural to themselves and easier to play, but they all achieved great hits with the audience. Mr. Beard played the part of a Johnny about town ; Mr. McAlpine that of a prosperous American farmer ; Mr. W. Smart that of a debt collector ; Mr. J. J. Brooks that of a policeman. The last 3 efforts were first appearances, though no one could have suspected it, and the Society is to be congratulated on bringing forward such promising beginners. Mr. G. Rittson Thomas stage-managed the proceedings with success, and promises to be a worthy successor to Mr. Wyndham Jones, when the latter goes on leave ; he should not be so diffident, however, about taking calls.
Mr. R. Mayer was entrusted with the organisation of the musical half of the performance, and presented a topping programme, with himself accompanying throughout. When touching on musical matters, I usually think it dangerous to make distinctions, but Mr. Beards singing of At Finnegan's Ball is an effort that will live for ever in Miri, and one that would have been a success in any West End theatre. Mrs. Wydler, as ever, was delightfully dainty in her two songs Widows are wonderful and Oh Frenchy I dont think I ever saw her look sweeter than she did in her widows weeds. Mr. J. Welch scored heavily in his two songs Plum and Apple and Pudden, both showing the attention that he is now paying to his dietary. With Mrs. Wydler too, his duet Have a Heart" was distinctly good. Mr. Thornton's two items Joan of Arc and Back Home in Tennessee were well received, and Mr. Moffats The Company Sergeant Major and Barnicombe Fair " were stirring items, appreciated very much by the audience.
Mr. Mayer's items of Swim Sam Swim and Theres a Good Time Coming, had the usual merit of being brand-new songs, presented with great dash, while his other numbers Knitting Prudence " and Where did that one go? were charmingly sung, and as usual delighted his audience.
The Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Co., Ltd., are to be congratulated on their snare in helping on these performances with staging, lights, transport, etc., and I have little doubt that they receive their quid pro quo in a greater keenness of the members of their staff
MELROSE.
138
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. JUNE 2, 1919.
Baptism.
The infant son of the Honble. A. B. and Mrs. Ward was baptised at the Pro-Cathedral in the afternoon of Wednesday, April 30th, the ceremony being performed by the Bishop of the Diocese.
After the ceremony there was an At Home at the Residency when the health' of little Alan Ferguson, proposed by the Bishop in a short speech, was drunk by all present.
The King's Birthday.
The Straits Government Gazette, publishes a des-
patch received by His Excellency the Governor from the Right Honble. the Secretary of State for the Colonies stating that it is His Majestys wish
that his Birthday shall be observed on June 3rd
this year and that unless the Treaty of Peace has
been meanwhile signed the ceremonial observed on
the day shall be the same as during the last four
years, viz: flags shall be flown, but no reviews,
dinners or other celebrations shall take place, nor
shall any salutes be fired.
Should the Peace Treaty be signed a further
-communication will be made by the Secretary of
State.
In Kuching, however, the salute will be fired as usual from the Fort at 8 a. m. on that day.
Prickly Heat.
One of the most uncomfortable signs of being in
good health in the hot weather is being inflicted
with the skin eruption known as prickly heat. Most
Europeans suffer from it, more or less, but it is by
no means confined to them. The use of highly
starched linen should be avoided by those who suffer
from it, for that aggravates it. as does a healing diet.
Few Europeans can do without eating meat, but the
quantity taken can be reduced with advantage during
the hot weather, and those who suffer least will
generally be found to be those who are strictly
temperate in both eating and drinking. Every
person of full age should know what suits him best
and as people's constitutions seem to vary almost
as much as their thumb marks there can be no rule
of universal application to suit each one of us. The Burmese say that bathing in rain water will be found
a good cure for prickly heat. But when the rains
set in, the weather is cooler and that alone will
generally be found to drive it away. Uncomfortable
and annoying as it is, it is something to know that
sufferers from prickly heat have seldom anything
else the matter with them and that they pray con-
gratulate themselves in being in a state of good
health.
Death
We regret to record the death of Yeo Guan Chow, late proprietor of Chop Ban Hok of Kuching, which took place at his residence in Ban Hok road on the 28th ultimo at the age of 61 years.
Deceased, who bus been in failing health for some years past, wits well known in Sarawak having traded here for a matter of 42 years, during which time he carried out numerous contracts for the Government including those of the extension of the Government Offices the Pavilion and others.
He leaves five sons and four daughters. The funeral, which took place in Kuching on the 28th ultimo, was largely attended* by his relations and numerous friends.
The Food Supply.
?
Sarawak is fortunate in that it possesses in its
supply of sago a very great standby should the rice
import fail. Mukah, Oya, Matu and, to a lesser ex-
tent, Bintulu, all possess large areas under sago
and the natives of these districts are practically in-
dependent of the imported rice, though Chinese
traders resident there require a certain quantity for
their consumption.
However, the present shortage of nee may well be
the means of drawing attention to the value of the
sago plantations of the country which are worth con-
sideration, and in which it possesses a most valuable
asset.
There is a constant and steady demand for this
product which forms one of our chiefest industries.
The plantations are entirely in the hands of the
Milano populations of the districts mentioned who
in many casesit could almost be said most cases
do not keep them clear of jungle growths which
retard the expansion of the dumps and prevent the
palms growing to their full extent, while monkeys
and wild pigs do immense damage to the palms at
every stage of their growth.
But though this may be the ca-se, yet. in spite of
many reports in past years to the contrary, mature
palms shew no signs of being worked out. The
palm matures in 7 or 8 years and as fast as one is
felled another takes it's place and the supply still
bolds.
Plantations could be cleared and the area under
sago much increased, but it is doubtful whether the
Milano population, who arc heavily in debt to the
traders, will ever find time to give their attention to
the matter it being all they can do to supply the sago
required.
The sago palm only grows in swamp, and often
very bad swamp too, so that the cutting up of the
palms into lengths, the rolling of them through the
swamp to the riveroften a considerable distance
the forming them into rafts, floating to their destin-
ation, and rolling the soaked logs up the bank to the
place where they can be worked, and the cutting them
up and treading them into paste, is exceedingly heavy
work for which the small price the natives receive
for the resultant paste is but poor remuneration.
The wet paste as shipped in bulk from sago dis-
tricts to Kuching is unfit for consumption and has to
undergo a number of washings in clean water in the
sago factory to remove dirt and remnants of fibre be-
fore being finally strained through fine cloth, spread
in the sun on mats to dry, and put into bags as the
sago flour of commerce.
Sago is usually prepared by the Milanoes for their
own consumption by mixing the fine paste with padi
husk and rolling it into pellets which are finally
baked to the consistency of biscuit on a hot clay
oven. Sago thus prepared and eaten still hot is ex-
ceedingly palatable.
The pellets boiled with milk and sugar form an ex-
cellent food well-known to the European, while
Dyaks and other natives, when unable to obtain rice,
usually boil the sago to a thick glutinous paste
and mixing it with sugar twist it round a stick and
so convey it to their mouths.
Doubtless, as the rice supply lessens, sago will be
increasingly used in it's place, and this may bring
about a rise in the price of the raw product which
will materially benefit the Milano and help him to
realise the importance of the industry which he con-
trols, and if the shortage of rice results in a revival
of the sago industry, a clearing and extension of
existing plantations and the opening of new ones,
much good will have come from what will generally
be recognised by the natives as an evil; while both
natives and Chinese will be made to realise that though
the planting of rubber and pepper is very necessary,
the providing of a local food supply is of the first
importance in such a country as this.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 2, 1919.
130
Cultivation.
The Malays of this country would do well to follow the excellent advice given by His Highness the Sultan of Perak in the matter of the cultivation of rice, a translation of whose speech we publish below together with a re-translation into Malay.
The Sultan thoroughly understands his own people and so, though the advice is given, it is coupled with a warning as to the certain consequences of its not being taken and put into practice.
Sultan of Peraks advice to Malays.
I am very sorry to stale that I have been informed
by the Director of Food Production that in five
months time not even a grain of rice will come into
this country. Therefore, the advice that I want to give you isplant foodstuffs as much as you possibly
can, such as tapioca, potatoes, maize, etc. Those
that have bendang land must at once make their
best efforts to resort to means that will make their
bendangs produce good padi, that is to say, the land
must be well irrigated, cleaned and watched, and
any adjacent jungle land must be felled and cleaned
so as to keep away rats, etc. Those who have no
bendang land can occupy, on temporaly licence,
islands or river reserves to plant hill padi or other
foodstuffs. To do so they need only lodge their
applications with the Magistrate at Parit
A WARNING.
I know that almost all of you have been much in-
terested in rubber planting, but what are you going
to do with rubber now when there is no rice? You cannot possibly eat rubber or the back of rubber trees. In urgently advising you to plant padi and other
foodstuffs. I do not expect that you will abandon
your rubber laud, but I expect you to pay more atten- tion to bendang and foodstuff planting than to rubber.
I would ask you all to bear in mind that during the
next bendang season L want to come here and visit all the bendangs personally. If God gives me the health I now enjoy, you need only rest assured that any remote bendang that is accessible to you will also
be accessible to me. Do not think otherwise. You need rest assured that if I find any bendang owner
neglecting his bendang I will cause mm to be severely punished.
One thing more I wish to say is about one draw-
back concerning Malays. We do work half-hearted-
ly. By saying half-heartedly I mean this. Suppose
we see now a Malay at work repairing the staircase of
his house. He has scarcely finished that work proper-
ly when he switches on to another work, such as mend-
ing his kitchen floor, etc. Regardless of that. I yet
believe that the Malay nation is the most hard-work-
ing and law-abiding of all nationalities in the world.
For, is it not the people of out nationality that are
frequently seen on these sunny padi fields in the
fasting month toiling with empty stomachs ? What
other nationality can do this? I know of none.
I will inflict heavy punishments on bendang
owners should I find, on my next visit, any of them
neglecting their bendangs. I will not like to hear
any complaints later about rice trouble, for I have
already given you timely warning in front of your
Magistrate and Penghulus here to plant foodstuffs
and padi. For my part 1 can live light through on
fowl and fish. I have been used to it. But if you
nil die of starvation and leave me alone in the world, what is the use of my being a Raja? From now 1 wish you all to work full-heartedly, and those who
are here and who have heard what I have said,
should not forget to intimate to other people who have not heard what I have ordered to be done. T. O. M.(Pinang Gazette.)
????? ????? ????? ??? ????? ?????
??? ??????? ????? ??? ???? ??? ???? ???? ????? ????? ?? ???? ????? ???? ????? ?????? ???? ???? ???? ????? ??? ???? ?????? ???? ?? ???? ???? ????? ???.
?? ????? ??? ????? ????? ??? ???? ??? ????? ??? ????? ????? ???? ?? ???? ????? ???? ???? ???? ???? (?????) ????? ????? ????? ?? ??? ????? ???????? ???? ?????? ????? ????????? ??????? ???? ????? ???? ??? ???? ???? ???? ?????? ???? ???????? ??? ??? ?????? ????? ??? ??????? ??? ???? ????? ?????? ?????? ??? ?????? ???? ??????? ???? ?????? ?????? ??? ?????? ?? ???? ?? ????? ???????? ???? ?????? ????? ?????? ????? ??????? ???? ????? ??? ????? ????? ??????? ???? ?????? ???? ????? ??? ????? ????? ? ?? ?????? ???? ???? ????? ?????? ???? ???? ????????.
???? ???????
?? ??? ????? ???? ???? ??? ????? ???? ????? ??? ?????? ??? ? ????? ?? ???? ???? ?????? ????? ????? ????? ??? ???? ? ???????? ???? ????? ???? ???? ??? ??? ?????? ?? ??? ????? ??? ?????? ?????? ???? ??? ?????? ???? ????? ? ?? ??? ????? ??? ?????? ???? ???????? ???? ??? ????? ??? ?????? ???? ????? ???? ???? ????? ?????? ???????? ??? ????? ???? ????? ???? ??? ?? ??? ??? ???? ??? ???? ?? ???? ???? ??? ?????? ??? ???? ???? ??? ?????? ?????? ???? ???? ??????? ?? ???? ???????? ???? ???? ??? ????? ??? ???? ?? ??? ????? ??? ??? ????? ???? ????? ???? ???? ???? ??? ??? ???????? ?????? ??? ???? ???? ? ?? ????? ???? ??? ???? ???? ??? ??? ??? ???? ??? ? ?? ???? ?????? ????? ??????? ??? ????? ????????? ?? ??????? ??? ???? ?????? ????? ???? ?
????? ????? ??? ????? ??????? ???? ? ????? ??? ?????? ????? ???? ????? ??? ??? ?????? ????? ????? ????? ???????? ???? ????? ??? ????? ????? ???????? ??? ?? ???? ???????? ???? ?????? ??? ????? ???? ????? ???? ??? ????? ?????? ????? ???? ????? ????? ????? ????? ?? ???? ???? ??? ????? ????? ? ?? ???? ??? ????? ?????? ???? ?? ?? ??? ????? ???? ??? ?? ??? ??? ????? ??? ????? ??? ???? ????? ?????????? ?????? ?? ??? ?????? ????? ???? ?? ??? ???? ????? ??????? ?? ????? ??????? ?? ??? ????? ??? ??? ????? ??????? ?????? ???? ????? ??????? ???? ??? ??? ???? ????? ???? ??? ???? ?????? ????? ?????? ???? ????? ???????? ??? ??????? ????? ???
140
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 2, 1919.
????? ?????? ????? ??? ???? ? ?? ???? ??? ?????? ????? ????? ???? ???? ??? ???? ???? ??? ??? ???? ???? ????? ???? ???? ???? ???? ???? ??? ?????? ??? ????? ???? ????? ???? ??? ????? ????? ??? ?????? ??? ? ?? ???? ??? ????? ??? ??? ??????? ???? ???? ????? ??? ?????? ???? ??? ???? ???? ????? ????? ??????? ?? ??? ??? ??? ????? ??? ???? ??? ????? ??? ????? ?? ????? ????? ?? ????? ??? ??? ????. Cultivation of rice in the Rejang.
? '
According to an agreement made by the late Rajah
with Mr. Uong Nai Siong. a Foo-Chow colony was
established on the Rejang in 1901. for the purpose
of cultivating rice and vegetables., ( See Agreement,
Art. 1). There is an impression abroad that these
colonists never made an honest effort to plant rice.
This is a mistake.
1. The first year they ail planted rice al Seduan
on the Sungei Merah. but they used seed they had
brought from China, and being seed adapted to a
colder climate it matured too soon. When the
stalks were only a foot high it begin to head, the
heads did not mature, and the crop was not worth
harvesting.
2. The second year they tried again planting two
crops. The first crop was a failure because it was
planted too early in the season to make way for the
second crop, the second brought nothing principally
because of the birds which concentrated on it, being
the only rice in the neighbourhood.
3. The third year they tried the Dyak method of
just cutting and burning without cultivating (as
in former years they had done in China, and ex-
pended much time and labour) As might be ex-
pected, this failed completely.
4. The fourth year they were so discouraged and
homesick that they refused to plant, and lived
almost entirely at the expense of the proprietor.
This soon brought him to bankruptcy, and the ,
colony to the verge of failure. At this junction the
Rajah thought the colony would do better without
the proprietor, and he was removed from the
country.
5. The next year it was necessary to plant rice or
starve as there was no proprietor to supply it, and,
as it happened, they got a good crop.
6. By this time many had begun to plant pepper,
and in a short time every body was planting as much
as it was possible to take care of.
7. For the next two or three years the rice crops
were more or less of a success, but the time came
when it did not pay to busk the rice, a mans labour
was worth mere doing something else. It took a
man and two women a day to husk and clean a bag
of rice. At the same price rice was selling in the
bazaar this did not pay, and compared with what a
man could earn sawing boards or planting potatoes,
he was losing money. This difficulty was solved by
the introduction of a rice-huller.
8. Rice cultivation then took a new life with some
hope of supplying the market of Sarawak. But
there were many partial failures of crops from
reasons I will name later. Very seldom was a full
crop harvested
9. Then came rubber, and the planting of rice
gradually fell off. because when people have money
as these people have, it is much cheaper to buy rice
than 10 raise it; always providing there is any to
buy.
10. Then came the war, and last year the bazaar
ran short of rice several times. With much per-
suasion and some fear, everybody put out rice, but
the crop, with a very few exceptions, is a failure.
When the rice was about eight inches high, floods
came and submerged it for more than a week, leaving
it half drowned, from which it did not recover. Now
here we are with rice dearer and scarcer here than
it has been before, and we have no rice of our own.
Malay and Milano rice here is a total failure.
With the years and experience in rice raising I
have had in this country, I may be excused if I try
to explain how I think rice can be sucessfully
cultivated.
1. It cannot be done the way the natives do it.
It is a gamble in which they lose nine times in ten.
They never get what might be called a full crop.
2. It does not pay to do it by hand even by the
best methods under the best supervision, except of
course in starving times like this when rice is not
to be had at any price. Mr. Davis of our Mission
tried it out at Bukit Lan ; a hundredweight of padi
cost him $13. when rice was selling at $8 a hundred-
weight in the bazaar. This of course was a bad
year ; but it never pays, labour is too dear, and other
things pay better, even working jelutong.
3. Nevertheless, if rice could be planted with a
reasonable hope that a full crop would be harvested,
a lot more would lie planted.
4. The things that make rice planting so pre-
carious an undertaking are worms, grasshoppers,
birds, pigs, deer, floods and drought.
(a ) Worms can be dealt with. I have seen
them gathered by the bucketful by holding the bucket
under the stalk, and striking the stalk with a stick,
the worms fulling into the buckets.
(b) Grasshoppers and other flying or hopping
insects may be killed by passing a torch between
the rows of growing rice at night. The insects jump
into the fire as it passes along and make good
fertilizer; I have seen fields infested with them
cleared in one or two nights.
(c) Birds, pigs and deer can be kept off by
pickets, poisons, scarecrows, etc.. At most they
would not cause much damage to a big field.
(d) If floods come at the right time and are not
too high, they make the crop. If they are early,
they prevent burning and planting. If they are too
late ploughing and weeding cannot be done. The
only way to get away from the floods is to select
land that is never flooded more than one foot at
highest tides.
(e) Irrigation is the only remedy for drought.
This could lie easily done with pumps, as the water
would never have to be lifted more than three or
four feet, and a little water would go a long wav on
such level land.
To sum up, the following are necessary:
1. Cultivate in large tracts. *
2. Select land of proper elevation with regard to
floods.
3. Use machinery-tractors, ploughs, etc.,
4. Irrigate when necessary.
5. Competent supervision.
(Sgd) J. M. Hoover.
Red Cross Finance.
Demobilization Begun.
TO THE EDITOR OE THE TIMES.
Sir,On the first day of a New Year-which brings
the promise of peace to a war-worn world, we ask
permission of The. Times to make to the public at
home and abroad a statement on the financial posi-
tion of the Joint War Committee of the British Red
Cross Society and the Order of St. John.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 2, 1919.	141
To-morrow we start, the work of demobilizing our Red Cross forces. The process of demobilization will take time, and it is impossible even approximately to fix a date by which it can be completed. Certain branches, such as the curative treatment and after-care of the sick and wounded, may have to be continued for some, years, and for work of this character we shall make such allocation of our available funds as may seem proper.
The marvel I mis generosity of the British people at- borne and overseas has enabled us to meet every legitimate demand which has been made upon us for lied Cross assistance since August, 1914, and the balance which remains in our hands to-day, together with the proceeds of collections already made or in process of being concluded, will, we believe, prove sufficient to enable us to discharge our present and prospective obligations.
Among the collections in this country which we have still to receive are those of the Churches on Sunday next, certain Our Day" collections from the counties, a number of future sales already announced by the British Farmers' Red Cross Fund, the valuable stock which remains unsold at the Gold and Silver Depot at 29, Old Bond-street, and various trade collections which form parr, of the great "Our Day contribution of the City of London.
From the Dominions and Colonies there are many collections still to come which it has not been possible as yet to have transmitted. We ask that, as far as is possible, all collections in this country may be wound up and remitted to us by January 31, and those from overseas by February 28.
The Finance Committee will issue shortly its fourth annual report on the receipts and expenditure of the Joint Committee to October 20 last. After October 20 next, the Finance Committee hopes to present a full account of our receipts and expenditure for the four and a quarter years of the war and for the tin al year of demobilization. Later still, we shall issue a general report of our stewardship, in which a brief narrative of our work from the outbreak of war will lie accompanied by the final statement of our accounts.
In the meantime, we beg to offer what may be termed our interim thanks to all who have enabled us to face the task which war imposed upon the Red Cross of our country.
First, we have in mind the innumerable donors to our Fund. We have been the channel by which their generosity has flowed to the sick and wounded. To our subscribers any expression of our thanks is as nothing compared with the silent gratitude of the wounded men. Next we thank those who have given their services to the work and organization of the Red Cross at home, in all the theatres of war. and in every part of the King's Dominions. Only by the devotion and self-sacrifice of these thousands of workers could we have accomplished our Lusk.
Finally, we tender our thanks to' the newspapers of Great Britain, Ireland, and the whole Empire. Without the constant help of the Press our needs could never have been made known to the vast and scattered public from whom we have drawn our support. In a special and peculiar degree the thanks of the Joint War Committee are due for the incalculable help which has been rendered by The Timex and by The Timex Weekly Edition. Apart from the collections which have still to be received the list which you publish to-morrow will complete to date the individual acknowledgment which The Times has made of each contribution received by us since the outbreak of war. Little short of 2,000 columns of your paper have been placed at our disposal as a free gift to the Red Crossan act of generosity in keeping with the great traditions of
The Times. We offer our thanks to the proprietors, and to the Editor and his staff, and not least to the careful compositors who have set up these millions of names and figures with a percentage of error so small as to be less than negligible.
From now our daily appeal in The Times and your almost daily acknowledgment of our subscriptions will cease, though we shall ask y u to be so good as to publish from ' time to lime occasional list of moneys which have yet to be forwarded to us.
Our work has brought us into close association with the sick and wounded of our Allies, and we wish to acknowledge the happy relationship which has always existed between their Red Cross organizations and ourselves, and in particular to record our indebtedness to the American Red Cross, from whom we have received such munificent contributions and with whom our cooperation in the common work has been of a peculiarly intimate character.
To-day we are only concerned to refer to the war work of the British Red Cross Soociety and the Order of St. John, and to the Fund raised for the needs which war brought in its train. Later there may arise fresh tasks and new responsiblities for the great humanitarian organizations on whose behalf we speak What the nature of that future work shall be calls for careful consideration, mid on this the British Red Cross Society and the Order of St. John, jointly or severally, may make some pronouncement when the labours of the existing Joint War
i Committee are happily at an end.
We are, Sir, yours obediently,
ARTHUR STANLEY, Chairman of the Joint. War Committee mid Chairman of the Executive Committee of the British Red Cross Society.
PLYMOUTH. Vice-Chairman of the Joint War Committee and Sub-Prior of the Order of Si. John.
IIOBT. A. HUDSON, Chairman of the Joint Finance Committee.
E. A. RIDS DALE, Chairman of the Central Demobilization Board.
S3, Pall-mall, S. W. 1, Dec. 31, 1918.
(Reprinted from The Times, January 1st 7.97,9.)
A visit to unknown Borneo.
( Continued from page 123.)
Next morning we left the large Murut district of the Brian and Belawit and go due south towards the bead of the Kurid stream a tributary of the Pa Karayan. The country here is not so densely populated or so well cultivated and our guide. Ballang Irang, a big heavily built man, says that the soil is no good at all being far too sandy and very different to that of the fertile country through which we have been travelling for the last few days. Tsu Poong, a Kurid chief, with two or three men and n number of women join us as we are nil going in his direction; the men carry nothing but their spears but each of the women had a heavy load on her back. These Murut women from the Kurid were a great improvement on those of the upper Trusan and of the country we had just passed through; they were short, stuggy, and heavily built with powerful legs and capable of carrying great weights for long distances. They were cleaner and very much better looking, with more intelligent faces than any we had yet seen : they wore the usual short waist cloth but, unlike those in the Trusan, also wore large palm leaf hats. The men gave them their guns to carry being too lazy to do so, but when nearing a house they took them back
142	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 2, 1919.
and carried them themselves for the last hundred
yards or so. In one case I noticed a Murut actually
give his wife his heavy gun to carry and relieved
her of a Chinese paper umbrella which she bad
acquired somewhere or other, and strut along
shading himself with his wifes umbrella.
After a short stop at the bouse of our guide where
the usual presents were handed over, wo started to
climb the steep hill behind it named Kurid which
rises to a height of over 1,000 feet; there was no
jungle here at all and the track was steep and
slippery, and with the hot sun on our backs the
going was very slow and it was late in the after-
noon before we reached the top. The only member
of the party that did not seem to mind the climb
was the goat, which was given us at the last house
and which was driven on ahead by a woman. At
the top of the hill was a large open space and from
this point of vantage a magnificent view was
obtained, range upon range of mountains surround-
ing us on every side. Away to the N. W. rose
Mt. Murud (8,000 feet) from the centre of a long
range which stretched away to the north and I
and south of him, his summit covered with woolly
clouds, while just to the side of Murud one of the
needle points of what was said to be Batu Lawi
were visible behind him, though I do not think
that the other point of that mountain can be seen from here as it should be directly behind Murud.
To the East Dutch Borneo seemed one mass of
rugged mountain peaks row upon row, while behind
us to the north lay the fertile valleys through
which we had just passed, surrounded by low
bills on the plateau between the mountain ranges.
Late in the afternoon descending the other side of
the hill we came out on to another irrigated valley,
the Kurid, where several long houses could be seen
surrounded by the usual fruit groves. Numerous
snipes disturbed by our approach rose from among
the padi, and some twenty couple of duck left the
water within a few yards of us and flew circling away
down the valley: not having brought it shot gun
these feathered Jowl went away without losing any
of their number, but an evenings snoot here should
afford excellent sport.
As we passed by one of the long houses a crowd
of women and children came out to meet us carrying
large bamboos full of arrack and, as each man passed
by. a bamboo some three feet long and four inches in
diameter was pushed at his mouth, the result being
that as much went out side as in, but everyone got
a few mouthfuls, and after another stop of this
description we reached Tsu Poongs house in the
evening. This gentleman for his misdeeds had had
his bouse burnt down over his head and 100 of bis
people killed some three years ago and so had not
had time to rebuild it as yet, so that his present
dwelling was a long but wretchedly low and poorly
built house, so low was it that even the owners had
to stoop as they walked along.
However the house was the only wretched tiling
about the place, the men were fine and well built,
and the women clean and very much better looking
than any we had seen so far, their skin being
much whiter than that of the Muruts in the Trusan.
The men for the most part had the lobe of the ear
stretched to a length of a couple of inches and carry-
ing a leaden ring at the end weighing several ounces
(the Muruts mostly perforate the lobe of the ear
but do not stretch it much ). Tsu Poong promptly
produced several goats and fowls and a quantity
of rice, and the fires were started and the cooking
pots filled. The goats were led outside and released
and while starting to graze, no doubt congratulating
themselves on regaining their freedom, each of their
heads was whipped off suddenly with a single cut,
the bodies remaining standing for a second, while a
yard away the cleanly severed beads blinked their
eyes at you.
Some twenty buffaloes were grazing in the long
grass at the foot of the slope while hundreds of pigs
and goats were feeding around the house, and fowls
scratched around the padi houses for what they
could find : the padi harvest was in full swing and
the store houses were nearly full, the women being
busy all day picking, drying and carrying it from
the fields to the stores. The smoke in the house
was quite unbearable, there being fires lit the whole
length of the building which was very low and
possessed no windows in the roof, and ones eyes
smarted so that it was not possibly to remain in
the house for very long. At night jars of native
arrack were produced and both men and women
started drinking, and in a very short time many were
laid out on tile floor hors de combat, but the tougher
spirits drank, shouted, and quarrelled in a friendly
way all night and the noise they made was awful.
One old fellow insisted on sitting alongside and
putting his arms round my neck as if he was on the
most friendly terms, but in reality in order to pre-
vent bis falling on his back into the fire or on to
his face into the collection of empty basins and
glasses in front of him, and chanting unintelligible
nonsense in a singsong way into my ear.
Little wooden tripods about six inches high held
a few lumps of resin which were always kept alight
and the pipes &ere lit at these, several of them were
upset and the burning resin ran down through the
floor, and it was a wonder that the rotten house was
not burnt down that night.
It was a difficult job to get our small procession
started again the next morning and many complained
of pains in their heads and were scarcely able to
carry their light loads, being generally fit for nothing
and certainly not motion, though it has been stated
at home that a man is only unfit for duty when
actually in drink. Several had stirrup cups before
leaving and these were the least hopeless of the
party, and they suggested that another night under
that low but hospitable, roof was really what was
required to remove the leaden feeling from their
skulls.
However they were all finally steered into line
and I thought it advisable to bring up the rear this
time instead of walking on ahead as I usually do,
as one or two shewed an inclination to stop and rest
by the way, so but slow progress was made and on
reaching an orange grove in the afternoon down went
the loads and the trees were sending down showers of
delicious fruit in a few seconds ; we ate what we could
and carried away a quantity, and keeping along tho
bank of the Koyar stream entered another irrigated
valley of quite small extent, not more than 100 acres,
and stopped at a house overlooking it. The padi fields
here were evidently infested with ruts as they were
entirely surrounded by a split bamboo fence some
half mile long, the bamboos being not more than
half inch apart. At intervals of some ten or twelve
yards there was a break in the fence, and in this gap
was set a most ingenious rat trap topped with a
heavy log in such a way that when a rat tried lo
enter the gap in the fence he was promptly logged.
There must have been several hundred of these traps
in the fencing and every one is inspected each day.
and rats were said to be so plentiful that were the
fields not protected in this way. a single night would
see the destruction of the entire crop.
The people here seemed very poor and there was
nothing at all in the houses and the padi, not yet
being fit LO harvest, there was nothing to eat. At
the last house we were told that there was plenty of
rice along the route so we had not troubled to bring
any, and conseqently we were all on short rations,
though the usual goat was brought and sacrificed.
The men of the place were all away and there were
only a few women in the house and these demanded
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 2, 1919.
143
matches from us, tobacco they bad plenty of their own
but matches they laid none, and all need flint and
steel when they wanted a light outside the house,
inside of course the fires were always burning.
Next morning as we were leaving a curious inci-
dent occurred. I had left the house first and was
about a hundred yards away when I heard a terrific
din and noise of hammering going on in the house
behind ns, the women shouting at the top of their
voices: thinking that one of the last of the party
had created a disturbance when leaving I hurried
back, amt found them all clear of the house,
but one or two old crones of over sixty wearing
nothing but very dirty and ragged bark petticoats
were on their knees beating the places where we
had slept with chunks of fire-wood, making a fearful
din and shouting all the time. They stopped when
they saw me and I asked them what it was all
about as it looked as if they were shewing their
pleasure at our departure, but they said that they
were only driving our spirits out of the house;
they were informed that there was no necessity
for making all that noise as we had taken our
spirits with us, and I enquired of some natives we
met if they had ever heard of the custom, and if
so what it meant, but they would not enlighten us
on the subject, but the Muruts of the party said
that it did not mean any good, though as we had
done nothing to displease the owners of the house
we could not understand it at all
We did not know these people nor did they know
us, nor had they ever seen a white malt before, so
we were rather more careful than usual on the way
that morning, more especially as they had openly
refused to give us a guide However we followed a
well worn track going down-river and presently
obtained a guide from a house lower down.
Crossing the Karayan river, here a stream twenty
yards wide and running deep, twice in quick
succession on single bamboos stretched across be-
tween the branches of trees some twenty feet above
the water, an unpleasant experience especially
when the bridge sways and crackles when one
is half way across, we reached a stretch of flat
land which had evidently carried a population at
some former date as it was one mass of giant, bam-
boos and groves of fruit trees : for hours we walked
through a regular forest of durian. lansat, rambutan
and other trees, large clumps of the prickly wild sago
growing between them.
The guide got astray in this place and we wan-
dered about for some time before we struck the
path again, finally emerging at a small Kelabit
house on the top of a rise. I had no intention
of stopping here, and in fact had been told that
there were no more houses until we reached the
Baram river, but the wily guide knew of this
house, and we had a lot of trouble getting another
man as he took us up to the house and scuttled off
home at once.
At each end of the house were pens in which
were full grown deer and the poor beasts had only
just room to stand up and lie down, while the
M*ns had never been cleaned out: they were said
to lie quite tame and would return to the bouse
if let out, but the owners seemed to have a dozen
objections to my suggestion that the experiment
should be tried.
Later on we passed another Kelabit house and at
nightfall reached a large hut built at the edge of a
mountain stream which flowed down to meet the
Karayan.
The leeches were awful along this truck which
was all dense jungle, and swarms of them could
be seen standing up in the track waiting for one
to step near them. These ground leeches were
bad enough when they got through the holes in
socks and putties torn by the thorns and made a
mess of ones feet, but the tree leeches (lematak
tupai) were ten times worse, they got on to one
from the leaves and branches along the track and
crawled inside ones coat and down ones neck and
their bite is painful but their presence is soon discovered by the bite and they can be removed at once, whereas the ordinary leech is never found until putties and socks are removed after a walk, when shoes are found to be full of blood and bloated leeches the size of a lead pencil which have dropped from ones legs when satiated, while it is very difficult to stop the bleeding and the bites frequently fester and become troublesome.
We slept very comfortably in the long hut with fires blazing round, as it was bitterly cold, and in spite of the numerous noises that are heard all night in the jungle, one insect in particular making a most monotonous chuck chuck at regular intervals all night long.
An hour before daylight begins to penetrate to the hut the monkeys (Wa Wa) start calling to one another high up in the trees, and the cooking pots are put on the fire and breakfast of hot rice and pork is ready before it is possible to see the light coming through the tangle of branches and creepers in front; the daylight brings silence, only the occasional kok kok of a pair of hornbill being heard in the distance
Everything is packed up in a few minutes and before it is really light we are off, and having carefully dried my shoes and putties over the fire all night and put them on comfortably in the morning it is distinctly annoying having to plunge waist deep into an ice cold mountain stream soon after leaving the hut. Growls at the temperature of the water are heard from behind us the rest of the party reach midstream, and they climb the slippery hank on the other side in no good temper.
Now came a stiff climb of several thousand feet and we left Dutch territory and from an open space on the top of the mountain looked down on the head waters of the Baram river flowing beneath us, and after a short stay here we descended to the valley, below by n steep, rocky, and slippery path almost vertical in places, and several falls occurred, one Dyak tripping over a creeper when coming down a steep plate and falling headlong, his load going rolling on down the mountain side till it brought up with a thud against u tree.
The track was anathemised pretty frequently, its slippery state lining attributed to the guide for some reason or other. Fortunately he only spoke Murut and Kelabit so the Dyaks remarks were unheeded. Late in the afternoon we came on to patches of padi ripening on the hillside and a good deal of jungle recently burnt off for planting, hut the difference in
the padi planted in this primitive way and that of
the irrigated land in the Bah country, was very
noticeable.
The two long houses of a Kelabit chief named
Tai Ewan were our next stopping place, and here
a woman had just died and arrack was being made
and buffaloes killed for the feast next day.
Whilst bathing in the stream Close by a number
of Kelabits came out of the jungle on the other
side pulling a long hollowed out log which looked
something like a native boat, the remainder of the
trunk having been carved for a length of some four
feet at either end. This was the coffin, and it. was
in length not less than 14 feet in all and exceeding-
ly heavy as it took 15 men to carry it. and they had
their work cut out to get it over the stream and up
the steep slope to the house.
We spent a quiet night and left the next morn-
ing early with a. guide, reaching the village of a
Kelabit chief named Tingung at midday. Here
we found the bouses practically empty, only two
or three women being present, and discovered that
Tingang, having obtained news of,our arrival in
the Brian country, had culled his men together
and had set out fully armed to extricate me, being
certain that there would be trouble in the Brian
owing to my arrival as it was known that the Brian
were an evilly disposed and treacherous tribe.
However we found a youth and sent him hot
foot after the party who returned in the evening
144
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 2, 1919.
drink and bathe. We passed several of these springs
and the mud around them shewed tracks of rhino,
deer, kijang, mouse deer, pig and many kinds of
birds. But being in a hurry we bad unfortunately
to leave the sport behind.
Next day wo arrived at the Kelapang river which
breaks through the hills here and rushes down a
boiling flood between sleep cliffs to the lower coun-
try, quite impassable for boats and impossible io
cross at this time of year. The track, a narrow path
in many places not more than a few inches wide and
in others non-existent, led along the edge of a steep
gorge and we had to swing ourselves along the face
of the cliff by means of the creepers on the rocks,
and a drop on to the boulders below was not a thing
to be thought of under the circumstances.
In one place where the limestone cliff receded a
little from the river some of its ledges had fallen
away and the remains of old wooden coffins lay
rotting at it's foot. This was an old burying place
of the natives, the coffins being placed in holes
hollowed out of the face of the cliff, and the carved
ends of the coffins could still be seen amongst the
musses of fallen limestone between the cliff and the
river bank. This was the first limestone we had
seen during the whole trip all the rocks hitherto
met with being of sandstone or shale.
Just beyond this place we built our lust hut near
the bank of the river and the following morning
started to ascend Tudan hill. This, took the
whole of the morning and some of the afternoon,
the mountain being very steep in places and
the ascent slippery, and it was a tired party that
sat down on the open space at the top to smoke and
enjoy the wide view. On one side of us we could
look down on the river roaring through it's gorges
several thousand feet below, and the far ranges of
mountains of the Pa Mabo, while on the other the
blue hills of the head of the Silat and the Ballang and
the distant mom tin ins of Dutch Borneo could just,
be seen, though the clouds lying low on the. hills
obscured a good deal of the view.
When a short distance down the other side of the
mountain a small white patch appeared it our feet
far down on the plain below, and this was pointed
out by one of the party as the Government fort at
Lio Matu, the station furthest up-river in the Baram
district, and the sight of this and the certainty of
being able to obtain rice made us put our best legs
foremost, but though the fort looked so near it was
late in the afternoon before we reached the foot of
the bill and starred along the level ground on the
river bank, eventually coming out opposite the fort
in the evening. Christmas Eve.
The river was in flood but we got across in
boats brought over by the police who were stationed
there, very glad to have seen the last of the jungle
after a 24 days walk. But the police here were short
of rice as the supplies from down-river had not
arrived owing to the flood iii the liver, and they
could only spare us a gallon or so, and they them-
selves were eking out their supply of rice with
tapioca root, so we borrowed a long boat which
fortunately happened to have been left there by
some natives who were working rubber in the neigh-
bourhood and set off down-river on the flood the
rather disappointed at having been deprived of a
practically certain scrap with the Brian who were
enemies of theirs.
The harvest had been a complete failure here and
there being no rice our party had to live on boiled
tapioca root, not at all a bad form of food when
there is nothing else to be had. Tingang gave us a
goat after, a good deal of trouble though he had
twenty or thirty buffaloes and numerous cattle,
swine, goats and fowls wandering about around
the house.
We stayed the night in the house which, though
large, was old and leaky, arid the roof let in the
rain in gallons and I spent half the night trying to
find a dry spot, and all the party were wet by the
morning. I sent back a couple of men to Tai
Ewan's house the next day to try and get some rice
to take us on our journey and so had to spend another night under the leaky roof, but got some
boys to climb up and put large leaves in the leaky places so that the night was spent in Comparative comfort.
As this was the last human dwelling before reach-
ing Lio Matu fort in the head of the Baram river
1 got a couple of men to act as guides ; after endless trouble and enquiries as to distance we elicited replies making it anything from 2 to 10 days, so I put it down as 5 days probably, and next morning we set out short of supplies as we could not get enough food for the trip.
Passing through the clearings near the house our party picked a number of vegetables and got all the tapioca root they could well carry, which did not
really amount to much, and for four days we wan- dered through that jungle, not meeting a soul nor seeing any sign of human life beyond an occasional
broken down hut which had been used by natives wandering on the lookout for rubber with which .
that country abounds.
Several times the guides got astray and the men had to cut a track through the undergrowth with ,
their parangs, while the hills were very steep and the track a slippery, muddy mess owing to thousands of wild pigs which had been digging for a certain small fruit that happened to be in season. We saw hundreds of wild pig every day and shot them
whenever we felt inclined to waste a cartridge
as the jungle was swarming with them, and
in many places the undergrowth was non-existent
and it was possible to see for several hundred yards
through the large trees.
Walking parallel to the Pa Kelapang and some little distance from it in order to avoid the steeper places near it's banks, we crossed the Ballang stream on the third day ; it was in slight flood and quite a hundred yards or more broad and the water rushed over the slippery boulders at a tremendous
pace, ft looked impossible to cross, but the men were
in the mood to try as the supply of food had all but
run out and we had to be content with only one plate
of tapioca and pork in the morning for the day.
The Dyaks took off their loin cloths and, taking the
gear a little at a time, managed to cross without an
accident, though at limes the rushing water was up
to their chests, but 1 had three shots at crossing
before I managed to reach the other side, while two
of the shorter men of the party got the others to take
their things across in two or three trips and, going a couple of hundred yards further up stream in the deeper but quieter water, swam across easily, landing
at the head of the rapid where we had crossed.
We saw no rhino though the tracks of several were
seen and could scarcely be missed, as these beasts
crash through the undergrowth and break down
anything in their way leaving a wide track, a good
many are shot in this part of the country as their
horns are of considerable value commercially, the
Chinese paying as much as $40 a lb. for them. Had
we had time to look for them it would have been
possible to get an easy shot as these beasts come
down to the muddy salt springs at certain times to
next morning: the boat was 54 feet long and our
party a small one so that we had plenty of room.
For the next three days we paddled down
the Baram river shooting the numerous rapids on
the flood and travelling at a great pace, stopping at
night at one of the many long Kayan houses which
are built on its banks, the hospitable people giving
us what food they could spare. They were in many
cases very short of food as the last year had been a
bad one for the crops and this year's padi was only
just ripening on the surrounding hills.
After passing the rapids we paddled by day and drift-
ed by night sleeping m the boat and one morning, that
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 2, 1919. 145
of the 29th December, we met the Government launch from the station coining up to look for us and boarding her reached Marudi the same evening. The next day we left for the mouth of the river and walking over the sands reached Miri, a little coast station 15 miles torn the mouth of the Bar am, late in the evening on the last day of 1912 after one of the most interesting trips I have ever made in this country.
D. A. O. Simanggang Regatta.
July, 18th and 19th, 1919.
Programme.
Judges:Honble. J. Baring-Gould, Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner, Rev. W. Howell, Datu Abg. Hj. Tamin, Abang Ading, Seng Kim, Kon Mee, Fook Leong, Sin Kwee, Tek Seng, P. Janggok, P. Mumin, P. Renang, P.
Angkon.
Starters: Mr. P.M. Adams, Abang Hj. Buassan, Abang Dulrasid, Abang Indut, Abang Bujang, Abang Matalip, Abang Madaut, Abg. Embit, Abang Zin.
Stewards:Messrs. Sim Chin Kaw, Law Ah Neu, Lagan, Entrieng, Gomes, Jerah, Gan Kim Tho.
4 to 6 P. M. First round of Foot-ball Matches between Teams representing Simanggang, Saribas, Sadong and Lingga.
6.30 to 8 ,, Drawing and Auction of Selling Lottery Tickets in four Beda and Bong races for to-morrow.
18th Friday.
RACE.
1. 8 00 a. m.Boats with 30 men, no restriction as to build, starting from Pangerans Cattle-shed. Prizes 1st $80. 2nd $15.
2. 8.30 Boats with crews of 3 boys, starting from Mosque Hill, 1st prize $1.50, 2nd 75 cents.
3. 9.00 ,, Boats with crews of 25 Chinese. Starting from Tanjong Enkabang, 1st prize $50, 2nd $25. (2nd only awarded if 3 or more entrants.)
4 . 9.30 ,, Bedas, no restriction as to length of boat or number of crew. Starting from Tanjong Sebubok, 1st prize $60, 2nd $30. 3rd $15.
5 10.00	Boats with crews of one man
only, who must sit in the bows. Starting from lower boat-shed. 1st prize $1, 2nd 50 cents.
6 10,30 ,, Bang Race, no restriction as to . length of boat or number of crew. Starting from Bakol's house. 1st prize $50, 2nd $30. 3rd $15.
7 11.00 Bedas, crews limited to 40 men. Sorting from Pendam Maloh, 1st prize $35, 2nd $15.
-8.11.30	Bongs, crews limited to-10 men.
Starting from Pendam Maloh, 1st prize $30, 2nd $15.
9.12 NOON.	Malay Luncheon in Fort.
4 to 6 p. M. Second round of Foot-bail Matches.
6 to 8.30 Drawing and auction of Lottery Tickets for to-morrow Saturday 19th.
19th Friday RACE.
1 . 8.00 A. M.Boats with crews of 3 men. Starting from Sungei Stawang, 1st prize $1.50, 2nd 75 cents.
2 . 8.30 Boats with crews of 15 men. Starting from Pangerans shed, 1st prize $15, 2nd $7.50.
3 . 9.00 ,, Boats with crews of 5 men. Starting from Sungei Stawang, 1st prize $3.50, 2nd $1.25.
5 .10.00 ,, Bandong Ikan, crews limited to one man rowing standing up. Starting from Tanjong Engkabang, 1st prize $2, 2nd $1.
6 .10.80 ,. Bedas and Bongs, no restriction us to length of boat or number of crew. Starting from Tanjong Sebubok, 1st prize Silver cup value $40. and $40; 2nd $30, 3rd $15.
7 .11.00 ,, Womens Race, boat's crews limited to 25 women. Starting from Tanjong Engkabang, 1st prize $20, 2nd $15.
8 12.80 Consolation Race, for boats of any length or build, winners of 1st prizes only barred, and winners of 2nd prizes to be penalised 10 men out of ordinary crew, 1st prize $40, 2nd $20.
12 NOON. Chinese Luncheon in Fort, followed by that of the Dyak Chiefs.
4 to 6.P. M. Final of Foot-ball Matches. There will be a display of Fireworks on both evenings.
10 p. M. to 12 MidnightMain in Fort.
MONTHLY REPORTS.
SIMANGGANG.
April.
Not being able to obtain rice in the bazaar, I sent word to the Balau Dyaks, etc. that Government required rice and they have now brought in sufficient to last a couple of months The Undup Dyaks are bringing in padi which is being stored for future use. The export of padi and rice has boon prohibited from this division, as otherwise there will be a serious famine. Chinese pepper gardeners have asked for farming land, and I am making arrangements with the Dyaks about this. The Banting.Dyaks hate already planted padi and I am told the padi looks well. Natives this year are starting their farms earlier than in former years, as I think they recognise that they will have great difficulty in obtaining rice and padi towards the end of this year.
During the month all Government buildings were whitewashed and tarred.
The s. 1. Hong Line started for' Sibu on the 3rd having been chartered by Chon Eng Seng of Sibu for three months at a rental of $100 per mensem.
146
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 2, 1919.
Abang Zin left for Lubok Antu on the 3rd to take up his appointment of Native Officer, on arrival he immediately left for the Delok and Jingin, etc.
The Rev. W. Howell, Mrs. Howell and daughter arrived here on the 6th in m. l. Sri Damai and went straight on to Sabu. The m. l. Sri Damai returned next day and left for Kuching.
Mr. J. Haldane arrived here on the 7th from Sadong, and returned next day calling in at Lingga and Sabuyow in re the working of gutta rian leaves.
Penghulu Sujang of Rimbas visited Simanggang in re various land disputes, etc.; he also reported that Ijau, Dram an, and Bakar, wanted for murder of a Chinaman in the Samarahan, had not been out of the district for some considerable time.
On the 5th I left for Lingga to meet s. 1. Lucile, having been granted leave to visit Kuching. Whilst al Lingga, Abang Bujang Native Officer of Kabong arrived with three Chinamen who were charged with the murder of one Lim Ah Tsui at Roban. I held an enquiry but the case will come before a jury on my return to Simanggang.
The s. 1. Lucile arrived on the 15th and I sailed for Kuching on the 17th. taking down $350 in copper for the Sarawak Treasury, I returned to Simanggang on the 28th.
Saribas.P. Corpl. 161 Bakar Rasit and P. C. .132 Bakar arrived from Kuching with a guide named Dunggat in order to arrest Draman, Ijau and Bakar, Rimbas Dyaks, these Dyaks were duly arrested, but were not the men wanted, so were released. The police then proceeded overland via Debak to Saratok in the Krian.
The Dyaks have started paying in door tax, and also clearing the Jungkong road.
Kalaka.On the 9th P. C. A num arrived from Roban with the body of one Lim Ah Tsui who had been beaten to death by three Chinamen. The cause of the assault started over a gambling dispute.
The three Chinamen are now on remand and the case will be heard at Simanggang.
On the night of the 12th a shop-keeper by name Ma Gee reported that some one had entered his shop by removing a few planks, and managed to get away with nine sarongs, and $20 in copper.
The body of a Sesang Malay by name Bebay Taim was found floating in the river below Taujoug Malem in the S'blak ; it is surmised that be capsized whilst returning from his farm.
On the 29th two policemen by name Corpl. Bakar Rasit, and P.O. Rasit arrived from Saratok with guide Dunggat from Kuching, they had come overland from the Rimbas, and stated that they were looking for Dyaks by name Draman, Bakar and ban suspected of murdering a Chinaman in the Samarrahan. The Dyak passes were then looked up ami it was found that two Dyaks by name Entebau and Entamin of Amangs house, Mapar, had arrived from Kuching on 27th March, 1919 per bandong Kim Chuan Watt. The Native Officer accompanied by police left for Amangs house and arrested these two men, and they were brought before Dunggat who recognised them. After various enquiries both Dyaks admitted they had assisted in the murder of a Chinaman in the Samarrah- an. hut they were led by one Ado of Rawings house ulu Rimbas. When they left Kuching Ado stayed behind.
The two Dyaks were taken to Kuching in charge of the two Kuching policemen.
The following are the trade returns for this division viz:
Imports. Exports.
April, 1919	$103,604.00	$112,806.00
Total to 30/4/19	290,402.00	349,708.00
Do. 30/4/lh	$134,086.55	$139,801.00
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER,
Resident.
SIBU.
April.
His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by Mr. Adams and myself, arrived at Kapil on the 3rd. His Highness took command of the expeditionary force against the Gaat rebels and was accompanied by Messrs. Aplin, Gifford, Adams and Lieut, Clark. The force left Kapit on the 5th, and was operating in the enemy's country until the 25th, on which date it returned to Sibu.
The rebels showed no combined opposition and in consequence the loss of life was small, but the whole of their country was laid waste and it is hoped that the salutary lesson will bring them to see the error of their ways.	A full account of the doings of the expeditionary force is being forwarded under another cover.
The Dyaks living in the Sut have, at various times, harboured the rebels, and although professing loyalty to the Government, have also assisted the rebels from time to time, thereby causing a very unsatisfactory state of affairs. His Highness the Tuan Muda gave instructions that the Sut head men should be called and were to be detained until their followers had removed below Kapit.
These instructions having been carried out, Messrs. Aplin, Adams, Lieut. Clark and myself together with the force of Sarawak Rangers left Kapit on the 30th.
His Highness the Tuan Muda and Mr. G. M. Gifford who are shortly proceeding to Baram, via Belaga, remained at Kapit.
For the greater part of the month I was in residence at Kapit and only made flying visits to Sibu Mr. W. R. Tudor Clement, who was in charge at Sibu, reports that on the night of the 7th the houses of Abangs Seman and Latep were destroyed, by fire at Binatang. It is thought to have been me work of incendiaries, and Abang Sip and one Kasten have been detained on suspicion.
A murderous attack with a parang was made on a Malay woman named Nyut and her daughter Salabiah by a Chinaman named Ah Kian The two women were severely wounded but are expected to make good their recovery. Ah Kian has been, arrested and the case will come before the Court as soon as the women are sufficiently recovered to give evidence.
There has been little Court work during the month owing to so many people being away on the expedition, and also to all the traders being absent purchasing illipe nuts.
Tenders were received for the Upper and Lower Rejang gambling farm for a term of one or three years Chop Ban Lee Ong of Kuching secured the farm for a term of three years from 1st May for a rental of $1,429 per mensem ; this being an increase of $768 per mensem on tiie previous rental.
Awang Mat Nor, Native Officer, Beluga, escorted a number of Chinese and Malay traders who brought down jungle produce, consisting principally of illipe nuts, from Beluga. The fleet of boats numbered thirty-eight and there were as well some rafts of rotan. The greater part of the produce was disposed of at Kapit the traders of which place must have reaped a rich harvest.
It came to my notice that the Kapit traders were using a tin measure for the purchase of illipe nuts which contained from four to four and a half gantangs. The price paid for one of these measures being fixed at $1.
A notice was issued prohibiting the use of these unorthodox measures and the price fixed, temporarily, at three gantangs of illipe nuts per dollar. The s. 1. Pren, Chin Lee and Hong Line have been busily employed throughout the month in towing I down lighters filled with illipe nuts from Kapit,
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 2, 1919.
147
Song, and Kanowit. The Government launches, when possible, have also assisted in the removal of
cargoes from the up-river stations to Sibu.
On the 29th, the s. l. Hong Line, which has
recently returned from Sima.ngga.ng, arrived from
Kanowit with a lighter in tow and came along side
the Customs wharf. Tt would appear that she had
sprung a leak en route from Kanowit which was not
noticed by any of the crew and, being over laden,
gradually filled with water and sank taking the
tongkang with her. All the crew had dispersed to
their homes on arrival and no one had been left to
look after the vessel.
Some 280 sacks of illipe nuts went down with the
boat which sank in five fathoms of water. All
efforts at salvage have so far been without avail.
The large increase in cargo export has, to some
extent, been cleared by additional ships calling at
Sibu.
The s. s. Alice Lorraine cleared on two occasions
with a full cargo for Kuching.
The s.s. Gladys cleared for Kuching early in the
month and later called again but was unable to take
any cargo being en route for Baram.
The s. s. Batavier cleared on two occasions direct
for Singapore and s. s. on one occasion with a
lighter in Low.
The principal item under imports comes under
Treasure; some$121,000 were imported, principally
in Singapore notes, and the balance in silver.
Some subsidiary silver coins have been imported
but not sufficient by any means to meet the demand
of exchange.
The principal exports were illipe nuts 16,897
piculs, jelutong .1,715 piculs, para rubber 445 piculs.
The value of imports and exports for the past
month show the following figures:
Coastings
Foreign
Imports.
$ 54,289
200,380
Exports. $ 83,087 177,867
Brought forward
$254,675
421,638
$260,954 543,584
Total to 30/4/1919
$676,313
$804,538
1918
$276,335
$279,723
Immigrants 35.
J. BARING-GOULD,
Resident 3rd Division.
MUKAH.
April.
After having made further enquiries about the price of rice here, I found that, taking into consideration Kuching prices, it was impossible for the Chinese here io sell at a lower rate. The stock of padi held by Government is only sufficient for another three weeks, and there seems to be no prospect of procuring a further supply. In the event of a shortage of imported rice however, this district will not suffer to any great extent, there being plenty of sago procurable. Steps are being taken to provide rice substitutes, and the natives are fully aware of the necessity of planting up all available land.
Land disputes continue to occupy the attention of the Court here, but there have been very few criminal cases.
One of the Milano men who are taking the place of the guard of Rangers during their absence was sentenced to a term of imprisonment for an impudent theft from the office.
The Post Office clerk was sent to Kuching under arrest to answer charges connected with some irregularities in the entries of registered letters.
During the absence of their husbands the wives of the Rangers had an attack of nervousness which culminated in a tremendous shouting one evening. On enquiry, some of the women asserted that a mini had attempted to break into their quarters, and that he was armed. It was found necessary to allot a night guard to the barracks for some evenings after this scare.
The dresser has continued vaccinating in the ka in pongs here, and has been more successful of late since a fresh supply of lymph has arrived.
The shortage of silver and copper is very pronounced in the bazaars and kampongs. I rather suspect that the Milano has a quantity of copper in hand, which be refuses to part with. Dollars are not popular amongst the natives at present as they suspect that a new dollar is to be introduced and the present coin will depreciate in value.
The sago trade here is very considerably handi- capped by the lack of copper.
The price of raw sago continues high, and is at times as much as 1.00 per passu. T cannot say that, any lack of mature trees is noticeable in spite of the number being felled daily all over the district,.
Twenty-three schooners cleared for Kuching during the month. The principal exports are as below :
1919.	1918.
Raw sago 507 koyans	578 koyans
.Jelutong	5,012 piculs	4,098 piculs
Engkabang 3,025 H. L. OWEN,
Resident 2nd Class.
MIRI.
April.
Messrs, the. Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Company s
new submarine pipe line which is over two miles in
length was successfully towed out from Lutong on
the 4th by the s.t. Ajax and s.s. Nerite.
The s.l. Chamois having returned from Niah on
the (5th, Mr. C. D. Adams sailed for Baram the
following day.
On the 16th a forest fire was reported to be rapidly spreading near Tanjong Lobang: after inspecting
this fire I decided to call out all the local natives to
assist in extinguishing it.
Mr. and Mrs. Vanscolina of Labuan arrived on
the 18th on a visit to the General Manager of the
Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Company, Limited.
Good Friday and Easter Monday were observed
as public holidays and all offices closed.
On the night on the 19th a very successful play
and concert took place m the Club, Miri, under the
auspices of the Miri Musical and Dramatic Society.
Owing to the rise in the price of "jelutong rubber
most of the natives of the district commenced tapping
again during the month.
The Mohammedan Chinese, Said alias Fong
Kwee, who escaped from here last month but was
recaptured by the Kuching police, arrived here by
the p.s. Adeh on the 27th and has since been sent
on to Jesselton, British North Borneo.
In the Courts Mohamed alias Matsarapit was im-
prisoned and P. C. No. 15 Samat discharged the
force for aiding and abetting the escape of Said
alias Fong Kwee.
Leo Ah Phong was sentenced to a term of impri-
sonment for attempting to stowaway on the s s.
Nerite.
Cheng Teng Sua, Lee Kui and Leong Loi Fat
were imprisoned for absconding under advances.
148
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 2, 1919.
Kong Yew, one of the Anglo-Saxon Company's coolies, was punished for running away.
Angun bin Rais was fined for travelling without a pass. Six of the Companys Chinese coolies were fined for brawling at Lutong. Ho Peng was fined for a breach of the market regulations and Lilit bin Timpus, Hussin bin Suleiman and Piut bin Timpus were fined for damaging jelutong trees.
The s. t. Ajax arrived from Palembang on the 2nd to assist in towing out the new Lutong pipe line.
The s. s. Nerite cleared for Soe Soe on the 6th and the s. s. Haliotie on the 9th and again on the 28th with full cargoes of crude oil.
During the month the chiefs of Bakun, Pujut, Luak, and Bakam villages commenced paying in the 1919 exemption tax.
The prisoners finished whitewashing and tarring tin- Government buildings and afterwards continued clearing the ornamental grounds extension.
The wireless charging engine, which had continued to give trouble, was, thanks to the courtesy of the General Manager, Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Company, Limited, thoroughly overhauled during the month.
The weather continued extremely hot and dry and this caused a good deal of fever amongst the native population.
The rainfall amounted to 2'43 inches.
The trade returns are as follows:
Exports.
Imports.
Miri
$120,290
$21,975
Niall
2,919
1,212
Sibuti
2.647
5,050
$125,866
$28,237
W. F. DE
V. SEKINE,
Resident 2nd Class.
The Sarawak Gazette.
RATES OF ADVERTISEMENTS IN THE SARAWAK GAZETTE Payable in advance.
Quarter of a column and under
First insertion
Second and third insertion each
Subsequent do	do
Half a Column and under
First insertion
Second and third insertion each
$1.00
0.50
0.25
2.00
1.00
0.50
Subsequent do
A Column and under
do
First insertion each
Second and third insertion each
Subsequent
do
Special arrangements may be made for standing
advertisements.
... 4.00
... 2.00
... 1.00
All communications intended for insertion in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed to the Editor at the Government Printing Office, Kuching. They should be clearly written and should reach the Office at least one day before the publication of each issue.
Letters and other contributions must be authenticated by writers name sent privately to the Editor.
We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not inserting them.
Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early intelligence of all matters of general interest n their respective neighbourhoods.
NOT I CE.
ASTANA FARM.
THE Manager of Astana Farm begs to inform the Public that he is unable to attend to Orders for milk after Office hours.
NOTICE.
FOR the convenience of residents at Outstations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums but only the 1, 2 and 3 cent values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that Money Orders be sent if possible.
J. C. SWAYNE,
Manager, Govt. Printing Office.
MIRI SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
THE SAHAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 2, 1919.
149
Kuching Foreign Trade Returns for the month of April, 1919.
IMPORTS I Continued.)
150
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 2, 1919
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 2, 1919.
151
FIREWORKS
for the forthcoming
PEACE CELEBRATIONS
are in stock.
The above first shipment has arrived in Singapore and is ready for immediate distribution to meet orders already received and paid for. Please read the printed circulars distributed with full directions and instructions how to lut these Fireworks off.
DO NOT WAIT TILL THE LAST
TO SEND IN
YOUR ORDERS
Please send in your Orders
if you want to participate in this
National Event
to
Mr. Y. TAN.
Raffles Chambers,
SINGAPORE .
Who has various assortments to satisfy
EVERYBODY and ANYBODY.
Prices from $200, $850 and $150. Full remittance to accompany Orders, and accompanied by an import permit from the C. P. O. at your city. Outstation orders plus $25 cost of transport by railway.
Set pieces, Day and Might Bomb Shells: Prices on application, if possible by wire, as the time is too short for correspondence. Selections may be left to me if preferred.
Do Not Delay.
[22]
NOTICE.
ss	THE KUCHING STEAM SAW MILLS LIMITED.
NOTICE is hereby given that Share Certificate
dated 25th August 1913, issued by THE KUCHING STEAM SAW MILLS LIMITED, for 330 shares of $10 each fully paid bearing Nos. 971 to 1300 inclusive, and registered in the name of J. H. BRODIE, is alleged to have been lost or destroyed.
Any person holding the said Share Certificate is required to return it to the undersigned not later than 15th June 1919, otherwise the said Share Certificate will be cancelled and a new one issued.
TAN SUM GUAN,
Secretary. [6-6]
A clean tooth never decays."
H. OHNISHI D.D.S. (T.D.C.)
(Graduated Tokyo Dental College)
Japanese Dentist
193-6, ORCHARD ROAD, SINGAPORE.
[18-11 j
WANTED.
ONE OR TWO APPRENTICE CLERKS (Chinese) for the Post, Shipping and
Customs Office, Kuching.
Preference given to those having a knowledge of Chinese writing.
Apply in own handwriting to the Postmaster General, Kuching.
THE MOTOR-SCOOTER has attained a certain amount of notoriety since a well- known M. P. went to Parliament on one, but how many people realise that its cost is far beyond that of the handy and democratic bicycle? Taking such a machine as the Raleigh, for instance, a whole family of four or five can be supplied with bicycles at the cost of one motor-scooter, and a bicycle costs practically nothing in subsequent up-keep.
ARRIVALS.
PER S. S. Kuching:13th MayFrom SingaporeMr. and Mrs. O. Siow Sian. Madame Geok Soo, Mrs. O. Ah Chew, Messrs. K. Wee Tat, K. Chong Seng, O. Tiang Soon and O. Biow Sim.
PER s. s. Rajah of Sarawak:19th May-From SingaporeHonble. Mr. Crocker, Messrs. Scott, Cobbold and Thomas, and Mr. and Mrs. Ng Bak Choon.
PER s. s. Alice Lorraine:21st MayFrom SibuBev. Fathers Dines and Jansen.
PER S. s. Alice Lorraine : 24th MayFrom Sadong Messrs. Archer and Haldane.
PER s. s. Kuching: 25th MayFrom SingaporeMr. Heap and Mr. and Mrs. Chin Hee.
DEPARTURES.
PER 8. s. Alice Lorraine16th MayFor SibuMrs. Baring-Gould.
PER p. S. Adeh: 17th May For Miri and Baram Rev. Ed. Dunn and Rev. A. Mulder For Mukah Brother Simons.
PER s.8. Kuching: 17th May For SingaporeMessrs. L. Chee Chong, Han Siew Hua and Miss flail Chink Cheng.
PER s. S. Gladys:18th May For SibuRevd. F. Dines and Mr. G. P. Davis.
PER s.l. Lucile:22nd MayFor SibuMr. Jacques.
PER B.8. Sarawak 26th May For SibuSister Dorothea and Alisa Lucy Mowe.
PER m. S. Sri Selalang: 28th MayFor SibuMr. Heap.
152
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 2, 1919.
AOBA & CO.,
HIGH CLASS JAPANESE PHOTOGRAPHIC ARTISTS.
(QUALIFIED IN TOKYO )
Will take outdoor photographs at any place and time. Night photographs can also be taken with the latest and safest flash light process. Best attention will be always given to patrons.
No. 32, KHOO HUN YEANG STREET.
KUCHING.
l-3j
SYN HIN LEONG & CO.,
22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS.
Beer, Wine, Spirit & General Store Dealers.
: (o)
SOLE AGENTS FOR :
FRASER & NEAVES AERATED WATERS
(The Bent throughout the East.)
NOTICE.
AUCTION SALE
of unredeemed pledges from Pawn Broking Farm YEW CHEE & Co., Chop Wo SANG and Chop LOON YEK of Bau at No. 18, China Street on Saturday, 21st June 1919, at 9 a.m.
List of all such unredeemed pledges can be seen at the Pawn Farmers premises.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO., Authorised Auctioneers.
NOTICE.
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic
Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at
$1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 catties of dry rubber.
ASAHI BEEK.
ACETIC ACID.
: (o):	Fresh supplies of Stores are received regularly.
PRICES MODERATE
Free delivery to customers in Kuching.
Free packing & shipping for Outstation
Orders.
[u. c.]
N
OTICE is hereby given that the Trade Mark con-
sisting of the emblem of a double lion's head
in conjunction with the word LION as shown almve
is the joint property of THE ASIATIC PETROLEUM
COMPANY (STRAITS SETTLEMENTS) LIMITED and and THE ASIATIC PETROLEUM COMPANY (FEDERATED MALAY STATES) LIMITED, both incorporated in England, and is used by them in connection with Imbricating Oils, Greases Petroleum Jellies. Refined Oils, Illuminating
Oils, Kerosenes, Benzines, Motor Spirits, Gasolines,
Paraffin Waxes and Candles. Fuel Oils, Residual Oils
and other products of oil and petroleum imported by
them to the Straits Settlements, the Federated Malay
States and the States of British North Borneo, Brunei,
Johore, Kedah, Kelantan, Perlis, Sarawak, Siam and
Trengganu, and sold under the description of and known
in the trade as the LION Brand, the name of
the class of product appearing in the space occupied by
the word LUBRICANTS in the above illustration.
Legal proceedings will be taken against any person
infringing the rights of the said Companies in respect of
the above Trade Mark.
Dated this 8th day of May, 1919.
DONALDSON & BURKINSHAW,
19, COLLYER QUAY, SINGAPORE.
Solicitors for the Asiatic Petroleum
Company (Straits Settlements) Limited
and the Asiatic Petroleum Company
( Federated Malay States ) Limited
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 2, 1919.	153
PURE FOOD MEANS GOOD HEALTH
ALEXANDRIA" CANNED MEATS
Every Tin Guaranteed under the New Sooth Wales Pure Food Act, and packed under the constant and vigilant supervision of a Government Inspector.
ASK FOK
ALEXANDRIA
Roast Beef
Roast Mutton
Beef Sausage
Corned Beef
Corned Mutton
Pork Sausage
Ox Cheek
Spiced Mutton
Frankfurt Sausage
Ox Tongues
Mutton Chops
Beef Dripping
Luncheon Tongues
Assorted Meats
Pork and Beans
Sheep Tongues
Minced Scollops
Irish Stew
Extract of Beef
Assorted Soups
Ox Tail Soup
As supplied in huge quantities to the Imperial and Indian Governments for use by both the Army and Navy.
Sold by all Stores.
CHARLES BOWEN & CO
2 Castlereagh Street, SYDNEY, N.S.W.
'ALEXANDRIA MEAT WORKS.
Distributors for the East:
Seremban General Agency, Ltd.
(Incorporated in F. M. S.)
Sub: Agents-BAH JUI LONG,
14 Carpenter Street, KUCHING-, SARAWAK.
and BAN JUI GUAN,
,24-6 J
MIRI, SARAWAK.
154	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 2, 1919.
THE SARAWAK STUDIO
THE BEST IN KUCHING
WHERE GOOD PORTRAITS CAN BE TAKEN AND VIEWS OF THE
NEIGHBOURHOOD PROCURED.
VIEWS OF THE WANGKANG PROCESSION IN GREAT
VARIETY FOR SALE.
PHOTOS FOR PASSPORTS
AT SHORT NOTICE.
AMATEURS FILMS & PLATES DEVELOPED, PRINTED &
ENLARGED AT REASONABLE CHARGES.
FRESH KODAK FILMS CAN ALWAYS BE SUPPLIED.
Free instructions given to Amateurs with pleasure.
C. M. LEE,
Manager.
21, COURT HOUSE ROAD. KUCHING.
[12-5]
1 RIDE A RIGID, RAPID, RELIABLE
TH
built on specially - constructed tracking jigs, so that every frame is in perfect line and easy running thus assured, combined with strength and graceful lines.
GUARANTEED FOR EVER	ALL THE WORLD OVER	Raleigh Cycle Co. Ld.,
NOTTINGHAM. ENGLAND.
KUCHING :Printed and Published by GHIN HENG SOON, Government Printer, at the Government Printing Office Barrack Rood.
