
VOL. XLIX
No. 768.
Sarawak Gazette.
Price KUCHING, MONDAY, FEBRUARY 17, 1919. 10cents.
CONTENTS.
The Sarawak Gazette.
SUBSCRIPTIONS to the Gazette ere ns follow
The Sarawak Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
Single copy	...	...	...	.10 cents
Subscription for one year	...	... 12.00
Subscription including postage to Outstation 2.25 Subscription including postage to all other
Countries. ...	...	2.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING
Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 5s. 10d
The Sarawak Government Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
Single copy	...	...	...	.05 cents
Subscription for one year	...	... $1.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 1.25 Subscription including postage to all other
Countries. ...	1.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING
Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 3s. 6d
All subscriptions are payable in advance anil must commence from the 1st January in each year on which date they are renewable. All broken periods will be considered as full.
Subscriptions will not be renewed unless notice of renewal given.
Changes of Address should be notified to the Office in writing.
MONDAY, FEBRUARY 17, 1919.
NOTES.
FEBRUARY 1st, Chinese New Years Day,
was observed as a public holiday.
THE following is from the Straits Budget
of January 17.
VYNEROn January 10, at Dalydene, Singapore, the wife of Capt. R. J. O. Cayley Vyner, R. G. A., of a daughter.
S. S. Gladys sailed for Sibu on the 3rd February with passenger Mr. G. M. Gifford; she returned to Kuching on the 6th with the Very Rev. Father E. Dunn.
THE wedding of Mr. P. C. B. Newington, formerly of the Sarawak Service, now of Sandycroft, with Miss Valerie Murray Henderson, will take place at St. Georges Church, Penang, on the arrival of the P. and O. Novara on Jan. 25 says the Straits Echo.
WE regret to report the death of Mr. Sri-wardene on the 6th. He was for several years in the Government Survey Department.
RICE profiteering at Sibu has received a check. The Manager of one of the principal Chinese firms was heavily fined for selling rice at a large profit. The maximum selling price of rice is now fixed on the arrival of the Singapore steamer.
IN the yearly report for 1918 the Resident of Simanggang calls attention to the fact that the pepper industry has greatly increased. Chinese from Upper Sarawak are taking up land, and pepper gardens have been started in the Lingga and also on Bukit Munggu.
Page.
Notes ...	...	...	...	... 45
The Padi Harvest	...	...	...	... 46
Sarawak and the War	...	...	... 46
Cigar Brands	...	...	...	... 47
The British North Borneo Lottery	...	... 47
The "Silver Thimble" Fund ...	... 47
Bowls ... ...	...	...	... 47
Monthly Reports:Upper Sarawak	...	... 47
Sibn	...	...	... 48
Lower RejangBintuluBaram	... 49
Shipping	...	...	...	...	...	51
Passengers	...	...	...	... 51
Almanac	...	...	...	...	...	52
Rainfall	...	...	...	...	...	53
(February)
The Sarawak Gazette.
46	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 17, 1919.
THE bandong Hiap Seng was wrecked off
Sebandi on the afternoon of the 8th February.
A cargo of sago flour was a total loss, but the
nahkoda and crew were saved. She was on
her way from Sebangan and was the property
of Kho Ah Liap and Chop Soon Ann Joo Kee.
S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore on
the 9th, with passenger Mr. Kuimura. No
European letter mail was brought.
IN future we hope to publish monthly the
meteorological returns taken at the General
Hospital. The first readings are published
in this issue.
S. S. Kuching left for Singapore on the
12th. A larger number than usual of saloon
passengers left by her, they included Dr. and
Mrs. van Hemert, Mr. and Mrs. Geikie,
Messrs. C. P. Davis, J. L. Beardon, C. Bowen,
Lau Chin Heng, Sim Kim Heng and Tamis
Doi.
WE hear that the Kuching will be docked
at Singapore this trip, which no doubt will
delay her return.
WE have no doubt that all our readers will
join with our congratulations to Mr. F. G.
Day who completed his twenty-fifth year in
the Government Service on the 13th of this
month.
THE Singapore price for sago flour quoted in the bazaar on the morning of the 15th was 9/, a drop of 1/70 since the steamer came in. It is rumoured there will be a large demand for engkabang.
The Padi Harvest.
The following symposium is mainly extracted
from reports from the outstations. Such little padi
as is grown in the Lumlu and Samarahan neigh-
bourhoods is said to be doing well.
BAU. The Dyak crop is very much behind-hand,
as usual. Many Dyaks never got their clearings
burnt off at all. as they were so kite in felling.
However the crop is doing quite well in places. A
few Malays have made efforts to plant patches of
swamp padi and these are doing well, but it is a
pity the area planted is not greater. ( Dec. ).
Dyak padi appears to be doing well and reports
from most quarters of its condition are satisfactory.
(Jan.).
SADONG. At the end of November news came
to hand that harvesting was likely to begin at
several places within a few days. The endeavour to
establish a second planting of padi in the year has
not succeeded.
THE RE.IANG. In the Lower Rejang it is stated
that the prospects of a good harvest are not very
bright. Sirek and Bruit are the only places where
good reports of padi come from. Rats have been an
awful pest and have destroyed more than half the
crops. Tn another part of the Delta, Abang Haji
Metair reported that the prospects of the Dyak padi
crop were fair.
Sibu. The padi crop of the Igan and the Dyaks
living in that district have been practically des-
troyed by mice. Reports from other parts of the
district, however, are more favourable and a fair
crop may be expected. From another source we
learn that the Sibus, who had increased their area
of cultivation, have lost much of their crop by rats.
Ulu Rejang. Kayans report that, all being well,
they should reap an excellent harvest in about a
month's time. (Oct.).
BINTULU. Prospects for the padi harvest, both
here and at Tatau, seem to be fairly good, although
insect pests on the farms have been worse than
usual. Unless the floods of last year are repeated,
there should be plenty of rice in the district during
1919. (Nov.).
BARAM.. it was one of the worst floods ex-
perienced in the district and all the low-lying ground
was some three or four feet under water. The padi
was all submerged and 1 am afraid is ruined which
is unfortunate, as it was promising well.
I.IMBANG. Mr. W. R. T. Clement reports that the
up-river padi, of which very much more than usual
has been planted this year, was looking very well.
Reports from the Second Division and Trusan
are not yet to hand.
THE Cantonese, says the Canton Times,
will not wash of clean their houses before
the Chinese New Year is past, owing to their
belief that five dragons sent from heaven
will invisibly occupy the walls or floors.
They think that if they trouble these
sacred dragons by cleaning the houses, they
will be punished by the Gods in some way
more or less detrimental to their families.
Sarawak and the War.
WE are informed that the prohibition of the use of abbreviated telegraphic addresses registered since July, 1914, is withdrawn, and such addresses will be admitted in all telegrams in which registered addresses may be used.
New addresses may be registered in the United Kingdom and the Straits Settlements for persons or firms for whom an address is not already registered.
No alteration will be made for the present in the countries between which the use of registered addresses is permitted, or in the regulation which prevents the use of a registered address as a signature.
Some rather amazing facts are brought to light of the vital part which certain special petroleum products played in connection- with the European war, for in a recent issue of the Petroleum Review the veil is lifted upon what has so far been a secret page of war history. It appears that both Great Britain and her Allies have drawn immense quantities of toluol (winch is a product of petroleum and necessary for the manufacture of high explosives) under an agreement made with the Shell group of companies of which Sir Marcus Samuel, Bart, is the Chairman. The Borneo heavy petroleum is very rich in toluolmore so than any other known oil and it was just at a time when Lord Moulton of the British Explosives Department was searching in vain for enormous quantities of this necessary article for high explosives that the Shell Company came
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 17, 1919.
47
forward with their offer. The Government had been
approached immediately the discovery was made, but
they then refused the offer, and eventually the French
authorities desired all the toluol they could secure
from this source. Our own Government, however,
was given another chance before the agreement
with the French was concluded, and this time they
accepted with an open band. The French and
Italian Governments expressed publicly their thanks
to Mr. H. W. Deterding and the Asiatic Petroleum
Company for the invaluable assistance given, while
s far back as 1915, the British Admiralty thanked
Sir Marcus Samuel and the Shell Company, though
the manner in which that assistance had been given
has been kept a secret until the present. M.
Berenger, the Commissioner General of petroleum
in France, asserts that Without these additional
quantities of toluol, it would have been impossible
to return shot for shot at Verdun, and the war
would not, at least so far, have been a victory for
the Allies.
But in another direction, the same group of
interests have rendered remarkable services to the
Allies in General. About eighteen months ago,
consequent upon the sinking of so many oil tankers
by the enemy, the stocks of liquid fuel in England
were at so dangerously low a state that the exercises
of the Fleet had to be curtailed. The Shell group
then came forward with a policy of converting
ordinary vessels into oil carriers, by which the oil
was carried in their double bottoms, and up to the
present time several hundred vessels have been so
converted, their carrying oil capacity being equi-
valent to that of one hundred oil tankers. They
have already brought over 1.000.000 tons of petro-
leum to this country, and have thus saved the
military situation. The Vaterland which has been
so long interned by the United States has been
converted so that she now carries about 4,000 tons
of liquid fuel in her double bottom each trip So
gratified have the Admiralty been with the success
which has attended the. adoption of the double
bottom policy that they have presented Mr. Zulver,
the Marine Superintendent of the Anglo-Saxon
Petroleum Company with a silver service, for it was
he who has superintended the whole of the con-
versions.
Cigar Brands.
We hear that the German firm in Manila which
had La Perla Del Oriente" among its brands has
changed hands, and will, no doubt, blossom out as a
British or American company. Before confi-
dence is given back again, however, the new proprie-
tors should satisfy the public that they have made
an actual change and that German management
and interest have been banished For the present
there are strong rumours to the contrary.(S.T.)
The British North Borneo Lottery.
No official list of the winning numbers in the
above lottery is to hand, but we learn that the
following were the numbers drawn for the four
bigger prizes:
1st prize No. 11175.
2nd prize No. 12279.
3rd prize No. 7805.
4th prize No. 14178.
It will be observed that the first and fourth prizes
could quite easily have been gained by one person.
The drawing began at 2 p.m. on Jan. 25; and
it was rumoured afterwards that the big prizes
bad all been won outside Borneo, and that at least.
three of the above winning tickets were sold in
Singapore.(M. T.)
The Silver Thimble Fund.
I beg to acknowledge with thanks the following subscriptions to the Silver Thimble Fund for the Mercantile Marine.
J. M. Bryan	...	...	$100
Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak	...	50
The Honble. and Mrs. Ward	...	20
J. C. Swayne ...	...	10
$180
Gold and silver trinkets from Mrs. Grove.
The Bishops House, Kuching.
IRENE DANSON.
Bowls.
? ?
The usual monthly Bowling Handicap took place at the Sarawak Club on the 3rd February and resulted as follows:
MONTHLY
REPORTS.
UPPER SARAWAK.
BAU AND PAKU.
January.
Court.Bong Tze, who has for some time past
been suspected of carrying on illegal traffic between
here and Sambas, has been watched and was smartly
caught by Corporal Bujang on the 20th with a
quantity of opium in pots about to leave for the
border. He admitted the offence and was fined
three times the value of the opium and the latter
was confiscated. According to his own statement
neither he nor his companions require passes to
enter Sambas which he frequently visits.
Ban Chong, Shim Fait and Ho Ah Hong, all
thieves, were each sent to gaol for six months and
Ng Kwi was sentenced to nine months for theft of
pepper from Lai Poh who in turn was convicted
for being in possession of a number of galvanised
iron buckets, the property of the Borneo Co., Ltd.,
besides other stuff also belonging to them which he
failed to account for.
A Buso Chinese was fined $25 for illegally manu- factoring arrack, and a Ban Chinese a similar amount ! for the same offence in Bau bazaar.
Four Javanese coolies from Sungei Tengah Estate were convicted for theft of fruit and vegetables from Singghi Dyaks. These Dyaks complain bitterly of the depredations of the Sungei Tengah coolies who continually raid their gardens.
A number of Chinese were fined for committing nuisances in the bazaar. This has been getting too common an offence and the police have been ordered to keep a stricter watch for offenders.
Chong Sam Min, a vagrant, was sent to gaol.
The usual number of cases were heard in the Court of Requests.
Public Works.The prison gang (averaged forty- six) have weeded paths and roads round the station
48
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 17, 1919.
and begun cutting anew piece of road on the Bau Buan track, to straighten out an awkward corner.
This has been cut and graded and was nearly com-
pleted at the end of the month.
The quarters for the telephone operators have
been pnt in hand.
The contract for the up-keep of the Jugan road
was taken away from Tambi Mohamat who was not
working properly and he lost his last months con-
tract money. Kap Siew has now taken on the
contract.
General.Mr. H. L. Owen returned to Kuching
on the 2nd after a short visit to Bau.
A Chinese boatman named Choong Kwi was
murdered in bis boat at Kranji on the night of the 4th and his body thrown overboard. The boat was holed and set adrift and was recovered at Batu Kawa several days later. The body of the murdered man came to the surface on the 7th. The skull had been split by a heavy blow with some very sharp weapon, the neck was deeply cut into and the left arm practically severed at the shoulder. Two Chinese
were arrested on information given by a woman and full enquiries have been made into the matter. A serious assault took place at Dahan on the 10th,
a Javanese coolie having his skull fractured by a
blow from a changkol. His assailant was arrested
and is in goal awaiting the mans discharge from
hospital.
Mr. E. Parnell arrived on the 13th to audit the
accounts of the station and returned to Kuching on
the 20th.
Two police were sent up to Jagoi to investigate
the reported felling of a large number of gutta
trees. I sent the parties concerned down to report
to the Honble. the Resident.
On the 28th I left for Kuching to see His High-
ness the Rajah who left for Europe on the 3Utb and
I returned to Bau the same day.
There has been a considerable amount of sickness throughout the district, influenza being ripe among both Chinese and Dyaks and a number of deaths have been reported. The epidemic showed no signs
of abating at the end of the month.
The rainfall, 14'79 inches, was unusually light for
the time of year and less than 1/5th of what fell in January last year. There were one or two heavy storms and the river rose 12 or 14 feet, but the flooding took place.
Dyak padi appears to be doing well and reports
from most quarters of its condition are satisfactory. DONALD A. OWEN,
Resident, SIBU.
?
January.
The 1st of the month was observed as a public holiday
A Malay was sentenced to a term of imprisonment for refusing assistance to Dyak Rangers and their wives, whose boat had upset.
The sentence passed on the Dyak murderer Saieng having been confirmed by His Highness the Rajah, the prisoner was executed on the morning of the 7th, having made a full confession of his guilt the previous evening.
The Manager of one of the principal Chinese firms, at Sibu, was heavily fined for selling rice at a large profit. Arrangements have now been made to fix the maximum selling price of rice on the arrival of a steamer from Singapore. This applies to the Sibu, Benatang, Sarikei and Rejang bazaars.
The Rev. Hoover reports that there are eight schools in the Foo Chow colony with a total of 303
pupils. A large proportion of the expense in con-
nection with these schools is borne by the American
Episcopal Mission.
The messengers sent by His Highness the Rajah
to the Gaat Dyaks returned from up-river on the
7th inst. A full report of the result of their mission
has been forwarded to His Highness.
Mr. H. L. Owen, who has been appointed to do
temporary duty in this district, arrived from Kuching,
by s. 5. Gladys, on the 3rd.
Date Abang Haji Halil, having received in-
structions to proceed to Lawas, left for Kuching by
the Government launch on the 25th.
Mr. Clement arrived by the return launch from
Kuching on the 30th to take up bis duties at Sibu.
The Datu Hakim has also been stationed at Sibu as
chief Native Officer of the 3rd Division.
Mr. and Mrs. H. H. Kort right left on the 3rd for
Rejang en route to Miri. Mr. F. F. Boult, who has
been detained at. Sibu since Christmas for medical
attendance, left on the 31st with Mrs. Boult for
Mu kali. The sum of $10,000 in silver was remitted
to Mukah by the launch.
A letter was received from Saratok on the 31st
stating that s.s. Alice Lorraine had broken down in
the river near Saratok, and would require to be
towed to Kuching. A wireless message was sent to
Kuching to this effect.
Mr. H. D Aplin visited Daro, Matu and Rejang
from the 11th to the 26th working off all accumu-
lated cases and dealing with other business.
It is reported that the padi crops of the Igan
people and of the Dyaks living in that district have
been practically all destroyed by mice. Reports
from other parts of the district, however, are more
favourable and a fair crop may be expected.
S. S. Gladys made two trips from Kuching during
the month, but as she sailed for Brooketon on the
first occasion and for Singapore on the second there
has been no direct communication from Sibu to
Kuching since December.
S. S. Flevo and S. S. Batavier have both cleared
once-during the month for Singapore.
The first of the engkabang has reached Sibu
bazaar, but up to the present poor prices have been
realised.
The weather during the month has been remark-
ably good. During January the island is usually
flooded at spring tides, but this year no floods have
been experienced.
The trade returns for the month show the follow-
ing figures: Coasting Foreign
Imports.
...	$ 35,905
76,874
Exports.
$ 15,136
89,603
$112,779
$104,739
? .. ??
1918
$ 46,379
$ 74,049
Immigration figures are: Men. Women. Children.
Foo Chow	6	2	3
Hokien	1	4	3 19 total.
J. BARING-GOULD, Resident 3rd Division.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 17, 1919.
49
BINTULU.
December, 1918.
Owing to the increasing scarcity of rice and con-
sequent high prices charged it became advisable to
lay in a stock for the provisioning of Government
employees until the harvest relieves the situation.
No more padi in any quantity was to be got from
the Dyaks, so an application was sent to the Food-
stuffs Committee in Kuching who procured and sent
the required amount.
Correspondence with the Resident 2nd Class of
Kapit while he was at Belaga brought to my notice
that Kayans and Punans are constantly moving
about between the upper Bintulu and the Belaga.
without passes. These people have been warned
that they will have to obtain passports before leaving
the district in the future and will be fined if they
omit to do so.
The Penans of Jelalong are somewhat disturbed
about the new wild gutta Order. Their rice crop
early in the year was mostly destroyed by floods
and there is no jelutong in their part of the country.
Hence they had been depending chiefly on the
working of gutta percha for their leaving. They ex-
press themselves quite willing to gather the leaves
if only the Chinese will buy, hut up to the present
no local merchant has shown a desire to do so.
However the engkabang crop is just beginning and
this should suffice to carry these Penans on until
the approaching rice harvest.
One Sapar, Tua of a small kampong at Bintulu,
had to be dismissed from his post for very persistent
neglect of his duties and disregard of Government
Orders. The people of the kampong have not been
able to decide upon a suitable man to succeed Sapar,
but are quite willing to have their villages divided,
as it is situated between two others without any in-
terval, one half the houses being attached to the
kampong above and the rest to that below.
Court work has been much less than usual. The
number of summonses issued in the Court of Re-
quests has been diminishing every month now for
some time, and so many people are away busy on
their padi farms that there has not been much other
litigation.
Influenza seems to have almost entirely died out.
In fact the few deaths attributed to it during Decem-
ber may lie for the most part due to other causes,
as the people are apt now to attribute any death
that may occur to influenza unless it is very palpably
caused by something else.
The motor tug Miri came in on the 24th towing
a lighter for the usual purpose of loading with bilian
timber. They left on the 27th and expect to pay
another visit here early in January as the lighter
was a small one and only able to load about half
the timber ready for her to take.
From the 28th to the end of the month the sea
was very rough and no boats, not even the barongs,
could get out over the bar.
The p.s. Adeh called at Kidurong on her way up-
coast on the 1st and 15th and on the return journeys
on the 8th and 21st.
A. E. LAWRENCE,
Resident 2nd Class.
HARAM.
?
December, 1918.
A good number of cases were settled in the
Courts, the chief one being that of Ambun and
Oyong Lintong fined for adultery and a further fine
for perjury. The remainder do not call for any
special mention.
LOWER REJANG.
January.
I left Sibu on the 11th instant reaching Daro the same day and Matu the next day. There was less Court work than usual, most of the people being away busy on their farms. Lim Cha Tan was
imprisoned for one year for theft of jewellery valued
at over $1,000. The other cases were mostly sago
disputes.
An enquiry was held of the burning of the Police
Station on the night of 13th December. This was
evidently the work of an incendiary, but I was
unable to find out who had done it. P. C. Saduniah
on guard that night was absent and so was dismissed.
A new Police Station is to be erected, the cost of
which is. to be defrayed by the Chinese and kam-
pongs.
The prospects of a good harvest this year are not
very bright. Sirek and Bruit are the only places
where good reports of padi come from. Rats have
been an awful pest and have destroyed more than
half the crops.
Raw sago was fetching a very good price.
The influenza epidemic was very bad here in
December, one of the victims being the jelutong
inspector. As there is not very much work for these
inspectors to do I have arranged that the inspector
at Daro is to divide his time between both places.
I left for Daro on the 17th. The bungalow was
completed in December and makes a great improve-
ment to the place. A small gaol is wanted here, as
at present there is no place to put prisoners, who
seem to wander about wherever they like.
The Chinese have subscribed $75 to raise and
repair the bazaar road. It is proposed to raise it
above high water level and do away with the wooden
path way, which is always out of repair and ex-
pensive to keep up. Court work was very light
here. On the 22nd I went to Rejang. The Government
compound was in good order, but the grass on the
roads was very long. At present there is no labour
to keep up the roads.
I inspected the light-house and kampong at Jeri-
jeh. The Malays complain of the Chinese shops in
the kampong extending and taking up their land.
The Chinese should not have been allowed to open
up shops in the middle of the kampong, but as they
have been there some time, I did not remove them,
but have given instuctions that no repairs are to be
done, or extensions made to their present shops. A
site can be given the Chinese outside the kampong.
One Mapi of Sirek was fined for holding a bebayoh,
he already having been warned about this by the
late Resident, Mr. Chynoweth.
I left for Sarikei on the 25th where I stopped two
hours. There were no cases brought before me.
Several new shops have been put up and trade
seems very brisk here. Binatang was reached the
same night. The Chinese have asked for a piece of
land to open up shops and a piece was given them
at right angles to the bazaar sufficient for several
shops.
Abang Haji Metair reported that the prospects of
a Dyak padi crop were fair. The Dyaks were all
busy collecting engkabang which is going to lead to
a lot of disputes as to ownerships of the trees.
I returned to Sibu on the evening of the 26th.
H. D. APLIN, Resident 2nd Class. 50
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 17, 1919.
Arrears of rubber tax were collected and all defaulters were made to pay double.
The prisoners have been engaged in levelling the site for the new bazaar and in repairing the damage done to the roads by the floods.
The frame-work of eight of the new shops was erected by the end of the month, so that the whole bazaar should be well advanced by the end of the landas.
I regret to report that two Malay prisoners managed to escape from jail at daybreak on the 21st. Their arrest has not been effected as yet. Negligence of the prison guard contributed to this escape and an enquiry will be held into the matter when the Honble. the Divisional Resident next visits this station.
The same day Mr. A. Mowe, Treasury clerk, reported that he could not open the main Treasury safe owing to the key breaking when trying to turn the lock. The safe was promptly sealed up and the matter awaits instructions.
Privates Malang and Naga were ordered to return to headquarters for insubordination.
The s. l. Chamois made two trips to the mouth with mails.
The trade returns for the month were:
Exports.	Imports.
$10,630	$5,828
The rainfall amounted to 993 inches.
DATU S. HAMID.
Native Officer.
The Sarawak Gazette.
RATES OF ADVERTISEMENT IN THE SARAWAK GAZETTE.	Payable in advance.
Quarter of a column and under
First insertion .	...	... $1.00
Second and third insertion each	... 0.50
Subsequent do	do 0.25
Half a Column and under
First insertion ...	...	... 2.00
Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
Subsequent do	do	... 0 50
A Column and under
First insertion each	...	... 4.00
Second and third insertion each	... 2.00
Subsequent do	do	... 1 00
Special arrangements may be made for standing advertisements.
All communications intended for insertion in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed to the Editor at the Government Printing Office, Kuching. They should be clearly written and should reach the Office at least one day before the publication of each issue.
Letters and other contributions must be authenticated by writers name sent privately to the Editor.
We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not inserting them.
Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early intelligence of all matters of general interest in their respective neighbourhoods.
NOTICE.
ASTANA FARM.
THE Manager of Astana Farm begs to inform the Public that he is unable to attend to Orders for milk after Office hours.
A clean tooth never decays."
H. OHNISHI D.D.S. (T.D.C.)
(Graduated Tokyo Dental College)
Japanese Dentist
193-6, ORCHARD ROAD, SINGAPORE.
[124]
NOTICE.
GnzeUf	ioiiM im i 1 *1-1 n( iiix
Olllev
FOK the convenience of residents at Outstations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums but only the 1,2 and 3 cent values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that Money Orders be sent if possible.
J. C. SWAYNE,
Manager, Govt. Printing Office.
NOTICE.
A V E beg to notify our customers that our y y Town Office has been closed since 31st December 1918.
For the sale of our sawn timber locally we have appointed Mr. YEO CHOO HONG of Chop. SOON TECK of Jawa Street as Agent, who will give his attention to all orders.
Prices for all timber delivered at our Works at Sungei Priok will be 5% less than those for town deliveries.
In future all communications should be addressed to THE KWONG LF.B BANKING CO., our Financial Agents, and ail monies due to us should also be paid to them.
THE KUCHING STEAM SAW MILLS LIMITED,
68]
WANTED.
COURT INTERPRETER with a know- ledge of Foo Chow (essential), Hok-kien and Cantonese dialects and able to read and write Chinese characters and understand Chinese accounts.
Applicants please apply to Residents Office, Sibu, Sarawak.
[6-4]
NOTICE.
Gaz	ioiiM im i 1 *1-1 n( iiix
Olllev
FOK the convenience of residents at Outstations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums but only the 1,2 and 3 cent values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that Money Orders be sent if possible.
J. C. SWAYNE,
Manager, Govt. Printing Office.
NOTICE.
A V E beg to notify our customers that our y y Town Office has been closed since 31st December 1918.
For the sale of our sawn timber locally we have appointed Mr. YEO CHOO HONG of Chop. SOON TECK of Jawa Street as Agent, who will give his attention to all orders.
Prices for all timber delivered at our Works at Sungei Priok will be 5% less than those for town deliveries.
In future all communications should be addressed to THE KWONG LF.B BANKING CO., our Financial Agents, and ail monies due to us should also be paid to them.
THE KUCHING STEAM SAW MILLS LIMITED,
68]
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 17, 1919.
51
Notice of Sale.
THE undermentioned lots in the district X of Kuching will be offered for sale by public auction at the Court House, Kuching on Friday, the 21st of February 1919, at 9 a. m. on the terms below specified :
Schedule.	Reserve Price.
Lot No. 22 West of 1 mile Rock Road, 2 acres $250.
Quit Rent 50 cents per acre, per annum.
Conditions.
The applicant shall maintain the said land in good order and any buildings erected as dwelling houses on the said land shall be of a substantial character.
The title will be a grant for 999 years.
The purchaser will be required to pay a deposit of 25 per cent of the purchase money and the balance within 14 days from the date of sale, failing which the deposit will be forfeited to Government. Plans may be seen and further in formation obtained at the Land Office where also offers may be made by persons desirous of purchasing the said land. Government reserves the right to withdraw the property from auction in the event of any satisfactory offer being made for same before the date of the auction sale.
ABA NG SULEIMAN.
for Supt. of Land & Survey Dept.
KUCHING SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
Departures.
PASSENGERS.
ARRIVALS.
PER s. s. Gladys-.6th February- From Sibu -Revd. Father E. Dunn.
PER S. S. Kuching: 9th FebruaryFrom Singapore Mr. Kimura.
DEPARTURES.
PER e. a. Gladys:3rd FebruaryFor SibuMr. G. M. Gifford.
PERS. s. Kuching:- 12th February-For 'Singapore-- Dr. and Mrs. van Hemert, Mr. and Mrs. Geikie, Messrs. C. Bowen, C. P. Davis. J. L. Beardon, Lau Chin Heng, Sim Kim Heng and Tamis Doi.
Notice of Sale.
THIIRTY lots of land for building shops A situated on the river bank at Engkililih, lauding place for Marup, etc., will be auctioned in the Court House, Simanggang on March 1 1th, 1919. Each lot consists of 3 fathoms by 15.
Condition.
That each owner of a lot must build a substantial shop of wood with bilian ataps. same to be completed within G months from date of auction.
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER.
Resident.
Simanggang,
29th January, 1919.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 17, 1919.
THE KUCHING DRUG STORE.
KUCHING. SARAWAK.
The place where you can a Runs get:
PHOTOGRAPHIC CHEMICALS, SURGICAL APPLIANCES,
OPTICAL GOODS, PATENT MEDICINES, TOILET
REQUISITES AND THE LATEST NOVELS.
HOURS.
From 8 a. m.	To 11.30 a. m.
,, 1 p. m.	4.30 p. m.
PRICES MODERATE.
ORDERS PROMPTLY EXECUTED.
[129]
FOR SALE.
A
WEBLEY & SCOTT AUTOMATIC PISTOL
together with leather holster, belt and
small cartridge pouch, and about 100 car-
tridges.
Also 100 Winchester Rifle Cartridges
(smokeless).
401soft point bullets.
The property of Mr. C. C. ROBISON.
Offers to be made to
F. G. DAY,
Kuching.
[The above will be sold subject to the Govern-
ment granting a license to the intending purchaser.
[3-1]
SYN BIN LEONG & CO.,
22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS.
Beer, Wine, Spirit A General Store Deniers.
: (o): SOLE AGENTS FOR:
FRASER & NEAVES AERATED WATERS
(The Best throughout the East.)
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic
Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at
$1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 catties of dry rubber.
ASAHI BEER.
ACETIC ACID.
:(o):	Fresh supplies of Stores are received
regularly.
PRICES MODERATE.
Free delivery to customers in Kuching.
Free packing & shipping for Outstation
Orders.
[u. c.]	GOVERNMENT WHITEWASHING AND
PAINTING CONTRACT, 1919.
TENDERS will be received at the Municipal Office up to 11 a. m. on Friday, 28th February next for the above contract, particulars of which may be obtained upon 'application. Ail tenders must be made on the forms provided by the Municipal Department and should be forwarded in sealed envelopes addressed to the Municipal Officer.
K. H. GILLAN.
Municipal Officer.
NOTICE.
AUCTION SALE
of unredeemed pledges from Pawn Broking Farm YEW CHEE & Co., Chop Wo SANG and Chop LOON YEK of Bau at No. 18, China Street on Saturdays of the following dates15th March 1919, 19th April 1919, 17th May 1919 and 21st June 1919, at 9 a.m.
List of all such unredeemed pledges can be seen at the Pawn Farmers premises.
SYN HIN LEONG A CO.,
Authorised Auctioneers.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
ALMANAC.
FEBRUARY, 1919.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 17, 1919.
METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS.
GENERAL HOSPITAL.
Kuching, January, 1919.
Highest Barometric reading
Lowest	3005 inches. 2997	Highest temperature (shade)	96
Lowest	69
Highest	Sun
Total rainfall (Museum)
160
13-48 inches.
Height of Hospital above sea level, approximately 75 feet.
54	TRE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 17, 1919.
THE SARAWAK STUDIO
THE BEST IN KUCHING
WHERE GOOD PORTRAITS CAN BE TAKEN AND VIEWS OF THE
NEIGHBOURHOOD PROCURED.
VIEWS OF THE WANGKANG PROCESSION IN GREAT
VARIETY FOR SALE.
PHOTOS FOR PASSPORTS
AT SHORT NOTICE.
AMATEURS FILMS & PLATES DEVELOPED, PRINTED &
ENLARGED AT REASONABLE CHARGES.
FRESH KODAK FILMS CAN ALWAYS BE SUPPLIED.
Free instructions given to Amateurs with pleasure.
C. M. LEE,
Manager.
21, COURT HOUSE ROAD, KUCHING.
RIDE A RIGID. RAPID. RELIABLE -
Raleigh Cycle Co. Ld.
NOTTINGHAM. ENGLAND.
KUCHING:Printed and Published by GHIN HENG SOON, Government Printer, at the Government Printing Office. Barrack Road.
so designed as to be almost self-steering
and can thus be ridden along the narrowest
path in comfort and safety. The fork
blades combine strength and
GUARANTEED FOR EVER
ALL THE WORLD OVER
