
VOL. XLIX.
No. 780.
Price KUCHING, SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1919. 10cents
C O N T E N T S.
The Sarawak Gazette.
Births:AndrewChan Peng Chuan
Death:Hardie	...	...	...
Notes
Miri Notes	...
Clippings ...
Death of Taha. Tua Kampoug Nomor Lima
Mr. John Hardie
Singghi Fire
Matang Rainfall
Mukah Peace Celebrations
The Globe-trotter	..
Sarawak Library
Monthly Reports: Upper Sarawak
Simanggang
Oya Mukah
Baram Miri
Trade Returns	...
Almanac ...	...
Rainfall
Market Price List for the month of October 1919 Passengers	...	...	...
Kuching Shipping Returns
Page.
279
279
279
280
280
281
281
281
282
282
283
284
284
285
286
287
289
290
290
291
291
292
SATURDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1919.
ON the 19th October, 1919, at Wellington. New Zealand, the 'wife of A. R. ANDREW, Miri, a son.
AT Kuching. Sarawak, on the 23rd October, 1919 the wife of CHAN PENG CHUAN a son.
Death.
2 HARDIEAt Labuan, on October 9, John Hardie, in his 79th
2W1 year.
291	292
NOTES.
The Sarawak Gazette.
SUBSCRIPTIONS to the Gazette are as follows:
The Sarawak Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
Single copy	...	...	...	.10 cents
Subscription for one year ...	...	$2.00 Subscription including postage to Outstations 2.25
Subscription including postage to all other
Countries. ...	...	2.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING
Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 5S. 10d
The Sarawak Government Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
Single copy	...	...	... .15 cents
Subscription for one year	...	... $1.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 1.25 Subscription including postage to all other
Countries. ...	.. 1.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING
Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 3s. 6d
All subscriptions are payable in advance and must commence from the 1st January in each year on which date they are renewable. All broken periods will be considered as full.
Subscriptions will not be renewed unless notice of renewal given.
Changes of Address should be notified to the Office in writing.
(October.)
His Highness the Tuan Muda, the Honble. H. B. Crocker and Mr. J. P. Mead left for Simatan on the 11th by s. s. Alice Lorraine, and returned overland, via Bau, on the 25th. An examination of the timber resources of the Poe district was made.
P. S. Adeh arrived from the North on the 11th with passengers Mr. and Mrs. J. H. Wright and Messrs. Alder and Laemmle.
THE out-put of gold and silver by the Bau Cyanding Works amounted to 1,463.9 ozs. and 264.4 ozs. respectively for the month of September.
S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore on the 16th with passengers Mr. and Mrs. Song Kheng Hai, Messrs. E. W. Howell, G. I). Burn and, Ho Tee Chim, Wee Cheng Ewe, How Teck Sze and Sim Choon Puang, Mrs. Chan Hong Sze and Mrs. Wee Kheng Hong.
S. S. Kuching sailed for Singapore on the 20th with passengers Messrs. W. B. Chilton,
280
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER J, 1919.
Chan Kui Cho, Chan Kui Yeow and Chan
Kui Chuan, Mrs. Ong Wee Hian and Miss
Sim Soh Eng.
THE Resident of Simanggang learns from
various sources that engkabang trees are in
flower in the Second Division.
S. S. Rajah of Sarawak arrived on October
21st. The passengers included Messrs. J. M.
Bryan, Chan Lian Wan and at Phiong Nyuk.
S. S. Rajah of Sarawak left for Singapore
on October 24th. Passengers were Messrs. Chan Lian Wan, Khoo Chong Seng and Mrs. Chan Kee Tuan.
We understand that a firm has chartered the vessel and she will not return to this port
for some three or four months. Meanwhile
s. s. Kuching will go back to her old run of
S. S. Alice, Lorraine arrived from Lingga 27th, passenger Mr. P. M. Adams. Mr. Adams is leaving for European furlough.
THE Indian festival of Dewali or Deepavali was celebrated in Kuching on the 22nd and 23rd with the customary illuminations.
MASTERS of vessels arriving in the Sarawak river from foreign ports are notified in the Government Gazette that they must proceed to Kuching for medical inspection.
The only communication permitted en route will be the landing of mails and cold storage supplies at Goebilt.
WE call the. attention of any of our readers who are still expecting goods from England dispatched in 1918 to an advertisement on page "291.
THE remaining Gaat rebels who sought refuge in Dutch Borneo were handed over to the Sarawak Government at the beginning of the month at Lubok Antu. A hundred were sent on to Sibu by the Zahora and the four ringleaders Blikau, Kenjau, Unyat and Gila were brought down to Kuching for detention.
S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore on the 27th, the passengers included Messrs. G. M. Allman, G. N. M'Gill and Cooke.
S. 8. Kuching left for Singapore on the 31st, amongst the passengers were Messrs. P. M. Adams, G. T. Bates and G. M. MGill. A large party were on board to wish the two former a quick and pleasant voyage to England.
Miri Notes.
A very serious affair occurred at Miri on October 2nd. On the night in question Mr. H. Beard, head of the Store Department of the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Co., Ltd., returned from a dinner party soon after midnight and retired to bed. He was waken up about an hour afterwards by a queer
sensation in his bauds and on inspection found he
was bleeding. Ho tried to switch on the electric
light, hut found that it bad been cut off, so called
for bis boy who gave the alarm to Dr. Andrew, in
the neighbouring bungalow, and to Mr. W. F.
Skrine, Resident 2nd Class. On further inspection
it was found that Mr. Beard was suffering from two
Severe cuts across both arms, his left one being
nearly severed above the wrist. If he had not
luckily been sleeping with his hands folded across
his body, he would certainly have been killed.
The culprit was found to be Mr. Beards late boy,
Bong Kook, who had only left his service on
September 30th. Bong Fook was arrested and
confessed his guilt. He apparently had no motive
for committing the deed, as he liked Mr. Beard who
had always treated him well. He tried to implicate
his successor, Ah Chiaw, but this was not proved.
Bong Fook was tried in Court on 13th instant
and found guilty of attempted murder, and was sentenced to seven years imprisonment and 24 strokes
with the rattan.
Great sympathy has been expressed with Mr.
Beard, who is a most popular mem tier of the com-
munity, in his misfortune and we are glad to hear
he is progressing most favourably and will be going
home to England next month.
Major E. V. Benjamin, who is taking Mr. Wyndham Jones place as General Manager of the Sarawak concessions of the Anglo-Saxon Pet. Co., Ltd.,
Miri, arrived at Miri by s. s. Kajang on October 24th.
Clippings.
A Reuter cable of the 8th inst. announces that Sir Laurence Nunns Guillemard, K. C. B. has been appointed Governor of the Straits Settlements.
The new Governor has been Chairman of the Board of Customs since 1908 and of the Amalgamated Board of Customs and Excise since 1909. He was created C. B. in 1905 and K. C. B. in 1910.
Sir Laurence Guillemard was born in 1862, and is the only son of the Rev. William Guillemard, D. D. He was married in 1902 to Ella, daughter of Mr. Thomas Spencer Walker. Educated at Charterhouse and Trinity College, Cambridge, Sir Laurence entered the Treasury in 1888, and was private secretary to Sir W. V. Harcourt and Sir Michael Hicks Beach from 1892 to 1902. He was appointed to the governing body of Charterhouse School 1906, and was Deputy Chairman, Board of Inland Revenue, from 1902 to 1908. (S. T.)
The engagement is announced of Miss Wee Thoe Neo, eldest daughter of Mr. Wee Chin Ek, and Mr. Chan Qui Chong, fourth son of the late Towkay Kee Soon, of Chop Chin Ann, Sarawak. The marriage will take place on November 26 at Mathies Hill, Kuching. (S. T.)
Under the new arrangement for the marketing of gold, the producers will ship all gold, except local currency requirements, to the Bank of England, which will deliver it to the refiners. Rothschilds, as the producers agents, will sell the gold at the best price obtainable, affording the bullion brokers and others the opportunity of bidding. The bank has Treasury authority for the issue of licences to re-export. The producers pay all charges of marketing. The effect of the arrangement is the provision of a free market.(P. G.)
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. NOVEMBER 1, 1919.
281
Death of Taha, Tua Kampong
Nomor Lima.
We regret to record the death of Talia, Tua kam-
pong of kampong Number Five, who died on the
22nd instant during a tuba fishing at Kuala Tabor.
Taha bin Gapar. Tua Kampong nomor Lima, kapala menuba. Prahu-prahu, sampan yang ada
menuba lebeh kurang 20 buah. Maka pada waktu
pukol 9.30 pagi Talia naik di-pasir dan dia bilang
kapada orang-orang, sahya mahu jalan di-laut
melihat ilamat ayer pasang, maka jika sahya me-
ngangkat bandera puteh kita semua buangkan ayer
tuba. Kemudian dia pun berjalan ; dekat pukol 10
bandera puteh pun ada angkat. Orang-orang pun
membuang ayer tuba dan Taha pun balek dengan
membawak bandera puteh sampei ka-prahu-nya,
ikan pun banyak timbul, Taha dan orang-orang
semua pun menyerampang ikan banyak sudah
dapat, kira-kira pukol 11 dia datang sakit sasak
tajam Maka di-ramas dengan ayer panas, di-dalam
suku jam ada lah baik, dia pun dapat mengisap
roko, kira-kira dekat pukol 11 datang lagi sakit
smacham itu jnga, dnu pada pukol 12 dia pun
mati. Dan kita banyak kasehan di-atas Taha, barn
10 bulan jadi Tua Kampong nomor Lima.
Mr. John Hardie.
By the passing of John Hardie at the age of 78
the British Community in Labuan hits lost its oldest
landmark. Mr. Hardie was taken seriously ill at
the beginning of August, but by reason of a remark-
ably strong constitution he lingered mi for two and
a half months and passed away peacefully in his
sleep on October 9th. He was buried in the
Christian Cemetery in Labuan on October 10th
when a large body of friends representative of all
classes and races attended the service.
The first part of the service was held m the church
of Holy Saviour of which church Mr. Hardie had been church warden for many years : The Bishop of
Labuan and Sarawak officiated, and Mr. J. A. H.
Hardie of the Sarawak Civil Service, son of the ,
deceased, was chief mourner. The pall bearers were Mr. Edmund Roberts, Officer in charge, Labuan, Dr. T. C. A. Cleverton : Messrs. It. M. MacAlpine,
W. S. Bevan and R. J. Marshall of the E. E. Telegraph Co. and Mr. J. S. Montgomery of
Vanscolina and Co. Many beautiful wreaths wit-
nessed the respect and affection in which Mr. Hardie
was held by all classes.
Mr. John Hardie had a remarkable career. The
son of Mr. John Hardie of B. O Mains, he was born
at Bo'ness Linlithgowshire. Scotland in 1841 and
was educated at the Royal High School, Edinburgh.
In 1863 he sailed for Singapore and joined the
Borneo Company Ltd., being sent to their newly
formed branch in Sarawak, where lie worked under
Mr. Helms, their first Manager in Kuching. He
was soon transferred to Mukah, Sarawak, to take
charge of the Companys sago factory and there
remained for ten years, when he returned to the
capital as Manager of the B. C. L. In 1886 he
retired and returned to Scotland.
Next year, however, on account of failing eyesight,
he left the old country and sailed in a sailing ship
via the Cape to Australia where he bought a farm in Barraloong and managed it. At this period, in
1891, he married Mary Christina daughter of Dr.
Fisher of Melbourne, but about the same time he, like
many others, was severely crippled financially by
the failure of the Australian Bank and had to begin
all over again. Possessed of indomitable energy
and determination be set sail with his wife for the
F. M. 8. and became manager of the Punjom Gold
Mines near Kuala Lipis, just about the time when
the state was disturbed by the notorious Malay rising.
Mr. Hardie had immediately to send his wife down
the Pahang river to Singapore for safety, and during
this voyage she was several times sniped at by the
disaffected Malays, but eventually got safely through
to Singapore where she gave birth to her only son
in 1892. Mr. Hardie then enrolled himself under
Sir Hugh Clifford and assisted in suppressing the
Pahang Rebellion.
In 1894 Mr. Hardie made his first acquaintance
with Labuan, when he become manager of the
Borneo Minerals Company, and prospected along
with Mr. H. H. Everett in Baram and Brunei In
1898 he started his own business in Labuan as a
merchant and also held the post of Sarawak Government Agent from 1808 to 1912, after which date
he confined himself solely to his own work until the
time of his death.
Mr. Hardie took a prominent part in the social life
of the Settlement and was especially interested in
horsemanship and racing. He was also the President of the Labuan Golf Club and a J. P. for many
years. In his later years he was a keen croquet
player and taught many friends how to play that
game scientifically. He was always a good friend,
a perfect best and an interesting conversationalist.
He was ever ready to lend a helping hand to those
in distress, a God fearing man, deeply interested in
church welfare and if one phrase could lie found to
sum up all his qualities, he might justly be described
us God's good man. His remains are laid beside
those of his wife and his brother, who predeceased
him, and he is survived by his only son.
May he fest in peace and may light perpetual
shine upon him.( F. P. )
Singghi Fire.
A serious lire occurred in Kampong Atas, Singghi, at 5 p. m. on the 20th instant when 18 out of 38 doors of that Land Dyak village were completely destroyed, together with all their contents.
The village was quite empty at the time, every man, woman and child being away in the padi fields. The Orang Kaya happened to be passing and saw two houses well alight. In vain he called for help and sounded a tetawak, but only at 7 p. m. did the people begin to return. Luckily there was not a breath of air and the Dyaks pulled the roofs off the rest of the kampong thus averting a disaster, but nothing at all was saved from the 18 houses burnt, and the total loss is estimated at between 4 and 5,000 dollars. But little padi was lost as it was not stored in the houses, but on the farms, but some of the live stock was unable to escape.
How the fire started is and will remain a mystery. Probably from smouldering logs left in the cooking place in Ma Mabeng's house which was the first to burn.
The flames were plainly visible for many miles round its the kampong is perched on the upper slopes of the mountain, and the evening was still and dark so that the conflagration showed very plainly against the mass of trees which formed the background.
Was it not for the serious loss of property the fire would have been an excellent thing, as the kampong is as filthy as most Land Dyak villages and the cleansing by fire would have done no harm; but, occurring as it did at a time when the Dyaks are, like everyone else, suffering from the high prices of food, it is to be regretted.
282
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER I, 1919.
Matang Rainfall.
?
The figures for the daily rainfall at Matang have been taken since June 1909, and though this is too short a period from which to draw any definite inferences, it will be seen that the rainfall, though slightly heavier, corresponds with that of Kuching.
The average for the years 19101918 is .182'9 inches, compared to 169'2 for the same time in Kuching. As the Kuching figure is above the general average, it is reasonable to suppose that the Matang figures are above the average too.
L. R. R.
Monthly Rainfall of Matang 1910-1918
9-45 on 14th.	* Height above new-level approximately 400 feet
9-50 ., 27th.
Mukah Peace Celebrations.
The 20th of September luckily turned out fine for on that day Mukah celebrated the signing of Peace and the glorious victory of the Allies.
No less than nine Europeans managed to collect together and the proceedings started about 8 a.m. with boat racing. Rather a welcome change was the absence of races for long boats, these are apt to become wearisome. Perhaps the best race from the spectacular point of view was that for barongs propelled by oars. The way in which the rowers hurled themselves off their seats and plumped down again with every stroke was most effective and if not quite according to Oxford and Cambridge practices, was at least most successful in getting the clumsy looking craft along. The bandong races
were paddled in marvellous time whilst in the race for ships boats the Lucile a dingy had no chance.
A greasy boom caused the usual intense excitement. Owing to the non-arrival of the axle grease from Kuching the Committee had perforce to use minyak sapi wherewith to grease the pole. Whether this had anything to do with the agility of the small boys I cannot say, but towards the end nearly every starter managed to clutch the elusive flag before he dived into the Muddy Mukah. A Melanau man bad the misfortune to bit his head on the pole whilst falling off and was picked up out of the water unconscious. He, however, revived later on and except for the loss of a few teeth appears to be none the worse for his adventure. Curiously enough the pole was not splintered.
At noon an adjournment was made to the Fort where over 300 persons sat down to a curry tiffin.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1919.
283
spots. Sarawak, I said, is my trump-card, I
think."
Having arranged the whole series very artistically
on the torso of my kit-bag I travelled down to
Shepperley on Friday evening. The Sheldon-
Browns (pere et fille). Gunter and I formed the
house-party.
The conversation at dinner that night was not
particularly geographical, True, Scarborough was
mentioned, and Widnes was lightly touched upon,
but I was quite at home in these latitudes and hold
my own with Gunter.
But after dinner we retired to the billiard-room,
and whilst I played a hundred up with old Sheldon-
Brown, Gunter snookered Lucy in a corner and
took her (in imagination) to the far corners of the
earth.
The game was just over and old Sheldon-Brown-
had gone off on a search, probably fruitless, for
whisky, when I heard Gunter say something about
Borneo.
Surely, I said to myself, this globetrotting
bounder might have left one corner of the world
unguntered, one little spot that I would call my own
and lie freely about without fear of detection."
Slamming my cue into the rack, for my blood was
up ink) the high numbers, I strolled over to the sofa
and sat down heavily on the other side of Lucy.
Gunter scowled.
Mastering my feelings, I smiled and said almost
sweetly, Borneo? Yes. lovely place, isn't it?
Gunter started. You have been there?" he said,
in a tone that seemed to imply a sceptical attitude.
This sent my blood further up till it touched the
top and rang the bell. I saw red and other colours
in several shades, but I still managed to smile.
Er yes, some years ago," I said. Top-hole
place."
Oh. do tell me about it," said Lucy.
What else could I do? Such girl as Lucy Sheldon-
Brown do not grow on every family tree. Gunter
should not oust me from Borneo without a struggle.
"Which way did you go? said Gunter.
"Oh, the usual route," I said, Marseilles, Cairo
(Shepheards Hotei there, of course), Colombo and
and the way you probably went."
"Very likely," said Gunter. And whereabouts
did you stay in Borneo?" he asked, his voice ap-
patently trembling with emotion.
Its er rather a long time ago," I said dreamily,
and you probably wouldnt know the little village
that was my objective."
Gunter made a peculiar noise in his throat.
"Sara-Sarawak?" he asked-
"I only stayed a night there," I said airily. I
trekked intoerSouthern Borneo. Quite the
wildest partwhat ? "
Quite. I should say," Gunter agreed; though
, I have not been further that Sarawak.
This is money for nothing, I said inwardly.
This is where I begin to get the bulge on Gunter."
Aloud I said, Never been further than Sarawak'?
My dear fellow, you don't begin to know Borneo
till you've been up-country, into theerthe
hinterland.
Gunter winced a distinct wince at my evident
familiarity with my subject.
You simply must tell me all about it, Lucy
urged, turning a nicely powdered back on the odious
Gunter. I couldn't resist such an urge.
So far as 1 remember," I said slowly-, when I
left Sarawak J took the first turning to the left and
followed the path leading to the mountains, which
run along the centre of the island" (the map had
shown me these). "After taking this path for about
one hundred and thirty-five miles or so I turned to
the right, where the roads divide, and, after walking
On the tables being cleared the Resident, Mr. H. L.
Owen, who was in his happiest vein, wished the
whole company present the best of luck and explain-
ed to them the necessity of putting up with a few
hardships, none of which could be compared to those
suffered by the Allied seamen and troops and the
whole of Europe generally. A Malay speech having
been read by the son of Datu Azahari and a few
incoherent words uttered by a nervous European
visitor the people dispersed.
At 2 p.m. the land sports began. These included a
Victoria Cross race for Rangers (aided by the stentorian efforts of the Rector on a cornet . a sago log rolling race, cigarette race, obstacle and Marathon races.
A tug-of-war for which a number of teams bad entered
was finally won by Father Bernard Mulders stout
veterans from the Tillian. At 7 p. m. a fire-work
display hail been advertised and long before this
crowds of natives followed by their shrouded and
veiled women-folk had assembled. The start was
excellent, but unfortunately a spark must have
fallen right in the middle of the dump as there was
suddenly an awful explosion and the spectacle of
high Church dignitaries and others running for
their life was afforded to the astounded natives
The rockets went off in all directions and it was a
case of sauve qui peut.
Amidst the plaintive cries of who did this?"
the more intrepid of the operators returned to the
fray and by their efforts succeeded in saving about
half the dump. The rest were let off successfully
although one European was seen suddenly to tear off
his shirt which was in flames whilst another calmly
walked about with the tails of his coat smouldering.
Much amusement was caused by another reckless
padre who, accompanied by the gentleman minus
the shirt, threw squibs amongst the delighted populace. the fair sex, as usual, showing their glee by
sundry squeals and shrieks and much play with their
headcloths.
The departure of a fire ballon concluded the show
and as the people slowly dispersed one could not
Help hoping that they understood the occasion
that had been celebrated and that they returned to
their homes with a thankful heart for the many
lives which have been sacrificed so that they might
live.
The Globe-trotter.
( With acknowledgments to Punch.)
As I fingered the Shelton-Browns' invitation for
the week-end to their place at Shepperley a sort of
feeling came over me as if my withers were being
wrung. No doubt I think it must have been caused
by jealousy, for Gunter, so Lucy Sheldon-Brown
said in her letter of invitation, was to be of the
party.
I had beard of Gunter but had never met him. I
understood him to be a globe-trotter and rather
epris with Lucy. No doubt he had told her travellers' tales. These things always captivate women.
On Friday my eye caught a somewhat similar
advertisement to the one reproduced in the pages
of Punch (issue of July 16th), which offered foreign
hotel labels for swank-potting purposes.
I too, I said, 'will be a globe-trotter and biff
the odious Gunter with his own petard."
So I wrote for a sample set of labels of out-of-the-
way places (so as to avoid running into Gunter, ns
it were, if possible) and received what was described
as Series 14, which included the labels of hotels
at Marseilles, Cairo, (Shepheard's Hotel, the only
one I knew by name out of the twelve labels sent),
Colombo, Sarawak, and several other Oriental
284
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1919.
over mountains and valleys for about another two
hundred and fifty miles I came to a village. Here
I distinctly recollect that I had to ask the way. The
headman could speak a kind of Lingua Franca, and
with that and a few signs and wonders T managed
to reach- . There, Ive forgotten the name of the
wretched little villagesome name like Songalong
or Wangaloo, chiefly hutsand palm-trees, of
course Oh, of course, Gunter said in an endeavour not
to be out of the scene.
And of course Dyaks.
Naturally, said Gunter.
Some of their customs' I continued with confidence, are very quaint; for instance	But my apparent familiarity with such outlandish
regions and their inhabitants was evidently too
much for Gunter, who rose at this point and went
off to help old Sheldon-Brown to find the whisky,
he said. So I spent a pleasant hour teaching Lucy
the use of the long rest (entailing several hand-
holds) and inventing manners and customs for the
Dyaks for which they would probably not thank me.
She was thrilled, and as Gunter didnt return I
concluded that either the whisky was found or that
he had gone to bed in disgust.
By the time Gunter and 1 left by the 9,27 for
Town on Monday morning (nothing but the infre-
quency of trains made us companions) I was several
up on him ; but I was heartily thankful that during
the journey he avoided the subject ol foreign travel.
In fact, he buried himself in his newspaper. I read
mine.
As we neared the King's Cross I noticed him
staring at my bag in the rack above my head. I
retaliated instantly by staring at his bag in the rack
above /us head. He sighed: I sighed. His sigh
sounded like one of relief. I don't know if mine
sounded like a sigh of relief or a peace-night peas-
bladder at the point of death, but it was certainly
caused by relief. For Gunter's bag, like mine, was
plastered with an undeniable genuine set of
Series 14 labels.
Sarawak Library.
THE following New Rules have been passed
by the Committee and will come into force
from 1st November 1919:
12. Visitors staying in Kuching may be admitted
to the advantages of the lending Library by the
payment of a subscription of $1 per month or part
thereof dating from the 1st day of the month ; pro-
vided that such privilege shall not extend beyond
six monthly payments.
13. The payment of $1 per month shall entitle
the Visiting Subscriber to borrow one complete
work at a time.
14. Any Chinese or Native employees of the
Government, a Mercantile firm or a Mission in
Kuching may be admitted to the advantages of the
lending Library on the recommendation of a
Government Officer, or a European Member of a
Firm, or a Mission, provided that the recommender
himself is a subscriber to the Library.
The payment for such a Chinese or Native sub-
scriber shall be a single subscription of 50 cents per
month or part thereof dating from the 1st of the
month.
The Library has for disposal the following periodicals and magazines:
The Illustrated London News 1914, 1915, 1916,
1917, and 1918, each year nearly complete.
The Graphic 1914, 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918, each year almost complete.
The Queen 1914 almost complete, and a few numbers of 1915.
Punch 1917. odd numbers ; 1918 almost complete.
The Nineteenth Century odd numbers of 1901. 1902. 1903. 1904, 1905. 1906. 1907, 1911, 1912, 1913, 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918.
The Fortnightly Review odd numbers 1915, 1916, 1917, 1918.
Harpers Magazine odd numbers 1915.
Geographical Journal odd numbers 1903. 1906, 1907, 1908, 1910, 1911, 1912, 1913.
It is proposed to auction the above on or about the 15th December next.
The undersigned will be pleased to receive offers from the Outstations for the purchase of any of the above before 10th December next.
A. B. WARD, Acting Honorary Secretary.
MONTHLY REPORTS	.
UPPER SARAWAK.
BAU AND PAKU.
September.
Court.The number of criminal eases was much
as usual. Bong Shoon, Khoo Hee Lee and Ng Jin
Thiam were sent to gaol for theft and Law Kin and
Bong Ngin for burglary. Two Tebang Dyaks
Manjin and Tambi were also sent to gaol for the
theft of a quantity of jewellery belonging to a Dyak
woman who was drowned up-river owing to the up-
setting of a boat in a flood some months ago.
Jong Shoon maliciously felled 400 rubber trees
in a garden in which he was working and was sen-
tenced to a term of imprisonment.
Two Krokong Dyaks were heavily fined for the
wilful destruction of gutta trees in the concession of
the Sarawak Rubber Estates at Poak and five others
were also fined for causing damage to gutta trees
when collecting leaves and for working the leaves on
the concession without leave.
Two Dyaks were fined for carrying weapons in
the gambling farm.
There were a number of other cases of no im-
portance and the usual number of civil claims.
Public Works.The heavy rain after the prolonged
drought caused heavy falls of earth along the roads
and these were all cleared by the prison gang who
also rebuilt ail the paths round the Court house.
Repairs were carried out on various roads and
several new drains and small bridges were put in.
A small two roomed gaol was built at Siniawan
which was very badly needed.
The gaol buildings at Bau have been tarred and
whitewashed, but the Court house and police bar-
racks are too rotten to touch, the planking and
most of the wood work being too far gone to admit
of repair and the roofs are in the same condition.
should be glad if a Public Works official could Come
up and report on the state of these buildings and
arrange plans for new ones which must be built very
shortly. The Court writers house is also too rotten
to be repaired.
General.I returned from short leave on the 7th.
As a result of the murder of two Malays at Senna
Semuti I left for up-river on the 15th going over-
land via Dahan. Semuti kampong is situated on
the divide between the head waters of the left hand
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1919.	285
was a letter, written to me in Malay by Insan,
stating that if ex-Penghulu Sumpieng was not re-
instated his following would give trouble, and
move into the Krian. I called up the Dyaks concerned who denied that they ever asked Insan to
write such a letter. Insan was heavily fined.
I returned to Kabong on the 9th and next day
I settled all outstanding cases, and the following day
left for Lingga taking with me copper $800, silver
$1,200. notes $2,000 for the Simanggang Treasury. Lingga was not reached the same day, on
account of wind and tide being unfavourable, so we
spent the night at Sungei Legi. Lingga was
reached early in the morning of the 11th and
Simanggang at 7. p.m. the same day.
Simanggang. The Court work during the month
was very light; one case concerning land situated in
the Enteban, a branch of the Skrang, caused a deal
of interest; the plaintiff by name Biiawlost his case,
but not being content with the decision of the Court,
appealed. Jelu, a Roban Dyak, sentenced for six
months for theft. Lee On six months for aiding
one Lee Jee to abscond with stolen money. The
case in which Tay Toi Hang appealed last mouth
was heard, and the decision in the former case was
upheld.
On the 14th I received a letter by express from the
Controleur of Smitan N. I. saying that a number of
Gaat rebels had been arrested in the Kaniau, and
that he was willing to hand them over to the Sarawak Government. I sent an express to Kuching
with a letter to His Highness the Tuan Muda to
this effect.
Mr. W. F. Dick arrived here on the 15th from
Kuching; he has been ordered to do duty U this
station
Ex-Penghulu Sidu, who retired on a pension last
year, died of old age.
The H. H. S. Y. Zahora arrived at Lingga on the
20th sailing again on the 23rd.
There have been a great number of land slides
along the Government roads, and the prison gang
was employed in moving away the earth,
The 26th, the birthday of His Highness the Rajah, : was observed us a public holiday.
The Assistant Resident accompanied by Abang Haji Buasan left for Lubok Antu on the 29th in order to receive the Gaat rebels from tbe Dutch authorities. Four hundred dollars were sent up in charge of P. C. Matsalleh who will endeavour to-buy padi from the Ulu Ai Dyaks.
A Dyak, by name Tain of Skrang, whilst returning home early one morning was accidentally drowned.
The health of the prisoners has not been good ; one Boon Khian was sent to Kuching for medical treatment and has since died, and one Lee Sam died of dysentery.
I gather from various sources that the engkabang trees are in flower, also other fruit trees ; the engkabang requires an equal quantity of sunshine and rain to ensure a good crop.
Saribas.A number of para rubber gardens were destoryed by fire, which originated by people burning off their farms, but as owners of rubber gardens will not keep them cleared of undergrowth, they cannot claim for damages caused by fire.
The new formed land at Tanjong Bau was divided out by Penghulu Empatti amongst the Malays who have not sufficient farming land.
The Rev. W. Linton arrived from Sabu on the 4th and visited the various Mission stations in the Saribas.
Kalaka.One Aug Ah Seng, nakhoda of the bandong Hock Gwee Choon, whilst on his way back from Kuching fell from the bandong opposite Kaba in the Krian and was drowned. Ang Ah Seng was steering the vessel against the tide at the time,
branch of the Sarawak river and the upper waters
of the Sadong on one of the spurs of Penrissen and
the approach is very precipitous
After collecting all the evidence possible I returned to Bau on the 21st. A full report on the
matter was sent to Kuching on my return.
So far the Dyak padi looks well the rain having
come at the right lime. In some places the padi has
been destroyed by grubs, but generally speaking it
has bad a good start.
Krokong Dyaks did a deal of damage to gutta
trees in and around the Rubber Company's con-
cession by felling and cutting off branches when
collecting the leaves. The Krokong Dyaks have
given considerable trouble in this direction and it is
not the first time they have been fined. This time
the fines imposed were heavy
The 26th. being the anniversary of the birthday
of His Highness the Rajah, the Court was closed and
flagstaff dressed.
Two Chinese, Lee Piaw and Tsai Tsiam, were
paddling down-river just above Buso in a flood on the
night of the 27th when their boal broke in two on a
rock and Tsai Tsiam was drowned, his body being
recovered three days later.
A cargo of 32 bags of rice consigned to the Bau
Government was upset in a storm off s. Mating and
lost on the 27th. The boatmen were saved. The
boat was probably heavily loaded, but has carried a
heavier cargo before Most of the big Tegora boats
going from Kuching to Buso are usually loaded far
too heavily and accidents of this kind are not un-
common the wash of a passing launch being usually
sufficient to sink them. It would save life and property if these boats were surveyed and tilted with a
marked load line, by a Government surveyor.
As a direct result of the shortage of padi (the prisoners having to eat white rice) a number of cases
of beri-beri have occurred in the gaol, the patients
being sent to the General Hospital. Pat boiled rice
is now to be tried. The first consignment un-
fortunately was lost with the Government rice.
The rainfall for the month totalled 15 inches.
The out-put from the Cyaniding Works was gold
1.463 9 ozs. and silver 264.4 ozs.
DONALD A. OWEN,
Resident.
SIM IHi,
?-
September.
Kalaka.On the 1st all sago workers in the
vicinity of Saratok, consisting mostly of Malays,
were had before the Court and warned that they
must filter the sago, and if found working coarse
sago in future, both they and the buyers would be
prosecuted.
The whole of my time was taken up in hearing
rimes, but none call for special mention.
I returned to Kabong on the 2nd and the following
two days settled various eases adjourned from the
Native Court. I left for Roban on the 5th at 6. p.m.,
reselling Sessang at 10 p.m. Next morning all
weights and measures were seized, and many Malays
were prosecuted for having false ones. Here the
Malays were warned about working sago and
cautioned as at Saratok.
Roban was reached at 12.30 p.m. and I was met
by Penghulus Engkamat and Chaung, also Abang
Mohamat T. K. The grounds here I found in excellent order, the Dyaks had worked bilian for a
flagstaff, which had been made up by n Chinaman
for $12.
The Courts were kept busy from morning until
late in the evening. The only matter of importance
286
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1919.
when a sudden squall blew and he was precipitated into the river. He was unable to swim and there was no time to rescue him.
On the 23rd the Court writer Kabong left for Boban to examine into pepper vino tax and rubber tax.
Two Chinese were seriously wounded by two Dyaks. The Dyaks were caught by the Chinamen stealing pepper Both Dyaks were arrested and sent to Simanggang.
Towkay Kho Ah Liap of Boban was fined by the native officer for selling native rice at an exorbitant price.
The following are the trade returns for the month, viz:
Imports. Exports.
September, 1919 $103,814.00 $139,726.00
Total to 30.9.19	735,772.87	961,464.45
Total to 30.9.18 $317,94245 $379,778.21
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER,
Resident.
OYA.
September.
General. I left on the 3rd for Mukah to talk over various official matters with the Resident, returning on the 7th.
On the 15th Mr. Jacques arrived from Mukah to audit the books of this district. We left for Dalat the same day and having settled up matters there returned to Oya on the 17th We finally left for Mukah on the 19th to attend the Peace Celebrations there at the kind invitation of Mr. H. L. Owen.
With the exception of a few minor errors I am given to understand that the books and cash were correct. I returned to Oya on the 23rd.
The 26th, His Highness the Rajah's birthday, was observed as a holiday and the flagstaff dressed.
Towards the end of the month there were several short sharp blows and one night the garden fence near the dapur was blown down. Owing to the usual carelessness of natives a fire took place in Kampong Quala Oya completely destroying three houses and a lot of rubber trees.
Aim was signed on as lighthouse keeper in place of Buassan dismissed and Awang Arun was engaged as police constable.
I regret to say that Pangeran Mohomat has been laid up all the month and is still unable to walk. I have appointed Haji Abas. Imaum of Oya, to be a temporary Magistrate.
Courts.There were the usual number of cases, heard mostly at Dalat. The following call for special mention:
Man, a Santubong Malay, was fined and expelled from the district for an offence against Mohammedan law.
Jabir, sentenced to three months for theft and a further term for contempt of Court.
Marip, fined and ordered to pay compensation for felling sago palms on a land still in dispute.
Appeal against the decision of Tua Kampong Haji Muda of Tanam. In this case a young Melanau, aged about 18, had summonsed Ins old father for boxing his ears. The Tua Kampong lined the father $11. Ijang, the father, appealed against this decision saying that his son had stolen $3 from him and deserved chastisement. Appeal upheld and fine remitted.
On arrival at Dalat I was waited upon by a deputation of the principal Chinese there with regard to the case of Kun Hong, n well known hawker in Dalat. It appears that Kun Hong was
performing his devotions in front of the temple when a Melanau boy rushed up, kicked the crackers away and trod them under foot. Kun Hong administered several well deserved smacks to the boy when he was arrested and put into gaol by the police. He asked to be allowed co find bail, or to put somebody to watch his bandong or to ring me up in Oya, all of which requests were refused Whilst, he was on remand cash and jewellery to the value of $1,000 were alleged to have been stolen from the bandong which was, perforce, left unguarded. On enquiry I found that the Chinese complaints were mostly true and the Dalat staff were reprimanded for their singular lack of common sense. Two policemen were transferred to Oya. The Melanaus were warned that in future any interference with Chinese ceremonies on their part would be met with heavy fines or imprisonment.
There were several cases between members of the colony of Chinese-Melanaus in Dalat. The woman who was the original cause of ail the trouble was sent back to Medong, but the men are still summoning and counter-summoning each other for fancied insults and imaginary offences.
P. W. D., etc.The telephone rentis from Bakong to Dalat was completed by the end of the month. Owing to the small number of prisoners in the gaols it is impossible to keep up Oya and Dalat as they should be. The small gangs available were engaged on ornamental grounds and on the roads. All the bridges on the Bakong road need attention, several of them having become dangerous even for pedestrian traffic. This work will be taken in hand as soon as possible, but it will lie a long and rather expensive job.
Food Control.Owing to the promptness of the Food Controller in Kuching 700 bags of rice were imported during the month. The chief difficulty is where to store it all. The local shops are so slightly built that about 10 bags is the maximum for one shop.
Trade.Raw sago still commands a very high price and the Chinese must be making a lot of money. The price of para rubber has given a stimulus to planters in the Cut.
Ten schooners entered the port and eleven cleared during the month.
Imports.	Exports.
$25,391	$79,287
Raw sago exported 301 koyans Jelutong ,,	250	piculs
Para rubber ,,	1	picul
J. BEVILLE ARCHER,
Resident 2nd Class.
MUKAH.
*
September.
With the exception of a certain number of land disputes there was hardly any Court work during the month.
There have been a number of thefts reported from the bazaar, but up to the end of the mouth no arrests have been imide. The rice store in the Government grounds was robbed by boring through the floor, a small quantity of rice being abstracted, and a rather more successful attempt was made on a Chinese godown containing Government rice. The Residency dapur was raided during the night, and a quantity of clothing carried off.
During the month Mr. W. H. Jacques audited the accounts at both Balingian and Mukah, returning to Sibu after visiting Oya and Dalat on the 23rd instant.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1919. 287
proceeding into the interior. Their work consists
in ethnological research and the making of motion
pictures of native customs and of mannerisms.
Prisoners returned from carrying padi at Bakong
on the 13th instant and then finished planting padi
in experimental farm which was under water at
end of month owing to heavy flood in the river.
Rainfall was 1106 inches.
P. S. Adeh made one trip during the month.
Imports.	Exports.
$15,679	$26,145
C. D. ADAMS,
Resident 2nd Class.
MIRI.
August.
The Honble. the Resident and Mrs. Douglas re-
turned from Kuching in H. H. S. Y. Zahora on the
11th accompanied by the Honble. J. Baring-Gould
and family, and Mr. and Mrs. L. J. Dennis; Mr.
Dennis comes to join the staff of the Anglo-Saxon
Petroleum Company. Ltd. The following day the
p.s Adeh arrived from Kuching with passengers the
Right Revd. the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak,
the Honble. H. S. B. Johnson, and Mr. C. D.
Adams, the first named is visiting various parts of
the Diocese. The p.s. Adeh sailed the same day for
Limbang, with the Honble. J. Baring-Gould and
family, and the Honble. H. S. B. Johnson. The
8th, the birthday of His Highness the Tuan Muda,
was observed as a public holiday.
The new Manager of the Anglo-Saxon Petroluem
Company, Captain Beazley accompanied by Mrs.
Beazley and family, sailed again on the 7th on
transfer to Mexico. Mr. A. Rawson also sailed for
Canada the same day. Mr. C. D. Adams returned
to Baram in the s.l. La Follette, on the 14th. A
celebration of the Holy Communion and Church
Service was held in the Court house on the 17th at
which the Bishop of the Diocese officiated, the
following day the Bishop consecrated the Christian
cemetery. The Bishop sailed on the 19th en route
for Labuan and British North Borneo.
I regret to report that the native chief of Sibuti,
O. K. Lubok, died on the 20th after a short illness,
his son Janai has been appointed chief on probation.
Wireless operator Suleiman was recalled to Ku-
ching early in the month owing to his being unable
to hear signals clearly and Mr. H. Gray of the Kuching Wireless staff arrived on the 25th to test and
overhaul the receiving apparatus: during his stay
he was able to get in touch with several long distance
stations clearly. It was found necessary during the
month to warn the local Chinese against spreading
false rumours and interfering with Japanese. A
large number of cases were heard in the Courts.
During the month carpenters continued fitting
out the Miri Maru, and carried out some very
necessary repairs to various buildings.
The prisoners were employed planting foodstuffs,
clearing the ornamental grounds extension, and on
the general up-keep of the roads. The weather was
extremely dry through the month the rainfall only
amounting to 16 inches.
The trade returns are as follows:
Imports.	Exports.
Miri	...	$20,325	$23,757
Niah	...	5,326	2,437
Sibuti	...	3,869	4,370
Total $29,520	$30,564
W. F. DE V. SKRINE,
Resident 2nd Class.
I was at Balingian from the 7th to the 11th.
There were very few eases to be settled there as I
did not give the Dyaks warning of my arrival, seeing
that they were busy on their padi farms. Ah Fook
Cheyne, who has been working as Court writer at
Balingian since early in 1915, has now retired after
handing over to the new Court writer.
The offices were closed on the 19th and 20th of
the month for the local Peace Celebrations, and
again on the 26th for the birthday of His Highness
the Rajah.
P. S. Adeh called on her way to Kuching and
picked up passengers on the 5th and dropped passengers from Kuching on the 27th on her way to Bar am.
A large number of Melanaus appear to be planting padi this year, which is rather surprising considering the high price of raw sago. The out-put for the
month is not as great as it might be on account of lack of shipping. The schooners now running are not sheathed and are consequently compelled to
beach after every two or three trips to Kuching and back. Some of the vessels on the run are distinctly unseaworthy according to the accounts of the juragans.
Lack of water on the bar at the mouth of the
river has also considerably hindered the regular sailing of vessels. The greatest depth found at
spring tides has been 8 feet 6 inches, about 18 inches less than the year before.
The principal exports from Mukah and Balingian are as below. A very small proportion of the jelutong exported is from Mukah, while Balingian has put out only 25 koyans of raw sago.
1918.	1919.
Raw sago	201 koyans	319	koyans
.Jelutong	940 piculs	3,445	piculs
Kayu laka ...	995 .,
Rattans	125 piculs	15	.,
H. L. OWEN.
Resident 2nd Class. BARAM.
? ? ?
September.
Several cases came Irefore the Courts for settlement. Chops Kim Watt, Joo Watt and Sin Soon Guan were each fined $100 for storing kerosene .
oil in the bazaar. Ah Chun fined $100 and See Seng
$50 for being in possession of false datching.
Fines and fees amounted to $849.79.
I returned from Bakong on the 1st instant and
paid the sum of $150 into Treasury; nothing of importance was brought before me.
The Honble. Resident 4th Division arrived on the 7th instant and was still here at end of month.
The Chinese traders demanded that they should
be allowed to buy native rice or they would refer the matter to Honble. Resident 4th Division who refused their request.
Dyak Penghulus Rhu and Lanting paid visits during the month, also Gumbang, Long Kiput chief.
Tama Tijau Anie, chief of Kayans, Long Palai.came
down to demand release of his brother Tama Deng,
who has been imprisoned for theft of birds-nests.
He was informed that Tama Deng would not be
released until he had finished his term of imprisonment.
The Mohammedans celebrated Hari Raya Haji on the 4th instant, a day earlier than mentioned in Calendar.
Messrs. W. F. Alder, Director, and E. Laemele, Assistant of Southern California Academy of Sciences
Explorations, arrived on the 30th instant and are 288
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1919.
The Sarawak Gazette.
NOTICE.
RATES OF ADVIRTISEMENTS IN THE" SARAWAK GAZETTE"
?
Payable in advance.
Quarter of a column and under First insertion ...	...	... $1.00
Second and third insertion each	... 0.50
Subsequent do	do	... 0.52
Half a Column and under First insertion ...	...	... 2.00
Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
Subsequent do	do	... 0.50
A Column and under
First insertion each	...	... -1.00
Second and third insertion each	... 2.00
Subsequent do do	... 100
Special arrangements may be made for standing adver.
tisements.
All communications intended for insertion in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed to the Editor at the Government Printing Office, Kuching. They should be clearly written and should reach the Office at least two days before the publication of each issue-
Letters and other contributions must be authenticated by writer's name sent privately to the Editor.
We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not inserting them.
Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early intelligence of all matters of general interest in their respective neighbourhoods.
NOTICE.
ASTANA FARM.
THE Manager of Astana Farm begs to inform the Public that he is unable to attend to Orders for milk after Office hours. NOTICE.
AUCTION SALE
of unredeemed pledges from the Pawn Broking Farm YEW CHEE & Co., Chop Wo SANG at No. 18, China Street on Saturdays pf the following dates:15th November 1919 and 20th December 1919 at 9 a. m.
List of all such unredeemed pledges is on view at the Pawn Farmers premises.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO..
Authorised Auctioneers.
N
OTICE is hereby given that the partnership here-
tofore existing between, LIM OH LIEW, LIM OH
PHIO, LIM THIAN SANG, LIM THIAN LAI, LIM THIAN Iio,
LIM THIAN KHAY, LIM OH CHAT, LIM THIAN HAI, LIM
THIAN LIANG and LIM THIAN TECK, carrying on business
at No.. 88 Main Bazaar. Kuching, under the style or
firm of ENG WHATT has been dissolved by mutual consent on the 26th July 1919 and the aforesaid LIM THIAN
LIANG and LIM THIAN TECK retire from the partnership
and have no further interest in the firm nor will be responsible as from the above date for any debts incurred
by the said business.
An agreement to the above effect has duly been registered in the Supreme Court, Kuching, and the undersigned, LIM OH LIEW, LIM OH PHIO, LIM THIAN SANG. LIM THIAN LAI, LIM THIAN HO, LIM THIAN KHAY, LIM OH CHAI and LIM THIAN HAI are now sole proprietors of Chop ENG WHATT.
(Sgd.) LIM OH LIEW
.. LIM OH PHIO
LIM THI AN SANG
,. LIM THIAN LAI
.. LIM THIAN HO (Sgd.) LIM THIAN LIANG LIM THIAN KHAY ,. LIM THIAN TECK
,, LIM OH CHAI	Retired Partners.
,. UM THIAN HAI
Sole Proprietors.
Kuching, 11th August, 1919.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO.,
22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS.
Wine, Spirit & General Store Dealers.
:();	SOLE AGENTS FOR:
FRASER & NEAVE'S AERATED WATERS
(The Best throughout the East.)
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic
Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at
$1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 catties of dry rubber.
ASAHI BEER.
ACETIC ACID.
:(o):	Fresh supplies of Stores are received
regularly.
PRICES MODERATE.
Free delivery to customers in Kuching.
Free packing & shipping for. Outstation Orders.
u. c. THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1919.
289
Kuching, Foreign Trade Returns for the month of Sept., 1919.
IMPORTS ( Continued.)
290
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1919.
Kuching, Coasting Trade Returns for the month of Sept,. 1919.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
ALMANAC
NOVEMBER, 1919
EXPORTS.
F. G. DAY.
Registrar of Trade
NOTICE.
NOTICE is hereby given that the partnership here-tofore existing between CHUA Mon CHOON. CHUA BOON KHIAN, CHUA BOON SIANG, CHUA BOON CHUA, CHUA BOON LOK, CHUA BOON PHOV and CHUA BOON CHHWEE carrying on business at No. 32, Main Bazaar, Kuching, under the style or firm of Chop HONG KIAT has been dissolved at the expiration of ten years agreement on the 14th day of August 1919. The aforesaid CHUA BOON CHUA, CHUA BOON SIANG, CHUA BOON PHOT, CHUA BOON LOK and CHUA BOON CHHWEE, having retired from the partnership and have no further interest in the film nor will be responsible as from the above date for any debts incurred by the said business
All accounts and estates of the said Chop HONG KIAT were examined and declared in the Supreme Court and the undersigned CHUA Mon CHOON and CHUA BOON KHIAN are now the sole proprietors of Chop BONG KIAT.
(Sgd.) CHUA MOH CHOON
CHUA BOON KHIAN
Sole Proprietors.
27th September, 1919. [3-3]
Rainfall, September, 1919.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1919. 291
Ex s.s. KIFUNEZAN MARU
arrived 31st December 1918.
OVERLANDED CARGO FROM MARSEILLES.
Unclaimed Cargo.
s.k	2 Cases Merchandise
Kuching
1 Case Wine
MA	1	..	Merchandise
V&C	4	Cases	,,
1	Case	,,
9	PASSENGERS.
ARRIVALS.
PER p. s. Adeh :11th OctoberFrom the North Mr.
and Mrs. J. H. Wright, Messrs.
Laemmle and Alder.
PER S. S. Kuching : 16th OctoberFrom Singapore
Mr. and Mrs. Song Kheng Hai, Messrs.
E. W. Howell, G. D. Burnand, Ho
Tee Chim, Wee Cheng Ewe, How
Teck Sze and Sim Choon Puang, Mrs.
Chan Hong Sze and Mrs. Wee Kheng
Hong.
PER S. S. Rajah of Sarawak:21st OctoberFrom
SingaporeMessrs. J. M. Bryan, Chan
Lian Wan and J. Phiong Nyuk.
PER S. S. Alice Lorraine : -27th OctoberFrom Lingga
Mr. P. M. Adams.
PER S. s. Kuching :27th OctoberFrom Singapore Messrs. Cooke, G. N. M'Gill, G. M.
Allman, Chan Kui Cho, Chan Kui
Yeow, Chan Chye Teck, Chan Kui
Chong, H. E. Teck, Mrs. Wong Kwee,
Mrs. C. M. Lee, Mrs. Wee Chin Ek,
Mrs. Bong Thiam, Mrs. Y. Pako. Mis.
Ong Wee Hian, Miss Tho Neo and 1
Chinese lady.
DEPARTURES.
PER H. S. Alice Lorraine: 11th October For Simatan
H. H. the Tuan Muda, Honble. H. B.
Crocker, Messrs. Adams and Mead.
PER s. s. Kuching: -20th October -For Singapore
Messrs. W. B. Chilton, Chan Kui Cho,
Chau,Kui Yeow and Chan Kui Chuan,
Mrs. Ong Wee Hian and Miss Sim
Soh Eng.
PER S. S. Rajah of Sarawak :24th OctoberFor Singa-
poreMessrs. Chan Lian Wan, Khoo
Chong Seng and Mrs. Chun Kee Tuan.
PER S. s. Kuching:31st OctoberFor Singapore
Messrs. G. N. MGill, P. M. Adams,
Lim Ghim Swee, Wee Keng Chiang,
Chua Bok Hin, Ong Kwan Hin. Wee
Boon Chew, Lim Hian Hoo, Song
Teck Ghee, Tan Ewe Chai, Lau Cheng
Hian, Lau Cheng Puang, Lim Chai
Heng, G. T. Bates and Teo Cheng
Hoon.
NOTICE.
SALE BY AUCTION
of all unredeemed pledges from YEK YEUN
& Co., Pawn Farmers, No. 8, Sibu Bazaar, Sibu, will be held on the 15th September
The above-noted packages arrived in Singapore from Europe per s. s. Kifunezan Maru on 31st December 1918. Anyone holding Bs/Lading or shipping advices pertaining to these are requested to communicate with The Borneo Company, Limited, Kuching.
1919 at 10 a.m. and quarterly from that date until further notice.
Lists of all unredeemed pledges are on view at the Farmers premises.
LAW JEE THAI,
Authorised Auctioneers,
292
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1919.
SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
F. G. DAY,
Registrar of Trade.
For Sale.
BEST BILIAN
TIANGS, SUIT, GILEGAR, etc. Quotations, (F. O. B.) Kapit, made on applications stating sizes.
Please apply to the RESIDENT 2ND GLASS, KAPIT.
[4-4]
NOTICE.
?
Gazette subscriptions and Printing
Office bills..
Foil the convenience of residents at Outstations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums but only the 1,2 and 3 cent values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that Money Orders be sent if possible.
J. C. SWAYNE,
Manager, Govt. Printing Office.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1919.
293
PURE FOOD MEANS GOOD HEALTH
ALEXANDRIA CANNED MEATS
Every Tin Guaranteed under the New South Wales Pure Food Act, and packed under the constant and vigilant supervision of a Government Inspector.
ASK FOR
ALEXANDRIA
Roast Beef
Corned Beef
Ox Cheek
Ox Tongues
Luncheon Tongues
Sheep Tongues
Extract of. Beef
Roast Mutton Corned Mutton Spiced Mutton Mutton Chops Assorted Meats Minced Scollops Assorted Soups
Beef Sausage
Pork Sausage Frankfurt Sausage Beef Dripping Pork and Beans
Irish Stew Ox Tail Soup
As supplied in huge quantities to the
Governments for use by both the
Imperial and Indian
Army and Navy.
Sold by all Stores.
CHARLES BOWEN & CO
2 Castlereagh Street, SYDNEY, N. S. W.
ALEXANDRIA MEAT WORKS
Distributors for the East:
Seremban General Agency, Ltd.
(Incorporated in F. M. S.)
Sub: AgentsBAN JUI LONG,
14 Carpenter Street,
KUCHING, SARAWAK.
and BAN JUI GUAN,
MIRI, SARAWAK.
[24--15]
294	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1919.
THE SARAWAK STUDIO
(REPRESENTATIVES OF MESSRS. KODAK LIMITED.)
THE BEST IN KUCHING
WHERE GOOD PORTRAITS CAN BE TAKEN AND VIEWS OF THE
NEIGHBOURHOOD PROCURED.
PHOTOS FOR PASSPORTS
AT SHORT NOTICE.
KODAKS, KODAK FILMS, PLATES, PAPERS, CHEMICALS
PHOTO PASTE AND ALL PHOTOGRAPHIC MATERIALS
SUPPLIED AT SINGAPORE CATALOGUE PRICES.
AMATEURS FILMS & PLATES DEVELOPED, PRINTED &
ENLARGED AT REASONABLE CHARGES.
Free instructions given to Amateurs with pleasure.
C. M. LEE, Manager.
21, COURT HOUSE ROAD, KUCHING.
[24-ir
KUCHING:Printed and Published by GHIN HENG SOON, Government Printer, at the Government Printing Office. Barrack Road.
