
VOL. XLIX.
No. 768.
Price KUCHING, THURSDAY, MAY 1, 1919. 10 cents.
CONTENTS.
Page.
Notes ...	...	...	...	... 103
Peace Celebrations ...	...	...	...	104
The threathened rice shortage	...	... 105
A now rubber coagulant	...	... 105
A visit to unknown Borneo	...	...	...	106
St. Thomas School ...	...	...	...	106
Correspondence ...	...	... 108
Monthly Reports:Upper Sarawak ...	108
Sadong ...	...	... 109
Sadong CollierySimanggang	... 110
Mukah	... 111
Trade Returns	... ...	...	...	112
Rainfall ...	...	...	113
Passengers	...	...	...	...	114
Almanac ...	...	...	...	...	114
Kuching Shipping ...	...	...	...	116
The Sarawak Gazette
SUBSCRIPTIONS to the Gazette are as follows: The Sarawak Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
Single copy	...	...	... .10 cents
Subscription for one year	...	... $2.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 2.25
Subscription including postage to ail other
Countries. ...	... 2.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING
Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 5s. 10d
The Sarawak Government Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY -
Single copy	...	...	... .05 cents
Subscription for one year	...	... $1.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 1.25
Subscription including postage to all other
Countries. ...	1.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING
Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 3s.6d
All subscriptions are payable in advance and must
commence from the 1st January in each year on
which date they are renewable. All broken periods
will be considered as full.
Subscriptions will not ire renewed unless notice
of renewal given.
Changes of Address should be notified to the
Office in writing.
The Sarawak Gazette.
THURSDAY, MAY 1, 1919.
NOTES.
(April.)
MRS. Bertram Brooke (Dayang Muda of
Sarawak) is giving up her Hat at 7, Park Place,
St. Jamess, and has taken Woodstock Cottage,
Bingham Place, Nottingham Place, W.
MB. F. A. W Page-Turner arrived from
Lingga on the 17th by s. 1. Lucile.
AT a meeting called by the Manager of the
Dahan Estate, Upper Sarawak of the headmen
of the employees a scheme was drawn up to
arrange for the planting up of a considerable
area in the concession with foodstuffs in order
to supplement the food supply in case of a
possible shortage of rice. The scheme had
the entire approval of the coolies, who are an-
xious to start at once and clearing has already
begun. It is so drawn up that it should
benefit both employers and employees, and we
trust the Manager will meet with the success
he deserves for having so promptly taken the
matter up.
S. S. Rajah of Sarawak left for Singapore
on the 18th. Passengers were Messrs. Pang
Yam Seng and Tan Hok Hin.
S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore on
the 19th bringing the following saloon pass-
engers, Mr. and Mrs. Hollings, Mrs. Howell.
Miss Scott, Messrs. Allan, Frazer, Stall, Ang
Kim Kok, Png Liang Huck. Lim Tee Chew,
Tan Ewe Chai, Wee Cheng Yew. Aug Hong
Choon, Lim Teck Khoon, Song Kheng Hui.
Lim Chee Gnim and C. M. Lee.
No European mail was brought.
S. S. Kuching left for Singapore on April
23rd taking as passengers Mrs. Danson, Mrs.
Sarawak Gazette
104
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1919.
Howell, Mr. and Mrs. Hollings, Miss
Scott, Mr. Frazer, Mr. and Mrs. Chin Hee
and Messrs. Sim Why Khu and Ang Kim
Kok.
P. S. Adeh left for the North on the 25th
with Messrs. A. E Lawrence and E. Parnell
for Bintulu and Messrs. J. Mills and D. B.
Murray for Limbang.
THE. body of a Japanese named Nagai
Kiyoso who committed suicide in the Samara-
han on the 26th was brought in to Kuching
next day.
It appeared that deceased had been ex-
periencing trouble with his eyes for some
months past and this seems to have weighed on his mind to such an extent that he deter- mined to take his life.
S. S. Rajah of Sarawak arrived from Singa-
pore on the 26th. Passengers were Pang
Yam Seng and E. Beng Hian.
Mn. Page-Turner returned to Simanggang
on the 27th by s. l. Lucile.
THE fall of a lighted kerosine oil lamp in
the bowling alley of the Sarawak Club a
few nights ago nearly resulted in a serious
lire on the premises, and had it not been for
the fact that a supply of sand happened to
be at hand the fire would have assumed
serious proportions.
The safest way of extinguishing a kerosine
fire is by throwing quantities of dry sand on
the blazing oil and a supply of sand should be
in every room in which kerosine lamps are
used.
MR. J. C. Swayne left for Upper Sarawak
on the 29th to relieve Mr. D. A. Owen and
Mr. Owen is now in Kuching carrying on Mr.
Swaynes duties temporarily.
THE s. s. Rajah of Sarawak left for Singapore on the 29th with a full cargo. Passengers by her were Messrs. Allan, E. Beng Hian, T. Peng Kuan and Skimasaki and Miss Howell.
Peace Celebrations.
On Wednesday the 23rd a public meeting was
held in the Court Room at 10 a.m. Prominent
members of the different communities in Kuching,
as well as the larger part of the European popu-
lation were present.
On the motion of the Honble. G. C. Gillan, the
Honble. the Resident of the First Division took the
chair. He then informed the audience that the
object of the meeting was to make fitting pre-
paration for the signing of peace. In his opinion
one day would scarcely be sufficient to do so and he
had written to His Highness the Tuan Muda asking
him to allow two days to he set apart for this object.
(Applause). The outline of the official programme
was as follows: Thanksgiving Services were to be
held at the Pro-Cathedral and St Joseph, while he
understood that the Malays would also hold a special
service in the Mosque. This would occupy probably
from eight to nine in the morning. Later there
would be a parade of Police and Rangers, also
a march past of the schools, a salute of the Allied
Flags and a General Salute. On one evening he
hoped there would be a- display of fire-works, for
which the Government might provide financial
support (hear, hear), it was for the present meet-
ing to decide what further measures should be taken
to celebrate the occasion adequately and also to
appoint a committee to that end.
The Chairman then turned to the Malay portion
of the audience and translated the gist of his speech
into that tongue.
Suggestions were then called for, most of which
seemed to gain the support of those present. Dr. D.
L. Greene (Principal Medical Officer) proposed that
torch-light processions should be arranged for one
evening and that & bonfire should also be included.
He added that since football appeared to be peren-
nially popular in this country a Challenge Cup
should be purchased and played for yearly on the
anniversary of the day, and since the winning team
would no doubt appreciate mementoes of the oc-
casion, this Cup should be suitably' endowed.
Very Rev. Father Dunn (Prefect Apostolic,
Roman Catholic Mission) suggested that sports
should be arranged for all school-children and that
a feast should be provided for them.
Honble. G. C. Gillan (Treasurer) while agreeing
with this, hoped that heats would be decided
previously and that only the cream of the athletic
world should appear on the day. lie added that
perhaps it would be well to open a public subscrip-
tion list.
Mr. Ellis (St. Thomas) thought that one day
should be devoted to sports and one day to football
and that these should be finals".
Kt. Rev. Danson (Bishop of the Diocese) proposed
a Venetian Fete for one evening and also water-
sports for one day.
The Chairman ( Honble. A. B. Ward ) wished to
include boat-racing with the last proposal.
Mr. Parnell then suggested that a committee
should be appointed and the following names were
approved.
Honble. A. B. Ward
Rt. Rev. Bishop
of the Diocese
Very Rev. Father Dunn
Honble. G. C. Gillan
Dr. D. L. Greene
J. M. Bryan
E. Parnell
Ong Tiang Swee Boon Siew Chan Kee Ong Dato Hakim Abang Abdillah Abang Suleiman Liang Tan Chew Dr. Ujita
The Chairman then announced that the question
of a war trophy had been mentioned to him and he
had already written to His Highness the Rajah on
the matter. He considered that if the present meet-
ing would pass a resolution urging the desirability
of such an acquisition, it might be cabled home and
lend considerable weight to his request. The reso-
lution was then put and carried unanimously.
Dr. D. L. Greene then addressed the meeting on
the question of a permanent national memorial to
those who had left this country to join the ranks of
the Allies. He suggested that the names of those
who had been born in Sarawak, or who had resided
here for over three years or who bad gone direct
home should be inscribed on some suitable stone
memorial, which should be erected in some con-
spicuous spot in Kuching and that a public subscrip-
tion list should bn opened for that purpose. In his
opinion a drinking-fountain, if possible made of
Sarawak stone, would be suitable. After this sug-
gestion had been translated into Malay and Chinese
a resolution embodying the proposal was carried
unanimously.
Honble. G. C. Gillan asked that a sub-committee
be appointed to receive subscriptions and suggestions
and that the final form to be taken should be decided
by a general meeting. This was also approved, and
after a vote of thanks to the Chairman, the meeting
dispersed.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1919.
105
Provisional Programme for the Peace
Celebrations on dates to be fixed later.
First Day.
Morning - Church Services in Pro-Cathedral, Ro-
man Catholic Church and Malay
Mosque.
Procession of Sarawak Rangers, Police
and Cadet corps of various schools.
General Salute.
Midday.(Possibly a public tiffin.)
Afternoon.Sports open to nil children.
Evening. Torchlight procession, Chinese fire-works,
bonfires and illuminated boats, etc.
Second Day.
Morning- -Aquatic sports.
Afternoon. -Land sports for adults.
Tea. etc., for all children.
Evening. Torchlight procession of Malays, Sikhs,
Tamils, etc.
Illuminations and illuminated boats and
possibly fire-works.
Third Day.
Chinese torchlight procession.
D. L. GREENE, Honorary Secretary. Kuching, April 25th, 1919.
SUBSCRIPTIONS are asked for towards a Fund to defray the expenses of the Public Celebration in Kuching of the signing of Peace.
Will anyone wishing to subscribe kindly send the amount to the Hon: Treasurer of the Fund at the Treasury Office, Kuching. The threatened rice shortage.
? -
The newspaper reports of the speech of the Food Controller S. S. in Singapore on the 10th April was the first intimation to Sarawak of the expected shortage, of rice in Malaya during the last part of this year.
A month ago the Food Controller in the Straits had officially intimated to this Government that the export of Burma rice to Sarawak was prohibited owing to the action of the Indian Government in curtailing supplies, and although the authorities were approached to grant this country a reduced import of Burma rice to amount to only one third of the total imports, the concession was not allowed. Previous to this the imports bf Burma rice had been from 60% to 70% of the total supplies and the loss of the cheaper grades of rice was naturally felt severely. Now we have to face a possible 50% reduction in rice from Siam and Saigon, our only remaining sources, in 4 or 5 months time.
It is useless to rely on the local production as the extracts given below from reports that have been received from various districts will show; and as we are definitely told no help can be expected through Singapore, the country through which we have always obtained our supplies in the past, it only remains to prepare for the deficiency with substitutes.
The Committee of Food and Supply Control
recommends in a Circular to Outstations the imme-
diate planting of tapioca (ubi bandong,) sweet pota-
toes (kribang), and kladi as substitutes for rice likely
to be consumed by both Malays and Chinese; while
raw sago will constitute a valuable food asset to
Malays and native tribes generally.
All waste lands that are suitable and convenient
are recommended to be requisitioned by the Govern-
ment for the benefit of foodstuff planters, and in
Kuching applications for free land for this purpose
may be made to the Superintendent of Lands and
Surveys who will also be ready to give planters any
advice that he can, and put them in the way of
obtaining stumps, cuttings, seeds, etc.
Meetings have been held in Malay and Chinese to
emphasize the. imperative importance of starting at
once the local production of foodstuffs, and it is hoped
that there will lie many helpers to impress on
natives and Chinese the necessity of action.
The Food Committee expect to keep in touch
with the Food Controller in Singapore and his
methods of dealing with the situation, and it must
be understood that circumstances may arise requir-
ing immediate action, amongst others the possibility
of the Government having to take over and dis-
tribute the entire import, of rice, and the necessity
of drastic measures lining taken to prevent the hoard-
ing of foodstuffs
Enquiries or suggestions in connection with the
rice shortage problem will be gladly received in Ku-
ching by the Food and Supply Control Committee.
Extracts from Reports on Local Padi.
Upper Sarawakfarms considerably damaged by birds.
Sadongcrops ruined by insects (empangau) and rats; the only promising padi in the district above Tabekang.
Smianggang crops now reported a failure, pro-
Batanq Lupar mised well but damaged by rats.
Saribasharvest reports not at all favourable.
Lower Rejangprospects not bright. Good reports only from Bruit and Sirik.
Iganpadi crops practically all destroyed by rats.
Upper Rejanghill padi satisfactory, swamp padi badly damaged.
Oyapadi in the main river not good, good reports only from ulu Petamin.
Mukahdown-river farms a failure owing to insects (empanqau) further up-river results have been very little better, and Dyaks are very nearly as badly off.
Bintulu and Tatauharvest not so good as expected owing principally to insects (empangau).
Niah and Sibutipadi crop will be a failure on account of the drought.
Baramlow lying padi ruined by floods.
Limbanghill padi has been dried up and withered by the drought.
Circular.
Owing to failure of crops and consequent restriction of Export from producing Countries the available supplies of rice are certain to be considerably reduced, possibly to the extent of 50% of the usual supply, towards the end of this year.
The usual supplies from Kuching cannot be relied upon and it may be necessary to regulate the Export of rice from Kuching.
106
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1919.
The following recommendations ore offered for
guidance in local legislation.
1. Impress upon "natives and others the serious-
ness of the position as regards necessary food supplies.
2. Make an immediate examination into local
resources and take measures to provide substitutes
for rice.
3. Requisition any available waste lands for
planting rice substitutes, such as bandong, kribang,
kladi and jagong.
4. Compel all landowners who are employers of
more than five coolies to plant a portion of their
land with rice substitutes
5. Prevent the hoarding of such substitutes
hoarded foodstuffs should be liable to confiscation. 6. Make it an offence for companies or large employers of labour to provide their employees with more rice than others in the district are allowed.
7. Impress upon padi farmers the urgent neces-
sity of commencing planting the next crop as soon as practicable and suggest that padi agit should be planted in addition to the usual padi.
As regards Government Employees
Vacant land should be allotted to Police and
Rangers to enable them to plant rice substitutes.
Prisoners should be employed m planting such
substitutes and prison rations should he reduced to
the following scale per diem which is recommended
and being adopted by the Medical Department in
Kuching for immediate use.
Rice 16 tahils, ubi bandong or other substitute
2 tahils.
General
Local Food Control Committees should be in-
stituted and the co-operation of the inhabitants
should be solicited to ensure the even distribution such rice as may be available.
Orders or regulations affecting other districts should
be submitted to the Committee in Kuching and it is
requested that Outstation Committees should keep
in touch with Kuching as much as possible.
By Order,
Committee of Food d Supply Control, Kuching.
Kuching, 19th April, 1919.
A new rubber coagulant
Coconut water or, as some call it milk" which
hitherto has been a waste product in copra making
countries has been found to be an excellent rubber
coagulant. The discovery has been lately made
in Ceylon. Millions of gallons of coconut water allowed to run to waste on coconut plantations can now be made use of at a good profit.
The coconut water is allowed to ferment four or
five days, after which it can be used without further
delay for coagulating latex.
This is said to produce a fine rubber superior
to that produced with the use of crude acetic acid,
The colour of the rubber with acetic fermentation is
decidedly inferior to the coconut water fermen-
tation. Coconut water is now made up in bulk
and shipped in large quantities from coconut plan-
tations to the various rubber estates.(Mindanao
Herald.)
A visit to unknown Borneo.
?
(Continued from page 90.)
We left this village early next morning and when
scarcely half a mile from the last house two fine
deer jumped up from the long grass at the edge
of the track where they had evidently been sleep-
ing not a yard from me and bolted into the thick
young jungle before I could get the rifle on to
them: deer were very plentiful about this part of
the country and their tracks were numerous on the
path which we were following. Travelling 8. E.
we started climbing over a range of mountains
following the Pa Beluyoh to its source and after
rising to some 4,000 ft. obtained a fine view of
the surrounding hills though to the east jungle
interfered with the outlook. Range upon range of
blue mountains comprised the view with no
level land in sight. Until the afternoon our track
followed the Medaring Ridge in jungle absolutely
undisturbed by man, the air was very cold and
though we walked hard all the time there was no
sign of perspiration on any of the party even after
a stiff climb. The jungle here had no undergrowth
and all the trees were perfectly straight and covered
with dripping moss far away up the trunks while
the fallen trunks with which the ground was covered
were entirely invisible owing to the thick coat of
moss on them. The large trees from which the
gum damar is obtained were plentiful along this
ridge and at the foot of each large masses of gum
had collected and extended for some feet round the
base and to some depth in the ground but the damar
is too far away up here to be worked as every pound
would have to be carried down to the bazaar by the
natives there being no means of communication by
water. In places the path ran along the top of a
narrow ridge with a very unpleasant drop on either
side while the roar of the streams as they fell from
the plateau through the rocky gorges to the lower
levels could he heard far down in the valleys below
on either side. Coming suddenly out into the open
on the southern side of the ridge we obtained a line
view of part of the Bah country, a large open space
of rolling country enclosed by the mountains and
the smoke of the Murut houses could be seen in the
far distance. At the end of the ridge we all slithered
down a steep slippery slope for several hundred feet
and stopped at the Pa Pala at the bottom for a
snatch of food and a bathe and then set off along
the level country following the Pa Kelapang, here
on the plateau a quiet smooth slow running stream
quite fit for boats and a very different thing to what
it is a few miles lower down where it drops sudden-
ly to the lower level and thunders through the
gorges over the boulders to meet the Trusan. The
streams here were swarming with fish of different
kinds but the natives do not seem to trouble them-
selves about catching them. Soon we appeared to
be leaving the jungle and there were signs of the
land having been under cultivation and the path
was overshadowed by clumps of giant bamboos some
8 or 10 ins. in diameter and 80 ft. high and for a
mile we walked through this bamboo jungle. As we
rounded a corner of the path a party of M units
came upon us from the opposite direction headed
by a big man dressed in the usual loin cloth and
short sleeveless coat of bark cloth and armed with
the inevitable gaspipe gun and long Murut sword;
this was Gaieng Abai one of the chiefs of the Bah
country of the upper Trusan who had come out some
way along the track to meet us news of our coming
having travelled on ahead in the marvellous way it
does in this country.
After a sit down to talk and smoke we moved on and very soon emerged from the shadow of the bamboos into the open country and the change was startling A long valley spread out ahead of us for many miles watered by the Pa Kelapang, here a deep and muddy stream, and the whole of the valley for a width of half a mile to a mile was irrigated and laid out in rectangular plots varying in size from one to ten acres, the plots divided by ridges of earth about two feet high and wide. The course of the stream had been altered and whereas it originally ran down the centre of the valley it was now
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1919.
107
This house being that of the chief was rather more
elaborate in this respect than others, most of the
houses having no trellis but merely loose planking.
The houses are on posts about four feet off the
ground and under the house are kept the pigs, fowls
and goats fenced in with bamboo fencing. The
flooring is of either split bamboo or planking and
the roofing is of the leaves of the wild sago which
abounds here: as timber is so scarce the large bam-
boo is cultivated and used for everything, walling
flooring, fencing, piping and for carrying water.
Dotted about on the irrigated land are small
houses raised well above the water and used for
storing the padi and as these people raise three crops
in the year and there is no outlet for trading in padi
these store houses are usually full up.
We spent the night here and not being armed
with a thermometer I cannot say what the temperature
was, but the fires were going all night and the
air was very cold, and at mid-night all the Muruts
woke up and sat round the fires wrapped in their
sleeping cloths. I was glad to roll up in my heavy
rug and even men to get up and sit near the fire till
daylight: thank goodness a mosquito curtain was
useless though I had brought one with me in case it
should be wanted as up-river even if mosquitoes are
unknown sandflies usually swarm, and these pests
are ten thousand tunes worse than mosquitoes. As
soon as it was light there was a general bustle as had arranged logo over the border to the Bawan Bah
and see the people there and try to settle the differ-
ences between them and the Muruts in this country,
so after a meal of rice and boiled goat we moved off
across the ridges between the fields cutting the
corners in some places and wading through a foot of
mud and water.
About half way up the valley I stopped to see
the salt springs winch were a short distance off
the track These people of Central Borneo have
to obtain all their salt locally its they do but
little trade with anyone, they say the deer originally
shewed them the place coming down at night
to drink, and now the spring has been covered
by a huge hollow log planted perpendicularily in the
ground and the water, which is very salt, is dipped
out of tins well and cooked in large pans close by
until the salt remains in the pans, it is then
dissolved and put into bamboos which are heated
mini the salt solidifies when it is stored for sale or
use. The water is taken in large bamboos to the
houses and is used for cooking purposes thus obviat-
ing the necessity of adding salt to the waler used
for cooking. The salt is quite white and pleasant
to the taste and is said by these people to be tin
antidote for goitre, and as the wells are very
numerous and salt consequently easy to obtain
there are no cases of goitre known amongst the
Muruts here Before we left the well every one of the
party took a chip out of the hollow log and stowed it
away in his bamboo baccy box, the edge of the log had
had very many chips taken out of it already by the
look of its edge so it would appear to be a custom
on strangers visiting the springs though none
of the party would say anything about it when
questioned on the subject. On the way up we passed
numerous long houses and finally reached the head of
the valley and the actual source of the Pa Kelalan the
southern branch of the Trusan river. Rising sharply
to the top of a hill some 300 feel high we obtained a
splendid view of the valley of the Pa Bawan which
stretched out at our feet like a map; every inch of
it is irrigated in the same way as the one we had
just left and the long houses are dotted about along
the foot of the hills while in the distance the
mountains of Dutch Borneo stretch in ever fading
ridges away to the East shutting in the farther
edge of this irrigated plateau like a wall of blue.
confined to a course which had been cut for it along
one side close along the foot of the low hills; it was
dammed with large stones and clay and bamboos at
intervals and the water carried by ditches from
these weirs to the different levels, so irrigating the
fields and finally rejoining the stream considerably
lower down, this irrigating causing the discoloura-
tion of the stream we had noticed on the way up
and had put down to pigs having crossed the stream
higher up The flow of the water between the
fields was regulated by bamboo pipes from the
higher to the lower levels. On the font hills on
either side of the valley were seen the Murut long
houses some of them 150 yards in length and sur-
rounded by fruit trees and bamboos. We walked
along the little ridges for some time before arriving
at the house of Gaieng Abai which was built like all
the others on one of the lower slopes, and from this
slight elevation we obtained a good view of the
valley the whole of which was irrigated, land. In
some of the patches the padi was ripening and these
were still flooded to a depth of six inches, in others
the crop was only half grown, while again still
other patches shewed signs of having been recently
harvested while others had been drained quite dry
and the soft ground was being dug up and turned
over by rows of women aimed with a kind of iron
adze When the grass and rice stems have been
turned over the patch is kept dry until the roots are
dead when it is again flooded; the dead grass and
roots soon rot under water and the water is then
drained off and the new seed plotted in the mud.
water being again admitted when the young plants
are about 6 inches high.
The women work all day in the sun wearing only
a short skirt of hark cloth barely reaching to tneir
knees and some wear a short bark coat in addition,
while their bead gear consists of a heavy circlet of
coloured beads some of which are valued amongst
the Muruts at over $200. The men appear to have
nothing to do with the cultivation beyond repairing
the ridges when they have been broken down by
buffaloes. On the slopes near the houses patches of
tobacco were growing while pigs and goats swanned
in the vicinity of nil the dwellings and numerous
water buffaloes might be seen wandering about in
the long grass at the edge of the cultivated land.
The low hills were covered with grass and fire-wood
had io be brought from a considerable distance, the
nearest jungle being on the slopes of the farther
hills.
The bouse into which we were led by the chief
was similar to all the other Murut houses; about
fifty or sixty yards long and about eight or ten
yards wide it is divided longditudinally by a
plank wall, on one side of the wall being the sleep-
ing room and the other the living room.
Inside the sleeping room are open hearths where
huge logs are always kept smouldering and where
the women cook all the food, the stock of fire-wood
is kept on a shelf above the fire and here also are
the cooking pots, home made pottery and unglazed :
the bottoms are round so that the pots cannot stand
up but they are made to do so when in use by being
pressed well down into the pile of ashes and the
fire is packed all round them.
Outside in the living room are also open hearths
but they are not used for cooking but merely for
warming the-house at night, large logs are always
smouldering here too. There are doors at each end
of the bouse mid there is a raised seat running along
under the window which is covered in with a sloping
trellis work of wood or split rotan or bamboo as a
protection against spears, while inside this is a
wooden flap which can be raised or lowered over the
trellis as a further protection against the iron bullets
of the Muruts and this is always lowered at night.
108	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1919.
Half an hours stop to smoke and enjoy the view in the brightening sunlight and cool air and we trail away down the slope on the other side through the long grass. A few women weeding the fields inn like rabbits at our unexpected appearance hut finding that they cannot reach the houses before us try and take short cuts through the swampy fields their short skirts tucked up round their waists, hut they soon give it up tired out and the Dyaks of course remarked how easy it would be to take their heads if we were on a raid into this country.
(To be continued.)
St. Thomas' School.
The annual prize giving took place on April 29th, the prizes being distributed by the Hon. the Resident. The Bishop, the Right Rev. Logie Danson, having introduced the Resident, the head-master read the report.
At the last examination 225 boys were examined, 72% of the papers passed, 30 boys being kept down in the same class for another year. The prizes this year went to 17 boarders and 6 day-boys, a result undoubtedly due to the rule that boarders may only speak English. There are now 95 boarders and 148 day- boys. The Bishop, who this year set the New Testament paper for the Singapore diocese gave the same paper to the boys at a special examination, in his report he said I have no hesitation in saying that the standard is much higher than that of the Singapore papers." The top marks in Singapore were 72%, 67 % and 64 %. The top boys in St. Thomas' gained 94%, 92%, 89% and 72%, the average mark being 494%. A new box-room has been built. The boys are now beginning to eat a little kribang with their rice and many of them will be employed planting rice substitutes during their manual work hours.
The prizes, given by His Highness the Rajah, were then presented.
The Honble. the Resident in his speech reminded the boys of their duty to God, the Rajah and their country, and, referring to the shortage of food likely to take place during the next few months, said there was one way in which they could help their country now and that was by ensuring a good crop of rice substitutes in the near future for their own consumption.
The Bishop, in proposing a vote of thanks to the Honble. the Resident, said that it was the duty of ail boys, especially those who were Christians, to be good citizens. There was a great difficulty in procuring good teachers, and one of the greatest needs was a school for teachers and catechists where hoys who felt the call to help the Mission might be trained.
The meeting ended with the usual cheers for His Highness the Rajah, the Honble the Resident and the masters.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the. opinions of correspondents.]
KUCHING,
April 20th. 1919. To
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
SIR,
Is it not time Kuching was in possession of a small but modern Hotel? At present the only place where European visitors can stay is the antiquated, ill-situated, badly arranged, unsanitary and in every other way very unsatisfactory Lower Rest House".
Not only are European visitors from Singapore and elsewhere frequently coming to Kuching on business, but Government Officers married and bachelor are constantly down from the outstations.
At one time there was an Outstation Rest House and officers knew where they could find board and lodging, hut now even that has been taken away and officers come down to find the one and only Rest House full.
The only other Rest House is that provided by Messrs, the Borneo Company for the use of then- employees only, and though a mom may be obtained there through the kindness of the Company, the house was not built for the convenience of visitors to Kuching and cannot be looked upon as a Rest I House for the general public.
: What is required is a small, well-equipped, modern Hotel of say ten rooms, so arranged that it can easily be added to at any future date, for which a suitable site can easily be found.
The present situation is exceedingly unsatisfactory and there is no reason why the Capital of such a country as Sarawak should not be able to provide respectable accommodation for European visitors, as is done in every Eastern town of anything approaching its size and importance.
The need is urgentcannot the Government move in the matter?
1 am, Sir,
Yours faithfully.
VISITOR."
MONTHLY REPORTS.
UPPER SARAWAK.
BAU AND PAKU
March.
Court.A number of cases of theft were before the Court amongst others Ng Khiuk was sent to gaol for the theft of several hundred tapping cups. He was smartly caught by L. C. Cham Singh at Siniawan in the act of loading them into a boat at night. Leong Hin, vagrant, was caught opening the ice box at Bau Works at 2.30 a. m. and was sentenced to a term of imprisonment. Low Song swept the gambling tables at 11 p. m. in the bazaar but was caught after a chase and was also sent to gaol. Kuan Chui stole a suit of clothes at Siniawan but was forwarded to Kuching for the state of his mind to be reported on by the Medical Authorities. Hiew Phan, a bad character and vagrant went to gaol for six months.
Two Dyaks were heavily fined for being drunk and assaulting the police in the bazaar. One had a parang at the time and tried to use it.
Sharimon a Dahan Estate coolie, who absconded seven months ago was arrested at Lundu. He returned with the evident intention of crimping Javanese from the estate. He has been in Sambas all the time and many Javanese have absconded recently. He slated that two escaped Bau prisoners Asma and another have joined the police and are in Batavia.
There were the usual number of cases in the Court of Requests.
Public Works.The new police barracks at Tondong have been put in hand and will be finished next month.
The prisoners (av:51) have completed the new section of the Buan road at the 1st mile A short section only remains to be done and when that is finished the track will be of uniform width throughout and gravelled for most of the distance.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1919.
109
Other roads and paths have been kept in order
and the bridge over the Seringgok stream completed
with substantial hand rails.
The ground at one end of the bungalow was found
to be a mass of white antsthis was all cut away and
several of the posts had been attacked by the pests
underground. These have all been supported on
and built round with brick which will effectually
prevent the constant settling of the posts which has
been taking place in the past. Many of them were
found to be only a foot or so in the ground.
General. As the currying of sewage in open tins
was a nuisance in the district this has been forbidden
in future and all such filth must now be carried in
sanitary buckets provided for the purpose by the
Government. Several Chinese were prosecuted for
evading this order and the nuisance has abated in
consequence.
The thefts of tapping cups from the various gar-
dens continues. How they are disposed of remains
a mystery at present but as many thousands are be-
ing stolen I suspect they are being taken to Kuching.
It is not possible to dispose of such a number locally.
So far only one of the thieves has been caught.
I went to Kuching on the 6th, returning on the
8th. A big bandong belonging to Yong Heng which
was hauled up on the bank behind his shop in Sinia-
wan bazaar was sprinkled with kerosene oil and
burnt at midnight on the 30th. The fire was ex-
tinguished but there was serious risk of the flames
spreading to the bazaar. The incendiary was not
seen but Yong Heng has his suspicions as to who
were those responsible for the outbreak. The boat
was partly destroyed.
The month has been unusually dry and hot, the
rainfall being 1039 inches only. The heat on some
days was intense and though storms frequently
threatened they usually passed over leaving the
atmosphere close and hot.
The health of the district has improved.
The out-put from the Cyaniding Works amounted
to gold 2,294.5 ozs. and silver 762.4 ozs.
DONALD A. OWEN,
Resident.
SADONG.
? ?
March.
There have been numerous cases before the
Courts during the mouth. Fines amounting to
nearly 200 were imposed upon Malays for des-
troying gutta rian trees. I hear that owing to the
price these leaves are now fetching thousands of
trees are being partially or totally cut down. I
have sent inspectors out to make further enquiries.
At the request of the Manager, I held Court at
the Colliery on the 12th where I was kept busy the
whole day. An enquiry was held respecting the
fire at the mine and fines imposed upon the guilty
parties. A number of debtors were brought before
me: I warned them to pay regularly seeing that
they earn quite good pay The Malays at the mine
complained about the Chinese pigs which they
asserted wire killed on the live-foot way and also
allowed to roam about under Malay houses.
It seems odd that although a well-built slaughter
house with cement floor and drains, etc., has been
erected the Chinese still prefer to slaughter their
beasts and exhibit the flesh for sale anywhere but
in the right place. The usual warnings were given.
The Manager asked me to see the traders about
the prices of rice and fish, etc., after some discussion
I drew up a provisional price list. I fear that the
Chinese are profiteering to a great extent on the
prices of necessities.
I understand that arrangements have been made
to supply the Manager with a fortnightly list of
prices from Kuching. A case which caused much
ill-feeling was that in which a small Chinese boy
had the misfortune to dislocate his arm whilst play-
ing football with Malay lads. The mother of the
Chinese boy immediately chastised one of the
Malays which made matters worse; such bad feel-
ing was shown on both sides that I have forbidden
lads playing on the Government grounds. The rest
of the cases call for no special mention.
On the 6th a fire broke out in No 6 mine, no
doubt the matter will be reported upon by the
Manager himself. Smoke was first seen issuing
forth from No. 8 mine by a Malay on duty at the
engines of the fan ; he calmly watched the smoke
increasing in volume for half an hour, pumping air
in hard all the time, before he told anybody. His
excuse that he did not realise anything was wrong
was not accepted and he was fined for negligence.
The head mandor of No. 8 was also fined for failing
to report to the Manager directly he noticed the fire
On the 15th Fook Leong, a Teochew barber, on a
holiday from Kuching, in attempting to jump on the train whilst it was in motion fell between two trucks and had his left leg crushed. His injuries were very serious, bits of bone being left on the line; he was sent to Kuching by express boat where I understand be underwent amputation of the leg.
I have issued a local order forbidding persons jumping on the train when in motion under penalty of imprisonment.
The water supply becoming very bad I investigated and found , that various people had made connection from the standpipes to their own houses; this was put a stop to, since when the supply has been satisfactory and the pressure increased 20%. The s.s. Alice Lorraine arrived on the 23rd with Messrs. Bates, Haldane and Strike from Kuching.
On the 25th the local Regatta took place, the weather was perfect and a most enjoyable day was spent.
Mr. Lau Luong Quee, the Court Writer, was : taken ill on the 10th and getting no better was sent to Kuching for medical treatment on the 28th.
I held a meeting of Native Officers on the 26th to discuss matters. I regret to say that they report the harvest as bad. and, except for Dyaks above Tebakang, the crops are said to have been ruined by empangau and rats.
The Native Officers are most pessimistic, but 1 hope things are not as bad as they seem. A certain amount of exemption tax has been paid in, and an extension of time has been given until the 15th of next month. With the present prices of jelutong and gutta leaves the Malays should have no difficulty in paying the tax.
The new road alongside the railway track is
progressing apace, and the owners of gardens have
only been too ready to ditch their land. They wel-
come the road as a safeguard for their children from
being knocked down by the train.
The Simunjan bridge was repaired by contract,
and it is to be hoped that it will last longer than
the last one. Prisoners have been engaged in the
usual up-keep of roads and ornamental grounds,
and have completed the new stables.
Thirteen steamers and forty-one sailing vessels
entered and cleared during the month.
Coal shipped to Singapore
.. Sibu
,, Annam
,,	Kuching
229 tons
89 ,.
100 1,331 ,, 13 cwts.
Total 1,749 13 Imports.	Exports.
$31,416	$32,312.90
J. BEVILLE ARCHER,
Resident 2nd. Class.
110
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1. 1919.
SADONG COLLIERY.
*
March.
The gross out-put of coal produced by the mines was 2,127.16 tons, 465 tons of this was consumed by our boilers and 1,662.16 tons was delivered for export.
The shipments for the month were:
To the Kuching Municipality	...	281.17 tons
Messrs, the Borneo Company, Ltd.	... 1,065.08	,,
,, British Malaysian Manfg. Co. 2.10	..
Soon Seng, Sibu ...	... 89.18	,,
PatersonSimons & Co., Spore. 210.00 Heng Ek Teng, Annam	...	100.00	,,
Total Shipments 1,749.13 tons.
The balance of stock (coal) on the wharf at the end of the month was 1,780.02 tons.
An underground fire broke out at 12.30p.m. on the 6th at a point some 530 yards below the entrance of No. 8 drift on the main engine plane, between the morning and afternoon shifts.
Relief gangs of experienced miners were arranged to work in squads on shifts of short duration, and by 7 a.m. next morning the fire bad been overcome.
At 10 a.m., being 22 hours after the outbreak, every trace of fire had been removed. A good many of the men engaged in extinguishing the fire were overcome by the fumes and the heat, but no lives were lost.
It transpired that five gangs, of repairers were employed on the morning the accident took place at and above the point where the fire originated. Heavy falls of roof had taken place in this section of the drift during October 1913, so that the roof and side lagging then put in were now in a very dry and decayed state.
The fire, after having obtained a hold on the intake side lags with such a large supply of dry fuelat its disposal soon spread. The cause must have been due to the negligence of one or more of the repairers hanging up their lamps too close to the dry side lagging, but during the inquiry they all pleaded their innocence. Leong Too, the underground mandor in charge of the repairing gangs, and Aniss the fan- engine driver, were both fined by the Court for neglecting their duty and failing to report the accident at once.
The drift where the fire occurred has been thoroughly re-opened and repaired again and the cast of repairing the damage done, including the loss of out-put incurred, does not exceed $600.
A down-throw fault was struck in the west side pillar of No. 8 mine. This was driven through and the seam struck again inside by the end of the month. The coal here being exception ally hard and overlaid by a good coarse sandstone roof.
The No. 11 mine coal-pillar was almost completely stoped out by the end of the month.
The fall in the lower east panel siding of No. 9 mine was cleared and the inside workings re-opened.
The upper panel levels, due partly to bad prospects and chiefly to shortage of underground labour, were not worked during the month.
The upper seam mine produced a steady and slightly increased out-put.
A years contract for 8,000 tons of our small washery coals was made with Messrs the Borneo Company during the month and two shipments, aggregating 199 tons of this coal was shipped.
The prospecting drift made fair progress. Two very thin layers of coal were struck during the month.
A large quantity of shale refuse was dumped for the road beside the railway line and the necessary ditching on the outside is proceeding well.
The machinery and boilers were kept in good working order and everything went well at the wharf.
An accident took place on the railway line opposite the Colliery bazaar. A Chinaman, a barber, residing in Carpenter Street, Kuching, who had been visiting his relations here, ran out. of the shop after the moving train with the intention of boarding it with the result that he fell in between the tail-end waggons and had his foot badly crushed.
The health of the employees was excellent, and the rainfall for the month was 1186 inches.
J. W. EVANS,
Manager.
SIMANGGANG.
March.
On the 1st His Highness the Tuan Muda arrived at Simanggang. Mr. P. M. Adams also returned from Lingga Next morning His Highness sat in Court, most of the down-river chiefs were present hut nothing of importance was brought to the notice of His Highness.
On the 7th His Highness accompanied by myself and Abang Haji Buassan left for the ulu Batang Ai, Batu Kudi was reached at 4.30p.m. and here we spent the night. Lubok Antti was reached next day and having spent a night here we left for the Delok which was reached on the 11th. His Highness visited all houses situated in the mouth of the Delok, also went as far as Wong Taung. This rapid is a fine sight and one cannot ascend or descend it in boats.
In the evening of the 11th His Highness was visited by numerous Dyaks from up and down-river. On the 12th we left for Engkari spending the night at Labangs house just above the mouth of the Jela. Penghulu Apai Karna visited His Highness. The penghulu is getting too old to attend his work and by general vote, and with His Highness approval one Nyandang, son of the lute Rugin, was appointed penghulu. Next morning we left in small boats for Penghulu Apai Karnas house in the debt and from there started to walk to the Lemanak. We reached Chang's house at 10 a. m. situated at N. Tapang in the ulu Jela. After leaving this house heavy rain set in but we continued walking and reached Pengkalan Wap (a branch of the Kesit a tributary of the Lemanak ) at 3.30 p. m. Here we found a leaky boat and having loaded it. up started off for the Lemanak which we reached at 4.40 p.m . and going up this river a little way we reached the house of Ayom where we stayed the night.
On the 14th we left Ayoms house in small boats and mot our boats in charge of P. C. Jinggan at Empawi's house at 2.30 pm., having changed boats .we started off again and reached Penghulu Renangs house Batang Ai at 7 p. m. Next morning making an early start Simanggang was reached at 10.45 a.m.
On the 19th His Highness sat in Court, the principal Chinese towkays were warned about the excessive prices they are charging as against Kuching prices; after Court His Highness visited the Government Chinese School and also the Malay School.
On the 20th His Highness accompanied by Mr. P. M. Adams. Abang Dulrasid and myself left for the Skrang. The first night was spent at ex-Penghulu Sidus house. Next day making an early start, Jilom's house, was reached; here we were very hospitably entertained. It is noticeable the farther one gets away from civilisation the nicer the Dyaks are. On the 22nd we reached Penghulu Labangs house above which there is only one other; we stayed the night and next morning His Highness
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1919.
111
accompanied by Mr. P. M. Adams and Abang Dulrasid left the Skrang for Penghulu Unjis house in the ulu Spak (a branch of the Layer) and from there will proceed to the Batang Rejang overland.
I returned to Simanggang on the 24th.
Penghulu Luta and party arrived here on the 27th from Baku Saribas. and Abang Indut, Native Officer, Betong and Abang Embit, N. O. of Spauh also arrived in re numerous cases mostly dealing with the ownership of engkabang trees. Abang Indut brought a complaint against the behaviour of Penghulu Luta in the Belong fort Penghulu Luta was duly warned .that if he behaved in an unseemly manner again he would be dismissed his post.
Towards the end of the month the supply of rice ran short in the bazaar and I had to send round to Dyaks who relieved the situation.
The engkabang crop seems plentiful, but I am told that a great number of Dyaks will not sell the engkabang they have for notes, and in consequence are holding it up until they can get silver. There is very little copper to be had now, and although I have offered to exchange silver for copper, nobody has taken advantage of the offer.
Saribas.The natives are still reaping their padi, but from reports the harvest will be a very poor one on account of the late epidemic of influenza, and now the field mice have destroyed great quantities of padi. A great number of Dyaks left ibis district
without permission in order to join the Government expedition against the Ga'at Dyaks.
Kalaka.I am sorry to say that in the end the padi crop in the Krian will not be good, the field mice being responsible lor this.
On the night of the 17th uu attempt was made to burn down Boban bazaar, the fire was discovered in time and the Chinese managed to put it out.
The engkabang crop has been of great benefit to the natives as Chinese have been buying the nuts at three gantangs the dollar.
A great number of Dyaks left for the Rejang without permission in order to join the expedition to the Gaat.
The export of engkabang for this division amounted 4o 8,173 piculs and sago flour 4,617 piculs.
The following are the trade returns for this division, viz:
There have been remarkably few Police Court cases.
One of the up-river penghulu sent a letter to the station announcing that he claimed 2U% of the engkabang Collected by Dyaks from outside the district, as the trees were the property of the Mukah Dyaks. He was informed that his claim was not upheld.
The attempts made by the local M chimes to plant padi at and near Mukah have proved most disappointing, as the farms have proved an entire failure owing to empangau, rats and sparrows. No padi has been harvested at all from the farms at Mukah, though the growth of this was to all appearances excellent. Further up-river the result has been very little better and the Dyaks are very nearly as badly off.
The price of rice in the bazaar is still very high and I am enquiring into the matter with a view to lowering the price, but the Chinese here assure me that they are making a nominal profit only on the sale. If this is the case the prices at which they buy m Kuching must be exhorbitant.
I arrived from Sibu by s.l. La Follette on the 20th and took over charge of the district the following day.
Mr. and Mrs. Boult left by the launch for Sibu on the 22nd.
Application was made to me to extend the period for payment of exemption tax, but, taking into consideration the high price of raw sago, I saw no reason for doing so. Practically all the tax had been collected by the end of the month.
Twenty-two schooners cleared during the month with full cargoes.
The principal exports are as below :
1919.	1918.
Raw sago	402	koyans	124	koyans
Jelutong	3,045	piculs	4,460	piculs
Engkabang	431	,,
Jangkar	15
H. L. OWEN,
Resident 2nd Class.
The Sarawak Gazette
Imports.	Exports
March, 1919	$ 96,672.00	$141,092.00.
Total to 31/3/19	186,798.00	236.902.00
Do 31/3/18 $ 94,048.95	$ 98,634.75
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER, Resident
MUKAH.
' -?
March.
Since the beginning of the month the sea has
been calm enough for schooners to clear from the
river and a good quantity of raw sago has been
shipped. The number of vessels available does not
seem, however, to be sufficient to cope with the
amount of cargo to be carried.
The fishing boats have been out from the begin-
ning of the month and appear to-have done fairly
well.
There are still a number of hind cases being
brought before the Court. These eases prove often
to be deliberate attempts to grab sago plantations
Without the shadow of an excuse, the high price
comma tided for sago palms being apparently suffi-
cient io warrant the risk of an unsuccessful claim.
RATES OF ADVERTISEMENTS IN THE "SARAWAK GAZETTE
?
Payable in advance.
Quarter of a column and tinder
First insertion .	...	... $1.00
Second and third insertion each	... 0.50
Subsequent do	do	... 0.25
Half ii Column and under
First insertion ...	...	... 2.00
Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
Subsequent do	da	... 0.50
A Column and under
First insertion each	...	... 1.00
Second and third insertion each	... 2.00
Subsequent do	do	... 1.00
Special arrangements may be made for standing advertisement
All communications intended for insertion
in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed
. to the Editor at the Government Printing
Office, Kuching. They should be clearly
written and should reach the Office at least
one day before the publication of each issue-
Letters and other contributions must be
authenticated by writers name sent privately
to the Editor.
112
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1919.
We cannot undertake to return rejected Kuching, Foreign Trade Returns for the month of Mar., 1919.
communications, or to give reasons for not
inserting them.
Residents at the Outstations will confer a
obligation by forwarding to the Office earl
intelligence of all matters of general in teres
in their respective neighbourhoods.
NOTICE.
ASTANA FARM.
THE Manager of Astana Farm begs inform the Public that he is unable attend to Orders for milk after Office hours
NOTICE.
?
Gazette subscription and Printing
Office bills.
FOR the convenience of residents at Out
stations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums but only the 1, 2 and 3 cent values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that Money Orders be sent if possible
J. C. SWAYNE,
Manager, Govt. Printing Office
NOTICE.
AUCTION SALE
of unredeemed pledges from Pawn Broking
Farm YEW CHEE & Co., Chop Wo SANG am
Chop LOON YEK of Bau at No. 18, China Stree
on Saturdays of the following dates17th
May 1919 and 21st June 1919, at 9 a.m.
List of ail such unredeemed pledges can be
seen at the Pawn Farmers premises.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO.,
Authorised Auctioneers
A clean tooth never decays.
H. 0HNISHI D.D.S. (T.D.C.)
(Graduated Tokyo Dental College)
Japanese Dentist
193-6, ORCHARD ROAD, SINGAPORE.
[12-a]
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1919.
113
114
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1919.
SYN HIN LEONG & GO.,
22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS.
Beer, Wine, Spirit & General Store Dealers.
:(o): SOLE AGENTS FOR:
FRASER & NEAVE'S AERATED WATERS
(The Best throughout the East.)
Coagulatex
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic
Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at
$1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 catties of dry rubber.
ASAHI BEER.
ACETIC ACID.
:(o):	Fresh supplies of Stores are received
regularly.
PRICES MODERATE.
Free delivery to customers in Kuching.
Free packing & shipping for Outstation
Orders.
[u.c]
NOTICE.
THE KUCHING STEAM SAW MILLS LIMITED. NOTICE is hereby given that Share Certificate dated 25th August 1913, issued by THE KUCHING STEAM SAW MILLS LIMITED, for 330 shares of $10 each fully paid bearing Nos. 971 to 1300 inclusive, and registered in the name of J. H. BRODIE, is alleged to have been lost or destroyed.
Any person holding the said Share Certificate is required to return it to the undersigned not later than 15th June 1919, otherwise the said Share Certificate will be cancelled and a new one issued.
TAN SUM GUAN,
Secretary.
AOBA & CO.,
HIGH CLASS JAPANESE PHOTOGBAPHIC ARTISTS.
(QUALIFIED IN TOKYO.)
Will take outdoor photographs at any place and time. Night photographs can also be taken with the latest and safest flash light process. Best attention will be always given to patrons.
No. 32, KHOO HUN YEANG STREET.
KUCHING.
ARRIVALS.
PER s. l. Lucile:17th AprilFrom LinggaMr. Page- Turner.
PER s.s. Kuching: 19th April From Singapore - Mr. and Mrs. Hollings, Miss Scott, Mrs. Howell. Messrs. Frazer, Stall, Allan, Ang Kim Kok, P'ng Liang Huck. Lint Tee Chew, Tan Ewe Chai. Wee Cheng Yew, Ang Hong Choon. Um Teck Khoon, Song Kheng Hai, Lim Chee Ghiin and C. M Lee.
PER S. S. Rajah of Sarawak:26th AprilFrom SingaporeMessrs. Pang Yam Seng and E. Beng Hian.
DEPARTURES.
PER S. S. Rajah of Sarawak:18th April For Singapore Messrs. Pang Yam Seng and Tan Hok Hin.
PER S. S. Kuching : 23rd April - For SingaporeMr. and Mrs. Hollings, Mrs. Howell, Miss Scott, Mrs. Danson, Mr. and Mrs. Chin Hee, Messrs. Frazer. Sim Why Khu and Ang Kim Kok.
PER p. s Adeh:25th AprilFor Limbang Messrs. J. Mills and D. B. MurrayFor BintuluMessrs. A. E. Lawrence and E. Parnell.
PER s. s. Rajah of Sarawak:29th April For Singapore Messrs. Allan, E. Beng Hian. T. Peng Kuan, Skimasaki and Miss. Howell.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
ALMNAC.
MAY, 1919.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1919.
11.-
PURE FOOD MEANS GOOD HEALTH
ALEXANDRIA CANNED MEATS
Every Tin Guaranteed under the New South Wales Pure Food Act, and packed under the constant and vigilant supervision of a Government Inspector.
ASK FOR. ALEXANDRIA
Roast Beef
Corned Beef
Ox Cheek
Ox Tongues
Luncheon Tongues
Sheep Tongues
Extract of Beef
Roast Mutton Corned Mutton Spiced Mutton Mutton Chops Assorted Meats Minced Scollops Assorted Soups
Beef Sausage Pork Sausage Frankfurt Sausage Beef Dripping Pork and Beans Irish Stew
Ox Tail Soup
As supplied in
Governments
huge quantities to the Imperial and Indian for use by both the Army and Navy.
Sold by all Stores.
R. GOSLING & CO.,
2 Castlereagh Street, SYNDNEY, N.S.W.
ALEXANDRIA MEAT WORKS.
Distributors for the East:
Seremban General Agency, Ltd.
(Incorporated in F. M. S.)
SINGAPORE.
Sub: Agents-'BAK JUI LONG,
14 Carpenter Street, KUCHING, SARAWAK.
and BAN JUI GUAN.
MIRI, SARAWAK.
KUCHING Printed and Published by GHIN HENG SOON, Government Printer, at the Government Printing Office.
Barrack Road.
116	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1919.
Arrivals.
