
VOL. XLIX.
No. 767.
Sarawak Gazette.
Price KUCHING, WEDNESDAY, APRIL 16, 1919.	10cents
CONTENTS.
The Sarawak Gazette.
Birth:Ward
Page.
87
Notes
87
The Rajah Charles Brooke Memorial Fund ...
88
The "Silver Thimble " Fund
88
Sadong Regatta
88
A visit to unknown Borneo
89
* A Cross-Crosslet, Fitchee. Azure "
90
Bowls	...	...	90
Correspondence
90
Monthly Reports;Sibu
90
Lower RejangOya
91
Mukah
92
BaramMiriBrooketon Colliery ...
93
Limbang
94
Trade Returns
96
Passengers
97
Almanac
97
Kuching Shipping
98
Miri Shipping
98
Meteorological Returns
99
Rainfall
99
The Sarawak Gazette.
SUBSCRIPTIONS to the Gazette are an follows:
The Sarawak Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
Single copy ...	.10 cents
Subscription for one year	...	..- $2.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 2.25 Subscription including postage to all other
Countries. ...	... 2.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING
Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 5s. 10d
The Sarawak Government Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
Single copy ...	.05 cents
Subscription for one year ...	... $1.00
Subscription including postage. to Outstations 1.25
Subscription including [lostage to all other Countries.	1.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING
Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 3S. 6d All subscriptions are payable in advance and must commence from the 1st January in each year on which date they are renewable. All broken periods will be considered as full.
Subscriptions will not be renewed unless notice of renewal given.
Changes of Address should be notified to the Office in writing.
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 16, 1919.
Birth.
AT the Residency, Kuching, on 12th April to the Honble. A. B. and Mrs. WARD a son.
NOTES.
(April.)
A Reuter telegram from London, dated March 18, states that the Rajah of Sarawak has arrived in England.
TAPPING on Dahan Estate has been resumed and the out-put for March amounted to 7,800 lbs.
S. S. Gladys arrived from Baram on April 3rd with passengers the Rev. W. Linton and the Rev. Fathers Jansen and Oss.
WE can heartily recommend to our readers The Spotted Panther, one of the new books on the Library list, rf they care to learn more of unknown Borneo. No more delightful writer has appeared since the earlier imitators of Multatuli or possibly Alan St. Aubyn.
WE are asked to make public the following notice from the General Manager of the Government Wireless Station.
The use of Romanized Malay is now permitted in telegrams between places within the Malayan Telegraph System. Addressees are requested to enter the time of delivery on telegraph receipt forms in the space provided. The Cable Company advise that pressure of traffic and breakdowns on cables make it necessary to forward by post from Marseilles telegrams addressed to the United Kingdom and beyond. Such telegrams suffer a delay of at least nine or ten days.
88	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. APRIL 16, 1919.
S. S. Gladys sailed for Sibu on April 6th with passengers Mr. and Mrs. Parry Davis and the Rev. Fathers Oss and Odyke.
THE Superintendent of Land and Surveys asks us to draw attention to the fact that quit rent should be paid by March 31st. After that date all payments on that account are surcharged. Persons who have not yet paid are requested to do so without delay.
M. Jules Vedrines, winner of the Gordon- Bennett Cup and one of the best known French aces shortly proposes to make a voyage round the world by air.
His suggested route in the East is by Bangkok. Singapore, Batavia. Bali and so to Australia. No doubt bad facilities existed he would have made a call on Sarawak.
P. S. Adeh arrived from the North on the 6th bringing Mr. A. E. Lawrence from Bintulu. A Public Meeting will be held in the Court
Room on Wednesday, 23rd at 10 a. m., to
discuss arrangements for the public celebration in Kuching of the signing of Peace.
The proposed official ceremonies and
Thanksgiving Service in connection with the
event should last from 8 a. m. to 10 a. m.,
after which the public are asked to combine
to celebrate the occasion adequately.
IN another column we publish the complete
prospectus of the new Steamship Company.
S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore on
the 8th with passengers Mr. and Mis. Bean
and Messrs. Ong Siow Sian and Ong Wee Hoe.
A most successful Regatta was held at
Dalat on 26th April. Seven new racing boats
completed visitors came from points as far
removed as Igan and Mukah. The event
proved a great boon to the local shop-keepers
also to the itinerant vendors of sherbat and
coffee, one of whom cleared $65 in the course
of the day.
PASSENGERS to Singapore by s. s. Kuching
on the 11th were Messrs. Weiding, Dilly,
Lau Chin Eng, Tan Ewe Chai, P. Liang Huk,
T. Joon Teck, Ng Bak Choon and C. M. Lee.
DRY rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah
during the month of March amounted to
62,000 lbs.
S. S. Rajah of Sarawak, after an absence
of two years, has returned to her familiar run,
reaching Kuching on April 14th. Passengers
were Messrs. I. Shelton and Tsing Ho Tang.
WE understand that Miss Gibson and Miss Seborn sailed from England on April 12th
to undertake work in this Diocese. Miss
Gibson will take charge of the junior school
in S. Thomas Kuching, and Miss Seborn
will assist Miss Andrews at S. Marys School.
Miss Olver is being transferred to Jesselton, on the arrival of Miss Cubitt, who will relieve her in Kuching.
A note consisting of two halves of Singapore notes, series A/23 28974 and A/19 97422, of ton dollars value has been presented at the Treasury in payment, of course by itself this note is valueless, but should the holder of the two other halves bring them to the Treasury he will be able to obtain a negotiable note.
The Rajah Charles Brooke
Memorial Fund.
Amount already acknowledged ... $23,323.20
Thomas Lewis	...	100.00
The Silver Thimble" Fund.
Previously acknowledged	...	...	$480.00
O. M. Peiniger	...	...	25 00
C. Ermen ...	...	...	15.00
Mrs. F. F. Boult	...	...	10.00
Proceeds from sale of trinkets	...	28.80
Total $558.80
This fund is now closed.
When the receipt arrives from England it will be
duly published in the Gazette.
I should like to thank all who have kindly sub-
scribed to this most deserving charity.
Bishop's House,
Kuching.
IRENE DANSON.
Sadong Regatta.
This event took place on the the 25th of March
amidst glorious weather: perhaps there were not so
many people present as in other year, but those who
did come made up. for their numbers by greater
enthusiasm.
The Colliery wharf presented a gay sight, whilst
huts were erected along the bank, on the line coal
trucks were drawn up covered in gorgeous cloths
which more or less concealed the fair burden they
carried.
By the courtesy of Mr. Hunt the s.l. Margaret
acted as starter's launch and greatly helped the
proceedings.
Six Europeans managed to collect together and
these with willing Malay and Chinese helpers
managed to carry out a rather lengthy programme.
Great credit is due to Mr. Ah Kim for taking up the
duties of Hon. Secretary and Treasurer at very
short notice.
The racing was fairly good on the whole, but an-
other year one might suggest that there should
be a limit to the number of prizes any one boat
may take.
A boat from the 2nd Division came round, but fail-
ed to obtain a place, I hope this will not deter other
sportsman from trying their luck another year.
Haji Medin and Tuanku Chi's Patri Simunjan
won all her three races easily, whilst Mr. Evan's
Intan Terpileh also accounted for three races.
In the Boys Race, limited to 15 paddlers, Sri
Grunggang should have won, but got into rough
water and nearly swamped.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 16, 1919.	89
At four o'clock the whole crowd moved off en masse to the Colliery where Mr. Evans the Manager had arranged various sports.
The railway was taxed to its utmost limits to carry such crowds and two engines were continually running, drawing trucks wreathed with struggling humanity.
On the Colliery football ground various pastimes had been arranged and the youth of the neighbourhood could be seen trying their luck at Sumpitan shooting, quoit throwing, long jump, etc., whilst a football match of 15 minutes aside between teams representing the wharf and the Colliery was won by the latter, with a score of one goal to nil.
The juniors were also engaged in a struggle for a football cup, but I was unable to obtain the result: from their war cries and continual scrums I have no doubt that they enjoyed themselves.
A series of races were run, the life of a coal miner however does not seem to tend to fleetness of foot and no records were broken.
The Europeans race caused more delight to the onlookers than if did to the participants; a close race ensued in which the representative of Goebilt won, whilst second place was doubtful. Darkness coming on put a stop to the proceedings and once more the struggling engines puffed and snorted in their endeavours to convey the happy perspiring crowds home again.
It was luckily a beautiful night which may somewhat have consoled those unfortunate persons for whom no room could be found on the Inst train.
( Contributed. )
A visit to unknown Borneo.
(Continued from page 78. )
Next morning we pushed on again and climbing Tudah hill some 1.500 feet, fall abruptly to the Brayong stream, a tributary of the Trusan which we crossed, and then a muddy slippery climb brought ns to a Murut house on the slope of a hill above the river. A line view of the Temburong hills and the peaks of Mt. Pagun Priok due S W. across the Trusan ami the mountains of the Tengoa due X. W. was obtained from cluse by here, the former being of considerable height, one peak with its jagged edge towering high above the others.
Just as I entered the long house I noticed a very unpleasant smell, and following my nose, came on a long box covered with a valuable Brunei cloth. A long bamboo came from the bottom of the box and its lower end was in a small pit in the ground below the house which was surrounded by a low fence The box contained a body of a woman recently deceased and according to Murut custom the corpse was allowed to remain in the box until ail but the bones has found its way to the pit below the house through the bamboo, when these are removed and buried elsewhere in a jar with great ceremony. This is the occasion for a feast, a buffalo being killed and vast quantities of arrack being consumed. The joints of the box are closed with native gum and often spring a leak which is nor. difficult for even a Murut nose to locate Fortunately the house was a fairly long one and we took up our abode at the far end, the smell of curried fowl soon making one forget the odoriferous box at the other end of the house. The head man provided our party with pigs, fowls and rice, as is their custom, so that it was far from a starving party that set out next day. Two of my party of Muruts fell sick here and wanted to go back, the disease, as usual, being laziness, so they were left behind.
The track now went up and down a series of hills between the Metalau and Mbaung streams and just as we got to a deserted house down came a smart shower of rain and henceforth the track on to Sirans
house was a vast mud pie of yellow' clay thoroughly churned up by the buffaloes that had just gone on ahead of us and we spent most of our time sitting down and sliding down the slippery slopes, the Dyaks cursing the buffaloes and the unlucky shower of rain and the Muruts coughing and spitting and stumbling along grumbling all the afternoon, so that it was a relief to come out at last on to a large clearing and see the long house not live hundred yards away. Here Muruts came in from all round having in some mysterious way got wind of our arrival, one of them ? from the country for which we were bound and he said that the stories of recent murders were entirely false as far as he knew. This house was pleasant and clean and a stream ran by it a few yards away so that the bathing was good and we decided to spend a day here and dry our wet gear and clean up after the mud bath of the day before, and luckily the next day proved fine and warm. Kaya went out in the evening and came back very pleased with himself, having shot a small pig with his gaspipe. The padi crop was good here and there were thousands of cucumbers amongst the padi so we had plenty of food.
I stalked a couple of large hornbills (Tajak) with the rifle, but a Murut had also been following them from the other side and he let fly with his gun just when I was about to fire and the two chunks of iron with which it was loaded went half way up the tree and carne. down again within a few yards of where I was standing.
The country was very open and had evidently been farmed for many years as it was practically, all under young jungle, only the tops of the hills carrying trees of any size ; the Muruts said that at one time there was a very large population living on the land in this district and a large number of long houses, but that small-pox and cholera and other diseases had wiped the people out so that at the present day the country is almost empty only a few houses being seen here and there.
Leaving the house next morning the head man stood lit the top of the steps to say good-bye and held in his hand a small piece of stick some three inches long with a couple of little cone-shaped pieces of wood strung on it and as we passed him each of us had to spit on the cones while he mumbled something to himself. This I discovered was a Murut way of wishing us good luck and a pleasant journey. The path to-day went through young jungle and sharp grass some twelve feet high, this being the farming land of the year before, and we felt the heat considerably after having been travelling through the shady jungle up till now. In the hollows the heat was intense, but a few hours walking took us into the jangle again where the air was cool and pleasant. At a turn of the track we met a troop of thirty Murut women and a few men carrying loads of rubber on their way down to the bazaar. The rubber was packed in neat rolls with a split bamboo casing in cylindrical form, the packages weighing from 5 to 10 tbs. Each woman carried from 30 to 40 tbs., but the men of course carried as little as possible the whole of the loads being put on the women and certainly they looked capable of carrying them, being strong heavy women with exceptionally thick legs, and they tramped up the steep hills at a steady pace, the men following behind spitting and coughing.
We stopped at several small houses before arriving at a bunch of three long ones perched on the very- top of a hill across the Trusan river. The river here is about forty yards wide and fairly deep, and if in flood would be impassable, the Muruts therefore had built a suspension bridge. A spot, was selected where the branches of two trees stretched over the water from opposite banks and giant bamboos were thrown across the intervening space, their ends being lashed to the branches, while smaller bamboos.
90
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 16, 1919.
bound to the upper branches with rotan, supported
the centre. The bamboos were slippery and swayed
about a good deal ns the supporting branches were
very small and the drop from the middle of
the bridge into the water was not pleasant to
contemplate; however we all crossed safely. A
couple of kijang darted across the path from the long
grass on the other side and two of the party let
fly four barrels at them when not more than five
yards away but not a shot touched them. On
arrival at the bouses we found that Muruts for
some distance round had heard of our approach and
came in bringing presents of pigs, fowls, eggs (these
latter mostly of the election variety) and rice all of
which, except the eggs perhaps, wore very welcome.
It was this part of the country that was over-run some
ten years ago by the Rajahs expedition, since when
no Government Officer has been near the place, and it
was the relations of the Muruts who were then willed
out who came to meet me to-day with these gifts.
These three houses perched on a hill commanded
a splendid view of the surrounding country, and had
evidently been placed there for a reason for it
would have been impossible to have approached
them without being seen a great distance away by
the inhabitants.
The head men Tadam Lawat, Ukap and Ngelo
Gaieng came down to meet us and had. a large
quantity of newly made arrack ready in jars, this
was made from tapioca root and was not at all
unpleasant to drink and the rest of the party put
away an enormous quantity after which, being tired
and hot they nil went off to sleep: being a fine
evening I walked back half a mile to the Trusan river
and enjoyed a deep water bathe: the water being
very cold the swim was refreshing after the hot walk.
(To be continued.)
Bott Is.
?
The usual monthly Bowling Handicap took place at the Sarawak Club on the 1st April and resulted
as follows:
Avera"'
J. C. Swayne	161'3
D. L. Greene	1901
G. T. Bates ...	... 159
A. B. Ward 1573
C. E. A. Ermen ... 183'4
Score. H'cap. Total. 397	+	411	-	438'4
399	+	scr.	399
284	+	698	353'8
268	+	76'3	344'3
265	+	194	284'4
CORRESPONDENCE.
The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of
correspondents.
VALE LODGE,
TORQUAY.
MY DEAR SIR.
Having read in one of your Gazettes lately that
crocodiles have become troublesome, I think that
through the medium of your paper, I can put the.
natives of those rivers onto a way of easily disposing
of those reptiles when occasion requires. Let them
obtain from their neighbours three or four old and
ugly cats or dogs and having killed these and having
removed their insides, let them fill them up with
unslaked lime (shell-lime is very good for this
purpose). Having stiched them up securely let them
hang them on the bushes by the side of the river
about a foot above high-water mark. The crocodile,
having swallowed one of these, slakes the lime inter-
nally and will die in a very few hours.
1 have disposed in this way of several big man-
eaters during my residence at Mukah and have
never known it to fail.
A Cross-Crosslet, Fitchee, Azure.
?
Brushing the dew from the fern and the heather, Each hardy clansman goes forward at dawn, Chieftain and children of Dougal together Follow to-day the cross-crosslet of Lorne !
Blue are the hills of Argyll and its highlands, Grey through the mist lies the western-most sea ; Up!" cried the chief of a hundred grey islands, Follow the cross of our people, and me!"
Centuries pass; and far south of the border Dwells a descendant of clansmen of Lorne, One in whose heart rings the old chieftain's order- Up! and be true to the badge you have borne !" In the dark Eastern jungles, in far tropic islands, Where Dyak hunts Dyak, and man enslaves man.
Plant the cross-crosslet in those savage highlands,
Plant there the crossthe badge of the clan !
He was the pioneer; he took bis orders, Saving Sarawak from darkness and night, Planting the Cross where the savage marander Erswhile had nested with eagle and kite!
Those who came after him ; building up sounder, Surer foundations than ever could be.
Took for a sign the badge of the founder, Made the cross azure the arms of the See.
Sharp-pointed Cross of the Son of the Father, Master of all men, with banner unfurled !
Where thou art planted may swift the clans gather, Striving to 'stablish His peace in this world !
ROY DAWSON.
A pointed cross-crosslet, grasped by a mailed hand, was the famous crest of the MDougalls of that ilk, formerly Lords of Lorne. The arms of the See of Sarawak are adapted from it, in memory of Bishop M'DougalI.
( Scottish Chronicle.)
Yours very truly, W. H. RODWAY.
MONTHLY REPORTS.
SIBU.
March.
Mr. H. D. Aplin returned from the Matu and Daro districts early in the month and later visited Rejang.
On the 6th, I left for Kapit and after spending one night at Kanowit reached my destination on the following day.
Mr. G. M. Gifford reported that an Ukit, named Usop, and a Kayan, named Kasieng, are said to have killed the three Dyaks who (vide my November report), met their end while collecting jungle produce in the Putai, pateh Batang Rejang.
A full enquiry will be held when an Officer next visits Belaga and should it be proved that Usop and Kasieng were the perpetrators of this crime they will be brought to justice.
The hill padi is being harvested and, taken as a whole, will prove a far larger crop than that harvested in the three previous years. Unfortunately this cannot be said of the swamp padi which has been badly damaged by mice and other pests.
On the 10th I returned to Sibu.
The work in the Courts has been very slack, during the month, owing to the natives being busy harvesting and collecting illipe nuts.
The illipe crop is reported to be the heaviest for many years and it is feared that a large proportion of the crop will be left to waste as the Dyaks and the others are not in sufficient numbers to harvest the whole crop.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 16, 1919. 91
A serious difficulty has arisen owing to the
shipping facilities being absolutely inadequate to
cope with the increase in cargoes for export. The
Chinese have made every effort to charter a steamer
in Singapore, but without success.
All the bazaars are choked with illipe nuts and it
is estimated that only about a quarter of the nuts
have as yet been put on the local markets.
There has, of late, been some difficulty with regard
to money. The Dyaks and Melanoes object to
receive notes in payment for illipe nuts and raw
sago and in consequence silver dollars are being
imported in large quantities, as there is not suffi-
cient silver or copper coinage .to pay for these
products.
The shortage of copper coinage in the local bazaar
is proving a great hardship to small purchasers ; one
dollar Singapore notes change hands at a discount
of 5%.
It was surmised that the Dyaks and Melanoes
wore hoarding large quantities of copper coinage and
that there would only be a temporary shortage, but,
after making various enquiries. I am led to believe
that this is not the case, but that a large quantity
of copper has entirely disappeared due to the melting
of a considerable amount by the metal workers when
copper and brass were unobtainable, during the
Inter stages of the war.
His Highness the Tuan Muda accompanied by
Mr. P. M. Adams arrived from Simanggang, by an
overland route, on the 29th.
His Highness met all the principal Malay chiefs
and also several of the Dyak penghulus who had
collected with their followers at the end of the month
in readiness to proceed on the expedition against
the Ga'at rebels.
Mr. H. L. Owen left for Mukah on the 20th to
take over from Mr. F. F. Boult, before his de-
parture on European furlough.
Mr. and Mrs. Boult arrived at Sibu on the 22nd
and left for Kuching, par the p.s. Adeh, on the 26th.
Haji Assim has been elected Imam and Haji
Majuki, Katip in place of the late Haji Anis who,
of late years, did the duty of both officials
The s.s. Alice Lorraine made three trips to Sibu;
once with a cargo of coal for the use of the station
and once to bring the contigent of the Sarawak
Rangers for the expedition: on the third occasion
she came to load illipe nuts.
The p.s. Adeh made one trip to and from Sibu
with cargo and the s.s. Gladys also made, one trip.
The s.s. Flevo and the s.s. Batavier made two
trips to and from Singapore, on each occasion clear-
ing with full cargo.
In spite of the increased shipping the bazaars are
still full of cargo awaiting shipment. It is to be
LOWER REJANG.
hoped that some means will be found to remove the oil nuts before deterioration sets in.
The trade returns following figures, viz
for the past Imports.
month show
Exports.
the
Coasting
$ 68,601
$ 81,289
Foreign
156,101
$224,705
195,409
$276,698
Brought forward
196.933
266,886
Total
$421,638
$543,629
1918
Immigrants 54.
$187,701
$214,629
J. BARING-GOULD,
Resident 3rd Division.
February and March.
Accompanied by the Honble, the Resident,
Mr. J. Baring-Gould and Mr. H. L. Owen I left for
Matu on the 21st February, the Honble. the
Resident and Mr. H. L. Owen returning to Sibu on
the 24th, this day being the If. H. the Ranees
birthday, the offices were closed.
Not so many cases were brought before the Court
as usual. Everybody was very busy working sago
which still fetches a very good price.
A Government auction of cuttle at Bruan will take
place on the 15th April This is a settlement of
the dispute concerning the ownership of these cattle
which has been up before the Court for several years.
On a petition from all the kampungs a road tax
of 25 cents per head was levied. The roads in future
will be kept up by contract. The main road to the
bazaar is in a very bad state, having disappeared
altogether in several places, and tenders for contracts
for repairing this road have been asked for.
From Matu I went on to Daro on the 1st. The
bazaar and the people here were very elated over the
price of sago and business had quite woken up.
The road and bridges through the bazaar have been
raised and it is quite possible to walk through now
with some comfort. I hope to be able to persuade
the Malays to do their road through the kampong
after the exemption tax has been collected.
A small gaol has been sanctioned for this place.
There being no gaol here it was impossible to keep
any discipline over the prisoners waiting to be sent
to either Matu or Rejang. formerly they always seen
to have been allowed to do whatever they liked. I
returned to Sibu on the 4th March and on the 12th
Rejang was visited. No cases of any importance
were brought before me.
The pengerih catches are reported to be poor. The
sum of 32,000 was remitted to Sibu Treasury.
On the 16th I went over to Selalang and spent
the night there, returning to Sibu on the 17th,
stopping at Sarikei and Binatang on the way. All
was reported well at these places Sibu was reached
on the morning of the 18th.
H. D. APLIN,
Resident Had Class.
OYA.
March.
A crocodile, measuring fourteen feet in length, was
caught on a book, on the 4th. It is probably the
one, or one of those which have been preying on the
Government cattle during tbc last two months.
The telephone at Oya has been giving a good deal
of trouble lately, there seems to be something wrong
in the connections at Oya between Mukah and Dalat.
Possibly there is something wrong with the switch-
board, which was a second hand instrument when
installed about four years ago. I have written to
the Superintendent of Telephones concerning it.
Dr. Luhn, the Medical Officer of 3rd Division,
arrived from Sibu via Dalat on the 8th. He had
surveyed the Cut while coming through and makes
the distance six and a half miles.
Dr. Luhn stayed in this district until the 14th
when he returned to Sibu
Penghuln Takin arrived from the ulu Oya on the
15th, he reports the padi crop in the ulu Petamin
good, but say it is not good on the main river.
His people brought down a large quantity of eng-
kabang of which there is an enormous crop in the
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 16, 1919.
these cases or boundary disputes will lessen until a
surveyor is stationed in the district when lands can
be properly marked out and permanent boundary
posts erected. The old, and present, system of sending a policeman out with a chain to make a
rough survey is most unsatisfactory, and often on
the lands being surveyed a second time the measure-
ments do not tally. The establishing of a properly
organised Land Department would be of the greatest
benefit to the district, the revenue accruing from
which should more than cover the cost. Owners of
sago gardens would I feel sure be quite ready to pay
the necessary survey fees, and if necessary a small-
land rent.
On the 15th Jertigan Assam reported his vessel,
tire schooner Kim Seng Ann, which was bound for
Kuching from Bintulu, with a mixed cargo, had
foundered at 2 a. m. that morning. The crew and
three Chinese passengers Look to the ship's bout,
which was swamped before reaching the shore. Ah
Choo, a fourth Chinese passenger, and an opium
smoker went down with the vessel; he at the lime
was lying ill in the cabin. It appears the ship left Bin-
tulu about 3p. m. the previous afternoon and touched
the sand slightly when coming out of the mouth.
It would seem that she must have shifted her plank-
ing, for when between Tatau and Balingian she
was found to be leaking. The jeragan thought of
running on the shore at Balingian, which is mud,
but finally decided to try and reach Igan. By the
time she was off Mukah the pump could not con-
tend with the flow of water so that the vessel finally
settled down in six fathoms, about four to five miles
off Judan. She is lying on mud, with her bows
pointing north. For a time both her top-masts
could be seen, but now only the main top-mast is
visible. Some of the deck cargo has been recovered
and a few wire stays.
The harvesting reports are anything but satis-
factory. Only at Judan, Jebungan, Selangau and
Tutus have padi planters had any success, all other
parts of the district the farms have been destroyed
by rats and insects.
The Rouble. the Resident at Sibu telephoned me
that he had received a complaint that Dalat traders
would only accept Treasury notes at a discount. I
at once sent instructions to Oya and Dalat to warn
the Chinese that notes were to be received at their
face value and any persons found taking them for
less would be fined.
The river bank in front of the stables has fallen
away a good deal this landas.
At Petanak Lama the river shows signs of trying
to break through at the old mouth. Should this
happen it will be necessary to build a new bridge.
Abas, telephone inspector from Kuching, over-
hauled all the instruments in the Mukah and Oya
districts. Before leaving he reported them all in
good order. However he had hardly gone a week
when it was only with difficulty Mukah could net on
from Oya to Dalat and talking with Sibu has been
well nigh impossible, though from the Mukah
Central communication.with the local calls and Oya
is uninterrupted. Now that the traffic over the
Mukah Sibu line is increasing daily, if the present
system of switching on at Oya and again at Dalat is
to be continued, it is important that none but the
most reliable switch boxes should be used. The
present ones are continually giving trouble either at
Oya or Dalat.
Omar hits been appointed a sub-jelutong inspector
on a three months trial.
No schooners entered and two waiting to get out
were detained the whole month owing to northerly
winds.
F. F. BOULT,
,	Acting Resident.
ulu this year. It is bought by the Chinese in the
bazaar at three gantangs for a dollar, but agents
sent up-river by the Chinese buy it at four gantangs
for a dollar
There is a very large amount not brought down
yet, the Dyaks being busy on their farms.
I left for Dalat on the 18tli and returned again on
the 28th
There was a lot of work in both Courts, but
especially in the Police Court. There were a num-
ber of disputes over sago land boundaries, and con-
cerning the ownership of fruit trees. A Chinese
bandong trader of Kampong Teh was fined for using
n. passu measure which had not been stamped by
Government and which was nearly one and a half
gantangs in excess measure; this passu was being
used in receiving lamanta from the people, and the
Tua Kampong seized it and prosecuted.
Trade has been very good all month and the
price of sago still remains very high.
Natives and Chinese alike are working very hard
and getting out as much as possible while the good
price lasts; the price has never been known to be
so high in this river, having reached $1.50, $1.60 and
$1.70 per passu, the price at the end of the month
was between $1.10 and $1.30 according to quality.
A great many people are paying off old debts, and
the prison gang, usually between thirty and forty
in number, has dwindled down to fourteen only.
By the end of the month the exemption tax of
the district with only a few exceptions had been all
paid in.
Eleven schooners including a Wongkang entered
the river during the month, and eight cleared.
The exports for the month are as follows : -
1918.	1919.
Raw Sago	141	coyans	245 coyans
Jelutong	30	piculs	145	piculs
Engkabang	...	69	do
Jangkar	...	4	do
There was a Regatta held at Dalat on the 26th,
the first since 1911, and it was a great success.
There were seven new long racing boats varying
in lengths between ten and twelve and a half
fathoms, none of which had raced before. The
finishes were very close indeed, a different boat
winning on each of the three occasions they raced.
There were seventeen events in all, and I was
greatly assisted by the Rev. A. Stotter, who acted
as judge for the various races.
There was a very targe crowd of people present,
people having come from Igan, Oya, Penat and
Mukah.
HENRY H. KORTRIGHT,
Resident 2nd Class.
MUKAH.
February.
I arrived at Dalat on the 1st going on to Oya on
the 3rd. 1 went over to Mukah on the 7th. As I
was unable to bring over the money I had brought
from Sibu I paid out some $5,000 to Mukah Chinese
at Oya
Owing to my enforced absence, I found an ac-
cumulation of Court work awaiting me, which was
considerably above the average. Land cases were
very numerous, brought about by the high price of
sago.
A local notice has been sent round the district
informing owners of sago lands that persons selling
sago trees must accompany the purchaser, or send
some responsible person, to point out and put some
distinguishing mark on the trees sold. This I hope
may in some degree help to lessen the unlawful
felling of sago trees. Personally I do not think
92
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 16, 1916. 93
BARAM.
March.
Court work was very light. Several Chinese were lined $15 for trading without a license. It appears that the Honble. Resident 4th Division made out an Order that no pass need be taken out if a license to trade had been obtained ; the Chinese took it to mean that the_\ could go anywhere without a pass or license.
Date Sheriff Hamid, Native Officer, paid a visit to the Dyaks in Bakong from 3rd to 14th instant. He reported all quiet in this, river all are busy harvesting, but the prospects are very bad. He obtained the names of about 50 Dyaks who had been going to Belair, continually without a pass. Summonses were issued and most of the culprits have been fined $15 each.
Fines and fees amounted to $1,020.81.
S. L. Chamois was chartered by Chop Soon Kiat for $150 to go to Bintulu to obtain bilian attaps.
Sickness has been very bad in the bazaar and kam- pongs, mostly fever, and the same reports come from up-country. I made two trips to Miri for medical treatment and Datu Sheriff Hamid. Native Officer, was taken ill on the 22nd instant and was still absent from duty at the end of the month.
S. S. Gladys arrived being the first steamer for the year News was received by telephone th.it she had left Miri on the 22nd instant, but she did not arrive until the 24th instant. Railing again on the 28th instant. She was unable to get out of the river until the night of the 31st instant
Prisoners were engaged m levelling the bazaar site.
S. L. Chamois has been running almost continually to Niah to get bilian attaps
Owing to the failure of the padi crop I am trving to obtain $500 worth from the Kadayans at Sibuti
The rainfall was 4'54 inches
Imports.	Exports.
$23,941	$15,817
C. D. ADAMS.
Resident 2nd Clans.
MIRI.
February.
The 1st being Chinese New Years Day was observed as a public holiday and all offices closed.
The Honble. the Resident returned from a visit to the coast villages on the 3rd.
Owing to the non-arrival of p. s. Adeh the local supply of opium ran out and caused a riot in the bazaar on the evening of the 12th, neccesitating the calling out of the police fully armed and the arrest of the ringleaders.
The following day a small quantity of opium was obtained from Baram and this, by restricted sale, just lasted until the arrival of the Adeh on the 17th.
Mr. J. W. Vincent arrived from England on the 14th to join the staff of the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Company.
On the 16th I left for Sibuti and Niah. accompanied by Native Officer Bujang. I was away until the 26th attending to local matters, including a trade dispute between the Niah Chinese.
The greater part of the native population at these places was away on padi farms, harvesting, so I was unable to settle my outstanding cases. While at Niah I paid a visit to the birds-nest caves, and inspected the new bilian causeway which is in course, of construction between the landing place and the caves.
Imports.
Min	11.748
Niaii 316
W. F.
I was informed by the chiefs of Niah and Sibuti
that they fear the padi crop will be a failure this
year on account of the prolonged draught we have
been experiencing in this division.
The s. s. Attaka arrived from Balik Papan on the
9th to load tank plates and sailed again for Tarakan
on the 23rd.
On the 14th the s. s. Haliotis arrived from Pulo
Sambo and after loading 2,000 tons of crude oil,
sailed for Soesoe two days later.
Court work was light throughout the month, the
only cases calling for mention being those of Ah Wa,
Chop Seng Bee fined for causing a fire in the bazaar.
(Ng See fined for trespassing in the Residency
grounds), and Mak Yow, Chun See and Chan Kang,
sentenced to terms of imprisonment for theft.
Some very necssary repairs were carried out to
the boat-shed and fish market, and the prison gang
was employed on the up-keep of the ornamental
grounds and clearing the road to the wireless
station.
The weather throughout the month was extreme-
ly dry, the rainfall amounting to only 1'16 inches.
The trade returns are as follows :
Exports.
$18,038
515
DE V. SKRINE,.
RESIDENT 2ND CLASS.
BROOKETON COLLIERY.
February.
Our out-put for the month was 2,455 tons, 4671 tons
were used for boiler fuel and 1,9871 tons were sent
to the wharf to be sold. Our sales amounted to
1,271 tons. The coal was taken by Messrs, the
Straits Steamship Co., Messrs, the. Mitsubushi
Trading Co., p. s. Adeh and the British Government
launch at Labuan. There was no rainfall during
the month The Chinese labour stopped five days,
celebrating their New Year.
We started to drive the No. 2 drift in the West
Slant farther down, but had to stop working there
during the latter part of the month, having run short
of dynamite. The intention is to drive this dip
down deep enough to enable us to lower the pumps
in No. 1 dip, so as to ensure us getting a couple
more levels in the North Drive without being troubled
with much water. The two dips in the North
Drive were on stop during the whole of the month,
we wanted a pump to clear the little water making
and having heard there was one in Kuching lying
idle belonging to Government we applied for it, but
apparently it could not be spared. We had several
mid parts in our workshop these were fixed up, so
we hope to make a start in these dips soon, in the
meantime we are driving a subsidiary small dip
down to induce the water to run off into the old
workings and so on to our main pumps with greater
ease. Everything went well in the mechanical line,
we were cleaning and repairing one of our large
Lancashire boilers during the month. The founda-
tions round the boilers were giving way so we streng-
thened these somewhat I should like to point out
that one of our locomotives was dismantled some
months ago and when dismantled was found to be
in such a bad state that it could not be used again,
so we are now dependent on one and that not in a
very good condition. This was reported on some
time ago, but evidently the report hits got mislaid.
We continued to repair the oil level at Buang Tawar
and made good progress with the repairs during
94	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 16, 1919.
the dry weather. The LAubaine and the two tongkangs are in good repair and continue to carry coal to Labuan. The LAubaine's boiler continues to give trouble, but we are getting over the matter. We did sundry repairs to our wharves both at Brooketon and Labuan. The agency affairs are going on quite smoothly. The health of the coolies are good with a good supply of labour on hand. No accident occurred during the month.
THOS. LEWIS,
General Manager.
January.
New Year's Day was observed as a public holiday.
Mr. W. F. de V. Skrine left here by boat for
Brooketon on the 2nd.
The p. s. Adeh arrived here from Kuching on the
8th. sailing the following day with passenger Mr.
G. M. Allman.
A herd of about twenty wild pigs seen swimming across the river in the direction of the bazaar caused some excitement during the evening. Twelve of them were accounted for, some being speared in the water, some on the lawn in front of the Court house and some actually in the bazaar itself.
The p. s. Adeh arrived again on the 19th with passengers Mr. and Mrs. Kortright and family and Messrs. Allman and Haldane. She sailed again for Kuching, via Lawas, the following day, Mr Allman returning by her to Lawas and Mr. Haldane to Kuching.
On the 24th accompanied by Mr. and Mrs. Kortright I left for Brooketon anti was absent at the end of the month.
Tapping the Government rubber trees, which was
stopped in April last year as it was considered not
worth while owing to the low price obtainable, was
restarted at the beginning of the month.
There were no important cases in Court. Fines
and hies amounted to $133.76.
P. W. D.The coolies were employed on the Lempaung road and Three Mile round and cleaning out and repairing the reservoir.
The prisoners were employed weeding the paths and ditches round the station and clearing the Government rubber plantation.
The channel marks at the mouth of the river have been replaced.
Trade.The following are the trade returns:
Imports. Exports. Coasting	...	$10,543	$11,040	Foreign	...	1,284	1,935
It was an exceptionally dry month for the time of year the rainfall being only 345 inches.
February.
A salute of seven guns was fired from the fort on the morning of the 1st in honour of the Chinese New Year and the day observed as a public holiday.
The body of a Chinaman, by name Ah Seng, was found at Lempaung on the 5th, as deceased had I been ill for some time and no marks of violence were to be found on his body there are no reasons to suspect foul play.
The p.s. Adeh made one trip only during the month, arriving from Kuching on the 18th and leaving the following day. Sir. and Mrs. H. H. Kortright and family, who embarked at Brooketon, were passengers on the return trip.
I returned from Brooketon on the m. 1. Damit on the 21st. The 24th being the anniversary of Her Highness the Ranee's birthday was observed as a Government holiday.
The s.l. Peter Duff came in from Batu Apoi during the day. Messrs Watson and Listerman of the Batu Apoi Rubber Estate, who were on board came up and called. They left for Brunei during the afternoon.
I left here on the morning of the 27th in the m.l. Damit for Brooketon e.n route for Lawas
accompanied by Datu Haji Halil who has been
appointed Officer-in-Charge of the Lawas and Trusan.
districts.
The m. l. Damit collided with something just
below Menunggul and bent her shaft and was unable
to proceed. After a delay of a few hours boats were
procured in which to continue our journey and we
arrived at Brooketon that evening.
Mr. Lewis kindly sent us on to Lawas the follow-
ing day in the s. s. L'Aubaine.
On the 27th a small Brunei Malay boy. age about
five years, fell into the river in front of the bazaar
and was drowned. His body was recovered the
same morning.
I regret to report the death of Abang Akup, the
Sarawak Government tax collector in the Pan-
daruan.
Court.Usman was sentenced to bard labour in
default of payment of a fine of 100 for attempted
theft of buffaloes.
Privates Kedu and Linggai, S. R. were punished
for seducing two Kadayan girls from Kampong
Tuna.
Fines and fees amounted to 51.50.
P. IK. D.The coolies were employed on the
Three Mile round, the Lempaung road, the Govern-
ment rubber plantation and repairing the reservoir.
The prisoners were on the Government rubber
plantation and ornamental grounds.
The following are the trade returns for the
month:
1 am sorry to say that owing to lack of rain, (the rainfall for the month was only 5'04 inches), most of the hill padi has been dried up and withered away.
H. S. B. JOHNSON, Resident 5th Division.
The Sarawak Gazette.
RATES OF ADVERTISEMENTS IN THE "SARAWAK GAZETTE"
Payable in advance.
Quarter of a column and under
First insertion .	...	... $1.00
Second and third insertion each	... 0.50
Subsequent do	do	... 0.25
Half a Column and under
First insertion ...	...	... 2.00
Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
Subsequent do	do	... 0.50
A Column and under
First insertion each	...	... 4.0(1
Second and third insertion each	... 2.00
Subsequent do	do	... 1-00
Special arrangements may be made for standing advertisements.
All communications intended for insertion
in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed
LIMBANG.
Imports.
Exports.
Coasting
$30K)2
$8,253
Foreign
2,530
3,759
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. APRIL 16. 1919.	95
to the Editor at the Government Printing Office, Kuching. They should be clearly written and should reach the Office at least one day before the publication of each issue. Letters and other contributions, must be authenticated by writer s name sent privately to the Editor.
We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not inserting them.
Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early intelligence of all matters of general interest in their respective neighbourhoods.
NOTICE
ASTANA FARM.
THE Manager of Astana Farm begs to inform the Public that he is unable to attend to Orders for milk after Office hours.
NOTICE.
Gazette subscription and Printing Office bills.
For the convenience of residents at Outstations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums but only the 1,2 and 3 cent values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that Money Orders be sent if possible.
J. C. SWAYNE,
Manager, Govt. Printing Office.
NOTICE.
AUCTION SALE
of unredeemed pledges from Pawn Broking Farm YEW CHEE Co., Chop Wo SANG and Chop LOON YEK of Bau at No. 18, China Street on Saturdays of the following dates19th April 1919, 17th May 1919 and 21st June 1919, at 9 a.m.
List of all such unredeemed pledges can be seen at the Pawn*Farmers premises.
SYN 111 N LEONG & CO.,
Authorised Auctioneers.
NOTICE.
THE KUCHING STEAM SAW MILLS LIMITED.
NOTICE is hereby given that Share Certificate dated 25th August 1913, issued by THE
KUCHING STEAM SAW MILLS LIMITED, for 330 shares of 310 each fully paid bearing Nos. 971 to 1300 inclusive, and registered in the name of J. H. BRODIE, is alleged to have been lost or destroyed.
Any person holding the said Share Certificate is required to return it to the undersigned not later than 15th June 1919, otherwise the said Share Certificate will be cancelled and a new one issued.
TAN SUM GUAN,
Secretary.
13 1
NOTICE.
N
OTICE is hereby given that the Trade Mark con-
sisting of the emblem of the rising sun and the words
RISING SUN as shewn above are the joint pro-
perty of THE ASIATIC PETROLEUM COMPANY (STRAITS
SETTLEMENTS) LIMITED and THE ASIATIC PETROLEUM
COMPANY (FEDERATED MALAY STATES) LIMITED both incorporated in England and is used by them in connection with petroleum, kerosene, illuminating oils, refined oils, benzine, motor spirit, gasoline, lubricating oils, grease, parafflin wax candles, petroleum jellies and other products of oil and petroleum imported by them to the Straits Settlements, the Federated Malay States and the States of British North Borneo, Brunei, Sarawak, Siam, Kedah, Perlis, Johore, Kelantan and Trengganu and sold under the description of and known in the trade as the RISING SUN brand.
Legal proceedings will be taken against any person in-
fringing the rights of the said Companies in respect of
the above Trade Mark.
Dated this 24th day of March, 1919.
DONALDSON & BURKINSHAW,
Solicitors for the Asiatic Petroleum
Company (Straits Settlements) Limited
and The Asiatic Petroleum Company
(Federated Malay States) Limited.
[1-31
96	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 16, 1919.
Kuching, Foreign Trade Returns for the month of Feb., 1919.
IMPORTS.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. APRIL 16, 1919.
97
Kuching, Coasting Trade Returns for the month of Feb., 1919.
IMPORTS.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO.,
22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS.
Beer. Wine, Spirit & General Store Denier*.
:():	SOLE AGENTS FOR:
FRASER & NEAVES AERATED WATERS
(The Best throughout the East.)
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at $1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 catties of dry rubber.
ASAHI BEER.
ACETIC ACID.
:(o):-	Fresh supplies of Stores are received
regularly.
PRICES MODERATE
Free delivery to customers in Kuching.
Free packing & shipping for Outstation
Orders.
THE "SARAWAK GAZETTE"
A LMNAC.
F. G. DAY,
Registrar of Trade.
APRIL, 1919.
PASSENGERS.
ARRIVALS.
PER S. R. Gladys: 3rd April From Baram Revd. Fr. Jansen and Revd. Fr. OssFrom Miri Revd. W. Linton.
PER p.s. Adeh :6th April From the NorthMr. A. E. Lawrence from Bintulu.
PEI: S. S. Kuching:8th AprilFrom SingaporeMr. and Mrs. J. S. W. Bean, Messrs. Ong Siow Sian and Ong Wee Hoe and 1 Chinese lady.
PER S. s. Rajah of Sarawak:- 14th April From SingaporeMessrs. Tsing Ho Tang and I. Shelton.
DEPARTURES.
PER S. S. Gladys :6th AprilFor Sibu Mr. and Mrs. P. Davis, Revd. Fr. Oss and Revd. Fr. Odvke.
PERS. S. Kuching:11th April For Singapore Messrs. Weiding, Dilly, Lau Chin Eng, Tan Ewe Chai, P. Liang Huk, T. Joon Teck, Ng Bak Choon and C. M. Lee
[12-8]
A clean tooth never decays."
H. OHNISHI D.D.S. (T.D.C.)
(Graduated Tokyo Dental College)
Japanese Dentist
193-6, ORCHARD ROAD, SINGAPORE.
98	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 16, 1919.
MIRI SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
Departures.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 16, 1919.	99
METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS.
GENERAL HOSPITAL.
Kuching, March, 1919.
Highest Barometric reading	80'07 inches.
Lowest 29'90	.,
Highest temperature (shade)	98 degrees.
Lowest .,	705 Highest Sun 164
Longest Period of Sunshine in one day 9 hrs. 15 mins.
Total rainfall (Museum)	998 inches.
Greatest rainfall in 24 hours 181	Height of Hospital above sea level, approximately 75 feet.
Rainfall, March, 1919.
DURING24 HOURS.
100
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 16, 1919.
THE SARAWAK STEAMSHIP COMPANY LIMITED.
ISSUE OF 10.000 SHARES AT $ I OO EACH.
PROSPECTUS.
A
SYNDICATE has been formed, in Sarawak with the view of purchasing the fleet of
Steamers, Wharf, Godowns, Goodwill, etc., of The Sarawak and Singapore Steam-
ship Company Limited.
The Syndicate has obtained from that Company an option to purchase same for the sum'
of $1,050,000.
The option expires on 31st May 1919.
The Syndicate propose to form a new Company having similar objects to those of The
Sarawak and Singapore Steamship Company Limited under, the name of The
Sarawak Steamship Company Limited."
The new COMPANY will be registered as a LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY in Sarawak.
The Capital of The Sarawak Steamship Company Limited will be $1,100,000 divided
into 10,000 Ordinary Shares of $100 each and $100,000 of Preference Shares.
The Preference Shares will be preferred as to repayment of Capital and cumulative as
regards dividend. The interest on the Preference Shares will be at the rate of 6% per annum.
The entire issue of Preference Shares will be taken up by the Sarawak Government.
If the Ordinary Shares are not fully subscribed for, the balance of unallotted Ordinary
Shares will be issued as Preference Shares and such additional Preference Shares will be
taken up by the Sarawak Government provided that the total value of Preference Shares to
be taken by the Government does not exceed $350,000.	The Ordinary Shares will be allotted only to persons resident within the State of Sarawak,
persons having bond fide professional or business interests in the State, or holders, at the date
of this prospectus, of Land Grants within the State. Future transferees of shares must be
similarly qualified at the date of transfer.	,
Transfers of Shares will be subject to the approval of the Directors whose decision shall
be final.
The Sarawak Government will be represented on the Board of Directors.
All Shares allotted must be paid for in Cush, at such time as the Directors may decide.
The following gentlemen represent the Syndicate :
Mr. Ong Tiang Swee of Ong Ewe Hai & Co.
Mr. Wee Cheng Hew of Chop Chin Chiang.
Mr. Lim Tee Chew of The Kwong Lee Bank.
The first Directors of the "Sarawak Steamship Co., Limited" will be:
A Government Officer nominated by His Highness the Rajah,
Mr. Ong Tiang Swee Mr. Lim Tee Chew
Mr. Wee Cheng Hew and two others
Mr. Chan Kee Ong
Forms of application for Ordinary Shares can be obtained from the Companys Bankers,
Kuching, and applications for shares may now be imide either on the printed forms or on
written forms in similar terms.
The List of applications closes on 30th April 1919 for Kuching District and 7th May for
Outstations.
The Registered Office of the Company will be situated in Kuching.
Kuching, SARAWAK, 15TII APRIL, 1919
THE SARAWAK STEAMSHIP COMPANY LIMITED.
FORM OF APPLICATION FOB SHAKES.
To	The Directors
of The Sarawak Steamship Co.. Ltd.
GENTLEMEN,
I hereby apply for	shares of $100 each in the above named Company and request you
will allot me that number of shares.
I hereby agree to accept the same. or any less number that yon may allot to me, upon the terms of the
Prospectus " attached hereto and the Memorandum and Articles of Association of the Company and I autho-
rise you to place my name on the Register of Members of the Company in respect of the shares allotted to me.
I hereby declare that I am fully qualified to hold shares in the above Company according to the regulations
laid down in the Prospectus" of the Company.
Tour Obedient Servant,
(Usual Signature)	.......
(Name in full)	.........
(Address in full)	Kuching,.........................................1919.
The 1st Call of $25 per share being due on loth May 1919, Outstation subscribers should remit this amount
together with this* application form.
This Form to be signed and sent to the Companys Bankers. The Sarawak Chinese Banking Co., Ltd or The Kwong Lee Bank.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 16, 1919.
101
PURE FOOD MEANS GOOD HEALTH
ALEXANDRIA CANNED MEATS
Every Tin Guaranteed under the New South Wales Pure Food Act. and packed under the constant and vigilant supervision of a Government Inspector.
ASK FOR ALEXANDRIA
Roast Beef	Roast Mutton
Corned Beef	Corned Mutton
Ox Cheek	Spiced Mutton
Ox Tongues	Mutton Chops
Luncheon Tongues	Assorted Meats
Sheep Tongues	Minced Scollops
Extract of Beef	Assorted Soups
As supplied in huge quantities to the Im
Beef Sausage
Pork Sausage
Frankfurt Sausage Beef Dripping
Pork and Beans
Irish Stew
Ox Tail Soup perial and Indian
Governments
for
use by both the Army and Navy.
Sold by all Stores.
R. GOSLING & CO.,
2 Castlereagh Street, SYNDNEY, N.S.W.
ALEXANDRIA MEAT WORKS.
Distributors for the East :
Seremban General Agency, Ltd.
(Incorporated in F. M.S.)
SINGAPORE .
Sub: Agents-BAN JUI LONG,
14 Carpenter Street,
KUCHING, SARAWAK.
and BAN JUI GUAN,
21-3.
MIRI, SARAWAK.
102
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 16, 1919.
THE SARAWAK STUDIO
THE BEST IN KUCHING
WHERE GOOD PORTRAITS CAN BE TAKEN AND VIEWS OF THE
NEIGHBOURHOOD PROCURED.
VIEWS OF THE WANGKANG PROCESSION IN GREAT
VARIETY FOR SALE.
PHOTOS FOR PASSPORTS
AT SHORT NOTICE.
AMATEURS FILMS & PLATES DEVELOPED, PRINTED &
ENLARGED AT REASONABLE CHARGES.
FRESH KODAK FILMS CAN ALWAYS BE SUPPLIED.
Free instructions given to Amateurs with pleasure.
21, COURT HOUSE ROAD, KUCHING.
[12-4]
C. M. LEE, Manager.
Kuching:Printed and Published by GHIN HENG SOON, Government Printer, at the Government Printing Office.
Barrack Road.
