
VOL. XL?
No. 777.
Sarawak Gazette.
Price KUCHING, TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 16, 1919.	10 cents
The Sarawak Gazette.
CONTENTS
Page.
Notes
... 218
The late Dr. D. L. Greene, P. M. O.
... 244
Clippings ...
244
German War Trophy	...	... 245
Peace Celebrations at Lundu
245
The Water Hyacinth
... 245
Kuching Foreign Import Trade Returns
245. 249
Bowls
... 245
Monthly Reports:Upper Sarawak
245
Sadong CollierySibu
... 246
BaramMiri
... 247
Kuching Shipping
... 250
Miri Shipping
251
Almanac ...	...	...	...
... 252
Passengers
... 252
Meteorological Returns
... 253
Rainfall ...
252, 253
TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 16, 1919.
NOTES.
(September.)
S. S. Rajah of Sarawak left for Singapore
on September 2nd with passengers Messrs.
D. M. Murray, J. L. Beardon, Mr. and Mrs.
Kong Sim Kan, Mr. and Mrs. Lim Song Koe
and Mr. Chan Qui Chong.
THE Sarawak Rubber Estate at Sungei
Tengah harvested 52,000 lbs. of dry rubber
during the month of August.
The rainfall for the month was 324 inches.
THE out-put from Bau Cyaniding Works
for August amounted to 2,138.4 ozs. gold and
401.2 ozs. silver.
S.S. Kuching arrived from Singapore on
September 4th, passengers were Mr. and Mrs.
Owen and children, Honble. A. B. Ward,
Messrs. J. Ferguson, R. Hamilton, A. L.
Ewart. K. Hayashi, S. Abe, K. Ah Ee, S. Kia
Hok and A ng Poh Choo.
A record inward cargo was carried on*this
trip, including 5,000 bags of rice for the
Government.
TRAVELLERS by the Sarawak Steamship
Company will hear with regret of the retirement of Mr. J. Gebbie, chief engineer of the
Rajah of Sarawak, owing to ill-health.
Mr. Gebbie had served with both the former
Companies and was on the run for nearly
eighteen years.
His many friends will wish him a speedy
return to good health at home.
S S. Kuching sailed for Singapore on
September 9th with passengers Misses D.
Clark, J. and M. Reutens, E. Bateman and
The Sarawak Gazette.
SUBSCRIPTIONS to the Gazette are as follows:
The Sarawak Gazette	PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY-
Single copy	...	...	... .10 cents
Subscription for one year	...	...	$2.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 2.25
Subscription including postage to all other
Countries.	...	...	2.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING
Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 5s. 10d
The Sarawak Government Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY -
Single copy	...	...	...	.05 cents
Subscription for one year	...	... $1.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 1.25
Subscription including postage to all other
Countries.	1.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING
Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 3s. 6d
All subscriptions me payable in advance and must
commence from the 1st January in each year on
which date they tire renewable. All broken periods
will be considered as full.
Subscriptions will not be renewed unless notice
of renewal given.
Changes of Address should be notified to the
Office in writing.
244
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 16, 1919.
M. Merrells, Masters W. Clark, G. Bateman,
P. Reutens, Messrs. C. Voon, Ng Swee Ing,
Mrs. V. Kon Siong, Mrs. L. Hock Boon and
Ang Poh Choo.
S. S. Rajah of Sarawak arrived from Singa-
pore on the 11th with passengers Messrs.
F. Willing and P. E. Cox. This is the first
time Capt. Newby has brought the vessel
to port.
WE understand that Mr. J. W. R. Law,
who left the Government Service in 1915 to
join up, is now in Singapore in the Asiatic
Petroleum Company.
THE very objectionable smell that has per-
vaded the part of the town near the railway
station during the last month is still notice-
able and we understand is under investigation.
IN a heavy storm that occurred at Ban on
the 24th over six inches of rain were recorded
in an hour and a half.
A successful experiment was tried in the earlv morning of Thursday the 11th when the Police and Rangers turned out for a night alarm.
At 1 a. m. the alarm was sounded on the bugle and repeated by whistle and telephone to the outlying suburbs, and all police immediately fell in at the Central Police Station. The signal was given to the barracks across river from the Square Tower by firing two rifle shots and running up a prearranged number of lamps on the flagstaff, and in less than twenty minutes the Rangers were paraded at the Stone Steps.
Fortunately for the peace of mind of the burghers a notice had been circulated that the alarm was to take place one night in the week, and though the date was kept a profound secret, no one was unduly disturbed by the martial sounds.
The late Dr. D. L. Greene. P. M. O.
Outstation Officers will have heard with deep regret the sad news of Dr. Greenes sudden death at Labuan and will miss his cheery and hearty welcome to them when they were visiting Kuching. His house was always open to them and they thoroughly enjoyed his hospitality.
He took a great interest in outstations from a medical point of view and worked hard to try and establish proper Government Dispensaries and Hospitals at each station.
We understand that by the courtesy of the British Resident of Labuan, he was given a military funeral, which was attended by the whole of the European community.
REQUIESCAT IN PACE.
(Contributed.)
Clippings.
An engagement is announced between Kenneth
Hume Gillan, Sarawak Civil Service, younger son
of Robert Gillan. Wellington Square, Ayr. and Nancy
Campbell, elder daughter of the late John Christie,
solicitor, Irvine, and niece of Mr. and Mrs. John T.
Goudie, Westlantls, Ayr.( F. P. )
Scenes reminiscent of the Marama, when she left
Singapore in April last on her voyage to the old
country marked the departure of the Egypt to the
same destination from the P. and O. Wharf at 4 p.m.
yesterday, when anxious relatives and friends filled
the pier to overflowing to bid those going home it
hearty farewell. The booking on the Egypt has
not been sufficiently heavy to lax its accommodation
to its fullest and this fact coupled with the excellent
arrangements that have been provided on board
should stand in inv way of even the most fretfully
disposed. Many a touching scene was witnessed,
as well as the hilarious side of leave taking to which
the fair leaven of military passengers contributed a
great deal, and as the ship left they sang out the
well known good-byee.(F. P.)
Major Moulton, who goes home by the Egypt for
eight months, returns as Director of Museums.
(P. G.)
There is one drawback to wireless communication between shore and ship that needs to be overcome. While a shore station has an operator on watch the whole time, it has not been possible for a ship with only one operator to arrange for this. Consequently although ships are in range, it .is nor, always possible to get them, or at any rate not without delay owing to there being no one at the ships ; instrument.
Owing to tin* wireless service with Sarawak being in force, Singapore was able to communicate the full text of the armistice to Sarawak the day the message was received in Singapore. Otherwise Sarawak would have had to wait until a steamer from Singapore arrived, as there is no cable to Sarawak. ( Postmaster-General's Report, S. S.)
In the current number of Chambers Journal the view is expressed that quinine in malarious places in small doses doubtless has a beneficial effect in warding off attacks of fever. The writer adds: The danger is, however, that the user will take to increasing his daily modicum, and then, when he requires quinine as a medicine and not as a prophylactic, will find that he has to take a much larger dose if it is to be of any service, and that may bring on deafness or otherwise act injuriously." It is also pointed out that a great deal may be done in the way f drainage and judicious planting to improve malarious localities, and this is certainly better than swallowing medicines of any sort or kind. Various other sensible remedies are also suggested and it is said in conclusion that "to keep one's health . . . moderation in every thing is the golden rule, but it is perhaps more absolutely necessary in a tropical climate than in a temperate one."
Our Penang correspondent wires that Mr. J. R. Danson, brother of the Bishop of Sarawak, has been promoted to be Sgt. Major of A Co., Penang Volunteers. (F. P.)
A Malay employed on the S. S. Rajab of Sarawak was convicted this morning in the Third Court for importing a bladder of chandu. He was fined $300, or in the alternative three months rigorous imprisonment. (F. P.)
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 16, 1919. 245
We are glad to note that a bill is about to be
introduced in the Federal Council for the purpose
of regulating the admission of former enemy aliens
into the F. M. S. It is explained that the object
of this Bill is to exclude from the F. M. S. during
a period of three years all citizens and subjects of
States which were during 1918 at war with Great
Britain. except in cases where this Government specially allows entry. The bill is framed at the
instance of the Secretary of State."(St. T.)
Batavia, September 5.There is an enthusiastic
movement among the inhabitants of the Dutch
East Indies to send a telegraphic address to the
Queen of Holland, urging Her Majesty to pay a
visit to the Dutch East Indian Archipelago. A
committee has been formed in Batavia, consisting
of the most prominent people in the Presidency,
including the President and Director of the Java
Bank, representatives of shipping, commerce, culture and all the Native Princes, for the purpose of
acting to realise the idea of the Queen visiting the
Dutch Indies as soon as possible in order to tighten
the ties of the Motherland and the Colonies.Aneta, German War Trophy.
Information has been received from the Colonial
Office to the effect that the Army Council find it is
impossible to allocate n heavy or field gun to the
Sarawak Government, in view of the extremely
large number of applications for trophies which is
being received.
The Army Council are however being asked
whether they can arrange through the High Com-
missioner for the Malay states for the allocation and
transmission of one or more machine guns, as may be possible, to the Government of Sarawak.
Peace Celebrations at Lundu.
-
On Saturday, August 2nd a huge gathering of Malays, Chinese and Dyaks took place in the morning at the Court House, Lundu and later a regatta took place on the river. At four oclock a Malay meal was served m the Court House and Police barracks at winch many attended.
Land Sports were held on tin* 4th at which some five bundled persons lined the ground, and in the evening a Chinese dinner was given in the Court Writer's house to the principal subscribers. The success of the celebrations was undeniable and is all the more gratifying when it is remembered that it was entirely the work of those living at Lundu and no Europeans were present. ( Communicated.)
Th? Mater III acini h.
The Agricultural Bulletin" of the F. M. S. gives details of the work done in 1918 to eradicate the water hyacinth, which experts in Bengal have proved to be of considerable use as a fertiliser, when properly treated. It has been shown that 500 maunds (40,000 lbs. or about IH tons) of the green plant per acre will supply the following approximate amounts of plant food: Nitrogen 20, potash 80, phosphoric acid 35, lime GO. It is well to remember that in the. green state water hyacinth is extremely bulky and contains about 95 per cent of water. It could not therefore be economically transported over any considerable distance. The rotted material is also bulky, being comparable with farmyard manure,. except in regard to its content of potash which is several times greater. It is probable that
transport difficulties will prevent the use of rotted
hyacinth at any greater distance from its place of
production. In preparing the rotted material the
green plant should be partially dried before stacking;
otherwise a lot of liquid is exuded during the rotting
process which causes a very serious loss of valuable
material, amounting in one instance to 75 per cent
of potash. The dried plant is only about one-twentieth of the original green weight and is therefore in
a much more convenient form for transportation. It
contains from 1.5 per cent to 2 per cent of nitrogen
and from 20 per cent to 25 per cent of ash including
8 per cent of potash. The ash, is only about one-
hundredth of the original green weight, and it contains all the valuable mineral constituents in an
easily available form ; but of course all the organic
matter and the nitrogen are lost in the burning.
Several samples of ash from plants from different
parts of the Dacca district contained nearly 50 per
cent of chloride of potash, in addition to appreciable
quantities of phosphates and lime.
Kuching Foreign Import Trade Returns.
The Rice Imports for July as published in Gazette
of 1st September should read as follows: Pikuls 24,883 4/5 value $415,468, of which 3.506 1/5 pikuls
value $62,887 were imported in June, but omitted
in June Trade Returns.
The Trade Returns as published in tins issue are
correct.
Bowls.
The usual monthly Bowling Handicap took place
at tin* Sarawak Club on the 3rd September and
resulted as follows :
Average. Sven*. Hcap. Total.
C. E. A. Ermen	...	144-4	377	+	238	400*8
P. C. W. Cobbold	...	1271	814	+	58	370
G. T. Bates 1449	805	+	306	3356
O. Lang 182	827	+	scr.	327
J. C. Swavne	1345	270 +	528	322.8
H. H. the Tuan .Muda
1393,
H. D. Aplin	1384
C. D. Adams	128
P. M. Adams	110
Did not compete.
G. M. Gifford	1042
J. B. Archer	1026 G. B. Burnand
972 UPPER SARAWAK.
BAU AND PAKU.
?
August.
Courts.As I was absent from the station the greater part of the mouth but few cases were heard.
Liew Mook and Fam Chong were both sent to gaol for long terms for theft and a Dyak employee of the Borneo Company was also sentenced for stealing from the Works.
A Chinese was sentenced to a term of imprisonment in default of payment of a heavy fine imposed on him for living amongst Land Dyaks, and there were a number of other cases of no importance whatever.
Public. Works.The gaol at Paku was demolished by contract. None of the timber except the bilian used in its construction was worth saving.
The prisoners have been weeding mid repairing rends and paths round the station.
246
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 16, 1919.
A large number of small bridges on the BauBusan
road have been rebuilt and the whole road repaired.
Several more bridges still require repair and this
will be done when planks are forthcoming.
General.Dyaks were busy burning off their
clearings all through the month and the intense
heat aided them considerably, the burns being excel-
lent. The air was full of smoke and in some cases
the fires spread to the hills, the dry timber on which
burnt furiously and could not be extinguished.
The Government offices were closed on the 2nd
till the 4th for the Peace Celebrations.
At 8 a.m. on the 2nd the Allied flags were hoisted
and a salute was fired, the full police force being on
parade In the afternoon a very successful sports
meeting was held on the football ground and a bon-
fire 50 feet high was fired at 10 p.m. after a dinner
given by the Manager of the Works.
I went to Kuching on the 5th returning two days
later with Mr. H. L. Owen who left again for Ku-
ching on the 12th.
The 8th instant, the anniversary of the birthday
of His Highness the Tuan Muda, was observed as
a public holiday.
P. C.'s Usop and Endeh were sent to Pengktdlau
Ampat to arrest two Palembang Malays who had
been reported by Senna Dyaks for stealing and living
amongst them and causing considerable annoyance.
I was away when they returned and brought down
seven Dyaks who shot the two Malays dead just
before the police arrived to arrest them
I left for Kuching and Singapore on short leave
on the 17th and was still away at the end of the
month.
P. C. Mat Dahan 164, who had been ill for a short
time was sent down to hospital on the 20th but died
in the boat en route.
The long drought which has done considerable
harm to the crops of maize and potatoes ended on
the 21th in a heavy downpour, some six inches of
rain falling in 1.1hours.
Thefts of rubber and tapping cups continue and
will continue until the owners of gardens put some
distinguishing marks on them. The sheet rubber
could easily be stamped and the stamp registered in
Court, but so far nothing of the kind has been
attempted in this district and consequently thefts of
rubber are of-almost daily occurrence.
The out-put from the Cyaniding Works amounted
to gold 2,138.4 ozs. and silver 401.2 ozs.
DONALD A. OWEN,
Resident.
SADONG COLLIERY.
?
August.
The out-put of coal for the month was 1,437$ tons, 465 tons of this was consumed at the mines, and 972$ tons was delivered for export.
The shipments for the month were: The Kuching Municipality ... 418.02 tons
Messrs, the Borneo Company,
Ltd., Kuching 751.04 ,. the Sarawak Steamship
Company 380.00 ,,
Total 1,549.06 The balance of stock on the wharf at the end of the month was 399$ tons.
No. 8 mine produced no coni during the month on account of the fall, which had taken place on the main engine plane in July. Work was carried on without cessation on this fall, and had it not been
for additional falls of side-stratum taking place, a
passage would have been made through by the end
of the month.
The workings of No 9 mine were in barren ground
throughout the 'month, mid production, in con-
sequence, was low.
The upper seam mine produced more coal than
usual. Au airway outlet was holed through on the
north side of the hill, and ventilation underground
has since very much improved.
Several breakdowns occurred in the mechanical
department. Some of the haulage ropes have be-
come quite unfit for further use, and accidents due
to the breaking of these ropes, under very little
strain, are matters of increasing frequence.
The old locomotive Sadong " is laid up with the
boiler crown-sheet damaged, and one of the Cochran
boilers is being overhauled.
A shortage of water for boiler consumption was
again experienced, as the total rainfall for the month
was only 251 inches.
The main water-service was regulated between
the 14th and the 25th of the month to suit the avail-
able supply. Ihe height of the water in the
reservoir never rose to the overflow mark, the
average being seven inches below, between the
above dates, so that the severity of the present
drought must be a local record, as this water-supply
has never been known to cease overflowing the dam
entirely before.
The water in the upper reservoir in holding out
well, ft is now ten inches below the overflow level,
and the supply is being regulated.
Large quantities of mine refuse was dumped on
the new road beside the railway line, and the wharf
end was completed by the end of the month. The
work is now being concentrated on the Colliery
end, only.
At die wharf the usual repairing and pile-driving
was carried out.
The health of the labour force on the whole was
good. One of the old Chinese workmen succumbed
to chrome dysentery at the local hospital.
Good progress was made with the clearing and
planting of new land. The rice substitute crops
are doing well, but the padi crop has been attacked
by caterpillars rather badly on one side of the Ngili
stream. The planted up area on the other side,
which is being irrigated by means of pumps, was
also attacked by the pests, but is recovering from
the effect, and growing well again.
J. W. EVANS,
Manager.
SIBU.
August.
Mr. G. M. Gifford and myself returned from Kuching in the S.S. Alice Lorraine on the 11th, accompanied by Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner who has come here on a visit.
Mr. W. R. T. Clement reported that nothing of importance had occurred during our absence.
The 8th, His Highness the Tuan Muda's birthday, the offices were closed.
This month has been extremely dry and hot and very little rain has fallen. It is reported from everywhere that all Dyaks have had very good burns.
The padi which has been planted in the low lying country is reported to be in very good condition, but the dry weather is destroying it in the nurseries, as, owing to the ground being so hard, it cannot be planted out. T do not think chat there is anybody who has not a farm this year, so the pros-
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 16, 1919.	247
pects at present of a good crop next year seem
bright.
Court work has been fairly heavy during the month.
The dry weather has caused a great many cases for compensation for rubber trees destroyed by fire. In most cases owners of rubber gardens, where the trees have only been planted up to two years, on the whole gain by the fires, which clean up the garden of all slumps, etc., and after Such a burn new
rubber trees planted grow with an amazing rapidity.
A boundary was fixed between the Dyaks at S.
Aup and Heng Whas. This boundary will have to
be extended at a future date, hut at present is
sufficient to stop disputes between these people.
The efforts of the Japanese diver in salving the
s. 1. Hong Line were successful. The launch is
reported to be in a had state. 150 sacks of engka-
bang were also salved out of 233, the remainder
having broken up and scatter, d.
A prisoner escaped during the month, but was
recaptured the next day
S. L. Lucile returned from Kuching on the 17.th.
she was not able to have her boiler tidies repaired.
On the24lh Mr. F. A W. Page-Turner returned to
Kabong in the s. 1 Lucile, the launch going on to
Kuching with the relieved Kapil squad under Cor-
poral Barat. She returned again on the 31st. doing
the trip in a day.
The s. s. Rajah of Sarawak cleared for Singapore via Kuching on the 1st.
The s. s. Gladys and Batavier made two direct
trips to Singapore, and the s. s Flevo one trip. The
s. s Sarawak made three trips from Kuching
The trade returns for the month are as follows:
Imports.	Exports.
To date	$1,510,331	$ 1,916,844
1918	606,436	677,127
Principal exports for the month were jelutong
3,244.37 piculs, para rubber 1.216.62 piculs, while
pepper 600.37 piculs, black pepper 76.58 piculs and
rattans 1,803.62 piculs.
Immigrants:
FooChow ...	... 16
BengWhas...	... 31
Cantonese ...	8
Kheh ...	...	1
H . D. APLIN,
Resident 2nd Class.
BARAM.
July.
Several cases came before the Court . P. C. Re-
mang was dismissed the force and imprisoned for
one year for theft. Ah Tatt imprisoned for one year
and banished, also for theft. Chong Chua fined $100
for being in possession of two weights to his datching.
Fines and fees amounted to $513 60.
I returned from accompanying His Highness the
Tuan Muda to Labuan for medical treatment on
the 9th inst. with the Principal Medical Officer and
Airs. Greene. They had come to Miri from Kidurong.
Dr. Greene who had been unwell for several days
left on the 16th inst. by s. 1. Chamois for Labuan to
seek medical advice and the sad news of his dentil was received on the 24th inst. by telephone.
Li ft for up-river on ihe J2tli inst. in s.l. Chamois. Discussed with Tama Tijau Anie, Kayan chief Long Palai. regarding land at Long Lama being set aside for the Chinese to plant pepper.
Aban Luat of Uma Aki paid up his security $250
that, he and the five doors with him would move
and live with their chief Tama Olong Jau.
I went into the Tutau and loaded padi bought
from the Orang Bukits on 13th inst. returning to
fort that evening.
Informed all the Chinese towkays that after this
year not one Chinese or Malay will be allowed to
build a house or trade at a Kayan pangkalan, but
they must make bazaars and from there they can
visit different houses with trading goods, but will
only be allowed a limited rime at each place.
Decided they could make bazaars at Long Lama
and Long Akar in Buram, Long Lobang and Long
Ayah in Tinjar and Long Apoh in Tutau and Apoh
rivers.
I regret to report the death of Mawa Payah, wife of
Kenyah penghulu Mawa Jau, and also of Haji Bakar,
late vaccinator, the latter being the first num to go
on the Haj from this river.
Heard news that there was a man at Belait
answering the description of Drahman alias Adoh
wanted by Kuching police; sent Lance Corporal
Gudang with a letter and warrant to Malay Magis-
trate asking help in arresting him.
Corporal Ayom of Sarawak Rangers was returned
to headquarters for gross neglect of duty.
Penghulu Tama Waging arrived from the Tutau
on the 23rd instant and paid in tax.
Received two hundred sucks of rice from Food
Controller which I divided amongst Chinese.
Owing to rough sea the s.l. Chamois and s. l. La
Follette were unable to enter this river so I left by
boat on the afternoon of the 26th for Kuching via
Miri to attend 'Peace Celebrations and was still
away at end of month.
Rainfall was 8'62 inches.
S. S Gladys and p.s. Adeh each made one trip
during the month, and cleared with full cargoes.
'There is still a large quantity of rotans remaining.
Exports,	Imports.
$50,090	$30,890
C. D. ADAMS,
Resident 2nd Class.
MIRI.
July.
His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by
Messrs. G. M. Gifford and C. D. Adams, arrived
from the North in the p. s. Adeh on the 4th.
After landing for a few hours His Highness sailed
again the same evening for Kuching.
On the 5th Mr. Bamford, the wireless operator
of the m. s. Dolphin Shell, came ashore in order to
arrange communication with this station.
Dr. and Mrs. Greene, arrived from Bintulu in the
m. t. Miri on the 7th and were the guests of Mr.
Wyndham Jones, until they accompanied Mr. C. D.
Adams on a visit to Baram in the s.l. Chamois on
the 9th.
After being thoroughly overhauled by the courtesy
of Messrs, the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Co., Ltd.,
the m. l. Helen began running again on the 8th; it
was, however, found necessary to instal a new
magneto before this could be accomplished properly.
On the 11th I received instructions from the
Superintendent Wireless Telegraphs to re-adjust
the 600 metre wave length as the previous adjustment was found to be incorrect, a correct adjustment was reached on the 18th. The Superintendent
gave orders for the operators Io listen regularly on
600 for ships at stated hours, and also to signal Mr.
Dupree, who in selecting suitable sites for the
erection of wireless apparatus in Brunei territory.
The Honble. the Divisional Resident accompanied
by Mrs. Douglas and family returned from tropical
248
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 16, 1919.
leave on the 12th. The following Monday I handed
over all correspondence and reported on the various
matters which had taken place during bis absence.
On the 15th the s. l. La Follette arrived from 8ibu
to replace the s. I. Chamois at Baram.
Captain Beazley, accompanied by Mrs. Beazley
and family, arrived on the 19th to taae over the
general managership of the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum
Co., Ltd. from Mr. H. Wyndham Jones.
The 19th. 20th and 21st having been fixed locally
for the Celebration of .the signing of Peace, the
festivities began on the 19th with land sports, fire-
works. processions, bonfire, and Malay main in the
Court House ; on the 20th Saluting the Flags of the
Allies. Thanksgiving Service and Chinese main took
place: andon the 21st a regatta, school childrens
treat, tea in Courthouse, football match and cinema
show.
The s. l Chamois arrived from Lahuan on the
24th bringing the sad news of the death of the
Principal Medical Officer Doctor Greene. Accom- pauicd by Native Officer Bujang. I sailed in s. l.
La Follette on the 24th for Sibuti to obtain supplies of rice and padi. The following day 1 met the local
Kadayan chiefs and informed them that I had been instructed by the Double, the Resident to buy rice and padi from them at an enhanced price, but that next harvest the old prices would be reverted to, they agreed to this, but they informed me that their last harvest is nearly sold out and that they are only
keeping sufficient for their own use and for seed
purposes.
After settling a number of outstanding affairs and
ordering the local Chinese traders to issue pass books
in future to customers, in order to simplify the Debt Court procedure, I left for the mouth of the river on the 26th, but was unable to get out owing to the
heavy sea on the bar. Hearing that the s.l. Chamois
was in the Niah river and also unable to get out, I decided to take passage in her to Niah. Arrived
there 1 met the local chiefs, fined Chop Sin Ghee Ann
for contempt of an order of the Court, and detained
Abil bin Mohamat for contempt of the Native Court I also checked the clerks books from the 1st January
and notified the local Chinese traders about the pass
book order. After making several attempts the s. l. Chamois succeeded in getting over the Niah bar on
the 30th and the s.l. La Follette cleared Sibuti bar
the same day. On my return to Miri I found the
Honble. Resident had sailed the previous day for
Kuching, but had left instructions for the crew of
the s.l. Chamois to take over the s.l. La Follette and
the s.l. Chamois to return to Kuching for refit.
On the night of the 29th a prisoner on remand,
named Mirin alias Ong alias Sahari, escaped from custody and has not yet been recaptured ; the matter is being enquired into.
The chief postal clerk, Law Ah Thong, was re-
ported seriously ill at the end of the month.
There were few cases before the Courts during
the month; the only ones that call for mention
were: Li Chin punished and sentenced to three
months for causing a disturbance and refusing to
work for the Company; Ow Sam four months for
theft of rice; Sam Soo, fined for being in possession
of stolen property; and Abun bin Basalt and Tapa
bin Hj. Sukor fined for non-payment of exemption
tax.
L. C. Juala Singh who had been giving a lot of
trouble of late was reduced to the ranks by order of
the Honble. the Resident.
The prisoners were employed clearing and levelling the ornamental grounds extension and on the
general up-keep of the station : they also began
to clear a foodstuff plantation. During the month
the s.s. Haliotis, Dolphin Shell and Hyreania cleared
for Soesoe with full cargoes of crude oil.
The rainfall amounted to 10'99 inches.
The trade returns are as follows :
Imports.
Exports.
Miri
$138,484
$28,298
Niah
6,801
4,600
Sibuti
6,135
3,610
W. F. DE V. SKRINE, Resident 2nd Class.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE.
RATES OF ADVERTISEMENTS IN THE SARAWAK GAZETTE ?
Payable in advance.
Quarter of a column and under
First insertion
... $1.00
Second and third insertion each
... 0.50
Subsequent	do
Half a Column and under
do
0.25
First insertion
... 2.00
Second and third insertion each
... 1.00
Subsequent do
A Column and under
do
... 0.50
First insertion each
... 4.00
Second and third insertion
each
... 2.00
Subsequent	do
do
.. 100
Special arrangements may be made for standing advertisements.
All communications intended for insertion
in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed
to the Editor at the Government Printing
Office, Kuching. They should be clearly
written and should reach the Office at least
two days before the publication of each issue-
Letters and other contributions must be
authenticated by writers name sent privately
to the Editor.
We cannot undertake to return rejected
communications, or to give reasons for not
inserting them.
Residents at the Outstations will confer an
t obligation by forwarding to the Office early
intelligence of all matters of general interest
in their respective neighbourhoods.
NOTICE.
ASTANA FARM .
THE Manager of Astana Farm begs to
inform the Public that he is unable to
attend to Orders for milk after Office hours.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 16, 1919.	249
250
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 16, 1919.
NOTICE.
AUCTION SALE
of unredeemed pledges from the Pawn Broking Farm YEW CHEE Co., Chop. Wo SAXO at No. 18, China Street on Saturdays of the following dates :20th September 1919; 18th October 1919: 15th November 1919 and 20th December J919 at 9 azin.	List of all such unredeemed pledges is on view at the Pawn Partner's .premises.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO.
Authorised Auctioneers.
KUCHING SHIPPING.
Arrivals. NOTICE.
SALE BY AUCTION
of all unredeemed pledges from YEK YEUN & Co.. Pawn Farmers, No. 8, Sibu Bazaar Sibu, will be held on the 15th September 1919 at 10 a.m. and 'quarterly from that date until further notice.
Lists of all unredeemed pledges sue on view at the Farmers premises.
LAW JEE THAI,
Authorised Auctioneers.
For Sale.
BEST BILIAN
TIANGS, SUIT, GILEGAR, etc. Quotations, (F. O. B.) Kapit, made on applications stating sizes.
Please apply to the RESIDENT 2ND CLASS, K A P I T .
[4-1]
THE SAKAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 16, 1919.	251
"GLORIA" INCANDESCENT
LANTERNS.
300 Candle Power of Brilliant Light at a cost that is far cheaper than any other known method of producing artificial light.
Suitable for Indoor or Outdoor Illumination.
Will Burn Kerosene or Benzine
With Equal Facility.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO.,
22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS.
Beer, Wine, Spirit & General Store Dealers.
:( ):	SOLE AGENTS FOR: FRASER & NEAVE'S AERATED WATERS
(The Best throughout the East.)
No Noise.
No Smoke.
No Grease.
No Wicks to Trim.
No Trouble Whatever!
Nothing to wear out, break or get out of order.
Made of heavy gauge brass, nickel plated,
fitted with a reinforced mica chimney.
Price $20(Twenty Dollars) each.
Complete with all fittings-and one
spare Generator.
Spare Mantles $4.80 per dozen.
Spare Generators 72 cents each.
Obtainable from
VANSCOLLNA & COMPANY,
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic
Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at
$1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 cat ties of dry rubber.
ASAHI BEER.
ACETIC ACID.
:.(o): Fresh supplies of Stores are received
regularly.
PRICES MODERATE.
Free delivery to customers in Kuching.
Free packing & shipping for Outstation
Sole Agents, LABUAN, S. S.
NOTICE is hereby given that the partnership here-
tofore existing between, LIM OH LIEW, LIU OH
PHIO, LIM THIAN SANG, LIM THIAN LAI, LIM THIAN HO,
LIM THIAN KHAY. LIM OH CHAI, LIM THIAN HAI, LIM
THIAN LIANG and LIM THIAN TECK, earning on business
at No. 88 Main Bazaar. Kuching, under the style or
firm of ENG WHATT has been dissolved by mutual con-
sent on the 26th .July 1919 and the aforesaid LIM THIAN
LIANG and LIM THIAN PECK retire from the partnership
and have no further interest in the firm nor will be res-
ponsible as from the above date for any debts incurred
by the said business.
An agreement to the above effect has duly been regis-
tered in the Supreme Court. Kuching, and the under-
signed, LIM OH LIEW. LIM OH PHIO. LIM THIAN SANG.
LIM THIAN LAI. LIM THIAN HO, LIM THIAN KHAY, LIM
OH CHAI and LIM THIAN HAI are now sole proprietors
of Chop ENG WHATT.
(Sgd.) LIM OH LIEW
,, LIM OH PHIO
LIM THIAN SANG
LIM THIAN LAI
LIM THIAN HO (Sgd.) LIM THIAN LIANG
LIM THIAN KHAY .. LIM THIAN TECK
,, LIM OH CHAI	Retired Partners.
LIM THIAN HAI
Sole Proprietors.
Kuching, llth August, 1919.
[6-3]
NOTICE.
252 THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 16, 1919.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
ALMANAC.
Rainfall, July. 1919.
SEPTEMBER, 1919.
ARRIVALS.
PER s. s. Kuching: 4th SeptemberFrom Singapore Hon. A. B. Ward, Mr. and Mrs. Owen and two children, Messrs. J. Ferguson, R. Hamilton, A. L. Ewart, K. Hayashi, 8. Abe, K. Ah Ee, S. Kia Hok and Ang Poh Choo.
PER S. S. Rajah of Sarawak:11th SeptemberFrom Singapore -Messrs. F. Weiding and P. E. Cox.
DEPARTURES.
PER S. B. Rajah of Sarawak:2nd SeptemberFor SingaporeMr. and Mrs. Hong Siu Kan, Messrs. J. L. Beardon and D. M. Murray, Mr. and Mrs. Lim Song Kee, Mr. Chan Qui Chong, 2 Chinese girls and 2 Chinese boys.
PER s. s, Kuching:9th SeptemberFor Singapore Masters W. Clark, G. Bateman, and Reutens, Misses D. Clark, E. Bateman, J. and M. Reutens and M. Merrells, Messrs. C. Voon, Ng Swee Ing, Mrs. V. Kon Siong, Mrs. L. Hock Boon and Ang Poh Choo.
THE SARAWAK STEAMSHIP CO., LTD.
STATUTORY REPORT.
NOTICE IS HEBEBY GIVEN that, the
Report of the Directors to the share-
holders, pursuant to section 22 of the Articles
of Association of this Company, has been
filed with the Registrar of Supreme Court,
Sarawak.
Copies may be seen on application at the
Registered Offices of the Company.
E. PARNELL,
Secretary.
NOTICE.
Gazette subscriptions and Printing
Office bills.
FOR the convenience of residents at Outstations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums but only the 1,2 and 3 cent values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that Money Orders be sent if possible.
J. C. SWAYNE.
Manager, Govt. 1riutuig Office.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 16, 1919. 253
METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS.
GENERAL HOSPITAL.
Kuching, August, 1919.
Highest Barometric rending
Lowest ..	Highest temperature(Shade)
Lowest	?
30-03 inches.
29-95	100 degrees.
69
Highest ,, Sun 155
Longest Period of Sunshine in one day 10*20 hours.
Total rainfall (Museum)	844 inches.
Greatest rainfall in 24 hours 1'25	Height of Hospital above the sea level approximately 75 feet.
Rainfall, August, 1919.
DURING 24 Hours
254
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, SEPTEMBER 16, 1919.
PURE FOOD MEANS GOOD HEALTH
ALEXANDRIA CANNED MEATS
Every Tin Guaranteed under the New South Wales Pure Rood Act, and packed under the constant and vigilant supervision of a Government Inspector.
ASK FOR ALEXANDRIA
Roast Beef
Roast Mutton
Beef Sausage
Corned Beef
Corned Mutton
Pork Sausage
Ox Cheek
Spiced Mutton
Frankfurt Sausage
Ox Tongues
Mutton Chops
Beef Dripping
Luncheon Tongues
Assorted Meats
Pork and Beans
Sheep Tongues
Minced Scollops
Irish Stew
Extract of Beef
Assorted Soups
Ox Tail Soup (Sa!
As supplied in huge quantities to the Imperial and Indian
Governments for use by both the Army and Navy.
Sold by all Stores.
CHARLES BOWEN & CO.,
2 Castlereagh Street, SYDNEY, N.S.W.
ALEXANDRIA MEAT WORKS.
Distributors for the East ;
Seremban General Agency, Ltd.
(Incorporated in F. M. S.)
SINGAPORE.
Sub: Agents BAN JUI LONG,
14 Carpenter Street, KUCHING, SARAWAK.
and BAN JUI GUAN.
M	MIRI, SARAWAK.
KCCIIINO:Printed and Published by GUIN HKNG SOON, Government Printer, M the Government Printing Office
Hairack Itotid.
