
VOL. XLIX.
No. 782
Price KUCHING, MONDAY, DECEMBER 1. 1919. 10 cents
CONTENTS.
Marriages- GillanWee Chong Bee	...	...	306
Notes ...	-	...	...	... 305
Diocese of Labuan and Sarawak	...	...	306
Clippings	...	...	...	...	307
Forest Reservation in Sarawak ...	...	....	307
German War Trophies	...	...	...	309
Correspondence	...	...	...	...	309
Sarawak Library	...	...	...	...	309
Sarawak Regatta ...	... 309
Monthly Reports:- Upper SarawakSadong Colliery ... 310
Sibu ...	...	... 311
Lower RejangUpper Rejang ... 312
Baram Brooketon Colliery
Limbang ... 313
Trade Returns	...	...	...	...	315
Markets Price List for the month of Xovemlier 1919 ... 316
Passengers	...	...	...	...	317
Rainfall ...	...	...	...	...	317
Meteorological Returns	...	...	...	318
Kuching Shipping Returns ...	...	... 318
The Sarawak Gazette.
SUBSCRIPTIONS to the Gazette are as follows
The Sarawak Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
Single copy	...	...	...	.10 cents
Subscription for one year	...	... $2.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 2.25
Subscription including postage to all other
Countries. ...	... 2.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING
Subscription for one year (including postage aliroiuli 5s. Hid
7 he Sarawak Government Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY-
Single copy	...	...	...	.05 cents
Subscription for one year	...	... $1.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 1.25
Subscription including postage to all other
Countries.	...	... 1.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING
Subscription for one year (including postage abroad)3s 6d
All subscriptions are payable in advance and must
commence from the 1st January in each year on
which date they are renewable. All broken periods
will be considered as full.
Subscriptions will not be renewed unless notice
of renewal given.
Changes of Address should be notified to the
Office in writing.
The Sarawak Gazette.
MONDAY, DECEMBER 1, 1919.
AT Holy Trinity Church, Ayr, KENNETH HUNK GILLAN, Sarawak Civil Service, to NANCY CAMPBELL. elder daughter of the late .John Christie, solicitor, Irvine.
ON the 23rd November, at Kuching. WEE CHONG BEE, Prison Department, fourth son of Wee Hock Kee, Chief Cashier. Government Treasury, Kuching, to TAN LIANG CHWEE. elder daughter oi Tan Bian 'Tin, Sarawak Farms Syndicate.
NOTES.
(November.)
THEIR Highnesses the Rajah, Ranee and family left Suez on the 20th and are expected to arrive in Singapore on the 7th or 8th December. His Highness the Tuan Muda is proceeding to Singapore by s. s. Kuching on the 2nd in order to meet the party.
OWING to the expected arrival of new Government officials it is unlikely that there will be any accomodation available at the Government Rest House for a short time to come and visitors from Singapore would do well to make their own arrangements before booking passages to Kuching.
THE out-put for the month of October at Bau Cyaniding Works amounted to 865.5 ozs. gold and silver 507.9 ozs.
S. S. Sarawak arrived from Sibu on the
16th with passenger the Rev. Father F.
Halder, who hopes to leave for Europe shortly
on furlough.
S. S. Sarawak left for Sadong on November 17th with passengers Messrs. J. C. Swayne
and E. H. Haldane.
306
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1919.
S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore on
the 18th, amongst the passengers were the
Rt. Rev. Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak and
Mrs. Danson and Messrs. E. O. Bruce and S.
Lawrence.
S. S. Kuching left again for Singapore on
the 21st with passengers Mr. and Mrs. Mohri
and daughter, Messrs. K. Matshusita and
Chan Kim Leong.
AN engagement is announced between Mr.
Martin A. Chan (of Messrs. Syn Hin Leong
& Co, fourth son of Mr. C. Hock Soon) and
Miss Josephine C. Ho (fourth daughter of Mr
H. Eng Chiang).
The marriage will take place at St. Josephs
church at a date to be announced later.
THE annual sale of work in aid of St. Marys
girls school is to be held on Friday and Satur-
day, December 5th and 6th in the school
buildings. We refer our readers to an ad-
vertisement on p. 314 showing several new at-
tractions at the sale. Owing to the greatly
increased cost of maintenance it is hoped
that a total of $1,000 may be reached.
MB. E. O. Bruce is gazetted as a cadet from
November 18th to do duty at Sibu.
S. S. Kuching arrived on the 29th with
passengers Messrs. F. G. Carpenter, P. H
Hayward, R. D. Horton and E. Westwood.
We understand Mr. P. H. Hayward is join-
ing the Treasury stall and Messrs. Carpenter
and Horton are also joining the Government
service.
Diocese of Labuan and Sarawak.
?
The Bishop of the Diocese returned to Kuching
on November 18th after a three months' visitation
in the North. The stations visited wore Miri, La-
buan, Jesselton, Kudat, Sandakan, La had-Dat it,
Tawau and the coal mines at Selim Popon.
Kuching is the headquarters of the Diocese and
here we have recently welcomed two new workers.
Mr. S. H. Lawrence comes from Henshaws Blind
School, Manchester, to relieve Mr. Ellis whose leave
is overdue, ns headmaster of St. Thomas School.
Mr. Edward Proctor, who has been trained at the
College of the Epiphany, Barisal, near Calcutta, has
come to take charge of the Tamil work.
The choir at the Pro-Cathedral have all been
fitted out with new robes. This is largely due to
the donations of the congregation at the Peace
Thanksgiving Service. All the musty old black cas-
socks have been scrapped, and the new albe with
black girdle is a great improvement both from the
point of view of cleanliness and appearance. The
servers at the Altar have also been re-vested. The
red cassock and rochet have been replaced by
apparelled amices, albes and scarlet girdles.
There has recently been a change made in the
hymn book used in the Pro-Cathedral. An anony-
mous gift of XT0, enabled the purchase of a stock of
English Hymnals, in place of Hymns Ancient and
Modern. The English Hymnal, which was first
published in 1906, is becoming increasingly recog-
nised as a collection of the best hymns in the
English language, and is a fitting companion to
the book of Common Prayer.
There is a small stock of hymn hooks for sale at
the price of $1 each. These may be had by ap-
plication to the Clergy or to the Verger. Hymn
books with tunes may be had at the price of $2.75.
Labuan.At Labuan, it is hoped shortly to erect
a parsonage, and to station a priest there to take
charge not only of the local work, but also to visit
Brunei and Miri. There is already a pretty little
Church at Labuan.
Jesselton. An anonymous gift of 1,100, towards
the erection of a Eurasian girls boarding school at
Jesselton, has enabled the first part of the scheme,
a house for European Teachers, to be gone on with
immediately. A suitable site has been levelled, and
it is hoped that the house will be ready by Chinese
New Year. Miss Olver, who is in charge of the
women's work at Jesselton at present, will move in
as soon as the house is ready.
Kudat.There is a crying need of a school for the
training of Chinese catechists in the Diocese. Kudat
has been fixed as the site, and funds have been raised,
and land secured for the building. It is proposed
that all Chinese, who desire to work as catechists in
the Diocese, shall be sent to Kudat for training. At
present we are looking out at home for a Principal
to take charge of this school.
Sandakan.The Church property at Sandakan,
which consists of Church, parsonage and two schools,
all situated on a hill, suffered recently from serious
landslips, and an extensive drainage scheme was
imperative in order to render the buildings safe.
Three thousand dollars were needed for the purpose,
and the S. P. G. promised to subscribe half this sum,
if the other half was raised locally. It is gratifying
to be able to record that this has been done and the
scheme has been carried through satisfactorily. The
Government of British North Borneo kindly advanced $1,500, to enable the work to be put in hand
immediately, and this loan has now been repaid.
Tawau.Tawau on the East coast of North Borneo, close to the Dutch border, is a new centre of
Church work, among the Chinese. The Bishop
confirmed *24 candidates there on September 7th.
There is a flourishing day school under Church
auspices.
Personel.The staff of the Diocese at present con-
sists of the Bishop, 10 priests, 22 catechists, 41
teachers, and 5 other workersa total of 76. Of
these 18 are European.
Those on furlough at present are Archdeacon
Small, Rev. B. Mercer, Mrs. Mercer, and Miss
Bryant, Kudat, and Miss Butcher, Jesselton. Mr.
A. N. Ellis and Miss Andrews, Kuching and Rev.
T. C. Alexander, Sandakan. will shortly be leaving
for one years furlough.
The bishop hopes to be in residence at Kuching
till the end of March : to visit the chief centres of
the 2nd Division in April, and to proceed to Eng-
land, to attend the Lambeth Conference, in May
1920. The Lambeth Conference, which is a gather-
ing of all the Bishops of the Anglican Communion,
is held once every ten years under the presidency of
the Archbishop of Canterbury. The last meeting
took place in 1908, and the one due to be held in
1918, could not take place on account of the war.
The Conference of 1920 will be an important one,
as the subject of Christian Unity is to be given the
first place on the Agenda.(Contributed.)
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. DECEMBER 1, 1919.
307
Clippings.
The locusts, or to be more correct, the acridiidae and the pachytylus. have for the time being, we are thankful to say, left the district, though rumour has it that they are just over the Sarawak border, in Merapok. -(B. N. B. Herald.)
Mr. Cook, Minister for the Navy, disclosed the
existence of the partnership between the Imperial
Government and the Commonwealth for the most
efficient exploitation, of the Papuan oilfields. The
Imperial Government grants the Commonwealth
50,000 and select borers (P. G.)
Honolulu : It is announced that complete cures of
leprosy have been effected in Kalini Hospital.
Twenty patients have been discharged in the past
few months without one recurrence of the disease.
The only medicine used in the treatment is
chaulmogra oil. perfected by a refining process
which was discovered by Dr. Dean, professor of
chemistry and president of the University of Hawaii.
Blood tests of discharged patients revealed no trace
of the leprosy germ.(S. T.)
Forest Reservation in Sarawak.
In nearly every country in Europe and in most of '
the Colonies and Protectorates of the British Empire
the necessity of preserving a certain proportion of
their areas of forest land has now been recognized.
Recognition has however come so late in some cases
that artificial reafforestation at enormous excuse
has had to be undertaken.
The area of forest lands in Germany is 26% of the
total area of the country. Of this area 52% is under
the direct control of the State and the remaining
48% is private forests which are partially under
Government control. To Germany, the United
Kingdom forms a great contrast, only 4% of its total
area consisting of forest lands and of this an area of
only 2% is under State control.
Permanent reservation of forests is usually un-
popular with the public, the fact being that in-
discriminate exploitation by the present generation
is restricted for the benefit of future generations.
Forests are of value both directly and indirectly.
The former most people realize, hut the latter is not so apparent. Forests for the purposes of this article may be divided into two classes
(I) Protection forests.
(II) Forests managed for their economic value. (I) Protection forests.Such forests in Sarawak would be required
(a) for the preservation of the soil on hill-sides to
prevent erosion, denudation, land-slides, the
silting up of fertile lands at the foot of hills
and the raising of the level of river-beds, a
frequent cause of floods,
(b) The preservation and regulation of the water-
supply in springs and rivers, so as to secure
an even flow and to reduce evaporation in
catchment-areas.
(r) For the benefit of the public health In the F. M S. all catchment-areas are declared forest reserves and their boundaries regularly
patrolled by the Forest . Department to prevent contamination of the water-supply.
The results of observations extending over many
years prove that forests tend to lower the temperature
of the air in their immediate vicinity. This causes
the condensation and precipitation of water-vapour
in the air. Did not forest exist the temperature of
the air would be higher and consequently no shower
of rain would result. This effect of forests on
temperature and rainfall is greater in mountainous
country than in the plains.
In land denuded of forest growth all the water
resulting from a shower of rain drains quickly off
into streams and rivers. On the other hand in a
forest a considerable amount of water is retained in
the crowns of trees and in the layer of humus
covering the ground. This water slowly evaporates
and is returned to the air as vapour.
The trees themselves take up water through the
roots which passes eventually by way of the sap-wood
to the leaves and by the process of transpiration is
returned to the air in the form of vapour. This
effect of transpiration in such a country as Sarawak
where all the forest is evergreen and broad-leaved, is
infinitely greater than in more temperate climates
where most of the evergreens are conifers and the
broad-leaved species deciduous.
The most cogent argument for protection forests
in certain localities is however the danger of
denudation to which the removal of the forest cover
exposes the surface of the earth. Showers of an inch
of rain or more in an hour are not at all uncommon
m this country and an inch of rain represents about
one hundred tons of water to the acre. From this
some idea of the mechanical power of water may be
gained. With no forest-cover the whole volume of
water precipitated rushes at once off the land to the
nearest channel, small water-courses are converted
into deep ravines, all the surface soil is washed away,
resulting in the silting up of fertile land in the plains
and the raising of the river beds with its resultant
floods, land-slides occur and the steeper and longer
the slopes of the hills, the greater the damage done.
The classical instance of this is at Hoshiapur in
the Punjab. To quote Schlich anyone who has
ever stood on the hills behind Hoshiapur in the
Punjab and looked down upon the plain stretching
out towards the South-west, has carried away an
impression which he is not likely to forget	Formerly the range was covered with a growth of
forest vegetation, but a number of years ago cattle-
owners settled in it mid under the combined attacks
of man, buffaloes, cows, sheep and goats the forest
growth disappeared while the tread of the beasts
lossened the soil. The annual monsoon rains,
though not heavy, soon commenced a process of
erosion and of carrying away the surface soil.
Gradually, small and then large ravines and torrents
were formed which have torn the hill-range into
most fantastic shapes while the debris has been
carried into the plains forming fan-shaped accumu-
lations of sand. These	reach for miles into
the plain and have already covered and rendered
sterile extensive areas of formerly fertile fields.
Indeed one of these currents, or drifts of sand, has
actually carried away a portion of the town of
Hoshiapur	To	cure the evil it is necessary
to stop grazing	and to help by artificial
sowing and planting wherever required. It is
understood that the. Government of the Punjab has
of late paid attention to the matter and inaugurated
measures with the object of preventing further
mischief".
The same result on a somewhat minor scale may
be seen on many dean-weeded rubber-estates on
undulating or hilly land in the F. M. S. At Kuala
Kubu the Selangor river has been completely silted
up and its level raised, a direct result of mining in
the hills at its head waters Frequent floods are
caused thereby
(II) Forests managed for their economic value.
Notwithstanding the fact that most countries are
annually extending their forests either by the
permanent reservation of already existing forests or
by reafforestation, the total area of the worlds
308
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1919.
forests is steadily decreasing. The demand for timber is steadily increasing on the other hand, consequent on the increase in population and the number of uses to which wood can be put. Besides timber, there is in all countries a steady demand for fuel, hi Sarawak moreover there exists a number of forest products which are used extensively in the manufacture of articles of common use such as rotans, gutta-percha, damar and cutch.
It may perhaps be said that land will pay better under other crops than forest and that forest land should be used for such crops and any timber required imported. Timber however is indispensable to many industries in every country and it is the duty of the State to maintain an adequate supply and not depend upon import from other countries over which it has no control. Again to quote Schlich Forestry is an industry based upon the productive value of the soil which differs from the production of field-crops by the long time which is required for the maturing of the produce, one hundred or more years frequently being required before the trees reach the necessary size. Thus continuity of action extending over a long period of time is an essential condition for successful forestry. The industry also requires considerable areas, whenever a steady annual yield is expected. These and other considerations make it clear that forestry conducted on economic principles is possible only on huge properties and is essentially an industry to be conducted only by the State".
If then it is conceded that forest reservation is necessary, the next thing to be considered is the extent to which it should be carried out.
With regard to forests that are to be managed for their economic value the primary object in view is the permanent supply of all possible future needs of Sarawak itself. It is not possible to guess what its future requirements may be in this respect and a wide margin of safety should be allowed, as it is certain that any future surplus would find markets in other countries such as China. Australia and India. In Sarawak there are as yet no forest reserves.
In the F. M. S. the work of reservation has already been in progress for 20 years or more and at the end of 1918 an area of 2,792 square miles or 10% of the area of the whole country had been finally constituted forest reserve and is under the permanent control of the Forest Department.
From this total however considerable areas have to be deducted as being nonproductive of timber, such as swamps, forest land at a greater elevation than 4,000 feet, gutta percha reserves and mangrove forests which are managed solely for the production of fuel.
It is estimated that eventually an area of not less than 7% of the whole F. M. S. or 1,950 square miles will have to be reserved for the future supply of timber alone, due allowance of course being made for a margin of safety.
In countries like Sarawak and the F. M. S. where there are no definite seasons it is at present impossible to estimate with any hope of accuracy the annual production of timber per acre of the principal forest trees. In countries like India and Burmah many of the important species show clearly defined annual rings caused by the complete change in seasons and definite season of rest from growth. With Teak for instance the annual rings are so well-defined that the rate of growth may be ascertained with great accuracy by an instrument known as Presslers' increment-borer". This is a hollow steel borer which is screwed into the tree to the required depth and when withdrawn brings with it a clean cylinder of wood. The rings are then counted and the length of the cylinder measured.
Three borings are usually taken from each tree and the mean calculated. The trees are divided into-girth classes, under 3', 3' to 4 ' and so on up to 7 and a hundred or more borings taken in each class. From the results obtained it is easy to calculate the time taken for a tree from a seedling to reach 7' or whatever the required maximum girth may be.
This method cannot unfortunately be followed in Sarawak, since no annual rings are shown. The more labourious method of annual measurement of sample-trees and plots must therefore be followed, as in the Peninsula. At first sight it would seem that this would mean waiting 100 years or more for results but this is hot the case, as by dividing the trees to lie measured into girth-classes measurements of all classes up to the maximum can be carried out simultaneously. Ir. 30 or 40 years reliable results may be obtained for the larger timber trees and for quicker-growing species such as mangrove and gutta percha m a very much shorter time.
From such knowledge as has already been obtained in the F. M. S. it appears probable that hard-wood trees such as Chengal may obtain a marketable size in 120 years. On an average without felling immature trees, one acre could produce 17 tons in 120 years and one acre therefore produces 1/7 of a ton per annum. These figures however do not include over-mature trees whose growth is completed and which should always be removed as soon as possible.
This rotation of 120 years is not an exceptionally long one and is idential with that of oak in the Bavarian Stale forests. By judicious Sylvicultural treatment, such as improvement fellings to free suppressed and dominated species, the marketable growing stock can be greatly increased and at a low estimate three times the yield could be expected from a forest which has been thus treated than from the same forest in its natural state.
Future reservation in Sarawak should then be carried out on the following lines -
1. The largest reserved area should be solely for timber, the final extent of which heed not at ' present be determined. Most of the timber reserves will yield other minor products as well. '
2. Reserves for fuel should be constituted of which the larger portion will consist of mangrove forest
3. All large areas rich in gutta percha, jelutong, etc., should be reserved.
4. Protective forests for catchment-areas, headwaters of large rivers, etc., can be reserved as the necessity arises in each case. Many of such forests will yield timber and other forest produce.
Timber and fuel reserves should be located as evenly us possible over the country care being taken to ensure that access to rivers and roads is or can be made available, all towns of considerable extent should have reserves in their immediate vicinity.
Forest reservation is a lengthy process even with a large staff, as it is always additional to such work as revenue-collection and the maintenance and development of existing reserves.
As has been stated this work has now been going on for some twenty years in the F. M. S. a country little more than half the size of Sarawak and is not nearly complete yet. The European staff consists of 22 Officers and this staff is even now being increased. The length of boundaries of forest reserves is at present 3,001 miles and is being increased yearly. The forest revenue for 1918 was $1,037,123 and the expenditure $521,110, showing a surplus of $516,012. As an instance of what large revenue may be obtained from properly managed
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1919.
309
forest reserves, the State forests of Bavaria (before the war) of a total area of almost exactly 2,000,000 acres yielded $25,000,000 (Straits) a year.
The expenditure was $11,500,000, giving a net profit of $13,500,000 a year.
It is always essential to consider the rights or claims of the native population when a reserve is being constituted. Their claims may be satisfied in two ways. One is to exclude from the area proposed for reservation a tract sufficient to yield them the quantities of forest produce required. This method is however objectionable in that it neither prevents the land so excluded from being used subsequently for some other purpose nor from being over exploited by the present users
A far better method is to include all the land in the reserve and to ensure to the native population their rights or claims under proper supervision and control. The forest will ultimately benefit by sylvicultural treatment and the value of the rights increase under the control of the Forest Department.
J. P. MEAD,
Conservator of Forests, Sarawak.
German War Trophies.
Information has been received that the War Office has allotted to Sarawak ten machine guns, a trench mortar, two German wire cullers, a German pack, and ten steel helmets to be kept as mementoes of the War.
The Ai my Council intimate that they will undertake to forward the trophies to Kuching as soon as the necessary Iran sport becomes available.
Sarawak Regatta.
The following is the programme proposed to be carried out on January 1st.
His	HIGHNESS THE RAJAHS
CUP.Value $200.2nd prize $65. 1st prize to crew $80. 2nd prize to crew 540 3rd prize to crew $20. Entrance fee $2. Open to any make of boat, unlimited as to size or number of crew. From Batu Bliong to the Stone Wharf.
REGATTA	CUP.Value
$50.Presented from the Regatta Funds. For any description of boat with crews limited to 15 men. Winner of the 2nd race to pull with 13 and 2nd boat in 2nd race with 14 paddles only. 1st prize to crew $15. 2nd prize to crew $7.50. Entrance fee $1.50. From Batu Bliong to the Stone Wharf.
Value $125.2nd prize $40 1st prize to crew $80. 2nd prize to crew $40. 3rd prize to crew $20. Open to any make of boat, unlimited as to size or number of crew. Entrance fee $2. From Batu Bliong to the Stone Wharf.
Value	$75.Open to all boats. Crews limited to 30 paddlers. One flag-man and one bailer may be carried in addition, but these must not use paddles. Entrance fee $2. 1st prize to crew $30. 2nd prize to crew $15. From Batu Bliong to the Stone Wharf.
THE CONSOLATION CUP. Value $100with $50 added. Crews unlimited. Entrance fee $1. From Batu Bliong to the Stone Wharf.
CORRESPONDENCE.	Value $75. Open to
all boats. Crews limited to 30 paddlers. One
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of flag-man and one bailer may be carried in addition,
correspondents.]	but these must not use paddles. Entrance fee $2.
Sarawak, 20th Nov., 1919. 1st prize to crew $30. 2nd prize to crew $15.
To the Editor, From Tanjong Patingan to the Stone Wharf.
Sarawak Gazette.	DEAR SIR,
In your Notes in the last issue of the Gazette
appears a paragraph referring to the capture by
Customs' Officers of opium concealed in brooms which
were being taken on board the s. s. Kuching as
luggage. You have not got the facts of the case
quite correct-. There were 22 brooms (not 12)
containing about 92 tahils of opium dross, and the
passenger who tried to take this on board certainly
forfeited his passage as you say not because he was
no longer to be found, but localise he is now doing Value	$50. For any
time in Kuching jail in default of the fine which description of boat with Crews limited to 15 men.
he was unable to pay.	1st prize to Crew $15. 2nd prize to Crew $7.50.
Yours faithfully, Entrance fee $1.50. From Tanjong Patingan to the
Stone Wharf.
SHIP'S GIGS1st prize $6,
2nd prize $3. From Pengkalan Dayung Atun to
the Stone Wharf.
INTERVAL
Racing will be resumed at 2 p. m.
BANDONG	RACEFor bona fide fishing boats to be propelled by oars, steersman only to use paddle. Crew limited to 5 men. 1st prize $7.50. 2nd prize $5. From Pengkalan Dayang Atun to the Stone Wharf.
F. G. DAY.
Sarawak Library.
The undermentioned books have been I added to the Liabrary:
B 768 Sir Thomas Stamford
Raffles by J. A. Bethune Cook H 11 B The British Campaign in France Flanders
1918, Vol. V. Conan Doyle
M 336 Uncensored Letters
from the Dardanelles ,, A French Medical
Officer
P Maling and Tarik and Ocher Verses (M. S) ,, T. L. Stevens Kuching, November 21st, 1919.
FOR	BOATS WITH CREWS LIMITED TO EIGHT MEN. - 1st prize $8. 2nd prize $4 From Pengkalan Dayang Atun to the Stone Wharf.
FISHERMAN'S	RACE (Dayong Ikan )1st prize $2. 2nd prize $1. 3rd prize 50 cents. Men to wear a distinctive mark on the left arm. These badges will be provided and prizes will only be given to men who have them on at the Winning Post. From the Judges' box round s. y. Zahora's mooring buoy, turning to the right, and return.
310
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1919.
ARMY. CONSTABULARY AND
STEAMERS.Crews limited to 15 men. Mixed
Crews from steamers will not be allowed; each
steamer must run a boat containing members of its
Crew who are signed on before January 1st, 1919.
1st prize $15. 2nd prize $7.50. From Tanjong
Patingan to the Stone Wharf.
A	CONSOLATION CUP.
Value $45.Open to all boats that have not won a
race at this meeting. Crews limited to 30 paddlers.
Entrance fee $1. From Batu Bliong to the Stone
Wharf.
THE	OFFICES RACEFor
employees in Government and Mercantile Offices,
who shall be employed on inside or oilice work only.
A list of crews to be sent in before December 20th,
1919. which will be subject to the approval of the
Umpire Number of Crew to be arranged later.
1st prize $16. 2nd prize $8. From Pengkalan
Dayang Atun to the Stone Wharf.
MONTHLY REPORTS.
UPPER SARAWAK.
BAU AND PAKU.
October.
Court. -The number of cases before the Courts
was much as usual.
Law Kim was sent to gaol for burglary and Lee
Shoon and Chong Joon for theft of rubber.
Lee Loi was heavily fined for refusing to follow a
boundary which was laid down years ago and caus-
ing ceaseless annoyance to his neighbour in con-
sequence.
Lee Nyong Nyok was fined for planting rubber
without permission and two Stinggang Dyaks were
fined for insulting the Orang Kaya there.
Tahu was fined for trading in rice nt Krokong
without a permit and a Bau trader for selling food-
stuffs at 90% above Kuching prices.
Eyo Fong was sentenced to imprisonment for
voluntarily causing hurt to Choo On with a weapon
in the bazaar.
Four Chinese who had been previously fined for
being drunk and disorderly in the bazaar were sent
to gaol for ten days for being drunk and causing a
disturbance in a house and damaging property there
and were ordered to pay damages.
Public Works.The prisoners cleared the Buan
road. The cross road to the bazaar was raised two
feet and nearly completed and the ground in front
of the bungalow' was cut down to the level of that ,
underneath. A quantity of tailings were run from
the works and dumped for spreading on the roads
where required. A new belian bridge was built over the B. Kajang stream.
General.I visited Dahan on the 8th returning
the same day. On the 12th I went round the
Japanese estates at Siniawan, which are separated
by two miles of rubber and pepper gardens, to see the
track along which they propose to construct a tele-
phone line connecting the estates with the trunk
line at Siniawan.
There seemed to be no great difficulty about this,
but their proposal to make a road along the same
track presented innumerable obstacles as so many ,
gardens would have to lie cut through and this
suggestion was dropped.
On the 17th I visited Skunyit to investigate com-
plaints made by gardeners of Mr. Davis having included some of their planted ground in his land
when he had it surveyed.
There has been much sickness amongst the
prisoners lately with some cases of dysentery and
beri-beri. Lee Jong died of dysentery on the 20th and two others were sent to hospital.
Chong Kin, arrested at Paku on the 30th. managed to swallow a packet of arsenic and died shortly afterwards. He and another occupant of the Chinese Topiconthe usual resting place of vagrants at Paku had been busy for some time past stealing tapping cups and a large number with the chops of widely scattered gardens on them wefre found in their possession. Although cups are being stolen by thousands from the various gardens every month this is only the second case where the thieves have been caught.
Kampong Atas, Singghi, lost 18 doors by fire on the evening of the 20th. An account of this has already appeared in the Gazette.
His Highness the Tuan Muda accompanied by the Honble H. B. Crocker and Mr. J. P. Mead arrived from a trip to Poe and Lundu on the night of the 24th at 10.30 p.m. and left for Kuching on the 25th.
The Court writer Ah Nyuk has been very ill with ? heart disease since his return from Kuching early in the month. He has suffered from this for many years but has not been incapacitated from work till now Towards the end of the month he grew steadily worse. Owing to the constant changing of the junior clerks during the last four years there is no clerk here capable of doing his work.
The rainfall for the month was 1540 inches.
One very heavy storm broke over Bau on the 14th when over 2 inches of rainfall in an hour.
The out-put from the Cyaniding works amounted to gold 865.5 ozs. and silver 507.9 ozs.
DONALD A. OWEN,
Pendent.
SADONG COLLIERY.
October.
The gross out-put of coal for the month of October was 2,050.18 tons, 465 tons of this was consumed by our boilers, and 1,585.18 tons delivered for export.
The shipments for the month were :
The Municipality, Kuching ... 535,01 tons
Messrs. The Borneo Company,
Kuching	514.19	,,
Sarawak Steamship
Company, Kuching	503.05	,,
Soon	Seng A- Co., Sibu ...	152.00	,,
Bunkering s. l. Margaret (Goebilt)	4.00	,,
Total Shipments 1,709 05 tons
Everything went smoothly below-ground up to the
20th when a heavy squeeze came over the upper
portion of No. 8 mine engine-plane and crushed the
timber for a considerable distance. These timbers
were being doubled as fast as possible, when, on the
22nd, another crush came on, which broke down all
the old and new timber-sets in successive stages for a
distance 112 feet and up to a great height. This
had the effect of shutting off the air connection with
No. 9 mine for several days, but as the work of
clearing away the debris was proceeding, ventilation
slightly improved. By the end of the month we
had made no progress, as the roof kept on falling at
irregular intervals to such a great height, that it is
doubtful whether the level could be re-opened before
it reached the surface, so that arrangements are now
well in hand to have this portion of the level sealed
off with concrete wailing and a new level tunnelled
round the light side of the fall, through to the other
side, in its place.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1919.
311
The extension of the railway line with a view to the opening of new mines in the lower seam to the East of No. 9 mine was begun anil a new belian house of five doors was completed.
Our main water supply was cut off for nearly two days, owing to an up-rooted tree falling across and damaging the pipe-line some little distance below the reservoir during a rain-storm.
Saturday the 18th was a general planting day. The Malays being employed on their own padi allotments, and the Chinese on the Government farm at Lepong.
Mr. Kortright the Resident very kindly assisted in obtaining for us a good supply of kribang tubers and sago, also cuttings of kribang, bandong and padi seedlings.
The crops are doing exceedingly well, but the rice birds are attacking destructively a few acres of the early padi, which is now nearly ripe.
The rainfall for the month was 17'17 inches. There was a great deal of fever amongst the labour force, and two Chinese coolies died while under treatment in the local hospital.
We are now very much handicapped on account of the labour shortage for the work below-ground, and a large number of the singkehs, who have fulfilled their terms of agreement, have tendered their notices to leave on the termination of their contracts.
J. W. EVANS.
Manager.
SIBU.
October.
Garing, Guntor, Kudi and five other Kapit Dyaks,
started for the Kayan country on the Kayu anak.
They were, however, brought back by their relation
before they bad done any mischief, and have since
been fined and ordered to place pledges with the
Government as securities for their future good
behaviour.
One hundred and one Ga'at Dyaks arrived per
the, H. H. s. Y. Zahora on the 26th, from Nether- lands India Territory, via Simanggang and Lingga. This was the puny which bad been interned by the Dutch authorities on their arrival from the Ga'at.
These Dyaks have been sent to live in the Igan
and will not be permitted to live anywhere in the
up-river districts unless they obtain His Highness the Rajahs permission.
Blikau, Gila, Unyat and Kunjan. who were the
leading men of this party, were detained for punishment.
There is no doubt that the kind assistance rendered by the Netherlands India authorities, in
handing over this party of ex-rebels will have a great deterrent effect on other troublesome members of
the border tribes who have been under the misguided
impression that, after committing any grevious offence, they can find a safe harbourage over the .
border.
The Gaat and the Sut districts are reported now clear of Dyaks.	Mr. H. D. Aplin visited Kapit on the 17th, and
returned on the 19th.
Mr. G. M. Gifford returned from Belaga on the
26th: he was delayed at the Bukitan settlement
above the rapids for a short time owing to the river
being in fresh. Mr. Gifford's report on his visit to
Belaga will be forwarded under separate cover.
From the 10th to the 12th. I was away on a visit
to Daro and Matu. It was found necessary al both
these villages for the Government to take over the
control of rice and also to ration the people. No
attempt having been made by the Chinese and
others to reduce the consumption of rice, in spite of
repeated orders.
Mr. W. R. Tudor Clement left for Matu on the
14th, and was still away at the end of the month.
Telephone communication with Dalat was broken
off early in the month owing to some defect in the
Sibu telephone hox which could not be adjusted
locally.
The Telephone Department, Kuching, was requested to send a man to do the repairs, but owing
to the irregular communication between Kuching
and Sibu no one arrived till the end of the month.
Accompanied by the Revd. James M. Hoover, I
visited the Foo Chow colony on two occasions
during the month. A very much larger area has
been planted with padi this season, in fact every
foot of land which is still damp enough for padi
planting has been cultivated The Foo Chows have
also made farms outside the boundary of the colony
and there is every reason to believe that there will
be ample rice for the consumption of those people
after the harvest.
The Malay as well as the Dyak farms throughout
the district are reported to be flourishing.
There have been numerous cases of theft before
the Court, during the past month, which, to-some
extent, may be accounted for by the people being so
badly off for food. Dyaks have been concerned in
several thefts, which is to be regretted, as hitherto
thieving by these people-has been unusual.
The pawn farmers, Chop Ek Guan, lost jewellery
to the value of $1,200. The case in which the
jewellery was kept was unlocked and all the gold
articles removed : silver-ware, watches, etc. were
not taken. There is no clue as yet as to who the
person or persons are who were concerned in this
theft.
A number of forged Singapore $5 notes have been
found in circulation and any one found in possession
of such forgeries has been prosecuted. It is regret-
table that these spurious notes have found their way
into the district as the Dyaks and others have now
less aversion to receiving notes in payment for
purchases, but the fact that there are forgeries in
circulation will again make them suspicions.
Ex-Police Sergt. Suntong, who has been in receipt
of a pension for many years, died on the 29th.
The s. s. Brisbane of 716 tons burthen, arrived at
Rejang, from Hong Kong via Singapore, to load
timber for Messrs. Tong Lee Wah.
Mr. Aplin visited Rejang from the 27th to the
30th, to see that the timber was being properly
measured for export duty.
The s. l. Hong Line which was salved, with the
aid of u Japanese diver, has been repaired and
despatched to Simanggang under her own steam.
The s. 1. Chamois arrived from Kuching on the
31st, to take the place of the s. l. Lucile which will
be sent to Kuching for repairs.
The s. s. Gladys made two trips and the s. s. Flevo
arrived from Singapore twice, but only cleared on
one occasion during the month.
The value of the imports exceeded the exports for
the month, owing to the large increase in the
quantity of rice imported.
The trade returns for the month of October show
the following figure, viz:
Imports. Exports.
Coasting	... $ 49,639 $	13,168
Foreign ...	...	150,034	173,484 ,
$ 199,673	$ 186,652
Brought forward	...	1,688,458	2,099,466
Total to 30th Oct.	1919	$ 1,888,131	$2,286,118
1918	...	$ 743.085	$ 854,512
Immigration figures show:
Men. Women. Boys.
Foo Chow	2	1
Hokkien	3	1	2 9 Total.
J. BARING-GOULD,
Resident 3rd Division.
312
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1919.
LOWER REJANG.
October and November.
Leaving by the s. 1. Mermaid on the 14th I arrived
at Matu the same evening. Although there were
several eases dealt with in the Courts none require
any special mention.
Most of my time was taken up in connection with
the control of rice.
Owing to the long distance from the bazaar it
seemed advisable for the Government not only to
store, but to sell direct to consumers. As the in-
habitants are sago eating people their allowance of
rice was reduced.
Left for Daro on the 28th, there again the matter
of food control was the most important matter.
In spite of the fact that raw sago was fetching
$2.80 n passu, but few of the Melanoes take the
slightest trouble to pay off their debts to the Chinese. The padi crop both at Matu and Daro promises to be good should there be no pests.
I left for Rejang on 1st. The British owned s. s.
Brisbane had arrived on 25th to load timber being
chartered by Messrs. Tong Lee Wah. She left on
the 4th for Hong Kong with about 1,000 tons of
timber and firewood.
On evening of 3rd the auxiliary motor schooner
Kirho Maru flying the Japanese flag hound from
Manila for Paloh, Dutch Borneo, entered the
roads, having gone out of her course.
I returned to Sibu on 7th.
W. R. TUDOR CLEMENT.
Resident 2nd Class.
UPPER REJANG.
September.
I left Kapit on September 10th arriving on 14th instant accompanied by Penghulu Akam Deng who had come to Kapit to fetch me.
Since my visit in 1918 the Government staff at Belaga has been changed from one Corporal and five local fortmen to a native officer and two policemen. This has proved more economical and satisfactory. as during my absence very little work is done. The police instead of receiving rice monthly in addition to their pay as formerly, now receive $2.20 p. m. in lieu of this. This also does away with the expense of large crews continually coming down to Kapit for supplies.
I fear that Awang Matnor who was engaged on probation as native officer, will not suit permanently, as it is difficult for him to disassociate his trading from Government work, and it would be preferable if possible to obtain a native officer from elsewhere, and not a native connected in any way with Belaga. This may be more easily accomplished now that Dyak affairs are more settled.
I found the fort in a very bad state of repair, it has been thus for some years, not having been repaired since Mr. Lows time. It is now practically impossible to live in owing to the leaky state of the roof and rottenness of the floor planking. The walls, posts and beams are still in good order. I have ordered the natives to work wood sufficient to do all necessary repairs, and beg your sanction to have these put in hand as soon as the wood is ready either by contract or failing this, by daily wages, Government supplying the nails. The contracts up to date have been rather too high. I think that four or five hundred dollars will be sufficient. Should this be sanctioned I propose sending Abang Aboi up to Belaga as soon as 1 hear that the wood is ready, so that he can get the work started.
I have left a Javanese long-sentence prisoner to
look after the .cattle and hope that be will be able
to give them the attention that has been lacking.
They were already beginning to look in better condition by the time I left. There are 22 head and
some promising looking young hulls in the herd.
A bridge was put up by the kampong Malays be-
tween the kampong and bazaar, Skapans supplying
the wood.
The Kejamans, Skapans and Punan Bar are short
of padi this year, but have planted early and will be
harvesting next month. The Kayans, Kenyahs and
others all had exceptionally good harvests and by
previous arrangement f was able to buy sufficient
padi at Belaga for all Government servants and
prisoners at Kapit. selling to them at the rate of
approximately 3 gantangs of rice to the dollar, and
obtaining a sufficient profit to cover expenses of
transport, etc.
I exempted the Bukitans from their revenue, which
was overdue, and of which there seemed little prospect of being able to collect at the time, on condition
that they transported all Government padi; this
they did.
The reports on this year's farms are good, only
those who planted too early in the drought suffering,
good harvests are anticipated in December.
During my visit to Belaga in 1919, I gave orders
that, on account of certain tuai and others gambling
and losing considerable sums running into hundreds
of dollars in some cases, no gambling was to take
place between traders, other Malays or Chinese, and
up-river people. This order had not been taken
heed of, so I accordingly fined the gambling farm
$100, and confiscated their apparatus. The natives
professed to be very pleased with this decision as
they had always lost heavily when visiting the bazaar.
I find that m payment of revenue, fines, and
judgment debts it is from the gamblers that it is
most difficult t ' collect payment, Skapans, Punans,
Kejamans and down-river Kayans being the chief
offenders. I hope that gambling has been put a
stop to, as I threatened to turn any Malay or China-
man out of Belaga found gambling with the up-river
people.
The traders at Belaga are always in competition
to obtain rhinoceros horns and gall-stones from
Punans, and for this reason large advances are given
to Kayans to trade with these people. The conse-
quence is that large debts are run up in the bazaar,
the Punans are harrasssed as they, cannot procure
enough to supply the number who wish to trade
with them and very little jungle produce is worked.
There is a good price for damar, and others pro-
ducts. and I have informed all Kayans and others
that as there is more profit to be made by working
in the jungle on their own account, they must give
up this custom of worrying the Punans perpetually and work for themselves or I will allow Dyaks to
work in their country. This has had the effect of
stirring them up and I have hopes of the trade at
Belaga increasing considerably this coming year.
Hundreds have already started off to work.
A heavy royalty on horns and gall-stones would
put a stop to this and allow of the Punans a chance
to pay their revenue regularly. Quantities of horns
are smuggled out of the country every year, fetching
over $260 a kati at present, and 1 doubt if duty is
ever paid on gall stones, winch fetch now over
to $100 a tahils
The sale of these luxuries is always known up-
river and to collect royalty would not be difficult.
Court. There were two cases of some importance
with regard to Belaga affairs.
In re: Apoh, Skapan and Mendu Bukitan who
killed an Ukit in the Belepeh. This took place in
April.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1919.
313
their own fault and the sootier they started to plant
rice substitutes the belter.
Hassan, a Miri, signed on to do duty us a police-
man at Lio Matu and left at once to warn the chiefs
that I was leaving for the ulu in sixteen days time.
Prisoners engaged during the month on experimental farm and cleaning up in the ornamental
grounds.
P. S. Adeh made one trip, this being her last
visit until after N. E. monsoon.
Rainfall was 12'29 inches.
Imports.	Exports.
$96,089	$46,211
C. D. ADAMS,
Resident 2nd Class.
BROOKETON COLLIERY.
September.
The gross out-put of coal for the month if
September was 1.675 tens, of which 355 tons was
consumed by our boilers, and the balance, 1,320 tons,
was sent to wharf. 94 tons of riddlings were returned to boilers from stock, making total boiler consumption of 445 tons.
Shipments amounted to 3,646 tons, and was made
up as follows :
Labuan	...	... 1,072 tons
Messrs. The Straits Steam-
ship Company 2,452 ,,
The defendants voluntarily surrendered themselves over to Government, and an enquiry was held with regard to this case, on August 19th : I have written to you with regard to this under separate cover.
In re; Easing, Sign and Usop, who killed three .
Dyaks Manang Gajah, Deng and Grih,in the ulu. Batang Rejang.
I heard this case at Belaga. The Dyaks had been specially warned by myself not to work in that district owing to unsettled state of Dyak affairs, they went at their own risk and in contravention of orders.
The parties were lined $100 each and patih nyawa has been paid to the relations of deceased, at their own request and that of all tuai and penghulu, who
were especially called to the fort at Kapit.
I hope that the last has been heard of this case. While at Belaga I received a report that eight Dyaks had gone on the warpath with the intention
of avenging the death of the three Dyaks mentioned
above. Owing to the prompt and sensible measures
taken by Abang Aboi, native officer at Kapit. in
seizing their tuai and tajok the party was prevented
from going far. and eventually brought back.
This is a good example of the hold that Government now has on Dyaks, since they are all in
the Batang Rejang.
There was a considerable amount of Court work
at Belaga.
There was trouble as usual in collecting Taman
Abit's revenue, and his is the only house, with the
Uma Tapu, whose revenue is not fully paid up to
date.
The health of the natives up-river has been good
and with the help of a good harvest this-year they
should recover from the parlous state that they ,
have been in for the last few years.
I collected some $4,600 odd of Government monies,
and with that collected in Mav, amounts to over $6,000 for 1919.
The amount of revenue and other Government monies has increased steadily during the last few years.
GERALD. M. GIFFORD.
Resident 2nd Class.
BARAM.
October.
Very few cases came before the Courts for settle- went. Sluein was ordered to deposit the sum of $50 for twelve months and Sawang and Entayut $25 each for six months to be of good behaviour. These people are Malohs.
Fines and fees amounted to $779.67.
Gumbang, Long Kiput chief, was ordered to bring all cases down to the Fort for settlement.
Tuanku Drahman, Native Officer paid a visit to the Tutau and Apoh from 15th instant to 25th instant. He reports all quiet. The people are badly off for rice, but the new padi looks very promising. He paid the sum of $388 into Treasury. The Honble. Resident 4th Division who had been
here for the last month returned to Miri on the 7th
instant by p.s. Adeh accompanied by Mrs. Douglas
and child.
Capt. E. V. Andreini. Cadet, arrived by p.s. Adeh
on the 4th instant. He has been appointed to do
duty at this station.
The Chinese now seem to be afraid that they will
not have sufficient rice. They were informed three
times concerning the shortage and the Food Control
Officer offered them 2,700 piculs of rice, but all they
required at first was 1,200 piculs, which they reduced
to 800 piculs. I have now informed them it was
P. 8. Adeh, etc. ...	...	122 Total 3,646 tons
Coal in stock at the end of the month was 1,083 tons.
The mines were idle for seven days, four of which were occupied in loading the s. s. Kepong.
Everything went smoothly in all departments, and there were no accidents of any kind.
The s. s. Euzkadi arrived on the 31st to load about 1,000 tons coal for Manila.
The work of repairing the office wharf at Labuan was completed about the middle of the month.
The s. l. LAubaine was kept very busy throughout the month. The old patches on her boiler gave a great deal of trouble and these will soon have to be taken off and new ones put on.
The rainfall for the month was 16'08 inches.
J. O. MADDOCKS.
Manager.
LIMBANG.
September.
The p. s. Adeh arrived here on the 19th, but as when she left Kuching the intention was that she should only go as far as Baram there was no cargo or mails for Limbang on board.
On her return trip the Honble. J. and Mrs. Baring-Gould and children were passengers from Brooketon to Kuching.
The s. s. Alice Lorraine also made one trip during the month arriving from Kuching on the 30th with the relief squad of Rangers.
Mr. Philip B. Richards, Acting Government Entomologist, Federated Malay States, called while I was at Brooketon to discuss the locust question and I am much indebted to him for valuable information as to the best way of dealing with these pests should they make their appearance in Sarawak territory.
314
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1919.
I left for Lawns in the s. s. L'Aubaine on the 21st and found everything in order. The new gaol and cow shed are finished and appear to be solid and and well constructed buildings.
I returned here in the s. l. Datu on the 28th.
The 26tb, being the anniversary of His Highness the Rajahs birthday, was observed as a public holiday.
Court.Salleh, a prisoner, was sentenced to nine ?months extra H. L. for theft of Government rubber and to serve the remainder of his term in Kuching gaol.
Fines and fees amounted to $215.79.
P. W. D.The coolies were employed on the , Government padi plantation, repairing the reservoir and on the up-keep of the kampong road; the prisoners on the Kaban Hill road and weeding the paths and ditches in the ornamental grounds.
Imports. Exports.
Coasting	...	$7,731	$5,091
Foreign	...	5,135	6,782
The rainfall for the month was 16'27 inches.
H. S. B. JOHNSON, Resident 5th Division.
The Sarawak Gazette.
RATES OF ADVERTISEMENTS IN THE" SARAWAK GAZETTE"
Payable in advance.
Quarter of a column and under
First insertion
... 1.00
Second and third insertion each
... 0.50
Subsequent do	do
... 0.82
Half a Column and under
First insertion
... 2.00
Second and thin! insertion each
... 1.00
Subsequent do	do
... 0.50
A Column and under
First insertion each
... 4.00
Second and third insertion each
... 2.00
Subsequent do	do
.... 100
Special arrangements may be made for
standing adver
tisements.
All communications intended for insertion in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed to the Editor at the Government Printing Office, Kuching. They should be clearly written and should reach the Office at least two days before the publication of each issue-
Letters and other contributions must be authenticated by writers name sent privately to the Editor.
NOTICE.
ASTANA FARM.
THE Manager of Astana Farm begs to inform the Public that he is unable to attend to Orders for milk after Office hours.
NOTICE.
?
Gazette subscriptions and Printing
Office bills.
FOR the convenience of residents at Outstations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums hut only the 1,2 and 3 cent values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that Money Orders be sent if possible.
J. C. SWAYNE,
Manager, Govt. Printing Office.
NOTICE
GOVERNMENT STORE.
M
ATANG TEA is now obtainable at the
Government Store in 1lb packets.
Price 50 cents.
Carriage to Outstations extra.
SALE OF WORK
AT
ST. MARY S SCHOOL.
The annual Sale of Work will be held at St- Marys School on December 5th and 6th.
Doors at 1.30 p. m.
Proceeds in aid of St. Marys School-
Mails.
We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not inserting them.
Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early intelligence of all matters of general interest in their respective neighbourhoods.
Mens Wear	Childrens Clothes.
Fancy Work	Literature
Bran Tub & Fish Pond
Refreshments at reasonable rates.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1919. 315
Kuching, Foreign Trade Returns for the month of Oct., 1919. Imports-(Continued.)
316
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1919.
Kuching, Coasting Trade Returns for the month of Oct,, 1919.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO
22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS.
F. G. DAY.
Registrar of Trade.
NOTICE
FRASER & NEAVE'S AERATED WATERS
(The Best throughout the East.)
NOTICE is hereby given that the partnership here-tofore existing between LIM OH LIEW, LIM OH PHIO. LIM THIAN LAI, LIM THIAN HO, LIM THIAN SANG, LIM THIAN KHAY and LIM OH CHAI carrying on business at No. 88, Main Bazaar. Kuching, under the style or firm of Chop ENG WHATT has been dissolved by mutual consent on 29th October 1919 and the aforesaid LIM OH LIEW retires from partnership and has no further interest in the firm nor will be responsible as from the above date for any debts incurred by the said business.
Au agreement to the above effect has duly been registered in the Supreme Court, Knelling and the undersigned, LIM OH PHIO, LIM THIAN LAI, LIM THIAN HO, LIM THIAN SANG. LIM THIAN KHAY and LIM OH CHAI are now sole proprietors of Chop ENG WHATT.
(Sgd.) LIM OH PHIO
LIM THIAN LAI
.. LIM THIAN SANG
LIM THIAN KHAY
.. LIM OH CHAI
LIM THIAN HO (Sgd.) LIM OH LIEW
Sole Proprietors.	Retired Partner.
[6-1]
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic
Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at
$1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 catties of dry rubber.
ASAHI BEER.
ACETIC ACID.
Fresh supplies of Stores are received
regularly.
PRICES MODERATE.
Free delivery to customers in Kuching.
Free packing & shipping for Outstation
Orders.
u. c. THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1919.
317
PASSENGERS.	Postal Notice.
ARRIVALS.
PER S. S. Sarawak: 16th NovemberFrom Sibu -Rev.
F. Halder.
PER S. S. Kuching: 18th NovemberFrom Singapore
The Rt. Rev. Bishop of Labuan and
Sarawak and Mrs. Danson, Lieut.
E. O. Bruce, Mr. and Mrs. Y. Taka-
nobu, Messrs S. Lawrence, L. Ghim
Swen, Law Cheng Puang, O. Kwan
Hin, L. Chai Heng, T. Ewe Chai, C.
Bok TIin, W. Kheng Chiang, L. Cheng
lining, L. Hian Hoo, T.Cheng Hoon,
Mrs. C. Cheng Foon, and Miss S. Soh
Eng.
PER s. s. Kuching:- 29th NovemberFrom Singapore
Messrs. E. Nixon Westwood, R. D.
Horton, P. H. Hayward, F G. Car-
penter, Wee Chin Ek, S. M. Tan, L.
Chin Ghee, A. Ong Chai, K. Matshu-
sita, T. Boon Siew, H. Choon Soo and
Teo Chin Kee.
DEPARTURES.
PER S. S. Sarawak:17th NovemberFor Sadong
Messrs. C. H. Haldane and J. C.
Swayne
PER s. s. Kuching:21st November-For Singapore-
Mr. and Mrs. Mohri and daughter,
Messrs. K. Matshusita and Chan Kim
Leong.
NOTICE.
AUCTION SALE
of unredeemed pledges from the Pawn Broking Farm YEW CHEF. & Co., Chop Wo SANG at No. 18, China Street on Saturday, 20th December 1919 at 9 a. m.
List of all such unredeemed pledges is on view at the Pawn Farmers premises.
SYN HIN LEONG A CO.,
Authorised Auctioneers.
A copy of a Magazine entitled Jewish
" Missionary Intelligence has been found in
the Mail without wrapper.
Application should be made for it at the
General Post Office.
NOTICE.
?
N
"OTICE is hereby given that LIM EWE TENG Ad-
ministrator of the Estate of LIM THIAN HAI (de-
ceased) has sold, transferred and made over to LIM THIAN
LAI, LIM THIAN HO and LIM CHENG SOON Administrator
of Estate of LIM THIAN SANG on 30th September 1919
( the whole of the deceased's shares, rights, titles and in-
terest whatsoever in Chops ENG WHATT and ENG HO
and the aforesaid LIM EWE TENG has no further internet
in the above firms nor will be responsible as from the
above date for any debts incurred by the said business.
An agreement has duly been registered in the Supreme
Com t, Kuching with regard to these matters.
(Sgd.) LIM THIAN LAI
LIM THIAN HO
,. LIM CHENG SOON
ADMINISTRATOR OF ESTATE
LIM THIAN HANG.
NOTICE.
NOTICE is hereby given that by a Deed Poll or Power of Attorney executed by LAU KIONG NGHEE alias KIONG NGHEE of 31 Arab Street, Singapore, the 6th day of November 1919, the said LAU KIONG NGHEE appointed and constituted LAU CHENG CHOON, of 6 Main Bazaar, Kuching, Sarawak his lawful attorney and agent in Sarawak and that he also thereby absolutely revoked and cancelled the Deed Poll or Power of Attorney made by him the said LAU KIONG NGHEE in favour of TAN WEE JOO the 24th day of October 1913, and every I power and authority expressed to be given by the said letter deed-poll.
Dated at Singapore this 6th day of November 1919.
A. de MELLO,
Solicitor for LAU KIONG NGHEE, 4. Cecil Street, Singapore,
NOTICE.
SALE BY AUCTION
of all unredeemed pledges from YEK YEUN & Co., Pawn Farmers, No. 8, Sibu Bazaar, Sibu, will be held on the 15th September 1919 at 10 a.m. and quarterly from that date until further notice.
Lists of all unredeemed pledges are on view at the Farmers premises.
LAW JEE THAI,
Authorised Auctioneers.
318
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1919.
METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS.
GENERAL HOSPITAL.
Kuching, October, 1919.
Highest Barometric reading
30'05 inches.
Lowest	2996
Highest temperature (shade)
96 degrees.
Lowest	,,	69	Highest	,,	Sun
169
Longest Period of Sunshine in one day 8'35 hours.
Total rainfall (Museum)	1670 inches.
Greatest rainfall in 21 hours 2'92	,,
Height of Hospital above the sea level approximately 75 feet.
SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, DECEMBER 1, 1919.	319
Departures.
F. G. DAY,
Registrar of Trade.
THE SARAWAK STUDIO
(REPRESENTATIVES OF MESSRS. KODAK LIMITED.)
THE BEST IN KUCHING
WHERE GOOD PORTRAITS CAN BE TAKEN AND VIEWS OF THE
NEIGHBOURHOOD PROCURED.
PHOTOS FOR PASSPORTS
AT SHORT NOTICE.
KODAKS, KODAK FILMS, PLATES, PAPERS, CHEMICALS
PHOTO PASTE AND ALL PHOTOGRAPHIC MATERIALS
SUPPLIED AT SINGAPORE CATALOGUE PRICES.
? AMATEURS FILMS & PLATES DEVELOPED, PRINTED &
ENLARGED AT REASONABLE CHARGES.
Free instructions given to Amateurs with pleasure.
21, COURT HOUSE ROAD,
KUCHING.
C. M. LEE,
Manager.
[2416]
320	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. DECEMBER 1, 1919.
PURE FOOD MEANS GOOD HEALTH
ALEXANDRIA CANNED MEATS
Every Tin Guaranteed under the New South Wales
Pure Food Act, and packed under the constant
and vigilant supervision of a Government Inspector.
ASK FOR ALEXANDRIA
ALE?
LAND RIA
Roast Beef	Roast Mutton	Beef Sausage
Corned Beef	Corned Mutton	Pork Sausage
Ox Cheek	Spiced Mutton	Frankfurt Sausage
Ox Tongues	Mutton Chops	Beef Dripping
Luncheon Tongues	Assorted Meats	Pork and Beans
Sheep Tongues	Minced Scollops	Irish Stew
Extract of Beef	Assorted Soups	Ox Tail Soup
As supplied in huge quantities to the Imperial and Indian Governments for use by both the Army and Navy.
Sold by all Stores.
CHARLES BOWEN & CO.,
2 Castlereagh Street, SYDNEY, N.S.W.
ALEXANDRIA MEAT WORKS.
Distributors for the East :
Seremban General Agency, Ltd.
(Incorporated in F. M.S.)
SINGAPORE .
Sub: Agents- BAN JUI LONG,
14 Carpenter Street, KUCHING, SARAWAK.
and BAN JUI GUAN.
[94 16
MIRI, SARAWAK.
Kuching:---Printed and Published by GHIN HENG SOON, Government Printer, at the Government Printing Office
Barrack Road.
