
VoL. L.
No. 784.
Price KUCHING, FRIDAY, JANUARY 2, 1920. 10 cents.
CONTENTS
Pages.
Death: Brooks	...	...	...	...	1
Notes ... ...	...	...	...	1
Dance at B. M. K.	...	...	...	...	2
Mission Notes	...	...	..	...	2
Clippings	...	...	...	...	2
The Rajah Charles Brooke Memorial Fund	...	...	2
A Farming Experiment	...	...	...	2
Correspondence:High PriceThe English Hymnal ...	4
Sarawak Regatta	...	...	...	...	4
Monthly Reports:Upper Sarawak	...	...	6
Simanggang Mukah	... ...	7
Bintulu	...	...	. 8
Miri	...	...	... 10
Trade Returns	...	...	...	...	11
Market Price List for the month of December 1919	...	12
Almanac ...	...	...	...	...	13
Rainfall ...	...	...	...	...	13
Passengers ...	...	...	...	...	14
Kuching Shipping Returns	...	...	...	16
The Sarawak Gazette
SUBSCRIPTIONS to the Gazette are an follows: -
The Sarawak Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
Single copy	...	...	...	.10 cents
Subscription for one year	...	... $2.00
Stibucriplion including postage to Outstations 2.25
Subscription including postage to all other
Countries. ...	...	2.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING
Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 5s. 10d.
The Sarawak Government Gazette
PAYABLE IN LOCAL CURRENCY
Single copy	...	...	...	.05 cents
Subscription for one year	...	... $1.00
Subscription including postage to Outstations 1.25
Subscription including postage to all other
Countries. ...	1.50
PAYABLE IN STERLING
Subscription for one year (including postage abroad) 3s. 6d.
All subscriptions are payable in advance and must commence from the 1st January in each year on which date they are renewable. All broken periods will be considered as full.
Subscriptions will not be renewed unless notice of renewal given.
Changes of Address should be notified to the Office in writing.
The Sarawak Gazette
FRIDAY, JANUARY 2, 1920.
Death
BROOKS.Ou the 30th June, in the Red Sea. on her homeward voyaqe. Aida Caterina, wife of Cecil Joslin Brooks, of Benkoelen, Sumatra, and daughter of the late W. de Jongh. of Hilversum, Holland. R. I. P. (Announcement delayed.)
NOTES.
(December)
CHRISTMAS was, as usual, held a holiday and most of the European community met in the morning at the Ranees Club to wish each other the compliments of the season. In the evening a large dinner was given by Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee at which some sixty Europeans were present. After dinner the Rangers Band was responsible for an excellent programme of music, and dancing was carried on until early the next morning.
WE publish on another page an account of the Sarawak Regatta held on New Year's Day.
WE are informed that the Annual Sale of Work for S. Mary's School took place on December 5th and 6th in the school buildings. There was a record attendance, and the sum raised was $1,170.
The school authorities wish to take this opportunity of thanking all who helped to achieve this splendid result.
S. S. Alice Lorraine arrived from Lingga and Sadong on the 18th with passengers the Rev. Hollis and Messrs. Evans and Haldane.
S. S. Kuching arrived from Singapore on December 22nd with passengers Miss. Clark, Messrs. D. Evans, C. J. Cook, G. P. Davis, J. W. Rowland, Mr. and Mrs. S. Teck Ghee,
2 THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 2, 1020.
Messrs. K. Tin Fong, A. Hong Choon, Wee Boon Chiew, Goh Siow Thong and Ong Sin Kun. S. S. Alice Lorraine left for Sadong on the 23rd with passengers Messrs. J. W. Evans and D. Evans.
S. S. Kuching left for Singapore on the 27th with passengers Messrs. C. J. Cook, J. W. Rowland, Song Kheng Hai, Poon Meng Teek, Cheong Kun, Lira Song Kee and Mr. and Mrs. K. Ohoseki.
OWING to the scarcity of pork and the reluctance of sellers to abide by the fixed price an absolutely free market is now being held in this commodity, an experiment which is of considerable economic interest.
WE are asked by the Medical Department to repeat the request that all empty medicine bottles may be returned as soon as possible.
IN the Government Gazette Mr. W. F. de V. Skrine is appointed to do duty in the Fifth Division and Messrs. F. G. Carpenter and R. D G. H. N. St. J. Horton to go to Sibu and Mukah respectively.
Dance at B. M. K.
On Wednesday, New Years Eve, Mr. J. M. Bryan, the Manager of the Borneo Company, gave a dinner and dance at B. M. K. at which some thirty-four were present, including Their Highnesses the Rajah. Ranee and Tuan Muda and many visitors from upriver.
An attractive programme was gone through by the Rangers Band, and it was not until 1920 was several hours old that the guests dispersed. Among the ladies present were Her Highness the Ranee, Mdes. Adams, Bean, Danson, Gillan, Griffiths, Mead, Parnell, Philpotts and Miss Tait.
Mission Notes.
We take the following extracts from the quarterly paper published in this Diocese.
Three confirmations took place in the Leper Camp during December, two Dyaks and one Chinese. These, we understand, are the first that have ever taken place there.
In the Second Division the Church, parsonage, and catechists' house in the Skrang have been rebuilt, and in the Saribas over $800 have been subscribed towards the building of a new Church at Betong, where it is hoped to send Mr. L. E. Currey to establish an industrial school.
At Miri the Honble. R, S. Douglas has been appointed honorary Lay Reader.
Clippings.
Aneta wired that Captain Ross Smith arrived at Atambowoe, Timor Island, at 3.30 p. m. on Tuesday.
The news bus come to the Asiatic Petroleum Company that the aviators landed at Port Darwin between 1 p. m. and 2 p. m. yesterday, thus finishing the flight in 29 days. - (M. T. )
In an addition to the trophies being presented to the Colony, one machinegun, 10 helmets, 1 German pack, 2 wire cutters and 1 trench mortar are being sent for Labuan.( P. G. )
The fate of the River Clyde, the famous ship used in the landing at V Beach during the Gallipoli operations, has now been settled. After being salved at Gallipoli and brought to Malta, it was thought that she would be brought home to England and exhibited, if not preserved permanently as a momento. Unless there is a further change in the official view, however, she is to be sold where she lies. It will be remembered her salvage from the rocks at Gallipoli was a fine piece of work, carried out by the company managed by the Borneo Co., Ltd., which company in its turn has been taken over by the recent Salvage and Towage flotation.( L.& C. E.)
The Rajah Charles Brooke
Memorial Fund.
Amount already acknowledged ... $39,303.20
Interest on Bank Deposit for $3,000
to 10th October, 1919	...	120 00
Inche Mohamat Ali	...	25.00
2nd January, 1920.	$39,448.20
A Farming Experiment.
In these days, when economic padi planting is again an urgent question, these extracts from The Tablet of November. 1892, of an attempt in the Third Division to make Dayak farming a less wasteful matter than it still is may be read with interest. The writer, who fortunately is still with us, maintains that had he had a hundred times the capital at his disposal the experiment would have proved a glorious success.
As you are aware, we have already been at work for one year with the aid of the funds collected by Canon Bamber. Three acres have been purchased and brought under cultivation. We have four buffaloes and sufficient funds in hand to bring the present acreage up to six. This land will remain mission property, but the use of it will be given, year after year, to the bigger boys in our school. So much for the past; now for our future plans.
Most of our Christians are living on tbe Bauan River or in its neighbourhood. About this river there are large tracts of good rice-growing land. We would start a farm here to be worked by the mission, say for three years. The Dyaks would work for wages under the direction of a Dusan, and would at the same time learn all that was required for working later on their own account. After three years, or so much longer as might be required for bringing sufficient land under cultivation, I would divide the whole among the different Christian families giving a small portion to each.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 2, 1920. 3
ble among a shifting population such as I have described.
It may possibly be asked, Can the Dyaks be induced to relinquish their old system of fanning and take up a new method?" If taken by the hand and helped over the difficulties attending such a change I am confident this question may be answered in the affirmative. There are several circumstances which would be found to favour the introduction of a new system at the present moment, principal among them being the fact that their favourite farming groundold jungleis becoming used up. Moreover, during the last few years Government has put a considerable check upon the migratory habits of the people. Again, considerable tracts have been so often cleared that the trees are dead and their roots have rotted, rendering the land easy to work with the plough.
Most races guard jealously their traditionary customs, and are prone to suspect everything savouring of novelty; nor are the Dyaks any exception to the rule. What was good enough for our grandfathers must be good enough for us," seems to them an unassailable position. But this prejudice will lie overcome when they see the decided advantages the new system can boast.
September 11. 1894.
This plan would lie expensive, hut I think it the I most likely to succeed.
Now for the answers to your questions which
have some bearing upon the above plan :
1. We shall want four buffaloes.
2. They will cost about 3 per head.
3. The cost of their transport will be about 2 5s. per head.
4. Wages for Dusans and labourers on the farm will amount to about 7 10s. a month.
5. The difference between the yield per acre under the old and the new system has been calcu- lated by our Dusan (and my observation confirms his reckoning) as follows: The old system is reckoned to yield crops of ten bushels on hilly land, and on- the wet low-lying soil crops of 30 bushels. Our new system has been tried only on the low-lying land, and there it has been found to result in yields averaging 80 bushels to the acre, or very nearly three times that given under the most favourable condition by soil tilled in the native fashion.
The Dyak method of rice-growing is extremely rude. The soil is left undisturbed, and of irrigationso important to the cultivation of ricethey know nothing. They clip down the underwood, then with the axe fell the larger trees. When the felled timber is sufficiently dry it is fired. The seed is then thrown broadcast over the ash-covered ground, if it is swampy; otherwise the grain is dropped into holes made with a dibbler. Then comes some weeding and fencing, and a five months struggle with a thousand and one enemies till the ear is ripe for the harvest.
The kind of success the Dyaks have with their present system of rice farming may be gathered from the following facts. A very considerable portion of the land on the Sarawak territory is admirably suited for rice-growing. In the Rejang there are large tracts of the best rice-growing land on either bank from the mouth to one hundred miles up the river. On the banks of this river there are upwards of 80,000 Dyaks whose principal employment during the year is rice-farming. Yet no rice is exported from Rejang; in fact, not unfrequently rice has to be shipped from Singapore to feed the few thousand Malays and Chinese who are trading on the river. The Dyak population of the other rivers in the territory are all likewise chiefly engaged farming, but produce only enough for their own support. Rice is imported from Singapore and Siam to the value of 30,000 annually; and this, be it remembered, in spite of the fact that three-fourths of the people are engaged in its production, and that it is the staple food of the country.
If the advantages of a favourable soil and a population chiefly devoted to rice-growing were utilized by the introduction of a good method of cultivation, rice, far from being imported, might be exported in large quantities. It is matter of astonishment to me that the Government has not considered it to its interest hitherto to do anything for the promotion of this object.
As things are at present, the Dyaks rove over the country, axe in hand, ruthlessly clearing large tracts
of noble forest land, giving the magnificent timber to the flames for the promise of a few bushels of rice. They move the site of their villages along the track of their depredations; and when one river is despoiled of its timber move on to the next. I have known a Dyak village to move its site as often us five times in as many years.
The difficulties attending missionary work among a people thus perpetually on the move are too
evident to need dwelling on. The erection of permanent chapels, the establishment of schools, and
the employment of catechists, all so essential to the progress of the mission, become practically impossi-
As we have now commenced work again for this, the fourth year, since we began to put our hands to the plough". I will give you a short account of the progress our farming among the Dyaks has made, and what our prospects are for the near future if our good friends of St. Joseph's Council only remain true to us, as I am sure they will.
Since we commenced work four years ago, the Christians living in our immediate neighbourhood have increased from two families to 15, and our little village at Kanowit contains now about 60 souls. The eight buffaloes obtained from North Borneo this year bring the number of our animals available for work up to 16, so we arc well provided for our work this season I have sold four of our buffaloes to as many Christians at cost price, and expect soon to have more purchasers. At Kanowit eight families are breaking up ground for new farms this year, and three families m the out-stations.
Four young men, former school-boys, are working the farm on the opposite banks of the Kanowit river which was commenced last year. The farm on our mission ground is being worked by nine of our school boys. From this you will see that there is a considerable increase this year in the number of Dyaks who have taken up our farming system, and could we give them some help in the hard work of breaking up new land, the number would be much greater. The purchase of buffaloes this year has taken up all the funds so kindly sent us by the Council last year and of course much more besides. Considering the difficulties we have to contend against, I think you will agree with me that our
scheme has been fairly successful up to the present, and that our prospects for the future are good. But the realization of these prospects, of course, will depend entirely upon how we are supported from home, so please, dear Father, to use all your eloquence at the next Council meeting in our behalf, that we may be able to continue this work during the coming year.
Our little Christian village of eight families at Kanowit, has lately increased by an addition of four more families who have proved here, attracted by the work to be obtained in the mission coffee plantation, and the facilities offered of opening rice farms with the help of implements and buffaloes to be obtained at the mission here. The Christians of the Bawan outstation have begun to farm with the buffalo, and with some assistance from the mission
4
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 2, 1920.
have purchased several animals for this year's farming, so now we have no anxiety about the stability of this out-station. The little chapel in Bawan, erected nine years ago. in spite of innumerable props added from time to time, is threatening to fall. It will have to be rebuilt during the coming year. During this year constant visits have been made to live villages up the Kanowit river.... We are building a small station at the mouth of the Melapis river, near which several of these villages are situated. There are large tracts of fine farming land in this vicinity, and we hope with Gods blessing that a Christian village may ere long begin to rise there. During the months of April and May, I was absent from the Rejang on a journey among the Dusan missions of North Borneo. This journey was undertaken to purchase buffaloes for our Dyak farmers and by personal observation of the Dusan farms to see how far we had been going on in the right direction with our farm work in the Rejang. The expenses of this journey and of the purchase of eight buffaloes have been very considerable.
CORRESPONDENCE
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of correspondents]
High Prices.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
DEAR SIR,
As we all know only too well local prices are steadily rising, and apparently not in sympathy with those of either Home or Singapore. Local shop keepers have been known to raise the price of goods considerably between two trips of the steamer giving as their reason that Prices have gone up although the goods in question have been in the shop for a month, while if prices did fall at homewhich is scarcely probableit is very unlikely that local traders would lower theirs until consumers transferred their custom to Home or Singapore dealers. Europeans have often joined and ordered a large consignment of goods from Home, and though this is satisfactory in some ways, yet it is not always convenient to keep a large quantity of goods in stock.
A complaint about the excessively high price of an article will frequently bring the reply that it was owing to a clerical error or that the salesman made a mistake and charged too much, but the mistake is invariably in favour of the trader and against the customer.
Europeans are often prone to pay a bill without troubling to look at the prices charged and on this fact many a small dealer trades, so a little more trouble in this direction would tend to keep the prices down.
But cannot some enterprising European who has been long enough in this country to know practically all the needs of the Europeans here start a local shop?
He could have his regular work as well and let his assistant run the shop. Goods could be obtained at wholesale rates at Home and sold here at fair profit with a rapid turnover and not a very large capital would be required. No credit could be given and all bills would be settled monthly.
Such a shop would be a boom to the European community who would most certainly support it, and they would be certain of obtaining first class goods at moderate prices cheaper, and far better, than any stocked by local Chinese dealers.
A man with a business head on his shoulders should make it pay well enough to add a good few dollars a month to whatever income he derived from elsewhere.
I am, dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
Job."
The English Hymnal.
Kuching, 22nd December, 1919. To The Editor,
The Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
SIR,
In your issue of December 16th, Senex" challenges the first words of the Preface to the English Hymnal, which states that the book is a collection of the best hymns in the English language. His reason is that Hymn 500 A. & M. (O voice of the beloved), is not included in the collection.
I quite recognize that everyone has his or her favourite hymns, and is disappointed to find that they are not in any given hook, but with respect to this particular hymn, I rather doubt if it can claim to be called a general favourite.
It is not contained in The Church Hyninary. " the leading Presbyterian hymn book, nor is it in Moody and Sankeys collection of popular hymns.
I have looked up my only book of reference on the subject "Hymns and Hymn makers" by Rev. D. Campbell, B. D. of Edinburgh, and I cannot find any reference to the hymn there : yet the author of that book claims that it is a collection of representative hymns from Anglican, Presbyterian, and Congregational books.
The writer of the hymn was Rev. J. Mason, a clergyman of the Church of England about 1694. In the book referred to above, there is a short paragraph about this writer, and his best known hymn is quoted, but it is not No. 500 A. & M.
As far as I know there is no particular doctrinal reason for its omission from the English Hymnal, but the Resurrection teaching is brought out more clearly, and in less florid language, in many of the Easter hymns which do find a place in the book.
Yours faithfully,
LOGIE DANSON,
Bishop of Labuan & Sarawak.
Sarawak Regatta.
The annual Regatta took place as usual on New Years day in as fine weather as could be desired ; except during a short shower at eleven, which helped to cool the air, the sun shone all the day. while a slight breeze prevented an excessive heat.
As none of the larger ships were in port, the s. s. Alice Lorraine was used as judges' box and grand-stand, making rather cramped quarters for the spectators who came in the morning for the long-boat races. The s. l. Lucile was used as starters launch and the Young Harry fur the Clerks of the Course, but both these boats found room for a few race-goers.
Owing to the late arrival of the Simanggang boats the date of entry had been extended to the 29th of December, at some inconvenience to the Committee, who would regret to have to enforce a rule which is, after all, made for the benefit of competitors.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 2, 1920. 5
As last year this was a good day for the visitors, five out of the six big races in the morning going to their boats or crews. The Oya crew, whose narrow paddles and different style of paddling were a novelty on this course, fully justified the opinion that the Dalat Melano is the fastest paddler as well as the best boat-builder in the country.
Owing to delayed starts it was not possible to keep to the exact programme time, but as one race (the offices) had been abandoned it was well before five oclock that racing finished.
Many thanks are due to the various officials who cheerfully undertook the labours of the day, and more especially to the Honorary Secretary and his staff on whom fell the major part of the arrangements.
Judges: - His Highness the Tuan Muda, The Honble. Mr. A. B. Ward, The Honble. Mr. H. B. Crocker, Messrs. H. A. Adams, J. M. Bryan and C. E. A. Ermen, The Datu Bandar, The Datu Temonggong, The Datu Hakim, Inchi Abu Bakar, Messrs. Ong Tiang Swee, Chan Kee Ong and Tan Boon Siew.
Starters: - Capt. Cunyghame, Messrs J. P. Mead, E. Parnell, The Datu Emaum, Tuan Belal, Inchi Mohamed Zin, Abang Abdillah and Abang Suleiman.
Umpire:- The Honble. Mr G. C Gillan.
Stewards. - Messrs J. R. Barnes. P. H. Hayward, Tan Sum Guan, Lim Tee Chiew, and Low Cheng Lak.
Clerks of the Course: Messrs W. Clark and A. C. Street.
Honorary Secretary:Mr. K. H. Gillan.
Honorary Treasurer:Mr. J. C. Swayne.
Programme.
1st Race, 8.15 a.m.His HIGHNESS THE RAJAH'S CUP.Value $200.2nd prize $65. 1st prize to crew $80. 2nd prize to crew $40. 3rd prize to crew $20. Entrance fee $2. Open to any make of boat, unlimited as to size or number of crew. From Batu B'liong to the Stone Wharf.\
Owner. Name of Boat.
1 F. A. W. Page Turner	..	Sri Kendawang
2 Abang Dul	..	Sri Belalang Biak
3 Inche Abu Bakar	..	Api Naraka
0 Inche Abu Bakar	..	Geruda Menyambar
0 Lambin	..	..	Naga Bongkas Gunong Lundu
0 L. Ah Nen	..	..	Bintang Berasap
0 Datu Temmonggong	..	Dayang Houri
Won by a clear two lengths by the Sri Kendawang who was seen well ahead of the other boats at the point. The Api Naraka made a determined effort for second place, but was out-classed.
2nd Race, 8.45 a. m. REGATTA CUP.Value $50.Presented from the Regatta Funds. For any description of boat with Crews limited to 15 men. 1st prize to Crew $15. 2nd prize to Crew $7.50. Entrance fee $1.50. From Batu B'liong to the Stone Wharf.
Owner. Name of Boat.
1 Hj. Assim & Hj. Drahman	..	Sri Plandok
2 Sulong and Mesra	..	Kemala Sakti
3 Kongsi Buso	..	Torpedo
0 Narsah	..	..	Aminah
0 Ampuan Udin & Hj. Saat	..	Dayang Jurita
0 Mr. O Lang	..	..	Sri Penangkap
0 Oyup	..	..	Dindam Berhayi Kakandak
Tupong
0 Mohamat Jawa	..	..	Ular Ledi
0 Haji Bojeng	..	..	Senang Mendapat Singa
Melompat
0 Inche Omar	..	..	Sri Gading
0 Hj. Kamarudin & Hj Usop	..	Endong Sigedup
The Oya crew came in three lengths ahead and do not appear to have been pressed at all. The second place was hotly contested by the Endong Sigedup, who just failed by half a length.
3rd Race, 9.15 a. m.THE CHAMPION CUP. Value $125.Presented by the New Sarawak Farms Syndicate. 2nd prize $40. 1st prize to crew $80. 2nd prize to crew $40. 3rd prize to crew $20. Open to any make of boat, unlimited as to size or number of crew. Entrance fee $2. From Batu B'liong to the Stone Wharf.
Owner. Name of Boat.
1 F. A. W. Page Turner	..	Sri Kendawang
2 Abang Dul	..	..	Sri Belalang Biak
3 Lambin	..	..	Naga Bongkas Gunong Lundu
0 Inche Abu Bakar	..	Api Naraka
0 Inche Abu Bakar	..	Geruda Menyambar
0 L. Ah Nen	..	..	Bintang Berasap
0 Datu Temmonggong	..	Dayang Houri
Another easy win for Mr. Page-Turner's boat. The distances were given as a length and a length and a half.
4th Race, 9.45 a. in.His HIGHNESS THE. TUAN MUDA'S CUP.Value $75.Open to all boats. Crews limited to 30 paddlers. One flag-man and one bailer may be carried in addition, but these must not use paddles. Entrance fee $2. 1st prize to crew $30. 2nd prize to crew $15. From Batu B'liong to the Stone Wharf.
Owner. Name of Boat.
1 Sulong and Mesra	..	Sri Maharaja Laut
2 Inche Abu Bakar	..	Geruda Menyambar
0 Mohd. Alan & Abdulrahman	..	Bujang Kilat
0 Sahat	..	..	Jimpaka Mas Tedong Blari
0 Ahmad Arbi	..	..	Intan Sarawak
0 L. Ah Nen	..	..	Bintang Berasap
0 Abg Dul	..	..	Tepong Tanah
0 Mohamat Jawa	..	..	Ular Ledi
1 Hj. Assim & Hj. Drahman	..	Sri Plandok
0 Sarawak Rangers	..	..	Sarawak Ranger
0 Sudin	..	..	Sri Kilat Menyambar
0 Hj. Kamarudin & Bakar	..	Petri Bueh
The best race of the day, there was just daylight between the two leading boats as they passed the post, while the crews were still going well, while Inche Bakar only just secured second place from three other competitors.
5th Race. 10.15 a. m.THE CONSOLATION CUP.-Value$100-$50 presented by the Sarawak Steamship Company, with $50 added. Open to all boats that have not yet won a race at this meeting. Crews unlimited. Entrance fee $1. From Batu B'liong to the Stone Wharf.
Won easily by the Sri Belalang Biak, making the third victory for the Simanggang boats.
6th Race, 10.45 a.m.FARM DIRECTORS CUP. Value $75.Presented by the Directors of the New Sarawak Farms Syndicate. Open to all boats. Crews limited to 30 paddlers. One flag-man and one bailer may be carried in addition, but these must not use paddles. Entrance fee $2. 1st prize to crew $30. 2nd prize to crew $15. From Tanjong Patingan to the Stone Wharf.
Owner. Name of Boat.
1 Sarawak Rangers	..	..	Sarawak Ranger
2 Hj. Kamarudin & Bakar	..	Petri Bueh
0 Ahmad Arbi	..	..	Intan Sarawak
0 L. Ah Nen	..	..	Bintang Berasap
0 Sulong and Mesra	..	Sri Maharaja Laut
0 Mohamat Jawa	..	..	Ular Ledi
0 Sahat	..	..	Jimpaka Mas Tedong Blari
0 Sudin	..	..	Sri Kilat Menyambar
0 Abg Dul	..	..	Tepong Tanah
0 Inche Abu Bakar	..	Geruda Menyambar
0 Hj. Assim & Hj. Drahman	..	Sri Plandok
0 Mohd. Alan & Abdulrahman	..	Bujang Kilat
Won by the Sarawak Ranger with a mixed crew by three and a half lengths from Petri Bueh. The tide was turning which made the time slower than usual.
INTERVAL.
7th Race, 2 p. m.BANDONG RACEFor bona tide fishing boats to be propelled by oars, steersman only to use paddle. Crew limited to 5 men. 1st prize $7.50. 2nd prize $5. From Pengkalan Dayang Atun to the Stone Wharf.
Three entries only.
1 Jibun.
2 Kadir.
6
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 2, 1920.
8th Race, 2.30 p.m.CHAMBER OF COMMERCE CUP.Value $50.Presented by the Members of the Chamber of Commerce. For any description of boat with crews limited to 15 men. Winner of the 2nd race to pull with 13 and 2nd boat in 2nd race with 14 paddles only. 1st prize to crew $15. 2nd prize to crew $7.50. Entrance fee $1.50. From Tanjong Patingan to the Stone Wharf.
Owner. Name of Boat.
1 Hj. Assim & Hj. Drahman..	Sri Plandok
2 Mohamat Jawa	..	Ular Ledi
3 Inche Omar	..	Sri Gading
0 Narsah	..	Aminah
0 Haji Bojeng	..	Senang Mendapat Singa
Melumpat
0 Sulong and Mesra..	Kemala Sakti
0 Oyup..	..	Dindam Berhayi Kakandak
Tupong
0 Hj. Kamarudin & Hj. Usop	Endong Sigedup
0 Mr. O. Lang	..	Sri Penangkap
0 Kongsi Buso	..	Torpedo
0 Ampuan Udin & Hj. Saat	Dayang Juwita
Tupong
0 Mohamat Jawa	..	..	Ular Ledi
0 Haji Bojeng	..	..	Senang Mendapat Singa
Melompat
0 Inche Omar	..	..	Sri Gading
0 Hj. Kamarudin & Hj Usop	..	Endong Sigedup
Won by two and a half lengths and a short half length.
9th Race, 3 p. m.SHIPS GIGS. 1st prise $6. 2nd prize $3. From Pengkalan Dayang Atun to the Stone Wharf.
In spite of the weight and size of the Zahora's boat she won easily with the Adeh's gig a length and a half behind.
10th Race, 3.15 p. m.FOR BOATS WITH CREWS LIMITED TO EIGHT MEN. 1st prize $10. 2nd prize $5. From Pengkalan Dayang Atun to the Stone Wharf.
There were eight entries and the Sri Plandok again showed her speed by winning by of a length, the Dindam Berhayi being a good second.
11th Race, 3.30 p.m.FISHERMAN'S RACE.(Dayong Ikan)1st prize $2. 2nd prize $1. 3rd prize 50 cents. Men to wear a distinctive mark on the left arm. These badges will be provided and prizes will only be given to men who have them on at the Winning Post. From the Judges' box round s. Y. Zahoras mooring buoy, turning to the right, and return.
Twenty-two entered for this race, but so crowded was the course that it was impossible to judge whether all fulfilled the conditions of the race. The prizes were allotted by acclamation to
1 Johari.
2 Amin.
3 Bakir.
12th Race, 4 p.m.ARMY, CONSTABULARY AND STEAMERS.Crews limited to 15 men. Mixed Crews
from steamers will not be allowed; each steamer must run a boat containing members of its Crew who are signed on before January 1st, 1919. 1st prize $15. 2nd prize $7.50. From Tanjong Patingan to the Stone Wharf.
1 p. s. Adeh.
2 H. H. 8. Y. Zahora.
Won by five lengths. Eight entries.
13th Race, 4.30 p. m.A CONSOLATION CUP. Value $45.Presented by the Sarawak Chinese Banking Company Limited and the Kwong Lee Bank. Open to all boats that have not won a race at this meeting. Crews limited to 30 paddlers. Entrance fee $1. From Batu Bliong to the Stone Wharf.
Won by the Jimpaka Mas who kept just ahead of the Bujang Kilat. The state of the tide necessitated the races being rowed from down-river.
MONTHLY REPORTS.
UPPER SARAWAK.
BAU AND PAKU.
November, 1919.
Court.A large number of cases were heard in the Police Court: eleven offenders were sentenced to imprisonment on various counts and some considerable fines were imposed.
Public Works. The prison gang completed raising the cross road to the bazaar and began raising the main road which had become much worn down. They also cleared the Seringgok road.
The prison bath house was floored with stone and cement and also the ground in front of the kitchen.
The contractor on the Toudong road did not carry out the work as contracted for and was dismissed at
the end of the month without payment. Another man has been found to take his place.
Many hard wood planks have been stolen from the various small bridges on some of the roads. It is impossible to prevent this and it has become a nuisance especially on the Batu Kitang road. I am trying to obtain some short lengths of old pipes from Kuching to use instead of plank covered drains.
Several of the bridges across the small streams require rebuilding. The Public Works Department would do well to make enquiries into the price of light tubular bridges, many hundreds of which were erected for the use of the army in the late war. They are constructed entirely of pipes screwed together, are light, easily and quickly erected and eminently suited for the purpose as only light traffic would cross them up here. They should be considerably cheaper than a belian bridge and with an occasional cost of tar or paint would last a very long time. The cost of building a belian bridge is now prohibitive and belian is almost unobtainable here.
Heavy rain during the month caused many land slides along the roads and interfered with the work of the prison gang very considerably.
General.The Court writer, Lan Ah Nyuk, died at 3.30 p. m. on the 1st.
On the 10th police returned from Semuti with the guns confiscated from the Semuti Dayaks. I have given the kampong till the harvest to pay the fine imposed on them by the Government in connection with the recent murder there.
A Chinese prisoner escaped from the gang on the morning of the 20th, but was smartly recaptured later in the day at Seniawan by two Bau police who went out after him.
A Dayak boy of fifteen or sixteen was reported by Rueng and Sayor to have been killed by a fall from a cliff at Singghi while on a shooting expedition with them. The Tuah Kampong inspected the body and finding stones and clay in the wound in the head allowed it to be disposed of, and it was cremated according to Dayak custom. Later his suspicious were aroused by a remark made by Sayor and both Rueng and Sayor were arrested. Sayor then said Rueng had shot the boy by accident and Rueng denied it, but an examination of the place where it took place produced proofs that Savors statement was correct. Rueng then admitted he had fired at moving jungle on the chance of a pig being in it and had shot the boy dead, and being afraid of the consequences attempted to conceal the truth. This particular case is a flagrant example of rash shooting aggravated by an attempt to conceal the facts and hush the matter up, and Rueng was given the maximum sentence of two years imprisonment.
Six out of ten doors in Krokong Dayak village were destroyed by fire on the night of the 30th. It
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 2, 1920. 7
appears that Tapir left his kitchen fire unattended at night while he went out to look for a durian which he had heard full outside, and in his absence the walling caught fire with the above-mentioned result.
Durian are ripening in vast quantities and the fruit crop will be a heavy one. Mangosteens, lansat and other fruit are very plentiful and only just ripening.
The Dayak padi is looking splendid all through the district.
The rain full amounted to 17'33 inches.
The out-put of the Cyaniding Works was:
Gold 859.7 ozs. Silver 444.4 ozs.
DONALD A. OWEN,
Resident.
SIMANGGANG.
November, 1919.
On the 7th s. I. Hong Line arrived from Sibu, and
will run between Simanggang and Engklilih.
Abang Zin. Native Officer of Lubok Antu, arrived here on the 10th and reported that the married quarters and Native Officer's quarters were burnt to the ground on the 9th at 3 p. m. The fire originated from the room of Pte. Sigoon who had been cooking in the room that morning, contrary to orders. The married quarters were deserted when the fire was first discovered, all fortmen and their wives being on their farms. All property was destroyed, including a number of Government snider carbines.
On the 17th Malieng of N. Buak Skarang reported that Naieng of Bujang's house. Leban, Batang Rejang, had been murdered on the evening of the 15th. It appears that Naieng had tried to commit adultery with the wives of Bakar and Nyalau and for this was fined by certain Dayaks of the same house. Naieng lived for about a day and before his death informed his father and brother that he suspected Bakar of cutting him up. Bakar, Nyalau and Malieng are on remand, and Penghulu Labang is now trying to gather further evidence.
The kampong Malays have levelled a site for the erection of a hospital. The frame work is nearly completed.
An unusual affair took place in the S. Mepi, above Lubok Antu, Jelani and Dina, brother and sister, fell in love with each other and wished to marry; this of course is not permitted by the Dayaks, they fled to the jungle and committed suicide. Their bodies were discovered a few days afterwards.
The following cases came before the Court, viz:-
Nyuk Lan (f) and Low Leong were fined $100 each for adultery. Rasit, a Dayak of Betong, four months for theft, Sadan, a Spaoh Malay, four months of theft of jelutong. Kiong, a Malay youth of Debak, two months for theft. Jubang of S'blak two years for incest. Awat, a Balau Dayak, nine months for swindling Sada Dayaks. There were numerous complaints of petty theft made by pepper gardeners, but owing to the difficulty of finding evidence, there were no prosecutions.
Kalaka.The s. s. Sarawak called in on the 2nd and loaded a 1,000 piculs of gutta rian leaves for Goebilt. On the 15th s.l. Margaret arrived and took a cargo of 625 piculs of gutta leaves, sailing on the 17th for Goebilt.
Most of the Malays of Kabong left for the Saribas and Batang Lupar to buy up the durian fruit.
All jelutong roads in the Sblak and Nyabor were examined, and a number of Malays and Dayaks were found working jelutong without a license; they were duly had up before the Court and fined.
A number of Malays were prosecuted at Saratok for working and offering coarse sago for sale, contrary to the regulations laid down.
Saribas.- The Malays below Pusa have commenced harvesting and the crop is said to be very good. Abang Dulrasid and Abang Omar arrived from Simanggang on the 9th and examined Government and Malay farming land at Tanjong Langgong. A few Malays were fined for disobeying Government orders in re division of this land.
Abang Indut N. O. visited the head waters of the Layer and made full enquiries concerning the lepers.
The estates of seven wealthy Dayaks were valued and probate duty amounted to $349.71.
The following are the trade returns for the month of November, viz:	Imports.	Exports.
November, 1919 $124,545.00	$119,714.75
Total to 30/11/19	973,575.37	1,242,723.20
Do. 30/11/18	$438,754.00	$ 532,279.42
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER,
Resident.
MUKAH.
November, 1919.
During the month it was found impossible to continue supplying rice to the bazaar Chinese for sale. As long as schooners were running the system was satisfactory, but as soon as communication with Kuching by sea became uncertain the traders, presumably fearing a shortage of rice, and having been warned to be careful about selling, promptly refused to sell to natives.
Arrangements were therefore made to dispense with the assistance of the traders and to sell direct from the Government store.
The natives in this district have been rationed on a lower scale than in other places as they are always able to procure sago in one form or another.
The Court Writer al Balingian seems to have miscalculated the amount of rice in hand there, and has sold freely to Dayak gutta workers from up-river, and from other districts, with the consequence that the supply, which should, with care, have been sufficient for the monsoon, had already run short during November. Happily more rice was available from Kuching, but the attitude of the hungry Dayaks was such that the Chinese at Balingian seem to have developed 'nerves." I have therefore despatched a guard of Rangers to the station.
The Honble. Divisional Resident visited the station on the 16th, riding from Oya. Appeal Court was held on the 19th. In the only case up for hearing the appeal was dismissed.
The Tua Kampong of Jebongan, temporarily appointed last year, has been permitted to resign. This man appeared to be under the impression that his position carried with it extraordinary privileges, amongst them being complete immunity from punishment after having deliberately poisoned three of a neighbour's hunting dogs.
More complaints have been received from Balingian about the crocodiles. Two women have been chased while paddling alone and both were severely mauled. I am trying to get the Native Officer to move in the matter, but the last time I sent a crocodile catcher to Balingian he was unable to procure any sort of animal for bait. I conclude that the Balingian people prefer losing a few lives to interfering with the crocodiles and so incurring their wrath.
8 THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 2, 1920.
A number of vessels were able to clear for Kuching on the 10th of the month, and fifteen have entered.
The price of raw sago has dropped, probably on account of the difficulty and uncertainty of transport.
At the end of the month half a dozen schooners were waiting for an opportunity to sail.
Principal exports are:
1919.	1918.
Raw sago	276 koyans	81 koyans
Jelutong 2,911 piculs 480 piculs
Jangkar	2 ,, ...
H. L. OWEN,
Resident 2nd Clast.
BINTULU
July, 1919.
The fasting month and concluding Hari Raya festivities being over, the Bintulu people have applied themselves in earnest to clearing and sowing padi, but I cannot hear that they have gone in very largely for planting rice substitutes which are sure to be badly wanted at the end of this year and beginning of next.
Returning from the North, the Adeh called three
times at Kidurong, on the 5th, 19th and 29th. L. Ah Yam, the head clerk at Bintulu and myself taking passage by her to Kuching on the last occasion. On the 13th the Adeh came in to Bintulu from Kuching with mails and 200 bags of rice, sailing again the same day, and on the 24 th she stopped at Kidurong with mails from Kuching.
One steamer, the s. s. Sarawak, came here for general cargo, arriving on the 18th and leaving on the 20th after a journey up-river to load jelutong and gutta.
Dr. and Mrs. Greene were staying at Kidurong at the beginning of the month and on the 6th Mr. Wyndham Jones arrived in the Miri to take them off for a visit to Miri, Mr. C. D. Adams being also on board. The Miri came in to Bintulu with Mr. Wyndham Jones and Dr. Greene at 9 a.m. and left at 2.30 p.m. on her return journey via Kidurong where Mrs. Greene and Mr. Adams were waiting. Again on the 16th the Miri entered the river, this time towing a lighter for loading with belian timber. The tug returned at once, leaving
the lighter behind to get her cargo.
A schooner, the Sri Sandakan, trying to get in on 27th in rough weather, struck on the bar at 4.30 p.m. and was only got off just before mid-night with the help of Bintulu people called out from the kampongs. If this boat had not been well and strongly built she must have broken up and it speaks well for what I am told is Tringganu shipbuilding that she was still sound when got off the bar after six hours of bumping.
I visited Kidurong on the 17th returning on the 19th and found while there that the light-house keeper has been neglecting his work lately and has apparently attended to nothing but the light itself. If the warning be received does not have the required effect another man will have to be found to take his place.
As to Court work there was a certain amount of litigation about disputed rights of working jelutong and cases of this sort are likely to become more frequent as the price of jelutong rises.
A Chinese, after having stolen a considerable sum of money and some clothes from a boat of a sawyer named Ah Kiong, who was visiting Tatau bazaar at the time, made good his escape at first but was met by Dayaks on the sands near Bintulu mouth. He ran into the jungle but left a box with most of the stolen money
behind and this the Dayaks brought to the fort. The thief made his way along the coast but was found on the beach near Similajau and taken to Miri where he was detained. Later on the man was sent here in custody, convicted of theft and imprisoned.
Other cases are not of sufficient interest to report.
August, 1919.
After clearing their padi farms a large proportion of the Mohamedan population asked Government to help them by procuring seed.
A good deal of Dayak padi had already been bought in anticipation of this and arrangements made to buy up as much more as possible so that L. Ah Yam was able after his return from leave on the 12th to distribute seed to all those applicants who had already burnt off their farms. Eor this they paid at a rate calculate to just cover the price and expenses of collection.
I was absent in Kuching during the whole month, the district being in charge fo the Native Officers and L. Ah Yam who reported to me fully by every mail.
The 2nd and 4th were observed as public holidays to celebrate the acceptance of the peace terms by Germany.
An average number of Native Court cases were heard during the month. One Tuanku Drahman complained that more than 200 young sago palms had been destroyed on land belonging to him. Tuanku Drahman first asked leave about four years ago to plant this hind with rubber and afterwards was allowed to change to sago instead. A number of young sago shoots were planted there, but for the last three years the place has been neglected and is now covered with scrub. It is in a low lying tract behind the main Bintulu kampongs which is being used this year for padi farming.
September, 1919.
A curious incident happened at Kidurong during the month.
A Chinese food-stall keeper who was waiting there together with several other people for a steamer to take him to Kuching, wandered off along the rocks for a solitary stroll on the afternoon of the 4th and did not return. Search parties were sent out for several days but discovered no trace of the missing man. However on the 12th, when people had ceased to look for him, he was brought back to Kidurong, half starved and very weak, by some Bintulu men who had found him wandering about quite lost on the sea shore near Likan, given him some food and taken him to Kidurong as soon as he was strong enough to walk there.
A Dayak house of some 20 doors was unfortunately destroyed by fire. No lives were lost, but the entire property was burnt of all the inmates except the only man who was not then out working on the padi farm. It was in the room of this man that the fire started and he was so intent on saving his own goods and chattels that he beat no alarm on a gong nor did he even warn those women and children left at home until the flames had got much too good a hold to be put out.
A gong could easily have been beard on the farm, which is not far off, and most probably other property would have been saved had an early alarm been given. Since the fire this man has been decidedly unpopular and the head man of the house has complained to Government of his conduct.
On the 23rd T. K. Jarah of Labaug reported that a Chinese goldsmith Ewe Ah Kok had been found dead and half-buried in the bed of small stream,
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 2, 1920.
9
tributary to the upper Labang. Spear and parang wounds on the body pointed to a probability of murder. Ah Koks wife, a Penan woman named Labe, first explained her husband's disappearance by saying he was taken by a crocodile as they returned together one evening from the padi farm to their house, but, after discovery of his body, accused Imang, son of the Penan chief in Labang, of the murder which she said she had witnessed. Labe declared she had been afraid to speak at first through fear that Imang would kill her too. The Native Officers took the available evidence and detained four men on remand until the ease could be heard.
I arrived at 1 a.m. on Sunday the 28th.
The Adeh entered at 3 p.m. the same day and left as soon as some Government cash had been put on board for the Treasury in Kuching.
Meanwhile Mr. Hardie and the Rev. Fathers Jansen and Morris who were all travelling on the Adeh had come ashore by boat in the morning and left by the steamer at 6 p.m.
Witnesses in the Labang murder case had returned up-river before I arrived and had to be sent for, so that it was impossible to hear the case before the end of the month. October, 1919.
Jarah. Tua Kampong of Labang and the witnesses in the matter of the murder of Ah Kok, mentioned in my September report, arrived on the 6th and the case was heard before a mixed jury. After hearing all the evidence procurable however, the members of this jury could not agree upon a verdict. Therefore the accused man, the woman charged as an accessary and the minutes of the case were sent to the Honble, the Resident 3rd Division at Sibu.
The last time a jury was empanelled at Bintulu to hear evidence on a capital charge was early in 1918 and on that occasion also the members disagreed and failed to return a verdict.
The opium farmer found he had such a small stock left that he sent off a boat on the 8th to Mukah to borrow enough opium for consumption until the next steamer should bring his own stock from Kuching.
Sago land and boundary disputes are being brought to the Court for settlement more frequently than usual now. This is easily accounted for by the high, and still rising, price of sago flour. Jelutong also continues to fetch a high price in comparison with previous years. To correspond with this, or rather in advance of it, all food stuffs and clothing have increased so much in price that the workers of sago and jelutong are in very much the same financial position as they were in pre-war days. If anything they are slightly better off.
Wages paid to natives show a paralled increase. Formerly the daily pay for loading or unloading cargo was 40 cents a man, but it is now $1 which has just at present not much more purchasing power. These native wages are effected immediately by the price of rice and after the padi, harvest when rice is cheaper they will decrease again, but of course are not likely to go back to the old figure for a long time yet.
Towards the end of the month there was plenty of maize for food at Tatau and here, the crops being good at both places. In some parts of Bintulu there is more than will be wanted, so that Tatau Dayaks can come over and buy if they run short of food, just as they did with the padi after last harvest.
These is promise of another good engkabang season later on.
New wire having been received for the purpose, I had intended to have the bad section of the telephone
line to Tatau replaced. However the undergrowth has got so thick and tall that Dayaks will have to be turned out to clear the track before it is possible to re-wire. As this entails waiting until after the padi harvest it would be just as well to have the whole trace cleared at the same time.
Certain persons, particularly at Pandan, have been making a pleasant and easy living out of jelutong working without doing a hand's turn themselves. They have taken out permits to work in certain streams, used these to reserve all jelutong there to themselves as owners, and then got other man to work, each on a path of his own for which he pays a monthly rent, varying according to the number of trees from $1 to $4 to the proprietor. This method of abusing the jelutong regulations came to light while hearing certain cases, which arose through disputes about the working of jelutong, and has now been stopped.
The p.s. Adeh brought mails from Kuching to Bintulu once during the month, calling at Kidurong on the 18th.
November, 1919.
A good many disputes connected with jelutong working both here and at Tatau have been settled during the month. There has also been a readjustment of permits, none being granted except to those who actually work jelutong and then only for as much as each headman and his party can comfortably deal with. Permits used to reserve jelutong only, as explained in my October report, have been called in and cancelled.
Several complaints have been made lately, mostly by Punans, about the disposal of valuables deposited by them as security with traders from whom they want credit. Very often the trader demands a pledge before giving credit. If payment is long delayed the pledge is sold by the creditor, who pays himself partly or entirely out of the proceeds. It is impossible to stop this altogether, but cases can be dealt with separately as they arise. Punans here can he proceeded against for debt and the Chinese allow them to run up surprisingly large accounts, whereas it would appear that few Punans have any intention of paying if they can help it. Hence if a trader will not trouble to make his man sign a contract to work jungle produce he gets a pledge instead. Other up-river tribes who cannot be sued in the Court of Requests give very little trouble either to tinders Or the Government although they work jungle produce just as much as the Punans.
A Chinese girl of 18 ran away from her father and step-mother because of ill-treatment and it was thought at first that she had made away with herself, but she was found on the third day. Her uncle, brother of her father, sued the step-mother for cruelty and proved enough to have the girl taken out of her father's custody and put into his own until her approaching marriage with a man in Kuching to whom she is engaged. The stepmother had been warned by Government once some years before because of her cruelty to the girl.
In consequence of a report from the Chinese registrar the earth close to a dis-used well that used to belong to the house of one Wee Kee, who mysteriously disappeared some seven years ago, was dug up on the 20th. The skeleton of a man was found there doubled up, the skull being split on the left side. At the time Wee Kee vanished his wife and two men were detained on suspicion of having killed him, but released as no body could be found.
One mail was brought from Kuching by the p. s. Adeh on the 6th and she called again at Kidurong on her return journey on the 12th. The motor tug Miri came in twice, on the 4th and 13th.
10 THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 2, 1920.
By the 28th all channal marks had been destroyed by the persistent rough weather we have had lately and there will be no chance of replacing them until a calm spell comes on.
The prisoners were employed on the roads, chiefly that from the fort over Tanjong Batu on the way to Kidurong, and on caulking the Government barong which had was quite unseaworthy.
A. E. LAWRENCE,
Resident 2nd Class
.
MlRI.
October. 1919.
The Honble. the Divisional Resident, accompanied by Mrs. Douglas and family, returned from Baram via Lutong on the 8th.
Captain E. V. Andreini arrived from Kuching on the 2nd on his way to do duty at Baram.
In the early morning of the 3rd Mr. H. Beard of the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Company, Ltd., was murderously assaulted in his bed and sustained several severe parang wounds on his arms; he was unable to recognise his assailant as the electric light was found to have been cut off. The following day Mr. Beard's late Chinese cook, Bong Ah Fook, was found to have absconded, he was however captured the same evening, and on arrest admitted having attempted to murder Mr. Beard, as he had been persuaded to do so by Mr. Beards present cook, Ang Ah Chiaw, while under the influence of drink. On the Divisional Resident's return from Baram, Bong Ah Fook, was tried and sentenced to seven years R. I. and twenty-four strokes, with the rotan, and Ang Ah Chiaw was ordered to be banished from Sarawak territory.
Major F. V. Benjamin arrived on the 24th to take over the management of the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Company, Ltd., from Mr. H. Wyndham Jones.
Doctor G. T. Foster-Smith, accompanied by Mrs. Foster-Smith and family, arrived on the 4th to take over the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Company's Medical Department. Mr. J. H. Fox arrived on the 12th and Dr. and Mrs. C. C. Mauve on the 24th to join the staff of the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Company, Ltd.
On the night of the 4th an attempt was made to burn down the gambling farm buildings, the farmer has since offered a reward of $100 for information which will lead to the arrest and conviction of the guilty persons.
While returning from p. s. Adeh on the 19th Chop Fook Foh Longs boat capsized on the bar and goods to the value of about $1,000 were lost.
The royalty on timber worked locally was increased during the month to 10% ad-valorem, and the sale price of foodstuffs fixed.
Wireless communication between Sarawak and British North Borneo and Labuan, via Miri, was begun at the beginning of the month and is proving a great convenience.
In the Courts, apart from Mr. Beards case, the only cases calling for mention were those of Tze Yan Chong
sentenced to hard labour for dangerously wounding a compatriot with a knife. Li Fuk sentenced to three months H. L. for theft of sugar from one of the Companys lighters. Chop Fook Foh Long fined and ordered to pay costs for causing a dangerous fire in his plantation behind Kampong Daggang, and P. C. Sadu Singh heavily fined for levelling loaded rifle at his Senior Officer while under the influence of drink.
The s. s. Meteor cleared for Pulau Bukum with a cargo of 5,000 tons kerosine oil and passenger Mr. R.
R. Mayer of the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Company*
wlio is proceeding to England on furlough.
The rainfall amounted to 21*49 inches.
The trade returns are as followers:
Imports.
Exports.
Miri
... $26,245
$296,602
Niah
... 5,259
3,297
Sibuti
... ...
...
W. F. DK V. SKRTNE,
Resident 2nd Class
The Sarawak Gazette
RATES OF ADVERTISEMENTS IK THE "SARAWAK GAZETTE"
Payable in advance.
Quarter of a column and under
First insertion ...	...	... $1.00
Second and third insertion each	... 0.80
Subsequent do	do	... 0.25
Haff a Colnmn and tinder
First insertion ...	...	... 2.00
Second and third insertion each	... 1.00
Subsequent do	do	... 0.50
A Column and under
First insertion each	...	... 1.00
Second and third insertion each	... 2.00
Subsequent do do	... 1.00
Special arrangements may be made for standing advertisements.
All communications intended for insertion in the Sarawak Gazette must be directed to the Editor at the Government Printing Office, Kuching. They should be clearly written and should reach the Office at least two days before the publication of each issue.
Letters and other contributions must be authenticated by writers name sent privately to the Editor.
We cannot undertake to return rejected communications, or to give reasons for not inserting them.	t
Residents at the Outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the Office early intelligence of all matters of general interest In their respective neighbourhoods.
NOTICE.
ASTANA FARM.
HE Manager of Astana Farm begs to inform the Public that he is unable to attend to Orders for milk after Office hours.
T
THE GOVERNMENT has for sale about 200 hand-made sarongs
(RELIEF WORK), $6 each.
Applications should be made to The Residents Office, 1st Division.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 2, 1920.
11
Kuching, Foreign Trade Returns for the month of Nov., 1919.
IMPORTS,
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
Aerated Water ...
CftXHR
301
8 4.030
Ammunition
687
Arrack, etc.
9.000
Biscuits
8,009
Blue han
piculs
65 f
1.184
Blankets	' ...
:RK Brass A Copper ware
2,912
Boots & Shoes ...
2,787
Butler end h *se
1.00
Candles
LI 16
Canvas
...
3,250
Cement
209
2,480
Clocks and Watches
1,010
Cloth
Cotton
84.178
Silk
300
Clothing
Cotton
23,720
Coke
tons
-10
3.600
Cocoanuls
No.
1.150
82
Coffee
Liberian, etc.
piculs
117 4.658
In tins
...
160
Coprah	...	...
piculs
80
540
Corrugated Iron
800
Cotton Seed
3,202
Crockery and Glass-ware
8,80-1
Curry stuffs and Hance, etc. ...
...
4,103
Damar
553
Drugs and Chemicals
Cyanide, etc.
ease
1
100
For Mig. purposes
...
6.469
Drugs
...
4.305
Eggs Salted
Xo.
000
45
Fire-arms
...
47
Fire-works
...
508
Fish
Dried
piculs
557?
1.5,955
Salted	...	...
pienls
281A
5.350
In tins	...	...
2.913
Flour
hags
2,893
17,788
V ruil
Fresh	...	...
...
1,174
Dried
742
In tine
...
388
Furniture
150
Ghee	...	...
picul
s
90
Gold leal
OZh.
374.6
16.900
Grains
Bean* arid peas
niciils
1.067 ft
16,814
Bice	piculs
14.430 ft
227.117
Other sorts ...
piculs
1.745 ft
10,855
Gunnies new
bales
80
12.090
Do. old
bundles
86
2,819
Hams and Bacons
207
Hats...
...
1,250
Iron-ware
...
28,895
Jars ...
X o.
5
20
Joss sticks and Papers
...
1,257
Lard ...
piculs
82
2,129
Lamps
...
929
Leather
piculs
7ft
1.800
Live stock
Cattle
head
1
150
Machinery
...
. 27,921
Hats...,	...	...
...
1,708
Matches
oases
108
7,296
Macaroni and vermicelli
819
Milk, condensed ...
caRcg
220
4,299
Oils, etc.
Vegetable ...
piculs
741
8,478
Lubricating	*
piculs
uof
3.667
Kerosine
CR90H
6,215?
40.835
Benzine
gallons
975
1,151
Methylated Spirit	...
gallons
57
116
Opium raw
chests
51
2'20,000
Paint, Varnish and 'Par
...
8.499
Papers
.i1.
4,957
Provisions sundry
3,685
Prawns ...
piculs
6?
640
Do. Refuse ...
piculs
800 ft
1,980
Rubber Reeds and seedlings ...
...
250
Carry forward
...
$876,857
IMPORTS (Continued.)
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
Brought forward
$876,857
Rickshaws
... No.
8
470
Rope
Coir
... coils
?79
2.668
Manila	...
... coils
19
1.810
Wire
... coils
25
8.556
Sago Pearl or Kaw
... piculs
8
54
Salt ...
... piculs
2.228?
5,571
Soap ...
...
4.8-7
Stationery and Books
2.605
Sugar ...
... piculs
959ft
29,581)
Sundries
...
...
31,425
Tea in bundles
... Imxes
158
8.677
Tea in Tins
538
Timber
...
155
Twine and Thread
5.743
Tobacco
In tins Cigars A Cigarettes
...
50.0-7
Chinese
... cases
168
11,902
r'brtng, Java A S'robok. t -
piculs
181 ft
26,477
Bail or Pepper ...
.. piculs
33 ft
1.350
Treasure
10,0( -0
V egetabh-s
Fresh
..
...
4,048
Salted
...
2.1U7
In tins
I.
458
Wines and Spirits ...
..
...
15.011
Zinc
1.030
TorAI. VAI.UK
9 1,992,882
Brought forward
...
8,995,608
Total Value to Date
..
...
S10.088.41H)
1918
..
...
$ 5.110.817
EXPORTS.
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
..
Betel-nuts
pii-nls
462ft
$ 2,128
Bees-wax
piculs
111
826
Birds-ueaM
piculs
111
7,520
Brass-ware
85
Camphor
catties
158
Do. Oil
6
Canes
Xo.
1.371
139
Charcoal
piculs
13
Coprah
piculs
289 j
5,928
Crockerv-ware ...
..
285
Damar ...	...
piculs
aot?
5,709
Dynamite
eases
8
451
Empties
1.413
Fish
piculs
568?
17,762
Gambier
-piculs
272ft.
2,427
Gold ...
ozs.
1,460.7
81,800
Gunnies old
bundles
878
5,470
Gut la and Rubber
Jangkar ...	. ...
piculs
18ft
900
Jelutong
piculs
1,170
19,829
llo. Hi-tind
piculs
3,389 ft
180,838
Pereha
piculs
29 J
6.6(11
Plantation ...
piculs
2,4767
284.273
Leaf Gntta ...
piculs
Hl
2,822
Hides A- Skins ...
piculs
181or
613
Iron ware	...
1,220
Mats
? 213
Machinery
4-0
Oil ...
piculs
27.8
Opium ...
520
Pepper (white' ...
nicnls
1.698,
99,801
Do. (black)
piculs
446?
16,401
Sago llour
piculs
2O.244J
249,009
Sugar nipa
piculs
1,461
12,696
Sundries
..
1,991
Timber (manufactured I
387
Tobacco
In tins Cigars and (ligarnttes
I
100
Treasure
2,000
Tuba roots	...
piculs
171?
2,919
TOTAL VALTK
$ 915,897
Brought forward
11,188,774
Total Value to Dale ...
$12,104,671
1918
$ 5.453,419
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 2, 1920.
12
Vhiikct Price List for the month of December 1919.
27th.
Beau-I ng	i*r catlv ..	,,
r Do. French	22
Do. Sprout*	fi
Bamboo lo.	..	,,
Brinjals	..	,.
12
Beef I(OWI No. 1	40
Do. do. .,2	30
Do. (Buffalo) No. 1 .,	?.	..
98
Do do. ,. 2 ..
tl
Do. do.	.. 3 ..	..
15
Cabbage	..
82
Cnpoca	..
Colerv	,.
$1.05 12
Chillies Fresh
4*
Cucumbers Crabs (large)	nach
Do. (medium)	4
12
H
Do. lamaU)	6
Duck*	is-r catty
Do. Eggs frosh (largei each ..
Do.	do. do. (amalli .,	..	..
Do do. (Salted
Eggs nen (Urge)
Do. Ismalb	..	..	..
r Fish No. 1	wr cattv ..	..
32
Do. .. 2
23
Do	8
11
Fowls (Cocks)	.,	..
70
Do. (Cockerels) HO
Do. iHena.)	,.
HO
Do. (Pullets)
Do. Cocks (Dywk Breed) per cattv
HO
t ??
Do. (Cockerels) Do.	,,
Do. t Heus'	Do.	..
7. a
Do. itnllets) Do.	?1
Ginger	per catty
5
Geese	.,	..
Gourd	,.	..	..
90
3
Mutton	W
Potaloe. Sweet	.,
4
Prawns (Fresh)	,,	..
23
Ptunpkiu a
Pork No. 1	72
.. 2	.,	..	,	..
no
Do. 3	.,	..	..
Pigeons Young	pet pair	..	*	..
58
70
Badiali	per catty ..
10
Turnips	..
4
Yama	..	,, ) Kuching, Coasting Trade Returns for the month of Nov., 1919.
IMPORTS.
Articles.
Quantity.
Value.
- a- Cattle
... head
76
? 1.572
Coal ...
... tons
770
8.458
Damar
... piculs
194,j
688
Gtttta jaugkar
... piculs
IB
530
Do. jelutong ...
... piculs
7,awi
96.151
Do. ] erchii
... piculs
1.080
F -utation Bnblter
... piculs
602 A
42.341
Prawn refuse
... picul*
117 fn
590
Pepper i white) ...
... pieuls
1.264,*,
75.740
Do. (black I ...
... piculs
1501
5.854
F. .tans No. 1. seen. etc.
... piculs
10$
61
Do. No. 2. temoi.etc.
... piculs
Ififb
50
Rice ...
... piculs
8?
58
bago flour
... piculs
1.610
16.100
.. raw
... t*pn
68,538
186.975
Sundries
... ..
14.554
Treasure
...
26,459
TOTAL VAI.CS
8 126.759
Bronght forward
...
5,334.419
Total Value tc Date
...
95.761.178
1918
...
82.245.918
EXPORTS.
Articles.
Quantity.
V aloe.
Brass-ware
9 2.392
Ironware
... ...
3.428
Jars ...
... No.
178
612
Oil kerosine . ...
... MIM
1.594 11.19.')
Opituu
... ...
40.185
B:ce ...
... picnls
6.730rf
106.079
Fundries
... ...
198.496
ri reaunre
... ...
53.717
Padi
... picnls
,5
51
TOTAL VALUE
S 425,105
Brought forward
...
4,20.5,422
Total Value tc Date
...
94,680.527
1918
...
12376.653
F. G. DAY.
Registrar of Trade.
NOTICE.
GOVERNMENT STORE.
M
ATANG TEA is now obtainable at the
Government Store in 1 lb packets.
Price 50 cents.
Carriage to Outstation Extra.
NOTICE.
NOTICE is hereby given that the partnership heretofore existing between LIM OH LIEW, LIM OH PHIO, LIM THIAN LAI, LIM THIAN HO, LIM THIAN SANG, LIM THIAN KHAY and LIM OH CHAI carrying on business at No. 88, Main Bazaar, Kuching, under the style or firm of Chop ENG WHATT has been dissolved by mutual consent on 29th October 1919 and the aforesaid LIM OH LIEW retires from partnership and has no further interest in the firm nor will be responsible as from the above date for any debts incurred by the said business.
An agreement to the above effect has duly been registered in the Supreme Court , Kuching and the undersigned, LIM OH PHIO, LIM THIAN LAI, LIM THIAN HO, LIM THIAN SANG, LIM THIAN KHAY and LIM OH CHAI are now sole proprietors of Chop ENG WHATT.
(Sgd.) LIM OH PHIO
LIM THIAN LAI
LIM THIAN SANG
LIM THIAN KHAY
,, LIM OH CHAI
,, LIM THIAN HO (Sgd.) LIM OH LIEW
Sole Proprietors	Retired Partner.
[6-3]
NOTICE.
N
OTICE is hereby given that by a Deed Poll or Power of Attorney executed by LAV KIONG NGHEE alias KIONG NGHEE of 31 Arab Street, Singapore, the 6th day of November 1919, the said LAU KIONG NGHEE appointed and constituted LAU CHENG CHOON, of 6 Main Bazaar, Kuching, Sarawak his lawful attorney and agent in Sarawak and that he also thereby absolutely revoked and cancelled the Deed Poll or Power of Attorney made by him the said LAU KIONG NGHEE in favour of TAN WEE JOO the 24th day of October 1913, and every power and authority expressed to be given by the said
letter deed-poll.
Dated at Singapore this 6th day of November 1919.
A. de MELLO.
Solicitor for LAU KIONG NGHEE.
4, Cecil Street, Singapore. [6-3]
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 2, 1920.
13
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
ALMANAC.
JANUARY, 1920.
SYN HIN LEONG & CO.,
22, CARPENTER STREET.
COMMISSION AGENTS.
Beer, Wine, Spirit & General Store Dealers
En-
Chi- Mo
High
clish.
nese. dan MOON'S PHASES. ETC.
water at
6th Full moouQ
Kuching.
13th Last quarter Month.
j
21*1 New moon A.
M. P.
M.
t
s z --
e	2sil Hret quarter ;
b.
in. h.
111.
1	Th
1
11
lift
J	-
9 Sarawak Regatta.
.11
51
F
J
121
10;	.! 0
40 1
11
S
3
13-
11	. 1
58 2
26
M
1
6
1 1 U
15-2
f 1 2l l HCXIIAY AFTKH CHHIHTMA*. . j 1 Haarilte-i burnt by l ynka 1856
3
; 4
10 .3
13 4
35
32
Tu
-
16 *
14 artniAxV...
. 4 5
30
W
7
*c
17 15	. 5
48 6
19
Th
8
t
18 16	. 6
3G 7
05
9
I
19 J
17 18 7
50
S
10
20
18:	59 8
32
H
H
21
J 9 lt nrstAV Acnta KFII-KASY.
. 8
41 9
13
M
12
CO
20	. 9
20 9
56
Tu
13
I
23
21	. 10
310
40
W
14
24
32	10
54 11
18
Th
15
25.
23...
11
50 -
F
16
26
24	. 0
45 1
17
S
17
27
23 Ib-atb of Admiral Slr ll. Kjqi-L VKM
Q
4, 2
20
S
IS
28i
26 2sii SCNUAT AFTER KPU-HANT.
. 3
13 3
36
M
19
29
.jy	. 4
7 4
25
Tu
-n
30
jHj Great 11m nt lirtcl.ltig, ,
4
43 5
8
W
21 12
1
'	( !?' IM...
5
20 5
45
Th
22
0-
1	19
F
23
3 2	. 6
27 6
52
S
24
4-5
3 . 7
2 7
25
M
25
26
5 6 3
4 1 3rd atXUAY AFTEH EPIPHANY.
, t Cuuvrr inn of 8t. Paul.
? 7
: 8
33 8
8 8
-J
39
Tu
27
7
6	'?	. 8
46 9
17
W
28
8-
7	. 9
25 10
4
Th
29
9
8	;	? 10
1510
56
F
.30
10
9	11
15 -
S
31
UI
10'	0
4 0
.37
Rainfall. November, 1919.
DATE.
llnliti 11 EMat**.
BintulH.
Malting.
Inches.
Inches.
Inches.
I
24
10
2
09
.
57
3
1-83
4
1-53
280
65
5
116
1-48
10
6 1-79
1-76
7
247
10
?12
8
39
06
40
9
74
24
25
10
08
11
1-30
12
3-00
1-55
18
38
10
14
80
!? ?
IA
-
20
10
50
125
17
49
75
JH
151
?44
88
19
?32
10
20
1-08
40
21
80
39
1-20
22
1'80
14
23
-1 ??
98
24
42
?32
1-30
2.5
51
05
?98
20
1-50
27
23
04
28
28
41
-
78
29
11
?38	30
47
?83
31
?80
Total
16-05
13-81
17-39
SOLE AGENTS FOR:
FRASER & NEAVE'S RATED WATERS
(The Bent throughout the East.)
Coagulatex.
An ideal coagulant and superior to Acetic
Acid in the treatment of rubber, sold at
$1 per quart bottle enough to make
150 catties of dry rubber.
ACETIC ACID.
Fresh supplies of Stores are received
regularly.
PRICES MODERATE.
Free delivery to customers in Kuching.
Free packing & shipping for Outstation
Orders.
NOTICE.
NOTICE is hereby given that LIM EWE TENG Administrator of the Estate of LIM THIAN HAI (deceased) has sold, transferred and made over to LIM THIAN LAI, LIM THIAN HO and LIM CHENG SOON Administrator of Estate of LIM THIAN SANG on 30th September 1919 the whole of the deceased's shares, rights, titles and interest whatsoever in Chops ENG WHATT and ENG HO and the aforesaid LIM EWE TENG has no further interest in the above firms nor will be responsible as from the above date for any debts incurred by the said business.
An agreement has duly been registered in the Supreme Court, Kuching with regard to these matters.
(Sgd.) LIM THIAN LAI
,, LIM THIAN HO
,, LIM CHENG SOON
ADMINISTRATOR OF ESTATE
LIM THIAN SANG.
14	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 2. 1920.
Postal Notice.
IN the mail which arrived here on the 22nd instant the following Magazines and Novel were found damaged by water and without wrappers:
The Premier dated October 24th 1919
The London December 1919
The Falling Star No. 277
H. A. ADAMS,for Postmaster General.
NOTICE.
Gazette subscriptions and Printing Office Bills
Fun the convenience of residents at Outstations Sarawak stamps will be taken in payment of small sums but only the 1,2 and 3 cent values will be accepted. It is requested, however, that Money Orders be sent if possible.
J. C. SWAYNE,
Manager, Govt. Printing Office.
NOTICE.
SALE BY AUCTION
of all unredeemed pledges from YEK YEUN & Co., Pawn Farmers, No. 8, Sibu Bazaar, Sibu, will be held on the 15th September 1919 at 10 a.m. and quarterly from that date until further notice.
Lists of ail unredeemed pledges are on view at the Farmers premises.
LAW JEE THAI,
Authorised Auctioneers.
PASSENGERS
ARRIVALS.
PER s. s. Alice Lorraine:18th December-From Lingga and SodongMessrs. Evans, Haldane and Rev. Hollis.
PER s. s. Kuching ;22nd DecemberFrom Singapore Messrs. G. P. Davis, D. Evans, J. W. Rowland, C. J. Cook, K. Tin Fong, A. Hong Choon, Wee Boon Chiew, Goh Siow Thong and Ong Sin Kun, Mr. and Mrs. S. Teck Ghee and Miss Clark.
DEPARTURES.
PER S. S. Alice Lorraine:23rd DecemberFor Sadong Messrs. J. W. and D. Evans.
PEI: S. s. Kuching:27th DecemberFor Singapore Messrs. C. J. Cook. J. W. Rowland, Song Kheng Hai, Poon Meng Teck. Cheong Kun and Lim Song Kee, and Mr. and Mrs. K. Ohoseki.
THE ART OF SELFEXPRESSION.
THIS remarkable little book explains exactly how YOU may acquire in a very short time a facile command of language, both in writing and in speaking. It tells how you may make certain of success in life by developing your latent powers of clear thought and of
forceful convincing expression.
The self-conscious tongue-tied individual is seriously handicapped at every turn. Unable to impress favourably those with whom he comes into contact by his powers of expression, he is regardedoften unjustlyas a mere nonenity. On the other hand, the man who has learnt the all-important Art of Self-Expression moves on from success to success, aided immeasurably by his ability to marshall his thoughts quickly and with confidence, and to express them arrestingly and authoritatively. In business life he stands out among his fellows ; his ability is recognised; promotion awaits him. Socially, he is admired and sought after as a witty conversationalist and a fascinating companion.
Whatever may be your station, or your profession in life, a knowledge of the Art of Self-Expression will help you enormously to achieve complete and lasting success. If you are ambitious to make your way in the world, write to-day for a copy (sent post-free) of The Art of Self-Expression to:
The Secretary, S. G.,
The School of Self-Expression,
57, Berners Street,
LONDON. W. I.
ENGLAND.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JANUARY 2, 1920.
15
PURE FOOD MEANS GOOD HEALTH
ALEXANDRIA CANNED MEATS
Every Tin Guaranteed under the New South Wales Pure Food Act, and packed under the constant and vigilant supervision of a Government Inspector.
ASK FOR ALEXANDRIA
As supplied in huge quantities to the Imperial and Indian Government for use by both the Army and Navy.
Roast Reef
Roast Mutton
Beef Sausage
Corned Beef
Corned Mutton
Pork Sausage
Ox Cheek
Spiced Mutton
Frankfurt Sausage
Ox Tongues
Mutton Chops
Beef Dripping
Luncheon Tongues
Assorted Meats
Pork and Beans
Sheep Tongues
Minced Scollops
Irish Stew
Extract of Beef
Assorted Soups
Ox Tail Soup
sa
Sold by all Stores.
CHARLES BOWEN & CO
2 Castlereagh Street, SYDNEY, N.S.W.
ALEXANDRIA MEAT WORKS.
Distributors for the East:
Seremban General Agency, Ltd.
(Incorporated in F. M. S.)
S I N G A P O R E.
Sub: AgentsBAN JUI LONG,
14 Carpenter Street, KUCHING, SARAWAK.
and BAN JUI GUAN.
MIRI, SARAWAK.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. JANUARY 2, 1920.
16
SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
DATK.
1919.
NAME OF VKSSRL.
NAME OF CAPTAIN.
XVKEMK FROM.
CHINESE.
VHIP. Frmulr.
NATIVES OTHER OF INDIA. ASIATICS. .Vi/r. A wilz Half, AVmii/r.
TOTAL.
Nov. 7
..	8
14
..	18
..	29
S. S Kuching Bdg. .Sn Seriate P. S. Adeh
S. S. Kuching
S. S. Kuching
XV. R. Barton Tahir Awg. Raia XV. R. Barton XV. R. Barton
Singapore
P'inangkat Brooketon Singapore do
?54
2
7
87
54
6
* 2
1
17
10
1
4
5
...	10	1
...	9	...
...	8'1
1	10	.?.
4
17 117
- 80
Brought forward
204
2,136
36
302
10
97
1 37	2
7 535 143
290
3,220
Total to Date
2,340
388
107
8 572 115
8,510
1918
2,156
291
66
6 511 T18
3. ns
Departures.
DATE.	NAME OF VESSEL.
..	XX HITHER CHINESE.
NAME OF CAPTAIN. BOUND.	jfalr.
NATIVES OTHER
OF INDIA ASIATICS. TOTAL.
Mair Flrmok H,ilr.
1919.
Nov. 4 P. S. Adeh
,.	11 S. S. Kuching
20 Motor Sri Sei ahi ng
21 S. S. Kuching
Awg. Rais	Brooketon	2
XX. R. Barton	Singapore	80	10
Junit	Pontianak XX. R. Barton	Singapore	96	9
1
4
...	6
...	17	5	113
8	8
...	12	8	124
I	,__L Brought forward
Total to Date
1918
178 19
2,017 410
5
74
... 35 11	248
15 470 160	3,146
2,195 429
*
79
15 505 171	3.891
2,696 396
96
9 359 113	3,669
E. G. DAY.
Regittrur i Trade.
KUCHING:Printed and Published by GHIN HENG SOON, Government Printer, at the Government Printing Office.
Barrack Road.
