The Sarawak Gazette
.. THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 1922.
THE NEW COURTS ORDER.
In an Extraordinary Government Gazette, ,
published on the 24th October, was printed
a copy 'of the new Courts Order whereby
the whole Court procedure of Sarawak will be
established. The Order comes into force at the
beginning of next year and provides for the
maintenance of five Courts: The Supreme Court,
the Resident's Court, the District Court, the
Magistrate's Court and the Native Court. The
Order is followed by various schedules: the, first
of which gives a tabular statement of offences and
by what Courts they are triable
Il can hardly be disputed thar some considerable reorganisation was necessary in the Sarawak
Courts; in the early days the administration of justice was perforce rough, summarily but
eminently just. In those days Magistrates were
few and far between ; communication was
indifferent and in many eases extremely young
Officials were entrusted with considerable
magisterial power; and may it be said to their
everlasting credit, that they never abused the
confidence which had been placed in them.
Latterly, however, it has been becoming
apparent to all that Courts and their jurisdiction
must be defined : judicial officers must be limited
to certain powers and the various offences which
they may try be known to all.
Lest there be any who may think that the whole
system of controlling crime and its punishment is
being changed, let us hasten to assure them that
this is not the case; except the abolition of the
Court of Requests, there will be no radical change
in the administration of justice in the State. The
new Order is based upon the Indian Penal Code
and this Code has always been the basis by which
punishments have been inflicted hi Sarawak. It
is not to be understood that the Indian Penal
Code need be slavishly followed in every case—
local conditions have to be taken into account
and punishments reduced or modified, according
to circumstances. The “ Undang Undang," the
native ad at or the Common tribal Law of
Sarawak have remained untouched. Whenever
possible it is always the aim of the Magistrates
to settle disputes by these laws. The customs of
tribes are respected, and underlying their quaint-
ness will often be found a strong layer of common
sense and knowledge of human nature.
It was inevitable that the Court of Requests,
as at present constituted, had to go in most
civilised countries imprisonment for debt has
been abolished; the machinery of the Court of
Requests was obsolete and cumbersome.
It is probable that modifications in the new
Code will be made from time to time and perhaps
at first the new system will work a little clumsily
but this is to be expected. It is the way of the
world to criticise anything new. and that generally
to its detriment. This new Court Order is the
result of many months of patient work, and it has
occupied the minds of those best qualified to know
the requirements of the Country.
It has been said that Sarawak is the home of
much justice and little law. How true this has
been in the past we do not know but it is no poor
compliment any way.
Let the subjects of His Highness the Rajah be
assured, therefore, that as long as the present
Government rules the State, the same justice
which has been so prized hitherto, will be meted
out. There will be no deviation from the strict
impartiality and lack of legal quibbles which
have always characterised the Courts of Sarawak.
Death.
-
On the 12th October, at bis residence, Blacksmith Road, Kuching, JOHN KIME, P. W. D. Sarawak.
NOTES.
(October.
WE welcome back Mrs. Small, who arrived from Singapore by s. s. Rajah of Sarawak on the 30th September.
MRS. J. S. Fenwick left for Singapore on the 3rd October and is not returning to Sara wak. We wish her the best of luck.
Mu. R. V. Palfreman left for Sibu on the 6th by s. s. Alice Lorraine to take up an appointment there.
THE amount of dry rubber produced at Sungei Tengah Estate for September was approximately 84,000 lbs.
MR. H. Calvert, who has been away some considerable time on audit, arrived back by p. s. Adeh on the 8th October.
THE 19th of October was “Deepavali” and on that day, and the day before, the Hindoo population, especially the Tamils, celebrated the festival in their usual joyous manner.
THE 7th was the eleventh anniversary of the proclamation of the Chinese Republic. Flags were freely flown in the town during the day and in the evening there was much letting off of crackers and other rejoicings.
THE Sikh community in Kuching celebrated their festival of Dewali on the 21st October.
Their temple was brilliantly illuminated with hundreds of Small lamps.
A big crowd of Malays assembled to watch the proceedings.
DIRECT communication has been established between all Sarawak Wireless Stations and Brunei. Telegrams for Brooketon, Limbang, Lawas and Labuan will be accepted for transmission direct via Brunei at the rate of
MR. D. E. Calver, who arrived on the 22nd October, has been appointed an Assistant Conservator of Forests. He is at present doing duty at Headquarters. By the same steamer Mr. H. Adams, a nephew of Mr. H. A. Adams, arrived to stay with his uncle.
MR. W. F. Dick has been in Kuching all the month suffering from fever.
He has recently been stationed in the Kalaka district where there has been no resident European Officer for many years. This is one of the biggest districts in Sarawak with its headquarters at Kabong.
THE construction of 'the Electric Power Station in Kuching progresses apace. The chimney, 68 feet high from the floor of the works, has been completed.’ Many of the bungalows in the town has been wired and the concrete standards for carrying the wires are being rapidly erected. THOSE who were present at the 1914 Races will be sorry to hear that Lady Lee has died recently in Tambi Kechih’s stables.
Lady Lee late Polestar was owned by Messrs. Lee Yeng Hoi and Lee Yeng Kow and won three times in the two days racing, including the Winners’ Handicap. Lady Lee was a very game little mare; she later came into the possession of Bak Choon who sold her to Tambi Kechih.
A new pattern of carbine has been decided upon to re-arm the Malay and Indian con-tingent of the Straits Settlements Police, who will discard the old Snider carbine, than which, for police purposes, it would be hard to find a better weapon. These latter, however, which must be from 50 to GO years old, are quite worn out. and the ammunition which has to be specially manufactured is very costly.—(M. T.)
ONE cannot but help noticing the sudden craze for motor bicycles in Kuching: on most afternoons one is almost certain to meet a string of these machines, in line ahead, ridden by enthusiastic young Chinese and others.
It is even whispered that the Editor him self has been seen careering round on one of these evil spelling steeds, but it is not true that he uses spurs to induce the magneto to spark.
THERE has been a mild epidemic in Kuching of what is, apparently, dengue fever. Many Europeans have been laid Up with this com-plaint especially those living along the Rock Road between the Mission Hill corner and the Blacksmith Road corner. Every single house in that vicinity has been attacked. The Editor is still firmly ensconced in his Editorial chair but he is daily expecting “ that tired feeling” (See Advertisements) which heralds the approach of the dread malady.
ON the 18th October the Mohomedans in Kuching celebrated the festival of “Safar” or “Tulak Bala.”
[ All Mohomedans must go down to a running stream, a spring or a pond; arriving there they throw into the water a leaf on which has been written a prayer from the Koran. The leaves most commonly used are “daun chempaka” or “daun jewang.” The pilgrims then immerse themselves entirely in the water and also drink some of it.
This ceremonial bathing is said to protect the participants from “nahas”, or accident, during the year. For the past month Kuching Town has
been full of little boys (and even, may we
whisper, their elders too) flying kites. This is
known as “ main gudi ” or “main woe'' and
all the open, spaces are alive with energetic
youngster rushing about in vain attempts to
keep their kites in the air.
We notice, with surprise, that very few have
any idea of the value of a tail for a kite
and the majority of the kites are very poor
specimens. Perhaps some benefactor will
come forward and construct a kite on the
European system end show these youngsters ,
how it should be flown.
MANY passengers most have noticed the very decrepid state o£ some of the ricksha pullers in Kuching. These wretched men are, in some cases, unable to draw their vehicles
along at more than a feeble attempt at a trot; they are generally extremely old and emit
woeful noises and groans as they attempt to
draw their burdens. One feels sympathy, of
course, for these wrecks of humanity, but at the same time they’should not be allowed to
pull rickshas for hire, not only for their passen- gers' but their own sake also. Perhaps the
Municipal and Sanitary Board, will consider
some means of remedying this state of affairs. A correspondent has written to us giving details of the flight of the flying vessel over Belaga. He says “	A hang Adeng and a crowd at Belaga saw the flying boat! It
came down at 8 p. in. quite close to the Fort
and banked round it. Abang said it looked
like a grey boat some 30, feet long with wings,
and the propeller was quite clearly seen. It
made a deal of noise and left a trail of white
smoke. They fired a ‘ gun” on board and a
bright light broke out over the Fort lighting
the whole place and incidentally the flying '
boat. It was heard over Kapit earlier in the
evening and I should think must have passed
over Lubok Antu or thereabouts	WE have seen a letter from Dr. A. C. Hanlon ;
in which he describes A visit to the Bronx Zoo,
New York and where he saw a Sarawak mias.
The “New York Sun” says"	The best
tempered of all the orang-utans is registered
as Rejang, which is a river that her folks played around in Borneo	” Dr. Hanton goes on
to say “the good tempered little orang-utan
came from Sadong. but still that is close
enough. I went up and said “ tabek ” and
we cried on each others “booby” over the Constitution and Mr. Volstend. It seemed good to see someone from Sarawak. An effort to get her name changed to George III was an utter failure	P. S..
Johnny Walker is $25 gold per bottle !!!	” THE P. W. D. have started on the erection of the concrete standards for the electric lighting
in Kuching. The first to be erected was opposite the Pavilion and the work is now proceeding
along Carpenter Street and elsewhere. These
standards are of great height and, although
naturally not very picturesque, are eminently
useful and durable. The height of these
posts has necessitated the lopping of many
trees bordering the roads and in some cases
complete felling. We heard rumours that
some of the owners of trees applied to the
P. W. D. for a new design of post whereby
the trees might be saved. Apparently the
bent method Vas suggested ; possibly the
tree owners favoured a neat design in the
shape of a question mark carried out in
concrete!!.
THE new Court' House at Sibu is finished
and already in use. The upper floor of Fort
Brooke has been partitioned off into offices
and glass windows have been fitted all round. ,
This will be a great improvement on the old
offices which were unsuitable for efficient work
in every way.
A new tennis court has been made between
the club and the main road; the court has
been raised well out of flood level and should
prove a boon to tennis enthusiasts in Sibu. His
Highness the Rajah has also presented a new
billiard cloth and cushions to the club. The
billiard table there is probably the oldest in
the country : we have been unable to find the
exact date of its arrival in Sibu but it was
for many years standing in the old Fort
quarters where the Court used to be and what
is now offices In those days all the Govern-
ment Officers lived in the Fort. The tabid is
still in a fair state of preservation and, as far
as the writer knows, this is the third set of
cloth and cushions.
. ONE of the serious bridge'1 players from the
New Club gives us the following details of a
hand recently played there.
Alpha called two spades. Beta five clubs, Gamma
four spades and Delta five hearts which got the bid.
Delta made his five hearts.
We leave it to our readers to say if this could
have been stopped or not.
The Rajah diaries Brooke
Memorial Fund.
Some Notes on the Religious Rites
and Customs of the Iban or
Dyaks of Sarawak.
We have been shown some copies of a paper
named “ Anthropos" which is published in Austria.
This paper, which is written in six languages, is
described an ‘‘International Review or Ethnology
and Linguistics."
There is no doubt as to the quality of the writers
who contribute to this work, and amongst the
articles we have found one describing the
“ Religious rites and customs of the Iban or Dyaks
of Sarawak."
The author is a Dyak himself, and his waiting
has been translated into English by an admitted
authority on Dyaks and their customs, but who
wishes his name to be withheld.
We do not intend to give the different chapters
complete but to pick out, here and there, some of,
or parts of the chapters which we think might
interest the general reader.
it is true that there have been many stories written about the Dyaks. Most of us can
mention one or two authorities in the subject and
whose works have become, as it were, text books
for those wishing to study the Dyaks.
We make, however, no apology for starting a
fresh series of articles, as perhaps some of our
readers may find new and interesting matter in
these hitherto unpublished notes (as far as Sarawak
is concerned) on the sea Dyaks and their rites
and customs.
Tu Nama antu ke laki.
Batara. Tu antu ari
alas Samoa: ia ngemata
ka lalu ngator samoa.
Bisi dua Batara, siko
datas din, siko di baroh
ditu. Ia ke datas ngator
Samoa, lalu samoa antu
bukai niteh ka ia. Ia ke
di baroh migai jako Ba-
tara datas. tang penemu,
pendiau siduai sabaka
sakali dalam samoa ulai
bla unggau ia, tang meda
ia di baron, ia kurang
mimit, ko kitai.
Selempala. Ngaga.
Selempandai. Ngulai.
Selempatoh. Ngamboh.
Udah nya baru Batara
ngelala, nya baru aki ini
munya nyadi mensia.
Pulang Gana unggau
Raja Sua, antu Ke ngaga
tanah unggau langit. Si -
duai tu tau ngasoh buleh
padi oleh sida ke umpu
tanah.
Seregende, tu antu ke
ngaga ai lalu ia pedua
samoa ai, mri nyadi sun-
gai siti siti.
The Mimes of Spirits
(invoked In the Iban).
The male Gods.
Batara. This spirit is
the highest of all; he
watches over and directs
all others. There are
two Bataras, one in the
regions above, the other
here below, and all other
spirits are under the
direction of the latter.
The Batara that dwells
below is obedient to him
who is above; but their
knowledge and attributes
are equal. However,
since the Batara of the
lower regions dwells be-
low, he is considered
slightly inferior to the
Batara that dwells above.
S e 1 e m p a t a. W h o
created matter.
Selempandai. Who
mixed, or constituted
matter.
Selempatoh. Who
moulded, or shaped mat-
ter. After which Batara
recognised it and thus
our forefathers became
man.
Pulang Gana together
with Raja Sua, are the
spirits that made heaven
and earth. These two
spirits can give men good
crops for the earth is
theirs.
.Seregende, who made
the waters, and divided
it up into streams.
Kuang Kapong, nya an-
tu ke ngaga buah, nya saja
ke ngasoh kayu bua bebuah.
Nti ari nda kamarau ia
nda tau ngamboh buah,
nya mun nadai buah nti
nda kemarau alah bisi
kemarau baru ia tau
ngamboh kuah, nya kayu
bagas raal bebuah nti bisi
kemarau.
Kling. Bungai Nuing.
Laja Pungga; sida ampat tu diri menyadi
Apai Karong Besi, Paw
Sengalang Burong, Bun-,
gai Jawa, Kumpang Pali,
Rendah, Sabalu Gawa,
Segunggang, Puntang!
Medang, Sulong Laiyang,
Renggang, Tutong madih
Kumang, b i n i K I i n g,
Manggi, Sanggol Labong,
Pinang Ipong, Se ga ta k
Pandak. Tu samoa antu
ke tau no long orang mayuh,
ngasoh raja, ngasoh brani.
ngasoh orang tampak rita'
nguan menoa. Nya mini
Iban mayoh selalubesum
bah antu tu ngadap ka sida ia. Keba samoa pen gawa 1ban, begawai, be
dara, selalu nganggau ka
antu tu ngatnbi sida un-
long. Tau iga sida nga-
soh kitai jai unggau baka
jako sida, ne pang orang,
nti jai, ko sida, lalu jai:
nti badas ko sida nya. baru
badas.
Ari Samoa antu bukai.
sigi samoa antu tu ke di
andal ka orang, ke tan
ngidup ka orang bendar
nguan menoa, ngasoh
orangberita, ngasoh orang
raja.
Penghulu samoa antu
tu nyadi Kling, unggau
Laja, Sengalang Burong;
tu raja samoa antu di
langit.
Oleh samoa antu tu
nda siti menoa antu siko
siti iga menoa. Samoa
macham tu sigi datai ari
Batara, di gaga ia samoa,
tang meda sida nyau ba-
das munya, brani, raja,
nya mun orang nyau nga-
dap ka sida.
Kuang Kapong. is the
spirit who made the.
fruits, and causes t h n
trees to bring forth their
fruits. Without the heat
of the dry season he can -
n o t fashion the fruit,
hence when there is no
dry season there is no
fruit, for only in the heat
of the dry season can he
weld the fruit. Thus af-
ter a good summer there,
are heavy crops of fruit
on the trees.
Kling. Bungai Nuing
Laja Pungga: these, are
four brothers
Apai Karong Besi, Pau,
Sengalang Burong, Bun-
gai Jawa, Kumpang Pali,
Rendah, Sabalu Gawa,
Segunggang, Pun tang
Medang, Sulong Laiyang,
Renggang, Tutong the
brother of Kumang who
was the wife of Kling,
Manggi, Sangol Labong,
Pinang Ipong, Segatak
Pandak: these are the
spirits who are able to
assist mankind, who can
make them rich, and
brave, and famous during
this life. Hence it is that
the Iban worship and
honour them on all oc-
casions. Therefore in all
their feasts and sacrifices
they call to them for help.
These spirits can also
bring evil upon men;
they can both curse and
bless. Misfortune follows
their curse and good for-
tune their blessing.
There are many other
spirits, but these above,
mentioned are the only
ones who can help man
in this life and bring him
honour and riches.
The chief of these spirits are Kling, Laja and Sen galang Burong; these rule over the other spirits in the skies above.
These spirits do not inhabit the same region, for each spirit has his own domain in which he rules. But all came in the beginning from the Batara, who made them all. They were renown ed for goodness, bravery, and riches hence it came about that man began to honour them.
Indah. Aki ini diri umpu munya, orang ke tuai klia. Nii sida ia brani munya, nyau ka antu Iban, selalu di tunggah disumbah sida. Ninting gawa sida nganggau ka sida, minta tolong ngambi brani. raja, baka sida ia, awak ka buleh ntai baka sida.
Antu Abo; di kanggau dalam sampi. Antu Grassi; tau jai
tau badas unggau kitai. Antu Buyo, ngaiak ka
orang.
Indah. Amongouran-
cestors there were some
famous chiefs of olden
times. 'Those famous for
bravery became objects
of worship to the Iban
and are likewise invoked
by them at all their feasts
and sacrifices when their
help is asked that their
devotees may become
rich, and brave as they
were.
Antu Abo; is mention-
ed In the sacrificial in-
vocations.
Antu Grassi; who can do both evil and good.
Antu Buyo, a per secutor of men.
Antu Buau Ngada, Antu Buau Nga da. Grassi Papa. Singa Bela- Grassi, Papa, Singa Be- bong Dilah, Blang Kepa- labong Dilah, Blang Ke-
pas.Galau Pranan: Samoa papas, Galan Pranan: antu ke di takut ka orang these are the spirits that Mun orang takut, penama all men fear. They are ia di peda orang, pendian feared because whenever ia nda jenoh selalu ka ma- seen they are busy prey- kai orang. Nti orang ta- ing upon men. The man kut ka ia, selalu di gagai who fears them they chase ia. ka makai orang; tang and destroy; but he who nti orang brani ka ia. ka is brave and will even ngelaban ia, nda ia makai wrestle with them they orang. Nya orang ka destroy not: upon such bagas di bri ia pengaroh they bestow charms by unggau brani, unggau virtue of which, they will raja, unggau brita become brave, and rich, Kedua orang belangkap and honoured Should ngelaban antu nya lalu one in his wrestle with a barang utai uleh ia ke spirit snatch something lekat di tuboh antu. tau ka from his person, such pengaroh magang. objects are charms.
Antu ke Indu.
Pantan Ini Andan. tuai antu ke indu. orang diau di langit.
Goddesses.
Pantan Ini Andan. the chief of female spirits.
who dwell in the skies.
Bi ku Indu Antu. tuai Biku Indu Antu, is the antu orang diau di tandh. chief of those who live on , Samoa antu ke indu betuaithe earth. All female' ka ia maggang. Nt i spirits obey her as their orang besampi ngangau chief. In his invocations . ka ia selalu, minta bd,mg , the Iban invoke her help ia oleh ia menyadisida for she is the sister of Batara. Batara.
M u ne Mental Batu,
Minti Dara Bunsu, Dara
Rabai Gruda: samoa sida
I iga tu diau dalam ai. Tau
ga nolong; bisi iga orang
l; e n a k a I bekatam a i,
ngumbai diri tolong antu
nya. Tang sida iga tau
munoh orang, keba ko
orang, Samoa orang ke
parai dalam. ai di bunnh
sida ia.
Kumang, bini Kling.
A lune Mental Batu, Minti Dara Bunsu. Dara Rabai Gruda: these spirits dwell in the waler. Good divers who cantre main long under water , say that they arc helped by these spirits. But they can injure men. and those that inert their death by drowning are said to be killed by them.
Kumang, the wife of Kling.
Sulong Indai Abang, Sulong Indai Abong, Mendong, Singgar, Gitir, Mendong. Singgar, Gitir, Puyu. Entelannying: sida Puyu, Entelannying; antu tu nolong orang diau these spirits are helpful nguan menoa; nolong to men, they can help orang indu tau. nolong BOTH men and women. orang laki tau, tang nti The only help they give ia nolong orang laki sigi men is to make them nolong orang bekebal saja,'invulnerable against the nda teleh laban munsoh. weapons of their enemies. Antu tu nolong indu tau They help women to nakar. tau kebal. Nti weave and to work the nadai mimpi lain antu ornamental patterns on nda madah ka ia. dini ia the native cloth (s Fig.3). tau nakar. Nti ia nguji Without being em- apin. tentu ia nyadi gila. powered in a dream by
Kebat.pua badas. kain these spirits, how could badas, olih antu mri ubat women attempt to work bulu landak dalam mimpi'these patterns? Should sida. Nti nda pia, nda they make die attempt kala tau ngar.	they would certainly go
mail. That a women may weave good blankets and fine dresses, she must ’ be endowed by the spirits in a dream with a c h a r m e d porcupine’s quill. Without this charm women can never weave the curious patterns of their cloth.
Kok Rer selalu ba; Kok Rer is a spirit that makai orang, lang orang ever preys upon men. As indu nda ia makai, olih it is a female spirit, it antu tu indu sigi orang does not injure women, laki saja ke ka dempa ia. it preys upon men only.
The Soul.
In life the soul is able to wander about. After death the place to which the soul goes differs according to the manner of death. Those who
die a natural death go the ordinary abode of the
dead. Those who die in fine weather have an
easy journey by way Klampai Silang. Should it
be wet weather the soul passes through Kepaiyang
Banggar. a way of never ceasing rain. Children
who die in infancy before they arc weaned, go to
a different place from that of adults.
As soon as the soul of the deceased leaves the laxly it passes the house of the spirit Bubut and arrives at the Titi Rawan (giddy passage). Should the soul be unable to pass over this, it can return again to the body, such are those who return to life again.
From Titi Rawan the soul journeys on until it
arrives.at Mandai Rinyai, Mandai Awai, Mandai
ini, Mandai mati and finally at the abode of the
dead. Arrived there the soul shivers with cold fire is scarce and the older inhabitants are greedy
of it; it can only be obtained if bought with a ring.
Hence the Iban custom of carrying fire to the
grave side for three or four nights after the burial.
Until the wake is performed iii the house of the
deceased, the inhabitants of the nether world will
not associate with the soul which wanders home-
less and uncared for.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of
Correspondents]
The British Red Cross Society.
19, BERKELEY STREET,
LONDON, W. 1.
15th March, 1922.
J. A. H. Hardie, Esq.,
Govt. Printing Office,
Kuching, Sarawak.
DEAR SIR,
I have to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of February 11th last, enclosing Money Order for
£1.8.8. being the balance of collections made at Miri, Sarawak, for our Funds, and enclose herewith our official receipt.
On behalf of the Joint Council I am desired to
convey to you, and through you to those who may
have contributed, the sincere thanks of the British
Red Cross Society and Order of St. John for this
help in our work.
Yours faithfully,
ARTHUR STANLEY,
Chairman.
Rubber Restriction.
October 26th, 1922. The Editor, Sarawak Gazette.
DEAR SIR,
November 1st is the day for the enforcement of Rubber Restriction in the F. M. 8. and the S. S.
What is Sarawak going to do. Restriction of out put or Export Duty?
This is a matter of considerable interest to local Rubber magnates.
Yours truly,
RUBBER.
“One Point of View.”
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
SIR,
In common presumably with other members I have just received a circular from the Sarawak Club embodying proposals for the raising of another loan, and for raising subscriptions and entrance fees.
The object of the loan seems quite clear viz, to pay for installing electric light and repairing the bowling alleys; but why the tremendous additions to subscrip tions and entrance fees ?
The additional annual recurrent expenditure is shewn to be over $200.
The additional revenue expectable from increased subscriptions etc. would seem to be as follows
30 Kuching members (there may be more) $30 per month, which is $3(10 per annum.
Say 6 entrance fees per annum, $60.
Say 12 Outstation members (there may be more) $30 per annum, making a total of $450 per annum or more than double the additional annual recurrent expenditure!!
As the last published accounts seemed to show a
sound financial condition it is difficult to see why all
this money is required.
Turning to the increased rates of subscription, $5
per month, or $60 per annum, seems literally a
tremendous price to pay considering. what is offered
in return, more especially when one realises that $60
is equivalent to £7 sterling!!
It appears to me also that $35 is a sufficiently
heavy entrance fee to keep out anybody with a small
salary.
The trouble is, moreover, that there is no guarantee
that the fees may not again be raised at any time in
the future, and so on at infinition to breaking point.
The fact that no alterations have been made to
subscriptions to meet the increased expenditure due
to higher wages and cost of stores during, or since
the war, has little or no point because the accounts
seem to show that it was unnecessary. Had it been
necessary doubtless the alterations would have been
made.
The fact that it is (presumably) now necessary
breeds the suspicion that something must have gone
wrong, especially in view of the fact that prices are
now lower than they were say two years ago.
A club must have, first of all, members and secondly,
those members must support the club by attendance.
The Sarawak Club has members: if the trouble, is
lack of attendance it follows that the Club is not
sufficiently attractive, and measures should be taken
to make it more so.
Raising subscriptions tends to make it less so and
may result in resignations, of which it would take
only seven to nearly equal the “additional expectable
revenue.”
I am unable to avoid the conclusion that the
present, scheme is “patch work and should be rejected
for the same reason as that for which the Committee
rejected the alternative estimate for repairing the
bowling alleys vis: because it will “not be satisfactory
for any length of time.”
I am. Sir,
Yours faithfully.
CLUBMAN.
Prize giving at St. Thomas'
School, Kuching.
The annual prize giving of St. Thomas’ School, Kuching took place on Wednesday the 18th.
On the platform supporting Mis. Small, who was giving away the prizes, were Archdeacon Smail, Mr. F. G. Day, (the Inspector of Schools) the Head master and the Rev. S. Hollis.
The scholars first of all sang a programme of songs by forms, and the greatest credit is due to the singing mistress. Miss Gibson, for their rendering, especially that of the little Chinese boys who sang two nursery rhymes in very good English although they cannot speak a word conversationally.
: The headmaster, in his report, spoke of the progress made in the past year both in work and
! games, and of the success gained in Singapore higher education by old boys. This reflected great credit on the School and staff, one old boy having gained a first prize in every subject at a college in Singapore.
Archdeacon Small spoke of the necessity of living up to the new motto suggested by Mr. Hollis i. e. "Aim Higher”, and told the boys and staff not to be content with being as they were, but to strive to make their school the best school in the East, mid keep it so.
We were very pleased to see the progress made in I shorthand, no fewer than seven or eight scholars receiving Pitman’s certificates.
A vote of thanks to Mrs. Small for kindly giving away the prizes concluded the proceedings.—(Contributed.)
Death of Mr. John Kime.
We regret to announce the death of Mr. John
Kime of the P. W. D., which took place in the early
hours of the 12th October. Mr. Kime was taken
seriously ill two or three days before and an operation
became necessary: the patient, however, never really
rallied and died after a very short illness.
The funeral took place in the Christian Cemetery
at I p. in. the same day, the body being taken straight
there without the usual service in the Church.
Nearly all the Government Officers were present as
a sign of respect to the deceased whilst many
beautiful wreaths were placed upon the grave.
The deceased came out to the East in 1892 to
work for the New Central Borneo Company in con-
nection with their coal mines in Labuan. He also
worked in the construction of the Labuan railway
and the harbour works in Port Victoria and in the
North Borneo Trading Company and the Liverpool
(Brunei) Para Rubber Estates, the latter of which
be was for a time in charge. Immediately Wore
coming to Kuching he was engaged in erecting a
lighthouse on Kuraman Island off Labuan.
Mr. Kime joined the Government Service in 1913
to superintend the plate laying of the Sarawak
Government Railway, and has since remained with
that Department and also in connection with the
7th mile quarry.
We understood that deceased was formerly engaged
in the construction of the Manchester Ship Canal.
Many will feel the loss of Mr. John Kime; he. was
a type of the old fashioned worker in the East and
had not been home mi leave during the whole of his
service abroad—in fact his passage had been booked
for leave early next year after over thirty years in
the East.
Football in Miri, Sarawak.
On the occasion of H. H. the Rajah’s birthday, the Gymkhana Club Miri Football Team met that of the Miri Recreation Club, September, 26th, on the former’s ground.
The Gymkhana Club was represented by; — Bishop, Gason, Head. Mackenzie. Mason. Peacock, Robertson. E C. Sharpe, Smallwood, Thorn bury mid FI. F. Turner and the Miri Recreation Club bv -Jaw Joo. A. Chong, I'". N. Lim, L. M. Low, Kow Kia, Sahari, Smith, Keng Bee, Theam Eng, Khin Choon and Hock Keng.
The weather was fluff, and the game started at a quarter to five.
The Gymkhana Club had the first kick-off; after ten minutes of hard pressing on both sides Gym khana Club opened the score, by a pass from Head to Mason who scored within the next five minutes the M. R. C.’s forwards kept the ball busy at the mouth of the Gymkhana goal and equalised the score by a short pass from Kow Kia to A. Chong who put the ball in. After this the forwards of both sides tried their best to score, but the defences were equally determined to keep the ball away from the goals, and when the half time came the score was 1-1.
The second half of the game was as fast as the first, and after twenty minutes of splendid play on both sides. Mason for the second time sent the ball into the M R. C.’S net by a pass from. Small wood. The game looked very black against the M. It. C., who had only another ten minutes to score. In spite of the short time left and the odds against the M. R. C. the players on the whole were not disheartened. They kept the ball swinging and within three minutes of strenuous attack, F. N. Lim shot a goal, thus making the game. 2—2.
There was hardly any time left for fancy play, so
both sides used their best tactics to try and put in
the winning goal. Within five minutes of bard
pressing on both sides. F. N. Lim sent a well aimed
shot which Gason, the Gymkhana goalie just managed
punch out. Jaw Joo then rushed up and found
the net with a hard shot. The game came to a close
a minute or so later with M. R. C. the winner by
3—2.
The game on the whole was one of the best that
has ever been seen in Miri and was witnessed by a
large crowd, both teams were well represented. Al-
though the Gymkhana Club lost the game yet they
must be congratulated on their splendid play:
Mason played splendidly and deserved the bulk of
the congratulations. Miri Recreation Club team
deserved ‘the heartiest congratulations in winning
such a tough game.
Thanks should be given to the referee, S. H.
Guerin, for his good services.
L. T. E.
Borneo Ponies.
On the 1st the drawing took place for six out of the eight remaining ponies. They were drawn as under: -
Mr. Gillan’s pony is a strong looking animal, as is also that drawn by Mr. Street. All the ponies were in good condition considering the circumstances under which they have been kept since their arrival in Sarawak.
The Committee of the Kuching Races have inaugurated a system of registration for racing ponies: this will facilitate the handicapping next year as a register is being started in which all details of a pony and its performances are entered.
Mainly About Nothing.
We wonder if any of our readers have perused. “The Kentish Independent and The Kentish Mail" lately.
If they have not we advise them to do so at once in the hopes of finding more accounts of Mr. Templer Tickell’s interesting lectures.
For the benefit of those who have missed the last numbers we give extracts from the account of his last lecture.
“Continuing his lectures at the Charlton
Vale Wesleyan Chapel (given in aid of the Sunday School Extension Fundi. Mr. Templer Tickell dealt, in the course of his address on “The Malay Archipeligo," on Monday, with the Borneo “head- hunters," whilst on Friday his early boyish ad ventures were humorously described. Many grue some details of the habits, of those pleasant, dusky gentlemen of Borneo, the Dyaks, were related, Mr. Tickell assuring his rather horrified audience 1 that a Dyak maiden will invariably require her fianc e to bring home an enemy's head so that it ‘ may hang in a net over the fire-place and thus afford proof of lover's valour
That the Malay States supply the world with three-fourths of its tin and that there are fortunes to be made in the metal, still, by the man who is steady enough to work and save, were other state ments made, whilst graphically told was the tragic story of an island off Java which was suddenly submerged with all its 30,000 inhabitants by volcanic action in the year 1883
Subsequent schooling at Boulogne, where he was the only English boy among three hundred French, and at Cranleigh School, where the head master invariably caned six scholars at mid-day, was referred to. Such was the brutality of this Squeers-like individual, that when young Tickell and a companion ran away to London, to be, eventually, found and taken back to the school, they were thrashed with 6 ft. birches until they were faint and bleeding and until a junior master protested. To-night' Friday the lecture, to which admission is free, will be on the subject of the South Sea Island, anil there will also be an ex hibition of native war weapons	............."
What a pleasant young fellow Mr. Templer Tickell must have been. We should have loved to hear him humourously describe to the horrified audience the way in which the Dyak maiden sends her “fianc e" out to get heads. Perhaps the extra ordinary betrothal was what really horrified the audience.
We are glad to know that there are still fortunes to be made out of tin in the Malay States. This will buck up the Singaporeans like anything, they have been obviously victims of a delusion lately.
We sympathise will Mr. Tickell on his bad time at school and we hope little Templer was not invariably amongst the unfortunate six to be “tickled'' up by the headmaster of Cranleigh School. We have it on his own authority that Mr. Tickell was thrashed with a 6 feet birch: what magnificent physique those masters must have had, personally we always thought a 3 foot cane was sufficient. Those who read the Spectator may have noticed the Ode to the Durian. For the benefit of those who have not we give the lines below.
One of our correspondents supposes it is by the one and only Pope—anyway that is how it is signed. Our correspondent, however, had no idea that the durian has graduated to England in Pope’s time!!!
THE DURIAN.
The traveller who would make us jealous Of his advantages will tell us
Of mountains, lakes, majestic falls, Of rock-hewn shrines, resounding balls, Of magic drums and mystic gongs, And—in conclusion—how he longs To taste once more, while taste he can, That fruit of fruits, the Durian.
The Durian excels, it seems, Whatever in our wildest dreams We dwellers underneath the Bear Can fancy grown in open air, Or raised where glass and heat defy The rigours of our northern sky. On Eve compassion had been wasted, If this had been the fruit she tasted, And Adam had been well-advised For this to be disparadised.
Yet may our traveller, closely-pressed, Own that this Durian, this best Of fruits has—not a fault, but yet A something some might half-regret, Quite trivial and unessential;
The smell, of course, is pestilential.
Poems and novels of to-day Excel, we know, in every way Poems and novels of the past. You seek the best? Then take the last. It turns you sick? Why, so it should: A book that does not is no good.
But one poor pedant, much belated, Musty, morose and antiquated, Cries, as he wags a weary head, “Where are the books that once I read? Let Durians adorn their tree— Apples or strawberries for me!"
Probably some of us will remember the efforts of a zealous dancer last Race Week who attemp ted to reform the rather antiquated methods of dancing affected by the local devotees of that enjoyable and heating pastime. The new methods advocated called for a certain amount of agility and perseverance, but that was nothing to the acrobatics which will be necessary before we hope to attain to that delightful dance known as the Camel-walk and the Camel-trot, which has come to town.
The Daily Mail says—“It has nothing whatever to do with the camel’s power of going without liquid refreshment for long periods. According to the more imaginative of its interpreters, it describes the course of the camel across the desert, although in spite of some acquaintance with the camel on his native ground—I cannot quite see what some of the description refers to. According to one of the experts, it is danced to a slow fox trot and starts with two long gliding steps this partis known as the Sahara (Hide-intended to represent the initial progress of the camel across the desert. The third step is more complicated. It consists (I give the words of the expert) of a glissando, a balance, and three solemn pawings of the ground with the left foot. In the fourth step the welcome sight of an oasis is greeted with hop, skip, and jump. Anyhow if artists and architects may conventionalise flower-forms, why may not the ballroom conventionalise the camel, even to the extent of making it skip like the mountains in the Psalms."
We, amongst others, noticed the article in the
S. P. of 23rd September entitled "Into Unknown
Sarawak," but we forebore from commenting
on it firstly, because we found it difficult to take it
seriously and secondly, because we felt almost
certain that someone else would relieve us of the
task.
Our second supposition was indeed correct: in
the S. F. P. of the 12th October above the*
signature “Borneo" we found a letter which
corrected some of the statements contained in the
first article.
It is of course difficult for Editors of papers to
vouch for the accuracy of all wonderful stories
they print. In this case, however, we fear that
the gentleman who gave the S. F. P. such interest
ing information about unknown Sarawak must
have had a very imaginative mind indeed we
wonder if our contemporary really believed this
lurid tale, or whether its undoubted humour
appealed to the Editorial brain.
We really thought that this "Outskirts of
Empire" yarn had died a natural death years ago.
It would be a dreadfully dull world if everyone
adhered strictly to the truth, but moderation in all
things, gentlemen!! moderation in all things.
ADVERTISEMENT in the North North Borneo
Herald.
FOR SALE.
“ONE A. J. S. six h. p. Twin Cylinder Motor
Bicycle. 1920 Model. Been in use about 15 mouths.
In fair running condition: requires new handle
bars and saddle
Phew! what a time they must have in B. X. B.
The handle bars perhaps	but the saddle gone
too!! Those elephants must be nearly as bad as
rats.
SOME joyous correspondent has been writing
in the S.F. P. about the “Spooks" of Borneo. Describing a haunted road the writer
says " on this road the “hantu " are known to
snatch riders from their bicycles etc
Ah! now we have a clue to the missing saddle belonging to the A. J. S. motor bike.
Conversation overheard at a sub-station between the District Treasurer, on a visit of inspection, and an impecunious Police Constable.
p C.—loq “Tuan. I am under orders to return to Sibu: can I borrow some money before I go to settle up?"
D. T.- " How much do you want to borrow?"
P. C.-“ Half my month's pay."
D. T.-I think if the Native Officer agrees you
might take a small advance, but
perhaps if you take as much as half
your pay the Resident in Sibu will be
angry with you."
p c.—“]f that’s so, I'll take all my pay’!!’’
And quite right too-one might as
well be hung for a sheep as for a lamb
FROM an outstation report : —
“	Owing to the cow shed being very
rotten, a new house was bought across river for $65. After a little alteration this will make a good temporary shed for the cows .
Hats off to the worthy benefactor of cows!!; no doubt with a little painting and papering this
house will make a most desirable, if only temporary,
residence for our bovine friends.
His Worship The Mayor of Kuching, or at
I least that was how it was addressed, has received
a postcard from Canada in which the sender. J. R.
Mutch, says. "I would like to have a list of the
names, occupations and addresses of all the
Mutches or Muches in your city directory."
Well! Well! We have heard of some nerve
before but this is really too “ Mutch. "
Child Actors.
Chinese Star at Ten Years of Age.
I think one of the hardest workers I have ever
seen in my life was a little Chinese boy playing the
leading part in an open-air theatre in the Kuching
Bazaar, Sarawak, Borneo, writes H. H. the Ranee of
Sarawak in a home paper. He was an artist to his
finger lips. He held the centre of the stage and
arrested everyone’s attention, like a small bird of
paradise placed in a gilded cage. He spoke his lines
fluently and rapidly. They told me he was only ten
tears old a “star” player in that little span of years!
One mistake, one hesitation, a slight weariness, and
he would lose his post.
Trained from babyhood to be play-actors, these
children are taught the secrets of sound and action
as soon as they can walk. I could not help com-
paring him with some of our own “star” players
who think themselves ill-used because twice a week
they are obliged to play twice a day. Why, this
child played all day and every day until midnight
with only a few hours rest between! Not only that,
but also he played in the open sunshine, with the
sweating, steaming crowd below him in the street.
And he played in a head-dress of such weight that I
could hardly lift it; his clothes were thicknesses of
gold. ' .
A DIFFICULT PLOT.
The story of a Chinese play is hard to follow.
The characters always seem to me angry and excited.
'There is no repose in their dramas. The stage is
never empty for one moment. Fighting, love, cow-
ardice, and courage, all are there, portrayed by
these child actors. The little boys who represent
the girls flit to and for with their friends, and make
great use of their sleepy, slanting eyes. If a scene
has to be altered, the stage hand moves from the
wings with an opium pipe in his mouth and quietly
hitches up some fresh curtain on a pole and yow
have to readjust your mind as rapidly from a palace
to a river-bank. ’Hie “ orchestra. " consisting of a,
Chinese flute, adds to the general effect of vivacity
and sound. The little boys shriek their amorous
songs The comedian performs Chinese antics in
the corner. And through it all, unperturbed and
glorious in his finery, the little “star" actor plays
bis heroic part, until at midnight the tragedy or
comedy is ended.
Gan he sleep will lie sleep?—this child who
should have been in bed three hours ago, or has the
teaching of perpetual motion been too much fur him?
One wonders how long they live, these children . . -
or if they die, like little tropical birds, trapped for
the self-indulgence of mankind.- (S. T.)
We think Her Highness the Ranee must be mis-
taken when she talks about the stage hand walking
about with tin opium pipe in his mouth. We think
Her Highness means the long pipe with the small
bowl, called by the Chinese hun choi, in which is
smoked very evil smelling tobacco.— [Ed. S- G.]
“ I “ and “My”	Always.
BY
Arthur Mortimer.
I don’t know why she interested me more than
her fellow waitresses. Yet, I do though; undoubted-
ly the result of the omnipresent male in me. Black
and white suited her. Her face was quite beautiful
under the arch of her frilled cap. A face that strangely
reminded me of	what? Funny, I could
never think. But there are faces like that which
call up memory. You have all felt that, at times
very often, havn’t you?
She was tall too; her movements were quite
graceful; it isn’t easy to be graceful when you are
handing half cold cabbage and potatoes to a satiated
Londoner.
That is why I always thought she rose above,
things, though in fact she probably didn't. We are
so apt to clothe others in our own impossible ideas.
It became habitual to sit at one of her tables.
Don't think my heart was affected. It was not in
the very least. It was my eye that was pleased. I
like to be served by well found people. It aids
digestion.
During the six months I lunched there, I don’t
think I said more than, “Good morning," beyond
the necessary ordering of food. True, in the latter
days, she made recommendations; I usually sub-
mitted, because, I imagined, she must know more
about the carte de jour than I did.
One day, for the life of me I cannot tell why. I
ordered coffee after my lunch. I don’t like coffee,
which made my action all the more inexplicable.
She put the cup down before me, and, contrary to
her usual habit, did not at once turn away, remaining
with hands hanging idly at her side.
She wanted to speak to me, I felt, and perhaps I
looked, a little self-conscious.
She looked away. So did I. The room was
almost empty.
I said, oh so stupidly,: "I think we’re in for a
spell of fine weather."
She did not reply to my imbecility for a few
seconds, and when she did, she said :
“ To-morrow, if you sit over there at Miss John-
son’s table she will serve you just as well as I can”—
She must have noticed my look of surprise, for
she added at once : “1 am going into hospital for
an operation.”
“An operation," I repeated incredulously; one
does not expect a person in apparently normal
health, to be the victim of the surgeon's knife.
“ I don't know how I’ve carried on these past
months; the pain has been awful. I shouldn’t have.
But—, I don’t know why I told you—”
She looked away, down the hall with its rows of
orderly white tables.
“It’s really funk. Oh!”
“ What is it?”
“I sha’n't get over it. I’ve put it off too long."
“Nonsence! It will be just a rest cure. When I
come back, you will be here to wait on me as usual.
I’m going on my holiday tomorrow, too— -”
I never felt so ashamed of myself in my life before.
Can we never forget our own beastly little affairs!
Poor girl, while she was standing, looking into the
face of death, I was babbling aliout my holiday, j
“I” and “my", throughout life. Fatuous and de- plorahle.
‘ I hope you will have a good time,’she was saying. "Of course, of course I shall; you’ll soon get well
and strong and	Au revoir—it is only au revoir,
I’m positive. See if it isn't!”
She took the hand 1 held out to her, and gripped
it firmly.
“Pray that you are right,” she said with sudden
emotion, and left me with eyes slowly filling with
tears.
thought, as I got into the tram next day; why
the devil, didn't 1 ask her what hospital she was
going to. I might have Unit her some flowers. I
might even have run up and seen her, quietly. You
can’t do those sort of things openly. Iron-bound
cast. Through probably her ancestors and mino
chatted to one another over a back yard ' wall.
Things are infernally mixed up in life, and even the
war hasn't made any real difference. “I" and “my” are
stronger than war. Do you know, to my eternal
shame, I had quite forgotten about her until the
moment I re-entered the restaurant.
At her table, a short waitress with straw-coloured
hair was giggling at a youth with an aggressive tie.
As she had not returned, I sat at Miss Johnson's
table. Presently I had the courage to say, “Oh, the
young lady who served over there at those tables, is
not back yet."
“No, and she’ll never come back, poor Miss Ripley,
never."
“She did die then." I said. Miss Johnson nodded.
“It's awfully sad, the staff sent her a lovely wreath ;
we all gave her five shillings each.”
“Horrible," I nearly said aloud. Somehow I can
never face Miss Johnson and her table again. To-
morrow I shall find another place to lunch. Why
should I be depressed ?
Tid’ Apa.
There is in the Malay language a little idiom,
which has become almost the national motto, and
is one that is very typical of the Malay character.
Tid’ apa means "Never mind," “It does not
matter," or some such equivalent term, the
Nitsche vo of the Russians and closely allied to the
Manana of the Spaniards and the Dolce Far Niente
of the Southern Italians, which is used on every
conceivable occasion, both appropriately and
inappropriately.
So frequently has the expression ''Tid' apa" been
used by the Malays that it has become a national
trait in the deeds of the people, and the tid' apa
spirit is now thoroughly instilled into their minds.
But it has not stopped there, for tid' apa-itis has
proved a highly infectious complaint, which the
European generally catches after he has been in
contact with it for about six months or a year.
The only known antidote to it is a mighty effort
of will which is seldom apparent ‘ in a climate
sultry." The first symptom is a general lack of
interest in anything and a desire to let things run
their own course regardless of the results. In a
short time the patient is saying "Tid' apa" to
everything.
Tid' apa-itis is common enough in the East to
cease to be really dangerous. But it appears as if
the disease were not only infectious but also con-
tagious, for it seems to have spread to the less
torrid zone of Great Britain, where the spirit of
tid' apa seems very much to the fore just at present.
There seems to be a great deal of “Never mind”
when it is suggested that the markets of the
Netherlands East Indies provide admirable' open-
ings for British traders. It is a poisonous enough
doctrine in the tropics, but it is far worse here and
quite inexcusable. The general idea seems to be
that if trade is booming it is good enough to let
well alone ; if, on the other hand, there is nothing
doing, it is a case of tid' apa, and nothing further
can be done.
Surely this is, in either case, an entirely wrong
view to take of the situation. No good business
was ever yet built up without enterprise, and
certainly none has ever been founded on a tid' apa
policy, and never will be. There is little question
as to the soundness of the Netherlands East Indies
as a field for British enterprise, but it is essential
that this horrible tid' apa feeling be cast off. It is
a fatal policy, spelling stagnation, and quite
inexplicable -Correspondent of “Netherlands East
Indies."—(C.E. & T.)
From the Sarawak Gazette 50 Years Ago.
SARAWAK" GAZETTE.
No 51 S’DAY, NOV., 2ND. 1872. Price 5Cts.
NOTICE.
Is hereby given that the British Consulate has this day been withdrawn from Sarawak.
EL B. M’s Vice Consul.
Sarawak. E. J. MARTEN.
14th Oct., 1872.
A Bazaar or Exhibition of native work was held at the Astana under the auspices of H. H. the Ranee on the 22nd and 23rd of last month. About three hundred pieces of different kinds of cloth, embroidery and fancy work, contributed by the native women in Kuching and the various outstations, were offered tor exhibition and afterwards for sale. The idea of a bazaar of this nature is so en tirely new’ to the Malays and Dyaks, and the time given them for preparing their work has been so short, that the undertaking may be considered a success. A very far number of articles was exhibited, and some of the work, both in fancy embroidery and productions of a more useful character, was really laith valuable and well executed.
The prizes were awarded after the different classes of work had been thorough lv examined. Scrips Mutang gained the first, which consisted of a diamond and sapphire ring presented by the Ranee; the 2nd and 3rd prizes fell to the lot of different workers in Kuching, while the fourth was awarded to some Kalaka people, whose contribution of twelve sarongs, beautifully interwoven with various patterns in gold thread, was much admired.
Some ornamentally carver! paper knives, made of several kinds of wood, were contri buted by the Rev. W. Crossland, as the work of the Undup Dyaks.
The Bazaar was kept open for two days, during which articles to the value of of about ‘ $300 were sold to various purchasers, Euro pean’ and native.
It is understood that at the next bazaar only fancy work of various descriptions will be exhibited, together with gold spangled sarongs or scarves.
Our readers will be glad to see the Notice we print in another place that the new Hotel will be open for the reception of visitors at Christmas next The building stands upon some rising ground to the right of the Rock Road, scarcely five minutes' walk from the riverside, and the same end of the town as the Public offices, the Steamer's wharf, the Fort and the Church. From the nature of the ground on which the building has been erected, the top of a hill sloping East and West having been levelled to make room for its foundations, there is a good clear view in either direction, and the house itself stands in the open. The extensive clearing once cultivated by the Sugar Company is' at no great distance, and over this some excellent snipe shooting may be had at the proper season, which is now commencing. Visitors may be reminded that Kuching possesses a Library and Reading Room, where the En glish Papers may be seen on the arrival of the steamers, as well as a Billiard Room for those whose tastes are that way inclined. The first of these is close to the Hotel and other about ten minutes walk from it.
The Tariff of charges which is being pub lished we believe is calculated to give satisfac tion, and the general management of the Hotel will be found to be in efficient hands.
A Truly Marvellous Forest,
From the columns of the S. F. P. we learn that “ Less than three years ago Commander J. E. Capstickdale, a naval reservist, left Sydney to invest his capital in Borneo. lie returned to Sydney (says the Brisbane Courier) in a vessel carrying for him a thousand tons of mahogany, cedar, and other timber. During Iris sojourn in Borneo, according to a statement in the “S. M. Herald," he has more than trebled Iris capital, hi an interview Mr. Capstickdale said he never intended to leave his lotus land of Borneo. As an evidence of the productivity of the soil, Mr. Capstickdale remarked that in a radius of 30ft. he had cut 11 trees from 8 to 14ft. in circumference, and from 120 to 150 ft. high to the first branch. It is a fine class of timber, and the haulage of the huge logs out of the hold of the vessel in Sydney provided an interesting spectacle. The visitor claims chat his country, which is quite mediocre, in his estimation, will yield 1 million tons of commercial timber from 31 square miles."
It would be interesting to know in what part of Borneo Commander Capstickdale found such a valuable area of limber. Being unversed in the mysteries of forestry we asked the opinion of an expert who writes as follows:—
Careful estimates made by the Forest Department of British North Borneo over areas representing about 275 square miles of the best commercial forest in the State show that the average stand of timber is about 2,600 cubic feet or 33,280 tons to the square miles Commander Canstickle’s forest, however, which is "quite mediocre'' is estimated to yield 48,387 tons to the square mile.
The productivity of the soil in his forest must be exceptional. I sing the smaller dimensions of 8 feet in girth and 20 feet in length and making allowance for loss in conversion these 11 trees would yield 5,280 cubic feet on an area of *0*065 acres or 160.5 trees per acre yielding 81,347 cubic feet (1627 toils), a truly marvellous forest.
Enumerations made by the Forest Department in the Federated Malay Slates in various forests have given the following results.
In one of the best, forest reserves in Perak there were found to be only 5.42 trees per acre of over 6 feet in girth.
In two finest reserves in Selangor there were found to be 1*2.5 and 9.5 trees per acre of over 3 feet in girth.
Of these-not more than 25% would be of merchan-table size.
It may be remarked that neither Mahogany nor Cedar occur in Borneo. Various Borneo timbers are sometimes used as substitutes for Mahogany, among them being Nyireh (Xylocatpus sp.). a native of the mangrove swamps. Penaga (Calophyllum inophyllum) is another substitute. It is, how ever, not a Mahogany and possesses neither the colour nor the structure of that wood. This timber is distinctly rare. The red Serayas are also used occasionally as substitutes for Mahogany in panelling. Seraya is a wood produced by the genus Shorea of the Dipterocaipnceae. The wood is light, has a reddish tinge and somewhat cedar-like odour. It is consequently known on London market as "Borneo Cedar."
FIRST Tamil gentleman, on meeting a friend:
“Oh, Mr. Rengan, have you heard about Mr. Sinnatamby? He has lost all his money in rubber, and it is all he can do to keep the cat cut of the bag!” Second Tamil gentleman: “Well, well, too much botheration to be sure! Poor Mr. Sinnatamby, he has buttered his
I bun, and be must He on it.”
A Quiet Rubber.
It was Sunday, a hot still day, the kind you know, when you cannot do anything during the day, and again nothing in the afternoon because it rains like,—well like it does rain after a still, hot day. A perspiring figure appeared coming up the path, leisurely ambling along. It bore a note from the Grundy-Brownes; a polite little note asking me to make a fourth at 6 o’clock, in a quiet rubber, and stay to dinner. It did not mention who the fourth was, but then, I surmised it would be a friend of theirs with a gift for the game. I myself, am not gifted with a love of it, though a “quiet rubber” is an excellent pastime. Yes, pastime, that is the word. Not a business, or a labourious undertaking. So I accepted and duly arrived at the Grundy-Browne’s at 6 p. m.
Mr. Grundy-Browne gave me a whisky and in formed me that his cousin, that charming woman, Miss Lettucia Garr-Browne, having gone to visit an Aunt, he had taken the opportunity of arrang ing “a little four" and John Scott Poaker and Willie Cheter were coming round.
Now if there is one person 1 can't stick playing anything with, it is Willie. He does not lack conversation, but then, that is the worst of it. His name implies something which belies it—or him, I forget which it is. Anyhow Willie does not cheat, nor does he ever conspire to win at any thing by illegal means. Moreover, he plays a good game of Bridge and a good game of football. It is just that conversation I can't stand.
I remember playing for Winning Rovers with Willie at centre-forward,—and a good clever centre too--and after the Referee had started the game going, (the whistle had just gone) a voice bawled out “send it out to the wing, man.” I was centre-half and had the ball at that moment and obeying on the instinct, punted the ball to the right wing, old Billy Frost, who was so startled by my accurate pass that he fell over it, together with three opponents who were doing “policeman” on Billy, who was always a marked man. During the three seconds that it took to sort them out, a voice bellowed close by, “ not the right wing. The left wing I meant old chap,"
Again, he stood within 8 yards of goal with nobody on him, and I neatly placed the ball so that all he had to do was to shoot. He shot al right. but about 20 yards left of goal and explained that I ought to have shot hard myself, and left him. I reminded him of the times when I had, 'and he had complained that I didn’t feed him at all, when well placed. Now those of you who gather the kind of man I mean, know that it is not possible to do anything right-except for the Willie Cheters. Well, we sat down and cut. Grundy-Brow ne cut with johnny Poaker, and Willie opened the ball by asking where they would sit. and which cards.
We were 900 down in the first six hands, having held nothing.
“For goodness sake call something partner” said Willie.
“Three Hearts." said I.
“Three!!!”echoed Willie somewhat taken aback by my attack.
I looked at him.
“Three Spades" said Mr. Poaker.
“Double" ejaculated Willie.
“Pass” said Browne.
Now I reasoned if Willie had a hand such as he indicated, he would like the double to go on. And also if he could go three, it was of course quite likely that Poaker would not Ate frightened out of his call, and would probably go up to 4, if I said 4 Hearts. So I passed.
We got the first 3 tricks, but that was all.
Willie looked across at me, sadly shaking his head. 1 know exactly what he was going to say, but got in first.
‘Well, that was very well played Johnny" to Poaker from me.	1
He said nothing, but Willie again inclined his fiery eyes.
"Why ever didn't you go on with Hearts" he said. It was not a question.
Ah well, never mind, thought I. let dear Willie play his own game. After several times trying to assist him in making the decision yes, Willie, as you have guessed, always decided who should win the call- 1 at last struck his suit.
"One no trump" said I.
’Two diamonds" said Poaker.
“Ah! hm ! Well, lets say two spades" said Willie. "Three diamonds" interposed Browne quietly.
1 thought a moment. Only a moment. I had 4 spades to the king.
"Three spades" said 1.
I caught Willie giving me a well directed blow between the eyes.
Not, as you know, a real blow. Just that look on his face which plainly said. "You ass. Oh you awful ass. Take that."
Willie got his call. It did it not to please him, although he had complained wailingly of never holding a hand he could call over. I did it because it was the obvious thing to do with my hand.
We went down one trick.
Willie had 4 Spades, Ace, ten, nine and six. He had nothing besides.
"Why not have gone on with your No-Trumps” he said ominously.
"They called Diamonds. 1 had the King bare I held good cards in your Spades." I answered, very lightly, but firmly.
Then he made that twittering noise with teeth and tongue, best expressed by a multitude of T’s according to the number of times it is perpetrated. It was perpetrated by Willie more times than I have time to write it.
And then a horrible thing happened. Browne revoked. Into the bargain he gained a trick which would have given them Rubber.
“I am most awfully sorry. Lets see. You score 150 above, and we got our Contract only. Honours?” said Browne.
“But” began Willie.
“Yes we only had simple. Thats right.” drawled Browne.
“But" again Willie began. "You can’t store anything below. You revoked.” And he began turning the cards over trick by trick.
"If I had not revoked, you would score nothing at all" said Browne in a very quiet voice.
Now I do not presume to know these little side lights, and they should be settled without argu ment, so I didn’t say anything.
It was settled by reference to a book by a man, I think, called Foster.
Yes, thats it. "Foster on Bridge" I believe. Though, 1 confess, to me, it was as enthralling and informing as “Grace on Cricket."
1 mean there are rules to every game, otherwise, why an Umpire or Referee. But a whole blessed book of hypothetical stuff: pages and reams of what to do if you go so and so, and your opponents go so and so and win the call and you should lead so and so, which nine cases in ten you can t: and if a bowler does so and so and the ball is at such and such a point, how you should hold your bat, and keep your eye on .
Ah ! me. But rules. Yes, rules of almost any game do not take up some several scores of pages.
So Willie, having this particular beanfeast of a book in his hand, proceeded to lay down the law to me. Not the rules of the game, which do not permit of argument, but the "huts” and “ifs” and “perhaps’s” which don’t count for anything, just as Mr. Grace and Mr.-Armstrong give hints in book form to the reader of “Cricket as I play it that reader usually being the kind of man’ who watches cricket but never plays, and gives sarcastic suggestions to Mr. Hirst or Mr. Jessop, as to how
to biff his (the reader’s) favourite bowler , all from' the Grand-stand.! For 2o minutes We all listened, and Browne then led us in to dinner. As we were going in. Willie, not meaning, me in particular, said "What a treat to play Bridge with a really good partner."
Browne fondled his Sherry glass.
“No Willie, it won't do. What yon mean really, old chap, is what a treat it is to hold a four-No-trumper every hand."
"Willie smiled. It was all that was left for him to do.
On leaving - it was last to go- my host said he was sony that Willie had partnered me on the last 3 occasions at his house (he often had us to Bridge), but that on Tuesday if I would honour him, he would arrange a different four.
I shook his hand at this.
“Do you know Benny Goodenough? No? Will 'he is coming and he's a first rate fellow, but un fortunately dumb. I know his finger language," said Browne.
“Dumb! Unfortunately? why unfortunately? said 1.
"You will enjoy a game with Benny," suggested Browne 1 bade him good night and journeyed home.
1 could not help thinking all the way home, what an ideal man for Bridge: Benny Good- enough -dumb.—(Contributed.)
Malayan Woods.
Arrival of Samples in London.
With commendable enterprise the forest -.authorities of the Federated Malay States are giving the users of commercial woods an oppor tunity of making personal acquaintance with the products of the Malayan forests. A few cabinets of samples have arrived at the offices in Cannon street of the Malay States Information Agency, where they may be obtained.
Each cabinet contains 70 samples, four inches by three, and half-an-inch thick. Each sample is named and initialled by Dr. F. W. Foxworthy, Forest Research Officer, F. M. S. They are smooth but unpolished, and it is thus possible to appreciate the beautiful grain of some o( the woods and to judge their suitability for cabinet or other wood work.
A full description of the woods is given in Dr. Foxworthy's bulletin “Commercial Woods of the Malay Peninsular," also obtainable at the Agency. The bulletin contains other information likely to be of service to the trade. Tables show the specific gravity of the various woods, as well as the dry weight and seasoned weight in pounds per cubic foot, and a chapter is devoted to the possible uses of the woods under varying conditions.
In his description of meranti, Dr. Foxworthy says it is produced by different soft-wood species of the genus Shorea. The wood varies in colour from a very pale pink or yellow to a dark red. It is soft and light, coarse-grained and easily worked. There is usually a very distinct difference between sapwood and heartwood. The sapwood is usually small in amount, and should be removed: rays fine to medium and straight; pores large and scattered, resin-canals forming conspicuous con-centric lines; wood parenchyma usually scanty in amount or lacking. Some of the pale yellowish forms occasionally have their pores arranged in a more or less reticulate pattern. This is the most abundant wood of the Peninsula. It is found in large quantity in almost every forested area, and makes up probably as much as 15 per cent, of the total volume of wood produced in Malaya.
As the timber comes into more extended use a number of grades will be recognised. This is the principal plank wood of the country. The better
coloured and figured pieces of meranti, like seraya, can be used as substitutes for mahogany in panels, veneers, etc. Meranti would seem to be one of the most promising woods which we have for the manufacture of ornamental veneers. It is light and porous enough to give quick results in season ing. With care grades like kepong, which arc now but little used, can be much more widely employed.. To a certain extent meranti does now, and it will still more in the future, occupy in the local trade the place which is taken by deal in the temperate regions.—(C. E. & T.)
Review.
THE TRAVELS OF TIADATHA BY OWEN RUTTER, author of “The Song of Tiadatha.” (Published by T. Fisher Unwin, Adelphi Terrace, London, W. C. 2. Price 4/6 net.)
We have read many appreciative articles on this work which is composed on the metre of "Hiawatha."
It would be impossible for those who have lived any time in this part of the East not to appreciate the marvellous manner in* which the author has interpreted the ordinary, and to many of us seem ing dull, life of the sojourner in Borneo.
The beginning of this collection of verses is given up to Tiadatha’s life in London and his departure for Singapore, whilst the end is descrip tive of his journey to Japan, Formosa and New- York, and his final return to England. But it is the middle which proves of such intense interest to readers in these parts.
The arrival in Singapore and the sailing for British North Borneo are treated in a manner which brings out a joyous outlook on life, whilst the account of Tiadatha’s wanderings in “The Jungle hand" cannot but help bring recollections, and often sad ones at that, to its readers.
The author has exhibited not only a spirit of irresponsible gaiety but also a wonderful insight into the teal beauties of the East, which he treats with a great delicacy of feeling.
“The Enchanted Jars" will charm its readers. The Rajah's intense disappointment when his beautiful River Lady eludes him- is well worth quoting:
"But, alas! he never reached her,
In his arms he never held her, Never knew her soft caresses, Never felt her hair about him, For upon that very instant From his longing eyes she faded, Vanished from the royal palace, And the River People with her. Then there was a peal of thunder, And a blinding flash of lightning, And the river roared in anger. Then there came a deathly stillness, Stealing through the lighted palace, Giving place to gong and laughter. For the Rajah and the courtiers, And the ministers and captains, And the slaves and dancing maidens, All had vanished from the palace, But on every hand were scattered Jars of different shapes and colours; Some were standing, some were fallen, Some were leaning on each other. But one greater than its fellows, Noble, delicate and flawless. Stood alone beside the cushions Where the River Queen had rested	"
We could go in quoting from these verses— selections both grave and gay. One feels better for reading this book. Sandwiched in between lines of apparently charming nonsense are bits of shrewed common sense and real poetical beauty. Indeed, a book which should be read by all.
Gold in Upper Sarawak.
Since The Borneo Company's cessation of mining
operations in Upper Sarawak, there has been
amazing activity in the quest for gold.
The writer is informed that the Government
have received applications from no less than two
proposed Companies for rights to treat ore chemi-
cally from deposits both at Bau and Bidi.
Apart from this, innumerable Chinese and Malays
have been scrambling to obtain rights to stream
for free gold.
At first only the tailings streams were permitted
to be worked, but as the Company gradually
demolished their buildings and machinery the
streamers were allowed further scope for their
activities.
—during this period of restraint it appears that
news spread of the possibility of making a fortune,
and former Chinese miners started to return to
Bau from all quarters. Kongsis began to form, and
on application certain orc deposits were allowed
to be worked on the payment of a nominal rale
levied with the idea of controlling the rush and
preventing trouble. Men, women and children
are now engaged in streaming the sand in the
ditches and going through the old ash and small
tailings heaps; anything from 50 cents to $4 a
person per day is being won.
This enterprise, although very remunerative, will
naturally come to a quick end. In the mean-
time attention is being paid to old deposits and
tailings dumps, and the writer learns that a kongsi
of 17 men (in a certain deposit) have had a clean
up on the first of each month (Chinese) for the past
three months, and their returns have been 52, 49
and 40 tahils, thus extracting gold to the value of
$4,794 (local price). The monthly decrease noted
is owing to the time spent in removing overburden.
Being dubious of these figures, the writer asked
to see the gold produced by the last clean up and
was shown this done up in packets just as each
man's share was to be allotted to him. In each
packet of fine go hl were found nuggets ranging
in weight from 6 amas* to 4 chuchoks (one
nugget weighing 1 tahil 1 amas: unfortunately had
gone to the melting pot before the writer had
made his enquiries)
There are now Kongsis working other deposits
in a similar manner, whose estimated returns
average 40 tahils per Kongsi.+
A still more enterprising Kongsi has now been
formed consisting of 28 men. who intend to work an
old tailings dump. At the time of writing they are
engaged in making a parit to bring water to their
dump and they are confident of recovering at least
$2,000 worth of gold per month. Wages of A 25 per
month are being paid and at the moment there is
not an available coolie for other work, as fast as
they return in Bau, they get employment. Already
there are 300 registered gold workers
Whether or not these profits will be made for a
period of any length it is impossible to say, but it
is gratifying to note that, after all, Upper Sarawak
is not dead yet, and further corroboration of this
will be found in the report of Mr. Sharples, Chief
Government mycologist F. M. S & S. S. He has
expressed his opinion that the pepper disease,
which is so prevalent in Upper Sarawak and which
has reduced the planting almost to a negligible
factor, can be controlled with little expense.
It is sincerely hoped that Upper Sarawak will
soon return to its former prosperity. Being in close
proximity with Kuching it should form a health
resort to that City as apart from the exquisite
scenery, Bau is still capable of catering for Club
life, with tennis, golf and deep lake bathing.
8-28 Amas 1 oz.
1 Tahil 10 Amas.
10 Chuchoks l Amas.
(Contributed.)
Kuching Sanitary and Municipal
Advisory Board.
Report or Meeting held on Thursday,
28th September, 19M4.
Present
Mr. K. H. Gillan (Chairman), Captain C. P-
Lowe, Messrs. E. Parnell. Salleh Marican,.
Law Chin Hian, Tan Sum Guan. Kon Eng
Law, C. Fenwick and Haji Hassim.
Absent:—
Dr. O. G. F. Luhn and Lam Chin Gee.
The proposed building By-laws were under
discussion during the whole course of the meeting
which was adjourned till Thursday 5th October
for further consideration of these.
Report of Adjourned Meeting held on
Thursday, 5th October.
Present: —
Mr. K. H. Gillan (Chairman), Messrs. E.
Parnell. Tan Sum Guan. Salleh Marican,
Kon Eng Law, Haji Hassim and Captain
C. P. Lowe.
Absent : —
Messrs. C. Fenwick. Law Chin Hian, Lam
Chin Gee anti Dr. O. G. F. Luhn.
The proposed building By-laws were further
considered and after certain modifications had
been made in connection with the paving of bath
rooms and latrines in areas outside the bazaar
and in the Mohamaden reserves, were duly
approved.
A proposal by Captain C. P. Lowe relative to
the reservation of a Catchment -area on the
Matang Mountain for Water Works purposes was
approved and that Captain Lowe be asked to
approach the Government accordingly.
It was however thought inadvisable to make
any recommendation in regard to a proposal by
Dr. O. G. F. Luhn that the Matang Estate be
dosed down within this area in view of a state-
ment by Captain C. P. Lowe that His Highness
the Rajah had already sanctioned the removal of
the coolie lines below the proposed Catchment
area
A discussion took place on a proposal by the
Chairman By-law No. 1, 1922, should be aim tided
by the addition of a section specifying maximum
taxes to be charged on motor cars being hackney
carriages as follows: —
(a) On every motor car licensed to carry not
more than four passengers 850.
(b) On every motor car licensed to carry not
more than seven passengers $75.
This was after discussion seconded by Mr. Kon
Eng Law and approved.
A discussion took place regarding a proposal of
the Chairman that the maximum tax leviable on
dogs be increased to $5 in order that a differential
tax be charged on dogs and bitches with a view to
reducing the excessive number of dogs in the
Municipal area. It was eventually agreed on the
proposal of Mr. Tan Sum Guan seconded by Mr.
Salleh Marican that the maximum tax might be
increased to $3.
The proposal by the Chairman that the owners
of all lands within the Municipal area used for
grazing purposes should adequately fence them
in to the satisfaction of the Officer in Charge
Municipal Department was duly approved.
It was suggested by the Chairman that owing to
the insanitarv condition of the drains facing the
Police Barracks that these might be constructed of
brick or cement and that steps should be taken to
prevent the obnoxious smell from the drain at the
corner of Pearl Street and Barrack Road. Captain
Lowe informed the meeting he would look into
the matter and report.
A proposal was made by the Chairman that the work of refacing the cement drains in the bazaar be either let out on contract or additional masons employed to complete it. Captain Lowe informed the meeting that tenders had been invited for this work.
The Chairman asked Captain Lowe whether arrangements could not be made to water the' streets as owing to their present condition, clouds of dust were raised by the scavengers and motor traffic, which settled on foodstuffs exposed for sale and caused annoyance to passengers. Captain Lowe informed the meeting that the water cart was not in working condition but he would see whether repairs could be effected.
A proposal was made that a motor lire engine be purchased. The Chairman pointed out that the existing fire engine would only be of use in the case of fires in its immediate neighbourhood and that in the case of fire in any outlying district the firemen would probably be in such a state of exhaustion by propelling the engine that if they ever got to the scene of the fire at all they would be quite useless. The proposal made by the Chairman and seconded by Mr. Tan Sum Guan was approved.
The Chairman asked the meeting whether in view of the increased motor traffic it would not be advisable to either remove the stall holders in Carpenter Street and Ewe Hai Street to the ad joining side streets or to close the main streets for motor traffics after 4 p. m.
After discussion it was proposed by Mr. E. Parnell seconded by Mr. Kon Eng Law and ap proved by the meeting that the use of Carpenter Street and Ewe Hai Street be prohibited for the erection of Food Stalls and that Stall Holders be confined to Bishopsgate and China Streets but that in Kling Street they be allowed to erect stalls on one side of the road only and that in view of this proposal an arrangement should be made for Stall Holders in Bishopsgate and China Streets to hold the pitches nearest Carpenter Street in rotation.
The Chairman drew the attention of Captain C. P. Lowe to the suggestion of certain house holders in the streets fronting the river that the lighting posts should be erected on the river side of the street as if erected at the side of the foot way it would be an incentive to burglars to enter premises by means of these posts. Captain C. P. Lowe requested he might be notified in writing in regard to the matter.
An application was made by Mr., Law Wee Pheng to use the vacant ground between his premises and No. 24. Khoo Hun Yeang Street for a Badminton Court on his undertaking to keep it in a clean condition and subject to its return to the Government when required. This was ap-proved.
An application was made by the Cycle and Auto Garage to erect a movable footboard in front of their premises in Ewe Hai Street to enable motor cars to enter and leave their shop. It was arranged that the Chairman should examine the premises in this connection.
Mr. E. Parnell notified his resignation under section 7 Part II of the Kuching Municipal Order.
Report of Meeting held on Monday,
43rd October. 1922.
Present:—
Mr. K. H. Gillan (Chairman), Captain C. P. Lowe. Dr. O. G. F. Luhn, Messrs. Tan Sum Guan, Lam Chin Gee; Law Chin Ilian, Salleh Marican, Kon Eng Law. C. Fenwick and Haji Hassim.
The Chairman having previously notified mem bers of the Board regarding the comments of the Officers Administering the Government in regard to the Building By-laws and other proposal submitted asked whether in the opinion of the meeting the proposed By-laws should be modified on the lines suggested by the Officers Administering the Government.
It was agreed on the proposal of Captain C. P. Lowe seconded by Mr. Salleh Marican to modify those as suggested and that the requirements of the Board in connection with Building operations should be obtainable at the Public Works Office. It was further recommended that no fees should be charged for the passing of plans and inspection.
In connection with the taxes on motor cars for hire and increased maximum tax on dogs the Chairman asked (t) whether the maximum taxes as originally approved by the Board should still be recommended or whether the rates of $20 or $30 respectively on the two classes of hackney motor cars as suggested by the Officers Administering the Government should be applied and (2) whether in the opinion of the meeting the proposed increase on the maximum tax for dogs should still be recommended for adoption.
Regarding the first query it was approved on. the proposal of Mr. Tan Sum Guan seconded by Captain C. P. Lowe that the taxes suggested by the Officers Administering the Government be applied. In connection with the second query it was proposed by Captain C. P. Lowe seconded by Mr. Tan Sum Guan that a maximum tax 82 be charged on dogs both male and female and that this maximum be applied to bitches only for the time being. This was approved.
At the conclusion of the meeting the Chairman proposed that the Boards regret at Mr. Parnell’s retirement and appreciation of his work on the Board be recorded in the minutes.
This was unanimously approved.
MONTHLY REPORTS.
Sadong Colliery.
September.
The gross out-put of coal produced by the mines during the month, was 1.(174.03 tons: 450 tons of this was consumed by our boilers, and the balance of 1,224.03 tons delivered to the wharf for export.
The balance of coal in stock at the end of the month, was 2,481.06 tons.
The Fan-drift was repaired and a foundation was put down for the old sawmill engine, which was also put in commission for driving the Fan during the month. The old Engine, which is inefficient for the work, is being kept on HI readiness for any cases of emergency, on its old foundation.
Good progress wits made with the stoping out of the coal at the upper seam mine under difficult conditions and a treacherously thin cover.
The mandor of this mine, by name Ho Seng, was sentenced to a term of nine months imprison ment, for breach of trust, during the month.
There was very little out-put from No. 8 mine, as the pillars worked beside the old main deep are very unremunerative. No. 9 mine workings also struck barrel: ground during the latter half of the month.
The labour force at the new mines Was employed in driving the Adit and erecting concrete arches at the two drifts.
The wharf and river-bank were both greatly damaged by the high tides during the month.
The rainfall during the month was 8'41 inches.
J. W. EVANS,
Manager.
SIBU
August.	Cum/.—The Court Writer of Kanowit, Jack tie Rozario, was sentenced to 2 years imprisonment for criminal misappropriation of Government monies in his charge, total defalcations $200. Nyanggu, Dyak, was sent to gaol-for 6 months in default of payment of a fine. Two Dyaks prisoners, who escaped from the gang sometime ago, one of them for the second time, were punished and put into irons. There were no other cases of any importance before the Courts.
Public Works - -The prisoners completed the Rest House site and concrete pillars for the kitchen, and carried a quantity of limber to the site. They also levelled the site of the new bungalow and built the path from the main road to the site, and the belian bridge connecting the path with the main road. The bridge to the Rest House and another to the Court House were also completed by the prisoners.
Prisoners also built a new copper godown under the big concrete vault, by walling up the space underneath it with concrete and fixing the entrance with a heavy door to the outside of the Fort. Hitherto the copper has been stored in boxes in a godown under the Fort and, it being infested with white ants, the boxes have always been destroyed. The new godown will of course be proof against these pests. The painting of the Court House was put in hand and also that of No. 2 bungalow, which was ready for the Doctor at the end of the mouth. The Tamil gang was employed in levelling and weeding as usual. The contractor commenced work on the new Rest House towards the end of the month.
The Malay houses which were on the proposed hospital site were demolished by the prison carpenter.
General.—The Auditor, Mr. Calvert, completed the audit of the Station in the District finishing that of Rejang, Mate etc. by the end of the month, after which he was proceeding to Oya and Mukah
The 8th, being the anniversary of the birthday of His Highness the Tuan Muda, was observed as a Public Holiday.
The p. s. Adeh arrived from the North via Ports on the 9th with Messrs. F. G Carpenter, H. H. Kortright, C. D. Adams and M. Hood leaving next day for Kuching with Mr. and Mrs. H. If. Kortright and 2children, Messrs. H. D Aplin, H. Calvert. R. A. Miller Hallett, F. G. Carpenter, C. D. Adams, M. Hood and Dr. Reed.
I left for Sadong by the s. s. Alice Lorraine, with Mrs., Owen and family, on the 12th. With Mr. IT. Calvert, I returned from Sadong in the s. I. Chamois on the 24th returning thence again by the Chamois.
I arrived at Sibu by H. H. r. Zahora from Sadong on the 31st with Mrs. Owen and family, Bishop and Mrs. Bickley, Master F. Bickley and Miss Felton.
The s, s. Flevo and Ban Siong Bee made two trips to and from Singapore during the mouth sailing in company. The s. s. Sarawak made two trips to Dalat proceeding via Sibu on each occasion, and the m l. Chin Teck Lee made one trip to and from Kuching. The 6. s. Alice Lorraine brought a cargo of coal on the 3rd and on the 11th arrived with Dr. Marjoribanks who has been appointed Medical Officer to this Division. She again left for Kuching on the 26th with Messrs. G. T. M. Mac Bryan and E. V. Andreini.
Penghulu Abbas’ long house was totally destroyed by fire one the 31st. This is the second time he has lost his house by fire in 5 years. All the contents were a total loss as on the previous occasion.
Songalang. a Dyak prisoner who escaped from the gang some time ago, was recaptured in the Julau by the Rangers on the 28th. His companion Untau, who escaped at the same time and was recaptured and escaped a second time, was again caught during the month at Binatang.
While the site for new bungalow was being levelled
on the wireless ground a gusi jar was unearthed from
just below the surface and was found to contain human-
bones. No graves have ever been located here before*
and what this jar was doing there is a mystery. It
was found directly under the site of Sha Liong’s
cattle shed which was demolished very many years,
ago.
' The rainfall for the month amounted to & 18 inches.
The weather was unsettled and stormy, some very
strong blows from the S. W. being experienced on
several occasions.
The Dyaks, Chinese and Malays were all busy
farming during the month. Reports from upriver-
presage a very heavy crop of engkabang fruit. A
good fruit season will be experienced judging by the-
appearance of fruit trees of all description.
DONALD A. OWEN.
Resident 3rd Division..
BINTULU.
August.
On the 8th, accompanied by Dr. Reed, Divisional'
Medical Officer, I took passage by p s. A de It for
Kuching to attend Race Week and was away frons
the District until the 24th.
On my return I found everything in good order*,
and that various instructions left by me had been
faithfully carried out.
September.
Court work has been exceedingly light nil the-
month.
The p. s. Adeh, northbound, called is on the 9th;
passengers by her were Messrs. Down and Water-
house for Bintulu, Mr. and Mrs. Baird and Mr.
Carpenter for Miri and Miss Swayne for Limbang.
His Highness the Rajah was pleased to station a
launch in this District and the s. 1. Elizabeth arrived
in tow of p. s. Adeh.
Joon Hin. Dresser, also arrived and the Dressing.
Station was opened on the 12th; since which date
many Dyaks have received N. A. B. injections and
the fact of there being a Dresser here is greatly
appreciated by all.
Messrs. Down and Waterhouse, having completed
their business here, proceeded to Miri by small boat
on the 18th.
On the 27th the p. s. Adeh called oil the mouth o£
the river and dropped Mr. Calvert, Government
Auditor, who at the end of the month was still
engaged in auditing the accounts of the District.
The heat during this month has been very trying
and there has been a good deal of sickness in the
kampongs, especially amongst children, many of
whom have died.
ft is rumoured that there ought to be a fair eng-
kabang crop from the up river streams, and this
should be ripe in another two or three months.
Trade Returns:—
Imports.	Exports.
August	$11,579.19	$23,671.23
September 2i.lt29.88	13,559.59
HENRY H. KORTRIGHT,.
District Officer.
MIRI.
September.
The usual cases came before the Courts but none
worthy of any special mention. Figes and fees
amounted to $673.83.
Mr. Taylor arrived from Kuching on the 2nd
instant to take charge of Wireless and Telephones.
On the 2nd instant there was an official opening
of the Club for the Senior Asiatic staff of Messrs.
LAWAS and TRUSAN.
August.
Court.—Ah Chit was imprisoned for one month
for theft of tobacco leaves. Leow Long fined for.
libel and contempt of court, Wahid of Trusan fined
$10 for fighting, Ah Choi was punished for breach
of pass regulations, and Sastro, a runaway Javanese
coolie from B. N. B., was detained pending enquiries.
Abai Tapak was imprisoned for six months for
assaulting Kurus with a parang during a drunken
brawl.
General.—I left for Kuching on the 9th to attend
the races, and returned on the 26th on the p. s. Adeh.
accompanied by Lieut Colonel and Mrs. Butcher,
who came on a visit to the station.
The p. s. Adds fouled her anchor on leaving the
wharf and had to cut it away. The in. 1. Burong
called at the Vamco timber mill and loaded sixty
tons of sawn lumber for Miri.
Akai Angau and some Tagals, who had been brought
down by Government from the interior and ordered
to live near the station, returned to the interior
during my absence without obtaining permission.
A young bull was slaughtered and all the meat
sold.
The Punang Malays wished to use a considerable tract of land as buffalo alaman, but were not allowed to do so as this would interfere with agriculture.
I brought two ponied back from Kuching, these will facilitate travelling in the district. H. H. the Rajah has also promised that a launch shall be stationed here as soon as one is available.
The influenza epidemic, reported last month, seems to have abated. At one time the entire squad of Rangers at Trusan was flown with this complaint. Practically no rain fell during the first three weeks but the latter part of the month was very wet.
P. W. D.—The buildings were whitewashed with the exception of the Fort. Sufficient planks and posts were collected to repair the bridges on the Gayah road and the work is almost completed. The swampy parts on the Trusan road were put in order by the prison gang which averaged twenty.
