The Sarawak Gazette.
TUESDAY. AUGUST 1, 1922.
EDITORIAL.
The Sarawak Gazette might well be called the Kuching Gazette as, bar the official reports from outstations, it contains as a rule nothing but Kuching news.
We would suppose that Miri, with its two hundred European inhabitants could supply interesting news, whilst Sibu,. the centre of the huge Rejang district and in communication with the coast, might also pass on its local gossip.
As we cannot achieve the impossible by being in two places at once, the Sarawak Gazette seldom contains any of the news of the whole Country.
We quite feel for those unfortunate outstation readers who complain that “Answers to Correspon-dents" and "Topical Topics” leaves them cold.
Those who read the North Borneo Herald will n nice that all parts of that State are represented by their respective notes.
The great majority of our readers do appreciate accounts of native customs, curious local peculiarities and similar matter. Weare sure that there are many diving in outstations who could supply us with most interesting reading. Perhaps many, remembering the old adage of “A little knowledge is a dangerous thing etc. “fear to expose themselves to the possible risk of ridicule and contradiction. That there is always this risk, we admit, but then everybody admires a “ trier."
We notice that " Comestres" has written two articles lately for the S. T. P. on Miri. Will not “Comestres" send us something too ?
There are so many things in this country which look different from various points of view. The most interesting tales can be woven from materia which others have cast aside as useless. We are reminded of the famous answer given by Turner to the critic who complained that he had never seen a sunset like the one in the picture he was viewing—“No" replied Turner “but don't you wish you had!" This answer, in our opinion, explains why we are so often charmed by the writings of others—the basis of the theme is often quite familiar, but it is set before us clothed in a new- light, decked out in new colours—and yet all the time we wonder why we had not thought of it in that light before. This appeal is, therefore, directed to all those who have perhaps often thought of writing down their experiences but have, for fear of ridicule, held back.
The Rajah Charles Brooke Memorial Fund.
NOTES
July.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Mr. F. H. Kortright, returned from Singapore on the 6th by s. s. Kuching.
His Highness brought over a new car which he had purchased in Singapore.
AMONGST the passengers on the same vessel were Mr. and Mrs. C. S. Griffiths, Mr. H. L. Owen, Mr. J. C. Swayne and Mr. T. A. Robarts.
We welcome Mrs Griffiths who has come out again from home.
Mr. H. L. Owen and Mr. J. C. Swayne were returning from leave.
AMONGST recent Gazettings are Mr. H. L. Owen to be District Officer of Baram, Mr. J. C. Swayne to do duty at Oya and Mr. E. O. Bruce to do duty in the 2nd Division.
MR D. A Owen, Resident of 3rd Division arrived by s. s. Alice Lorraine on the 13th accompanied by Mr. H. L Owen and Master Tony Owen.
He returned again on the 16th.
Mi: H. Ellis arrived from Singapore on the
17th and left again on the 20th.
Mr. Ellis, who is Manager of Linotype and
Machinery Ltd. Singapore, came over in
connection with the proposed reorganisation of the Government Printing Office. The
present machinery, or at least most of it, has been in use for well over fifty years. With the present increase of work it has been found
impossible to carry on with the old methods
and the proposition is to install the Linotype
System, together with a new Press; the whole
machinery to be driven by motors. The
matter is under consideration at present.
A correspondent sends us the following:—
“Favoured with pleasant weather and a
large concourse of competitors with new
boats, a very interesting Regatta took place
at Mukah on the 21st, where some fast racing
was witnessed.
Visitors from the Oya and Balingean rivers
turned up in force and the large number of
entrants for the more important events
necessitated heats being paddled off the
previous day. which events in themselves
caused no little excitement.
Considering the difficult course and nu-
merous entries, it was remarkable that no
instances of fouling marred results.
The time honoured “tiffin” and “main”
took place in the Fort, being largely attend-
ed, and thanks are due to those officiating
for a very enjoyable meeting.”
A copy of the programme was also sent, by
which we see that the honours in the long boat
races were shared by the Dalat Kongsi and
Mr. F. G. Carpenter.
SUJAL, a Malay who has been working as second boy to Mr. S. H Lawrence, WAS brought before the Police Court on the 11th charged with theft of $30 in silver and notes and a Silver cigarette box, the property of his master. The charge was proved and Sujal sentenced to 12 months imprisonment.
Mr. Lawrence lost some $290 about five months ago from the same safe.
We hope this sentence will be a deterrent to other servants. In these days many of the so called “boys” appear to consider that they have no duties towards their masters other than doing the very minimum amount of work, I coupled with demanding the most exhorbitant wages. Servants should understand that in return for their wages they are bound to give their masters work to the best of their ability.
We have noticed a spirit of mild Bolshevism amongst a certain class of servant lately; they are not willing to give their masters any extra I service and appear to forget the man kind nesses which they have received. We wish it to he understood that this does not apply to Malays only but to all nationalities of servants in Sarawak. There are, of course, exceptions, but they are few and far between.
MR. H. D. Aplin and Mr E. O. Brine
arrived from Sibu by s I; Chamois on the
23rd. The latter is passing through Ku-
ching on transfer to the 2nd Division.
Mr. Aplin returned to Sibu on the 25th.
MR. A. D. Taylor arrived on 16th by s. s.
Kuching to take up the position of Assistant
on Probation in the Government Wireless
Department.
WE are told that one of the ponies at the
Astana Farm has died from the effects of in-
juries inflected upon him by some of the other
ponies.
We have no particulars except that it was
the pony known as number 8, a roan with a
white face, 11 2 hands.
THE attention of the Municipal authorities
is drawn towards the state of many of the
draught bullocks drawing carts in Kuching.
Many of these animals are unfit for work
owing to sores and lameness.
Is there no local equivalent of the S. P. C. A?.
Dr. Mj berg informs us that be proposes
to leave for the upper sources of the Baram
River, in the first week of August.
He hopes to visit the interior parts of the
Kelabit Country and expects to be away
until January of next -year., he will be
accompanied by two natives collectors and
he hopes to make a thorough biological, sur-
vey of the jungle regions and the mountains
beyond.
Mr. J. P. Anderson of the Wireless Depart-
ment went to Singapore on 9th July to meet
his wife who is coming out to the East for
I the first time.
Mr. C. S. Griffiths has been Gazetted as Assistant in the Land and Survey Department, to date from May 1st 1922.
JUST before going to press we bear that Mr. E. H. Kortright’s racing pony Cou has died. The pony has not been well for some time and unfortunately belied its name by not getting better and better.
AMONGST the passengers on the s. .4. Kuching, which arrived on 28th, was Miss Swayne who has visited Sarawak before.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Mr. F. H. Kortright and Mr. and Mrs. K. H. Gillan paid visit to Santubong on the 22nd returning again on the 25th.
J HE great event of the month was un-doubtedly the anniversary of that historic occasion when “St. James, Ap. again visits Sarawak, 1843” as recorded in the Sarawak Gazette Almanac for July 25th 1922.
MB. F. G. Day who bad been to Sibu on official business, and Mr J. P. Mead who had been on duty in the 5th Division, returned to Kuching by p. s. Adell on the 29th.
DRY rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah during June was approximately 75,000 lbs.
Murder and Suicide at Stampin.
On the 13th a terrible murder and suicide
occurred on a pepper garden in ulu Stampin near
Simpang Tiga.
Chong Mee reported to the Police on the 13th
that he had found his brother lying murdered in
the house, and suspected one Bong Fatt with whom
the murdered man had quarrelled.
The Superintendent of Police, accompanied by
others, repaired to the spot where they surrounded
Bong Fatt’s house. Being unable to gain an entry
they broke in and discovered Bong Fatt lying dead,
having apparently poisoned himself. The body of
Chong FOOD was then examined when it was found
that he had received terrible injuries inflicted by a
sharp weapon.
An inquest was held in the Pavilion on the 20th
before Mr. H. A. Adams, Coroner, and a jury. The
evidence pointed to a quarrel over a Dyak woman
anil after listening to the statements made by the
Police and other witnesses, the jury returned a
verdict of murder against Bong Fatt, who after-
wards committed suicide by swallowing tuba.
A Census of the Balui.
The Resident of the 3rd Division has sent us a
rough census of the Balui compiled recently by
Mr. G. T. M. MacBiyan The census includes all
those living above Giani Tukok within the limits
of the 3rd Division
The total population amounts to 5.714 of which
2,868 are male and 2,486 female. The Kayans
number 2.791 and the Kajangs 1,919.
We note that the Lisum tribe have been entirely
wiped out. Neither Bukitans nor Chinese are
included in the census. We learn that there were
said to have been more than 200 deaths last year
owing to failure of the crops.
In the detailed list attached we note with interest
that, with a few exceptions, the numbers of males
and females are almost equal.
Letters from a London Loiterer.
LONDON,
July. 18th 1922.
MY DEAR ARCHIBALD,
Since Percy’s correspondence with Cuthbert
seems to have passed through ail the stages from
the zoolical to the vegetable: and, from what I read
in the May Gazette, is now in the nasal catarrh
period—as Mr. Latimer says, “there is nothing like
an attack of catarrh for bringing out character"—I
do not see why we should not start writing to each
other, do you? Nothing like a change sometimes—
even a clean pocket-handkerchief you know—and
yon might really have called me last Cuthbert effort
“Great Expectorations.”
Being on leave is all very tine, Archibald, but it ,
never comes up to one’s expectations. Theft is the
question of Finance, you know. They are always
having conferences about that here now-a-days—
; Pierrp nut Morgan and all the other multi-million-
aires even. I have been at several myself too—the
, only difference being that there were no millionaires
present, unless of course Mr. Attenborough. Putting
frivolity on one side with a firm hand though, one
1 really does inquire live fishers a day now in order to
be able to have one’s shave and brush one’s teeth
-that is not even starting to think of fond, unless of
course you use that stuff that lies flat on the brush.
Clothes are still very expensive compared to pre-
war days, if you want to get decent cloth—but shirts
and socks and such-like fair raiment seem remark-
ably cheap again compared to Singapore.
Not having been home for many a year under
uber than war conditions, it strikes me how polite
every one is compared to what they were in pre-war
days—taxi-drivers included- hut then I never can
realise that there are only eight half-crowns to the
pound.
Communism—the rankest of Bolshevism- is how-
ever rampant everywhere Much more than is ever
revealed in the papers, or realised by the majority
of easy-going people at home I bought an evening
paper in St. James’ yesterday and overheard the
man saying to another news-vendor standing near-
by "the (unprintable) War Office sent me four
(sanguinary) medals ter-dye! Wot’s the use of the
(crimson) thingster me? I’m or f to sell the(illuminated)
. things when this little bunch of news is finished."
1 It seemed a great pity that all the traditions and
de corps of the war should be lost so soon.
Another thing that struck me is that it is no
i disgrace to be seen anywhere with golf clubs or a
tennis racket on Sundays I can remember not so
long ago seeing people go to all manner of subter-
fuges to disguise a bag of clubs when passing
church-goers. This seems all a change for the
better.
The theatres seem very poor—and the class of
tiling people laugh at is pathetic, and when it’s
j meant to be pathetic it generally is really funny.
Old “Papa" went with me to one show which is
being boomed by Northcliffe, and had to go out at
the end of the first act. It was his last night on
leave, and he went back to the club and drank ginger-
ale for three hours, which will show you how bad
the poor old mofussil must have been.
There's no climate in this Country—it's just
Weather. You wake up one day to find it as hot as
I the New Club’s Billiard Table, and then, having
discarded all the decencies of life, you go down to
I breakfast and have to cut through a coating of ice
to get at your porridge.
Every Revue and Music-Hall has a song about
“the Silver Lining to the Dark Clouds.” or “the
Spring is Coming" business “though Winter be
here.” This gives you an idea f the mentality of
people with even a 25% income tax.
But things are not so bad. I have just struck an old friend—known him for years—ever so long— ever since Big Ben was a watch, you know—and as he's a very good chap—one of those hail fellows well wet—the rest of the furlough—g-h-pronounced soft— may not be so cloudy.
Cheerio! and let me have some of the village gup.
Thine Own,
TIMOTHY.
SELECTION FOR THE RACES.
THE TOUT.
Kuching Races.
The programme for the Kuching races was finally decided upon at a Committee meeting held on the list.
There will be seven races, and prizes to the value of about $1,16O are being offered.
The race course, being under repair, is closed at present but the Committee wish to inform trainers that it will be re-opened again on the 1st of August if possible.
Owners are also warned that Bujang Chinteng, a Malay jockey, is disqualified from riding at this meeting.
The following is the result of the drawing for classes and the weights which the ponies must carry in their first race.
There will be a totalisator run under the same
rules as in former years. Particulars will be given
in the programmes which will be on sale later.
The handsome cup given by the Sarawak
Oilfields Ltd. is now on view in the Court of"
Requests Office.
Animals of Sarawak. Monkey.
Most people here are acquainted with the com-
mon Cercopitheque monkeys the Brok and the
Kra for the reason that they are hardy animals
and easily kept in captivity, though it is truly
astonishing how many people who have lived in
Borneo for more than a year have never seen these
or any other monkeys in their wild state.
The Brok or pig-tailed Macaque is a favourite
pet with Malays, and any number of these clownish,
grimacing creatures may be seen during a stroll
through a Kampong. They are easily tamed, and
it is said that in some places, especially Dutch
Borneo, the natives train them to climb cocoanut
trees and throw down the ripe nuts They are apt
to develop very savage natures in their wild state,
however, and anyone who has come across an old
male in the jungle, with his powerful frame and
huge canine teeth, will agree that an encounter
with this monkey would be far from pleasant.
The Kra or crab-eating macaque makes a some-
what more relined pet. He is certainly more
handsome with his bluish grey whiskers and his
long tail. His physical appearance is perhaps
spoiled by his dead-white eyelids which flash out
with quite disconcerting suddenness whenever
he blinks. 1 have often wondered what is the
significance of these peculiar eyelids, but I can
imagine that their dazzling effect, if put into
action on the approach of a stranger with
suspicious intentions, might be quite sufficient, so
to speak, to put him off his stroke.
An albino variety of the Brok has been seen in
Samarahan. and it would be interesting to know
whether there is any authentic record of an albino
Kra. Lovers of Santubong will recollect the
pretty little island in the bay called ‘Pulau Kra',
and the question of the origin of this name may
have occurred to them. There are no Kra monkeys
there now. and the obvious suggest ion is that there
were some on the island many years ago. But
then, no doubt, the other islands round about also
had their share of the animal.
I put the question to an ancient Malay in San-
tubong Kampong. and he informed me that, 50
years ago or so, there used to be a Ume white Kra
who lived on this island, and that one day a Malay
killed it. Further details I could not obtain even
by persistent questioning. Possibly this may be
an incident of a local folk-lore story, and it would
be interesting to know whether a story of a white
Kra is met with elsewhere.
Borneo can boast of the monopoly of one of the
most interesting monkeys—a monkey with a nose.
This "long nosed monkey” is called Orang blanda
or 'Rasong' by the natives—and it is by no means
uncommon along the banks of the Kuching river.
If you want to see it, take a little sampan and
paddle down river in the evening (preferably by
yourself) during the landas. Past Tanah Puteli,
you will find the banks of the river thickly covered
with large. Pedada trees, and it is on the young
shoots that the Rasong feeds. No doubt you will
see many long-tailed black monkeys in groups of
half a dozen or more, silhouetted against the sky
as they sit among the branches of the trees eating
their evening meal By paddling very quietly,
you may be able to approach within 20 yards or
so without disturbing them. Then, all of a sudden,
they take fright, and in a flash they have dis-
appeared. leaping and falling down from the
topmost to the bottom branches for all the world
like enormous apples falling from a huge apple
tree which is being shaken by some giant hand.
If you are lucky, you will by and by come across
a large yellowish brown monkey either by itself
or perhaps with one or two companions, and if
you look carefully, you will see that they’ have all
prominent noses. Some will have small some
what retrousse noses, others will have large
pendulous noses which merit the name of probos-
cis. The size of the nose, as a matter of fact,
depends upon the age of its possessor, and it is in
the old males that it reaches it by highest develop-
ment. Nobody knows what is the use of these
large fleshy noses. It can be imagined that they were evolved by a process of sexual selection by virtue of their appealing to the aesthetic sense of .
these monkeys, but such an explanation is, to say
the least of it, somewhat far-fetched. Possibly
they have something to do with the cry of the
animal, which is a harsh resonant sound with a
distinct nasal twang.
In many details of its structure the Rasong
approaches man more nearly than does a Brok or
a Kra. It certainly appears to be much more
intelligent It is difficult to keep it in captivity
apparently because if its exclusive feeding habits.
I once kept a female long-nosed monkey for
three months giving it a mixed fruit diet. One day,
however, the animal developed signs similar to
those of scurvy, indicating no doubt an error of
diet. I endeavoured to persuade her to go off
into the jungle and search for suitable food as
she knew best, but unfortunately she had become '
too tame, refusing to leave the garden, and in a few days she died. Mr. P. M. Adams obtained
a mother and child of this species for the Malaya -
Borneo Exhibition, and he informs me that it was
quite ludicrous to sec the meticulous care with
which the parent watched over the feeding of her
baby, snatching away with almost uncalled-for
violence any food which she considered not good
for it.
The long-nosed monkey can be very fierce when
attacked, and the large male mounted in the
museum is said to have given considerable
trouble to the native collector who shot him.
The other monkeys of Sarawak are all Semno-
pitheque monkeys or langurs, and are closely
allied to the Rasong They are all vegetarians
and delicate feeders, and are difficult to keep in cap-
tivity. One of these has a beautiful chestnut red
coat and it is fairly common. It is usually seen I
in large numbers, and is very’ destructive of fruit
gardens The Dyaks call this monkey Jellu Merah.
The black monkey’—called Bigit- is common in
lowland districts near the seashore and can be
frequently seen along the banks of the river in the
evening.
The other five or six species of Sarawak monkeys
are more rare. One, a grey coloured species sup-
plies the bezoar stones prized by the natives as
medicine. This animal was first brought to i
scientific notice by Dr. Hose, and has been called
in his honour. Semnopithecus Hosei.
He states that it is a mountain species, leaving
the mountains at certain times in search of food. I
An effort was made to send some of these
animals home but they’ suffer so severely' from sea-
sickness that they cannot stand the journey.
Cheap Living.
We are all trying to find the cheapest place
(with the highest salaries) to live in, so the attached
list, supplied by a correspondent who has just,
visited twelve countries, may afford a clue. The
correspondent works out the cost per day in a good
class hotel on the purchasing power of English
Its 14 a week for England seems a lot, particularly
when occasional cable reports assure us that the
cost of living is falling
St. Thomas' School Sports.
This event took place on the 22nd in the School
playing grounds before a big and representative
crowd.
The races were keenly contested and many of the
events also proved most amusing.
The tug-of-war, as usual, caused much enthusiasm
whilst the bicycle race was a severe test to the com-
petitors who. however, managed to get. over the
ground with wonderful agility.
The Regimental Band of the Sarawak Rangers
was in attendance, and Mr. and Mrs. Lawrence
entertained then guests with the greatest hospitality.
Mrs. Ward kindly presented the prizes io the
winners and n most successful meeting was conclu-
ded with cheers for Mrs. Ward and the playing of
the National Anthem.
We might mention that all the prizes and sub-
scriptions were collected by the Old Boys who appear
to take the keenest interest in their old school. This
must be a source of gratification the headmaster and
others who feel that the time and trouble they have
spent in turning out intelligent boys has not been
wasted. We append a list of events and their winners.
Dancing.
Below we print a few extracts from an article
on dancing which recently appeared in a well-
known paper. So many people dance nowadays
that a few hints may not be uncalled for.
The article says “ The war caused the
young man to take to dancing; it also made his
elderly relatives dance too in order they might
accompany him in his brief spell of pleasure .
Of course there are two sides to every question. [
We do not doubt but that the sight of some
elderly relatives treading the light fantastic
is indeed a pleasure, and at the same time a source
of innocent amusement, to even the less mirthful of
their younger relations, but we can well imagine the somewhat doubtful pleasure exhibited by '
the impecunious nephew who sees his formerly
hypochondriacal uncle, from whom he had ex-
pectations, hopping round the floor with the
agility of a goat and advertising the theory put
forward by Mons CouA
We also read that “	An informal con-
ference of all the principal ball-room teachers in
this country was held wisely these teachers j
suggested that -all steps of a freakish nature. ;
including dips, twinkles, lifts, exaggerated pauses,
were in bad form and should not be used	We quite agree with this suggestion. Those who
have watched certain local experts “dipping"
'twinkling" and “lifting” will not hesitate to
condemn these "freaks” of dancing. We make this
reservation, however, we only regard the “lifting"
as bad when applied to the feet; when applied to
the elbows it is generally considered quite correct,
and in fact most necessary. Again " It was
also suggested that it would add to the comfort of
the ballroom if dancers would always progress
round the room and not take sideways or rearward
steps which obstructed other dancers ” This
again is a sensible suggestion with the one draw-
back that when coupled with “lifting” of the
elbows the room is apt to progress round the
dancers. However, no system is perfect.
We quote again “	The result has been
astonishing, eccentric steps have vanished from
the ballroom;	..merely using the
recommended steps, with the addition of an
occasional crossing of the feet, they arc able to sweep
round the room in a delightfully flowing move-
ment that absolutely expresses the rhythm of the
dance " We have noticed the delight fully
flowing movement so many times; it has charmed
even the poor bridge players—how many times
have they been irresistibly drawn from their cards
by the sudden crash of the couple who have
occasionally crossed their feet “	The	modem
valse is a combination of the pre-war boston, the
hesitation, and a walking movement in valse
time	" We do not doubt that these delight-
ful movements coupled with the double shuffle,
lock step, double march and Irish jig would make
a dance not only of extreme gracefulness but of a
nature likely to endow us with perpetual life,
the aim of all dancers.
PROGRAMME.
Wednesday,	August, 16th.
1ST RACK—2.30 P. M.—The Farms Syndicate Cup.—
Value $100. Presented by the Farms
Syndicate. Second horse to receive $50,
third horse to save entrance fee. A race
for subscription Borneo griffins Class A.
12.2 hands to carry 11 stone with an
allowance of 3 lbs. for every inch under.
Entrance fee $10. Distance 3 furlongs.
2ND RACE 3 P. M. The Kuching Cup -Value $50.
Presented by the Datu Imam, with $50
added. Second horse to receive $50, third
horse to save entrance fee. A race for
subscription Borneo griffins Class B. 12.2
hands to carry 11 stone with an allowance
of 3 tbs. for every j inch under. Entrance
fee $10. Distance 3 furlongs.
3RD RACE- 3.30 P.M. The B.C L. Cup--Value $100.
Presented by the Borneo Co., Ltd. Second
horse to receive $50, third horse to save
entrance fee. A race for subscription
Borneo griffins Class C. 12.3 hands to
carry II stone with an allowance of 34 lbs.
for every .1 meh under. Entrance fee $10.
Distance 3 furlongs.
4TH RACE-4 p. M.— The S. S Co. Cup. Value $100.
Presented by the Sarawak Steamship Co.,
Ltd. Second horse to receive $50, third
horse to save entrance fee A handicap for
subscription Borneo griffins Class A. Top
weight may be 11 stone. Entrance fee $10.
Distance 3 furlongs.
5TH RACE—4.30 p M.— The Civil Set vice Cup—Value
$100. Presented by members of the Sara-
wak Civil Service. Second horse to receive.
$50, third horse to save entrance fee. A
handicap for subscription Borneo griffins
Class B Top weight may be 11 stone.
Entrance fee $10. Distance 3 furlongs.
6TH RACE—5 P. M.— The Miri Cup.— Presented by
the Sarawak Oilfields Ltd. Second horse to
receive $50, third horse to save entrance
fee. A handicap for subscription Borneo
griffins Class C. Top weight may be 11
stone. Entrance fee $10. Distance 3
furlongs.
7TH RACE—5.30 P. M.— The Sarawak Cup.— Value
$150. Presented by His Highness the
Rajah Second horse to receive $25. A
handicap for all subscription Borneo griffins
that have won a race at this meeting.
Top weight may be 11 stone. Entrance
fee $10. Distance 3 furlongs.
J. BEVILLE ARCHER,
Honorary Secretary, Kuching Races.
Sarawak Library.
The following books have been added to the
Library by purchase.
CORRESPONDENTS
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of
Correspondents.]
Kajah Charles Brooke
Memorial Fund.
KUCHING,
4th July, 1922.
To The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
SIR,
With your kind permission I should like to
inform, through your paper, the Subscribers to the
above Fund what the Committee have decided to do
presume every body knows that the Committee,
after putting aside $20,000 towards a personal
memorial, decided to use the remainder to open a
Leper Settlement.
The General Committee having appointed a
Sub-Committee to find and report upon the most
suitable site for a Leper Camp, and the latter
reporting upon the island of Satangas most suitable,
this site was decided upon unanimously by the
General Committee
At the last Committee meeting June 15th,
Mr G. C. Gillan submitted a Financial Statement
of the Fund.
Captain Lowe submitted plans of. and estim-
ated for, proposed New Settlement to accommodate
255 persons with all necessary offices, such as
Hospital ( 20 beds ), Dispensary and Bungalow for
European.
After due consideration and studying of plans
etc., the Committee unanimously decided to request
Captain Lowe, assisted by the Sub-Committee, to
proceed to carry out the plans as soon AS possible.
ROBERT J. SMALL,
Hon. Secretary.
Awake Sarawak.
SINGAPORE,
20th July, 1922.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
DEAR SIR,
The letter under the above bending in July
issue, inspired one must think, by love of this Coun-
try in which the writer has spent the most able
years of his life, has most likely been read with great
interest by ail readers who adhere to, and assist in
every way, the country in which they live, and
which gives them in return for their efforts the
comforts and living, of which it is capable. The
sentiments which the letter expressed bring home
to all chinking people, whether Government Officials
or not, the fact that the betterment of conditions,.
of trade, commerce and defence must be the
endeavour of all, in the interests of the country in
which they live. If this first necessity be admitted,
then acted upon, why then all countries will be the
better for it, because it is only by such a real and
unclouded ideal that whole communities can live
prosperously. In such ideal there is an element of
selfishness, but it is a national selfishness combined
with the personal ambition, or at any rate, it becomes
so. Countries have too often been subjugated to the
personal will and desire of an individual. Very
seldom ban the reverse been the case. 'Presumably
because no individual has been of sufficient impor-
tance to the country. However that may be, the
real, and only real history of any Country or Nation,
lies not in its Wars nor its Kings but in its
development—Science, Art, Literature, Trade and
Commerce. The roots of these developments are very
like the roots of a tree, some of which feed from
under and others from above the soil. The greater
ones from beneath the soil. The gentler from the
air. Let us then apply this to development in the
human. The root is education: the air is environ-
ment. These two make us what we are, or they do
not make us what we could be. Poor, spasmodic
and useless “ education ” with bad environment
make up a community of dependents, wasters, cri-
minals—useless aimless beings. In Sarawak there is
apparently no State Education. There is, on the
other band, a most delightful climatic and " free "
environment, vitiated only in such places where large
bodies of people are living herded together in the
main streets of a town, where children play in vile
smelling gutters; where every night the streets are
packed. This condition is not peculiar to Kuching
or Sarawak—it obtains almost everywhere. It is a
pity to see it. That can be remedied though, es-
pecially in what one could call "an open air country"
like tins. One remedy is education - thorough, use-
ful, and with utility as its object Another is
development of the resources which must follow in
the wake of education, provided that education
is fathered by a desire and effort to obtain the best
from its pupils in the interests of the country, and
this would, and does, tend to make that most useful
of all human products -The National. State educa-
tion is an investment for the State, but let it lie an
education conducted to that end.
"A Pensioner" says that adulteration of Sarawak
produce should be snipped by inflicting heavy penal-
ties. Yes, he is right. A whole country's producers
will be boycotted by the buying centres just because
of the malpractices of a few of those producers.
Let us take one product—Rubber. Why is it that
Manufacturers in Europe and America place an
order with their Broker like this :—
“50 tons per month No, 1 Smoked Sheets, deli-
veries July/Deer. Marks, ( H & L)?’’
Because that mark is relied upon to be uniform
in Standard of quality—always. That is all. But
let the -Manufacturer only one* experience any tricks
of hedging and covering, adulteration or alteration,
and good-bye to that mark—for ever. Establish
your produce, keep it uniform, and you have a
market for it. There is a most important matter,
about which “A Pensioner” in his letter, does not
say anything. That is Banking and Finance so
necessary to Foreign traders. Commercial people
doing business with Europe are dependent upon
Singapore Banks, even if they require to know a
rate of exchange on a given day at a given hour.
Someone asked the Post Office what the Franc rate
was, quite recently, and was told that the Post
Office would transact his business at Fr. 25 to the £
sterling. Would that I could have transacted it at
that for him. Of course no Post Office is a medium
for exchange, but then is there a Banker here who
could have given a rate of any value to business?
However, it would be interesting to read “ .A Pen-
sioner’s" views with regard to Finance and financial
relations between Sarawak and her customers abroad,
leaving out Singapore. Are there any Foreign Bills
for collection in Sarawak, or does she always pay
against documents for her purchases at Port of
shipment? Are there any Sarawak Bills for
collection in Foreign countries, against her sales, or
do her customers pay cash against documents in
Sarawak? If neither, then one must conclude that
Singapore makes a very good, if small, Service Debtor out of her. Governments are always criti cised, but it should be the endeavour to assist too in making citizens realise that they too have res ponsibilities, which, if enacted, will make tor the betterment of all and for development, which cannot be accomplished just by Government efforts.
Yours faithfully.
ADVANCEMENT
The Rule of the Road.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
DEAR SIR,
Your correspondent Royston Crow asks whether
there is any rule of the road in Sarawak.
Reference to Ricksha Regulations of 1896 will
show that jinrickshas are ordered.
"(1) To Keep to the left band side of the road.
When passing another vehicle going in the same
direction pass it on the right, hand side.
(*2) When nearing a crossing or going round a
corner the jinricksha must proceed slowly."
Again in the Sarawak Gazette of July 1st 1896 a
note re an accident to Mr. Daubeny's trap says
The P. W. D. carts are at present driven by a
number of Malay youths whose ignorance of the rule of the road and of the difference between right and
left is calculated to cause further damage unless
something is done to remedy the defect.
It is thus clear chat the rule of the road was laid
down in if not la-fore 1896.
The fact that absolutely no attempt is made to
enforce the regulations is as obvious to ethers as it
is to Royston Crow,
Yours faithfully.
ROADSTER.
The Old Cemetery Kuching.
K UCHING, SARAWAK,
11th July, 1922.
To The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
SIR,
Some time ago, with the Editor's kind permis-
sion, an appeal was made in the Gazette, by Rev. F.
S. Hollis, Acting Honorary Secretary of the Cemetery
Board—for funds to restore the Monuments and
Headstones etc. in the Old Cemetery.
In response to that appeal 45 was received. Since
then the Board has had all the headstones reset and
monuments repaired and all re-lettered at a cost
of $110.
The Board has advanced the money, but we should
be graceful for any contributions, especially from
any one who overlooked, or forgot the first appeal.
Now that the work is finished we should like our
subscribers to visit the Cemetery, and we feel confi-
dent they will be pleased with its present condition
and appearance.
Thanking you for allowing us one more space in
your valuable paper.
Yours faithfully,
ROBERT J. SMALL, Honorary Secretary.
Courtesy.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
DEAR SIR,
Referring to the “Curious" letter in your last issue I have not the faintest idea as to whether or not the average European lady is interested in “the art of etiquette”, nor indeed .do I care; in fact I think the letter is a trifle futile.
Of course if poor “Curious” has been “cut many times” he is probably getting sick of it and in that case he might try the following: on seeing a lady in the street emit a loud yell, wave your stick and/or hat (if any) wildly in the air and rush out at her; on reaching her seize both her hands and shake them long and vigorously maintaining a light conversation the while.
Under these circumstances I can assure “Curious” that the lady will find marker! difficulty in administer-ing "the cut"—and if her hands are shaken long enough she cannot even hit the chap
Apropos of a knowledge of etiquette I should like to hear "Curious' " answer to the following question.
My wife and mother-in-law were both staying with me (permanently it seemed ) I had called on a lady whose husband subsequently fell sick and did not return my call. My wife and mother-in-law wished to call hut did not know how many of whose cards to leave, nor indeed did they know which corners of which cards to turn up if any.
Your faithfully.
SNIP.
DEAR “CURIOUS,"
We have, unfortunately, been unable to find a Look on etiquette and so are obliged to trust to our rather rusty memory when we say that the class of book mentioned generally instructs a lady to bow first, whereupon the gentleman raises his hat.
We would warn " Curious,” however, that the instructions contained in these books are not to be taken too literally. We have some dim recollection of very minute instructions to gentlemen callers, who, garbed in immaculate frock coat, silk hat in hand, advance towards their hostess with that free and easy manner which that attire seems to bring. It is impossible to lay down an exact law on these matters -circumstances alter cases.
We are supposing that “ Curious" was writing impersonally and of the world to general, otherwise the subject is not becoming to a public discussion.
Your faithfully,
THE EDITOR.
All Appreciation.
JUNIOR CONSTITUTIONAL CLUB,
PICCADILLY, W. 1.
12th June, 1922. The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
DEAR SIR,
I note and thank you for certain congratulatory remarks in the May issue concerning the Sarawak Arts and Crafts Section in the Malaya-Borneo Exhibition.
But I would point out that any success there may have been in connection with this could not have been attained but for the earnest co-operation of all the Outstation Officers
I especially wish to thank those at Muknh and Oya for the great trouble they must have taken to obtain the excellent display of models sent from that district.
Mr. Hayward also deserves great credit for his assistance in Singapore- -in addition to the superin-tendence of the accounting side he had also to arrange the displays of the Forestry and Agricultural Sec tions, and lake charge of all three after my departure on furlough.
And I would also like to thank Mr Jee Koo of the Sarawak Museum, and the clerks and other members of the subordinate staff, who assisted in Singapore, under what were perhaps at times somewhat trying circumstances.
1 Trusting you may be able to find space for the publication of this letter.
Yours faithfully,
J. A. H. HARDIN.
An Abrupt Change.
KUCHING,
17th July, 1922.
; The. Editor. .
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
, DRAW SIR.
An article “Revocation” under the heading of "A Timely Warning” in your last issue, seems to 1 me that the writer possessed very poor knowledge of Chinese customs My first point of view in the subject will be, “Are those educated girls and youngsters have to annul all their customs?" Of course not. I dare say. and even those who had forsaken their religion are still maintain the lights more or less. Suppose one gives up completely—what qual ity of gossips there will be in the public—griefful
effect is sure to encircle him and all his nearest kins.
Well, so far as the subject can be penetrated ' through, the abandondee is similar to. "A wolf in the sheep skin " " Shiow Taw." are the words we ought to bear in mind because, it is the duty that the parents should uphold their rights, but instead of which the former act losingly, which is an inconsistency towards the matrimonial custom.
While writing the above paragraphs I recollect the incidents in China during my visit, through which I am urged to pen another few lines in addition before I come to the conclusion. As now-a-days China is improving and changing abruptly, and every one seems to enter into the words, " Tsze Yaw" which I suppose is the new habitual practice. But any how this gives as a little opinion of the future,
I although it is not the usual way in this place.
Yours faithfully,
A CHINESE GIRL.
CHINESE GIRL. — There is nothing like encouraging local talent and we are pleased to see that the perusal of "A Timely Warning," which was published in our last issue, has spurred on others to put their thoughts into print.
This time our correspondent is “ A Chinese Girl " and to her we offer our congratulations on her maiden effort The depth of her penetration is indicated by the delightful use of the old proverb about the sheepskin-covered wolf in respect to the wicked “abandondee." We feel sure that our renders will join with us in plumping for “ Shiow Taw ” I every time.— Ed. S. G. ’
Who Wants a Flat in Town?
The Editor,	Sarawak Gazette
DEAR SIR,
One often bears people returning from leave
bemoaning their fate in being unable to afford a flat
in town. Why not have a kongsi flat? It is proposed
that a flat be taken in town in a central position and
the rent be paid by a nominal subscription collected
from members of the proposed kongsi. The furnishing of the flat would be done jointly by members, a great deal of the furniture could no
doubt be given by individual members and the balance bought by means of a special subscription levied on the inauguration of the scheme. At first sight it might appear unnecessary to pay a regular subscription fur three or five years for the advantages of a flat, in town which one might use for a month or so. but a little consideration will shew that there would be many advantages in having what prac- tically amounts to ones own flat and-consequently worth paying for. It is hoped to hold a meeting of bachelors at the Sarawak Club during race week
and suggestions for and against the scheme discussed. It should be pointed out that, with a membership of fifteen, the subscription should not be more than $5 per month possibly less.
Yours faithfully.
BRIGHTER LONDON. 1
BRIGHTER LONDON.—We leave comments on this
scheme to those who may attend the proposed
meeting the race week.— Ed. S. G.
Sarawak Oilfields Limited.
The following congratulatory messages have been
exchanged between The Anglo-Saxon Petroleum
Company Limited and Ris Highness the Rajah on
the eventful occasion of the completion of the first
million tons of oil production by the Sarawak Oil-
fields Limited’s operations at Miri.
LONDON,
17th July, 1922.
To His Highness the Rajah,
Kuching.
“On completion of the first million tons of oil pro-
duction in Sarawak we venture to congratulate Your
Highness upon the prospects of the crude oil industry
in your State. A broad and farseeing policy inspired
confidence to invest the vast capital required for
exploring the possibilities and fostering the develop-
ment of your natural resources, and the decision to
confine this task to one experienced and trusted
organisation receives its complete vindication in the
event we are now celebrating. We desire to express
to Your Highness our confidence in the brilliant
future of the Sarawak Oilfields Limited and in the
prosperity their success will add to the country in
which their labours are directed. ”
ANGLO-SAXON PETROLEUM COMPANY LIMITED.
KUCHING,
17th July, 1922,
To Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Company Limited, London.
“Heartiest congratulations on completion of first million tons of oil in Sarawak. Friendly relations between Company and Government will always be encouraged by me, as brilliant future of oil means corresponding prosperity for Sarawak.”
RAJAH OF SARAWAK.
A Borneo Blowpipe.
Built on the same principle AS 16-inch
naval gun.
Few weapons invented by primitive man are
more deadly than the blowpipe and its poisoned
darts, which, curiously enough is the weapon of
two tropical races living on opposite sides of the
globe the natives of Guiana, in South America,
and some of the tribes inhabiting Borneo.
In principle it is a gun. kin to the 16-inch guns
of the modern battleship. They fire a shell 30 miles
by the pressure of expanding gases behind a pro-
jectile within a long tube. So does the blowpipe,
the expanding gas in its case being air expelled
from the human lungs. The efficiency of both
(says Mr. Charles Hose, in " Everyday Science”)
depends primarily on the straightness of the tube,
the smoothness and exact cutting of its bore, and
the accurate fit of the projectile within it.
Such exactness is a wonderful achievement of
unaided manual skill The Guiana native makes
his gun-tube by boring with a heated iron rod.
The Punan native of Borneo uses the much more
difficult method of cutting, with the most primitive
possible form of the lathe used in a British
ordnance factory.
MAKING THE BORE.
The Borneo blowpipe is a tube about seven feet
long, with a bore of a third of an inch, and an
external diameter tapering from one inch at the
"breech" to three-quarters at the muzzle.
The material of which the tube is made is a
light and rigid yellow wood A piece of this is
selected as free from knots as possible, and is
roughly shaped. The whole is bored with an iron
rod, eight feet long and necessarily slender, with
a cutting edge at one end.
It takes eight to ten hours to bore through the
pole in this manner, and although the chisel does
beautifully regular work, the Punans further po-
lish the inside with a small rattan, which is
passed rapidly backwards and forwards, sometimes
using a ribbed leaf to finish the operation.
. When the Punan uses the blowpipe he lashes a short spear to the end, bayonet fashion, so that he may have a weapon to ward off the attacks of infuriated victims. The weight of this spear would seriously distort the long slender tube, and make it difficult to take true aim. The Punan accord ingly proceeds to curve the thin end of the blow pipe a certain amount, which the weight of the spear and lashings exactly compensates, so that when these are fixed on they bend the tube
I straight.
THE DART.
I The dart is made from the stem of the Nibong palm, a piece of which is cut down to a length of seven or eight inches anil the thickness of a fine straw. The shaft is made perfectly straight and uniform, and this is done entirely by eye. One end of the shaft is sharpened to a point, to be smeared with poison, while the other is fitted with a conical piece of pith which exactly corresponds I with the bore of the blowpipe.
A short distance from the point of the dart the natives cut two or three rings almost through to the centre of the shaft, which is in this way rend ered so brittle that if anyone tries to draw it out of a wound the tip snaps off, and remains buried in the flesh, unless the dart is drawn perfectly straight outwards.
When everything is to his liking, he draws the dart up flush with his lips It is then blown with a quick puff, apparently requiring little exertion, but evidently with some knack. The dart will earn’ fully too yards, and the native is very skilful, usually choosing some bony part of the body to aim at, so that the shaft may break, and very seldom missing his mark
The poison is the dried juice of the tree known to the Punan by the name “tajam" and to the Malay as “ipoh" (upas). It is obtained by making incisions in the bark and collecting the emulsive pink sap in the tough leaves of the "silat" paint. This is taken to the dwelling and dried slowly over a fire until almost black and of the consis tency ot sealing-wax. When wanted for use, it is softened in warm water and kneaded on a wooden disc
The darts are smeared with the poison while it is still moist and are then put point foremost to the fire to dry. The little pith-cone is fixed on the dart afterwards.
The Kuching Sanitary and Municipal
Advisory Board.
Report of Meetings of 11th April, 29th June. 5th July & 11th July, 1922.
At the meeting of the Board held on 11th April 1922, the following members were present:—
Mr. K. II. Gillan (Chairman), Captain C. P. Lowe, Messrs. Tan Sum Guan. Salleh Marican, Kon En Law, C. Fenwick. and Haji Hassim.
Absent
Messrs. E. Parnell, Lam Chin Jee, and Lau Chin Hian.
A discussion took place in connection with the rating of Malays, when it was agreed by a majority of members that the following suggestions by the Chairman should be submitted for the approval of His Highness the Rajah
That Malay householders within the Muni cipal area should be rated on the same basis as other ratepayers and that the. Kampong Water Rate and Road Tax paid by themselves should be abolished or alternatively.
That Malay householders within, and other householders without, the Municipal area should be subject to a flat rate of $2 30 per annum, con sisting of $ 1 for Water and $ 1.30 for Road main tenance and that where lighting were provided in any Kampong or district outside the Municipal area a separate rate of 50 cents per house per annum should be charged.
The application of certain householders in Cen tral Road for the erection of Standpipes there was again brought before the meeting. It was agreed that a pipe should be erected at each end of the road and that householders benefitting should be notified that their assessment would be increased and that in event of further water shortage their supply would be liable to be cut off before others.
The Superintendent of Public Works submitted plans for additional Police Quarters at the end of Kai Joo Lane and Khoo Hun Yeang Street, for any suggestion or alterations as to these buildings which the Board might think advisable. It was decided that certain outbuildings might be erected behind instead of at the side of these quarters in view of the proximity in their original position to the end house in Kai Joo Lane.
The resignation from the Board of Mr. W. E. Le Gros Clark, F. R. C.’S.. in view of the return of Dr. O. G. F. Luhn was notified to the meeting.
At the meeting of the board held on Tuesday, 29th June, the following members were present; -
Mr K. H. Gillan (Chairman), Messrs. Lam Chin Jee, Lau Chin Hian. Salleh Marican, C. Fenwick, E. Parnell, Tan Sum Guan, Captain C. P. Lowe. Dr. O. G. F. Luhn and Haji Hassim.
Absent:—
Mr. Kon En Law.
A discussion took place in connection with the proposed Public Health Order when certain altera tions were made in various sections.
The regulation of improvements to Public, Latrines were thereafter considered. Dr. Luhn reported that the latrines were in an extremely insanitary condition owing to their construction and that the accommodation was inadequate. It was unanimously approved on the proposal of Dr. O. G. F. Luhn seconded by Captain C. P. Lowe to recommend that these latrines be reconstructed on Sanitary lines with increased accommodation. It was further approved that the supervision of . the Public, Office and Police Latrines be un- dertaken by the Public Health Department.
The condition of the Blacksmith quarters was then considered by the Board.
Dr. Luhn reported that these quarters were in a dangerously insanitary condition and unfit for use i as dwelling houses It was further pointed out that the difficulty of enforcing any Sanitary regulations in connection with privately owned property would be considerably increased were , Government owned buildings themselves in an . insanitary condition.
It was therefore approved on the proposal of ‘ Dr. O. G. F. Luhn seconded by Mr. Tan Sum Guan that the attention of the Government be drawn to the condition of these premises and that they be either put in first class sanitary condition or that the Blacksmiths be removed to an industrial area to be decided upon by a special Committee at a later date.
A proposal by Dr. O. G. F. Luhn to apply a three standard system of Sanitary to Kuching was held over for further consideration.
The consideration of the plans for the new Mal y Reserve at Patingan was also held over till the next meeting of the Board.
An application of Dr. O. G. F. Luhn for two assistant Sanitary Inspectors for Kuching was approved for recommendation to His Highness the Rajah.
At the meeting of the Board held on Tuesday, 5th July 1922, the following members were pre sent :
Mr. K. H. Gillan (Chairman;, Messrs. E. Par nell, C. Fenwick, Lam Chin Jee, Lau Chin Hian, Salleh Marican, Kon En Law, Tan Sum Guan. Captain C. P. Lowe, Dr. O. G. F. Luhn and Haji Hassim.
Business transpiring was as follows
Recommended on the proposal of Haji Hassim seconded by Mr. Salleh Marican that of the existing Grant Holders in Kampong Patingan be bought out in order to enable the sub-division of this area to be carried out according to plan.
It was further recommended on the proposal of Mr. E Parnell seconded by Captain C. P. Lowe that the applications for the sub-divisions in this area be forwarded to the Superintendent of Lands and Surveys subject to the following conditions:— (1) That no tree of large size be planted with in to feet of any boundary between neighbouring sub-divisions.
That all dapors and latrines be so constructed that all water and excreta discharge into the proposed tide flushed ditches. Other suggestions in connection with this Reserve approved by the Board were as follows
By the Chairman—
That the general sub-division of the Kam pong Patingan Reserve as indicated on the plan of the Superintendent of Land and Surveys be approved.
That the roads indicated on the plan be cleared and laid out as soon as possible and that the Superintendent of Public Works prepare an estimate of the cost of this work.
Dr. O G. F. Luhn moved an-amendment second ed by Mr. Salleh Marican to the Chairman's first proposal that the words "subject to temporarily keeping Section 3 on the plan as a Government Reserve" be added to this proposal. This was approved.
By Dr. D. G. F. Luhn—
That the scheme of drainage of the roads and sections be such that all main and sub sidiary ditches be flushed at mean tides in order to apply the standard of sanitation which he had suggested and that the Super intendent of Public Works be asked to prepare a scheme of drainage on these lines.
That if any owner or occupier of any house provides a concrete surface below hos dapor to the satisfaction of the Board, the Public Works Department shall lay water into such house at the cost price of materials only.
An addition to Dr. Luhn's first proposal was proposed by Mr. E Parnell and seconded by the Chairman that a scheme of drainage at lowest high tide, as well as at mean tides, be prepared together with an estimate of the cost of both schemes of drainage was approved
A proposal by the Chairman seconded by Haji Hassim to again include the cross-river Kampongs in the Municipal area for rates and general pur poses was approved.
A suggestion by the Chairman that before sub mitting the proposals relative to the sanitation of the Blacksmith quarters and the alterations to the Public Latrines, plans and estimates of the schemes be submitted to the Board was approved.
A discussion of Part V of the Municipal Order relative to Streets took place when certain amendments were made in and additional sections added to the draft submitted.
At the meeting of the Board held on 11th July 1922, the following members were present: —
Mr. K. H. Gillan (Chairman), Messrs C. Fen wick, E. Parnell. Lam Chin Jee, Tan Sum Guan, Lau Chin Hian, Salleh Marican, Kon En Law, Dr. O. G. F. Luhn, and Haji Hassim.
Absent:—
Captain C. P. Lowe.
The Chairman intimated that His Highness the Rajah did not wish any alteration made in the existing total of Malay rates although he was agreeable to their correct allocation. As the suggested amalgamation of the existing Water Rate and Road Tax on the present basis would not be received favourably by the Malay ratepayers, it was necessary to revise certain sections in Part IV of the Municipal Order relative to the rating of Malays.
The suggested amendment proposed by the Chairman and seconded by Mr. E. Parnell that a consolidated rate of $3 per house payable annually or at certain optional periods, and a separate rate of 25 cents per man per annum payable in advance was after a lengthy discussion unanimously approved by the meeting.
An additional section relative to the payment of
compensation for damage to certain Government property specified in Part V of the Municipal Order was approved.
The Chairman read a letter from certain householders in Ban Hok Road asking that two main drains be constructed there to prevent the floods during the North East Monsoon. Dr. O. G. F. Luhn however informed the Board that no steps could be taken in the matter until the general survey of the town was completed and it was therefore agreed to notify the applicants in question to that effect.
A letter from the Superintendent of Police was also read suggesting that steps should be taken to advise householders against the use of paper for covering the ceilings of their premises, owing to the danger of fire which might arise from this custom. It was suggested that provisions in con nection with this practice would be included in the Building Regulations and that the Superin tendent of Police be advised to that effect.
MONTHLY REPORTS.
SADONG.
May.
Court. Most of 1 he cases which came up during the mouth were small civil ones only. There were two separate cases of Dyaks felling "katio” trees in each or which a line of $1(1 was imposed A Malay was sentenced to 3 months imprisonment for cheating, and a Chinese mine coolie sentenced to 3 months for attempting to abscond. 1’he other cases call for no particular comment.
P. IF. 1).—The clerk's house was completed by the contractor mt the 30th. He was hampered by the shortage of planks caused by the temporary stoppage of the sawmill at the Colliery, which, however is now working again. Minor repairs were executed m the bungalow and Wireless mechanic's quarters.
The prison gang averaging 18 men. has been em ployed on general upkeep of roads and grounds *
General.— S. S. Alice Lorraine arrived fi-mi Ku ching on the 1st with Mrs. Beresford Stooke, Mr. W. F. de V. Skrine and the writer as passengers. On the 2nd the writer took over from Mr. W. F. de V. Skrine, and the latter left again for Kuching on the 3rd. The s. s Alice Lorraine paid visits again on the 9th, 20th and 26th, the Sri Sadang on the 12th, I8th and 24lh and the Sarawak on the 3rd of the month. Several bandong* also entered from and cleared for Kuching. The s. s. Yurt IVah at rived from Kuching on the 16th and left again on the 19th with about 1,200 tons of coal from the Mine
Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager of the Sadong Mines, left for Kuching on the 24th and was still away at the end of the month Hari Raya falling on Sunday the 28th, the Government offices were closed on the 29th. The offices were also closed on the 24th, it being Proclamation day.
A letter from Lingga and a telegram from the Superintendent of Police Kuching were received on the 14th regarding one Kueh Teng Tong who is wanted at Lingga for assault, and is supposed to have entered the Sadong district. The Dyaks were all warned and s. s. Yuet Yah thoroughly searched but so far there is no trace of the fugitive.
During the month the Forest Department staff carried out inspections in the Ulu Simunjan, Gedong and Sebangan. On the 31st I left Sadong in the s. l. Vava for Sebangan, arriving at Selabu at 4 p. m, where I spent the night in Nanggai’8 house.
Rainfall during the month of May was 6 31 inches.
The balance of coal in stock at the end of the
imprisonment.
A Chinese coolie by the name of Lok Lee was taken to Hospital in a weak condition on Sunday evening the gist, and died there early on the morning of the following day.
I left for Kuching by the s. j. Sri Sadong on the 24th and returned again by the s. s. Alice Lorraine on Thursday June 1st.
The rainfall for the month of May was 6.54 inches.
On the 9th WAN Laham, an escaped prisoner who
had been caught at, Pati Temiang, was brought
back by Lubok Antu fortmen.
The Dyaks who went to Singapore for the Ex-
hibition returned on the 10th with the exception of
40 men who still remained in Singapore. Two of
the boats capsized on their way up from Lingga and
some property was lost in consequence.
Tuai Rumah Senin of Tisak was taken off the bank
of the river near his house by a crocodile and badly
mauled. He was, however, able to escape from the
saurian which was frightened off by the neighbours.
On the 13th the s. I. Malarco arrived with time
expired Dyak coolies from Miri. She left again on
the 14th after having lost two of her anchors
Mr. H. E4 Outfield went to Lubok Antti over-
land returning on the 17tli. The road from Sabu
to Marup was nearly all under water.
There has been an epidemic in the Kampongs of,
what is apparently, influenza. The jail has also
been affected.
Courts. —There has been the usual number of
cases during the month.
Job Kui was imprisoned for' theft of jelutong,
Jelini (f.) for un assault with a weapon and Jong
Chan for theft. Raiun was fined for inciting ulu
Dyaks to go on the warpath. The N. I. Authorities
kindly assisted in arresting this man.
P. W. D.—Prisoners completed the road which
joins those of Brayun and Sabu and started the
annual whitewashing of Government buildings.
May.
Reports of this years harvest are generally good, the Engkari (Ulu Batang Ai) and Ulu Skrang being
the only two districts reporting a bad one.
On the 6th Mr. D. Carroll arrived here to start
the Forest Office in this division; it was unfortunate that he was unable to stay more than three days.
Dyaks have been making the plank road to Belong which has been put in better repair owing to stricter supervision, although there is still much room for improvement.
During the month three crocodiles were brought in from the Tisak, they were 11 feet, 11 and 12 feet long respectively. It was at the mouth of the Tisak
that T. R. Senin was attacked by a crocodile, vide
last month’s report.
On the 13th three wounded Chinese were sent from i
Lingga in a serious condition. They had been I
wounded by one Teng Tong who found his wife with
another man. Up to the time of writing he has not
lieen caught. A special boat was sent to Kuching
with these Chinese as the dresser here, Abang Taha,
considered that their wounds were too serious to be
dealt with in Simanggang.
Tenders' for the Simanggang birds-nests farm were opened on the 22nd and the farm let to Chop Hua Joo of Simanggang for one year at a rental of $57.50. The last rental was $32.
The 24th being Proclamation Day, the offices were closed.
The s. 1. One left for Lingga on the 24th to fetch
1 he District Officer, who was expected back about
the 27th.
Hari Raya being on Sunday, the offices were
closed on Monday.
The Court Wilier of Lubok Antu reports that a
woman by the name of Tambit committed suicide by taking “tuba". Her husband is a Chinese trader and was upriver at the time. It is not yet known why she committed suicide.
P. IF. D.—The prisoners finished the whitewashing on the 15th. They then worked on the Kampong roads and at the end of the mouth they wore on the road behind the bazaar which was in a very bad condition.
Court.— Ah Sin was sentenced to 4 months for an impudent attempt at fraud. He reported that his trading boat had upset in the Undup, and the consequent loss of ten sakes of rice. After making enquiries and getting Dyaks to dive, it was proved that Lis alleged bags of rice contained sand. Ngee Seng was fined $25 for using a farm hut for trading purposes. Janting mid Emma were lined $60 each for adultery. No other cases call for mention.
OYA.
April.
Court.—The Courts were busy this month and
an unusually large number of theft cases WAS dealt
with. Sentences passed include:- Lupai 3 months,
Ulu 6 months and Lila 3 months R. I. for theft.
Di is 3 months R I. for swindling. Ajus, Baki,
Rapii. Mergani, Hitam, Serapong and Blagiew
were also sentenced to various terms of imprison-
ment for similar offences. Numerous land disputes
were settled.
P. W. D. The increased prison gang has been
engaged with the annual painting of Government
buildings and boats, which was completed both at*
Oya and Dalat. The usual upkeep of roads, ditches,
and ornamental grounds has also received its
attention.
The kuala signal flagstaff was removed and re-
erected in a mere visible spot out of reach of the
rapidly encroaching waters.
Several street lumps were installed at favourable
points in Dal at as. a deterrent to thieves, who have
been particularly active lately. All shopowners
there were approached with a view to co-operation
in raising the bazaar frontage, frequent inundation
of which has always been a great source of incon-
venience. It is difficult, however, to obtain the
necessary material for making a substantial raised,
path.
Eight schooners and two steamers entered, whilst
nine school era and two steamers cleared the port
General -The 14th and 17lh. Good Friday and
Easter Monday respectively, were duly observed ns
public holidays and the Government offices closed.
Tremendous catches of fish were made during
n few days towards the end of the month.
Local stocks of salt were speedily exhausted, with
the result that several catches were selling at the
unique price of 50 cents per pikul which, I believe,
is a record.
The annual “salamat kuala” festival took place
on the 19th.
The small child of Chui Tong, a bandong trader, fell
out of a boat and was drowned on the 5th. En-
quiry showed that it was an accident.
I visited Dalat on the 17th, returning a fortnight
later.
E O. BRUCE,
Officer-in-Charge.
MIRI.
May.
One case of special mention came before the Courts,
Abang Haji Bohan bin Datil Temunggong was fined
$500 and ordered to repay $390 odd being a sum of
money concerning Mohamedan Law which he had
converted to his own use. This man was Native
Officer at Niah and resigned last February.
Fines and fees amounted to $701.43.
I paid a visit to Niah and Sibuti from 2nd to 5lh
instant accompanied by the Auditor, Mr. Calvert.
The new Lighthouse at Tanjong Lobang was
completed and the new lamp installed there will
commence working from 1st June next
The Auditor, Mr. Calvert, left for Baram on 9th
returning again on 16th instant.
The 24th instant being Proclamation day, offices
were closed and the flagstaff dressed.
Prisoners were engaged on repairs to roads, bridges
and Treasurer’s house.
The Resident 4th Division left for Baram on 25th
instant and was still away at end of month.
Captain Chancellor, Inspector General Police,
Singapore, arrived on 30th instant and left for Belait
via Baram, the following day.
The 28th instant being Hari Raya, offices were
closed flag staff dressed and a salute of 6 guns was
fired.
Rainfall was 11'9.7 inches.
BROOKETON COLLIERY
April.
The gross out-put for the month amounted to
1,275 tons, and of this 640 tons were consumed at
our boilers, and the balance of 635 tons was scut to
the wharf.
Coal shipped to Labuan by s. 1. L' Aubaine and
Lighters amounted to 405 tons and 121 tons were
supplied to H. H. Y. Zahora. p. s. Adeh and local
launches. Coal sales at Labuan amounted to 531
tons, and of this 511 tons were supplied to the
Straits Steamship Co.'s steamers. This is a decrease,
on previous months owing to the B. B. Kajang being
replaced on the Borneo run by s. s. Kammuning for
part of the. month. S. S. Kammuning is an oil
burning vessel. The stock of coal at the end of the
month was 1,195 tons.
A fire, caused by spontaneous combustion, occurred
in the West Slant workings on the 23rd and owing
to the pillars of coal between levels 1 and 3 being
broken, some difficulty was experienced in sealing
off these levels where the fire occurred. However,
it was successfully dealt with towards the end of
the month when several clay dams had to be put
up to prevent any possible leakage of air.
Our Walkers Air-Compressor gave a little trouble
dining the month, owing hi one of the discharge
valves on the low pressure cylinder breaking. A
locally made valve was put in, but as this is of brass,
it is difficult to keep it air-tight which reduces the
efficiency of the machine. Spare valves are on order
from England, and when these arrive the machine
can be made to work more efficiently than at present.
Except for the few cases mentioned above every-
thing went well in both mining and mechanical
departments.
On the 27th His Highness The Rajah, accom-
panied by Mr. F. A. XV. Page-Turner, Mr. K. II.
Gillan and Mrs. Gillan, paid a visit to the Mines.
The rainfall for the month was 9 20 inches.
May.
Coal supplied to H. H Y. Zahora, p. s. Adeh ai.id local launches amounted to 158 tons. Coal sold in Labuan was 373.5 tons. The a. s. Kammuning was still on the Borneo run during the month, which resulted m a further decrease in the Labuan sales. The stock of coal at the end of the month was 1,450.75 tons. Everything went well in both min ing and mechanical departments during the month.
The rainfall for the month was 3’67 inches.
s. W. HARRIS,
Acting Manager
