
VOL. ??.
No. 874.
THE
PRICE	KUCHING, Thursday, July 1st, 1926.	20 CENTS.
Contents.
BirthFenwick
Notes
The Dayang .lean Brooke Engagement definitely
announced
Overheard in Miri
Marketing of Derris (Tuba Root)
Late Major J.C Moullton, O.B.E. ...
Sarawak Club- Erratum --Snooker Pool Tournament
Final ...	..	... 167
Bowling Averages	...	167
Bowling Competition	...	...	167
Derby SweepResults	of Draw	...	167
Derby Sweep Results	...	...168
Sarawak Turf Club -New Official Classification of Ponies
for Autumn Meeting 1926	... 168
Sarawak Golf Club-Spoon Competition Eclectic ... 168
Committee Meeting ...	... 168
Kuching Football Club	...	...	168
Island Club; Sibu ...	...	...	...	169
Bintulu Notes	...	...	...	...	169
Sibu Notes	...	...	...	...	169
Extracts from Yearly Reports; -5th Division	... 159
Dr. E. Mjoberg's Expedition to Mount Tibang	... 169
Correspondence	...	...	...	...	170
Notes on Rainfall in Sarawak	...	... 171
Pasal Manang	...	...	...	...	171
Monthly reports :First Division	. .	... 171
Sadong Colliery	173
Second Division	... 173
Third Division ...	... 176
Coast Division	...	178
Fifth Division	...	182
Kuching Trade Retains	...	... 184
Passengers	...	...	...	... 185
Kuching Market Price List. ...	... ... 186
Kuching Shipping	...	...	... 187
Rainfall ...	...	...	.. 188
Meteorological Returns	... 188
The Sarawak Gazette.
THURSDAY, JULY 1, 1926.
Birth.
FENWICK. At the Grange Hospital on the 9th June, 1926,
to Mr. anil Mrs. CHARLES FENWICK, a son.
NOTES.
June.
IT is with much regret that we record the sad news of the death of the Chief Secretary, Major J. C. Moulton, O.B.E., M.A., D.Sc., which occurred on the 6th of June following
an operation for appendicitis which was con-
tracted on the voyage home. Such details as
are available will be found in another column.
In this connection we are asked to state that
His Highness the Tuan Muda on behalf of
His Highness the Rajah wishes to take this
opportunity of expressing his sincere thanks
to all those from whom messages of condolence
WE read that Saturday the 16th and
Monday the 18th October are the dates
provisionally fixed for the Autumn Race
Meet]ng at Kuching.
SATURDAY the 5th June was the seventieth
anniversary of the registration of Messrs.
The Borneo Company, Limited. We wish
them many more years of increasing pros-
perity, especially the local branch at Kuching
which must have passed through many
anxious times during its earlier association
with Sarawak.
MRS. A. E. Lawrence, wife of the Director
of Education, left Kuching on the 28th and
is proceeding to Europe for a holiday.
- WE hear that the wife of Mr. O. Lang,
Superintendent of Police now at home on
furlough, has presented him with a son.
REV. Fathers B. Mulder and W. Van
Odyk passed through Kuching recently look-
ing very fit after their home furlough. IN the Supreme Court of Sarawak at
Kuching, on the 9th of June, Mr. M. C.
Motte of Singapore and Mrs. A. C. Motte of
Sabu, Sarawak, were granted a divorce.
MUNICIPAL Department figures show that
up to the 30th June there have been regis-
tered in Kuching 50 private motor care,
31 motor taxis, 16 motor buses, 15 motor
lorries, 33 motor bicycles, and 1,768 bicycles.
166
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1926.
IT is rumoured that Kuching intends to emulate Labuan and institute speed limits within the Municipal area.
WE hear that two beetles met in midair and crashed in the vicinity of the railway crossing in Blacksmith Road. Fortunately, nothing worse occurred than bruised antennae and a buckled wing or two!
WE are glad to see that Mr. B. A. Trechman is making satisfactory progress after the injury to his foot sustained during a local football match.
MR. P. Down of the Telegraph Department left Kuching on the 11th June, having resigned at the expiration of his agreement.
MR. W. F. de V. Skrine, Acting Divisional Officer, Coast Division, passed through Kuching on the 10th, having been granted six weeks local leave.
MR. A. M. Forrest, of the Chartered Bank, and Mr. H. G. Barraclough, of Messrs. MacDougall & Robertson Ltd., have moved into their newly built residencies in Rodway Road.
MESSRS. H. E. Cutfield, A. L. M. Honors, D. S. McDougall, D. S. McLeod, C. E. Pascoe, F. H. Pollard, J. G. Sampson, and G. J. D. Walters visited Kuching to sit for the Government Examinations during the middle of the month.
DRY Rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah Estates during the month of May was approximately 89,000 lbs.
The Dayang Jean Brooke.
ENGAGEMENT DEFINITELY ANNOUNCED.
We are happy to be able to record the engagement of the eldest daughter of His Highness the Tuan Muda of Sarawak, to Lieut. T. G. Halsey, R. N.. the eldest son of Colonel and Mrs. Walter Halsey, and grandson of Sir Frederick Halsey of Gaddesdon Place, Hemel Hempstead.
Educated at Eton, Lieut. Halsey left school to enter the Royal Navy during the war. He obtained his School Cricket XT colours, subsequently playing for the Navy. Being the present holder of the Navy Racquets Cup he will be unable to defend his title this year, as he is serving in H.M.S. Hankins now in the China Station.
We congratulate and wish them both the best of luck.
Overheard in Miri.
Two small brothers went to the pictures when they happened to be showing one of those films prepared for circulation in Sumatra and Java, the titles and descriptive matter being printed in Dutch
You know how Dutch looks in print? Die zoo lang aan die lucht zijn bloot gestelt dat ze niet meer bros zijn. Thats an example	Exactly.
Now it was part of the enjoyment of these two at ordinary times to try and finish reading out the descriptions before they disappeared from the screen, but on this occasion they were completely puzzled. After a while. one of them had an inspiration I know what that must be, Jim, its SCOTCH.(Contributed.)
Marketing of Derris (Tuba Root).
By D. H. Grist.
An investigation of the possibilities of marketing tubs, the best form of preparation, and the likelihood of a steady market for the produce was considered advisable in view of the attention which many planters have given to its cultivation.
Tuba is the essential ingredient in several proprietary insecticides, and in 1901 one firm patented various claims for the use of the root. There are at present three large firms using tuba, and various sheep dips and sprays have been placed on the market, the efficiency of which depends upon the tuba root. Other firms, and also several scientists, are investigating the use of tuba in other directions. In particular may be mentioned that interest in the value of tuba root as an insecticide has been stimulated in Australia by the increase in popularity of a certain brand of sheep-dipping paste which contains tuba root extract In Nova Scotia experiments are being conducted with tuba against a large number of varieties of fruit, pests. Investigations in other directions may open up new markets, hut for the prevent there is no doubt that active interest in tuba is confined to only a few firms.
SOURCE OF SUPPLY.
The hulk of supplies of the root came from the Malay Archipelago, mostly from Borneo, where buyers can almost invariably buy much cheaper from native growers than they can from estates in the Federated Malay States and elsewhere.
At the end of 1925, 500 acres were under this form of cultivation in the Federated Malay States and 600 acres in Johore.
MARKET PRICE.
There has been considerable divergence of opinion as between seller and buyer regarding the value of this product. Sellers have demanded prices of approximately one shilling per lb., whereas buyers are not prepared to advance the price in Singapore beyond fivepence to sixpence per lb. At about the latter price business can generally be effected. Undoubtedly buyers are influenced by the fact that they can obtain supplies al their offer, which may or may not be remunerative to the estate producer, but pays the native grower. Glowers should remember that the present conditions of preparation of the root for the market entail a freight charge to England of nearly 20 per ton. and furthermore they are in no position to guarantee the toxicity of their consignment. The freight charges to Melbourne are. much less nod an effort is therefore being made to encourage interest in Australia.
PREPARATION OF ROOT FOR MARKET.
As mentioned above, the two main difficulties io marketing tuba are: (a) lack of knowledge of its toxic value and (l) excessive cost of shipment.
The best variety to grow is generally stated to he "tuba merah and " rimba but what exactly (botanically) tuba merah and rimba mean is uncertain. The varieties are being investigated by the Department of Agriculture and, after identification, it will become possible to compare the toxic content of the varieties.
Methods to reduce bulk for shipment are of urgent necessity. Attempts to press the root before baling have not proved vet y satisfactory Chopping up the root reduces ns bulk to some extent, but not sufficiently. Grinding the root and then pressing into bales seems to give the best results ; this method has been used in two factories in Malaya.
The suggestion that the toxic principle might be extracted by solvents awaits further investigation. The opinion is expressed that this method lowers the toxicity.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1926.
167
It is regretted that, at present, evidence on many of these points cannot be proved by figures.
Difficulty has also arisen on account of tuba root
exported being found to contain borers which not
only eat the root but destroy its toxic qualities In
view of this, fumigation of tuba before export will
probably prove necessary.
CONCLUSION.
The cultivation of tuba will show no advance in
Malaya until the difficulties attending the selection
of the best varieties and reduction of freight are
overcome. The solution of these points would pro-
bably open up a larger market. Fumigation before
shipment is also considered necessary, but entails
no difficulty and little expense.
In the meantime, especially in view of the fact
that the market is restricted to a few buyers, there
seems little purpose in advising the cultivation of
this crop on estates.
( The Planter. )
Late Major J. C. Moulton, O.B.E.
Sarawak was shocked to bear on the 6th June that the Chief Secretary, Major J. C. Moulton, had died in England after an operation. Details have not yet arrived, but the news has just been received that an operation for appendicitis was performed on June 1st immediately after arrival in England.
In Major Moulton, Sarawak has lost one of her ablest administrators. A man of brilliant attainments, with powers of concentration far beyond the ordinary, he would have made his mark in any sphere of intellectual activity. His capacity for work was abnormal and he never spared himself; he gave of his bestas he expected the best of othersin the Rajah's Service.
He was in strong sympathy with the traditional policy of the country since the inception of the first Rajahs rule, and in discussions of problems arising from expansion kept the claims of the native inhabitants ever in the foreground; in him these deplore the loss of a sympathetic and loyal friend, as does the Sarawak Government that of a devoted and assiduous Officer.
Major Moulton originally came out to Sarawak in 1909 and took up the appointment of Curator, Sarawak Museum. Soon after the outbreak of war, he resumed his commission in the 4th Wiltshire Regiment (T.F.) and served in India. From 1916 to the end of the war he was Staff Officer to the Local Forces, Straits Settlements and Federated Malay States, having resigned his appointment in Sarawak, and he was awarded the O.B.E. (Military).
Later in 1919, he was appointed Director of Raffles Museum and Library, a position which he filled until 1923, when he accepted the appointment of Chief Secretary to the Government of Sarawak.
On the 7th May, 1926, lie left for Europe on furlough, apparently in the best of health, and the news of his untimely death at the early age of 40 will be received with much regret by a large circle of friends.
We offer our deepest sympathy to his relatives in their bereavement.
Club News.
Sarawak Club.
Erratum:
SNOOKER POOL TOURNAMENT FINAL.
Result published in our issue of June 1st should
read ; P. M. Adams and W. F. Dick (Outstations) beat
H. Calvert and C. D. Adams (Kuching).
BOWLING AVERAGES FOR MAY, 1925.
J. P. Baird
A. A. Rennie
G T. Bates
F. G. Carpenter
C. D. Adams
H. H. the Tuan Muda
N. A. Middleman
R. W. Chater
B. J. C. Spurway
D. Y. Proudfoot
R. D. Bjome
G. D W. Frayling ...
C. S. Griffiths
E. M. Marjorbanks
B. A. Treclman
R. V. Carr
W. Harnack
No. of Games-
19
13
11
10
22
18
5
8
8
10
13
6
17
12
8
13
12
Average.
149-2
118-9
147-7
139-4
138'8
136-2
133-2
133-0
125-6
124-2
123-4
120-7
118-2
115-1
1118
106-5
104-5
BOWLING COMPETITION MAY, 1926.
Score.
H'cap.
Total.
B. A. Trechman (Winner) 333
37
370
Dr. Marjorbanks ...
300
34
334
F. G. Carpenter
298
10
308
B. J. C. Spurway ..
270
22
292
G. D. W. Frayling
262
28
290
A. A. Rennie
285
Scr.
285
W. Harnack
241
44
285
G. T. Bates
281
1
282
D. Y. Proudfoot
240
27
267
H. H.the Tuan Muda
242
13
255
R. V. Carr
212
42
254
C. S. Griffiths
222
31
253
R. D. Binnie
218
26
244
R. W. Chater
200
16
216
Total Dumber of Tickets sold ...	1724
Total amount of Pool	...	$3,448.
1st Prize	... $2,068.80
2nd ,.	...	689.60
3rd 344.80
Commission to the Club 344.80
Results of Draw, 1st June, 1926.
Mah Jong ?
King Bruce
Jessel
Caracalla
Tom Bowling
Grand Flight
Ballynahinch
Booklet
Buccaroo
Chiste
Southbourne
Plexbourg
Colorado
Warmist
Battleline
.675 3153 2353 1275 3886 1100 3599 1534 3573 1381 1699 3699 1500 2101
- - 3923.
168
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1926.
Apple Sammy ... Silver Crusade Lanchester Grassmoor Plymouth Hoe
1307
3102	1041	1065	1508
Caissot
3860
Buckler
3640
Star of Destiny
3649
Hercules
3056
Cimiez
1876
Barbican
3524
Simon the Beggar
2691
Pharam
1205
Finglas
2516
Balthazar III
1874
Coronach
3199
Bleu de France ..
3890
Heggar ?
...	3975
Harpagon
1178	The Rogue II
1407
Norman Duke ...
3090
Lancegaye
3759
Lex
1416
Rosehearty
1961
Out of Tune
...	3884	Phanarite
3686
Autocrat
2534	1
Redditor
3941	Comedy King ...
3110	1
Vandyck
3492	Swift and Sure ...
1880
Masked Ruler
3563	Lemson
1560
Amilcar
3929
Nansen
1271	Tenacity
3840
Banstar
3558	Sun Yet Sen
3142
Le Gros
1443
St. Mary's Kirk .
3697
Macanudo
1900
Black Hawk II ...
1152	Lulworth Cove ...
1591
Spartacus
1273	Ardsallagh
3503	!1
Friar Wile
3936
Delius
1815
Captain Blood ...
2497	1
Artist Glow
353b
Gap ?
1401
Bassoon
1846
Seyez Ferme
3139
Review Order ...
1045	11
Gay Lothario
1051
Bicarbonate
1474
Pantera
3156
Hope
1663
Happy Recruit ...
3083
Gain-or
3627
Duke of Buckingham
2531
Buck Away
3939
Henri de Navarre
2037
High Art
3&75
Le Taciturne
3853
Derby Sweep, 1926.
Result.
1st PrizeTicket No. 3199, Coronach, drawn by Kongsi Tujoh, Police Office, Kuching ... $2,068.80
2nd PrizeTicket No. 3759, Lancegaye, drawn by Miller & Holmes, Jesselton, B.N.B. ...	689.60
3rd PrizeTicket No. 1500, Colorado, drawn by F. Wang, Mukah 344.80
Sarawak Turf Club.
NEW OFFICIAL CLASSIFICATION OF PONIES FOR AUTUMN
MEETING, 1926.
16th and 18th October.
Division I.
Division IL
Division III-
Division ?
Billy Buster
White Wings
Nizam
Bagaimana Ula
Jalan Remput
Pegasus Late ;
Kcliling
Hopeless
Sakbon
Bang
Burak
Penglima
Kijang
The Rat
Kismet
Tolin
Bakcba
If
Blazes
Lutong
Bintang
Pitak
Lee Mah
Sisit
Kuching
Bintang Terpileh
Wembley
Sarawak
Rusa
Sabok
Untoug
Adham Beaver Apa Kana
Jin Damit The Scout Mah Jongs Tony, late
Gundah Ghalib Penghulu Aladdin Azab
Sakai
Manna Buleh Anjing Laut Ajaib
Burong Shotaway Plandok
Guntor Pan Tan
J. A. H. HARDIE, Hon. Secretary.
Sarawak Golf Club
MONTHLY SPOON COMPETITION (ECLECTIC)
JUNE, 1926.
H. B.	Crocker	(winner)	34
R. D.	Binnie	3g
F. G.	Carpenter R. V.	Carr	37
13 Entrants
At a Committee Meeting held in Kuching on the 17th June it was decided that the monthly competitions shall be played during the first Saturday or Sunday of the month, either but not both of the two days, instead of on the first Sunday of each month as mentioned in the previous issue of the Sarawak Gazette.
Thus, members who are prevented from playing on Sundays, will he enabled to compete.
Further proposals for the reclamation of the swampy ground between the first and second greens have been favourably considered. Estimates are being submitted to the Committee for the cost of transferring several feet from the top of the hillock now forming the fourth green.
Out tanding Account -. The Committee reserve the right to disqualify the entry of any member in any competitions should that member's account with the Club be in arrears for more than 5 months from date of the account.
E. O. BRUCE,
Hon. Secretary.
Kuching Football Club,
On Saturday the 12th instant a Football team from Bau visited Kuching to play a return Match.
A fust game ensued, and at the end of the first half Bau led by 10.
Immediately after the interval Kuching went straight through to score, thus equalising, and in spite of the energetic efforts of Messrs. Carrie, Smith and Edwards, Bau were unable to regain the lead.
After a ding-dong struggle, Kuching secured two more goals, winning the Match by 31.
Immediately after the game the Annual General Meeting of the Club was held in the Club house, and we hope to be able to publish a report thereon in due course.
A very cheery dinner was enjoyed by Members the same evening at the Rest House, and thanks are due to the organizers for a very hearty repast
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1926.
169
Island Club, Sibu
We are informed that the following Officers have been elected :
Mr. H. C. P. Adams, Honorary Secretary, Capt.
E. V. Andreini and Mr. C. E. Pascoe, Committee. Bintulu Notes
On the 7th June, a very interesting football match was played, between the Bintulu Fort Rangers and I the crew of the s.s. Auby, the match being ably refereed by the Second Engineer, Mr. A. H. Foggie.
The Aubys team, despite their very brilliant play, was finally beaten by two goals to nil. Captain Cuthbertson played a very excellent game at centre-forward, and the Chief Engineer, Mr. Hockaday, : captain of the team, displayed great judgment. Mr. H. H. Kortright as the trojan of the Fort, by scoring a goal, spurred the Bintulu learn lo greater efforts which enabled them to win, although the result is no criterion of the play as the Auby's crew was greatly outnumbered by the opposing forces, one Bintulu man being disabled, two others took his place. The Auby, however, was not able to retaliate, hence the result !
After the battle, the visitors were generously refreshed at the residence of the District Officer, Mr. H. H. Kortright.(Contributed.)
Sibu Notes
We were all very glad to see the Rev. Father Halder back from sick leave, and trust he will soon be completely restored to his usual robust health.
Rev. Father Klerk went home on a well-deserved furlough after a good many years and we wish him a good leave.
Mr. J. B. Archer's pony "Apa Kena returned from his triumphs in Kuching and is rumoured to be entering for the Lonsdale Belt.
Aviation is going strong, likewise tennis, golf, and other games, handicap tournaments of which are now in progress.(Contributed.)
Extracts from Yearly Reports.
Fifth Division
Apart from the financial result the year has been one of progress and prosperity. The chief ban to further progress is the scantiness of the population.
There are some thousands of acres of valuable agricultural land lying idle simply because there is no one to make use of it. A few families have come in from Brunei mid several Muruts have come over from B. N B. If families from the more crowded parts of Sarawak could be induced to settle here plenty of land could be found for them and work could always be obtained.
Dr. E. Mjobergs Expedition
to Mount Tibang.
Discoveries of New Fauna and Flora by date
Curator of Sarawak Museum.
In August 1925, the Swedish explorer, Dr. E. Mjoberg, from Stockholm, passed through Java on his way to the central unknown parts of Borneo. Dr. Mjoberg has returned to Java only a few days ago, and granted your correspondent an interview, details of which follow.
Dr. Mjoberg left with two Javanese bird collectors and a crew of Bahau Dyaks from Samarinde, Dutch Borneo, on September 3rd, 1925, and proceeded to Long Iram where a military escort consisting of one European sergeant and nine soldiers joined him on his journey up the Mahakam river.
The usual difficulties in passing the Kiams (rapids) were experienced. As Dr. Mjoberg had calculated to cover the distance in as short a time possible on account of his limited food supply, be went ahead alone and passed the rapids further up successfully, the sergeant and the soldiers following behind.
It had been decided to follow Soengei Boh up to Kobo Mesai, from there march over the Baboin mountains forming the watershed between Mahakam and Soengei Kay an and to enter the proper Apo Kajan Lands.
Everything went smoothly until one night the expedition was surprised by a 5 metre high banjir (flood).
BOATS LOST.
In the darkness of the night and in a terrible downpour one big boat was swept away and was no more seen. The very same night the sergeant lost his biggest boat.
It was a sheer accident for which nobody could be made responsible. As thereby a large quantity of rice was lost and the Soengei Boh is a very dangerous river, enclosed between steep sides. Dr. Mjoberg decided to deposit the rest of his outfit at Seongei Sripa and to push ahead himself with four coolies in order to reach the Apo Kajan country and I to muster up 50 Kenyah carriers from the nearest villages.
After a very strenuous march over unknown, rough and intersected country where the way had to be cut inch by inch, Dr. Mjoberg reached- with his four companions, badly worn and torn, the Long Nawan military station.
He speedily sent 50 Kenyah carriers with foodstuff to bring help to the crew left behind.
The remainder of his outfit was successfully brought over to Long Nawang, from where Dr. Mjoberg planned to reach the great water divider bet ween Sarawak and the Dutch territory and to study above all the mysterious Mount Tibang, so often referred to in the legends and stories of the natives.
UNKNOWN MT. TWANG.
After having completed his outfit at Long Nawan the Doctor proceeded in late October to the unknown Mt. Tibang which highly interesting mountain was duly ascended and explored from the foot to the top.
The height was fixed at 1,700 metres and Dr. Mjoberg made a preliminary map of all the surroundings.
170
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1926.
It was discovered that in reality there are two Mount Tibangs, both of the same altitude, one falling entirely within Dutch territory, another one at the very watershed, both not very far away from each other.
It was the Mt. Tibang so dreaded by all Kenyahs and other people which Dr. Mjoberg explored.
Animal life was found to be very rich and so also plant life on the top. Dr. Mjoberg came across a subalpine vegetation consisting of Rhododendron species and other bushes with coriaceous leaves. Also a snow white viola was found on the higher slopes.
Rich collections were made, including the largest and smallest sized specimens of the animal and floral kingdom.
25,000 SPECIMENS.
Dr. Mjoberg cleared the top of the mountain of all big trees and mapped the surrounding country. Mt. Tibang was found to be of volcanic origin.
Loaded with very rich and highly interesting material, the return journey to Long Nawan was commenced and here Dr. Mjoberg studied for another month the different tribes of Kenyahs.
Rich ethnological collections were made and the beliefs and superstitions of "the interesting tribes studied carefully.
On January 15, Dr. Mjoberg returned to the coast following the dangerous Kajan river, and successfully bringing with him his collections numbering about 25,000 specimens, arrived at Boelongan.
The journey was completed in ten days. Dr. Mjoberg continued his studies in Boelongan and went for one month to the peculiar Maratoea island, where extensive collections were obtained. He also visited the Berau district and made a thorough research of the big Kimanis caves the Birang river.
IN THE HIGH MOUNTAINS.
Dr. Mjoberg is an old explorer who headed two scientific expeditions to Australia in 1910 and 1913 with splendid results. He also spent three years in Sumatra making rich collections.
During three years he was Director of the well- known Sarawak Museum at Kuching and carried out not less than three different expeditions.
The most noteworthy was the one to the unknown Mt. Murud in the north of Sarawak near the Dutch boundary.
Two previous expeditions under the leadership of Major J. C. Moulton had tried to reach the ; unknown mountain (altitude 2.200 metres) but , failed. Dr. Mjoberg was successful in reaching the , top, where he camped for six weeks making a thoroughly rich collection of animal and plant life. It has long been a well-known fact that the high mountains in the extreme north of Borneo, Kina Balu, showed a peculiar fauna of its own. Not less than twenty-five beautifully coloured and peculiar birds were known only from that locality.
KINA BALU BIRDS.
Many speculations have been made on account of the peculiar fact, and Kina Balu has been considered as a wonderful source of endemic species.
Dr. Mjoberg managed however to capture no less than ten of the famous Kina Balu birds on the top of Mt. Murud, thus showing that the Kina Balu fauna probably extends the whole way through the unknown central mountain chains.
In order to prove this, Dr. Mjoberg had selected Mt. Tibang as a working field during his last expedition and he has been highly successful in finding nearly a dozen of the Kina Balu birds and mammals also on Mt. Tibang, thus definitely proving that we have a continuous mountain fauna right along the central mountain chains and that Kina Balu is only the more northern distributing centre.
IN THE RAINY SEASON.
The very rich collections made by Dr. Mjoberg under great hardships and difficulties will be distributed in due course amongst the scientific workers of the world and will undoubtedly serve as a solid basis for future conclusions.
I travel purposely in the rainy season, says Dr. Mjoberg, proudly. It is true that it is more unpleasant but, on the other hand the whole nature is more richly pulsating and the results therefore far better.
For a biologist in Borneo the proper field is the region above 1,500 metres. There the ancient fauna of Borneo will be found. I have always had for principle to select a fine field and to work it through properly thus getting a reliable crosssection of the fauna and the flora.
A biologist must be able to dispose over his time and not burry along covering new ground every day. By having a fixed head camp he has opportunity for excellent observations and to collect also the rare specimens.
Dr. Mjoberg will return to Sweden in the first half of June after a few weeks rest at Buitenzorg and other places. When at home he will commence a new book on bis travels in the East. He expressed his great appreciation of the facilities offered him by the Dutch Indian Government and the scientific staff at Buitenzorg. Dr. Mjoberg presented a collection of plants to the Herbarium at Buitenzorg.[Straits Times.]
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correxpondents.].
To
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
Kuching
DEAR SIR,
Are there no means of stopping the wholesale slaugther of our song birds in and around Kuching? I frequently meet parties of youths around with B.S.A. sir rifles returning from a local shoot with strings of dead birds mostly of the bulbul variety. Something might be done to stop the indiscriminate slaughter of our feathered friends.
Yours faithfully.
DODO.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1926.
171
Notes on Rainfall in Sarawak.
From graphs kindly supplied by the Curator, Sarawak Museum, we have been able to compile the following chart showing the average rainfall in Sarawak during the last five years.
Average rainfall for the five years, 19201925.
From the above it will be seen that the first group of five stations, i.e., the western area of the State, has roughly speaking a very wet landas and a dry season with rainfall under io inches per month.
The second group, comprising the eastern area of the State, experiences a moderate wet season, and a dry season averaging over io inches per month, with not a great deal of difference between them.
The third group, comprising the central coastal area, apparently enjoys an even drier wet season, and a dry season well under io inches per month.
It will also be noticed that the landas period is very marked in the eastern and western areas, occurring about the same time at each district, i.e.. during the month of January.
Further comparison shows that, among the residential stations, Kuching records the maximum average for one month (January) and Baram the minimum (August). Lawas and Trusan may be called the wettest stations, and Baram is easily the driest.
For the whole State, the Annual Rainfall average 153 inches, with January as the wettest and August the driest month.
Pasal Manang.
Runding mensia bangat besai, Lalu ka pun penyarut datai;
Bekliti nyadi Manang Matai, Dikena ka ubat sengapa utai.
Baum ngamula ka pangan diri, Ngiga untong ari menyadi;
Nyadi Manang bebisa diri, Andal ka upah kain kalambi.
Trang tusi Manang Ubam, Betuboh maioh nandang belian; Mekong nyumboh di madang resam, Simpan di lupong tambit temeran.
Sida datai orang pen gaga, Meda sida samoa kamara; Macham penyakit tentu ngelala, Ti ngawa indu beranak papa,
Ubam nyaut lalu bejako, "Dinga ka penemu aku dulu;
Indu beranak machatn tu, Tentu iya bisi buyu.
Ati Ubam udah gaga, Nyumboh disimpan udah nyengala; Hari pen udah umbaa pemanah iya, Sida belaboh nebah nyawa.
Manang berundang nengah ruai, Buyu dikumbai udah datai ;
Tama ka bilik nyumboh dibantai, Dibunoh sida gegaring bangkai.
Upah sida enda gegawa, Sigi benong tajau rusa; Tutup bebendai brat lima, Indu diadu ka nadai ngawa.
Patut kita nemu mragam, Pemula Manang ngakal Iban; Utai ditaroh enda sa leman, Awak ka orang arap ka pelian.
Pasal Manang enda ulih ratan, Enti ditulis enda alah sa bulan; Tu umbaa nyadi ka chuan, Umbas ditu alai pemadam.
MONTHLY REPORTS.
FIRST DIVISION.
?
Kuching.
April, 1926.
Resident's Court.There were four cases, one criminal mid three civil. The appeal of Chop Hong Kiat, mentioned in my last report, was referred back by the Supreme Court for further investigation of accounts. This was done but nothing to indicate the alleged offence was discovered. An appeal against the decision of the District Court was dismissed.
Civil claims dealt with amounted to $1,113.34.
Datu's Court fines amounted to $55.08.
General. The offices were closed from 2nd to 6th instant for the Faster holidays, and again on the 14th for Hari Raya.
His Highness the Tuan Muda arrived from Singapore by the 8 s. Kuching on the 29tb. All Officers present in Kuching and representatives of the different communities awaited His Highness at the Astana.
Bujang bin Tulips tender of $1,485 for the erection of a Court House at Munggu Babi was accepted and work has commenced.
A letter was received from the Tamil community applying be allowed to settle their matrimonial disputes before a board of arbitrators chosen by themselves. The matter was laid before His Highness the Rajah who did not consider there was any necessity to alter the present procedure. When necessary Tamil accessors may be asked to advise the Court
Land Office.Mr Chan Kee Ong applied for 200 acres of land at Lundu for padi planting. The land applied for is being inspected and it is hoped
172
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1926.
will be available for the purpose required. Messrs.
Nissa Shokai, Ltd., applied for 1,800 acres of land to
extend their rubber estate at Samarahan. This
was granted subject to native rights not being in-
terfered with. During the month 19 leases were
issued for coconut and rubber planting, covering an
area of 458 acres. 90 occupation tickets were issued
covering an area of 660 acres, 631 acres being for
rubber and the remainder coconuts.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter,
reports as follows : District Court 41 cases were heard, 31 of which
were criminal and 10 civil. Of the 31 criminal cases 27 convictions and 4 acquittals were adjudged. There were 6 cases of assault, one of cheating, and 7 offences against Municipal By-laws. Fines
amounted to $253 mid fees to $90.25, while claims to the value of $2,303.55 were dealt with.
Magistrate's Court 66 civil claims were brought
for h oaring, for winch fees of $122.50 were collected. The total value of claims was $1,620.55.
Police Court 49 summary cases were up for hearing, one of which was transferred to Rejang The principal charges were assault 3, and theft 5. A total amount of $208 was imposed in lines while fees collected totalled $58.25.
May, 1926.
Residents Court Criminal.There were 5 cases.
of a Dyak prisoner, Chundi, in the gaol and confirmed by the Supreme Court. Other sentences wereSim Hoi Joo 18 months for theft of opium ; , Bong Teng fined $1,000 or in default 6 months for , breach of Opium Order No. XVI. 1925; Teh Joo Hong fined $100 for breach for the same order.
In the Civil Court an appeal from the decision of the District Court was dismissed. Total value of claims dealt with was $1,339.01.
In the Datu's Court fines amounted to $88.02 and
General.His Highness the Rajah and Dayang
Leonora left the State by s.s. Kuching on the 4th
for Europe.
The Chief Secretary, Mr. J. C. Moulton, left by
the same boat on furlough.
The offices were dosed on the 24th being Pro-
clamation Day.
I was in Upper Sarawak on duty from the 26th
to the 28th.
Mr. Gild took 24 Dyaks to Singapore during the
month, his intention being to teach them scientific
methods of jelutong tapping.
Land Office.Leases, squatters licences and
occupation tickets were issued as follows during the
month :
A.
5 leases for rubber and coconuts ... 73
9 squatters licences for rubber ... 28
227 occupation tickets for rubber ... 603
2 occupation tickets for coconuts ...	8
R.
3 0
P.
06.
12.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter,
reports as follows :
District Court.66 cases were heard, 48 of which
were criminal and 18 civil. Of the 48 criminal
cases 35 convictions and 13 acquittals were adjudged.
There were 11 cases of assault, 3 of cheating and 11
offences against Shipping and Customs Regulations.
Fines amounted to $281 and fees to $!58.25. The
18 civil claims involved amounts totalling $3,318.54.
Magistrates Court.105 Civil suits were brought
for hearing, for which fees of $170 were collected.
The total value of claims was $2,023.74.
Police Court.46 summary cases were brought before the Court, one of which Was transferred to the Resident's Court. 40 convictions and 5 acquittals obtained. The principal charges were assault 3 and theft 10. A total amount of $241 was imposed in fines and fees collected totalled $46.50.
Upper Sarawak & Lundu.
April 1926.
The District Officer, Mr. F. H. Kortright, reports
as follows; General.His Highness the Rajah visited Lundu
on the 2nd in H.H.M.Y. Maununa and on the 5tb
proceeded to Simatan and Telok Srabang, calling at
Talan Talan. Whilst at Lundu His Highness
interviewed the natives and inquired into the pros-
perity of the district. There was some forty Court
cases awaiting settlement but only the most im-
portant were dealt with, the rest being held over
till a future visit. A large stock of timber, chiefly
belian, has accumulated dining the past landas and
the traders are anxiously awaiting the arrival of
bandongs and steamers to take delivery. Corporal Bujang. who has served 22 years in the Police,
wished to retire on pension and was allowed to do
so, his position being filled by L.-C. Laji.
In Upper Sarawak the general affairs kept the
stuff occupied. Court cases were numerous, but the
only important case was that of a Sumban Dyak,
Sabor, setting a man-trap in the form of bamboo
spikes along a common footpath. Another Dyak,
Benin, stepped on two of these spikes, one of which
penetrated through his instep and the other was
stopped by the ankle hone.
The P. M.O. with Dr. Barnes of the Rockefeller Foundation the district, returning to Kuching the same day.
The Oriental Prospecting Syndicates crushing plant commenced work on the 12th and it is hoped that large developments will soon be the issue and the old mining fraternity re-established.
On the 29th Messrs. Cheek and Timlin, members
of Mr. Harvey Firestone's party, visited the district with special object of seeing the conditions of labour, etc in the Dahan Estate; they were received by the Assistant Mr. Carrie, in the absence of the Manager, and given all
possible assistance. They returned to Kuching by road the next day. A new road to cut right through the back of Seniawan Bazaar was commenced and when finished will greatly help towards the sanitation of the village. The new bazaar was laid out and five new shops are already in course of construction.
Mr Ong Seng Chai is doing invaluable work iu supervising these improvements.
Rainfall amounted to 1207 inches
May, 1926.
His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by the Acting Chief Secretary, Mr. H. B. Crocker, came up from Kuching by road to spend the week end. embodying Proclamation Day, in Bau, and visited nil the places of interest in the district.
The Divisional Officer, Mr. C. Ermen, visited the district to conduct the trials of Bassir accused of the Javanese murder at Dahan and Chong Nam Sen of gang robbery at Paku in 1924.
The former was sentenced to the supreme penalty subject to confirmation of the Supreme Court, and the latter banishment after his release from his present term of imprisonment.
Other Court work was normal, there being no cases of special interest. One, Liew Chink Lee. a rubber tapper at Siniawan, developed signs of lunacy and as he appeared to adopt a dangerous attitude he was sent to Kuching for observation.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1S26.
173
Mr. L. K. Krol, leader of the West Borneo Geological Survey, who for some time has been working on the border, came in from Jagoi and spent several days here and in Kuching.
I left in the s.s. Alice Lorraine for Lundu on the 12th instant with Mr. A. L. Honors, and after handing over the affairs of that district to him returned on the 15th. A consignment of chengal planks which had been in readiness for the Superintendent Engineer were shipped and I took the opportunity of buying up a small stock of belian for use in Upper Sarawak.
Work was commenced in laying the new 4-inch water main through the bazaar, and since, every shopkeeper has applied to have water laid on in his shop.
A new set of W.E.G. accumulators of 125 ampere hour capacity were installed and on being charged up were duly put into commission for bungalow lighting.
Rainfall amounted to 21.86 inches.
May, 1926.
The Officer-in-Charge, Lundu, Mr. A. L. Honors, reports as follows :
Court.Jong Kon and Kuan Fa were sentenced to terms of imprisonment for petty thefts. Three cases of assault were heard, one being dismissed, In the other two Phang Kui was given 3 months' R.I. and fined $50 and Katut and Sinan were each sentenced to one month. Chiew Jok was sentenced to one year's imprisonment and Kawi to one month under Order No. XII, 1902.
The practise of receiving money in this way is very prevalent in the district. A case of mischief was heard and defendant Ah Yaw given 3 months. Alip was fined $20 for breach of Forest Regulations. None of the civil cases call for special mention.
Prisoners. The daily average number of prisoners amounted to 4.13. The gang was employed on various T.W.D. works. A ditch was cut along the path leading from the end of the bazaar which was always very muddy after rain. The boatshed, which has been slowly slipping into the river, was taken up and moved to a harder site. The prisoners are at present engaged in collecting props from disused pepper gardens to build a fence for the future dairy farm.
Health.This has been good. There is no sickness at present in the district.
General.I came over on the 12th with Mr. F. H. Kortright to take over from him the charge of the station. Mr. Kortright remained till the night of the 14th, returning to Kuching again on the s.s. 4 lice Lorraine with a full cargo of timber for Kuching and Bau. I found a number of cases waiting for settlement with the result that the number of prisoners, which was one on mv arrival, increased to nine and now amounts to eight.
There have been two or three reports of Dyaks drunk in the bazaar and making trouble in a mild way. When in this state, however, they pay absolutely no respect to police authority. At the end of the month, two, including the O.K.s grandson. received sentences of one months R.I. and it is hoped this will have a sobering effect on the others as well.
Rainfall for the month totalled 9.04 inches.
Shipping.-The s.s. Alice Lorraine made one call on the twelfth of the month. Bandongs that entered the port numbered 20 and 16 cleared.
Trade.The local returns for the month for comparison with last year are as follows :
Mav. 1926
,,	1925
Imports.
$14,286.00
6.494.14
Exports.
$16,487.58
9.996.00
Foreign.
Imports. Exports.
Mav, 1925	... nil	nil
1926	... nil	$569.00
C. ERMEN, Acting Divisional Officer,
SADONG COLLIERY.
June, 1926.
The output, export, local consumption, conversion to coke and coal stock figures for the month were as follows :
1st May Stock Balance	70.02	Tons.
May Gross Output	1,499.15	,,
Total	...	1,569.17	Shipped 1,190.17 Tons.
Consumed by boilers and converted into Coke 379.07	1.569.17	,,
Stock Balance nil.
The Upper Seam Mine intersected old workings, resulting in the loss of output from this source during the latter half of the month.
The coal pillars, which had been left in, to support the lower end of No. 9 Slant were extracted to No. 35 West crossing by mid-month. A block of unworked coal on the east side of the slant is now being opened out, but as the thickness of the seam is only 8 inches, production from this point will be negligible until a better section of coal is struck, as the result of further drivages in-bye.
The bulk of the months output was obtained from No. 8 and New Mines, where conditions below ground were much more favourable.
I proceeded to the Ulu Lingga on the 9th to resume prospecting work, returning again on the 29th.
The Rainfall for the month was 11.18 inches.
J. W. EVANS.
Manager.
SECOND DIVISION
May, 1926.
General.Mr. 1J. E. Culver. Assistant Conservator of Forests, returned from Kuching on the 6th.
Lau Chee Mook arrived here on the 6th, having been sent here to act as Post Office clerk.
Police Lance-Corporal Lani left for Belong on the 7tb to take charge temporarily whilst Police Lance-Corporal, Ngelambong arrived at Simanggang for training.
Clerk Julin proceeded to Pusa via Betong on the 7th to take over from clerk Ranti Broke who arrived here on the 14th for further training.
Court Writer, Enlrieng strived from Lingga on the 17th for further training, bis accounts for April being incorrect.
I return to Simanggang from Kuching on the 15th.
Mandor Abas and staff of Telephone Department arrived on the 17th and next day started erecting the new telephone line from Simanggang to Betong, a distance of about miles.
SARAWA 1 GAZETTE, JUEY4,4M
Abang Madaut, Native Officer, Lingga. visited the Klauh and Strap and a great number of Dyaks were prosecuted for planting; para rubber without permits
The 24th was observed fjs a holiday it being anniversary of Proclamation Day.
On the 26th Mr. R. L. Daubeny left for Lubok Antu, also Mr. D. E. Calve r, Assistant Conservator of forests the former to enquire into the further rumours of smallpox, etc., and the later concerning forestry work They were still away at end of the month.
One Kimbot (f.), of Dor, cut and wounded badly one Unggok (f.) whom she found together with her (Kimbots) husband. The husband managed to escape being wounded.
Unggok (f.) is now in Hospital and on her recovery an inquiry will be held.
On the 25th Mr. G. M. Allman arrived from Betong and whilst here visited numerous para rubber gardens and instructed owners in the way to prepare their rubber. Mr. G. M. Allman left for Kuching on the 28tb via Lingga.
Forest.Mr. D. E. Calver, Assistant Conservator of Forests, reports as follows The Assistant Conservator visited the ulu Lingga and ulu Sebuyow to examine the alleged belian forests of this region. The extreme headwaters of the Sanjau, Ibol, Sapa, Ipoh and Sebuyow were examined in particular, and the result indicates that there is nothing in the nature of a belian forest in thjs locality.
Only occasional isolated trees in the most inaccessible spots were found.
During this trip a sketch map and report prepared by Mr. J, A. H. Hardie in 1917, were used, and it is interesting to note the difference between then and now in the amount of belian located.
Towards the end of the month the Assistant Conservator visited Engkilili and Lubok Antu, and at the latter place examined some virgin forest on the upper slopes of Bukit Besai.
Court.In Resident s Court, Legah, Dyak, vs. Dol, Malay theft of $300. This case was adjourned from Magistrate's Court for a decision. There being insufficient evidence to convict the charge of theft was dismissed.
Umbi vs. Ranti, Dyak of Skrang, property dispute Umbi appealed Against decision of the Magistrates Court and the decision of that Court was reversed.
District Court.Mandor Gani dismissed his post for negligently allowing a prisoner of state to escape.
A number of prisoners were punished for breach of prison regulations. There were numerous other cases but none call for special mention.
Agriculture.114 permits to plant para rubber were issued and 11 to plant pepper.
The natives have finished harvesting, and on the whole the padi crop is good. Most natives having
Cattle.The Simanggang herd number 92 head, one was killed for sale. Lubok Antu herd number 44 head.
Medical.A total of 242 persons were treated in hospital during the month as follows:European 3, Eurasians 1, Malays 31, Chinese 28, Dyak 179.
136 cases N.A.B. injection for yaws, etc., were given during the month
Land and Survey.--On the 19th Mr. N. A. Middlemas, Superintendent of Surveys, arrived at Lingga from Kuching in order to survey the Batang Lupar river. The Superintendent and staff were still in this district at end of the month
Shipping.Eight motor launches and ten bandongs arrived and ten motor launches and ten bandongs cleared during the month.
Trade.The principal exports were:-
Gutta jelutong	811piculs valued at ... $20,660
Pepper white 19 do	... 1,090
Pepper black	27	do	995
Para rubber 167 do.	... 17,612
Para scrap	66	do.	4,155
Imports. Exports. May, 1926	...	$33,452	$53,420
May, 1925	...	26,890	31.255
Public Works.The prison gang averaged 51'5 and during the early part of the month were employed on repairing Sabu mad, towards end of the month they starting whitewashing and tarring Government, buildings. The behaviour of the prisoners on a whole was very unsatisfactory.
Carpenter Matsalleh finished the clerks quarters at Engkilili on the 12th and on the 22nd starting squaring timber for two clerks quarters Simanggang The landing stage was washed away again by a very strong tide and had to be practically rebuilt.
Saribas.
The Court Writer, Betong. reports as follows for month of May.
Court. In the Native Court. Bunau was fined $36 and Rumi (f.) $28.8U for incest ; Then Kiam, Lika ff.) Radin and Rendang (f.) were fined $21.60 each for berangkat; Medan and Siah (f.) were fined $22.14 each for trespass ; Itam(f.) and Jew Nyong (f.) were fined $15 each for damaging rubber trees and to pay compensation $50 each to the owner. Eight Dyaks were fined $14.40 each for committing adultery. Various other small fines worthy of no mention. Fines and fees for the month amounted to $636.40
General -Police Corporal Buma retired on pension from the 1st, having completed 21 years service with the Government, and Police Corporal Ngelambong was appointed in his place. Penghulu Unji of Ulu Layer visited the Station on the 4th, and paid in fines $64.80.
The Commissioner of Trade and Customs, Mr. J. A. H. Hardie, accompanied by Messrs. G. M. Allman, Tan Sam Guan and Law Chin Hian, arrived from Kuching on the 8th by s.l. Lucile as far as Sebuloh, and then the party boarded the m.l. Scud and proceeded to Betong. The next day Mr. Hardie explained to the people the method of treating their rubber. Up to date there are six rubber instructors to teach them. A small smokehouse has been built by the Government as sample for the people. Messrs. Tan Sam Guan and Law Chin Hian returned to Kuching on the 10th by the s.l. Lucile.
Clerk Kami Broke, the Court Writer of Pusa, arrived on the 11th, and proceeded to Simanggang on the 14th for further training, and clerk Julin bin Jubin was sent from Simanggang to relieve him.
Police Lance-Corporal Lani was sent from Si- manggang to take over temporary charge of the police force here, and Police Lance-Corporal Ngelambong was sent to Simanggang for training.
Mr J. A. H. Hardie, Commissioner of Trade and Customs, returned to Kuching on the 18th, by s.l. Lucile, and Mr. G. M. Allman followed on the 28th, overland via Simanggang. During Mr. Allmans stay here, he was kept busy visiting the rubber gardens at Padeh. Layer and Paku rivers.
All Dyaks have been called out to carry the telephone posts and placed them along the Betong, Simanggang road as far as Bukit Sangkob a distance of 5 miles. The telephone mandor arrived from Simanggang at the end of the mouth to put up the line, and telephone communication with Simanggang will be expected soon.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1926.
175
A temporary leaf attap bouse has been built for
the Native Officer, Abang Omar, by the Kampong
Malays. Dyaks are working timber for the erection
of a substantial building. The Native Officer is
suffering from heart disease, and be refused to go to
Kuching for medical treatment.
Dresser Attenborough was stoned and assaulted
by a great number of Foochow Chinese, bin luckily
policemen intervened. Three of the culprits were
arrested and fined $15 each.
The Native Officer Abang Omar and Penghulu
Isek left for Paku on a round of inspection on the
4th till the l0th, they settled some land cases on the
way.
Agriculture.No planting permits have been
issued during the month.
Shipping.13 motor boats and one vessel arrived,
and 11 motor boats and one vessel cleared the port
during the month.
Trade.The principal exports were.
Gutta jelutong	1	picul	valued	at
Para rubber	672	do.
Para scrap	142	do.
Padi	130	pasus	valued at
$	18
40,317 4,271 260
Imports.
$29,475
34,367
May, 1926
May, 1925
Exports.
$47,219
43,817
The Court Writer, Pusa, reports as follows for the month of May.
Court.Very few cases came up before the Native Court during the month, and none of which call for special mention.
General.On the 8th instant I arrived here from Simanggang to relieve Ranti Broke who proceeded to Simanggang for further training.
On the 9th instant I took over cash book, etc., from Court Writer Ranti Broke.
On the 16th instant I left for Debak, accompanied by P. C. Bungin, in order to attend to clerical work there. Nearly all the Dyaks paid in their door tax during my stay at Debak. I returned to Pusa on the 21st instant. No European Officer visited the station during the month.
Public Works.The policemen were kept busy during the first part of month in whitewashing the Government buildings, and towards the end of the month they were kept clearing round the Government compound.
Agriculture.One permit to plant sago, and one to plant rubber were issued during the month.
Shipping. S.L. Lucile called in twice, once brining Mr. J. A. H. Hardie, Commissioner of Trade and Customs, accompanied by Mr. G. M. Allman, who proceeded to Betong in connection with the Rubber Improvement Fund, and once taking Mr. J. A. H. Hardie, Commissioner of Trade and Customs, back to Kuching. Twenty-one sailing vessels entered and twenty-five cleared the port during the month.
Trade.The principal export were: Gutta jelutong
Para rubber
Para scrap
Prawn (dried)
Fish salted
201 piculs valued at ... $ 3,418
471	do.	...	23,570
159	do.	...	3,991)
186	do.	...	6,473
45	do.	...	1,850
Imports.
$22,958.00
31,177.00
May, 1926
1925
Exports.
$40,418.00
57,699.50
Mr. H. E. Cutfield, Acting Assistant District
Officer, reports as follows:
CourtAn average number of cases came before
the Courts during the month, most of which, as
usual, were at Saratok.
Sebli, Malay, was sentenced to six months' R.I.
for obtaining money under false pretences and
criminal breach of trust; Mut was sentenced to six
months for theft; Tega, Malay, also sen Cen cod to
six months for theft; Angga and Rasiah (f.)
sentenced to six months and three months res-
pectively for non-payment at fines. The two latter
also have a charge of incest against them but the case
has not yet been settled.
Two Chinamen were fined $25 for carelessness in
causing a fire in the Saratok bazaar and another
Chinaman fined $15 for obtaining money under
false pretences. A Dyak was fined $60 and $20
medical expenses for causing grevious hurt while
out bunting.
Six Dyaks were fined various sums for misappro-
priation of Jelutong road, and another fined $10 and
costs for breach of Weights and Measures Order.
There were also the usual land and property
disputes.
General. 1 returned from Kuching, where I went
to attend Race Week, by the s.s. L'Aubaine on the
6th.
On the 17th, I left Kabong at 3 a.m. by boat for
Saratok which was reached at 9.45, on a very swift
tide As usual there was a number of cases, etc.,
before the Court during my stay here. The ditch
behind the bazaar is nearly completed Progress
has been made with the gaol and extension of police
barracks although work on the gaol has been some-
what hindered by the reng ordered from Rejang not
arriving. Those have now come and the work should
be completed. Posts are also being made for the
lamps for street lighting At 6.15 a.m. on the 2lst.
I left Saratok by the overland route for Roban which
was reached al 9.30 a.m.
There was very little doing here on this occasion
as the Dyaks were just completing their harvest.
The Krian Dyaks have already completed their
harvest which seems fairly good.
I left Roban at 1 15 a.m. by boat for Kabong which
was reached, after a break at Sessang, at 5 a.m. the
next morning. The same day al about 8 a tn.,
Sunday, the Lucile arrived from Kuching with Mr.
Rennie, Treasurer (if Sarawak, and Mr. Bruce on
board, having come to spend the week and Pro-
clamation Day in this district
The Treasurer went through some of the hooks in
the morning and gave Jerah, acting Court Writer,
some instruction and advice as to the keeping of the
new accounts. A fair amount of progress has been
made with the waterworks but the second iron well
or cylinder and the pipes required have not yet been
sent from Kuching.
Corporal Anum has been sent up to Saratok in
charge of the police there and Lance-Corporal
Jan ting of Saratok has taken Anum's place hero.
Tan Eng Chong, Court Writer, returned from
leave on the s.s. LAubaiue on the 26tb.
Examination of rubber gardens was commenced
by Abaug Mohamat, Native Officer from Roban, and
although when I was at Roban he had only visited
the main river from Roban upwards, over 200 people,
mostly Dyaks were reported by him as having
gardens without permits. A start is also being made
from Saratok and Kabong.
Abang Bujang, Native Officer, returned from
Kuching, by the Lucile on the 9th, having been
under medical treatment for over a month, and re-
sumed his duties.
It is to be regretted that he is quite blind.
PW.D.The prison gangs averaged at Kabong
10-61 and Saratok 3 07. At the end of the month
there were three prisoners only remaining in gaol at
Saratok but fourteen at Kabong. The Saratok
prisoners have been engaged during the month with
the police whitewashing and tarring the Government
buildings, which were completed at end of the month.
They were also employed on the general upkeep of
the station and maintenance of cattle. At Kabong
176
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1926.
the temporary stables were completed. The large
bridge between the Fort and Police Barracks was
repaired and two large posts replaced, the old ones
having been eaten away below the water line. Most
rtf the time they were employed in tebassing the
Government compound from the Fort to the water
edge and as far as the cowshed also behind the Fort,
towards the bazaar and round the boatshed and
Police Barracks.
This was nearly completed by the end of the
month. On two occasions they were also used for
fetching wood for the use of piles for the construction
Of the windmill and water tank.
The remainder of the time they were employed on
any work that was necessary for the general upkeep
of the station.
No one yet has been found to take the place of
P C. Jemat who was dismissed at the end of the
last month.
This has been a very dry month especially at the
end of the month, there was no water for drinking
or bathing in any of the Government quarters unless
fetched from inland beyond the waterworks, which
must be a mile and half away, and then the water
was very foul for drinking purposes. The well neat
the cowshed has run dry and is being cleaned out by
prisoners and a roof put over it. I understand from
the Superintendent of Public Works that the pipe,
when completed, will not be extended to the Govern-
ment quarters and Fort, although the Government
quarters are the furthest away of all buildings, from
any water during dry weather. At the moment the
shortage of water is really serious but it is hoped
we shall get some rain before many days over.
The trade statistics far the month were as
follows:
Imports.	Exports.
May, 19-26	... $47,049	$30,173
..	1925	30,723	40,452
During the month :
Three steamers entered and three steamers
cleared this port.
Three motor schooners entered aud three motor
schooners cleared this port.
Eleven bandongs entered and seven bandongs
cleared this port.
The following are the trade returns for the Second
Division :
Mav, 1926
Total 81.5.26
31.5.25
Imports.
$132,934.00
655,998.00
351,927.70
Exports.
$177,230.00
841,168.50
705.598.00
F.
A. W. PAGE-TURNER.
Resident Second Division.
THIRD DIVISION
April, 1926.
The Resident, Mr. TI. B. Crocker, left for Kuching on the 23rd April, to take up his appointment as Acting Chief Secretary, and the following is written from notes in his diary
The principal event of the month was the arrival of His Highness the Rajah mid Dayang Leonora in H.H.M.Y Maimuna on the 9th, His Highness leaving the next day for Kapit.
His Highness was pleased to approve of the payment of travelling allowance of 50 cents pet diem to Penghulus when on Government work His Highness returned to Sibu an the 12th and, after attending to several matters, returned to Kuching on the 14th.
The offices were closed from the 2nd to 5tb fur the
Easter holidays and again on Hari Raya.
Messrs. Harvey Firestone, Myers, Cheek and
Timlin, visited the district from the 15th to 18th,
when they returned to Kuching. During their stay
here they made inspections of the land in the
vicinity of Sibu.
Dr. Barnes, of the Rockefeller Foundation, also
arrived on the 18th and made inspections of the
hospital and various bazaars and was able to give useful
advice on methods of sanitation.
Mr. R. E. Le Sueur was granted seven months'
furlough and left for Kuching on the 14th.
Forestry. Mr. D. S. McLeod reports that during
the first half of the month he was attending to
ordinary office routine.
On the 17th he left for Daro, accompanied by
Mr. Gild. Whilst there various jelutong forests
were examined. Binatang, Rejang and Selalang
were also visited.
The District Officer, Mr. J. B. Archer, reports aft
follows:
District Office. The 2nd, 3rd and 5th were ob-
served as Easter holidays. I was away from the
district from 2nd to 5th. His Highness the Rajah
and the Dayang Leonora arrived in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on 9th and proceeded to Kapit on the next
day, leaving again for Kuching on the 14th.
Messrs. R. D. Binnie and R. E. Le Sueur were
permitted to take passage to Kuching in the Mai-
muna. The former had been on P.W.D. duty here,
and the latter was proceeding on furlough. On the
20th I visited Binatang and Sarikei At the former
Station the Court Writer was reprimanded for
negligence and disobedience of orders. A case of
alleged murder was reported from Sarikei, but in
spite of careful inquiries I was unable to find truth
in the matter. Four persons were arrested on sus-
picion but were ultimately released on payment of a
fine for concealing unaccidental death. Dr. Barnes,
of the Rockefeller Foundation, was shown over Sibu
bazaar and noticed the many improvements which
are necessary before the Municipal Area can be con-
sidered even partially sanitary. Owing to pressure
of work and the absence of members little could be
done at Sibu Municipal Meetings. Several Chinese
were found floating in the river as usual and in-
quests were held. A Cantonese boy was drowned
at Kanowit. Hari Raya on the 14th was observed
as usual and a salute of 14 guns was fired on the
evening of the 13th at 6 o'clock. The customary
visits were made.
Public Works Department. Work was started on
eight houses for members of the subordinate
service, four in Sibu, and two each at Binatang
and Sarikei. Sibu Bungalow No. 4 was practically
completed at the end of the month and the two new
ones are progressing well. A contract was made for
keeping up and repairing the Binatang road whilst
timber is being collected for bridges there at Sarikei.
The usual repairs to roads and bridges were under-
taken at Sibu and work was continued on the con-
crete bazaar drains. Piles for the foundations of
the new Sibu District Office were driven in and the
contractor is collecting materials to start on the
brick pillars next month. The two new hospital
wards are being erected but in all cases contractors
are handicapped for want of timber. Material is
being collected for the survey coolies lines at Sibu.
renders were invited for the new Sarikei wharf at
Nanga Nyelong and the Aup road. Tamil and
prison labour was employed as usual. Complaints
were made about the quality of the ice manufactured
by the Government ice machine. It would appear
that the demand greatly exceeds the supply and in
an endeavour to meet this demand very inferior ice
is turned out. Instructions have been given not to
sacrifice quality for quantity.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1926.
177
Police.The strength at the end of the month
was one sub-inspector, three sergeants, three cor-
porals, eight lance-corporals, sixty-eight constables,
and one detective. Two recruits joined and two
men were dismissed, one for police offences and the other on conviction in a Civil Court. Sergeant Salleh was promoted sergeant-major and sent to
Kuching for training.
Prisons.14 men were admitted and 13 dis-
charged. Of the former five were Foochows and
of the latter 8. The daily average number of pri-
soners was 52'16. Six men were whipped for breach
of prison discipline. At the end of the month 57
men remain d in jail. The chief warier was demoted and transferred back to the police again for gross
negligence, and Police-Corporal Besin Singh was transferred to the Prison Department as chief
warder.
Judicial Resident's Court. No cases were heard
in this Court.
District Court. -The following persons were sen-
tenced to terms of imprisonment:Ngipa, Dyak, one
vear for theft ; Ah Moi six months' for theft ; Ngu
Seng Tee and Tai Siong six months each for theft;
Ho Hok three months for giving false evidence ; Tiong Ah Long (f.) and Lee Kee Yam six and twelve months respectively for fraud : Su Sing Gung
three months for false personation tinder section 205; Hu Nang Ging three months for aiding and abetting Su Sing Gung ; P.C. No. 9 Saifullah one month for assault and Hee Mau three days for
contempt of Court. Ngulang and Jebum, brother and sister, were fined the usual amount for incest, whilst numerous fines were imposed in cases which
call for no special mention. A number of ap-
plications to eject tenants came before the Court
but most of these were adjourned pending the action
of the Sibu Municipal Board.
Magistrate's and Police Courts.No cases of
special note
Fines and fees amounted to $1,673 77. 121 deeds
were registered during the month,
Land and Surrey Department -Mr. R. Miller-
Hallett, the Acting Divisional Land Officer, reports
as follows on the progress of the demarcation of Foochow lands at Ulu Binatang:
The first part of the month was occupied with
purely routine work in the office in Sibu.
On the 20th April, accompanied by Native Officer
Abang Abon Seman and a surveyor, I left for Bina-
tang to demarcate Chinese clearings in the Ulu Mador, etc. The next day I spent in office, leaving in m.l. Jean at 2 p.m.
Haji Metair, Native Officer, was not helpful in finding me the boats he promised and caused a lot of
delay.
I arrived at Rumah Somah in the Ulu Mador at
7,30 p in. Owing to the flooded stale of the river
the party did not arrive with barang until next morning, as one of the boats supplied was unsafe
and clumsy.
After inspection of the land in the Ulu Maliu I decided that only half the area claimed by
Chinese should he allotted, as they had gone further
inland than had been intended
I have told the men interested to put in claims
for compensation which I will recommend if I con- sider them fair.
Penghulu Ugik was sent for, hut was frankly uninterested and later returned to his house. I did not find him of any assistance.
On the 26th I went into camp midway between .
the Mador and Tulai rivers.
On the same date Abang Abon Seman returned
to Sibu.
One, Ting Tiong Hwat, had felled recently, and
bad also claimed, land cleared by Hu Toh Tu. On
investigating this, it was quite clear, so I ordered
Ting Tiong Hwat to move out of the area and to
pay a fine of $25.
Three men were ordered to remove from close to
the Tulai Dyak's house. I have told these men to
apply for compensation.
Land can be found for them inside the boundaries
which I am laying down for Chinese.
The question of compensation for Dyak Temuda
and fruit trees was gone into with Native Officer
Abang Enjah, who arrived on 1st May. He made
lists of claims and the compensation due has since
been worked out. Abang Enjah returned to Sibu
with me on the 4th.
Mr. Raynham kindly sent the Renggit tor
on 4th May, on which date I returned to Sibu,
bringing the work, as far as it had been done, to be
put on the main plan.
I expected to return to Binatang 12th May, and
hope that the demarcation will be concluded by the
end of the month when a final report will be
rendered.
Medical.Dr. L. B. Haye, the Divisional Me-
dical Officer, reports as follows The number of in-patients treated at hospital
during April was 99.
There were 722 out-patient attendances, being an
average of 24'07 daily. 98 arsenical injections were
given. 10 deaths occurred in hospital during the
month, 3 from typhoid, 4 from pneumonia and
influenza, 2 from mitral disease and pericarditis, and
1 from nephritis following pregnancy.
12 operations were performed during the month,
3 requiring a general anaesthetic.
One inquest was held in hospital on a Chinese
who died from drowning.
12 lepers were sent to Kuching Leper Camp, in
all cases voluntarily submitting themselves.
174 vaccinations were done during the month and
292 passengers of ships were inspected.
From the 18th to 23rd Dr. Barnes of the Rockefeller
Foundation was on a visit here. During that time I
showed him the hospital, and also went with him
inspecting the bazaar and schools, we also went up
river and inspected the bazaar of Kapit, Song and
Kanowit.
It was without much difficulty that I found some
of the worst spots.
Respiratory affections still continue to occupy first
place in the list of diseases, a number of cases of
typhoid have also occurred, 2 being fatal.
No increase in any other disease has occurred.
Rejang.
April, 1926.
The District Officer, Mr. J. C. Swayne, reports as
follows:
General.The 2nd to the 5th were public holidays
and the Offices closed, and also on the 14th, Ran
Raya, when the usual complimentary visits were
paid.
A claim for losses caused by the non-fulfilment of
a contract was brought by Ba Kee against Ah Fong,
no proof of substantial loss was shown and the case
dismissed. At Matu, Smail and Rais, two Sirek
men. were caught stealing six bags of harvested padi
from a farm and sentenced to terms of imprison-
ment. No other important cases were beard.
Some progress has been made on contracts to re-
make the kampong road and also a new Customs
shed. A lamp sent from Sibu has replaced a smaller
light at Jerijih, and I hear is satisfactory. At the
same place a mark for the aerial survey was re-
painted black. Aeroplanes have several times been
reported over the district. A supply of firewood
was towed to Sibu by s.l. Mermaid for the use of the
Forest Department.
I regret to report the death of P. C. Madok, who
had just arrived from Matu to do duty at Daro. He
appears to have died after a short illness of two
hours. A further inquiry will be held into the matter.
178
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1926.
At Daro I received a letter from Mr. Gild informing me he had dismissed his manager at Tanjong Blatok, and left Durahman, a Tregganau Malay, in charge; previously there had been some friction between the two.
I left for Matu on the 20th and was away at the end of the month. The bazaar road has been reopened and cleared and slight repairs made to all ; Government buildings. The work of moving the station will depend on the supply of timber available. No new contracts will be made until materials are actually at Matu. Nine estates in the Probate and Bankruptcy Court were wound up and five others held over to be advertised in the Government Gazette.
Exports. For the month as.follows: -
Damar Daging	Piculs	44.80	Value	$1,330
Rattan Letek	..	7.70	80
Rattan Tot No. 2	476.50	8,300
Illipe nuts	9.00	80
Gutta Percha	2.04	MOO
Plantation Rubber	,,	58.08	4,895
India Rubber	3.45	120
H. D. APLIN, Acting Resident Third Division.
COAST DIVISION.
Kapit.
April, 1926.
The Court Writer reports as follows ;
General. Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, Acting Assistant
District Officer, returned from Kuching on the 7th instant. His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by
the Dayang Leonora, Resident Third Division, and Mr. and Mrs. Gaskell, arrived at Kapit on board
H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the evening of the 12th
instant.
His Highness the Rajah dtuing his visit here held
an interview with the Penghulus and many of the
senior Tuai Rumah, and was pleased to sanction
new Penghulu and Mata Mata. His Highness gave
a feast to the Dyaks which took place at the parade
ground and dancing was carried on until 11 p.m.
On the 11th instant a seaplane, under Mr. Raynham, arrived and returned again the same day to Sibu.
Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, Acting Assistant District Officer, left by H.H.M.I. Maimuna on European
furlough.
On the 20th instant Captain E. V. Andreini,
Assistant District Officer, accompanied by Divisional Medical Officer and Dr. Barnes, arrived by the Chamois, returning again on the 21st instant.
On the 28th instant Abang Aboi, Native Officer of
Kanowit, arrived by the Soon Aik to relieve Abang Moos, who is proceeding to Sibu on the 29tb instant. The sum of $10,000 was remitted to Sibu Treasury during the month.
The Offices were closed on the 2nd for Good
Friday and again on the 4th for Easter Monday and
on the 14th for Hari Raya.
During earlier part of the month the river was in
flood.
The wireless was still out of action at the end of
the month.
Court.Very few cases came before the Court.
Chin Ah Foh was sentenced to three months for
assault; Sigow, Dyak, three months for theft of
rubber. Fines and fees amounted to $142.97.
Health.Anthony Harry, Government Vacci-
nator, vaccinated 166 persons.
Public Works.The contractor started to work
materials for the construction of clerks new house.
Prison.The prison gang, average 23, was em-
ployed on the Kapit river roads and general upkeep
of the station. The prison carpenter was employed
on minor repairs to bridges and buildings.
Dairy Farm.The herd numbered fifteen at the
end of the month.
Sarawak Rangers Parades and duties were carried
out as usual during the month.
Trade and Shipping.The s.l. Chamois and Soon
Aik made two trips each during the month, and
s.s. Sarawak, m.l. Tama, H.H.M.Y. Maimuna one
only.
Mukah and Balingian.
April, 1926.
General. 1 was laid up with fever throughout the
early part of the month.
Native Officer Abang Haji Mohidin was granted
short leave to attend the Hari Raya celebrations in
Kuching.
The 14th being Hari Raya was observed as a
public holiday and the leading Mohammedan Chiefs
paid their customary visits.
I left for the interior on the 19th, accompanied by
Mr. Arundel), Datu Awang Udin, Dresser Ah Khiaw,
vaccinator Cheng Geek Cheng, and Forester Abu,
but owing to pressure of business at Mukah I was
only able to proceed as fur as Penghulu lutings
house On the return trip I personally landed at each
house and inspected the vaccination of the inmates.
I also seized a number of false and unregistered
weights and measures found in possession of certain
Chinese boat hawkers.
All Dyak Chiefs were notified that they must
personally collect and pay in tax in future and for
their services they will be paid ten per cent com-
mission. Many complained of the negligence of the
Penghulu in dealing with petty cases, fines often
being withheld and judgment passed when only one
of the aggrieved parties is present; this matter will
be inquired into in due course, but it is apparent that
there is a strong tendency amongst these Dyaks to
ignore their Chiefs entirely and hide away in miser-
able leaf huts on the remnants of padi farms rather
than live in the longhouses as heretofore.
The only Dyaks showing any signs of prosperity
were found to be either Saribas or of Saribas
extraction.
Datu Awang Udin. accompanied by vaccinator
Cheng Geek Cheng, afterwards proceeded on up
river to deal with the smallpox outbreak at Sungei
Selangau and with orders to vaccinate every one en
route; they were still away at the end of the month.
Cadet Officer Mr. R. Arundel) left for Kuching
in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 27th to attend the
Races.
On the 28th I paid another visit to the interior,
reaching and returning from Sekoian the same day.
The proposed Forest Reserve at Snngei Skei was
visited, together with neighbouring jelutong workings,
and all weights and measures inspected en route.
Courts. Many Chinese traders, chiefly boat haw-
kers, were fined for breaches of the weights and
measures regulations. The case Chan Gek Kheng
(f.) vs. Sim Tong Kheng was referred to the
Supreme Court as defendant was found to be
married to a Chinese wife as well as local wife by
Civil marriage certificate. Bakir bin Rasam was
fined for obstructing the waterworks staff. Hussin
bin Silat, Yaman bin Gano, and Hamdan bin Itin
were fined for attempting to evade payment of
exemption tax
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1926.	179
Health.Datu Awang Udin, accompanied by
vaucieator Cheng Gena Cheng, left again for Sungei
Selangau on the 19th to continue vaccination of the
interior Dyaks, and was still away at the end of the
month.	Acompanied by Dresser Ah Khiaw I visited the
interior as far as Penghulu Intings house and per-
sonally inspected all houses en route, vaccinating
those .who had evaded vaccination previously, I also
inspected Kampongs Judan and Petanak and again
supervised the vaccinating of all those who had
evaded treatment. In spite of the fact that Chiefs have reported all persons vaccinated locally it was found that about 50 per cent of population had
managed to evade vaccination. However, since the inspection took place, the natives have begun to apply for vaccination of their own accord.
Public Works. The Tamil gang was employed filling in swampy ground and clearing sago clumps with a view to eradicating the mosquito pests at this
station.
I inspected the waterworks and arranged to have substantial new quarters erected for the foreman at
the Petanak Intake.
During the month the people from the surrounding
kampongs turned out en masse and cleared the
large stretch of nipa swamp in front of the Fort.
The prisoners, averaging 5'20 men, were employed
on the general upkeep of the station grounds.
Divisional Treasury The Divisional Treasury
Clerk proceeded to Balingian on the 3rd to make
some adjustment in the accounts there.
The Treasurer of Sarawak kindly instructed Mr.
Cotterill, late Divisional Treasurer, Third Division,
to come over on the 9th and inspect the local
methods of accounting. He left for Oya en route for
Kuching the following day.
Trade and Shipping The trade returns for the
month are as follows : Coasting Imports. Coasting Exports.
Mukai .. 56,226	575,953
Balingian	29.177	2,380
The principal exports are as follows Coasting Exports.
Mukah Raw Sago 343 koyans $41,160
Jelutong	1,604 piculs	27,452
Balingian Jelutong 120 ,,	2,280
The rainfall record shows 3'39 inches-
May, 1926.
Courts.Seven persons were fined for breach of
Forest Regulations and four Chinese for assault
and trespass. One Goh Ho Peng was fined $100
for being in possession of five false dachings and a
false gantang measure. Hiap Jee Bee, Lam Choon,
Ah Bui, and Hassan, were fined for being in poss-
ession of unregistered dachings. Kee Seng for
concealing a false daching. Tuai Rumah Selan
was fined $100 for evading vaccination, one Ukong
was also fined for the same offence. There were a
few land cases and the usual number of petty cases
not worthy of mention.
Health.Datu Udin and vaccinator Cheng Gek Cheng were sent up river to vaccinate all Dyaks they could get hold of and they report having made
1,880 vaccinations. The vaccinator reported having found thirty-six cases of smallpox in the ulu S. Selangau with twenty-four deaths, also twenty-six cases in S. Luan with eight deaths. Most of the Dyaks have now been vaccinated, but in many cases
it was necessary to follow them into the jungle to
their langkaus to do it.
Vaccinations were also given by Dresser Ah Kiu
at Judan and Tutus.
Public WorksThe old jail and kitchen was removed to another site and the frameworks of buildings were re-erected during the month. Carpenters were employed erecting quarters for Assan the waterworks Foreman.
The Tamil gang were employed cleaning ditches, in ornamental grounds, The Tua Kampongs Abdul Hamid, Haji Matair, Hajj Dullah, Abun, Kadir and Jahar were called and instructed to bring out their people and make repairs to tile roads in their kampongs. A good deal of this work was done before the end of the mouth.
General. Penghulu Inteng arrived from upriver, he complains that this people refuse to abide by his decisions His Dyaks on the other hand complain that he seldom settles their cases.
The dachings in the Mukah bazaar were all verified during the month. The clerk was ordered to see that the police do not receive the fees connected with tins.
On the 11th the Acting Divisional Officer, Mr. W. F. de V. Skrine, was granted three mouths' special leave and requested Mr. H. H. Kortright, District Officer, Bintnlu. to act for him until his return.
Having received instructions from H. H. the
Tuan Muda I arrived on the 20th by m.l. Joan from
Bintulu to take charge of the Coast Division during
Mr. Skrine's absence on leave. A week was spent
going into various matters, and I finally took over
on the 28th.
Mr. P. M. Adams came over from Oya on horse-
back on the 22mi, returning again on the 25th.
The 24th being Proclamation Day a holiday was
observed.
A series of football matches between three teams
from Mukah and three from Oya and Dalat were
played off during the week end. The finals were played on Monday, when Mr. Arundella team of
Government servants narrowly defeated the Revd.
Father Quadekkers R. C. Mission team. During
the same afternoon sports were held and were a great
success. Prizes well worth winning were presented
by some of the local Chinese.
Great credit is due to Mr. Francis Lim who
organised both the football competition and the
sports.
About two thousand people attended on each of
the three afternoons.
Trade and Shipping.The trade returns for the
month are as follows :
Imports.Mukah, value $55,005.
Exports. Raw sago 610 koyans value $73,020;
Jelutong 1,048 piculs value $14,895.
30 schooners entered and 30 cleared the port
during the month.
The rainfall was 3'31 inches.
Oya and Dalat
April, 1926.
The District Officer, Mr. P. M. Adams, reports as
follows:
Court.Fines amounting to $325 were imposed
at Dalat for breaches of smallpox regulations. Lani
and Rikai were sentenced to six months' R.I.
for leaving the isolation camp without permission.
Seven Dyaks were fined $25 each for ringing
jelutong trees.
General.His Highness the Rajah intended visit-
ing the district, but unfortunately was unable to do
so.
Visitors during Easter were Messrs. Crocker,
Archer, Andreini, Haye, Pascoe. Binnie, and Proud-
foot, from Sibu. This probably constitutes a record
gathering of Europeans in Oya.
I went to Kuching on the 10th and was still away
at the end of the month.
180
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1926.
Accounts. Mr. Cotterill visited the district from 7th to 10th during which time he also visited Mukah. He corrected a few minor mistakes which bad been made in the latest accounting system.
The clerks now seem to thoroughly understand the new system.
The approved estimates have at last been made known, and much work which might have been spread over four months, will now have to be performed in order to get the vote book up to date.
The sum of $7,500 in notes was transferred to the Divisional Treasury.
Prison.Prisoners averaged eleven, and they were employed on the usual upkeep. The whole gang were at Dalat from 5th to 10th. One man was sent to Sibu Hospital for treatment.
Travelling. I visited Dalat via Igan from the 5th to 8th and settled all outstanding matters.
Trade.4011 koyans of raw sago were exported to Kuching.
Trade returns were : Exports	... $58,587.00
Imports	... $29,649 10
Shipping.Entered one launch, four motor schooners, nine schooners. Total fourteen.
Cleared one launch, six motor schooners, ten schooners. Total seventeen.
May, 1926.
Court.Fines collected amounted to $229.42 and fees $165.25. Prisoner Ah See was sentenced to 12 months extra and 12 strokes for theft and breach of prison regulations; a Melano sailor was imprisoned two months for deserting his schooner and contempt of Court, and Laie to two years for theft from a dwelling. Fines amounting to $410 were imposed on Dyaks for refusing vaccination and all Tuai Rumah kept on remand until these are paid and their people vaccinated. Several Pen at people were fined for breach of the Land Order.
General.I returned from Kuching on the 9th and found everything in order. Dyaks have been down to pay tax and report their districts free from smallpox. I rode over to Mukah on the 22nd to meet Mr. Kortright, who has temporarily taken over the Division, and remained there until after the Proclamation festivities.
All opium smokers were photographed. I visited Dalat from 25th to 29th and settled all outstanding cases.
P.W.D.A contract was made with Koo Eng to supply all materials for and whitewash all Government buildings at Dalat for $200 A local carpenter has been engaged to replace all rotten planks in the Dalat Court House. The Court House Oya is nearly completed and all that remains to be done being the fixing of the zinc chutes and the doors. The original design had to be slightly altered to allow sufficient space in the interior. The workmanship of the carpenters is excellent.
Clerical.Soon Thai Law was sent from the Treasury Kuching to relieve Spurah who had been granted 2 months' leave, but he was recalled after six weeks. It is impossible to keep the accounts and office work up to date under such circumstances. Stationery seems as difficult to obtain as clerks, and it is probably only a question of time to be without either.
Prison.Prisoners averaged 1516 and were employed on the usual upkeep of roads and ornamental grounds.
Trade.247 koyans of raw sago and 716 piculs of jelutong were exported to Kuching.
Shipping.One motor schooner and 10 schooners entered and cleared.
Trade returns were :Exports $59,304 ; Imports $24,674.
Bintulu.
April, 1926.
The District Officer, Mr. H. H. Kortright, reports as follows : Court.There was a fair amount of Court work this month. One Berasap was imprisoned for six months for contempt of Court; Tua Kampong Lassab, of Pandan, was fined $100 for deserting his kampong; Kadeng, nine months concealing a case of smallpox ; Liram, six mouths for same offence : three Chinese $5 each for breach of Government Orders. There were also twenty-seven respons mulcted in fines amounting to $1,595 for ringing jelutong trees.
Health.The health of the district has greatly improved ; two cases of smallpox were found hidden in the kampong early in the month and were isolated, but as far as we know no other cases have occurred. Dresser Benjamin, at Pandan, reports that no new cases have occurred in that neighbourhood and that the epidemic is over. He has vaccinated 674 persons there during the month, and 391 have been done here. This brings the total number of vaccinations given m this district since last August up to 11,160. Dresser Benjamin has now gone to Tubau to vaccinate the Kayans and when this is done he will return to Kuching.
Public Works. The local Public Works Department has completed the Forest Bungalow, which is now ready for occupation, at a cost of $1,570.54. A house for a Customs Officer, costing $651.69, is also finished. The Police Station in the bazaar has been pulled down and rebuilt on a new site, the old site being required for a Customs examination shed and enclosure. Work on this structure is now well advanced. Most of the timber for the new wharf has been assembled, and the piles for one of the runways have already been put in, but nothing more can be done until a pile driver arrives from Kuching. A contract has been let to whitewash and tar the Government buildings and this work should be finished by the J 5th of May.
General.On the 4th clerk Boon Swee went to Sebauh to relieve clerk Lik Huang who took his leave. This district is still short of two clerks, and the greatest difficulty is being experienced in keeping the work up to date.
On the 5th s.s. Auby arrived from the north. Dr. J. L. Farquharson was a passenger en route for Kuching and while here he inspected the Government Dispensary, etc. Mr. Cox also arrived and changed batteries in wireless station.
There was a very severe electrical storm experienced here on the 6tb. The ground at the very base of the flagstaff was struck by lightning, but with the exception of a hole made and some earth scattered about no damage was done.
The 14th, being Hari Raya Puasa, the usual salute of seven guns was fired from the Fort at 8 a.m. Later on about fifty people visited the bungalow and partook of light refreshment.
Mr. R. V. Palfreman, A.DO., arrived from Tatau on the 17th to discuss various matters concerning Punans and Dyaks in the Tatau. While here he visited Sebauh to look for a piece of suitable laud in that vicinity, on which possibly later on to allow a few Foochows to settle to plant sago and padi. Mr. Palfreman returned to Tatau on the 24th.
On the 28th I left by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna to attend the Spring Race Meeting in Kuching.
Trade.The trade of the district has been quite good and seems to be developing considerably. Arrangements have been made to obtain a site for six new shophouses at the up river end of the bazaar. The six applicants have clubbed together over the building of these shops, which will be uniform in design.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1926.
181
The trade returns for the month are as under: 19-26	1925.	1924.
Imports $74,104.51	$26,752.21	$32,119.20
Exports 94,014.19	26.460.44	30,239 39
'The following vessels entered and cleared the port
during the month.
Entered four steamers and two schooners. Cleared
four steamers and three schooners.
The rainfall was 13*56 inches.
May, 1926.
Courts.Cases heard between the 7th and 19th
were few, the principal were Mat 6 months for
hiding a smallpox case; Tua Kampong Klajat fined
$10 for not reporting births and deaths ; Nasar fined
$10 for riding a bicycle to the danger of the public ;
Tuai Rumahs Lanau and Esau were fined $25 each
for refusing to allow their people to be vaccinated.
An inquiry into a case of abduction and rape was
started, us was also an inquiry into the wilful
destruction by Dyaks of some 700 jelutong trees
large and small, and the action of Penghulu Jalin
in connection with this. Penghulu Jalin was sub-
sequently fined $200. Tuai Rumah Kedoo $50, mid
90 Dyaks the sum of $15 each for the damage done
to this jelutong.
Health. There have been no fresh cases of small-
pox in the district this month, at least none have
come to light.
GeneralI returned from the Kuching Races by
H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 7th, winch towed in I.
Joan the new launch for this district.
Punans Tama Gran and Keseng came over from
Tatau to discuss the future dweling-place of Punans
in the. Kakus River. As they are all in favour of
remaining sit S. Penjarai this has been agreed to,
provided they build a proper house and all live
together at that place.
The s s Sulong entered this port on the 16th to
load belian attaps for the north ; she sailed the
following day. Messrs. Cotterill and Adams were
passengers by her.
On the 13th I received a message from the Acting
Divisional Officer, Mukah. that he had been granted
three months special leave and that I was to act for
him. This was confirmed by II. H. the Tuan
Muda by telegram a few days Inter.
On the 18lh the m.l. Joan went to Tatau to fetch
the A.D O., Mr. R. V. Palfreman, who will now
make his headquarters here until he goes on leave in
July.
The s.s. Auby entered the port on the 17th
leaving the following day with a fair cargo of
jelutong and belian attaps.
Three Foochow Chinese arrived from Sibu to ask
for land in this river. They wish to bring in 100
families. There is a suitable piece of land above
Sebauh which Mr. Palfreman has inspected together
with the Foochows themselves. They are very keen
to go there, but it is thought that not more than 50
families can be allowed in at a time on account of
the difficulty in settling them, but that if the first
50 make things easy more might be allowed in
later. I have communicated with the Acting Chief
Secretary, also Mr. Hoover, over this matter.
The Dyaks in the Tatau are very anxious to get
some Foochows to move in there also and to settle
at Nanga Anau, a place about three tanjongs below
the Government Station. I am in favour of this
and it would be an easy matter to arrange as there
is any amount of unoccupied land there and the
Dyaks actually want them in there.
Having left various instructions with the Assistant
District Officer I sailed for Mukah on the night of
the 20th in m.l. Joan and arrived there in 7 hours.
I returned here again at 9 a.tn. on the 29th. On the same day about 1,500 Dyaks arrived from up river to enlarge the Government cattle ground aria this was finished by the end of the month.
Trade and Shipping.The trade returns for the- mouth are as follows: 1926.	1925.	1924.
Exports	$62,262.10
Imports	62,323.65
$41,683.35	$31,742.08
30,639.50	22,526.95
The following vessels entered and cleared the port
during the month : Entered	7	steamers	3	schooners
Cleared	7	,,	1	The rainfall was 11'29 inches.
Tatau.
April, 1926.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. V. Pal-
freman, reports as follows:
Court. During the month a Dyak by name Dun-
dang of the Batang Rejang, Was sentenced to two
months' R. I. for coming over into the Ulu Anap
from the Pelagus without a pass. A Bintulu Malay,
by name Budin, was sentenced to nine months' R. I.
for theft of jelutong, also two other Bintulu Malay
named Sia and Busu, were sentenced to six months'
R.I. each for the same offence. There were no
other cases of any importance brought before the
Court during the month.
General. I returned from the Ulu Anap on the
4th after having investigated various matters and
rumours there. A full report of these investigations
has already been forwarded to the District Officer,
Bintulu, under separate cover.
I left for Bintulu in company with Penghulu
Bunyah on the 16th, returning again on the 25th.
During my visit to Bintulu I was instructed by the
District Officer, Bin lulu, to visit Sebauh and
Sebungan in order to examine land for a proposed
settlement of Foochows in the Sebauh District.
On the 29th many up-river Tunis arrived in order
to hold a meeting, in re the creation of a new Peng-
hulu for the Ulu Anap, to take the place of Peng-
hulu Bunyah who is getting too old to travel and
who has asked to be allowed to retire. The Tuais
have not come to anv definite decision to date.
Towards the end of the month Penghulu Lang-
gong from the Batang Rejang arrived overland from
the Pelagus; he had not returned by the end of the
month.
Prisoners.During the month three prisoner
were sent to Bintulu to serve their terms of
imprisonment, also three prisoners were released,
their terms having expired.
P. W. D.The Tatau Dyaks, Punans. and Bukitans,
have been ordered to work, at once, 400 telephone
posts and also two wireless masts.
The Kampong Malays during the month have
been engaged in clearing the wireless station site,
and arc at present engaged in constructing a bridge
across the Sungei Jatan for the use of the wireless
station.
Repairs are also being carried out on the Court
House verandah.
Health. The. health of the station still remains
good. In accordance with the instructions of the
District Officer, Bintulu, the quarantine of the
station in regard to Balingian has now been removed.
Shipping During the mouth the schooner Intan
Terpeleh Zainudin denied the port on the 15ih
with a cargo of belian for Kuching.
182
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1926.
The schooner Sri Mukah arrived and cleared again with a cargo of Government timber.
A Chinese junk also entered the port, but has not as yet cleared.
Trade returns:
Imports $8,514.20 ; Exports $12,706.99.
May, 1926.
Courts.There were only two cases of any importance during the month, these being Government vs. Balut, contempt of Court, defendant sentenced to two months' R.I., and Government vs. Jeket, offering a bribe to a Government servant, defendant sentenced to one years R.I.
General.During the month a meeting was held of all the ulu Anap Tunis in relation to the making of a new Penghulu to replace Penghulu Bunyah who is now old and wishes to retire from his Penghu lu- ship. Owing to the Dyaks above Muput being all Lemanak Dyaks and all below Muput being Skrang Dyaks no satisfactory decision was arrived at and it seems that the best thing be that Government appoint whomsoever it may think fit, since that Tuais will never come to any agreement among themselves.	On the 4th Tama Gran and Keseng, Punans, were sent to Bintulu with a letter to interview the D.O. Bintulu in regard to certain matters concerning the making of their new house in the Kakus. They returned to Tatau on the 9th.
The news from the ulu Anap is now good and the Dyaks state they do not any longer expect trouble, at any rate for the present.
On the 18lh I received a letter from the D.O. Bintulu requesting me to proceed to Bintulu at once; I left by the m.l. Joan at 9.30 a.m. arriving Bintulu at 1.30 p.m. The District Officer discussed various Tatau Dyak and Punan affairs with me and also requested me to proceed up to Sebuah to look into the matter of land for a proposed Foochow settlement, also to bold an inquiry into the behaviour of Penghulu Jalin in re the working, by his people, of jelutong trees. These matters having been attended to I again returned to Bintulu and at the end of the month had not as yet returned to Tatau.
Prisoners.During the month two prisoners were sent to Bintulu.
P. W.D.--The Kampong Malays were still engaged in preparing the wireless site and also in whitewashing the Government buildings. All buildings were whitewashed excepting the police station which could not be done owing to the lack of sufficient whitewash.
The Dyaks of Gis* bouse were engaged for one day in clearing all the long grass around the station.
Health.The health of the station still remains good.
Shipping.During the month the schooner Intan Terpeleh Zainudin entered and cleared the port.
Trade. Imports $11,054.70 ; Exports $7,356.00.
W. F. DE V. SKRINE, Acting Divisional Officer.
FIFTH DIVISION.
?
Limbang.
April, 1926.
General. His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Dayang Leonora, arrived at Brooketon on the 22nd in the Maimuna at 8 20a.m., where His Highness landed and paid a short visit to the bungalow, proceeding to Limbang at 10 a.m. and arriving there at noon, where a large crowd had gathered to meet him. That evening the ornamental grounds were illuminated and there was a short firework display. His Highness the Rajah was in the Division from the 22nd to the 26th. Whilst at Limbang His Highness sat in Court and listened to the complaint of the Selangan people, who had been ordered to remove their buffaloes from alaman Selangan to alaman Merapayang Lubai. His Highness was pleased to direct that as these people had failed to carry out the order of the lower Court through no fault of their own the buffaloes could remain at Selangan, and stated that the Limbang District was first and foremost a buffalo rearing centre, and persons opening gardens in recognized buffalo areas did so at their own risk and must fence these off.
His Highness also distributed four Long Service Decorations.
His Highness left for Lawas on the 24th and from there went on to Kuching on the 26th.
Mr. Holl. Director of Agriculture, arrived by the Sulong on the 3rd and returned by heron the 9tb. During his visit he inspected both the Brooketon and Lawas cattle; the question of giving up the Brooketon herd, and the buffalo situation generally, were discussed.
The two large Lancashire boilers and all material in connection with the same were transferred to Labuan. The Sulong made two trips from Brooketon to Labuan for the purpose of towing them. The boilers were eventually taken on to Singapore by the Tanker Nerite. General Sir C. H. Powell, representing the purchasersthe Malayan Wood Distillation Ltd., of Ki ambit, F.M.S.was also a passenger by the Sulong. He returned via Labuan.
Mr. Venables, British Resident, Brunei, spent the night of the 11th here.
Dr. Braendlin and Mr. Wilhelm, geologists of the Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., were in the district during the month.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1926.	183
The rainfall was 1213 inches.
Marine.Both Sylvia and Saripah were out of
action the greater part of the month waiting for
spares. The former is now running again.
Court.There were no cases in the Resident's or
District Courts, but there were the usual number
of petty cases in the Magistrates Courts.
Health.Vaccinator Ali Omar arrived by the
Auby and proceeded to the Madamit and Mendalam
streams to vaccinate in the Upper Limbang.
With the return of the wet weather there has
been a good deal of sickness about, especially
amongst the Police and Rangers, and a number of
deaths amongst the children.
Education.As yet it has been impossible to find
anyone suitable to fill the post of teacher at the
Vernacular School, rendered vacant by the resigna-
tion of Abang Haji Anist at the end of March.
Public Works.- All the whitewashing and tarring
of the Government buildings has been finished.
Prisoners were still employed on the new boat-shed
and in carrying material for the contractor.
Trade and Shipping. -Fifty head of buffalo were
shipped to Kuching.
Shipping Inwards : s s. Auby made 2 trips from Singapore via
Kuching
s.s. Sulong	1	Kuching
m.l. liunga	1	,,	,, Miri via Brunei
s.l. Kwong Yick	2 trips	Labn. via Brunei
s.l. Peter Duff .. 2 ,,	,,	,,
s.l. Muara ., 1 trip Brunei
Below are the trade returns:
Exports.	Imports.
Foreign	...	$29,359	$24,381
Coasting	...	11.305	17,744
$40,664	$42,125
Brought forward 86,093	83,935
Total to date $126,757 $126,060
1925	...	92,463	79,342
May, 1926.
Court.In the Residents Court one Mohamet
Latip was found guilty under section 457B and
sentenced to three years R.I. Defendant, who was
steward on the s.s. Sulong, broke into a first-class
cabin through the porthole and stole nearly $500
which had too trustingly been placed in a drawer by
one of the passengers.
In the District Court Adam was sentenced to
18 months R.I. and fined $50 for theft of a buffalo.
For the same offence one Panjang was sentenced to
three years R.I. and a flogging. This was defen-
dants third conviction on a like charge.
Lee Chee, in charge of Ah Piaus rubber smoke-
house, on the 21st reported the theft of over two
hundred sheets of rubber, two days after they were
actually missing, although he lives barely 10 minutes
from the police station. The impression formed
is that he knows more than, he cares to confide to
the police.
Treasury.Mr. Cotterill arrived on the 13th to
look into the working of the new system of accounts
throughout the Division. He was still here at the
end of the month, having visited Lawas, Trusan
and Sundar.
Health.The sickness of last month still con-
tinues. It is difficult to say what it is, but it
would appear to be a sort of flu. A number of
the rangers and prisoners are in hospital. Mumps
are still very prevalent.
Vaccinator Ali Omar returned from the Ulu
Limbang on the 13th. He reported having visited
the Madamit, Madalam, and as far up as Leong
Datu, having vaccinated 306 persons.
Dr. Furnivall, Medical Officer, Labuan, inspected
the hospital on the 28th.
General.I returned from Kuching with Mrs.
Boult in the Maimuna on the 8th.
Mr. F. H. Pollard, A.A.D.O., Lawas, spent the
night of the 10th here.
I went down to Brooketon for the day on the
30th and instructed the clerk to close the office and
come on by the Sulong to Limbang where he is
being transferred; I am afraid, however, that it
will be necessary to keep some sort of a clerk at
Brooketon.
The rainfall recorded is 8.15 inches.
Public Works.The prisoners finished building
the new boatshed and carrying material to the
Residents bungalow for the contractor.
The road coolies cleaned the ditches on the Sungei
Poyan, and repaired some of the bridges.
Shipping and Trade.Forty-two buffaloes were
shipped to Kuching and twenty to Sibu.
Shipping.(Inwards)s.s. Auby made 1 trip from
Singapore via Kuching; s.s Sulong made 1 trip
from Kuching via Miri; s.l. Kwong Yick made 4
trips s.l. Peter Duff 2 trips, and m.l. Adele 1 trip
respectively from Labuan via Brunei.
Below are the Trade returns :
Foreign Coasting
Exports.
$ 14,601 9,457
Imports.
$ 14,829
16,207
B / forward
$ 24,058 126,757
$ 31,036 126,060
Total to date 1925
$150,815
118,118
$157,096
96,213
F. F.
BOULT,
Resident Fifth Division.
184	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1926.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1926.	186
EX PO E T 8 t Coutu. ued.)
EXPORTS.
J. A. H. HARDIE,
Ue rielrar of Trade.
PASSENGERS.
EU IDL.. teUiuo ri'Hiic Returns lor ior niootti o! May, 1926.
IMPORTS.
Arrivals
PER s.g. Kuching. 8th June. From Singapore. Measra. Da Souza, Slmebridge, Sim Cheng Chun, Sim Moll Seng, G. G. Tan, Chun Kia Hock, Law Chin Eng, Liin Chai Hin. Liin Hinn Hoo, Lim Teo Chew, Kho Eng Kong, Wee Kheng Chiang, Law Chin Heng, Teo Cheng Boo, J. Myajinia and T. Dake.
PER S.S. Kuching.
19th June. From Singapore. Fathers
O Dvke and Moulder, Messrs. Liin
Cheng Sun, Teo Wee Eng, Tan Jong
Tong. Chua Poh Thak, Wee Guan
Long, Chan Kui Chnan, Teo Cheng
Homi, Kho Hee Thai. Wee Cheong Siu
aud Mr. and Mrs. Ho Hong Seug.
Departures.
PER S.H. Kuching. 24th May. For Singapore. Capt. MacDonnel, Messrs. Lee Quee Lim, Wee Hock Siew, Lee Teo Kwan, Liin Ciiai Heng, Law Chin Eng, Law Chin Heng, Kho Eng Kong, Chua Bak Hin, Kho Hee Kliai, I eo Cheng Hoon, Liin Peng Koon, Wee Kheng Chiang, Lim Hian Hoo, Madams Chua Poh Thak, Ah Lan and Ah Kiat.
PER s . Kuc.hiug. 11th June. For Singapore. Mr. P. Down, Fathers A. Klerk, and Hopfgartner, Mr. and Mrs. C. Motte, Messrs. Tan Ah Kim, Tan Siin Pot, Low Gcok Tong. Mr. and Mrs. Wee Kheng Watt, Miss Wee Geok Bee.
1B6	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY i, 1926.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1926	187
788	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1926.
Rainfall, April, 1926.
DURING 24 HOURS
METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS.
K WK K A K IIONPITAL.
Kuching, 3 1st May, 1 3 2 0 .
