
Vol LVL
No. 869.
THE
Sarawak Gazette.
PRICE
KUCHING, Monday, February 1st, 1926.	20 CENTS.
Contents.
DeathMabel Artis Cox Page.
Notes
Departure of Her Highness the Ranee The Retirement of Mr. H. A. Adams and
Mr. E. D. Humphery
Opening of New Football Ground
Proposed Extension to S. Thoma**' School
Sibu Slush ...	...	...	...
"Hello! Siapa Itu ?" ...
Mr. Voon ThianSoo ...
Club Notes; - Kuching Football Club
Sarawak Library
Correspondence
Monthly Reports: First Division
Department of Agriculture
Sadong Colliery
Third Division
Const Division
Fourth Division
Fifth Division
Kuching Trade Returns
Passengers ...	...	...
Almanac
Miri Trade Returns
Kuching Market Price List
Kuching Shipping
Knelling Shipping Returns ...	...
Miri Shipping
Rainfall
Meteorological Returns
The Sarawak Gazette.
MONDAY, FEBRUARY 1, 1926.
ON November 25, MABEL ARTIS. the beloved wife of E. A. W. Cox of Corvichan Bay, V.I., B.C.
NOTES.
January.
His HIGHNESS the Rajah, accompanied by Mr. H. B. Crocker, Resident, Third Division, and Mr. J. A. H. Hardie, Commissioner of Trade and Customs, left on the 17th for a short visit to Sibu.
TELEGRAPHIC information has been received that His Highness the Rajahs new motor ship Maimuna arrived at Palermo on the
16th, at Port Said on the 21st January and
left Perim on the 30th.
MANY keen dancers availed themselves of
Their Highnesses invitation to dances at the
Astana on the 15th, 22nd, and 29th.
OWING to the doubtful utility, for development purposes, of the trace beyond the 17th
mile. His Highness the Rajah has approved
of the discontinuation of the Sarawak
Government Railway extension thereto from
rift the 12 mile.
It has been decided, however, to continue
clearing the rentis, which will be kept open
as a bridle path.
THE Divisional Officer, First Division, Mr.
H. D. Aplin, accompanied by Mrs. Aplin,
visited Sadong from the 18th to the 20th.
MR. F. A. W. Page-Turner returned
5i to Simanggang on the 29 th, having completely
recovered from a slight operation undergone
in the Grange Hospital, Kuching.
THE Acting District Officer, Kuching, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, accompanied by Mrs. Carpenter. returned on the 21st after a short visit to Sambir, First Division.
RECENT appointments gazetted include : Mr. W. F. Dick for duty at Ba ram as from date of arrival; Mr. R. E. Le Sueur to be Acting Assistant District Officer, Kapit; Mr. G. W. Aldridge, Cadet, to be Assistant Controller, Government Monopolies, both with effect from the 1st January ; Mr. B. A. Trechman to lie an Assistant Treasurer; and Mr. D. Y. Proudfoot who succeeds Mr. Thomas as Electrical Engineer.
THE Superintendent of Police, Mr. O. Lang, left Kuching on the 3rd on a visit of inspection to Miri, and returned on the 28th.
28
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1926
ARRIVALS by s.s. Kuching on the 11th included:Mr. H. B. Crocker, who has returned from sick leave, looking very much fitter for his holiday. He left for Sibu on the 18th to resume duties as Resident. Third Division. Mr. E. Parnell. Controller of Government Monopolies, and Mr. P. Stewart, Assistant Superintendent Engineer, who spent the Christmas vacation in Singapore. Mr. and Mrs. R. V. Carr, who stayed at the Residency. Mr. Carr arrived on a short business visit, and is a London Director of Messrs. Sarawak Trading Company, Ltd.
WE are requested to correct a misleading statement in our leader 1925 of the issue of the 2nd January, in which it is stated that the Chinese Community have guaranteed sufficient funds for the erection and maintenance of the new Pauper Camp, and that the work is being undertaken by the Public Works Department.
We are now informed that the arrangements for this work will be carried out by the Municipal Board and the Chinese Community, and that the whole community, irrespective of nationality, is paying for the erection of the new Pauper Camp by an assessment on property, which does not guarantee the total expenditure nor maintenance, but only the fixed amount of 2 per cent on the annual value of' property inside the Municipal area for one year only. The erection will be supervised by the Chinese Committee.
Highness the Rajah. Details will be found in another column.
ELEVEN inches of rain were registered at Matang Reservoir during the 24 hours of 21st December last.
ARRIVALS by the s.s. Kuching on the 22nd included Mr. and Mrs. S. R. Hadfield; Mr. and Mrs. Wilson, who have joined the S.P.G. Mission here; Messrs. B. A. Trechman and D. Y. Proudfoot, who have taken up Government appointments: and Mr. Brown, the I Singapore representative of Messrs. Thorney-croft & Co.
CHINESE New Year Pian In. or third year of the Cycle, commences on the 13th of February. Saturday the 13th and Monday the 15th will be observed as public holidays, and Government offices will accordingly be closed from Friday the 12th 3.30 p.m. to Tuesday the 16th 8.30 a.m.
SEVENTY-FOUR bags of mail arrived from i Singapore by the s.s. Kuching on the 11th January. We understand that this is the largest single consignment yet dealt with by the General Post Office, Kuching.
THE m.l. Southport has been purchased by Government from Messrs. The Island Trading Company, Limited, Brunei. It has been renamed Saripah and detailed for use in the Fifth Division.
WE are sorry tn hear that Dr. Kusel has been advised to return home to receive further medical advice and treatment for his knee. He left Sarawak for Europe on 27th by s.s. Rajah of Sarawak accompanied by Mrs. Kusel, and we wish him a speedy recovery.
DRY rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah Estate during the month of December was approximately 82,000lbs.
THE honour of declaring the first of what will be a series of big dividends belongs to the La was (Sarawak) Company. says the China Express and Telegraph. The declaration is 35 per cent for the working up to June 30th last, and is the highest yet announced, but if the price of rubber is maintained even a dividend of this magnitude will be overshadowed by much superior recommendations. That the value of shares has advanced is not a subject for wonder, though such values are far below possibilities with present spot quotation for rubber. They are based as regards probable profits on a price of about 2s. per pound. A point that may be noted also is that the rise in rubber and rubber shares is taking place at a time of great trade depression. With improved trade consumption of rubber should tend to increase. It is no wonder, therefore, that investors have made the rubber section the most active on the Stock Exchange, so that its activities overshadow any other market in the House.
THE new Kuching Football Club ground was officially opened on the 16th by His
MR. A. A. Rennie, Mr. and Mrs. Fenwick visited Santubong on the 8th for the week-end.
Mr. and Mrs. Bean also returned thence on the 21st, having enjoyed a weeks holiday.
CAPT. C. D. Le Gros Clark left per s.s. Kuching on the 14th for Singapore. We hear he will be attached to the Chinese Protectorate, Singapore, for a few months experience prior to taking up a course of 1 study in Hongkong, after which he will 1 resume duties in Sarawak.
CAPT. A. S. Lowe left Sarawak per s.s. Kuching on the 4th en route to Europe, having been granted six months furlough.
MR. A. 0. Thomas left Kuching per s.s. Kuching on the 4th, having resigned the Service on completion of his agreement.
MISS M. Chater has taken up an appointment in Singapore; we wish her every success, and hope that she will frequently find time to visit her parents and friends in Sarawak.
AT a meeting of the Sarawak Turf Club, it was decided to hold the Spring Meeting on Saturday and Monday, the 1st and 3rd of May respectively.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1926.
29
S.S. Alice Lorraine and a native prahu
were in collision between Binatang and
Sarikei, on the night of the 26th.
The prahu was sunk but the six occupants were picked up without loss of life.
Tuan (engaging cook boy) and remember 1 want to be served at table with alacrity ?
Ee Bang Tin (enthusiastically) Baik lah.
What time Tuan likeafter soup?
My friend, said the solemn-looking one, what are you doing for those who come after ' you ?
Doing for them? Im trying to dodge the Eests' replied the man who was harassed by bill collectors.
Street casualty (faintly):	Water
water.
Sympathetic onlooker : Poor fellowhes delirious."
Departure of Her Highness
the Ranee.
?*	After an only too short slay, Her Highness, together with Dayang Elizabeth and Vava. left, for Singapore en route to Europe per s.s. Kuching at 1 p.m. on the 25th, accompanied by Captain W. R. Barry Gifford, A.D.C.
Farewell gatherings had previously taken place on the 22nd when a large number of guests were invited by Her Highness to a Dance at the Astana.
A cheery Dinner party and Dance was also given by Major and Mrs. Cunynghame on the 19th, and on the 23rd justice was done to an excellent curry tiffin at the Residency by the invitation of the Chief Secretary.
A large number of Europeans and leading members of various communities were present on board to wish them bon voyage.
We congratulate Her Highness upon her wonderful recovery from a serious operation in England recently, and we voice the wish of everyone here in hoping that we may soon welcome them back to Sarawak.
The Retirement of Mr. H A. Adams
and Mr. E. D. Humphery.
The Official Gazette of 2nd January contains a notice of the retirement of Mr. H. A. Adams and Mr. E D. Humphery, who left Kuching in June last on seven months' furlough.
Mr. Adams has held a variety of appointments in the Service. He arrived in Sarawak in June, 1902, as Civil Engineer, Public Works Department.
Having acted as Superintendent of Public Works, he was transferred to the Police for duty in 1906, becoming Superintendent the same year, an appointment be held for eleven years.
He was in charge of the Sadong district from 1917 to 1919, and was appointed in August 1919 to Kuching as Registrar, Supreme Court, which appointment he held until his retirement. He was also appointed Coroner
Under normal circumstances he was not due to retire until February of next year, but the illness of his stepson, Mr E. D. Humphery. who had served 3 years in the Service, made it necessary for them both to proceed on special furlough in June last year, and although the latest news of Mi. Humphery is that he has made slight progress, we. understand that it must be many months before he can be fit again. Their many friends in Sarawak will sympathize with Mr. and Mrs. Adams in their anxiety, and trust that they may enjoy many years of health and happiness.
Opening of New Football Ground.
His Highness the Rajab honoured the Kuching
Football Club by kicking off at the inaugural,
match of the new football ground on 16th January,
1926.
Wherever one goes, even to the most remote
places in the wilds of Upper Sarawak, goal posts
are seen. Football is a universal game. We learn
from this game many lessonsthe great asset of
co-operation and clean sportsmanship being two
essentials to successful team work. With these
words the Bishop of Labuan & Sarawak wished
every prosperity to the Kuching Football Club
and the new ground.
The field is situated near the Sarawak Club and
in a few months should be as good as almost any
ground in the world. At present the turf is rather
bare of grass owing to the land having to be entirely
levelled and resown.
The first match was between teams representing
the English and Scottish communities. The players
seemed at first very much baulked by the hardness
of the ground as compared with their old field. The
English team had somewhat the better of the game
and would have been the victors had it not been for
the brilliant defence displayed by the Scottish goal-
keeper. The result was a drawone all, Bates
and Macdonald scoring.
A large assembly watched the match, which took
place under ideal weather conditions, the heat not
being too oppressive, and enjoyed the hospitality
and refreshments offered by the members, as well
as appropriate selections of National Airs
rendered by the band of Sarawak Rangers.
A photograph was taken which will perpetuate the
memory of the occasion and an extremely exciting
match.
The Kuching Football Club offer grateful thanks
to the Government for giving the land rent free for
a period of years at a nominal rent, and for a loan
on easy terms, which, together with the amount
subscribed by members, has enabled the ground and
Club-house to be completed.
TEAMS.
England:
P. Down, Turner, D. E. Baxter, Arundell,
J. P. Mead, E, Banks, S. T. Ennion, H. D. Aplin,
J. G. Barraclough, G. T. Bates, J. S. Mudford.
Scotland:
Smith, Macdonald. H. H. Calvert, G. Carpenter,
Finlay, Currie, J. P. Baird, Adams, E. 0. Bruce,
P .Stewart, J. L. Farquharson.
Referee:D. Carroll. (Contributed.)
Proposed Extension to S. Thomas
School.
A meeting of Old Boys, and others interested, was held on Saturday, 16th January, 1926. in the Sarawak Union, to consider the question of the extension of the premises of S. Thomas' School.
There was a good attendance, and the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak took the chair. The substance of his speech was as follows : -
The general development of Sarawak, and especially of Kuching, which has taken place in in the past few years, has brought the question of education prominently before the public. In an official speech at the last Council Negri, His Highness the Rajah gave it a leading place, and we, who were the first to give education to the country are naturally interested in its development.
30	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1. 1926.
the senior assistant masters. This will leave the
main building of the school entirely for class
rooms, and will free the present dining hall for
class rooms also, as the boys will feed in their
boarding houses; this will give us ten new class
rooms in all. The cost of this part of the scheme
will be about $26,000. and I think that it will be
for the better supervision and comfort of the boys.
, We also want to provide better equipment for
teaching.
"To meet the cost of this development the
I Government has promised us sympathetic con-
sideration, and we may hope for some help from
them, if we can show that we are carrying the
Chinese public with us. The Mission will be able
to put in about $4,000 but for the rest, we must
appeal to the public, especially to those who
were educated here themselves, and to those who
I have sons or grandsons in the school.
"It is a big scheme, the biggest scheme that we
, have ever put before the people of Kuching, but
1 think it is a scheme that is well worthy of con-
sideration. We want about $ 16.000 from you to
1 help us to make the school more efficient, and
I whether we can do it depends entirely upon your
interest.
I should like to tell you that one old boy to
' whom we appealed, Mr. PChin of Se rem ban, has
I sent us $3,000. which is a good lead. It proves
that he is grateful for the benefits which he here
1 received
You cannot have better education unless you
have proper premises and proper equipment to
begin with. You perhaps know that the Gov-
' eminent has made provision for a better training
of teachers by the appointment of our headmaster,
Mr Ellis, as Normal Instructor, and I understand
that his course of instruction will begin almost
immediately; this will be another step towards
the object which we have in view.
3. The Position of the Mission .I want you to
understand quite plainly that the Mission is not
out here for its own ends, but for the benefit of
the country. It is a charitable organization,
Whatever you subscribe to the appeal which I am
now making, will go, every cent of it. into the
school fund : not one of us will be personally the
better off. But you of the Chinese community
will be better off. and the country generally will
be better off, for you will have a better school and,
in time better education.
Therefore, I ask you to give us liberal support
in our scheme to help you Remember what the
school has done for you in the past; think of your
sons and gran sons who are at present in the
school; think further of the children yet unborn
who will in the future benefit by this school. I
ask you for a large sum. $16,000. I hope that
those who are blessed with riches, will give really
liberally, and that those who are not so well off,
will give what they can If you will do what I
ask, you will be conferring a real benefit, not on
the Mission, but on the whole community of
Sarawak."
Mr. Tan Sum Guan kindly interpreted the
Bishop s speech into Chinese, and also into Malay
for the benefit of the Datu Bandar who was
present.
Mr Ong Tiang Swee then made a short speech
in Chinese supporting the proposed scheme, and
the meeting was thrown open for discussion.
It was pointed out that the average cost of a
boy in S. Thomas School is $3.40 per month,
while the average receipt from fees for each boy
is $2.50 per month. Thus the school loses 90 cents
on each pupil. The charitable offerings of people
in England, and the Government grant make this
cheap education possible.
There is undoubtedly a desire among the
Chinese community that the education facilities
in Kuching should be greater than they are, and
also that it should be possible to obtain higher
education than is given to-day.With both these
desires the Mission is in entire sympathy. We
quite realize that the present arrangements in S
Thomas School, which is the largest in the country and the oldest, are inadequate, and the object
of this meeting is to consider how they can be im-
proved.
1. The Past.- I should like to remind this meet
ing that it was the Christian Missions which
first began education in Sarawak. One of the
first things that Bishop McDougall did, when he
came to the country in 1848, was to start a school
in the Bishop's House, and when the premises
proved too small for the purpose, S. Mary's School
was built as the new boys' school. In Bishop
Hose's day, the school had outgrown even its
new quarters, and in 1885 the first part of the
present S. Thomas' School was built. It has been
enlarged from time to time by the addition of
class rooms, dining hall, etc., but to-day, even the
present structure is absolutely inadequate.
"The Roman Catholic Mission started its school
in the eighties, and since then there have been
several Chinese schools started in the bazaar, but
even so the accommodation is not sufficient to
meet the demand
"Education is a costly thing, but it is so impor-
tant to the development of a countrv. that the mo-
ney spent on it is well spent. Kuching has been
famous in the past for its cheap education, and
that has been possible only by the willing and
charitable support from Great Britain.
Quite a number of boys have been sent to Ku-
ching all the way from China for the sake of the
schooling here, and that is to the credit of the
schools.
There are doubtless many in this room today,
who received their education at S. Thomas'. and
they know that they have been helped in their
careers by their knowledge then acquired.
When I came to Sarawak in 1918, there were
365 boys in the school, and we were able to rope
with the situation. But about 1920 or 1921,
Kuching began to develop rapidly, and naturally
there was a demand for further admissions to the
school ; to-dav we are faced with the fact that we
have 482 boys in a school just large enough for 365.
We tried to meet the demand in a temporary
fashion by the erection of the jungle school, which
is now almost worn out, and is certainly not a
suitable place for education. It is therefore quite
evident to those who think, that something must
be done on a large scale to make the school able
to cope with its responsibilities.
2. The Present. -In the beginning of 1925, I ap-
proached the Rajah with a scheme of school
development, and received from His Highness a
sympathetic hearing. The scheme has been well
thought out. and is divided into two parts:
"(i) The pulling down of the present Upper
School, and the erection in its place of a two-
storied building, with an assembly hall below,
and two class rooms above. The assembly hall
will be used for physical drill, meetings, prize-
giving, etc., and the two class rooms for the upper
school. The Mission is putting $6,000 into this
scheme, and the Sarawak Government is putting
up the balance, so that this is provided for, and is
only awaiting the arrival of materials for its
carrying out.
(ii) It is the second and larger part of the scheme
that we are met to consider to-day. The idea is
to erect three boarding houses, each of which will
house 40 boys, and will be in the charge of one of
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1926.
Mr. A. N. Ellis, the headmaster, pointed out to
the meeting, that the recent division of classes
into two sections was merely the result of the
large numbers in each class. If a boy in Class 3B
passes his examinations, he will move up into
Class 4B at the beginning of a new year, not into 3A, as some persons had thought
Mr. Ong Tiang Swee then moved the following resolution : That this meeting welcomes the effort now ;
being made to enlarge the accommodation, and to
improve the equipment of S. Thomas' School, and
promises its cordial support to the scheme." This resolution was seconded by Mr. Song Kheng Hai and carried unanimously.
The following committee was then appointed to carry out the organization of the scheme: The Bishop (or his representative). Rev. Kong Kwui Fn. Messrs. Lee Teck Huat, Ng Siak Kiong,
Tan Sum Guan. Wee Kheng Chiang, Yap Ghee
Heng, and A. N. Ellis, Treasurer.
The Bishop thanked those present for their
attendance, and the proceedings terminated.
"	Sibu Slush.
Once more to The Optimistic Fiddler falls the unenviable task of recording the New Year doings at Sibu without causing his unhappy readers too To avoid disappointment to those who now
expect a detailed list of events and their winners
it might be said at once that they are not going
to get it. That method of journalism appears to
be the exclusive privilege of the Kuching Regatta,
and anyhow the compositors detest that sort of
work.
The Sri Bulan Perak, owned by Mr. Le Sueur
and Abang Enjah, won the long boat race open
to Third Division only; but the Melanaus got their
own back by winning both the 30 and 25 men
easily with T.K. Aleks Kijang Nerais The brave
Foresters again won the Offices race, having
become web-footed by continual labour in the
Daro swamps. A crew of boys paddled the Pilate
(Pontious?) to victory, and the Tua Kampopgs
Cup was won by Hadji Salleh s men. The 15
men was won by a Sibu boat, Bujang Kilat, but
the Melanaus ran away with the Consolation
Race in T.K. Tiras A yam Terbang.
The great event of the day to many, however,
was the launch race. We believe this is the first
to be held in Sarawak and attracted six entries
let it be said at once that this does not represent the
entire strength of the Sibu Fleet which runs into
over a dozen It was thought, however. that to
enter such flyers as the Mermaid would have been
obviously unfair to the other runners, whilst the
conservative steam driven vessels quite rightly
refused to consort with such vulgar little sprites
as motor boats Furthermore, it was thought
advisable to deter some of the motor owners from
many yawns, and withal, giving a descriptive :
account of the celebrations on the 2nd January
and previous days That these were quite equal
to former years, and in some respects possibly
better, was the opinion of all those who had the luck to be there.	As usual the football competition started early, and on every afternoon following Christmas Day teams of valiant men entered the arena of liquid mud to contend with each other before the spark- ling eyes of the many charming Malay ladies who,
ensconced in little wooden huts round the field,
anxiously watched their menfolk slithering and
sliding in the quivering morass. Indeed, the
arrival and departure of these damsels afforded
more entertainment than the football to many.
Those, however, who were not so susceptible,
thronged every point of vantage and yelled or otherwise as the fancy took them ; and perhaps giving a bigger yell when the referee had his last remaining eye closed by a clod of evil-smelling mud or sat down with alarming rapidity. Most of the games were well contested, the final being played on the 2nd January. Here a Police XI (when is a bobby" not a "bobby?) beat a Kam-
pong Nyabor team fairly easily. The losers made a bad start and appeared to lose heart, although
with the state of the ground the winners were
those who fell down the least number of times.
Another competition was that open to Members
of the Sibu Recreation Club for billiards, 50 up.
and played in the Island Club. Here the size of
the table seemed to nonplus some of the players,
whilst others, throwing discretion to the winds,
made a bold dash at it on the *you-never-know-
if-you-hit-hard-enough system. In the final,
which was played on the 2nd, Sim Ah Bee, a very
steady player, proved too much for Augustus Mo we
who continually found the pockets too small.
On the conclusion of the game the Acting Resident
presented the winner with a silver cup given by
the Regatta Fund.
* ? * * *
The morning of the 2nd January opened
drearily	pouring rain and a doleful outlook.
By eight oclock, however, the weather had
cleared and racing was started an hour late.
entering their craft as the regatta was a one day
show only.	The boats passed the starter according to their
handicap, but the scratch vessel. Gertie, owned by
Mr. Reich of Selalang, had little difficulty in
overhauling her opponents and won by about
twenty lengths from the Ling Kong Thai, wild
came in complete, with stained glass windows
and flags flying, the same distance ahead of the
Rimba who had received 6 minutes' start. Next
in order came Rengit, Sri Tama, and Jean. The
last named attempted to excuse her ignoble
position by admitting to a bad start. From all
appearances this was true unless her pilot
intended to run the race backwards.
For those who preferred less stirring events a
greasy pole invited persons to try their luck, whilst
a pair of clowns spent the entire day in falling
about in every conceivable position. One must
not forget, too. those merry makers who. having
looked upon the wine when it was red, produced
much unconscious humour by their antics, and
even rivalled the clowns in this respect. A brass
band, under the conductorship of Father Halder,
performed marvels, albeit the conductor was at
times obliged to risk his blood vessels to sustain
the melody when his fellow flautists and trom-
bonists petered out.
The totalisator too, attracted many sportsmen,
and we were only just in time to prevent one in-
dignant backer from exhibiting personal violence
when one of the clerks refused to pay out on a gun
licence which was thrust at him by an excited
winner.
? ???.
At 2 p.m. a move was made to the Court House
where an enormous curry was devoured amidst
the customary tense silence, only punctuated by
the grinding and champing of jaws. After the
usual speeches the distended ones proceeded to
the football field where the final of the football
competition was played, on the conclusion of
which Mrs Kusel presented this and other cups
won at the Regatta. At 5 p.m, a party of Malay
schoolboys took the field and, with the utmost
indecorum, proceeded to chase one of their revered
schoolmasters (no less a personage than NR. Z
too !!) round and round the quagmire. This
32
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 192G
appeared to be a sort of blind-man's buff the wrong way round, and the shriek of delight when the pedagogue .vas finally caught and rolled in the mud seemed to prove to the rather muddled onlookers that this indeed was the object of the , chase. Following this came other intricate games such as sliding on the stomach and sliding on the . reverse side, but the general impression left on our minds was a howling mob of semi-naked uichins rollicking and galumphing in the mire, oblivious to all and everything except that they I must cover every particle of their body with a t coating of brown moist and evil-smelling mud. The revels were put a stop to by the entry of a company of Chinese boys marching on to the field with hand playing and colours flying. Having escaped the last mad charge of the mudlarks by inches, this company gravely took up their position on the only fairly hard piece of ground left and without a wink proceeded to go through a long and complicated set of military and physical exercises with much precision and endurance. All things come to and end. however, and the party moved off again with the same imperturbable air. their bugles braying lustily and their banners still raised aloft.
have a reputation in Kuching, attempted to stay another round but the referee stopped the fight after a minute, as Taha was obviously too groggy to continue and retired to his corner His second, however, refusing to throw in the towel, and Taha being unable to continue the fight, the referee counted him out It was noticed that a very good spirit was shown in all the fights, there being no case of bad temper or ill feeling between cither principals or their supporters During the intervals those who preferred something rather less bloodthirsty were regaled with dancing in the ring by the star actresses of the local bangsawan. These damsels pivoted and gyrated to the amorous tunes of a Malay band and chorus and to the obvious satisfaction of the local knuts, who at times, unable to hide their feelings, joined in the merry dance. During all these proceedings an excellent band, conducted by Sejili, performed fox-trots and other seductive music, whilst frequent explosions from the neighbourhood of the harbour indicated that Mr. Hiller-Mallett was starting up his nighty barrage again.
Those who were not too weary then went to the
Island Club to see Sim Ah Bee win the billiards
competition from Augustus Mowe; after which
stimulants filled up the gap until 8 oclock. At
this hour a Chinese dinner was served in the Court
House, the curry makers having been replaced by
perspiring celestials who flitted round mysterious
cauldrons like one possessed and broiled and
roasted themselves amongst the leaping flames of
many fires. The result was a dinner a superlative
quality, fully qualified to satisfy the ravenous
guests.
At nine a move was made to the boxing ring which had been erected on the padang and brilliantly illuminated with high power lamps. In spite of the slowly rising floods this ring had been surrounded by enormous expectant crowds since seven o'clock, who every now and again expressed their impatience by a roar. Even the ladies showed their interest in the noble art, as benches and benches surrounding the ring were occupied by squatting Malay girls who, as the water rose over the seats of the benches, preferred to remain where they were rather than miss the opportunity of seeing their loved ones perform indeed a service of love !!
The programme consisted of five contests of four two-minute rounds each. Owing to the excellence of the Chinese dinner the writer (who was, by the way, referee) missed the first three fights, which were between beginners. It is said, however, that the lads put up a good show and showed a considerable amount of promise. Suhai, a diminutive lad from the Resident's Office, beat Duin ; Anthony (known professionally as Young Harry) beat Jaha. and Lamin beat Sirat. After an interval the two big fights of the evening came on. Battling Sabul, a Kuching Star, was matched against Teck Dee, a forcible if not quite orthodox boxer A strenuous four rounds resulted in Teck Dee being awarded the fight. It is possible that Sabul was the better boxer but he lacked his opponent's weight and strength and wascalled upon several times to stand up and fight. The next contest was a rather one-sided affair. Young Hon, alias James Hon, knocking his opponent Taha all over the ring in the first round. Taha, who is said to
And lastly one must not forget to mention the
crowd and such a crowd too !everyone was
there at least throughout the whole day as far
as the eye could reach was a seething mass of
humanity Staid and courteous Hadjis in their
flowing robes -jovial Dyak Chiefs from the
hinterlandscores of chattering Melanaus from
the far away sago districts---hundreds of Malays
dressed as fancy suited them, brogue shoes, bow
ties, store suits- ? -droves of Malay girls in gorgeous
headcloths, their silver anklets tinkling as they
walked---processions of Dyak women, most of
them in their wonderful gala dress, but some
alas! in batek sarongs and highly-coloured
flowered coats so dear to these maidens- -hundreds
of Dyaks, Dyaks in gents' boaters," Dyaks in
girls1 coats. Dyaks in striped pants, Dyaks in
almost nothing at all- all were there. Tamils
in the last stages of inebriation---dignified Sikhs
in holiday turbans---Sepoys in national dress---
Chinese Towkays with enigmatic faces---droves
of Foochow tappers-- dozens of Foochow women
with their neatly coiled hair and coloured trousers
- whilst all around and in and out squirmed and
skedaddled hundreds of little boys whose
nationality was totally obscured by their thick
coating of mud. How happy everyone see mid
in fact why shouldn't they ? - --there was some-
thing for all. For those who wanted a gamble
games of hoop-la and other tests of skill were on
tap. where one was almost persuaded to achieve
the impossible by the thought of the handsome
prizes offered. Those who experienced the gnaw-
ing pangs of hunger could satisfy themselves at
the numerous foodstalls where anything from
a complete hot supper to a dish of cold eels could
be obtained at prices to suit even the most modest
pockets.
It was a day which will live in the memory of many for years to comeand the sight of that enormous, reeling, rollicking, exaltant crowd just before the Sarawak Anthem was played at 11 o'clock should be quite sufficient recognition to those who had organised the day and who wondered, perhaps, if it had been a success.
Need more be said?The Optimistic Fiddler..
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1926.
33
Hello! Siapa Itu?
How sweet those tintinabulating jungles Midnight or morn, ne'er mind the time o day ; Scandal flies winged and Dionysius dangles Dangerous blade oer someone in his way. Wearer of boiled shirt or Oriental spangles Merchants or Princes ; Royalties at play ; None can escape Brass Hats or Babes what matter	Heed not the wires idiotic chatter.
Hello dear! 1R that you? a piercing cackle Jars through the new receiver smart and glossy, Grinding of gears and wheeze completes the tackle.
Harold despairs of intercourse with Flossie Dreams the delights of matrimonial shackle. Jock, do ye ken yer Mithers oop at Lossie?" A whirring buzz with weird and raucous screaming
Riots through space, wholly bereft of meaning !
This is our daily means of conversation.
Business, or all about our old pal Eno ; Where Percy held his last flirtation ;
How the old Diehards" had a fearful beano. Apologies, love, hate, vituperation,
All these broadcast from bungalow to Casino. Old Mother Grundy loves the Morning Strafe , Shares in her gloat betimes her belter half!
Hallo there ! Whats the latest price of gin? Some wily housewife dares herself to utter Another ardent shouts amidst the din Fierce words about her last cold storage butter. When finally I manage to chip in The switch bird promptly rattles down the shutter!!
So I retire, my kindled wrath to sate
In one long drawn-out lurid Hymn of Hate!! CACOETHES LOQUENDI.
Club Notes.
Kuching Fool bull Club.
Result of games played during the year 1925.
Played	...	57	Won	...	...	23	Drawn ...	...	10	Lost	...	...	24	Goals (for) ...	...	100
Goals (against)	...	91
Only one match was played during December, owing to extremely wet weather, when K.F.C. lost to Police by 51.
S. T. ENNION, Honorary Secretary.
Sarawak Library.
The following books have been added since the latest additional list was circulated:
Book.
Sporting Reminiscences Miss Tiverton goes out
Orphan Island Cold Harbour
The Talkers
Precious Bane
Arnold Waterlow ...
Alan
Noblest Frailty
Carolinian	...
Numerous Treasure...
Unconventional Memories Those barren leaves Upstairs...
Uncensored Recollections An affair of honour...
Kept ... George and the crown
Things I shouldnt tell Unity
The Lighted Room...
My Story
The Painted Veil ...
The Mothers Recompense Mrs. Dalloway
Eclipse ...
The Black Republic Mr, Petre
A Saturday life
The truth at last ...
Mayfair...
Author.
... Banderas	... Author of House
made with Hand
... Rose Macaulay ... F. Brett Young
... R. W. Chambers .
... Mary Webb May Sinclair
... E. F. Benson ... Michael Sadler ... Rafael Sabatini
... Robert Keable
... R. Nevill
... Aldous Hurlfey
... Mrs. Victor Rickard
... Anon ... Stephen McKenya
... Alee Waugh
... Sheila Kaye Smith
... Anon
... Beresford
... Lettico W. Copper
... Lambton
... Somerset Maugham
... Edith Wharton
... Virginia Wolll . ... Mais	... H. F. Reeve .	... G. K. Chesterton ... Radclyffe Hall ... Charles Hawtrey
... Michael Arlen F. G. CARPENTER,
Honorary Secretary
Mr. Voon Thian Soo.
The Chinese Hotel, Gopeng, was the venue of a very pleasant function on the evening of Saturday, 21st December, 1925, when Mr. Voon Thian Soo, J.P., the Ketua or Headman, of Gopeng, entertained his friends to dinner in return for their entertainment of him on the occasion of his being made a Justice of the Peace for the State of Perak.
About 100 were present, and the menu, which was entirely Chinese, was thoroughly enjoyed by all. At the conclusion of the dinner, several congratulatory speeches were made, after which the whole party repaired to Mr. Voon Thian Soo's house, where they were entertained by a choice selection of music rendered by an amateur band of Chinese young men. The party broke up at a late hour after having spent a very enjoyable evening.
Mr. Voon Thian Soo is the elder brother of Mr. Voon Kon Siong of Bau, Sarawak, and left this country many years ago during his younger days. Amongst the many old scholars of the S.P-G. school who left Sarawak, he is the second man to be honoured with a J.P. in the Federated Malay States.(Contributed.)	I
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
KUCHING,
13th January, 1926. To
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,	Kuching.
SIR,	It may be of interest to your readers to know that there is no truth whatever in the rumour that there was an earthquake in Sarawak at about 3 a.m.' on New Years Day.
I was, however, assured by two people, one at Limbang and one at Sibu, that this was so. In one case the bungalow appears to have had an unusual swaying motion, and in the other the klambu was observed to be rotating at great speed.
Whilst not wishing to cast aspersions on these- two gentlemen, I feel it my duty to make known the fact that all scientific instruments concerned do, not record so much as a tremor.
Yours sincerely,
SEISMOGRAPH
Yours sincerely, SEISMOGRAPH.
34.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1926
MONTHLY REPORTS.
FIRST DIVISION.
Kuching.
November, 1925.
Supreme CourtDayang Julia obtained a divorce . from Low Ah Kow on a Civil Marriage Certificate on the grounds of adultery.
Resident's Court.Criminal. - There were four cases m this Court namely: (I) H.H. the Rajah cs. P. C. Drahman for the murder of his wife. Sentence of death was passed and confirmed by the Supreme Court.
(II) Government Monopolies vs. Lim In Lian. This case was ordered for re-trial but the Court after hearing fresh evidence did not alter their previous decision.
(?) Chop Chiu Chiang vs. Sim Phiow Hiang of , Chop Chin Nam Hin, Cheating. The charge of cheating was dismissed but defendant was ordered to pay plaintiffs the. sum of $3,581.55.
(IV) Kueh Ah Jee for Estate Kueh Ah Mee vs. Lim Chit Moi(f.), defendant was ordered to repay to the Estate the sum of $1,095.66.
CivilThe total value of claims dealt with was $1,988 84f and $40 in fees collected.
H.H. the Tuan Muda and Dayang Jean left on the
afternoon of the 3rd by the s.s. Rajah of Sarawak,
en route for Europe
Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee, Dayangs :
Leonora, Elizabeth and Vava and Captain W.R.
Barry Gifford. A D.C., arrived in Kuching from Singapore on the 12th. Ail Officers present in
Kuching with representatives from the different .
Communities awaited Their Highnesses at the
Astana. That night the kampongs were brilliantly
illuminated and for several nights afterwards the
Malays and Chinese made wonderful preparations
to welcome Their Highnesses.
The offices were closed on the 11th in memory of Armistice Day and a two minutes' silence was observed at 11 a.m.
On 22nd November news of the death of H.M.
Queen Alexandra was received and Bags were half-
masted.
A jury brought in a verdict of guilty of murder against P. C. Drahman, who had murdered his wife Alam one night in the barracks. There was no apparent motive for the crime, but jealousy seemed to be the cause. The death sentence was duly carried out.
A meeting was held in the Municipal Office to inquire into the price of firewood, which matter had been brought to the notice of the Chief Secretary
by the Conservator of Forests. It was agreed that
firewood dealers should be licensed and the price
should be fixed at $1.70 per cart load.
The Chief Secretary, accompanied by Mrs. Aplin and myself, visited the Leper Camp, where Doctors ,
Farquharson and Le Sueur showed us over the Camp. The inmates seemed most delighted at the new spot chosen and I must say looked more happy and contented than at Satang
A meeting of the Board of Visitors was held to
explain to the members what their duties of inspec-
tion should be and to arrange dates of visits.
On the 6th of the month 1 left in m.l.. Elizabeth
on a visit to Sambier and district, and an inspection
of all gardens was made. As usual the Chinese coconut gardens were well kept but the Malays seem i
to take no pride in looking after their own. I
walked along the Government path to the ulu Subi
and then along the Subi-Moyan ditch. The land has all been taken up by Chinese on both sides of this ditch to plant coconuts and the ditch should be extended in the near future to join up with the
Nonok. At Moyan a dispute between Malays and
Dyaks over land was settled Many years ago a
boundary was fixed between the Malays and Dyaks,
but now there are only five doors of Dyaks remain-
ing whereas the Malays are increasing. It is my
intention to keep the Dyaks to the true left bank of
the Moyan and give over the land on the other bank
to the Malays. From Moyan I returned to Sambier
by the other mute through Sempadi. Several Malays
at Sambier were summoned for not taking any notice
of an order issued by Mr. Dick that their gardens
must be cleared. On this trip I was accompanied
by Mrs. Aplin and we returned to Kuching on the
10th.
Mr. A. L. M. Honore, having been appointed to do
duty temporarily at Sadong, we sailed for Sadong in
the LAubaine on the 16th. Whilst at Sadong I
started an inquiry into a complaint brought by the
Orang Kaya Temong against Abang Samsudin,
Native Officer of Tabekang. P. C. Awang Aman and
a Chinese trader Sin Yan. The inquiry was ad-
journed for more evidence.
The Manager of the mines complained that Law
Jee Thai had been crimping his labour. I have
written to the Acting Resident Third Division on
the subject.
I visited the mines and warned the apprentices
that they could not leave the mines until their period
of apprenticeship was completed. 1 returned to
Kuching via Lingga on 18th.
On the 25th, accompanied by Mr. F. H. Kortright,
D. O., Mr. R. E. Edwards of Bau, and Inchi Mohd.
Zin, I left on a visit to Lundu.
The night was spent at Santubong and Lundu
reached midday on the following day. Only a few
matters of importance were brought to my notice,
the principal matter being the question of rubber
planting.
Chia Pet and Ah Ja were on trial for the murder
of Ah Lai at Sempadi on night of 28th September,
but there was no evidence against them and the
jury returned a verdict of not guilty. Most of the
people were away on their farms and in till cases the
padi looked very healthy.
The District Officer has infused so much enthu-
siasm into the people at Lundu, that on our arrival
we found that the Dyaks themselves had turned out
to work two masts for the new wireless station, to
replace the soft wood ones as sent from Kuching.
On the 29th we left for upriver en route for Bau.
There were signs all the way up the river of there
being a good engkabang crop next year, the fruit
having formed The Chinese are refusing to make
any mote timber contracts for the present.
I was still away at the end of the month
Mr G. J. D. Walters, Acting Assistant District
Officer, Sadong, was grained three months Eastern
leave and sailed for Singapore on 3rd.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
November, 1925.
Mr. F. G. Carpenter. Acting District Officer, Kuching, reports:
District Courts.Fifty-four cases were heard, seven of which were civil claims. Of the forty-seven criminal cases brought up thirty-three convictions and twelve acquittals were adjudged, and two cases were referred to other Courts. Of the criminal cases, five were for assault and seventeen offences against Municipal By-laws. Fines amounted to $167, and the total value of claims dealt with $1,731.23
Magistrate's Court.Seventy-five civil claims were heard involving a total of $1,595.32, and for which fees amounted to $144.25.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. FEBRUARY 1, 1926.
35
Police Court.--Thirty-six cases wore brought forward, all of which came under criminal headings. Thirty convictions were obtained arid four acquittals. Two cases were transferred to other Courts. Eleven of these cases were for theft. Fines totalling $265 were inflicted.
Courts General.Motor Bus No. 58 was suspended from the road for three months for being driven recklessly, and the owner was fined. Tambi Krisnen was sentenced to twelve months imprisonment for attempted suicide Two Chinese, one year and 18 months respectively for theft. Goh Ah Hee three months for giving opium to a prisoner.
On the 14th twenty cases came up for hearing.
Upper Sarawak and Lundu.
November, 1925.
Mr. F. H. Kortright. District Officer, Upper Sarawak and Lundu, reports :
The Chief Secretary visited Upper Sarawak from the 6th to 8th when he was shown everything of interest in the District.
The Government Offices have been transferred temporarily to the school quarters whilst the old Court House which was absolutely rotten is pulled down. Work is started on the re-erection on the same site.
His Highness the Rajah's bungalow on Batu Kajang lake is completed and is now ready for occupation.
Three Javanese prisoners broke jail and two were caught in Poak Estate and duly handed over by Mr. Smith the Manager. They received the usual punishment.
Messrs. Baxter and Thomas visited Bail, the former in connection with the experimental garden and the latter to inspect the lighting arrangements of the new bungalow.
On the 25th, m company with the Divisional Officer and Mr. R. E Edwards, I proceeded to Lundu in the s.l. Lucile. The natives were so occupied with their farms ana timber working that there was practically no Court work awaiting.
Two Chinese gardeners, Ah Ja and Chai Pet. were arranged before the Divisional Officer on the charge of being concerned in the murder of Fam Ah Lai at Sempadi. There being insufficient evidence against them they were acquitted. One Leman of Sempadi took over the duties of Cheng Yee who has now left the Government Service.
Dyaks of Kampong Stunggang and Sajirin voluntarily undertook to provide the masts for the Wireless station and delivered one of merbo and one of metrang, and then made arrangements to trim these and erect them on arrival of the experts from Kuching,
The m.s. Merbo arrived on the 28th bringing two mechanics and most of the materials, and work was concerned at once, and it is now hoped that the Wireless Station will be working early next month.
On the 29th we returned to Bau, going upriver by motor to Pulau Stunkol and next day walking via Stunggang and Grogo. The road through was then being cleared and was in very good condition.
As the sea is now rough the usual bandong service between Lundu and Kuching has ceased, so arrangements were made to re-start the overland service which was inaugurated last year
The Lundu rainfall was 6'97 inches, and Trade Returns as follows;
Imports.	Exports
1924	$ 10,670.50	$11,717 00
1925	8,624.00	12,284.20
Sadong.
November, 1935.
Mr. A L. M. Honore, OfliCef-in-Charge, Sadong,
reports as follows: Court. In the Magistrates Court, Merasan and
Kan were fined for breach of Forest Regulations.
After referring the facts of the case to the Datus
Court. Kuching. Haji Merosin Tuan Khatib was fined
825 for misleading certain Malays into buying meat
that was haram. Din and Ban Hin were likewise
fined for offering this meat for sale, which was that
of a dead deer washed up on the shore. Junow was
sentenced to one months imprisonment for endanger-
ing the safety of his wife and children in a boat.
In the Civil Court, Bong Fook summoned Thian
Long for $100 placed in his safe-keeping which was
stolen. Thian Long declared the theft was plaintiffs
fault whereupon plaintiff accused defendant of having
faked a theft in order to obtain possession of the
money for himself. There was absolutely no evidence
and the case was dismissed.
Prisoners. The average number of prisoners
during the month was 13'3. The gang was employed
in cleaning the railway road which was much over-
grown and needs installing to keep it in good
condition. They also worked on the bazaar road and
ditches.
The coolie gang worked on the ditches in the
Kampongs and in repairing bridges and culverts.
They also shored up the bank of the river that was
slipping away from under the bridge.
Health.This has been good. No further cases
of smallpox have been reported and all quarantine
conditions have been withdrawn.
Medical.A total of 117 patients were treated at
the Dispensary as follows
Europeans three. Dyaks twenty, Chinese sixty-six,
Malays eighteen, Tamils six, Sikh three, Angalese
one.
There were twenty-four admissions into Hospital
while seventeen still remained from last month
milking a total of forty-one in-patients during the
month. Twenty have been discharged as cured, 21
still remaining.
Six minor operations were performed including
two on abscesses. Twenty-four N.A.B. injections
for yaws were given.
Education.Attendance to the Government Malay
School has increased to 60 pupils and the master
expects another ten or so shortly.
General The Divisional Officer arrived on the
16th to inquire into the case of alleged dishonest
inducement of delivery of property and I came with
him to take up my duties here.
Mr. Aplin returned to Kuching on the 18th.
Numbers of Dyaks have been coming to take out
tickets for rubber lands but in all cases for small
gardens only.
Other visitors to the station were Mr E. V.
Andreini, Mr. D. S. McDougall, Lieut. Willis, and
Mr C. 8. Griffiths.
Rainfall for the month was 062.
Shipping.Calls were made by vessels during the
month as follows:
S.S Alice Lorraine	...	3 times
S.J. Sri Sadong	...	3 S L. L'Aubaine	...	once
M.S. Muaratebas	...	once
Trade.The local trade returns for the month
for comparison during the same period last year are
as follows:
Imports.
November 1925 ... $24,886
1924 ... 26,466
Exports. $47,182.90 24,141.00
H. D. APLIN,
Divisional Officer,
36	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1926.
DEPARTMENT OF
AGRICULTURE.
December, 1925.
EXPERIMENTAL GARDEN, PENRISSEN ROAD
(1.) Grasses.Napier Grass. Pennisctum pur-pureuin. This grass grows luxuriantly, but appears to require a somewhat better soil and to thrive better during the wet season than does Merker grass. It is not much liked by cattle, the foliage being rather coaise. but it would probably make a good silage crop
Merker Grass This is a variety of Napier grass and grows luxuriantly even in rather poor sandy soil. It appears to flourish best during the drier part of the year. Cattle eat it readily, provided it is not allowed to become too old and woody. It is an excellent fodder grass for stall leading.
Carpet Grass.Axanopus compressus. -This forms a good compact turf very quickly, and does excellently on a light sandy soil. If kept mown it forms a very good lawn turf, but is somewhat too coarse for tennis-courts, golf greens, etc. Cattle graze it readily, and grazing appears to improve the turf considerably. The turf stands hard wear well. It would probably make a good permanent pasture grass for this country.
Dadis Grass.-Paspalum dilatatum.This grass grows in tufts and does not form a turf. It flourishes on all soils and is readily eaten by cattle
Guinea Grass . -Panicum maximum.- Fresh supplies have been obtained and successfully propagated. One-tenth of an acre has been laid down. It appears to be well suited to this climate.
Kikuyu Grass.Fresh supplies of this grass were obtained from India but, as before, it arrived in a very dessicated state.
A fine-leaved creeping grass which grows very quickly, has been propagated from this turf received, but it is doubtful whether it is Kikuyu grass, since it produces seed, which is a characteristic unknown in Kikuyu grass. It may be an Indian grass which was accidentally mixed with the Kikuyu. It appears to be well suited for grazing mid for lawns and plot has been laid out. It will be identified later.
It has not been possible to determine yields of any of these grasses, but it is hoped to do so in the near future
Supplies of all these grasses, except the last two, are available, but should seed be required a somewhat lengthy notice is necessary, as, owing to lack of storage facilities, no stocks of seed are kept.	(2.) Fibres.Up to the present the production of fibres has had no place in Sarawak agriculture, although, as far as can be judged without practical experience, there is no reason why some, if not all, of the fibre producing plants of commerce should not give good results in this country. In order to test the feasibility of fibre- production in Sarawak a few suckers of six different fibre plants were obtained and planted out.
Mauritius Hemp	Furcraea gigantea.This crop ap-
pears to be well suited to the climate. The 'bulbils" which were planted out about nine mouths ago are now about three feet in height and are producing "bulbils" which are being planted out as they reach a sufficient size
Maguey Hemp, Philippine Sisal	Agare cantula.A
few suckers only of this plant were received from Manila. They are suckering profusely and making vigorous growth. It is possible that this will prove to be the most suitable form of fibre crop for Sarawak as it thrives under much wetter conditions than the other fibre producers of the same type.
Sisal Hemp, Hawiian Sisal.-Agare rigida var. sisalana This appears to be well suited to the climate. The growth is somewhat slower than that of Mauritius hemp, but is quite good. 'The plants arc suckering strongly, and the suckers are being planted out as rapidly as possible. It is expected that at least an acre will be planted out within six months.
Henequin, Yucatan or Mexican Sisal. Agare fourcrodes (Agave rigida var. elongata).Two suckers only of this variety have been propagated. They are growing .strongly and are throwing out numerous suckers.
Manila Hemp or Abaca.Musa textilis. This crop was badly affected by the dry weather, and has been transferred to a lower situation. It will probably do well in low-lying, well-drained land.
Columbia Pita. Bromelin magdalene.This plant
grows in heavy shade, the undergrowth merely being
cut and the large trees left standing. No cultivation is
necessary, except to keep it clear enough to make a good
start Three suckers, obtained from Kew, have been
successfully planted out and appear to be thriving.
Each has produced three and four suckers.
Of the foregoing fibres Mauritius, Sisal, Maguey and
Mexican Hemps are suitable for development on planta-
tion lines, as the machinery required makes it pro-
hibitive to the smallholder and native cultivator, where-
as Abaca and Columbia Pita are very well suited to
these types of cultivator, the former requiring no
machinery to extract- the fibre and the latter being
really a jungle product.
Whether the fibre obtained from these various plants
in Sarawak will he of a quality to compete with other
sources of supply, cannot of course be ascertained until
maturity is reached and tests made.
(3). Oil seeds. Castor	Rincinus communis. The three
varieties obtained from Kuala Lumpur proved, on reach-
ing maturity, to contain seven distinct types, of con-
siderable variety, both as regards type of seed, yield aud
habit of growth. A process of selection is being carried
out, and it is hoped to ascertain shortly the strain best
. suited to conditions in tins country.
Ground-nut.Arachis hypogea This crop has been
planted as a catch-crop under Castor, Pepper and Fibres.
The tops are hoed in for green manure after harvesting the
nuts. Results have been comparatively good, and seem
to point to its being a good crop for smallholders, if
only to supply the local market, which at present. I
believe, is chiefly supplied with imported nuts.
This crop works very well into a rotation with most
other small local crops
Some experiment is still necessary to determine the
best types to grow in Sarawak, and to decide the best
months for planting. Up to the present January and
February plantings have given the best results.
Pepper.Piper nigrum.An acre of pepper has been
planted out with cuttings obtained both locally and from
Muntok. The planting has been done in three sections,
on a hill-side, to illustrate three different methods of
soil conservation, viz., by silt drains, by terracing, and
by contour planting with contour drains between the
rows.
I
I
I
It is the intention to demonstrate the possibilities of
pepper cultivation without the use of burnt earth, sub-
stituting a process of liming, cultivation and green
manuring, with possibly the application of a small
amount of potash, thus obviating the present necessity
for a reserve of jungle about three times the area of the
actual cultivation.
Three different methods of training are also being
demonstrated, viz., the present Chinese method of
tiding poles up to 1G feet high, espalier training on a low
fence, and the use of living trees instead of poles for
training.
The vines are all doing well. Up to the present only
green manuring and cultivation have been done.
Fruit Trees. About two acres have been laid out in
fruit trees of various sorts, cm which it is hoped to
demonstrate the possibilities of grafting, etc.
Rice.A small experiment in irrigation of padi is be-
ing carried out with five local varieties. It is proposed
to grow only one crop of padi each year, and to alter-
nate it with a leguminous crop, such as ground-nuts, during the dry weather. This system in conjunction
with pig-keeping, the pigs being herded on the nuts as
they mature, should prove a good typo of farming for
Chinese and Dyaks. Other crops such as sweet
potatoes could be added to the rotation if desired.
Other Crops.Sweet Potatoes.Ipomen batatas Four
varieties were grown, with good results, but owing to
lack of space they are at present being maintained only
in small nurseries.
Maize.Zia Mais.The two varieties from Manila
Cagaya Red and Yellow Corn) were harvested for seed
only, the finest cobs being selected. During the coming
season it is intended to make tests of yields, on a small
scale. Two varieties of American Sweet Corn have
been received from Professor Harrison-Smith. and these
will be planted out shortly.
Arrowroot.Maranta arundinacea.This crop appears
to be well suited to the climate and soil. A small
sample plot only is being maintained.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1926
Jerusalem Artichoke.Helianthus tuberosus.About
1 kati of tubers, presented by Mr. Barnes, were planted out, and at the end of four months 90 katis were harvested. One root weighed 741bs. This should prove satisfactorv crop for pig and cattle feeding, if such
yields can he relied on. The cultivation is simple, and
the growing of artichokes by market gardeners for
human consumption appears to be worth encouraging.
Experimental. Spraying.The experimental spraying,
conducted during the season 1924-25, having given
results showing that lime sulphur wash is a fairly
efficient preventive of the Black Fruit Disease of Pepper,
further experiments were commenced in September
1925, to prove this conclusively and to determine
whether any variation of interval between sprayings or of dilution of wash would add to the efficiency of the treatment. Portions of four gardens, kindly lent by Tan Ah Boh, Lee Hap, Wong Tin and Wong Min, are being used for experiment.
The conclusions arrived at as the result of two pre-
vious years of experiment appear to be borne out very
conclusively, but of course any definite statement on
this point is not possible until the conclusion of the
experiments.
Cultivation ExperimentOn the same gardens ns
are being used for the experimental spraying, a culti-
vation experiment is being carried out, with the object
of disposing with burnt earth, the preparation of which
involves the necessity of a large reserve of jungle,
altogether out of proportion to the area actually under
cultivation.
A system of cultivation, liming, green manuring and
the use of small dressings of artificial manures is being
carried out.
The experiment has been in operation for a year and
the vines show no deterioration as compared with vines
in the same gardens treated with burnt earth, etc., on the
Chinese method, but show rather an improved growth
and a greater fruiting capacity.
Costs are not yet available, but will be published as
soon as the experiment has run for a sufficient time to
enable reliable figures to be given.
D. EYRE BAXTER,
Mycologist.
SADONG COLLIERY.
December, 1925.
The output, export, local consumption, conver-
sion to coke and coal stock figures for the month
were as follows :
1st December stock balance ..	290.15 tons.
December gross output	...	2,113.18 Total 2,404.13 Shipped ...	... 1,674.00 tons
Consumed by boilers and
coverted into coke... 379.10 2,053.10
Stock balance ...	...	351.03 tons.
The general improvement in conditions below-
ground in No. 9 and the Upper Seam Mines
respectively were such that the output obtained
during the month was the record of the year.
The junior Surveyor, Mr. Van der Slot, with his
Malay assistants, who had been kindly lent by the
Superintendent of Surveys Department, for field
work in the Upper Lingga District, returned to
headquarters on the 1st.
One, Chin Chin, a pensionable old miner, died at
the local hospital on the 9th.
The rainfall /for the month was 23'32 inches.
An unusual number of landslides occurred at various
points within, the mine area, and considerable
erosion was caused at and near the wharf by the
high tides and floods.
J. W. EVANS,
Manager.
THIRD DIVISION.
Sibu
November, 1925.	General.Mr. H. M. Calvert, who had been; Acting Divisional Treasurer, returned to Kuching on the 1st. He was accompanied by Mr. D. S. McDougall, a candidate for the Government Officers Examination.
During the month Captain Le Gros Clark visited I the Foochow Colony accompanied by the Revd. J. M. Hoover; and the districts of Bintang and Sarikei accompanied by Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, Acting Assistant District Officer. A meeting was held in the Resident's Office on the 2nd which was attended by Captain Clark, Mr. Le Sueur, Abang Enjah, Abang Hadji Metair and Abang Hamid to discuss Bintang land affairs. Captain Clark finally returned to Kuching on the 20th after having submitted a confidential report to me on the subject. The Acting District Officer, Mr. Dick, left for Kapit on the 4th and returned on the 10th. He took two ? new posts for the Wireless Station there, the old ones having become unsafe. I visited Bintang on the 6th where the Divisional Land Officer had been since the 2nd doing the layout of the new Bazaar sites there. I returned with him to Sibu the same evening.
On the 8th the s.s. Alice Lorraine arrived with Mr. E. V. Andreini who had been appointed
Assistant District Officer at Sibu. Mr. McDougall also returned from undergoing his examinations in Kuching, and Mr. Willis. R.E., from the Colonial. Survey Department to find Dyak labour for work in Johore. Captain C. P. Lowe. Commissioner of Public Works, arrived from the Cut on the 16tb and left for Kuching on the 20th after inspection works in Sibu. On the 11th, Mr. McDougall left for Simanggang. via Lingga, having been transferred to the 2nd Division, and Mr. Griffiths proceeded . to Kuching on leave. Mr. R. V. Palfreman passed through Sibu during the month on his way to the Coast Division. Other visitors to Sibu were Messrs. Parnell, C. Fenwick. J. T. Clarke, Lam plough and Partridge. Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, Acting Assistant District Officer, proceeded to Kuching on the 20th on sick leave. Mr. Andreini was in Kapit from 12th to 15th; he was accompanied by Mr. Willis, R.E.
Fourteen shop sites in Sibu were auctioned on 16th and fetched a total of $44,600.
I left for Mukah, via Oya, on the 20th and returned to Sibu on the 29th. Whilst in Mukah I attended a meeting in the Divisional Office there to discuss the boundary between the Third and Coast Divisions. Those present were the Acting Divisional Officer. Coast Division, the District Officer, Oya, Datu Udin, Hadji Mehidin, Abang Enjah and myself. The results of the conference have been submitted to His Highness the Rajah. On the 30th, twenty-four shop sites at Bintang were put up to auction but only six sites were sold, these fetching $1,700.
Armistice Day was observed as a public holiday throughout the Division.
On the 22nd news was received of the death of Her Majesty the Dowager Queen Alexandra, and all flags were half-masted during the day.
Pangeran Hadji Gusti, Native Officer of Selalang, visited Sibu during the month. Penghu in Meringai of the Ngemah was severely cautioned for disobedience of and contempt of Government Orders.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY I. 1996.
Judical.Residents Court.Mawar, Tikoh and Alat were sentenced to imprisonment for one year each for their share in helping Ah Ba Mowe to abscond. The other three defendants were discharged. This finally finishes this affair in which seven persons have been sentenced to terms of imprisonment amounting to 13 years in all. Linsong and Bidang, blood brother and sister, were fined $200 and $100 respectively for incest.
Two appeal cases from the Sibu District Court were heard. Tn one case the Police had prosecuted Chop Leong Bee under section 293 and defendant had been fined $ 100. Tn the other case the Customs Department prosecuted Lau Kun Siong under Order No. XV, 1908, and coins to the value of about $300 had been confiscated. In both cases the Residents Court dismissed the appeal with costs.
District Court.The following persons were sentenced to terms of imprisonment. Le Song Poh, 1 year for theft; Sng Tong Hua alias Tong Pong and Tan Guan Reng 1 month each for theft ; Kudi, Met oh and Siboh 1 month each for breach of agreement; and Bagong, Assan, Mangai, Kali, Limbai, Ganyor, Ansam, Dunyat, Rumar, Jibau, Purah, Sading, Lindang and Ensalai, 6 weeks each for looting. Three prisoners received extra terms of imprisonment for various offences.
Ngieng Ah Liew and Ngieng Ah Hock were fined $150 and $100 respectively for attempted fraud. Wong Peng Chiong washedered to refund $500 to Wong Kow Moi (f), or be imprisoned.
There were the usual number of minor cases mostly concerning Government regulations and land.
Magistrate's and Police Court.Cases in these Courts call for no special mention.
Fines and fees amounted to $1,904.05 exclusive of substations.
184 Deeds were registered in the Sibu Courts.
Prisons.-Prisoners Chieng Ting Si, Ewe Keh Chuan and Kho Ah Nong were sentenced to six months extra imprisonment, 1 month extra and 12 strokes and 3 strokes respectively for various offences.
The average number of men in Sibu was 72.4 and they were employed on the usual work.
Ona prisoner named King See escaped and is still at large.
Two mandors were engaged.
P.W.D.The boiler which had been left at the abandoned Teluk Assan-Selalo Canal was brought to Sibu and erected at the Waterworks next to the present boiler. It is hoped to have this under steam next month. The newly-erected Tangye pump from Brooketon was put under steam for a short while on the 19th, but the present boiler could not give sufficient steam to run the ice machine as well as the pump. It has been necessary to send to Singapore for some new parts for the valve gear.
Prison and Tamil gangs were employed as usual, and the carpenters spent their time in minor repairs and erecting some small buildings. Bungalow No. 1 was completed. One of the new bungalows is being built and the site for another one marked out. Bungalow No. 4 is being demolished.
Police.All available Police, strengthened by a detachment of Sarawak Rangers en route for Kapit, paraded on Armistice Day and presented arms during the two minutes silence. Previous to this the men were inspected by the Acting Resident.
The strength of the Force, excluding the local Police in Lower Rejang and Kapit, is 3 Sergeants, 2 Corporals, 8 Lance-Corporals and 51 Constables making a deficit of 11 men.
The Acting District Officer reports:-
Tua Kampong Jais of Kafupong Nyabor, a very
old Government Servant, died during the month and
was replaced by Lebi Salleh. Hadji Gapor, Native
Officer, was made Tua Kampong of Kampomg
Tengah vice Hadji Taip dismissed.
Penghulu Langgong was brought before the
Acting Resident who reprimanded him for his con-
tinual intemperance. Abang Latip, Native Officer,
is doing duty in Sarikei in place of Hadji Karrim on
leave.
The Dyak-Foochow dispute in the Tulai district
of Bintang resulted in a number of Dyaks being
arrested for looting and being imprisoned by the
Court. Penghulu Lani of Bintang was dismissed
his post for his share in the above-mentioned
disturbances.
The Municipal Board accepted a tender for
scavenging Sibu Bazaar and went into the matter
of applications to build shops, price of pork, and
street lighting.
Forestry.The Assistant Conservator of Forests
has submitted to me a copy of his diary for the
month of November, in which, he mentioned that he
was in office until the 17th. He left for Tanjong
Blatok on the 18th where he inspected the rentis
round the new area to be subjected to improvement
felling.
While at Daro he checked the Cash Book and
inquired into various matters in connection with his
Department.
He visited the Daro end of the short rentis with
Mr. Gild in his launch, where demonstrations were
given by Mr. Gild on the correct method of tapping
with a stage.
He returned to Sibu on the 26th and the rest of
the month was spent in Office.
Medical.The Divisional Medical Officer reports
as follows :
During this month the number of in-patients
treated at the Sibu Hospital amounted to 82.
There were six deaths in the hospital.
They were due to the following causes : Beri Beri	...	...	1
Perforated Gastric Ulcer	...	1
Cancer	...	...	1
Peritonitis	...	...	1
Ac. Endocarditis	... 1
Unknown cause, autopsy refused 1
Total ... 6
Twelve operations were performed with two deaths already included in the above six deaths.
There were two post-mortems performed this month, one on a case of sudden death on the s.l. Ulu; death was found to have been caused by heart failure. The other was performed on a case of sudden death in the bazaar and cause of death was found to be due the rupture of an aneurysm of the abdominal aorta.
There were 620 out-patient attendances this month, an average of 21 daily. 123 Arsenical Injections were given this month.
I am pleased to report that the Third Division is still entirely free from smallpox. Sporadic cases of Para typhoid however still continue to occur but nothing approaching an epidemic can he reported. Malaria is still practically an unknown quantity in Sibu, and the health of the station still continues to maintain its high order of excellence.
Among the European population, minor maladies occasionally call for medical aid, but the serious
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1926.
39
cases invariably appear among the Native and Chinese population.
I hope this will serve as an object lesson to our Eastern friends to adopt the Western methods of living and hygiene.
November, 1925.
The Court Writer reports as follows :
Court.12 Civil and 15 Criminal cases were brought before the Court during the month but none are worthy of special comment.
Fines and fees amounted to $116.49.
General.The Acting District Officer, Mr. W. F. Dick, visited the Station from the 5th to the 9th.
On the 13th, Captain E. V. Andreini, Assistant District Officer, accompanied by Lieutenant Willis, R.E., arrived here. The former on an official visit and left again on the 15th.
The Wireless masts were re-erected on the 7th instant; the old ones which were rotten were replaced by new ones.
The shortage of small change is being felt in the bazaar; possibly this is dug to the high price of rubber.
Chin Tamby, Wireless Operator, having been granted one months leave, was relieved by James Choong, an apprentice operator.
The relief squad of Sarawak Rangers under Lance- Corporal Keng arrived from Headquarters in the middle of the month ; and the old squad under Corporal Renchang sailed for Sibu en route for Kuching two days later. On the morning of the 28th about two o'clock, the smoke-house belonging to Chop Hiap Seng was burnt down to the ground owing to carelesssness on the part of one of his coolies. The value of rubber in the smoke-house which was destroyed is said to be about $3,000.
The sum of $7,000 was remitted to the Sibu Treasury.
Mosque.Hadji Ali was elected Khatib vice Hadji Dullah who has resigned.
Weather.During the middle of the month there were very heavy rains and the river was generally in flood.
Prisons.Prisoners, numbering 16 at the end of the month, were chiefly engaged on the upkeep of roads and ornamental grounds.
Cattle.There were 21 head at the end of the month.
Trade and Shipping.The m.s. Namhoi made her usual monthly trips; the s.l. Ulu, s.l. Chamois made two trips and the s.l. Soon Aik and m.l. Jean one trip each.
Exports for the month were as follows : Plantation Rubber piculs 60.60	value	$9,365
Gutta Percha do.	10.20	do.	1,296
Damar Daging do.	152.10	do.	5,512
Rattan Sega No. 1 do.	148.52	do.	527
do. Tot No. 2 do.	203.91	do.	650
Lower Rejang.
December, 1925.
The Acting District Officer, Sibu, reports as under :
I left Sibu on Wednesday the 2nd instant accompanied by Datu Azahari and Hadji Bahaudin and arrived at Rejang at 5 p.m. the same evening. Hadji Gusti of Selalang arrived the same evening from Selalang and reported everything all right there.
The Tua Kampong of Belawai, Jerijeh, Barong and Paloh, were sent for to attend the installation of Hadji Bahaudin as Native Officer of Rejang. The following day Hadji Bahaudin was installed as Native Officer of Rejang in the presence of the Tua Kampong of Selalang, Jerijeh, Barong, and Rejang and a number of local Malays, when your letter was read out to them. The Tua Kampong of Belawai did not arrive in time, and the Tua Kampong of Paloh was too ill, and has since, I regret to say, died.
No cases came up before the Court, Mr. Andreini having settled all cases while there a few days previous to my visit.
The belian fence around the ornamental grounds is in a very had state of repair; I understand however that some 4,009 pieces of fence are on order of which 1,900 have been delivered. The Court Writer was rtold to warn the various Tua Tua Kampong that the balance are to be delivered this year.
On Friday I went to Jerijeh by launch and walked to the new lighthouse which has been completed on contract. This structure has been properly put up and appears to be according to specification. It is urged that the lighthouse be painted as soon as practicable, as the old paint is peeling off and the framework getting very rusty. Pa Jungkong, head lighthouse keeper, is a very old man, and asks that he may resign on account of old age. I told him I would refer the matter to you.
I left Rejang on Saturday morning and stopped at Sarikei on the way up. The Sarikei bazaar road is in a very bad condition and should be raised and surfaced. I understand that there is.no good soil obtainable less than half an hour up river. There is no boat at Sarikei for use of Police or Customs and every time a boat is required, it is necessary to borrow one from whoever happens to have one available.
I stayed about an hour at Bintang and the Clerk took the opportunity of remitting some cash to the Treasury.
Ah Loh of Chop Bee Chiang asked that the proposed road through his factory be altered to run through the back of the factory. I have spoken to the Divisional Land Officer about this and he will no doubt bring the matter before you.
I arrived back at Sibu at 4.30 p.m.
The Assistant District Officer, Sibu, reports as under :
Court.Accompanied by Abang Hadji Gapor, I held Court at Rejang, Selalang, Daro, Paloh and Belawai.
At Rejang, a Dyak named Marong was fined $25 and made to pay compensation for negligence whilst burning his padi land ; F. G. Rahmat was sentenced to 6 months R. I. under sections 417 A 160; Ah Keng two months and Hassan three months tinder section 324; Choo Soon was fined $25 and Ali $16 under section 160; Lumba received three months R. I. for obtaining money under false pretences.
At Selalang, Han Leh and Lim Bong Fun. were sentenced to 14 days and two months respectively under section 324, and Ah Fong one month for an assault on a mandor.
At Daro there was no crime and only a few eases in the Civil Court.
At Paloh and Belawai several Civil cases were heard.
40	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1,1926.
General.The Rejang Chinese approached me and asked for some land adjoining the bazaar for shophouses. I told them I would place the matter before you. There is no Government boat at Rejang, which causes the greatest inconvenience and the Rejang mail was carried past to Kuching in consequence on one of the days whilst I was there. I have told the Court Writer to buy a small boat for the present until a proper boat can be obtained. The roads and ditches were in bad state owing to lack of labour.
Selalang.The Island Trading Company are finding great difficulty to persuade the neighbouring Malays to work bark for them and their output is suffering in consequence. I have suggested the importation of Dyaks. There is no gambling farm there and a lot of trouble. Petty fighting seems to have taken place there lately over gambling. I have told the Tua Kampong to take steps to stop it and the Chinese, if they want to, to apply for a farm.
Paloh and Belawai.The Dresser accompanied me here to attend to the Tua Kampong, Hadji Usop, who was seriously ill and has since I regret to report died. Both these Kampongs appear to be very prosperous.
I visited Mr. H. Gilds Jelutong Worlds near Daro. He has several parties of Dyaks working for him and is enthusiastic as to the prospects in the District provided he ran get the labour.
Abang Hadji Gapor and the Dresser visited the Dyaks in Sungei Takup and the former inspected the gardens burnt owing to the negligence of Marong who was dealt with by the Court at Rejang. The Dresser reports no sickness there.
Daro.The roads were in a good condition but the Bazaar was very dirty and the shopkeepers have made no effort to carry out the orders left by you when you last visited the place. One was fined for deliberately taking no notice of your orders and the others were warned that at the end of the various periods mentioned by you they would also be fined if your orders were still disobeyed.
Rejang.
November, 1925.
The Court Writer reports as follows :
Court.Court was held by Captain Andreini, A.D.O. In the Magistrates Court, Rahmat was Sentenced to 6 months R. I., Chua Ah Kheng to one month R. I., Assan to 3 months' R. I., Lim Bong Fu to 2 months R. I., Hamleh to two weeks' R. I., and Ku Ah Teng to 1 month R. I.
Fines imposed amounted to $60.
General.Captain Andreini, A.D.O., arrived here from Sibu by s.l. Mermaid on the 18th. On the 21st he left for Matu, via Belawai and Paloh, and went as far as Daro but was unable to proceed to Matu owing to heavy seas and returned here again on the 30th.
Armistice Day was observed as a public holiday and the Offices were closed.
Health.Many people were laid up with headache and fever in the kampong; and during the middle of the month the epidemic became for about a week.
Prisons.Six prisoners were sent up to Sibu to serve their sentences.
Rainfall.The total rainfall for the month was 10.48 inches.
P.W.D.Prisoners, averaging two in number, have been engaged on the general upkeep of the compound.
Trade.The Trade Returns for the month are
as follows :
1925.
1924. November Foreign Exports
$ 34,571
$ 79,998
Total to date
416,132
597,228
November Foreign Imports
10,063
15.799
Total to date
85,625
58,763
November Local Exports
5,359
1,599
Total to date
18,581
33,458
November Local Imports
26,624
31,880
Total to date
255,488
149,108
Shipping.5 steamers, 5 steam launches and 8 motor schooners entered while 5 steamers, 5 steam launches and 5 motor schooners cleared the Port.
November, 1925.
The Court Writer reports as follows :
Court.A few Civil claims came before the Court
for settlement during the month. Two cases
were settled in the Native Court. In both cases
defendants were fined $10.80 each and costs. Fines
collected during the month amounted to $150.30.
General.Hadji Dul, Juragan of the m.s. Majinis,
was summoned by the Government for discharging
his passengers before inspection. The case will be
heard on an arrival of an Officer in this Station.
His Majestys Ship Iroquois arrived on the 14th
instant at Tanjong Serik and was engaged in
surveying operations in the vicinity of the Tanjong.
She left on the 21st.
On the 22nd the s.l. Mermaid arrived from
Rejang towing a lighter loaded with timber for the
new station. Abang Hadji Gapor was on board,
and returned the same day after giving orders to
unload the timber.
P.W.D.23 coolies were engaged unloading
timber brought over from Rejang and two other
coolies repaired the roof of the Police Barracks for
one day.
Rainfall.Total rainfall for the month amounted
to 1G.91 inches.
Agriculture.The natives have finished planting
and their farms promise a good crop.
Dairy Farms.Two male calves were born during
the month, making the total of cattle 32 bead.
Shipping.6 schooners and 2 motor
entered while 5 schooners and 3 motor
cleared the Port during the month.
Trade.	1925.
Matu Imports November $ 17,381
Total to date ...	212,165
Matu Exports November ...	24,308
Total to date ...	262,432
schooners schooners
1924.
$ 10.744
205,338
17,036
310,077
Average cash market price of :
Raw Sago Pearl Sago Jelutong ... Para Rubber do. Scrap
$ 1.30 per pasu
1.00 per tin
11.60 per picul
165.00	do.
45.00	do.
November, 1925.
The Court Writer reports as follows :
Court.Before Mr. E. V. Andreini, Assistant District Officer, and Hadji Gapor, Native Officer, Chop Guan Soon Ann was fined $25 for disobedience of Government Orders for not pulling down his
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1926.
41.
kitchen as ordered by the Resident. Many other outstanding cases were settled but none call for special mention. Fines and fees amounted to $186.75.
General.I proceeded to Matu on the 1st and returned on the 4th. Tua Kampong Hadji Mat arrived on the 9th reporting the birth and death returns. Tua Kampong Hadji Boyong of Saai came on the 10th bringing the birth and death returns and the Malay marriage and divorce registration book for entry.
The 11th being Armistice Day Offices were closed and the day observed as a public holiday.
Mr. Me Leod, Assistant Conservator of Forests, arrive! here on the 23rd. On the 24th he arrived -again accompanied by Mr. H. Gild. Mr. E. V. Andreini, Assistant District Officer, accompanied by Mr. H. Gild, arrived on the 28th and left for Rejang on the 29th after hearing some minor cases. P.W.D.All the grass around the Government compound was cleared by the Tanjong and Tua Kampong, Hadji Ahmat's people. No repairs were done to buildings; the whitewashing remains uncompleted owing to a shortage of wet lime.
Police.Police Lance-Corporal Majaie returned to Matu and was replaced by Police Constable Masalleh.	Prisons.There were no prisoners during the month.
Agriculture.The natives report that they have finished planting their padi.
Health.The health on the whole was good.
Trade and Shipping.Three schooners entered and cleared.
Imports.	Exports.
$9,745	$9,277
J. BEVTLLE ARCHER,
Acting Resident, Third Division.
COAST DIVISION.
?
Mukah and Baligian.
November, 1925.
General.1 returned from Oya by bicycle on the 1st. The District Officer. Oya and Dalat, rode over on horseback to discuss various matters on the 11th, and again on the 23rd, accompanied by Mr. J. B. Archer. Acting Resident Third Division, who wished to arrange a definite boundary between the Third and Coast Divisions.
As this question appears to have been omitted at the time of the partition of the old Third Division a provisional administration boundary was drawn up, mid has since been submitted to His Highness the Rajah for ratification.
Courts.A large number of cases were dealt with. Vadivel, the mandor of the Tamil gang, who was undergoing a short term of imprisonment for drunken brawling was sentenced to a term of imprisonment in Kuching for breaking gaol and again brawling, with the other members of the Tamil labour gang.
Ibrahim bin Saat was imprisoned for attempting to amok in Kampong Judan.
Ramai and Ilok (f) Dyaks were heavily fined for incest. Penghulu Suita had previously beard this case and attempted to keep the fines himself contrary to Dyak Regulations.
Kuling, Dyak, was fined for assaulting Ho Peng, a Chinese trader of Siting.
Many breaches of the local Land Regulations were detected and dealt with, including an attempt at altering boundary marks.
A number of Forest, offences were discovered by the Forest Guard and suitable fines imposed
The usual number of Sago Garden ownership disputes and debt cases came up for hearing, but none call for special mention.
Public Works.The Commissioner of Public Works visited the District on the 12th in order to inspect and arrange the completion of the Milk ah Water Supply Scheme.
The Tamil Labour Gang assisted the Public Works Department employees by digging the necessary trenches for the water mains and clearing the Petanak Intake Road.
The prison gang, averaging 11, was employed on the general upkeep of the grounds around the Government Station.
Carpenters commenced work on the reconstruction of the Telian Road Bridges, the majority of which aie in nutate of collapse.
Health- Dresser Senada passed through during the month on his return vaccinating trip from Bintulu via Belingian; he was unable to persuade the Belingian Dyaks to be vaccinated; these Dyaks have since informed the Court Writer, Belingian, that they are prepared to pay any fine in order to avoid vaccination. Dresser Senada succeeded in vaccinating a large number of Milanaus in this District. A number of Dyaks from Penipah actually applied for vaccination, and Dresser Ah Heng at once proceeded thence and vaccinated 75 of them.
Divisional Treasury Work on the new accounts is progressing slowly, but it is hoped to have all the accounts from Bintulu, Oya, Dalat. Belingian, and all local accounts entered up to the 30th June, 1925, and reconciled with the Kuching statements by the end of the year
The acquisition of an additional Clerk, one Joseph Chong, has enabled the original staff to carry on the routine of the station as well as deal with the arrears of work in the new accounting system.
The sum of $3,600 was remitted by the Sub- Treasuries at Oya and Dalat for use in cashing trade letters of credit and telegraphic transfers.
Marine. The m.l. Leonora being of little use in this Station during the monsoon was lent to the District Officer, Oya and Dalat where I understand she has done singular service in carrying mails upriver to connect with the Sibu mail launches; and conveying the survey staff to various parts of the Oya river on demarcation work.
Telegraphs and Telephones.The Wireless Telegraph charging engine broke down during the month necessitating the temporary closing of the Station to traffic. Mr. P. Down arrived from Kuching on the 22nd accompanied by a Mechanic who quickly rectified the trouble, enabling the Station to re-open for traffic the following day Mr. P. Down remained here at the end of the month in connection with the introduction of a new system of recording departmental accounts.
Agriculture.A number of persons were granted permission to plant rubber on land unsuitable for the cultivation of sago or padi. Such applicants were issued Occupation Tickets under the Land Order of 1920, with instructions as regards planting the trees well apart and clear of thorough fares, and on the understanding that quit rent at cents per hundred trees will be payable annually until the trees are mature or are tapped.
Forest. Forest Guard Liho was cautioned for leaving his post at Igan without the knowledge of the District Officer, Oya. Forest Guard Meligang who had been to Sibu on sick leave was recalled by the Assistant Conservator; and Forest Guard Jerman come over from Balingian in connection with a jelutong tapping boundary dispute in the Bayan District.
42	THE SABAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1926.
Native Affairs The various Tua Tua Kampong,
both Mohammedan and Pagan Melanau. were re-
minded to report all cases heard in the Kampong
Courts at the Port, and to pay in or notify all fines
imposed by them in order that a proper record may
be kept of all such hearings. These Chiefs were
also recommended to continue to hear and settle
their own cases rather than take even the most
trivial disputes to the Mohammedan Native Court
for decision.
Trade and Shipping.The. Trade Returns for the
months are as follows :
Coasting Imports. Coasting Exports.
Mukah	... $63,094	$37,061
Balingian ...	30,016	31,649
The main exports from Mukah, as compared with
November 1914, are:
1925.	1924
Raw sago 173 koyans
Gutta jelutong 771 pikuls
Gutta Para 12.60	Raw sago ... 158 koyans
G. jelutong ... 182 pikuls
G. Jangkar...	4
G. Para ...	2	Rattan Si-
mambu ... 2,000 kerat
During the month ten schooners entered the Port and eleven cleared.
The Rainfall records show that 1561 inches fell in November, and 1034 inches in October; not 1561 inches as recorded in the October Report.
The main exports from Balingian for the month of November are: Gutta jelmong
Raw sago Para rubber
2,239	pi kills
14 koyans
13.40 pikuls
Bintiilu.
November, 1925.
General.-Mr. R. V. Palfreman was appointed to
do duty in this District and arrived by m.s. Muara-
tebas on the 14th. He left for Tatau on the 17th
where he has been appointed Acting Assistant
District Officer with powers of a District Court
Magistrate. Mr. E. Banks returned from Kidurong,
where he had been collecting specimens for the
Museum, on the 8th, and left again for the ulu Sebiau
on the 12th.
The 11th being Armistice Day was a general holiday.
Two minutes' silence from 11 oclock was observed.
News of the death of Queen Alexandra was received
here on the 22nd and the flag was half-masted
Mr. N. A. Middlemas. Superintendent of Surveys,
arrived by s.s. Gladys from Min on the 1st and left
again on the 3rd for Kuching.
Mr. P. Down Accountant in Telegraphs and Tele-
phones Department, also returned to Kuching by that
vessel.
The S.R. Gladys also called here northbound on the 29th. Amongst the passengers was Mr. Woodward bound for Baram.
Trade.Trade is being greatly handicapped by the smallpox, and little or no produce is being worked in this river. Large consignments of jelutong have, however, been coming in from Suai, and the price of this commodity has reached $19 per picul.
The Trade Returns for the mouth are as follows: 1925.	1924.
Imports	...	$65,518.86	$36,219.21
Exports	78,497.40	34,158.08
The following vessels entered and cleared the putt during the month: Entered schooners 4 cleared schooners 2
,, steamers 5	steamers 6
The rainfall was 1647 inches.
The District Officer of Bintulu reports as follows: Court.On account of smallpox there has been very little litigation during the month. Tua Kampong Salleh was fined $100 lor concealing a case of smallpox in his own bouse. Tua Kampongs Awang Mail and Dali were each fined $50 for being absent from their kampongs without leave find each man in those two kampongs was fined $2 for continually hiding cases and refusing to report known cases of smallpox in their kampongs. Kamarudin, $25 for refusing to take his infected children to the Isolation . Camp.
Health. The Dresser in Charge went to Pandan on the 1st and found thirteen cases of smallpox there. Both the Tua Kampongs had run away. Having isolated these cases he returned to Bintulu on the 3rd. On the following day four more cases appeared here in Kampong Dali, and Joon Choy, the Forest Clerk, also developed the disease.
On the 6th news arrived from Pandan that the I sick were being deserted by their relatives and that there was no one to bury the dead. The Dresser was again sent to Pandan and as he could be ill spared from here, I wired Kuching for help. On the 9th three more cases appeared here. On the 11th Joon Choy was seriously ill and I sent to Pandan and I fetched the Dresser back hem I regret Joon Choy j died on the 12th. August Chai, Dresser from Kuching, arrived here by m.s Muaratebas on the 14th and the local Dresser then returned to Pandan.
Lately only one more case has appeared here and be w as a prisoner, but Im afraid them are still many cases in the jungle in huts. Many deaths have already been reported from these huts, where the people have taken their sick rather than that they should go into the Isolation Camp. There have been over tinny deaths here reported to date. There are no doubt many more to be reported from the jungle, and at Pandan there have been sixteen deaths.
Tatau.
November, 1925.
Mr. R. V. Palfreman, Acting Assistant District Officer, Tatau, reports as follows: I arrived at Tatau on the 19th instant and took over the affairs of the Station; the Native Officer Abang Bojeng reported that everything was all right and that nothing of importance had occurred lately.
Courts. - Many cases were brought before the Courts, practically every case being brought by Dyaks, most of these being cases of butang. Gangan, an Anap Dyak, was fined $5 for proceeding to Rejang without a pass and also to one month's imprisonment for gross Contempt of Court in that he refused to answer continual surat panggils from Government and also tried to hide in the Bazaar when Police went sent to call him. A Chinese by name Ah Choon was fined $30 for attempting to hide two unregistered gantangs from Government, both these gantangs were, however, on measuring found to be correct, and defendant was allowed to keep them after they had been registered. T. K. Haji Ismail was fined $10 and $5 respectively for attempting to prove that other peoples coconut trees belonged to him.
Two Magistrate's Court summonses, civil fees $3.50 claims $78.93, two judgment summonses, fees $2.50, nine District Court summonses criminal, fees $11.25 and fines $42, were issued during the month.
General.The Chinese and Dyaks here continually complain about not being allowed to work the jelutong in Kukus district. I have informed them that I have received instructions from the District Officer, Bintulu, to look into this matter when I proceed upriver on about the 2nd December.
All the Chinese dachings and gantangs were checked during the month and it was unnecessary to impose any fine beyond the fine previously mentioned.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1926.
43
The Chinese informed me that there will now be no more schooners into the port until after the landas.
Penghulu Bunyah reports that a Bukitan, whilst chasing pig, ran into a sharp piece of belian which passed practically through his body just below :he ribs, and that although the man was still alive when the Penghulu left to proceed down river, that he is practically sure to die.
Health.The health of the District at the present moment appears to be good and both Penghulu Tam boh and Penghulu Bunyah reported that as far as they know there is no serious illness of any sort upriver.
P.W.D.The Police here continue to mow the grounds round the Court House from 6 a.m. to 8 a.m. The Tua Kampong Draman here was ordered to clear and renew the Kampong road in company with his people. This he has done exceedingly well within the space of seven days ; there still, however, remains one bridge which must be completely renewed, and one months time has been given for the renewal of same.
Three hundred planks and one hundred and ten rengs from Bintulu were received here on the 24th instant. These planks are to be used on the new Native Officers house.
Shipping.One schooner from Kuching, by name Intan Terpleleh Zainudin, entered and cleared the port	Trade.
Imports.	Exports.
$3,520	$4,051
Oya and Dalat.
November, 1925.
The District Officer, Mr. P. M. Adams, reports as follows:
Court. -There were no cases of any importance. A few outstanding Dyak cases were settled at Dalat. Pangong was imprisoned on a judgment summons.
General.The Acting Resident Third Division, Mr J. B. Archer, visited the District from 29th29th when the question of the boundary between the Third and Coast Divisions was discussed with the Acting Divisional Officer at Mukah. Capt. C. P. Lowe passed through on his way from Mukah to Sibu.
Land and Surveys.A surveyor and chainman arrived from Kuching via Sibu on the 14th and by the end of the month had mapped all the rubber gardens, worthy of the mime, between Balan and including Sungei Cut. If these men are able to remain in the district until the end of January all existing rubber gardens can be surveyed after which it would be comparatively easy' to prevent people opening new gardens before the land has been surveyed. This being the only way to insure land being taken up in rectangular plots. If it could be arranged to Fend surveyors here every year for a period of 3 months, arrangements could be made beforehand and all land within easy reach of the river, whether cultivated or not, could be mapped in a few years
This would facilitate dealing with applications for land and would educate the natives in the process of alienation. At present they are under the impression they may plant first and obtain permission afterwards.
Marine. -The Acting Divisional Officer kindly sent the m.l. Leonora to be stationed here during the landas. She arrived on the 4th and has been used almost daily, especially in transporting the survey staff. The Igan lighthouse keepers quarters were completed.
Treasury. $3,600 in notes was transferred to the Mukah Treasury. Cheques and advices are now issued at Daiat, thus keeping the accounts of the two stations almost entirely separate and avoiding transporting cash up and down river.
Staff.Clerk B. L. Spurah was off duty for a few days owing to fever. Munan was transferred to Oya but will shortly return to Dalat to relieve W. Upit who is due for leave.
Dyaks Several Dyaks visited Oya and Dalat and paid in the arrears of tax. Several people who had cases to be settled, but bad for a long time successfully avoided meeting each other, were brought together and their differences adjusted.
Travelling.I visited Dalat from 15th to 20th and again on the 28th being still there at the end of the month. 1 rode to Mukah on the 10th returning on the 12th and again on the 23rd with Mr. Archer returning on 25th.
P. W.D.The balance of the timber for the new Court House was collected with the exception of some of the belian posts which are being floated down from upriver by Dyaks. It is hoped to obtain an estimate for the costs of erection from a Sibu contractor. Various minor repairs to buildings and bridges were effected-and the Clerks new quarters jodelited.
Cattle.An old cow which bad been sick for some time was destroyed and buried.
Telephone-Communication was uninterrupted during the month. Some rolls of copper wire have been sent from Kuching with which to replace the worst parts of the old line, but this is being used very sparingly so long as communication remains satisfactory, as when the old line is entirely replaced by copper wire it is feared there might be many unnecessary joins which would interfere with communication.
Forest.I am told by some of the more enlightened Malays that the reason for the decrease in the export of Jelutong is entirely due to Government regulations as to bow jelutong trees should be tapped. They say that when the bamboos are fixed to the handle, of the tapping instrument in order to tap higher up the trees, the tapper has diminished control of the instrument and invariably wounds the tree. The white ants then attack the wound and the tree dies. Formerly jelutong workers used to chip the bark off with parangs and could not reach very high and by this means the trees were seldom wounded. There used be a great number of trees in this district I am told, but nearly all have died from the cause stated
Only four cases of Forest offences have been before the Court in the last three years, which is remarkable.
Prison.Prisoners averaged 113 and were employed on general upkeep of the station.
Raw Sugo exported amounted to 149 koyans value $27,614.
The Trade Returns were:
Exports.	Imports.
$57,929.80	$60,203.65
W. F. DE V. SKRINE, Acting Divisional Officer.
FOURTH DIVISION.
December, 1925.
Court.No cases calling for special mention came before the Courts during the mouth.
General.Mr. Woodward, Cadet, appointed to do duty in the Ba ram district, arrived by the s.s. Gladys on the 1st.
A steel lighter constructed by United Engineers, Singapore, for this station arrived in tow of the s.s. Min on the 5th. She will be very useful for work between Miri and the sub-station, and the initial cost should be recovered in a few years time.
Mr. Cotterill arrived from Singapore on the 9th to relieve Mr. Hayward, who has been granted short leave, and was still here at the end of the month.
Several tongkangs loaded with jelutong and para rubber capsized on the bar on the 21st owing to heavy seas. They were proceeding to s.s. Gladys. No lives were lost but a Malay reported the loss of $1,030 in notes which he had tied round his waist.
44
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1926.
The ships boat with five crew of s.s. Gladys also capsized in attempting to enter the river to obtain ship's papers. The men got ashore and the boat was recovered later. A Chinese committed suicide by hanging, in a garden at the foot of Shell Hill on the 27th. Deceased was an opium smoker.
Awang Itam, Native Officer, Niah, and the Tua Kampongs of Sibuti visited the station during the month and reported all well. Samples of Niah birds-nests were inspected. They should be - ready for gathering at the end of January.
Mr. C. D. Adams arrived from Baram on the 25th for the Christmas festivities.
Health. Suleiman continued vaccination in the Division. Seven fatal cases of smallpox were reported from Suai. Two cases of chicken-pox were reported at Pujut and were immediately isolated as a precaution.	,
Baram.
December, 1925.
The District Officer. Baram, Mr. C. D. Adams, reports as follows :
Obituary.I regret to report the death of Juragan Ali on the 14th instant. Deceased was to have taken his pension at the end of the year after 45 years service.
Court. -Tee Hong fined $25, breach of Trading Regulations; Badingang, Lemada, Mang. Aleh and Sampulut fined $25 each, disobedience of Government Orders. Akon, a Kalabit, imprisoned two years, subject to His Highness the Rajah's approval, for killing a brian Kalabit last year. All blood money has been paid up by the relations. Seventy-nine people lined $25 each for planting rubber without a permit.
- Fines and fees amount to $3,799.16.
1 General. I left on a visit to Tinjar on the 1st instant accompanied by Tuanku Drahman, Native Officer, and Dresser Kim Cheng. At Long Tru I ordered fourteen people to have framework of new house erected by my return in fourteen days; this was done. On arrival at Long Lobang it was reported that many people had died within the last two days in Lining's house, Ulu Tinjar. I left immediately with Native Officer and Dresser and the sickness was found to be smallpox. They were put into quarantine and supplied with provisions to last them until the harvest, at Government expense, to be repaid at a future date.
I visited all upriver and Penan houses in this river and vaccinated the whole lot, which took very successfully.
Penghulu Tinang Saong paid in $500 outstanding fines
I returned on the 15th instant.
Mr, Woodward, Cadet, arrived, he having been appointed to do duty in this district. He left for upriver on the 27th, accompanied by Galau, Upriver Agent, and Dresser Kim Cheng, to vaccinate the people in the ulu Baram and Akar.
Tuanku Mohamat, Native Officer, left to visit Tutau and Apoh to collect Penan Tax, Dresser Reggie accompanied him to vaccinate.
I left for Miri on the 25th instant to spend Christmas and New Year.
Agriculture.The issuing of permits to plant rubber was stopped as it was found that many people were planting without same. Before the end of the month 592 had reported and most of these gardens were found to lie over three years and some already tapped. These people were duly punished and a notice has been issued that in future those wishing to plant rubber must first report, when the land will be inspected before issue of permit.
Rainfall 4'66 inches.
Forestry - Many rafts of timber arrived from upriver for Sarawak Oilfield, Limited, Sawmill, Bakong; This was owing to a fair increase in the price and the Company agreed to pay the Royalty, but the Company now stipulate that a contract must be obtained first. This I am certain will stop upriver people from
working as it takes long enough to bring wood down
when cub without coming down to get a contract
which will take at least a month.
Medical.--Two Dressers kept busy the whole of
the month vaccinating.
P. IV.D.New Police Barracks completed.
One tongkang load of wood arrived from Miri for
new Wireless Station.
Prisoners, average 30'58, were engaged during the
month in upkeep of roads and ornamental grounds.
Trade.Was fair during the month. S.S. Gladys
made an attempt to enter but failed. A large
quantity of produce was sent overland.
Exports. Imports.
1925	$159,679	$18,716
1924	38,267	5,280-
Total to date:
1925 $945,967.00	$453,538.00
1924	433,025.57	286,165.96
C. ERMEN,
Acting Resident Fourth Division.
FIFTH DIVISION.
Limbang.
November, 1925.
Courts.Consequent on the high price of rubber
theft of scrap is very prevalent. Notah and Yahia
were each sentenced to six months for this offence.
With the fruit season in full swing fruit grove dis-
putes have been numerous.
In the Residents Court, Kim Kaw. a youth
charged under section 506 w-as bound over to be of
good behaviour. Ah Yaw, who accused his wife
Tet Jin Mah of committing adultery with Chiok
Sia was allowed to withdraw the case
Travelling. I was away in Labuan from the
22nd to 26th. Whilst there I checked the Agency
accounts.
Piles for repairing the wharves are urgently
required. It is unfortunate that there is such
difficulty in obtaining transport for shipping these
over from Punang.
1 called in at Brooketon on my return to Lim-
bang. The boilers have once again been beached.
The carpenters have finished repairs to. His Highness
the Rajabs bungalow and are now busy on the
servants' quarters.
The issuing of occupation tickets for land on His
Highness the Rajahs Brooketon Concession pro-
ceeds slowly. So many of the inhabitants on the
closing down of the colliery removed to Miri and
Sadong, abandoning their gardens.
Staff. Mr. Pollard, A.A.DO., was granted leave
to Kuching and sailed by the Gladys on 19th. Mr.
Corson, A.C.F., also went on local leave and left
Brooketon by the Alice. Lorraine on the 26th.
Mr. J. G. Anderson, Cadet, arrived on the 20th to
do duty in this Division.
Trade and Shipping.One hundred and two
buffaloes were exported to Kuching and ten to Miri.
The Alice Lorraine and Gladys each made one
trip from Kuching. The Chinese owned launch
Kwong Yick was put on the Brunei Bay run for the
first time during the month and made two trips to
Lirnbang, as also did the Peter Duff. The Adele
made one.
The Trade Returns are as under:
Exports.	Imports.
Foreign	... $ 32,383	$ 22,385
Coasting	...	6,709	12,715
39,092	35.100
Brought forward ...	297,320	256.590
Total to date	...$336,412	$291,690
1924 ...	...	$230,501	$216,103
F. F. BOULT,
Resident Fifth Division..
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1926
Kuching. Foreign Trade Returns for the month of Dec., 1925.
IMPORTS/ Continued.)
IMPORTS.
ARTICLE.
QUANTITY.
VALUE.
ARTICLE.
QUANTITY.
VALUE.
Brought forward
Paint, varnish and tar
Papers
Provisions, sundry
Prawns (dried)
(refuse)
Rickshaws
Hope
Coir	... Manila
Wire
Sago, pearl or raw ...
Salt
Silverware	...
Soap
Stationery and books
Steam and motor launches
Sugar
Sundries
Tea in bundles
Do. tins
Telegraph mid telephone materials and apparatus ...
Timber
Twine and thread ...
Tobacco
In tins, cigars & cigarettes Chinese
P., Java and Sarobok. etc.
Treasure
Vegetables
Fresh
Salted and preserved
In tins
Wines and spirits
Wire
Brass and copper
Galvanised
Manufactures of
Zinc
Sheathing and sheeting Zincware
TOTAL VALUE
Brought forward
Total value to date
1924
piculs	3 3/5 piculs	214 4/5
no.	5
coils	43
ceils	24
coils	4
piculs 5 piculs 2,089 3/5
piculs	2,052 3/10
boxes	309
...
...
cases	78
piculs	135 3/5
...
$ 843,8*26 7,023 8,854
10,452
197 1,127
250
764 693 76 50
4,179 2,800 7,816 5,704
3.500 16,717 58,104
5,711 513
1,860 2,157 11,587
92,013 4,861
14,490
155,300
4,181 6,372 1,554 32,827
255 2,126 1,067
1,132
2,082
31,305,056
10,545,058
811,850,114
$8,255,759
Ammunition Arrack, etc. Biscuits	...
Blachan Blankets
Brass and Copper plates, sheets and sheathing ...
Brass & copperware Boots & shoes Butter & cheese ... Candles Canvas.
Cement
Cinematographic films Clocks and watches Cloth
Cotton
Silk and woollen Clothing
Cotton
Silk and woollen
Sarongs Coffee
Liberan. etc.
In tins Confectionery Cotton seed Crockery and glassware Curry stuff and sauce, etc. ... Cycles and motor cycles
and accessories ... Damar torches ...
Drugs and Chemicals
Cyanide, etc.
For manufg. purposes ... Drugs and medicine Druggists and dentists sundries ... Eggs, fresh and salted Electrical goods and apparatus Firearms Firework
Fish
Dried and Salted
In tins	...
Flour Fruit
Fresh
Dried and preserved
In tins Furniture Ghee Gold leaf Grains
Beans and peas
Padi Rice ... Other sorts ... Gunnies, new Do. old Hams and bacon Hats ... Iron and Steel
Bars, plates and rods, etc
Cooking and household utensils ...
Corrugated and galvanised iron ... Other manufactures of iron and steel ...
Jewellery
Joss-sticks and papers Lard
Lamps Leather
Do. Manufactures of Live stork
Cattle
Swine	...
Machinery Mats Matches Macaroni and vermicelli Milk, Condensed and
sterilised ... Motor lorries and cars
Do.	accessories ...
Oils, etc.
Vegetable
Lubricating Kerosene Benzine
Methylated spirit
Carried forward ...
piculs	23 1/10
...
casks	965
piculs	112 cases	11
no.	97,395
piculs	3,446 3/10
bags	1,967
...
piculs 18	1/5 ozs.	1,069
piculs 1,001 piculs	620
piculs	23,273 2/5
piculs	3,409 2/5 bales	6
bundles	34
piculs	129 4/5	*
piculs	24 3/5	head	96
head	80
cases	421
cases	1,320
piculs	75 2/5
piculs	185 cases	4,820 gallons 25,188 gallons	582
$	847
6,340
12,968
323 3,420
450 4,113 2,915 1,964
653
908 4,295 3,900 4,512
129,629 11,895
9,538
400 33,704
4,814 1,907 2,365 1,916
23,285 10,191
8,083
573
250 3,199
11,259
250 3,870 2,200 2,613 4,120
38,227 11,182
6,993
4,222 3,519 2,912
5,860 1,645
39,275
9,922
2,180
190,157 12,002
1,316 1,055
846
6,580
6,171
4,593
8,415
23,172 3,096 2,381
5,033 4,250 2,203 2.888
8,200 3,620
16,972 1,240 4,293 2,024
18,087 15,450
1,179
2,159 5,080
27,477
28,882
599
S 843.828
EXPORTS.
ARTICLE.
Betel-nuts
Bees-wax
Birds' nests, white
Do.	black	...
Do.	refuse
Blachan
Cinematographic films
Charcoal
Copra
Crockeryware
Damar
Daging
Darat or laut...
Empties
Fish
Dried and salted
Fins
Maws
Roe
Guru and laka wood
Gold ...
Gunnies, old
Gutta. and Rubber
Jangkar
Jelutong
Do. refined	...
Percha	...
Plantation Leaf gutta ...	...
Hides, skins and horns, etc.
Rhinoceros ...
Other kinds ...
Imports returned to shippers
Kajangs Mats
Carried forward ...
QUANTITY.
piculs	69 piculs	23 1/5 catties	5 3/10
piculs	9
cutties	173 1/10
piculs	6 9/10
piculs	993 3/5
piculs	1,854 9/10
piculs	37 3/10
piculs	95	2/5
piculs	83	1/5 piculs piculs	18 1/5 piculs	7	piculs	29	4/5 ozs?	110'2
bundles	217
piculs	28 piculs	856	2/5 piculs	2,777 7/10
piculs	2	3/4
piculs	4,852 3/5 piculs	1 catties	1	7/8
piculs	3 VALUE.
$	731
1,655 226
4,031
121
457
12,500 1,714
15,649 213
1,243
167
2,021
2,214
70
3,721
476
50 3,858 2,400
1,067
11,899
171,106
805
1,052,405
365
3
48 2,778
183
378
$ 1,294,617
46	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1. 1926.
EXPORTS(Continued.)
PASSENGERS.
VALUE.
?
ARTICLE.
QUANTITY.
Departures.
Brought forward
Oils
Vegetable
Pepper (white)
Do. (black) ...
Prawns (dried)
Rattans, No. 1. sega. etc.
Do. No. 2. temoi, etc.
Sago flour
Sugar nipa Sundries Tuba-roots
piculs piculs piculs piculs piculs piculs piculs piculs
piculs
1/10 1,090
88 11 1/10 1/5 310 9/10 1/5
9,487 220
580 9/10 $ 1,291,617
2
96,184
6,130
583
3,078
1
59,771
1,106
837
3,528 PER
PER
s.s. Kuching. 4th January. For Singapore. Mr. E. Whitehead, Mr. A. S. Lowe, Mr. P. E. Cox, Miss P. Cox, Mr A. O. Thomas, Mr. Cheong Cheng Joon, Mr. Lim Thian Liang, Miss Lim Ah Leong, Mr. Teo Cheng Hoon, Mr. Wee Boo Kho, Miss Stella Mown.
Al
Arrivals.
s.s. Kuching. 11th .January. From Singapore.
TOTAL VALUE Brought forward
Total value to date
1924 $1,405,282 17,159,794
$ 18,625,076 $ 9,763.474 I
Mr. E Parnell, Mr. P. Stewart, Mr. H. B. Crocker, Mr. and Mrs. Carr, Mr. G. H. Watts. Dr. A. L. J. Lim, Mr. Lim Peng Khoon, Mr. Kok Tsing Yong, Mrs. Kok Chuan Heng, Mr. Lim Thian Liang, Mr. S. M. Tan.
Kuching, Coasting Trade Returns for the month of Dec. 1926. ?	- - . IMPORTS.
ARTICLE.	QUANTITY
VALUE
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
Birds nests	...	Cattle	-	Coal ...	Damar	Gutta jangkar	...	...
Do. jelutong	...	...
Do. percha Indiarubber Padi ...
Plantation rubber	Prawns refuse
Pepper (white) Do. (black)
Rattans, No. 2. temoi. etc. ...
Rice Sago raw
piculs head
tons piculs piculs piculs piculs
piculs piculs piculs piculs piculs picul.s picul piculs tpins
2
18 1185
50
58 1/10 6069
8 3/10
10 3/5 490 2375 36
745
$	355
850
18,035
126 1,794
125,952
1,657
185
2,114
343,456
180 49,827
ALMANAC. FEBRUARY, 1926.
54 1/4
1
40 16,075
2,342
4
352 .
17,826
En- glish. Days of
Chinese
Modan
MOON'S- PHASES, ETC.
6th Last quarter
13th Now MOON 19th First quarter 28th Full moon
High water at Kuching.
Sundries Treasure
TOTAL VALUE
32.465 5,785
$ 598,045
Moons
Dates
Months
_Montgs
Dates.
A M.
h. m.
P. M.
h. m.
brought forward
Total value to date
$ 6,300.779
$ 6,898.824
M
Tu W
1
2
3
12
19
20
21
Rajah.
s
19
20
PurificationCandlemas
7 09
7 40
8 11
7 13
7 46
8 20
Th
F
S
S
M
4
5 6
8 4o
9 24
10 12
11 14
8 58
9 43
10 41
11 51
0 27
1 42
2 51
3 49
4 37
5 26
6 16
7 03
7 47
8 31
9 16.
10 07
11 09
1924
...
$ 4,263,664
23
24
26
27
28
29
30
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
-1
22
EXPORTS
7
24
SEXAGESIMA SUNDAY
(Governor Generalship of North Borneo
Offered to Sir Charles Brooke, 1894
1st Bukit Batu Expedition, 1881
Chinese New Year
QUlNQlUAGESlMA Shrove Sunday
St- Valentine
SHROVE TUESDAY
ASH WEDNESDAY. Lent begin Chinese Insurection, 1837
( QUADREAGESIMA1st Sunday in
Lent
1st Gat Expedition, 1915
( St. Mathias
H. H. The Ranee's Birthday ..
(Quelling of Chinese Insurection, by
Sir Charles Brooke with Malays and
Balau and Skrang Dyaks 1857
ARTICLE
QUANTITY
VALUE.
Tu
W
Th F
S
S
Tu
W
Th F
S
S
M
Tu
W
Th F
S
S F
8
8
9
10 11
12 13 14 1015
16 17 18 19 20 21
? to l- X Ci O -1 CO ?* O : I- X M T-l 71 ? ! ? CO
1 09
2 23
3 29
4 23
6 11
5 59
6 45
7 29
8 10
8 53
9 39
10 33
11 40
Brassware	...
Flour ...
Ironware
Jars ...
Oil, kerosene
Opium Padi ... . Rice ... Salt ... Sundries Tobacco, cigars and cigarettes Treasure
Wines and spirits
bags
no.
cases
piculs piculs piculs
306
502
1,468 130 1/5 6,050 9/10
923 $	4,620
1,275
11,527
1,445
8,869
93,425
679
50,675
2,734
225,316
29,497
128,616
9,026
*1
Shaaban
TOTAL VALUE
Brought forward
$ 567,704
$ 5,159,190
22
23
24
Year Plan IN or 3rd Year of the Cycle
10
11
12
9
10
11
0 25
1 47
3 01
0 59
2 16
3 19
Total value to date
1924
$ 5.726.894
$ 4.327,069
25
26
28
13
14
15
16
12
13
14
15
3 56
4 37
5 11
5 41
4 06
4 45
5 19
5 51
J.
S. MUDFORD,
2ND SUNDAY IN LENT
for Registrar of Trade.
Year Plan IN or 3rd Year of the Cycle
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1926.	47
Miri. Foreign Trade Returns for the month of Oct., 1925.
IMPORTS.
DESCRIPTION.
QUANTITY.
VALUK.
Acid Clay
tons
79.85
Aerated Water ...
cases
69
$ 3,682	486
Ammunition
no.
300
30
Arrack (Chinese)
cases
20
900
Automobile Accessories
9,867 Bicycles
no.
9
500
Biscuits
1,405
Brassware
40 Butter	...
738
Cloth, cotton
yds.
9,870
4,576
Clothing 28,361
Coffee
piculs
17,88
804
Cement	...	...
casks
2,572
11,615
Crockeryware
1,444
Cinema films
reels
82
265
Drugs ...	...	2,863
Drill parts for Boring
865,872
Eggs, salted
no.
73,050
3,,93
fresh
no.
4,700
227
Electrical apparatus
595
Fish, salted
piculs
102.78
2,774
,. in tins Firearms
627
no.
2
60
Fruit, fresh
2,544
Flour ...
sacks
449
1,799
Gas ...	... *
cyls.
293
15,649
Hose canvas	...	...
ft.
480
6.518
Hats
680
Ironware
22,407
Lard ...
piculs
33.73
1,389
Leather
piculs
5.60
595
Live stock
Cattle
head
6
310
Pigs
head
97
3,885
Poultry	...
head
1,577
1,789 j
Matches
cases
21
Mats ...
521
Machinery
19,899 ?
Milk ...
cases
384
5,814
Oil and Grease
Kerosene
cases
635
3,495
Lubricating ...
gallons
5,764
6,809
Vegetable ...
piculs
71.72
2,024
Paint
lbs.
87,744
8,584
Provisions & sundries
84,184
Rattan goods
158
Refinery material
3,002
Rice ...
piculs
3,879.10
82,176
Sugar	piculs
409.37
8,415
Salt
piculs
69.49
150
Shoes
pairs
450
600
Soap
cases
63
951 Sauce and Vinegar
jars
88
453 Stationery
574
Tea
43
2,270 Timber
c. ft.
31,274.16
84,895
Tobacco & cigarettes in tins ...
lbs.
13,571
26,247
Chinese	...
cases
89
1,950
Siam	...
Treasure
lbs.
8.95
284
125,000
Vegetables, fresh ...
505
salted ...	...
Wines and Spirit*
jars
71
858
gallons
2,180
6,182
Brought forward ...
TOTAL	...
$ 818,304
5,101,969
$5.920,273 EXPORTS.
DESCRIPTION.
QUANTITY.
VALUE.
Aerated Water
cases
10
$	60
Bicycle
no.
1
109
Biscuits
216
Birds' nest black cleaned
catties
1 22
Buffalo hides
piculs
1.18
10
Dried Prawns
piculs
2.70
189
Empties
154
Furniture
225
Gutta of RubberJelutong ...
piculs
451.00
5,747
Plantation...
piculs
117.75
18,840
Ironware	...	...j
20,000
Kajangs
piculs
1,000
163
Machinery
10,005
Milk ...
cases
87
559
Oil, Benzine
tons
5,774.74
888,585
Crude
tons
13,334.49
177,082
Kerosene ...	...
tons
18,039.77
782.887
Liquid fuel ...
tons
26,627.85
452,674
Vegetable
piculs
6.56
2G0
Provisions & sundries
8,429
Rice
piculs
187.79
1,648
Sugar
piculs
18.08
172
Stationery	...	...
168
Tobacco & cigarettes-in tins ...
lbs.
475
670
Treasure
4,500
Wine and Spirits ...	...
gallons
60
800
$2,363.059
Brought forward
19,515,494
TOTAL
$21,878,558
Miri, Coasting Trade Returns for the month of 0ct.,_1925.
IMPORTS .
DESCRIPTION.
QUANTITY.
VALUE.
Aerated Water
. cases
103
$	595
Attap Belians
. pieces
249,600
2,135
Attaps, Leaf Bricks
. pieces
1,700
17
. no.
6,000
151
Butter
180
Biscuits
992
Cloth, cotton
yds.
10,622
5,443
Clothing
1,100
Charcoal
piculs
159.87
816
Coffee
piculs
3.00
168
Cement
casks
15
124
Crockcryware
282
Damar
piculs
44.00
1,320
Dried prawns
piculs
9.65
691
Eggs, fresh
no.
4,300
187
Fish, Suited
piculs
7.20
227
In tins
204
Fruit, fresh
1,049
Gultad Rubber -Jangkar ...
piculs
3.30
67
Jelutong ...
piculs
610.00
5,414
Plantutiou...
piculs
215.15
27,475
R. Scrap ...
piculs
8.00
720
Hats
200
Ironware
974
Kadiangs Lards	...	...
pieces
4,800
720
... ....
piculs
5.40
253
Live slock
Buffaloes	...	...
head
8
380
Pigs
head
75
3,200
Matches
cases
14
159
Milk
cases
19
264
Oil, Vegetable ...
piculs
22.49
516
Opium
22,800
Padi
piculs
224.98
1,016
Provisions and sundries
10,200
Rice	...
piculs
516.82
4,836
Sugar Nipah
piculs
20.40
111
Salt
piculs
80.30
269
Shoes
pa rs
420
540
Stone Crushed ...
cases
20
226
c. yds
316.84
1,678
Sauce and Vinegar
jars
10
46
Timber
u. feet
10,633
1,936
Tea
cases
2
90
Tobacco and Cigs. in tins ...
120
203
Do Siam ...
piculs
1.50
120
Wines and Spirits
gallons
848
2,757
Brought forward
$101,931
500,092
TOTAL
$602,080
48
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1926.
EXPORTS .
DESCRIPTION.
QUANTITY.
VALUE.
Aerated Water
cases
7
$	18
Birds Nests White
catties
11
380
Biscuits
478
Bicycles
no.
8
420
Cloth, cotton
yds.
1,950
1,665
Clothing ..
238
Damar
piculs
56.00
1,4110
Empties
473
Fish, salted
piculs
8.95
258
Fishing Nets
sets
10
100
Gutta & Rubber Jangkar ...
piculs
8.00
120
Jelutong ...
piculs
1,010.80
11,858
Plantation...
piculs
-
12,770
H. Scrap ...
piculs
80.85
2,102
Ironware
...
120
Matches
cases
1
120
Milk ...
cases
28
421
Oil, kerosene
cases
825
1,748
Vegetable
piculs
6.99
158
Provisions and sundries
,,679
Rice ...
piculs
541.18
4,908
Sugar ...
piculs
52.20
482
Salt
piculs
81.60
146
Soap
cases
6
120
Silverware
1.000
Tobacco and Cigs, in tins
lbs.
1,800
3,837
Do. Siam
catties
85
100
Treasure
1,780
Wayang Effects ...
1,300
$56.189
Bought forward
282,290
TOTAL
-
$288,479
Kuching Market Price List.
January, 1926.
Beef
Beet Imported .. local
Buffalo 1st Quality meat only
Meat with bones Feet
Heart
Kidneys Liver Bones ..	..
Tail Tongue ..
Pork-
Pork lean	..	..
withfat .. fat
Pig Brain Feet Head Tongue
Fish
Fresh
No. 1 2
3 Cooked
No. 1 ..2
3
Salted
No- 1 .. 2 3
Crab-
No. 1 2 .,3
Sea Prawns
Udang Gala
Siar ..
Payak ..
per catty
43
Cents
10
25
...
23
10
each
25
..	25
per catty
25
15
per catty
25
25
per catty
70
Cents
56
48
each
5
per catty
35
40
70
per catty
..	36
Cents
28
14
per catty
36
Cents
28
14
per catty
32 to 38
Cents
24 to 28
12 to 14
per catty
28
Cents
..	22
a.
18
It
per catty
..	28
Cents
28
..	14
Poultry, etc.
Capons ..	..
Purks
Fowls
.. I)ynk Breed
Gn'o, 1 Full Growtij large ..
Du do. sninll ..
Pigeons
Eggs, (Fowls) ..
io 1 Pucks) ? ?	..
Do do. (Salted)
Vegetables
Baagkuang
Brinjal	..
Cabbages
Celery
Chillies (Green) (Dried)..
(Bod)
Coconut ..
Cncuuiber
French Beaus
Garlic
Ginger(French)..
Kangkotig
Lubu (merahl
Ladies Finger ..
Lettuce (Chinese I Lobak (Turnip) ..
Long Beans ..
Onions (Bombay) ., (Smaller)
Patola
Potatoes (Bengal) ,, (Sweet) ..
Pna
Pumpkin
Kadi sb Sawi Sireh
Yarns
Sundries
Be tel -nn t (F res b) (Dried)
Blachan
Bread
., (Smaller) ..
Butter (Australian) Do do
Cinnamon
Cloves Coffee Firewood
Flour .Wheat; 1st quality Ghee (1st quality)
Do- 2nd do.
Garam (Calcutta) ,, i Rangoon)
Jintao HiXam .ladain Jemuju Return bar Lada Hi cam Do. Puteh
Langkuas
Lara
Matches ..
Milk
Do. (Fresh) Oil Coconut
Do. Kachang
Do. Keroaone (Devoes) (Hylvan)
(Tiger Brand) CEagle Brandl
(Crown Biand)
,, (Fish Brand)
., (Dragon Brand) (Cock Brand)
Rice (Siam I No 1
Do. 2
Do. 8
Rice Dyak 1
Do.	2
Saffron (Fresh) .. Do. (Dried) ..
Salt (Fine) Do. (Coarse) ..
Sugar (Candy) ..
Do. (Brown) ..
Do. (White) ..
Tamarind
Tea (Ceylon) ..
Do. (Assam) ..
Do. (Chinese) Do. (Matung) ..
per catty
90
Cents
? 70 to 80
If
..
85
It
7u
each
85.0U
.. 3.00
..
60
Cents
5
ft
..	5
5
per ratty
3
Cento
6
*.
32
per bundle
1
per catty
10
*
35
60
each
5
per catty
8
24
22 to 24
ft
8 to 12
II
3
..
2
per bundle
I
p;r catty
1
8
s
8
If
..	13
12
If
.. 11
tt
14
2
1*
16
ff
2
,,
10
pur bundle
16
..
per catty
5
It
per JOO
30
Cents
per catty
..	15
11
16 to 18
per loaf*
6
?1
..	4
..
lib tin
75
2tti tin
.. 91-45
per catty
26
Cents
82
II
..
52
It
per cart
.. 91.60
per catty
14
Cents
.. #1.02
V.
85
Cents
per gantang
..	56
58
per catty
32 to 10
75
per chupak
80
i*
..	10
ft
30
per gautang
..	62
1
it
per catty
40
a .
per packet
..	5
If
in tin
25 to 35
per bottle
16
If
per catty
..	28
24
per bottle
38
40
II
per case
.. 96.10
It
.. 5.70
tf
11
II
ft
If
per gautang
.'. 6.90
64
Cents
60
IS
58
fl
? a
..	54
per catty
62
*1
8
H
85
*1
ft
6
If
3
fl
II
22
1
St
10
I
s.
10
tt
..	12
per pound
.. #1.05
in packet
.. 1,26
8
Cents
,
..	75
1
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1926.
49
KUCHING SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
Dec.
VC-. NAMK
El. AO ANO Ilie.
TONS.
CAPTAIN OK
NAKHOOA.
I ROM.
2
L'Aubaine
Bar. str.
48
HUSH an
Sadong
2
Au gat
11
136
AH
Miri
8
Bintang Trang
f	M
19
Jeu
Betong
8
Mas Lalang
11	11
67
Sahari
Rejang
7
Muaratebas
n
82
Awg. Jen '
Si bn
7
Sri Merbo
140
Sicnt
Lundti
7
llojah f Sarawak
892
Hollinghead
Slim
7
Sri M t Igan
Bell.
6b
Issa
Sadong
8
Knching
,, str.
903
Benfield
Singapore
8
Kim Chin Thong
11	H
211
Latip
Kaluka
8
Nani Hoi
i
Nor
Sibu
9
Hock .4/in
11	11
15
Mantasan
Belong
9
Sri Sadong
131
Mohamad
Sadong
1(1
Lu par
It	11
34
Osman
Simatan
11
Gladys
173
Deli
Miri
12
liintang Trang
1*	11
12
Jen
Betong
12
LAubaine
4b
Hassan
Sibu
12
Alice Lorraine
HO
Seimin
Liiudu
11
Mas Lalang
67
Sahari
Rejang
14
Auby
819
McPhail
Limbang
14
Sri Sadong
184
M ohamad
Sadong
15
Raiah of Sara wak
.	* V
892
Hollinshetul
Singapore
IB
Kim Chin Seng
11	IT
128
Awg. Hais
Ova
17
L'Aubaine
ft	11
I
Hassan
Sadong
18
Hock 4n
tl	15
Mautasan
Betong
lb
Knell mg
903
Benfield
Singapore
19
Kim Chin Thong
? ? 20
Latip
Saratok
19
Eng Hap Leong
1*	IT
69
Hassan
Binttiln
19
Muaratebas
Awg. Jen
Sibu
21
Majiiiis
11	1
70
Hj. Dul
Ova
21
Sri Sadong
11	11
134
Mohamad
Sadong
22
Sri Mukah
,, sell.
111
Mahaii
Betong
28
liintaug Trang
t * s t r
12
Jen
23
Rajah of Sarawak
11	ii
892
Hoilinshead
Sibu
28
Mas Lalang
M	11
67
Sahari
Rejang
34
Auby
M	11
319
McPhail
Singapore
kf f7
Num Hoi
72
Nor
Sibu
25
M iiuralebas
62
Awg. Jen
Sadong
28
Gladys
. ? ? ?
178
Deli
Bintnln
28
Sri Merbo
140
Si rat
Ltitidu
29
Lu par
..
31
Osman Simatnn
29
L'Aubaine
18
Hassan
Sadong
30
Kull Ching Thong
20
Latip
Sarutok
30
Hock zln
? 1	11
15
Man tan an
Betong
80
Kuching
kt
91)3
Benfield
Singapore
30
Utrecht
Dut. 709
Zeylemaiinr
31
Kim Chui Soon
Sar. 51
Awg. Dahlan
Balingian
31
M tiara tebas
If	T
62
Awg. Jen
Sadong
D
epartu res.
1 Dec.
1
\ KMHKI. H NAMK.
FLAG ANR RIG.
i
CAPTAIN OR NAKHOPA.
FOR.
1
Muara tebas
Sar. str.
G2l vol
Awg. Jen
Si Im
1
Majinis
? a	..
Hj. Dul
Oya
1
Auby
I	a
319
McPhail
Limbang
1
Kim Chin Thong
.. ..
20
Latip
Kalaka
i 1
Mrak Taujong
i i	if
29
Dralunan
Mate
2
Hock Aim
IT	tf
15
Mantasan
Betong
1 2
Lu par
a.	..
34
Osman
Simatnn
4
Eng Hap Leong
1*	H
69
Hassan
Bintulu
i 4
Alice Lorraine
1	11
140
Soman
Lundti
4
Sr Sadong
It	IT
134
Mohamad
bndong
4
Sri Mukah
sch
111
Mahaii
4
Mas Lalang
str.
67
Sahari
Rejang
5
L'Aubaine
.. ..
48
Hassan
Sadong
o
Angus
11	11
136
Ali
Miri
6
Bintano Trang
* ? 12
Jen
Betong
10
Sri Sadong
a a a
134
Mohamed
Sadong
11
Kuching
I*	1
903
Benfield
Singapore
11
Hock Ann
It	It
15
Mantasan
Betong
1 It
Nam Hoi
? 1	? ?
72
Nor
Sibu
11
Sri Merbo
1	1
140
Sirat
Lundu
11
Kim Chin Thong
? ? ..
20
Latip
Kaltika
12
Kim Chin Soon
? a	..
54
Awg. Dahl an
Balingian
18
Mun ra tebas
a a	a a
62
Awg. Jen
Sibu
14
Alice Lorraine
? a	a ?
14(1
Seman
Limbang
15
/I uby
LAubaine
a*	II
319
McPhail
Singapore
i 16
Ik	It
48
Hassan
Sadong
15
Biutang Trang
11	IT
12
Jen
Betong
15
Gladys
?
173
Deli
Bintulu
15
Max Lalang
?	a*
67
Sahari
Rejang
16
Uaj ih oj Sarawak
? a	aa
892
Hoilinshead
Sibu
1 17
Patricia
a a	? ?
14
Bujeng
tl
1 17
Sri Sadong
k.	ft
134
Mohamed
Sadong
20
Lu par
aa	a a
34
Osman
Simatan
22
M uaratebus
62
Awg. Jen
Sadong
1 28
Kuching
.a	.i
903
Hen field
Singapore
23
Hock Jiui
15
Mantasan
Betong
23
Kim Chiu Thong
a a	.a
20
Latip
Kai aka
23
Rajah / Sarawak
*a	a
892
Hoilinshead
Singapore
21
LAubaine
aa
48
Hassan
Sadong
26
Eng Hup Leong
t11'	11
69
Hassan
Bintulu
2i.
A by
a a	a a
319
Melhtnl
Limbang
26
Mas Lalang
aa	aa
87
Sahari
Rejang
27
Kim Chin Seng
128
Awg. Ruis
Balingian
27
Nam Hai
72
Nor
Silm
29
Sri Sadong
..
134
M oh am ad
Sadong
29
Muaratebas
aa	aa
62
Awg. Jon
Matu
29
Majima
a a	aa
70
Hj. Dul
81
Sarawak
If	11
46
Awg. Smail
Sibu
KUCHING SHIPPING RETURNS.
Arrivals.
DATE.
NAME OF VESSEL.
NAME OF CAPTAIN.
WHEKE
FROM.
CHINESE.
NATIVES OF INDIA.
OTHER ASIATICS.
TOTAL.
Muir.
FPM.
Male.
Male.
tit.
1925.
-
Dec. 8
S.S. Kuching
A. C. Benfield
Singapore
137
21
7
59
2
226
1H
S.S. Kuching
A. C. Benfield
Do.
114
15
5
...
25
...
159
..	21
Kotak Koug Tiang Hat
Joo Hoe
Painixugkat
1
...
...
1
24
S.S. Aulnj
A 1). McPhail
Singapore
24
i
...
...
25
: 30
1
S.S. Kuching ...
A, 0. Benfield
Do.
193
/
...
18
...
234
469
52
20
102
0
645
Brought forward
5.353
460
188
14
758
41
6,814
Total to date
5,822
512
208
14
860
43
7,459
1924
3.518
187
259
7
1056
122
5.479
50
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1926.
Departures.
DATE.	NAMI, OF VEHSKL.
NAMK OF CAPTAIN.
BOUND.
CHINKRR.
Frw.
NATIVE'. OF INDIA. Matt Frm.
OTH EK
Asi ATIUS.
Unit, trw
TOTAL.
1925.
Dee.
ft
1 Kotak Kong Tumg Hai
11 S.S. Kuching
12 Kotak Ten Seng Lee
15 S.S. Auby	..	A.
23 S.S. Kuching
Joo Hoe
A. C. Benfield .Ong Teck Uin A.-D. McPhail \. C. Ben Geld
Painangkat Singapore Painangkat Singapore Do.
2
96
4
62
sit
2
13
12
1
1
is
1
3
149
2
5
79
Brought forward
164
2,890
36
459
13
158
1
15
22
632
1
90
237
4,244
Total to date
1924
3.054
495
171
16
654
91
4,481
2,366
488
127
14
799
160
3,954
MIRI SHIPPING.
Arrivals.
Departures.
ZJ
VESSEL'S NAME.
FLAG
1 CAPTAIN mt
ITmw.
AND RIG
7 ; NAKIIODA.
1 V ESHEL'S N AXE.
1' LAG
7.
CAPTAIN OK
FOR.
1
1
Gladys
Snr Brit.
173 Deli
2729 Forrest
Kuching
Singapore
? : -
AND RIG.
0
N A K HODA.
I
Purpura
Sar.
Doilah
Belait
1
Kep. mil
1322 Welblirn
S.indakim
1
Punai
48
2
Deli
720 F.Strachan
Singapore
2
Gladys
173
Deli
Barain
4
Auby
Snr
319 McPhail
Kuching
Deli Brit.
726
F. Strachan
Lab'mu
4
Ka, a ng
Bril.
1275 T. 11. Findlm
l.rihiuin
Buah
Snr.
16
Sved
Belait
4
Pun m
Sar.
48 Doilah
Bclnit
4
K'ljany
Brit.
1275
T.H. Findlay
Singapore
4
Buah
16 Syed
3161 Bain
Do.
4
K' pnii a
1322
Welburn
Do.
6
Argonauta
Brit.
Singapore
St. Helens
Sar.
13
Palajo
P.elait
5
Min
367 Lloyd
b, iigti i re
1'U H I
48
Doilah
Bakong
A- Tutong
8
Punai
Sar.
48 Doilah
Bakong
Buah
..
hi
Syed
8
Huai.
16 Sy.-a
Tutong
5
.4 u by
*
819
McPhail
Lilubang
s
Anyas
136 A. bin Awang
Kuching
5
1 u rpu ra
Brit.
2729
Forrest
Aomori
8
Maru ilu
Brit.
982 It. .1. Work
Singapore
7
Hurting
Snr.
118
Bralihn
Bintuhi
t)
St. Helens
Sar.
13 Paltijo
Belait
7
Gladys
. 178
Deli
K itching
9
Auby
..
819 McPhail
Litubang
9
Buah
..
16
Syed
Belait
10
Perla k
Brit.
llOai Harrison
Saigon
9
Punai
Brit.
48
Doilah
Bakong
10
Buah
Sar.
16 Syed
Belait
V
.1 rgoiinuta
316!
Bnin
Tokuyniu a
11
Darrel
Brit.
002 A Kiehurilxin
1. b'HII
10
Maru du
9H2
R..I. Work
L ibuan
12
Pu nai
Sar.
4s Doilah
Bakong
10
Auby
Snr.
319
McPhail
Kuching
18
I retie
10 Snrip
16, Sved
Bfl Hl Hl
11
D i reel
Brit.
1002
A.Richard*ou
Singapore
Brunei
14
Hua h
Belli It
11
'din
367
Lloyd
14
Me lor
62 Snibi
Do.
11
Perla k
..
110:1
'H arrison
Singapore
14
A m ru m
Dutch
984' Heide
Hongkong
12
Melor
Sar.
32
Snibi
Belnit
15
Min
Bril.
367 I.lovtl
Brunei
1:;
Baah
..
16
Syed
Do.
15
Ka/umi
1275 T.H. Findlay
Singapore
15
Irene
..
10
Snrip
Ba ram
17
Alice Lorraine
SH r.
140 SeUltin
K uching
16
Prmhipe
..
H
1 land
Belait
17
Huron./
118 Brahim
Bi ituiii
17
Kaga no
Brit.
1275
T.H. Findlay
Labnnn
17
1 rear
10* Snrip
B.raui
17
,'ilirr Lorraine
bar.
1 40
Soman
Linibang
18
Deli
Brit.
726 p. Strachan
r.ab'inn
17
1 nr rum
Dutch
934
Heide
Singapore
18
Gladys
bar
173 Deli
Kuching
18
D-l.
Brit.
726
F. Strachan
Do.
18
21
Penelope
Hua h
8 Daud
16 v.. ]
Bcb.it 'Tuton_
P.i
Buah
I rt n c
Snr.
16
10
Sye l
Snrip
Tutong Niah
23
Pahidina
Brit.
34'14 Wilson
Singapore
21
rind if s
1.
173
Deli
Kuching
28
DarC'l
1002 \ Ulrlurd.nh
Singapore
23
Buah
16
Sved
K-lail
24
? Oliva
3325 Burkin
Singapore
28
Pu nai
IS
Doilah
Biikong
25
Marudu
..
!D 2 It .1. Work
Lubmin
21
Darrel
Brit.
I'Mrj
A.Richardson
1 iiibunn
25 Irene
Sar.
10 Snrip
Sibuti
Marudu
9-2
R. J. Work
Singapore
27
Buceinuiii
Bnt.
30S2 Lucas
Kobe via
Pahidiu a
3434
Wilson
Madras
Singapore
27
Oliva
88'15
Purkis
Do.
2H
' A uliy
Sar.
319 McPhail
Kuching
K
Min
? .
367
Lloyd
Singapore
30
Friesland
' Ger.
8750 B. Bakle
Singapore
29
Bucci n it tn
3082
Lucus
Kobe
St
Buah
Sar.
16 Syed
Heiuit
29 Auby
Sar.
319
McPhail
Liinbung
3 Purai
48) Doilah
Bakong
29
Anyas
186
Ali bin Aw g.
L. & Tutong
81
Deli
Brit.
726; F. Strachan
Singapore
31
Friesland
Ger.
.8750
B. Bakle
Manila
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1926.	61
Rainfall, December, 1925.
DI'RING 24 HOURS.
DATK. Mad on J; Mntigci l/bang. Mini,	Mingi'i
Mines. Tcnguli.	('Ilina.
'laiaiiK l.undii. Barnin.
Kvoir.
Binlulu.
Inches.	Inches.	Inches.	Inches.	Inches.
1	117	6-20	B-Ofl	U85
2	-56	-21	'0 8	98	-20	1'02	-30	-58
4	1 04	-20	*62	-08
5	'31	0	.50
-in	!	-10	-07
Inches.	Inches.	Inches.
PM	103	15
1-33	03	-57
? 95	16	1-28	-53
? 25	? 03	-10
Inches. 2-99
47
99
04
1-62
88 298
7'46
05
87
186 99
08
185 25 24
?78
86
08
84 48
__
06
02
02
293
. is
08
7	'48	-20	06	1'45	98	'34	8-56	13	1'77	80	08	08	9	-88	*12	04	18	-10
10	'80	62	11 1	-	-	-	-
1*2	1'19	-80	'28	,	'54	"21
18	'34	?	1-1X7	4G	'5*2
14	-86	-68
15	181	(JO	13	17
16	-92	240	-7'2	280
17	1-84	1-2C	'57	-5-2	1*50
18	140
19	-84	1'82	"20
20	1'46	'	1-40
?1	-75	6-00	2.20	2'82	2*00
22	2 38	6 00	19	180
23	1-85	2-10	06	43	30
24	2-40	1'80	2 20
25	-85	4 00	1-&0
26	14	.90	20	2-72	-10
27	-66	-80	85
28	-20	-80
29	"22	-08
80	155	3-30	166	1-:15
61	IB	KI
09	1'20
36	117
38	113	75	08
1 28	-65	-04
1-20	04
20	-85	30	148	1-43	1	-65
11-00	165	-HI
1'80	-64	13	4-78	1-78	90	-85	-16
18	40	1-45
9.8	1-43
05	-08	'07
1-85	72	88	1.50	Total	23-32	37-41	9'97	18 10	24 41
88-81	1	16-89	4-96
28-65
Rainfall, December, 1925.
Rainfall, November, 1925.
DURING 24 HOURS.
l L*RIN(i 24 HOURS.
DATE.
.11 tri.
DATE.
3 4
5 6
o
9 10
11 12
18 14
15 16
17 18 19
*20 *21
22
*23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
Mitin.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
*26
27
28 *29 80
31
Inches.
15
06
18
-09
47
1-40
01
14
1-06
110
?90
240
95
1-59 200
1-80
?40
?50
17
2*2
05
Inches.
16
342
198 14
160	1-20
140
1 15
25
84
21
58
1.20
1-03
?38
114
Total
15.64
Total
16-63
52	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY J, 1926.
METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS.
I I	,
GENERAL HOSPITAL.
A'u c h in (j, o 1st December, 1925.
BA RO. M ETER.
T H E
1 M O M E T E It I
X SHADE.
SOLAR MAXIMUM.
Museum Rainfall in 21 hours.
DATK.
At 8 A.M.
Dl
8 A. M.
y B u L t tsoon.
8 V. M.
Wet Bulb at 8 A.M.
Maximum Minimum prev. 24 hrs. prev. 24 hot.
Prev. 24 hours.
1
2
3
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
14
15
10
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
80 02 inch. 80-01 ..
3000
2995
30 00
80-00
80 00
30 00 8007
30-05 ..
3007 ..
8000 ..
80-10 8020 3010 ..
30-10 8010 ..
80-50
30 50 3010 3010 ..
3100 3010
30 10 ..
30-10 3010 3000 30 00 ., 30-05 ..
30-05 ..
80-10 ..
*
: r r: -i i- i- x T /? c c i	r- i r ; x x / i i- -1 x sc
77	78	75	89	72
84	86	70	79	75
75	74	71	78	73
83-5	78	79	78	73
91	79-5	71	82	70
91	72	81	97	75
89	70	71	91	80
91	78	7tt	103	75
89	80	76	106	71
79	78	71	103	#	79
89'5	77	77	89'5	71
86	75	?	77	100	76
81	76	76	102	76
89	76	74	102	74
90	78	77	102	76
88	74	?	77	103	77
80'5	75	1	78	107	78
77	,	70	1	75	93	75
84	7-	75	M2	7J
85	'	76	77	96	'	76
76	72 i 75	101	79
75	77	71	!( 0	73
82	78	76	89	76
84	77	77	92	76
85	78	77	HH	I	74
88	81	78	88	78
80	78	7G	93	72
82	77	76	88	75
83-5	70	76	S3	72
87'5	78	77	81	70
85-5	79	75	91	70
Highest Barometer reading	31-00 inches.
Lowest	29-95	,,
Highest temperature (in sii.i 1	91	degrees.
lowest	,.	,.	75	.,
Greatest rainfall in 21 hours	731 inches.
Total rainfall (Milsc-muj	25'18	,,
104
99 98
98
100 112
112 104
110
108
99 99
107
107
98 104
110
108
94
101
109
109
95
91
105 110 100
110
100 91
105
-24 01 87 09 66
1-09
20 01 (Hi 58 73 08 12 .28
139 ?98 05 38 so
7'31 2'96
17
2-55
24 12 201
03
05
109
Height of Hospital r.bjve sea level approx'.ni it-iy 75 fvet.
