
VOL. LVIL
No. 890.
Sarawak Gazette PRICE
KUCHING, Tuesday, November 1st, 1927.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette.
TUESDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1927.
Page.
Engagement: - T. B. Franklin-Alice Khoo ...	... 273
Arrival of His Highness the Rajah	...	278
Departure of His Highness the Tuan Muda ...	... 274
Notes	...	274
General Council ...	274
His Highness The Rajah's Birthday at Miri...	... 270
His Highness The Rajah's Birthday Sports ...	... *275
Malay Reception at Astana	...	...	... 278
Datu Bandar's visit to Malay States	...	...277
Sarawak Oilfields	...	...	... 278
S. S. Vyncr Brocke	...	...	...278
Apes' Sunrise Song ...	...	...	... 279
Tootle him with Vigour	...	...	... 279
Gymkhana Club Sports, Miri	...	...	...280
Football and Sporta at Mukah	...	...	281
School Football ...	...	...	... 282
Club Notes: -
Sarawak Club - Race Week Optional Pool Tournament 232
Optional Pool-Final ...	... 282
Race Week Billiard Tournament	... 282
Race Week Tennis Tournament	...288
Golf-Entries, Handicaps and Result of the Autumn Race Week Golf Com- petition ...	...	...	288
Special Notice ...	...	...	283
Results of Race Week Bowling Com- petition ...	...	...	283
Sarawak Turf Club - Committee 1927- 1928	... 283
Autumn Meeting 1927, Results ... 284 Result of Two Dollars unlimited sweep ...	...	...	286
Result of Two Dollars Cash Sweep-
First A Second Day ... ...286
Totalizator Dividends ...	...	-286
Winning Owners ...	...	286
Winning Ponies ...	...	287
Winning Jockeys ...	...	287
Correspondence:	...	...	...	... 287
Extracts from Monthly Reports: -
First Division	...	...	...	288
Sadong Colliery	..	...	...	289
Second Division	...	...	...	289
Third Division	...	...	...	290
Coast Division	...	...	...	292
Kuching Trade Returns	...	...	...	293
Passengers	...	...	... 294
Miri Trade Returns ...	...	...	...	295
Kuching Shipping ...	...	... 299
Kuching Market Price List	...	...	-	300
Miri Shipping ...	-	-	-	301
Kuching Shipping Returns ...	... ... 302
Engagement
An engagement is announced between Mr. Tan BENJAMIN FRANKLIN of the Government Medical Department, Kuching to Miss ALICE KHOO, third daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Paul Khoo Ah Chit, late Chief Clerk of Sadong Colliery, Sadong.
Arrival of His Highness the Rajah.
At 3 p.in. on the 10th October, a signal of two guns fired from the Fort announced that the s.s. Kuching, with His Highness the Rajah and the Dayang Leonora on board, had reached Pending. At about half past three the ship, flying the Rajah's pennant at the fore, came in sight round the bend of the river and the royal salute was fired from the Fort Battery.
The Chief Secretary and the Treasurer went on board to meet His Highness, whilst the rest of the community, including all the members of the General Council who had arrived on the previous day, waited in the Astana grounds where the Guard of Honour of Sarawak Rangers, under the command of Major Stuart Cunynghame, was drawn upon the lawn.
His Highness after landing, amidst a fusillade of crackers and to the sound of native music, inspected the Guard of Honour and proceeded to the Astana where a short reception was held. The Chief Secretary proposed the health of His Highness and, on behalf of all present, welcomed His Highness back to Sarawak.
His Highness was accompanied by Mr. J. A. H. Hardie, Mr. J. B. Archer and Mr. and Mrs. K. H. Gillan.
The Chinese community, in honour of His Highness' return, organized a firework display which was held on the Police parade ground on the nights of the 11th and 13th. A special stand was erected and was tastefully decorated with coloured buntings and brilliant electric lights.
Mr. Tan Sum Guan made a speech of welcome when His Highness, accompanied by His Highness the Tuan Muda, the Dayang Leonora and Dayang Anne, arrived at 9 p.m. on the 11th.
The fireworks display on the first night was preceded by an excellent torchlight tattoo by the Sarawak Rangers, and the Sarawak Rangers Band was also in attendance. With the moonlight and fine weather prevailing, a record crowd turned out to witness the display on both occasions.
274
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1927.
Departure of His Highness the Tuan Muda.
The departure of His Highness the Tuan Muda and the Dayang Anne in the middle of race week was a source of real regret to the whole community.
A representative gathering was present on board the s.s Kuching, which left for Singapore on the l6th, to say good-bye to His Highness and the Dayang.
His Highness was the guest of His Excellency the Governor of the Straits Settlements at Government House, Singapore, prior to the departure of the s.s. Malwa on the 21st for England.
VISITORS from the outstations for Race Week included Mr. and Mrs. H. D. Aplin, Mr. B. A. Trechman and Miss Trechman, Messrs. C. D. Adams, P. M. Adams, G. R. H. Arundell, E. O. Bruce, H. E. Cutfield, W. Cotterill, W. F. Dick, W. Harnack, J. J. Hill, R. D. Horton, H. H. Kortright, A. E. Lawrence, F. H. Pollard, J. C. Swayne, G. J. D. Walters, J. W. Whiteside and E. M. Woodward. On the night previous to their return to their stations, they were entertained at a most enjoyable "At Home" at the Astana, where dancing was indulged in till the early hours of the morning of the 22nd.
NOTES.
October,
A large number of guests enjoyed an informal dance given by Mr. H. B. Crocker, Acting Chief Secretary, at the Residency on the 1st.
MR. G. T. Bates, Acting Manager of The Borneo Company Limited, entertained a large and appreciative party at B.M.K. on the night of the 18th.
BY the s.s. Kuching, which arrived here on the 10th, there returned from leave Mr. J. A. H. Hardie, Commissioner of Trade and Customs and Shipping Master, Mr. K. H. Gillan, Postmaster-General, and Mr. J. B. Archer, who has been appointed District Officer, Upper Sarawak and Lundu as from the 22nd. Mr. K. H. Gillan was accompanied by Mrs. Gillan.
MR. Granville Roberts, Editor of the Malaya Tribune, Singapore, arrived on the 10th on a short visit to Kuching.
AN "At Home" was given by Mr. H. B. Crocker, Acting Chief Secretary, at the Residency on the 14th. Great regret was expressed at the unfortunate enforced absence, through indisposition, of the host, but nevertheless everyone present voted the occasion a very pleasant one.
ON the 8th Mr. O. Lang, Commissioner of Police, proceeded to Singapore to meet Mrs. Lang who is coming out from Home, and we understand that the couple will pay a short visit to Klang before returning to Sarawak.
MR. D. S. McLeod, Assistant Conservator of Forests, Fourth and Fifth Divisions, has been granted three months' vacation leave, and left Miri on the 28th for India. Mr. B. J. C. Spurway will take over temporarily his duties during his absence.
SMALLPOX has, we are sorry to say, again appeared in Kuching. So far only a few cases have been reported, and it is gratifying to remark that through the vigilance of the staff of the Health Department, the danger of an epidemic has been averted. The Divisional Officer, First Division, has issued a timely warning to the effect that any person failing to report or found to be concealing infected cases will be severely punished by fine or imprisonment.
General Council.
The twenty-second session of the General Council was convened at 9 o'clock on Monday morning, 17th October, 1927, by His Highness the Rajah.
The various persons called to the Council had arrived in Kuching previous to the arrival of His Highness in Sarawak.
The members of the Council, having taken their places in the dining room at Astana, His Highness mounted a dais and addressed the members in the Malay language. A full report of His Highness' speech will be found in the supplement to this issue.
At the completion of His Highness' speech, The Venerable the Archdeacon of Sarawak, Mr. A. B. Champion, administered the Oath of Allegiance to new European Members. The Datu Imam then administered the oath to the Datu Hakim, who subsequently swore in the new Native Members.
This ceremony being completed, His Highness extended an invitation to the members to attend a dinner at Astana at 7.30 in the evening.
The Council then adjourned and a photograph was taken of the members in front of the Astana.
Astana was illuminated at night and the various visitors were welcomed by a band of engkrumong.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1927.
275
After dinner a cinematograph entertainment was given in front of Astana, followed by a firework display.
On Tuesday, the 18th, the Datu Bandar invited to dinner, at his residence in Haji Taha Road, all the Native Members of the General Council and the headmen of the Kuching villages and the outstations and also the families of the various Native Members from outstations. The guests numbered over one hundred.
Haji Nawawi Abang Haii Suhaili Abang Suleiman .. Haji Ampuan Narudin Awang Abu Bakar..
Haji Taha
Tuan Khatib Tuan Imam Assistant Land Officer Tua Kampongs
The Members absent were:-
His Highness the Tuan Muda of Sarawak
H. L. Owen ..	.. Divisional Residents
F. F. Boult
F. A. W. Page-Turner
C. E. A. Ermen ..	.. Divisional Officer
O. Lang	..	.. Commissioner of Police
At the close of the dinner the guests adjourned to a pavilion which had been erected in front of the
house to witness a performance of the ronggeng dance which WAS given by Javanese and which proved very successful.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by the Dayang Leonora and the Chief Secretary, also paid a visit to the Datu's house and witnessed the per- formance.
The grounds of the Datu's house were gaily decorated with electric lights. The entertainment closed at 12 o'clock.
The staff of the Electrical Department are to be heartily congratulated upon for the fine work carried out in connection with the temporary decora- tive lighting arrangements at the Astana, the Residency and the Datu Bandar's residence.
The manner in which the Printing Office Staff executed the excellent printing of the Memoranda for the session of the General Council is also deserving of praise.
His Highness the Rajah's Birthday at Miri.
Miri celebrated His Highness the Rajah's birth- day in strenuous fashion. Starting at 7 am., at which time a ceremonial parade of the Police and Rangers took place, Europeans and Americans were kept busy until 12 midnight and great credit is due to the organizers for the success and punctuality with which the various programmes were carried out. His Highness the Rajah's health was drunk by a large gathering at the "Residency" at 11 a.m. The weather, although tempered by several showers, on the whole was kind and en- abled some excellent performances to be made in the sports, of which perhaps the outstanding events were the success of Ager in the Hurdles which
secured for him the Championship of the Meeting, the running of Francis and Jelf in the quarter and half mile respectively and Parry's long jump. The relay race, was won by the G.C.M. from the M.R.C. and Police and Rangers who finished in the order aforementioned. In the evening a bridge drive took place.
Next week Miri entertain the Rugger Team from the Duke of Wellington's Regiment stationed in Singapore. - (Contributed).
The Members present were:-
H. B. Crocker A. E. Lawrence
A. A. Rennie
H.D. Aplin
Major 8. Cunynghame J. A. H. Hardie
C. D Adams
F. H. Kortrigbt .. H. H. Kortrigbt .. W. F. de V. Skrine.. J. O. Swayne J. B. Archer P. M. Adams E. M. Marjoribanks K. H. Gillan Abang Haji Abdillah Abang Haji Halil .. Abang Haji Morshidi Inchi Abu Bakar .. Inchi Mohamad Zin Pemancba Raman.. Mohamad Udin Haji Azahari Haji Abdullah Pengeran Mohamad Haji Abdul Rashid Pengeran Haji Matusin Haji Moasilli Haji Buassan Pengeran Mohamad Haji Ahmad Orang Kaya Baja .. Mohamad Marali ..
Haji Metahir Abang Bujang Pengeran Haji Mohamad Abang Haji Mohidean Abang Abdul Gapor Abang Matalip Abang Madaut Abang Enjah Bujang bin Anchi ..
Abang Zin bin Abang Arip Abang Omar bin Abang Arip Haji Bahaudin ..
Tuankn Drahmnn bin T. Zin Abang Hamdan Abang Haji Spi-ee..
.. Chief Secretary .. Divisional Residents
Treasurer
Divisional Officer
Commandant. S. Rangers Com. of Trade & Customs District Officers
Principal Medical Officer Postmaster-General Datu Bandar Datu Imam Datu Hakim Supreme Council Member Malay Magistrate Datus
Native Officers
His Highness the Rajah's Birthday.
ATHLETIC SPORTS.
His Highness the Rajah's Birthday Sports took place on Monday, 26th September, on the S.P.G. ground.
They were quite a success in spite of the fact that the "going" was very trying for the competitors, especially in the jumping events, owing to the heavy rain that had fallen daily for the whole week preceding the sports. On the actual day the weather was quite fine until about 4 p.m. after which it rained continuously. This did not, however, damp the ardour of the competitors and some very keen races were witnessed, one of the best being the quarter mile open to Rangers, Police and Fire Brigade, when Pa-ee of the Police beat Ismail of the Rangers on the post, having been led the whole distance. Special mention should also be made of the Pole Jump, Kheng Hai of the Monopolies won this easily with a record jump, and the runner up and 3rd and 4th men all jumped well above the average too, this in spite of an exceedingly greasy pole and the sodden state of the ground.
The Lau Chen Hiang Shield for boys of four feet six inches and under and the Victor Ludorum Shield were both won by the Hokkien Free School and St. Thomas' were runners up for both.
A very cheery note was struck by the Sourabava Jolly Minstrel Band. This band consists entirely of local talent from one of the large kampongs across the river; they gave a really good performance and deserve every encouragement.
276
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, B27.
After an enjoyable afternoon's entertainment the Dayang Anne presented the prizes The Data Bandar and Mr Tan Sum Guan botn delivered short well phrased speeches, wishing on behalf of all present, many happy returns of the day for His Highness tire Rajah and thanking His Highness the Tuan Muda for honouring the Sports with his presence and the Dayang Anne for presenting the prizes. The Datu Bandar then called for three hearty cheers for His Highness the Rajah, followed by three more for His Highness the Tuan Muda.
His Highness the Tuan Muda, in replying on behalf of the Dayang Anne and himself, expressed much pleasure at the inauguration of the Annual Sports, as it was not only a splendid institution for the schoolboys and other competitors, but also it was a fine opportunity for all the various races of people living in Kuching to gather together as one large happy family in order to celebrate their Rajah's Birthday.
Many thanks are due to Mr. Choo Ah Hian, who ran the sideshows with great success, to Messrs. S. Gawing. L. Teck Whatt and Kueh Choo Seng, who managed the job of barkeepers very well indeed, to all the Europeans. Chinese. Malays, and Indians who subscribed so generously and to the Judges, Starters and Stewards for the hard work they put in at the Sports, whilst special thanksare due* to Messrs. E. Howell, Tan Sum Guan and Abang Suleiman, who were again entirely in- despensable to the organising of these Sports.
The Official results are as follows :
t. too yards, open to any Government Clerk.
i John Chong Wireless.
2 Harry ... Medical.
2.	IOO yards. Schoolboys, 4 feel 6 inches and under.
1.	Eng Seng	Hokkien free School.
2.	Bunchol	St. Thomas' School
3.	Putting the weight, open to an Govt. Servant.
1.	Nata Singh ... Sarawak Police.
2.	Chengki ...	" Rangers.
4.	50 yords. Schoolboys, 4 feet and under.
1.	Seng Chong ... St. Thomas' School.
2.	Wah Sin ... St Joseph's School.
5.	Long Jump, open to any Govt Servant.
1	. Pa-ee ... Sarawak Police.
2	John Chong Wireless
6.	too yards, open to Schoolboys, 5 fe- t and under.
1.	Teck Guan ... St Thomas' School.
2.	Teck Ann ... Hokkien Free School.
7.	100 yards, open to any Schoolboy.
1.	xl van Joon	... bt. Joseph's School.
2.	Beng Huat ... Hokkien FreeSchool 8. 100 yards, open to Mercantile ( lerks.
I Eskoto ... Borneo Co., Ltd.
3.	Eddie Lim ... Steamship Co
9- 350 yar s. School joys, 4 feet 6 inches and under.
I Eng Seng ... Hokkien Free School'
2. Thos Chai ... St Joseph's School.
10.	Suck ' ournament, open t all comers.
1	. Bodol ... Sarawak Rangers.
2	Mohd. Kawi ...	"
11.	250 yards, Sch olboys, 5 fe-t and under.
1.	Teck Guan ... St. Thomas' School.
2.	Wahap ... Govt Lay School.
12	Egg and Spoon Race Girls only.
1	. Hope Ong St. Mary's School.
2	Ah Hong ... Min Teck School.
13	Quarter Mile Race, open to any Schoolboy.
1	. Nyan Joon ... St. Joseph s School.
2	Kiang Eng ... Hokkien Free School.
14.	Mile, open to Govt. and Mercantile Clerks.
1.	Eskoto ... Borneo Co , Ltd.
2.	Jaw Joo ... Govt. Workshop.
15.	Pole Jump, open lo a'.l comers.
1.	Kheng Hai Govt. Monopolies.
2.	Agin	... Sarawak Rangers.
16.	Hurdle Race, open to all comers.
1.	Bujang . Sarawak Rangers.
2.	Harry	... Medical.
17.	Hurdle Race, open to all Schoolboys.
1.	Beng Huat ...	Hokkien Free School.
2.	Edwin	...	St Thomas' School.
18 1/4 Mile, open to Rangers, Police & Fire Brigade.
1.	Pa-ee	...	Sarawak Police.
2.	Ismail	...	" Rangers.
19.	Potato Race, open to Schoolboys.
1.	Edwin	St Thomas' School.
2.	Sen Siong	Hokkien Free School.
20.	50 yards, Vaterans Race.
1.	Sergt Nukah ... Sarawak Rangers.
2.	" Empan ...	"
21.	75 yards, open to School Girls.
1	Tan Gek Kim ... Min Tek School.
2	Rantai ... St. Mary's School.
22.	Bun on string competition, Schoolboys, 4 feet and under.
1.	Eng Kee ... Hokkien Free School.
2.	William	... St. Thomas' School.
23.	Obstacle Race, open to all comers.
1.	Anis	... Sarawak Police.
2.	Bujang "
24.	Tug of-War, open to Fire Brigade, Rangers, Govt. Shipping and Malay Police.
1.	Rangers.
2.	Police.
Re ult of the Victor Ludorum Shield.
Points given in inter-school events Nos. 2.4.6.7.9.11.13.17. (Two for a first and one for a second).
Won by Hokkien Free School ... 9 points.
Second St Thomas' School ...8
Third St Joseph's School	6
Fourth Govt. Lay School	1 point.
Result of the Lau Chen Hiang Shield.
Points given in inter-school events Nos. 2.4.9. (Two for a first and one for a second).
Won by Hokkien Free School ... 4 points.
Second St. Thomas' School . 3	"
Third St. Joseph's School ... 2
S. T. ENNION, Honorary Secretary, Sports Committee.
Malay Reception at Astana.
At the invitation of His Highness the Tuan Muda and the Dayang Anne, the Malay Community of Kuching gave an entertainment at Astana on 5th October.
The entertainers are to be congratulated on producing such a good programme at such short notice.
Programme.
0 Buka main budak-budak As- tana
1	Inchi Abu Bakar and Inchi Mohamad Zin	..
2	Mohamad Arbi dan Mohd. Sudin
3	Abang Suleiman
4	Tu&tiku Mohamad
5	Abang Haji Suhaili (Tuan Imam)
6	Haji Montaba ..
7	Haji Dris
Lagn Ampai setankai bunga
Suchi bati membri selamat
Gendang lama dan tari lama
Sampan di-kayoh dan nyanyi sela- mat berlayar
Lakon radat
Gendang prampuan dan tari
Lakon siti Zubaidah
Lakon hadrah
THE HA KAWA K GAZETTE. NoVEMBI R 1, 1927.
PerAan
8	Mohamad A lay
9	Haji Haaaim, Hatok
10	Haji Hnaaiin, Kampong Lin- lang
11	Bujang
12	Brahim
13	Haji Nawnwi	..
14	Haji llamini, Kampong No. 6 dan Hraliman. Kampong No. 6
Knud Pio
I Chtuitoh Mania
2 Chatigkay Nona
8 A"am l'aya
tian.
Mainau M-man di Smnboh Barlanda bndak bndak
Lakon tepong la war malayu
Oandang orang Sungoi Bedi) bi-
Har dan Sungei Bedil kechil
Gendang pratnpiian
Extra Tunis
Manyadiakan rabana pakai bar- gen tin ng
* Sarampang Lent
6 Saleudaug Mayatig
6 Krone bong
The Datu Bandar's Visit to Malay States.
Di bawah ini lah kenyataan pratian dan preksaan aaya di atas hal Tanam Tanaman dan lain lain penghidopan orang di dalam Tanah Simananjong Malayu dan Negri yang berdekat di situ. Ada pon kenyataan ini sambar sambaran mata saja, dan jika ada pon preksaan saya tiada chukop trang nya, yaitu kerna sendiri ada korang faham di alas hal di preksa, jadi tiada lah terkluar atau terfikir apa apa juga yang patut di tanya bertambah pula tempoh nya kurang panjang, ya lah jadi kenyataan ini boleh buat tikal saja, dan jika korang chukop atau korang trang atau pon berseliseh sidikit kenyataan ini saya mita maaf lah kapada Tuan dengan kerna yang sudah tersebot terlibeh dahulu.
Permulaan saya bersama Dato Haji Moasili, Limbang, dan Abang Hamdan, Sundar, brangkat ka Singapura pada 23 hari bulan July tahun 1927. Di Singapura segra pergi berjumpa Tuan H. Gill menyampai kan surat Tuan E. S. Holl, kerna Tuan H. Gill itu lah membri tau Tuan Tuan kapala kerjaan di Tanah Simananjong Malayu. Bila Tuan H. Gill sudah siap semoa hal itu serta pukol "Wireless" lalu lah saya brangkat ka Kuala Lumpur.
Pada 29th July ada satu termasha di Kuala Lumpur yaitu pertunjokan Tanaman dan Dagang Dagangan di perbuat di dalam kampong kampong (Agri-Horticultural Show). Pergi lah saya malihat Pertunjokan itu serta membawa surat Tuan Holl kapada Tuan D. H. Grist, Com. Dig. Agr., dan Tuan H. W. Jack, B.A., D.Sc., Tuan H. Gill pon ada juga membri surat menuju kapala kapala Pertunjokan itu. Banyak lah pertulongan Tuan Tuan yang tersebot sampai saya di kenalkan nya kapada Mentri Mentri Malayu. Dia orang pon sedang chukop tulong tunjokan apa apa juga yang handak di lihat dan preksa.
Maksot saya pergi ka Tanah Simananjong Malayu handak pratikan aturan Tanaman Padi, jadi saya habarkan maksot itu kapada Tuan H. W. Jack, suatu kapala Skolah Tanaman di Negri S'kutuan Malayu. Sedang lah suka Tuan itu serta chukop pertulongan dia sampai di suroh nya Yang Mulia Raja Mahmood, saorang yang ahli fasal Tanam Tanaman buat manunjok dan membri tau apa apa juga yang saya suka preksa serta di bri herti semoa yang di tanya. Dalam Selangor chukop banyak tempat di pergi tatapi pertama nya Kebon Tanaman Prentah di Serdang (The Government Experimental Garden). Demikian itu juga di Perak, Pulo Pinang, Kedah sampei ka Siam; balik lagi ka Negri Sembilan, Malacca, Muar dan Batu Pahat.
Ada juga saya pergi ka Skolah Tanaman (The Agricultural School) di Malacca di bawa oleh Tuan J. Fairweather, N.D.A., U.D.A. Banyak lah bagos atoran nya dan plajaran buda buda itu berfaidah benar. Saya fikir kalau di Negri kita di buatkan Skolah sibagai itu baru lah orang kita jadi bangon dan bergerak otak nya. Tanaman Ta- naman yang lain di preksa juga tatapi yang di indahkan betol lah hal Padi sebab saya suka mau tau apa betha atoran di situ dengan Negri kita.
Saya prati di atas hal Padi Bukit kapada tahun yang pertama libeh korang juga simacham sini tatapi saya bacha di dalam book hal Padi yang di perbuat oleh Tuan H. W. Jack, tempat itu di huma lagi lain tahun dan tahun yang datang. Rupa nya boleh di pakai dua tiga kali satu tempat, tatapi di trang oleh nya perolehan tahun yang kadua dan katiga ada kurang. Siompama nya tahun pertama dapat 350 gantang satu acre, yang kadua dapat 250 dan katiga 150 sahaja. Betol perolehan tahun kadua dan katiga ada banyak kurang tatapi patut
di timbang juga kerjaan nya pon banyak kurang, sebab kerjaan tebang menebang dan kekas mengikas tiada lagi, tinggal tebas rumput sahaja.
Yang tentu skali berbetha atoran nya Padi rapak hnkan atoran kerjaan sahaja berbetha. perkekas kerjaan pon berlainan. Di Negri kita di katakan rapak yaitu tanah yang jadi lichak kerna ayer hujan. di Tanah Simananjong Malayu, rapak itu oleh di perbuat siperti pegong yang chitek yang boleh mcngandongkan ayer. Di sini kita simata mata berharap kapada ayer hujan tatapi di Tanah Simananjong Malayu orang tiada harap hujan sahaja kerna tiada tentu. Maka di situ Prentah Prentah nya buatkan parit ayer di mana mana juga tempat tanah yang rata yang di kasingkan tempat menanam Padi. Demikian lah yang di adakan oleh nya jadi orang menanam Padi rapak tiada watir sontok ayer musim kemaro. Dan lagi atoran tali ayer itu ada dengan pintu nya jadi ayer tiada dapat masok kadalam bendang Padi terlibeh dari yang di kahandak. Maka di sini tanah rapak kalo sudah di huma satu kali musti di tinggalkan lima anam tahun sampai jadi jiramai baru di huma lagi kerna takot romput demikian juga tanah bukit. Di Negri Negri yang tersebot itu orang nya berhuma tiap tiap tahun di satu tempat sebab ada atoran memunoh romput, serta di buatkan jadi baja, dan lagi bila menanam anak Padi di bri baja juga jadi jika tanah di huma korang gemok baja itu ada bantukan. Dan lagi bendang Padi itu berpetak petak dan batas nya (tanah tampan ayer keliling persigi bendang) dua atau tiga kaki lebar nya dan di situ lah terlalu bagos tempat menanam Jagong, Kladi, Obi Kledek, Obi Kayu dan Sayor, maka di sini barang tanaman sibagai itu berchampor dengan Padi.
Dua macham perkara berhuma sudah saya chritakan dan skarang tinggal lagi satu. yaitu atoran pakai Tenggala (plough)-Tanah kring yang rata atau kaki kaki bukit tiada tinggi churam nya boleh di humakan atoran pakai tenggala. Ada pon yang di katakan Tenggala yaitu ada simacham jintra bermata besi baja di tarek dengan lembu atau kerbau buat mengali serta membalik tanah yang handak di tanam Padi. Habis dari pada itu tanah itu di sikat spaya rata pechah nya dan apa bila semoa sudah siap baru di tabor tomboh Padi lalu di sikat lagi sahingga manutop tomboh Padi yang di tabor tadi.
Saya ada dapat book atoran menanam Padi bukit dan rapak yang di perbuat oleh Tuan H. W. Jack. Kuala Lumpur, dan surat Osaha Menanam Padi yang di bri oleh Yang Mulia Raja Mohamad, Kedah. Saya fikir kalau surat surat itu di turon pada Malayu
278
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1927.
dan di bagi kapada Pasisir Pasisir kita tentu skali besar faidah nya, spaya siapa siapa yang rajin dan gram hati boleh choba kan atoran baik dan senang bertambah pulak perolehan pon libeh yang tlah di pakai oleh orang di Simananjong Malayu, Tanah Slat (Straits Settlements) Kedah, Siam dan Johore. Ada juga saya preksakan hal kebon buah buah, fasal damar dan atoran menyangkok Getah Para spaya boleh mendapat libeh susu nya.
Dari hal changkok buah buahan ada senang mendapat sebab Tuan F. R. Mason, Pulo Pinang, ada menonjok dengan saya tempat nya dan dia pon suka mau tulong di atas hal itu. Tuan F. Birkinshaw pon ada membawa malihat changkok buah buahan di Kuala Kangsar. Dari fasal membli changkok itu ada senang mendapat sebab dua dua Tuan itu ada suka mahu tulong. Fasal changkok Getah Para saya ada lihat di Kedah di bawa oleh Che Mohamed Amin, Junior Agricultural Assistant, Province Wellesley. Saya ada pesan book atoran menyangkok yang di perbuat oleh Tuan Major Gough.
Damar Mata Kuching yang di sibot kita di sini padu nya dapat dari pokok kayu Chengal. Rupa nya pokok Chengal itu di pahat spaya damar boleh kluar. Saya ada dapat dari Yang Mulia Raja Mahmood book atoran mengambil Damar serta dengan gambar nya yang di perbuat oleh Agricul- tural Department, Kuala Lumpur. Banyak lagi book book lain di kasih oleh dia semoa nya fasal Worta Perosaha-an Tanah. Maka dengan sebagitu kamujoran dan senang perjalanan saya dari sibuah Negri ka sabuah, dari Singapura sampai ka Siam dengan tiada sidikit ganggu tentu skali saya tiada lupa pertulongan yang sudah di trima.
Hal di Singapura saya banyak trima kasih kapada Tuan H. Gill, dan kapada Consul General Negri Holland yang membri hezin serta Passport buat masok ka Rhio. Di Selangor saya trima kasih kapada Tuan D. H. Grist, Tuan H. W. Jack, Tuan B. Bunting, N.D.A., dan Yang Mulia Raja Mahmood, Yang Mulia Raja Mahdi dan Inchi Abdul Razak, Datu Stia di Raja Klang. Dalam Perak saya trima kasih kapada The Hon'ble Tuan H. W. Thomson, British Resident, The Hon'ble the Raja Hilir, C.M.G., Yang Mulia Raja Bendahara, Tuan F. Birkinshaw, Agricultural Field Officer, Taiping, Tuan C. Bazell, Head-master Malay College, Kuala Kangsar, Tuan N. K. Bain, District Officer, Kuala Kangsar, dan Che Mohamed Osman bin Hitam, Junior Agricultural Assistant, Che Mohamad Nor, Agricultural Officer, Parit Buntar, Inchi Abdul Majid, Co-operative Officer, Parit Buntar. Di Pulo Pinang trima kasih kapada Tuan F. R. Mason, Agricultural Field Officer, dan Che Mohamed Amin, Junior Agricultural Assistant, Che Mohamed Usop bin Sultan Meedin dan Inchi Abdul Jalel bin Osman. Di Kedah trima kasih kapada Yang Mulia Raja Mohamed dan Inchi Abdul Rahman, Pagawai Sarikat. Di Malacca trima kasih kapada The Hon'ble Mr. R. Crickton, Resident Councillor of Malacca, Mr. J. Fairweather, Dato Demang Haji Abdul Ghani, Inchi Hashim bin Abdul Ghani.
Yang tersebot dalam surat ini lah kenyataan perlihatan dan periksaan saya dari Johore sampai ka Siam, Kedah dan Pulo Pinang, dan saya harap Negri kita mupok bangon mengikot atoran orang yang sudah di uji dan terpuji.
A. H. ABDILLAH, Datu Bandar, Sarawak.
Sarawak Oilfields.
- -
REMARKABLE DEVELOPMENT AT Miri.
An interesting account of the development of the oilfields in Sarawak was recently contributed to the "British Malaya'' by Mr. C. Hose, who was largely responsible for the successful establishment of the oil industry in Sarawak. The writer recalls that in 1909 an agreement was entered into whereby the Anglo-Saxon Petroleum Co. was granted a con- cession to work petroleum in Sarawak for a term of seventy-five years, and a clause was inserted in the agreement to the effect that a minimum amount of 10,000 tons of liquid fuel should be kept in storage for the use of the British Navy. The initial diffi- ctilties surmounted, there were many others to be met and overcome before the profitable working of the Miri oilfield was permanently established. First, the actual foundation of the scheme was a geological survey, an accurate knowledge of the territory, and the necessity of exactly ascertaining the most suit- able site to choose for the primary activities. The certain knowledge of the presence of oil WAS not, in itself, a guarantee that the quantity produced would be sufficient to warrant the risk and expenditure necessarily involved at the outset. The finally selected area mainly consisted of large patches of untrodden jungle, unexplored swamps and sparsely inhabited territory. To bring about a complete transformation of this forest-clad wilderness was the necessary first objective of the newly-formed com- pany- the Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd. After a few years of strenuous endeavour, a wonderful change was apparent. Miri, a small unheard-of fishing station with a few hundred Mohammedan inhabitants, de- veloped into an important centre from which enor- mous supplies of petroleum are obtained. The town is situated near the mouth of the Miri river, about fourteen miles along the coast from the mouth of the Barmn river. Small brunch streams are numer- ous, and the Miri river serves as a controlling factor in the working of the oilfields.
Not only has Miri developed into a prosperous oilfield producing crude material of the first quality, but it has made great strides in improved methods of dealing with the natural product. Refineries and tank storage, fitted with some of the finest machinery, have been installed tl convenient points in the immediate vicinity of the wells and at Lutong, be- tween the mouths of the Miri and Baram rivers. An ice plant, an electric station, and a mineral water plant are only a few of the additions to the increasing vitality of the oilfield. Machine shops for the manufacture of equipment are becoming nu- merous. An efficient wireless and telephone service is installed and, in a general way, Miri is now one of the most scientifically effective centres of oil pro- duction.-(China Express and Telegraph.)
S.S. "Vyner Brooke."
We understand that the new steamer building for the Sarawak Steamship Company, Limited, is being launched by Her Highness the Ranee at Leith on 10th November, 1927. The following is a brief description of the ship.
Builders Messrs. Ramage & Ferguson of Leith.
Length over all ...
Breadth
Moulded depth ...
Maximum draught " speed ...
Economic speed ...
...	251	feet
...	41	,,	2"
...	17	"	7"
...	16	"
12-13 knots
... 10-11 ,,
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1927.
279
ENGINES.
Twin screw
Cylinders 16" - 27" - 44" - 30 inch stroke.
Boilers 14' 9" X 11' 6" by Barclay, Curle & Co. Working pressure 180 lbs.
She is designed with a straight stem and round stern. Her bows are well flared. She is fitted with 10" bilge keels and is schooner rigged.
She is being built to Lloyds classification 100 AI.
All steel is British.
She has six watertight bulkheads so arranged that a double bottom is unnecessary.
She is flush decked with 'tween decks. All decks are steel, sheathed with 21/2 -inch teak. Height between all decks 7' 6".
The main deck has been kept as clear as possible of all houses to leave ample space for deck passengers. Accommodation on this deck is provided for crew, situated forward, and clerks, stewards, boys, etc., aft. On this deck is situated the refrigerating machinery with a cold store room designed for temperature to be maintained at 2o below freezing point.
On the upper deck cabin accommodation is provided for 44 first class passengers situated amidships. At the forward end of this accommodation is a large saloon 40'X24'. All tables are folding so as to allow for ample space if there are not a full complement of first class passengers. Dining tables are all separate, each table seating four persons.
This saloon is panelled to the full height with polished mahogany and is provided with twenty large windows of Laycock type, these are easily opened and locked at any height to suit the convenience of passengers.
All furniture is of mahogany, the chairs being of chippendale design with leather seals, the seats are reve- rsible and have cane on the underside.
In the saloon are two houses containing a pantry and a bar.
The saloon is lighted by means of ten ceiling lights, having cut crystal bowls, it is ventilated by means of six ceiling fans of 30" diameter. Further individual lighting is provided by means of polished brass standards, with silk shades, at each table.
There are, aft of the saloon, six cabins, four of two berths each and two of three berths. Entrance to these is directly from the after end of the saloon. Amidships are situated two bathrooms and two lavatories.
The passage way leading to these cabins is panelled on both sides and has a mahogany dado round the boiler casing. All this accommodation is insulated.
Situated aft of the engine room casing are eight, four-
berth state rooms with five bath rooms and four lavatories. The upper bunks in this accommodation are folding thus leaving ample space when used by two passengers only.
Ail cabins are fitted with wash basins and water is laid on direct; also all waste pipes lead to the sea.
The bathrooms and lavatories are white tiled throughout; bathrooms are fitted with twelve-inch bracket fans and lavatories are ventilated by means of exhaust fans.
A handsome staircase leads from the after end of the saloon to the shade deck. On this fleck are situated the cabins de luxe. Special attention has been given to these cabins, they are panelled throughout with mahogany and maple and are carpeted; all furniture is leather covered and fittings are of bronze; these two special cabins are furnished with brass bedsteads. A comfortable private sitting room is also provided for use of passengers using this suite.
Aft of this accommodation is ample deck space providing room for two games of deck quoits and deck tennis for those who need exercise.
It is intended to furnish the after end of the shade deck with rattan furniture thus making a comfortable verandah for use of passengers.
Access to this verandah is obtained by means of ladders on either side leading from the upper deck.
As regards cargo, large hatches have been provided, and at each hatch are placed two cranes designed to lift three tons each. This should ensure speedy handling of cargo. A special heavy derrick with winch is provided, designed to lift twenty tons. This is a considerable advancement on the lifting capacity of the present steamers engaged in this trade.
The vessel is fitted with wireless and has a full supply of lifeboats, rafts and lifebelts for six hundred and fifty persons.
Apes' Sunrise Song.
PERFECT RHYTHM AND UNISON IN COMMUNITY CHORUSES.
The wonderful sunrise song of the apes, their varying calls, and harem life, formed the subject of a fascinating address to the Zoological Section by Mr. H. N. Ridley, of Kew, who was bead of a tropical zoo at Singapore for 15 years.
Mr. Ridley told his hearers that the habits of animals in a tropical zoo were wholly different from those of the inhabitants of the Regent's Park Zoo.
"There is the wonderful community singing of apes like the gibbons." Mr. Ridley continued. "They are famous for their song at sunrise, and the marvellous thing is that the notes they utter run up and down the scale perfectly.
"To hear them singing in unison across a valley is a weird experience.
"The language of monkeys can be very expressive indeed, they make a noise like 'krah,' which the natives say means 'I see a man,' but they make quite a different cry to represent 'I see a tiger,' and in the forest camps this cry of warning wakens you like an alarm clock.
WHERE MIGHT IS RIGHT.
"In a tropical zoo each male monkey has a harem of seven wives. If we put a female monkey into a cage of mixed monkeys it is the signal for an attack on her by all members of her sex, just us the males would be similarly hostile if one of their sex were introduced.
"But let the intruding male win the battle and he becomes king automatically. He has the pick of the harems and is permitted to take first choice of all food.
"The result is that they over-eat, and I had two king monkeys die from this cause.
"When the king becomes old there is a fierce fight with the younger monkeys in which the king is usually slain."-
(Evening Standard.)
Tootle him with Vigour.
- -
An American Missionary has forwarded to the "Granite Cutters' Journal" a copy of "Rules of the Road in English," which have been posted at the Central Police Station in Tokio.
The rules are as follows: -
1.	At the rise of the hand policeman stop rapidly.
2.	Do not pass him by or otherwise disrespect him.
3.	When a passenger of the foot hove in sight, tootle the horn. Trumpet at him. Melodiusly at first, but if he still obstacles your passage, tootle him with vigour, and express by word of mouth the warning, "Hi! Hi!"
280
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1927.
4.	Beware the wandering horse that lie shall not take fright as you pass him by. Do not explode the exhaust box at him as yon pass him by. Go soothingly by.
5.	Give big space to the festive dog that shall sport in the roadway.
6.	Go soothingly in the grease mud, as there lurks the skid demon.
7.	Avoid tanglement of dog with your wheel spokes.
8.	Press the brakes of the foot as you roll round the corner to save collapse and tie up.
Gymkhana Club Sports, Miri.
As in past years, 20th September, the birthday of His Highness the Rajah, was celebrated with a general holiday, and the 5th Annual Sports Meeting of The Gymkhana Club was held in the afternoon.
After the reception at the Residency and presumably fortified by numerous cheery tiffin parties the spectators arrived on the padang only to be met with gloomy skies and a persistent drizzle.
The first outstanding event was the 100 yards championship which was won by McDonald in the record time of 10.25 secs. Considering the wet state of the grass track, this is a remarkable time effort.
The long jump produced a very keen contest between Parry and Webster, the former winning with a jump of 20' 8" beating his last year's record by two inches.
The quarter mile open race for the Resident's Cup was well won by Francis of the Miri Recreation Club, with Webster a good second.
At the interval everyone withdrew to the Rest House to partake of the excellent fare provided by the ladies and to argue about the possible winners of the Championship Cup. Webster and Ager appeared to be the favourites, the latter having piled up a useful total of "place points "
After tea the weather apparently gave up trying to be good, and became steadily' worse much to the joy of the Officials, who had to wander about in the rain. Perhaps next year the Committee will arrange to have a fine day, if only in their own interests.
The Relay Race was somewhat easily won by the G.C.M. team from the teams representing the M.R.C. and the Rangers.
The Pole Jump was distinctly disappointing, Ager being the only competitor to clear the necessary six feet to qualify for points, thus bringing him well within reach of the Championship. He then proceeded to make certain of it by winning the 120 yards hurdles from Rust on the tape
In the half mile Jelf revenged his defeat by Grover last year by setting a hot pace and winning comfortably, Grover being second.
A new vent this year was a Consolation 220 yards' handicap race for those who had not succeeded in winning a prize. Willers, a dark horse, received an extremely generous handicap and won easily.
Space does not permit us to mention the numerous other events in detail, outstanding features being Joe Long who putted a pretty weight and McGowan who tripped a dainty veteran's victory.
At the conclusion of the Meeting, Mrs. Richards very kindly presented the prizes to the successful competitors and the Championship Cup to Ager, who well deserved his most popular triumph.
During the meeting a satisfactory tote was run by Mr. Haley, 10% going to the London Hospital Fund. Thus ended a somewhat moist but most enjoyable meeting.
1. Throwing Cricket
Ball	...M. A. Rust.
2.
100 Yards	... 1st D. McDonald.
G.H Webster.
2nd J. P. Ager.
H. Blatcher.
3.
Slow Bicycle	... C. F. Bateson.
4.
High Jump	... 1st J. P. Berkin.
2nd J. P. Ager.
3rd R. C. Howie.
5.
Drop Kick, Rugger
Ball	... M. A. Rust.
6.
Long Jump	... 1st B. B. Parry.
2nd G. H. Webster. 3rd J. P. Ager.
7.
Putting Weight ... 1st J. J. Long.
2nd W. T. Corwin. 3rd I. F. Brown.
8.
220 Yards	... 1st G. H. Webster.
2nd D. McDonald.
3rd H. Blatcher.
9.
Pillow Fight on Pole	... J. Leverton.
10.
Obstacle	... 1st R. McLure
Smith. 2nd R. E. Norelius. 3rd H. S. Mans-
bridge.
11.
Veterans	... 1st M. McGowan.
2nd L. R. Brown.
12.
Quarter Mile	... 1st S. X. Francis.
2nd G. H. Webster.
3rd Fung Kam Thong.
13.
Three Legged	... C. F. Bateson and
J. Leverton.
14.
Relay	... J. P. Ager, D.
McDonald, B. B.
Parry, and G. H. Webster.
15.
Sack Race	... 1st M. A. Rust.
2nd R. E. Norelius.
16.
Pole Jump	... J. P. Ager.
17.
Kicking Football
(Soccer)	... J. L. Andrews.
18.
Hurdles	... 1st J. P. Ager.
2nd M. A Rust.
3rd G. H. Webster.
19-
Half Mile	... 1st A. C. Jelf.
2nd B. M. Grover. 3rd D. McDonald. W. A. Beames.
R. J Bell.
W. T Corwin.
20.
Tug-of-War	N.S. Goddard.
... W.E. Grohosky.
W. E Heaton. R. E. Norelius. L. A. Toone.
21.
220 Yards' Consolation (Handicap)	... 1st C. Willers.
2nd E. F. Dennis.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1927
281
Football and Sports at Mukah.
20TH TO 26TH SEPTEMBER. 1927.
A football competition and Sports Day, organised by Mr. H.H. Kortright, the Acting Divisional Officer, was held at Mukah commencing on Tuesday, 20th September and ending with sports on His Highness the Rajah's birthday, 26th September.
So many teams entered for the football competition that it was necessary to play off the preliminary rounds during the week preceding the actual sports day, 26th September.
The new football field on the Green Road was used both for the football and sports ; throughout the week it presented a gay and animated appearance surrounded as it was by leaf attap langkos bedecked with flags and bright colours.
The teams were divided into two classes; those teams which had won in previous years being in Class A whilst those who had never won before were in Class B.
Four sets of silver medals were played for-two in each class.
The draw for the first round was as follows: -
Class A.	Class B.
Bintulu Vernacular School	Oya Kampong Kadir	Dalat	Kg. Teh R.C.M. Mukah Kg Tutus Government Kg. Haji Rioh Kg. Petanak	"Frank's" Team Kg. Petanak Kg. Abun 2nd Kg. Abun 1st R.C.M. Dalat The results may be briefly described as follows :-
First Day, 20th September.
Kampong Kadir beat Vernacular School, 4-0.
A fine game to watch with Kadir, a big strong side, worthy winners.
Kampong Tutus beat Kampong Teh, 3-0.
Not such a good game as the previous one, both teams tiring on the big ground.
Second Day, 21st September.
"Frank's" Team beat Kg. Haji Rioh, 2-0.
A very keenly contested game up to half time, in the second half the winners scored their two goals and lasted better than their opponents
Kampong Abun 2nd beat Kg Petanak, 1- 0.
A very fine fast game both sides going all out to the very end. Kampong Abun won somewhat luckily in the last minute of the match.
Third Day, 22nd September.
R. C. Mission Dalat beat Kampong Abun 1st 4-2-
A very keen game, the boys, though heavily out- weighted, lasted better than their opponents and this fact combined with very accurate shooting won them the match.
Dalat drew with R. C. Mission Mukah, 1-1.
A Class A match.
Very keenly fought out though in the final stages the Mission played up well and could do everything but score.
Fourth Day, 23rd September.
The draw for the second round of Class B resulted as follows: -
R.C. Mission Dalat Kampong Abun 2nd Kampong Kadir 1 "Franks" Team Kampong Tutus, a bye.
Kampong Kadir beat ''Frank's" team, 1-0.
A ding-dong struggle between the winners forwards and their opponent's defence.
Government beat Kampong Petanak, 8-0. Class A.
A very one-sided game but a word of praise should be given to the losers goalkeeper who by his fine play kept the score in the single figures.
Fifth Day, 24th September.
Bintulu beat Oya, 2-0. Class A, at 6.15 a.m.
A quick goal against them in the opening minutes discouraged Oya, who defended desperately in the final stages.
R. C. Mission, Mukah, beat Dalat, 2-1. Class A. Replay, at 7.20 a m.
A very fine fast game, play changing from one end to the other with astonishing rapidity.
The winners well deserved their success.
Kampong Abun 2nd beat R. C. Mission, Dalat, 2-0. at 4 p.m.
A fair game with the schoolboys holding their own all through the second half during which no goals were scored.
The school defence played a very plucky game.
Sixth Day, 25th September.
The draw for the second round of Class A resulted as follows
Government Bintulu R C Mission, Mukah, a bye.
Government beat Bintulu, 3-0.
A slow game played in a sea of mud. The winners obtained all their goals in the first half and were well held during the second.
Km pong Abun 2nd drew with Kampong Kadir, 1 -1.
Another mud fight with both teams going all out.
A fitting result to a very sporting game.
Seventh and Final Day, 26th September.
Kampong Abun 2nd beat Kampong Kadir, 2- 0, at 6 a.m.
A fine game with the winners having just that little bit more stamina which made all the difference on the heavy ground.
Both teams are reported to have slept on the ground overnight.
Final Class B.
Kampong Tutus beat Kampong Abun 2nd, 2-1.
The losers had very bad luck after playing four games in quick succession in drawing a fresh side who had had several days rest.
Final Class A.
Government beat R.C. Mission, Mukah, 2-0.
Played in a sea of mud with some parts of the sorely tried field under water this was a rough and tumble game with the winners easily superior.
The Government team was as follows :-Goal, J Chong; Backs, Sindu and A. Johnson; Half-Backs, Idi, Flaver Boo and Ah Thiam; Forwards, Tamby, Abu, Francis Lim, Chew Liang and Tali.
At the close of this match the sports prizes and football medals were presented and this ended a strenuous day for all.
NOTES.
The football competition aroused the greatest enthusiasm in the district and it says a great deal for the people that a crowd of some 700 gathered to watch a Class B match at 6 a.m.
The weather throughout the week was wretched and the ground during the finals was like a very waterlogged ploughed field, though it had worn well and in a few months time should be one of the best in the country. The sports were held on the football field on Monday, 26th September, commencing at 8 a.m.
282
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1927.
All the usual events were held and fortunately there was no rain in the morning and very considerable progress was made.
In the afternoon there was extremely heavy rain and it was not possible to commence at the scheduled time.
However, "fortune favours the brave" and, although starting in rain, the programme was carried out and finished in good time, the rain, ceasing just before the last few events.
Great enthusiasm was aroused throughout the day despite the weather and in the morning there
were some 2,000 spectators.
The thanks of all who enjoyed the football and sports are due to the Chinese community without whose financial aid nothing could have been accomplished, to those who refereed in football or judged in sports and last but not least to those who themselves participated in the events and who showed, with a few exceptions, such good sportsmanship and keenness - (Contributed.)
S. T. ENNION, Honorary Secretary,
Sports Committee.
Club News.
Sarawak Club.
School Football.
RACE WEEK OPTIONAL POOL TOURNAMENT.
The competition for the Tan Siang Kun Shields, which was played off on the Police Parade ground, was one of the most interesting affairs that has taken place in Kuching for a very long time.
It was expected that only the two schools with their own football grounds, i.e., St. Joseph's and St. Thomas', would compete, but to the surprise of everybody no less than seven schools entered for the Junior Shield.
The Juniors played with a size 3 ball and their time of pity was fifteen minutes each way. Some of the learns had a very good idea of the game although there was a general tendency for the whole team to follow the ball like a rugger scrum, but for an exhibition of pluck, endurance and sportsmanship these splendid little fellows take a lot of beating. In fact, judging from the showing the Juniors put up this year, some excellent play should be witnessed next year.
Only two teams entered for the Senior Shield, i.e., St. Thomas' and M. Joseph's, and they gave as good a display of football as has been seen m Kuching for many a long day. There was very little to choose between the two teams excepting that the St. Joseph's forwards appeared to be the slightly better combination of the two.
The finals took place on Saturday the 22nd October, the Juniors kicking off at 4.15 p.m. and the Seniors at 5 p.m. The Hokkien Free School and St. Joseph's are to be heartily congratulated on winning the Junior and Senior Shield respectively.
When the games were over Mrs. Champion kindly distributed the Shields. Mr. Tan Sum Guan made
KUCHING MEMBERS.
a short speech thanking Mrs. Champion for distributing the prizes and he also mentioned how grateful everybody must feel to Mr. Tan Siang Kim for presenting two such handsome Shields, thereby causing another step in the advancement of School Sports in this Country. He then called for three hearty cheers for Mr. Tan Siang Kim, this marking the close of a very enjoyable afternoon's entertainment.
The results were as follows: -
JUNIOR SHIELD.
First Round.
19th October, 1927.	St. Joseph's
Kwonig Min School
"	Yik Kwang School
St. Thomas'
20th October, 1927. Min Tok School Hokkien Free School
Thai Thoong School
St. Joseph's	4-0
St. Thomas'	1-0
Hokkien
Free School 2-0
Bye
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1927.
283
SPECIAL NOTICE.
1.	On 30th November next at 6 p.m. all the unclaimed clubs lying in the Golf Room will be sold by auction and the proceeds credited to the Sarawak Club Funds.
2.	No claims to ownership preferred after the time fixed for the auction will be recognized.
3.	The clubs will be divided into sets as far as possible and each set will be sold separately.
J. S. W. BEAN,
For Golf Sub-Committee.
RESULTS OF RACE WEEK BOWLING COMPETITION (NON-HANDICAP).
H. D. Aplin (Winner.) H. E. Cutfield
N. A. Middlemas
J. S. W. Bean J. P. Baird P. M. Adams
G. D. W. Frayling H. H. Kortright
G. R. H. Arundell G. T. Bates W. F. Dick C. D. Adams L. Gregory E. O. Bruce A. S. Lowe W. Harnack R. W. Chater R. C. Kay F. H. Pollard B. A. Trechman R. D. St. J. Horton G. J. D. Walters R. E. Le Sueur L. D. Kennedy B. J. C. Spurway J. B. Archer R. E. Edwards T. E. Walsh A. M. Forrest
Sarawak Turf Club.
COMMITTER 1927-28.
Kuching
Outstations
Election
Committee
H. B. Crocker J. A. H. Hardie Tan Sum Guan E. Parnell The Datu Bandar C. Fenwick
B. J. C. Spurway C. D. Adams P. M. Adams E. S. Holl Abang Suleiman
A. A. Rennie
Score. 349 342 326 322 812 296 293 290 254 252 245 234 227 225 224 223 222 220 220 214 197 194 194 189 186 178 165 165 151
284
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1927.
Sarawak Turf Club.
Autumn Meeting, 1927
The Autumn Meeting was held on 13th and 15th October in excellent weather. A slight shower fell on the second day. The meeting was put forward to enable His Highness the Tuan Muda and the Dayang Anne to be present before their return to Europe on the 16th.
Excellent racing was witnessed and the handicapp- ing was up to its usual high standard. There was no outstanding pony in any division as in the past, Sisit and Akal only, succeeding in catching the Judge's eye on both days.
Special mention must be made of Rajak, who look the prize awarded by the Club to the most successful jockey at the meeting with three first and six seconds. He rode in fifteen out of the seventeen races. Rajak rode his first winner in 1892, when he won the Con- solation Cup with His Highness the late Rajah's Milksop.
The Civil Service Cup went to the Datu Bandar's Sisit with two firsts, a second and a third.
The Tea Room arrangements were admirably carried out by Mrs. Chater and Mr. Banks as in the past, and the decorations were if possible better than ever. Both the Totes and the Cash Sweeps were popular, and $34,006 and $12,562 passed through them respectively during the two days. The Unlimited Cash Sweep on the Sarawak Cup was the largest so far promoted. The result of the draw will be found elsewhere.
RESULTS.
First Day: Thursday 13th October, 1927.
RACE NO. 1.-THE GRIFFIN STAKES.
Division IV (Griffins).-3 furlongs.
HORSES.
1 Radium
2 Jaih
3 Black Pirate ...
0 Jorrocks
0 Tai Hu
0 Typhoon
0 Shooting Star...
0 Seduan
OWNERS.	H'CAP.
Ong Kongsi	9	3 1/2 Kongsi Ampat 8 101/2 Mr. Tan Ah Kim 9 7 Messrs. Page-Turner.
Cutfield & Arundell 9 2 Mr. Law Chen Hiang 9 7 Chan Brothers	8	121/2
Law Kongsi	9	31/2
Mr. J. B. Archer 8 101/2
JOCKEYS.
Lohor
Biloi Salleh
Lundu Awg. Damit Uchek Bakar
Brahim
Radium made most of the running to win comfortably from Jaih by one and a half lengths. Black Pirate was third a length away. Shooting Star was fourth. Time 50 4/5 seconds.
RACE NO. 9.-THE BANKERS' PURSE.
Division III.-3 furlongs.
Hosses. OWNERS.	H'CAP. JOCKEYS.
1	Singa	... Mr. Ang Ong Chye	8 4
2	Tolin	... Haji Hassim	9 10
3	Osaha ... Brothers and Sona Kongai	9	3
0 White Wings... H. H. the Rajah 10 0
0	Mah Jongg	...	Mr. Hinway	9	3
0	Tony	...	Mr. E. Lim	8	9
0	Penghulu	...	Mr. F. H. Pollard	8	9
0	Ghalib	...	Mr. J.D. Walderson	9	7
0 Bagaimana ... Mr. E. O. Brnoe 7 12
Brahim Tabit
Bakar Mr. Spurway Salleh
Archunar Usop Chim Rajak
White Wings gave trouble at the post. At the fall of the flag Singa jumped off in front and led home to win by three lengths from Tolin. Osaha third a length away. Penghulu was fourth and Tony last. Time 50 2/5 seconds.
RACK NO. 3.-THE KUCHING STAKES.
HORSES.
Divisions II and III.-5 furlongs.
1 Sukbon
2 Sisit
3 Pegasus
Lee Mah
0 Adham 0 Penglima
0 Aladdin 0 Badad 0 Bang
OWNERS.
... Abang Suleiman 8 12
... The Datu Bandar 8 9
... Eng Guan Leong Kongai 8 12
... Messrs. T. Teck
Cheng & Wee Boon Chow 10 0
... The Datn Imam Tua 9 7
... Munn. T. Teck
Cheng & W. Boon Chew 9 8
... Triple Kongsi	8 4
... Badad Kongsi	8	2
... Sri Binta Amin	7	10)
H'CAP. JOCKEYS.
Brahim
Lohor
Mr. Spurway Tembam
Tabit Salleh Tuah Archunar
Sisit got away first closely followed by Aladdin, Lee Mah and Sakbon in that order. At the four furlong post Sakbon came up on the outside and heading Sisit at the road, went on to win nicely by one and a half lengths. Pegasus got up just on the post to dead heat with Lee Mah for third place three lengths behind Sisit. Bang was last. Time 1 minute 26 4/5 seconds.
RACE No. 4.-THE TUAN MUDA'S CUP.
Divisions I, II and III.-6 furlongs.
HORSES. OWNERS.
1 Wembley
2 Untong
8 Azab
0 Flying Fox ...
0 Burak
0 Kismet
0 Akal
0 White Knight
H. H. the Rajah Mr. P. M. Adams Mr. Ed. Hardell Mr. C. D. Adams Ali bin Dollah Ong Kongai Mr. Ed Hardell Mr. L. Chen Hiang
H'CAP. JOCKEYS.
9 2
10 7
8 12
11 0
11 0
10 1
9 8
9 7
Rajak
Owner
Biloi
Owner Mr. Spurway Salleh Awg. Damit Bakar
Flyin Fox and Untong got away first. Burak started very slowly, but had closed up to the leaders Untong, Wembley and Azab at the road. Here the weight began to tell on Burak and Azab dropped back. Wembley took up the running closely followed by Untong. Wembley resisted the challenge, and finishing strongly won a popular race by a length. Azab was three lengths behind Untong and Burak
fourth close up. Flying Fox was last. Time 1 minute 39 4/5 seconds.
RACE NO. 5	THE FARMS' HANDICAP.
HORSES.
Division IV (Griffins)	6 furlongs.
OWNERS.
1 Shooting Star ... Law Kongsi 9 3 1/2 2 Black Pirate ... Mr. Tan Ah Kim 9 7
8 Typhoon ... Chan Brothers Kongsi 9 3 1/2
0 Radium	... Oug Kongsi	9 8 1/2
0 Jaih	... Kongsi Ampat	8 10 1/2
H'CAP. JOCKEYS.
Bakar
Salleh
Awg. Damit Lohor Biloi
Radium set the pace but soon fell back to make way for Shooting Star and Black Pirate in that order. Black Pirate challenged at the distance but was
shaken off. Shooting Star taking the race by half a length. Typhoon was three parts of a length away third. Radium was fourth. Time 1 minute 42
seconds.
RACE NO. 6.-THE TURF CLUB CUP.
Division III.-6 furlongs.
HORSES. OWNERS.	H'CAP. JOCKEYS.
1 Bagaimana 2 Osaha
8 Mah Jongg
0 Tolin
0 Shotaway
0 Bang
Mr. E. O. Bruce Brothers & Sons
Kongsi
Mr. Hinway Haji Hassim Mr. D. Carroll Sri Binta Amin
8	0	Rajak
9	7 Bakar
9	5	Lohor
10	0	Tabit
7	12	Mahmood
7	7	Richmond
Mah Jongg set the pace for the first three furlongs followed by Osaha, Tolin and Bagaimana. Baga mana then came through and took command in the
straight and won by half a length from Osaha, with Mah Jongg third one and a half lengths away. Tolin was fourth and Bang last. Shotaway's jockey weighted in 6 lbs short. The Stewards inquired into the reason which was concluded to be a mistake
during saddling up. The owner and the jockey were both cautioned. Time 1.44 1/5.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1927.
285
RACE NO. 7-The DATUS' PURSE.
Divisions II and III.-4 furlongs.
RACE NO. 8.-THE RANEE'S PRIZE.
Divisions II & III.-6 furlongs.
HORSES.
1 Sisit
2 Sakbon
8 Penglima
0 Lee Mah
0 Adham
0 Pengarah
0 Pegasus
0 Aladdin
0 Badad
0 Ghalib
OWNERS.
... The Datu Bandar
... Abang Suleiman
... Messrs. T.T. Cheng & W. Boon Chew
... Messrs. T.T. Cheng & W. Boon Chew
... The D. Imam Tua ... Mr. J.A. H. Hardie ... E.G. Leong Kongsi ... Triple Kongsi
... Badad Kongsi
... Mr. J.D. Walderson
H'CAP.
8 10
8 13
9 0
10 0
9 7
8 12
8 12
8 6
8 13
7 121/2
Brahun Rajak
Tabit
Mr. Spurway Tembam Awg. Damit Lohor Salleh Chim
Lundu
Lee Mah, Aladdin, Pengarah, Sisit and Sakbon got away in a bunch. Pengarah ran well till the road, when Sisit and Sakbon pulled out followed by Aladdin. Sisit took command soon after entering the straight and ran on to win by a length from Sakbon with Penglima the same distance away third. A good finish, the rest of the field being close up. Time 1 minute 6 4/5 seconds.
RACE No. 8	THE SEKAMA STAKES.
Divisions I, II and III.-4 furlongs.
HORSES.
1 Akai
2 Wembley
3 Beaver
0 Flying Fox . 0 Burak
0 Untong
0 White Knight.
OWNERS.
Mr. Ed. Hardell H. H. the Rajah Messrs. J. B. Archer and P. M. Adame
M r. C. D. Adams Ali bin Dollah Mr. P. M. Adams Ong Kongsi Law Chen Hiang
JOCKEYS.
Awg. Damit Rajak
9 8
9 7
9 2
11 0
11 0
10 8
9 8
9 71/2
Brahim Owner Mr. Spurway Owner Salleh
Bakar
Untong and Flying Fox got away first on the outside, Burak, Beaver and Akai went off together in close attendance. At the road Flying Fox was leading Untong was shut in but made a fine effort after coming into the straight. Akai then took up the running to get home by a neck from Wembley in a very close finish, with Beaver half a length away third. Wembley's jockey appeared to make his effort just too late. Untong was fourth. Bakar was cautioned by the Stewards for his riding of White Knight. Time 1 minute 5 2/5 seconds.
Second Day: 15th October, 1927.
RACE NO. 1.-THE COUNCIL NEGRI STAKES.
Divisions I, II & III.-5 furlongs.
HORSES.
1 Akai
2 Untong
3 Azab
0 Kismet
0 Burak
0 White Knight.
0 Wembley
0 Badad
0 Flying Fox
OwNRRs.
Mr. Ed. Hardell Mr. P. M. Adams Mr. Ed Hardell Ong Kongsi Ali bin Dollah Mr. L. Chen Hiang H. H. The Rajah Badad Kongsi Mr. C. D. Adams
8 IS
10 4
A ragged start. Flying Fox, White Knight and
JOCKEYS.
Awg. Damit Owner Biloi Salleh Mr. Spurway Bakar Rajak Tuah Lajim
Akai got off first. Untong went up at the road to challenge Akai and Azab. Akai resisted the challenge to win by half a length and Azab could only make third place by a neck. Kismet was fourth and Flying Fox last. Time 1 minute 24 2/5 seconds.
RACE NO.
STAKES.
2.-THE BUNGA KEMBANG MBLATI
HORSES.
1 Ghalib
2 Bagaimana
8 Tolin
0 Osaha
Division III.-4 furlongs.
OWNERS.	H'CAP.
... Mr. J. D. Walderson 7 9
0 Mah Jongg 0 Penghulu 0 Singa 0 Shortway
Mr. E. O. Bruce Haji Hassim Brothers and Sons Kongsi Mr. Hinwav Mr. F. H. Pollard Mr. Ang Ong Chye Mr. D. Carroll
IO
8
JOCKEYS. Lnndu Rajak Tabit
Bakar Lohor Lajim Brahim Mahmood Richmond Owner
0 White Wings... H. H. the Rajah
0 Tony ... Mr. E. Lim	Anybody's race up to the road. In the straight Ghalib pulled out from a bunched field to bring off a very unexpected win by half a length from
Bagaimana. Tolin a length away third. Time 1 minute 8 4/5 seconds.
When the ponies came into view Sakbon was leading Sisit, Badad and Aladdin, with Pegasus last. Coming into the straight Badad was moving up into the lead, and made a very fine run in to win by a length from Sakbon who was having a duel with Sisit, on the Stand side for second place. Sakbon was second by a head. Aladdin was fourth and Pegasus last. Time 1 minute 45 3/5 seconds.
RACE NO. 4.-THE INDIA HANDICAP.
Division IV (Griffins).-4 furlongs.
HORSES.
1 Black Pirate
2 Radium
3 Jaih
0 Typhoon
0 Tai Hu
0 Shooting Star.
0 Seduan
0 Jorrocks
OWNERS.	H'CAP.
Mr. Tan Ah Kim	9
Ong Kongsi	9
Kongsi Ampat	8
Chan Brothers Kongsi 8
Mr. L. Chen Hiang Law Kongsi Mr. J. Li. Archer
Messrs. Page-Turner.
10
Cutfield & Arundell 8
81
JOCKEYS.
Salleh Lohor Biloi Rajak Awg. Lompor Bakar Tuah
Lnndu
Radium jumped off in front to make the running from Jaih and Black Pirate. In the straight Black Pirate's jockey commenced on excellent run half way home to win a well judged race by a head from Radium with Jaih three parts of a length away third. Typhoon was fourth and Jorrocks last. Time 1 minute 8 2/5 seconds.
RACE NO. 5-THE ROYALIST STAKES.
Divisions I, II & III.-3 furlongs.
Flying Fox got away at once and made the running to win by half a length from Wembley and Beaver who dead heated for second place. Akai was third. Rain fell as the ponies went to the post and all weighed in 2 lbs. extra. Time 499 seconds. RACE NO. 6.-THE B. C. L. CUP.
HORSES.
1 Osaka
2 Bagaimana
8 Tolin
0 Mah Jongg
0 Penghulu
0 Singa
0 Shotaway
Division III.-5 furlongs.
OWNERS.	H'cap.
Brothers & Sons Kongsi 9 8 1/2 Mr. E. O. Bruce Haji Hassim Mr. Hinway Mr. F. H. Pollard Mr. Ang Ong Chye Mr. D. Carroll
Jockeys.
Mr.Spurway
Rajak
Tabit
9 7 Lohor
9 0 1/2 Lajim
9 0 Brahim
Richmond
Osaha jumped off in front and was challenged almost at once by Singa, who dropped back at the road to make way for Bagaimana. Osaha kept his lead, however, to win comfortably by one and a half lengths. Tolin was third two lengths away. Mah Jongg was fourth and Shotaway last. Time 1 minute 27 seconds.
RACE NO. 7.-THE KEPPEL STAKES.
Divisions II & III.- 3 furlongs.
HORSES.
1 Sisit
2 Aladdin
8 Pengarah
0 Lee Mah
0 Adham
0 Penglima
0 Badad
0 Ghalib
OWNERS.
The Data Bandar Triple Kongsi Mr. J. A. H. Hardie Messrs. T. T. Cheng
H'CAP.
Jokeys.
Brahim
7 61 Rajak
8 11 Awg. Damit
& Wee Boon Chew 9
The Data Imam Tua 9 Messrs. T. T- Cheng
& Wee Boon Chew 9
Badad Kongai 7
Mr. J. D. Walderson 7
8; Mr. Spurway
0 Bakar
1 Tabit 6 1/2 Tuah 7 0 1/2 Lundu
280
TRE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 10-27.
A delayed start. Sisit and Aladdin get away together with Lee Mah and Pengarah in close attendance. Coming into the straight Pengarah took up the running on the Stand side. Aladdin then went up to Sisit and Pengarah dropped back, Sisit ran on to win from Aladdin by half a length and Pengarah was the same distance away third. The rest of the field was close up. Time 50 1/3 seconds.
RACE No. 8 - THE SIMANGGANG PURSE.
Division IV (Griffins).-5 furlongs.
"	ur.	JOCKEYS.
HORSES.
1	Jaih
2	Black Pirate.
8	Shooting Star.
0 Radium
0 Typhoon
0 Jorrocks
OWNERS.	HCAP
Kongsi Ampat	8	7
Mr. Tan Ah Kim	9	12
Law Kongsi	9	5
Ong Kongsi	9	8
C. Brothers Kongsi	8	12
Messrs. Page-Turner, Cutfield & Arundell 7 18
Biloi Salleh Bakar Lohor Rajak
Lundu
Shouting Star led from Jaih and Black Pirate. A furlong from home Jaih came up to Shouting Star and Black Pirate moved up to challenge Jaih. Black Pirate just failed to catch Jaih on the post, the latter getting the verdict by a very short head. Shooting Star was third three parts of a length away and Radium fourth. Typhoon was last. Time 1 minute 251 seconds.
RACE NO. 9.-THE SARAWAK CUP
Divisions I. II & III.-II. C.
HORSKS.
1	Kismet
2	Untong
8 Azab
0 Burak
0 Flying Fox
0 Akai
0 Pegasus
OWNRSS.
Ong Kongsi
Mr. P. M. Adams
Mr. Ed. Hardell
Ali bin Dollah Mr. C. D. Adams Mr. Ed. Hardell
H'CAP. JOCKEYS, 9 5 Lohor 10 2 1/2 Owner
8 7 Bakar
11 8
Mr. Archer
9 12 Awg. Damit
Eng Guan Leong
Kongsi 7 12 Rajak
7 9 Chim
... Abang Suleiman
0 Sakbon
Untong was away first after a delayed start, with Akai, Flying Fox and Kismet closing up. The field came to view again with Kismet in the van followed by Akai and Azab. Untong then went after Kismet and caught him at the road. Coining into the straight, however, Untong did not improve his position further, and Kismet went away again to win by three lengths with Azab the same distance behind Untong third and Burak fourth. Time 3 minute 5 4/5 seconds.
17th October, 1927.
Reclassification of Ponies.
Sarawak Turf Club.
E. S. HOLL,
Official Handicapper.
Result of Two Dollars Unlimited
OHM It Sweep.
SECOND DAY, RACE NO. 9-THE SARAWAK CUP.
Total number of tickets sold 5,000 at $2 each $10,000
Result of $2 Cash Sweep.
FIRST DAY.
Race. Total a'mt. 1st Prize.	2nd Prize, 3rd Prize.
of Sweep.
T'ket No.
A'mt.
T'kat
No. A'mt . T'ket No. A'mt .
1
$568
116
9281
253
9113 60
273
956 80
2
806
503
403
156
161.20
4 15
80.60
3
818
500
409
207
763,60
412
81.80
4
884
478
417
299
16680
457
88 40
5
766
859
383
438
153 20
814
76.60
6
700
426
350
371
140.00
365
7000
7
548
425
274
417
109,60
168
54.80
8
604
503
302
497
120.80
471
60.40
$5644
SECOND DAY.
1
$632
8$15
$316
131
$126 40
179
$ 63.20
2
742
269
871
134
148 40
214
74 20
3
931
470
467
501
186 80
182
93 40
4
872
375
436
317
174.40
822
87 20
5
888
630
444
451
188.20
145
133.20
6
664
449
332
353
13280
459
66 40
7
780
382
390
159
15600
476
78.00
8
656
522
328
486
181.20
410
65 60
9
750
524
875
453
150.00
497
75.00
$6,918
Totalizator
Dividends.
FIRST DAY.
Race No.
Winner.
Amount of Dividend.
$2 Tote.
$1 Tote.
1
.. Radium
$ 4.90
$ 2.60
2
.. Singa
25.70
7.00
3
.. Sakbon
20 80
16.50
4
.. Wembley
22.30
10.20
5
.. Shooting Star
16.50
7.40
6
.. Bagaimana
8.60
4.10
7
.. Sisit
8.40
3.90
8
.. Akai
6.80
9.00
SECOND
DAY.
1
.. Akai
$ 6.60
$ 4.80
2
.. Ghalib
85.60
19.30
3
Badad
15.30
7.10
4
Black Pirate
13.10
6.90
5
.. Flying Fox
10.20
8.30
6
.. Osaha
9.70
6.60
7
.. Sisit
8.00
3.50
8
.. Jaih
16.80
8.60
9
.. Kismet
31.40
9.40
Winner Owners.
Name of Owner.	Total Winning.
H. H. the Rajah	...	...	$382.50
Ong Kongsi	...	750.00
The Datu Bandar ...	...	465.00
Mr. Ed. Hardell	...	...	455.00
Mr. Tan Ah Kim	...	...	315.00
Abang Suleiman	...	-	310.00
Mr. E. O. Bruce	...	...	300.00
Badad Kongsi	...	...	300.00
Brother and Sons Kongsi	...	265 00
Kongsi Ampat	...	...	265.00
Law Kongsi	...	...	215.00
Mr. C. D. Adams	...	...	200.00
Mr. J. D. Walderson	...	200.00
Mr. Ang Ong Chye ...	...	200.00
Mr. P.M. Adams ...	...	185 00
Haji Hassim	...	...	80.00
The Triple Kongsi	...	...	50.00
Messrs. P.M. Adams & J.B. Archer...	47.50
Messrs. T. Teck Cheng & W. Boon Chew 22.50
Mr. J. A. H. Hardie...	...	16.00
Mr. Hinway ...	...	15.00
Messrs. Chan Brothers	...	15.00
Eng Guan Leong Kongsi	...	7.50
Total ... $5,060.00
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1927.
287
Winning Ponnies.
Name of Pony.
Total Winnings
Kismet
$500.00
Sisit
465.00
Akai
400.00
Wembley
382.50
Black Pirate
315.00
Sakbou
310.00
Bagaimana
300 00
Badad
300 00
Osaha
265.00
Jaih
26500
Radium
250.00
Shooting Star
215 00
Flying Fox
200.00
Ghalib
200 00
Singa
200.00
Untong
185 00
Tolin
80.00
Azab
5500
Aladdin
50.00
Beaver
47.50
Pengiima
15.00
Pengarah
15.00
Mah Jongg
15.00
Typhoon
15.00
Lee Mah
7.50
Pegasus
7.50
$5,060.00
Winning Jockeys.
Jockey.
1st.
2nd.
3rd.
Mounts.
Rajak
3
6
15
Brahim
3
2
2
9
Lohor
2
1
2
10
Mr. P. M. Adams
1
3
5
Awang Damit
2
2
9
Salleh
1
2
1
11
Bakar
1
1
3
13
Biloi
1
1
3
6
Mr. Spurway
1
1
9
Tuah
1
5
Lundu
1
7
Tahit
2
2
8
Nasurul
1
1
Mr. C. D. Adams
2
Lajim
3
"Richmond"
3
Mahmood
2
Mr. J. B. Archer
1
Archuuar
2
Chern
3
Tun bam
y
Uchek
1
E. Lim
1
Usop
1
Awang Lompor
1
The following are copies of correspondence which has passed between His Highness the Rajah and the Honorary Secretary, Sarawak Association, Singapore.
13, KINTA ROAD, Singapore, 8th October, 1927. His Highness
Sir Charles Vyner Brooke, G.C.M.G., Rajah of Sarawak.
YOUR HIGHNESS,
The members of the Sarawak Association request me to acknowledge, with cordial thanks, the receipt of Your Highness' cable of the 6th October, 1927, and much regret that Your Highness was unable to accept the invitation to an entertainment given in your honour by us, your most loyal subjects residing here, owing to Your Highness' early departure for Sarawak and previous arrangements in Singapore.
We congratulate Your Highness most heartily on the honour recently conferred upon you of Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George by His Majesty King George of England, and feel that we in some reflected measures participate in this title so well earned and so well deserved. The progress of Sarawak under your rule has been remarkable, and this we, as old residents, fully realize has been due to the statesmanship, justice, thoughtfulness, generosity, mercy and untiring application you have always displayed in the multitudinous duties of your high position. Though we are so far apart from our native land, we still always bear in our minds Your Highness' kindness and generosity.
In conclusion we pray most heartily and sincerely to Almighty God to grant Your Highness good health aud long life and the continued progress of Sarawak our native land.
I have the honour to be,
Your Highness' most obedient and loyal subject, SONG LIAN SIONG,
Honorary Secretary, Sarawak Association, Singapore.
ASTANA, Kuching, Sarawak, 20th October, 1927.
DEAR SIR,
It has been a very great pleasure to me to receive your letter dated 8th October, and I would ask you to convey to the members of the Sarawak Association of Singapore my thanks and gratitude for their kind message.
I hope that all the members of your Association will realize that I do not regard the great honour recently bestowed upon me by His Most Gracious Majesty King George V in the light of recompense for personal services but rather as a symbol of recognition, through the medium of myself, of the sterling qualities exhibited by all races throughout Sarawak which have effected the establishment of, in the times of my predecessors, and have preserved during my own time, a prosperous and peaceful State.
I desire to emphasize that I am very proud of the satisfaction depicted by the members in so rightly numbering themselves amongst those who have been and are associated in the building up of the prosperity of this State, and I am convinced that their sense of loyalty to the country of their birth will be sufficient incitement to impel each individual member to asist in upholding law and order wheresoever his calling may take him.
With hearty congratulations for the strength and spirit of your Association and with every good wish for its continued prosperity.
I remain.
Yours truly,
C. V. BROOKE, Rajah of Sarawak.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
KUCHING, SARAWAK, 12th October, 1927.
To
The Editor,
The Sarawak Gazette.
Kuching.
DEAR SIR.
I understand that the former Public Library which was a boon to those wishing to refer at times to points in doubt is now only available to members.
288
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1927.
It is a pity that this should be so, as there are many persons who are not interested in reading the usual books that are kept there for those who have a few hours daily to pass their time.
If the Library has in any way been abused by any non members, will it not be better for the Secretary to grant a pass to any bona fide visitor to it without any charge.
The fee charged for membership is far too high for one who probably enters it only about a dozen times a year, and that chiefly for reference or for passing away an odd hour now and again.
Hoping my appeal will be considered.
I remain, Yours faithfully, "CASUAL."
Extracts from Monthly Reports.
First Division.
KUCHING, September, 1927.
A serious affair took place in India Street on the afternoon of the 24th when a Chinaman by name Lim See ran amok with a knife fatally stabbing one man and wounding six others before he was over- powered by the Police.
The owners of granted land at Sekama were asked to assemble to discuss the arrangements and terms offered for them to vacate their land. They were all most agreeable and showed willingness to comply with the Government's proposals.
On the 23rd I took over duties as Acting Divisional Officer from Mr. H. D. Aplin who had been appointed to do duty in the Fourth Division.
UPPER SARAWAK.
SADONG.
September, 1927-
Mr. E. O. Bruce, Acting District Officer, re- ports :-
P. W.D.-The engineer's quarters attached to the boatshed are nearing completion.
Wire stays of the Sadong flagstaff were replaced and set, the former ones being now in use at Gedong.
A small quantity of the Dyak belian for Govern- ment stock has come in, but not sufficient to enable a start to be made with extensive repairs to be un- dertaken.
There have been several applications for new shops in Sadong bazaar area which is somewhat congested. A suitable location has been selected where the demand for sites is very keen. This will necessitate building a new by-road for a certain distance which will connect with the site selected for the erection of a landing stage for kampong small craft in the Muara Simunjan Lama.
Thia arrangement will obviate the necessity of renewing about 200 yards of the present raised tim- ber footpath leading from main kampong bridge to main bazaar.
Trade and Shipping.-Comparative figures as follows.-
Imports. Exports.
September 1927	$20,772	$35,318
1926	24,658	96,475
Exports, included coal 979.10 tons, jelutong 949 piculs, Para rubber 93 piculs, padi 4 koyans and 15 pasus, belian timber value $694.00.
Agriculture and Land-Weather conditions experienced during the month have been favourable for padi and engkabang, the latter showing signs of definite fruiting.
September, 1927.
Mr. F. H. Kortright, District Officer, reports: -
Court work was as usual, though an affray amongst some eight coolies working for Poi Hiap of Siniawan might have been very serious had not the police appeared in time. Land disputes occupied much time.
Education. -The Bau traders complained that the Chinese teacher in the Government School was getting old and his teaching was insufficient and asked to be allowed to re-open the Bazaar school ; as there are enough pupils for both schools this was allowed on the understanding that it must be closed again if and when a more efficient master is found.
P.W.D.-The Siniawan water supply engine had to be dismantled and new brasses fitted; work was commenced in doubling the telephone line from Siniawan to Batu Kitang as the increased number of instruments installed have rendered the single line inadequate. It is hoped to have better service when this is completed and the jungle cleared from the line between Batu Kitang and the Rock Road.
Captain C. P. Lowe, Commissioner of Public Works, and Mr. R. E. Edwards paid short visits.
On the 22nd I came to Kuching to take over duties as Acting Divisional Officer, and returned again on the 29th to attend to the general affairs of the district.
The rain gauge was tested and found to be inaccurate so no readings are being recorded until a correct measure is procured.
LAND OFFICE.
Mr. C. 8. Griffiths, Chief Land Officer, reports :- Drainage Scheme at Sungei Moyan, Samarahan.-A further length of 1225 fathoms of the 7-foot drain was accepted during the month, making a total of 2009 fathoms completed.
The work under the contract for the Telok Sabang and of the 15-foot drain is progressing satisfactorily. A rise in the surface of the ground has necessitated a depth of 8 feet for a certain distance. No additional length of this drain was taken over during the month.
The third contract, viz., for the Nonok end of the 19-
foot ditch, together with the arrangement for clearing the Sungei Moyan, has been terminated, owing to very unsatisfactory work on the part of the contractor. A new contract has already been let for completing the clearing of the river between the two drains, and it is possible that the contractor for the 7-foot drain will, on completion of this latter work, undertake the 15-fool drain. The depth, however, will have to be reduced from 4 feet to 2 feet, with the prospect of deepening to tbe full depth next dry season.
Lundu Road. -Over 21/2 miles of new construction has been done roughly but will be gone over again after primary settlements have had time to take place. The old portion of the road was kept mown and temporary bridges were maintained.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1927.
289
Levels for permanent bridges were taken on Sungei Malang Bahru, Buda, Parboi, Suat, China and Silang.
Kuching District. - Arrangements for the transfer of certain portions of Kampong Padungan to Sekama were put in hand. This is necessitated by the new Town Planning scheme in the former area.
In Kuching there were 115 applications for land during the month, and 25 inspections were made. For various reasons a considerable number of applications were refused without the necessity for inspection, while applications for land within planting reserves were granted, in many cases without inspection.
TITLES ISSUED DURING SEPTEMBER, 1927.
A letter was received on the 4th instant from the Assistant Resident of Sintang, N.I., desiring to pay a visit with District Officers Semitau and Ulu Kapuas in order to strengthen existing cordial relations between two Governments and ensuring continuance of peaceful conditions on the border. A reply was sent informing him that this Government welcomed his suggestion.
Forestry.-Abang Seman, of Kuching, wished to open a small sawmill in this district and was ordered to find a site when same would be inspected and a report sent to the Conservator of Forests.
Trade.-The principal exports were:- Gutta jelutong 439 piculs, valued at $ 4,072
Pepper, white	1,400	"	"	128,127
" black	104	"	"	4,500
Para rubber	208	,,	"	12,871
" scrap 50	"	"	1,635
Raw sago	200	"	"	530
Damar	675	.,	"	1,978
Imports.	Exports.
1927	...	$42,693	$174,053
1926	...	45,068	65,403
F. H. KORTRIGHT, Acting Divisional Officer, First Division.
Sadong Colliery.
September, 1927.
Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager, Sadong Collieries, reports: -
The output, export, local consumption, conversion into coke and coal stock figures for the month were as follows: -
1st September stock balance ... nil.
do. gross output ... 1,400.02 tons
Total ... 1,400.02 "
Shipped	986.00 tons
Boiler consumption
& coke conversion 364.02 "	1,350.02 "
Stock balance at end of month 50.00 ,,
The total rainfall for the month, (13.33 inches) which came on rather suddenly after the previous dry months, was responsible for frequent falls of roof in the shallow workings of the upper and lower seams, but fortunately, no serious accidents occurred.
Second Division.
SlMANGGANG.
August, 1927.
General. -Mr. Langton and Datu Abang Haji Dulrasit returned from Lingga district on the 1st instant and report having visited every house and settled all outstanding cases.
KALAKA.
August, 1927.
P.W.D.-The contractor for the three houses at Dobak and Pusa completed the house at Pusa and also the two at Debak, except two inside walls in each which he was unable to do on account of shutage of planks. The required planks were ordered from Rejang and arrived before the end of the month.
All three houses are also without belian steps. This item, however, has been completed by Dyaks but they have been unable to bring them down on account of the low water. A serious drought was experienced throughout the Kalaka and Lower Saribas districts from alxiut the 25th of last month until the 23rd of this month, no rain being recorded during this period.
The question of water is also being very serious at Kabong.
Trade.-The trade statistics being:-
1927
1926
Imports. $34,126 25,991
for
the month
Exports.
$49,827
35,495
The principal exports were :-
Fish, salted, dried
5 piculs, valued at
$ 124
" salted, wet
202 jars	"
606
Jelutong
195 piculs ,,
1,817
Para rubber
198 "
13,876
" un smoked
7 "
426
" smoked
101 "
7,954
" milling scrap 101/2 "	"
521
" scrap
49 "
1,714
Pepper, white
35 "
3,150
" black
6 "
531/2 koyans "
330
Raw sago
5,26
0
290
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1927.
Shipping--The statistics for this port are as under:-
Nine motor schooners and sixteen bandongs entered ; ten motor schooners and ten bandongs cleared.
SABIBAS.
August, 1927.
General.-The Native Officer and the Capitan China at Spaoh were ordered to remove all the rubber smoking houses within sixty yards from tbe bazaar and other buildings. The Spaoh Chinese have also been given orders to repair their shop- houses in three months time, the leaf attap roofs to be replaced with belian attaps and leaf-walls with planks.
Agriculture.-Twenty-one permits to plant rubber and one permit to plant pepper were issued during the month. The Malays and Dyaks are busy clearing land preparatory for padi planting this year.
Imports.	Exports.
1927	...	$42,659	$66,609
1926	...	39,720	36,776
The principal exports were : -
Para rubber 966 piculs, valued at $56,971 " scrap	229	"	do.	8,632
Padi	50 pasus	do.	110
The following are the trade returns for the Lower Saribas: -
Imports. Exports.
1927	... $20,780	$21,110
1926	...	19,572	31,899
and the chief exports were:-
Damar
16 piculs, valued at
... $ 160
Fish maws
21/2 1,300
Fish, salted
14	,.
350
G. jelutong
22	,,
154
Gutta para
187	"
...	10,764
" scrap
108	"
3,250
Kadjangs
3,600 pieces "
360
Raw sago
211/2koyans "
2,150
The following are tbe trade returns for the Second Division:-
Imports. Exports.
August, 1927	... $ 119,478 $ 290,489.00
Total to 31/8/27 ... 1,102,310 1,734,335.00 Total to 31/8/26 ... 1,054.374 1,386,556.50
C. D. ADAMS, Acting Resident,Second Division.
Third Division.
August, 1987.
SIBU.
General.- On the 10th of the month the Director of Agriculture and myself left for Sarikei and on the following day walked through the pepper area up the
Sarikei river. A very large number of new gardens are being opened. No signs of disease were seen but several of the older gardens were suffering from previous neglect during the slump in price of pepper.
The crop which was being gathered at the time, however, seemed most satisfactory. The soil in this area is eminently suited to pepper and an unlimited supply of belian is on the spot for conversion into tuat.
On the 6th a party of four went down to Rejang, returning to Sibu on the 8th.
A meeting of Kanowit Dyaks was held at Kanowit on the 4th when several names were put forward as candidates for the vacant Penghuluship. Eventually it was decided to appoint Manggi to tbe post.
A contract was signed for the construction of roads through the new Binatang bazaar and a number of plots have already been taken up at good prices.
A number of forged Singapore $10 notes were received from Kapit. Inquiries are being made. All the notes are of the old yellow type, series B/19 dated September 1924. They are easily recognizable by the very thick paper used and by their fresh appearance.
The District Officer, Mr. P. M. Adams, reports: -
General.-In order to prevent bankrupts and others from absconding arrangements were made by which passports were inspected between Sarikei and Rejang and all passengers whose passports were not in order were removed at the latter port.
Smoke houses have been erected in Kampong Nyabor to accommodate all rubber produced by Nyabor and Kampong Pulo natives and all old smoke houses have been demolished.
The District Officer of Rejang, Mr. J. C. Swayne, reports:-
In accordance with a letter from the District Officer, Sibu, passports of all passengers for Singapore were examined while steamers were still in the river, several without passports were returned and a few whose passports had not been vised were allowed to proceed to Kuching.
The weather during tbe month has been unsettled and there have been several storms. I regret to report the total loss of the Soon Kiat, a Matu owned schooner, off Kuala Nyabor on the 4th; no lives were lost.
The Acting District Officer of Kapit, Mr. E. V. Andreini, reports:-
General.-The whole of the early part of the month of July was spent on the journey to Long Nawang, D.I.. at which place I arrived on the 23rd
July having left Belaga on the 1st. An agreement was reached with the Controleur thereon various mat- tersconnected with the border. The main question of Sarawak subjects working jungle produce in the Batang Kayan district was fully discussed and there is no donbt that this was not brought up at the peace-making as a letter from the Resident, Third Division, at that time clearly staled that the Dyaks here were willing to waive this question which bad been the stumbling block to a peace-making for some time previously. Unfortunately there was no copy of this letter to be found either at Sibu or Kapit. Permission was granted to Sarawak subjects to work jungle produce subject to various formalities.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1927.
291
I met the Uma Padang chiefs who wish to leave N.I. and to return to Sarawak and, as they were
given only ten days by the Controleur to either move or make padi fields in D.I., I allowed them to move into the Aput river instead of coming right down river as the journey would have taken a considerable amount of time and no doubt they would not have been able to plant padi at all this year. They, however, will complete their journey after this harvest.
By the courtesy of the Controleur I was able to return by way of Batang Kayan-1wan-Kian to the Sarawak border in the Ulu Kajang and thus able to see many of the tribes and also districts in which the Sarawak Dyak wishes to work.
During this trip the Dyak mata-mata who was with me took part in many ceremonies in connection with cementing the peace. It is, however, my opinion, having regard to what I have seen and heard in D.I. that certain districts will be unsafe for Sarawak subjects notwithstanding a state of peace and that Natives so far apart in customs and character cannot be allowed to mix freely unless within reasonable access of Government. These districts Dyaks will not be allowed to work in for the present and I am in thorough accordance with the Dutch Officials in their decision.
In the Kajang I met several parties of Sarawak Dyaks from all parts of the Division and heard of others who undoubtedly had been working jungle produce in D. I. without passes and if they incur any penalties or lose their lives it will be entirely their own fault. I have given these Dyaks six months to collect produce and clear out of this river, which is one of the districts on which the wandering Punans depend for their existence. There is no doubt that these wandering tribes are now used by other tribes as they in their turn are sometimes used by unscru- pulous merchants and there is a strong suspicion that sometimes for the means of obtaining heads which the other tribes are afraid to openly collect. I was not able to meet all the Punans but met several tribes and have directed the Native Officer, Belaga, to get in touch with them all and arrange a meeting place at the mouth of the Kajang where they will meet a Government representative once in six months and only at this time will other tribes be allowed to trade with them.
Subject to your approval I propose that a large tract of country between the mouth of the Kajang Ulu Kajang-Ulu Lima, be definitely reserved for wandering tribes and possibly later another tract in Ulu Danum and Pliran, but as I have not yet been able to penetrate into these latter regions I am leav- ing them out for the present. In the district between the true right bank of the Baloi and the Dutch and Fourth Division borders I estimate there are at least 700 of these people. An attempt has been made with some of them in the past to make them make houses and padi fields but it appears to have a bad effect on their health and physique and the houses and padi fields are of a poor sort.
The tribes who maintain their nomadic existence, however, seem to be remarkably healthy and of good physique.
There is also considerable activity amongst Ukits at present and I met and brought down to Kapit another party of these people from N.I. who had come overland without passes. I am detaining these until I can communicate with the Controleur, Long Iram, It appears that the heads of the Katibas Dyaks who were taken in Ulu Kapuas were bartered with a tribe in Makham and I am now investigating their destination.
I arrived at Belaga on the 17th August and spent a few days there before returning to Kapit, where I arrived on the 28th August,
Mr. E. Banks, Curator of Sarawak Museum, visited the district during August and spent some time at Belaga and district during which he obtained some
interesting material.
The Native Officer, Song, visited the Tekalit river and marked out boundaries between rubber and padi land. Awang Samsudin, Junior Native Officer, Kapit, accompanied him on this trip.
The Native Officer, Belaga, placed boundary marks between the Dyaks and Bukitans, Punans, etc, at Pala Wong and arranged the removal of the Sians
to land selected for them at Pala Wong. Abang Abdul Gapor, Native Officer, visited the Sut in July and the Gat in both July and August and reports that good progress has been made in the election of the Fort there. The sum of 1200 dollars was brought down from Belaga. Considerable amounts of money collect in this place which is very cut off and I am trying to improve communication. A rentis has been cut round the Pelagus rapids and I had hoped to have been able to blow up one or two dangerous rocks which are a stumbling block to easier communications but have been unable to obtain the necessary assistance from the P.W.D. and this will now have to wait dry, weather next year. I regret to report that these rocks were the cause of a fatality in July, a boat being upset and a Dyak swimming to the shore was taken by a crocodile.
There are now four shophouses at N. Mrit Pala Wong.
Health.-The Divisional Medical Officer visited
the district during August, going up the Baloi as far as Belaga and Balleh to Dut. Vaccination was started and the vaccinator is still in the district.
Agriculture.-The Skapans were encouraged to
keep cattle and two of the Government herd at Belaga were sold to them as a start. The strength of the herds at Belaga and Kapit amount to 37 and sales of milk averaged $70 per month. Groundnuts are being grown at N. Balleh in considerable quantity and do very well. I still await seeds which were promised for Dyaks who are still planting rubber on land which is obviously made for foodstuffs, tobacco, cattle, fruit, etc.
Land.-Considerable progress has been made in marking out lands already planted.
Trade. -The question of improving and grading rotans was again brought up; this time by the Chinese themselves on the occasion of the Resident's visit.
The Divisional Engineer of Sibu, Mr. Whiteside, reports: -
Power Station.-The erection of the plant and the completion of the building proceeded rapidly during the month and is now almost completed.
The erection of the proposed cooling towers and sumps etc., has not yet been undertaken, the reinforcement for the foundations not yet having arrived. The outside wiring is almost completed and the internal wiring of a few house installations are finished.
The Steamship Company have not facilities for handling heavy gear and it was unfortunate that they could not give the assistance afterwards in the
matter of allowing us the use of the winches of the
s. s. Rajah to transfer the five ton weight from the large lighter to a small one.
The station is expected to be working at the end of September.
Waterworks.-A three-inch main has been laid
from Island Road to the new property in course of
erection abutting on Wharf Road.
The applications for water services in the bazaar' have now ceased. All are supplied except a few applicants in Cross Road who are awaiting the ex-
tension of the three-inch main to their premises.
292
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1927.
No complaints have been received as to the water supply. The supply appears to be ample whilst a great deal of waste occurs. This is probably due to the water supply being cut off at night, which en- courages Consumers to leave the tap always turned on.
The area including the European bungalows and the hospital has a supply laid on all night; the area including the clerks' quarters and all consumers beyond the Mission bridge are supplied until 10 p.m., and the bazaar supply is turned on al 6 p.m.
The question of supplying water to the proposed new jail and clerks' quarters is urgent, and there are no pipes and materials available with which TO carry out the work.
Roads- General inspection and maintenance have been carried on during the month. A few culverts have been made good. The services of the con- tractor in charge of the mowing of the padangs has been dispensed with and his coolies have been taken into the direct employ of the department as formerly. The widening and surfacing of Telephone Road has proceeded as rapidly as circumstances permit, but the lack of plant and handling facilities causes need- less expenditure on these works.
New Administrative Offices.-The work on the above has been delayed by the contractor's attention being diverted by the pressure of work at the Power Station.
New Police Station.-Work has now begun on the windows and doors preparatory to commencing the erection of the building.
Clerk's Quarters- Contracts have been let for the first two blocks.
New Markets.-Foundations are being placed and the contract for the framing has been let.
Bazaar Drains -Drains have been laid in Island Road and Blacksmith Road but no earth filling has been undertaken owing to the lack of a suitable tongkang for transporting the earth economically.
A tongkang has been ordered but will not be in use for four or five months.
The scavenging contractor has undertaken to pro- vide men to work under our instructions. Hitherto the work has not been satisfactory.
Mr. C. E. Pascoe, Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Sibu, reports:-
(1)	Theodolite Survey. Seven hundred and fifteen chains measured at average cost of forty-six cents. (Rentising for the above worked out at fifty-three cents).
(2)	Prismatic Compass demarcations of existing gardens. Three thousand one hundred and twenty- one chains measured at average cost of twenty-on cents.
(3)	Prismatic Compass demarcations in old jungle. Two thousand six hundred and eighty-eight chains' measured at average cost of twenty-five cents.
(4)	Compass Location of proposed roads at Engkilo and Binatang. Five hundred and seven chains measured at average coat of nineteen cents.
(5)	River Surveys (Katibas and tributaries). Sub- tense-about three miles at total cost of $14. Rangefinder-Five thousand nine hundred and forty-six chains at average cost of five cents.
H. L. OWEN,
Resident Third Division.
Coast Division.
REPORT ON VISIT TO ULU MUKAH.
Mr. J. G. Anderson reports:-
Having received instructions from the Acting Divisional Officer to visit the ulu Mukah and Selangau river, I started from the Fort at 6.45 a.m., on July 15th, accompanied by Datu Awang Udin and Native Officer Awang Juli.
The objects of this visit were chiefly to collect the newly imposed head tax from the ulu Dyaks, and to visit their principal houses. It was also proposed to visit as many rubber gardens as possible and complete a record of them, in order to bring the Land Order, 1920, into force in this district. The launch
took us to Sikat, where we spent the night at a Dyak house, proceeding up river early next morning in a temoi winch we bad towed up.
Penghulu Inting's house was reached on the 16th at midday. Considerable difficulty was experienced here in collecting tax, the Penghulu himself giving no assistance. Eventually the house was ordered to have the money ready on the return journey, when it was ultimately collected only after threat of punishment, the house having given more unnecess- ary trouble than any other. The following morning we left and arrived at Penghulu Lumpoh's. at Sungei Duran, ulu Mukah on the 19th, having visited the principal houses on the way up. There are four or five houses beyond this point, but none of any con- sequence, and they are very scattered. We decided, to stop here a few nights and call those houses down to foregather at the Penghulu's. Most of these arrived late on the night of the 20th, and on the 21st all tax had been received, and all matters brought up discussed. Most of these were purely domestic and do not call for mention. The various tuais were reminded that no new houses, excepts langkos for padi. etc., may be opened above Nanga Kua, about four hours paddle up. This order was made to keep the Dyaks within a certain limit for purposes of control.
Early on the 22nd we returned down stream and entered the Selangau river after one hour's paddling. This stream was almost dry, there having been no rain for two months in this district. At midday we reached Panggaw's, a large house, and were unable to proceed further owing to the lack of water, all the ulu houses were called and tax duty collected.
The need of an extra Penghulu for the Selangau is apparent here. Penghulu Lumpoh at present has charge of it, as well as the ulu Mukah. The furthest houses in the Selangau are a long way up, and this Penghulu cannot cope with them satis- factorily in addition to those in the main river.
Leaving the Selangau on the 24th we proceeded down to Sikat in easy stages, visiting houses missed when coming up. Below Sikat there are very few long houses, most of these having split into langkos, where each man has a little rubber, etc., planted.
Eventually all the head tax was collected, but not without some difficulty. This was increased by the fact that this year's padi crop was a poor one. Under normal conditions head tax would impose no hard- ship even on the poorest.
From Sikat downwards there is a good deal of rubber planted, but very little (and that worthless) above that place. Many of those below Sikat were inspected, and occupation tickets granted to those not yet recorded.
At Pedada, about a dozen Dyaks have planted rubber in padi land. This was inspected and as there is more than enough padi land here for all, it has been decided to let them have lots of three acres
round their houses. There is absolutely no other land here available, and some of this temuda is quite suitable as it has returned to lallang and is useless for padi.
At Siteng and Skoyan, there are three Foochow rubber gardens. These are beautifully planted and drained and the owners have all taken out tickets.
The longest of these is about eighty-five acres, planted one year, and worked by sixteen men. Be- low this, are small plantations all the way down to Mukah, and a rough sketch map was made of all these showing their positions and size.
I arrived back at Mukah on the 28th. The services and experience of Datu Udin were invaluable during the trip.
SUPPLEMENT TO THE Sarawak Gazette. KUCHING, TUESDAY. 1ST NOVEMBER, 1927.
HIS HIGHNESS THE RAJAH'S SPEECH AT THE GENERAL COUNCIL, 1927.
It is with pleasure that I welcome you to the twenty-second triennial session of the General Council.
I cannot let this occasion pass without paying a tribute to the memory of two esteemed members of the Council, whose deaths we all deeply deplore. I refer to Mr. J. C. Moulton and to Haji Mohamad Ali, the late Datu Temonggong. Each was a true lover of Sarawak and each devoted a large portion of his life to its service.
You will remember that, at the last session of this Council, I directed your attention to the expansion of the export trade of the State. I am glad now to be able to report that the last three years has been marked by further steady progress. The value of our exports in 1923 was over 35 million dollars and in 1926 over 53 millions. During the same period there has been a corresponding growth in the revenue. In 1923 our revenue was million dollars and in 1926 over 6 1/4 millions. At the same time it should not be forgotten that our expenditure in 1926 was 4 1/4 million dollars as compared with 3 1/2 millions in 1923. This increase in the growth of trade and revenue is enormous, and when we visualize the further possibility of development we must look with optimism to the future. There is another aspect of the matter that it is necessary to refer to in this connection. An analysis of our revenue in 1926 shows that the Government Opium Monopoly was responsible for contributing over 1 1/2 million dollars. It is necessary here to point out that the Government is committed to the enforcement of the control of opium smoking, and that it is the policy of the Government to bring about a gradual but progressive diminution of opium consumption throughout the State with a view to the ultimate suppression and eradication of the use of this drug. Since economic considerations will not permit of our suffering the loss of the revenue which accrues from this monopoly, we must turn to other fields to countervail the discrepancy. It may, therefore, be necessary to examine the question of tariff, and to decide whether or not the time is ripe to increase the duties payable on certain imports with special regard to non-essential commodities which are in fact luxuries-I refer to wines, spirits, tobacco, etc.-and to give legislative effect to any decisions that may be made.
I cannot pass on without a reference to the Rubber Exports Improvement Board which was established in 1926 under the auspices of the Board of Trade. This body has done much valuable work in instructing the owners of small rubber estates in the manner of improving the quality of and thus increasing the market value of this commodity. By co-
operation with this Board the quality of our rubber can be improved to correspond with the productions of other countries. I desire here to affirm my sense of the extreme desirability of all classes of the population having a more positive conception of the situation of the rubber industry. Such a conception once realized by you who are here, and diffused through the State generally, cannot fail to act as a warning to all people. However superior the quality of the commodity may be, so long as it is possible to produce throughout the world a quantity in excess of the absolute requirements of the manufacturers, there will always remain the danger of a slump in the price. Rubber is now what may be considered a staple commodity of the State, and in the event of such a catastrophe the whole community will surely be faced with the greatest hardship. I recognize, however, the attractions of planting this product and the difficulties of translating warnings into effective action.
SUPPLEMENT TO THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER I, 1927.
I think it fitting here, to remark upon the future possibility of a shortage in the supply of a rice, for a first glance at our statistics of imports is	somewhat alarming	in
that the quantity of this staple
food imported	into the State	has	risen	from 130,000 pikuls in 1922 to
350,000 pikuls	in 1926. We	are, however, in the fortunate position of
having other foodstuffs to fall back upon in the event of such a danger-I refer to sago, tapioca, Indian corn and sweet potatoes. I would urge you to encourage the individual peoples of your districts to safeguard themselves by concentrating on the cultivation of a proportion of these foods. Provided that all people co-operate, in. this respect, there will be no immediate danger of a famine. I desire particularly to stress this policy in sago-producing districts where the people should be advised not to abandon their ancient industry for the allurements of rubber. A system of propaganda is contemplated, designed to accustom people to the idea that there are other foods which support existence besides rice and to the fact that in many countries people depend upon other nutriment.
In the field of communications the most striking development has been the amount of work completed in connection with wireless telegraphy. This work has been extensive, and we may now boast of the possession of nineteen small stations and may anticipate in the near future an addition of two others which are in the course of erection. These stations form a network of communications which extend to embrace the whole State. This means of communication has already proved of the greatest administrative value and its benefits have been appreciated by the various commercial communities.
As regards our policy in connection with lands, forests and agriculture, perhaps the most important question is the admitted necessity for closer co-operation between the departments controlling these affairs in pursuit of a definite system of land tenure satisfactory to all classes. I consider that it is necessary that these departments should stand in careful adjustment to one another and to industry in general, and I should like to add here a brief reference to the recent advancement and development of the Forestry Department, which has been in advance of the development of the Land Department and possibly of the immediate requirements of the State. I refer to the imposition of certain restrictions which, in the light of the past seven years' experience, it has been necessary to remove. In formulating our combined land, forest and agricultural policy, it will be necessary to classify the land into forest and agricultural land; as far as possible to confine the grant of holdings for cultivation to uninhabited tracts of country; to separate different races; and to set aside areas for specific cultures. I would observe here that our only existing means of communication between the various accessible areas are the navigable rivers, which are the main arteries of the country, and the only lands which have been developed are the coastal regions and lands adjacent to these navigable rivers. I consider that our first duty is. therefore, to develop these approachable areas, that is to say coastal regions. To alienate the land in the manner I have outlined it will be necessary to budget for expenditure to construct bridle-paths designed to connect these adjacent navigable points, in order that the inaccessible areas between them may be developed.
In the sphere of land, policy also there are matters which require careful joint consideration. I refer to the selection of suitable men for taking up the holdings. Everything will be done to encourage the right type of colonists and preference will always be given to small holders. I have heard it suggested from time to time that this Government is to blame for not encouraging capital. These statements appear to me to be due to a failure to study sufficiently closely our policy which always has been to give preferential treatment to the small holder in order to avoid the alienation of large areas of land and thus cause hardship to the natives of the State.	There are other reasons which have influenced the formularization of this policy. It is not generally appreciated that the State is intersected with rivers and streams and the population is very widely diffused. These two factors render it difficult to find large and accessible areas, such as are required by concessionaires, without interference with the rights of the natives and other occupiers of the land. Coupled with this is the fact that many years' experience has proved that the division of available land among small holders, who are true colonists, yields a prosperous, contented and peaceful population which readily adapts itself to local conditions without friction and the consequent necessity of introducing special legislation; and those who, cultivate the soil reap the full benefit of their labours and are not merely wage slaves. Thus, instead of large areas of land being withheld from development for a period of
SUPPLEMENT TO THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1927.	years, as is generally the case when it is leased to capitalists, it is developed as it is taken up. I desire at the same time to observe that it has always been the policy of this Government to encourage "bona fide" investors, always providing that circumstances permit of their requirements being fulfilled. Substantiation for this statement may be found in the number of thriving undertakings of this class already in existence throughout the State.
I should like here to refer to the inauguration of the Labour Department, which has become necessary in order to give a guarantee to the Governments of countries whence immigrants arrive, and to the immigrants themselves, that their interests are being safeguarded. These guarantees are reflected in the recent legislation which has been adopted. Furthermore, it is essential to provide for the examination of immigrants in order to protect the inhabitants of this country from the possibility of infectious diseases brought by persons of this class from without the State.
In another direction too, in the all important field of health, we have been fortunate in obtaining assistance from the Rockefeller Foundation of America, who have caused an officer to be attached to our Health Department to assist us in instituting a definite health policy. I desire here to affirm that any recommendations that this Health Officer may make will, as far as possible, be carried out. In this connection I would refer to the recent and serious outbreak of smallpox, which jeopardized the health of the community and resulted in many deaths. The institution of rigid regulations was effective in stamping out the danger, but in the event of any similar outbreak in the future I must ask for the absolute co-operation of you all in effecting any measures which the Health Authorities may regard as necessary for your better welfare. I would here remark that the cost to the Government of the last epidemic was over $110,000. It is hoped that the people will realize that the measures which are employed to stamp out diseases are for their own benefit, and the Government must necessarily depend to a great extent upon their assistance in carrying them out.
I have spoken hitherto of our policy in relation to those aspects of the administration which affect particular problems. I propose now to allude to our central organization. We are but now reaching that stage of development where expansion of work renders it more difficult for me to maintain that close personal touch with individuals and exercise supervision and control over the affairs of every department which has made for such successful administration in the past. It has been necessary to devise machinery by which to issue and carry out my instructions and to co-
ordinate, supervize and control the various departments. This administrative machinery is at present represented by the Secretariat. This office is presided over by the Chief Secretary, to whom I have delegated many responsibilities previously discharged by myself, and who acts as liaison officer between departments, public bodies and myself, and it is through him that I am able to maintain close touch with all activities. I consider that, provided we do not permit the adaptation of this system to become too highly centralized, it is best calculated to promote the efficiency of our administration. These improvements in our central machinery have been devised with the special aim of sufficiently relieving me of smaller business to permit of my keeping fully informed of all that is going on in the State, whilst at the same time enabling me to exercise my authority.
Side by side with this development has been the corresponding growth in the complexity of litigation. We must realize that better communication has brought us into closer contact with other countries, and we must adopt the principle of bringing our legislation into line with that of others. A beginning has been made by revising and consolidating our existing laws, but many of them have been found to need clarification and amplification in certain ways. A second step has been taken by appointing a Judicial Commissioner who will arrive in December. It is proposed as a supplement to this process of judicial reform to give immediate consideration to the question of making more adequate provision to govern the treatment of convicts. This will entail the building of a central jail of a design which will provide for the separation of civil from criminal prisoners. It is also proposed to introduce special legislation to provide for the treatment of juvenile prisoners.
Turning now to the subject of education. The problem before us is to think out the kind of education best adapted to the needs of Sarawak, and the best means of providing it, but you may be assured that such measures will be taken as are necessary to afford educational facilities, having regard to the growing requirements of the State. A sum of $150,000 has been spent since our last meeting on grants in aid to schools, and a scheme for establishing a central Government school, in addition to existing lay schools, is now under consideration.
iv. SUPPLEMENT TO THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER I, 1927.
In regard to these economic and political problems that face us, I would stress to you that it is vital to the future of Sarawak that we regulate our progress in accordance with the needs of the times. I cannot pass on without asserting that I am profoundly conscious of the rights of the natives of this State, and the policy of His Highness the late Rajah in upholding these rights will be rigidly adhered to. I depend upon you all to impress upon the people of your districts that all measures taken are in their own interests and to their advantage. I have every confidence that when these measures have been examined by you, they will commend themselves for general concurrence and co-operation.
In conclusion, I desire to say that I have been informed by His Highness the Tuan Muda that you have given him every possible support during the periods of my absence from the State, and I should like to add a word of personal appreciation of the valuable assistance rendered in the past by members of this Council. One of the many advantages which result from these meetings is that members are able here to interchange views on the basis of absolute equality and thus become able to appreciate one another's point of view and special difficulties. It is, I think, this sense of personal contact and spirit of friendliness which has done so much to make for the success of our existing concordant system of Government and to build up the present prosperity of the State and, provided that this atmosphere of goodwill and undertaking always permeates our deliberations, we should have no difficulty in solving the problems which affect us as a whole.
MEMORANDA
PRESENTED TO THE GENERAL COUNCIL
BY ORDER OF
HIS HIGHNESS THE RAJAH.
KUCHING, SARAWAK
17th October, 1927.
vi.
SUPPLEMENT TO THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1927.
MEMORANDUM BY THE ACTING CONSERVATOR OF FORESTS ON THE FOREST POLICY OF SARAWAK DURING THE PERIOD 1919-1926.
I.	Introductory.-Few persons will be found in these days to question the fact that timber, firewood, and the various other substances described collectively as "forest produce" form one of the basic and perpetual needs of human communities.
The science of forestry deals with the creation, culture, protection, conservation and utilization of forests.
II.	Origin of Forest Policy.-In primitive and sparsely inhabited countries, where forests cover a considerable portion of the land surface, the need for a forest policy is not at first realized. The produce of the forest is looked upon as the gift of nature, like air and sunlight, free to all, and therefore to be taken, used, or merely destroyed, without let or hindrance, at the will of the individual.
As population increases, and commerce and industry develop, the inroads on the natural forest become more and more destructive, and the difficulty of obtaining necessary supplies becomes greater and greater, until a point is reached, when the community decides that the forest property can no longer be left to the haphazard raiding of the individual, but must be brought under regulation and control for the common good, and for the advantage of posterity. The awakening to this economic necessity may come early or late in the history of different communities. For example, the countries of central Europe, notably Germany, Austria. Switzerland and France, were fortunate in the early development of forest conservation, and long before the industrial revolution they had established permanently productive forests.
To-day. Germany, one of the most highly industrialized countries, has no less than twenty-five per cent of her land area under scientifically managed forests.
By way of contrast we need look no further afield than Great Britain, where the last remnants of our despised and neglected woodlands were reduced almost to vanishing point by the exigencies of the late war. At the Armistice in November, 1918, it is estimated that there remained in Britain only sufficient pitwood to keep the mines open for one more year.
HI. The need for a Forest Policy in Sarawak.-Has Sarawak reached a stage of development where a policy of forest conservation is required?
This is a serious question and deserves to be seriously considered. In a sense, it may be said that this question was answered in the affirmative by the act of Government in creating, in 1919, a Forest Department, which from the first was placed on a permanent basis. But it is perfectly proper that, on this occasion of the triennial meeting of the General Council, the question should be reiterated and reviewed in the light of experience and knowledge gained in the last eight years.
The difficulties of exploration in Sarawak are great, and it is extremely hard to give an accurate estimate of the probable area of useful forest available.
This much, however, is certain: that the area of useful forest (meaning by this more particularly the dry land type of mixed hardwood forest) is far less than it was supposed to be even so recently as six or seven years ago.
Meanwhile, the native peoples of Sarawak are increasing in numbers under the safety and prosperity of the present regime, and the demand for farming land grows proportionately; at the same time every steamer adds its quota to the stream of Chinese immigrants, hungry for lands.
The truth is that the economic process, sketched in very general terms above, is seen to be in full swing in Sarawak, and the causes which led to the inception of a Forest Policy eight years ago, are relatively more insistent than ever to-day.
SUPPLEMENT TO THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER I, 1927. vii.
IV. Forest Policy up to the present.-The work of the Forest Department during the eight years of its existence may be described under four heads, viz. :-
(1)	Exploration and Demarcation of Reserves.
(2)	Works of Improvement of Forests.
(3)	Research.
(4)	Revenue Collection.
Taking these heads in order-
(1)	Up to the present the area of reserves demarcated is 252,531 acres, or about 395 square miles. This has involved the survey of some 500 miles of boundary.
In addition, topographic surveys, though not usually forming part of a Forest Department's duties, have been completed over about 10,000 acres and partially completed over a further 30,000 acres.
These figures are, perhaps, not altogether unsatisfactory, but the magnitude of the task still before the Forest Department may be realized, when it is stated that the area of reserved forests noted above does not amount to one per cent of the total area of the State.
(2)	and (3) Comparatively little has been accomplished under these heads for reasons which will appear in the sequel. The following, however, may be mentioned :-
(a)	Improvement fellings have been commenced in three reserves, and some hundreds of acres have been treated. The object of this operation is to encourage the growth of the more valuable species.
(b)	Eight sample plots have been established in which annual measurements are taken to ascertain the rate of growth of important species-an indispensable basis for the preparation of systematic working plans. Numerous small planting experiments have been carried out at small cost to determine what species are suitable for the re-afforesting of the scrub land. Certain promising exotic species are also under trial, notably Burma teak.
(c)	A museum and herbarium have been commenced. The most important item in the former is a collection of specimen planks, and sections of trunks of the more important timbers of Sarawak. In the herbarium several hundred botanical specimens have been Collected with a view to the correct identification of our trees-an essential matter.
(4)	Revenue collection is practically the only aspect of the Forest Department's activities which comes before the public eye, and for this reason, perhaps, it has assumed an undue importance. Nevertheless the following figures are worth quoting :-
Year.
Revenue.
Expenditure.
Surplus.
Percentage of Expenditure to Revenue.
1920
$ 18,245
$22,341
(-)$ 4,096
1921
54,743
37,569
17,174
69%
1922
72,750
47,087
25,662
65%
1923
84,598
55,245
29,352
65%
1924
99,627
67,717
31,910
68%
1925
95,289
72,488
22,801
76%
1926
138,391
95,895
42,496
69%
The figures are the more remarkable when it is borne in mind that there has been
no increase whatever in the rates of royalty since 1920, although the market value of timber has risen very substantially.
V.	Forest Policy for the future.-The most unsatisfactory feature in the present position is the small total area of reserved forest, and the energies of the Department should be concentrated primarily on exploration and reservation. The slowness of progress hitherto has been due to three factors-
(a)	the smallness of the technical staff available (the total number of qualified officers in the Department is five, and the average number available over the whole period has not been more than three);
(b)	the responsibilities of Forest Officers for revenue collection;
(c)	the very great natural difficulties of the work in this country.
It is suggested for the consideration of the General Council, that the staff of technical officers should be increased to a minimum of one per division.
viii.
SUPPLEMENT TO THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1927.
At present an Assistant Conservator has to take charge of the work over two divisions- an impossibly large area for efficiency. The amount of time wasted-quite unavoidably-in merely getting from place to place is lamentable.
With a reduction of the normal charge to one division, it ought to be possible for the officer to spend at least a foil half of his time on that side of his work where his technical skill is required.
As regards revenue collection it is possible that some simplification of details may be worked out but it is a mistake to think that this could be achieved by a return to the system of a "flat rate" of 10% ad valorem in place of the present graduated scale based on the kind and cubic quantity of the timber.
The simplification so attainable is only apparent, and it is obvious that this procedure would open wide the door to constant disputes and to chicanery. Timber royalty is quite different from export duties : the former is internal revenue, and is collected for the most part on transactions where there are no documents, such as invoices, to show what the actual selling price was : nor is there any general "market price" for timber throughout the State. Further, it is a mistake to think that a "flat rate" of 10% ad valorem would mean a reduction in the amount of duty payable by licences : it would quite certainly mean an increase.
Finally as to the natural difficulties of field work in this country-difficulties the severity of which can only be realized by those who have actually experienced them, such as Survey and Forest Officers; these are in the nature of things inevitable, but they can be overcome by patience and determination.
These suggestions broadly amount to a recommendation that the existing policy should be pursued : but something more is necessary if the remaining dry land or hill forests are to be saved for future generations. Even with an augmented staff on the lines suggested, the rate of reservation could not overtake the rate of destruction by farming.
It is therefore suggested that the General Council should take into consideration whether the time has not arrived to prohibit further felling of valuable hill forest for farming. It is understood that such prohibition has been applied in certain districts by the administrative officers in charge : and it would be esteemed if such officers would state their experience of the application of such a measure of conservation, and their opinion as to whether it could be applied generally throughout the State.
It is not suggested that this measure should apply to flat land or swamp type of forest, large areas of which are available for conversion to farming or planting. A most important part of the forest policy of the future should be the development of native industries dependent on minor forest produce such as jelutong, gutta percha, damar, rotans, and illipe nuts. But important as it is, this must be subordinated to the pressing immediate need of further reservation.
VI.	Some criticisms answered.-It may be serviceable to consider briefly some of the objections commonly made to the current Forest Policy.
(i)	"The creation of Forest Reserves prevents the native of the country from getting the materials which he requires for house and boat building, etc."
Bearing in mind that there are 99 square miles of State land to every one of reserved forest, and that the native can take just exactly what he wants for his own use from all State land without any payment whatever and without any formality or control of any kind, it will be seen how unreasonable such an allegation is.
When Forest Reserves are created, care is always taken to leave outside the reserved area ample forest for the needs of natives living in the vicinity: furthermore, if in any special cases some particular product is desired which can only be obtained in the reserved area, it has always been the practice of the Department to allow facilities for taking such material from the Reserve itself.
(ii)	"The rates of royalty are too high and the method of collection by an account subsequent to the time of measuring the timber is irksome."
SUPPLEMENT TO THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1917. ix.
The first part of this objection has been fully answered in the earlier remarks on royalty collection : as regards the method of collection, it is the fairest that can be devised in the circumstances. Every single licensee's account is scrutinized periodically by the Forest Officer in charge of the Division to ensure that no mischarges are made : and any licensee who doubts the correctness of his account has only to produce his removal pass in the Forest Office to have the amount due calculated in his presence then and there.
Nevertheless if any one can suggest a better system, which is at once feasible and fair, the Forest Department would be only too pleased to adopt it.
In conclusion it may be said that it would be quite too much to expect that a Department which opposes ideas of conservation, protection and control to the improvidence and laissez faire of natural man, could be in its early stages, popular.
The premier forest service of the Empire-The Imperial Forest Service of India-has achieved its present magnificent results in spite of apathy, unpopularity and opposition throughout three quarters of its history; and, to take an example nearer our doors, the Forest Department of the Federated Malay States is only now overcoming similar prejudices after some twenty-five years' work.
Sarawak differs from these examples perhaps, only in that the liberties of the native are the widest, and the restrictions imposed the lightest, of the three.
SUPPLEMENT TO THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1927.
MEMORANDUM BY THE COMMISSIONER OF PUBLIC WORKS ON THE MAJOR WORKS COMPLETED DURING THE PERIOD 1924-1926.
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT.
During the last three years for which complete figures are available, namely 1924, 1925, 1926, the expenditure on Public Works throughout the State was as follows:-
1924.
1925.
1926.
Total.
Kuching 1st Division
.
$444,302.48
$646,234.91
$646,251.43
(excluding Kuching district)
27,031.55
42,061.29
2nd Division
14,669.75
24,195.65
3rd Division
181,582.03
56,846.46
99,961.17
4th Division
55,664.60
42,719.51
5th Division
23,719.04
60.236.05
Coast Division
J
25,864.48
46,408.35
$625,884.51
$850,030.78
$961,833.45-
-$2,437,748.74
The total expenditure over the three years of $2,437,748.74 represents 20.88% of the total expenditure and 15.65% of the total revenue of the State during the same period.
KUCHING.
Buildings.
Additions to the Residency.
New General Post Office.
New Police Barracks on Sungei Gertak Reclamation.
Bungalow at the 12th Mile Experimental Garden.
Tamil Coolie Lines and mandor's quarters at Slaughter House, 10th Mile, Batu Kawa Road, 13th Mile and 14th Mile.
New Pig Slaughter House.
Two Bungalows-Pearse's Road and Rodway Road.
New General Hospital.
New P.W.D. Offices and Store.
New Government Workshop.
New Fire Brigade Station.
New Police Station, 10th Mile.
Extension to Museum Office.
New Blacksmiths' shops at Padungan.
New Clerks' Quarters. Blacksmith Road.
Alterations to Opium Divans.
Extension to Printing Office.
Alterations to Old Sarawak Club House.
New Arrack Distillery at Green Road Halt.
New Treasury.
New Ice Plant.
Miscellaneous.
River wharf in Main Bazaar.
Reclamation of Sungei Kuching.
Roads.
The large influx of motor vehicles, about 150 during the last three years, caused very considerable damage to the surface of the roads and in 1925 surface painting with bitumen was tried; in some cases this proved to be fairly satisfactory but it was soon found that in the majority of eases a more permanent treatment was necessary as the existing foundations would not carry the loads coming on them. The most heavily loaded roads have been remetalled, grouted with bitumen and later surface painted with bitumen.
A total of 11.25 miles of road has been remade and treated with bitumen since 1924.
SUPPLEMENT TO THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER i, 1927.
Waterworks.
New Main Pipe Line from Matang.
New Main to Sungei Sebbubut.
Satok Suspension Bridge (completion).
Extension to Lower Reservoir for emergency supply.
The following Town Main extensions have been made :-
Rodway Road
Rubber Road
Nanas Road
Pisang Road
Rock Road
Central Road East
Haji Taha Road
Datu's Road
New Blacksmiths' shops 520 Private Water Services
20 New Fire Hydrants 14 New Public Stand-pipes
approximately 53/4 miles.
have been connected.
Electricity Department.
During 1926 it became necessary to consider extending the plant. A new generating set 250 k.w. and two boilers were purchased and are now being erected.
The total connected load at the end of 1926 was 495.92 k.w. and it was decided not to make further connections until the new plant was erected.
Railway.
1924.
1925.
1926.
Train Miles
37,520
38,290
42,480
Expenditure
$39,843.21
$45,189.66
$53,943.65
Revenue
35,504.20
36,129.63
45,587.91
Loss on working
4,339.01
9,060.03
8,355.74
Loss per tram mile
11.25 cents
23.50 cents
19.66 cents.
During 1926 the railway fares were reduced and two additional halts made between the 10th Mile Station and Kuching.
An extension of three miles from the 10th Mile Station was made during 1925 and trains have run regularly during 1926 and 1927. This accounts for the increase in train mileage and increased working expenditure during 1926 shown in the above table.
FIRST DIVISION.
Forty-six miles of road have been opened up in Upper Sarawak to carry light motor traffic.
Waterworks have been installed at Siniawan and those at Bau have been considerably improved. These works have been carried out entirely under the direction of the District Officer.
SECOND DIVISION.
Waterworks have been installed at Kabong. The windmill which drives the pump has not been found satisfactory and a new petrol engine and pump have now been obtained to replace it.
A bungalow for the District Officer at Betong is in course of construction.
Arrangements for the re-construction of Betong bazaar in brick are being made.
THIRD DIVISION.
Extensions to Waterworks.
Water Filtration and Chlorinating Plant.
Planning of Bazaar.
Electric Lighting.
School House.
Bazaar Roads and Drains.
New District Office.
New Police Station and Offices.
New Dresser's Quarters.
Land Officer's Bungalow.
Forestry Department Bungalow.
Medical Officer's Bungalow.
Cadet's Bungalow.
Extensions to Hospital.
Divisional Engineer's Bungalow.
Sarikei and Binatang.- Buildings and wharfs for Customs Department.
xii. SUPPLEMENT TO THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER r, 1927.
COAST DIVISION.
Mukah.-Waterworks.
School House.
Schoolmaster's House.
Oya. Court House	built under the direction of the District Officer.
District Officer's Bungalow Bintulu. -Wharf, Customs shed and enclosures built under the direction of the
District Officer.
FOURTH DIVISION.
New Lighthouse at Baram Point.
Extensions to Miri Waterworks.
Bazaar drains at Baram built under the direction of the District Officer.
FIFTH DIVISION.
Limbang.-Waterworks.
Bazaar drains and 5-foot ways
Wharf	under the direction of the Resident
Customs compound and quarters and the District Officer.
at various stations
SUPPLEMENT TO THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1927. xiii.
MEMORANDUM BY THE PRINCIPAL MEDICAL OFFICER OF SARAWAK COVERING THE PERIOD 1922-1926.
A.-MEDICAL.
1.	Personnel.-The staff consisted of three Medical Officers-a Principal Medical Officer, Pathologist in Kuching and the Divisional Medical Officer in the 3rd Division. A Matron was in charge of the European Hospital at Kuching. The Subordinate Staff consisted of two Assistant Surgeons, two Asiatic Nurses, fourteen Native Dressers and four Dispensers. The Fourth Division was under the charge of the Medical Officer of The Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., but was supplemented by a Government Dresser in the Dispensary there.
2.	Buildings.-In Kuching we had a Pauper General Hospital, constructed in 1888, to which was attached the Lunatic Asylum. The Grange Hospital for Europeans and its Annex for Eurasians and a Dispensary and Hospital attached to the Fort. Further, in the Pavilion Building we had an Out-patient Department, Dispensary. Pathological Laboratory and Medical Store; Medical Offices were also in this building.
A hospital had recently been established in Sibu, and we had small hospitals or dispensaries at Sadong, Simanggang, Miri, Limbang and Baram, the latter being subsidised by donation from the Harrison Smith Fund. A temporary dressing station was opened at Brooketon owing to the prevalence of hookworm.
3.	Summary of work done in 1923.-In Kuching General Hospital there were 1,166 persons treated as in-patients. At the dispensary 11,188 persons received outdoor treatment. In Sibu the number of in-patients was 195 and out-patients 4,737.
Progress.-During 1924 a hospital was opened at Limbang, and dispensary at Rejang with dressers in charge at each. We opened further dispensaries at Betong in 1925 and Bau in 1926 and hospitals at Mukah and Bintulu in 1926. In Sibu extensions and improvements to the hospital were carried out each year, especially in 1926 when special wards were erected for the reception of female patients and infectious cases. Here in Kuching the foundations of the New General Hospital were laid towards the end of 1925, its construction progressed rapidly during 1926 and at this moment wards are in use for female patients, female lunatics and tubercular men, and the rest of the building is nearing completion.
The general expansion of the department has produced a corresponding increase which is shown in the following table :-
1923.
1924.
1925.
1926.
Kuching.
In-patients
1,166
1,396
1,804
2,266
Out-patients
11,188
19,732
12,544
15,855
Sibu.
In-patients
195
350
595
834
Out-patients
4,737
6,460
7,360
6,676
Total Outstations
5,406
13,792
11,036
13,956
The vast majority of the in-patients, practically 75%, is Chinese, but there has been a gradual steady increase in the number of Malays and Dyaks who seek admission to hospital. It is gratifying to know that their confidence is being gained in the efficacy of western obats and methods of treatment. Another point of importance is the striking increase in the number of women treated, especially as regards midwifery.
The date on which the New General Hospital will be opened has not as yet been fixed, but we have been promised that the building will be ready for occupation very early in 1928. It will provide accommodation for patients of all classes and nationalities with a complement of 400. It will be equipped with modern appliances including new operating theatre furniture, an opthalmoscopic section and X-Ray and electro-therapeutical apparatus.
The disposal of sewage by the water-carrier system is installed throughout.
The asylum is apart from the main building, but in the hospital grounds, and is designed to separate patients according to sex and types of insanity.
SUPPLEMENT TO THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER I, 1927.
At the moment the staff of the department consists of:-
Principal Medical Officer
Pathologist
Assistant Medical Officer
Divisional Medical Officer
European Matrons (four)
Assistant Surgeons (two)
Asiatic Nurses (six)
Dressers (thirty-three)
Dispensers (five)
and is not up to Establishment strength, but we hope that the present improved terms of service will overcome this difficulty.
The Department of Pathology began in 1922 in a very meagre way. The premises were enlarged to the present size in 1923, an excellent equipment has been gradually acquired and the personnel increased from one to five persons.
Statistics are published yearly and are of great interest in forming a medical survey of the country though to the layman the figures indicate the quantity rather than the quality of the work.
In modern medicine speculation is eliminated; the "doctor" must be sure of his diagnosis before starting treatment, e.g., to say a man has "fever" is not sufficient, the prescriber must know why the patient has fever, and whether it is malarial or typhoid or dengue, etc. And it is impossible for him to make a diagnosis until various examinations have been made by a competent pathologist. From a "health" point of view accurate diagnosis is essential in order to ensure isolation and preventative measures and to discover what localities are the foci of certain disease.
The laboratory work at present includes examination of materials sent from hospitals, out-patient departments, local practitioners and from outstations. Microscopes and equipment for elementary work are kept at Sibu, Miri, Limbang, Simanggang and Sadong, and are entrusted to dressers who have had special training. An untrained man with a microscope is a public danger. Dressers are trained in the Kuching Laboratory and need at least six months' work under supervision before being considered competent for this elementary work.
The laboratory in Kuching is equipped to do all routine hospital work, including Kalu and Wasserman Reactions, Widal and Blood Culture, Section Cutting and food and water analysis. It is essential that these should be done by expert workers and in a well- equipped laboratory. The present laboratory is well-suited to do this work, but is much too small and further development is dependent upon the acquiring of larger premises.
B.-HEALTH.
In dealing with this department I would discuss the progress of the work under the following headings :-
(1)	The Leper Camp.
(2)	The Pauper Camp.
(3)	The Port Health Work and General Sanitation.
At the beginning of 1924 the staff consisted of Chief Health Officer, one Sanitary Inspector, two Assistant Sanitary Inspectors, Government Vaccinators and one Assistant Surgeon.
(1)	Leper Camp.-At the time the Leper Camp was situated at the 5th Mile and consisted of a few attap huts accommodating seventy-six persons of both sexes, under the control of the Chief Health Officer and a Lady Missionary. Early in 1924 the camp was removed to Satang Island where a series of wooden houses with concrete floors was built. The Lady Missionary and an Assistant Surgeon were resident there with the lepers.
In 1925 an inquiry was held as to the advisability of continuing the settlement at Satang Island. In view of the inaccessibility of the island especially during the landas, its complete isolation and the difficulty of communication and transport, it was agreed to transfer the lepers to the mainland-a temporary camp was therefore erected at the 13th Mile, Penrissen Road, and one hundred and eight lepers were moved into it in October of that year. The results of the transfer were so successful from the point of view of health
SUPPLEMENT TO THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1927.
xv.
and contentment of the lepers that the erection of a permanent settlement at the 13th Mile was authorized. At the time of writing there are two hundred inmates in the camp, the majority of whom are Dyaks. The control of the camp is invested in a European Superintendent who resides in the immediate vicinity.
The huts at Satang Island have been dismantled and re-erected at the present site by the lepers themselves. The camp is self supporting. Each leper is now a potential landowner and his little garden patch of beans, krebangs, melons and other native vegetables is thriving and bananas, betel-nut, pupaya and lime trees suffice for his fruit supply. Further, land is being allocated for agricultural development and shortly each inmate who so desires will be the possessor of a miniature padi farm.
The officers administering the camp correspond regularly with the British Empire Relief Association and are kept in touch with the advances and improvements with regard to scientific treatments. Formerly moogrol oil was the universal panacea in the treatment of leprosy and, though effective up to a point, its administration produced painful symptoms. Treatment to-day is carried out with improved and specially prepared products of essential! oils of the Hydnocarpus Anthelmintics. The method of administration is by injections which are highly efficacious, speedy in result and practically without pain or subsequent discomfort. The lepers submit themselves voluntarily to treatment and the results are indeed gratifying.
On the disappearance of lesions and after a full course of treatment a number of lepers have been discharged to their homes on parole-at the end of six months they report to the nearest dispensary for re-examination-a few cases have had to be re-admitted to the camp.
(2)	Pauper Camp.-A Pauper Camp was erected at the 10th Mile in 1922 for old and disabled persons. It consisted of three leaf attap houses designed to accommodate thirty persons in each. The site was frequently waterlogged after heavy rains and the buildings were in constant need of repair.
We are indebted to the Chinese Community who have, at their own expense, recently erected on the low hills in the vicinity of the former camp permanent and excellent buildings composed of timber with concrete floors.
The number of inmates averages one hundred per year. Their health and welfare are in charge of an officer of the Government.
(3)	Port Health Work and General Sanitation.-Inspection of all vessels is carried out systematically and by this method detection of early cases of infectious diseases is assured and the spread of them prevented. The system is helped by the League of Nations Bureau in Singapore, which circularizes a weekly fasiculus to the health authorities in all international ports. The fasiculus publishes a list of ports and the incidence of disease in each.
The number of immigrants to Kuching in the year totalled 13,034; and that for Sibu was 4,120; the majority were Chinese.
Two quarantine stations have been approved of-one for Kuching and the other at Rejang, which is the port of Sibu.
(a)	Sanitary Measures.-Disposal of Nightsoil.-Quantity to be disposed of based on a population of 20,000 is a maximum of 1,000 cubic feet per day.
The method of removal is by the bucket system. Nightsoil is collected from public latrines and dwelling-
houses in the bazaar area and removed by covered vans and motor lorries to a large rubber estate outside Municipal limits-approximately 2 miles from the town. The nightsoil is entrenched at a sufficient depth to admit of the action of air and light.
Owing to the isolation of the estate and to the absence of dwelling-houses in the vicinity there is little danger of the spread of disease, e.g., ankylostomiasis.
A suitable depot has been erected as a cleaning place for the buckets, carts, etc.
Water disposal.-Nightsoil from the European bungalows is collected by sanitary squads daily and removed by tongkang (boat) to a suitable place in the river, below the town, where it is thrown in at ebb tide. The discharge of 100 cubic feet of nightsoil is entirely negligible compared with the volume of water passing by in any second.
SUPPLEMENT TO THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER I, J917,
El-San Method.-This method is under trial in the public latrines. The experiment, however, is of so recent date that a criticism of its valve and efficiency would be premature.
The septic tanks method is being installed in the New General Hospital, which is to accommodate some four hundred persons. It is intended that this system be applied to- European bungalows within the Municipal area, and later to include the whole bazaar area.
(b)	Refuse.-Formerly Municipal dustbins were placed in conspicuous corners in the bazaar and occupants of houses in the neighbourhood instructed to use them. A preferable method is now being instituted, namely, each house has its own dustbin which is to be kept in readinesss for collection every morning at a given time.
Covered carts remove the rubbish to the railway station whence it is conveyed by covered railway waggons to fixed parts of the line where it is dumped, spread out and covered immediately with earth. The system has proved satisfactory and it has not created a fly or a rat nuisance.
Rubbish is also used extensively for reclamation areas.
School Hygiene.-The number of schools in Kuching area is thirteen. Mission : - 8.P.G. two, R.C. two; Chinese six ; Malay three. All are helped by Government Grant.
Till recently these schools were self-supporting and their sanitary conditions left much to be desired. The recent access of funds, by virtue of the Grant, has put the schools on a better financial footing, and housing, sanitation, etc., under the advice of the sanitary authorities, have considerably improved. As is to be expected in this country, intestinal parasites, especially the Ankylostom duodenale and Ascaris Lumbriceides, were found to be the most prevalent and debilating causes of disease among the children. The recent construction of standard latrines with the bucket system and the introduction of an excellent water supply in the schools, have gone far to ameliorate the conditions and produce better health results.
Further, elementary hygiene is being taught in all the schools of the country-the study is being made as easy as possible by the introduction of illustrated primers for small children and more advanced text books for the adults and teachers. The text is printed in English and in the vernacular-Chinese and Malay.
In the outstations there are in all sixty-one schools. They have not as yet come within the sphere of our activities but it is expected that they will be included in the scheme later.
Waterworks.-Total number of fire-hydrants in Kuching is seventy, of which twenty were erected in 1926.
Annual Consumption-Catchment Area.
Matang Reservoir Daily average supply Estimated daily consumption
... 797,903,822 gallons.
2,186,937 gallons.
1,000,000 gallons.
Owing to the insufficiency of the water supply during periods of drought on Matang Mountain it has been decided to install a 2,000,000 gallon tank on the top of the site known as the Datu Muda's Hill and to acquire, if possible, an additional catchment area on Matang for impounding 100,000,000 gallons of water.
Analysis of the water, however, proves that it is reliable, satisfactory and eminently fit for human consumption.
Infectious Diseases.-Smallpox.-In 1925 an outbreak of smallpox occurred in Siniawan, spread to Singhi, and thence spread throughout the First Division. Later it affected the whole State Cases occurring outside Kuching were isolated in temporary houses erected away from the kampongs and visited by members of the Medical and Health Departments. In Kuching cases were isolated in the Sekama Isolation Camp. The total number of cases reported was eight hundred and five, of which one hundred and fifteen died. The number does not record the total incidence or the death rate of the disease, as the epidemic was particularly difficult to deal with, owing to the reluctance of people to notify the occurrence of cases.
SUPPLEMENT TO THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER I, 1927. xvii.
In order to give the Sanitary Authorities wider powers in dealing with infectious disease an Ordinance was passed instituting compulsory vaccination in Kuching and Upper Sarawak, and in infected areas. And the cessation of the epidemic and the fact that we have had no further outbreak proves the wisdom of this step.
The Sekama Isolation Camp consisted of four leaf attap houses which accommodated the patients and some of their relations. The site of a new Isolation Camp has been selected at Pending and will be furnished and equipped on modem lines.
There were no cases of cholera and only one case of Cerebral-Spinal Meningitis. An outbreak of foot and mouth disease occurred towards the end of the year-forty-three cases in all were reported. The following measures were successfully carried out. Animals exposed to infection were not slaughtered, but infected and suspected animals were isolated and treated. The transfer of cattle, sheep and pigs from one locality to another was prohibited.
Tuberculosis.-Phthisis in Kuching is, as it is throughout the world, a pressing social problem which is as yet awaiting solution. But authorities agree that improvement of conditions in housing and general sanitation will go a very long way towards ameliorating the pathogenesis and lessening the incidence of this disease.
So far here the members of the Chinese community have been the greatest sufferers and the disease is rife among them, but it is regrettable to report that the malady is fast spreading to the Malays and Dyaks.
But now that the confidence of these latter in the efficacy of hospital treatment, in medicines, and in scientific hygienic measures is being gained, we hope to prevent any further spread of the disease among them. Printed propaganda is displayed and advice on personal and community hygiene is given to all sufferers and their relations. This advice is more and more needed as its worth is proved by results.
Malaria.-Most of the cases are reported from estates and places where imported labour, Chinese, Javanese, and Indian, is employed. It was requested that some form of legislation should be drawn up before the disease became endemic in the country. Inspection and quarantine depots were needed for the examination and treatment of such imported labour and at last these measures have been sanctioned and will be in force shortly.
A number of breeding places for the Anopheline mosquito exist in and around Kuching of which the following is a list, viz. :-
A. Karwari and Kochii from Central Road
A. Sinensis from Simpang Tiga
A. Ludlowii from Satang and Santubong
A. Barbirostrus and Sinensis from Sungei Tengah and Dahan
A. Maculatus from Satang
A. Umbrosus from Sungei China.
Anti-Malarial measures have been initiated but, unless the depots for examination and treatment of infected persons are installed, these measures can be of little avail.
Hookworm.-Regular periodic investigation and treatment for hookworm is carried out in all estates, schools, Government labour forces and hospitals'. This measure has improved the health and efficiency of the individuals concerned. The economic results of the hookworm campaign should make a strong appeal to any Government, as a means of lessening sickness and diminishing hospital costs; to employers of labour such campaigns mean more regular, more efficient and better contented labourers; to the infected individual hookworm treatment means the removal of a handicap with consequent ability to earn more money, to provide better for self and family the necessities of life and to become a better citizen. With the end in view of inaugurating a General Hookworm Campaign a representative of the Rockefeller Foundation was invited to visit Sarawak in 1926. As a result of the visit the Government derided that they would be only too ready to start health work here in co-operation with the International Health Board and now Dr. Clark Yeager of the Rockefeller Foundation has arrived to organize and advise on a definite health programme and to demonstrate that a native population in the tropics can be educated in disease prevention.
xviii. SUPPLEMENT TO THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1927.
MEMORANDUM BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE TOWN PLANNING COMMITTEE OF KUCHING.
The necessity of providing for extension of towns on a rational basis has long been recognized as one of the first and most important matters in Municipal affairs. There is no town of any size or prosperity the ratepayers of which are not now having to disburse large sums of money in order to rectify the lack of attention to, and anticipation of, the future needs of the community by their predecessors.
The objects of town planning are two-fold, firstly the provision of areas for future extension and secondly the correction of existing areas to meet the present hygienic standards and conditions. No place, however small, can afford to be without a scheme to provide for these objects. It is very bad policy to allow building to be carried out anyhow and in any place and it is impossible to control erection of buildings unless some scheme is agreed on. The evils of overcrowding are sure to occur sooner or later and every endeavour ought to be made to avoid such conditions as prevail in most towns. Kuching suffers greatly in this respect. The lack of shops and dwelling-houses is a great handicap on trade and the resultant high rents tend to increase the prices of all commodities and labour, to say nothing of the impossibility of having a healthy community when houses are occupied as at present, in numerous instances, to the extent of twenty-five people having to sleep and carry on their various businesses in an area of 800 square feet.
Town Planning Schemes are not brought forward generally in order to inaugurate extensive building schemes, but owing to the large increase of population in Kuching and the disinclination of possible builders to erect any building outside the present bazaar area, it has been found necessary for the Government to do all in its power to push forward the provisions of the Kuching Scheme as rapidly as possible.
Before the Scheme was ultimately adopted every endeavour was made to bring the matter before the public, in order to help devise the best scheme possible by receiving suggestions from landowners and others who ought to have been interested, but only one landowner took the trouble to inquire further into the matter. This unconcerned attitude has caused various delays and inconveniences. The Town Planning Scheme was sanctioned in September, 1926, together with a scheme by which the Government make advances to intending builders, at a rate of two-thirds the estimated cost of building. In order to get the scheme started the Government bought a suitable piece of land which enabled them to offer sites at a reasonable figure to any one wishing to build. These sites are being taken up slowly and, although many inquiries have been made about building thereon, the actual results are below what is necessary.
The general feeling of the public is that there is too large a break between the old bazaar and the proposed new one; this is true, but the drawback will be reduced considerably when the new B.C.L. road and bridge are completed. Other prejudices have also to be overcome.
The Government are prepared to buy all land which comes under the scheme at its assessed value. Where it is necessary to disturb a grant holder the grantee has the option of selling the land or building on it in accordance with the plan. Where new roads intersect granted land no compensation is given to the grantee if such roads improve the-
SUPPLEMENT TO THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, NOVEMBER 1, 1927. xix.
value of the land, i.e., facilitate the development of the remaining portion of the land by adding new road frontages, but where a plot is so intersected by roads that no portion of it can be utilized compensation is granted to the owner. Landowners who have buildings on granted land are to be compensated on the basis of what it would cost to erect a similar building on other land when it becomes necessary for them to vacate their land in order that the building of shophouses may be proceeded with. When this is done as much of the old house is utilized as can be safely transported and compensation reduced accordingly, but if it is not feasible to remove any portion of the building full compensation is paid.
The taking over of granted land is not a policy which commends itself to the Government, but it should be borne in mind that the needs of a community as a whole must take precedence over the convenience of individuals. There are still many difficulties in the way of rapid development under this scheme, but it is hoped that, with the co-
operation of landowners, these will be speedily overcome.
The carrying out of the second part of the Scheme in replanning the present bazaar area involves many difficulties. It is not considered feasible to start into any part of it just now, as all sections necessitate the removal of certain houses and shops which would tend to make the shortage of accommodation more acute, but the commencement of this work is none the less urgent. All the blocks of houses in the present bazaar will have to be provided with back lanes. It will be realized that, even in a small place like Kuching, this entails a considerable amount of work. The object of providing back lanes is to enable all household refuse and nightsoil to be lifted from the back instead of having to be carried through the shop as at present and also to provide accessible land for construction of sewers in the future and to provide air spaces which are a very urgent requirement.
The provision of back lanes is a comparatively simple matter compared with the widening of the present streets. All the principle streets in the bazaar are at times very congested, what will they be like ten years hence? This part of the replanning of the old area has not been detailed yet as it is considered advisable to see what effect back lanes and a bazaar at Padungan have on this area before maturing any scheme. There are two methods of providing wider streets. The first is to fix new building lines and when any property is being structurally altered the new building line must be adopted. This method is a very lengthy process and nearly every town, where the transport question is acute, adopts the method of rectifying the building line in sections. This entails buying property in blocks, dismantling the buildings thereon and erecting modern types of buildings further back from the street. The initial expenditure involved by this method is large, but special assessments are levied for the purpose of creating an Improvement Fund which is utilized for buying property and constructing new buildings. With careful handling the loss on the transactions are small and when property owners realize that the expenditure is for their benefit and sell their property, which they can always repurchase when reconstructed, at a reasonable rate little or no loss is incurred.
The main point to be realized by communities is that it is not for direct benefits to Governments or Municipalities that town planning schemes and their resultant disturbance of property are being enforced, but principally for the benefit of the community at large and no community can be successful, contented or healthy unless the aims of town planning are attained.
