
VOL. LVII.
No. 884.
THE
Sarawak Gazette.
PRICE
KUCHING, Wednesday, June 1st, 1927. 20 CENTS
The Sarawak Gazette.
WEDNESDAY, JUNE 1, 1927.
Marriage.
HAYWARD-WAIN. - On the 22nd April. 1927, at St. Mary, Abbots Church, Kensington; P. H. Hayward, to Avis MARGARET second daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Wain of Ealing.
Departure of His Highness the Rajah.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Mr. J. A. H. Hardie, left for Europe on the 3rd instant.
Departure of His Excellency Sir Laurence Guillemard, British Agent to Sarawak.
His Excellency the British Agent to Sara- wak, Sir Laurence Nunns Guillemard, left Singapore for Europe on May 5th by P. & O. s.s. Malwa. The newspapers of the Straits Settlements and Federated Malay States have recently been so full of panegyric regarding his great achievements in those countries that it is difficult to amplify the matter of their columns, but we desire fully to associate our- selves with all their statements and whilst thanking Sir Laurence for the interest he has always shown in Sarawak, we wish both Lady Guillemard and himself a good voyage and a Iong and prosperous retirement.
Sir Hugh Clifford.
The "Times of Ceylon" which has evident- ly read Sir Hugh's "Downfall of the Gods" appears to imagine that his main object in returning to Malaya, his early love, is to flirt with the romantic "Cambodia!" Ceylon is
feeling jealous!
Sir Hugh Clifford has reigned with bril- liant success over Nigeria and Ceylon and is now returning as Governor to Malaya where he started his career. But it is not only as an Empire Builder that we know him. He is a writer of the first class and his stories
are amazingly good. For nearly twenty-five years, he was an intimate friend of Joseph Conrad who dedicated to him his novel "Chance." Their meeting came about in a strange way. Each had reviewed the other's books; Clifford having pointed out Mr. Conrad's unfortunate lack of knowledge concerning things Malayan. In due course they met as fellow contributors to Blackwood's, and the friendship lasted to the end of Conrad's life.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1, 1927.
110
NOTES.
(May)
His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by the Dayang Anne, proceeded to Bau on the 20th instant. His Highness returned on the 23rd instant and the Dayang Anne, together with Mrs. Kortright, followed on the 26th.
THE new Court House building at Pengkallan Bintang Munggu Babi has been completed and furnished. It is a substantial building and concreted underneath with quarters for boys.
There is good deer shooting in the vicinity
and Pengkallan Bintang can be reached in a day by a small motor launch to within half an hour's walk of the Court House. Keen shots could spend a very pleasant week end. All information can be obtained from the District Officer.
The tunnel and canal mark the culmination of a remarkable engineering feat first planned in 1841, be it noted before the Suez Canal was cut.
The accomplishment of the scheme must be accounted speedy in comparison with that of the Suez Canal which was mooted twelve centuries before the first spadeful of sand was cut. The completion of the Rhone canal when it is brought about will link up Marseilles with the waterway system of France and Central Europe and will bring about a wedding between the waters of the Mediterranean and the North Sea.
We are unaware whether these canals can accommodate large sea going vessels and in any case the necessary restriction of speed would neutralise any saving of time from the usual route. via the Bay of Biscay. But at all events cargo from the interior of Europe could be expeditiously handled and the canal when completed can hardly fail to increase the volume of trade between Europe and the East. - [Straits Echo.]
"A Pilgrimage to Mecca."
BY SIRDAR IKBAL ALI SHAH.
MR. F. W. Douglas, formerly the Resident of Brunei and brother of Mr. R. S. Douglas, a pensioned officer of the Sarawak Civil Service, has been appointed to act as British Resident, Perak, from May 6th.
THE newspapers contain many references to Her Highness the Ranee who is reported as being engaged upon a new play and a novel. We look forward to the publication of these works.
MR. H. B. Crocker, accompanied by Mr.
A. A. Rennie and Mr. N. A. Middlemas, sailed for Sibu on board H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 14th and returned on the 17th. The Resident of the 3rd Division was absent from the station having departed on a protracted visit to the upper waters of the Rejang.
WE understand that the Datu Bandar, Abang Haji Abdillah, intends to visit the Straits Settlements and Federated Malay States during July. He will be accompanied by Mr. E. S. Holl. Director of Agriculture. His primary object in making this visit is to study Agricultural methods as applied in Malaya.
CONGRATULATIONS to Mr. Percival Hayward on his marriage to Miss Wain. We welcome Mrs. Hayward to Sarawak.
MR. G. T. M. MacBryan arrived on the 10th instant per s.s. Kuching.
Reuter in Mythology.
It is not often that Reuter cables take us back to the pre-Christian era but we publish a message from Paris this morning which tells us that it has taken 86 years and about 55,000,000 francs to rea- lise the prophecy made by Aristade, priestess of Artemis, who told the astonished founders of Marseilles that a miraculous ring will one day seal the union between Marseilles and Etangdeberre. And now the first journey on a new waterway has been accomplished beneath the Rove mountains.
Sirdar Ikbal Ali Shah, a native of Afghanistan, and student at Edinburgh University, in the following article graphically describes his experiences in the Moslem pilgrimage to Mecca, where, as "one of the 250,000,000 Faithful," he attended the first All-
World Moslem Congress as a delegate. Among the pilgrims were a number of men from the Punjab belonging to the Ali Hadis sect, who profess almost the same rigid Moslem doctrines as the Wahabis of
Arabia.
Recent events in the Hedjaz helped for the first time within living memory to draw the veil from the Holy City of the Moslems, and the very first impression of true faithfulness to Muhammad's creed which one notices on ones's pilgrimage to Mecca is decided- ly at the docks in Bombay, as the hadjis come aboard a pilgrim boat. Away ever so far you see a string of earnest-looking men and women very much loaded
by parcels of all descriptions, hurrying along toward the boat. Men leading their women folk, children hanging on to the skirts of their mothers, and the whole procession made up of an excited and travel-
worn crowd, respresenting all types of humanity, from the beady-eyed Uzlrek of Turkestan to the lean and half-starved Bengali pilgrim.
THE FIRST RUSH.
AS soon as the medical examination of the passengers has taken place there is a rush for the gangway;
every one wishes to be the first on board. And in this hustle and bustle poor veiled women suffer the most, for not only have they never seen a boat in this hustle and bustle poor veiled women suffer carry children and the valuable assets of their journey; they cling to these with grim tenacity. As often as not, they stumble at the first rung of the ladder leading to the gangway. There is much shouting and needless noise, and where the human voice cannot reach messages are signalled by curious gesticulations.
I noticed, for instance, a stalwart Pathan, hoarse through shouting, lift his right arm above the crowd, and move it five times in the air, describing a curve every time that he moved it. He was signalling to his son at the end of the shed some two hundred yards away. Later I discovered that he had in that manner communicated his message to say that he was leaving his family in the safe custody of the Prophet and his four disciples.
OFF AT LAST!
In this mob you are sometimes carried off your feet, and thus sandwiched, and your next experience is that you are banged against the railings of the boat. The intense beat of the midday sun does not
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1, 1927
141
improve matters, and when you do get to the boat you find that all the apace of the upper hatches has already been filled by previous arrivals, and that you are obliged to get to the lower hatch.
That accommodation at best is hot and stuffy, but you are glad in any case to have got so far as boarding the boat which will take you to the sacred land of your faith, to which you have directed your face five times a day at prayer during your whole life.
The gangway is at last lifted, the ship blows the siren, the boat is moving, and those on the shore are now shouting out to you the last words of farewel-they are grievous and sad.
And here I observed a remarkable contrast between the psychology of the East as compared with the West. For your friends and relations who had come to see you off are standing at the dock with sad faces, not on account of the fact that they appreciate that you might never come back to them at all, or what might become of them in your absence, if you are the breadwinner: they have no such materialistic thought.
What is affecting them is to see so many of their co-religionists whose ''prayers are answered" and who are blessed by good fortune to be able to go to Holy Mecca, to perform the pilgrimage at the head and fount of Islam. They are sorry because they have had no such opportunity to visit the sanctuary of their faith. And that, to my mind, constitutes a very strong force among the Moslems of the world, and unquestionably tends to make their religion essentially international and less circumscribed by purely national ties to a country of their birth-or adoption, however glorious its traditions.
UNNECESSARY HARDSHIP.
After three days of our journey from Bombay we arrived at Karachi, where more pilgrims were taken on board the boat, and the Bombay scenes were refloated as the hadjis filled the remaining hatches. It was indeed a relief to us in the first- class saloons to see the pilgrims' boat move off the Indian shore, specially on account of the hardships to which pilgrims are subjected as they come up the ship.
It seems all such unnecessary hardship-and yet it is said that the more hardships you experience in a journey to Mecca, the greater the virtue of the pilgrimage. But most of the inmates of the boat- in all close upon a thousand-did not take happily to the life at sea. Hearts beat with excitement when the siren of the boat informed us that the sa- cred hills of the Holy Land were within sight, and the time had come to wear our prescribed garb of pilgrimage.
ALL EQUAL BEFORE THE SHRINE.
By the evening prayer time everybody was dressed in the Ahram, the regulation costume of the pilgrims. It consists of two white sheets, one for the upper part of the body and the other for the lower. They are fastened together by knots, for no pins, stitches or other form of attachment is permitted. With the exception of this garment and sandals-for shoes are not allowed-I had no other covering. My head also was shaved and devoid of any protection from the sun. The idea of this simple white dress is that all should enter the sacred shrine in a uniform spirit of humility, with nothing to indicate a worshipper's position, wealth or rank.
The next day the fierce rays of the sun were beat- ing upon the minarets and domes of Jedda, the "White City of Arabia" as it is truly called. It is unlike any other city in the world, as you have an impression that away in the distance there is an enor- mous beehive of white clay, honey-combed by tall minarets and round domes. Beyond that you notice no more animation.
THE OFFICIAL WELCOME.
Before we had time to collect our belongings the Governor of Jedda came up to the boat and wel- comed us as the guests of his Wahabi King, Ibn Saud, and while the excited pilgrims were still shout- ing the names of Allah in the babel of tongues, we steamed away from the "hadji" ship toward the town of Jedda, in the Governor's motor launch, and were very comfortably lodged in a grand house which once belonged to Prince Ali. I could not help strol- ling the streets of the City, even in the great heat of the day, as the Governor told us that our stay in Jedda was going to be short-early next morning we were expected by the Wahabi King at Mecca.
Jedda is a typical Arab town with covered bazaars where they sell everything under the sun. There are mosques of grandeur, too, one attributed by the historian Ibn Zubair of Andalusia to Kaliph Omar, and the other to Harunal-Rashid. Outside the city there are various ruins, and Abulfida's description of Jedda as "a plain wanting water" still holds good.
It is only recently that waterworks produced drink- ing water from the" sea. In the outskirts of the town there also stands the Tomb of Eve, but it is now inaccessible to many pilgrims. A white wall
encircles it, or what remains of it, for the earlier Wahabis had the idea that the best manner of pre- serving the sacred buildings and sites was to destroy them.
PILGRIMAGE BY FORD.
Early next morning we started in motors-Fords, by the way, constructed in the form of Red Cross lorries-towards Mecca. Hardly had the city of Jedda disappeared from view than the coolness of the air left us. The sun had risen, and within half an hour's journey beyond Jedda the heat was un- bearable. Here and there on the path-for it was a path and not a road-we came upon small thatched huts, put up anyhow for the accommodation of the pilgrims, and as we passed several caravans of camels loaded with pilgrims we were greeted by shouts of abuse, for the camels, not being used to the cars, shied, and perchance threw over a pious pilgrim or upset his water receptacle.
Some little distance before the halfway house of Bahra, one of the wheels of the car got deeply em- bedded in the soft sand. In the distance we saw a Beduin leading his camels. We hailed him to help dig out the refractory wheel, but in order to show his disapproval of the car, he refused to come.
Mecca lies in a hollow, surrounded by barren hills, and comes into view suddenly. Its first glimpse stirred my imagination. I gazed with a mingled feeling of awe and rapture upon the city of my faith, and at the motor station in Mecca, as I alighted from the car, prayers were on my lips. Then an hour after, as I stood inside the spacious quadrangle of the Shrine, its vastness impressed me. It is 257 paces long and 210 paces broad, entered in by many gates and surrounded by graceful colonnades.
THE GREAT CENTRE.
In the centre stood the Kaaba- the house of God which Ibrahim built-toward which one-seventh of the human race all over the world turn their faces five times every day of their lives. It is an almost square stone erection, about 35 feet high. It was draped in a khaki-coloured cloth, as the black cover- ing had not arrived from Egypt. I encircled the Kaaba seven times, and thought how vain materia- listic theories were about that seven encirclement of Kaaba by the pilgrims. Indeed none could believe that these had any association with seven planets, the worship of Venus, sun or fire.
142
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1, 1927.
To us it stands as a monument of the forgiveness of the sins of Adam at Arafat. Near by stands the famous well of Zam Zam, a spring reputed to have been shown to Hagar by God Himself.
I sat in the shade of the pulpit facing the Kaaba and saw a number of people in a corner of the mosque listening to the recitation of the Koran. A batch of pilgrims calling aloud their prayers approached and encircled the Kaaba.
Then I rose, and left the sacred shrine so that 1 could fulfil the next ceremony. 1 ran seven times in the area around the walls of the shrine, and having had my head shaved I changed the pilgrim's garb into my ordinary Eastern dress, meditating long and often whether we erring individuals wasting time and energy in the pursuit of things material do not worship gods of our own making, and fight shy of all endeavours to understand what lies below the superficial. Perhaps its superficiality dazzles our eyes, already not too keen, so that we cannot perceive that which does not lie on the surface.-[Straits Echo.]
By the Way.
Of all the sly, silly, old women who ever lived, Johanna Southcott was about the silliest, and why her preposterous old box of tricks has never been openend has always been a mystery to men of commonsense. She was born about the year 1750, of parents in very humble life. When about forty years old, she assumed the pretensions of a prophetess, and declared herself to be the woman mentioned in the twelfth chapter of
the Book of Revelations. She asserted that, having received a divine appointment to be the Mother of the Messiah, the visions revealed to St. John would speedily be fulfilled by her agency and that of the son, who was to be miraculously born of her. Although extremely illiterate, she scribbled much mystic and unintelligible nonsense as visions and prophecy, and for a time carried on a lucrative trade in the sale of seals, which were, under certain conditions, to secure the salvation of the purchasers. The faith of her followers rose to enthusiasm. They purchased, at a fashionable uphols terer's, a cradle of most expensive materials, and highly decorated, and made costly preparations to hail the birth of the miraculous babe with joyous acclamation. The delusion spread rapidly and extensively, specially in the vicinity of London, and the number of the converts is said to have amounted to upwards of one hundred thousand. Most of them were of the humbler order, and remarkable for their ignorance and credulity; but a few were of the more educated classes, among whom were two or three clergymen.
On December 27, 1814, death put an end to Johanna's expectations -but not to those of her disciples. Some of them would not believe that she was really dead; others flattered themselves that she would speedily rise again, and bound themselves by a vow not to shave their beards till her resurrection. Before she died, Johanna left a heavy wooden casket which she declared contained secrets of the future world. She specified that the casket should only lie opened in the presence of the Prime Minister and twenty-four Bishops.
Now we hear that its mysterious contents will shortly be revealed to the world. The possessor of the box has handed it to the National Laboratory of Psychical Research. Nine mediums have endeavoured to psycho- metrize the contents, but with little success, although the more practical X-rays reveal a heavy horse pistol, sponge, ear rings, coins, and a roll manuscripts. The box will be opened in a few weeks' time. Like the story of the empty glass, there will be nothing in it.
Dancing Mania Symptoms.
The suspicion is germinating in the minds of doctors that the world-wide dancing craze is of the same nature as the dancing manias of former times, many of which are recorded in history writes a Doctor.
These were regarded as the result of nervous disease and were given various names such as St. Vitus's dance, St. Guy's dance, dance of St. John, choro mania, orchestromania, and others.
We read at present of hundreds of youths dancing the Charleston on the highway, girls being punished for dancing it in schools, and we see women and even some men making the jerky leg movements on the platforms of railway stations and in the streets.
This was what happened at Aix-la-Chappelle in 1374, the first recorded epidemic. Crowds of men and women danced wildly in the streets. They soon began to see visions and had to be thumped on the abdomen for their relief. The dancing mania spread to Metz and Cologne, and in 1418 it appeared in Strasbourg, when even children took part in the orgies. France, Holland, Italy, and England were visited by what Paracelsus, the physician and alchemist, called the plague which causes mental abberations and disgusting convulsive movements.
To a medical man the present dancing mania appears to be a result of lowered stability of the nervous system due to the strain of the war, and to be very like St. Vitus's dance mania of early times.
Here are some definitions of forms of St. Vitus's dance, or chorea, taken from a medical dictionary,
which seem to apply approximately to the present mania:
Chorea.-A convulsive nervous disease with involun- tary jerking movements.
Saltatory Chorea.-Rhythmic chorea with dancing movements.
Automatic Chorea.-The movements of the limbs seem to be voluntary, but they are really independent of the will and are performed in response to some nervous stimulus.
Mimetic Chorea.-The result of imitation.
School-made Chorea.-Resulting from over-stimu- lation at school.
There is also senile chorea, which comes on in old age. The fact is, at any rate, that there must be some irritable nervous disease abroad when children cannot keep their limbs still at school, or men and women when taking meals.
In former epidemics, it may be observed, flogging was found to be the only cure; our health authorities should seek some milder remedy for the present one.
The Great Seal of the Realm.
As a result of decisions reached by the last Imperial Conference the title of King George V. has been changed, and the official procedure by which such change can be made is interesting.
Parliament cannot itself change the title of the King. All it can do is to make it lawful for His Majesty "by His Royal Proclamation under the Great Seal of the Realm " to make such an alteration. A new Great Seal, therefore, becomes necessary and takes an important part in change. It would be interesting to know how many Great Seals of England have been struck since the original in the time of Edward the Confessor, and who were makers in each case. In recent times the special press was made by Greenwood and Batley Ltd. of Leeds, who have supplied complete minting plants to numerous Governments, including those of India, France, Italy, Turkey and Afghanistan.
The Great Seal of England may be described as the specific emblem of authority, and is affixed on all solemn occasions to documents expressing the pleasure of the Sovereign. Thus it appears on proclamations summoning Parliament, treaties with Foreign Powers, patents of nobility and charters to towns.
Nowadays the Lord Chancellor is responsible for the moulds, but in earlier days the custody of the Great Seal was a permanent appointment usually held by a peer for the duration of the King's pleasure. By an Act of Queen Elizabeth the status of die Lord Keeper of the Seal was made practically equal to the Lord Chancellor and eventually the two appointments became merged. Actually the last Lord Keeper was Sir Robert Henley, who was made Chancellor on the accession of George III.
Miscellaneous.
A tribe in which women practise polygamy, and the inhabitants of the harem are men, has been discovered in Mongolia by M. Kasloff, the Russian scientist. The tribe, says M. Kasloff, is ruled by women, and each woman has several husbands. M. Kasloff also relates how he braved "the demons" of Mongolian superstition by swimming across a sacred lake in the Gobi desert, and was himself hailed as a demon.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1, 1927
143
A. O. F. B.
Mystery Play in Sarawak.
SUCCESSFUL EXPERIMENT IN A FAR AWAY LAND.
A meeting of the Ancient Order was held in the Residency on Monday, 25th April, to inaugurate the Sarawak Vat. It was owing to the kindness of Blower H. B. Crocker that we were able to meet so happily and have so good an evening. Thirty-two Blowers were present.
After some preliminary lubrication-moderation of course being observed-the Ancient Order proceeded to dinner. The Blowers Anthem was sung when the pipes had been tried and found good, and then the Chairman, Blower Crocker, gave the command "Shoot your Linen." All Linen was shot, and all links were present.
Blowers H. H. Kortright, E. M. Marjoribanks and S. T. Ennion, were elected "Chuckers-Out" and dinner proceeded.
Dinner finished, a vote of thanks was passed to Blower Crocker and the following Toasts drunk- "The King." "His Highness the Rajah," "Sir Alfred Fripp and the A.O.F.B"; and then we broke up for further entertainment.
No one really knew how it happened but on a sudden a rugger scrum started. It was an irregular scrum but the general idea was a 3, 2, 3 formation. The ball (a cushion) was neatly heeled and Blower Rennie made a getaway but was caught by the ankles and was not seen for some minutes, but was heard wondering where it was all going to end! He emerged gradually from a struggling mass of blowing Blowers, the very incarnation of Triumph, clasping to his disordered shirt front the remains of the ball, with most of its inside sprinkled on his head.
After that the evening was devoted to the various games, and the Oast Box went round and $227.37 were collected, and this enabled us to send $133 home to the Wee Waifs' Fund.
The Oast Box still contains $10 and there is a promise of another $5 which will be given when enough money has been collected to make it worth while sending a draft home. Any subscriptions to the Oast Box will be received gladly. Please send them to Tornado T E. Walsh, Kuching.
BY THB LORD BISHOP OF LABUAN AND SARAWAK.
On December 29 and 30 a Mystery play, entitled "The Seven Sacraments," was performed in the Cathedral of St. Thomas, Kuching, Sarawak. This is a bald statement of a very remarkable event. I was merely a spectator, and confess to some wonder before the performance as to how a play with such a title would be presented, and whether it was possible that the most sacred subjects of our holy religion could be portrayed without causing some feelings of regret or at least a sense of doubtful taste. But on seeing the presentation, any such qualms were wholly dispelled. The atmosphere of the Cathedral, and the demeanour of the performers, led one to feel that the spirit of Christ was there, and that one was taking part in an act of worship rather than viewing a display. Further, the reverent portrayal of the Sacraments had a remarkable instructive value for the large congregration, many of them heathen, that filled the church.
One must remember the polyglot nature of a Sarawak audience in order to visualize the scene. The spectators were for the most part Chinese and Dyak, but there was also a sprinkling of Indians and Eurasians. The language of the play was English, but as many of those present could not understand that tongue, a short explanation, both in Malay and Chinese, was given by a Chinese priest during the interval.
Those who took part were boys and girls from St. Thomas' and St. Mary's School, Kuching, (Chinese and Dyak) along with one of two former pupils, and the play brought out very clearly how Mother Church cares for us and tends us from the cradle to the grave. We were led from Baptism and Confirmation to the Holy Communion; Penance, Marriage, and Orders followed, and the last scene was a representation of Holy Unction and the Via-
ticum, which wits both solemn and impressive.
Bishop, priest, and deacon, penitent and sorrowing relations, guardian angels, the sick and dying-all were there; and even Satan, the tempter, had his part, a truly difficult one to play, but relieved later by his presence in the procession, and his evident conversion. Suitable hymns were sung at intervals, and the play was followed by a procession round the Cathedral, in which about sixty performers took part. The station hymn was "Faith of Our Fathers," and the whole was concluded with a Collect and the Benediction.
The preparation for a play of this kind means no little work The speakers have to be taught their parts individually, and special care must be taken with their elocution seeing that they are speaking in a foreign tongue. The costumes have to be made locally, and there is not much selection of materials in an Eastern town such as Kuching. Above all, the performers must all be inspired with the true spirit of the play so that the right atmosphere may be created. I am of the opinion that special care was given to this aspect of the performance, and that no religiously-minded person could fail to realize that he was not merely a spectator of a show, but a fellow-worshipper in an act of devotion.
To the Rev. F. S. Hollis, Acting Vicar of Kuching, and Miss Andrew, headmistress of St. Mary's School. Kuching, is due the credit of the success of the undertaking, and I for one can safely say that the "Seven Sacraments" fully maintained the high standard set by "The Pageant of the Christian Year" and " The Nativity Play " which have been performed at Christmas in recent years in St. Thomas' Cathedral.
141
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1, 1927.
Sarawak Library.
His Highness the Rajah has kindly presented following books to the Sarawak Library:-
Book.
Kra Ratit Red Heels Ghost Stories of an Antiquary ... More Ghost Stories
The Square Egg
Mr. Bottleley Does Something ...
The Emerald Half a Sovereign Colin II The Isles of Fear	...
The Travel Diary of a Philo- sopher (2 vols.)
Fifty-two Years a Policeman
The Poor Man's Court of Justice...
An Adventurous Journey, Russia, Siberia, China Relations
Through Flood and Fire Christina Alberta's Father Mary Elizabeth Haldane 1825- 1925
Beau Sabreur Three Farms The Casuarina True Portrait of a Man with Red Hair ... The Flame of Courage
The Black Knight	...
Dear Idiot
The House of Souls
Emily Reed
Whipped Cream Jannifer	...
Crewe Train
A Passage to India The Field of Mustard	...
By Candle Light Night's of the Round Table
The Planter of the Tree Main Street
Author.
Carel Kapek Margery Lawrence M. R. James
H. H. .Munro (Saki) Temple Thurston Hillaire Belloe Ian Hay E. F. Benson Katherine Mayo
Keyserling Sir William Knott Bower
Cecil Chapman
Mrs. Alec Tweedie Sir Harry Johnston R. W. MacKenna H. G. Wells
Her Daughter P. C. Wren Cynthia Stockley Somerset Maugham Hugh Walpole George Gibbs E. M. Dell M. Bryant Arthur Machan Harry Tighe Geoffrey Moss John Palmer Rose Macaulay E. M. Forster A. E. Coppard Gertrude Knevels Margery Lawrence Ruby M. Ayres Sinclair Lewis
Sarawak, its Inhabitants and Productions
Natives of Sarawak and British
North Borneo, Vol. I
Manners and Customs of the Chinese
Uncensored Letters from the Dardenelles
The Conquering Jew ...
National Humour
A Private in the Guards
Crime and Punishment
The Principles of Political
Economy
English Lyrics
Six Short Plays
H. Low
H Ling Roth
J. D. Vaughan
French Medical Officer
J. F. Fraser
Micrae
S. Graham
Dostoieffsky
Gide
W. E. Henley Galsworthy
M. BEAN, Honorary Secretary
Club News.
Sarawak Club.
BOWLING AVERAGES FOR APRIL, 1927.
BOWLING HANDICAP FOR APRIL, 1927.
Mr. G. T. M. MacBryan has kindly presented:-
What's Wrong with China
... Rodney Gilbert
The following books have been missing for some time from the Sarawak Library. Any person having any of these books in their possession will they kindly return them to the Library immediately :-
Book.
Japan, the People and the Place ... Highways and Homes of Japan ... Ancient Tales of Folklore of Japan The Summer Isles of Eden Wanderings in West Africa El Medina and Mecca, Vol. 1 Through the Dark Continent The Route from Zanzibar to Egypt Unknown Horn of Africa
Moorish Wanderings A Voyage in Sunbeam A Short History of England Behind the Scenes at German
Headquarters
Napoleon's Russian Campaign of 1812
The Grand Fleet 1914- 1916 The Peninsular War (2 Vols.)
Mount Stuart Elphinstone Set Down in Malice ...
Fifty Years of Public Service
Life and Letters of Walter Page
(3 vols.)
450 Miles to Freedom	...
The Picture Printers of the
19th Century Wordsworth	...
Burke ..	...
Life of Lorenzode Medici
Pitt
Escaped ...
The Life of Marie Antoinette The Story of the Guides Dyaks of Borneo ...
Author.
G. W. Browne Lady Lawson R. G. Smith F. H. Burnett R. F. Burton R. F. Burton H. M. Stanley Capt. Grant F. L. James C. A. Payton Lady Brassy G. K. Chesterton
Henri Homelier
Ed. Foord Admiral Jellicoe Leith Hay J. S. Cotton Gerald Cumberland Maj. Grifiths
J. Burton Hendrick Capt. Johnston
C. T. C. Lewis Meyers John Morley M. Roscoe Lord Roseberry Ellison Wallace C. D. Yonge J. Younghusband F. Boyle
' '
E. M. MARJORIBANKS, Hon. Secretary.
Derby Sweep 1927.
Sarawak Turf Club.
Spring Meeting, 1927.
Result of $2 Cash Sweep.
FIRST DAY.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1, 1927.
145
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents. Now the interest allowed by the Provident Fund is even leas objectionable, if anything, than that of a Co-
operative Society. Government presents every contributor of 5 per cent of his salary to the Fund with 10 per cent of his salary, and in addition allows 5 per cent interest per annum. This "Interest" is after all but a further present from the Government to the employee and need not, as far as I can see, cause the slightest qualms of conscience to the strictest observer of his religion.
Yours faithfully,
F. G. DAY.
24, ALBERT ROAD, CROYDON, 4th April, 1927.
To
The Editor, Sarawak Gazette.
Kuching.
SIR,
My wife and I wish to thank all the past and present boys of St. Thomas' School, who so willingly and generously subscribed to a parting present for us.
We shall find it very useful when we settle down, and it will be used to help furnish our new home.
We have spent many happy years in Sarawak with the boys of St. Thomas', and I regret very much that the doctors will not allow me to return.
But wherever we eventually go, we shall always
remember St. Thomas' and the many boys connected with it, and hope that the School will continue to prosper.
A. N. ELLIS.
Mohammedans and the "Interest" Question.
MONTHLY REPORTS.
May. 16th 1927.
To
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
DEAR SIR,
There seems to be some doubt in the minds of the Mohammedans in the employ of Government as to whether they should come under the Amended Conditions of Service which substitute a Provident Fund for a pension.
The obstacle appears to be the interest which the Government proposes to allow under these new con- ditions, the receiving of interest being contrary to the teachings of the Mohammedan religion.
The following extract from a recent issue of the Straits Times may help some to arrive at a solution of the problem :-
"The Chairman of the Co-operation Board F.M.S., reporting the steps taken by the Co- operative Societies Department to obtain authoritative statements from the leading Mo- hammedan religious teachers, not only in Malaya but also in Mecca, that the giving and receiving of interest in a Co-operative Society are in no way contrary to Mohammedan religion, the Board decided, when opportunity arose, to do what it could to dispel the fallacy which still exists in certain minds that the lending and borrowing functions of a Co-operative Society are forbidden by the Koran "
SADONG COLLIERY.
March, 1927.
The output, export, local consumption, con- version into coke and coal stock figures for the month were as follows:-
1st March stock balance	...	100.17 Tons.
" gross output	...	1,580.01 ,,
Total 1,694.18 "
Shipped	1,320.00 Tons.
Consumed by boilers
and converted into coke 374.18 " 1,694.18 "
Stock balance	Nil "
Normal conditions prevailed at the Upper Seam Mine during the month, and a good output obtained.
Most of the coal pillars left to support the upper west panel levels in No. 8 Mine had been withdrawn by the end of the month.
The withdrawal of the Main No. 9 drift pillars at the 800 yard slope horizon proceeded at a fairly rapid pace.
146	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1, 1927.
Very poor output was obtained from the new mine on account of the continued denudation of the coal seam. The underground labour scarcity is now so acutely fell, that we are threatened with the partial closing down of this mine in a month's time, until new labourers arrive.
The Divisional Officer visited the mine as from the 6th to 8th inclusive.
A great deal of thieving took place early in the month, and one Chin Kwai a leader, and a mine employee, was banished from the district by the order of the Court.
Bong Sin Fook and Kong Wan, mine employees, were given short terms of imprisonment for absconding from the mine area on the 14th, and remaining at their hiding-
place in Ah Song's rubber garden until captured on the 16th.
Mr. L. H. Krol, Leader of the West Borneo Geological Survey, Pontianak, visited the mines on the 27th and 28th, and left for N. E. I. territory via Tebakang on the 29th. I accompanied him on this interesting trip as far as Kujang, in the upper Sadong, about an hour's walk from the border, and returned on the fifth day.
The hospital was whitewashed, and the necessary repairs made to the roof. The dresser's quarters were also repaired and whitewashed, and a bathroom extension erected onto the kitchen.
A new water pipe-line was laid from the old school reservoir to the dresser's quartets, and the new hospital kitchen, which will be erected on a new site at the western side of the hospital, in place of the old one, which is being converted into a coolie line, for the use of the miners employed at the old buffalo and Blacksmith's Mines nearby. The old creek bathroom has been converted into a lavatory, in place of the old one, and an icinerator is being erected.
The rainfall for the month was 17.98 inches.
,	April, 1927.
The output, export, local consumption, conversion into coke, and coal stock figures for the month were as follows:-
1st April stock balance	Nil. Tons
" gross output	...	1,509.03 "
Total 1,509.03 "
Shipped	759.10 Tons.
Consumed by boilers and
converted into coke... 360.00 "	1,119.10	"
Stock balance	. .	389.13 "
Production obtained from the Upper and Lower Seam Mines was slightly below that of the previous month.
The New Mines were partially closed down owing to the scarcity of underground labour.
The erection of the new hospital kitchen is almost finished, and the bookworm examination of the labour force was neatly completed by Pelidolpo Uzaraga at the end of the month.
Ginger Ho, the local Opium Monopoly Clerk, was granted his accumulated leave on the 8th.
The water service branch lines at Simunjan Bazaar were relaid with piping of a larger section by mid-month, with improved results.
I proceeded to the spring race meeting on the 24th, and was still away at the end of the month.
The rainfall for the month was 1.85 inches,
J. W. EVANS, Manager.
SECOND DIVISION.
Simanggang.
March, 1927.
Court. The Courts were kept fairly busy during the month. In the Resident's Court, Ah Yew of Betong was fined $25 for giving false evidence. Chop "Chin Kiat" of Kuching vs. Chop "Ho Lee" of Betong. This case took some considerable time and in the end the partners of Chop "Ho Lee" were found guilty under Courts Order, section 421. Ah Hua was sentenced to two years' R.I., Cheng Guan Eng to one year's R.I., and Kumbau (f.) a Dyak to six months' R.I.
In the Magistrate's Court. Numerous Dyaks were fined for tapping their rubber trees before registering their gardens. Abang Ali was sentenced to three months' R.I. for obtaining money under false pretences; Gulima of Strap was fined one picul for setting a pig trap which caused injury to a Dyak youth and also to pay compensation. An appeal was heard against decision of Penghulu Renang concerning property, the decision of Penghulu was upheld. Inche Mat was sentenced to six months' R.I. for non-payment of Native Court fines; Madul, Malay of PUSA, was sentenced to six months' R.I. for swindling a Dyak ; Ah Jin of Sabu was fined $25 and costs for offering a bribe to Police Lance-Corporal Lani.
Many other cases were heard and settled but none call for special mention.
Fines and fees amounted to $1,096.97.
General. On the 1st the m.l. One proceeded to Lingga. Mr Hurst, Superintendent of Rubber Exports, took passage to Lingga in order to superintend the improvement of sheet rubber in the Lingga District.
The m.l. One returned on the 2nd with Mr. D. E. Calver, Acting Conservator of Forests, the visit being in connection with the Forestry Department. He returned to Kuching on the 7th.
Mohamad Ali, Inspector of Schools, returned on the 2nd, he having held examinations in each school in this Division.
The weather was very unsettled during the greater part of the month. The roads and cattle plain were flooded and much damage done to roads and bridges.
Foo Lai Fatt arrived on the 5th to be opium salesman and also to take charge of the Store Department.
On the 9th, His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Major S. Cunyanghame, Messrs. J. A. H. Hardie, and E. S. Holl, arrived at Lingga in H.H.M.Y Maimuna.
Next day the m.l. One arrived at 10 a.m. with His Highness the Rajah and party.
On the 11th the principal Chinese towkays called on His Highness, also the Dyak Penghulus.
His Highness visited the bazaar and was given a great welcome by the Chinese. The mosque was also visited; the same is being rebuilt and cemented.
The Penghulus asked that their present uniform be changed, they object to wearing red trousers. His Highness informed them that they could have the red trousers replaced by black ones and they appeared to be very satisfied at this alteration.
On the 12th His Highness and party, accompanied by myself, left in the m.l. One and on reaching Lingga boarded the H.H.M Y. Maimuna which immediately set sail and on reaching Sebuyow anchored for the night.
Next morning His Highness set sail for the Saribas.
I returned to Simanggang from Kabong on the 19th. Mr. Arundell reported that nothing of importance had occurred during my absence.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1, 1927.
147
On the 24th Mr. G. R, H. Arundell, accompanied by Pte. Maja, left for Lubok Antu, via San, Eng- kilili, and Murup, and was still away at end of the month.
Abang Sedik, Native Officer, Lubok Antu, who has been granted his annual leave, arrived on the 25th. He brought down a party of 18 Poi Dyaks who had been arrested by Dutch Officials in the Leboian N.I. for travelling without a pass. These Dyaks were sent back to Sibu via Kuching.
Abang Omar, Native Officer, arrived on the 29th from Betong having been granted his annual leave. He brought over $20,000 in notes for the Simang- gang Treasury.
Penghulu Linang of Selanjan reports that a Dyak by name Juieng was taken from his boat by a cro- codile, and that up to date his body has not been recovered.
On the 31st the m.l. Santosa arrived, Mr. W. Harnack being a passenger. His visit is in con- nection with the survey of the Batang Lupar and its tributaries.
Public Works. The prisoners average 50.16. The prison gang in charge of a mandor were em- ployed on weeding kampong roads and ditches also Sabu and Brayun roads, and later in the month were spreading manure on cattle plain and also raising the bazaar road.
The mowers were kept busy mowing on the bills in the morning and during afternoon tebassing the cattle plain.
Carpenter Matsalleh started erecting the Forest Clerks' new bungalow.
Cattle. The Simanggang herd number 83 head, three head were slaughtered for sale. Lubok Antu herd number 40 head.
Agriculture. Both Dyaks and Malays started harvesting towards end of the month. The Undup and Lingga crop is said to be above the average.
The following permits to plant were issued, in-
cluding Sebuyow, Lingga and Engkilili: -Pepper 16, Para Rubber 107.
Medical. A total of 189 persons were treated in hospital during the month as follows:-Chinese 23, Dyaks 143, Malays 21, European 1. Javanese 1.
126 cases of N.A.B. injection for yaws, etc., were given during the month.
Shipping. 18 motor launches ; and 8 bandongs arrived and 13 motor lunches and 8 bandongs
cleared during the month.
April 1927.
Court, Resident's Court Criminal.-Bunang and Budin, Malays of Saribas, both ex-prisoners, were each sentenced to seven years' R.I. for robbery, under section 392 I.P.C.
District Court, Criminal.- Sedan, Malay, sentenced to two years' R.I., Ismail eighteen months' R.I , Unggu (f.) and Timot (f.) each to six months' R.I. under section 414 I.P.C.
Magistrate's Court, Civil & Criminal.-Gambang and Sendon (f.) fined 20 catties each for adultery.
Ah Keing, Ah Joon, Joo Kiang, Sin Koi, and Bung Nyok, each fined $25 and costs for breach of Opium Regulations.
Tambi Smail sentenced to three mouths' R.I. for obtaining goods under false pretences. There were numerous other cases but none call for special mention. Fines and fees collected in the Batang Lupar amounted to $834,26.
General. On the 4th a public holiday was ob- served being "Hari Raya." A salute of fourteen guns was fired and the usual visits were paid.
Forest Clerk John Muda was granted his yearly
leave.
Mr. W. Harnack of the Survey Department left in the m.l. One on the 7th, getting as far as Baloi in the Skrang and from Baloi he proceeded by boat in order to complete the survey of the Skrang. He returned on the 15th.
On the evening of the 7th one Sim Liang Chai was accidentally drowned whilst bathing; he was intoxicated when he went to bathe. His body was recovered on the 8th.
Wan Ibrahim, Native Officer, was granted special leave to go to Sibu on account of his wife's serious illness. He returned to Simanggang again on the 22nd. His wife unfortunately died.
The yearly rental of various Farms in this Division amounts to $56,855.
Penghulu Renang of Bintulu arrived on the 14th. He has come to visit his old home and relations.
The 15th and 16th were observed as holidays, being Good Friday and Easter Monday.
Messrs. Arundell, Langton and Harnack left in the m.l. One for Engkilili on the 17th. From Eng- kilili Mr. W. Harnack will complete survey, going up river to Lubok Antu. Messrs. Arundell and Langton returned on the 18th.
On the 19th I left for Kuching in order to attend the Races.
Mr. Arundell left for Kuching in m.l. One on the 21st.
On the 2lst the m.l Para arrived with Mr. G. M, Allman, Superintendent of Rubber Improvement Fund, and Mr. R. W. Hurst, Assistant Superin- tendent of Rubber Improvement Fund.
They left for Engkilili next day and returned on the 2rd. On the 24th the m.l. Para sailed for Kuching.
On the 24th Mr. W. Harnack returned from Lubok Antu, he having finished the survey as far as Wong Mutan above Lubok Antu. Mr. W. Harnack returned to Kuching in the m.l. Hong Lee Huat, which left on the 30th.
The weather was very unsettled, incessant rain and very little sunshine.
Mr. G. R. H. Arundell reports as follows on his visit to Lubok Antu :-
On Thursday, 24th March, I started for Engkilili and Lubok Antu at 7 a.m., taking with me Pte. Maja. After about two hours' walking we reached the bamboo bridge over the Undup river near Raweng's house, where we changed luggage bearers. From Raweng's house we made for the house of Penghulu Mekoi and after three of four changes of bearers reached it at about midday.
The road from Raweng's house to the Penghulu's is nearly all through padi fields, it is undulating and, if the path is dry, easy going. Great delay was caused by the fact that all the padi was ripe and the men in each house were out harvesting. My in- tention had been to reach Engkilili in one day, but nearly everyone said that we should not do it unless we found everyone in for the rest of the way.
148
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1, 1927.
On leaving R. Mekoi we made Ulu San our next point and reached it at about 3 p.m or shortly after. The path from Mekoi's house onwards is much hillier and the going bad, the track being very slippery.
Marup was reached at about 6.15. I was told that Engkilili was only a very short way on, but, as it was getting dark and knowing how vague Dyaks are as to time and distance, we spent the night at Kalom's house and reached Engkilili at 7.30 a.m. on Friday.
Friday I spent at Engkilili and counted the cash and signed gun licences, planting permits, etc.
On Saturday 1 started for Lubok Antu - walking across the big tanjong, we boated from Selindong to Kandi's house, about 20 minutes paddle. I visited Penghulu Emong's house but did not stay long. Penghulu Emong was still asking that someone else be appointed Penghulu in his place. Reaching Changgol's house at midday we lunched there and started again at about 1 p.m. Lnbok Antu was reached at 4 p.m. The loud is in good condition and the going easy. Everyone was harvesting but 1 had taken the precaution of sending up a tongkat the day before to have men ready to carry the barang. There is a very satisfactory crop of padi in this district this year.
On Tuesday morning I started for Engkilili again and on Thursday left for Simanggang by way of Peng- hulu Lambai's house in Ulu Undup. We should have reached Ulu Undup at about midday if we had not been taken by a very roundabout way, after des- cending Bukit Demana, and had not been hopelessly misled about the distance. As it was we reached Tajak's house at Skol at about 6.30 p.m. Next day we reached Penghulu Mekoi's house at about 3 p.m. and spent the night there.
On Saturday, starting from Mekoi's house at 7 a.m. we reached Simanggang at 12 noon. There having been heavy rain for two nights, it was prac- tically impossible to return by road so the distance from R. Mekoi to Sabu was covered by boat. The Undup being in flood it took a very short time.
Public Works.-The prisoners averaged 50.36 and the gang were mostly employed in raising the bazaar road, a long and tedious job. The rest of the pri- soners were employed on upkeep of ornamental grounds and assisting Carpenter Salleh in the erection of Forest Clerk's quarters.
One prison carpenter was sent to Engkilili in order to build the new boat-shed.
Cattle.-The Simanggang herd number 80 head ; 4 head were slaughtered for sale. Lubok Antu herd number 41 head.
Agriculture-The following permits to plant were issued including Lingga, Engkilili and Lubok Antu; Pepper 10, Para Rubber 54.
Medical-A total of 154 persons were treated in hospital during the month as follows:-Chinese 23, Dyaks 106, Europeans 2, Javanese 1, Malays 22.
77 cases of N.A.B injection for yaws, etc., were given during the month.
Shipping -Twelve motor launches and six sailing vessels entered and seventeen motor launches and eight sailing vessels cleared the port during the month.
Trade.-The principal exports were :-
Kalaka.
March, 1927.
Mr. H. E. Cutfield, Acting District Officer, reports:-
Court. There was very little Court work during the month as no visiting was carried out in order to save calling out coolies during Bulan Puasa.
In the Resident's Court there was one case, being an appeal brought by an Arab, Sheik Ali, against the decision of the District Court over a matter of debt.
The decision of the District Court was upheld, the complainant to be sent to Kuching after settlement of his debts. A case of incest, referred to in the report for February, was brought to the notice of the Resident's Court but is still outstanding pending further evidence from Pusa. This evidence is now to hand and the case quite clear, but as most of the people concerned have returned to Pusa a final settlement will be made on my next visit.
In the Lower Courts, Leman, a Malay of Rejang, was sentenced to three months' R.I. for living in a Dyak House and evading arrest; Gom a Saratok Malay, was sentenced to three months' R.I. for (1) fraudulent disposal of property and (2) breach of contract; Sa-at two weeks for contempt of Court; Assan and Lemantan (f.) were fined twenty catties and ten catties respectively for minor incest.
Junit fined $10 for criminal neglect, also Bujang Kop, prisoner, was sentenced to three months extra for breach of prison regulations and Koh Cheok Kim, prisoner, to one mouth for attempting to escape. No other cases call for special mention.
General. On the 16th His Highness the Rajah arrived in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna for a visit to this district, accompanied by the Resident, Second Division, Mr F. A. W. Page-Turner. Mr. Hardie, Major Cunynghame, and Mr. E. S. Holl. Acting on instructions I went straight aboard the H.H.M.Y Maimuna on her arrival opposite the fort and His Highness proceeded direct to Saratok. His High- ness went ashore to Saratok that evening and was again in the fort the following morning.
Nothing was brought to the notice of His High- ness the Rajah and no special requests were made.
His Highness left again at midday and spent the evening ashore at Kabong. His Highness spent the following morning in the Court House where again nothing was brought to his notice. The H.H.M.Y. Maimuna sailed for Kuching the same, afternoon.
The Resident remained over the following day at Kabong when several matters were attended to.
The Resident left early on Saturday the 19th in m.l. One for Simanggang.
Harrv Sulong, Monopolies Clerk, was sent here for duty at Saratok and arrived in the 3rd. He is to take charge of the sale of opium and work as general clerk in the office. Enda, junior clerk at Kabong, who has been instructed here, was transferred to Debak during the month.
P. C. Gundi of Kabong was dismissed the force for petty theft and other irregularities.
On the 23rd I developed eye trouble and, as it was still bad on the 29th, I had to proceed to Kuching for medical treatment on m.s. Kim Chin Thong, returning by the same vessel, but was still away at the end of the month.
P.W.D. The prisoners averaged 24.54. At the beginning of the month most of these were em- ployed at Saratok but owing to the mandor, who is a Kabong Malay, having no quarters I brought him and the whole gang down to Kabong on the 6th. Here they were employed in the rebuilding of the road from the fort to the pengkalan, the repairs needed to the road from the fort to the sands and the new inland road. They also tebassed the plain in the front of the fort and the land on each side of the road from the cattle shed to the sands.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1. 1927.
149
A fair amount of labour was also put in on the fort garden and general upkeep of the station. Toe mowers were employed as usual. At Saratok the remainder of the prisoners were employed on the general upkeep of the station.
A contract was made out with one Mohamad bin Nalok for $1,400 for the building of three houses in the Lower Saiibas. There are two buildings at Debak, one fur the Native Officer and one for the Court Writer.
The other building is to be erected at Pusa for the use of the Court Writer there. All three buildings are to be built to the same plan. Work is also progressing satisfactorily with the second clerk's quarters at Saratok.
Trade. The trade statistics fur the month were as follows:-
Shipping.-One steamer entered and one steamer cleared, six motor schooners entered and seven motor schooners cleared, sixteen bandongs entered and fourteen baudougs cleared during the month
The following are the trade returns for the Second Division:-
April, 1927.
Mr. H. E. Cutfield, Acting District Officer, reports
Court.-Court work during the month has been very light. Tesen was sentenced to three months' R 1. for criminal desertion ; Johari to three months for theft; Jenal fined $5 for breach of Port Regulations and a Dyak man and woman were fined two piculs and one picul respectively for incest. No other cases call for special mention.
General.-At the beginning of the mouth I was away in Kuching for medical treatment to my eye, returning again by motor schooner on the 2nd.
Monday 4th, being Hari Raya, was observed as a public holiday and the offices closed. The usual Malay feast was celebrated.
On the 19th I left by s.s. Alice Lorraine for Kuching for race week and was still away at the end of the month.
Tan Eng Chong, Court Writer, visited Roban during the month. Julin, the Court Writer from Saratok, took over from Tan Eng Chong on the 20th, and the latter proceeded on six weeks' leave
Rajak was employed as policeman as from the 1st of the month.
This fills a vacancy caused by the dismissal of Corporal Remat from Roban. Towards the end of the month the dresser from Belong arrived on a visit to this district.
P.W.D.-The prisoners, averaging 26.03, were employed putting a road through the swamps at the end of the new Hilir road on the sands Squaring and collecting timber and planing planks, etc , for the rebuilding of the stables, a permanent stable replacing the leaf attaps building.
Six men were sent up to Saratok to level the site for the new clerk's quarters and to return here with belian attaps for the new stables. The work of constructing the stables was undertaken by the mandor and prison gang during the absence of the pony in Kuching for the races and was completed by the end of the mouth.
The road from the Fort to the main bridge over the Sungei Kabong to the police barracks was also repaired and caulked.
Trade Returns.-The trade statistics for the month were as follows :-
Saribas.
March, 1927.
Mr. A. L. Honore, Officer-in-Charge, reports:- Court. A Chinese from Singapore was fined $25 for selling false medicines declared to be antidote to snake-bites; Umar, Malay, was sentenced to six months' R.l. for theft of $60; Lawin, Dyak, to the same for theft of posts and for setting adrift a boat. Several Dyaks were fined various sums for brawling at a feast. Two Chinese were given three months' jail for breach of Opium Regulations. Another three months for misappropriation of $270. Several fines were imposed for being possessed of false weights and measures and breach of Hawkers Regulations.
The Civil Courts dealt with a certain number of land disputes and debt cases. Claims dealt with amounted to $1,073.58. Fines and fees to $498.39.
Prisoners. There averaged 5.5 for the mouth. They were employed in the general upkeep of the station.
Health. This has been good on the whole, though them were twenty three cases of pneumonia, and colds were very prevalent.
General. His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by the Resident Second Division, the Commandant Sarawak Rangers, the Commissioner of Trade and Customs, and the Director of Agriculture, visited the station on the 13th, arriving at 3 p.m. in the m.l.One. A large representative crowd was assembled to welcome them at the pengkalan. His Highness visited the kampong and bazaar and was also entertained by the Paku Dyaks in a decorated hut of their making. His Highness discussed with the local towkays the plans for building the new bazaar.
ON the 14th, at 1.30 p.m., His Highness and party returned down river. The m.l. One having started on a trip the night before to fetch His Highness's camera had unfortunately grounded on a sand bank with the tide running out and was still there when His Highness left.
The m.l. Loyal Rose, the property of a Paku Dyak, then came to the assistance and His Highness started in this. Before the first bend, however, the m.l. One arrived and a transhipment was made and the journey continued in more orthodox fashion.
A thing that shows how much respect must have been paid to Hawkers Regulations in the Paku in the past is the mauner in which the enforcing of these regulations was received by the Chinese.
150
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1, 1927.
The Capitan China who has been some twenty years al Spaoh declared that now for the first time with Ijau as Penghulu were Chinese traders bailed from Dyak houses. The Chinese conceived the whole affair as a deliberate piece of inhospitality on the part of the Dyaks.
They retaliated by closing their doors to Dyaks who wished to spend the night in the bazaar.
All hawkers boats were recalled and in the latter , half of last month hardly a sheet of rubber reached Spaoh.
The Dyaks were put to certain inconvenience by not having their wanted supplies to hand though this was eased by the assistance of the Dyak motor launch, but the Chinese have realised that retaliating as they were doing was only recoiling against them- : selves, and now trading boats are again going up river and Dyaks are allowed to sleep in the shops. As a result of trading boats having been recalled ex- Penghulu Luta complained of his losing by having his cooties continually making trips to Spaoh to purchase provisions. He has been told that there is nothing to prevent him feeding his coolies himself and keeping supplies for them in his house and deducting accordingly from their pay, but this must not turn into trading.
Mr. Hurst visited the station in the middle of the month in connection with the work of the Rubber Impiovemeni Fund.
Agriculture. There were 64 permits to plant rubber issued during the mouth.
Shipping. The motor boats Lang Indang, Bin- tang Trang and Hap Soon Ann each made four trips to Kuching during the month. Trade returns are as under
Abang Matair was appointed Tua Kampong with pay also as from the 1st January
I left for Debak on the I7th, with L.-C. Sumbang. After 1 had finished collecting exemption tax 1 re- turned here on the 24th.
Abang Sedik, Native Officer, and P.C. Abang Aron arrived from Debak on the 29th with cash, etc., and left again the next day.
Endawi Gelanggang, clerk, arrived from Kabong on the 27th, he is tn be stationed at Debak.
Mr. R. W Hurst visited this stationed also Debak during the mouth.
Health. Pusa, ten births and two deaths were reported during the month. Debak, 39 births and 22 deaths were reported (January to March).
Trade and Shipping. Seventeen sailing vessels (bandongs) and two motor schooners cleared and twenty bandongs and three motor schooners entered during the month.
The Court Writer, Pusa, reports:-
Court. The following fines were imposed by the Native Court al Pusa. Siton ten reels for slander; Suhal (f) for main mulut lined thirty reals and three sukus; Rabiah (f.) of Kampong Samarang fined thirty reals and three sukus for causing disturbance in the kampong; Tamin and lbong for giving false evidence in Court fined fifteen reals each.
Debak. Laba and Sadiah (f.) for misconduct during qidah fined thirty reals and three sukus each.
P. Mon fined Garingo for ngemalu five catties, ten catties to Government and twenty catties to plaintiff and child ; Jawat (f.) fined ten catties for divorce and another five catties for giving malu; Kuuun and Mapong (f.) fined fifteen and ten catties respectively for breach of Dyak custom. Fines and fees amounted to $216.88.
General Mohamedan fasting month commences on the 6th, instead of Saturday the 5th instant, acting on instructions from the Datu Hakim.
1 left for Betong on the afternoon of the 6th, re-
mitting February cash balance which amounted to $1,156.43, returning on the 10th.
M L. One called here ou the night of the 13th,
when news was received that His Highness the Rajah would arrive next morning
H H.M.Y. Maimuna with His Highness and others on board passed about 11 a.m. His Highness the Rajah arrived here just before dark the next day from Belong and next morning sat in Court. Nothing of much importance was brought up before His Highness
One Kapi, an ex-Policeman, with four others complained to His Highness in re the building up the kampong road.
Pusa Mosques officials weie grunted pay as from January.
April, 1927
Mr. A. L. Honore, Officer-in-Glinrge, reports :- Comt. - In the Criminal Courts Bakir was given six months' R.I. for theft of jars.
Two cases of slander were heard and the defen- dants were in each case fined; Letu, T. R. Melayu, was fined for unfair division of money paid him in compensation for loss at a feast; Jack de Rozario was fined for assaulting a coolie; Gondol was fined for contempt of Court. In the Civil Courts there were the usual number of debt claims. There was one case in which a Dyak named Gasan proceeded against his brother Luta. Gasan wished to claim back property inherited by Luta from their father on the grounds that had their father been alive he would have disinherited Luta in view of his having eloped with his (Gasan's) wife. This claim was not allowed. Fines and fees amounted to $487.05.
Prisoners.-A godown was built under the Fort by prison labour. Besides working on the general up- keep of the station grounds the prisoners were also employed in making a banked-up path round the Fort. The average number for this month was 5.06.
Medical.-Towards the end of the month the dresser left on a tour to the Kriau and the towns of the Saribas down stream from Betong and was still away at the end of the month. The health of the district has been good.
General.-The Malay festival of Hari Raya was celebrated in the usual way. The kampong was very gay with decorations and candles by night.
On the 8th I visited Spaoh. What was thought to be a common desire on the part of all the inhabitants of Spaoh Chinese as well as Malays to move to the moutn of the Bangkit was found to be looked on with disfavour by the older towkays. The site at Bangkit is certainly preferable to the present site. The latter is very cramped and altogether swampy and could not easily be developed or made decently habitable. The river to Bangkit is moreover navigable by the biggest boats that come to Betong.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1, 1927.
In the middle of the month Mr. Allman, Superintendent of Rubber improvement Fund, and Mt. Hui at. Assistant Superintendent of Rubber Improvement Fund, unexpectedly arrived at Betong in the m.l. Para and a couple of days later I accompanied them on a visit to the Ulu Baku. P. Ijau's house was reached the first day. the launch itself reaching S. Plawa whence a transfer was made to the O.B.M.B. Biji in which the journey was continued to Mat up. The last house up the Paku was reached the second day whence a return was made to Senunus to spend the night. Mr. Allman found that the Dyaks have still much to learn- about the preparation of rubber and an instructor, Bet, was left behind at Samo to start on the work. During the walk up the river P. Ijan's posts were seen that he intends using to build his new house. These are cologsally lareg. A man's arms could not span one round. At Penom the framework of the new house is complete. Here again the posts could each be cut into four or five decent-sized posts. This, it would seem is the new sport in the Paku, since Luta built his, to outdo the last man in the magnificence of one's new house, but it is a little extravagant with the limited supply of belian Another thing that is seen with regret, especially around Betong and in the Paku, is the hold spirit-drinking has on the Dyaks.
On the 20th Rev. Archdeacon Champion visited Belong, returning after two days.
At the end of the month a policeman was sent to the Ulu Layer to arrest a man for non-payment of fine He was met by six armed Dyaks who refused to allow this and was obliged to return empty handed.
Agriculture. - There were 109 permits to plant rubber and three permits to plant pepper issued during the month.
Shipping. Twelve motor boats arrived and cleared the port during the month.
Trade.-Returns as follows :-
The Court Writer, PUSH, reports:-
Court.-Very few cases were brought up for hearing during the month. The following persons were dealt with
Two lads, Kucheh and Bunto, were each sentenced to one month for theft. Johari of Kampong Serabang for theft of padi was sent to Kabong to tie dealt with by the Acting District Officer, there he was sentenced to three months' imprisonment.
Antek of Kampong Manggut for "Paternity'' was fitted thirty reals and three sukus and to pay the usual brian and blanja to plaintiff.
Debak.- Fines reported by P. Mon. Seman was fined ten catties for slander, Jimbau and Leka (f.) were each fined twenty catties for adultery.
Fined by the Native Officer.- Kalo fined fifteen reals for obtaining money under false pretences.
General.-I proceeded up to Betong on the 6th with accounts and cash tor the Betong Treasury. March cash balance transferred amounted to $2,703.55, returning on the 10th.
Endawi Gelanggang was installed at Debak on the 14th as a Court Writer there.
Contractor Mohamat has started the building of the Clerk and Native Officer's Quarters at Debak; and is expected to come down here as soon as the framework of the houses at Debak are erected, that is to say early next month.
I went to Debak on the 20th, after banding over to Court Writer Endawi all outstanding work, returning here on the 24th.
Dresser Juluis Chung arrived from Belong on the 22nd, and treated Dyaks with N.A.B. injection for yaws. He left for Kabong on the 26th.
Forest Guard Mahmudi arrived from Kabong on the 23rd. After measuring timbers, and collecting royalty on same, he proceeded to Debak on the 26th, returning here again on the night of the 30th.
Owing to the annual pengerih season very few Malays are left in the kampong, they having gone to Samaludam.
Driftwood in the Rimbas is bad and it makes it very difficult for even a small boat to push its way through
A long drought prevailed here, and lasted very nearly a month. The want of drinking waler was felt very badly.
P.C. Suntong's first agreement of four years expired at the beginning of the month, and he has now signed the second agreement. He has drawn the $40 bonus as laid down in Order No. VII, 1927.
Agrtculture- .-One sago planting permit was issued during the month. Dyaks have just about finished harvesting their hill padi. Halfway up river, Dyaks reported a very good crop of padi. Down river the crop is repotted to be a failure owing to a pest called the empango. which destroyed the padi.
Health.--Health of the district has been good.
Trade and Shipping.-Exports on rubber have greatly increased, due to the motor launches calling in here declaring goods which they have shipped from Spaoh. Formerly they never did this, and in consequence the returns were considerably down last year.
M.S. Bintang Trang called here on the 29th and proceeded to Betong. When returning from Betong she will proceed to Debak, and in future make a regular trip to that station.
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER,
Resident, Second Division.
152
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUN E 1, 1927
THIRD DIVISION.
Sibu.	'
March, 1927.
Court Three appeals against the decision of the District Court were before the Resident's Court during tbe month.
In one case the decision of the Lower Court was amended.
General I returned from Kuching on the 4th I instant, the Acting District Officer of Kapit returning up river on the following day.
From the 15th to the 19th I was at Kanowit. Accompanied by the Divisional Land Officer I walked to the Upper Bawan to inquire into a further complaint by Dyaks about farming land in connection with the Rejang Plantations Company concession. It was decided to keep to the left bank proper of Sungai Bawan instead of crossing the stream as had been intended. The Dyaks in question appear to be satisfied, at any rate for the time being. On our return we walked across the head of the proposed concession to the Sengayan stream, returning to Kanowit by river.
Mr. Woodward was at Kanowit for the whole month. He proposed visiting the Kanowit and Entabai rivers, but was unable to go upriver on account of the heavy fresh. Eventually he left the station on the 21st and was away to the end of the mouth. The Dyaks were all harvesting and reports received show that an exceptionally good rice crop is expected.
Preliminary inquiries were made with a view to appointing two Penghulus, one to replace P. Astin , and another for the Entabai District. The matter 1 will be settled when the Dyaks come down river , again
A good deal of work has been done at Kanowit in the way of repairs to buildings. bridges and roads, ' but still more remains to be taken m hand.
On the 25th instant I visited the Foochow Colony, walking through a number of gardens and visiting some of the schools. Some very well-equipped sawmills and rubber mills were visited, also an efficient mineral water factory. It is noticeable I that nothing but English machinery is installed in these factories, with the exception of some American rice-bulling machines, which are probably not procurable in England.
I suggest that two roads should be constructed as Soon as possible One of about five miles connecting the plantations area as far as Bukit Lan to the point opposite Sibu, and another which will open up a very large area from Selalau to the head of the Binatang stream or a tributary thereof. Both these roads would be most beneficial tn tbe planters.
At the beginning of the month the island was flooded for some days. Floods were also excep- tionally high at Kapit and Kanowit. Tbe tujoh ' lekor illuminations weie rather spoilt by heavy ram ! on that evening.
District Office. Mr. P. M. Adams, late District Officer of Oya, arrived on tbe 25th in order to take over charge of the district from Mr. J. B Archer, who is proceeding on furlough.
Visitors to Sibu during the month include Captain C. P. Lowe, Commissioner of Public Works, Mr. W. F. de V Skrine, Acting Divisional Officer, Coast Division, Doctor Marjoribanks, Principal Medical Officer, Mr. N. A. Middlemas, Superintendent of Surveys, Mr. E. V. Andreini, Acting District Officer of Kapit. the Right Rev. Bishop Titus Lowe of the Methodist Episcopal Mission, Mr. and Mrs Burt of Rejang Plantations, Ltd., and Mr. Pollock of Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd.
Bishop Titus Lowe consecrated the new Methodist Church in Sibu on the 23rd when large number of converts assembled.
The Resident returned from Pontianak on the 4th and left again for Kanowit on the 15th returning to Sibu on the 19th.
Mr. Woodward, who had been away in the Kanowit district all the mouth, returned on the 30th, together with Abang Enjah, Native Officer.
Mr. A D. Taylor of the Sarawak Steamship Co. was transferred to Kuching, being replaced by Mr. H. C. P. Adams.
Three inquests were held during the month. One on a Foochow woman who was drowned by her boat sinking in the wash of a launch. Evidence proved that the launch was in no way to blame and the woman was apparently left to drown by her husband and his friend who managed to get ashore. Another inquest was on the body of a young Henghua girl, who was found in the water having apparently fallen off a jelatong. The third inquest was on a body of a Foochow who was killed by a tree which he was felling coming down upon him.
Mr. Teo Teow Peng, the eldest son of Mr. Teo Hoi Lai of Chop "Soon Bee." Singapore, visited Sibu during the month and entertained a party on board their new twin-screw ship Kuranda, which made its first trip to Sibu.
Messrs. Daubeny and Anderson passed through on their way to stations on transfer.
A Foochow carpenter tried to strangle himself at Binatang but was found in time and brought round. He died a few days later in hospital from cancer.
Mr. Archer, District Officer, visited Sarikei and Binatang on the 17th, calling in at the Dyak School at Baong Assan. This school now has 30 odd boys and reflects great credit on Penghulu Ikau, T.R. Ujang and others.
Mr. R. E. Edwards, Divisional Engineer, left for Kuching, being relieved in Sibu by Mr. Whiteside.
There were constant floods during the month the water rising to a height not reached for several years previously.
A site has been chosen for the new Government Malay School in Sibu and work has begun in clear- ing and levelling the ground
A Dyak house in the Assan was destroyed by fire owing to the carelessness nf a little girl.
Obituary.-Chong Tek Foo, popularly known as Mopeng, a well-known Towkay in Sibu. Tuanku Mat of Sibu.
Police. Seven men were recruited during the month and one was dismissed for making a false attestation on joining, Two ordinary court martials were held. The force is now almost up to full strength.
A number of minor offences by police were dealt with but, considering the large number of raw re- cruits, conduct was good.
Prisons. The conduct of the prisoners was bad and seven men were whipped for robbing Dyaks on the public highway. A prison mandore was dis- missed and fined for disgraceful conduct.
Ting Tian Hing, a Foochow on remand, escaped on the 15th and is still at large
The number of prisoners has greatly decreased, the number at the end of the month being only 89.
Only three men were admitted and five discharged.
District Court. Court work was slack during the month and only three persons were sentenced to imprisonment for minor offences.
A number of persons were fined for contravention. of the Government Opium Regulations and fines inflicted under this Older totalled $435
Loh Goh Teh was fined $100 for indecent assault under section 354.
An appeal in a Civil case heard by the Sarikei Native Court was upheld and the order of that Court reversed.
A number of minor cases were before the Courts but none worthy of special mention.
Magistrate's and Police Courts. Nothing of im- portance.
Fines and fees amounted to $2,646.25 and 159 deeds were registered.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1, 1927.
153
April, 1927.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by the Acting Chief Secretary, visited Sibu, arriving on the evening of the 12th from Oya and sailing for Kuching the following afternoon.
On the 6th of the mouth I visited Sarikei accompanied by the Divisional Laud Officer.
A deputation of Chinese mentioned the matter of street lighting which I promised to attend to, and also asked that the question of a proper water supply might be considered. It is suggested that good water can be obtained from S. Repok, a tributary of the Sarikei, or S. Bulat, a tributary of the Nyelong, both streams being about 4 to 6 miles distant from the bazaar.
The size of the bazaar at present would not justify any heavy expenditure, but applications have been received for sites for an additional 43 shops and in view of the inevitable increase of population I think that the matter should be looked into. The present supply is drawn from one small and shallow well, as I pointed out to the deputation, very little use is made of rain watar, which should be collected and stored. As a matter of fact I believe very few of the bazaar houses, and none of the kampong houses are fitted with guttering.
A walk along the road, now in process of Straightening and widening, running inland from the kampong gives an idea of the great possibilities of the place, as the road runs through miles of excellent well-kept rubber plantations.
Further up river a good deal of pepper is planted on what appears to be suitable soil, and a pepper reserve has been made there with a view to encouraging the opening up of more gardens. Most of the pepper loosed well, but I thought I saw signs of disease and am communicating with the Director of Agriculture on the subject. The Chinese are only too anxious to turn their attention to products other than rubber, and no effort should be spared to encourage them.
From Bukit Peninjau up the Sarikei River a good view can be had of the surrounding district. All the land between the hill and Sarikei village, a distance of about six or seven miles, has been planted up with pepper and rubber.
On the afternoon of the 7th I visited the Bugis colony established opposite Sarikei. These people have done an astonishing amount of work in felling big jungle and driving deep straight ditches through from the main river. They have about 40, 000 coconuts planted out and are in the meantime living on their catch-crops of tapioca, bananas, pineapples, sugarcane, pumpkins, etc. They appear to be contented and by no means badly off to judge from the appearance of their women-folk.
I left for Rejang on the 8th, visiting Selalang on the following day and returning to Sibu on the 11th.
On the 23rd instant, I paid a flying visit to Kanowit, meeting the Acting District Officer there. A few important matters were attended to and, on my return to Sibu the following day, I brought down two unfortunate Dyaks in very advanced stages of leprosy. There appears to have been no trouble about getting these two, a man and a woman, to come down, and I think this is very possibly the result of a visit paid by some of the upriver Peng- hulus to the Leper Settlement, where they had a long talk with some of the Dyaks' occupants and have returned here with most glowing reports on the way they are treated. They even affirm that Dyaks. about to be discharged as cured beg to be allowed to stay at the Settlement.
The sixteen Poi Dyaks, who left on an unauthorised visit to N. 1. Territory in February, arrived here under escort on the 3rd of the month, having been arrested by the Dutch Officials and handed over at Lubok Antu. These men were sentenced to a term of imprisonment.
Hari Raya was observed in the usual way on the 4th.
A petition was banded to me by a deputation of Foochow matrons in which they protested against the laxity of morals prevalent amongst the men of their race and demanded that laws should be passed with a view to suppressing all immorality and raising the status of the Foochow women both married and unmarried.
The petition emphasised the fact that whereas western nations treated their women with respect, the Foochow regarded and treated his women as animals. The members of the deputation appeared to me to be mostly of the greatest respect and they were accorded a sympathetic bearing.
The first squad of six police has been sent up to Kapit to take a musketry course with the 303 rifle.
The Rev and Mrs. Hoover left Sibu on the 18th. They are proceeding on leave after a spell of seven years.
Dyaks throughout the Division were busy getting in their padi Reports from up river are excellent, I understand that the Igan Dyaks have not got good crops, a plague of empangau having destroyed most of the padi. This was expected by the Dyaks of this river, the district being kudi on account of the double murder at Aup in December.
Accompanied by the Divisional Land Officer I went down the Igan on the 30th with a view to selecting a suitable piece of land for experimental ploughing with tractors.
We went some distance up Loba Kabang. I understand that the land here is most suitable for sago planting and hope to arrange for Chinese to open up an area in the vicinity.
Staff. Mr. J B. Archer handed over the duties of District Officer on the 1st of the month and sailed for Singapore by s.s. Kuranda on the 14th. Mr. Archer is going home on leave. Dr. Haye, Divisional Medical Officer, also left the same day on short leave.
Mr. Cotterill took over the duties of Treasurer and Postmaster from Mr. Jacques, who left for Kuching on the 6th hy s.l. Chamois Mr. Jacques is also going on furlough to England.
Mr J. C. Swayne, of Lower Rejang, arrived at Sibu on the 16th, having kindly consented to take over Mr. P. M. Adams' duties during his absence in Kuching.
The District Officer, Mr. J. C. Swayne, reports: -
His Highness the Rajah and the Acting Chief Secretary visited the station "n the 12lu, leaving the following day. Mr. P. M. Adams left with His Highness and his place was temporarily taken by myself.
Good Friday and Easter Monday were observed as public holidays and the offices closed.
The Courts were occupied with the average number of cases, none of outstanding importance. An inquest was held on the body of an unknown Chinaman found in the river and a verdict of found drowned returned Two inquiries were made about the death of two Foochows who were killed while felling timber. There seems no doubt that their death was due to complete ignorance of this kind of work. It is probable that these two accidents will serve as a warning to others.
Amongst the visitors to the station were Captain Clark and Messrs. Banks, Kidd and Tait.
Mr. and Mrs. Hoover left on the 18th on furlough.
154
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1, 1927.
Lower Rejang
March, 1927.
The District, Officer of Lower Rejang reports : -
I returned from Matu on the 1st and was there again from the 24th to the end of the month. I was accompanied by tbe Divisional Medical Officer. Fourteen lepers now remain in the river and it is proposed, failing direct communication, to send these to Sibu, whet they can be cared for until arrangements can be made to send them to Kuching.
Mr. Pascoe arrived on tbe 26th and on the following day started to lay out the site of the new bazaar. Unfortunately, owing to injuries to his foot be had to return before this was finished. However he left men behind who were still at work when I left.
S.S. Alice Lorraine arrived off Bruit on the 28th to unload lighthouse material for Serik; a telegram announcing this was received the same afternoon at Matu. Such boats and labour as were available were sent off as soon as possible and 1 understand some progress was made. It was an unfortunate time to come, as, owing to rough weather few people cared to risk their boats, and being near the end of bulan puasa the katupong people disliked being called out for several days work.
At Daro the new sawmill is at work and should do well. Some attempt has been made to clean the bazaar, which is in better condition than it has been for some time. A number of cases were heard, but none of importance. Haji Bujeng, Tua Kampong of Saai, who has acted for 29 years, asked to be allowed to resign. I have no doubt that one of his sons-in-law could take his place. He has the reputation of having worked well for the Government.
Amongst visitors to Rejang were Mrs. and Mr. Taylor, Mr. Cotterill, Mr. Jacques (on Treasury business) Mr. Pollock (of the S.O. L.), and the Principal Medical Officer
Prisoners were engaged on the usual upkeep of tbe station.
April, 1927.
The District Officer of Lower Rejang, reports:--
His Highness the Rajah, the Acting Chief Secretary and Mr. P. M. Adams spent the night of the 13th of Rejang. leaving the following morning.
Hari Raya, the 4th, Good Friday and Easter Monday, were observed as public holidays and the offices closed. On Hari Raya boat racing, football and tennis matches were very successfully organised by the Malay community.
The Divisional Resident was at Rejang from 8th to 11th. An appeal case Ah Fong vs. Ah Hong was heard and the decision of the Lower Court upheld. Leave was given to take this matter to the Supreme Court, but I understand this has not been done. A visit was paid to Selalang on the 9th to the Island Trading Company, Limited, who still have great difficulty in procuring labour.
On the 16th I left for Sibu to take the place of the District Officer, who is temporarily absent, and was still away at the end of tbe month.
Kapit.
March. 1927.
The Acting District Officer of Kapit reports;-
General. I returned from Pontianak via Kuching and Sibu, arriving at Kapit on the 6tb. There was very little to report as most of the Dyaks were busy farming. I left Kapit on the 20th to visit Dyaks in the main Balleh Gaat and Mirirai and bad visited all the houses as far as Mirirai by the end of the month. Abang Abdul Gapor, Native Officer, visited the Katibas and Bankit and Awang Samsudin, Native Officer, the Paku and Mnjong.
Agriculture.-Blleh, Gaat and Mirirai. Padi crops everywhere are splendid and record harvests have been gathered. Great advance has also been made in planting rubber and other cultures. There is a small engkabang crop half collected in the Balleh
Katibas. Reports of the harvest are not so good but a fair crop should eventuate.
Health. There has been a good deal of sickness and I regret to report that P.C. Jambang, S. Rangers, died from typhoid fever after admission to Sibu Hospital. Drugs do not arrive for this district in sufficient quantities and in spite of frequent application to the Medical Department the district is often without essential medicines. There is a considerable amount of hookworm up river and natives are only too willing to buy medicines for the goitre from which 25% of the women up river suffer.
Education. A small school to teach reading and writing in the Dyak language has been started in the Uiu Gaat in Penghulu Grinang's house.
P.W.D. I took the contractor as far as N. Gaat and made preliminary arrangements for the erection of the Fort there, arranging to meet him there again with his carpenters on my return from up river. The erection of the new jail at Kapit was commenced and the kitchen behind the Fort at Song cemented and repaired. Prisoners were engaged on the upkeep of the grounds and in making a new road towards the Amang.
Trade, Shipping Customs duties amounting to $ 1,410 were collected.
The Divisional Medical Officer of Sibu reports:-
During the month 85 patients were treated in hospital, of which 67 were new. 580 out-patients attended and 105 N.A.B. injection were given. Seven deaths occurred during tbe month due to the following causes:- One typhoid, one cardiac disease, one beriberi cum lumbar pneumonia, two lumbar pneumonia, one perforated gastric ulcer and one amoebic dysentery.
Seventy persons were vaccinated during the month. Only 377 passengers were examined. The s.s. Rajah of Sarawak having been inspected in Kuching on each trip.
I was absent from Sibu from the 15th to the 20th being on a visit to Rejang and Selalang. 1 was again absent from the 22nd to the 28th visiting Rejang, Daro and Matu, a report on this trip has already been submitted.
The health of the European community continues to be good.
The Assistant Conservator of Forests reports : -
From the 7th till the 12th 1 was absent from Sibu on a visit to the Pasai. I inspected the belian area in the Bun as far as Janteng's house and found the forest formed only a narrow strip on the river banks, hacked on both sides by hill padi farms. The belian forest is not in need of reservation as the land is not suitable for farming, and in any Case the typography would render demarcation a difficulty undertaking. A stand of belian and engkabang which would be worth exploration is repotted in the head-
waters of the Pasai. Reservation would not affect collection of engkabang fruits An area of lowland forest in the fork of the Siong and Pasai containing a stand of Agathis alba I consider worthy of exploration.
On the 28lh I left for Selalang to settle a mis-
understanding about the rights of the Island Trading Company in Pulau Entulang Mangrove Reserve. I also explored an area in Snngai Seliah, a confluent of the Limut, containing Agathis, the Gum C-pal tree. The stand proved to be of no great size, but is of tbe greatest interest botanically in that Agathis
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1, 1927.
155
alb a IR found growing within A few yards of the mangrove, and only about three feet above high water mark. The stocking was evidently good at one time, but has Buffered from exploration. How- ever, this stand should be reserved unless the Siong stands turn out to be more attractive.
The F. R. C. S., Mr. Reutens, visited Kanowit, Song and Kapit. I visited the Sibu (Chin Seng) sawmill and found considerable improvement in conversion. I also visited the Selalu mill (Lee Hua) which was still under reconstruction. I was in- formed that the Daro mill, belonging to the same firm, was now in operation. On my return from Selalang, I inspected the Binatang mill, and inter- viewed one Tamin who had been working for this mill outside the licensed area. As it was not clear that he had infringed the licence terms knowingly, I allowed him to remove the timber already cut but ordered him to cease felling.
Chop "Mee Aug" of Binatang applied for a licence applicable to a small mill he is setting up at Bukit Lan. I confined him to his original area under the Binatang licence.
On the 31 st 1 was at Sarikei and checked the Forest books.
Juruimudi Riipaii of Rimba failed to return from leave when due. Inquiries at Balingian elicited the information that he was ill. The second clerk, Muk Nam, left at the end of the month.
The Annual Report was completed and copies sent to the Resident, Third Division, and Divisional Ollicer. Coast Division.
April, 1927.
The Acting District Officer of Kapit, reports:-
General. I returned from the Balleh on the 7th instant. I stopped at N. Gaat on the way down and started the carpenters on the new Fort there. Abang Abdul Gapot, Native Officer, visited the Bukitans above the first rapid and settled a land dispute between these people and the Dyaks. Iban was appointed Tua Kampung of the Bukitans vice Nuak who is always causing trouble of some sort. I visited Song from the 17th to 19th and again from 21st, going to Kanowit to meet the Resident, Third Division, and returning to Kapit on the 27th. During the month oneN.C.O. and five men from the Sibu police force were put through a simple musketry course at Kapit.
All Government buildings were whitewashed.
A Foochow named Cheng Ho was accidently drowned at Song on the 17th.
The sum of $6,000 was sent to Sibu Treasury.
Court. Chin Foh (Kheh) WHS sentenced to three months' imprisonment for breach of Opium Regulations. There is a certain amount of opium being smuggled into Kapit and a raid at the end of the month resulted in another unregistered smoker being caught.
Agriculture. A bull was sold at Hari Raya realizing $85. During the month over $30 was collected from the sale of milk. Three calves were born and the herd is now in very good condition.
Trade and Shipping. Custom duties amounting to $ 1,059 were collected. S.S Sarawak made three trips, s i. Ulu four trips and various small motors four trips from Sibu.
The Divisional Medical Officer reports:-
63 persons were injected with N.A.B. for various skin diseases.
613 persons were treated during the month com- prising 65 new in-patients and 214 new outdoor patients, and rhe rest were old patients for repeated treatment.
There were seven deaths during the month and the causes were as follows:-One typhoid fever, one amoebic dysentery, three lobar pneumonia with pleurisy, and one bacillary dysentery.
13 operations were performed, 7 of these were done under general anesthetic and the rest were under cocaine and freezing anaesthetic.
79 Inmates of various nationalities were vac- cinated and out of this number, 20 were passengers from the Singapore vessels.
H. L..OWEN, Resident, Third Division.
FOURTH DIVISION.
March, 1927.
Courts. A normal number of cases were dealt with in the various Courts and a large number of convictions obtained. Few cases call for any comment.
In the Resident's Court, Sirat, a Post Office boy, was imprisoned for four years for criminal breach of trust, and six Chinese were sentenced to three years and one to two years for being concerned in the death of company coolie Han Kim Long.
P.W.D. 8ome small repairs were effected on the bungalow occupied by the Treasurer after being handed over by the company.
New vegetable market regulations necessitated slight alterations and additions to the building and these were carried out.
The Bazaar Police Station was reconditioned. The new Peninsula bungalow was sandpapered and oiled and the paint work started.
A contract was signed for removing the New Brighton pengkalan to the Peninsula.
General. Messrs. Middlemas and Cotterill re- turned to Kuching by the s.s. Gladys on the 1st.
Mr. McLeod, Assistant Conservator of Forests, arrived from Lawas on the 4th and proceeded to Baram on the 7th.
Right Rev. the Btshop of Labuan and Sarawak arrived from Kuching on the 9th and remained till the 16th, when he proceeded to Labuan.
Mr. Horton proceeded to Limbang on the 22nd in connection with Customs matters.
I left for Baram on the 29th to attend Punau Meetings in the Baram and Akar rivers and was still a way at the end of the month.
During the month the company cleared the jungle behind the Residency tennis court preparatory to commencing drilling operations, the actual location being about 100 feet behind the bungalow.
THESARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1, 1927.
Baram.
Court. Five Kayanns given 1 month each for contempt of Court, and fined $25 for ringing jelutong trees; Juragan of s t. Molek fined $5 for pulling out navigation lights before leaching the wharf.
Gineral Mr. Dick and Mr. G. M. Allman returned up r iver on the 5th. The La Follette went down to the mouth on 7th returning on the 8th with the Assistant Conservator, Mr. D. S. McLeod, and seven prisoners from Miri on board. A piece of the Kampong Dagang road has been washed away by the river and there seems to be no practical way of stopping the erosion. On 14th Mr. G. M. Allman left by the s s. Gladys for Kuching. Mr. Dick left by the La Follette for Bakong on the 21st on his way to Beluru. He returned on 24th accompanied by Mr. Weigall of Bakong Sawmill. The La Follette went down to the mouth on 29th returning on the 30th with the Resident and Father Jansen on board.
Rainfall for the month 7'30 inches.
P.W.D. The prisoners, averaging 24 daily, were employed on general upkeep work, repairing bridges and whitewashing buildings. The carpenter was employed on alterations to the Fort, repairing longboats and also the La Follette wharf. The building of the new school has been put into the hands of the Contractor who built the new arrack distillery. The cfinishing of the arrack distillery has been held up owing to the fact that we are unable to obtain stone from Kuching.
Medical. The dresser reports that 4 in-patients were admitted during the mouth and 45 out-patients treated and of the latter 19 were Dayks. Ten NA B. injections were given.
Forty-eight cut-patients and 1 in-patient were treated account Professor Harrison Smith's Fund, these included 29 N A.B. injections.
Telegraphs and Telephones. 168 messages were received and 107 despatched The Bakong-Baram telephone line has been fairly satisfactory most of the month.
Trade and Shipping. The s.s. Gladys made two trips from Kuching and m.l.Red Leaf one trip from Miri during the month. The local traders have still large stocks of jelutong and also some Para rubber.
Trade returns are as follows :-
C. ERMEN, Acting Resident, Fourth Division.
FIFTH DIVISION.
J " Lawas and Trusan.
Februaty, 1927.
Court. At Lawas three persons were imprisoned for travelling without a pass, one of them, Awang Tati, being extradited to B.N.B. on a chaige of theft.
At Trusan in the District Conrt, Bridang Bangau was ordered to hand over a share of property to Likoh Sia (f.). He appealed against this decision but up to the time of writing the case had not been heard.
At Sundar there were several cases mostly for breach of Forest Regulations but none calls for mention.
Crime. 1 regret to report that during the month it was found necessary to detain Customs Officer Mustapa on grave suspicion of criminal breach of trust. The case is awaiting trial by the Resident's Court.
Travelling. On 6th I left for Sundar and Trusan with Messrs. Allman and Cook, returning on 10th. Mr. Allman returned to Limbang on I4ih.
On 26th I walked to Trusan, leaving up river next day to collect evidence for the trial of Lallong Ballang and Sawai.
Prisoners. The average number of prisoners during the month was 5. They were employed on the general upkeep of the station.
Public Works. Work on Sualai Road progressed slowly. About a mile and a half of rentis was cut for the Melipat Road and on 25th Kian Seng signed a contract for the construction at $9 per chain.
Wong Chuan undertook the construction of the Customs Examination Shed at Lawas for $280, Government supplying materials and Ah Kaw signed the contract for the Trusan Shed at an inclusive price of $720. Hassan continued to work timber.
General. Cornelius Low was granted six weeks' leave from 8th. Mr. A. H. Nunes, Assistant Superintendent of Customs, visited Lawas, Trusan and Sundar from 15th to 26th.
Agriculture. The Lawas Sarawak Rubber Estate, Ltd., exported 27,792 lbs. of dry rubber to Labusn. Harvesting has started and the padi crop is reported to be fair.
Shipping. M.L. Edmee made five trips to Labuan, and m.l. Ban Sapu made three trips to Punang.
Rainfall. The rainfall recorded was, Lawas 6.57 inches, Trusan 12.13 inches, and Lawas Estate 5.22 inches
Trade. The trade returns are as follows :-
FOREIGN.
F. F. BOULT, Resident, Fifth Division.
