
The
Sarawak Gazette
PRICE
VOL.LVII.
No.880.
KUCHING,Monday,January 3rd,1927.	20 CENTS.
Contents.
-*-
Page
1920	...	...	...	...	...	1
Notes	...	...	...	...	...	2
Arrival of Tier Highness the Ranee	...	...	4 Christmas	...	...	...	...	...	4
Miri Observes St.Andrew's Day ...	...	...	4
St.Andrew's Nicht' in Miri ...	4
Mr.N.Vintccnt's Adventure ...	...	...	6
Death of H.I.M.the Emperor of Japan	...	...	5
The Hoard of Trade and the Rubber	Exports Improve- ment Fund ...	...	...	...	6	I
Club News: -
Sarawak Club- Bowling Handicap	...	...
6	,
Sarawak Golf Club-Special Christmas Competition ...	6
Pasal Manang	...	...	...	...6
Dividends paid by Totalizator	9
Monthly Reports:-First Division	...	...
10 Second Division	11 Coast Division	...
...	17
Passengers
Miri Trade Returns ...
Kuching Market Price List
Kuching Shipping
Miri Shipping
Rainfall
Kuching Shipping Return*
Meteorological Returns
Her Highness the Ranee,together with Dayang Elizabeth and Vava,left for Eng- land early in the year,but happily was with us again before its end,this time accompanied bv the Dayang Leonora.His Highness the Tuan Muda arrived in April and remained in Sarawak until the return of His Highness the Rajah early in October.
During the year the country had to mourn the deaths of Hjs Highness the Tuan Bunsu and Major J.C.Moulton,O.B.E.,Chief Secretary,both sad events occurring very suddenly.
Perhaps two of the outstanding events of
the year were the commencement of vigorous
work by the officials of the Rubber Exports
Improvement Fund,and the completion of
the field work in connection with the survey
of the Rejang River and its tributaries,by
the Aerial Survey Company.An article on the former appears on another page of this issue,and it is,therefore,unnecessary to enlarge upon it,except to emphasize the importance of making "Chop Sarawak" synonymous with excellence in all exports.
With regard to the survey,few users of maps realize the immense amount of work
The Sarawak Gazatte.
MONDAY,January 3.1927.
1 9 2 6.
that their production involves,and,although the new maps are not yet available,we under- stand that a great deal of the preliminary work has been accomplished.
The Public Works Department was very busy during the year,the principal buildings completed being the new P.W.D.Office and an extension of the Government Printing Office.In the cases of the new General Hos-
While it is admittedly difficult to forecast the effect which very recent events may have ion the future,yet it seems probable that the 'ultimate verdict regarding the year now past 'will be that it was one of quiet but steady progress,as far as Sarawak is concerned. It is impossible at the moment,however, to do more than offer an epitome of the more salient events which transpired during the period.
pital and the new Sarawak Club work has been hindered,owing,we understand,to difficulties with the contractors.We are informed,however,that work is now pro- ceeding on both buildings,the former, indeed,being in partial occupation.
The erection of a new Treasury Office is well advanced,and,as far as judgment may be passed at the moment,the building will be of imposing appearance.
2
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE,JANUARY 8,1927
The matter of telegraphic communication,one of very great importance to the trading interests of the country,continued to exercise the attention of the department concerned,and new Wireless Stations were opened for traffic at no fewer than seven points,viz.,Matu,Saratok,Balingian,Limbang,Baram,La was and Trusan.
Recruiting for the Police was active and the force was considerably strengthened during the year.
A feature of the year has been the continued expansion of the Sarawak Service,many new appointments,both in the Cadet and the Professional Services,having been made during the year.
Turning to Sport,a notable event was the opening of the Kuching Football Club's new ground early in the year by His Highness the Rajah.Increasing keenness on the game was evinced throughout the year,alike by the European and the Asiatic communities,and many well-contested games were fought out in competition for the Challenge Cup presented to the Club by the firm of Buchanan.
NOTES.
(Dictmber.)
WE offer everyone the Compliments of the Season and wish them the best of good fortune during 1927.
ON 16th December His Highness the Rajah gave a dinner party which practically the entire European community attended,and a happier method of enabling everyone to voice their own welcome to Her Highness the Ranee could hardly have been conceived.It was noticed that Her Highness looked very fit and the Dayang Leonora was just her own bonnie self.The party,enveloped as it was in the Astana "Atmosphere" which forbids gloom,was most enjoyable,and everyone went home throughly pleased and in good spirits (yes,we know-but we don't mean what you're thinking).
WE welcome to Sarawak Messrs.J.J.Hill and R.G.Aikman,Cadets,who arrived on 6th and 13th respectively.The former subsequently left for duty at Baram while Mr.Aikman has been gazetted to the Department of Trade and Customs.He unfortunately contracted "dengue" fever shortly after his arrival,but,though obliged to enter hospital,he made a rapid recovery and is now' about again.
WE also offer a welcome to the Rev.Father Hopfgartner,who returned from furlough on 6th.Twenty-five consecutive years' work deserves a holiday indeed.We cannot help wondering what were the Rev.Father's impressions of Europe after so long an absence.
Miss Tait was another of the arrivals on 13th December,having accompanied Her Highness the Ranee from England.Her ship encountered a very bad storm off the coast of Portugal and a great deal of crockery was broken on board.We are glad to say,however,that Miss Tait is looking very fit and we offer her a hearty welcome.
MR.H.M.Calvert,Government Auditor,returned from furlough by the Kuching on 28th.We offer a hearty welcome both to him and his bride.
IT is with much regret that we have to record that,while playing football recently,Mr.E.O.Bruce,the Editor of this Journal,had the misfortune to break his leg.We hear that the fracture is a serious one and we fear that a considerable time must elapse before Mr.Bruce is about again.In the meantime we offer him our very sincere sympathy and as speedy a recovery as possible.May we also express the hope that the shortcomings of this present issue of the Gazette,edited by a tyro stop-gap,may move him to mirth rather than anger.
WE venture to draw the particular attention of all readers to the last few lines above,and to implore them to reserve their cartridges and "Sarawak" eggs for a more worthy object.
WE note the promotion of Mr.J.A.H.Hardie to be an Officer of Class IB and offer him our congratulations.
MR.C.E.A.Ermen,late Divisional Officer,First Division,has been gazetted- Acting Resident,Fourth Division,on Mr.H.L.Owen's transfer to the Residency of the Third Division.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE,JANUARY 3,1927.
3
MR.W.Cotterill left on 11th December in H.H.M.Y.Maimuna for duty at Miri and Limbang.We understand that he will be away for about two months.Mr.A.Macpherson,Cadet,left by the same vessel for duty at Limbang.
MR.E.Banks,Curator of the Sarawak Museum,recently left for Ceylon to recuperate after a stiff attack of typhoid.We wish him a pleasant trip and renewed health.
WE are asked to call the attention of all concerned to the notice in the Government Gazette to the effect that medical practitioners in Sarawak are required to renew thier licences annually as from the first day of each year.We believe that the penalty for non-compliance has some connection with boiling oil,but we are not certain on that point.
WIRELESS Stations were opened for traffic at Tatau and Balingian on 14th and 18th December,respectively.
WE are asked to announce that a woollen sweater,left in one of the Sarawak Steamship Company's vessels,has been lying in the Sibu Office of that Company for about a year,and that the owner may recover the article on application.We are not informed as to whether the Company intends to make any charges for rent,commission or demurrage,or not.
"All the small holders in Saribas have been instructed and stencils given to them,and in future no more unmarked rubber will be shipped from here.All the rubber dealers have been warned to get rid of any unmarked rubber they may have.One trader at each of the following places: Betong,Spaoh and Saratok was fined 10 each for failing to keep a record book,showing the name and kampong of the person from whom they had bought their rubber.At Debak two rubber dealers were fined.Another three Chinese traders at Spaoh have just been summoned and as they have been told repeatedly to keep a record and a fine of 10 does not seem to have any effect on them at all,they will be dealt with more severely this time.
"Eighteen smoke houses altogether have been erected by Native rubber planters in Saribas and undoubtedly as time goes on many more will be built.At Debak there is only one smoke house and it has just been reported to me that no use is being made of it,as the traders there,all having smoke houses of their own,refuse to give a better price for smoked sheets.
"I personally visited many Dyak houses and everywhere found them very keen to improve the quality of their rubber.Where as some time ago many of them did not possess rubber mangles,there is at present hardly anyone who has not got one.The sale of mangles,sieves,etc.,at Betong for the month of November amounts to over seven hundred dollars,which alone proves that they take an interest in what we are doing for them.An all round improvement in the quality of the rubber is distinctly noticeable and the traders all admit that in most cases nothing more can be done to turn out better sheets.
"On taking a look at the rubber in the Kalaka bazaars,where so far only about half of the gardens have been visited,the diference when comparing a marked sheet with an unmarked one,is remarkable.In Kalaka there are many houses that have no mangles at all,but they are nearly all willing to buy them.Up to now only two smoke houses have been erected in the Krian.Many Dyaks are interested in it though,and about six of them have already promised to build smoke houses."-[Extract from Report.]
WE congratulate the Rubber Exports Improvement Fund on the success which is attending its efforts and are very glad to note that,in due course,its attentions are to be turned towards the pepper industry.We hope that similar success may reward its labours in that field,which,we think,is of no less importance than the former.
DRY rubber harvested at Sungei Tengah Estates during the months of October and November was approximately 180,000 lbs.
MEMBERS of the Malayan Amateur Wireless Society,says the Singapore Free Press,will be interested to hear that Capt.Benfield of the s.s.Kuchinq recently picked up a concert broadcasted from Singapore when 150 miles out at sea.The reception was remarkably clear.
THE Government Offices were closed on Christmas day and on Monday,the latter being Bank Holiday.
THE following publications are now ready and may he obtained,at the Government Printing Office:-
Sarawak Gazette Almanac 1927 price 75 cents.
Sarawak Civil Service List Supplement 1927 price 50 cents.
Sarawak Gazette 192G Index free to
Sarawak Government Gazette subscribers.
1926 Index	4	TFIE SARAWAK GAZETTE,JANUARY 3,1927.
Arrival of Her Highness the Ranee.
Her Highness the Ranee,together with the Davang Leonora,arrived from England by s.s Kuching on 13th December at to aan
There w is no official reception,but the follow- ing ladies and gentlemen were invited to be present at the Astana to welcome Her Highness, viz..The Rt.Rev.the Bishop and Mrs Danson, Mr.and Mrs Fenwick,Mr.E.Parnell,Mr Ong Tiang Swee,Mr and Mrs Aplin.Dr.and Mrs
Marjoribanks and Messrs.A.A Rennie,J.A.H. Harcie,and H B.Crocker.
It is good to know that Her Highness and the Dayang Leonora are in Sarawak once more, and we offer them a belated,but none the less sincere,welcome.
Christmas.
Jolly old Christmas! And it was so.
I don't know what people did in the morning, still less do ( know what they did in the afternoon (one never does know that),but in the evening everyone went to the Residency to dance,play cards,or what not.
As an early arrival I watched,from the veran- dah,the advent of the various dinner parties. One of our " Merchant Princes" did not seem quite satisfied with the position into which he had egged his car.and,indeed,it necessitated some skilful driving on the part of one or two later arrivals.
Nearlv everyone was there,from their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee and the Dayang Leonora downwards and the place was ablaze with electric lights and flags.
To describe the ladies' frocks is beyond me, but they were all charming,the one warn by Her Highness,which started red and gradually shaded into something else (a very poor descrip- tion ! -Ed.),being particularly so.
The men's dresses (quite unnecessary.- Ed.).
The scene at supper was a gay one though the empty chairs of those who had left early were a pity.Capt Clark and the brothers Notherspctski very kindly amused us,as did the Lord Mayor a little later
Altogether it was one of the most enjoyable evenings ever,and one that will be spoken of for many a long day as "Crocker's Christmas."
Miri Observes St.Andrew's Day.
On St.Andrew's night a large company of Scotsmen,with certain privileged guests,assembled to celebrate Scotland's Patron Saint in the accustomed manner.At the Rest House.Miri,some sixty persons partook of a dinner that was most excellently ordered and served.The responsibility for the excellent catering was borne by Mr.Rhys Jones assisted by Capt Carstares-Dunlop,while the ladies did their part by beautifying the dining hall beforehand with flowers,and at the dinner with their presence.
It was a feast in every sense,for the list of toasts in the hands of Dr.Stookes called forth those gifts of oratory and ready wit that did ample justice to the themes allotted to the several speakers.Mr.Kerr from the Chair proposed "The King and the Rajah," and Major Richards followed with an encomium for the happy thought and mood that prompted the holding of that their inaugural St.Andrew's Dinner.Mr.McAlpine toasted "The
Guests" whom he welcomed with the utmost cordial- ity.The Hon.T.G.Cochrane on behalf of the guests expressed the pleasure and privilege that were theirs. His speech was clothed in the motley of official
phrases,and office tags,much to the amusement of his audience.The Resident,Mr.H.L.Owen,gave "The Allies" and in the course of a very interesting speech,dissipated the clouds of war,and burnished up the silver lining.Capt.Dunlop responded appro- priately The onerous duty of proposing "The
Ladies''was committed to Dr.Murray who sustained his charge with a valour and chilvary indigenous to the Scottish Nation.Mrs.Stookes replied for her fair sisters in a speech succinct and graceful.
In endeavouring to harness in a few words the torrent of oratory and compliment,it would be idle to imagine that the toasts were not drunk enthu- siastically: they were.Rut the best was not over. 'I here followed a programme of song and dance that recalled as vividly as the spoken word the minstrelsy and blithe spirit of the Scottish race.The contri- butors were Mr.Steele.Mr.Strathdee,Mr.Miller Black.Mr.C.M.Black,and Mr.and Mrs.A.A. Geddes.Our thanks are due to every one of their, for the pie sure they all tided At the piano was our valued and capable Mr.Mayer,who gave as usual of his best..
St.Andrew's Nicht' in Miri.
Ha' ye heard aboot oor supper,
The St.Andrew's day ye ken.
When forgathered here at Miri,
There'll be hordes o' Scottish men,
Wi' their auld frien's an' their wifies,
Scottish lads an' lassies braw,
Folk frae ilka nearby clachan,
An' frae places far awa'.
It matter not ye come frae Scotland,
Or frae lands across the sea,
In sae muckle ye are Scottish,
Come wi' ns an' sup-a-wee,
There'll be auld frieu's there tae greet ye,
Lads.an' lassies yin an' a',
An' the music ye'll Ite bearin',
Will aye tak' ye far awa'.
Ye will hear auld songs o' Scotland,
Sung by voices fine an' clear,
Wi' the gentle tango' gaelic,
That's tae your heart sae dear,
Ye will see some Hielan' dancing,
That will fill your heart wi' joy,
As partakin' o' the Haggis,
As ye used tae when a boy.
Ye will laugh an' be sae mirthfu',
That the tears run oot your e'e,
At the guid auld Scottish humour,
As it's gi'en sae fu' and free,
T'will be thirtieth o' November,
Gin yon nicht' be bricht'and fair,
Sac ye'd best begin your planin',
Tae assemble wi' us there.
By A CANADIAN SCOT.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE,JANUARY 3,1927.	5
Mr.N.Vintcent's Adventure.
A.Four.Mile Swim.
ORDEAL IN THE GULF OF MARTABAN.
The following tale of Mr.N.Vintcent's adventures on his recent flight to Rangoon will be found interesting.
Accompanied by Bishop he flew on October 17th from Port Weld to Penang and then to Kan Tan in Siam,where he spent a night.The next day he flew to Puket in Siam,where His Highness Prince Sridedey entertained him.
Leaving Puket the next day he had proceeded 100 miles when he ran into heavy rains and,owing to the absence of visibility,was forced to land.He discovered that it was near Kahrah in the Malay Archipelago.Here he had to pass two days with the native woodcutters on account of bad weather,but on the third day he managed,during a hill in the monsoon,to fly to Victoria Point where he was again detained by bad weather.He made several attempts to fly,but finding the machine waterlogged he dropped his mechanic Bishop there.
Vintcent then continued his flight alone and reached Mergui on October 23rd.He left Mergui the same afternoon,but had to return there owing to a burst of the waterpipe which had to be mended with the help of the engineers there.He reached Tavoy on October 25th and Amherst on October 26th.After taking petrol there he left for Rangoon,but,after a flight of 30 miles,the machine began to lose oil.He therefore decided to cut across the Gulf of Martaban instead of following the coast line.
HOUR MILES SWIM.
When he was about four miles from the Martaban coast,he was forced to alight on the water,keeping his clothes and money,about 326 dollars in Straits' notes,in a suitcase well concealed inside the plane.He swam across without shoes,to the shore,and from there be sent two chits,intended for officials,asking for oil.He spent the day there in a Burmese fisherman's hut and,aided by the villagers,managed to drag the machine down.He then noticed that his clothes and money had all been stolen and his things scattered inside the plane.Some of the outer parts of the aeroplane were broken.
While living in the fisherman's hut,one evening Mr.Wilson,formerly a sergeant in the Supply and Transport,but now a farmer in the jungle,appeared there,having received the news of Vintcent through the villagers.Wilson took Vintcent to his house in Kawa,but Vintcent had to journey some way by canoe and the rest by walking through the jungle barefooted.This was the worst experience in his life.
From there Wilson and Vintcent rode to Thongwa.where they met a Police Inspector.He informed Vintcent that the oil he had asked for had been despatched from Rangoon,Vintcent and Wilson rode back a part of the way and travelled the rest of the way by sampan till Vintcent got back to his seaplane.There he met Mg Pe Maung,a Treasury officer,who had brought all the requisites he had asked for.
Messrs.Vintcent and Bishop will be remembered by dwellers in Sibu and elsewhere as members of the Aerial Survey Company's staff at Sibu recently.
---[S.F. P.]
Death of H.I.M.the Emperor of Japan.
H.I.M.the Emperor of Japan died on Christmas Day.
His late Majesty Yoshihito was born on 31st August,1879,and ascended the throne on 30th July,1912.
He married,in 1900,the Princess Sadako,fourth daughter of the late Prince Kiyo.There were six children of this marriage,the eldest of whom,Prince Hirohito,now ascends the throne.
His late Majesty was educated at Nobel's School as well as by European tutors,and the progress of Japan among the nations of the world is,perhaps,the most fitting memorial of an able monarch.
The Board of Trade and the Rubber Expor/s Improvement Fund.
It is thought the general public may be interested in a few notes on the operations of this body,especially with regard to the Rubber Exports Improvement Fund.
It will lie remembered that the latter is dependent for its income upon a surtax of 21
/2% ad valorem on all exports of adulterated or wet rubber in lien of prosecution and fines under the Orders prohibiting the export of such plantation rubber from the State.
Objects.The immediate object of this campaign is to improve the lot of the native smallholders by increasing the price received by them for their produce through improvement in its quality.There is no extra expense incurred by them in making good as compared with bad quality rubber.All the instruction is given absolutely free,and materials such as coagulant,timber for smoke-houses,sieves and mangles at cost price.
Results of working to date.As an instance,though,of what the operations of the Fund have accomplished these figures may be of interest.The following are specimen quotations of the values of
6	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE,JANUARY 3,1927.
the various grades of Sarawak Rubber when "Singapore Standard" is at $86 a picul
:-
1.
Sarawak "ChineseEstate" would be $85 a picul
2.
"	Good F.A.Q.
"	" 83 " "
3.
"	F.A.Q.
"	" 78 " "
4.
"	R.S.S.No.1
" " 74 " "
5.
"	" " " " 2
"	" 72 " "
6.
"	" " " "	3
" "	70 " "
Rubber from the comparatively small Saribas District which produces about 1.200 piculs a month, is now accepted as Nos.2 and 3 grades above,only $3 to $8 below "Singapore Standard." Prior to the Fund's operations in the Saribas the rubber from that district never fetched more than oetween $10 and $13 a picul below tue quotation ruling for that quality,or practically $20 a picul below what it might have been sold for.With the progress made already even it means therefore that some $16,000 a month more,or an additional $190,000 a year,is being earned by the Native smallholders there from marketing of their rubber than they would have got under previous conditions.
Evidence of the improvement of the product is also forthcoming from Sibu.There are certain large buyers of rubber for America who wait parti- cularly for the at rival of the Sibu rubber on the Singapore Market having realized it to be of such uniformly good quality.Surtax receipts at Sibu have also been gradually dwindling from $23,000 a few months ago to $16,000,$11,000 and now $8,000 per meusem.
While rubber remains at its present level,however, the results may not be so apparent as they would be if there were a heavy drop in price.Then,by the improved quality of their product,the Natives would still be able to carry on production,whereas,before these measures were taken,there would have been DO market for their rubber,it being of such very inferior quality.
Future operations of the Fund.When the quality of the product throughout the country is more uni- formly up to standard,then the Fund will be avail- able for purposes such as improvement of planting and tapping and eradication of disease in Native smallholdings,the urgency for which is very evident. The accumulated funds available for these purposes now amount to over $200,000.
Board of Trade As regards improvements in other Sarawak produce effected by the Board,pre- viously Bandjarmassin Jelutong was quoted at $1.50 to $2 premium as compared with Sarawak.Sara- wak is now quoted $1.50 to $2 higher than Bandjar- massin.
This means about $350,000 more is being received in a year by those concerned in this industry here than was the case previously.
As regards the two other principal exports, Sago and Pepper,the Board is satisfied that the only improvements it is possible to effect in the former aie from the planting and agricultural end, in the improvement of the "lemanta." Under the peculiar market conditions at present,the factories produce the particular article which is desired by the consumers,and,what might actually be im- provements in the quality,would actually result in a lower price being given for the product by the buyers.
As regards Pepper,the Board is at present engaged on schemes for the resuscitation of this industry by improving the basis of the transactions between the towkay and the planter and regulating the marketing of the produce through Exchanges and,with co operation of the Director of Agriculture,on spraying schemes to cure black-fruit disease.
Club News
Sarawak Club
BOWLING HANDICAP FOR NOVHMHKK,1926.
Name.
Score.
H cap.
Total.
D.Y.Proudfoot (Winner) 289
72
361
J.P.Bfurd
331
24
355
L Gregory
284
60
344
A.M.Bathurftt
227
102
329
W.Cotterill
283
38
321
N.A.Middleman
258
54
312
R.V.Carr
298
...
298
J.S.W.Bean
220
68
288
R C.Kay
209
74
283
A.M.Forrest
204
76
280
G.T.Bates
220
56	276
J.A.H.HARDIB,
Hon.Secretary.
Sarawak Golf Club.
The Special Christmas Competition of the above Club,played off on Monday 27th inst.,resulted in a win for England at the expense of Scotland,though we do not suggest that the Golf Club intended to promote an International Contest when they arranged this Competition.The scores of the Competitors were as under:-
R.D.Binnie ...	...1 down
J.P.Baird	...	...3 down
We congratulate Mr.Binnie on beating Mr.Baird,and we congratulate Mr.Baird on only being 3 down: but where were all the rest? Must poor old Christmas answer for them,too?
Pasal Manang.
Enggau pengambis tabe aku nulls lalu ugarang,
Ngenang samoa leman utai pasal sida Manang;
Pasal pengawa sida ti seruran dalam petang,
Akai pen dikumbai besai apin bangat trang.
Mensia pedis ukai iya kala belambang,
Ngambi sida Manang enda temu siang enggau petang; Ujan,panas,ribut,malam pen endang dilaban,
Baka nya pen ati lembau nadai me tan lengang.
Manang diainbi ukai nya agi cbechamang,Daya ngema sida Manang bejalai gegelang; Sida pen nunda udi baka Pengeran Abang,Lupong kulit entli sida enggau jimat dima orang.
Datai di ruiuah pemadu iya pendiau sida Manang,Diasoh orang dudok di tikai anvam bekrawang;
Dienjok ka orang kandi disua ka pinang tembawang; Sida pen lalu dudok ditunga ka olih orang.
Orang ti sakit ukai nya patut ka buah kenang,Pendiau iya tentu likun di bilik simpan orang;
Lupong pen udah sedia nganti sida kemara Manang,Tama ka bilik nyidi lalu ngentau ka pemdis enggau trang.
Manang nusi pemdis nadai agi betagang.
Sida ninjau batu ilau nentang batu kinyang;
Leka jako sida,"Peda olih kita Daya nanibab kami Manang,"
"Laban penyakit udu serpan tu seruran balat petang."
"Bungai tu nyau sulai chundong tumbang,"
"Nyadi peliau tu nadai bukai enti enda Ngelanjan;" "Tu baka penemu kami Manang sayau ka nyawa orang,*' "Nyadi kita Daya anang takut rugi,nyawa lebih ari barang.'*
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE,JANUARY 3,1927.	7
Manang betabas di bilik ditunga dara rumah panjang,Kaban bujang ka ruai ngemas pagar api enggau barang; Sida ti empu sakit nangkap manok ari tansang,Lalu kiroh berapi ngemas ka lauk diempa orang.
Manang belian nama ti enda jako disebut,Nadai enda utai dipansa sida datai ka ribut: Empong sida dikumbai antu ka pengriput,Adai ti nyebut adai ti nimbal berebut.
Leboh Manang ti ngambi samengat orang,Samoa sida belawa baka bala ti nyerang;
Diklingi sida pagar api ama duku disandang,Kabangai iya samoa luput rebah besundang.
Leman Manang maioh bendar klakar sida,Enda takut ka busong laban Iban enda nyida; Utai ka sabang enda betagang sida minta,Ari pinggai mangkok datai ka prauh timba.
Jako tu ngajar lalu madah ka samoa orang,Badu agi arap ka pelian enti utai sabarang; Badu arap ku Manang olih akal sida udah trang,Samina ngerugi diri lalu enda sayau ka wang,barang.
Manang ti mantun pemedis udah bula nyata,Suah Daya udah teprasa lalu bejako mantah; Utai dislepak tunjok dikumbai penyakit nyengala.Iban ti enda nemu utai andal ngapa ka pemula.
Adaipen endang udah adat ari aki ini kalia,
Laban mensia apin tetemu ka pasal,dikumbai antu ti mia; Samoa penyakit,mansa enggau mara antu ti empu kuasa,Nyadi enti sida antu dibri makai nadai agi binass.
Dalam Manang ti mantap buyu bini orang.Di dalam bilik sida miring dalam petang;
Di ruai sida ngangau enggau nyawa trang,Ngumbok buyu datai nyebut jako enda chechamang.
Manang tu ukai samina Daya aja ti ngembuan,Samoa banes ti apin nemu utai bla kena keduan; Orang puteh menya apin nemu tunga,Manang ga ka tuan,
Utang kamaiatu udah diajar Injil Manang dibuang.
Buyu pen diadu ari jauh udah nya datang,Sida Manang tama ka bilik besandang pedang; Besmok mantap ukai nya agi utai dikenang,Pemendar sida Manang ambis beploh magang.
Dunya tu ngembuan utai ukai nya sa leman.
Enda kitai tetiap enda kitai tesagam;
Pemanah enggau penyai,pengrai enggau macham,Penyakit seruran nuntong kitai petang malam.
Sida Manang bekliti ambis jako dikenang,Ngajar pangan penemu ngakal dalam petang; Iban andal Manang katawa beati lantang,Munoh buyu sida baka mantap klamayang.
Baka nya mega du nya tu bisi penabar,Ti tau ngidu ngubat enggau mambar; Samoa macham penyakit ti bangat mar,Semadi mensia apin tetemu ni dikena enggau nawar.
Kita Iban anang enda berunding ngiga utai trang,Anang beguai arap ka utai ti mina pemandang; Giga penemu baka nenggau utai ti dalam petang,Awak ka enda kena akal olih budi sida Manang.
Manang bepanggai atas penemu tuai ti enda nemu,Laban agi menya mensia apin bisi penemu;
Baka anembiak ti agi nusu tindok gali enda tentu,Bepanggai atas mata enggau idong nuju ka tusu.
Dalam belian ukai nya ngasoh grai nyamai,Semadi jako Manang disebut berintai-rintai; Utang ti amat nyuman ka pemedia ubat ti amai,Nya ti patut dikaarap ka mensia alai bepegai.
Empa pengagu mensia ti dalam petang,Pulai ka maioh pengarap melintang putang;
Arap ka samoa macham jako enggau klakar orang,Laban ti bangat lap lalu enda tesidi ka utai trang.
Sapa ti udah? sapa ti tau ngagai Sabayan? Sapa ti brani bula enti enda nyengala Setan? Sapa ti udah tentu telih enda mai litan?
Kati sida Manang ukai ka mensia baka Iban
Kitai mensia tau bendar ngemula ka pangan,Ngumbai diri maioh penemu,ati ngakal seruran; Bisi ti tau mimpi ti bempong ka jelu utan,Nyadi Manang Matai tau ngagai Limban.
Nyau me tu bobanding ka leman kenang,
Niu pasal sida Manang ti ngumbai samengat lelang; Tau ka ditampil baru jari ti udah kepong ari brang?
Kati ko mensia agi bedau idup samengat nyau ngejang?
Enti kita bekenang ka pasal buyu samoa orang,Diadu ka sida Manang samoa sida nya antu magang; Enti sida nya antu kati ko tau diakal Manang? Lap kini samoa antu sema bisi munyi kenang.
Orang ti betuku maioh mungkir nyadi Manang,Takut ka pemusong takut ka sumpah orang; Enggai ngiga utai enggau kerja dalam petang,Bula ka orang lalu naroh ati ti enda lantang.
Dalam dunya tu nadai bisi antu ti ngerusak orang,Samoa leman penyakit nya ti endang mara magang; Orang ti sakit endang udah ator enda ulih dibuang,Sida ti mati endang jalai pemulai samoa orang.
Mlakang ka kenang mlakang ka pasal Manang,Berunding ka utai tau pulai ka salamat orang; Pengawa besai tu ukai agi ka pemadu kenang,Pasal ngajar samoa orang ka jalai sambeyang.
Sambeyang tu pasal ajar ngidup ka samengat orang,Takut dibuai ngagai api naraka ti angat berandang; Pemarinsa dia ukai agi ngetu pemadu chechamang,Nadai agi alai madah ka pemarinsa samoa orang.
Samoa kita ti macha tu anang enda beati lantang,Mikir samoa leman pengawa enggau pelian Manang; Anang beguai arap ka utai ti enda tentu trang,Lebih ari samoa pasal Manang ti mantap buyu orang.
W.H.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE,JANUARY 3,1927.
Sarawak Regatta
SITIIRDAY,1ST JANUARY,1027.
2nd Race,8.45 am.-THE INDIA STAKES.- Value $75.Presented by The Indian Community.2nd prize $20.1st prize to crew $15.2nd prize to crew $8.Open to any description of boat with crews limited to 15 men drawn in Class B.Entrance fee $2.From above Tanjung Patingan to Stone Wharf.
OWNERS.
1-Haji Suleiman ..
NAME or BOATS.
..Siti Khradija
RESULTS.
2-Aiup Kongti Biak Tupong ..Kumbang Belari
Conditions were ideal in the early part of the day,but somewhat spoiled by rain later on,with the result that the river banks were not so crowded as they have been in previous years.
3rd Race,9 15 a.m.- THE NIPPON STAKES.- For bouts with crews limited to eight men.Value $30.Presented by Nissa Shokai Limited.1st prize to crew $20.2nd prize to crew $10.From Sungei Lajim to Stone Wharf.
OWNER.
Programme.
1-Wee Hone Kee
NAM* or BOAT.
..Punai Terbang
4th Race,9.45 am.-SHIPS' GIGS.-1st prize $10.2nd prize $5.Limited to 4 oars and one paddle.From Pungkalan Dayang Atun to Stone Wharf.
Judges:-Messrs.H.B.Crocker,A.A.Rennie,C.Fenwick,Tan Sum Guan,Chan Kee Ong,The Datu Bandar,The Datu Imam Tua,The Datu Imam,The Datu Hakim,The Tuan Imam,The Tuan Khatib,Haji Hassim,Iuche Mohd.Zin and Abang Haji Zulaihi.
Umpires:-Major S.Cunynghame aftd A.E.Lawrence.
Starters:-Messrs.H.D.Aplin,R.E.Le Sueur,W.W.Duncan,D.S McDougal,S.T.Ennion,B.J.C.Spurway,R.C.Kay,Bishop Danson,The Datu Bandar,Datu Abang Hj.Abdulrasid,Abang Suleiman,Inche Abu Bakar,and Inche Mohd.Zin.
Steuards:-Captain C.P.Lowe,Dr.E.M.Marjori- banks.Dr.T.Walsh,Law Chin Hiang,Mohd.Sheriff,Dr.Krishna and Tuan Belal.
Clerks of the Course
:-Captain W.T.Clark,Messrs.P.Stewart,R.W.Chater,W.H.Avery and A.C.Street.
Totalisitor:-Mr.Tan Sum Guan.
In Charge of Refreshments:- Mr.W.W.Duncan.
Sideshows:-Mr.W.Clark and Abang Suleimen.
Honorary Treasurer.-Mr.G.T.Bates.
Joint Honorary Secretaries:-Mr.E.O.Bruce and Mr.W.Harnack.
1st Race,8 a.m.-THE CHINESE BANKERS' STAKES.-Value $75.Presented by The Sarawak Chinese and Kwong Lee Banks.2nd prize $20.1st prize to crew $15.2nd prize to crew $8.Open to any description of boat with crews limited to 15 men drawn in Class A.Entrance fee $2.From above Tanjutig Patingan to Stone Wharf.
1-Sri Merbau
2-S.S.Sulong
5th Race,1015 a m.-THE PERSEMBAHAN STAKES-Value $100.Presented by THB DATU IMAM TUA.2nd prize $30.1st prize to crew $20.2nd prize to crew $10.3rd prize to crew $7.Open to boats finishing Ist,2nd and 3rd in Races Nos.1 and 2.Limited to crews if 15 paddlers.Entrance fee $2.From above Tanjong Patingan to Stone Wharf.
Orxrju.	NAME or BOAT*
1-Haji Suleiman	..	..Siti Khradija
9-Aiup Kongri Biak Tupang	..Kumbang Bclari
6th Race.11 a.m -THE DATUS' STAKES.- Value $125.Presented by The Datus Supreme Court $100.Regatta Fund $25.2nd prize $30.1st prize to crew $50.2nd prize to crew $25.3rd prize to crew $15.Open to any make of boat,unlimited in size or number of crew,drawn in Class A.Entrance fee $4.From Batu Bliong to Stone Whaif.
OWNERS
1-Father Mulder St Haji Omar
NAME or BOATS.
OWNERS,
1-Wee Hong Kee ..
2-Mohamad Waslie ..
NAME OF BOATS.
..Punai Terebang
..Sri Nyamok
(Dalat)
9-Haji Hassim
3-F.A.W.Page-Turner
..Semut
..Intan Sarawak
..Sri Kendawang
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE,JANUARY 3,1927.
9
7th Race,11.30 (a.m.-THE SATANG BESAR STAKES.-Value $125.Presented by Inche Mohamad Zin $50.Funds including Inche Mohamad Zin's 1926 donation $75.2nd prize $30.1st prize to crew $50.2nd prize to crew $25.3rd prize to crew $15.Open to any make of boat unlimited as to size or number of crew,drawn in Class B.Entrance fee $4.From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
OWNERS.	NAME or BOATS.
1-Father Mulder and Haji Omar "61"
2 -Datu Imam	..Lang Laut
8-Datu Bandar ..	..Maharaja Kaya
INTERVAL.
8th Race,1.15 p.m.-THE CHAMPION CUP.- Value $200.Presented by H.H.the Rajah. 2nd prize $65.3rd prize $20.1st prize to crew $80. 2nd prize to crew $40.3rd prize to crew $20. Entrance fee $4.Open to boats finishing 1st,2nd and 3rd in Races Nos.6 and 7.unlimited as to size or number of crew.From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
OWNERS.	NAME or BOATS.
1-Father Mulder & Haji Omar .."61''
2-Father Mulder & Haji Omar
(Dalat)	..	..Semut
Rather disappointing,as only three boats were ready for the start,although this was about half an hour late.
The Dalat boats and crews were far superior to their opponents in spite of the handicap imposed by rule No.17.
9th Race,2 p.m.-THE YAMASHITA STAKES.- Offices' Race.-Value $20.Presented by The Yamashita Rubber Estates.Limited to employees in Government and Mercantile Offices whose names as being in the receipt of monthly wages appear on the pay sheet of any such Office for December 1926. A list of crews to be sent in before midday December 20th.Limited to crews of eight paddlers in each boat.1st prize to crew $10.2nd prize to crew $5. From Godown Bau Seng to Stone Wharf.
OWNERS.	NAME or BOATS.
1-Survey I	..	..	..(Ghahaya Balan)
2-Survey II	..	..	..(Starlight)
10th Race,2.30 p.m.-THE CONSOLATION STAKES-Value $125.Presented by Sarawak Steamship Co.$50 Borneo Company Ltd.$50.Sarawak Trading Company $25.2nd prize $25.A Consolation Race.For boats which have not finished first in Races Nos.6,7,or 8.Unlimited as to size or number of crew.Entrance fee $4.From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
OWNERS.
1-Data Imam
2 -Assim (Satok)
NAME OP BOATS.
..Lang Laut
..Sri Matang
11th Race,3p.m.-THE BATU BLIONG STAKES.- Value $50 Presented by Seng Chiang Gambling Farm.A Consolation Race.For boats which have not finished 1st in any Races Nos.1,2,or 5.Limited to crews of Id paddlers.2nd prize $10.Entrance fee $2.From Batu Bliong to Stone Wharf.
OWNERS.
1-Aiup Kougsi Biak Tupong
2-Haji Hassim
NAME or BOATS.
Kumbaug Belari
Siling Sarawak
12th Race.3.45 p.m.-THE RANEE'S CUP.- Value $150.Presented by H.H.the Ranee $100. Regatta Fund $50.2nd prize $40.3rd prize $15. 1st prize to crew $50.2nd prize to crew $20. 3rd prize to crew $10.Open to any boats limited to crews of 30 paddlers.One flag man and one bailer may be carried in addition,but these must not use paddles.Entrance fee $3.From above Tanjong Patingan to Stone Wharf.
OWNERS.	NAME or BOATS.
1-H.B.Crocker & T.K.Sudin .."Snipe"
2-Father Mulder,Haji Omar
and T.K.Alek (Dalat) ..Kijang Nrais
3-E.O.Brace	Singa Nerais
13th Race,4.15 p.m.-ARMY,CONSTABULARY AND STEAMERS.-Crews limited to 15 men.Mixed I crews from Steamers will not be allowed,each ; steamer must run a boat containing members of its crew who are signed on before January 1st,1927. 1st prize $15.2nd prize $8.From Pengkaian Dayang Atun to Stone Wharf.
OWNERS.	NAME of BOATS.
1-S.S.Sarawak	..	Punai Terebang
2-Police	Kumbang Belari
14th Race,4.45 p.m.- THE DAYANG MAS DIAH STAKES.-Value $75.Presented by Haji Hassim, T.K.Patingan $50.Regatta Fund $25.2nd prize $15 A Consolation Race.For boats which have not finished first in Race No.12.Limited to crews of 30 paddlers.One flag man and one bailer may be carried in addition but these must not use paddles.Entrance fee $8.From above Tanjong Patingan to Stone Wharf.
OWNERS.	NAME or BOATS.
I-Father Mulder,Haji Omar and T.K.Alek (Dalat) ..Kijang Nerais
2-E.O.Bruce	Sings Nerais
Dividends paid by Totalizator.
Race No. 1
$ 1.90
3
4.00
"	5
3.40
"	6
1.40
7
1.20
"	8
1.30
9
6.80
10
2.10
" 11
1.70
"	12
33.80
14
1.70
10
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE,JANUARY 3,1927.
MONTHLY REPORTS.
FIRST DIVISION.
Kuching.
October,1926.
Supreme Court.-Penot (f) vs.Joon Shay,application for divorce.A divorce was granted under Order of 1st May,1871,and defendant fined $60.
Resident's Court.-Three Criminal and three Civil cases came before the Court Chop Syn Kim Eng were fined $50 for breach of Rent Restriction Order,clause VI (I); Government (Oya) vs.Teh Ah Hun (f) and Ho Kang Look,accused of criminal breach of trust,section 406 P.C.was transferred to Ova Court for settlement; Mohamed Yakup vs.Ngayak (f),garden dispute,an appeal by plaintiff against the decision of the District Court wits dismissed ; Tan Ah Wee of Monopolies was fined $30 under section 477 I.P.C.Noothei cases call for mention.Civil claims dealt with amounted to $1,200.Fines and fees in the Native Court amounted to $188.37.
General.-His Highness the Rajah returned to the State on the 11th.On arrival at the Astana His Highness was greeted by the Officers of the Civil Service and representatives of the various communities in Kuching.
His Highness the Tuan Muda left for Singapore by S.S.Angby on the 17th.
The 16th and 18th were observed as Public Holidays for the Autumn Race Meeting and the Offices closed.
Rao Sahib Pillai,Agent-General for Indian Immigration,ariived in Kuching from Miri on the 21st,his intention being to study Indian labour conditions in Sarawak.
A case which has come up in the Courts has again brought up me question of Hindu marriages in Sarawak and it is suggested that a code be drawn up in accordance with Hindu custom which can be used as a guide in the Courts when cases of marriage or divorce arise.
The Batu Kawa traders wish to erect new belian shophouses in the bazaar in place of the present dilapidated leaf snap houses.The Superintendent of Surveys has been requested to survey the present site and suggest an improved building scheme.
A meeting of the Board of Visitors was held in the Divisional Office on the 26th and arrangements were made to visit the Gaol and Hospital on the 27th and Leper and Pauper Camps on the 28th.
Land Office.-The following leases,etc.,were issued during the month
:-
Area.
A.R.P.
16 Leases for Rubber and Coconuts 190.3.00.
2 Squatters' Licences	...	...	8.0.07.
68 Occupation Tickets for Rubber
and Coconuts	...	...357.0.00.
October,1926.
District Office.- The Acting District Officer,Mr.E.O.Bruce,reports:-
District Court.-55 cases were heard,48 of which were criminal and 7 civil.Of the 48 criminal cases 34 convictions,12 acquittals,1 case referred to Resident's Court and 1 to Simanggang Court were adjudged.There were 15 cases of assault.2 for cheating,6 for theft,2 for breach of Municipal Bylaws and 23 other offences.Fines imposed amounted to $333 and fees collected totalled $84.50.The civil claims involved amounts totalling $1,197 90 while fees amounted to $133.75.
Magistrate's Court.-56 civil suits were brought for hearing for which fees of $196.25 were collected.The total value of claims was $1,438.56.
Police Court.-46 summary cases were brought before the Court.40couvictions and 4 acquittals were obtained.One case referred to Sadong and one to Bintulu.The principal charges were assault two,theft three,contempt of Court five,for breach of Municipal By-laws seven,and 29 minor cases.A total amount of $253 was imposed in fines and $37 was collected in fees.
Upper Sarawak.
October,1926.
The Acting Assistant District Officer,Mr.D.S.McDougall,reports:-
Travelling.-On the 10th I went up the Left Hand Branch.All the principal villages were visited,including Sadir,Semuti and Bedut beyond Sennah.The people at Bedut were encouraged to collect themselves into a sizeable village near the water instead of living in several scattered houses.This will give them more farming land and be more satisfactory in many ways.Semuru and Blimbing were visited on the way back.Several small cases were heard at Pengkalan Ampat.The Chinese there have completed their new bazaar and seem pleased with the new arrangement.
The Bungoh and Empro Dyaks were very keen to have a case about their old dispute.This was settled finally by H.H.the Tuan Muda in 1925,but as I have no map showing the boundaries set by him it was impossible to tell which side was in the wrong.I arrived back at Bau on the 20th.The hot springs near Semuti were visited.
P.W.D.-Work was completed on the widening of the main road in the new part of the bazaar at Paku and the Chinese have put up three new shops there.Work on the dam at Seniawau was not completed.
Court,Criminal.-Tongkat (Dyak) was sentenced to one month's R.I.for breach of Forest Regulations; Rawas (Dyak) was sentenced to one year's R.I.for moving a boundary peg lawfully placed.There were many land disputes during the month end the usual debt cases.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE,JANUARY 3,1927.
11
I.undu.
October,1926.
I visited Lundu on the 22nd and also Simatan.There were many cases waiting,and there was not time to hear them all.Tuanku Mail of Simatan was sentenced to six months for cheating and Ko- long Siew of Selarat to three years for theft.
I returned to Bau via Ruso.Stunkor and Stengang,arriving at Bau at noon on November 2nd.
General.-The Director of Agriculture,Mr.E.S.Holl,and the Principal Medical Office,Dr.E.M.Marjoribanks,visited the station on tbe 21st.
Rainfall for the month was 22.94 inches.
Sadong.
October,1926.
The Acting Assistant District Officer,Mr.G.J.D.Walters,reports:-
Court.-In the Magistrate's Court,Mudin bin Ali was hued $10 for contempt of Court and sentenced to three months' imprisonment for breach of Contract; Twelve Dyaks were fined $5 each for planting rubber without permits; Three Malays and six Dyaks were fined various amounts for breach of Arms Order.Sangin (Dyak) was fined $50 for theft.Fines for breach of Forest Rules amounted to $20.
Prisoners.-The daily average number of prisoners was 12.4.The prison gang cleared the Railway Road up to the 2nd mile and were also employed on the general unkeep of the station.
The coolie gang cleared tbe ditches on the Lin- tang and Sageng Roads.
Medical.-At the dispensary a total of 161 patients were treated as follows: Dyaks 23,Malays 59,Tamils 9,Europeans 4,and Chinese 56.There were 12 admissions into the hospital,the number remaining from last month being 4,making altogether a total of 16,out of which seven were discharged as cured.Nine patients were still in hospital at the end of the month.
On the 13th instant,acting upon my instructions,the dresser proceeded to Sebangan to investigate the rumour of cholera,returning to the station the same day.He reported there was no trace of cholera there.28 N A.B.injections were performed for yaws,muli,etc.,in the dispensary.35 pigs were inspected and slaughtered for sale.
The rainfall recorded amounted to 6.34 inches.
Shipping.-The following vessels entered the port:-
S.S.Alice Lorraine four times,s.l.L'Aubaine twice,s.l.Lucile twice,s.j.Sri Sadong four times.
Trade.-The local trade returns,for comparison with last year,were as follows
:-
October,1926
October,1925
Imports.	Exports.
$18,537.50	$33,511.12
40,399.00	33,309.40
C.ERMEN, Acting Divisional Officer.
SECOND DIVISION.
Simanggang.
November,1926.
Resident's Court.His Highness the Rajah vs.Bakar Kabong Malay,charge murder (see June report).Defendant was sentenced to death,and later the Judges of the Supreme Court confirmed sentence.Law Moh Toon was sentenced to two years' R.I.under Order XXVII,1911.Chan Khan appealed against decision of the District Court.Defendant was fined $500 under section 417 I.P.C.Decision of former Court upheld.Gaong,Dyak,appealed against decision of Magistrate's Court Criminal.Gaong had three pigs killed by Gani.Gaoung had been continually warned to keep his pigs fenced in as they were destroying gardens planted up with foodstuff.Gaong claimed compensation which was refused by the Court.Decision of former Court upheld.
District Court Civil and Criminal.There were three cases.Clerk Koh See Kong was sentenced to two years' R.I.under section 161 and 167 Court Orders 1926.
Magistrate's Court.There were a considerable number of cases.Ah Yew was fined $50 for giving false evidence; Lee Lok was fined $50 under section 206 Court Orders; Tarip,Malay,was sentenced to three months' R.I.for theft; Jee Lin Hin and Lim Kee Chong sentenced to six months' R.I.for assault; Chin Puh fined $50 and costs for being in possession of a false daching.There were a number of land disputes and other cases.Fines and fees in the Batang Lupar amounted to $961.30.
General.On the 11th the Offices were closed,it being Armistice Day.
The m.l.Rahmal Saptuyah arrived on the 11th with Mr.Duncan,Assistant Controller of Monopolies,on board.His visit here was in connection with the destruction of opium during the Betong bazaar fire.Mr.Duncan returned to Kuching on the 20th in the m.l.Hong Soon Huat.
On the 12th a wire was received from the Acting Chief Secretary containing the sad news of the death of His Highness the Tuan Bunsu.Next day Offices were closed,and flag flown at half mast.
On the 15th Mr.C.S.Griffiths,Chief Land Officer,and Mr.G.R.H.Arundell arrived at Lingga,and next day at Simanggang in the m.l.One.Mr.C.S.Griffiths came in connection with the land policy for this Division.Mr.G.R.H.Arundell has been ordered to do duty in this Division.
Mr.C.S.Griffiths left for Engkilili on the 21st in m.l.Rahmat Saptuyah.Mr.C.S.Griffiths returned to Simanggang on the 25th having walked from Engkilili via the Undup.During Mr.C.S.Griffith's visit the land policy was thoroughly discussed.Mr.C.S.Griffiths left for the Saribas on the 29tb.
Dyaks from tbe Saribas,Skrang,Undup,and Lemanak,report that most of their bill padi has been destroyed by a pest in the form of a slug.The padi has been eaten down to the earth,also grass has been destroyed.The slugs were in great quantities,and the Dyaks were unable to destroy same quickly enough.
12
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE,JANUARY 3,1927.
The following Penghulus visited this Station during the month: Ingkas of Entiling,Ijaw of Paku,Saribas,Mekoi of Lower Undup,Mumin of Lower Skrang,Labang of Upper Skrang,Lanibai of Upper Undup,Jaul of Saduku.
On the 22nd Bakar was duly executed in the presence of Mr.G.R.H.Arundell.
During the month Ranti Broke was sent to Sebu- yow to act as Court Writer.This is the first time a clerk has been stationed at Sebuyow.
The weather was very unsettled during the month, there was hardly a day that it did not rain.
Mr.A.L.Honore,accompanied by Abang Abu- talip.Native Officer,left in the m.l.One for Liugga and Sebuyow on the 24th in order to attend to Court work and inspect roads and buildings.He returned again on the 28th.
Public Works.The prisoners averaged 53.The gang were employed on raising the bazaar road in order to bring same on a level with the new cement ditches.
The Sembauh and Kampong roads were weeded and ditches cleaned out.
Carpenter Salleh completed one of the new clerk's quarters and commenced erecting the second.The contractor is getting on well with the bazaar cement drains.
Agriculture 105 permits to plant para rubber and forty to plant pepper were issued during the month.
Cattle.The Simanggang herd number eighty- six head,and Lubok Antu forty-seven head.
Medical.A total of 233 persons were treated in hospital during the month as follows:-Chinese 21, Dyak 182,Malay 30.189 cases of N.A.B.injection for yaws,etc.,were given during the month.
Forestry.The Forest Ranger Special Class has nothing of importance to report this month.
Shipping.Six motor launches and ten bandongs arrived and eight motor launches and ten bandongs cleared during the month.
Trade.Trade remained good,during the month, 738 piculs of white pepper were exported valued !
$66,295.
Imports.
November,1926 $48,179 "	1925	41,878
Exports. $105,070 $7,177
Pinn.
November,1926.
The Court Writer.Pusa,reports
Agriculture.262 planting permits for planting para rubber were issued to those applicants who were duly dealt with by the Acting District Officer during tbe mouth.
Court.Court work has been very heavy during the month.A great number of cases were dealt by Mr.H.E.Cutfield,A.DO.,dealing mostly with those people who planted para rubber before obtain- ing permits.
Pusa 85 cases and Debak 225 were beard by the Assistant District Officer during his visit in this district.
The following cases were also brought before him.
Abang Ahim of Kampong Seblor,and Dol of Sema- rang were each fined $15 for trading in their respective kampongs without permission).Buda Dyak Did was fined $20 for breach of Forest Regula- tions,rule xii,section iii.
Abang Dulkarrim,Native Officer,imposed the following fines:-Assan for divorce was fined 30 reals and 3 sukus ; Jee Nai was fined $15 and costs for breach of Hawkers' Regulations ; Ah Tang and Ba
Chee were each fined $15 for similar offences ; Dan for breach of Tua Kampong's order was fined 15 reals ; Kumang was fined 10 reals for misbehaviour in Court; Pisah (f.) for failing to appear when wanted in Court was fined 5 reals; Haji Matrang for assault was fined $5 ; Hak Seng for interfering in the case was fined $5.
Abang Sidek,Native Officer,Debak,fined Sadish (f.) 30 reals and 3 sukus for divorce.
Penghulu Mon reports he imposed the following fines:--For abduction Kassim and Ugat were each fined 20 catties,and pay the usual Permalu to the parents of the girls; Gelayan for failing to report a dispute in his house was fined 5 catties ; Racha (f.) was fined 5 catties for trespass.
Fines and fees paid during the month amounted to $1,495 89.
General.I left for Belong on the 1st,remitting cash and accounts,returning on 5th.
Mr.H.E.Cutfield,A.D.O.,arrived here on the 8th per m.l.Ringgit.
H.H.M.Y.Maimuna arrived at 5 o'clock on the 9th with tbe Acting Chief Secretary and the Treasurer of Sarawak on board.The Assistant District Officer went on board to meet them.The Acting Chief Secretary and the Treasurer left for Betong the same night.
Mr.H.E.Cutfield,Assistant District Officer,and myself went to Debak on the 10th.After holding various cases he left for Saratok early on the morn- ing of the 14th by the overland route.
L.-Corporal Sumbong's pay was cut $5 for gross neglect of duty.
P.C.Bungin was permitted to resign at the end of the month.His place is to be filled by an Udai. Dyak name Tamby.
The materials for the boat-shed are now ready, but the work has not been started yet as I do not know how much was granted for the erection of same.
The shop-keepers here have subscribed towards the buying of eight fire extinguishers (Minimax) and they are due to arrive shortly.
Health.Pusa deaths reported during the month 38,and births 45.Debak 10 births and 11 deaths were reported.
Public Works.The landing stage collapsed during the month and the police have rebuilt same. The timber for the new buildings will be ready by the end of the month.
Shipping.The statistics for this port were as follows:-One motor launch entered and one motor launch cleared,fourteen bandongs entered and nineteen bandongs cleared.
Trade.The principal exports were;-
Raw Sago 1,760 piculs valued at $ 4,420Para Rubber	325	"	"	23,010
Rubber Scrap	116	,,	"	2,405
Fish Maws 2j "	"	1,895
Jelutong	4H	,,	"	4,844
Kajangs 5,080 pieces	,,	508
Imports.	Etports.
November	1926	...$23,911	$41,114
"	1925	...38,821	47,525
Betong.
November,1926.
The Court Writer,Betong,reports:-
Court.In the Magistrate's Court,Ngerambang and Dari (f.) were fined $21.60 each for barangkat. Sahari was fined $22.14,Nangkai,Guang,Bunyau, and Rantai were fined $7.20 each for divorce.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE,	JANUARY 3,1927.
13
Fourteen Dyaks were fined $5 each for breach of Rubber Garden Regulations.Various smaller fines were imposed.
Fines and fees for the month amounted to $676.23.
Penghulu Ijaw visited the station on 18th and brought in fines to amount of $137.60.
General.The m.l.Lang Indang arrived from Kuching on the 1st with passengers The Reverend W.Linton,Messrs.G.M.Allman and Lowry.
Dresser Willie Geikie left for Kuching on the 5th, taking charge of a patient to Kuching Hospital for medical treatment.He returned to this station on the 10th.
The Arrack and Gambling Farm's clerk named Jee Seh committed suicide on the 5th,by taking acetic acid.
A Dyak named Linggi of Anyut attempted to take his own life by stabbing himself in the chest with a knife.The wound was serious,and he was in a critical state but has since recovered.
H.H.M.Y.Maimuna arrived and anchored at Sebuloh on the 11th,with the Acting Chief Secretary and the Treasurer of Sarawak.They then boarded a motor launch and proceeded up to Betong.After visiting the site of the new bazaar and the new Government Malay School they left again at 6 p.m.
The Superintendent of Surveys,Mr.N.A.Middle- mas,arrived from Kuching on the 17th.to supervise the surveying of the site for the new bazaar.He returned on the 19th.
Mr.P.Johnson,the Forest Ranger Special Class, arrived from Simanggang on the 18th.He stated a Forest Checking Station was to be erected next year,and meanwhile he will place a forest guard here to collect duty on timber which is being worked by the people for the building of the new bazaar.
Mr.C.S.Griffiths,of the Land Department, Kuching,arrived here from Simanggang on the 29th, and during his stay here he has been kept busy in attending to the Pepper and Rubber Registration Books of this station.
The sum of $16,775 was remitted to the Sarawak Treasury,and the sum of $500 was paid out on let- ter of credit from Kuching during the month.
Agriculture -176 permits to plant rubber have been issued during the mouth.
Shipping.-Nine motor boats arrived and ten motor boats cleared the port during the month.
Trade.- The principal exports were:-
Gutta Jelutong
19 piculs valued at
$ 342
White Pepper
37
1,125
Black Pepper
3
68
Para Rubber
350
27,052
Para Scrap
112	,,
4,475
Imports.
Exports.
November,1926
$37,473
$34,226
November,1925
48,561
70,380
Kalaka.
November,1926
Mr.H.E.Cutfield,A D.O.,reports:-
The month has been spent in travelling.Leaving Kabong on the 8th I was still away at Saratok at the end of the month.
On the 8th 1 left for Pusa where a vast improvement was noticed in the work of Government servants since Court Writer Jerah was sent there.
Several cases came up for hearing and a number of people were fined for planting para rubber without permits.
On the evening of the 9th the H.H.M.Y.Maimuna arrived with The Acting Chief Secretary,Mr.H.B.Crocker,and the Treasurer of Sarawak,Mr.A.A.Rennie,on board bound for Betong.
At midday on the 10th I left for Debak by boat,taking Court Writer Jerah with me.Debak was reached at about 8.30 p.m.in heavy rain.
Dyaks in large numbers were awaiting me at Debak and a further 225 people were fined for planting para rubber without permits.Several other cases came up for hearing,and over a thousand dollars in fines was received during my stay of three days there.
I left for Saratok at 3 a.m.on Sunday the 14th.I stayed at Saratok for a week attending to an ever increasing number of cases.A further 563 people were fined for planting para rubber without permits,and they were still pouring in at the end of the month.
Roban has been mostly finished,Kabong and Nyabor finished and when all are completed there will have been over 2,000 fined for this offence.Over 938 have been fined during this visit.
Formerly over 400 were fined at Roban,about 200 at Kabong,a number at Nyabor,and there are still more to come at each of these places,except Kabong,which has had each garden visited.
At midnight on the night of the 15th and 16th Abang Bujang and Abang Abu Bakar,Native Officers,arrived from Kabong,with the prison gang and mandor.
On the 22nd I left by the overland route for Roban were a number of cases came up for settlement and I returned to Saratok on 25th.
On the 27th 1 left for the Ulu Awek,reaching Penghulu Nyalu's house in the Ulu Awek the same evening.
The following morning I left for the Kriau overt land.The night was spent at Andau's house at Ulu Kabor,and left by boat the next morning up the Krian to Penghulu Undom's house,the latter par- of the journey being completed overland owing to the low water.After an all night sitting at the Penghulu's house I left for Saratok the next morning which was reached at 6 p.m.
An investigation has been made at Saratok into the Chinese having built into the gaps in the bazaar which have always been preserved as protection against fire and for making roads through to the back.It appears that none of the people who have filled in the actual gaps have got permission.Two people have got permission but these are for small spaces and not the proper gaps preserved by Government and are unnecessary if the proper gaps were still there.The matter was referred to the Resident.
14
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE,JANUARY 3,1927.
A big case of a Malay committing incest and rape on his step-daughter came up for hearing and was
referred to Resident's Court.
Another long case is before the Court in which a man was brought up under charges; 1,obtaining money under false pretences; 2,absconding under advances; 3,forgery.It would appear that the plaintiff has lodged false charges and is liable to a heavy punishment for this offence and misleading evidence.The case is still adjourned.
There was a considerable amount of Native Court work which was settled by Abang Bujang.
The usual number of land disputes and other small cases were settled during the month.
Fines and fees amounted to $2,441.24 and $748.50 respectively.
Public Works.-- The prisoners,amounting to an average of 20,were employed half the month at Kabong and half at Saratok.The gang was employ- ed with the mandor at the beginning of the month raising the land round the Kabong Fort garden. They were then put on to the path over the sands, commencing between the bridges over the Sungai Endut and Sungai Numbu,running along the high land between these two rivers,parallel with the sands until it comes out on to the sands beyond the Rhu trees.This was completed by the middle of the month and the gang removed to Saratok,leaving only three at Kabong for general upkeep.
In the middle of the month they were transferred to Saratok and were employed in clearing the new road at the back of the bazaar,redigging the ditches of same,and also the ditches round the clerk's quarters,gaol and Dyak Court House up to the Wireless Station.
They then commenced work clearing out the ditches in front of the bazaar and clearing up the rubbish,after which the place is to be kept clean by the Chinese themselves.
They were also employed moving attaps from the land near the Native Officer's house to the godown under the gaol.The remainder were employed in the general upkeep of the station.
Sait was taken on in place of Jamaludin as mandor at the beginning of the month.
Agriculture.-The hill padi planted is without exception very good and the brightest prospects are reported by the Dyaks.There are on the other hand no signs of fruit this year.
Mr.Hirst,of the Rubber Improvement Fund, arrived on the 18th by motor launch and remained at Saratok until the 27th.
He brought some more rubber inspectors with him making the total employed in this district 14.
Shipping.-During the month the statistics were as follows:-
Entered one steamer,three motor schooners and seven bandongs ; cleared one steamer,four motor schooners and eight bandongs.
Trade.--The statistics for the month were as follows:-
Imports.	Exports.
November,1925	$74,350	$74,598
November,1926	31,338	39,168
The chief exports were as follows:-
Fish salted 233 jars valued at $	706
Gutta Jelutong	459 piculs	,,	5,976
Para Rubber	186	"	"	12,805
Para Scrap	42	"	.,	1,754
Pepper White	133	"	"	9,275
Pepper Black	25	,,	"	812
Raw Sago	24 koyans	2,520
Sugar Nipah	113 tins "	226
Timber	1,581
F.A.W.PAGE-TURNER,Resident Second Division.
THIRD DIVISION.
Sibu.
November,1926.
The chief event of the month was the visit of His Highness the Rajah to the Division.His Highness,who was accompanied by Mr.E.S.Holl, Director of Agriculture,arrived in Sibu on the 17th ' in H.H.M.S.Maimuna and landed at 5 p.m.A guard of honour was furnished by the police,and His Highness was met by the Officers of the station and representatives of the other communities.The next morning His Highness proceeded to Kapit, accompanied by the Acting Resident and Mrs. Aplin.At Kapit His Highness met most of the Chiefs and discussed various matters with them.
Details of this are included in the Acting District
Officer of Kapit's report.His Highness left Kapit m the 20th reaching Sibu about 4.30 p.m.The next day His Highness landed and visited the bazaar and also inspected the Residency which is in the course of being altered and repaired.On the 22nd and 23rd His Highness landed in the morning and gave interviews to various deputations.Certain payments to relatives of persons killed in the recent "amok" were granted,and the question of wharf
accommodation,brought up by Foochow towkays, .was discussed.The fine which had been imposed on Penghulu Asun by the Acting Resident,and ? which he had refused to pay,was upheld by His Highness.Penghulu Asun thereon paid the fine and intimated that he was resigning his appointment by handing in his uniform and flag.Malays inter- viewed His Highness with reference to the coming pilgrimage to Mecca.During his stay,His High- ness visited all the Government Offices and was pleased to express his satisfaction with all that had been done.His Highness left Sibu on 23rd and anchored off Rejang for the night.On the 24th His Highness landed at Rejang where he was met by the District Officer,Mr.J.C.Swayne.His Highness discussed various matters,details of which will he found in the District Officer's report.His Highness finally sailed for Kuching the same morning.
The Acting Resident,accompanied by Mrs. Aplin,sailed from Sibu with His Highness,having been appointed to another Division.He handed over temporarily to the District Officer of Sibu.
Mr.J.A.H.Hardie,Commissioner of Trade and Customs,accompanied by Mr.J.S.Mudford, Superintendent of Customs,3rd Division,left for Kanowit,Song,and Kapit on 1st and returned to Sibu on 3rd; Mr.Hardie left for Kuching on 6th, another passenger by the same vessel being Mr. Miller-Hallet.Acting Divisional Land Officer,who was proceeding to Kuching for medical treatment. The Acting Resident and the Assistant Superin- tendent of Surveys went to Matu on 2nd in order to meet the District Officer of Lower Rejang to discuss the new bazaar site there.They returned on the 4th.Mr.K.H.Gillan,Postmaster-General, and Mr.Jacques visited upriver stations on postal business.On the 7th Messrs.Allman and Lowry arrived from Kuching in connection with the work of the Rubber Improvement Fund.Mr.Allman returned on the 22nd having installed Mr.Lowry with headquarters at Sibu.
Armistice Day was observed as a holiday through- out the Division.On the 12th the sad intelligence of His Highness the Tuan Bunsu's death was received and on the next day all Government Offices were closed and flags half-masted,whilst Officers more mourning bands for seven days.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE,JANUARY 3,1927.	15
The s.I.'Chamois returned to Sibu on the 7th after -docking in Kuching.The s.I.Ilir,which had been chartered by Government in the meanwhile,could not be used owing to engine trouble.On the 24th Mr.L.D.Kennedy arrived to relieve Mr.J.S. Mudford,Superintendent of Customs,who sailed for Kuching the next day on home furlough.The Divisional Engineer and Divisional Medical Officer visited Kanowit and Kapit on business during the month.
There were only two cases in the Resident's Court during the month.P.C.Jam was tried for murder on the 6th and,having been found guilty,sentence of death was passed.This sentence has since been confirmed by the Supreme Court.The other case was a civil one wherein Ting Nguok Hiong applied for a divorce from her husband Yew Yeok Hang. This was granted.Arising out of this case Ha Mee Teck was allowed to divorce his wife Tong Ngung Ngung who was one of the parties responsible for the first-named divorce.
Public Works Department.-The Divisional Engineer reports:-
I have the honour to say that the usual Sibu P.W.D.work was continued during the months of September,October,and November.
The laying of the new five-inch steel pipes which arrived in October was commenced on 20th Sep- tember and completed as far as the old tank on Island Road.
On the 21 st a portion of the Land Office was taken over as P.W.D.Office as,owing to floods,the office under the Fort had become untenable-the old office being used as a store.
The materials for the new water tanks arrived on 14th October and the carrying of the parts was com- menced on 24th October.
I sailed for Kuching on 6th October and returned to Sibu on 28th October.The erection of the tank near the Mission Bridge was commenced on 20th October and completed on 18th November.
The old police station in the bazaar was demo- lished on 18th October and work commenced on the foundations of the new police station and Govern- ment Offices in the bazaar on 16th November. Work was also recommenced on the new District Office which it is now proposed shall be a two-storey building holding the Resident's Office,Treasury,and Post Office in the ground floor,leaving the whole of the upper storey for the District Office.The latter work was much hampered by floods in the middle of the month.
The Tamil contractor's contract expired on 31st October but I decided to keep him working another month in the hope that he will obtain more coolies so that the use of the prison gang can be dispensed with.
I had hoped very much to have a visit from the Commissioner of Public Works Department as pro-
mised when I was in Kuching as there are many matters that can only be decided by him when on the spot,and certain work has been held up pending his decision.
Medical.-The Divisional Medical Officer reports:-
During the month 110 in-patients were treated. 791 out-patients were also treated; 112 N.A.B.in- jections were given.
Seven deaths occurred in hospital due respectively to:-Chronic dysentery 1,mitral stenosis 1,typhoid 3,hemiplegia 1,senile debility 1.
Nineteen operations were performed,3 being done under general anaesthetic.
Seventy-five persons were vaccinated during the month.
From the 25th to the 27th I was absent from Sibu on a visit to Kanowit,Song,and Kapit.
I am pleased to be able to report that all the victims of the "amok" which occurred last month
are now discharged from hospital,although a few still report for treatment every day.
The health of the European community still continues to be good.
District Officer reports:-
District Office.-Most of the Penghnlus were in Sibu during the mouth in connection with the visit of His Highness the Rajah,but they had little to discuss.Penghulu Asun of the Entabai was ordered by His Highness the Rajah to pay the fine of two piculs which had been imposed upon him by the Acting Resident and which he refused to pay.
Later in the day this Penghulu handed in his uni- form and flag,from which it is to be supposed a resignation was intended.Abang Hadji Metair, Hadji Karrim,and Hadji Rapiee visited Sibu.The latter is concerned in a supposed conspiracy to defraud a Dyak boy of his rubber garden but the matter is still being investigated.Dyaks in the Binatang District are still complaining about the inroads of Foochow settlers,but it is obvious that many of these complaints are without foundation and with intent to extract large compensation for their so-called inherited lands.The Assistant Superintendent of Surveys reports that the same is happening up river.
Two persons who were wounded in the amok last month have since died,but in neither case was death due to their wounds.A Chinese tailor,with a very slight superficial wound,died on the 3rd but a post- mortem examination proved that death was due to
natural causes.On the next day Wong Teck Huat, whose relations took him away from hospital,died from pneumonia.A Foochow boy aged 6,named Sui Ing,was drowned at Nanga Jee through falling
in the river and being unable to swim.
During the month I visited the Tiong Hua and Roman Catholic Mission Schools in Sibu.In the former school a deplorable lack of knowledge of the Malay language was noticed and Tuanku Ali,who was with me,had difficulty in getting any replies at all to his simple questions.This state of affairs
for a bazaar school is amazing and 1 have threatened the School Governors with withdrawal of the grant- in-aid if genuine efforts are not made immediately to see that proper Malay classes are held and attended. The Roman Catholic Boys' School is now housed in their new class-rooms as well as the old school. I was struck by the large number of Malay scholars. Here again many of the smaller lads were ignorant of Malay,but as all the masters and elder boys understand that language it is obvious that they will soon pick it up.I visited the Convent,but school was not in progress owing to a special holiday. Mother Peter showed me round and explained the necessity of another class-room as the present one is far too small for the number of girls.
A Municipal Board Meeting was held on the 7th but little business transpired.
Mr.Woodward was absent for some days owing to ill-health.Mr.P.C.Parker,the last remaining representative of the Air Survey Company,left on the 2nd and the Public Works Department has taken over most of the material left behind.On the 20th a seaplane piloted by Mr.N.Vintcent,accompanied by Mr.Andrews,arrived in Sibu from Jesselton. She left again next day for Singapore via Kuching. Police Constable 60 Jam was executed on the 20th.
16
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE,JANUARY 3,1917.
Police Court.-Four or five cases in the Doftce Court call for special mention.On the 2nd instant, Chan Su Ming was imprisoned 3 months for va- grancy.On the 8th instant,Ngoi Ngi Yew,Lai Ah Heu,and Ewe Oh Nang were fined $100 each for fraudulent removal of property.On the 10th instant,Koh Ah Moi (f) was imprisoned two months and Goh Chai Tau was sentenced to 6 strokes with the rattan and to detention in s.I.Chamois for 3 months for theft.On the 17th instant,Ling Muk Chui and Tang Sung Chee were fined $100 each for contravention of Order No.XVI,1925,Opium Regulations,sections 3 and 4,par.(iii.).On the same day Ting Hiong Ing was sentenced to im- prisonment for one year for theft.
Prison.-Twelve men were imprisoned during the month,of these 5 were Foochows,3 Dyaks,2 Teochews,1 Honan,and 1 Melano.and 20 men were discharged,6 being Melanoes,4 Hokkien.4 Sepoys, 2 Foochows,2 Malays,1 Dyak.and 1 Cantonese.
The number of men in prison at the end of the month was 46,and the average daily number was 49.46.
The conduct of the prisoners during the month was satisfactory,and they were employed on the usual work of upkeep of ditches and gardens,coaling launches,carrying and moving furniture,etc.High floods during part of the month hindered work in the early mornings for a few days.
His Highness the Rajah was pleased to reduce tbe sentences passed on Tomedjo and Martopaviro and to order that they be released in 6 months from the 22nd instant on account of their continuous good conduct for a period of over 10 years in prison.His Highness was also pleased to order that Ah Chong's (alias Lim Eng Chong) sentence of one year be reduced to 6 months owing to particular circum- stances connected with the recent amok in that Ah Chong's children are left destitute.His Highness was also pleased to allow the four Sepoy prisoners, Mohamat Amin.Niat Mohamat,Najur Khan,and Mohamat Wali,to remain in the State of Sarawak after their release from jail on the 26th instant.
Attempts have been made to recruit Dyaks in this district for the Sarawak Rangers but it is improbable that many will care to join in view of the price of rubber.Mr.and Mrs.Kidd arrived from Kuching on the 27th and went up to Sengayan the next day.
William Haddin arrived for duty as clerk in the Wireless Department.
Kong Ping has erected a very substantial factory opposite Sibu Fort where he intends to run an aerated water factory and a sawmill as well as the rubber scrap machine which is at present working. The aerated water factory at Selalo is now working as well,but at present the quality of the waters turned out is said to be inferior.
During Mr.Allman's stay in Sibu he made a thorough examination of the rubber gardens which Government proposed to buy near Telephone and Race Course Roads.On the 30th I left for Sarikei and was still away at the end of the month.
District Court.-The following persons were sentenced to terms of imprisonment:-Sia Hok Wong and Ngo Mee Chiong 3 years each for theft (habitual criminals ; Ting Hiong Ing 1 year for picking pockets (second offence); Eu Ling Ing,Sugi, and Blubok 3 months each for theft; Goh Chai Tau 3 months and 6 strokes for theft; Koh Ah Moi 2 months for aiding and abetting her son Goh Chai Tau; Chang Su Ming 3 months for vagrancy; Medah (f) 1 month for giving false evidence and Moh Ah Neng 3 days for theft.
Ngoi Ngi Yew,Lai Ah Heu and Ewe Oh Nang were fined $100 each for attempting to conceal the property of a deceased person and Ling Muk Chui and Tang Sung Chee $100 each for contravention of Order No.XVI.1925 (Opium).A number of other persons were fined sums ranging from $15 to $5 for various minor offences.
Ang Seng was ordered to pay $100 damages for defamation of character of a married woman. Other cases call for no special comment.
Magistrate's and Police Courts.-The usual number of cases were settled in these Courts.Fines and fees in all Courts amounted to $2,054.88 and 135 deeds were registered.
Police.-There were no recruits during the month but Corporal Sambang and P.C.Sahari signed new agreements and received bonuses.Lance-Corporal Keeshin Singh returned from leave on the 24th inst.
On the 6th instant,ex P.C.Jam was sentenced to death by the Resident's Court for wilful murder.The sentence was duly confirmed by the Supreme Court and carried out at 11.30 a.m.on the 20th instant,at Sungei Betai-ee.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to increase the strength of the force to 100 men for 1927 but has stipulated that,in view of the complaints of the Bazaar Chinese concerning the recent amok,no Dyaks are to be recruited in future.
In view of the high prices asked by Sibu tailors for the sewing of all Sibu Police uniforms for 1927 it has been arranged,through the Superintendent of Police,Kuching,to sign a contract with Chop Kong Lee.This Kuching tailor is asking less than half the price asked by the Sibu tailors for sewing the uniforms for next year.
On the 27th instant,Mr.Woodward visited Kanowit and inspected the police and arms there.He had no complaint to make about either.
The total strength of the force at the end of the month was 84 men; of these 27 were Malays.21 Dyaks,13 Sikhs.7 Sepoys,8 Melanoes.3 Pathans.1 Tanjong,1 Punjabi,1 Bagat,1 Gurkha,and 1 Foochow Detective.
Lower Rejang.
The District Officer of Lower Rejang reports:- Armistice Day,11th,was kept as a public holiday and the usual eleven o'clock ceremony held.News of the death of His Highness the Tuan Bunsu was received on the 12th and all flags in the district were flown at half-mast.
I was at Matu till the 14th.An inquiry was held into the origin of the fire and it was found to have been accidental.Thai Joo,in whose house the fire started and to whose carelessness it was due,was sentenced to six months' imprisonment under section 285.A further inquiry was also held into the conduct of the Native Officer,a copy of which I have already sent to yon.A temporary bazaar has taken the place of the old one,but for superstitious reasons the Chinese wish to move to a new site,this being the second time the bazaar has been burnt down in 18 years.
This has been sanctioned and loans will be granted,on proper security,to those who are unable to find capital for new buildings.The Acting Resident and Mr.Pascoe were at Matu from the 2nd to the 4th and a site for twenty shophouses was pe gged out.I have to thank the Shipping Office and the Sarawak Steamship Company for their prompt assistance in sending boats with supplies. There has been very little distress,some twenty families received rations for a fortnight.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE,JANUARY 3,1927.
17
Court work at Matu and Rejang has been much as usual,a complaint was brought against one of the Forest Guards for taking bribes,but the evidence is not complete and the matter is still under investigation.
On the 23rd His Highness the Rajah paid a visit to Rejang with Mr.and Mrs.Aplin and Mr.Holl.The kampong and bazaar were seen and His Highness met the leading representatives of the community in the Court House.Requests for a school,a wireless station and water supply were made.
The Acting District Officer of Kapit reports:-
General.-1 visited the Katibas and Song district from the 5th.Upon this visit was to be decided the question of pati nyawa to the relations of Abor and party who were killed by Ukits.A brother of Abor,named Ujom,who lives in the Katibas,bad been talking a lot about going on the warpath against the said Ukits.I spent a night in his house and was able to assure him that pati nyawa would be paid.This was only paid on the arrival of His Highness the Rajah later in the month.
Native Officer Abang Abdul Gapor visited the Dyaks above the Pelagus rapids and had cleared the sites which I had chosen for bazaar shops at N.Merit,opposite the Bukitans' house.Native Officer Abang Ahmat visited the Dyaks in the Musa and Katibas during the month.
On the 12th I received news of His Highness the Tuan Bunsu's death.All flags were at once half- masted and the following day the Offices were closed.
On the 14th I proceeded to the Sut and presented a Long Service Decoration to Penghulu Mata Hari,who is now very old,having been born about 1840.
Tokens were received through a kampar Dyak from Kayan and Ukit chiefs in the Markham district,Dutch Borneo,but as they were apparently sent without the knowledge of the Dutch Government a letter was sent to the Controleur at Long Tran informing him and asking him for confirmation.
Visitors to the station during the month included Messrs.Hardie,Gillan.Mud ford,Binnie,and Haye,in connection with their various departments and Father Van Den Berge.The latter proceeded to the R.C.Settlement at N.Pila and Belaga.
P.IV.D.-Prisoners were employed on grounds and roads and putting cement drains round the Court Writer's house.The contractor was working on the extension to the Sarawak Rangers' quarters which are nearly completed.
Agriculture.-The Director of Agriculture visited the station and inspected the cattle and is sending some buffaloes up here ; these should do very well.
Health.-There has been epidemics of measles in the Katibas and a good deal of sickness amongst Government servants during the month.A China- man named Ah Piu (Foochow) was drowned owing to his boat being capsized in a heavy fresh on the 22nd and his body has not yet been recovered,in spite of constant search.
Trade.-The following are the trade returns for
the month:- Piculs.	Value.
Plantation Rubber ...	63.25	...	$6,170.00
Gutta Percha ...	4.80	...	1,000.00
Rattan Sega No.1 ...	40.09	...	892.00
Rattan Tot No.2	1,183.50	...	4,983.80
Shipping.-During the month the s.s.Sarawak made three trips,s.l.Soon Aik and Ulu two trips,H.H.M.Y.Maimuna,s.l.Chamois,Lucile,Kuala,Jean,one trip each.
Forest Office.-The Assistant Conservator of Forests,Third Division,has submitted a copy of his diary for November.
He left Sibu on 7th and was away until 14th visiting Daro,Tanjong Belatok,Lobah Kabang,Kampong Bruit and Rejang.
Mr.Turner,who had been attached to this Department,returned to Kuching on 15th.Complaints were made regarding the new Raft Regulations and the matter was submitted to His Highness the Rajah.
Mr.Corson left Sibu again on 25th for Tanjong Belatok and was still away at the end of the month.
J.SEVILLE ARCHER,
For Resident Third Division.
COAST DIVISION.
Mukah and Balingiau
October,1926.
General.I left for Kuching in the s.s.Sulong on the 5th to attend the race week festivities,and was away until the 22nd; Cadet Officer Mr.Arundell reported all well during my absence.
The Dyaks,having finished planting up their padi farms,commenced to bring in supplies of belian timber ordered about twelve months ago.
Mr.Arundell looked into a laud boundary dispute between Melanaus,Dyaks,and Foochow Chinese,the final decision being reserved until my return.
Clerk Wang Chiew Liang reported his return from annual leave on 18th instant.
Judicial,Resident's Court.No cases were called for hearing in this Court.
District Court.Selimah (f.) binti Haji Kadir was convicted of theft of jewellery and sentenced to three months' imprisonment; Temah (f.) binti Mor was sentenced to six weeks' imprisonment for cheating; Juki anak Asiar and Imoh (f.) were lined for attempted abduction; Ulam bin Jimaat and Tuat anak Sadang were fined for failing to answer summons served on them in 1925; Um Hong Ghee and Haji Seman bin Ismail were both fined for transferring a sago garden without registering the deed of transfer; Omar,Dyak,was fined for planting robber in ancestral padi land.
After repeated warnings to the local police P.C Jahar was dismissed the force for receiving monies payable to deposits,and for withholding summons given to him for service.
18
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE,JANUARY 3,1927.
Sim Yan Kuang was fined for paying deposit monies to P.C.Jahar which should have been paid into Court.
Several sago garden ownership disputes and fruit tree claims were settled.
Magistrate's Court.Cadet Officer Mr.R.Arundell,with the assistance of Native Officer Abang Haji Mohidin,dealt with a number of debt claims during the month.
Native Courts.In the Datu's Court one case was dealt with and $22.14 fines imposed.In the Tua Tua Kampongs Courts Islam and Pagan seven cases were dealt with and $97.22 fines imposed.
Health.Owing to reports of sickness of an epidemic nature among the Dyaks,Dresser Jong Ah Tong proceeded to Sikat and discovered that the Dyaks were suffering from measles,and that two children had already died through being immersed in cold water in the hope of reducing the rash.
A number of Dvak lepers were discovered and reported to the medical authorities; unfortunately these lepers cannot yet be forwarded for treatment owing to lack of suitable transport The number of patients treated during the month was 73,chiefly Dyaks,Malays,and Chinese; the most noticeable diseases under treatment being measles,muli,wounds,yaws,and influenza.One operation on a finger was performed and 19 N.A.B.injections given.
Public Works.Timber necessary for the construction of the Native Officer's and clerk's quarters is being gradually accumulated,and the Dyaks have assisted by working a quantity of belian posts for this purpose.
The District Officer,Bintuhi,very kindly assisted in obtaining three laksa of belian attaps for roofing these buildings,and it is hoped to commence construction early in December next.
The Tamil labourers,averaging 14.29 persons,were chiefly employed clearing and levelling the site for the hospital and a new football ground.
The prisoners,averaging 9.26 persons,worked on the general upkeep of the Government grounds.
At Balingian the kampong people cleared the Gover- nment grounds,and Dyaks assisted by bringing down gravel for surfacing the paths around the station.
The Chinese levelled and surfaced sections of the
bazaar road opposite their respective shophouses.
Waterworks.The one-inch pipe-line into the R.C.Mission compound,which has been continually choking,was dug up and replaced with a few of the remaining two-inch pipes.
Several fire tubes in the boiler at the pumping station commenced to leak; these were plugged temporarily pending the arrival of a boilermaker from Kuching.
A copy of the map of Mukah showing the lay of the local water system together with a survey of all possible future extensions is being prepared for the use of the Divisional Engineer,Sibu.
Marine.The m.l.Leonora left on the 5th for Kuching in tow of the s.s.Sulong for her annual docking and refit.
Trade and Shipping.The trade returns for the month are as follows:-
Coasting Imports.Coasting Exports.
Mukah	'...	$75,642	$61,448
Balingian ...	2,767	889
The principal imports and exports are as follows:-- Coasting Imports.
Coasting Exports.
Mukah-Rice	914,568	Raw sago	222 koyans	926,642
Clothing	14,454	G.jelutong 1,498 piculs	26,268
G.Para	40 "	8,140
Balingian-Rice	509	Jelutong	40	"	650
Three motor schooners,9 schooners,and 15 bandongs entered the port of Mukah with tonnage of 686,and 3 motor schooners,12 schooners,and 22 bandongs cleared with tonnage of 803 tons during the month.
The rainfall recorded shows 8.05 inches.
General.I left for Kuching to attend the races on the 5th and returned on 27th.Nothing of importance occurred during my absence.P.C.Yahya spent practically the whole month upriver ordering belian posts from the Dyaks for the new bungalow Oya.These will be brought down during the wet weather.
Marine.The crew which arrived with the m.l.Nellie returned to Kuching and the launch will be run by the crew of the m.l.Leonora until she returns to Mukah from Kuching.
The condition of the m.l.Nellie leaves much to be desired as apparently nothing was done to her when she was supposed to have been docked in Kuching.The Igan lighthouse mast was moved to a safe position by the Survey Officer,Sibu.
Clerical.J.L.Tambik was granted three weeks' leave.A new Grade V Clerk,J.Douglas,was engaged and commenced his duties on the 21st.
P.W.D.The godowns under the new office were completed and jodelited.An old building was renovated to accommodate the crew of the Nellie.
Estimates.These,after making inquiries in Kuching from heads of departments,have beeu prepared and are ready to be despatched.
Shipping.	Entered.	Cleared.
Motor schooners	...2	2
Schooners	...7	8
Total 9	10
Trade and Customs.3281
/2 piculs of jelutong,and 212 koyans of sago were shipped to Kuching.
Trade returns were:-
Imports.	Exports.
$40,149	$43,075.50
Prisons.Average of prisoners 13.
Bintulu.
October,1926.
Mr.H.H.Kortright,District Officer of Bintulu and Tatau,reports:-
General.There is very,little to report on this month.I left the station by s.s.Sulong on the 5th to attend the Race Week in Kuching and returned again by H.H.M .Y.Maimuna on the 22nd.
Soundings were taken on the bar which revealed that the channel had considerably changed.The new channel has been found and marked out,but it is thought that this will probably shift again in a short while.
Mohamad Akbar Khan's sawmill is practically completed and be hopes to start sawing in December.
Courts.A few cases only have been heard.One jelutong road dispute.A case of ownership of fruit trees between Dyaks in S.Benai and S.Semob,this case also led to the discovery that Dyaks in S.Benai,having been granted leave to plant rubber,promptly planted it in fruit groves belonging to Malays.Two cases were brought for the recovery of chattels left by people who died during the smallpox epidemic ; the difficulty is,however,that the property,consisting of household articles and jewellery,cannot be found.Five Dyaks and one Chinese from Tatau are on remand for assault,the case being adjourned for witnesses.
Medical.The dresser in charge reports that 133 people were treated during the month for various com- plaints,nine persons were vaccinated and twenty-four N.A.B.injections were given.Eight deaths occurred during the month.
Trade and Shipping.The trade returns for the month are as follows
:-
1926.
1926.
1924.
Oya and Dalat.
.October,1926.
The District Officer,Mr.P.M.Adams,reports:-
Court.Owing to my absence in Kuching during most of the month there were no cases heard.
Exports	...980,493.80
Imports	...	46,189.04
53,981.62	929,693.15
59,016.88	25,123.00
There were 2,926 piculs of jelutong and 303,850 pieces of belian attaps exported during the month; also 103 tons of belian timber.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE,JANUARY 3,1927.
19
The following vessels entered and cleared the port during October:-
Steamers.Schooners.
Entered	...	7	nil
Cleared	...	7	nil
The rainfall was 13'67 inches.
W.F.DE V.SKRINE,
Acting Divisional Officer.
FOURTH DIVISION.
Miri.
October.1926.
Court.More cases than usual were before the Courts during the month,the principal convictions being rioting 9 and 6 months' R.I.,theft 6 months' R.I.,criminal assault 18 months' R.I.,breach of Customs Regulations #100 fine,breach of Hackney Regulations #39 fine,breach of Forestry Regulations #150 fine.A number of cases of breach of Monopolies Opium Regulations were also dealt with.
P.W.D.Sungei Mirebo road and bridges were repaired.
A number of notices were issued on persons occupying shops in the bazaar to carry out certain alterations.
A good deal of work was done by prison gangs on the Peninsula.
Military and Police.Discipline was good,petty offences only having to be dealt with.
Drills.The flooded state of the parade ground prevented regular parades,route marches being substituted.
Disposition.Sarawak Rangers 87 rank and file in Miri,13 rank and file at Lutong.
Two police were transferred to Baram from Miri to replace two men sent here for training.
Health.Generally good.A number of oases of ulcers amongst the Rangers.
Arrests.Twenty-two arrests were made by the police at Miri during the month.
Prison.The average number of prisoners was 35.87.Daily average of sick prisoners two.
No punishments for breach of prison discipline were ordered during the month.
General.On the 3rd m.l.Irene was towed back from Suai with her gears stripped.The spares wired for arrived but were found to be suitable for an engine of a different type.Au attempt was made in Singapore to weld one gear wheel but this on arrival was found to IXJ cracked.In consequence the launch has been laid up for the month awaiting spares from England.
The Resident,accompanied by Mr.Dick,left for Baram by m.l.Penelope (kindly lent by the General Manager,Sarawak Oilfields,Limited) on the Sth.and was still away at the end of the month.
On the 3rd Mr.Corson of Forest Department passed through Miri en route to Sibu.
The Reverend F.W.Synnott arrived on the 4th from Kuching to do duty here.
A fatal accident occurred on the 7th when a Chinese named Kong Moi Seng was swept off his feet in the river and drowned.
A representative of the Indian Government visited Miri from the 15th-19th to discuss questions affecting labour.
As the result of a meeting of the principal Chiness held in the District Office,Yu Seng was unanimously nominated to the position of Chinese Magistrate vice Ah Chit deceased.The nominee is son of a former Magistrate at Miri.
Rainfall recorded at Miri for October wits 1386 inches.
November,1926.
Courts.In the various Courts 85 criminal cases and ten civil cases were dealt with during the month,none of any great importance.
Military and Police.Drills were interfered with by the continuous rain which flooded the parade ground.Route inarches were substituted for morning parades.
Health.There was a case of measles in the police barracks but the disease did not spread.Health generally good.
General.One Sarawak Ranger was returned to headquarters as he showed signs of insanity.One police constable was discharged for general slackness.A new recruit was enlisted.
Prison.The average number of prisoners was 36 for the month.
Discipline.Generally good.One prisoner was punished for striking a mandor.
General.Two men were transferred to complete sentences in Kuching Jail.
Two lunatics and one pauper lunatic were sent under escort to Kuching Asylum.
General.I returned from Baram on the evening of the 4th.
On Armistice Day service was held in St.Columbia's Church at 10.30 a.tn.,at the conclusion of the service the congregation standing for the two minutes' silence which was announced by the firing of a gun and the last post by the buglers,followed by the reveille.
During the day Flanders Poppies were sold,the sum of about $1,200 being realized for Lord Haig's Fund.
It was with deepest regret that the news of the death of His Highness the Tuan Bunsu was received on the following day.
The Government Offices were closed on the 13th instant.The Dead March in Saul was played after the Church Service on the following evening.
Mr.Horton of the Customs Department left for Limbang on the 16th.
Messrs.Vintcent and Andrews arrived from Jesselton on the 23rd by seaplane,leaving the following morning for the south after taking in supplies of oil.
The District Officer's new bungalow,which was nearly completed,had to be dismantled at the end of the month as the erosion of the river bank rendered the site unsafe.
S.S.Gladys,Auby.Alice Lorraine,each made one trip from Kuching during the month.I left for Bakong on the 25th,returning overland from Riam (up the Bakong River) on the 29th.During my visit to Bakong and Riam I arranged for a party of Dyaks to start preliminary clearing for a trace of projected road connecting Riam to Miri.
BARAM.
October,1926.
Court.Fines and fees amounted to $758.25.
Hussin was sentenced to two months' imprisonment for contempt of Court; Muda two mouths' for breach of agreement.
lu the Resident's Court an appeal brought by Chop Chong Long against the decision of the District Court was upheld and the original decision reversed.
20
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE,JANUARY 3,1927.
The Baram River has been in flood most of the month,the rainfall recorded being 4.98 inches.
P W.D.The prison gang,averaging 25 men,have been employed on general work mainly on roads.The carpenter did repairs to various pieces of office furniture and then started to re-roof the woodshed.It has not been possible to start the new bazaar drains owing to the impossibility of getting crushed stones from Kuching.
Medical.There were 78 out-patients and 1 in-patient treated during the month.Dresser Tuah was sent here to duty for the Harrison Smith Fund,but I regret to say that this man flatly refused to go up river saying that he was ill.He seemed to have a very vague idea of what was wrong with himself and never discovered that he was ill until all other excuses for not going up river had failed.He was sent back to Kuching.Dresser Ahmat Chee relieved Dresser Sejili who has done duty here for seven months.
Telegraphs and Telephones.The wireless station was as usual kept busy during the whole month.151 messages were received and 138 messages sent out.The Baram-Bakong telephone line was working most of the month,but towards the end of the month communication stopped,due no doubt to heavy rain and flooding of the Baram River.
Trade,Shipping and Customs.The s.s.Gladys made two trips during the month.Prices of jungle produce have remained fairly steady during the month with a slight upward tendency.The engkabang (illipe nut) trees are reported in flower,but the natives are not sanguine about a crop this year,the weather conditions being too wet generally.
Trade returns for the month are as follows:-
Imports.	Exports.
$ 31,840	$100,761
Brought forward ...360,650	578,950
Total $ 422,490	$679,711
1925	418,456	745,401
November,1926.
Court.The juragan of outboard motor launch Sri Sulong was fined $15 for breach of regulations,Drahman Banjar was fined $25 for threatening with a weapon.Several Dyaks were fined for damaging jelutong trees and two Punans fined for felling damar trees.An inquiry was held into the murder of Tina Jingang (f.) by her brother Budin and the minutes sent to the Resident Fourth Division.
Fines and fees amounted to $666.25.
General.The Resident left on the 4th to return to Miri.The Foochows at Poyut encroached into Dyak land twice,saying that they did not know the
I arrived back at Baram at midday and left again in the afternoon for Bakong,to meet the Resident who had come to see about tbe proposed Miri-Riam road.I arrived at Riam at midday on the 27th with Wan Mohamat.The following day the Resident left overland for Miri and I returned to Baram leaving Wan Mohamat to supervise the Dyaks doing the preliminary clearing of a rentis.Budin,who was the accused in the Tinjar murder case,died on board the motor lighter Kim on the 30th while on te way to Miri for medical treatment.
Rainfall for the month was 5.57 inches.
Medical.Two in-patients were treated,of whom one died.Sixty-two out-patients were treated including 21 N.A.B.injections for yaws.The bazaar was regularly inspected,and there is an improvement in the general cleanliness of the shops.
Public Works and Prison.The carpenter completed the new roof of the wood shed and started on the alterations to the lower part of the fort.The walls of the fort quarters were painted with "Kyltar" preparatory to being painted white; it is hoped that the experiment will prove successful.The prison gang,averaging 20 men,were employed on general work around the station.
Wireless Telegraphs.One hundred and twenty nine messages were received and one hundred and six despatched as well as daily news.Apprentice Operator Khiuu Siong arrived during the month.There has been no interruption of wireless communication from mechanical causes since the station was opened.
Trade and Shipping.The motor lighter Kim,m.b.Red Leaf and m.b.Kasuka-an made one trip each from Miri.The s.l.La Follette was sent to
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE,JANUARY 3,1927.
21
Miri to bo examined as to her general condition.Prices of produce generally were low owing to the .uncertainty of export.
Trade returns for the month are as follows:-
Imports.	Exports.
$ 23,727	$ 8.203
Brought forward 422.490	679.711
$446,217	$687,914
1925	...	434,822	786,288
The trade returns fur the month are:-
Exports.	Imports.
Foreign	...$ 26,633	$ 36,768
Coasting	...	17,492	23,375
$ 44,125	$ 60,143
Brought forward 377,112	312.171
Total to date	$421,237	372,314
1925	...$336,412	$291,690
H.L.OWEN, Resident,Fourth Division.
Lawas and Trusan.
FIFTH DIVISION.
September,1920.
Limbang.
November,1926.
General.The sad news of the death of His Highness the Tuan Bunsu was received with profound regret on the 12th.All flags were immediately half-masted,and offices closed.
Armistice Day was observed as a public holiday.
Mr.Pollard passed through on his way to Lawas from Kuching on the 17th,as also did Mr.Tait who came up to superintend the erecting of the Lawas Wireless Station,which was working by the 13th.
Mr.McLeod,Assistant Conservator of Forests,returned to Lawas on the 1st.
Mr.Horton,Superintendent of Customs,arrived from Miri,via Labuan and Brunei,on the 17th; he was still here at the end of the month.
The rainfall recorded amounted to 19.69 inches.
Travelling.I was at Brunei from the 13th to the 15th; Trusan from tbe 17th to the 19th,and Labuan the 20th to the 23rd.My visit to Trusan was chiefly in connection with Dyak affiirs upon which I have reported fully elsewhere.Whilst in Labuan I checked the Agency accounts.
Public Works. The coolies have repaired all the bridges on the 3rd and 5th mile rounds,and along the Sungei Poyan Road.They have also made paths,to the Malay School and Master's house,and started a road leading to the new benzine godown now in course of construction.The small gang of prisoners was employed in cleaning up the pipe-line rentis,in removing driftwood front the dam,and in draining the Sungei Poyan Road.
The Auby arrived on the 4th bringing the bulk of the material for the pipe line; by the end of the month most of the pipes were in position ready for trenching.Her next trip up on the 24th she brought the litters under Phillip Jitam.This work is now proceeding.
Trade and Shipping.Eighty head of buffaloe were shipped to Kuching and one to Bintulu.
Shipping.(Inwards).S.S.Auby made two trips from Singapore via Kuching and ports,s.s.Alice Lorraine one trip from Kuching via ports,s.l.Kwong Yick three trips from Labuan via Brunei,m.l.Adele one trip from Labuan via Brunei,and m.l.Edmee one trip from Lawas.
Court.In the Resident's Court at Trusan,Assan Padan and Ibi Tukang were fined $25 and costs under section 50SB,and a similar charge brought against Padan Gaing was dismissed.
In the Magistrate's Court,Trusan,Bong Lip and Mumin were ordered to deposit $15 each as security for good behaviour and Tabat Unad was fined $25 and costs for contempt of Court.
At Sundar Jabat vs.Jappar and Jappar vs.Jabat,theft of buffalo,were adjourned for further evidence.
No cases at Lawas call for mention.
Travelling.The Resident,Fifth Division,accompanied by Mrs.Boult,visited Sundar and Trusan from 8th til 11th when all outstanding cases were settled and the estimates for 1927 were discussed.
On the 6th I walked over to Trusan,going down to Sundar by boat in the evening of 7th and returning to Trusan with the Resident on 8th.On 10th I accompanied the Resident to Sundar and on the 11th went down in the Sylvia to Kuala Trusan to start clearing for the new Customs station,returning by boat.On 12th I went up to Trusan by buffalo,stopping to inspect some land under dispute at Serempang.
Leaving Trusan at midday on the 4th I went overland to Siang Siang,thence by boat to ulu Punang and walked back to Lawas.arriving about 8 p.m.,in heavy rain,the Trusan Road being knee deep in water.
Prisoners.The prison gang,averaging nine men,was employed on the general upkeep of the station and also in carrying materials and levelling the site for the wireless station.
Public Works.The contract for the extension to the Gaya road was taken up by Ah Kui at a flat rate of $9.50 per chain,including stumping,and Batang undetook to construct the Sualai road for $12 per chain,which I consider not excessive when the amount of cutting necessary at Bukit Betong is taken into consideration.
Haji Taip signed a contract to repair the Trusan Road between Lumut and Siang Siang.The section between Siang Siang and Trusan will be repaired after the erection of the bridge as if done now it would be ruined by buffaloes drawing timber along it.
Haji Zainie,the contractor for the wireless station,arrived from Kuching on 2nd but as he had made no arrangements for purchasing planks locally he was somewhat delayed at the start.The building was nearing completion at the end of the month.Matussin signed a contract to rebuild bridges at $1 per foot and 1 have hopes that the new type of bridge will be able to withstand the frequent floods.
22	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE,JANUARY 3,1927.
Mr.Cook will supervise the erection of the Sloating suspension bridge,Chin Yun supplying the labour.
Corrugated iron for Customs Examination Sheds was received from Limbang but no fencing having arrived it was not possible to make a start.The Customs quarters at Sundar were completed and the contractor Wong Chun is now working on the Customs station at Awat Awat.The site for the new station at Kuala Trusan was cleared and a telephone rentis is being put through from Sundar.Kow Nui was employed on the jail repairs.
Agriculture.The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates,Ltd.,exported 31,108 lbs.of dry rubber to Labuan during the month.
Rainfall.The rainfall recorded was Lawas 9.82 inches,Lawas Estate 12.01 inches,Trusan 11.83 inches.
Shipping.S.S.Sulong called on 2nd bringing materials for the wireless station and after discharging went down to Kayangaran to load timber.M.L.Edmee made six trips to Labuan.
S.L.Daisy called four times at Sundar for mangrove bark.
The new magneto for m.l.Saripah arrived and the launch is now running well.
Trade.The trade returns are as follows:-
FOREIGN .
Lawas.--
Imports.
Exports.
September,1926 ...
$19,052
$36,200
"	1925 ..
8,012
78,240
Trusan:-
September,1926 ...
7,111
11,533
.,	1925 ...
12,031
14,038
COA
STING.
Lawas:-
Imports.
Exports.
September,1926 ...
$ 657
$ 1,441
1925 ...
576
888
Trusan:-
September,1926 ...
937
1,309
"	1925 ...
1,113
1,166
October,1936.
Court.No cases were heard owing to my absence in Kuching.
Crime.On the night of 3rd a Murat named Lakoi Chang was attacked with a parang and wounded by Talal Lemawan who was apparently under the influence of drink.Police were at once sent up but to date Talal has evaded capture.
Batang bin Mohamat,contractor for the Sualai Road,absconded on the night of 6th,stealing a boat.His whereabouts are not known.
Prisoners.The prison gang,averaging six men,was employed in carrying timber for repairs to bridges and in the general upkeep of the station.
The Customs Station at Awat-Awat was completed and work started on the new station at Kuala Trusan; a telephone rentis from Sundar to Kuala Trusan was also put in hand.
Travelling.On 1st I left for Kayangaran to catch the Sulong en route for Kuching.I was still away at the end of the month.
Agriculture.The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates,Ltd.,exported 47,402 lbs.of dry rubber to Labuan during the month.
Rainfall.The rainfall recorded was as under:-
Lawas ...	...	16.70	inches
Lawas Estate	....	16.65	"
Trusan ...	...	23.44	"
Shipping.M.L.Edmee made seven trips to Labuan and s.l.Datu called once at the Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates,Ltd.
Trade.The trade returns are as follows:-
FOREIGN.
Lawas
Imports.
Exports.
October,1926
...$20,777
$43,444
"	1925
...	17,849
63,774
Trusan:-
October,1926
...	13,972
14,882
"	1925
...	12,499
19,451
COASTING,
Lawas:-
Imports.
Exports.
October,1926
...$ 1,305
$2.997
"	1925
1,053
614
Trusan.-
October,1926
2,290
2,587
"	1925
2,937
2,170
F.F.BOULT, Resident,Fifth Division.
