
VOL. LVII.
No. 889.
THE
Sarawak Gazette.
PRICE
KUCHING, Saturday, October 1st, 1927.	CENTS.
Contents.
NOTES.
Page
Acknowledgment	...	...	...	... 247
Notes	...	...	...	... 247
His Highness the Rajah's Birthday	...	...	249
Hose on Kayan Ladies' Legs ...	...	...	M9
How to Keep Young ...	...	...	2*9
Sarawak Library-List of New Books	...	..	249
A New Use for Snakes...	...	...	...250
Simanggang Regatta - Results ...	...	...	250
Club News: -
Sarawak Club-Bowling Handicap for August 1927... 251
Race Week Optional Pool Tournament-
Handicap and Draw 251
Race Week Billboard Tournament-
Handicap and Draw	251
Race Week Tennis Tournament-
Handicap and Draw ...
(september.)
A telegram has been received advising the departure of His Highness the Rajah and the Dayang Leonora who are travelling by the P. & O. s.s. Macedonia, which left Marseilles on the 16th. Messrs. J. A. H. Hardie, J. B. Archer and K. H. Gillan are also passengers on the same boat.
Golf Competition-September Stroke, Result
Race Week Golf Competition Match Play
Sarawak Turf Club -Annual General Meeting
Notes on the Entries and Weights for Autumn Meeting
HER Highness the Ranee has written as follows :-
1927-First Day ..	...	...	...251
Sarawak Turf Club-Autumn Meeting, 1927-Entries and
Handicaps
Traffic Regulations-Autumn Race Meeting, 1927 New Sarawak Club ...	...
Poppy Day, 1927
School Sports in General	...	...
Extracts from Monthly Reports: -
First Division	...
Sadong Colliery Third Division Coast Division ... Fourth Division Fifth Division	...
Kuching Trade Returns	...	...
Passengers	...	...
Miri Trade Returns ...	...	...
Sibu Trade Returns ...
Kuching Shipping
Kuching Shipping Returns ...
Miri Shipping ...	...
Kuching Market Price List
Sibu Shipping Returns... ...	...
"I am engaged on, and have almost com-
pleted, a Comedy, the setting of which is out
East. It is a very light comedy, perhaps too light, and I have no real faith that it will
ever be accepted. My greatest ambition is to write a Play; not a bad play-thousands do that-but a good one. I would prefer to make people cry, but the mania at the moment demands laughter. So I have tried this skit on men and women out East-Men
The Sarawak Gazette
especially. For those who have lived at all out East will realise what little tin gods the white men are, not to others but to them- selves. The book I am more compiling than writing has been furnished for me by a great friend of mine-a Malay-who has given me the history of his life told in the quaint English he knows, which, when put together
and helped a bit, should make rather an interesting little volume."
[Pinang Gazette.]
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 1, 1917.
Acknowledgement.
Mr. Ong Kheng Siang and brothers, beg to thank all friends and relatives who attended the funeral of their mother, the late Mrs. Ong Tiang Siew, also those who sent scrolls or expressed sympathy in their bereavement.
His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by the Dayang Anne and Mr. H. B. Crocker, Acting Chief Secretary, paid a short visit to Baram. The party left by H.H.M.S. Maimuna on the 7th and returned on the 13th, via Bintulu.
248
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1927.
WE learn that His Highness the Tuan Muda intends leaving for Europe on the 15th October.
MAJOR F. W. Richards, General Manager of the Sarawak Oilfields Limited, returned to Miri on the morning of the 6th after spending two days in Kuching.
MR. F. G. Carpenter, Acting District Officer, Miri, and Mr. C. McApline of the Sarawak. Oilfields Limited also came down on a short visit The former returned together with Major F. W. Richards whilst the latter proceeded to London on holiday on the 17th.
THE following announcement was issued by the Treasury of His Majesty King George V. on the 6th September, 1927 :-
"The Treasury announces that applications will shortly be invited for the-
Conversion of the-
Three and a-half per cent War
Loan maturing 1st March 1928.
Five per cent National War Bonds (Second Series) repayable 1st April, 1928.
Four per cent National War Bonds (Second Series) repayable 1st April, 1928.
into Three and a-half per cent Con-
version Loan.
Prospectuses and forms of application will be available on Friday, 16th September, 1927."
Any person interested should apply to the Chartered Bank of India, Australia and China, who in due course will be able to supply prospectuses and forms of application.
MR. W. F. de V. Skrine, Acting Commissioner of Trade and Customs, returned on the 9th from his tour of the outstations in connection with Customs affairs.
MR. F. H. Pollard passed through Kuching on the 9th on his way to Simanggang where he has been transferred.
MR. E. Banks, Curator of the Sarawak Museum, arrived back on the 16th from his collecting expedition to the headwaters of the Rejang.
THE dates for the Autumn Race Meeting have been altered to the 13th and 15th October.
MR. C. D. Adams, Acting Resident, Second Division, arrived on the 23rd, bring- ing two aspirants for the Long Service Decoration and returned to Simanggang on the 27 h.
THE New York Public Library has asked us to say that they would greatly appreciate it if any readers who are in possession of copies of the Sarawak Gazette of all issues previous to vol. 38 (1908) and no longer need them would present them to that Library.
WE venture heartily to congratulate the Committee on the work which they have accomplished in connection with the new Sarawak Club and the untiring labours of the Secretary, Dr. E. M. Marjoribanks, call for the hearty thanks of all members.
THE WILY MAN OF BORNEO.
THE short-wave wizards have been at it: again-this time at Sarawak, Borneo. A British listener recently picked up Sarawak signals on a Det. and L. F., and he was astonished to learn that the other fellow was using a transmitter only twelve inches high I by eight inches across. Visions of some special super valve, capable of tickling up telephones over 6,500 miles away, impelled the listener to ask for details, and what do you think that wily man of Borneo was using?
Highly Surprising Low Power.
His transmitting valve was an old Cossor Ted Top, his voltage was limited to 220, and the power used was only seven watts. Seven watts, mark you, to reach nearly 7,000 miles. (And you know what a wretchedly poor light a fifty-watt lamp can throw on a table a yard away, don't you?). No wonder that more and more listeners are building shortwave sets-Sarawak, seven watts, and a Red Top are enough to intrigue anybody!-(Modern Wireless.)
HE was an elder of his kirk in a small Scottish town, and had consulted a specialist on his health. Told that he had a floating kidney he was much disturbed, for the complaint had all the terror of mystery. He went to the minister of his church with a request that the prayers of the congregation might be offered. "I don't know," said the minister. "I'm afraid that at the mention of a floating kidney the congregation might laugh." "I see nothing to laugh at," replied the sufferer. "It was only last Sabbath that you prayed for loose livers."
FOUR and twenty Yankees, thirsty and dry, Motored up to Canada, to get a drink of rye; When the rye was opened they all began to
sing
Who the Hell is Coolidge, God Save the King.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1927.
249
His Highness the Rajah's Birthday.
26TH SEPTEMBER, 1927.
How to Keep Young.
THE PARADE AT THE FORT.
His Highness the Tuan Muda arrived at 8 a.m. and was met by the Acting Chief Secretary, Mr. H. B. Crocker, who accompanied him on an inspection of the Guard of Honour who were drawn up in line with the Police on the left.
A mountain battery stationed at the far end of the parade ground and under the command of Capt. W. T. Clark, Sarawak Rangers, fired a21 gun salute. After every seven guns the Rangers fired a feu-de-joie, the Police presented aims and the Band played the opening bars of the Sarawak Anthem.
At the conclusion of the salute, the Commandant, Major S. Cunynghame, Sarawak Rangers, called for three cheers for His Highness the Rajab.
His Highness the Tuan Muda proceeded to the pavilion and took the salute at the march past of the troops, who then wheeled round and formed a hollow square in front of the pavilion. His Highness then presented the Long Service Medals and Decorations to various aspirants.
This ceremony completed, His Highness returned to the pavilion and the Rangers, under the command of Captain W. T. Clark, opened out for bayonet exercises and physical drill.
The smart appearance of the Sarawak Rangers and the precision with which the movements appointed for the occasion were carried out reflect high credit on both officers and men, whilst all ranks of the Kuching Police Force are to be congratulated on their appearance and steadiness.
After the troops had dismissed, the Acting Chief Secretary in the grand stand proposed the health of His Highness the Rajah, this being responded to by all present.
Hose on Kayan Ladies' Legs.
FASHIONS PRIMITIVE AND PARISIAN.
Possibly these headlines will be misleading at first sight except to those already acquainted with Dr. Charles Hose's book "Natural Man."
Of course "natural women" do not wear stockings. However, Kayan ladies go to considerable pain and trouble to make their legs look as unnatural as possible. Any of us who have seen Kayan women in the flesh must wonder why they have tortured that flesh with intricate patterns of tattoo.
Dr. Hose tells us that religious belief is one reason. But designs vary according to the rank of the person tattooed! This looks as if vanity ran a close race with religion, often the case where women martyrs are concerned. Might not this then be a poignant example of "11 faut souffrir pouretre belle?"
Perhaps Kayan women look upon European visitors of their own sex with astonishment and may even doubt our sanity. It must seem strange to them that, taking the trouble to cover our legs, we yet strive to obtain a glorified nude effect by the use of skin-coloured silk stockings!
Our primitive sisters have never heard of the Chancellor of the Exchequer. Should they ever do so they might discern a ray of hope and a chance of our adopting their more rational custom. How often the silk tux forms the one subject of conversation during the last days of a homeward bound journey. Ladies' nightmares are of that merciless official at Dover, who, making one heap of all their treasured silk, carries off his bundle with stockings dangling, to assess the duty.
Mr. Churchill must beware lest Dr. Hose's book fall into the hands of the makers of ladies' fashions. Should they see therein the delightful illustrations of Kayan women they might lend us to emulate our Sarawak sisters. One of the geese that lay the golden eggs will be slain and what will Winston do then, poor thing ?-K. M. L.
Dance a lot, perspire a lot, then you sleep a lot, and that keeps the eyes brilliant. Use only rain water; take tepid baths with "milk of violets" added. When tired, apply hot linseed poultice to fuse morning and evening.
As for lotions, the Creole Charleston Queen uses orange and eau de Cologne for the skin, "eau de banane" against wrinkles, this being made from six cut bananas steeped in alcohol for a week. And to get a healthy bloom, crush strawberries all over the face and neck-and if there aren't any strawberries, then grapes, and, failing grapes, fresh figs!
It sounds rather a sticky business.
Sarawak Library.
New Books.
The following books have been added to the Library during September: -
Kindly presented by His Highness the Rajah.
Mr. Charles, King
of England ... John Drinkwater
Roving Through
Southern China ... Harry Franck
The Oldest God ... Stephen McKenna
Saviours of Society ...	,,	,,
The Secretary
of State	...	,,	"
Kindly presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda.
Arabia Deserta ... C. M. Doughty
Kindly presented by Mrs. Kidd.
In Days that are
Dead	... Sir Hugh Clifford
Purchased by the Committee.
Life of Edward VII. Places and Persons... The Venture Book ... Hims Ancient and
Modern
The Secrets of a Showman
Rosemary
Cats' Cradle After-noon The Buttered Side
Down
Diary of a young Lady of Fashion in the year 1764-1765 ...
The Ghost Book
The Green Lacquer Pavilion
Odtaa
The Old Bridge Pharisees and
Publicans ...
Lord Raingo Quince Alley The Pigeon House ... Blackmailed Fraulein Else Elmer Gantry New Age Encyclopedia
Sir Sydney Lee Margot Asquith Elinor Mordaunt
J. Glover
C. Cochran
Fay Compton Maurice Baring Susan Ertz
Edna Ferber
Cleone Knox
Lady Cynthia Asquith
Henry Beauclerk
John Masefield
W. J. Locke
E. F. Benson
Arnold Bennett
Mrs. Henry Dudeney Valentine Williams William Le Queux
Arthur Schnitzler Sinclair Lewis (10 Vols.)
250
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1. 1927.
A New Use for Snakes.
Just RS men have tried to adopt waists and petticoats in order to catch up with the prevailing fashions, so they are trying in their humble fashion also to make some use of the serpent and his wisdom. Very neat, small ties of nothing less than whole Serpents are being made for men These have to be caught very young in order to be exactly the right length and breadth for the purpose. Their markings are important, according as they have to go with blue stripes or mauve spots. Little cobras from Borneo are very much in demand, and in exterminating them thus early a good deal of trouble is perhaps saved later on. Pythons of only a few months give very soft and delicate shades, and are said to cling round the neck with a life-
likeness which takes some nerve to carry off successfully. Very deadly small snakes are much in demand, with their suggestion of dangers heroically overcome These ties are popular in France, where marriage is arranged on a business basis. They are exceedingly expensive, and they do not last long enough to be borrowed with any facility. A suitor, therefore, with a handsome collection of snake ties, may be safely regarded as an "homme serieux"-the first essential to successful negotiations. If so much is accomplished with baby snakes what may not be revolutionised when man adopts a whole boa-constrictor ?- Ex.
Simanggang Regatta.
Held 4th and 5th September, 1927.
RESULTS FIRST DAY.
Race No. 1. -Crews limited to three in number
1	Tambi
2	Sintan
Race No. 2-Bongs, no restriction as to length, or number of crew.
I Singa Terbang ... Anjat
3	Stnga Kala Sri
Kendawang ... Gambang
4	Sri Kubong	... Grugu
Race No 3.-Boats, crews 30 men, no restriction as to build.
1 Singa Nerais ... Mr. Bruce
5	Lang Laut ... Nyambang
6	Intan Sebangan ... T.K Abang Alek
This race was ordered to be run again, all boats fouled, original result
1 Sri Belalang
7	Singa Nerais
8	Kapal Terbang
Siti Jebedah, owned by T K. Abang Alek was third but was disqualified for not having previously entered.
Race No. 4. -Bedas, with no restriction as to
length or number of crew.
1 Belalang Bijat ... Nyambang
9	Sri Belalang ... P Angkon
10	Sri Bakong ... Mr. Adams
Race No. 5.-Boats, crew 15 men, no restriction as to build.
1 Ular Lidi ... Mohd. Jawa
11	Intan Semangan ... K.T Abang Alek
12	Kapal Terbang ... Ingai
Race No. 6. -Bandong Ikan.
I Brahim
2 Mohamat
Race No. 7. -Beda, restricted to 40 men.
1 Siti Jebedah ... T.K. Abang Alek
2	Sri Belalang	... P. Angkon
3	Sri Bakong	... Mr. Adams
Belalang Bijat was first but disqualified for fouling.
Race No. 8. -Chinese crew, restricted to 25 men.
Both boats disqualified one having Malay steers- man the other a Dyak.
Malay Luncheon was held in the Fort.
RESULTS SECOND DAY.
Race No. 1- Boats with crews of 15 men.
1 Sri Tanjong	... Muyang
4	Ular Lidi	... Mohamad Jawa
5	Singa Terbang ... P. Renang
Race No. 2. -Bongs, crews limited to 40 men.
1 Singa Kala Sri
Kendawang... Gambang
6	Singa Terbang ... Anjat
7	Sri Kubong ... Grugu
Race No. 3. -Boats, limited to 5 men.
1	Sintal
2	Tambi
Race No 4.-SIMANGGANG CUP.--ALL comers, no restriction as to length, build or number of crew.
1 Sri Kendawang ... Sergt. Slapok
3	Singa Kala Sri
Kendawang ... Gamhang
4	Belalang Bijat ... Nyambang
Race No. 5 -CONSOLATION RACE.
1	Sri Belalang ... P. Angkon
2	Sri Ngeumpas ... Datu Abang Haji
Dulrasit
3	Sri Bakong ... Mr. Adams
Race No. 6 -School boys, crew of one.
1	Bujang
2	Drain
Race No. 7. -Men, crew one rowed from Bows.
1	Tambi
2	Pilit
3	Awang Jalai
Race No. 8 - Chinese, crew limited to 25.
1	Ular Lidi with Betong Chinese crew.
Chinese Luncheon held in the Fort.
Simanggang football Matches.
PLAYED FROM 1ST TO 6TH SEPTEMBER.
For the first three rounds teams played off in the mornings and afternoons, between 6 a.m. and 8 a m., and 4 p.m. and 6 pm.
Twenty-two teams entered of which sixteen were Dyak.
RESULTS FIRST ROUND.
Unggi, Banting 2 vs.
Seduku (W.O.)	"
Lang Gran
Lambong	0	"
K Hilir	4	..
Ra wan	2	"
San Undup	1	"
Abang Omar	3	"
Bijat	1	"
Sergt. Slapok	0	"
K. Lemanak	1	"
Inchiam, Banting 0 Sadong
Awan Gran (W.O.)
Ah Nen	3
Lugus Tawang	0
S'bu	0
Sunga	0
Lunchong	0
Igah Skra	0
Govt. Employees	2
P. Angkon,
Banting	0
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1927.
251
RESULTS SECOND ROUND.
Seduku	0	vs.	Kampong Hilir	3
Ah Xen	6	"	Awan Gran	0
Rawan	2	"	San Undup	1
Bijat	0	Govt. Employees	4
Unggi	o	"	Abang Omar	3
Kampong Lemanak, Bye.
RESULTS THIRD ROUND.
Kampong Hilir	2	vs	K. Lemanak	o
Govt. Employees	0	"	Ah Nen	1
Abang Omar	2	"	Rawan	0
SEMI-FINAL.
Ah Nen	1	vs.	Abang Omar	2
Kampong Hilir, Bye.
FINAL.
Kampong Hilir 0 vs. Abang Omar 1
Datu Hakim of Kuching, presented the Cup and Medals to the winning team and also the Cups
won in the Boat Racing.
The winning Team consisted of Malays from the Saribas River.
Club News.
Sarawak Club.
BOWLING HANDICAP FOR AUGUST 1927.
Name.
L. Gregory (Winner) G. D. W. Frayling ...
A. M. Forrest
J. P. Baird
Score. H'cap. Total.
315	...	315
302	8	310
200	108	308
262	26	288
RACE WEEK OPTIONAL POOL TOURNAMENT.
KUCHING MEMBERS.
No TIME LIMIT. (OLD OPTIONAL GAME.) HANDICAPS AND DRAW.
Walsh and Forrest +40 Bye; Gregory and Bates -40 Bye ; Benn and Nash + 20 vs. Marjoribanks and Bathurst scr. ; Wilson and Chater + 40 vs. Edwards and Middlemas scr.
RACE WEEK BILLIARDS TOURNAMENT KUCHING MEMBERS :-250 np.
HANDICAPS AND DRAW .
Nash scr. vs. Taylor-125; Calvert - 25 vs Wilson scr.; Baird scr. vs. Forrest scr.; Middleman scr .vs. Walsh + 35 ; Kennedy +25 vs. Bates- 35; Marjoribanks - 40 us. Bean 35 ; Edwarda - 25 vs. Bathurst - 25; Gregory - 25 vs. A. S. Lowe 4-40.
The time occupied for the game will be charged at 20 cents per cue for each period of 45 minutes.
RACE WEEK TENNIS TOURNAMENT. PARTNERS AND HANDICAPS.
MIXED DOUBLES.
Mrs. A. S. Lowe and A. M. Forrest + 1/2 ; Mrs. Bean and J. P. Baird - 30 ; Miss Tait and R. C. Kay + 1/2 ; Mrs. Hayward and Dr. Marjoribanks scr. ; Mrs. Pitt-Hardacre and H. B. Crocker- 15.
MEN'S DOUBLES.
N. A. Middlemas and Dr. Walsh - 15; J. P Baird and Major Cunynghame - 15 1/2 ; P. Hayward and A M. Forrest scr. : Dr. Marjoribanks and D. E. Calver scr ; A. S. Lowe and L. Gregory - 15 ; H. Smith and R. C. Kay + 1/2 ; C. S. Griffiths and H. B. Crocker - 15 1/2 .
Golf. The winner of the September Stroke Competition was B. J. C. Spurway.
AUTUMN RACE WEEK GOLF COMPETITION. V. BOGEY -MATCH PLAY.
NINE HOLES.
OPEN TO MEMBERS AND VISITING MEMBERS.
1.	Members may play off either on Sunday, 16th October, or Monday, 17th October, 1927.
2.	Competitors must enter in pairs.
3.	Entry Fee, one dollar each player.
4.	Entrants having no official handicap may be assessed by the Committee.
5.	Entries close on 12th October.
6.	A prize will be presented to the winner.
Sarawak Turf Club.
The Annual General Meeting of the Sarawak Turf Club will be held in the Sarawak Club, by kind permission of the Committee, on Saturday, 22nd October, at 11.30 a.m.
BUSINESS.
1.	To receive the Club Accounts for the year ending 30th June, 1927.
2.	To elect seven ordinary members of the Com- mittee and three members of the Election Committee for 1927-1928.
3.	To transact any business and decide on any resolution which may be submitted to the meeting in accordance with the Rules.
B. J. C. SPURWAY, Honorary Secretary.
Notes on the Entries and Weights for the Autumn Race Meeting 1927.
FIRST DAY.
We welcome the new blood in the eight griffins racing in Division IV and two new ponies introduced to Division I since the Spring, and we wish their owners the best of luck. Of the griffins Black Pirate, Typhoon, Shooting Star and Jaih have faced the starter before al Jesselton. Tai Hu, Radium, Jorrocks and Seduan are all youngsters and new to racing, and it is not lobe expected that they will show up on the first day at any rate, in spite of the handicapping. This brings us to consider the more experienced ponies at once,and Jaih on his form at Jesselton should most certainly catch the Judge's eye here at the weights; Typhoon and Shooting Star providing the danger, but both these ponies would appear to like a longer distance. Tai Hu is a very nice youngster and should win races later on.
While Wings carries top weight in the three furlong race for Division III; although a bad starter he must never be left unconsidered over this distance. Tolin, also moved down, likes a longer distance. Osaha might win here.
The five furlong race for Division II has Lee Mah at the head of the list, having been brought down from Division I. Sakbon has a very nice chance here, unless Pegasus can produce his old form again. It is a furlong too far for Adham. If the going is heavy the winner may come from the lightweights, Badad or Aladdin in particular.
252
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1927.
The six furlong race for Division I has Flying Fox snd Burak with the maximum. The former is araced pony from North Borneo. Conditions are against him, especially weight. White Knight, the other new comer, claims the maiden allowance under regulation 6, but he is still quite young and has to learn to gallop. Burak is undergoing special train- ing and is in excellent condition. Hopeless and Wembley are both in Outstations. Untong had bad luck last meeting being short of a gallop through back trouble, all being well he should go somewhere close.
The fifth race over six furlongs for the new comers should prove Typhoon's reputation as a stayer, Shooting Star also catches the eye The first lace of the day will no doubt shed a little light on this race.
In the six furlongs for Division III, Tolin has too much weight although he likes the distance. Either Shotaway or Bagaimana has a good chance of passing the Judge in front of the rest (or the first time.
In the last race but one, over four furlongs, Sisit or Adham should have the measure of the rest of the fiel at the weights. Pengarah is galloping well in his training and is specializing over the distance. Sisit, however, should satisfy his connections here.
The last race of the day open to all Divisions gives Hopeless a chance of winning over his favourite distance carrying a large handicap. Beaver is very nicely treated and might occupy a leading place at the finish. But should Burak be on his day, and
the going promises to lie his liking, then even with top weight he will be hard to beat.-CENTAUR.
RACK No. 3.
Divisions II & III. - Handicap 5 furlongs, weight 11 stone.
HORSES.
WEIGHTS.
1
Lee Mah
... 10
0 ...
2
Adham
... 9
7 ...
3
Penglima
... 9
8 ...
4
Pengarah
... 9
0 ...
6
Pegasus
... 8
12 ...
6
Sakbon
... 8
12 ...
7
Sisit
... 8
9 ...
8
Aladdin
... 8
9
Badad
... 8
10
Bang
... 7
o
Top
OWNKRS.
Messrs. Chan Teck Cheng and Wee Boon Lhew
The Datu Imam Tua
Messrs. Chau Teck Cheng and Wee Boon Ch-w
Mr. J. A. H. Hardie
Eng Guan Leong Kongsi
Abang Suleiman
The Datu Bandar
The Triple Kongsi
Badad Kongsi
Sri Binta Amin
RACK NO. 4.
Divisions I, II & III. -Handicap 6 furlongs.
weight 11 stone.
HORSES. WEIGHTS.
1
Flying Fox
.. 11
0
2
Burak
... 11
0
8
Hopeless
8
4
Untong
... 10
7
6
Kismet
... 10
1
6 Akal	...	9	8..
7 White Knight 9 7..
8 Wembley	...	9	2..
9 Azab	...	8	12 ..
OWNKRS.
Mr. C. D. Adama Ali bin Dollah H. H. the Rajah Mr. P. M. Adams Ong Kongai Mr. Ed. Harden Mr. Law Cheng Hiang H. H. the Rajah Mr. Ed. Hardell
Top
Sarawak Turf Club.
Autumn Meeting, 1927.
Thuraday. 13th and Saturday. (15th October, 1927.
Programme Firstt Day.
Entries and Weights. RACE NO. 1.
Division IV (Griffins). - Handicap 3 furlongs. Top weight 11 stone. W.F.I.
HORSES. WEIGHTS. OWNERS.
1 Jorrocka ... 9 7
2 Tai Hu ... 9 7
3 Black Pirate ... 9 7
4 Typhoon ... 9 31/2
5 Radium ... 9 31/2 6 Shooting Star... 9 31/2
7 Jaih	...	8	101/2 8 Saduan ... 8 101/2 Messrs. Page Turner, Cutfield and Arundell Law Cheng Hiang Tan Ah Kim
Measrs. Chan Brothers
Ong Kongsi
Hiang Kiang Kongsi Kongsi Ampat
Mr. J. B. Archer
RACE NO. 2.
Division III.-Handicap 11 stone.
3 furlongs. Top weight
RACK NO. 5.
Division IV (Griffins). -Handicap 6 furlongs. Top weight 11 stone. W.F.I.
Horses. WEIGHTS.
1 Black Pirate	...	9	7..
2 Typhoon	...	9	3 1/2 ..
8 Radinm	...	9	3 1/2 ..
4 Shooting Star	9	3 1/2 ..
& Jaih	... 8 10 1/2 ..
OWNERS.
Mr. Tan Ah Kim Messrs. Chan Brother
Ong Kongsi Hiang Kiang Kongsi Kongsi Ampat
RACE NO. 6.
Division III. -Handicap 6 furlongs. Top weight 11 stone.
HORSES. WEIGHTS. OWNERS.
1 Tolin ... 10 0 ... Haji Hassim
2 Osaha (late Kuching) ... 9 7 ... Brothers & Sons Kongsi
8	Mah Jongg	...	9	5	...	Mr. Hinway
4	Peughulu	....	8	12	...	Mr. F. H. Pollard
5	Singa (late
The Scout)...	8	5	...	Mr. Aug Ong Chye
6	Bagaimana	...	H	0	...	Mr. E. O. Bruce
7	Shotaway	...	7	12	...	Mr. D. Carroll
8	Bang ...	7	7	...	Sri Binta Amin
RACE NO. 7.
Divisions II & III.-Handicap 4 furlongs. Top
weight 11 stone.
HORSES. WEIGHTS.
1 White Wings... 10 0 ...
2 Tolin ... 9 10 ...
8 OSAha (late
Kuching)	...	9	8	...
4 Mah Jongg	...	9	8	...
6 Tony	...	8	9	...
6 Pemhulu	...	8	9	...
7 Singa (late
The Scout) ...	8	4	...
8 Ghalib	...	8	0	...
9 Bagaimana	...	7	12	...
10 Ta'Dapat	...	7	7	...
OWNERS.
H. H. the Rajah
Haji Hassim
Brothers and Sons Kongsi
Mr. Hinway
Mr. E. Lim
Mr. F. H. Pollard
Mr. Aug Ong Chye
Mr. J. D. Walderson Mr. E. O. Bruce
Abang Suhai
HORSES.
1 Lee Mah
2 Adham
8 Penglima
4 Pengarah
5 Pegasus
8 Si-it
7 Sakbon
8 Aladdin
9 Badad
10 Tony
11 Ghalib
WEIGHTS. OWNERS.
... 10 0 .. Messrs. Chan Teck Cheng and Wee Boon Chew
... 9 7 ... The Datu Imam Tua
... 9 0 ... Messrs. Chan Teck Cheng and Wee Boon Chew
... 8 12 ... Mr. J. A. H. Hardie
... 8 12 ... Eng Ouan Leong Kongsi
...	8	10	...	The Datu Bandar
...	8	8	...	Abang Suleiman
...	8	6	...	The Triple Kongsi
...	8	4	...	Badad Kongsi
...	7	7	...	Mr. E. Lim
...7 8. Mr. J. D. Walderson
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1927.
253
RACK NO. 8.
Divisions I, II d III.-Handicap 4 furlongs.
Top
weight 11 stone.
HORSES.
WEIGHTS.	OWNERS.
1
Flying Fox ..
. 11
0
... Mr. C. D. Adasa
2
Burak
. 11
0
... Ali bin Dollah
8
Hopeless
10
12
... H. H. the Rajah ... Mr. P. M. Adams
4
Untong
. 10
8
6
Kismet
. 9
8
... Ong Kongsi
8
Akal
. 9
8
... Mr. Ed. Hardell
7
White Knight
9
7
... Law Cheng Hiang
8
Beaver
. 9
2
... Messrs. P. M. Adams & J.B.
Archer
9 Wembley
10 Azab
. 9
. 8
2
12
... H. H. the Rajah ... Mr. Ed. Hardell
11 Pengarah
. 8
5
... Mr. J. A. M. Hardie
Divisions I, II & III.- weight 11 stone.
HORSES.
1	Flying Fox ...
2	Burak
3	Hopeless
4	Untong
5	Kismet
8 Akal
7	White Knight
8	Wembley
9	Azab
10	Pengarah
11	Badad
Second Day.
Provisional Programme.
RACE NO. 1.
Handicap 5 furlongs. Top
OWNERS.
... Mr. C. D. Adams
... Ali bin Dollah
... H. H. The Rajah
... Mr. P. M. Adams
... Ong Kongsi
... Mr. Ed. Hardell
... Law Cheng Hiang
... H. H. The Rajah
... Mr. Ed Hardell
... Mr. J. A. H. Hardie
... Badad Kongsi
RACK NO. 2.
Division III. -Handicap 4 furlongs. Top weight 11 stone.
HORSES.
1	White Wings...
2	Tolin
3	Osaha (late Kuching)
4	Mah Jongg ...
6	Tony
8 Penghulu
7	Singa (late The Scout)
8	Ghalib
9	Bagaimana
10	Shotaway
11	Ta'Dapat ...
OWNERS.
H.H. the Rajah Haji Hassim Brothers and Sons Kongsi Mr. Hinwav
Mr. E. Lim Mr. F. H. Pollard Mr. Ang Ong Chye Mr. J. D. Walderson Mr. E. O. Bruce Mr. D. Carroll Abang Suhai
RACE NO. 3.
Divisions II & III 11 weight stone.
HORSES.
1	Lee Mah
2	Penglima
8 Pegasus
4 Sakbon
5 Sisit
8 Aladdin
7 Badad
8 Bang
-Handicap 5 furlongs. Top
OWNers.
... Messrs. Chan Teck Cheng & Wee Boon Chew
... Messrs. Chan Teck Cheng
& Wee Boon Chew
... Eng Guan Leong Kongsi
... Abang Suleiman
... The Datu Bandar
... The Triple Kongsi
... Badad Kongsi
... Sri Binta Amin
RACE NO. 4.
Division VI (Griffins).-Handicap 4 furlongs. Top weight 11 stone.
Horses.
1 Jorrocks
2 Tai Hu
8 Black Pirate ...
4 Typhoon
6 Radium ...
6	Shooting star
7	Jaih
8	Seduan
OWNERS.
... Messrs. Page-Turner, Cutfield & Arundell
... Mr. Law Cheng Hiang
... Mr. Tan Ah Kim
... Messrs. Chan Brothers
... Ong Kongsi
... Hiang Kiang Kongsi
... Kongsi Ampat
... Mr. J. B. Archer
RACK NO. 5.
Divisions I, II & III- weight 11 stone.
HORSES.
1	Flying Fox ...
2	Hopeless
8 Untung ...
4 Akai
6 While Knight
6	Beaver
7	Wembley ...
8	Tony
9	Pengarah
10	Ghalib
-Handicap 3 furlongs. Top
OWNERS.
... Mr. O, D. Adams
... H. IL The Rajah
... Mr. P. M. Adams
... Mr. Ed. Hardell
... M r. Law Cheng Hiang
... Messrs. P. M. Adams & J. B. Archer
... H. H. The Rajah
... Mr. E. Lim
... Mr. J. A. H. Hardie
... Mr. J. D. Walderson
RACE NO. 6.
Division III. -Handicap 5 furlongs. Top weight 11 stone.
HORSES.	OWNERS.
1	Tolin	...	...	Haji Hassim
2	Osaha (late Kuching) ... Brothers & SONS Kongsi
8	Muh Jongg	...	...	Mr. Hinway
9	Penghulu	...	...	Mr. H. F. Pollard
10	Singa (late The Scout) ...	Mr. Ang Ong Chye
11	Bagaimana	...	...	Mr. E. O. Bruce
12	.Shotaway	...	... Mr. D. Carroll
13	Bang	...	... Sri Binta Amin
RACE NO. 7.
Divisions II & III. -Handicap 3 Jurlongs. Top weight 11 stone.
HORSES.	OWNERS.
1	Lee Mah	...	. .	Messrs. Chun Teck Cheng
& Wee Boon Chew
2	Adham	...	...	The Datu Imam Tua
3	Penglima	...	...	Messrs. Chan TeckCheng
& Wee Boon Chew
4	Peugarah	...	...	Mr. J. A. H. Hardie
5	Pegasus	...	...	Eng Guan Leong Kongsi
6	Sisit	The Dutn Bandar
7	Aladdin	...	...	The Triple Kongsi
8	Badad	...	...	Badad Kongsi
9	Ghalib	...	...	Mr. J. D. Walderson
RACE NO. 8.
Division IV (Griffins). -Handicap 5 furlongs. Top weight 11 stone.
HORSES.
1 Jorrocks
2 Black Pirate ...
8 Typhoon
4 Radium
6 Shooting Star
8 Jaih
OWNERS.
Messrs. Page-Turner, Cutfield
& Arundell
Mr. Tan Ah Kim
Messrs. Chau Brothers
Ong Kongsi
Hiang Kiang Kongsi
Kongsi Ampat
RACE NO. 9.
Divisions I, II & III. -Handicap R. C. Top weight 11 stone.
HORSES.
1 Flying Fox
2 Burak
8 Hopeless
4 Untong
5 Kismet
6 Akai
7 Wembley
8 Azab
9 Pegasus
10 Sakbon
11 Penghulu
12 Bagaimana
OWNERS.
... Mr. C. D. Adams
... Ali bin Dollah
... H. H. The Rajah
... Mr. P. M. Adams
... Ong Kongsi
.. Mr. Ed. Hardell
... H. H. The Rajah
... Mr. Ed. Hardell
... Eng Guan Leong Kongsi
- Abang Suleiman
... Mr. F. H. Pollard
... Mr. E. O. Bruce
B. J. C. SPURWAY, Honorary Secretary, Sarawak Turf Club.
254
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1927.
Traffic Regulations.
School Sports in General.
Autumn Race Meeting 1927.
After the hour of 11 a. m. on 13th and 15th October, 1927, all cars, motor lorries, and carriages, etc., except those authorised to carry a red flag, may only proceed to the Race Course via the Sekama Road.
After depositing their passengers at the Grand Stand, cars must be turned round and parked in the Grand Stand Road facing away from the Grand Stand on the extreme left-hand side of the road, each car must draw up to within four yards of the car ahead. Red flag cars, where space permits, may park outside the Grand Stand, otherwise they must be parked in the same manner as other cars.
No VEHICLES ARE TO PARK ON THE RACE COURSE.
Kickshaws and pedal bicycles may proceed at any time via the Padungan and Ban Hock Roads, using the road to the Grand Stand and parking on the cleared space on the left-hand side of the road on entering. They are not allowed to remain on any part of this road and must move off to their parking ground without delay.
New Sarawak Club.
The new building of the Sarawak Club was officially opened by His Highness the Tuan Muda on Monday, 29th August. The opening ceremony was timed to start at 6 p.m., and the rain apparently heard about it and came too. Many people were prevented by the sudden storm from coming in time to the opening.
Those of us who were present waited on the verandah for the yellow red and black ribbon which barred the entrance to be cut. His Highness th e Tuan Muda made a short speech. He congratulated all those who had helped to prepare the building and get it ready for opening that day. Specially to be thanked and congratulated were Capt. C. P. Lowe for his untiring vigilance in regard to the building and for his ability to overcome the lack of skilled labour in various parts of work; the Committee for their care and forethought in the arrangements and last but not least Dr Marjoribanks whose labour in connection with all things pertain- ing to this Club had been positively Herculean.
ills Highness wished happiness to all in the new surroundings at the same time remarking " May peace be within thy Walls!" He then cut the ribbon mid we entered to sample the delights of the huge building.
In a very few minutes billiards, bridge, and the bar were in full swing, and in the main room many sweep tickets were bought-the ladies being most successful at rolling the dice!! And so continued a very enjoyable first night in the new building.
Poppy Day, 1927.
It is with gratification that we note the increasing keenness that is now being displayed among the local schools in the pursuance of their sports. Although this year is only the fourth anniversary of the Inter-School Sports, a marked increase in esprit de corps Was reflected in the enthusiasm shown by the supporters of the competing schools at both the early heats and the finals.
This good spirit is mainly due to the unfailing generosity of the local public and to the unselfishness with winch people give their assistance in the Annual Birthday Sports, and we extend our grateful thanks to them. Special mention should be made of Messrs. Lau Chen Hiang and Tan Siang Kim, who have between them presented three very hand- some shields this year.
Mr. Lau Chen Hiang's shield, is for competition
at His Highness the Rajah's Birthday Sports, for boys of four feet six inches in height, and under. This shield was presented in order to encourage the smaller schools, the numbers and size of whose hoys, handicap their chances in the Victor Ludorum Shield.
The two shields kindly presented by Mr. Tan Siang Kim are for an annual inter school football competition, one being for Senior and one for Junior boys of four feet six inches and under in height. At present the only two schools, who play football are St. Thomas' and St. Joseph's, but we hope that the advent of these two shields will promote the enthusiasm of the other local schools for the game.
With regard to football we should like to bring to notice the fact that most of the schools are unable to take part in this game owing to their not having suitable playing grounds. The daily advancement of education, coupled with a steady increase in the popularity of school sports, continually reminds one of the necessity of having a large public playing ground, equipped with a sufficiency of proper football grounds, to supply the needs of the children of the schools who have not got any, We would therefore invite the attention of the Town Planning Com- mittee, who, we understand is examining the question of extending the bazaar in the Padungan direction, to the possibility of allotting an area of land suitable to supply this urgent public need. If any such scheme materialized it would mean once more call- ing on the generosity of the local Public, but we feel sure they would all be only too willing to subscribe to such a useful purpose.
A letter has been received from Messrs. Evatt & Co., Singapore, Honorary Secretaries for British Malaya of the Appeal Department for British Legion, appealing for subscriptions to the Poppy Day Fund.
It is mentioned in this letter that the objects of the appeal are so well known that it is unnecessary to deal with them in detail, and it is stated that last year Malaya established a new record and the Executive is hoping that the results of the 1927 effort may exceed those of the past year.
Subscriptions will be received and acknowledged by the Treasurer of Sarawak, who will pass the amount on to the Honorary Secretaries in Singapore.
S. T- ENNION,
Honorary Secretary, Birthday Sports Committee.
The report and results of His Highness the Rajah's Birthday Sports which took place on 26th September, 1927, will appear in next month's issue of this Gazette.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1927.
255
Extracts from Monthly Reports.
First Division.
KUCHING.	August, 1927.
AT the Malay Kampong area at Padungnn is required for bazaar building purposes under the new Town Planning Scheme, I am suggesting that the Malays should be moved into land off Sekama Hoad and adjacent to the Isolation Camp and Race Course. I have also decided with the Municipal Commissioner that a reserve should be made for a Malay burial ground across river at Sungei Bedil. The Mosque Officials are in favour of this as they understand that there is no available land on this side of the river.
A piggery and vegetable reserve has been made along the Batu Kawa Road at Stapok adjoining the Forest Reserve.
An Inquiry was held into the finding of water in No. 1 Hold of s.s. Auby resulting in damage to cargo, whilst on her trip from Kuching to Sibu. The Court of Inquiry's finding was that the water entered this bold owing to the accidental opening of a valve with no negligence on the part of any of the ship's company.
M. S. Siti Jaoyah sank off the Shipping Offices, whilst loaded with a full cargo of sago. It appears that owing to a heavy fresh she dragged her anchors and capsized on striking the rocks off these offices.
LAND OFFICE.
Drainage Scheme at Sungei Moyan, Samarahan. The clearing of one stretch of the Moyan stream was almost completed, but the work on another section was unsatisfactory, and more clearing has been called for 276 feet of cutting, joining two tanjongs, in connection with the straightening of the river, was also completed.
Lundu Road. The construction of the earthwork for the four miles of road mentioned last month was completed during August, and accepted.
A similar contract, at a rather cheaper rate, has been entered into with the same contractor for a further distance of 2 3/4 miles, this being the last remaining length of trace that has been completely cleared, and as much more as the contractor can finish before the end of the year when the contract automatically terminates. At the request of the Commissioner of Public Works, Mr. Davidson made cross-sections of the various streams that require bridging, but it seems that much more work is necessary before the bridges can he designed. It is to be hoped greatly that these may be completed as soon as possible, as it is probable that nearly ten miles of road may be complete, except for bridges, by the end of the year.
In Kuching there were 180 applications for land during the month, and 52 inspections were made. For various reasons a considerable number of applications were refused without the necessity for inspection, while applications for land within planting reserves were granted, in many cases without inspection.
UPPER SARAWAK, BAU.
August, 1927.
The District Officer, Mr. F. H. Kortright, reports: -
I was visiting the left-hand branch from the 6th to the 11th. The Dyaks here all seemed to be very prosperous and healthy. Dresser Su'ut accompanied me with the object of given N.A.B. injections, and vaccinating, but there was surprisingly little demand for his services.
The river was very dry, there having been no rain for over six weeks, and all the new padi clearings had very satisfactory burns.
On the 14th, the Simawati reservoir, capacity 58,000 gallons, was filled for the first time and water turned on in all bazaar houses. In connection with
this, all arrangements worked very satisfactorily, it only taking l1/2 hours to pump up this quantity of water, which should be an ample supply for two days; the fire hydrants were tested under pressure of the pump, and a very satisfactory volume of water was projected from the fire-
hose nozzles.
SADONG.
August, 1927.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. E. O. Bruce, reports: -
Agriculture. -There is every prospect of an engkabang crop this season, unless the weather is un-
usually dry for the next month or so. Determined endeavours are being made to ensure a large padi harvest next year, to make up for several failures last spring.
Favoured with an exceptionally dry month, excellent burnings have been effected in most areas which I have visited recently. Four occupation tickets for rubber were issued. Progress is being made with the proposed reserve for Malay rubber gardens in rear of the kampong-an area of about 200 acres has been demarcated with a view to the division into three-acre lots, when the necessary main rentises and roads are completed.
Another area at Lubok Boh, on the east bank of main river just below the Station, has also been marked off as a reserve for Chinese gardens, totalling 4,000 acres if desired. About one hundred acres has already been applied for, and a rentis cut as a boundary from small Malay holdings and padi land at Sungei Sedilo.
A supply of fire extinguishers has been obtained from Kuching for use in Court House and bazaars at Simunjan, Gedong and Tabekang. Police and Government clerks were instructed in their use.
Rainfall during the mouth was 5.13 inches.
H. D. APLIN,
Divisional Officer.
Nil 1,499.09 tons
1,499.09 " " 1,499.09 ,,
Sadong Colliery.
August, 1927.
The output, export, local consumption, conversion into coke, and coal stock figures for the month were
as follows: -
1st August stock balance " gross output
Total Shipped	... 1,126.00 tons
Boiler consump- tion and coke conversion ...	373.09
Stock balance at end of month Nil
No coal stock balances existed at the end of the month, as the month's output had been shipped away, and the rest consumed locally.
Twenty-two men were recruited during the month, two of whom were Malays, eight Javanese and twelve Chinese.
One Kho Ah Kang, an old wharf employee, who had just been granted a long service bonus on his retirement, died at mid-month.
A site was selected on the hillside, mid-way between No. 9 and the New Mines, for the opening of a new slant, to work out an area of outcrop coal at this point, and a commencement had been made on this work by mid-
month.
A start had been made with the erection of two new quarters for the clerical staff, and the framework had been placed in position by the end of the month, and the ground area cleared, burnt, and filled in, with boiler cinders and shale.
256
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1927.
His Highness the Tuan Muda, Dayang Anne, the Acting Chief Secretary and the Acting Con- servator of Forests arrived by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 15th, but, owing to an accident to the m.l. Vava, they were unable to visit the Mines, as pro- posed, and the party left again the same evening.
The other visitors to the Mines during the month were, The Reverend Fathers Hopfgartner and Staal, Mijnheer L. H. Krol. Messrs W. F. de V. Skrine, W. W. Duncan, A. Humphreys, and B. J. C. Spurway, respectively.
The rainfall for the month was 2.10 inches.
J. W. EVANS,
Manager,
Third Division.
Dr. L. B. Haye, Medical Officer, Third and Coast Divisions, reports as follows on his trip to Belaga.
I left Sibu on 22nd July, accompanied by Dresser Chui Hua and Government vaccinator Geek Cheng and was at Kapit a week vaccinating in the bazaar and kampong also inoculating with anti- typhoid vaccine all Government servants. The somewhat lengthy stay at Kapit was due to my having to wait for Mr. Banks who was unexpectedly delayed owing to the breakdown of his boat from Kuching. Mr. Banks and myself left Kapit on the 29th, arriving below Pelagus rapids that day and passing through the following day. From the experience I had at the first Dyak house we came to (Penghulu Angsi's house) I determined to do no vaccinating or giving what small medical treatment was possible until my return, when I should have some idea of the number of houses and people. This was necessary as at Penghulu Angsi's house alone I could have got rid of all the medicine I had taken with me and I wished to give a fair proportion to each house.
We arrived at Belaga on the evening of the 3rd ; the water being very low, progress was by no means rapid. I stayed in and around Belaga until Satur- day the 6th vaccinating Kayans and giving N.A.B. injections to those who wanted them and also any medicine I could spare.
The number of people vaccinated here was 630 and 45 injections were given. I did not consider it of any use leaving the Government vaccinator at Belaga to go farther up the ulu as, without a Euro- pean or a Native Officer, he would not be able to force the natives to be vaccinated (the majority had to be coerced), I therefore brought him back with me to Kapit.
I left Belaga at 3 p.m on the 6th and visited every house, long and small, down to Kapit, vaccinating all who were present, giving what medicine was avail- able and any injections that were wanted. The population included Kayans, Kenyamans, Sians, Skapans, Bukitans and Dyaks, and in all some 1,380 people were vaccinated and twenty injections given. Some thirty long houses were visited (two Kayan long houses farther up from Belaga were also visited while there). Kapit was reached on Wednesday the 10th and I eventually returned to Sibu on the 13th. While at Kapit I spent one day up the ulu Baleh and vaccinated at two Dyak long houses.
The total number of vaccinations during the whole trip was a little over 2,000, this number is easily less than 33% of the population in that area and the reason that more people were not vaccinated can be accounted for by the time of the year, it was the month for the people to plant padi in their farms and unless one was actually at a house at night or early morning many of the adults were away from the house. It is manifestly impossible in a short period to be at every house at night time.
A rough estimate of the percentage of the various people vaccinated is as follows: Dyak 35%, Kayan 15%, Skapan 16%, Punan 13%, Kenyaman 9.5%, Bukitan 7%, Chinese 4% and Sian 0.5%.
Impressions received during my visit.
Health.- This struck me as being on the whole good. Admittedly one cannot judge with much accuracy during a two weeks' trip but from what I saw the health of the people in the Kayan district was in every way as good as that in the Rejang delta. Belaga bazaar is, in my opinion, the cleanest in the Third and Coast Divisions and the conditions in the Kayan, Skapan, and Punan houses are as good, if not better than in the average Dyak house.
Taking the population at a whole it struck me forcibly what an absence of evident signs of disease there was; malaria was by no means common; I inquired in every house whether they had many people sakit demam and invariably got a negative reply. I saw only four cases of framboesia, which is in marked contrast to the Dyaks, crab yaws of course was fairly common, the absence of pox marks was striking as also was that of vaccination scars, the vast majority of the people in this district were certainly unvaccinated. One case only of leprosy was found nor did I hear of any others; syphilis seemed to be comparatively non-existent and cases of tuberculosis were hard to find.
The two diseases which are extremely rife are kourap and goitre and to a lesser extent con- junctivitis and allied infections of the eyes. Scabies, like kourap. was also common but septic sores were relatively few and far between.
One striking fact which one notices on visiting all these houses is the large number of young children (1-10 years) in proportion to the adults, I could find no evidence of sickness o hear of it but certainly the infant and child mortality must be somewhat high.
Medical Treatment.
All the natives were continually clamouring for obat but it is a well-known fact that whether he is sick or not a Dyak, etc., will always want medicine and in my opinion merely a few simple drugs is all that is wanted but these are really required. At present I cannot see the immediate use of a dresser in the Kapit -Belaga district in view of the shortage in other parts of the division; the Court writers or Native Officer's are quite capable of administering from their stocks of simple drugs which should include tinct. iodine, mist, ammon. tussis, mist.
influenza, quinine, pot. permang, calomel, castor oil, etc.
The cases of goitre are easily treated by giving tinct. iodine mxxx in one pint bottle of water.
In the question of a suitable and practicable treat- ment of koerap and other skin diseases, I confess I am at a loss; to administer lotio koerap in sufficient quantities to these people to have any beneficial affect at all would entail such an enormous ex- penditure of money and labour as to render it im- practicable and apparently the unfortunate native in these out-lying districts must just "grin and bear it."
The majority of the people can and are willing to pay for their medicine and in many cases if they could not in cash they did in kind (fowls, eggs and so on) these I bought myself and the money for the N.A.B injections, etc., was thus made up to the proper total. I should like again to emphasize that these "impressions" are merely those which one can receive in a somewhat hurried two weeks' tour, I am, however, certain that -
(a)	as a district it has a relatively healthy population;
(b)	vaccination was and still is badly needed;
(c)	a large supply of simple drugs at Kapit and Belaga forts is essential.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1927.
257
Coast Division.
MUKAH AND BALINGIAN.
June, 1927.
General.-On the 2nd I accompanied Mr. G. M. Allman on a visit to rubber gardens in the Mukah River as far as Sikat and returned the following afternoon. Some Foochows have acquired a line piece of land at Skoyan aim have planted up about 200 acres.
On the evening of the 3rd I went to Oya to hear an appeal, also a Resident's Court case, and returned again on the 5th.
The Revd. Father Anthony Mulder returned from European furlough on the 7th and was accorded a great welcome by past and present members of the R. C. Mission, and by many others.
Clerk Hon Sye Chin, transferred for duty here from the Baram district, also arrived from Kuching on the 7th.
Francis Lim, Treasury Clerk, was granted six weeks' leave from the 8th instant and handed his work over to Joseph Chong.
Mr. G. M. Allman, left for Bintulu in the m.l. Para at 6.30 a.m. of the 9th.
The Revd. Fathers Bernard Mulder and Epping arrived in m.l. Leonora on the 10th to visit the Rev. Father Anthony Mulder, just returned from Europe. Mr. G. J. D. Walters, of Oya, also came to sit for certain papers in bis second examination.
On the 12th the m.l. Leonora was chartered for a trip to Oya and was held up there through stormy weather until the 15th.
The s s. Sulong called off the kuala on the evening of the 13th to drop Mr.T. Corson, Assistant Conserva- tor of Forests, Third Division. The sea however, was too rough to permit a boat going out to take him off and he was obliged to make the round trip, eventually arriving here on the 21st. He visited Balingian between the 26th and 29th and left for the Forest Reserve at Sekaye, in the Mukah River, on the 30th. He was still there at the end of the month.
Mr. J. G. Anderson left on the 15th to visit the Dyaks in the ulu Mukah, to collect their tax and to inspect all rubber gardens and issue occupation tickets. He returned on the 29th and brought back the sum of $547. Appended is his report on his visit up river.
On the 16th, tbe sea being again calm, the Rev. Fathers Mulder and Epping returned to Dalat. The Dresser L. Ah Kow, who is being transferred to Rejang, also went to Dalat en route to Sibu.
Mr. E. H. Weigall, of the Sarawak Oilfields Limited, arrived from Balingian in a Dyak temui with an out-board motor on the 25th. He had been visiting the ulus of the Tatau and Balingian Rivers, trying to get information from the natives of oil seepages, etc.; I understand that he was not very successful. He left for the ulu Mukah on the 29th and was still there at the end of the month.
I visited the Government Vernacular School on the 12th, when it was formally opened. The attendance on that day was 118 boys, and since then it has increased considerably. The three schoolmasters seemed to be fully occupied.
Judicial. -Court work has been heavy this month. In the Magistrate's Court 136 summonses were taken out and some sixty-one cases were heard, the balance being admitted debt cases.
In the District Court some difficult land cases were brought up and seven of these were settled. Lah was fined $25 for felling sago trees on another person's laud. Mulak and Blalang were also fined $25 each for the same offence and Gagus and Liram $25 each for not registering a land transfer. P.O. Samah was dismissed the force and imprisoned for nine months under section 408. Kim Hok was sentenced to three years' imprisonment under section 380. Ex-P.C. Mat, and Ba Ba, one month each under section 106. One Tan Suk Nam got three months for breach of agreement.
In the Resident's Court at Oya, Upit, late clerk at Dalat, received a further term of two years' imprison- ment under section 408 and Forester Usop was ordered to pay to Government $44.50, the sum of money involved through his neglect in procuring the necessary receipt. In an appeal case Liang Chuan vs. Kim, for custody of a child, the appeal was upheld and the former decision reversed.
In the Datu's Court, five cases were heard and the fines imposed amounted to $65.88.
In the Tuah Kampong's Court, Islam, there were six cases settled and the fines amounted to $98.82.
In the Tuah Kampong's Court, Liko, six cases with fines of $70.08 were heard.
Public Works.-The new wireless buildings have been completed and the old masts will be taken down and re-erected, and the plant installed, within the next few days.
The material for the new bungalow has now all arrived from Bintulu. The Acting District Officer of that place was able to charter a local motor schooner and two trips were sufficient to bring all the necessary timber and attaps. A contract has been let to a local carpenter to erect the building according to plan, and to do the concrete work as well, for $3,500. The Kuching carpenter's tender was $6,000 to erect the building only. The work has now been started.
The local P.W.D. has completed the fourth cot- tage for clerks, who are all now housed in decent quarters.
The prison gang, averaging 30.25 men, have finished grading and levelling the site for the new bungalow, and have been employed on clearing and burning a piece of jungle on the south side of the station, adjoining the Malay grave-yard. This clearing greatly improves the appearance of the station.
The remnants of the Tamil gang have been doing odd jobs, also ditching and weeding in the ornamental grounds.
Trade.-The value of exports and imports for the month are as follows:-
Mukah:-
Exports Imports
Balingian:-
Exports
Imports
1927.	1926.	1925.
...$58,397	$71,023	$49,732
...	33,539	51,642	43,786
...	51,923	23.101	12,099
15,202	21,623	6,467
The principal exports and imports are as follows:- Mukah:- Exports.	Imports.
Raw sago	423	koyans $49,239
G jelutong	948	piculs	7,094
G. jangkar	8 ,,	320
G. para 8.80	"	660
Balingian:-
Jelutong	1,996 piculs $18,966
P. rubber	22	,,	1,830
Scrap	7	200
Raw sago	43	koyans 4,300
Rice 167 bags $2,596
Clothing 12 cases 3,366
Rice 5 bags $ 100
Clothing 8	1,500
Seven motor schooners, fourteen schooners, and thirteen bandongs entered with tonnage of 1,006 tons, and seven motor schooners, fifteen schooners, and eleven bandongs cleared the port of Mukah with tonnage of 1,117 tons during the month.
The rainfall was 6.64 inches.
August, 1927.
General.-Mr. W. G. Tait, of the Wireless Depart- ment, arrived from Kuching on the 1st with me- chanics and appliances to move the wireless plant to the new building. A temporary mast was raised, while the heavy belian masts were being lowered, carried to the new site and re-erected and the station WAS never once out of communication during the whole process. Thanks are due to the kampong people who turned out and did all the heavy work of taking down and re-erecting the masts. The new station was operating on the 5th.
Juragan Dris of the Kim Po Kok reported that on midnight of the 12th when off Palo, Tanjong Sirik, his vessel started leaking badly. The sea was
258
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1927.
fairly rough at the time and being unable to keep the water out he beaded for the shore. He stated that the pumps were kept manned until the crew were exhausted and eventually the crew of seven and one passenger were obliged to take to their boat; the ship sank in twenty fathoms at 4 p.m. on the 13th. The crew were picked up by Juragan Zahari of the Kim Soon. This vessel was also in a very leaky condition and was obliged to put back into this port. The Kim Po Kok and the cargo of twenty koyans of sago was owned by Ah Heng of Mukah.'
On the 23rd, accompanied by Mr. G. M. Allman and R. L. Danbeny, I visited Sebauh to examine the work done in the Foochow colony. Two thousand eight hundred and seventy-five acres have now been demarcated for rubber planting and these consist of seventy-seven lots of five acres, ninety- nine lots of ten acres and seventy five lots of twenty acres. Some five hundred acres have already been planted up. In addition to this one hundred and twenty lots of ten acres each have been surveyed for the planting of sago only. The eighteen fool road from Sungei Sebangat through the bazaar and Government station has now been completed to a distance of neatly three miles. Great difficulty has been experienced to get the Native land holders to do their share of the road running through their own lands, but this is nearly done now and the remainder will be done by the Foochows. Mr. Allman kindly offered to send twenty thousand selected rubber seeds to be sold at cost price to Chinese and others at Sebauh. About thirty Foochows approached me with a view of obtaining a loan of $100 each from the Government with which to get their lots planted up and the matter will be duly referred to the Chief Secretary.
On the 24th I left in m.l. Para with Mr. Allman for Balingian. The bazaar at this place seems to be growing considerably and shop owners with leaf straps on their shops were ordered to take these off and replace with belian.
The Chinese traders asked to be allowed to summons Dyaks for debt, they complained that they were owed large sums of money which they were unable to collect, they admitted, however, that they quite aware when giving advances to Dyaks that the money could not be recovered in the Courts. It is a fact that the Balingian traders are so eager to get Dyaks and others under advances to them and have such extraordinary trading methods that they actually compete with each other in the giving out of advances and in the end pay in the local market the Kuching market price and even higher for jelutong and other produce.
Public Works. -The Government carpenters have taken down the old wireless building and have re-erected same on another site, this will shortly be used as a Land Office.
The last of the cottages for clerks is nearly finished at time of writing. Five of these have now been built since April.
Trade-The value of exports and imports for the mouth are as follows: -
Mukah
1927.	1926.	1925.
Exporta	... $50,785 $65,522 $57,858
Imports	...	39,397	47,019	50,656
The principal exports and imports are as follows: - Mukah: -
Exports	Imports.
Rww Sago	818 koyan $36.000 Rice	412 bags $6,204
G. Jelutong 458 piculs 4,980 Clothing 16 cases 3,188
G. Para	12.20	piculs	788
Balingian: -
Jelutong	1.669	piculs	$16,670	Rice	26	bags	$480
P Rubber	26	"	1,530	Clothing H	cases	1,200
R. Scrap	7	..	220
Raw Sago	36	koyans	3.500
The rainfall was 2.57 inches.
OYA AND DAL AT.
June, 1927.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. G. J. D. Wallers, reports: -
Court. -In the Resident's Court, the appeal against the decision of the District Court was heard in the case Liang Chnan vs. Kim (f.) for the custody of the child Swee Nior (f). The decision of the District Court was reversed, the custody of the child being awarded to the appellant, Liang Chuan.
Ex-clerk Upit was sentenced to a further two years' imprisonment under I.P.C. section 408 for misappropriating $44.50 of Government money, this man having previously been sentenced to one year on a similar charge.
Forester Usop was ordered to repay to Government $44.50 for his neglect is not securing a receipt from Upit when be paid money to him.
In the District Court, Amey was fined $25 for cheating, Ado fined $10 for contempt of Court, Tian Hock fined $20 for breach of Farms Order, Kirad and Kalang sentenced to one and two months respectively for contempt of Court. Limah (f.) was sentenced to two months for criminal breach of trust, Awang Gaui sentenced to two months for absconding in debt.
A large number of civil claims and disputes were also settled.
Prisoners. -The daily average number of prisoners was 9.5. The prison gang were employed on the roads and general upkeep of the station.
General. -The Acting Divisional Officer with Mr. G. M. Allman, Superintendent of Rubber Exports, visited Oya on the 3rd in m.l. Para, returning to Mukah on the 5th. On tins visit the two outstanding cases and various other affairs were settled.
On the 10th I proceeded to Mukah by m.l. Leonora in order to sit for the Government Officers Standard II Examination. On this occasion, the Rev. Fathers Bernard Mulder and Epping also visited Mukah in order to meet the Rev. Father Anthony Mulder who recently returned from home leave.
I returned to Oya on the 14th.
On the 17th, Mr. W. Harn ack, Assistant Superin-
tendent of Surveys, arrived at Oya from Sibu in m.l. Ringgit.
Various affairs in connection with the surveys here were discussed, Mr. Harnack returning to Sibu on the 19th.
I visited Dalat from the 21st to the 27th, where a large number of cases were settled and affairs attended to.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 14,27.
259
Daring the month Day's Road was cleared throughout by the kampong people.
The weather during the latter part of the mouth was extremely hot, there being very little rain.
Shipping. -Four motor schooners, six schooners and three motor launches entered, three motor schooners, seven schooners and two motor launches cleared.
Trade -Two hundred and thirty-nine koyans of raw sago, 599 piculs of para rubber and 385 piculs of jelutong were shipped to Kuching.
The trade returns for the month and for comparison with those of the same period last year, are as follows: -
BINTULU.
July, 1927.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, reports: -
P. W.D.-Carpenter Mohamat has cemented the kitchen and drains from the bathroom of the Forest Bungalow, and has also turned the old dispensary quarters into a Forest Office, including the making of three windows, ceiling and extension of trellis work round the inner wall. This will make a very suitable Forest Office, at the same time leaving more room for the Stores Clerk upstairs.
Contractor Mamoh has completed the timber for new clerks' house and had just started electing same by the end of the month.
July, 1927
Imports.
$31,546.13
" 1926 ...	52,368.50
Exports.
$34,925.20
63,221.50
August, 1927.
General.-On Monday the 15th, the body of one. Ah Hee (Hylam) of Dalat bazaar, was found floating in the river below Kampong Tanam. This man had last been seen walking in the direction of the kam- pong the previous Thursday night. As he had not returned to the bazaar the following morning, inquiries were made and the kampongs turned out to search for him, but with no result. The Divisional Officer, Mukah. was informed, and an inquiry was held at Dalat on the 15th and following days. IT was also notified that a reward of $100 would be given to any person who gave information which would disclose the manner in which Ah Hee met his death. At the end of the month inquiries were still being made.
During the month many applications were made for rubber gardens, on the new order being made known that Native Holdings of three acres may now be occupied free of charge for the purpose of planting rubber or whatever is desired.
Travelling.-On 12th instant I left for up river,
accompanied by Datn Haji Abdullah and clerk Mang Fook, arriving at Tuban on 13th. Sebauh, Pandan and Labang were visited and assessment according to Order No. V, 1915, was duly levied on all these
places. I found that the quality of belian attaps exported from Tubau was good, thereby proving that the inferior attaps were obtained from somewhere between Tubau and Bintulu. A strict examination
is now enforced when exporting from Bintulu.
Trade.-The price of jelutong has gone up to $10 per picul. Of tins commodity 2,834.89 piculs has
been exported. 255,000 pieces of belian attaps and 950.25 piculs of raw sago were also exported during the month.
Below are the value of exports and imports, local and foreign, for the month.
1927.	1926.	1925.
Exports ... $72,327.12 $98,881.50 $45,304.00
Imports ... 53,230.30	65,456.51	44,976.71
Rainfall.-Rainfall for the month was 10.03 inches.
August, 1927.
It appears that the lighthouse keepers' quarters both at Igan and Dalat will have to be moved further inland very soon, owing to the encroachment of the sea.
Trade.-One hundred and ninety-four koyans of raw sago, 145 60 piculs of Para rubber and 56 piculs of jelutong were shipped to Kuching.
The trade returns for the month and for com- parison with those of the same period last year, are as follows :-
Imports. Exports.
August, 1927	$23,563.00	$33,346.00
"	1926	33,259.20	40.060.50
P. W.D. Carpenter Mohamat has completed the new Forest Office below the Fort and the old Forest Office is now used by the Store Clerk. A new spar for the tide balls has also been erected extending six feet on either side of the flag post and about twenty feet above the old spar.
A contract was signed with Mamoh for $800 to erect a new bungalow at Kedurong mid work was started on the timber on 29th. The bungalow will be built entirely of belian with the exception of rengs which will be of soft wood.
Trade. The price of jelutong has gone down again to $9.50 per picul. Of this commodity 3,056.70 piculs has been exported. Three hundred and ninty-five thousand five hundred pieces of belian straps and 1,040 piculs were also exported during the month.
260
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, OCTOBER 1, 1927.
Below are the value of exports and imports local and foreign for the month: -
1927.	1926.	1925.
Exports	$60,960.87 $67,546.56 $55,451.10
Imports 62,036.42	65,023.38 51,596.50
HENRY H. KORTRIGHT.
Acting Divisional Officer.
Fourth Division.
MIRI.
July, 1927.
P.W.D. Work was started on the erection of a new block of Clerks Quarters on the padang in front of the barracks.
General. H.M.S. Herald arrived on the 23rd and remained until the 25th.
August. 1927.
Court. Numerous Jelutong workers were fined for breach of Forestry rules. It would appear that nearly all the jelutong in the District has been ruined owing to non-
observance of the tapping regulations.
General. Major T. A. Lowe, D.s.o., of His Majesty's Intelligence arrived on the 2nd and remained until the 9th. During the week he gave a most interesting lecture on the world situation which was much appreciated.
BARAM.
July, 1927.
General. A meeting of local Chinese was held in the Fort with the idea of getting them to invest in patent fire extinguishers, they have since installed extinguishers in nearly every shop and Government has put extinguishers on the five-foot way. A successful demonstration of the Minimax Extinguishers was given them.
The Resident, accompanied by Mr. G. M. Allman and myself, left on the 22nd for the Punan meeting at Long Malinan, and on the way there, Mr Allman examined rubber produced by natives of the Tatau. We arrived at Malinau on the 24th, the last section of the journey taking longer than usual owing to the water being very low. One hundred and fifty-five Punans came to the meeting and brought more produce than previously. More than the usual number of trading boats came up also.
Medical. Prof. Harison Smith Fund. Mr. Lazaroo was engaged temporarily to work under the Professor Harrison Smith Fund. Eighty-four people were treated including fifty-eight injections for N.A.B.
Baram Hospital and Dispensary. The number of patients treated were four in-patients and eighty-eight out-
patients including eleven N.A.B. injections.
Telephone and Telegraphs. The whole telephone system was re-wired, both here and at Bakong. and a new swtichboard put in here which has considerably improved communication with Bakong.
Trade. The trade figures
for the month are
as follows:-
Imports.
Exports.
$ 62.731
$ 95,052
Brought forward 225,388
335,611
$288,119
$430,663
--	-
1 .
1926	$230,448
$418,326
C.
E. A. ERMEN,
Acting Resident, Fourth Division.
Fifth Division.
LAWAS AND TRUSAN.
June. 1927.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
Public Works. On 14th, I inspected the new road rentis between Betong and Belimbing. Work was started on the road during the month. The road from Sualai to Punang is going ahead well. Talip was employed on the Melipat Road Bridges.
A wharf was erected at Awat-Awat and another is being built at Kuala Trusan.
Agriculture. The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estate, Limited, exported 40,492 lbs. of dry rubber to Labuan.
Obituary. The death of Haji Samat, Tua Kampong of Melipat was reported during the month. I understand that he was preparing to go on the Haji again next year. His place as Tua Kampong will he hard to fill as men of his stamp seem to be few and far between.
Rainfall. The rainfall recorded was as under: -
Lawas ... 12.06 inches.
Lawas Estate 10.49	"
Trusan ...	8.87	"
Trade. The trade returns are as follows:-
FOREIGN.
Lawas.
Imports.
Exports.
June, 1927
$26,901
$37,535
" 1926
25,567
45,267
Trusan.
June, 1927
$4,153
$5,209
Sundar.
June, 1927
$3,696
$8,706
Trusan and Sundar.
June, 1926
$5,213
$17,053
Lawas.
June, 1927
COASTING.
$3,712
$2,143
"	1926
2,283
$3,298
Trusan.
June, 1927
$567
$14
Sundar.
June, 1927
$1,851
$7,354
A. E. LAWRENCE, Resident, Fifth Division.
