
VOL. LVII.
No. 886.
Sarawak Gazette.
PRICE
THE
KUCHING, Friday, July 1st, 1927.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
Birth.
AT Arbroath, Scotland, 2lst June, to Mr. and Mrs. J. C. SMITH, Dahan, a son.
Birth:-J. C. Smith	...	...
Notes
Death of Captain Hollingshead
Wedding:-Abang Izawawi and Dayang Samah Mr. N. Vintcent's World Flight ...
Malayan Exhibition ...
The Oil Palm
Nipah Possibilities Prehistoric Tragedy By the Way	...
Are yon a Mason Rubber Improvement Fund Rubber Improvement ...
Sarawak Library and Reading Room-Revised Rules Club News:-
Sarawak Club-Bowling Averages for May, 1927
Bowling Handicap for May, 1927
Sarawak Golf Club-Stroke Competition Bogey Competition
Sarawak Turf Club- Derby Results Correspondence
Monthly Reports : -First Division
Sadong Colliery
Second Division Third Division Coast Division Fourth Division ... Fifth Division
Kuching Trade Returns Passengers Miri Trade Returns ... Kuching Market Price List Kuching Shipping Rainfall Miri Shipping Kuching Shipping Returns
Meteorological Returns
171
The Sarawak Gazette
165 165
166
166
167
167
167
167
167
168
168
169
170
170
NOTES.
(June.)
... 171
.. 171
... 171
... 175
... 175
... 178
...180
... 184
... 185
... 186
... 187
... 188
... 188
...190
... 191
... 192
... 198
... 194
WE learn with pleasure that His Majesty the King has been pleased to confer the honour of the Order of the Grand Cross of the Most Distinguished Order of Saint Michael and Saint George on His Highness the Rajah.
Many letters of congratulation have been received by His Highness from the various communities in Sarawak, and His Highness has been pleased to reply to these congratu- lations to the effect that the honour should be regarded as conferred on Sarawak rather than himself.
His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by Dayang Anne, Mr. H. B. Crocker, and Mr. A. A. Rennie, spent the first week end of the month at Matang Mountain.
His Highness the Tuan Muda and Dayang Anne were absent visiting Bau during the latter part of the month.
MR. C. D. Adams returned from leave by s.s. Macedonia and is proceeding to take up an acting appointment of Resident of the Second Division.
FRIDAY, JULY I, 1927.
Mr. Charles Fenwick.
P.P.C:
P.&O. Mantua, 1.7.27.
MR. F. A. W. Page-Turner, Resident Second Division, and Mr. A. L. M. Honore, of Betong, Saribas, passed through Kuching on their way to Europe on Home Leave.
WE congratulate Mr. G. M. Gifford on winning 4 Firsts, 3 Seconds and 2 Thirds in the recent Singapore Races.
166
TIJE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1927.
A committee under the Presidency of the Divisional Officer, First Division, Mr. H. D. Aplin, has been formed to arrange for the accommodation of Native Members of the Council Negri. A Meeting was held in the Divisional Office, Kuching, on the 27th June.
THE raffle of Mr. C. Fenwick's motor car took place publicly at B. C. L. Office in the morning of the 23rd instant, after the numbers, etc., had been scrutinized by Mr. A. M. Forrest.
The winner number, which was No. 7, turned up after 42 blanks had been drawn. The lucky winner was Mr. P. Cobbold of B. C. L., Sibu.
THE engagement is announced between Mr. Gilbert Weston Peck, 3rd The King's Own Hussars (second son of the late Captain Herbert W. Peck, Sarawak Service), and Miss Barbara Salaman, elder daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Clement Salaman, of Treborough Lodge, Treborough, Somerset.
The late Captain Herbert Withers Peck entered the Sarawak Civil Service in 1884. He was appointed Commandant of the Sarawak Rangers, 1st April, 1885, and promoted Captain, 1st February, 1886; Superintendent of Police and Prisons, 1st August, 1886; Acting Consul for Sarawak in Brunei and Labuan from 16th May, 1888, to 15th May, 1889; Administrator of Brooketon, 15th May, 1889; Resident Second Class in charge of Upper Sarawak 1892; Special Agent for Sarawak in Labuan, 1st June, 1893; Acting Resident First Division, 1st July, 1894, to 15th February, 1895; Acting Postmaster, 31st January, 1897; Resident of Mukah, 1st April, 1897, which post he held until his retirement in 1901. The supervision of Oya was added to his duties, 15th October, 1898.
A fire occurred on the evening of the 24th instant, when a roll of films became ignited in one of our local cinemas. Had it not been for the prompt use of a fire extinguisher the consequences, in all probability, would have been disastrous, both with regard to life and loss of property.
WE understand that a Labour Inspector of the Netherlands India Government is due to arrive by the s.s. Kuching on Monday 4th July.
Death of Captain Hollinshead.
We regret to have to announce the death, at the General Hospital from pneumonia, of Captain F. S. Hollinshead, late Master of the steamship Auby on the Sarawak run. Captain Hollinshead, who was 57 years of age, was well known and much respected. He had been for the past few years on the Sarawak run having previously sailed on the China coast and as Master of tankers. The funeral took place yesterday afternoon at Bidadari the Rev. G. G. Elliott, Port Chaplain, officiating. Amongst those present were Capt. Swinton, Capt. O'Neill, Capt. Benfield, Capt. and Mrs Leighton. Messrs. W. Greig, C. G. Osborne, McLeod, Mr. and Mrs. Eber, Mr. and Mrs. W. H. Elmslie, Mr. E. Baker. Lieut Newbury, Mr. J. Smith, Mr. Gibson, Capt. D. S. Harvey, Captain H. Watson, Mr. Ong Joo Chin, representing Messrs. Ong Ewe Hai and Co., Mr. Ee Eng Hong, representing the Sarawak Steamship Company, Mr. Sim Ah Toah, Mr. Sim Ah Say. There was a large number of wreaths sent including those from the Widow. Messrs. Ong Ewe Hai and Co., Sarawak steamship Company, Master and Officers of the Kuching, Master and Officers of the Auby, Masonic Club, Straits Merchant Service Guild, Mi. W. Greig, Mr. C G. Osborne.
Wedding.
ABANG IZAWAWI AND DAYANG SAMAH.
The wedding took place on the evening of the 11th June, 1927, of Abang Izawawi bin Abang Haji Abdul Latip and Dayang Samah binti Abang Haji Fadell.
His Highness the Tuan Muda and the Dayang Anne honoured the bride and bridegroom with their presence and, it was observed that it was the first occasion that the Dayang Anne had witnessed a wedding conducted in accordance with the custom of the Malay people, and the appreciation of the bride and bridegroom, together with their many relations and visitors, at their presence, was, if possible en-
hanced by this factor.
Both His Highness and the Dayang Anne sprinkled yellow rice over the contracting parties and touched their brows with gold in accordance with Malay custom.
The bridegroom was brought to the house of his bride in a decorated litter which was placed on wheels and dragged through the streets by two bullocks.
The decorations of the house in which the ceremony took place were most attractive and the extensive illuminations and arch at the gate, coupled with excellent weather, added to the gaiety of tho occasion.
We extend our heartiest congratulations to the bride and bridegroom and wish them all happiness and prosperity in the future.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1927.
167
Mr. Vintcent's World Flight
COMPANY TO BE FORMED AT HOME.
Mr. N. Vintcent who, during the last few years has spent a considerable amount of time in the Far East in connection with aerial survey work for the F. M. S. and other governments, passed through Singapore recently on the transport Nevassa, which is homeward bound from China. Mr. Vintcent's visit to China had for its object the completion of financial arrangements with Mr. J. S. Newall. who is a pilot of long standing, and Mr. Vintcent is now going home with the intention of forming a company, which will operate passenger-carrying machines whose first undertaking is expected to be a world flight with the object of collecting data on which to ascertain just where commercial air routes are wanted with a view to the formation of subsequent companies. Discussing his plans with Mr. S. G. Vickers, a member of the Committee and one of the founders of the Singapore Flying Club, Mr Vintcent, whose aerial survey work extends over Sarawak, Burma, Bengal and Malaya, and who has had previous flying experience in Europe, Egypt, Palestine, Mesopotamia, Iraq, Persia and Arabia, stated that two machines, probably Bristol three-seaters, with
Lucifer engines of 350 h.p. will be purchased. They will be land machines. It is hoped that they will be completed in the course of a few months and when they are ready they will be flown, one by Mr. Vintcent and the other by Mr. Newall, who is shortly leaving for England on a world flight, the route of which will be France, Spain, Algiers, Egypt, across Mesopotamia, India, Burma, Malaya, China, Japan, across the Pacific to America, across America to New York, and across the Atlantic-probably by boat. It is expected that the flight will occupy from a year to eighteen months. Mr. Vintcent hopes to be back in Malaya, in the course of this flight, early in 1928.
Malayan Exhibition.
We have received preliminary schedules of classes in the following sections of the forthcom- ing Malayan Exhibition, which is to be held at the Race Course, Kuala Lumpur, from 29th July to 1st August, 1927:- Rubber, oils and fats, horticul- ture, cats and poultrv.
Rubber. The rubber section, which was well represented last year, should again prove a success and attract an even larger number of exhibits. A few alterations have been made to the rules which should commend themselves to exhibitors, while the schedule itself has been revised where necessary. A silver cup is offered as first prize in smoked sheet.
Since the schedule was printed it has been decided to include a class for comps crepe. Fur- ther, exhibits of "sole crepe thin" should be one- eighth of an inch in thickness or under, and anything over this will be classed as ''sole crepe thick."
Oils and Fats. Oils and fats will this year con- stitute a section of their own. The section has . been divided into two groups, one for estates and manufactures and one for smallholders. Minor classes have been deleted in order to concentrate more adequately on the important oils and fats of Malaya.
Horticulture. The horticultural schedule is practically the same as in 1926, but includes a class for pot plants artistically arranged. This section is deserving of far greater support than it has hitherto received, and every effort is being made by the Section Committee to get into touch with exhibitors.
Cats and Poultry. The cat show will be held on Monday, 1st August.
The poultry show will be held on 29th and 30th July. The schedule conforms closely to that of previous years and the usual large number of cups and medals are again offered.
The Oil Palm.
On the cultivation of the oil palm the Chief Secretary's report for 1926 to the F. M. S. Govern- ment states that the interest in oil palm cultivation has been well maintained, the area alienated for this cultivation being over 30,000 acres, of which over 10,000 acres are actually planted.
Three estates have reached the bearing stage, two being equipped with modern machinery for the preparation of a high-class oil. The yields for 1926 were 751 tons of palm oil and 168 tons of kernels.
Further areas of over 100,000 acres in extent, chiefly in Pahang, are provisionally reserved for this cultivation, but it is not yet known if all will prove suitable for the purpose.
The Department of Agriculture is experimenting at Serdang with new varieties of oil palm from West Africa with a view to selecting improved strains of seed for distribution to planters in this country.
Recent improvements in machinery for the extraction of the oil and for cracking the kernels
should stimulate this promising industry.
Prices reached for local palm oil continue to be in advance of those reached by the West African product.
It is of interest to note that during the rear under report the Government of the Gold Coast and Nigeria each sent an expert to study the plan- tation industry here and in the Netherlands East Indies.
Nipah Possibilities.
The possibilities of nipah palm estates as a future source of power alcohol have recently attracted some notice.
There are two existing estates in Selangor with a planted area of over 900 acres varying in age from a year to nearly four years. The growth is reported to be excellent and the older palms are already fruiting.
The department has records of yields taken over a period of two years from some palms eight to nine years old growing in conditions less favourable than those on estates.
These records show that very high yields of l,000 gallons of alcohol per acre per annum are quite probable and if such difficulties as maintaining a large enough tapping force and finding a stable and satisfactory market can be overcome the prospects would appear to be very bright.
Prehistoric Tragedy.
How DINOSAURS FOUGHT IN
VAIN FOR WATER.
The tragedy of the graveyard of the dinosaurs m East Africa is described dramatically by Mr. F. W. H. Migeod in the second number of the "Natural History Magazine," just issued by the British Museum of Natural History. He explains in detail the various excavations undertaken, and then, reconstructing this tragedy of prehistoric times, writes:-
"Some of the bones seemed to have been fractured in life, and to have healed with a bad set, and others had apparently been broken immediately after death and while the muscles were, still operative. This site gave one the impression of having been the pool in the bed of a river which flowed only during part of the year. We may figure to ourselves a region suffering a process of desiccation such as is going on in lands bordering on the southern Sahara at the present day, and coming on again in the Tendaguru region also, though less advanced.
168	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1927.
"All living things flocked to the remaining pools of water for vegetation to eat and such water to drink as was left in the bed of a dried-up river; and here they perished when the water dried up. A subsequent good rainy season could not help them, as all was over. Sand swept over and covered their remains, and the brief annual flow of the river in subsequent years buried them com- pletely."
By the Way
A Suit All Round.
What is described as an Auction Bridge miracle occurred recently. The players were each dealt a complete suit after the cards had been shuffled and cut. The holder of spades called "one spade," sub- sequently explaining that he expected his opponents to be strong in the other suits and hoping to be forced up and doubled.
A woman player holding hearts called "four hearts," followed by calls of "seven clubs," "seven diamonds" and finally "seven spades." The holder
of spades put down his band claiming a grand slain.
He scored 63 below the line and also 100 for a grand slam, 70 for honours and 18 for his partner's chicane. The opponents received 36 for their chicane.
This in the fourth authenticated instance within forty years of such an occurrence. The first was in Calcutta in 1816, the second in Brighton in 1892 and the third at a Surrey whist drive in 1917.
It is estimated that the chances against the occur- rence are over 2,235,000,000,000,000,000,000.000,000 to one.
Frothblowers.
This ancient Order of recent origin is developing far more rapidly and to an extent beyond the dreams of its founders. New Frothblowers are coming in by thousands weekly to the benefit of the Fresh Air Fund, which for years has endeavoured to cope with the enormous number of poor children in London who, under ordinary circumstances, would never see the country or the sea.
Membership has extended to schoolboys and school-girls and as such has raised protests from a Cabinet Minister, who does not think that the book of membership is fitting literature for the young. Nowadays schoolboys and girls have access to all sorts of literature which does not appear to do them any harm.
We do not think the average schoolboy would be likely to follow literally the advice of the motto "Lubrication in Moderation," and if he did so, we remember the beer or " swipes," as it was called at school, as innocuous.
A Curious Plant.
There is a plant, a native of Borneo, which is known as the "clock plant." The name is derived from the action of the sun's rays on the leaves, which are three in number, a large one extending forward with two small ones at the base pointing sideways. These, coming in contact with the rays of the sun, oscillate like the pendulum of a clock, the larger leaf moving upwards and downwards, going its full length every forty-five minutes, the smaller leaves moving toward the larger, completing the distance forward and back every forty-five minutes, thus resembling the hour and minute hands of a clock.
Are You A Mason?
WHAT ARE THE FACTS?
Freemasonry is not a secret society in the ordinary sense of the words. Rather it is, as one Masonic writer puts it, "a society possessing secrets." Free- masons are usually known as such to their relatives and friends, and there is no mystery about the identity of the higher officers of the Order. There is no concealment of the whereabouts of Masonic lodges, although the secrets of their contents and the mysteries "worked" within them are jealously guarder.
OLDEST SECRET SOCIETY.
What, then, is there secret about Freemasonry? What are its mysteries? Or has it no secrets, only secrecy; no mysteries, only mystification? To an- swer these questions it is necessary to review briefly the history of the cult. There is little doubt that Freemasonry is the oldest society of its kind. The Authentic School of Masonic Research traces the relationship of Freemasonry with the Collegia Arti- ficum, Roman corporations of craftsmen instituted in 714 B. C., basing its claim on the fact that their initiation ceremony had a strong resemblance to that in present-day symbolic Masonry. In an interesting booklet on "Freemasonry, its Derivation and De- velopment" R. C. Davies follows up these traces of a secret society akin to, if not identical with. Free- masonry through the "Steinmetzen" of Germany and "Compagnonnage" of France, those mediaeval builders of the great cathedrals, such as Strasbourg, Cologne, and Melrose Abbey, in Scotland, to modern
speculative or symbolic Freemasonry, which has no
connection, except in its symbolism with stone- working. 1714 marks the period when speculative Freemasonry finally overpowered Operative Free- masonry. i.e., the craft guild pure and simple.
THE ACT OF UNION.
It is in this country that speculative or symbolic Freemasonry made its greatest strides, and the Grand Lodge of England still holds unassailably the premier position among sovereign Grand Lodges, of which there are 141 throughout the world. In the eighteenth century there were two main branches of English Freemasonry, called the "Antients" and the "Moderns." who differed slightly in the number of their grades and in their rituals. Undoubtedly the most important date in Masonic history is 1813, when these two were united by the famous Act of Union. From this point the history of the craft is a record of simple development and expansion throughout the world. A modern definition of Free- masonry is "a secret Brotherhood existing through- out the world, with a peculiar system of moral and social ethics veiled in allegory and illustrated by symbols founded on the principles of geometry."
Thus it is seen from this brief history that Free- masonry is in one sense the sublimation of a trade union. How, then, did the secrets enter into its structure? They were there from the earliest begin- nings of Operative Freemasonry. A. E. White, in his "New Encyclopedia of Freemasonry" says : "The Masons' Secrets were Operative Secrets and could be no otherwise in the nature of things. It has been well argued that they were practical appli- cations of geometrical science." That is, the work- ing of set-square, compasses, and other tools used by stonemasons were kept secret from the public just as some industries to-day preserve their manufactur- ing secrets.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1. 1927.	169
FREEMAHONS' BECRwra.
Needless to say, the secrets of Operative masons are not those of Freemasons. But just as Freemasons took the tools and in some cases the language of the stonemasons and endowed them with an involved symbolism, so they envolved their own symbolic secrets.
What those secrets are even Masonic writers cannot agree. While the Rev. J. T. Lawrence, in his "Sidelights on Freemasonry" says, "The secrets are only modes of recognition. In themselves they are but of little importance," the same A. E. White remarks :-
The concealed part of Masonry, the things by which its members are known to one another and distinguished from the rest of the world, are too often supposed to consist in certain external conventions which are a ready means of recognition, and in what is termed the arrangement of interiors, meaning decorations of Lodge or Chapter.
He goes on to say that some interpreters assert that certain Keys are put into the hands of the Brethren, as each initiate in his turn passses through the successive grades; and it is for him-if he is able-to open the Temple into which they do or may give entrance.
COEVAL WITH CREATION.
The Rev. Dr. Dodd, in a well-known Oration on Freemasonry, said :-
The art itself is coeval with Creation, when the Sovereign Architect raised on Masonic principles this beauteous globe, and commanded that master science, Geometry, to lay the rule to the planetary world, and to regulate by its laws the whole stupendous system in just, unerring proportion, rolling round the central sun.
In these words is to be found the core of Free-
masonry-not the blasphemous implication which the profane may find in the words that the Creator is a Freemason, but the basic principle that Freemasons. if not actually in possession of, are at least on the track of the secret to the universe. In White's words, "Our hidden mysteries are those of our relations to God, man and the universe, that we may be enabled to fulfil by Masonry the higher law of our being."
It is significant in this connection to discover that no foreign brother may be received in any English Lodge unless he professes his belief that an acknowledgment of T.G.A.O.T.U. (The Great Architect of the Universe, i.e., the Deity) is a landmark of the Order. (A landmark is one of the principles of Freemasonry regarded as irremovable and unalterable.)
THE "WORKING" OF RITES.
What are the mysterious ceremonies performed behind closed doors, when the Lodge is properly "tyled," or, in ordinary language, when the Tyler or guard is posted without and the Inner Guard within to ensure the exclusion of uninitiates and the profane, or, to use the Masonic word, "cowans" (derived from the Greek word meaning "dog")? These are the "working" of the rites connected with the various degrees, each with its elaborate and symbolic tracing-board lecture by the Muster and catechism of the candidate.
The second of the famous Articles of Union of of 1813 reads :
It is declared and pronounced, that pure Ancient Masonry consists of three degrees, and no more, viz., those of the Entered Apprentice, the Fellow Craft, and the Master Mason, including the Supreme Order of the Holy Royal Arch. But this article is not intended to prevent any Lodge or Chapter from holding a meeting in any of the degrees of the Orders of Chivalry, according to the Constitutions of the said Orders.
The candidate is "initiated" into first degree, Entered Apprentice; "passed" to the second, Fellow Craft; and "raised" to the third. Master Mason. The other degrees-
those mentioned in Article II. as of the Orders of Chivalry-are thirty-three in number, although in this country only five as a general rule are given. These have some beautifully extravagant titles : 18 Knight of the Eagle and Pelican and Sovereign Prince Rose Croix of H.R.D.
M. (Heredom); 30 Grand Elected Knight K. H. Knight of the Black and White Eagle: 31 Grand Inspector Inquisitor Commander: 32 Sublime Prince of the Royal Secret; and highest of all, 33 Sovereign Grand Inspector-General.
ADVANTAGE OF FREEMASONRY.
Freemasonry, then, possesses the same characteristics which are found in all the most successful societies of the kind-a promise of secrets to be revealed : high-sounding titles and impressive ritual; a letter of credit, as it were, to all other Freemasons throughout the world; and not least it offers to the candidate membership of a carefully-selected class of the community whose collective censure or other-
wise is worth considering. It is this last which perhaps accounts for the remarkably small number of Freemasons who have broken their vows, thrown over their allegiance, and revealed the secrets-to say nothing of the fact that these renegade Freemasons by their actions proclaim themselves to be men whose word is not to be trusted, since they have broken the most solemn vow it is possible to make.
And now it may be asked what use is Freemasonry? The Rev. J. T. Lawrence answers this question fully in a chapter of his "Sidelights on Freemasonry" with a description of the value it has been to himself-notably on a globe-trotting tour, when he discovered in a remote colony Brethren who, on the strength of his membership alone, at once made him at home and did all in their power to make his holiday a pleasant one. Finally, he explains that its greatest benefit is the influence it has on a man's conduct.
Rubber Improvement Fund.
REPORT ON MIRI AND BARAM DISTRICTS.
Miri was visited from the 19th February to the 22nd. There are very few gardens round about Miri. Two were visited and the tapping done or these gardens was quite good.
I also visited two smokehouses.
There was hut little rubber in the bazaar and that found there was pretty poor.
Coagulant in use was chiefly Coagulatex and gardeners were advised not to use this as it contains sulphuric acid. A consignment of acetic acid was ordered from Kuching for one of the shopkeepers.
On the 23rd three Dyak gardens were visited at Bakong, also the bazaar.
The Dyaks had previously been visited by instructors and the type of sheet produced was quite good--though no proper curing was being done, the sheets only being sun dried and thereafter hung over the dapurs of the houses.
170
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. JULY 1, 1927.
Some of the rubber found in the bazaar was very poor.
I was in the Baram District from the 24th February till the 14th March.
Some of the rubber produced by the Baram bazaar Chinese was quite good. The smokehouse methods, however, were faulty. In a later paragraph curing will be dealt with.
Mr. Dick, the District Officer, gave me very great assistance while I was in his district. Within three days of my arrival, thanks to his help, a model smokehouse was erected which I hope and think will be instrumental in getting owners of gardens to adopt this type of smokehouse.
Several houses were being built prior to my leaving the district. Assistance is being given towards smokehouses in that corrugated iron roofing, etc., is being supplied free by the "Fund."
Mr. Dick kindly took me up river as far as Long Palai. Gardens were visited en route and acetic acid and sieves were sold at cost price to owners of gardens. Mr. Dick has arranged that supplies of acetic acid and sieves will be obtainable for the ulu natives at Baram Fort.
Rubber produced up country was quite fair now, only needing curing.
It is gratifying to find the Dyaks. Kayans, etc., are so keen on improving their produce. Malays, however, are less keen, but the Native Officer, Wan Taha, has taken a considerable interest and it is hoped that he will influence at least his own kampong people.
1 did not visit the Foochow colony but hope to do so on my next visit. However, I met with one Foochow garden. These Foochows are very pigheaded and the work of instructing them will be difficult as, of course, we cannot enforce the instructions and advice we give.
At Miri the former Government clerk, Ah Tong, had spent quite a considerable amount on his smokehouse-
Chinese type.
At Baram the bazaar Chinese have quite a number of smokehouses also Chinese type.
It is a pity that nearly all smokehouses built by the Chinese owners (also copied by Natives) are of a type with outside furnaces and with no ventilation stall. The smallest vents are closed up, the water evaporated from the wet rubber not being able to escape and the heat also intense. It is in fact practically a "bakehouse."
To get the best results there should be plenty of ventilation giving free circulation to beat and smoke.
Further, a common fault is that producers accumulate stocks before smoking instead of starting smoking when the sheets are freshly milled.
Tapping has been very bad but it is hoped that owners will be more careful of their new gardens as I think they now realize the results of bad tapping.
I have, however, great hopes that there will be a considerable improvement in the product in this district.
G. M. ALLMAN,
Superintendent of Rubber Exports.
Rubber Improvement
Since my last report our progress may be considered satisfactory, all nationalities showing more interest in our activities. Especially is this so the further we get from Sibu. A great improvement in the standard of rubber is to be noticed in the kampongs of Kanowit, Binatang and Sarikei. A Foochow towkay, the owner of one of the largest gardens, has admitted that since my instructor vi-
sited his estate, his rubber has been graded in Singapore as No. 1, a standard which he had never attained in the past. I may say he tells me he has taken the necessary action with his coolies to maintain the quality of the output.
Standard smokehouses are being erected at Kanowit, Binatang and Sarikei and Dyaks living outside Kanowit are keen to build smokehouses as soon as the padi harvest is finished. A Dyak house outside Binatang is also building one. I am hoping that when Dyaks from outlying parts see the correctly smoked rubber in the various bazaars they will be encouraged to call my instructors for advice. There is now quite a substantial premium in all bazaars for "improved" rubber.-(Extract from Report.)
Sarawak Library and Reading Room.
RKVISED RULES.
1.	Subscribers only shall be admitted to the Library and Reading Room.
2.	The Library and Reading Room shall be open from 9 a.in. to 11. 30 a.m. and from 2.30 p.m. to 6 p.m. except on Saturdays when the room shall be open from 9 a.m to 12 noon and on Sundays and Public Holidays when the room shall be closed.
3.	All persons wishing to become Subscribers must first pay an Entrance Fee of $5 and a Subscription of $9 per annum payable half yearly in advance.
4.	If a Subscriber shall for a time withdraw from the Library he shall not be called upon to pay the Entrance Fee again on renewing his subscription.
5.	A Subscriber residing in Kuching shall be en titled to borrow two books at a time (on a single subscription). and in Outstations six books at a time.
6.	A Subscriber shall not be entitled to borrow books unless he has returned the books previously borrowed.
7.	Visitors staying in Kuching may be admitted to the advantages of the Library by the payment of a sub-
scription of $1 per month or part thereof, provided that such privilege shall not extend beyond six monthly payments.
8.	No book can be taken out of the Library until the Librarian in charge has recorded the title, date of issue, and borrower's name.
9.	Subscribers residing in Kuching shall be allowed to keep works of fiction and new books seven days only, and other works fourteen days only.
10.	Any person losing or defacing a book belonging to the Library will be required to pay the cost of replacement.
11.	Subscribers wishing to withdraw from the Library, whether temporarily or otherwise, must inform the Honorary Secretary in writing before the end of the half year, otherwise they will be held liable for another half year's subscription.
By Order of the Committee,
M. BEAN,
Hon. Secretary.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. JULY 1, 1927.
171
Club News.
Sarawak Club.
BOWLING AVERAGES FOR MAY, 1927.
Name
No. of Gena.
Average
L. Gregory
14
146
J. P. Baird
10
138
N. A. Middlemas
13
138
G. T. Bates
5
123
A. M. Bathurst
5
105
R. E. Edwards
7
100
A. M. Forrest
6
87
BOWLING HANDICAP FOR MAY, 1927.
Name.
A. M. Forrest ( Winner)
L. Gregory
G. T. Bates
J. P. Baird R.E. Edwards N. A. Middlemas
Score.	H'cap.
281	188
338	Scr.
290	46
290	16
195	92
245	16
Total. 399 338 336 306 287 261
E. M. Marjoribanks.
Honorary Secretary.
Sarawak Golf Club.
MAY STROKE COMPETITION.
Score.
H.D. Aplin	(Winner)	38
BOGEY COMPETITION RESULTS
Dr. T. E. Walsh (Winner)	4 down
Sarawak Turf Club.
Results of the Derby :---
1.	Call Boy, drawn by Ticket No. 3980
2.	Hot Night	..	3412
3.	Shiam Mor	,,	,,	"	" 3083
Payments will be made on confirmation by mail from Singapore.
E. M. MARJORIBANKS,
Honorary Secretary.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondent]
30th May, 1927 To
The Editor,
The Sarawak Gazette.
SIR,
In the course of an article headed "The Communist Element" in the Sarawak Gazette of 2nd May, an American writer, conversant with conditions in China, is quoted as saying, in an address, that the present situation has been produced, firstly, by the growth of the spirit of Nationalism, and, secondly, by the injection of Communistic doctrines from Moscow
This is correct as any student of modern China can testify.
Where this article goes widely astray, however, is in the extraordinary and quite illogical deductions which appear to have been drawn from the above speaker's remarks.
The article continues to "submit that anyone who has investigated conditions in China to-day must conclude that extraterritoriality, unequal treaties, Imperialism.	have
nothing to do
with China's troubles."
This is certainly a most startling statement to make and, to an unbiassed observer of conditions in China, savours suspiciously of total ignorance of the country, its people, and its progress.
Among all thinking classes in modern China, whether extremist or moderate in their political views, there is, undoubtedly, a very real and deep-seated feeling that extraterritoriality is a disgrace; that many treaties are unfair-unequal, in fact; and that, arising out of these grievances, China is being exploited by Foreign Powers, i.e., Imperialism.
The last is admittedly a slogan, and would automatically disappear with the annulment of ''extra territoriality" and "unequal treaties."
The sense of inequality, however, arises directly from the growth of the spirit of Nationalism The Communistic element has only embittered this sense, making it more actively hostile to foreigners, But, whether the Communistic element remains or disaupeara, the so-called "inferiority complex" will continue to inspire the articulate classes of China. Foreigners would do well to study this tremendous upheaval on a basis of Naturalism, and not overestimate-as they are inclined to do-the importance of the Communistic element. Moscow, agitators and "catchwords."
Certainly these latter exist, but they may be likened to a wind which disturbs the surface of an already heaving ocean-an irresistible, spontaneous and all-embracing movement arising from causes far deeper than the mare effect of wind upon water
I am, Sir,
.	Your Obedient Servant,
STUDENT.
MONTHLY REPORTS.
FIRST DIVISION.
Kuching.
April, 1927.
Supreme Court There were two appeals from the Resident's Court. Chop " Hak Kee " appealed from the decision in which he was lined $100 for offering a bribe to a policeman at BUSO. The appeal was allowed as this Court did not consider that the evidence was sufficient to convict. Cheong Khoon appealed against the decision in which he was ordered to remove from the premises of the Soon. Hong Kongsi. The appeal was disallowed.
There were very few cases in the Resident's Court.
District Court. Forty-six cases were heard, 83 of which were criminal and 13 civil. Of the 33 criminal cases, 28 convictions and five acquittals were adjudged. There were nine cases of assault, one for theft, two for cheating, one for contempt of Court, two for breach of Municipal By-Laws, one for breach of Customs and Shipping Regulations and 14 other offences. Fines imposed amounted to $293 and fees collected totalled $22.50.
The civil claims involved amounts totalling $2,666.58 while fees amounted to $198.25.
172 THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1927.
Magistrate's Court. Ninety-four civil suits were brought for hearing for which fees of $293.25 were collected.
The total value of claims was $2,060.65.
Police Court Seventy-five summary cases were brought before the Court. Seventy-five convictions and seven acquittals were obtained, and three cases transferred to Outstations.
The principal charges were assault four, theft five, contempt of Court one, breach of Municipal By-Laws three, breach of Customs and Shipping Regulations one and 61 minor cases.
A total amount of $583.50 was imposed in fines and $123.50 was collected in fees.
Courts, General. Ling Kaw Moi sentenced to one month, Romboi, Dyak, to 14 days, Jen, Malay, to three months all for theft; Dubi, Malay, to 14 days for contempt of Court; Kiew Ah Yong to 15 days for non-payment of fine and Tho Sen to one month for obstructing a public servant in the execution of his duty.
The offices were closed on the 4th, Hari Raya, and 15th, Good Friday and 18th, Easter Monday.
Katok was fined $25 for damaging sacred stones belonging to Dyaks at Kampong Bungoh.
It was reported from Bako that Leman bad been seriously injured through an assault by six Malays during sehmah rites at Pulo Lakei. On receipt of this report the Commissioner of Police arrested the six Malays and brought Leman up to the General Hospital, where he died a few days afterwards. The case, which is still sub judice, has caused great excitement amongst the kampongs at Muara Tebas.
Eight sites were allotted in the new Batu Kawa Bazaar. Other traders prefer to wait for the shops which Chop "Siang Hak Watt" propose to build on their land. All sites for shophouses have been surveyed and will be built according to plans approved by thn Government.
Sudin, N. O., Samarahan, reports that there should be a fairly good padi harvest this year amongst the Dyaks and Malays.
Mr. R. E. Le Sueur went to Sungei Moyan on the 8th to meet Mr. D. S. McDougall to inquire into the Singghi Dyaks' complaint that the Sungei Moyan Rubber Estate's extensions encroach on their land.
Owing to some misunderstanding, unfortunately, the Dyaks did not turn up. On his return Mr. Le Sueur visited Sungei Tengah and district.
Mr. Le Sueur went to Upper Sarawak to take over temporarily from Mr. McDougall, who had been granted two months' Eastern leave from the 22nd.
His Highness the Tuan Muda, with the Dayang Anne, arrived on the 25th and also Mr. F. H. Kortright, who returned from leave. The latter resumed his duties as District Officer, Upper Sarawak and Lundu, as from 27th.
Mr. R. A. Miller-Hallett left for the Sambir-Moyan district on the 7th. He will live there and superintend the proposed drainage system in that district. Contracts for the extension of the existing drain and 3 1/2 miles of the 15-
foot drain, which is to connect the Samarahan and Sadong rivers, have been signed.
Land Office The following leases and occupation tickets were issued during the month : -
A. R. P.
2 Lease for coconuts ...	62 0 07
117 Occupation Tickets for rubber,
coconuts, sago and fruit	... 1073 3 30
May, 1927.
Resident's Court (Criminal). His Highness the Rajah vs. Bassir, Javanese, for the murder of Kaw Ah Jang. Assessors returning a verdict of murder and defendant was sentenced to death subject to confirmation by the Supreme Court. This was later confirmed and the execution duly carried out.
Resident's Court. The principal case was chat in which Chops "Eng Ann" and "Eng Huat" claimed the recovery of the price of marine motor engines from Mr James Scott, which they claimed were faulty engines. The case was dismissed as the Court considered that Mr. Scott was not liable and any faults in the engines were due to the ignorance of the mechanics as employed by plaintiffs. Chop "Eng Ann" appealed against this decision which was disallowed by the Supreme Court.
Messrs. McDougall & Robertson, Ltd., claimed the sum of $6,800 from Lee Nyuk Liong for breach of contract in failing to supply tuba at a certain date. Defendant was ordered to complete his planting by the end of August otherwise to pay for the amount of tuba which may be due on the contract.
There were the usual Chinese matrimonial disputes and claims for the custody of children.
Datu's Court. Fines amounted to $82.22 and fees $13.
District Court Sixty-two cases were heard, 42 of which were criminal and 20 civil. Of the 42 criminal cases 39 convictions and three acquittals were adjudged. There were eight cases of assault, two for cheating, one for being in possession of stolen property, two for contempt of Court, four for breach of Municipal By-laws, three for breach of Customs and Shipping Regulations and 22 other offences.
Fines imposed amounted to $107 and fees collected totalled $67.25.
The civil claims involved amounts totalling $5,279.45 while fees amounted to $329.25.
Magistrate's Court. One hundred and thirteen civil suits were brought for bearing for which fees of $352.75 were collected.
The total value of claims wan $2,800.78.
Police Court. Fifty-six summary cases were brought before the Court. Fifty-one convictions and three acquittals were obtained, two cases transferred to other Courts.
The principal charges were assault four, theft six, contempt of Court one, breach of Municipal By-Laws two and 43 minor cases.
A total amount of $370.50 was imposed in lines and $19 was collected in fees.
Courts, General. Kaw Chow sentenced to two months for illicit purchase of opium; Chua Hoh to two months and Law Ng (f.) to two weeks for being in illicit possession of opium; Law Ah Peng to two months for illicit purchase and possession of opium; Guan Chai to two weeks; Ah Chek and Bisu to one month each and Toh Ah Lee to two months for theft; Ho Ann Hoo to three months for voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapon, section 324, I.P.C.; and Sim Bah to one mouth for lurking house trespass, section 454, I.P.C.; Chee Fong to one month and Tan Ah Tee to two months for attempting to commit suicide; Khoo Hok Seng and Ewe Tai Koo to two months each for being in possession of stolen rubber scrap; Sim Ah Choi, Sim Chew In and Sim Kit Ann to two mouths each for assault; N. S. Nair to two weeks for being drunk in the public road.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Mr. J. A. H. Hardie, left for Singapore en route to Europe in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna in the early morning of the 4th.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1927.
173
The Malay assault case, mentioned in my last month's report, was settled. The Court found that the six Malays were not guilty of assault and that Leman died from natural causes.
A most brutal murder occurred in Kuching gaol at midday on Sunday 15th, Bassir, a Javanese prisoner, stabbing Kaw Ah Jang, a Chinese prisoner. Bassir was quickly arrested by three other prisoners and made no attempt to amok. He pleaded guilty from the beginning and at the trial was sentenced to death and after confirmation was duly executed. He was a coolie from the Sungei Tengah Rubber Estate and was serving a sentence of ten years for the attempted murder of another Javanese on the estate about six months ago. An inquiry will be held later as to how such a deed was possible.
The offices were closed on 24th, being Proclamation Day. The affairs of Chop "Hong Kiat" have been before the Court for investigation. When the late Chua Moh Choon died, he left a will by which Lite Ancestral Reserve Fund was to have ten shares in the firm, the other shares being divided up among his relations. The sole remaining partner in this firm is now Chua Boon Kian, but the ten shares belonging to the Ancestral Reserve Fund still remain. The other fommer partners now claim that they have a share in the Ancestral Reserve Fund, but Chua Boon Kian contends that, as provision has been made in another part of the will for this Fund and as the other partners have now left the firm, they have no claim.
The principal Chinese in the bazaar have been asked to give their opinion, but I do not anticipate any helpful results.
I paid a visit to the Sungei Moyan Rubber Estate. This is a Cantonese owned estate of 1,500 acres and managed in an up-
to-date manner. Whilst I was there I made an examination of the boundaries of their extensions, which 1 reduced by 500 acres owing to a complaint by the Singghi Dyaks that too much of their farming land was being taken. As most of the younger members of these Dyaks are working as rubber tappers and only a few of the old people farm these days, I think the real reason for complaining is to see how much compensation they can get. In time to come all this land as far as the foot of Singghi is bound to go for planting purposes.
On the 25th, I visited Bau to talk over various matters with the District Officer. The land question in Upper Sarawak is getting acute.
On the 30th, I went to Sambir by launch, walking from there along the old Government drain to the Ulu Moyan where Mr. Hallett has his quarters. The contractors have started in with their work, but seem to experience difficulty in obtaining sufficient coolies. From Sambir to Moyan the walk is through coconut gardens the whole way mid as the Survey Department have now pegged out the lots between the two main ditches, when these have been dug, the land will be occupied very quickly. I gave instructions that no Dyaks from other districts were to be allotted land in tins area. There is a flourishing school at Sambir with over 80 pupils. The new Tua Kampong, Abdul Karrim, seems to be a very energetic man and does his work well. He has a large district to control.
As notice has been given to the piggeries in the Municipal area that they must relieve very shortly, the difficulty now is to find them another site of easy access to Kuching. The only possible site seems to be part of the Stapok Forest Reserve on the right hand side of the Batu Kawa Road.
The Superintendent of Surveys reports that he has now completed the demarcation of about 4,000 acres into 20-acre lots along the Matang Road. This division of land into blocks of 20-
acre lots is a great saving of work for the Land Office. There are numerous applications for the land.
Mr. R. E. Le Sueur visited the Samarahan on the 9th for the purpose of taking over the new Court House at Pengkallan Bintang Munggu Babi from the contractor. He reports that the contractor his done some good work. He ordered the Dyaks to build a road from here to the furthest point that can be reached in a small launch.
The Dyaks and Malays have just about completed their harvest and there are reports of a good crop from most of the districts.
Mr. E. O Bruce, who has been appointed as Acting District Officer, Sadong, vice Mr. G. J D. Walters, transferred to Oya. reported that he had taken over the affairs of the District. Mr. H. E. Davidson has been appointed to do duty temporarily in the Land Office and is now occupied in superintending the construction of the Lundu road.
Land Office. The following leases and occupation tickets were issued during the month ;-
A. li. P.
1 Lease for coconuts	...	6 0 30
85 Occupation Tickets for rubber,
sago, coconuts and fruit ... 682 0 04
Sadong.
April, 1927.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. G J. D. Walters, reports:-
Court. In the District Court, Lam Tak, Colliery collie, was sentenced to six months' imprisonment for voluntarily causing hurt; Ragus, Land Dyak of Temong, was sentenced to one year and six months under section 304A, and to it further six months under section 202, the two sentences to run consecutively; Tiung Chin Swee was fined $20 for forgery; Anchai was fined $2 for breach of Arms Order.
Prisoners. The daily average number of prisoners was 13. The prison gang was employed on clearing the Railway Road and on the general upkeep of the station.
The coolie gang cleared ditches on the Lintang and Sageng Roads, and were also employed on filling in swampy patches on the Lintang Road.
Medical. The Dresser-in-Charge reports:-
At the dispensary a total of 105 patients were treated. There were six admission into the hospital, the number of patients at the beginning of the month being seven, thus making a total of 13, of which seven were discharged as cured, leaving six still under treatment at the end of the month.
Twenty-seven N.A.B. injections were given, chiefly for yaws and mull, and thirty-nine pigs were inspected before slaughtering for sale.
There was one minor operation, being an amputation on a finger performed under anaesthetic, also two dental extinctions were performed under local anaesthetic.
P. W.D. The repairs to the Sageng Bridge were completed, the contractor being paid off in full.
174
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1927.
General. Al the beginning of the month Mr. R. W. Hurst, Assistant Superintendent of Rubber Exports, arrived and inspected the local rubber. On the 7th Mr. G. M. Allman, Superintendent of Rubber Exports, arrived by m.l. Para. The following day we all proceeded to Tabekang, staying the night at Gedong. Messrs. Allman and Hurst, after completing their work at these two places, returned to Sadong and proceeded on up the coast by m.l. Para. On my arrival at Tabekang I was informed that a Temong Dyak had been reported missing from that village. Three days later a Temong Dyak named Ragus gave himself up admitting that he had accidentally shot the missing Dyak white out hunting pig about three weeks before, and had been afraid to report the affair to the Government for fear of the consequences. I then proceeded to Temong, the deceased's remains being found in the jungle. On inquiries made at Temong it appeared a clear case of accidental shooting. On this visit an attempt was made to capture the escaped prisoner, ex-Orang Kaya of Temong, who was said to be living in the village. On my arrival at the house a search was at once made, but unfortunately on my approach he escaped out at the back of the house and took to the jungle. On making further inquiries it appears that Layu, together with his brother and son, named Mat and Takor, had been terrorizing the village, saying they would cut anybody up vho gave Layu away to the Government. Mat and Taker were therefore taken back to Tabekang for further proceedings. Unfortunately, while at Tabekang, Taker escaped from custody and so far there has been no further news of him. It is hoped, however, that Layu and Takor will soon be captured.
Various affairs were settled at Tabekang and I returned to Sadong on the 18th.
On the 25th I proceeded to Kuching to attend Race Week, being still away at the end of the month.
During the month thirteen Occupation Tickets to plant rubber, thirteen Occupation tickets to plant coconuts and one permit to plant sago, were issued.
The rainfall recorded during the month amounted to 2.15 inches.
Shipping. Tho following vessels entered the port:-S.S. Alice Lorraine twice, s.j. Sri Sadong twice, m.s. Chaya Mas de Goebilt once and m.l. Para once.
Trade. The trade returns, for comparison with last year, are as follows:-
Imports.	Exports.
April, 1927	...	$11,644.04	$10,548
" 1926	...	20,590.00	44,233
May, 1927.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. E. O. Bruce reports:-
General. I arrived from Kuching on the 13th, as instructed. After handing over the affairs of the district Mr. G. J. D Walters sailed on the 15th by s.s. Alice Lorraine, having been appointed to Oya.
Since arrival I have been occupied with the general affairs of the Station, making visits of inspeclion, interviewing various persons, and prepar- ing for the annual tax collecting trip up river, which will be undertaken as early in June as possible.
Inquiries have been made regarding the collection of necessary timber for clerk's new quarters, recently sanctioned, but it appears that, although the supply of hardwood should be plentiful, the local purchase price is excessive. Meanwhile plans have been drawn tip and the services of a carpenter reserved at a reasonable figure.
Rough belian timber has been procured for the renewal of small bridges in the Bazaar road.
An attempt to discover the cause of the incessant pest of flies in the vicinity of the Court house and other Government buildings, showed that immediate measures are necessary to improve the methods of sanitation in the bazaar urea and neighbouring dwelling-houses.
Tuesday, the 24th, Proclamation Day, was observed as a holiday and Government Offices closed.
Mr W. F. de V. Skrine , Acting Commissioner of Trade and Customs, and Mr. W. Avery, arrived on the 22nd for a short visit.
Court. There were no cases of any importance.
Jahot was sentenced to three months' R.I. for contempt of Court; Drahman to three months' R.I. for breach of contract.
Prisoners. The daily average number in the gang was 15, and they have been busily occupied with the general upkeep of the station roads and ditches. The kampong areas were dealt with by the coolie gang of six men. The annual whitewashing of Government buildings will be effected as soon as the consignment of lime arrives.
Medical. Dresser Benjamin Franklin reports:- At the Dispensary a mini of 85 out-patients were treated for various ailments, excluding 15 in-patients treated ill hospital, of which ten were discharged as cured, one discharged on pension, one died of tuberculosis, remaining three at the end of the month.
Twenty-five N.A.B. injections were performed at the dispensary and thirty-eight pigs inspected before being killed for sale.
One minor operation (Lobuloplasty) and six dental extractions were performed with local anaesthesia.
The Laboratory Assistant made an examination of the Colliery employees re Heiminthic Infection with the following results:-
Miners examined 210. Infected with hookworm 21 1/2%; infected with rotnid w im2 %.
Sin face labourers examined lb". Infected with hookworm 114%; infected with round WORM 36%.
Infected employees received worm treatment.
On the 30th ultimo I received a bicycle, complete with fittings, for the use of Medical Department of this station.
Shipping.-Vessels entered and cleared the port as follows:-
S.J. Sri Sadong 5 times, s.s. Alice Lorraine 4 times, s.l. L'Aubaine once, s.l. Lucile once and s.s. Sulong twice.
Agriculture.-92 occupation tickets for rubber and 8 for coconut gardens were issued during the month.
Padi crop reports have been good from the lower "ulus" but elsewhere rats have caused some damage. There is no report yet of an engkabang crop.
Except for a small area at Sebangan river, sago does not appear to be grown to any extent, although the land watered by the main river seems admirably suitable.
Trade.-The local trade returns are as follows:-
Imports.	Exports.
May 1927	...	$12,724	$20,435
Bau. Upper Sarawak.
April 1927.
The District Officer, Mr. F. H. Kortright, reports :-
On the 25th ultimo I returned from home furlough and on the 27th took over affairs of the district from Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, who was temporarily in charge since the departure of the A.A.D.O. Mr. McDougall.
I returned to Kuching on the 28th and on the 2nd instant resumed my duties in the district.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1927.
175
Court work was exceptionally heavy, land disputes in particular occupying much time.
A very brutal murder was committed on the night of 31st when someone as yet unknown attacked an old man Kem Ah Jee, aged 70, who lives alone off the Bidi road. The victim, apparently on hearing a noise outside his house, lit a match and opened the door when he received a violent parang cut on the side of his face, and then when he fell received cuts across both knees and ankle. His wounds were dressed and he was at once sent down to Kuching where he died the next, day from shock. No clue as to the murderer has yet been discovered and the reason is a complete mystery.
A number of Javanese contract coolies absconded from the Dahan Estate and a letter was sent to the Controlleur of Sambas asking for assistance in arresting these men. In reply the Controlleur regretted that he had received orders from Pontianak not to return any of these coolies until their Labour Inspector had visited the estates and reported on the coolie conditions there.
It is hoped that the inspector will soon pay his visit when, without doubt, he will report that the coolies are exceptionally well treated.
His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by Dayang Anne, visited the district from the 20th to 23rd and the Divisional Officer came up from Kuching for the day on the 25th.
The motor lorry which had been out of commission was repaired and is again doing useful transport work.
P.W.D.-Carpenters and fitters Deli, Jais and Madris returned to work again, having previously left owing to some small misunderstanding, and were engaged painting the bungalow annex and repairing water pipes, etc.
A contract was made for the laying of the Siniawan water main and house pines and it is hoped that the reservoir tank may be filled before the end of next month.
The rainfall amounted to 11.60 inches.
H. D. APLIN.
Divisional Officer.
SADONG COLLIERY.
May, 1927.
The output, export; local consumption, conversion into coke and coal slock figures for the mouth were as follows:-
1st May stock balance	.,	,389.13 tons
,, gross output	...	1,188.07 "
Total 1,578.00 "
Shipped	... 1,121.10 tons
Consumed by boilers
and converted into
coke	...	376.08
1,497.18 "
Stock balance	...	80.02 ,,
The labour shortage was responsible for a further reduction in output as compared with the previous mouth.
The New Mines were closed down, and the labourers transferred to the Buffalo and other mines, where mines, were most urgently required, in order to maintain output.
Ho Chee Chai, an old long-service miner, who had been granted a pension by His Highness the Rajah (but had not yet drawn it), died at the local hospital on the 1st.
I returned from the Spring Race Meeting on the 5th.
Mr. S. W. Harris proceeded to Kuching for dental treatment on the 8th. and returned on the 5th.
Visitors to the Collieries during the month were Messrs. Skriue and Avery on the 22nd, and Messrs. Haye and Spin way on the 26th.
The rainfall for the month was 8.17 inches.
J. W. EVANS,
Manager.
SECOND DIVISION.
Simanggang.
May, 1927.
Resident's Court. Chai Jok of Engkilili vs. Chin Sim (/ ) of Engkilili, an appeal against the decision, of the Magistrate's Court. This case dealt with the dowry of a relation of plaintiff which the former Court order awarded to Chin Sim, who was no relation to the girl. The decision of the former Court was reversed and defendant ordered to pay the dowry, $100, to plaintiff with costs.
Magistrate's Court, Civil and Criminal. Simba (f.) was fined $25 and costs for breach of Opium Regulations; Srit, Dyak, fined one picul for setting a pig trap which injured one Andar, also to pay compensation and hospital bill; Ah Kuang fined $15 for trespass; Seng Kiak and Chong Tong were each fined $15 for assault; Joo Kiang fined $15 and costs for interfering with prisoners whilst at work on Bazaar Road. There were numerous other minor cases.
Fines and fees for the Batang Lupar amounted to $901.03.
General. On the 2nd I returned from Kuching and Mr. Langton reported all well during my absence.
On the 5th I received a wire from the Acting District Officer that prisoner Ubam had run "amok" and killed one female prisoner and wounded two others.
On the 6th Mr. G. R. H. Arundell returned from Kuching.
On the 11th I left for Engkilili, taking with me Carpenter Salleh. Engkilili was reached at 3 p.m. I found Penghulus Renang and Imong awaiting my arrival. Next morning Carpenter Salleh with two prisoners erected framework of the new boat-shed. One prisoner will stay on in order to complete same.
The principal Chinese complained that they found great difficulty in obtaining land for planting pepper and stated Dyaks were holding up land which was unsuitable for planting padi. I was informed that there was a large area of land vacant in the Lower Lemanak and instructed Draup, Native Officer and Penghulu cf the Lemanak, to examine same and, if possible, mark over sufficient for Chinese who wished to plant pepper.
I left Engkilili at 1.30 p.m. and reached Simanggang at 5 p.m.
A petition was received, signed by fourteen Malays of Spaoh, complaining of the behaviour of Abang Mat, Tua Kampong. Mr. A. L. Honore, Officer-in-Charge, Betong, Saribas, was asked to make full inoniries.
Draup, Native Officer, Engkilili, was granted his annual leave of three weeks.
176	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1927.
Abang Sedik, Native Officer, Lubok Antu, reports that a Dyak house consisting of two doors was com- pletely destroyed by fire. The inhabitants lost some valuable property, and one old woman who refused to leave the house was burnt to death.
On the 17th, accompanied by Datu Abang Haji Buassan, I left in the m.l. One for Kabong. I stopped at Lingga for a short time to give in- structions concerning the building of the kitchen for the clerks' quarters and also necessary repairs to the quarters. Kabong was reached at 3.30 p.m. In the Kalaka districtI1 visited both Saratok and Roban. There were no appeals and very few cases to be heard. At Saratok I held an inquiry into the "amok" by prisoner Ubam.
Various matters were discussed with the Acting District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield.
The 24th, being Proclamation Day, the offices were closed.
On the 25th I left for Pusa at 8 a.m., arriving at 10.15 a.m. The Native Officer, Abang Dulkarrim, reported all well.
I left Pusa at 11 a.m. the same day, stopping at Sa- maludam, also Meranti, and reached Sebuyow at 5.45 p.m.
Abang Zin, Native Officer, reported all well and no cases for settlement. Next morning I examined the Government buildings, which are kept very clean, and also the grounds. A landing stage is required; at present one has to walk up a slippery log. I left at 9 a.m. and reached Simanggang at 2 a.m. Mr. G. R. H. Arundell reported all well during my absence.
On the 27th Mr. R. W. Hurst, Assistant Superin- tendent of Rubber Improvement Fund, arrived from the Undup and on Monday 30th left for the Saribas via the Skrang and Bangat.
The following Penghulus visited this station during the month :-Mekoi of Lower Undup, Ing- kas of Entulang, Jaul of Seduku, Lambai of Upper Undup, Munau of Engkari.
Agriculture. The Dyaks of this Division on the whole are very satisfied with the padi harvest, and are now thinking of preparing for their annual feasts.
The following permits to plant were issued, para rubber 82, pepper 29.
Public Works. The prisoners, averaging 44.87, were employed on general upkeep of roads, orna- mental grounds and raising level of Bazaar road.
Carpenter Matsalleh, with prison labour assis- tance, completed the new Forest Clerks' quarters. The cementing of bazaar ditches was completed by contract; a scavenger was engaged at a salary of $25 per mensem and the bazaar is at last looking realty clean.
Cattle. The Simanggang herd number 81 head; Lubok Antu herd number 42 head.
Shipping. 5 sailing vessels and 14 motor launches entered and 4 sailing vessels and 14 motor launches cleared the port during the month.
Medical. A total of 191 persons were treated in hospital during the month as follows :-Chinese 21, Dyaks 143. Malays 24. European 1. Tamils 2.
Trade. The principal exports were :-
Gutta Jelutong 641 piculs valued at $1,808.00 Pepper White 6	do.	483.00
Pepper Black	58	,,	do.	1,780.00
Para Rubber	172	,,	do.	13,609.00
Para Scrap	69	,,	do.	2,731.00
Raw Sago	190	,,	do.	520.00
Damar	158	,,	do.	476.00
Prawns, Dried	407	,,	do.	11,830.00
Imports.	Exports.
1927	...	$39,732.00	$45,187.00
1926	...	33,452.00	53,420.00
Saribas.
May, 1927.
Mr. A. L. M. Honore, Officer-in-Charge, reports :-
Court. Six Malays were fined $25 each for working timber for sale without licences; Chong Kian was sentenced to two years' R.I. under section 406 Indian Penal Code. In the Civil Courts the total claims dealt with amounted to $1,385.28 and costs $37.25 of which one claim was for $1,070.68. This case was, however, withdrawn by the plaintiff after preliminary inquiries.
Prisoners. These averaged 7.48 for the month, and were employed on the general upkeep of the station and in whitewashing Government buildings.
Health. Several deaths from pneumonia occurred during the month. The district has also been troubled by an epidemic of eye-sickness.
Agriculture. One hundred and two permits to plant rubber were issued.
The padi harvest has, on the whole, been good.
Shipping. The m.s. Hap Soon Ann made four trips to and from the station. The m.s. Lang Endang three and the m.s. Muaratebas one.
Trade returns are as follows :-
Imports. Exports.
1927	...	$36,592	$59,238
1926	...	29,475	47,219
General. Penghulu Unji was called to Betong regarding the resistance to arrest by Undi in the Ulu Layer. Penghulu Unji expressed little hope that Undi could be induced by the Dyaks alone to go down either to Betong or Simanggang. On the 9th I went up river, accompanied by Abang Umar, Penghulu Isek. and Penghulu Jabieng, on a general round of inspection.
Above Nanga Spak, Uln Layer, it was seen that a very remarkable number of landslides had occurred, the like of which, according to the oldest natives, had never been seen in their lifetime. The continual rains have caused great floods and not only have padi huts but also a solidly-
built house has been washed away. Other misfortunes include the burning to death of a man in his hut and the death of another through falling over a cliff. It was with great difficulty that the Dyaks could be induced to offer an opinion as to the cause of the trouble and when they did speak it was to give the astonishing reason that the old gun had been removed from Mt. Sadok.
That such things would happen in such an eventually they said had long ago been foreseen in dreams. The explanation was all the more extraordinary in that two cases of incest, of such a description that would in former days have obtained for the culprits death by impaling, are at present going unpunished in the district.
It was to attempt the arrest of one of these persons that I went as far as Nunga Tiga. The attempt failed as the man fled into the jungle many days before. In the ordinary way the Dyaks themselves could probably effect the capture but as the man in question is a leper and prepared to fight for his freedom, fear of the illness keeps them from coming to grips with him. After returning to Betong I went to Spaoh on the 30th to plan out a site for the new bazaar at N. Bangkit. This was made large enough for some thirty or more shops about 100 fathoms from the mouth of the tributary in the main river.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1927.
177
May, 1927.
The Court Writer,Pusa, reports:
In the Resient's Court. Kapi, Haji Metair and Mail, Tua Kampong Pusa, of Kampong Hilir, were each fined $50, $25, and $25 respectively for interfering with the Native Officer's orders and collecting subscriptions without leave from the Resident or Officer-in-Charge. The last named (Mail, Tua Kampong) was also dismissed from his Tuah-
ship of Kampong Hilir.
District Court. Bandong sentenced to 6 months for theft, and Luit to 2 years' R.I. for incest. Usop, for giving false evidence in the incest case, was sentenced to three months and Mat for false evidence was fined 60 reals and 6 sukus.
Haji Ali, for purchasing gardens without making a written agreement, fined $5: Chulai was fined $5, for evading rubber tax.
Native Court . Pusa. Din was fined 30 reals and 3 sukus for seduction and ordered to pay the usual brian of $50: Mumin, Sait and Kreng were each fined 15 reals for giving false evidence; Takip fined
15 reals for gross contempt of Native Officer's order ; Ham Tea fined $10 for trading without licence.
The following cases were dealt with by the A.D.O. when be visited Debak. One appeal case brought up by Slah (f.) in connection with a dicision of P. Mon, re division of property. P. Mon's dicision was reserved and plaintiff's fee returned. Mensan for theft of 2 sheets of para Rubber was fined $25 or to 2 months' imprisonment.
Native Court, Debak. Lai Khian, Usop, and Abang Dembok for slander, the former was fined 5 reals and the two latter were each fined 15 reals.
Fines reported by P. Mon. Udom, for "Ngayap," fined 20 catties ; Embong, for slander, fined 5 cat ties; Upo, for divorce, fined 25 catties. Fines and fees for the month amounted to $141.03 (Pusa only).
General. I left for Betong on the 5th, returning on the 9th. Cash remitted to the Betong Treasury amounted to $780.40.
Endawi. Court Writer. Debak. came down here with his accounts. etc., on the 2nd. going up again on the 4th. F. G. Mahmudi returned to Kabong on 1st.
Abang Dulkarrim, Native Officer, with Malays from Pusa and outlying kampongs, proceeded up to Debak in order to remove driftwood from the Rimbas river. They started on the 2nd and finished on the 5th. All Dyaks assisted in removing the driftwood.
P. C. Rajak arrived from Kabong on the 12th with 70 tampins of wet lime for this station and Betong.
Forty tampins of lime were sent to Betong in charge of P. Tamby.
The Resident. Second Division, accompanied by Datu Abang Haji Buassan. Native Officers Abang Bujang and Abang Abu Bakar, and also the Acting District Officer, arrived here from Kabong per m.l. One on the 25th. The Resident, after holding cases on the 26th. left the same afternoon, returning to Simanggang.
The Acting District Officer. Abang Bujang and Abang Abu Bakar were left behind in order to visit Debak. They proceeded to Debak on the 27th and came down here again on the 29th. returning to Kabong early the next morning.
Agriculture. Pusa, 3 permits for planting sago and 69 for planting para rubber were issued during the month. Debak, 1 sago and 8 para rubber.
Health. Health of the district has been good. 17 births and 15 deaths were registered in the Pusa Court. Debak, 4 births and 7 deaths.
Prison. The two lads who were serving sentences here were released on the 4th. Bandung and Usop, who were sentenced to 6 and 3 months respectively were left here, and they are doing the tebassing and levelling the site for new clerk's quarters, and as soon as they have, finished they will be sent to Kabong to serve their terms there.
P.W.D. Contractor Mohamat came down from Debak having completed the framework of the Clerk's and Native Officer's Quarters, and is return- ing to Kabong for a week. He will return here and promised to start the building here, and on com- pletion will finish the walling, etc., at Debak.
Most of the timber for clerk's quarters is at Debak. and coolies were engaged to fetch same from there.
Trade, Customs and Shipping. M.S. Bintang Trang made four trips to Debak during the month. Lang Endang has been in dock during the month : she made one call only at the beginning of the month. M.S. Muaratebas made her call on her way back from Betong. She did not stop at Spaoh for the cargo there.
Fourteen bandongs, 3 motor schooners and 2 motor launches cleared; 11 bandongs. 5 motor schooners and 2 motor launches entered.
1927
1926
Imports. $18,776
22,958
Exports.
$37,655
46,418
Chief Exports:-
Para Rubber
270 piculs, valued at $23,324
Rubber Scrap
78
do.	1,281
Raw Sago
37 koyans
do.	3,710
Charcoal
47 piculs
do.	94
Damar
49	.,
do.	490
Kajangs
2,560 pieces
do.	256
Nipa Salt
5,460 garis
do.	77
Kalaka.
May, 1927.
Mr. H. E. Outfield, Acting District Officer, ' reports :-
General. On the 2nd I returned from Kuching, where 1 had been tn attend the Spring Race Meeting, by the s.s. Alice Lorraine. The following day, after settling outstanding cases, I proceeded to Saratok by a local motor schooner. The following morning, among a number of other cases, was one in which a Dyak, by name Ubam, was sentenced to a term of three years for a serious theft of $553 from a house in the Rimbas. This man having had several pre- vious convictions for similar offences.
The same night at about 1.30 a.m. I regret that this man Ubam ran "amok" in the gaol. The gaol was only inhabited by two female prisoners and one other man who was lame. Ubam had evidently thought out his actions and after breaking his way out his own cell, bolted the main doors from the inside, to prevent interruption, and first wounded the other male prisoner very seriously with a 6-inch wound in the stomach and then broke into the female cell and attacked the women. One was seriously wounded with eight stabs with a knife and the other woman I regret to say died soon after my arrival. Ubam and his victims were duly sent to Kuching. This matter has been reported in full to the Resi- dent and also to the Acting Chief Secretary.
I left at 3 a.m. the following morning by the return of the motor schooner with Ubam and his victims on board.
178
THE SARAWAo GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1927.
On the 17th the Resident arrived from Simang- gang in m.l. One for a visit to this district and Lower Saribas.
On Thursday 19th I accompanied the Resident to Saratok. A number of matters were dealt with here but none of particular importance. There were no cases in the Resident's Court. We returned to Kabong again on Saturday the 21st.
On Monday 23rd I accompanied the Resident to Roban, returning again in the afternoon of the following day. Again nothing of importance was brought to the notice of the Resident. An arrange- ment was entered into with a carpenter for the making of a number of tongs for use at Kabong to try to cope with the shortage of water that is always experienced here.	On Wednesday I accompanied the Resident to Pusa. Here three men, Kapi, Haji Metair, and Tua Kampong Mail, were brought before the Resi- dent for stirring up people to oppose Government instructions and the illegal collection of money. Kapi was fined $50 and the other two $25 each.
The Resident left for Sebuyow and Simanggang after Court on Thursday 26th.
The following morning I left by boat, accom- panied by Abang Bujang and Abang Abu Bakar, Native Officers, for Debak. I left again at 3 a.m. on Sunday 29th for Pusa and started for Kabong at 4 a.m. the following morning.
Tan Eng Chong, who left on 6 weeks' leave in April, was still away at the end of the month.
Court. An average number of cases came before the District and Magistrate's Courts. An incest case at Pusa which has been outstanding for some time was settled, the man concerned, Luit, being sentenced to 2 years' R. I. and Usop to 3 months for making false and misleading statements in Court; Ubam sentenced to 3 years for theft from a house; Dana to one year for theft having had previous con- victions; Bandong, a Debak Malay, was sentenced to 6 months for theft and a Dyak fined $25 or 2 months for petty theft.
Kong Kong, a former rubber instructor recently released from gaol, was again sentenced to 6 months for theft. He and Chuat. another prisoner, were also sentenced to 2 months' extra for getting out of gaol at night. A Dyak man and woman were fined
2 and 1 piculs respectively for incest.
Lasa, a Dutch Malay, was sentenced to 3 months for theft of padi. Liang Koi was sentenced to 6 months for swindling.
Ugoh, a Dyak, was fined $50 for opening an old case.
Haji Bujang, the Tuan Imam of Saratok, was fined $15 for planting rubber on the Native Officer's land. Another Babang land dispute was before the Court and Chundi, the man concerned, fined 20 cat- ties. Mersal was fined $10 for laying a false charge and Mat 60 reals and 6 sukus for giving false evi- dence in the Pusa incest case.
P.W.D. The prisoners, averaging 22, were em- ployed mostly at Kabong. The first part of the month they were employed on the new inland road from Undut past waterworks on to Kampong Ulu, rebuilding and laying hard earth on surface.
All the Government buildings were whitewashed and tarred and the inside of the stables jodelited. At the end of the month they made a road from the bridge over the Undut direct to the sands through the grove of the Ruh trees. The mowers at Kabong and the cowman at Saratok were employed as usual.
The new clerk's quarters at Saratok were nearly completed by the contractor at the end of the month. The framework and roofs of the clerk's quarters and Native Officer's bungalow at Debak were completed and the contractor stinted the preparation of the timber for the clerk's quarters at Pusa.
Agriculture. The Dyaks have almost completed their harvest and it appears to be a very satisfactory crop, especially in the Krian.
Trade. The principal exports were as follows :-
Gutta Jelutong 313 piculs, valued at $2,524
Para Rubber	487	,,	do.	36,920
Para Scrap	63	,,	do.	2,091
Pepper White	3	,,	do.	210
Sugar Nipa	87	tins	do.	176
Jelly Fish	402	,,	do.	432
Salted Fish 16 piculs do. 283 Timber	do. 869
Imports.	Exports.
1927	...	$27,883	$51,884
1926	...	47,049	30,173
Shipping. The statistic for this port were :- Nine motor schooners entered and 10 motor schoo- ners cleared; 12 bandongs entered and 12 bandongs
cleared.
The following are the trade returns for the Second Division :-
May, 1927	$122,983	$ 193.964
Total to 31.5.27	705,283	1,007,145
do. 31.5.26	655,998	841,168
F.	A. W. PAGE-TURNER, Resident, Second Division.
THIRD DIVISION.
Sibu.
Mag, 1927.
I returned from the Igan on the evening of the
1ST. The result of a further inspection of the land in Loba Kuching confirmed the opinion already formed that this land is most suitable for sago planting and I hope it may be possible to arrange for clearing this year with a view to planting up a considerable area.
Arrangements have a already been made to have the loba cleared of logs when a clear run from Igan to Binatang will be assured. The channel is deep enough to allow of the passage of boats of a con- siderable size and, in the event of the sago planting proposition being taken up, the transport of raw sago from the plantations to the Binatang and Sari- kei factories will be rendered easy and cheap.
The Commissioner of the Public Works visited Sibu from the 4th to the 7th instant, returning to Kuching by s.l. Chamos. I left for up liver at noon on the 12th, stopping the night at Kanowit.
On the 15th the Acting District Officer of Kapit and myself h ft for Belaga and reached the station on the afternoon of the 19th.
From the 21st to the 25th we continued up river, reaching the last house, which is occasionally occupied by Ukits.
TfTE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1927.
179
As regards tbe Dyak Colony at N. Pila, a con-
siderable distance above the bend of the Pelagus Rapids This now consists of well over 200 doors. At the lime it was arranged for these people to move up river I am given to understand that a promise was made that a Government Station, a Mission and a Chinese Bazaar would be established there. Up to the present not one of these projects has been carried out, although I hope to see u Chinese shop established there soon.
The Sians and Bukitans do not appear to appreciate the benefits conferred on them by the close proximity of the Dyaks and were proposing to move away up the Pila Stream. They have been ordered to collect on the main river as I do not consider the upper Pila a desirable spot for these people. I hope laler to induce the Punans to join forces with them and move back into the Bah on the left bank ascending, thus pulling them cut of reach of the Dyaks.
Judging from the amount of preventable disease to be met with in all the houses up the Baloi it would be must desirable could a travelling dresser be spared to visit the district at intervals.
A 2 1/2 horse-power outboard motor was employed for part of the journey up river, but it proved of too light construction to stand up to the work.
The Government Station at Belaga is well cured for by the Native Officer, Abang Mohamat, the grounds near the fort and other buildings being neatly laid out. A number of paths have been constructed in tthe vicinity of the station.
The Skapans and Kayans appear to be working jungle produce, principally damar, with more energy than usual, but they are all, of course, heavily in debt to the Belaga traders.
I arrived at Sibu on the 31st of the month.
Mr. P. M. Adams, District Officer, reports;-
General. I returned from Kuching on the 4th and took over from Mr. Swayne next day. I visited Binatang and Sarikei on the 13th. Both these places require more furniture. The Acting Chief Secretary and the Treasurer came from Kuching on 15th to inquire further into the murder of Moi Nguong. I accompanied them to Ensurai, the scene of the crime. They returned to Kuching on 17th after ordering various people to be called and questioned. Messrs. Middiemas and Gregory were visitors to Sibu.
Mr. Lau Ka Tiew gave a banquet to celebrate the opening of his new house. Over 2000 people were very hospitably entertained, including all Europeans.
Mr. Woodward came back from Kanowit on the 16th and remained in Sibu for the rest of the month during the Resident's absence to Belaga.
Most of my spare time was spent in gathering fresh evidence in connection with the murder case and the local detective showed great diligence in finding the witnesses. When the chain of evidence was completed the accused man, Chong Tung, hung- ed himself in his cell. In spite of being handcuffed
and in leg irons he managed to make a rope with cloth torn from his trousers.
A woman named Sa Moi committed suicide by cutting her throat at Kanowit. Two cases from Kanowit, one of grave robbery and the other infan- ticide, were inquired into, but the evidence in both cases was too scanty to warrant continuing the prosecution.
Tne Foochow Chinese insisted on building a wharf just above the Residency, in spite of severals warn- ings. This has now been pulled down and the timbers confiscated. A deputation of Foochows from Saduan requested a change in the headman of their area. As their only reason is that they want a man who will help them to get land their request was refused.
At about 3,30 a.m. on the 28th one of the Government Clerks' houses, occupied by Koo Chong Seng, was gutted by fire. The fire seems to have originated in the kitchen. The efforts of the fire brigade were almost negligible. This has been inquired into and a report made to the Divisional Engineer, who was in Mukah at the time.
The usual number of drowning fatalities occurred amongst the Foochows.
The latter part of the month was very hot and dry.
Dr. Haye, Divisional Medical Officer, returned from short leave on 27th. Mr. ami Mrs. Partridge and family spent one night in Sibu. Other visitors were Messrs. Ridgway, Spurway and Hamilton. Mr. Allman was travelling about the district on rubber improvement work.
Police. The conduct of the force was good, there being only four orderly room cases for minor offences.
One constable resigned. Ten men of various ranks were granted the allowance for reading and writing and one for speaking Chinese. The usual routine was carried out satisfactorily.
Prisons. Prisoners averaged 56.4 daily. Eleven were admitted mid 12 discharge. Four men were
whipped or had their sentences increased for breaches of prison discipline. Many of them are difficult to handle and a firm hand is required at times.
Court. Under this heading the chief cases were as follows: -Ming Ngong Lee was fined $10 for cruelty to a child ; Tang Kang Hong and Tang Keng Tong $10 each mid Lau Chik $25 for assault; several Foochows were fined $20 each for planting rubber on reserve land ; Lim Ah Seng $25 for ccontravention of Opium Order; Wong Nee Moi for defamation ; Shaw Sam $25 for ignoring boundary laid by Land Office and Agong $50 re land dispute ; Poi bin Latip was sentenced to two weeks' imprisonment for desertion vide ship's article ; Hun Ah Pan six months for absconding; Yen Ah Chu one month for theft; Ting Mui Heng and Johari six months each for theft; Ting Tieng Heng one year for theft and escape from jail while on remand ; and Ting Tian Hing one month and six cuts for escaping from jail, and later was given extra six months and 12 cuts for same offence.
Fines and fees amounted to $1,815.44 and 86 deeds were registered.
Lower Rejang.
May, 1927.
The District Officer, Mr. J. C. Swayne, reports; - Proclamation Day, the 24th, was observed as a public holiday. I returned from temporary duty at Sibu on the 7th. the Native Officer reported that nothing of importance had occurred during my absence.
Court cases were mainly concerned with the affairs of Sikandar & Co., Indian traders, who have been summoned by most of their creditors. The firm of "Soon Hock Hin" of Selalang, were able, after considerable argument, to settle their affairs without the assistance of the Court.
I spent the night of the 10th at Penghulu Ambu's house in the Sari; the rice crop this year seems to have been a poor one. I noticed a good amount of
planted rubber, most of which has been badly over- tapped.
I80
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE. JULY 1, 1927.
On the 14th H.H.M.Y. Maimunah spent the night at Rejang on her way to Sibu. The m.s. Nam Hoi broke down off Muara Tebas on the 9th and I hear will be laid up for some time till new parts can be supplied. The m.l. Helen was towed from Miri by s.s. Sulong and was received here on the 16th. The engine seems in excellent condition, after a supply of fuel was received from Sibu she has been in constant use. Her speed, compared with that of s.l. Mermaid is of great advantage. The Mermaid is at present at Matu transporting Government property from the old station to the new and will be sent to Sibu as soon as possible.
At the end of the month a start was made to whitewash the Government buildings in the station ; the prisoners have been engaged on this and work in the compound.
Visitors to Rejang included Messrs. Gobbold, Davis, Lowe, Ridgway and the Rev. Father Staal.
- Kapit.
May. 1927.
The Acting District Officer. Mr. E. V. Audreini, reports:-
Court. There were two cases of incest from the Katibas. Tama Abit, Punan Chief, was sentenced to one year's imprisonment for theft and swindling. A Chinaman in Kapit to six months for theft and some Chinese were fined for breach of orders relating to collection of subscriptions. No other cases call for comment.
General. Mr. Cotterill, Divisional Treasurer, visited the station and audited the accounts. Other visitors included Messrs. Fenwick and Allman, of the Board of Trade, Kuching, and Mr. Lowry, who started the rubber improvement propaganda in the district. The Resident, Third Division, arrived on the 13th, accompanied by Mr. E.M. Woodward. Mr. Woodward returned on the 14th. On the 15th accompanied the Resident up the Baloi, visiting Belaga and going on up to the last house (Ukits). We returned on the 29th to Kapit. The Resident left for Sibu again on the 31st. A letter was sent to the Controlleur of Long Nawang, informing him that propose to visit him there in July to arrange the moving of the Uma Badang and discuss other border matters. Abang Ahmat, Native Officer, Belaga, returned from Long Nawang, having taken back the four Uma Badang who come over to ask permission to move and having arranged with the Controlleur that 45 doors, 269 people in all, would be ready to move in July. The Punan gang were met during our visit up the Baloi and paid in their tax ; there are only seven families of these people now left.
Awang Samsudin, Native Officer, visited the Pelagus and Abang Abdulgapor the Mujong in connection with Dyak affairs.
Agriculture. 1,999 coconut plants were received from the Director of Agriculture, Kuching, and were eagerly bought up by Dyaks for their gardens. Tobacco planted in an experimental garden has done very well and some Foochows have agreed to start tobacco gardens. Various vegetables have been, experimented with and local gardeners encouraged to plant more variety.
P.W.D. Work was continued on the New Jail and Gat Fort and prisoners were engaged on the roads and grounds..
Customs. Customs duties, amounting to $1,935, .were collected during the month.
H. L. OWEN, Resident, Third Division.
COAST DIVISION.
Mukah and Balingian.
April. 1927. '
General. His Highness the Rajah was pleased to visit Mukah and, accompanied by Mr. H. B. Crocker, Acting Chief Secretary, arrived off the month of the river in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna at 7.30 a.m. of the 10th.
His Highness came ashore in m.l. Leonora at 9 a.m. and the Maimuna entered at about l0 o'clock.
During the morning His Highness paid a visit to the R. C Mission and school and inspected their new buildings. The following morning His Highness met all the principal people of the community and also walked through the bazaars and met all the Chinese traders and shopkeepers. His Highness and Mr. Crocker then sailed for Oya and Dalat and I accompanied them. A short stop was made at Oya when Mr. C. S. Griffiths, Acting District Officer, came on board and Dalat was reached at 2.30 p.m.
At Dalat a large crowd was gathered to meet His Highness who sat in Court and listened to all who had any requests to make or matters to bring forward. The bazaar and R. C. Mission were also visited, after which His Highness boarded the Maimuna and we returned to Oya, arriving late in the evening.
On the morning of the 12th His Highness met the Oya people and sailed for Sibu at noon of that day.
This is the first occasion on which H.H.M.Y. Maimuna has entered the Mukah and Oya rivers.
Having been appointed Acting Divisional Officer Coast Division I took over the cash and other affairs of the Division from Mr. W . F. de V. Skrine on the 1st and Mr. Skrine sailed for Kuching on the 3rd to take up for another appointment.
On the 18th I visited Oya to hold Court and sailed in s.s. Lucile on the 21 st for Kuching to attend Race Week. I was still away at the end of the month.
Mr. J. G. Anderson visited Balingian on the 19th. returning the following day with $6,000, which rather large sum of money was in charge of the Court Writer there. A sum of $21,000 in Mukah safes was remitted to Kuching Treasury.
Courts. The Magistrate's Court was kept fairly busy during the month, but there was very little work in the District Court. In the Resident's Court, Spurah and Upit, Clerks at Oya and Dalat, were sentenced to three years and one year respectively under section 408 P.C.
Public Works. Very indifferent progress has been made by the contractors of the Public Works Department in both the construction of the new Vernacular School building and the house for the schoolmaster. The building of the school house was started last August. It is a great pity that the floor of this building has been built on the ground instead of being raised, as the land is swampy all around and undermined by land crabs and it has been necessary to spend about $490 extra to put in piles to support and strengthen the concrete flooring.
The house for the Divisional Treasury Clerk has now been finished.
It will be necessary to build three more cottages for occupation by clerks, as at present one clerk is living at the R. C. Mission and the dresser and other clerk are sharing disreputable quarters in the back bazaar.
The prisoners have been employed on the general upkeep of the station and in whitewashing Government buildings. The Tamil gang have been working on roads and ditches.
Trade. The value of exports and imports tor the month are as follows:-
Mukah 1927.	1926.	1926. .
Exports ... $46,807	$75,953	$65,483
Imports ... 21,987	56,226	40,363
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1927.
181
Balingian-
Exports ... $16,851	$ 2,380	$ 3,615
Imports ...	7,375	29,177	6,366
One motor schooner, 12 schooners, and13 bandongs entered with tonnage of 670 tons, and one motor schooner, 12 schoohers, and 42 bandongs cleared the port of Mukah with tonnage of 779 tuns during the month.
The rainfall was 8.31 inches.
May, 1927.
Courts. In the District Court there were not a great number of cases, but six rather complicated land disputes were settled and in connection with these three persons were fined $25 for trespass. Jamieng, a Dyak, was also fined $25 for planting up a fairly large piece of padi land with rubber. It seems that a great many Dyaks in the ulu Mukah have planted up then padi lands with rubber.
The Magistrate's Court Civil was kept quite busy hearing cases of debt.
P.	W.D. Mr. J. W. Whiteside, Divisional Engineer, Third Division, arrived from Sibu via the Kut on the 26th to see about the three extensions to the water-pipe line, which have been sanctioned; he visited the intake and examined the boiler and pump there and inspected the whole works generally. He also took over the new school house and school-master's house which have at last been finished by contractor Chan Cho. The electric light scheme sanctioned long ago was also gone into again and I hope something definite may be decided soon.
Mr. Whiteside, returned lo Sibu on the 30th.
The building of a new bungalow and four cottages for clerks has been taken in hand, one consignment of timber for the former has already arrived from Bintulu, and the framework of three cottages has been elected. These I hope to have ready for occupation in six weeks' time.
The site for the new wireless station has been marked out and the contractor, Tasun, arrived from Kuching with the necessary building material on the 30th.
The kampong people have cleared the old clearing in front of the station which had become considerably overgrown and they have also made a new large clearing to the southward and right up to the edge of Malay graveyard.
This clearing is a great improvement and opens up the station to full view from the sea.
The Tamil gang, reduced in number by three men whose agreements have expired and who are unwilling to re-sign, has been looking after the roads and ditches and doing odd jobs around the station.
General. I returned from race week by s.s. Sulong on the 6th and found everything in excellent order.
Smail bin Hadji Mat was engaged on probation as telephone linesman, vice Dullah imprisoned for neglect of duty, and sent to Kuching for a course of instruction.
A new clerk, Kong Sang, arrived by s.s. Sulong on the 6th and has taken up his duties here.
It was necessary to request the P.M.O. to relieve Dresser James Hon, who was behaving very badly, and who had not rendered a reporter entered up any of his work since his arrival last November. L. Ah Kow arrived on the 16th and took over from him. An almost futile attempt was made to make JAMES Hon pick up his arrears of work and he was then sent back to headquarters.
The wireless receiving gear went out of order on the 11th but fortunately Mr. Anderson was able to get it working again.
Applications have been received and granted to build ten new shophouses on the Penakub Bead. Along this road an extension of the water pipe-line has been sanctioned.
I visited Oya and Dalat between the 14th and 16th. Mr. G. J. D. Walters arrived at Oya on the 16th to take over from Mr. C. S. Griffiths who had been, doing temporary duty in the Oya district.
Mr. Griffiths handed over to Mr Walters on the 20th and arrived at Mukah on the 22nd to resume his duties as Chief Land Officer and continue his round of the Divisions. His intention was to go to Bintulu but unfortunately both the launches Leonara and Joan broke down and he was eventually obliged to return to Kuching and sailed by motor schooner on June 1st.
Five motor schooners, 23 schooners, and 14 ban- dongs entered with tonnage of 1,334 tons, and 5 motor schooners, 19 schooners, and 30 bandongs cleared the port of Mukah with tonnage 1,193 tons during the month.
The rainfall was 13.36 inches.
Oya and Dalat.
April, 1927.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. C. S. Griffiths, reports:-
Crime. B. L. Spurah, Chief Clerk at Oya, and W. Upit, second Clerk at Dalat, were sentenced to imprisonment for three years and one year respectively in the Resident's Court for converting Government monies to their own use.
Two Malays, Bunsu and Wan Ali, were sentenced, in the District Court at Dalat to six months' imprisonment
each, for absconding under advances, while Ahap, of Kampong Oya, received three months in jail for non-
payment of brian.
There were a number of minor cases at both Oya and Dalat that call for no comment.
Early on Easter Monday it was reported to me that a small child of 14 months was missing at Bakong. A little later it was reported its body had been found in the river just below Kampong Teh, and had been brought to Bakong.
Accompanied by the Native Officer and Police Corporal Latip, I went to Bakong at once and held an inquiry on the spot.
The body showed no signs of violence and the inquiry revealed nothing. The mother of the infant was taken into custody.
The Acting Divisional Officer subsequently held an inquiry and, although nothing further was elucidated, it is difficult to escape the conclusion that the child was thrown into the river by its mother. The inquiry stands adjourned.
182
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1927.
Land. The demarcator, Awang Anuu, was sent to Medong on 28th for the purpose of demarcating I the rubber gardens in that district.
The people had been warned earlier through the Tua Kampong to have their gardens cleared by the end of the month.
A few applications for new lands were received during the month.
P. W. D. A small temporary bangsal was built near the head of the boatshed for the accommodation of such of the timber that has been collected for the new bungalow as was sufficiently seasoned for storage within it. The remainder of the timber will be moved in as soon as it is dry enough. This bangsal was erected by prison labour.
New notice-boards were set up at the months of most of the streams between the Kuala Oya and the Judan. The roads marked by these boards, leading from the beach to the bridges over the streams, were also cleared, that on the east side of Sungei Bulu being re-made.
Travelling.- I spent five days at Dalat during the month. During that period I visited Medong for the purpose of ascertaining the wishes of the people
in the matter of the appointment of a new Tua Kampong. During the visit of His Highness the Rajah to Dalat the present Tua Kampong, Tira, asked permission of His Highness to resign his appointment on the ground of ill-health. His High- ness granted this provided that a new man could be found. I was informed by Tira and some of the leading men of the kampong that the inhabitants were unanimous in wishing Soerah to be appointed Tua Kampong. I informed them that I would submit this man's name to the Divisional Officer.
General. His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by the Acting Chief Secretary, Mr. H. B. Crocker, and the Acting Divisional Officer, Mr. H. H. Kort- right, visited the station on 11th in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna, arriving at about 12.30 p.m.
After pausing sufficiently long to pick me and the Pengeran Mohamat up at Oya, the yacht went on to Dalat. The kampongs passed on the journey up river were decorated with flags, etc., and Chinese crackers made a great din.
Dalat was reached at 2 p.m His Highness landed at once and walked under a red canopy erected by the Chinese inhabitants, to the Court House. A few moments later a move was made through the bazaar to the Roman Catholic Mission. With the Rev. Fathers Bernard Mulder and Epping as guides, His Highness inspected the building, being greeted with cheers by a squad of schoolboys draw up inside.
After His Highness had requested that the boys might have the rest of the day free, the party ad- joumed to Father Mulder's quarters and were there refreshed.
His Highness then returned and, sitting in a packed Court, listened to the various inquests of the people.
The party afterwards returned to the yacht and, leaving Dalat for Oya at 4 p.m., reached the latter place at 5.30 p.m.
The following morning His Highness landed at Oya in heavy rain and sat in Court. The rain, which persisted throughout the morning, did not encourage walking about and, after a visit to the bungalow, His Highness mid Mr. Crocker went aboard the yacht, sailing for Sibu at midday.
It is a long time since His Highness visited this station and the delight of the people at seeing him amongst them was very obvious.
On Hari Raya, 4th April, I cycled to Mukah at Mr. Kortright's invitation, returning on 6th.
The offices were closed from Good Friday till Easter Monday.
The Acting Divisional Officer, Mr. H. H. Kort- right, arrived from Mukah on 18th in m.l. Leonora, accompanied by the Datu. He held Court and dis- cussed various matters, leaving for Kuching in s.l. Lucile on 21st.
The Rev. Father Staal passed through from Dalat- to Mukah and back.
A new Chief Clerk, J. Chin Nyan, arrived from Kuching on 20th.
On the Divisional Officer's instructions, he re- mains in Oya vice Spurah, Munau being transferred to Dalat to replace Upit.
Cattle. At the beginning of the month the herd comprised 11 head. One cow was slaughtered on account of disease, and buried, leaving ten. They appear to be in good condition.
Shipping-	Entered. Cleared.
Motor schooners ...	6	6
Schooners	...	9	11
Government launch	1	1
Total	16	18
Prisoners. Averaged 12.3 and were employed on the roads and general upkeep of the station.
Trade. 364 piculs of jelutong, 76 piculs and 87 catties of para rubber and 441 koyans of raw sago were shipped to Kuching.
Returns. Trade returns are as follows:--
Exports.	Imports.
$60,926.20	$26,974.20
May, 1927.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. G. J. D. Walters, reports:-
Court. In the District Court, S'damong (husband of Mary) and Da'ak (f.) were fined $25 each for adultery, S'damong being also sentenced to three months' imprisonment for contempt of Court.
Prison. The daily average number of prisoners was 13. The prison gang were employed on the roads and general upkeep of the station.
P.W.D. Certain alterations and improvements were put in hand to the chief clerk's house.
Part of the gutters round the Oya bungalow, which had been blown down dining a storm, were repaired.
General. The Divisional Officer, accompanied by Mr. J. G. Anderson, visited Oya and Dalat on the 13th, the Divisional Officer returning to Mukah on the 16th and Mr. Anderson on the 18th.
On the 16th I arrived at Oya to take over the district from Mr. C. S. Griffiths. Having handed over the affairs of Oya and Dalat Mr. Griffiths pro- ceeded to Mukah on the 22nd.
His Highness the Rajah having been pleaded to approve the appointment of Pangeran Mohamat bin Pangeran Shah Bandar, Native Officer Class I. Oya, as a Datu.,the Pangeran was installed as Datu in open Court, all the Tua Kampongs in the Oya dis- trict being present.
On the 25th Mr. J. W. Whiteside passed through the station on his way to Mukah. He returned from Mukah on the 30th and proceeded to Sibu via the Cut on the 31st.
Land. The demarcator, Awang Annu, continued with the demarcating of rubber gardens at Medong and at the end of the month was engaged in plotting these gardens. Applications for new lands continued to be made during the month.
Shipping-	Entered.	Cleared.
M. schooners	...	4	4
Schooners	8	6
Total 12	10
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1927.
183
Trade. 279.20 koyans of raw sago, 75 piculs of jelutong and 133.35 piculs of para rubber were shipped to Kuching.
Bintulu.
April. 1927.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, reports: -
Court. There has not been a great amount of Court work during the month. The following are the more important cases; Latip, a Malay, sentenced to one year's imprisonment under section 404 I.P.C., dishonest misappropriation of property; Chin Seng fined $50 or six months' imprisonment in default for libel about the Native Officer, Tubau, Abang Matali; Drahman bin Sulong sentenced to nine months' imprisonment for gross contempt of Court ; Brahim, three months for non-payment of brian and Garim three mouths for breach of contract; Lim Teck Seng (Chinese, Tatan) six months for threatening his employer with a spear; Alek, a Dyak, six months for making 11 jelutong in a Malay's jelutong road; Keti and Riman (f.) fined $21.14 each for adultery.
P.W.D. Repairs to the Kort have now been completed, including cementing of the floor, erection of four new godowns, and the re-building of the bachelors' quartets for the Sarawak Rangers Carpenter Mamoh is now at work on the old school- house which is being transferred into a combined hospital and dispensary. Contractor Ah Yaw will have finished the two schoolmasters' houses in a few days. Coolies were recruited from the various kampongs and have been working on the road behind the bazzar, which has now been re-laid and bordered, including repairs to bridges as far as the first turning to the right.
Street Lighting. Six Tilley lifebuoy suspension lamps arrived for the bazzar and were duly erected. They are a great improvement on the old ligthing System. Lighting tax in the bazaar has been raised accordingly.
Prison. The prison gang, averaging 20 in number, has been engaged in various work as fetching sand and stones for cementing, carrying timber for new houses, and are now whitewashing the various Government buildings.
General. On 19th I left for Tatan and stayed there for three days only its there were few Dyaks down. Carpenter Drahman and Dris were engaged to make some small repairs to the police quarters, including replacing five gelagars and a few floor boards and walling which were rotten. 1 returned to Bintulu on the 22nd. Wireless Operator, Khium Siong, arrived here from Baram to do duty on 23rd. Clerk Lee Chin Shin obtained three weeks' leave as from 9th. Clerk Oh Choo Jin returned from leave on 3rd. A regrettable accident occurred on 15th to Pte. Abun. A bamboo section into which he was pouring molten lead burst, and spattered his face. It is feared that he may lose the sight of an eye. He was sent to Kuching for medical treatment by the first boat. On 4th, Hari Raya, the offices were closed. Datu Haji Abdullah, Abang Naga and various others partook of light refreshments at the District Officer's bungalow at 8 p .m. The offices were also closed on 15th and 18th, being Good Friday and Easter Monday.
Mr. Johnson, F.R.S.C., left for Tatau on 10th and had not returned by the end of the month.
Trade. The price of jelutong is still low and has varied from $5.50 to $6.50 per picul. In spite of this, however, 3,598 picnls were, exported during the month. I believe that a great deal is being held up by both Natives and Traders who are hoping the price will go up. Of belian attaps 167,000 pieces were exported and raw sago 803 piculs.
The value of exports and imports local and foreign are as follows:-
1927.
1926.
1925.
Exports ..
. $70,458.80
$94,014.19
$26,460.44
Imports ..
. 58,673.41
74,104.51
26,752 21
Shipping. The following vessels entered and cleared the port during the month:-
Entered ... 12 steamers and 3 schooners
Cleared ... 10	"	" 4	,,
The rainfall was 11.45 inches.
May, 1927.
Court. The following were the more important cases heard during the month. Chin Eng sentenced to six months' imprisonment for nonpayment of fine; P.C. Ya sentenced to six months and dismissed the force for cheating under section 417 I. P. C.; Ah See sentenced to three months for breach of contract; Ruyah (f.) and Timah (f.) fined $20 each and cocts for breach of local order on native women in the bazaar; two persons were fined $10 and eight fined $15 at Sebauh for breach of Government Order reference the new Sebauh Road; Man, a Bintulu Malay, fined $l0 and costs for ringing jelutong. There were other small cases and the usual amount of debt cases.
Traveling. On 1st May I spent the day at Sebauh in order to go into the question of boundaries between Dyaks and Foochows. The dispute was finally adjourned for the Divisional Officer, Coast Division.
On 14th I left for Sebauh and up river, accompanied by Datu Haji Abdullah and head clerk L. Ah Yam. On 16th I left Sebauh for Tubau, stopping in Pandan and Labang for a short while, and stayed there till 19th when I returned to Sebauh, finally arriving at Bintulu again on 20th. During my visit to Tubau, Yat Lileng was fined $25 for making improper advances to an unmarried woman; Nyalau fined $25 for making a peti and not reporting same; Lijaw sentenced to three months for breach of contract. The remainder of the cases were small and of no importance. A contract for Government stock wood was made out including 10 laksa attaps; 200 rough planks 18 feet by 10 inches by 2 inches which are to be used for boarding up the kampong roads. The local Chinese and traders all complained about the difficulty of trading owing to the Kayans and Punans not being allowed to be summoned for debt. I informed them the matter would be referred to the Divisional Officer on his next visit to the district.
Prison. The prison gang, averaging 23.05 in number, have been employed in whitewashing and tarring the Government buildings, assisted by ten Malays from the kampong. This work is now completed.
184
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1927.
P.W.D. Carpenter Mamoh has finished the new hospital and has also done repairs to head clerk Ah Yam's house. Mamoh having completed 21 years' service with the Government, retired on 31st May, and his place was taken by Mohamad who is on probation for six months. Contractor Ah Yaw completed the schoolmasters' houses on 6th and these are now occupied by Ahmad and Abang Beng. Contractor Sim Cheng Koo has finished the cementing of the Customs' shed floor which greatly improves the appearance. The roof has also been painted red and the wire netting tarred.
Work on the kampong road has been completed as far as S. Sibiau. The bazaar and front kampong road have not yet been started owing to luck of planks for boarding purposes, which have been ordered from up river.
General. Mr. Johnson, F.R.s.c , returned from Tatau on 6th and left for Sebauh, Tabau, on 30th. Abang Bojeng obtained three weeks' leave from 21st and clerk J. Mang Fook as from 31st. Mr. Cox of the wireless arrived here from Tatau on 21st and reported all well. Dr. Braendlen, of the Geological Department, Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, Miri, arrived hereon 12th from Kedurong to obtain coolies, and returned the same day. The following passengers passed through the station during the month. Mr. and Mrs. Partridge and children, Messrs. Spurway, Bates, and Ridgeway. Rubber instructors Bakir and Sebli arrived from Baram on 6th and have started work here.
Trade. The price of jelutong is still low and has varied from $6 to $7 per picul. In spite of this however, 1,908 piculs were exported during the month. Of belian attaps 346,300 pieces were exported, which are at present selling here for $130 per laksa f.o.b. Bintulu and raw sago 1,620 piculs.
Shipping. On 3rd the juragan of the m.l. Joan reported that the rudder had split close to the supporting arm This was duly repaired locally. The launch is to proceed to Kuching by first opportunity for repairs and annual overhaul. The following vessels entered and cleared the port during the month.
S.S Auby nnce, s.s. Sulong three times, s.s. Gladys once, m.s. Muaratebas once, m.s. Wha Guan once, m.t. Peter once, m.t. Kim twice, pce. Eng Guan Choon once and pce. Ban Whatt Hin once.
Rainfall for the month was 10.01 inches.
H. H. KORTRIGHT,
Acting Divisional Officer.
FOURTH DIVISION.
Miri.
April, 1927.
Court. A larger number of cases than usual were dealt within the District Court during the month.
P.W.D. The new pengkalan at Brighton was moved to the Peninsula site across river, the work being finished by the end of the month.
Extensive repairs were effected in the wireless station and bungalow.
The new vegetable market regulations were brought into force.
General. I returned from Baram on the 25th.
Sea Line No. 1A was successfully lunched from Lutong on Saturday, 23rd April. Weather conditions were perfect, and at about 10 a.m. the tide was sufficiently high. The pipe-
line, which was 14,000 feet long and eight inches in diameter, was pulled into position by s.s. Buccinum, assisted by the tug Hercules. Towing started at 10.32 a.m. and finished at 11.29 a.m., a total of 57 minutes.
The reconstruction policy for Kampong Daggang was commenced and appears to be welcomed by the Malay population there.
Baram.
April, 1927.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports:-
General. The offices were closed on the 4th being Hari Raya. A theft of over $206 worth of goods was reported in the bazaar on the night of 4th to 5th. Two prisoners, both of the names of Latip, escaped from jail early on the morning of the 9th, one of the escaped prisoners was prison cook and was let out as usual at 4 a. m. to cook prisoners' food, the other prisoner was Mr. Hili's tukang ayer; he stole a quantity of Mr. Hili's clothes as well as Mr. Hili's cook's clothes and all available edibles. It is believed that the prisoners made for Sibuti. A Dyak house of five doors in the Malikat was burnt down, everyone was at the farm harvesting at the time. The Resident returned from up river on the 22nd and left on 25th for Miri per s.l. La Follette. The La Follette was sent to Miri for repairs to her steering and also for engine repairs.
Wireless and Telephone. 125 messages were received and 102 messages sent out during the month. The telephone line to Bakong has been in good order most of the month.
Medical. The Dresser reports that no in-patients or out-
patients were treated at the hospital during the month owing to his absence up river. 245 patients were treated account Professor Harrison Smith's Fund; this includes 82 injections of N.A.B. to children and 50 injections to adults of this total, Badangs account for 59, Kelabit 58, Kenyahs 44, Punans 38, Kayans 34, and Muriks 12.
Travelling. I left on the 1st, accompanied by the Resident, for Malinau to meet the Punans. We met Galan at Kuala Apoh on his way back from the Kelabit country, Seredan. Galan was suffering from fever again. We arrived at Malinau at 3 p.m. on the 3rd and found the Punans already waiting for us. The two Punan Chief, Tama Lawai and Oyan Amat, asked that the meeting place should be moved to Leppu Peniew in the Belana river, Ulu Apoh, giving as their reason, the difficulty of finding food at Malinau. It was decided to try Leppu Peniew as a meeting place in October or November. We left Malinau on the 5th and arrived at Batu Blah in the afternoon when the La Follette was waiting with Wan Mohamat, Galan, and Dresser Ahmat Chee. Julong was appointed head of the Batu Blah Punans in place of Jingang who died in March. The following day we went to Long Palai; the birdsnest cave were examined and permission given to collect nests. A site for the new Government building at Long Lama was chosen. We left Long Palai at 8 a.m. on the 9th and arrived at Lirong Ayer at 1.30; only 10 Punans had turned up here and were waiting for us. We left again at 9 a.m. the follow-
ing morning and spent the night on a gravel bed just below L Kaliman; we could have reached Long Kaliman that evening if we had known that it was only another half hour up stream. Fifteen Punans turned out here, they looked well-kept and fit. Dresser Ahmat Chee injected six Punans for yaws.
Another charge of the same sort against a Murut was dismissed. It should actually never have been brought as on investigation the case resolved itself into one of joint ownership with a disputed amount of compensation due from one party to the other.
The Javanese prisoner who recently escaped was recaptured in Trusan and sent here in irons. He received the usual punishment.
Those Muruts who live at Lubai have allowed themselves to be intimidated for some time by a Chinese against whom first a summons and after- wards a warrant were issued. This man was brought in and sentenced, for living with Muruts (second offence), contempt of Court and resisting arrest by the police, to an aggregate of two years' imprisonment.
General. Mrs. Boult left for Lawas by the Sylvia on the 1st, going on later from there to Labuan where Mr. Boult joined her on the 6th after finally handing over the offices of the Division to me on the 5th.
The Acting Assistant District Officer came over from Lawas on the 2nd to discuss official matters, returning next day. Again on the 20th the Acting Assistant District Officer visited Limbang, leaving on the 24th.
Mr. Macpherson was away in Labuan from the 11th to the 20th under medical attention for an abscess in the ear.
On the 13th the Sylvia was sent to Sundar for Mr. Banks, who arrived here at 1.30 p.m. and sailed for Kuching in the Sulong on the 17th.
Captain Clark, who was on board the Sulong, arrived at Limbang on Easter Sunday the 17th at 6 a.m. and left the same day at 11.30 a.m.
There has been rather unusual weather for this season of the year, with the N.E. wind still prevalent and rain nearly every day. However, the actual rainfall total of 13.27 is not very heavy.
Telegraphs. The wireless operators reported something wrong with their engine on the 5th, so that it was impossible to run the dynamo for re- charging. No machine being at hand to do the necessary repairs the plant gradually went out of action, until by the 10th no messages could even be received. However, a mechanic from Miri arrived on the 17th who put things right and re-charging was completed by the 20th. Meanwhile we had been practically without wireless for a fortnight owing to the bad luck of a breakdown at a time when no steamer happened to be coming here.
Public Works. Early in the month a few more breaks in the water supply pipe line had to be attended to, but none occurred in the last two weeks.
Work on the Court house verandah is still delayed owing to the non-arrival of belian planks from Bintulu.
Cement work under No. 2 bungalow was com- pleted during the month.
Trade. Sixty-six head of buffalo were shipped to Kuching.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JULY 1, 1927.
185
It was arranged that the next meeting should take place at Long Keseh which is between at Lirong Ayer and Long Kalimau, both Penghulu Abun Wan's Punans and Penghulu T. Wan Bayer's Punans will use this as a meeting place. We left L. Kalimau on the 12th and arrived at L. Akar the same evening. The trip from Long Palai to Long Akar was done in the two Government boats fitted with outboard motors, a 6-H.P. and a 4-H.P.; the saving in time was very noticeable as far as Long Kalimau but not so appreciable after that. We left Long Akar on the 14th at midday and arrived at the Punan meeting place at Leppu Nanga in the Ulu Akar on the afternoon of the 16th. 105 Punans turned up here of whom only 14 needed injections, but it was noticed that they did not appear to be nearly so well kept as the Punans previously met in the lower Baram and Tutoh. The Punan tax was collected in gutta lichak, the rest of their produce was bartered for cloth and tobacco. It is necessary to carefully watch all the bartering as it has been found that the Kayans and Kenyahs have been in the habit, of exchanging produce, making a profit of from 600 to over 1,000% out of the Punans. The Resident left on the 18th to return down the Akar and arrived at Baram on the 22nd. I went overland to Long Meligoug then up the Akar to Long Benaleh (Kelabit) thence overland to Long Sleh, down the Selungan river to the Baram and up the Baram to Lio Matu. On arrival at Lio Matu on 21st I found the Punans already here, also the Kelabits. The tembuku seems to have gone wrong somewhere as these people had been waiting here 10 days-the Kalabits were not due here until the 24th. The next five days were spent collecting taxes and fines, renewing gun licences and hearing cases. Ballang Ratu was appointed Penghulu in the Kelabit in place of Tok Kah Rim, deceased. Dresser Ahmat Ghee, spent several busy days injecting Kelabits and Kenyahs for yaws; only one Punan out of 69 at Lio Matu needed an injection.
I left Lio Matu on the 27th and arrived at Long Akar the same evening. The next two days were spent collecting taxes, fines, gun licences, etc. I left Long Akar on the 30th at 8 a.m. and arrived at Long Palai at 5 p.m. the same evening-this quick trip was only possible as the river was in flood and it was consequently possible to use the outboard motors continuously after passing the Ubin falls.
Prison and Public Works. The prisoners, averaging 22 men, were whitewashing Government buildings most of the month ; this is a very slow process owing to the small gang. The carpenter did some work on the bridge leading to the bazaar, also made new steps for the fort entrance, the rest of his time was spent doing general repair work.
Trade and Shipping. The Gladys made two trips during the month. The s.l. La Follette was sent to Miri on 25th for repairs to her rudder and any other repairs necessary.
The trade returns for the month are as under
Imports.	Exports.
$ 58,498	$ 50,253
Brought forward 94,794	182,613
$153,292	$232,863
1926	55,024	134,143
C. E. A. ERMEN, Acting Resident. Fourth Division.
FIFTH DIVISION.
Limbang.
April, 1927.
Court A Bisaya was sentenced to two years' imprisonment for buffalo stealing. It was his third conviction for this class of offence
Shipping (Inward).-S.S. Auby made two trips from Singapore via Kuching and ports, and s.s. Sulong made one trip from Kuching via ports.
Local. S.L. Kwong Yick made three trips from Labuan via Brunei and m.l. Peter Duff made two trips from Labuan via Brunei.
A. E. LAWRENCE, Resident, Fifth Division.
