
VOL. LVII.
No. 881.
THE
Sarawak Gazette
PRICE	KUCHING, Tuesday, February 1st, 1927.	20 CENTS
Contents.
Mamagf Halsey-Brooke
Teo-Law-
Death:-Huinphery, E. D.
Notes ...	...
Marriage of the Davang Jean
New Year's Eve
Death of H. I. M. the Emperor of -lapau
Death of Mr. Eric Hiuuphery
Marriage of Mr. Law ('hen Hiang's daughter
Delivery of Telegrams in Sarawak
An Open Letter to Lieut. T. E. Halsey, K.M. ...
Correspondence ...	...
Club News : -
Sarawak Club-Bowling Average for December Bowling Handicap for December
Sarawak Turf Club: Spring Meeting. 1926 Ngnyati Ka Delok
Monthly ReportsSsrlong Colliery Third Division Coast Division Fourth Division Fifth Division
Kuching Trade Returns
Passengers
Miri Trade Returns ...
Kuching Market Price List
Knehing Shipping
Miri Shipping
Rainfall
Kuching Shipping Returns
Meteorological Returns	...	-
NOTES.
-	(January.)
HER Highness the Ranee and the Dayang Leonora have been most assiduous of late in visiting the sick. They probably know the weariness of the long days of convalescence and their thoughtfulness (and books) have been thoroughly appreciated.
THE Dayang Lenora narrowly escaped a serious accident recently. While riding one of the local ponies her mount bit that of her escort who was riding ahead. The leading pony lashed out and just touched the Davang Leonora's knee. Fortunatelv the blow was a light one. Had it been heavier and two inches higher the consequences might have been serious indeed. As it was the knee stiffened a little, but that will doubtless soon wear off.
The Sarawak Gazette
Monday. FEBRUARY 1. 1927.
Marriages.
HALSKY -BROOKE. On 20th December at St. Peters, Cranley Gardens. Lieut. T. E. Halsey, R.N., elder son of Colonel & Mrs. Halsey, to the Dayang Jean, eldest daughter of His Highness the Tuan Muda of Sarawak & Mrs. Bertram Brooke.
WE offer our very sincere congratulations to Lieut. Halsey and the Dayang Jean, and wish them everything they can possibly wish themselves. A telegram has been despatch- ed offering congratulations and best wishes on behalf of all communities.
TEO-LAW. -On Sunday, 2nd January, at the Min Teck School. 23 and 24, Khoo Hun Yeang Street. Mr. Teo Boon, Kui, second son of Mr. Teo Soo Ann of Kuching, to Miss Law Hong Lan, only daughter of Mr. Law Chen Hiang of No. 7, Main Bazaar, Kuching.
MRS. Danson suffered a nasty accident on the tennis court earlv in the month, when she fell and twisted her ankle. She was confined to the house for much longer than she appreciated and we are very glad to see her about again.
Death.
HUMPHERY.-On 17th December at Davos Dorf, Switzerland. Eric Danvers Humphery, aged 22 years, late of the Sarawak, Civil Service, of tuberculosis.
MRS. Barraclough left for England on 8th, as did Mr. W. Clarke. We wish them both bon voyage, and a pleasant holiday.
32
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1927.
MR. E. S. Holl was the victim of a rickshaw accident which, though the results were sufficiently serious, might have been very much more so. We understand that the puller lost control of his vehicle on a steep hill and Mr. Holl was thrown out, striking one of the concrete electric light standards. He sustained very severe bruises and was much shaken, but fortunately no bones were broken. The rickshaw was reduced literally to matchwood.
DR. Charles Hose has been elected an honorary fellow of Jesus College, Cambridge.
WE learn that Mr. F. G. Day, who, we are glad to say, has derived great benefit from his visit to England, sails for Sarawak on 5th March.
MR. H. L. Owen, Resident, Third Division, arrived in Kuching on Saturday 23rd on a business visit, into which, nevertheless, we hope he managed to squeeze a little pleasure. Mr. Owen left for Sibu again on the following Saturday.
MESSRS. Middlemas and Banks returned from local leave and sick leave respectively on Monday 24th and both looked as if they had enjoyed it.
THE Ven. Archdeacon and Mrs. Champion also returned by the same ship. We welcome them back and hope that furlough at home benefited them.
MR. J. G. Barraclough returned on 17th from what we understand was a business trip to Sumatra.
MR. J. A. H. Hardie went to Singapore recently for medical reasons. We hear with regret that he is not very fit, but we understand that he is not in hospital. We hope to see him back very shortly, quite recovered.
MR. Law Chen Hiang wishes to express his sincere thanks to all who attended his daughter's wedding and especially for the honour of the presence of Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee and the Dayang Leonora during the festivities.
MAJOR the Hon. T. G. F. Cochrane, D.S.O., paid a short visit to Kuching at the end of January in connection with the oil interests at Miri, arriving in Kuching by the Min on Tuesday 25th. Major Cochrane returned to Miri on Thursday 27th.
MR. G. C. Turner left for Europe by the s.s. Angby on Saturday 22nd. Mr. Turner resigns the service on the expiry of his fur- lougn and we wish him good fortune on whatever fresh venture he may undertake.
Marriage of the Dayang Jean.
The Davang Jean, eldest daughter of His Highness the Tuan Muda of Sarawak and of Mrs. Bertram Brooke, and Lieut. T. E Halsey, R.N., elder son of Colonel and Mrs. Walter Halsey, were married on 20th December at St. Peter's, Cranley Gardens, the wedding being a quiet one owing to family mourning. The ceremony was performed by the Rev. F. Halsey (uncle of the bridegroom) assisted by the Rev. Thomas Brackenbury.
The bride, who was given away by His Highness the Tuan Muda, wore a gown of bois de rose radium velvet and georgette, with a velvet hat to match, and she carried a bouquet of violets and lilies of the volley. Her sisters, Miss Anne and Miss Betty Brooke, in powder blue georgette, with fawn felt hats, attended the bride, while Lieut. W. Halsey, R.N., was best man.
New Year's Eve.
(By Our Special Correspondent.)
"A motley fool: a miserable world." The melancholy Jaques might have seen fit to modify his dictum had he been present at the Astana on New Year's Eve. Motley we were: fools some of us may have been miserable we most certainly were not. The fancy dresses seem to me to get better each year, and what I want to know is, where's it all going to end?
Many of the dresses were very striking. Her Highness the Ranee almost persuaded me that she really was a Russian lady, while the Dayang Leonora was Peter Pan indeed. What a shame it is, that these Peter Pans eventually insist on growing up !
Third Corporal Mrs. A. S. Lowe won the ladies prize. Badges of rank, some of them upside down, as worn by the P.W.D. platoon of Wooden Soldiers, were a trifle confusing, and it may be that Mrs. Lowe's indicated a higher grade than that suggested above. If so, I apologise, and throw myself on the mercy of the court martial. The Viking (S. T. Ennion) deservedly took the men's prize.
John Bull (E. S. Holl) and Tweedledum and Tweedledee (J. A. H. Hardie and Dr. Marjoribanks) were splendid, while even the pierrots, clowns, harlequins, pirates and other cut-throats seemed better than usual
A few moments before midnight we joined hands in a huge circle round the room, and waited for the band to give us a lead in Auld Lang Syne, but one of the revellers got tired of waiting and started in on his own. The result was exactly what might have been expected, and in a flash the splendid old air was taken up. The band joined in and doubtless meant what it played, but it was almost drowned by the vocal efforts of the company.
Vale 1926-Ave 1927.
Followed a joyous supper. Everyone talked, everyone laughed, everyone ate, some sang, others didn't, corks flew, and so did Time. More dancing, and at last one more New Year's Eve was a thing of the past.
A wonderful function, indeed, and I cannot help feeling that their Highnesses the Rajab and Ranee could hardly fail to have been satisfied that the traditionally high standard of Astana New Years had been thoroughly well maintained.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1927.
33
Death of His Imperial Majesty the Emperor of Japan.
The following messages have passed Detween His Highness the Rajah and the Imperial Japanese Government.
3rd January, 1927.
To His Majesty's Consul-General for Japan, Singapore.
1 have heard to-day with deep regret of the great loss the Japanese Nation has sustained by the death on 25th December of His Majesty the Emperor of Japan and I desire to express my sincerest sympathy.
RAJAH-
4th January, 1927.
To His Highness the Rajah of Sarawak, Kuching.
I have the honour to acknowledge with thanks the receipt of your Highness' kind telegram for the sad death of His Imperial Majesty the Emperor of Japan. I, on behalf of mv Government, express my heartfelt thanks for your Highness' profound sympathy and condolence in our great national sorrow. I have transmitted your Highness' kind telegram to Japan.
NAKASHIMA.
19th January, 1927.
To His Highness the Rajah of Sarawak, Kuching.
I have the honour to inform you that this morning I received a cablegram from the Foreign Minister in Tokio advising that His Highness' kind message of sympathy and condolence which I had forwarded to Tokio by telegram had been submitted to His Majesty the Emperor who commands me to convey to His Highness His Majesty's heartfelt thanks for His Highness' kind sympathy in our great national sorrow.
CONSUL-GENERAL OF JAPAN.
Death of Mr. Eric Humphery.
We most sincerely regret to have to announce the death of Mr. Eric Humphery, late of the Sarawak Civil Service, at the very early age of twenty-two. Mr. Humphery left Sarawak on 11th June. 1925, after tuberculosis had been diagnosed, for Switzerland in the hope of arresting the progress of the disease. He was accompanied on this journey by his mother and stepfather, Mr. and Mrs. H. A. Adams, who are within the memory of many of our readers, and Mr. Adams subsequently resigned the Sarawak Service, somewhat before arriving at the age limit, in order to stay in Europe with his stepson.
After Mr. Humphery's arrival in Switzerland the state of his health fluctuated, but the deadly malady ultimately attacked his throat. This presaged the end of the long struggle, and he passed away on 17th December at Davos Dorf.
The advent of death can never be other than a very severe shock, even in cases where it may be almost prayed for as a release from suffering, and we offer our most sincere condolences to Mr. and Mrs. Adams in their grievous loss.
Eric Danvers Humphery was born on 19th April. 1904. He was educated in Australia and was appointed a Cadet in the Sarawak Service on 9th November, 1921. He served at Limbang, Sibu, and Mukah. before going to Switzerland on seven months' furlough prior to his resignation, which took effect on 11th January, 1926.
Marriage of Mr. Law Chen Hiang's daughter.
Sunday, 2nd January, saw the end of a week's festivities given by Mr. Law Chen Hiang to celebrate the marriage of his only daugther Miss Law Hong Lan.
On Sunday, 26th December, Mr. Law Chen Hiang invited Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee and the Dayang Leonora to dinner at his residence in Main Bazaar, a representative gathering of Europeans being invited to meet their Highnesses. Among those present were Mesdames Aplin, Marjoribanks, Fenwick, Baird, and Messrs. Crocker, Rennie, Aplin, Marjoribanks, Parnell, Fenwick, Baird. Lang and others. Messrs. Ong Tiang Swee, Voon Kon Seong, Tan Sum Guan and Tan Boon Siew were present and helped the host to entertain his guests.
A very enjoyable Chinese repast was provided for consumption of which the use of "chopsticks" only was allowed The European guests are to be congratulated on the dexterity they displayed in handling these somewhat unwieldy instruments.
After dinner all the guests adjourned to the Chinese theatre where the thoughtful host had arranged with the manager for a short play and afterwards a display of the gorgeous costumes for which the troupe had gained some repute. Light refreshments were served and at midnight a start was made for home. All the guests appeared to have thoroughly enjoyed the food provided and the visit to the theatre was a happy thought which made a pleasant change from the somewhat stereotyped parties usual in Sarawak.
During the week Mr. Law Chen Hiang entertained at various dinners his Chinese friends both ladies and gentlemen.
Sunday, 2nd January, at 10 o'clock, saw a very large gathering at the Min Teck School, composed of the European, Chinese, Malay, Japanese, and Indian friends of the father of the bride. There could not have been less than 300 people present; in spite of the number of guests Mr. Law Chen Hiang's arrangements enabled all to see the ceremony.
It is believed that this is the first occasion on which the "New Style" marriage ceremony, known as " Bun Meng," has been seen in Sarawak. Mr. Aplin, Divisional Officer, First Division, kindly acted as Registrar and signed the Register of Civil Marriages.
Soon after the guests had been received the bride arrived, looking very pretty in a dress of pale pink brocade trimmed with pearls and diamanti with a yoke of gold brocade; she wore a veil with a crown of orange blossom.
To European onlookers the wedding ceremony appeared to be carried out without a hitch, thereafter the bride and the bridegroom passed through to the adjoining room where Her Highness the Ranee and Dayang Leonora were seated with European guests; here the bridal cake was cut and champagne served.
Mr. Aplin proposed the health of the bride and bridegroom in a few well-chosen words, and the bridegroom made a suitable reply in Mandarin Chinese.
The bride and bridegroom then left for their home in Gartak Street on foot surrounded by the usual crowd of adults and children.
Her Highness the Ranee and the Dayang Leonora paid a visit to the bridegroom's house where they were able to see the bridal chamber.
The presents were very numerous and handsome.-( Contributed.)
31
THE SARAWAK AZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1927
Delivery of Telegrams in Sarawak.
1. It is requested that ad Government Officials and others notify the Wireless Department at their particular station when they change their locality, at the same time mentioning that telegrams are to be re-directed to then new address.
2. Hitherto the Department has obliged and re-directed messages when the whereabouts of the Addressee have been known; this procedure is irregular, however, and involves an extra inland charge of 10 cents per word.
3.	For example, if an addressee cannot be dis- covered in Kuching telegrams addressed to Kuching only should, according to regulations, be kept in Kuching by the Department until the owner returns.
4.	Telegrams will be re-directed free of charge
when the Department has received orders to this effect by the person concerned, as mentioned above.
5.	At present it is impossible to guarantee delivery when the movements of an addressee are insufficient- ly known.
In spite of the heavy rain, which continued pour- ing the whole day, there was a good attendance.
After the dinner the Honorary Secretary, Mr. Song Lian Siong, gave a very long and fine speech regard- ing the welfare of the Association and pointed out that its success depends entirely on the unity and co- operation of all Sarawakians. He urged all Sarawak friends residing in Singapore, who are not members
yet, to join the Association.
The President, although unprepared, also gave a few words of cheer to all those present and said that it was a great success this time owing to the interest taken by all the members.
Many followed afterwards with touching speeches and ended their talks with loud applause.
The celebration lasted till late in the night.
Yours faithfully,
KANG GUAN LEONG
An Open Letter.
To LIEUT. T. E. HALSEY, R.N.
DRAB SIB,
We don't know you but we should like to. As
however, we never leave Sarawak, except in small pieces, we fear that you must come to us if you would know us; in fact we hereby invite you to come
and blow froth with us.
Our object in addressing this letter to you is two-fold; firstly, we offer you our congratulations on your marriage to "Our Dayang Jean," and secondly, we beg to remind you that, although married so you, she still remains "Our Dayang Jean." She became "Our Dayang Jean" when she visited us two years ago, before our formal incorporation, and that she remains.
Should we, therefore, hear the least hint of any necessity for disciplinary action during what we hope may be your long and honourable career, we shall at once despatch a strong deputation to deprive you of your cuff-links and shall use our great in- fluence with the omnipotent Bert Temple No. O to prevent you from obtaining any more.
The result of this action would be, as you are doubtless aware, that you would spend the rest of your life "shooting your linen" and standing drinks to everybody.
We feel, however, that such action will never be necessary and we now "lubricate" in honour of you both.
We are, dear Sir,
Yours sincerely, THE FROTH BLOWERS OF SARAWAK.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor it not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.
SINGAPORE,
27th December, 1926. To
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching Sarawak
SIR,
Sarawak Association Annual Dinner at Singapore.
The Annual Dinner given by the kindness of the members of the above Association was held at Heong Kong Restaurant on Christmas night, the 25th December, 1926.
KUCHING, SARAWAK,
27th January, 1927.
To
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
DEAR SIR,
Apologizing most profusely, as is the wont of correspondents, for this encroachment on your
valuable space, may I call to your notice, and to
that of your readers who may be interested, that it is proposed to form a Sarawak A.O.F.B. Vat, here in Kuching.
For those who may not have heard of this Order let me give a brief account of it. It happened thus- One Bert Temple had appendicitis! Sir Alfred Fripp attended him and advised operation. Bert Temple knew he could not afford Sir Alfred's usual fee (I don't know what it is, but with a "Sir" in front and "F.R.C.S." and most of the alphabet after his name it must be high) and said so. Did Sir Alfred mind? No! He operated-most successfully for nothing! But, there we are-he made it a condition that Bert Temple should endeavour to raise money for Sir Alfred's waifs and strays fund. Now Bert is assuredly a genius. He touched the right spot when he started the A.O.F.B. He de- scribes it as an "Ancient Guild (circa 1924) which exists to foster the noble art and gentle and healthy pastime of Froth Blowing amongst Gentlemen of Leisure and Ex-soldiers."
To be a life member one pays 5 shillings ($2.15) or any larger sum and receives for that a handsome pair of silver cuff links which must be worn on all occasions of festivity or thirst penalty for non- compliance-" drinks all round" and a most amusing book about the A.O.F.B. written by Bert Temple.
The membership now exceeds 80,000, and the sum collected and paid to Sir Alfred is over 20,000.
The term "Vat" is synonymous with "Club," "Lodge," etc. The rules governing the formation and proceedings of a "Vat" are in my possession.
1 would be grateful if any A.O.F.B.'s in favour of this proposal would let me know. And if those of your readers who are not already A.O.F.B.'s would send me $2.15 or any sum larger, with their names and addresses, I would be pleased to write home for their links and book.
I am, Sir,
Yours fraternally,
T. E. WALSH,
(No. 20510 BLASTEB, A.O.F.B.)
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY I, 1927.
35
Club News.
Sarawak Club
BOWLING AVERAGE FOR DECEMBER, 1926.
Name.
No. of Garnet.
Average.
R. V. Carr
11
137-3
J. P. Baird
24
34 3
H. D. Aplin
8
1291
C. Fenwick
5
125 2
D. Y. Proudfoot
9
124-7
N. A. Middlemas
7
122.3
W. Cotterill
7
118.7
L. Gregory'
19
116.3
R. C. Kay
6
1151
A. S. Lowe
6
115 I
R. E. Le Sueur
18
1142
J. S- W. Bean
8
112.2
A. M. Bathurst
20
111.6
G. T. Bates
5
110 0
A M. Forrest
5
IO5 J
BOWLING HANDICAP FOR DECEMBER, 1926.
Name.
Score.
ITcap.
Total.
A. M. Bathurst (Winner) 270
no
320
G. T. Bates
255
54
309
J. 2. W. Bean
243
50
293
J. P. Baird
286
6
292
R. E. Le Sueur
240
46
286
R C. Kay
231
44
275
C. Fenwick
249
24
273
L. Gregory
231
42
273
H. D. Aplin
242
16
*258
A. M. Forrest
188
64
252
D. Y. Proudfoot
218
24
242
R. V. Carr
230
230
G. T.
BATES,
for
Hon. Secretary.
New Club.
BRIDGE TOURNAMENT.
Mr. Secretary Forrest secured a good entry for an American Bridge Tournament, which took place during the month at the New Club.
We were playing a "friendly" game there one evening early in the tournament, and really the thunderous babel made by people frantically searching for aces, kings, slams, jokers, chicanes, revokes and other attributes of the game must have shaken the old building to its very core.
For some time past the atmosphere of this club has been one of cathedral calm rather than one horn of junketings of this description, and we hope that this tournament may mark the revival of the cheery times of old.
Sarawak Turf Club.
Spring Meeting, Tuesday, April 26th, and Thursday.
April 28th. 1927.
First Day-Race No. 1-2.0 2-2.30 3-3.0 4-3.30 5-4.0 6-4.30 7-5.0
8-5.30
p.iu. Div. I 6 furlongs
"	" II	5	"
HI	4	"
..13	"
,.	.. II	4	"
.,111 5	"
,, Maiden Plate 3	"
" Divs. I,
II, III R. 0. Second Day-Race No. 1-2.0 .p.in. Div. I 5 furlongs
2-2.30	"	"	II	6
3-3.0	" HI 3
4-3.30	.,	"	I	4
5-4.0	"	"	II	3	"
6-4.30	" III 6
7-6.30 " Catch wts.
9 st. 7tbs. 44	"
No Race to fill unless five entries.
Course open for training on Saturday, 12th March.
Regulations.
1.	All nominations, accompanied by entrance fees, $1 each, description of ponies, and declaration of colours, to be made to the Honorary Secretary not later than noon of the 11th March.
2.	(a) Entrance fees for ponies entered previously and scratched before that date will be returned.
(b)	Handicaps for the First Day will be published on 8tb April.
(c)	In the event of ponies not being scratched before 8th April, a further $2 forefeit.
(d)	If not scratched by 18th April, a further $2 forfeit.
(e)	If not scratched by 5 p.m. on the day prior to the race, a further $5 forfeit.
(f)	If a starter, a final $5 forfeit.
(g)	Handicaps for the Second Day will be posted on the Notice Board of the Sarawak Club at 12 noon on the 27th April.
3.	The penalty for a win, after publication of the handicaps, shall be 5lbs.
4.	The maximum weight shall be 11 stone and the minimum 7 stone.
5.	Registered Racing Ponies in B.N.B. Division III shall be eligible for entry in Races open to Sarawak Division I ponies, and shall be handicapped for the first day's racing in which they participate at not less than 11 stone.
6.	Ponies from British North Borneo which have not been raced at any meetings of the British North Borneo Turf Club, other than Subscription Griffins imported by the Sarawak Turf Club, shall be classified in Sarawak Division I, and shall not carry more than 21 lbs. below the top weight in the first day's races in which they participate, subject to the provisions of Regulation No. 3 above.
7.	Registered Racing Ponies in B.N.B. Divisions I and II are ineligible for entry in Races at Meetings of the Sarawak Turf Club.
8.	All ponies in Sarawak Divisions II, III, and IV shall be eligible for entry in any race for ponies of any division higher than their own particular division.
9.	No second prize will be awarded if there are less than three runners, and no third prize if less than five.
10.	Ponies must have run on the First Day to be eligible for entry in Races on the Second Day.
11.	Any Jockey who has not already won two races shall he entitled to an allowance of 5 lbs.
12.	12. No whip used in any race shall exceed two feet in length.
36
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1927.
13.	If spurs lie worn these shall not have rowels.
14.	Any objection shall be accompanied by a deposit of $10.
15.	The maximum fee to a winning jockey shall be 15 and to a losing jockey $5, in the absence of any agreement to ride for a lower sum.
J. A. H. HARDIE, Honorary Secretary, Sarawak Turf Club. Kuching, 7th January, 1927.
OFFICIAL RECLASSIFICATION of PONlES.
Divuion I.
BiUy BnsU r Hopelc""
Bunk Kirniet Blaze- Lee Mah Wembley U ntong Ak"l Beavei
Diruion II-
Choba I'l-ngnmh White Wing- Saklion Pengliroa Tolin
Kilal Sit-it Adhr.ui Apa Ki-tui A Zab Pegaoua
IheitioH III.
NiZAin Bai.g
Kijanc Itakcha limiting Kuching Jin Mah Jongi Tony Ghalib I'cnghulv Aladdin Hagai mana The Hat If I'iiak BiuUng Terpileh .Mint lair Sakai Mauna Bult-li Anjing Laut Aiaib ItllluUg Shotaway Guntur
E. S. HOLL,
Official Handicapper.
Ngayau Ka Delok.
Batang Ai maloh bepangpang, Menoa Ngumbang di Bukit Kedang. Ai pandi, Delok Batang Sriang, Enggau Mepi Batang Menrang.
Tanah alai bumai seruran lantang, Mala umai rimba maia pengrang.
Alai nasa kadiri onda tau temu orang, Anak bini sida pen enda masok srang.
Truba iya bebala ngalah ka Skrang, Ngalah ka rumah Lang Labang;
Enda teanti ka penatai penguang, Ngumbang bekejang berayan kajang.
Enda jera tuda Ayah Ngumbang, Ngumpul bala datai ka Tawang;
Ngalah ka orang di Batang Kumpang, Nuntong serta tikup petang.
Baum Ngumbang mcrkas daun lalang, Enggau nunu rumah sida orang Kumpang;
Serta hari pen ka tebuka siang.
Bala ka nuntong ngcnyit nyerang.
Apin tegagai ka memudai orang, Udah ditemu orang Kumpang;
Bala Nbumbang datai nyerang, Saman bepegai ka perkas daun lalang.
"Tu munsoh," leka jako sida orang Kumpang, Ditebah ka tetawak ngumbai penguang;
Begau Undup datai ka Tapang Tumbang, Begau ga Dau ambis Batang Engkerbang.
Betampong begau melunggang Kalingkang, Begau ga Bugau datai ka anembiak Demang Ladang. Manang Renggan besandang pedang, Baka ti ngamang buyu ditimang.
Hari pen ujan enda chechamang, Ai pen bah ngampoh ka batang;
Titi sungai andau penyembrang, Nekat ka singkang pejalai penguang.
Moa hari pen pemadu petang.
Kilat nyelar melintang putang;
Guntor temepur enda belapang, Tanah berenyang enda chechamang.
Biobalai nurun pemadu kenchang.
"Kudi menoa." nya leka jako samoa orang;
Ujan nurun enggau nitar kilat berandang.
Ambis ati samoa orang ti mansang nguang.
Nyau datai di Tinting Janang,
Agi Manang Renggan nyandang pedang;
Udah tepantup do tunggol tebang.
Lalu laboh tebelunggang putang.
Ka nyingkang lalu tekedadang, Leman kaki tuda Renggan Manang;
Lalu temenslit di urat mawang, Bebadi nikal enda enggau orang nguang.
Ukai nama agi tekepang tuda Ngumbang, Ninga tetawak ngumbai penguang;
Lari enda tesapa ka orang, Alah bala ambis pambar ka Batang Empanang.
Saja pia apin jera tuda Ngumbang, Agi mersap sablah babas madang pengrang; Kayau anak bctuboh ampat lima orang, Ngagai Undup sida Sengkuang.
Ukai nama agi tckenyit tuda Danyang, Meda anembiak iya dipantap orang;
Di jalai umai andau penyembrang, Pulai turun serta mata hari mandang rajang.
Begau Undup ukai chechamang,
Ditebah ka tetawak ngemegau ka orang;
Mansia nurun nadai belapang, Maia ari umai, maia ari kampong pengrang.
Adaipen Idah siduai Kluang, Pulai turun dudi ari orang;
Diipa munsoh di andau penyimbrang, Dipantap di pegu ditumbok enggau serpang.
Idah pen laboh ka dalam darong, Munsoh pen berebut ka mumpong; Laki iya pen terjun baka ditempalong, Ninding bini iya enggaika kena pumpong.
Tumbok munsoh nadai belambang, Kluang nyambut ka kiba kanan; Iya pen nyau sampal lelak magang, Munsoh pen nyau bisi telih laban Kluang.
Leka jako siduai Kluang.
Pemaioh munsoh duablas iko orang;
Sida lari ukai nya chechamang.
Baka ti ninga gub bala ti mansang nyerang.
Darong nya tau dikumbai lebak mati !
Andau nya dikumbai lanjan titi meniti !
Ukai nama agi beamok dia baka manok ngena taji !
Pegari ati brani lelaki nadai agi bepenti !
Sayau tuda Kluang nyau leai mati, Utang pembrani iya agi idup baka besi bari;
Bini nya ti dudi idup pemadu ngenang laki, "Nya ti sulu tuju ati tau dikumbai Bujang Brani."
Munsoh pen bekejang lelu bema lari, Idah siduai Kluang pen pulai ka rumah diri;
Tuboh siduai ti bedarah ukai agi ditusi, Telih ti sablah-blah tuboh madah ka bebadi.
Ngumbang bechakap ukai chechamang,
"Isa ga tiang aku pungkang,
Prabong aku nyadi arang, Enda aku ka nundok ka orang."
"Enda aku meniti diau di alai sabrang, Kapa enda anak bini aku nyadi benatang;
Empai pia udah me teleba diau di kampong puang, Teleba lari teleba malai blangkau kajang."
Mensia di ulu ukai nya jarang, Ari Lubok Antu datai di Kedang;
Ari Mepi datai ka Sriang, Orang Danau enggau Kedungkang.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1927.
37
Mudik Raja mai nyerang, Ngumpul Saribas, Undup, Engkerbang.
Balau Banting datai ka Skrang, Lemanak datai ka Kumpang.
Kapal ngundnn ubat enggau anapang.
Enggau sida Laut di Kainpong Abang; Ngetu di Lingga Ulu Skupang,
Nganti Raja pengulu prang.
Serta kembong bulan nadai timpang, Raja pen datai di Kubu Simanggang; Datai mega bala serta beribu orang. Luan prau dipeda ukai agi utai dikarang!
Nyau me tu ngelimpang ka kenang, Pasal siko tuai anak Engkerbang; Nama iya Mamba julok Pat Pantang, Tuai lukai bungkok blakang.
Serta pernama randang tarang.
Ngikut semaia Mamba bekejang.
Undor Klauh di kaki Kalingkang.
Mling menoa ngagai Simanggang.
Ka beguai ngercbut Raja bekejang, Ngerang Ngumbang di Bukit Kedang;
Serta lemai tikup petang, Nuntong di pengkalan orang.
Laban enda nemu pasal nengri orang, Nanchang ka prauh di punggang batang; Tanchang pen rat nadai betagang.
Anembiak iya ambis niki ka rumah orang.
Dudi di prauh Mamba Pat Pantang.
Chelap bekindu nadang blakang;
Nadai nemu penyurut pasang.
Ala nyau karam tetunggang.
Manjong tuda ayah Pat Pantang, Madah ka pangan ka ti di rumah orang; Nyau chelap baru tudah ti nadang blakang. Dialun ka ai ti ngampoh ka ruang.
Bekal pen basah utai pen ilang.
Prauh pen rusak tetukang bang: Nemu mensia sempal udah bekejang, Lalu nikal tuda Ayah Pat Pantang.
Bala mudik serta meriam dipasang, Ngejang ka pasar kubu Simanggang;
Penoh Ai Lupar baka disegang pasang, Laban luan prauh ti mansang nyerang.
Prauh dipeda ukai nya chechamang, Besai enggau mit bla diisi orang;
Pcnambai prauh ukai nya utai dikenang, Ngelantar baka nabau sida ular bekengkang.
Prauh Raja alit ati aku ngarang, Kayoh orang baka jari renguang;
Penambai iya nyelai ari enggi orang, Makota Raja tampak dipandang.
Sipi ngemudi enda malik blakang, Nuji lurus baka ditentang;
Penambai mansau baka jernang, Chelum tampak kuning bekengkang.
Prauh Resident Tuan Simanggang, Enggau Raja ngalah ka Kedang;
Bebai ka senunggol tanda prang, Bekayoh dras nunda tedong nyembrang.
Pemaioh bala ukai nya utai dikenang, Pengraml bekayoh saman beati lantang;
Adai ti besuar adai ti bcbatak di krangan, Adai ti tepanggai adai ti karam olih pangan.
Pemanchal bala nya chechamang.
Ngambi utai orang nadai agi enggau tagang; Pinang serih enggau buah diruroh magang, Ambis bebadai ringat tuda ti mangkang.
Balau, Lemanak, Undup. Engkerbang, Saribas. Paku, Krian, enggau Skrang; Rimbas Sakayu anang agi dikenang, Begulai enggau Laut ti mansang nyerang.
Di Lubok Antu bala ngetu baun bekenang, Hari siti mudik ngagai Nanga Manyang; Ari nya bala bedarat jampat nyingkang, Lalu kena pansa menoa Lempa Sriang.
Belangkau Raja bekubu kajang, Belangkau mega Resident Tuan Simanggang; Langkau kadedua diklingi Pengeran Abang, Bala maioh ka dinding sida rapat magang.
Ari nya bala besai bedudok mansang nyerang, Adai ka menoa Tajum adai ka menoa Kedang; Adai ka Delok adai ka Lempa Engkabang, Adai ti begiga ka krapa tunga ka menoa puang.
Munsoh lari ukai nya agi chechamang, Anak bini sida disimpan ngagai menoa orang; Rumah sida ditinggal enda sempat dipuang, Ngumbang lari jaoh tepejoh lalu enda tesapa ka orang. Pembrani munsoh semadi chakap puang, Semadi brani di petang takut di trang;
Marinsa kadiri baka jelu benatang, Diau kekachau naroh ati irau begitang.
Bala Raja pulai ari menoa ti disrang, Mai kaban udok manok sida Ngumbang; Tikai, bidai, anang agi disebut utai ti sabarang, Tetawak, bebendai, tajau, pinggai, mangkok enggau wang. Panjong mensia alit ati aku ngarang, Andal kadiri menang enda rarah bulu tenyalang;
Pulai sida ka pengkalan pemadu brat blakang, Raja pen dipuji tau nurun ka bala nyerang. Ukai agi jera lalu tekepang tuda Ngumbang, Minta ampun Raja lalu nundok ka prentah Simanggang; Mudik Resident ka Lubok Antu munoh babi tetak pelintang, Alus menoa, Ngumbang digaga tuai megai samoa orang.
W. H.
MONTHLY REPORTS.
SADONG COLLIERY.
November, 1926.
Stock balance at beginning of month 240.05 Tons
Gross output for the month ...	1,545.08	"
Total 1,785.13
Shipped	905 00 Tons.
Boiler consumption and
Coke conversion 362.19 "	1.267.19	"
Stock balance nt end of month	517.14	"
The working coal face of the Upper Seam Mine was reduced in length by nearly one hundred feet as the result of striking the old Robertson Mine workings to the rise.
Preparations were made with a view to the opening up of new mines in the upper seam at a point situated between the present workings and the Pansi Valley watershed to the south-east.
There was a slight improvement in the lower seam section obtaining at the new mines.
No. 8 Mine maintained a fair average output throughout the month.
At the only remaining development section of No. 9 Mine the coal seam had pinched out entirely by mid-month, and further development in this mine ceased altogether after the 18th. A few small coal pillars remain to lie extracted inside the rail terminus after which the main engine-plane coal pillars will be split up and extracted to the rise outbye as far as the entrance and the mine in due course dismantled
Dr. Walsh visited the mines on the 19th.
I proceeded to Kuching with Dr. Walsh by S.L. L'Aubaine on the 20th and returned on the 26th.
The sad news of Ris Highness the Tuan) Bunsu's death was received with profound regret by every one on Friday the 12th and all work ceased immediately.
The rainfall for the month was 15.43 inches.
38	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1927.
December, 1926.
Stock balance at beginning of month 517.14 Tons.
Gross output for the month ...	1,742.19	"
Total	2.260.13
Shipped	1,385.11 Tons.
Boiler consumption and
Coke conversion 377.18	"	1,763.09	"
Stock balance at end of month	497.04	.,
Conditions obtaining below ground were similar to those reported for the previous month.
Surface development work on the S.W. crop of the upper seam was temporarily discontinued on account of labour shortage.
As the timber obtained from the adjacent swamp earlier in the year was so poor in quality, and unequal to the strain to which they were subjected below ground, it was decided to work off the remainder of the hill timber situate on the cliff above and beyond No. 8 and No. 9 Mines, where two new log chutes were erected, and connected up with the necessary tortuous bridle paths along and across the cliffs.
One, Tang Yip, a Chinese Trammer, died at the Kuching General Hospital on the 4th.
An attempt was made by Leong Kan, alias Husop, a Chinese underground labourer with an indifferent record of service, to murder his mandor, Youg Ship, with an axe, by rushing at him suddenly from behind, near the No 8 Mine entrance. The mandor, who very narrowly escaped with his life, is now under hospital treatment with a deep wound at the top of his right shoulder, and Leong Kan has been placed in safe custody awaiting trial.
The rainfall for the month was 13.85 inches.
J. W. EVANS,
Manager.
THIRD DIVISION.
Sibu.
December, 1926.
Having arrived at Sibu on the evening of the 19th, 1 took over charge from the District Officer on the following day.
Preliminary inquiries were made about the murder of a Dyak and his wife at 8. Aup, below Sibu, and on the 31st I visited the scene of the murder myself. Fourteen Dyaks from Machan and the neighbourhood were on remand in connection with this murder.
A large number of Dyaks visited Sibu at the end of the month, and it is obvious that there is a good deal of feeling amongst the upriver people on the subject of crossing the frontier to work rubber. Unless some arrangement can be made which permits Dyaks to do so, I fear that the peace-making with the N.I. Natives, which was held at Kapit in 1924, will prove abortive. The Dyaks are willing to abide by any regulations laid down by either Government, or to pay any duties demanded on the other side of the border, and they have promised to respect the present prohibition whilst the matter is under discussion.
Satisfactory arrangements were made whereby a number of Malays (over 40 in all) were enabled to leave for Singapore to proceed on the pilgrimage to Mecca direct from Sibu instead of going via Kuching.
Messrs. J. C. Swayne, District Officer of Lower Rejang, and E. V. Andreini, Acting District Officer of Kapit, arrived at Sibu on the 23rd and 22nd instant respectively.
Messrs. Parnell and Allman arrived from Kuching on the 28 th.
I understand that the slow progress made with the construction of the new Police Station and other work in hand is due to the lack of towing facilities here. Filling has to lie brought by lighter from some distance up river and at present we are dependent on the Steamship Company for a launch to tow the lighter. A Bollinder-engined lighter would be most useful and economical in the long run.
Medical-The Divisional Medical Officer reports:- During the month 79 in-patients were treated and 828 out-patients.
Two patients died in hospital from (i) lobar pneumonia and (ii) amoebic dysentery.
Seventeen operations were performed, five under general anaesthetic.
136 N.A.B. injections were given and 48 people vaccinated.
The health of the European community continues to be good except for occasional cases of fever.
The District Officer, reports;-
District Office-I was still in Sarikei at the end of November. On the 1st December I visited the Foochow School at Tembang Buah, about four hours walk there and back. This is an extremely well-run school of 50 to 55 boys and five permanent masters. A playground was in the course of being prepared.
During my stay in Sarikei there were the usual applications from Foochows for shop sites but, as has occurred many times previously, the applicants refuse to apply in writing or to state how many sites they require. Orders were given to remove young rubber recently planted on either side of the Repok Road, a space of 24 feet being reserved on each side of the road for future widening.
Sarikei Kampong houses are in a most dilapidated state and the Native Officer was instructed to have them repaired.
1 left for Binatang on the 2nd, and on 3rd visited the bazaar there. It was noticed that numerous fires had been started in the shops themselves and on the five-foot way. Orders were given to stop this. I inspected dentists' shops both here and at Sarikei and have reported on their dirty condition to the Divisional Medical Officer. Just before leaving Binatang on the 4th the corpse of a drowned Malay was brought in. This man was from Kuching and had been queer for some time. It is thought that he committed suicide.
An inquest was held in Sibu on the 4th on the body of a Chinaman drowned above Sibu. On the 22nd another Chinaman was drowned near Kanowit, his body being recovered the next day.
On the 12th I visited Kanowit and the new estate opened by Rejang Plantations, Ltd. A deputation of Igan Malays arrived on the 15th, but as they had no authority from their own Divisional Officer I refused to see them.
Penghulu Nibong reported a brutal murder on the 14th, whereby a Dyak and his wife had been hacked to death near S. Aup. Parties were at once sent off and 10 Machan Dyaks, suspected of the murder, were arrested the same day and four the next day. Inquiries were still being made at the end of the month.
The m.l. Jean was lent to the District Officer of Lower Rejang for some time owing to the breakdown of his launch.
Mr. Woodward sat for bis first Malay Examination on the 17th and 18th.
Mr. H. L. Owen arrived on the 19th to assume charge of this Division and I handed over all papers, etc., on the following day.
The District Officer, Oya, complained of Igan Dyaks refusing to work timber for him stating that they paid tax in this district. The matter has since been settled.
Amongst visitors to Sibu during the month were Messrs. J. C. Swayne, P. M. Adams, E. V. Andreini, G. M. Allman, P. Cobbold, C. Davies, and G. Turner.
Mr. R. D. Binnie, Divisional Engineer, left on the 17th for Kuching on transfer, his duties being taken over by Mr. R. E. Edwards.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1927.
39
A great number of Dyak Chiefs were in Sibu at the end of the month in order to attend the New Year Celebrations, whilst the Native Officers of Binatang, Sankei, Kanowit and Telok Lubok and various substation clerks were given leave to visit Sibu also.
The Wireless Station at Sibu was out of order for a short while but was effectually repaired by the Revd. J. M. Hoover.
Penghulu Jantieug of the Julau reported that a Dyak named Raising had been killed by a deer trap Abang Latip, Native Officer, was instructed to visit the place and make inquiries and it eventually transpired that the affair was an accident and the unfortunate Rabong has only himself to blame.
During part of the mouth Sibu station was flooded and the weather throughout the whole month was stormy.
A certain amount of progress was made in the Municipal Department and a start made in forming a rent restriction policy. This is one of the most difficult problems in Sibu Bazaar and the landlords naturally oppose every scheme of partial restriction. Building in the area has been more or less stopped pending a town planning scheme. Exceptions, however, are the foundations for six new brick shops, a new block of Government offices on the old Police Station site and a big brick and concrete church for the Methodist Episcopal Mission. This latter building is nearing completion and promises to be a most imposing structure.
District Court.-The following persons were sentenced to terms of imprisonment. Ho Ah Seng, six months for manufacturing deadly weapons and six months for attempted bribery; Wong Chai Kiew and Awang Drahman three mouths each for theft; Tingom, Dyak, two months for a cowardly assault on a woman; Sharum, 15 days for cheating and Kong Seng and Salleh two days' each for neglecting to given information concerning a death.
Tan Hai Guan of Monopolies Department and Lim Poh Kiew were fined $60 each for adultery and Ling Kie Ik one picul for disturbing Dyak graveyard. Many, others were punished for minor offences. Police and Magistrate's Courts heard the usual number of eases. Fines and fees amounted to $1,685,54 and 110 deeds were registered during the month.
Police.-M. Than, the Police and Prison Clerk, I was absent on special leave from the 8th and was still away at the end of the month. His place was taken by a District Office Clerk.
Sub-Inspector Abang Adeng was absent part of the month having contracted mumps. Abang Abu Seman, Native Officer, was attached to the Police as Acting Sub-Inspector during that time. Sergeant-Major Salleh has been ill since the 7th and is not likely to be fit for duty again.
Detachments of police succeeded in rounding up the Machan Dyaks concerned in the Aup murder.
Owing to the exhorbitant prices tendered by local tailors a Kuching firm was given the contract to make police uniforms. His representatives arrived here during the month to measure the men.
Strength at the end of the month was 84 of all ranks.
Prisons -Eight men were imprisoned during the month, of which three were Chinese, two Malays, and one each Melanau, Tamil and Dyak. Eleven men were released.
Average number in the jail was 44.14. Prison discipline was fair.
Lower Rejang
December, 1926.
Two District Officer reports:-
Owing to the kindness of the District Officer, Sibu, I was able to borrow m.l. Jean while s.l. Mermaid was under repair, and visit Matu and Daro from 7th to 11th. At Matu I found the Chinese undecided whether to move to the bazaar site and left the matter to be settled at my next visit. At Daro the traders com-
plained that the sago now worked is of a very coarse description and requested Government supervision; I have asked the Tua Kampung to speak to those concerned, but do not think any interference is necessary.
On a check being made of the opium now in the agent's hands a shortage of over a thousand packets was found; the mutter is still under investigation.
The usual number of cases came before the Court. On the 20th I met Mr. Cutfield, A.D.O., at Pasir Hukum, to discuss a boundary matter; it was agreed to have a rentis cut and a further examination made later.
Three prisoners were reported by the dresser to be suffering from beriberi, but this was cured by a change of diet. The prisoners were employed on the upkeep of the ornamental grounds, and two carpenters for a fortnight on the Government bungalow which required urgent repairs.
On the invitation of the Resident, Third Division, I left for Sibu on the 23rd for the Christmas and New Year holiday.
Kapit.
December, 1926.
The Acting District Officer reports :-
General	From the 1st to the 18th I was away
visiting Belaga and district. On the way up to Belaga I stopped at N. Merit and bad the site of the new bazaar cleared and pegged out. So far there are two applicants for shops here. I met most of the chief Kayan and Kenyahs at Belaga aud visited Penghulu Abun's house and the Skapans. I started up the Belaga river to visit the Kenyahs there but was held up by bad weather. I sent Penghulu Usun Haug with a letter to the Controlleur Long Nawang with reference to my coming visit to that place.
Land.-A considerable acreage of land is now under cultivation at Belaga and Kayans are planting as well as the Bruneis aud Chinese. I inspected most of the rubber gardens near Belaga and arranged for their boundaries to lie defined.
P.W.D.-In addition to the usual upkeep of the station the prisoners were engaged on a new path round the rubber gardens at the back of the Fort at Kapit. At Song a floating wharf was constructed and at Belaga the cattle shed was repaired. The Fort at Kapit underwent minor repairs and a cement floor was laid down. The Fortmen's kitchens were cemented and repaired.
Health.--The condition of the Skapans and Kayans I visited was deplorable and the need for medical attention urgent. Many Dyaks came to the Fort for medicine and with wounds for dressing. The services of a dresser would be most appreciated.
Trade, Shipping and Customs.-Seven launches made trips to the station during the month, several on two or three occasions. Custom duties amounting to $2,115 were collected.
Court -The only case calling for comment was one of theft at Kapit when goods value $100 were alleged to have been stolen by one Koh Ewe Sin, but at present there is not sufficient evidence to convict. Various minor claims were heard at both Kapit and Belaga.
Forestry	The Assistant Conservator of Forests
reports:-
I returned from the Lower Rejang on the first, and found that Mr. Reutens, F.R.S.C., who had arrived from Kuching, had taken over from Mr. Wright who proceeded to Bintulu on the 9th.
On the 13th, Mr. G. C. Turner arrived from Kuching without any written instructions from the Acting Conservator. However, I gave him what assistance he asked for, including the use of Forest Guards for his survey work at Bukit Lima. He left on the 20th owing to his work lining hampered by floods.
The Resident asked me why Mr. Turner's arrival had not been reported. 1 said that I had left that to Mr. Turner as 1 bad no official information regarding him, and be was therefore not attached to this office.
Having been asked to undertake the duties of Secretary to the Regatta Committee I was unable to leave the Station during the mouth.
H. L. OWEN,
Resident, Third Division.
40
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1927.
COAST DIVISION.
- -
Mukah and Balingian
November, 1926.
General. -The Cadet Officer, Mr. R. Arundell, nailed for Kuching on the 10th in m.s. Majinis en route for Simanggang on transfer.
The 11th, Armistice Day, was observed as a Public Holiday.
The sad news of the death of His Highness the Tuan Bunsu was received on the 12th, the flag being immediately half-masted and the Government Offices closed the following day.
The District Officer, Oya and Dalat, Mr. P. M. Adams, cycled over on 18th to take delivery of his ponies which had arrived in the m.s. Kim Chin Seng from Kuching; after discussing various administrative matters he left again for Oya on horseback on 21st instant.
A seaplane passed over the station on the 24th travelling in a south-westerly direction.
The resignation of Penghulu Sana which has been repeatedly tendered on account of old age, was accepted, and one, Umpoh, a Batang Rejang Dyak of many years local standing, was elected Penghulu on probation in his stead.
Awang Juli, a son of the Chief Native Officer Datu Awang Udin, was engaged as a Class II Native Officer on probation.
Throughout the month the sea remained remarkably calm, enabling many schooners to enter and clear the port.
Judicial.-Courts District, Civil and Criminal.- Many Dyak cases which the Penghulus had been unable to settle were dealt with, the majority being property and domestic disputes.
Sim Lai Seng. Tang Liang Cheng, and Tang Ah Cheng were convicted of theft from certain bazaar godowns, and each sentenced to six months' H. L.; Bakir bin Rasam was fined for assaulting his wife and a divorce was granted through the Native Tua Kampong Court; Drahman bin Daud, a prisoner, was punished for a breach of gaol discipline; Ho Chong Hin was fined for assaulting Chan Ah Hong, while Kadri bin Daut, Ulum bin Tulan, and Tan Su Nam were fined for breach of agreement; a sago garden boundary dispute was settled by the claimants bidding for the area in dispute the price going to Government, Supong bin Tilun was fined for failing to answer a summons; Samah bin Laut was fined tor absconding from a schooner in which he was articled; Ajak and Nawi were fined for transferring a sago garden without registering the transfer.
Magistrate's Court.-A. large number of debt eases were heard and many outstanding summonses were called in and dealt with Plaintiffs have been advised to make inquiries at the District Office in future regarding the service of such summonses.
Native Courts.- In the Datu's Court three cases were dealt with and $55.08 fines imposed. In the Tua Tua Kampongs Courts Islam and Pagan twelve cases were dealt with and $150.72 fines imposed.
HeaIth.-During the month an outbreak measles occurred in the surrounding villages causing great infantile mortality.
The Dresser left for Balingian on 12th to inspect the bazaar and villages there, and returned on the 17th reporting very little sickness in that district.
The number of patients treated during the month was 113, the chief ailments being measles, muli, ulcers, and yaws. Fifty-five N.A.B. injections were given chiefly to Dyaks.
Public Works (Local).-Hamdani, a local carpenter, signed a contract to build new Native Officer's quarters in three months from date. The Government carpenters were employed, with the assistance of a number of coolies, in pulling down and rebuilding the boatshed which had collapsed, and erecting new kitchen and latrines for the old Tamil quarters.
The Kampong Telian road bridges were completed as far as Sungei Misan; this was made possible by the Dyaks having at last commenced to deliver belian timber ordered over a year ago.
At Balingian the Dyaks continued to bring down gravel for the bazaar road repairs, and the Court, House (European quarters) and kitchen were thoroughly repaired and a gaol erected.
The Tamil labourers, averaging 16.4 persons, were employed clearing the road and drains to the Kuala Lama.
The prisoners, averaging 8.8 persons, cleared all parts of the station grounds and assisted the carpenters in transporting timber.
Public Works (Kuching).-The contractors continued work on the new Government Vernacular School buildings, but much delay has been caused by lack of material.
Waterworks - Owing to the leaking of the boiler a boilermaker arrived from Kuching on the 6th and completed the necessary repairs with the help of local labour. The boiler has since been running satisfactorily.
All the Natives who use the Government water supply were called out during the month to transport 150 tons of coal to the Petanak Intake.
Manap resigned his post as fireman, and Bana bin Daud has been engaged to take his place.
Telegraphs and Telephones.-Mechanic Mahali came up from Kuching on 5th and overhauled the wireless charging engine. Omar, apprentice, returned to headquarters, and Sirat relieved him on 25th.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1927.	41
Divisional Treasury.-The Mukah and Balingian Estimates for 1927 were completed and sent to the proper quarter.
A fresh set of books (Expenditure Statements) was received and the work of writing these up was immediately taken in hand.
Several clerks were laid up with fever during the month.
Trade and Shipping.-The trade returns for the month are as follows :-
Counting Imports.
Coasting Exports.
Mukah
$62,508
$36,754
Balingian
37,722
20,171
Prisoners.-Averaged 10.76 and were employed on usual upkeep of roads and grounds.
Travelling-Dalat was visited from 5th to 11th and again on the 24th.
Shipping.- One motor schooner and six schooners entered and one motor schooner cleared during the month.
Trade.-358.5 piculs of jelutong and 145.5 koyans of raw sago were shipped to Kuching. *
Returns.-Exports $37,518.30, Imports $43,618.00.
Bintulu.
Mukah-Rico $11,630	Haw Sau'o	204
Clothing	8.410	G. Jelutong	725
G. Para	8
Balingian - Kice	5,992	G. Jelutong	1,270
Clothing	l,9S0	P. Bobber	17
Raw bago	5
The principal imports and exports are as follows: - , Coasting Imports.	Coasting Exports.
koyans 424. 180 piculs 11.139 ' piculs 560 j piculs 17,908 j
..	1,190	koyans 550 Five motor schooners, seven schooners, and three bandongs cleared with tonnage of 767 tons, and four motor schooners, ten schooners, and six bandongs entered the port of Mukah with tonnage of 815 tons, during the month.
The rainfall record shows 19.92 inches.
November, 1926.
Courts.-There was the usual amount of Court work during the month. There was a case of assault from the Anap, Tatan, where, during a "begawai," a Chinese sawyer working in the vicinity and who had been invited to the feast, was assaulted by two Dyaks of the house and four others were also im- plicated. The row occurred outside the house and apparently the parties concerned were pretty drunk at the time. Nyabong and Chaong were each fined $50 for assault and an additional $25 each for attempting to bribe another Dyak to give false evidence. The four other Dyaks were also fined $25 each for aiding and aliening; they held lights while their friends beat the Chinaman. The latter, however, was not hurt much, but was forbidden to work any longer in that neighbourhood. There were thirty-nine cases of breach of Forest Regula- tions and several persons were fined heavily for working and ringing jelutong trees under three feet in girth. Jumulien, a Punan, who has been con- stantly fined for adultery, has, it appears, at last run out of money and was sent to prison for three months for non-payment of another fine for the same offence. Tibah (f.) was fined $50 for holding and trying to claim the lawful property of one Jabeh (f.).
There were a lot of petty cases heard at Tubau, between Kayans principally, but none of any im- portance.
P.W.D. -The new wharves were finished during the month. These are 202' and 208' long by 14' wide respectively with T ends 30' by 36'. They are very strongly built of belian and have cost $4,112.
The customs shed and page wire enclosure have also been completed, but the gates of the former are not yet hung, as we are waiting for the hinges; also for chains and padlocks to secure them. A shed and dry dock have been made to accommodate m.1. Joan.
General. -Armistice Day was a holiday. The two minutes' silence at 11 o'clock was heralded by the first gun from the Fort and was observed by all Government servants.
On the afternoon of the 11th I left to visit the substations, returning on the 19th.
On my arrival at Sebauh on the 18th I beard, with deep regret, of the sudden death of His Highness the Tuan Bunsu.
The demarcation of the Foochow reserve at Sebauh is getting on well, but the thick jungle and difficulty in getting coolies for the surveyor is mak- ing it a rather slow job. On the true right-hand bank, starting at a point about a mile above Sebauh,
Oya and Dalat.
November, 1926.
The District Officer. Mr. P. M. Adams, reports:-
Court.-No cases of any importance were brought for settlement.
General.-The sad news of the death of H. H. the Tuan Bunsu was received on 12th and the office closed next day and the flag was flown at
half-mast. I went to Mukah on the 18th and re- turned on the 21st. Although the sea was rough
during the middle of the month, the wind still continues to blow from the south-west. The motor schooner Kim Chin Seng, as usual, wasted lime unnecessarily both here and at Mukah; the majority of the crew being local men they avoid sailing as long as possible. This no doubt accounts for the dearth of motor schooners calling here.
P.W.D.-Belian timbers for the new bungalow Oya are steadily being brought down by Dyaks. No serious repairs to buildings were executed. A considerable quantity of furniture was received for
the bungalow.
Marine. - Them.I.Nellie was painted and thoroughly cleaned. She was in continuous use throughout the month.	Surveys.-P.C. Awang Annu was sent to Ku- ching to be trained as a demarcator. Surveyors who have been promised have not yet arrived.
Obituary.-I regret to report the death of Hj. Muda ex-Tua Kampong of Tanam who will be remembered by many previous Officers in charge of this district.
Clerical.-W. Upit was granted annual leave and was relieved by J. Douglas.
42
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1927.
640 acres have been surveyed into 2O-acre lots, with the required road reserves of 66 feet and also an 18-foot road following the river bank from Sebauh and running through this part of the reserve. Some of these lots will be sub-
divided into 10-acre lots and this piece of land will accommodate about 40 gardens.
There are about 40 Foochows now there and nearly all this land has already been felled and some has been cleared and even planted np.
On the left-hand bank and opposite the above mentioned there is room in the reserve for 33 10-acre lots on the river bank and I have instructed the surveyor to mark out these and 33 more behind these. There will be the usual road reserves, also an 18-foot road following the river bank. There is plenty more land behind these again, but I think that about 100 gardens to begin with will be enough. Eater on, when these Foochows have settled down, perhaps some more might be allowed in.
The Foochows have asked for a piece of land in S. Selezu in which to plant 'mulong" and also to borrow a piece of Dyak land to plant padi next year.
The weights and measures in the sub-stations have all been verified.
A seaplane of the Aerial Survey Company, piloted by Mr. Vintcent, arrived here from Miri on the 24th. Having taken on petrol the plane left again for Kuching.
Trade and Shipping.-The price of jelutong has been down a bit this month, nevertheless 2,839 piculs have been exported.
S.S. Auby made two trips during the month, on the 8th and 29th, and the s.s. Gladys also two on the 10th and 22nd. S.S. Alice Lorraine dropped mail at Kidurong on the 4th.
The trade returns for the month are as follows :-
1926.	1925.
Exports	$64,482.70	$78,497.40
Imports 68,567.96	65,518.86
Five steamers and one schooner entered and cleared the port during the month.
The rainfall was 12.57 inches.
1924.
$34,158.08
36,219.21
District Officer is now in course of erection by the Company on this site. The construction of the new Residency will be proceeded with as soon as the plan of the building has been definitely approved. The Treasurer is to be housed in a bungalow on this side of the river kindly handed over, by the Company.
The Baram light was reported out of order during the month and efforts made to repair it.
The prisoners were chiefly employed clearing and levelling the new Peninsula site.
General.-I arrived at Miri by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 12th and took over the affairs of this Division from Mr. H. L. Owen on the 15th. Mr. H. L. Owen proceeded to Sibu by s.s. Sulong on the 18th. All the leading Europeans and representatives of the various communities assembled on the wharf to wish Mr. Owen farewell.
Awang Itam, Native Officer, Niah, visited the station during the mouth. He reports that natives were only being offered $80 for birds'-nests which seems unreasonable considering the price at the time in Singapore was $170.
The body of Salleh, of lighter Nancy, was discovered in the river near the car ferry on the 7th. Inquiries were made which led to the conclusion that death was due to drowning.
The Miri Pawn Farm ceased to operate as from the 31st as no tenders have been received.
The Native School children assembled in the Court house on the 23rd, and prizes, consisting of books, were handed to the successful boys by Mrs. Carpenter.
The Offices were closed on the 25th and 27th for the Christmas holidays.
W. F. DE V. SKRINE.
Acting Divisional Officer.
Baram.
December, 1926.
FOURTH DIVISION.
December, 1926.
Court.-An average number of cases were brought forward for hearing, none calling for special mention.
PAY.I) -The Dyaks under Penghulus Rhu and Lanting continued felling and clearing the jungle along the Miri-
Riam road and this was practically completed by the end of the month. It is reported that the work has been very well done.
The proposed Government building reserve in the Brighton area having been abandoned owing to erosion by the sea it was decided, after inspection, that the area on the Peninsula at the mouth of the river would be most suitable. A bungalow for the
Court.-Court work during the month was very light, no cases calling for comment. Fines and fees amounted to $472.69.
General. - Mr. and Mrs. Carpenter and Mrs. Jelf arrived here on the night of the 6th on a short visit. I received instructions from the Resident on the 6th to proceed to the Miri-Riam road and report on progress. I accordingly left on the 8th, together with Wan Taha, Native Officer, slept the night at Rumah Beti at Riam and arrived at Mr. Grover's camp the following afternoon. Mr. Grover expressed his appreciation of the work done by Penghulu Rhu and his party and for Native Officer Wan Mohamat's help. I left again the following morning and reached Bakong the same evening. The following day 1 returned to Baram, after settling a few outstanding matters, and left again in the evening for Miri together with Mr. and Mrs. Carpenter and Mrs. Jelf. I left Miri on the 16th to return here, accompanied by Mr. J. J. Hill, who has been appointed to do duty in the district Tuanku Drahman. Senior Native Officer, left on the 18th for local leave prior to his departure for Mecca early in February. Penghulu Tama Kuli Arang arrived on
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, FEBRUARY 1, 1927.
43
On 16th I walked to Trusan where I met the Resident Fifth Division who sent the Dyaks back to Limbang. Jala left for Fa Brayong on 19th with instructions to turn back any Dyaks he might meet there. He was still away at the end of the month.
Travelling.-I returned from Kuching via Lim- bang on 8th, accompanied by Mr. Tait and Mr. Cox of the Wireless Department. I was at Trusan from. 16th to 17th.
Prisoners.-The average number of prisoners was 5. They were employed at the wireless station and on the general upkeep of the station.
Public Works - The wireless station was com- pleted and testing began at 8 a.m. on 13th. I am told that this is record time where no preparations have been made previously.
The extensions to the Gaya Road progressed slowly, the contractor appearing to have difficulty with his coolies. A mile of rentis was cleared for the road.
Batang having absconded no work was done on the Sualai Road. Haji Taip will take up the work on the hills as soon as he has finished the Trusan Road. I have hopes that Mr. Cook will try the more level parts with his tractor.
General.-The first message received on the wire- less contained the sad news of the death of His Highness the Tuan Bunsu. Flags throughout the district were at once half-masted.
Agriculture.-The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Ltd., exported 26,401 lbs. of dry rubber to Labuan during the month.
Rainfall.-The rainfall recorded was : Lawas 27.31 inches, Lawas Estates 25.27 inches, Trusan 15.49 inches.
Shipping.-S.S. Alice Lorraine called at Lawas bringing material for the wireless station and loading planks at Kayangaran. M.L. Edmee made five trips to Labuan, and m l. Adele one trip to Lawas.
Trade Returns -The trade returns are aa follows: -
FOREIGN .
the 20th with 20 Kenyahs from N. I. territory, Penghulu Tama Wan Bayer arrived the following I day. Tama Mayang and 22 followers also arrived from Seredan (Kelabit) for medical attention. I went to Bakong on the 23rd and returned again on the 24th with Mr. R. R. Hamilton, who came to spend Christmas here. The Offices were closed on Christmas Day and the 27th. I received a letter from Galau, Upriver Agent, informing me of the reported death of Penghulu Tuh Kah Rini of Pak Main in the Kelabit.
Rainfall for the month was 7.40 inches.
Public Works.-The carpenter has been putting in part of the ceiling to the new office below the Fort, and also making new steps. The work has, been delayed owing to the difficulty of getting planks. Some Foochow carpenters contracted to build the new distillery in two months, and the framework and part of the roof had been erected by the end of the month. The Bakong Dyaks turned out to do felling and clearing of the proposed Miri-Riam road, on contract, on the 13th and the Baram Dyaks turned out for the same work on the 18th. Practically the whole of the 15 miles had been felled and cleared by the end of the month. Prisoners were employed on general upkeep of the station and, owing to the diversity of work and shortage of prisoners, the mowers had to be taken off the Golf Course to work in the gang. It will be a great pity if the upkeep of the Golf Course has to be stopped altogether from lack of labour.
The average number of prisoners was 15 men.
Agriculture.-Six Rubber Inspectors were sent here by the Board of Trade to teach Native owners to improve the quality of their rubber, and they started on the gardens round about here first, with the exception of one man who was sent to Bakong.
Reports of the new padi upriver are bad generally.
Medical.-The bazaar was inspected regularly during the month and the shopkeepers are keeping their shops as clean as can be expected. No patients were admitted into hospital during the month 73 out-patients were treated and 16 injec- tions of N.A.B. given.
Trade and Shipping.-The s.s. Gladys made one trip during the month and took away a full cargo. Prices of jungle produce have fallen during the month owing to the uncertainty of when a ship will come in again.
The trade figures for the month are as follows :	.
Lawas:-
Imports.
Exports.
November, 1926
.. $21,178
$30,220
"	1925 .
17,688
80,250
Trusan: -
November, 1926 .
9,984
13,317
"	1925 .
7,944
24,878
Brought forward
Imports.
$ 17,647
446,217
Exports.
$ 40,855
687,914
Total value to date
$463,864
$728,769
1925
$453,538
$945,967
C. ERMEN,
Acting Resident, Fourth Division.
COASTING .
FIFTH DIVISION.
I.awas and Trusan.
November, 1926.
Court.-There were no cases worthy of mention before the Courts.
Native Affairs.-On 15th I received a telegram from Limbang stating that a party of Dyaks had left Pandaruan ostensibly to work for a Chinaman, but it was suspected that they intended to attack the Muruts in the Ulu Trusan who were responsible for the murder of Grisah in 1922.
Lawas:-
Imports.
Exports.
November, 1926 ..
"	1925 ...
$1,718
1,299
$1,937
1,075
Trusan :-
November, 1926 ..
"	1925 ...
1,788
2,259
1,928
2,294
F. F. BOULT, Resident, Fifth Division.
