MONDAY, JULY 2, 1928.
Births.
To Mr. and Mrs. P. H. HAYWARD, at the Grange, Kuching, on the 80th May, 1928, a son.
POLLOCK:—On May 10, 1928, at Miri, Sarawak, to IRENE. wife of CHARLES MURRAY POLLOCK—a daughter.
Death.
Beresford STOOKE :—On 22nd May, in a nursing homo at Peterborough, following an operation, Winfred THIRZA, dearly loved wife of G. Beresford Stooke, R. N. (ret.), District Officer, Kenya Colony, and of Tytherton, near Chippenham, Wiltshire.
NOTES.
June,
THE Autumn Meeting of the Sarawak Turf Club has been fixed for the 22nd and 24th September. On another page we pub lish a provisional programme of the Meeting.
IT is satisfactory to learn that since the beginning of this year 29 lepers have been discharged, as recovered, from the Leper Camp and have returned to their homes. This number includes 24 Dayaks, 2 Malays, 2 Chinese and 1 Tamil.
THE Government Gazette for June 16th contains the following appointments. Mr. F. F. Boult to act as Superintendent of Lands, Dr. W. Hutchison to be Acting Principal Medical Officer and Mr. R. A. Miller-Hallett to be an assistant in the Public Works Department. WE understand from the General Post Office that from the 7th April a new printing of postage stamps has been on sale. All stamps (with the exception of the five cents, of which there still remains a large quantity) are issued on paper containing a multiple quatrefoil watermark, similar to that for merly found in the stamps of Johore and Zanzibar.
DURING the next three years the Kuching Municipal Area is to be considerably increased. A notice of the proposed new boundaries will be found in the Government Gazette. A home paper states that a ship arrived in London on May 5th with the world’s record consignment of 46 orang-utan from Borneo, as well as a tiger, an elephant, a wild cat, rare game and other animals. With the beasts was their attendant, a native of Sumatra, speaking only Javanese. The orang-utan consumed 100.000 bananas during the voyage. We are informed that none of the orang utan came from Borneo, but from Sumatra. An adult pair with a little one was being sold for $80 to $110, which in normal times would not be the price of a young one. Elephants were to be had for $60 each. A steel storage reservoir for water, having a capacity of two and a half million gallons (which represents approximately 11,000 tons) is shortly to arrive in sections in Kuching and will be installed upon the top of Datu Muda’s hill. This tank is stated to be the largest of its kind in the world.
Connection with the present system of town mains will be made by a special 16’ steel pipe to be laid from Datu Muda’s hill to the high level tank at the Waterworks, a distance of about one mile. Upon com pletion this substantial reserve of drinking water will be available for emergencies.
OUR readers, says The North Borneo Herald will learn with regret that Mr. Edward Dent has decided to resign his Directorship in the Chartered Company, and thus sever his Official connection with the Territory he has so long assisted to administer. Mr. Dent’s connection with North Borneo dates back to the period prior to the actual incorporation of the Chartered Company in 1881, and he is the last survivor of those responsible for the early adminis tration of the Territory. It will he recalled by many that the Sultans of Brunei and Sulu in 1877 and 1878 trans ferred their sovereign rights over their territories to Mr. Dent’s brother, the late Sir Alfred Dent, who represented a small syndicate of which Mr. Edward Dent is the last survivor, and that as a result of the petition of this syndicate the Charter incor porating the British North Borneo Company was obtained from the Crown. Mr. Dent has therefore been closely con-nected with the acquisition, administration, and development of the country for many years; he has seen North Borneo rescued from what amounted to a state of barbarism and brought to its present state of development; and we are sure that all our readers will join with us in sending him our best wishes, and the hope that he will live to see even greater development in the future.
AMONG the passengers to arrive by S.S. Vyner Brooke on the 18th were Mrs. Reynolds and child. Mrs. Reynolds travelled direct from Kenya Colony and has come to join her husband in Kuching.
WE regret to report that Mr. 0 Lang, Commissioner of Police, has been laid up for a short time and that an operation was found to be necessary. He is at present in hospital where he is making satisfactory progress.
THE engagement is announced of Mr. R. E. Edwards of the Public Works Depart ment to Miss B. Slater, daughter of Mr. G. Slater and the late Mrs. Slater of Hull. The marriage will take place in November.
NEWS was brought by the S.S. Vyner Brooke on the 18th of the successful advance of the Southerns on Pekin and was received with delight by the local Chinese population. In fact the celebrations did not cease until the last cracker in the bazaar had been fired.
WHILE going to press we regret to learn of the death of Dr. H. Mortlock Waller in England. No details so far have been received.
Dr. Waller joined the Medical Department in December 1914 and eventually became Principal Medical Officer, he resigned on account of ill-health in October 1917. The greatest sympathy will be felt for Mrs. Waller by her old friends in this country.
THE following appointments are notified in the Government Gazette of July 1st.—Mr. C. D. Adams to act as Resident of Mukah and Oya, Mr. T. Corson to act as Conservator of Forests, Mr. H. C. P. Adams to be Assis tant in the Monopolies Department and Mr. G. Taylor to be Assistant Engineer in the Government Workshop.
Mr. R. W. Chater is reported as returned from leave.
Death of Mr. Pratt Barlow.
It is with sincere regret that we have to announce the death of Mr. Pratt Barlow which occurred in England on the 4th May. in his 70th year. For some time he had been paralysed.
Except for a year at Baram, 1893—1894, and for two months in Kuching in 1904, he served the whole of his time, twenty-eight years, in the Third Division, principally at Mukah, Bintulu and in the Lower Rejang.
Appointed a Cadet 1st May, 1878, he did duty at Mukah 19th June, 1878; at, Bintulu, Muy 1879; at Sibu, February 1880; at Mukah, August 1880. He Was Officer in Charge of Bintuln Sth June. 1882 ; in charge of Mukah and Oya 19th June. 1882 Pro moted Acting Resilient 2nd Class 1st January. 1883. Confirmed us Resilient 2nd Class of Mukah and Oya 1st November, 1886. Resident 2nd Class of Mukah 10th October, 1890 (Oya being separated). Acting Resident of Baram 1st August, 1892. Acting Resi dent of Bintulu 19th August, 1893.
Appointed Resident of the Lower Rejang 1st October, 1894, which appointment he held until his retirement in 1906. except for a short period when he was Acting Postmaster-General 18th April to 23rd May, and Acting Magistrate Court of Requests and Coroner 23rd May to 13th June, 1904.
He was a Member of Council Negri ami retired on pension in May, 1906.
An exciting episode in his career was his attempted murder by an ex-prisoner, fortunately, though bit on the temple by a pistol bullet, the wound did not prove serious. At Matti, where he spent the last two years of bis appointment. Ins best monument is the series of roads which he completed through the up river kampongs. After his retirement from the Service he acted as Secretary to Bath and County Club for live yean, and during the war served us Special Constable.
On 25th November, 1907, he married Ethel, the youngest daughter of the Rev. J. H. Gale, J.P., Vicar and Patron of the living of Milton, Lilbourne, Wilts. To her and her only daughter, we offer the sincere sympathy of the community.
The Maasai and Bornean Natives.
Mr. C. Cardale Luck, writing in the Journal of the E. Africa and Uganda Natural History Society for August 1926, has suggested the possibility of a similar origin for the Maasai and certain Bornean natives, the former to be the ancient Ishraelites, the latter Edomites.
In the following number of the Journal he is criticized for giving the Maasai a Semitic origin but the Borneans have not been further examined. His knowledge of them has been obtained almost wholly from I lose and MacDougall's “Pagan Tribes” and the writer has herewith tried to express bis ideas without however commenting on them.
Apart from a similarity of customs to be men tioned later there appears to be a startling Hebrew strain in many Bornean words, particularly for Gods and Spirits, the same Hebrew root cropping up in the Maasai words for their various Deities; for example the Borneans are credited with a supreme Deity Loki Tenganan—now L'akir in Maasai — “star” Iln’ enganan " the people of Canaan” (also the name of a Maasai clan) Laki Tenganan becoming “Star of Canaan”: furthermore rukenya — “mist” comes in the Maasai expression for morning star” and also for the low country round the foot of Mt. Kenya where they live, but anan in Hebrew “cloud” and Canaan “the low regions” ; there is thus the same Hebrew root in Maasai “low country “star of the morning" and the equivalent Bornean “Laki Tenganan.” Again a Kayan creation myth is quoted in which Kaluban Gai and Kalubi Angai are cited as ths first human beings, male and female—engoi or angai is Maasai for “The God" and the rest of the name suggests “Caleb” ; he, an Edomite, was a descen dant of Esau and as the Edomites deified their ancestry Esau came to be worshiped by them, Laki
Tenganan, “Star of Canaan,” being that very man— this may seem a bit of a jump but there is further evidence for Laki Tenganan had a wife Doh Tenga nan, no other than Esau’s wife. Adah or Odoh; then comes the fable of Usai (Esau) whose wife wanted a large Prawn out of the Baram river—the wretched Usai made a dam and started bailing the water out but the dam broke and his wife was
drowned and Usai went looking for her, wailing Adoi Adoi ! for just as the Hebrew Elah “God” becomes "Eloi"' My God” so “Adah” has become “Adoi" “My Adah,” the despairing cry of Esau for his wife and an exclamation of dismay in Borneo to this day ; Usai fell among the Miri’s who are reputed to have beautiful hair in the district where his head fell and the rest of them such hair as was on his limbs ("Esau was a hairy man").
The names of the older inhabitants of Borneo show a Canaanitisch origin—the 36th Chapter of Genesis gives the genealogy of the Edomites and of Esau in particular, some of the names of the Dukes who came to him being Pinon (punon), Kenan, and Teman—these in four thousand years have but changed to Punan, Kenyah and K'lemantan. Klemantan would mean “The Teman” Tribe "(Hebrew Teman “right hand" also Melano Te man" to eat,” E. & O. E.) ; in the above-mentioned chapter the Dukes are recorded as called after their places, by their names, and Hebrew records re fer to the land of Teman. For Murads, Mered was a great man of the family of Caleb, Kalabit is Caleb again and for Dusun, Dishon is found in the genealogy of Esau. Miri may be Miri, the people of Iri or Iram, who wag also one of Esau's Dukes.
Kayan may be connected with the Hebrew chayah “to live” and Dayak with Hebrew Dayyag “a fisher.” Kami menoa "we of this country” is almost pine Hebrew, menoah “place,” am "people.” The “Kina” of Kina Balu may be from the Hebrew chin “comely.”
Further the Maasai had to cope with certain people who lived in holes (the Horites, original inhabitants of Edom) and whose mode of warfare was sudden attacks from hidden places; they earned the name of “Bees” in Maasai. Among Borneans ( Kayans) left-handed men were sorted out especially as ambushers and known as singat or “Hornets.“ Singat would come from the Hebrew sene “bush,” gad "a troop,” or possibly from seen "battle.” Ball Flaki is represented as a hawk whose flight is studied as an omen before going on raids, the Hawk being the symbol of a departed sou) in ancient times. Bali is pure Hebrew "My Lord” and Bali Flaki "My Lord of the Stars or Hea vens" ; Laki and L'akir are from the Hebrew bahir "bright,” and bachir “chosen.” Odin La- hang. the mythical founder of the Kayan race (there is said to be a stone above Belaga on which the words Unan Lahai can be made out) receives treatment: the Din is connected with the Maasai Dinet and this again with the name of a city of Edom—pos sibly Edom itself; lahang may be Laban, Esau's uncle, or the Hebrew laban “glorious” “Edom The Glorious.” Singalong Burong may have been shinqala who was worshipped m Edom.*
On page 43 Vol. If of "Pagan Tribes" is a rough map of the “Land of Shades" and meanings have been given to the names therein ; Long Bali Matei— “the River of Death,” Matei from the Hebrew Muth “death”: Bawang Daha the “Lake of Blood,” wang from Hebrew yarn :"1ake" and daha from dam " blood”-; Alo Malo, Hebrew alaz—"re joice," malon “abode”—"The Abode of Rejoicing" : Bali Akan from Jaakan, who is Deified ; Bali Da- yong ‘‘My Lord the Judge”—Hebrew dayyan "a judge," a word still used both in Borneo and N. Uganda : Long Malan Hebrew malat ‘‘deliver"— “the River of the Delivered” : Ta Padan Tana Ka nan, padan "plain" tanah “affliction,” The Plain of Affliction— Kanaan.
Klieng was a mythical War God and a Wood pecker known as Kieng is regarded as an omen bird ; certain African tribes have Chieng as a Deity, also their name for the Sun, and the Maasai have a woodpecker as an omen bird.
The Dayak War coat, a skin with a hole in it to put his head through, the seat mats, the brass wire coils on the arms legs of the women, the corset or rawai, the ear ornaments, particularly gerunjun, rows of small rings inserted round the margin of the shell of the ear, the ceremonies accompanying adoption of children—all have their Maasai counter parts, in some cases remarkably similar.
Whatever may have been the origin of the Maa sai and of the Borneans concerned they appear to have many abstruse customs in common and both their languages show a very pronounced Hebrew element.
Singapore Floating Dock.
Within a few weeks, says The China Express, the Singapore floating dock is to start on its four months’ journey from the yard of Swan, Hunter, and Wighnin Richardson through the Suez Canal and the Indian Ocean to the new naval base about which political arguments were so persistently urged. The dock is floating in the Tyne, equipped and almost ready for its journey. On April 21 it was tested as far as the river would allow by being sunk a few feet and raised again; and on April 28, ns a special act of courtesy by the Admiralty, a party of pressmen and members of the Institution of Electrical Engineers was allowed to inspect it and its equipment, with the further enlightenment of a paper on the subject given by Mr. Ernest T. Williams, an official of the Admiralty. Mr. Williams’s explanations were mostly technical, but he concluded with the encouraging opinion that the trade reactions of the war were coming to an end, and that we need no longer despair. But this, he was careful to add, was a personal opinion, not expressed as an official one. The text upon which Mr. Williams hung his optimism was, of course, the dock itself. Its build ing is acclaimed here as being unequalled in speed. It is one of the biggest things of its kind in the world, and it was started only ten months ago. It is so large that it could comfortably carry our largest battleship, the Hood, or the Mauretania, or a couple of cruisers like the new Sussex, which lies opposite it in the river, or even three destroyers. Its lifting capacity is 70,000 tons. Its two steel walls tower over the water’s edge like those of an enormous ship, and on one of them are four sizable funnels. Between the walls is a steel floor nearly 300 yards long and GO yards wide. It contains 20,000 tons of steel and well over 100 miles of electric cable. So great a structure as this would be no comfortable traveller at sea. It is to go in two pieces, one comprising its bows and stern sections, the other its centre, and in this shape it will be towed to Singa pore by a firm of Dutch experts.
The equipment of the dock is all electrical after its oil-burning boilers and steam turbines. It has a 1,000-voit equipment for its main work, a 220-volt equipment for smaller duties and lighting, a 20-volt system for the actual control of its apparatus, a telephone system, apparatus for supplying ships and submarines with electric light and power and for charging batteries, and apparatus for the supply of compressed air all housed within its walls. It has fully equipped works, with kitchens, dining-rooms, and bathrooms for the use of the crews of ships upon which work is being done, but for itself it will have only a crew of a very few men The tops of its steel walls, which are the decks of the structure, are equip ped with four large cranes and with electrical capstans, every one capable of immediate arrest from the deck itself in case of danger. The decks are lit -so large is the scale—by something very much like street lamps. Below the deck level and facing into the. steel floor fifty feet below are 1,000-watt lamps, specially designed. As we saw it to-day, there could be seen at the base of the walls large manholes by which the tanks of the docks can be entered and cleaned. Through them and under the floor run tunnels by which the cables for power and light are carried from one side to the other.
But perhaps the most interesting part of the structure is the control-house. Here, in an electrical sense, the whole dock is under one or two pairs of hands. It is a long room, with the counter divided by bands of blue paint which correspond with the sections of the dock Each section has its gauges and its complete electrical controls. At present the dock floats in fifteen feet of water, but at Singapore, for safety sake, it will need seventy feet.
Suppose it is required to dock a large ship. From the control-house the dock master will order the tanks to be filled. Each in turn the valves will be opened to let in water. Through a prismatic sighting telescope the master can see whether the dock is dropping evenly. When it has sunk low enough the ship will be floated over the dock floor and secured, and then the seven main drainage pumps will be started to drive out the water. The’ dock can be trimmed accurately to the disposition of the weight, and all the time in both operations those in control can watch the level of the water in each section of tanks by means of the gauges in the control-house. As soon as the ship is lifted clear the large pumps of 15.000 and 42 brake horse-power will be stopped, and the final draining left to smaller pumps, the whole operation taking a little over four hours. After the main pumping the subsidiary equip ment will provide all that is necessary for the work in hand.
Review,
The, Blood. Sister, by Charles Bruce ( Elkin, Mathews and Marrot, 7/6). Nowadays a reviewer must feel uneasy when he confronts a new novel about Borneo, but, in this case, after shuddering at the picture on the dust-cover he has very little to worry about. It is, say the publishers, “ a gripping and dramatic Story, kidnapping, war, the loyal fulfil ment of the bonds of blood and eventual happiness bought at a high cost,” and, though perhaps they will not be grateful for our saying so, we can add it is a good clean yarn in the old Ruler Haggard style. The war does not seem very obvious, but the author, who has lived in Borneo, gets his local colour right (and he mixes no mud with his colours either) and the descriptive passages are first-rate.
The story? Well, Stella steps off the boat at Fort Malcolm which nestles under the shadow of Kina balu “full of bonhomie and vivacity” and “ ready to st etch out a hand of friendship and protection” and Desmond (DO.) bites. We have met Desmond (D.O.) in chapter one sipping a glass or two of rice-wine several years old and it probably affects his judgment, because he never stops talking and walking until. , but you must read that for yourself. Stella, after a pretty temperate Christmas week at Fort Malcolm, goes up country and then what is coming to her comes sine mora (without delay). Of course she is quite safe really because Desmond (D.O.) starts to walk and talk immediately while his blood brother and sister get through some rough work with kris and spear.
And there is a moral, for if Desmond I D.O.) bad stuck to his original intention, to cut out the Christ mas week and get on with his yearly report, he would have saved himself a lot of travelling and remained a bachelor.
Home Photography.
( Continued.)
Printing from a negative will naturally depend on the appliances available. If there is neither a dark room or electric light, then contact printing on self-toning paper is the simplest method. The hypo already mixed for fixing plates, diluted with an equal amount of water, is the only chemical re quired. In any case a supply of self-toning paper is a useful thing to have handy for making proofs. A gross of quarter plate paper can be obtained at home for three shillings.
When there is a dark-room, but no electric light, then any sort of printing can be done, and enlarging in a fixed daylight enlarger. It is not a difficult mat ter to make a dark-room from any store-room over six feet square. Cracks between planks are covered with strips of brown paper and strips of the same material pasted over the edges of the door so as to exclude ail light. It is as well to mix some sort of insecticide with the paste, otherwise insects of some kind or another will eat through the paper with disastrous results. I find a spoonful of jodelite mixed with the paste will prevent this. Ventilation is very necessary ; a hole of two feet square cut in the ceiling and covered with some light-proof cloth, but leaving an air-space of an inch and a half on two sides, will be found sufficient.
For contact printing with gaslight or bromide paper an electric torch gives a fast and constant light. Daylight enlarging in a fixed focus enlarger has the obvious disadvantage that only one size of enlargement can be made; if only part of the nega tive is to be enlarged it is a wise precaution (and this applies to all enlarging) to mask the part not required with black paper, otherwise the scattered light will set up fog. Putting the paper in and development of course takes place in the dark-room. Oil, methylated spirit and acetylene gas have all been used as iliuminants for enlargers, but besides being uncertain in their results, are dangerous and send up the temperature to an alarming extent. I have only tried oil and gave it up after the second attempt.
However nowadays a combination of electric light and dark-room can be enjoyed in a good many stations in the country, and with these facilities any form of photography can be undertaken. For the sake of simplicity I only use two kinds of bromide paper, a contrasty glossy and a normal matte, and one developer, metol-hydrokinone. It is tempting to have different developers and papers, but leads to a waste of time and material. Bromide paper how ever carefully kept will not last more than three months. I get mine in tins of six sheets from Singapore ami cut it up as wanted.
The only precaution necessary in making up this formula is to see that the metol is dissolved before adding the hydrokinone. The usual method is to dissolve about a quarter of an ounce of the sulphite in 10 oz. of water (not over 90 F.), dissolve the metol in this end then ndd the hydrokinone. In another 20 oz dissolve the rest of the sulphite and the bromide, when cool mix the two solutions and make up to 40 oz. with water. This will keep for at least six months and probably longer. For use this is mixed with a 20% solution of carbonate (as already described for the pyro developer). To make eight ounces of developer take two ounces of the metol-hydrokinone, one and a half of carbonate and four and a half of water. I use three ounces of this for four quarter-plate prints, and twelve for four whole plates and then throw it away, if too little is used there is always a risk of stain. A factor of six is correct for development and this generally works out at one and a half minutes.
It is best to use an acid hardener and fixing, but 1 do not think this is essential. The hypo already mixed for fixing plates will do very well; it is best to have two dishes of hypo and transfer prints from one to the other if many are being made. Fixing should be for not less than ten minutes and the prints should always be face down in the dishes to prevent stain.
After this comes the tedious business of washing. To do this I put all the prints in a basin full of water transferring them to another basin of fresh water ten times, squeezing out as much water as possible between each change. This takes about an hour, but it is not advisable to cut the time down. Drying is best done by banging up large prints with a clip or pin, smaller prints may be laid on a dry towel or clean cloth after wiping off all surface moisture. L. B. R.
Land.—Harvesting was still proceeding across river at Stunggang. From all reports the general path harvest for the district has been good. At the request of the Land Department I sent Abang Merali and police to inspect certain land which, it was alleged, has been taken up without per mission alongside the Lundu Road reserve at Sungei Angus. The reports were true and I have sent in details to the Land Office at Kuching asking if they wish to take action.
I visited the Protestant Mission at Stunggang The church and bungalow are in need of repair.
Haji Ibrahim. Ah Tet and Sejili, of the Rubber Improvements Department, left the district having completed their work. Lau Ah Yam, of the Mono polies Department, arrived on 22nd to audit the opium books and left again for Kuching on 25th.
The District Officer, Mr. J. B. Archer, reports
General - The District Officer arrived in Lundu on the early morning of the 5th and left again on the 8th. Accompanying him were Mr. E. S. Holl, Director of Agriculture, and Dr. Hutchison, Medical Officer. The former arranged various matters in connection with the Government rubber and pepper estate in Lundu, and the latter attended a number of persons for N A.B. injections, vaccination and different ailments. Owing to the short notice many persons were prevented from seeing the doctor.
LUNDU.
Land Office—Sungei Moyan Area—Mr. Miller- Hallett, who was sick, remained in the house collecting quit rent until the end of the month.
The Court Room and District Office were cleaned and necessary repairs effected by the Public Works Department.
The District Officer dealt with a total of 358 cases- At the end of the month about too cases were unheard.
Coroner's Court—An inquest was held on the body of Jong Kui Fan and a verdict of suicide by hanging returned
General - Sudin, T. K. of Samarahan, reported that Kimchi, a Dayak of Munggu Babi, had fallen on a gur. which burst and seriously- damaged his right arm.
Resident's Court (Criminal).—There were five cases, defendants in each being convicted Chan Mah Khiok and Lee Chui Chua. Government Clerks at Lundu. were both charged under section 408 I.P.C. The former was sentenced to eighteen months’ R.I., whilst the latter received two years and a fine of $150. Both were dismissed the service
First Division.
May, 1918.
Health —A mild sort of influenza seems to have gone round the district.
BAU, UPPER SARAWAK,
The District Officer. Mr. J. B. Archer, reports:—
General —The new Government Pork Market in Bau has proved a success ; fees for the month were $106 One person was fined for attempting to sell pork in his own house On the 5th I inspected some land at Paku which had been applied for by the Upper Sarawak Gold Mining Syndicate. This land includes the site of the old Paku Government Station. The matter was referred to Kuching and permission has been granted to the Syndicate.
Another request from a different Syndicate has been received to work gold at Bidi. The matter is being held up pending formal application The gold workings at Jambusan have not proved a success.
The Bau trolley line was finished by the end of the month and is now in good order. Tua Kampong Kribang reports that he has inspected the Buso end of the Buso-Sungei Tengah Road and that all the trees on the rentis have been felled. The Dresser's house and Government servant's quarters opposite at Bau are in bad repair.
A pair of bullocks have arrived, and towards the end of the month the roads round Bau were being rolled.
The Trojan Lorry has been giving trouble.
Education- The Bau Government School has an average of about eighty pupils, but the occasions of the numerous holidays, both Mohamedan and Chinese, gives parents an excuse for not sending their children to school. These unofficial holidays are in addition to the usual Government holidays which are taken advantage of by all races and sects of pupils.
SADONG.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports
Arrangements were satisfactorily made with the people of Kampongs Sageng, Lintang and Kalaka for the re-making and raising of their roads and the work was started on the 17th. The new roads are fourteen feet at the base and nine feet on the surface and considerable work is entailed because of the extremely poor state of these roads former ly, which were anything from one to five feet wide. The raising comprises various heights from two feet to four feet.
Medical — Fourteen persons were admitted to hospital and eleven were discharged.
There were four hundred and ninety atten dances comprising one hundred and twenty-nine patients. The daily sick averaged 15.25.
Ten N-A.B. injections were administered, of which six were for muli and four for yaws.
On the 8th it was reported that a Gedong Malay named Arun bin Ali had been mauled by a crocodile. He was not bad enough, however, to require medical aid. A few days later the crocodile was caught and brought downriver.
F. F. BOULT,
Resident, First Division.
Sadong Colliery,
May, 1928.
The output export, local consumption, conversion into coke and coal stock figures for the month were as follows :—
Seventy Chinese labourers were recruited at Kuching during the month, and the output was appreciably stimulated as the result.
The task of re-opening the New Mines which had been closed down for over a year on account of the labour shortage was begun, but it will take some time before normal production can be obtained, on account of the heavy falls of roof and the necessary repairs to be completed.
A start was also made with the laying out of the
distributing water mains, and it is hoped to com
plete this work before the arrival of the dry season.
Mr. S. W. Harris left here homeward bound on furlough on the 24th.
The Wireless Station was thoroughly overhauled by the Manager of Telegraphs and Telephones Department during the latter part of the month.
The rainfall for the month was 9.18 inches
J. W. EVANS,
Manager.
Second Division.
May. 1928.
BATANG LUPAR.
General.—Duriug the month Datu Abang Haji Dulrasid visited the Skrang and measured out fourteen lots of three acres each for pepper gardens.
Penghulu Kama arrived during the month from N. Jingin and reported the death of his only sou
The mason from Kuching completed the new landing stage and same is well and substantially built
Dyaks brought in timber for the framework of the three new clerks’ quarters.
Medical.—A total of 207 persons were treated in hospital during the month as follows:—Malay 24, Dyak 157, Chinese 23, European 1, Milano 2.
One hundred and twenty-eight N. A.B. Injections for yaws, etc , were given and twenty-one head of pigs were inspected and slaughtered for sale during the month. Shipping.—Nineteen motor schooners arrived and eighteen motor schooners cleared the port during the month.
KALAKA.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. E. Cutfield, re ports :—
General.—On the 8th the Acting District Officer went to Rejang taking seven Foochow Chinese who were returned to the Third Division, and returned to Kabong the same day.
I regret to report the death at Saratok from dysen tery of Wazir-Ossen formerly of the Kuching Police-
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER, Resident, Second Division.
Fourth Division-
May, 1928.
Miri.
I arrived at Miri on the 13th and took over from Mr. H. D. Aplin on the 14th who left on the 18th H.M.S. Herald, Captain Haselfoot D.S.O. anchor ed in the roads on the 5th leaving again on the 7th. She will be surveying in this vicinity for some time and will make her permanent base for the year at Miri. She is expected again on the 2nd June.
The Acting District Officer, Capt. R. E. Le Sueur visited the Coast districts Niah, Sibuti and Suai during the month. The Court House at Niah is in bad condition and it is proposed to rebuild it at once—this was estimated for and sanctioned in the 1928 estimates.
Visitors to the station included Right Rev.
Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak and Mrs. Danson.
A. M. Pillay arrived from Kuching on the 21st to
take over the store from R. T. Wadivale but resigned
as he was unable to cope with the work. Chin Kui
P.W.D. clerk has been transferred to the store tor
the time being and appears to be doing the work
satisfactorily.
BARAM.
The District Officer, Mr. E. V. Andreini, reports
General.—Some thirty-eight families of Punans from Ulu Belait met Galan in the Lilian and informed him they were moving back into Sarawak Territory.
On the 27th instant a Dayak named Mut anak Budin of Sungei Jerak was accidentally shot by Sergeant Gudang whilst out after deer.
BINTULU.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, reports: Repairs to the Fort Tubau have been completed and include complete new floor (billian), new walling, new kitchen and office. Several of the floor joists have been renewed and the building generally strengthened. The contractor is now working on the timber for the combined Police and Native Officer's quarters.
Travelling. — I returned from Miri on 3rd instant by s.s. Sulong. On 26th I paid a visit up river visiting Sebauh, Pandan, Labang and Tubau returning to Bintulu again on 28tb.
Trade.—Owing to the fall in price of rubber, trade has been very slack this month. Jelutong has again gone down to $7.50 per picul.
Billian attaps have also fallen, the price now being $120 per laksa in the. bazaar.
C. ERMEN, Actg. Resident, Fourth Division.
Fifth Division.
May, 1928.
LIMBANG.
There were no court cases worthy of special com-ment. Two prisoners sentenced for buffalo stealing made good their escape whilst out cutting firewood hut were subsequently recaptured.
The slipway for launches was successfully laid and will be put into use immediately, as the m.l. Sylvia needs renewal of her stern tube and pro peller shaft.
Medical.—The M. 0. of Labuan paid his monthly visit and Dresser Attenborough, who was relieved by Beniamin Franklin, returned to headquarters.
Mr. G. M. Allman, Superintendent of Rubber Exports, on bis way to Lawas by the s.s. Sulong,. paid a visit and Mr. W. Lowry returned to Sibu by the same vessel.
LAWAS.
May, 1928.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports ;—
Native Affairs.—The Fa Tawing people seem to have settled down quite happily at Trusan. They are farming this year at Menganggah and will move to Siang Siang after the harvest. Pengiran Ukong of Fa Trusan came down during the month with his followers, bringing damar and paying tax.
Travelling.— I returned from Trusan and Sundar via Punang on 2nd. On 15th I visited Punang and Sualai with Mr. Allman when a scheme for the co operative working of the Kadayan rubber gardens was discussed. We spent the night at Punang returning at midday on 16th. On 20th I walked to Trusan where I inspected the work of the various contractors, going down to Sundar on 22nd. where I held court and cheeked the books, also visiting the Customs station at Kuala Trusan. 1 returned via Awat Awat on 24th picking up the Sulong's mail at Tagai.
Agriculture.—The Lawas Sarawak Rubber Estates, Limited, exported 41,628 lbs. of dry rubber to Labuan during the month.
F. H. KORTRIGHT, Acting Resident, Fifth Division
