WEDNESDAY, FEBRUARY 1. 19X8
NOTES.
(January.)
WE understand that a number of books belonging to the late Major Moulton are being sold by auction at the request of the executors. This will take place at the Government Offices at 11.30 a.m. on the 10th March next. A list is being prepared for distribution by Mr. P. H. Hayward.
THE Rt. Rev. L. Danson, Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak, and Mrs. Danson left England by the Kashima Maru on December 31st, and hope to spend a week in Penang on the way out.
MR. E. Parnell, Managing Director of the Sarawak Steamship Company, Ltd., and Mr. J. A. H. Hardie, Commissioner of Trade and Customs, paid a short visit to Singapore before the New Year, the former returning on the 3rd and the latter on the 11th via Limbang and Miri.
MR. T. J. L. Boyd arrived on the 3rd to take up an appointment as Judicial Com missioner. He has also been gazetted as a Judge of the Supreme Court.
MR. C. Fenwick, Manager of The Borneo Company Ltd., returned from leave on the 3rd and was accompanied by Mrs. Fenwick. Mr. B. A. Moir travelled out together with Mr. Fenwick to join the local branch of the Company.
MR. E. O. Bruce arrived from Sadong to attend the Regatta and proceeded on the 7th on short leave to Singapore, whence he returned on the 16th.
THE preliminary session of the Educational Commission was held on the 17th and was presided over by Mr. J. C. Swayne.
LIEUT. R. E. Le Sueur has been appointed a Captain in the Sarawak Rangers as from 1st January, 1928. He left for Miri on the 16th to take up the duties of Acting District Officer and Officer Commanding the Rangers and Police.
MR. Ennion has returned from a visit to various outstations which he visited in connection with the police forces and prisons.
DR. Victor G. Heiser, Director of the International Health Division work in the Far East of the Rockefeller Foundation, expects to visit Kuching about the middle of February. We understand he will stay here for a few days only and will proceed to Manila via Miri.
THE 23rd being Chinese New Year was observed as a public holiday. The Chinese community heralded their New Year with an outburst of cracker firing which rejected their adherence to their ancient customs.
H.H.M.Y. Maimuna left for Lawas on the morning of the 26th with Mr. F. H. Pollard to relieve Mr. J. G. Anderson, who is being transferred to Lower Rejang.
THE pupils of the St. Teresa’s Convent gave a concert entitled "Ali Baba” on the 3rd and 4th, which was largely attended. Among those present were Her Highness the Ranee and the Dayangs Leonora and Elizabeth. The standard of the play was high and the audience passed away a very enjoyable time. Those who organized the concert and those who participated in it are heartily to be congratulated.
MR. F. A. W. Page-Turner, Resident of the Second Division, returned from furlough on.the 30th by the s. s. Kuchina. Miss M. C. Giddings, of St. Mary's School, and Mr. E. D. Shaw, who has come in connection with the sale of Ford Cars, were also passengers
WE learn that the water wagon has become a prominent feature of the island of Sibu.
IN connection with the Educational Com- mission which has been convened by His Highness the Rajah to examine the problems of education in Sarawak it is interesting to recall that the first Malay School ever started in Sarawak was opened on 21st June, 1883 by His Highness the late Rajah. This school had its origin in the house of Abang Mat Kas- sim who being a man of great intelligence and anxious to see people raised from the state of ignorance in which they existed, collected a tew boys from surrounding houses and educated them with his own sons in his house
This attracted others who came forward and asked to be taught and a master was then, provided by the Government to instruct chiefly in reading, writing the Malay language and arithmetic. The number went on increasing until a school was necessary which was built in Abang Mat Kassim’s Kampong in close proximity to his house and mosque.
Pacific Islands.
HEADHUNTING AND MORALITY IN MELANESIA.
In an article on "Missions at the Institute of Pacific Relations," Dr. Daniel J. Fleming of Union Theological Seminary, New York, quotes this from
“An interesting illustration of the way in which unforeseen effects upon the moral life of primitive peoples may result from eradicating certain customs without first finding the function which they serve in the social structure of the community, was given in one of the round tables of the Institute of Pacific Relations.
“ The uncompromising suppression of head hunting among certain Melanesian tribes led to grave consequences in the moral life of the com munity in which head-hunting played a very im portant part. Thus the possession of a head was a necessary qualification for a young man con templating marriage.
" Under these circumstances the uncompromising suppression of head-hunting was practically a sup-pression of the marriage ceremony and the effect on the moral life of the community was disastrous. Finally a policy was evolved by the. administration, by which all previously captured heads were confiscated and needs so obtained were hired out for weddings for two shillings and sixpence”
“A Caddie’s Decalogue”!
“IF MASTER PLAY BADLY DO NOT LAUGH
BEHIND HAND.”
" Ten commandments to golf carrying children ” issued in Tamil to caddies of the Ceylon Golf Club, include:
Watch master, if angry.
If master angry, keep far.
If master playing badly, do not laugh behind hand.
If master use. swear-words, put wool in ears.
Always remember master is good, kind Christian gent with plenty money.
The somewhat quaint phraseology of the trans lation is due to the fact that, as explained, it was tone by a clerk of understanding, though un acquainted with golf.”
To
The Commandant,
Sarawak Hangers.
Sarawak.
MOST RESPECTED SIR:—
I am a South Indian belonging to a landowning
Hindu Nair family In S. Malabar. My family pays more
than 1500 Rs. to the British Government as revenue on
land. My guardian and uncle is Vadavannoor, Parak-
kal Sankunny menon, who is a retired Thasildar now.
I have passed the S. S. L. C. Examination I am a
young man of 28 with a good physique. I am a good
sportsman also. My height is 5' 6" and the measure-
ment of my chest is 32".
I have a great desire to serve in Military Department
either in competent service or in Incompetent service.
So I humbly request your Honour to be kind enough to
give me a chance.
I beg to remain.
Most Respected Sir,
Your most humble and obedient servant,
Sitiawan.
Date 25th January 1928.
The above letter which has been received by Major Cunynghame has been passed for the con sideration of the head of the Incompetent Department.
The Automatic Telephone.
We have received through the kindness of a
correspondent an account of the wonderful new
10,000 line Automatic Telephone Exchange at
Holborn, which was opened for service on 12th
November, 1927. and is the first Public Automatic
Telephone Exchange in London. Much of the
account is highly technical and as such would there-
fore be of little interest, as being probably unintelli-
gible, to the majority of our readers. Some idea of
the enormous size of this installation and of the
marvels of modern electrical engineering which it
demonstrates can however be gathered from the
following extract :—
“The current required to operate all this com-
plex mechanism as well as that constituting Holborn
Mechanical Tandem Exchange in the same building
is supplied from a Power Plant in the basement
having a total output capacity of 300 h.p. There
are duplicate sets of 25 cell chloride storage Batteries,
each of 10,000 A. H. capacity, the weight of each
individual cell being of the order of 2 tons, or 50 tons
per battery. No less than 8 square miles of solid
copper constitute the cross-sectional area of the main
bus bars, and the peak load on the exchange reaches
1,500 amperes at 50 volts.”
B.N.B. may be proud of having been several
years ahead of London in its installation of an Auto-
matic Telephone at Sandakan in 1924, and those of
us who have lived in Sandakan can testify to its
many advantages and to the remarkably few
occasions on which it has failed.
Even this wonderful London exchange, with all
the latest improvements, has its seamy side, as is
shewn by the following extracts from recent issues of
the Daily Mirror, and we hope therefore that when
any of our Sandakan readers next gets a wrong
number or experiences some other telephonic annoy-
ance and feels like anathematising the Automatic
Telephone, he will bear in mind the statements set
forth in these extracts and realise that if such things
can happen in what is the last word in exchanges,
situated in a temperate climate, surely it is under-
standable if little mishaps occur in an installation
placed in what is probably the most trying climate
for any delicate mechanism of this kind and a climate
for which it was impossible at the time, through
want of experience of its effect on such mechanism,
to provide.
What is a ‘'convalescent telephone?”
If you are one of the unfortunate subscribers in.
the Holborn area, where the automatic dialling
system is—or should be—working, you will know all
about it.
Perhaps you want a Grosvenor number, for
example. Having dialled GRO and the number, a
I total stranger from FUL will no doubt answer you 1
Try again, and the chances are that LEE will
respond this time. But don’t give up. There are
still CHA, PAR, KEN. FRO, and scores of other
exchanges who have not “been troubled."
Then you dial “O,” which will instruct, you to
dial GRO. which you do correctly again. This time
PAL replies.
THE WRONG “IMPULSE.”
“Of course you cannot get your number,” inter-
rupts “O’s” charming voice in triumph "You are not
dialling correctly. 1 don't get the right ‘impulse’ 1”
You have been using a convalescent ’phone with
“wrong impulses" all the time !
This is only one of the many trying experiences
of an operator near Fleet-street, who tried for over
an hour to get GRO.
It is possible that the P.M.G. anticipated some
loud and painful noises from the automatic system,
as a notice is displayed at the Victoria-street office
bearing the words : "Do you suffer from deafness?”
It then explains that an attachment can be fitted
to your ’phone which will help you. Holborn sub-
scribers please note 1
DELAY AND ANNOYANCE.
The following letter has been received from a
well-known public man in the Holborn district, and
The Daily Mirror welcomes correspondence from
readers who have had difficulty with their automatic
’phones :—
“I hope you will not relax your efforts to get
the Holborn telephone put into reasonable working
condition.
“The Postmaster-General has been misinformed.
If you get a wrong number it is by no means always
your fault.
“A few days back I got the same wrong number
twice, though the dialling was quite correct, and I
had finally to call on the operator.
“This was not my fault, and I do not see why
I should pay for it, or for the calls which have to be
repeated because they are cut off after communi-
cation has been established.
"Some offices have been driven to send messengers
out to the public call-boxes to avoid the delay and
annoyance involved in having their own tele-
phones.—Yours faithfully,	8.”
London's new automatic telephone is setting
switchboard operators a wearisome puzzle. Even
the experts cannot get the numbers they want.
“You don’t know how to use the automatic tele-
phone on this switchboard.”
This was the helpful comment of one of the
maintenance men who had been sent by the London
Telephone Service to inquire into “the complaint
which had been made in the Press” by a big business
house in the Holborn area.
With appropriate meekness the telephonist begged the great man to show her how it should be done by getting two different numbers.
Ten minutes passed, but neither "Mar' or "Wal" would respond to the correct dialling. Another fifteen minutes went slowly by, during which many strange and fascinating noises were heard, but no voice came in response.
When, at the end of three-quarters of an hour, the expert was still unsuccessful with these numbers, he suggested that it was quite possible that the operator had been dialling correctly, and that the instrument was out of order
A Daily Mirror correspondent was equally un-fortunate when he operated the automatic system on several big switchboards.
"Anyone with a couple of hours to waste could have a most enjoyable time listening-in to the many and varied sounds which occur,” he writes.
Having dialled “PAR" on two occasions, the reply came in the form of a fearful wail.
"FRO" usually obliges with a ping-plonk sort of noise, while for the imitation of a cheap German alarm clock one cannot do better than dial "LEE."—[B.N.B. Herald.]
In view of the above article. It is interesting to recall that an Automatic. Telephone System teas installed at Miri in 1923.
The Volcano of Krakatua.
In vew of the recent activity of the volcano Krakatua, it 'is interesting to recall the Cal unity which o'cu'red on 27 th August, 1883.— The follow-ing is a report which appeared tn the Sarawak Gazette 1st October, 1I83. "It is with regret that 111 our summary of the present week, from the 25th August to the' 1st September inclusive, for our readers in Holland, we find ourselves obliged to perform the part of Job's messenger by setting forth the full extent of a calamity such as had never yet befallen Java, and Banian in particular. We mean the volcanic outbreak on Krakatau Island, whereby the appearance of Sunda Straits has not only been wholly changed, but also thou sands upon thousands of people have perished and a whole province has been laid waste The havoc wrought is still very imperfectly known, but its extent daily becomes greater. In the sub joined narrative we will endeavour to furnish our readers with as concise and full a summary as possible of the calamity, which has aroused hiter- to compassion and sympathy among the public, and will continue to do so for a long time to come. On beginning with the commencement, we have in the first place to mention the lore tokens. which were above all strongly manifested and terrific. In the afternoon of Sunday, the ,-6th August, a rumbling sound was generalIy heard at Batavia, coming from the West like that of far distant thunder varied by strong deto nations the concussion from which shook and rattled doors and windows on all sides. Later in the evening and particularly after midnight, a dull red glow was visible in that quarter of the sky noticed by us. The inhabitants of our citv having gained experience by a previous outburst from the island of Krakatau, such manifestations had lost the terror of novelty to them, and they generally tranquillised themselves with the thought that these could be ascribed to a second outbreak of the volcano there and nothing else feeling thus little fear. Yet it was noticeable tha the reports were louder than before, that the distant rumble was much stronger, so that in the end. people were but half tranquillised. especially when on the night between the 26th and 27th August these phenomena steadily became more violent until 1 a.m. when a detonation was ex perienced which brought about such a concussion
that the gaslights here were all as it were extingu ished at the same moment. Many persons, anxious for their wives and families and for life and limb, hence forbore to sleep and awaited the morning in great excitement. Morning broke, but the sun, instead of shining with that clear brightness which characterises the morning hours in the East, concealed itself, and the whole sky seemed overcast At 7 a m. on that day, the 27th August, the first shower of ashes was noticed here, from which it was inferred that whatever might be the volcano at work in the neighbourhood, the outbust must assuredly be appalling when ashes in showers could be noticed even in distant Batavia. People had, however, hardly set about their ordinary business occupations when this inference was in deed confirmed. The sky becoming pale yellow and more obscured, the air, already thick with ashy particles, thickened still more. The ash showers fell heavier, and before the hour of midday had struck the whole of Batavia was enveloped in thick dark ness, 'and a few miles off, fire, that element so hostile to man. was holding high revel within the Krakatau volcano
Notwithstanding the excitement generally prevailing, and though every one was prepared for something dreadful happening, no one had the slightest idea of what impended over him and of what nature was the drama then enacting a few leagues off, whereby so many people met a miser able death. From the lack of sunlight the tem-perature fell several degress. People shivered with cold, their discomfort being heightened by anxiety, especially when lamplight had to be used at midday Suddenly business of all kinds ceased. Those who could, left off work and hastened to their homes- In the lower city, all the labourers from Bantam employed there struck work and made off in crowds. In a moment, half the city was forsaken. The ash showers become heavier Meanwhile there was a greater uproar, bustle, and tumult than usual in the China camp. Every Chinaman who could get hold of a prahu brought his family, valuables, and available supplies of food into it. not knowing, at the time, it was just the water to which he was entrusting them that would prove to be the more formidable enemy. Shortly before noon, in fact, water there did rise frightfully. Like a mountain a great sea wave came rushing on along the whole coast of west Java, forceri its way into the rivers, thus causing them instantly to rise several yards anil over flow their banks. Indescribable was the confusion into which prahus. steamboats, and tambangs were thrown in the lower city, and no pen ran depict the confusion in old Batavia, resulting in especially the natives and Chinese seeking safety by a general flight. To give some idea of the tidal waves which agitated the sea and rivers, we need only say that at Tanjong Priok, in particu- lar, the water rose to feet within a few minutes, that is rot only wholly overflowed a portion of Lower Batavia quite suddenly, but also bore fully laden prahus of 25 lasts and even more Capa- city ashore like straws This phenomenon was repeated at 2 p. in but hot so violently. How ever great was the force exerted by this heavy flow, there came a moment, after it had raged its utmost, when the water in masses of immense height suddenly ebbing away varnished, and left the river beds and sea bottom awhile dry. Mean- while the thick, heavy, and oppressive atmos- phere, charge with sulphurous fumes, began to clear up somewhat in spite of the cold It be- came lighter, and by the increasing light people beheld a sight seldom certainly witnessed here in the course of centuries. The streets or rather the roads the trees, and the houses, were covered with a wholly white layer of ashes, and presented in the land of the sun a genuine butch winter scene. In the meantime, when, later in the day, the distant detonations had ceased and rumbles had become fainter, no one had yet the least idea of the havoc wrought by this strange natu- ral phenomenon. By that time Anjer had been flooded and devastated by tidal waves ; with few
exceptions its inhabitants had been drowned in a
moment of time, and. on its site in the course of
that disastrous Monday, nothing but an extensive
muddy morass could be seen.
Tanara, also situated on the coast, had shared
the same fate, and, at the time we are writing
this, 700 corpses had already been found there.
At Cheringin the harbour, dams were washed
away, the sea water rushing inland for several
miles. The same thing took place at Karang
Antu Further east, the coast towns of Mauk
and Kramat have disappeared like Anjer. At
the former, yesterday, the passar or market place
was still full of corpses, and the number of those
who perished there is estimated at 300 Light-
houses along the coast were borne down as if they
had been so many reeds. Merak, a small hamlet
with quarries for the harbour works, has dis-
appeared, with everything that happened to be
there. It is reported officially that at Merak loco-
motives were dented as if they were of tin, and
cranes had been swept away, while iron railings
were found twisted together is if they were made
of paper. /\t the Engineer's house on a hill at
Merak only the floor remains A whole ward
was washed away in an instant. The number of
natives and Chinese who perished at Merak is
countless. The volcanic outburst extended to a
greater distance, however, and was not confined
only to the Java coast. Telok Betong on the Su-
matra shore suffered too, and was literally swept
away. From want of telegraphic communication
after the calamity, the number of persons who
perished there has no yet been ascertained Stea-
mers despatched thither from this had not return-
ed at the hour of our going to press.
As we have said above, the results are not yet
fully known, and daily further information comes
in, comprising most dreadful tidings. Thus, one
of the N. I. S. N. Company's steamers anchored at
the place where formerly the hotel stood at Anjer.
The whole coast line of West java has changed in
configuration. Several islands, large and small,
in Sunda Straits, have disappeared. Athwart-the-
way, a large island at the entrance to the Straits,
has been divided into five parts, and in the neigh-
bourhood of Krakatau no less than 16 new volcanic
island have risen from the depths of the sea
Lighthouses, including those at Anjer. have been
completely washed away, anti several islands
which formerly were visibly distant from the
shore have suddenly been joined on to it. Hence,
great and so far unknown upheavals of land have
taken place which now imperil navigation through
the magnificent Straits, and which will give much
to do to the topographical department in surveying
them. But far more impressive are the lives lost
and the districts devastated in conseqence of the
calamity, the stricken population being now in
the utmost distress. Several shipmasters have
reported that the sea in the Straits was full of
floating wreckage and corpses ; many unfortunates
were seen holding on to bamboo rafts, or clinging
to boughs and torn off branches of trees. The
number of those swept off by a single tidal wave
at Anjer cannot be given even approximately, the
scenes which occurred there being described to us
as heartrending Children have seen their parents
perish before, their eyes, and wives their husbands.
The wife of the Assistant Resident there, for in-
stance. when standing in the back gallery of her
house with her child, was swept into a bathing
room by the tidal wave, which Hung her repeated-
ly against the sides. On being again carried
away and borne out by the raging water, she saw
her husband struggling to reach a tree, against
which he was shortly afterwards dashed to death.
This unfortunate lady was thereupon cast upon a
hillock, where her child also soon died and she
thereupon fainted from exhaustion, the result of
exertion, fatigue, and loss of blood from wounds
received. Very few Europeans were rescued at
Anjer and at Cheringin. Meanwhile, about half
of the population of Bantam have become dis-
couraged. being stupified and overwhelmed by
the successive calamities which of late have
stricken that formerly flourishing province. Roads
there have become impassible for miles, communi-
cation of every kind being thereby interrupted.
The surface of the ground lies buried under a
thick layer of ashes, owing to which all vegeta-
tion ha ceased growing and the cattle are apparent-
ly doomed to die of starvation, especially stock
in North Bantam Beyond count is the number
of trees uprooted from the ground, branches from
them being scattered far and near. The Govern-
ment has meanwhile, with praiseworthy zeal,
striven to alleviate this misery' wherever it could,
and has, first of all, made arrangements for des-
patching food supplies to be distrbuted among the
distressed people The Resident of Batavia has
left for Tangerang, and Mr. Levyssohn Norman,
a member of Council, left to-day for stricken Ban-
tam with Dr Gelpke, to see what more can be
done. From Cheringin we heard yesterday, on
official authority, that the number of lives lost in
that district alone amounts to 10,000. The Ophir,
a steamer owned by' the N. I. S. N. Company, is to
convey from Anjer to Batavia as many of the
rescued persons as wish to come away.
In the neighbourhood of Batavia the tidal wave
has manifested itself strongly At Amsterdam
island the dry’ dock was washed away from its
moorings, upon which the bulky construction
floated seawards. Onrust was overflowed and the
colossal dock there floated off The enormous
cannon on that island, to which ships alongside
used to be moored, broke in the middle like laths,
and it took great trouble to secure the
man-of-war Koningin Emma to the shore.
A steam launch from the Blemmendal, a
surveying vessel, manned by six men, when
steaming’ off Onrust at the time the tidal
wave came on. capsized, upon which four of the
crew saved themselves by swimming but the other
two disappeared immediately At Batavia, the
harbour light was greatly-endangered. A large
quantity of lighthouse material was washed
away or rendered unserviceable, and several
fishermen on the habour dams were swallowed
up by the tidal wave. The water flowing on-
wards so furiously, exerted such distinctive force
that it made two breaches 50 and 100 yards wide
respectively in the east sea wall, while, that on
the west subsided for a distance of 100 yards. At
Tanjong Priok, the steamer Wilhelmina was dri-
ven from her anchors. She fired signals of distress,
but was fortunately rescued by some hoppers.
The harbour works themselves at Priok suffered
little harm from the tidal wave ; the only' damage
done of any' consequence was to one of the harbour
dams which being fully exposed to the water ru-
shing in with fury and then suddenly' flowing
back into the sea, subsided for the distance of one
hectametre and two metres ; no injury' to life or
limb however is reported from Prick ”
The following are extracts from the Journal of the late C. Denison, Esq
(From 29th April to 25th May, 1892)
WHEN ON A TRIP PROM
S a r a w a k to M e r i,
ON THE NORTH-WEST COAST OF BORNEO
IN THE BRUNEI TERRITORY
April 29th, 1872. Having had a passage offered m by C	in his steamer the Bertha, a small
craft seventy feet long, fifty-five tons burthen, of ten (nominal) horse-power, I gladly availed myself of his kind invitation, especially as he was bound for Meri in the Brunei territory, touching at some of the Sarawak coast stations.
Left Sarawak at 7 am., steamed down to Bind-
ing, and breakfasted with M	. the Vice Consul
at Tanah Puteh. We got out of the Sarawak
river at the Muaratebas entrance soon after 9 a m and cleared Tanjong Poe at noon I see the hill
has been cleared here for the lighthouse, which
is in course of construction
30th April At daylight off Sirik. The neap
tides prevented our entering one of the Rejang
entrances to visit Bruit, so we stood off along the
coast for Oya. Weather very fine, but extremely
hot. At 5 p.m. we passed the steamer Sri Sarawak
from Bintulu bound to Kuching. Entered the
Oya river at b 30 p.m. This river has a bar with
nine feet on it at high water At 8 p.m. we were
anchored off the jetty of the Oya Trading Com-
pany, where we met W	awaiting us.
1st May- The Resident De C	came over to
call on me in the morning, and I walked round
with him to see the new buildings which are being
erected. I f und Oya improved since I last visited
it' The new Court House has been built, and I
attended De C	holding Court in the afternoon.
W	and C	have now got their stores up, and
the engines in working order for sago-washing.
They speak very hopefully of their respects if
they can only once get fairly started, but their
difficulties are great in opening in such a new
place as Oya. De C-—dined with us in the
evening.
2nd May. Left Oya at 3 p.m. Weather fear-
fully hot, with a light breeze. Steered North for
Bintulu.
3rd May. Still steering for Bintulu. making a slow passage, wind and tides against us ; the heat intense Reached Bintulu at 1.30 p m., and found S-—in the Fort. I walked through the bazaar with S	, which 1 found had considerably
extended, but was not so clean and smart as when 1 last visited this place. I found my friends Galean and Pangeran Buntar still alive and
The conversation at night turned on Brunei and Borneo politics. Orders have been given to clear Kidurong point for a lighthouse, and it is hoped a settlement will be formed here, but 1 question if it will ever come to anything. Where is the trade to come from?
4th May. We were delayed getting away till 3.30 p m., C —having a case in the Malay Court against a man named Bilioh Rhio, which cost a great deal of wrangling and disputing.
We left with the ebb tide in a squall of wind and ram, and nearly care to grief on the bar at the mouth of the river, there being only five feet of water. I can see very well C-—-is not much of a skipper.
Sailed a N.E. course, enjoyed a fine evening with a strong breeze, which, however, died down at sunset.
5th May. Passed Soubise mountain and later a
high mountain could be perceived in the interior
the name of which 1 could not learn. The weather
very fine, but the heat intense. The coastline
hilly, covered with jungle, with what appears to
be limestone cliffs occasionally showing
e made the mouth of the Men river at 4 p m.
and not knowing the channel grounded, eventually
anchoring in two fathoms C —and myself
amused ourselves walking on the sandy coast
We returned on board after dark in a boat from
the Men village bearing a deputation headed by
the chief trader Awang Badar,
After dinner, a long conversation was carried
on, which lasted till well into the night the chief
topic being trade The Awang stated that the
Sultans Officers bearing his chop had already
been down the coast giving notice that no oppres-
sion would be allowed, and that only the fair and
lawful taxes would be allowed to be collected
This is the first-fruit of the treaty between Brunei and Sarawak, and shows that the Sultan's territory is not in such a state of anarchy as is generally supposed. OYOW ABIT, the Kayan Chief who was at Bintulu, was spoken of as a bad character.
The Awang stated that two Chinese had
proceeded up the Baram river, leaving two others
in their prahu at Meri. Everything reported quiet
up the Baram. The Awang undertook to look
for cinnabar, saying he was sure it was to be
found in the interior of the Baram. He seemed
afraid of compromising himself with the Sultan,
but C	told him there was nothing to be afraid
of.
The Awang finally stated he would proceed to
Kuching in the Bertha, if we would give him a
passage; he seems a perfectly civilised Malay,
and told us he had been twenty-seven times to
Singapore, but only once to Sarawak, i. e.
Kuching.
The Malay's who accompanied the Awang told
us almost anything might be found in the Baram,
and mentioned cinnabar, earth, oil, bird's nests,
gutta, gold, diamonds, in fact everything that is
to be met with in Sarawak. The rice crop in the
Baram had failed, and rice is now selling at high
prices; there is every chance of a famine breaking
out.
We were told that the point we had walked
out to in the evening was Tanjong Baili, the
rock facing which we found to rise about fifty or
sixty feet from the water's edge, and composed of
what seemed to me to be sandstone.
6th May. At 8 am. tried to enter the Meri river: we experienced much difficulty in finding the channel, owing to the numerous sand-banks, and we found only 5,', feet of water to get in on. The southern bank of the river slopes back to a low range of hills, the lower portion of which seems admirably suited for gardens. On the opposite bank an extensive plain extends to the sea, and, I should think, to the northward as far as the Baram river, the mouth of which is visible from the sea-shore here We anchored off Meri village, which bears a similar appearance to other Malay villages on the coast.
Meri village consists of ten houses, and is under
Orang Kaya Setia Raja. I landed on the right
bank of the river, accompanied only by my boy,
and crossing over the plain to the sea, bathed and
spent some time in strolling about, C—being
busy with the steamer. I found the natives quiet
and obliging, and I felt just as much at home here
as if I had been at Oya. The villagers appear to
keep a good many buffaloes, I counted as many
as fifty head.
In the evening an old Brunei Chief came on
board and said it was all up with the Brunei
people, as the Chinese had got into the Baram
and were giving the Kayans 840 per picul for
gutta, while they had been paving a lower price
It is very evident that, if the Chinese obtain a
footing in this river and come into direct contact
with the Rayans. the Brunei dealers' occupation
is gone.
The two Chinese who were in the village paid
us a visit. They belonged, they said, to Sarawak,
and were awaiting the return of two friends
from the Baram who had gone trading in the
company of some Brunei men; these Chinese
seemed quite contented and satisfied with Meri
I gathered from the conversation at night that Meri village, where we were, was only the Malay Kampong the Milanos were to be found only a day's pull up the river. The entire population— Malays and Milanos—in the Meri river was estimated at 1,000 souls-
There was formerly a Milano village below the present one of Meri, the posts of which attracted mv attention as we ascended the river. This village was abandoned in times gone by. as the natives were so harassed and ravaged by Dyaks and Kayans, that they had to move their quarters, and they are now scattered over the different rivers in the neighbourhood.
Our Nakoda's son and his nephew had just re-
turned from Brunei, and gave C	and myself
come curious information as to the immorality
prevailing in the Brunei capital.
7th May. Up early and enjoyed a delightful bath in the sea with a walk on the sands
The Orang Kava of Gamun—the headman of the village round Baili Point which bears the same name as the bay. namely, Luak—came on board. He spoke of the village as extensive, the anchorage being good for praus, sheltering them from the N.E monsoon.
The Orang Kaya not being a Brunei man com-
plained of the exactions of Pangeran Mohamed
Alam, to whom the village had to pay eighty
catties net annum per man.
1 learnt to-dav that Men and Sibuti are the propertv of Pangeran Anak Chuchu (called Pan geran Muda in Brunei) and Pangeran Mohamed Alam; the former claims 87, and the latter 107 doors. The population may be estimated at 1.250 souls.
' Nyah to Suai inclusive is the property of Pan- geran Pemanchah; population 500. Suai to Kidurong belongs to the Sultan.
Bliat, on the other side of the Baram, belongs to Pangeran Pemanchah ; population 1,500. The Bliat river flows so close to that of Baram that boatscan be pulled across and cargoes tran shipped Bliat may, therefore, become a better station than Meri.
The Baram population may be estimated at about 30,000. under four or five independent Chiefs The Malays assure me that this river is safe for trading purposes from its mouth to its source. If this is correct, the Baram is not in such a state of anarchy and confusion as the Sarawak people would lead us to expect.
To-day I had to hear an argument between
C--and the Brunei people as to the relative
merits and demerits of the Sarawak and Brunei
Governments. Awang Badan and Tuan Panjang
defended Brunei, and C	took up the cudgels
for Sarawak.
The former said: “Look how the Sarawak "people are fined for the slightest offence, which "fine goes to the Government, while here, except "the serah, we rarely fine people, unless it is for "some grave offence, and then the fine goes to "the injured party.”
In reply to this C	said: "Your rule is even
"worse than serah which is bad enough. How "about that case where Panglima Baling—the “headman of a village—had to pay Pangeran “Anak Chuchu 20 pikuls of gums; not having “these, he borrowed them from you, Awang “Badan, and he has to pay you sixty pikuls of “gutta value about $2,400. You, Awang Badan, “who are a wealthy Brunei man. pay nothing, “while Panglima Baling (who does not belong to “Brunei) and his people have to pay. You get "three pikuls of gutta for one pikul of gums, that “is to say, sixty pikuls of gutta for $1,500, which “gutta is worth $2,400. and this way of dealing “you call trading, for this is not an unexceptional “case, but of constant occurrence."
The above-quoted case originated whilst Pan- geran Anak Chuchu (whose property the Men district is) was proceeding from Sarawak to Bru nei in his schooner. Meeting with head winds, he brought up in the Meri river, and, finding this a good opportunity for replenishing his exchequer, levied the above tax. The Pangeran carried away plunder from the unfortunate natives to the ex tent of $9,000, leaving the population so deeply in debt that it will take them years to recover themselves.
8th May. Trading seems slow work in these parts, as C	had great difficulty in getting his
friends to come to terms, and it was not till he got up steam and showed that he was in earnest in what he had said that the traders began to make up their minds to commence business.
I laving settled his affairs, and got up steam we' commenced working our way downstream and at about 1 p tn. were out at sea steaming SW. with a light breeze, but the weather intensely hot.
The Brunei people say that, in former times, their profits, when trading in the Baram river, sometimes reached 400 per cent, but this has been reduced by competition to too per cent, and, as the traders borrow their money at Brunei at from 2 to 3 per cent per mensem, and in trading with the Kayans have to make advances for the pro duce which it takes, in many instances, twelve months to come to hand, they cannot be said to be such large gainers by this apparently large profit, considering the risk run.
The Kayans in the Baram appear, from all I can learn, to be very unsophisticated in matters of trade, and their ignorance and simplicity are taken advantage of by a lot of Malays for their own ends who cheat and swindle these aborigines to their heart's content. The Malays, however, all tell the same story, namely, that is it easy to tium1 u. the Kayans. but dangerous to bully them ; they barely acknowledge the rule of the Sultan, if thev do so at all. which appears very doubtful.
The upper-river Kayans are jealous or their brethren lower down working white birds nests, and they consider it infra dig to work the inferior quality, which is all they have. The birds nests may be estimated at about fifty pikuls per annum, which at $200 per pikul would give $10,000.
The Orang Kaya of the upper-river Kayans is known by the name of Prang Nibut, and can command about 5.000 fighting men.
Tingir is a tributary of Baram, running to the head of the Bintulu There are now ten Chinese settled here who have opened a bazaar. These traders are from Bintulu Having gone overland, they have, by competition and combination, pushed out the Brunei dealers
A rough estimate of the population between Bintulu and Baram may be as follows
say. 2,000 in all.
The Kayan Chief of Tinjir, Timalong by name, appears to be more or less enlightened ; he flies his own flag erected on a regular staff, affects looking glasses, and encourages Chinese settlers. He commands about 1,000 lighting men.
A Kayan Chief, Oyow Abit, has asked per mission to settle in Bintulu, and has moved and fixed his residence at Seping, at the head of the Bintulu, about eight hours’ march from I ima- long's house on the Tinjir. Report says that this movement has been brought about in a measure to avoid payment of a debt of $800 due to a Brunei Chinaman.
The headman at Miri confirmed what we heard before, that cinnabar is supposed to exist in the interior of the Baram.
We made very slow progress to-day ; wind failed us, and we could make no use of our sail; the engines were out of order.
9th May. Off Balignian in the morning at 6am.; weather very hot. At 3 p.m. we were off Muka, and off the mouth of the Oya river about sunset just too late to cross the bar ; we, therefore lay off all night.
10th May. Got up steam at daylight and cross ed the bar, reaching the Oya Company's Wharf about 8am Made mv arrangements for pro ceeding to Muka on Sunday. In the evening Pangeran Abu Bakar came to call, and we had some talk about Meri and Brunei.
11th May W	off early this morning in the
Renna up river to collect sago remained quiet all dav preparing to start to-morrow for Muka. 12th May. Left Oya this morning at 10 am for Muka, walking along the sea-shore I had good walking, the sands being dry and firm, but the I had several small streams to cross, and, being unable to swim, and there being no bridges, I had to float over one stream after another by means of batang' or trunks of trees.
The first stream thus crossed was Benutus There were no inhabitants here ; then came Bulu also uninhabited ; the Renat with a small village of about 100 souls; then Judan with 400 or 500 , Petian uninhabited ; and Petanak with 500 or 600. These villages are all up-stream, and there are no habitations near the sea where 1 crossed.
My legs and face were very much scorched, and I was very glad to reach Muka, which I did at about 3 p.m , after having been thoroughly wetted to the skin by a thunder-storm. I called on H	of the Borneo Company, where I met F	from Tigera, who was here on business; from thence I went on to the fort, where I found De C	and R	. The former is now the Resident
vice R_ who is promoted to Sarawak. R—- is only here now for the purpose of ‘coaching' De C-—in his new duties.
14th May. Walked over to the Borneo Com pany's works and saw N	The company talk
about extending their operations, and an engine will soon be at work here.
I went up the Tilian river to-day with R Sago is actively worked in this small stream ; houses, on both sides, full of sago. Men, women and children find ample employment. At the same time the stench was almost overpowering.
Some Sea-Dayaks from up-river to see R—--. They have a grievance, or a bichara, which will be looked into to-morrow.
De C	told me to-day that a young male
mias, shot by him on the Padas river in the north of Borneo, measured eight feet ten inches across the span, height four feel seven inches, and across the face thirteen inches*
15th May. The Sea Dayak complaint was gone into to-day by R	. it resolved itself into a
request on the'part of these "spoiled children of nature” that they might obtain a head.
It seems that one of their relatives had died, and, therefore, they wanted a head Some one had told them that a head belonging to one of the Lanun pirates killed off Bintulu was available there, and they wanted permission from the Resident to go and find it R	talked them
over and sent them all home again. Had he granted the permisssion they asked, the whole story might have been a myth, and instead of proceeding to Bintulu to look for an old smoke dried skull, they might very quietly have picked up a fresh head' without the owner's knowledge or consent—a little, game these people are fond of playing among themselves
16th May. Made arrangements to leave for Oya to-day R	tells me that there are some nine
Milano kambongs up the Muka river, and three up the Tilian. all working sago Their united populations may amount to about 5,000 or 6.000
At the head-waters of the Muka and Oya rivers some Sea Dayaks have settled. On the Oya river are three Chiefs with a following of perhaps foo fighting men ; on the Muka there are four Chiefs with perhaps the same following. These Dayaks have come in from the Rejang and Kanowit rivers, there being a great tendency on the part of the people of these rivers to settle in Muka and Oya.
[*This is the largest ever heard of if the figures are correct.—ED,]
H	in answer to some questions of mine,
such as. whether women are allowed by the Milanos to take part in religious ceremonies, whether they sell their children, and whether there is any record of cannibalism having been practised in this part of the country or not within the memory of the present generation, very kindly eave me the following information
“The Milanos have no established religion “of their own, though there is no doubt that they "acknowledge and believe in one Supreme Being “and give him the same name as the Maho- "medan-‘Allah taala.' They seldom appeal to "him, however, in their troubles, and rely rather “upon the power of hantus or spirits, whom they “propitiate in time of sickness by letting off guns “and feasting. It is generally the practice, after a "feast of this kind, to place a portion of the viands "in the jungle, at a distance from the house where "the prayer-meeting has taken place, to lure away "the evil-spirit which is troubling the house.
"Sorcery in this part of the country is chiefly "practised by women, and the older and uglier "they are the greater is supposed to be their know ledge of the art; men who practise these tricks "are called manangs.
“Milanos and Dayaks have the strongest possible “affection for their children, it being considered a “disgrace for any woman to be childless ; so strong "is this affection among the Milanos that they will “readily part with a child in order to better its “condition, and money never passes on such oc- " asions People will often thus adopt the “children of others poorer than themselves, not "with any idea of making slaves of them, but 'showing them the same affect on that they would "do were they their own.
"Human sacrifices were common among the "Milanos previous to the cession of the country to "Sir James Brooke. At Rejang village, a young “virgin was buried alive under the main-post of a “house, and it was not at all an uncommon prac- “tice, when an Orang Kaya died, to sacrifice from "10 to 12 of his slavesand bury them with him, the “peer wretches receiving a solemn admonition to "tend well upon their master in the new world
‘ That cannibalism was once prevalent in “Borneo may be a fact from the traces of it which “are still seen existing. Among Dayak and “Milano tribes in many parts of the country, it is the practice still to cut up and consume the raw heart of "a brave" killed in battle, under the idea "that the partakers will in time become braver.* “The way in which they establish a brotherhood "between people of different tribes, viz., by punc turing the arms and each imbiling a portion of ‘the blood, points also to the fact of such practices "of cannibalism having been anything but un- “common in the country.
De C	tells me that in this district sons are
a curse, and daughters a blessing to their parents, both amongst Malays and Milanos, for this curious reason, that when the sons grow up they look to the parents to help them with the bri an, or wedding portion, and when married live their home to leave in the home of their father-in-law.
A man and a woman with a family of daughters would thus be gainers by a number of young men coming to live in their house and working on their sago plantations, and would, at the same time, have the pleasure, of seeing the gongs ra- ged round the posts and walls which the young men have brought as bri-an into the family.
De C	, who was amongst the Muruts
shooting mias in the north of Borneo for some months in 1870, speaks of these people as
[*A similar practice prevails amongst the Chinese in China' the liver being the part usually selected.— ED. thorough savages. Some of them are tattooed. They are great head hunters, and when De C— was up the Padas river, a sacrifice took place in the neighbourhood, and 1 cannot do better than use his own words:—
“One of the Muruts had been murdered by a “roving party of head-hunters, i.e killed with “blow-pipes. The tribe, determining to avenge "his death, seized on an old woman belonging “to the hostile tribe, who had been 1ong living “in the village, and. binding her on a bamboo “grating over the grave, proceeded to despatch "her with knives, spears and daggers.
“The brother of the murdered ma struck the "first blow, then all joined in till life was “extinct; the blood was allowed to flow in to the "grave over the corpse; the skull was cut into “fragments, and with the corresponding portions “of the scalp, the hair attached, was di- "vided amongst the friendsand relatives; the "nails were also extracted.
“The Orang Kaya then proceeded to orna- ‘ment a pole in the native fashion, with strips “of plantain bark, the summit of which be "surmounted with his part on of the skull, on "either side of the centre pole, another pole “was erected, on each of which the five nails “of a hand were exposed. The body of the “woman was buried with that of the murdered “ man.
" The Muruts have a curious prejudice against “ pork that has not been raised under their own "houses: the people of one village will not eat " of a pig which has been reared in a neighbouring “village. This prejudice extends even to European "bacon in tins, which they refuse to touch, al-though jungle pigs are eaten readily.
“The sago plantations in the Muka district are "strictly considered personal property of in- “dividuals, as a general rule, and questions as to “proprietorship form the principal cases in our “Courts The plantations are either acquired by “hereditary succession, or by purchase. Oc- "casionally a plantation will be found which is “held in common by the members of one family, "but generally th is occurs when the parents have “not long died, and the children consist principally "of girls. In the north, amongst the Dusans, where “sago is unknown and padi plentiful. I have visited "some villages where the padi is common to all. “These are inland villages. Those near the sea “have not this custom
“As for the presence of women at religious cere- “inonies, here at the swinging ceremonies they are "always present, and also when feasts are held in “honour of the padi spirits. So far as 1 had power “of observing, women do not become spectators of “human sacrifices, even though the victim be a “woman. The Muruts never sacrifice one. of their “own people, but either capture an individual of a "hostile tribe, or send to a friendly tribe to pur chase a slave for the purpose. The Dustins do not "sacrifice human beings, even when they build "their houses.
“In this country, when an aged Milano is sick "unto death, and no hope remains of his recovery, “it is the custom for the nearest relative to present “the dying person with a shroud, generally a gold-cloth- Among the northern tribes it is the “custom' at this crisis, for friends of the dying "person to present the nearest relation—husband, “wife, or child—with small tokens of affection, "such as a piece of black cloth, tobacco, etc. The "corpse is invariably kept in the house until it is "far advanced in decomposition from ten days to "a fortnight—and then, if it can be squeezed into a "jar this is done at once, if not. the corpse is put up "a tree or covered with stones, until it is reduced in "dimensions.
“Among the Muruts the women till the soil "and reap the padi, roam the forest in search “of edible leaves and fungi, while the men hunt, "fish and make war, and when not employed in "any of these occupations, remain idle, as they “ never help the women in the fields.
“The Dusans on the contrary, till and hunt “also, the women carrying wood and water and “attending principally to household duties sel- “dom going afield except when all hands are “ wanted
“The Muruts will fell forest trees In order to "clear land, but will not clear secondary jungle. "Certain fruit trees are considered the common "property of the village, and others are private “property; unless the tabu mark is placed on "any particular tree (a few dead leaves bound "round the tree), it is generally considered that “passers-by may help themselves to the fruit-
"I have never met with cannibals in Borneo, “although I am sure, from all I have heard, that "the practice of eating human beings has not " long died out. and 1 think it very likely it may “still exist in obscure and little known places in " the far interior.
“With regard to slavery, the Muruts have slaves “and will sell their children to pay Iheir debts. “ They follow fixed custom in not selling a slave " to another person, unless with the slave's “ consent.
" Dusuns will not have slaves, nor will they sell “ their children, nor will they give up runaway “ slaves.
I left Muka to-day in a prahu with F	of
the Borneo Company We had both wind and tide against us, and reached Ova only at 7 p.m.
18th Mav I find Oya very much improved since my first visit last year. The cultivation of sago is rapidly extending During the twelve months the Government has erected a Court- hcuse and Officers’ quarters, a bazaar has sprung up. a road has been constructed connecting the Oya Trading Company’s sago manufactory with the village, and on to the sea-shore. The Oya Company,s works are all new. and besides the manufactory itself with its various sheds, there is a substantial dwelling house for the partners.
10th May. Went over the sago mill with W——, who give some particulars about the works and the manner in which they prepare the sago.
The engine is one of 14 horse-power, and when the mill is not in use in grinding and washing sago, can be used for driving sawing machinery.
Both raw sago and sago trees are purchased and worked up ; when the former is bought it is simply washed and prepared for the market, the grain hav ing been previously stamped out of the tree trunks by the feel of the natives; when, however, the trunks of sago trees are purchased, the process is a longer one
The trunks of the sago trees are some thirty to forty feet in length and are sold by the cut or krai of three feet, the average price being thirty cents per cut. One cut may be said to contain a little more than half pasu of sago, though some cuts may run higher, even as high as a pasu. hut this is rare.
These krats in coming to the mill are denuded of the outer bark and then split with a wooden wedge; the sago tree being nothing but a cylinder of pith, splits with great ease-
The krats are then placed before a revolving cy linder studded with steel points, driven with great velocity and liberally supplied with water; this cylinder tears or pulverizes the krais into a pulpy consistency with extraordinary rapidity.
Placed immediate!” under the cylinder is a cir cular vat in the centre of which stands a vertical shaft with revolving wings, which agitates the sago pulp with great velocity and drives it into a horizontal cylinder of fine wire- The interior of this gauze cylinder* is provided with means to propel the fibrous matter forward while the pulp is forced through the gauze into a vat or tank beneath ; in this the sago flour sinks to the bottom while the refuse is discharged at the other end of the open cylinder on a tray covered with wire- gauze-
The sago on being removed from the tank is placed in vats supplied with clean water in which are revolving agitators When it has been tho-roughly stirred up by this process, it is drawn off through taps and allowed to fall on a tray of fine wire-gauze, underneath which are long wooden gutters to receive the sago water, while the refuse is thrown off the tray in another direction.
From the gutters the sago is dug out and and placed in the sun to dry when it is ready for market.
I find there are a dozen Chinese settled in Oya
and perhaps half a dozen engaged in trade up
the river.
21st May. As I wished to get to Sibu as quickly as possible and having little kit or im- pediminta, I engaged only a small boat with a crew of five men, our only arms being a nider rifle and our swords.
I left Oya at about it am. after some trouble with my crew. When off to Mudan, found the stream dry; so I had to stand off with a fair wind, but in a heavy squail of -ain. for the mouth of the Igan, which I reached at 6 p.m
The shore between Oya and Igan differs en-tirely from that between Oya and Bintulu, casu- raina trees entirely disappear and are replaced by jungle down to the very water’s edge, and a muddy foreshore replaced the fine sands which exist further north
The Igan village is a dirty collection of Malay huts and hovels, and it being low dead water I had the full benefit of the smell which arises from the accumulation of mud and filth under the buildings.
I left the village about 8 p. m. and proceeded up-stream with the flood tide.
22nd May. All day engaged in working my way up the Igan stream, one of the most uninteres ting rivers it has ever been my lot to explore. The Shores, low and muddy, are covered with jungle to the water's edge, so much so that it was very difficult to find a spot where we could land to cook our mid-day meal- Nota bird or beast of any sort to be met with, and not a human habi tation till very late in the evening when we appro ached Sibu Station. 1 think we passed only one boat the whole day. Weather very hot. but a steady breeze enabled us to make good progress, and 1 reached Sibu fort at about 7 n.m.
33rd May. I heard to-day that the bala or expedition against the up-river Dayaks under Andam. who had built a small stockade on the Mujok, had been quite successful, and had only fust returned ; one man of the enemy was killed, and a good many wounded, our bala losing two men killed, but no heads, and a few wounded. The expedition went on to Intiman. and found the Dayaks moving to Entabai. Meeting with no
*This gauze cylinder works in about live inches of water and in internally arranged with wings or paddle, on the Archimedean principle of screw.
The cylinder at the admisson end is six feet in diameter white the discharge end is but four feet; hence this enables two thirds of the cylinder to revolve in a few inches of water, while the tray at the discharge end is just above the water level placed there to receive any sago-flour that may escape from the cylinder, of which, however, there are no traces
resistance, our Chiefs ordered all the houses to be destroyed, and the Dayaks were ordered to move to Entabai. Andam ran away, but is expected shortly to return to Entabai and sue for peace. Fitz C	, in charge of Sibu fort tells me that
the Rejang is now free of enemies, and perfect peace may be said to prevail. I wonder how long it will last Our bala was a Kuluka and Rejang one
I walked over the island of Sibu and through
the bazaar and *a pongs, finding everything
much improved, and was told that trade had very
considerably increased. It must, however, be
terriblv rnontonous living on this island-
25th May- The gun-boat Heartsease steamed up-river to-day bringing powder, which had run short in the fort-
I took a passage in her for Kuching, arriving there on the 26th May.
Sarawak Library.
His Highness the Rajah has kindly presented the following books :—
Second Division.
December, 1927.
BATANG LUPAR.
Agriculture.—It IS reported that the next pepper
crop will be a failure owing to incessant rain, padi
prospects for main river are very good indeed.
The following permits were issued Rubber 14,
pepper 54.
Trade.—Commissioner of Trade paid a visit here
from 11th to 16th and also visited Engkilili with
reference to pepper regulations.
SARIBAS.
Agriculture.—Thirty-nine rubber planting per mits were issued during the month.
KALAKA.
Trade.—Tbe trade statistics were as follows:
Kalaka.
Twelve motor schooners and seven bandongs
entered, ten motor schooners and eight bandongs
cleared.
Lower Saribas.
Eight motor schooners and thirteen bandongs
entered, thirteen motor schooners and twelve ban-
dongs cleared.
C. D. ADAMS,
Acting Resident, Second Division-
Third Division
December, 1927.
SIBU.
General.—Good progress has been made during the month with The Borneo Company and the Ship- E Company Offices on the river front. The District Offices were practically completed at the end of the year. The new shop-houses are also going up rapidly. Other buildings which have shown progress are the Police Offices, New Market, and Island Club. The P.W.D. Bungalow was com peted and occupied during the month.
The Electrical Department has continued wiring the bazaars for light ami it is obvious that the exis ting plant is too small to deal with all requirements and that another more powerful unit is required immediately if all demands for current are to be met.
Very good progress has been made with sanitary work in the Sibil bazaars and also with the lay-out of roads ami plots for additional shop-houses.
Philip Hu a species of Christian Scientist or revivalist came from Singapore and held religious meetings hut his ritual so upset bis converts especially the women that he was deported at the request of the leading Foochows.
H. L. OWEN,
Resident, Third Division.
Coast Division.
November, 1927.
MUKAH AND BALINGIAN.
General.—A good many people have lately applied for land on which to plant sago and this has been glanced free provided they do plant sago.
I regret to report I he death of two old Govern ment servants, both well known and respected by many Officers stationed here in the past. Tuah Kampong Abdul Hamid, of the lower Telian and ex-Penghulu Sana, Ulu Mukah.
Balingian.
Raw sago ... 35 koyans 5 3,850 Rice	231 bags, $4,258
Jelutong	... 243 pikuls 2.100 Clothing 29 cases, 5 000
P. Rubber ... 10 850
The rainfall was 16.96 inches.
OYA AND DALAT.
Trade.—One hundred and forty-one koyans of raw sago, 160 piculs of jelutong, and 114 piculs of para rubber were shipped to Kuching.
Second Division.
December, 1927.
BATANG LUPAK.
Agriculture.— It is reported that the next pepper crop will be a failure owing tn incessant rain, padi prospects for main river are very good indeed.
The following permits were issued Rubber 14, pepper 54
Trade— Commissioner of Trade paid a visit here from 11th to 16th and also visited Engkilili with reference to pepper regulations.
SARIBAS.
Agriculture.—Thirty-nine rubber planting per mits were issued during the month.
KALAKA.
Trade.—The trade statistics were as follows.
Kalaka
Kalaka.
Twelve motor schooners and seven bandongs entered, ten motor schooners and eight bandongs cleared.
Lower Saribas.
Eight motor schooners and thirteen bandongs entered, thirteen motor schooners and twelve ban dongs cleared.
C. D. ADAMS, Acting Resident, Second Division
Third Division.
SIBU.
General.—Good progress has been made during the month with The Borneo Company and the Ship ping Company Offices on the river front. The District Offices were practically completed at the end of the year. The new shop-houses are also going up rapidly. Other buildings which have shown progress are the Police Offices, New Market, and Island Club. The P.W.D. Bungalow was com peted and occupied during the month.
The Electrical Department has continued wiring the bazaars for light and it is obvious that the exis ting plant is too small to deal with all requirements and that another more powerful unit is required immediately if all demands for current are to be met.
Very good progress has been made with sanitary
work in the Sibu bazaars and also with the lay-out
of roads and plots for additional shop-houses.
Philip Hu a species of Christian Scientist or
revivalist came from Singapore and held religious
meetings but his ritual so upset his converts
especially the women that ho was deported at the
request of the leading Foochows.
H. L. OWEN,
Resident, Third Division.
Coast Division.
November, 1927.
MUKAH AND BALINGIAN.
General.—A good many people have lately applied for land on which to plant sago and this has been granted free provided they do plant sago.
I regret to report the death of two old Govern ment servants, both well known and respected by many Officers stationed here in the past. Tuah Kampong Abdul Hamid, of the lower Telian and ex-Penghulu Sana, Ulu Mukah.
OYA AND DALAT.
Trade.—One hundred and forty-one koyans of raw sago, 160 piculs of jelutong, and 114 piculs of para rubber were shipped to Kuching.
The trade returns for the month and for com parison with those of the same period last year, are as follows:—
