THURSDAY, NOVEMBER 1, 1928. Marriage.ENNION-CANE—On September 1, 1928, at St. John's, Cam
bridge-sopare quietly, Sydney Terence, eldest son of Major and Mrs S. J. Ennion, of Newmarket, to Phyllis BETTY, DAUGHTER of the late Mrs. Henry-Cane, of East Molesey, and of Henry Cane, of Winter, Saskatchewan.
Acknowledgments. The Datu Shahbandar, Abang Haji Abdillah, wishes on behalf of himself and his wife to express his very sincere appreciation and thank to all those which attend the funeral and to those who have been kind enough to send message of condolence. Mrs. Ton Bian Tin and family beg to thank all friends and relatives who sent wreaths, scrolls and letters of condolence and also those who after did the funeral of the late Mr. Tan Bian Tin.
NOTES.
( October.)
THE seventeenth anniversary of the Chinese Republic was celebrated in Kuching on the 10th by processions of all Chinese Schools through the town.
PROSPECTS of an engkabamg crop are re-ported from the Second and Third Divisions. An exceptional fruit season is expected in the First Division and this is confirmed, accord ing to native opinion, by the large number of “flying foxes” to be seen every evening.
THE following are from the Government Gazette of October 1st, Mr. EH. P. Bengts son to be Surveyor of Ships and Mr. G. M. MacBryan to be Private Secretary to His Highness the Rajah.
A third and final meeting of the Educa tional Commission was held on the 16th. Proposals that the Government engage a competent educationalist and also start a scheme of scholarships tenable in Singapore were made and subsequently approved.
ON Friday the 19th the annual prize giving to the Government Malay Schools was held at Astana before a large gathering of parents and guests. After the distribution a joint address was read from the three schools to His Highness the Rajah, followed by a song and chorus from the individual schools. After giving three cheers for His Highness the scholars wheeled out with military pre cision to the cloisters below where a gargan tuan curry awaited them. Later a special film was shown in which the hero appeared to be a white horse of astonishing sagacity.
On the 24th His Highness the Rajah paid a visit of inspection to the Seventh Day Adventists School at the Third Mile. An entertainment was given by the students. His Highness in a letter to Mr. T. G. Tan, the headmaster, said he had seen with satisfac-tion the comfortable surroundings in which the children were instructed.
THE Rev. Mr. and Mrs. Hoover, of the Wesleyan Episcopal Mission, returned to Sibu on the 11th September after a furlough spent in the United States.
MR. Robarts, General .Manager of the Island Trading Company, spent a few days in Kuching at the beginning of the month on his way back to Selalang from Singapore.
There has been a record output of cutch for the month of August, a very satisfactory end to the plucky fight put up by the Company’s officers against adverse circumstances over which they had no control.
THE following are among the appointments announced in the Government Gazette of October 16th. Mr. A. A. Rennie to act as "Government Agent in London, Mr. E. M. Woodward to be A. D. O. of Lower Rejang, Mr. C. D. Adams to be D. O., Situ, and Mr. W. F. de V. Skrine to act as Resident of Mukah and Oya.
Mr. J. S. W. Bean is Director of Agri-culture, Mr. W. G. Tait to act as Superin-tendent of Telegraphs and Mr. G. T. M. MacBryan to be Secretary for Native Affairs.
THE Coronation of the Emperor of Japan is fixed for 10th November. 1928. ADVERTISERS will note that from the 1st January, 1929, a small increase is being made in our rates for advertisements. This has been found necessary as the present charges do not cover the cost of printing. A Colonial Office report for last year from the State of Brunei says :—
“It is early to prophesy as yet, but high hopes are entertained that one day there will be a big oilfield here.”
Towards the end of the year “indications of a very favourable nature” were discovered along the seashore between two rivers.
THE attention of our readers is drawn to an advertisement of the Post Office Savings Bank appearing in our current issue in which some interesting figures are given shewing the amount due to depositors of $5 and $10 monthly at the end of each year beginning in January up to a period of 20 years. NOT only is modern Turkey, says the Evening Standard, with the blessing of Mus-tapha Kemal, adopting the European mode of writing in place of what to the majority of non-Turks appears to be picturesque hieroglyphics. Abbreviations of titles such as “bey” and “effendi” are to be used, and they are to follow the name, as in the case of our own “Esq.”
“Effendi” is to be abbreviated into "E.F.,” and when, according to an official intimation, the two are combined (as happens in the case of certain notable people), the name is to be followed by the august letters “B.F.”
Should these letters be placed after the name of an Englishman, he would be quite likely to be effendied.
His Highness the Rajah’s Birthday
Sports at Simanggang.
The athletic sports held at Simanggang in honour of His Highness the Rajah's birthday, turned out a great success. They were preceded by a Malay ma kan, presided over by Datu Abang Haji Abdulrasid. The Datu, while wishing all success to the after noon's sports, in a fitting speech, very touchingly alluded to the death of Datu Buassan and, only the day before, that of the Datu Bandar's son.
The ground was in perfect condition and the various officials are to be congratulated on the most efficient manner in which they carried out their duties. The clerk of the weather, who just at first allowed his frown to overshadow the gathering, soon relented and, except during the first event when there was a heavy shower of rain, the after noon was ideal for athletics. Though there were no particularly meritorious performances, the standard of running was of a fairly high order. There was no lack of competitors, in fact, in the majority of the events several beats had to be run.
The half-mile and the 100 yards, won by Rau and Sipudin in that order, were run in fine style and it is to be regretted that the absence of a stop-watch made it impossible for these events to be timed. Another performance worthy of comment was the pole jump won by Nyambang, some excellent jumping being witnessed here. The obstacle, sack, wheelbarrow and three-legged races, all caused con siderable amusement and raised roars of laughter from the spectators. A race for Abangs and Pen- hulus, followed by a herculean tug-of-war, brought the afternoon's proceedings to a pleasurable con clusion a few minutes before six.
That evening a Chinese dinner was held in the Fort at which the health of His Highness the Rajah was enthusiastically toasted.
Mr. Arundell, who was over from Belong, very kindly acted as one of the judges. Special mention should be made of Mr. Yaw Hunt, the originator of the sports, who was untiring in his efforts and made all preliminary arrangements.
Simanggang, Dyak Football.
A highly successful knock-out football competition for Dyaks only in the Batang Lupar river came to a conclusion at Simanggang on the 11th October, when in the final R. Empenit, Stumbin, defeated R. Nyuin, Tawang, by three goals to nil.
Altogether 23 teams from far and near entered, and the whole competition was only marred by one unfortunate accident, a broken leg.
Play throughout was very hard and keen and, considering the fact that grounds the Dyaks practice on are small and they teach themselves a standard of play, it was quite promising and free of very much intentional fouling.
It was unfortunate that a Lingga team (R. Unggi, Banting) had to play four tunes in three days owing to two re-plays in the semi-final in which they were finally knocked out and their conquerors had in consequence a gruelling time when they reached the final.
The best match occurred in the second round between Kaong-Tisak and R. Lejam, Rawan. Play in this match was of a very high standard; the Dyaks concerned had obviously studied and learnt a lot about the game. They kept their places well, marked opponents closely and showed considerable signs of combination, passing being invariably done along the ground.
Runners-up were another promising team and out of all who took part a decidedly good team could be raised and trained.
Winners were a well-balanced side, but play in the final, due, no doubt, to excitement, was a long way inferior to that between Kaong-Tisak and R. Lejam, Rawan.
Had Tawang taken all the easy chances they had of scoring the result might have been different, but they failed lamentably in front of goal.
At the close a silver cup and medals were pre sented to the winners by the Resident amidst, great enthusiasm while the runners-up were also suitably rewarded.
Marriage of Mr. R. E. Edwards
and Miss B. Slater.
A very interesting wedding took place at the Pro Cathedral. Kuching, on Saturday 6th, when Mr. R. E. Edwards, of the Public Works Department, married Miss Bessie Slater. At the wedding the Right Reverend the Bishop of the diocese officiated and the bridegroom was accompanied by his best man Mr. Douglas Binnie, whose sang froid proved it was not the first time he bad assisted a fellow bachelor in similar circumstances. The bride wore a gown of white chiffon over charmeuse silk made from a unique design, the simplicity of which was its great charm ; a narrow bund of radium velvet at the waist held by a clasp of brilliants, the gift of the bridegroom, was the only adornment. A veil of Nottingham lace reaching to the ground formed a graceful train and a large and beautiful bouquet of jasmine, lilies, white Honolulu and asparagus fern, the gift of the Kuching ladies, with a spray of orange blossom completed the bridal effect. Miss Silcock acted as bridesmaid.
After the ceremony a reception, attended by all the European community, was held at the Residency, by kind invitation of Mr. and Mrs. Boult. After partaking of a colossal wedding cake the health of the bride and bridegroom was cordially drunk by all present, and the happy couple left by car for their honeymoon.
The Chingey Procession.
The Chingey (or fancy dress) procession which took place last month in Kuching is, as is generally known, entirely maintained and organized by the Hockien, Hokchia, Hengwha and Foochow com munities. This year it was produced with the usual magnificence at a cost of over $30,000.
The origin of this pageant is obscure, some say that the Emperor Lee See Bin. of the Tong dynasty, to test the magical powers of Teo Thien Su, “the immortal pope of Taoism," concealed 300 of bis subjects in a cave and after bidding them strike up a tune called in Teo Thien Su to put a stop to what he pretended was an unholy nuisance. The priest was equal to the task and breathed a spell which decapitated the whole band.
Another version is that one of the Ming Emperors, unjustly displeased with thirty-six of the most brilliant scholars in the Empire, ordered their execution. His mistake was discovered too late. Whichever tale is true the fact remains that there was a body of spirits with a grievance ; to appease them they were created Ong Yahs (princes) with full liberty to go where they pleased.
It is for these spirits that the procession is held once every ten years and it is for them (should any happen to be present) that the fully-rigged and equipped “wongkang'’ is drawn through the streets. At every corner and every temple the procession halts for a moment and the sacred banner, waved three times, lures them to the junk that will take them home. On the third day the “wongkang” is burned with proper ceremony and peace and pros perity follow.
Everyone who saw the sight with its wonder fully decorated cars, the lion and the dragon, the dainty princesses, the gorgeous warriors and the troop of souls in hell will hope that the pious wish of the founders will meet with the success they deserve and that this will not be for the last time that Kuching witnesses a Chingey procession.
The Venerable Archdeacon Perham.
The death of Archdeacon Perham, formerly Colonial Chaplain of Singapore, recalls some incidents in the past history of the colony which will prove of interest to many still here, especially the permanent residents, who in their younger daya knew him well.
The Archdeacon was a man of attractive per sonality, and was greatly esteemed by Europeans and Eurasians alike. He came out at the age of 28 to Sarawak as a missionary and, after a short time at Kuching, was sent up country into the wilds of Borneo, to work among the Dyaks. His post was three days’ journey by river and there he lived and worked with great success for 20 years with only two short spells of leave. In 1889, the Colonial Chaplain of Singapore went on leave prior to retirement. Tilings were at a low ebb in church matters, and Sir Cecil Clementi Smith. Governor of the Straits, asked the Bishop if he could find a man to wake things up.
The Bishop sent Mr. Perham from Sarawak, and he soon won his way. As acting Chaplain, he secured the esteem of such men as Mr. Donaldson, of Donaldson and Burkinshaw, Mr. Thomas Shelford and Mr. Charles Stringer, of Paterson, Simons and Company, and Mr. Charles Sugden, of the Borneo Company, all of whom were his warm friends. Sir Cecil Clementi Smith offered him the permanent appointment of Colonial Chaplain, with the consent of the Secretary of State.
During his regime, he beautified St. Andrew’s Cathedral and raised the music to a really high standard. He built St. Andrew's House .for boys, St. Andrew's Hall (now part of the school), and St. Matthew's Church, Sepoy Lines, and founded St. Mary’s Home, which began in a Chinese house in Hill Street, and was the parent of the Children’s Aid Society. Before the days of the Y.M.C.A. he established clubs and guilds for young men and women and was a leading figure in those days in all philanthropic movements.
Sir Cecil Clementi Smith was succeeded by Sir Charles Mitchell, and Archdeacon Perham ultimately became one of his best friends. Sir Charles died at Government House, and was to the last ministered to by Mr. Perham. The funeral at the Old Bukit Timah Cemetery was remarkable. Singapore ceased all business and the whole naval
The Adventures of Limbang,
a Hero of Dyak Mythology.
Once upon a time, ages ago, Klieng and his brothers went out in the forest to hunt. They were five in number, Klieng, Pungga, Bunga Nawieng, Laja and Limbang.
Limbang was the youngest of the brood and, ns was supposed, required to be looked after and tenderly dealt with. While his elder brothers carried each a “pasu” of rice, he was only asked to carry a "gantang." It would not do to start without provisions; for they might wander astray into an unknown region, and be quite unable to find their way home. As it was, they fully intended to make a long business of it. and be absent for days and weeks. The dogs were permitted to run on ahead; the hunters followed in their wake in Indian file, Klieng leading the column and Limbang bring ing up the rear. In this order they marched for hours in the shade of the jungle and by noon arrived at the foot of a hill named Panggau Libau. The dogs now began to bark and the game to break cover. Said Klieng to Limbang, “You are too young, my boy, to bear the fatigue, so just you stay here and take charge of our rice, we run on and support the hounds.” They then dropped their burdens and bounded into the thicket, spear in hand. As soon as they had passed out of sight the youngster tied the baskets together with a thong, slung them upon his shoulder, and dashed away in pursuit. And, lo and behold I when Klieng and the rest reached the spot where the dogs were baying, there was Limbang before them, calmly seated on their burdens, and a huge boar weltering in blood at his feet. “You have, stolen a march on us, Limbang.” said they, “but had we known the speed of your foot and the strength of your back before we left home, we would have given you our burdens to carry long before this." Limbang felt proud of what he had done, for this was the first time his hand had shed blood and, though it was but the blood of a pig, it awoke in him a fierce desire to dip his hands in human gore, whereby he might win unto himself (what he most cherised) name and fame. His brothers next ripped up the belly of the pig, cast out the entrails, and quartered the carcase. To each was given a limb, but to Limbang was given the head. They then resumed their journey, and reached the top of the hill before dusk and were enabled to erect a bower before it grew too dark to see. Wood and water were procured without trouble, and everything was got ready for cooking. Klieng drew out his flint and steel, but could not manage to strike a light, so he 'flung the flint away and asked his brothers to try theirs. They tried, but with no better success, and flung their flints away also in sheer disgust. “This will never do,” said Klieng, "we must get a light somehow, or we shall starve, not being accustomed to eat raw meat." By and by, as the night grew darker, he caught a glimpse of a fire a long way off and pointed it out to his brothers, but they would none of them go and fetch a light, pleading fatigue, the distance, the unknown dangers of the route, the blackness of the night. Klieng then asked his youngest to go and do what his elder brothers dared not to do. Limbang agreed to go, but reminded them he might not be back in a hurry; he was slow of foot and besides the fire might be a longer way off than it looked in the surrounding gloom. Saying this, he disappeared in the jungle and was lost to view. A run and bound or two and he was beside
the expiring embers. With the sword in his hand, he cut down a sapling, split it into firewood and fit the resinous brands. Half-way back, he was clutched by the arm by a demon of gigantic stature, who demanded of him in a voice of thunder what he meant by setting the forest on fire. Having explained that he had been sent by his brothers to procure a light, and was even now on the way back with a. flaming faggot, he begged permission to proceed unmolested. The giant, however, would not hear of this, but wanted Limbang to come along with him. His house was close by, he said, and his young friend must refresh himself with meat and drink.
Limbang was afraid to gainsay the giant, and he was too insignificant to grapple with him, so he determinded to put the best face on the matter, go home with the giant and partake of his hospitality. The more so, when he reflected that the giant was not unkind in his manner, though imperious in his language and shaggy in appearance. He therefore closed with the offer, was lifted up from the ground and deposited in the hollow of the ear. A few enormous strides and the giant's residence was reached. It was a long rambling house, having accommodation for 30 families. The place was empty now, for the giant had long since eaten up all his people, and he was constrained to live a life of solitude. But he began to tire of his lonely life and invited Limbang to share it with him as his adopted son. He gave him many a costly present, and promised to leave him his vast wealth and to form his character after the most approved model, so that he should become in the fullness of time the love of lovely women and the envy of aspiring warriors. Limbang listened to the voice of the tempter and was won. On these terms he consented to remain and forsake his kindred. But he shed many a bitter tear in secret.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor it not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
Singing Sands.
To
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching,
KUCHING, 18th October, 1938.
SIR,
WITH reference to a recent letter in the Gazette on “Singing Rivers" and calling for comment, I have not heard the noise mentioned but no doubt a somewhat similar noise is produced by certain sands, notably at home and in one case at least out here, namely in a small bay immediately beyond Tanjong Po.
It is not a permanent feature anywhere, only prevalent in a spell of fine weather, producing as one walks along dull humming, ringing notes of varying pitch, depending on the size of the sand grains in the area trodden on ; and I can only con clude that to bear even a remotely similar noise in a river is due to the pasang stirring up such a patch of sand which has accumulated for example in a long dry period when there was no "fresh" to correspond to rougher waves which spoil such sands on the seashore.
On the sands neither ikan buntal nor prawn is responsible and the former is of course not found at home; Singing Sauds are a fact ("established and scientific” if one is sceptical about other peoples’ facts) but though reams have been written and many experiments carried out on them no intelligible explanation as to the manner in which the sand makes the noise is forthcoming.
Yours, etc., "B. FLAT.”
Cricket.
30th September, 1998.
KUCHING CRICKET CLUB V. CEYLONESE CLUB.
Extracts from Monthly Reports.
First Division.
KUCHING.
August, 1928.
Mr. F. F. Boult, Resident, First Division, re ports :—
Resident's Court—(Criminal).—There were nine convictions and one acquittal.
An appeal by J. C. Matthews against the decision of the District Court, Bau, in his case with the Dahan Rubber Estate, Limited, was allowed, the respondents being ordered to pay the appellant three months' wages in lieu of notice.
Resident's Court—(Civil).—Only two claims were lodged amounting in all to $2,671.41.
General.—On the 7th, accompanied by Mr. Binnie of the P.W.D., I inspected the new Pork and Vege table Market and Slaughter House at Batu Kawa.
I visited Bau from the 15th to 18th.
Kudi, a Dyak and criminal lunatic who escaped from the Asylum on the 4th, was recaptured in the Ulu Tabekang and brought back on the 19th.
The District Officer, Mr. J. O. Swayne, reports :—
I was away from Kuching for the last three days of the month, during which time Mr. A. E. Lawrence officiated in Court.
District Court—Fifty-eight cases were heard, thirty-five of which were criminal and twenty-three civil.
Magistrate's Court.—One hundred and seven civil suits were brought for hearing.
Police Court.—Twenty-seven summary cases were brought before the Court, twenty-four convictions and three acquittals were obtained.
In addition ninety-six judgment summonses were dealt with.
Forty-five cases were carried forward for hearing in September.
Coroner’s Court.—An inquest was held on the body of Yio Ah San on the 25th August, and a verdict of death by asphyxia (suicidal hanging) was returned.
September, 1928.
In the Supreme Court the dissolution of the marriage of Gamon and Daie was granted.
Resident’s Court— (Criminal).—There were four convictions and two acquittals.
Resident's Court— (Civil).—Seven claims were lodged amounting in all to $1,632.47.
The District Officer, Mr. J. C. Swayne, reports :—
District Court.—Forty-eight- cases were heard, thirty-two of which were criminal and fifteen civil. The civil claims involved amounts totalling $5,968.87.
Magistrate's Court.—Seventy-seven civil suits were brought for hearing. The total value of claims was $1,568.91.
Police Court.—Nineteen summary cases were brought before the Court .
In addition fifty-nine judgment summonses were dealt with. Forty-five cases were carried forward for hearing in October. No cases were of special importance.
The Coroner's Court sat on four occasions and brought in the following verdicts: Goh Soo, accidental death (due to haemorrhage); Chong Ah Moh, death due to asphyxia (suicidal hanging); Chong Fah, death due to disease (empyaema); Loh On, death caused by a wound : in this case a verdict of murder was returned and Loh Sing (now in custody) was charged.
Tn spite of the fact that an unusual number of holidays occurred during the month, His Highness the Rajah's birthday, two race days and the Chingey procession, there was very little increase in Police Court work. It was specially noticeable that there was no increase in the number of charges for breach of Traffic Regulations.
BAU, UPPER SARAWAK.
August, 1928.
The District Officer, Mr. J. B. Archer, reports:— General.—A. Harry, from the Health Department, arrived on the 2nd in Bau to do duty in this district. He is busy making a preliminary inspection of the. bazaars, and a definite policy will be considered when the Chief Health Officer has more details. A consignment of fire extinguishers has arrived and they have been placed in all Government buildings and bazaars.
Attempts are being made to induce the Chinese to purchase them for their private use. His High ness the Tuan Muda’s birthday was observed as a holiday.
Dr. Krol, of the Dutch Government Service, arrived on the 16th, accompanied by eighteen Dyaks and native followers. He left for Lundu, via Stengang and Stungkor on the 18th.
I left for the Left Hand Branch on the 23rd, re turning to Siniawan on the 29th. The return journey from the Pengkalan Ampat only took 9 hours, which quick journey was accounted for by heavy rain the night before we started.
The weather was very hot and dry for most of the month and the Siniawan water supply was not available for nine days. The Bau supply was ex cellent.
The Pengkalan Ampat Chinese keep their small bazaar very neat, and trade appeared to be fair. They asked for breech-loading guns which request has been referred to the Resident. There are Chinese at Pelontan but this district, although above the Batu Kitang, appears to be under the jurisdiction of Kuching. The Landeh Malays, too, are not in this district so I did not land at what seemed to be a well-kept and flourishing little kampong.
On the 23rd a smoke house on Dahan Estate containing 10,000 tbs. of rubber was destroyed by fire.
Dyak Affairs.—I visited the Left Hand Branch from the. 23rd until the 29tb. A night each was spent at Sidanoh and Sennah, and the remaining nights at Pengkalan Ampat. No cases of any im portance were brought up and, except for the small pox, the people seemed prosperous and contented.
I regret to say that most of the frequently used main tracks are reported to be in an overgrown and bad condition. The path from Pengkalan Ampat to Sennah is very rough. This is a short cut and absolutely necessary when the river is too high or low for boats. Another track which should receive attention is one from Sidanoh to Puak. This is only a day's travel and much used in the dry weather. The path from Pengkalan Ampat to Tebia is so over grown that even a mile out I was forced to walk half- cent in order to get along. I hope to arrange with the chiefs to keep these tracks in better condition, as they constitute a valuable and necessary means of communication. The work would not be a hardship. Tax was collected from all except the three Brang Kampongs were smallpox had broken out. This fact was reported by a Pengkalan Ampat Dyak and the Dresser who accompanied me was sent to investigate immediately. He found that ten deaths had occurred and that thirty-four persons were infected.
The Orang Kaya, Pa’Rendong, who had arrived at Pengkalan Ampat to meet me, appears to have ignored the epidemic and had not reported to Govern ment. Rumour says that he left his post on the out break and has lived some distance away ever since, I sent him back to his people in spite of his desire to accompany me to Sennah for a begawai there. In view of this sickness I did not collect any tax from Brang, informing the inhabitants that this matter would receive attention when the epidemic bad been got in hand. Despatches were sent to the Resident by coolies asking the Chief Health Officer to send men to try and segregate the sick, stop travelling and attend to those who needed treatment. The Dresser vaccinated all he could find, and the Resi dent informs me that the Health Department have taken the necessary steps.
The Dresser informs me that twenty-five N.A.B injections and three hundred and thirty-nine vaccina-tions were performed up the Left Hand Branch.
On the 21st a Chinaman living near Pengkalan Senggi reported that his house had been invaded by gang robbers who tied up his son and himself and stole $70 in cash. The complainant shewed marks of cords on his wrists and the story seems to be true. No trace of the alleged assailants can he found as their faces were blackened and they only left a carry ing pole marked " Voon Nyan."
September, 1928. General.—I left for Kuching on 17th, having been granted leave to attend Race Week, and returned on 28th to Bau.
On the 25th, I held an inquiry into a serious shooting affair which had happened just outside Siniawan. The affair was one in which car No. B.10, was held up on the public road and the driver, a Chinese, shot, at by another Chinese standing at the edge of the road. The driver was wounded in the right arm and neck and collapsed in his seat. The other occupants of the car, two young Chinese girls, were uninjured. The assailant then walked a few yards into a rubber garden and committed suicide by shooting himself in the mouth. From the results of the inquiry it appears that the assailant, who was the uncle of the two girls in the car, had warned the* driver about his alleged
improper conduct towards his nieces and, failing to obtain satisfaction and hearing that they had been seen driving out to Tundong again with the same driver, deliberately waited for their return and held up the car. Having challenged the driver, and receiving an unsatisfactory or no answer, he shot him and then destroyed himself. It is possible that he thought he had killed the driver when he committed suicide. The driver was taken straight down to Kuching Hospital where he still remains.
On the 9th I walked to Bidi to inspect the pre-parations being made there for the. new Bidi Gold Company. Part of the old road has been repaired at the Company’s expense, but is still soft in places. The Company are wisely erecting temporary offices and lines in view of the uncertainty of the venture. New machinery is being ordered from England, and the promoters are making efforts to get the plant running as soon as possible.
A Chinese was nearly drowned at Tundong on 13th and was only saved by the vigorous efforts of the ferryman Karim. The victim was offered and accepted Government employment and promised to reward his rescuer when in funds. He disappeared the next day, however, and is still missing.
The alleged case of abduction and rape which was mentioned in my last report, has collapsed owing to the girls’ prospective father-in-law’s reluctance to help the police find the suspected man.
A Javanese from the Labour Protectorate visited Dahan Estate for a few days, and informs me that nothing of importance transpired.
The Upper Sarawak Gold Mining Syndicate’s works at Baku are fast nearing completion and the Company hope to begin work shortly.
The new Morris 12-cwt. lorry arrived in Bau on the 8th, having been brought up to Siniawan by lighter. She is a well-built and handy vehicle, and is at present doing valuable work in conjunction with the. Trojan 10-cwt. lorry in carrying stone for the roads in preparation for the landas.
The new Buso barracks were finished and occupied during the month, and the old barracks demolished.
Owing to the drought the Siniawan water supply failed for 9 days and a rebate was’ allowed to consumers.
The usual routine work has been carried on, and more hills cleared near the District Officer's bunga low.
Education.—The annual prize-giving at the Bau Government School took place on the 8th. The examiners, both Chinese and Malay, report well on the school in general with the exception of the arithmetic. A night school in Bau was licensed under certain conditions.
hand.—Difficulty has been experienced in deal ing with attempts by Chinese, to buy up land in Malay kampong areas. It is thought that certain areas should be defined wherein none but the natives should hold land. Pepper is not being planted up in any quantity and the people are as ready as ever to plant rubber instead.
It is gratifying to notice that large areas of land bordering the Dahan Road is being planted up by Dyaks with jagong and other food-stuffs, whilst the padi clearings are said to be good and excellent burns made. Reports say that the engkabang, both in the Lundu and in the Simatan districts, are flowering freely.
Lim Ah Kit; who was wanted on a charge of suspected murder from Kuching, was arrested on the 7th by Orang Kaya Amas and police.
September. 1928.
Mr. D. Carroll visited the Gunong Gading Reserve during the month.
Order No. 1, 1925, was explained to all the pepper traders, and all those concerned where ordered to register and obtain the necessary licences before 1st October.
Report says that the engkabang is flowering freely at Simatan and Ulu Simatan.
The s.s. Maleng made six and the m.s. Lundu four trips during the month. The Buan Ann cleared for Pamangkat with a cargo of charcoal, salt fish and turtles eggs. Export duty was collected on these.
SADONG.
July and August, 1928.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, re ports :—
The usual Ris-Lanchang dispute broke out anew regarding the Sirip end of the boundary line. This was settled on July 9th on the spot at Munggu Akar.
Tabekang is becoming quite, a pretty little station and is being well laid out by Court Writer Lim Shin Hin.
The Temong Dyaks asked whether it would be possible to stop Orang Kaya Layu from returning there as he has threatened dire penalties on that kampong for recapturing him when he escaped from Simunjan gaol.
On the 19th July I left with Mrs. Carpenter for Kuching and Singapore, and returned alone on 22nd August.
Mr. E. Banks, Curator of the Museum, arrived on the 22nd and left for the Klingkang Range via Ulu Simunjan on the 27th.
September. 1928,
A petition by the Chinese against the Native Officer, Abang Haji Spi-ee, was quashed, there being no grounds for any of the complaints made therein.
The Coroner viewed the body of Tamby Kupusamy, dhobi, on the 5th.
Work was started on fitting 11/2 miles of new 4-inch water piping from the drain to the Nanas Road junction The Manager of the Colliery is making a new exit in the dam to feed the vicinity so that the pressure at Simunjan should be more than doubled when this work is completed.
I am trying to interest the Gedong people in sago and have promised them every assistance if they undertake to plant this commodity. The elder men of the village seem keen and it remains to be seen what influence they may have over the new generation.
Medical.—Out-patients at the hospital number one hundred and twenty and these totalled two hundred and twenty-three attendances. There was one case of measles.
The Resident visited the station from the 4th to the 7th and settled all outstanding matters requiring his attention.
On the 7th a hamadryad, measuring 15 feet, was killed near the Colliery. The skin was forwarded to the Museum on the following day.
F. F. BOULT, Resident, First Division.
Sadong Colliery.
September, 1928.
Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager, Sadong Colliery, reports ; -
The output, export, local consumption conversion into coke and coal stock figures for the month were as follows The output for the month is the highest recorded for a working period of 11/2 years, and the new labourers recruited during the first half of the year are fast approaching the skilled stage at their work below ground.
A mild form of sickness resembling influenza was rather prevalent during the month
J. W EVANS,
Manager.
Second Division.
BATANG LUPAR.
August. 1928.
Mr. E. A. W. Page-Turner, Resident, Second Division, reports:—-	Mr. R. W. Hirst, Assistant Superintendent of Rubber Improvement Fund, arrived from Kuching via Sadong on the 10th, and next day proceeded to Engkilili.	On the 14th, accompanied by Datu Abang Haji Dulrasit, I left for Saratok in m.l. Anne. Sebuyow was reached at 8 p.m . the night was spent here, and next morning we left for Kabong which place we reached at 10.30. Here I met Dr. W. Hutchison who was on his way back to Kuching. We left Kabong at 12.15 and reached Saratok at 3 p.m.
Saratok should be a very flemishing centre before long, and when a good road is put through to Sebitan and Roban a great number of pepper gardens will be started.
On the 17th I left Saratok, accompanied by Mr. H. E. Cutfield, Acting District Officer. A short time was spent at Kabong and then we left for Pusa. On arrival we picked up Abang Haji Dulkarrim, N O., and left for Debak. In the upper reaches of the Rim- bas driftwood was very bad and delayed the progress of the launch considerably. Debak was reached at 5.30 p.m Next morning Court was held by Mr. H E Cutfield and Native Officers. Sedik, N.O was dismissed his post, being responsible for the not between Malays and Chinese, also the Tua Kam- pong Abang Mentair was dismissed his post for “"Whilst at Debak I visited the new pepper gardens; the soil appeared suitable and there is plenty of old jungle all round. The gardeners are held up from planting as they cannot obtain young pepper plants
Mr. E. W. Oswald, M.E of Selantik Coal Prospecting Company, arrived via Lingga bringing Chinese coolie for medical treatment He reports that one Chinese coolie died on arrival at Lingga Mr. E. W. Oswald returned to Selantik via Lingga next day.
The m.l. Para arrived on the 29th with Mr. G. M. Allman Inspector Rubber Improvement Fund, and MR. J. S. W. Bean, Acting Director of Agriculture, on board. Next day I accompanied them to Engkilili. The visit was to examine into pepper vine and fruit disease.
The m.l. Santosa arrived on the 29th with the Right Reverend the Bishop of Sarawak and Labuan. After a short stay the m.l. Santosa left for Sabu Mission.
September, 1928. On the 1st Messrs. Bean, Allman and Hirst, accompanied by myself, return from Engkilili; next day they left in m.l. Para for Saratok.
The Right Reverend the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak left Sahu on the 3rd, spending a night at Simanggang, and early next morning left for Kuching in m.l. Santosa.
The Dyaks from all over the district report that fruit trees are in flower, also the engkabang trees, and they arc all very optimistic about the future of the latter crop.
A great number of natives took advantage of the drought and burnt off their clearings for padi farms.
The opening up of pepper gardens in the vicinity of Engkilili is extensive and, on making a rough estimate, I should think about 700 acres have been dug up and planted.
Kadir, of the Land Office, is now stationed at Engkilili and is employed in surveying gardens for occupation tickets.
On the 15th Mr. E. Banks, Curator of Sarawak Museum, arrived from Sadong district, via Selantik, overland.
On the 16th I left for Lingga in m.l. finne. accompanied by Mr. E. Banks and, on arrival boarded the s.l. Lucille and left for Kuching. By this opportunity I took down $15,385 for the Sarawak Treasury.
P.-Corporal Kedar, P.-C. Guntor, Penghulus Tngkas, Khatib Ismail and Tuab Kampong Adak also proceeded to Kuching in order to receive the Long Service Medals on His Highness the Rajah's birthday.
I returned to Simanggang on the 29th.
Mr. R. H. P. Langton reports that during my absence Mr. R. D. Binnie and Mr. G. M. Allman arrived on 19th in m.l. Para. They are here to make a rough survey for a road from here to Kuching. They were still beyond the Termudok range of hills at the end of the month.
Medical.—A total of 156 persons were treated in hospital during the month as follows :—Malays 14, Chinese 38, Dyaks 101, Javanese 1, Sikh 1, European 1.	,
Eighty N.A.B. Injections for yaws, etc., were given.
SARIBAS.
August. 1928.
Mr. G. R. H. Arundel), Officer-in-Charge, Belong, reports:—
Genet al.—On the first of the month Lance-Cor poral Drahmau was put in charge of the police here and P. C. Ngelambong was transferred to Simanggang.
The contractor for the new bazaar road has been working throughout the month and is making fair progress.
It was discovered during the month the Penghulu Ijau of Paku had misappropriated death duties collected by him in bis district. He has been sent for several times in order that an inquiry may he held, but pleads that he is ill and unable to leave his house.	.
On the 19th the Resident of the Division and Mr. H. E. Cutfield arrived from Debak. The Resident, after looking into one or two of the more important affairs, left again for Simanggang on 21st.
On 27th I paid a visit to Spaoh about the ponce barracks there and arrived with Tamili and Sujai to build them for J6u0.
September, 1928. The new bazaar road is progressing slowly. It was retarded by the absence of both the contractor and his foreman during the festivities in Kuching.
The Dyaks have been busy farming all the month and have now mostly finished planting.
September, 1928.
KALAKA.
August, 1928.
Mr. H. E. Cutfield, Acting District Officer, Kalaka, reports:—
On the 1st 1 got news overland from Debak that an unusual affair had taken place there at 10 o’clock that night. This proved to be a fight between Kampong Malays and the Bazaar Chinese.
I arrived at Debak the same evening. The whole kampong and bazaar were concerned but luckily no more dangerous weapons were used than sticks. Eight people were injured but only one really seriously. The Malays were chiefly to blame. Eight men were put on remand and pledges imposed throughout the bazaar and kampong. Later, in the settlement of the case, two Chinese and five Malays received terms of imprisonment and four people were fined.
The Native Officer, Sidek, and Tua Kampong were dismissed by the Resident who was present during the hearing of the case, the former being proved to be largely responsible for the whole affair.
On the 5th Dr. Hutchison arrived, accompanied by Dresser Suhaili, in m.l. One which had been sent to fetch him from Pusa. Dr. Hutchison came to give N.A B. injections but I am afraid his visit was not altogether successful for two reasons. The first being that it was the Dyaks busiest time of the year, being in the middle of their clearing for the new farms, and they are particularly busy this year owing to the complete failure of their crops last year. Secondly it was just the end of a serious drought and the upriver people were unable to get down in consequence.
Two Dyaks who came to the bazaar informed me they had been six days coining down from their house, a trip which they can usually do in a day. If it took them this time to get down it would take them considerably longer to get back and there arc few who would be willing co spend this amount of time away from their farms at this season.
Dr. Hutchison returned to Kuching via Kabong, leaving here on the 14 th.
The Resident arrived on the 15th and I accom panied him to Debak on 17th for the settlement of the rioting case there. The Resident left me at the Saribas month on the 21st, from where I returned by boat, spending one day at Kabong.
The m.l. One left for Kuching early in the month for docking and to be thoroughly refitted. She was expected back, but had not returned at the end of the month.
Contractor Koh Lai Tee, from Kuching, finished making a road through a swamp on the Sebetan road and made a new road through at the back of the new or second bazaar, also the lorong from the old bazaar through a gap made by the demo lished shops across the first road behind the bazaar to the newly-made road. Work was also started on the enlargement of the load along the side of the football field in front of the clerk's quarters, prison, etc. Work was also commenced on the redigging and straightening and deepening of the ditches in front of the old bazaar.
September, 1928.
Messrs. Bean, Allman and Hirst paid a visit to the station from the 3rd to the 4th on their respective duties. I visited Nyabor, Kabong, Boban and S. Maludam from the 11th to the 19th.
The visit to Nyabor was primarily to fix a boun dary between the Second and Third Divisions and this was done with the apparent satisfaction of all concerned and to the convenience of Government Administration.
On Friday 20th the Right Reverend the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak arrived in the m.s. Santosa. His Reverence left for Betong on the 30th.
Lance-Corporal Saun, of Roban, proceeded to Kuching to receive his medal on His Highness the Rajah’s birthday after completion of 18 years’ satisfactory service. He returned to duty at the end of the month.
Owing to building operations the office was tempo-rarily transferred from the Fort to Malay School.
F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER, Resident, Second Division.
Third Division.
August, 1928.
The Resident, Third Division, reports:—
In the Resident’s Court the following criminal cases were dealt with : —I.P.C. section 302, sentenced to death; I.P.C. section 304, ten years' R.I.; I.P.C. section 308, three years' RI.; I.P.C. section 408, two years’ R I. and fine.
In the Civil Court one Chinese claim concerning a will of 1902 was settled, and a long outstanding claim which bad been adjourned in December last was also decided The delay in the latter case was on account of the difficulty experienced in finding Dyak witnesses, who were finally discovered in the Katibas River.
A Dyak house in S. Assan (Kilat’s) was burned down during the drought. As reported by the District Officer a large number of rubber gardens were destroyed by fire below Sibu. The Foochow practice of burning off new clearings during a bad drought is most dangerous as the fire, although apparently stopped, continues to travel underground in the peaty soil and is apt to spring to the surface again at any time in the most unexpected places. The Dyaks fully realize this and will not start burn ing off clearings until after a few showers of rain.
I paid a short visit to Kanowit on the 15th. The police barracks there are finished and have been taken over. Inquiries were made about. Dyak com plaints of the behaviour of the newly-appointed Penghulu Manggi. This man was appointed at the instance of the Dyaks living in the district, but no sooner had he started settling cases than the very men who were anxious that lie should be made penghulu came down with a number of vague ac cusations against him, all of which proved to be without foundation. No action was taken in the matter.
Owing to the law prices of jungle produce a large number of upriver Dyaks have been coming down clamouring for passes to other countries. Home have been engaged by the Colonial Surveys in Johore, and others have taken on contract work in that State Messrs. Sarawak Oilfields. Ltd., of Miri, do not at present require any more Dyaks, and it is most difficult to know what to do with these men, us they flatly refuse to take on any work locally, whatever pay is offered.
S.L. Chamois returned from Kuching after having been docked. A new boiler has been installed and she has been converted to oil fuel. She now shows a very good turn of spued.
A great deal of work has been done in the bazaar in the way of filling and broadening roads, while the concrete shops under construction arc well advanced. A number of Chinese have at last decided to start building buck shops without Government assistance. The construction of a new wharf below the fort wharf was started during the mouth. Good pro gress was made with the erection of the Candy filters and the electric motors for the waterworks were received.
A party of linesmen was sent up to Daro and Matu to erect the telephone line connecting those stations, and the work was nearing completion at the end of the month.
Mr. Goodfellow, who has been in the Ulu Mujong for some months collecting pheasants, returned to Singapore. This gentleman did not appear to be at all impressed with the traditional hospitality of the Dyaks. He, in fact, seemed to think that he had discovered “the lost tribe.” There is no doubt that the present-day Dyak is fully aware of the value of the dollar and allows very little to escape him, but it is a pity if this mania for collecting dollars is to be indulged in at the expense of his good reputation for hospitable treatment of strangers.
Dr. O. Wilhelm of Miri came on to Sibu from Daro by outboard motor and visited the Aup hills. Mr. Parnell, and the Acting Treasurer, the Prin cipal Medical Officer, the Acting Conservator of Forests, and the Commissioner of Customs, were amongst the visitors to Sibu.
The District Officer, Sibu, reports :—
Several new reports of rubber gardens being damaged by fire were made, including Binatang and Sarikei, but only in one case has it been possible to prove who originated the fire. I inspected the Tanjong Kunyit area and estimate, the damage there at 30,000 tappable trees and 200,000 young trees. Several houses were burnt out and over 60 people rendered homeless.
A motor launch caught fire at 9 p in. on the 24th, but fortunately several boats were soon on the scene and the flames were extinguished without anyone being injured
Nearly all the kajang huts in the bazaar have been removed and the occupants accommodated in the temporary wooden buildings. It was found necessary to restrict the rent of these houses.
I visited Sarikei and Binatang and settled all out-standing affairs. The Sarikei Malays are asking for a school to be built and equipped at Government expense. I inspected the new shops and was not impressed with the interior design, there being very little light.
Penghulu Nibong applied for a school in his district on the same lines as at Baong Assam He was told to erect a building and collect pupils and report later.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Kapit, reports:—
General.—I spent the greater part of the month in Sibu for medical and official reasons.
Mr. Goodfellow arrived back at Kapit from S. Mujong on the 3rd instant and sailed for Englund about a fortnight later.
He had spent two mouths in Ulu Mujong and had collected four live specimens of burong bekia and about another 100 live specimens of various other species of birds as well as snakes. He had the great misfortune on his way back to Kapit from S. Mujong to run into a storm just above Kapit. One of his boats capsized and he lost practically the whole of his two months’ collection of birds. He stated that he had been grossly swindled by the Mujong Dyaks over the price of foodstuffs, etc. Native Officer Abang Aboi returned from the 8. Mujong and 8. Sut and informed me that there was nothing to report except, that he bad vaccinated twenty Dyaks and that there are prospects of a very good engkabang crop this year.
Mr. Harnack. Assistant Superintendent Surveys, visited the station during the month and continued his survey of the station.
The Divisional Medical Officer. Sibu, reports : -
During the month ninety-six people were treated in hospital. Thirty of these remained from July.
Seven hundred people were treated in the out patient department. Ninety-four N.A.B. injections were given.
Cases of typhoid, dysentery and acute diarrhoea were less frequent than in the previous month, although still high. Many of the dysentery cases occurred amongst the police, in whose quarters I consider better sanitary conditions are necessary.
September, 1928.
For the greater part of the month I was away from Sibu, returning from Rejang on the 12th and leaving for Kuching on the 16th. On the 1st of the month I held Court at Daro. A Foochow who had open at Daro for some years accused another Foochow of causing the death of his child by breathing in its face. The night I left Daro the aggrieved Foochow went to the other man's garden and killed his pigs and ducks and destroyed a number of “sirih" vines. The man was arrested and brought before the Court at Matu the following day.
I arrived at Matu on the afternoon of the 1st and stayed there until the 6th.
There were a number of cases to be heard, nearly all civil claims. I again met the principal Chinese with a view to persuading them to build a decent bazaar. They were offered financial assistance but with sago at its present low price trade is so depressed there that none of them was able to find even half the cost of a shop. My idea was to build shops with belian framework and brick filling, but as things are at present I fear it is hopeless.
The telephone line from the bungalow to the station was in working order and the line to Daro was nearing completion. This line should be most useful as there is a good deal of communication between the two places. The distance is about 10 miles. Rejang was reached on the 6th, the Chamois doing the run from Kuala Matu in 7 hours.
Necessary repairs to the District Officer's bunga low had been completed as arranged on my last visit.
The new P.W.D. Motor-Lighter Wee Wullie (a sister vessel to Big Bill), which had just been launched, was towed up to Selalang to have the motor installed. The second lighter is slightly larger than the first and appears to be rather better built.
All outstanding matters at Rejang were attended to and I left for Selalang on the 10th.
I am glad to say that The Island Trading Syndi- cate is now finding no difficulty in procuring labour, and the General Manager reported a record output during the month of August. The Company is almost entirely dependent on local labour; Chinese and Dyaks have been tried but were not a success.
I returned to Sibu on the 11th and left for Kuching in s.l. Chamois on the 16th, being away until the 29th.
Mr. Macpherson, Officer-in-Charge during the absence of myself and the District Officer, reports :—
Genernl.—On the 6th the District Officer left for Kuching for the races and home furlough. The Rev. and Mrs. Hoover arrived on the 11th. The Resident left for the races on 16th returning on the 29th. On the 20th Mr. Pascoe, Divisional Land Officer, left for Kuching.
Visitors to the station included Messrs. Middlemas, Gilbert and Woodward.
On the morning of the 23rd Chop “Thai Yu's” sawmill was burnt to the ground.
Immigration.—is almost at a standstill.
Dyaks.—Large numbers came down during the month looking for work.
The Divisional Medical Officer, Sibu, reports :— Seventy-three people were treated in hospital, fifty new patients being admitted during the month— eight deaths occurred in the hospital.
Six hundred and forty-nine people were treated to the out-patient department, making nine hundred and sixty-nine attendances; one hundred and two N.A.B. injections were given.
Six operations were performed, three under general anaesthetic. Eight further cases of typhoid reported but there seems to be no danger of any more than sporadic cases occurring. I was absent from Sibu on 18th to 19th on a visit to Kapit, and found the health of the Rangers, Police and prisoners much improved, practically no cases of malaria have occurred since the practice of giving a weekly prophylactic dose of. quinine was started.
I was absent from Sibu again from the 22nd to 25th on a visit to Binatang, Sarikei, Selalang and Rejang.
With the exception of an “outbreak" of a few cases of ear trouble, similar to “Singapore ear," the health of the European community continues to be good.
KAPIT.
September, 1928.
The Acting Assistant District Officer reports :— Abang Ahmat, Native Officer, Belaga, visited the station during the month.
I was away in Kuching from the 19th instant, to end of the month to attend the Autumn Race Meeting.
Native Officer, Abang Indih, visited Pala Wong during the month to settle an outstanding Dyak case.
The Rev. Father Dunn, Prefect Apostolic, and the Rev. Father Klerk visited Nanga Pila during the month and were still away at the end of the month.
Dr. Haye and Messrs. Poushkine, Horton and Cotterill visited the station during the month.
Six houses of Badangs and twenty houses of Kenyahs have asked permission to move from the Batang Kayan to the S. Dunum.
Private Kasa proceeded to Kuching during the month to receive a Long Service Medal which was presented to him on His Highness the Rajah's birthday.
MUKAH AND BALINGIAN.
August. 1928.
The Acting Resident, Mukah and Oya, reports:— .
The Divisional Surveyor arrived by m.l. Rentis on the 7th instant, and returned on the 12th instant, having visited Balingian.
Dr. Wilhelm, Geologist of Messrs. The Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., was in the districts of Balingian, Mukah and Oya prospecting for oil most of mouth and left for Sibu via Igan and Matu
I paid a visit to Balingian from 9th to J 1th instant. Thirty-five cases came up for settlement, mostly concerning breach of Forest Regulations.
The Native Officer, Balingian. has been given orders to proceed to Kuala Sedupai at end of month to meet the Native Officer of Tatau with reference to the boundary with Fourth Division.
Mr. Gilbert left for Kuching on the 20th instant for medical treatment.
OYA AND DALAT.
August, 1928.
General.—On the 1st a tuba fishing was held at Kekan.
There was a very large attendance from all the kampongs in the Oya but unfortunately the number of fish caught was very small and those not until the evening and far down river.
The Resident of Mukah and Oya and the Rev. Father Epping left for Mukah in m.l. Nellie on the 5th. A visit was paid to Mudan on the 8tb.
M.L. Ringgit arrived from Mukah on the 9th to act as survey launch in this river.
On the 12th m.l. Rentis arrived from Mukah with Mr. W. Harnack, Assistant Superintendent of Sur veys, and Dr. 0. Wilhelm of the Sarawak Oilfields.
Mr. Harnack, after a shan't trip up river, left for Sibu the next day.
Dr. Wilhelm returned from the ulu on the 14tb in his outboard motor temoi and left for Mukah the next day.
I regret to have to report that on the 18th three Foochow Chinese were drowned on the Oya bar whilst trying to enter the river.
According to statements made by the one sur vivor it appears that they were returning to Mukah from Sibu and, meeting with a somewhat heavy sea, decided to seek refuge in the Oya river. While crossing the bar their boat was caught by a wave and capsized with the loss of life above mentioned.
An inquest was held on the three bodies recovered and a verdict of death by drowning returned.
I cycled to Mukah on the 18th, returning on the 20th.
Dalat was visited from the 1st to the 5th, 9th to 11th, and 21st to 27th.
H. L. OWEN,
Resident, Third Division.
Fourth Division. Miri.
August, 1928.
The Acting Resident of the Fourth Division, reports:—
I returned from Baram on the 6th. The District Officer left on the 3rd to visit the Kalabits and was still away at the end of the month.
Mr. T. Stirling Boyd, Judicial Commissioner, returned from Sandakan on the 3rd and left for Kuching by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 5th. The Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak was also a passenger by her.
H.M.S. Herald anchored in the roads twice during the month, on the 4th and 11th.
A fire broke out on the 18th August at 6 a.m. in the main Oil Pump Station at Miri. The cause of the fire is uncertain, but it undoubtedly followed directly after the bursting of an air vessel on one of the pumps. The quantity of oil burnt was not large but the fire spread rapidly down ditches along the main Miri-Pujut Road. It was kept under control and finally extinguished by 7 a.m. by the use of Foamite Fire Foam in large quantities from a new fire-fighting installation completed a few months before. Pumping of oil to Lutong was main tained by means of the field pump stations and a temporary pump station was completed within 6 days after the fire so that it was unnecessary to curtail production.
It was suggested by the General Manager, Messrs. Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, that a Company bunga low adjacent to the new site should be exchanged for the Government bungalow occupied by Captain De Sueur, near which drilling operations will commence shortly and render it unfit for occupation, and this was agreed to.
The question of the present Government water supply was carefully gone into and recommendations made and also a scheme for the disposal of sewage from Government. Quarters and from the Bazaar.
September, 1928. His Excellency the Governor of British North Borneo, on his way to Singapore by s.s. Kajang, landed for a short time on the 7th.
Mr. E. H. P. Bengtsson, Superintendent En gineer, visited the station and also Mr. L. D. Kennedy, Superintendent of Customs, Kuching, the former to survey vessels and launches at this port and the latter in connection with Customs matters. Mr. Bengtsson will pay another visit when oppor tunity occurs as there were a number of vessels which he was unable to examine.
I visited Baram from the 8th to the 14th. The
District Officer, Captain Andreini, reported hie
return from the Kalabit country on the 21st.
Tuanku Haji Drahman, Native Officer, Baram,
left for Kuching by s.s. Gladys on the 13th to be
installed as Datu on His Highness the Rajah’s
Birthday and also Penghulu Tama Wan Bayer and
Penghulu Rhu to receive Long Service Decorations.
H.M.S. Herald anchored in the roads on four
occasions during the month.
The 20th, being His Highness the Rajah’s Birth-
day, was observed as a public holiday. A ceremonial
parade of the Sarawak Rangers, under the command
of Captain Le Sueur, was held on the "padang" at
7.15 a.m., the Acting Resident taking the salute.
In the afternoon the annual sports of the Muri
Gymkhana Club took place and were successful in
every way. The presence of competitors from
H.M.S. Herald added to the interest of the proceed-
ings.
BARAM.
August and September, 1928.
The District Officer, Captain E. V. Andreini, reports :—
The greater part of these two months was spent by the District Officer in travelling. He walked from the Apoh river by way of the Tutoh, Seridang, Magoh, Penela, Kabaan, Bah, Fa Trap, Mein, Bengar and Lemodo to Lio Matu. The Kalabits living in the vicinity were all visited and, with the exception of a few minor quarrels, appear to be quiet. He took the travelling dresser, Mahomad Lazaroo, on this trip and as will be seen from the medical report, he gave over two hundred injections of N.A.B. In this connection the greatest credit is due to this dresser for the cheerful way he undertook this arduous walk and. although tired from a long day’s walk, often went straight off to attend to patients in order that an early start could be made the next day. The total days actually spent walking was thirty-five.
During this visit many interesting archaeological remains in stone were noticed.
The Resident, Fourth Division, visited Baram in August and September during the absence of the District Officer and held Court.
A regrettable fatality occurred in the Ulu Tinjar, eight Punans Apat being killed by a landslide and several others injured.
Tama Wan Bayer, Kayan Penghulu, and Rhu, Dyak Penghulu, proceeded to Kuching to receive their long service decorations. Tuanku Drahman also proceeded to Kuching for His Highness the Rajah's birthday celebrations.
Tuanku Mahomad, Native Officer, visited the Tinjar in August, walking overland from Peking to Lelak and afterwards visiting the Ulu Tinjar. Wan Taha, Native Officer, visited the Ulu Baram in September.
BINTULU.
August, 1928.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, reports :—	I visited Tatau from 15th to 16th. There was no one down from up river so I returned to Bintulu early, after settling various small matters outstand-
Sebauh was visited on 24th when I accompanied the Resident, Fourth Division, on a visit of inspection.	The Resident, Fourth Division, visited tins station on 22nd instant and returned to Min again on 29th. Various outstanding matters were settled.
The m.l. Joan returned from Kuching in tow by s.s. Sulong on 12th instant. ,
The m.s. Lang Endang, Sarawak Steamship Company, arrived on 11th for duty here.
Trade is still slack. Jelutong averaged $7.85 per picul during the month. Belian attaps were $110 per laksa f.o.b. Bintulu.
September, 1928. Work by the contractor in the extension to the bazaar wharf is at present held up owing to the absence of a pile driver.
I visited Sebauh on 9th instant in connection with the question of Dyaks and Foochows' lands. This matter is to be referred to Resident, Fourth Division.
Mr. Beasley, the Superintendent Government Stores, Kuching, visited this station from 2nd to 8th in connection with the belian timber question.
Towards the end of the month the m.s. Lang Endang broke down at Niah and was still there by the end of the. month.
The price of jelutong has again gone up to $9 per picul.
C. ERMEN, Acting Resident, Fourth Division. Fifth Division. LIMBANG. September, 1928. The Acting Resident reports :—
Court work was very light and there were no eases of any importance.
Mr. Flood-Page, Acting Director of Public Works, paid a visit during the short stay of the s.s. Auby.
The Acting Director of Agriculture, Mr. J. S. W. Bean, arrived in the H.H.M.Y. Maimuna and, after inspecting the pepper gardens here, left for Lawas to study particulars of the oil palm which is being extensively planted by the estate there.
I took this opportunity of visiting Lawas were a few outstanding affairs were settled up, and also visited Labuan in connection with agency affairs.
I regret to report that the .bazaar at Ukong, comprising five shops, was completely burnt down on the night of the 3rd. Claims were lodged against one Mah Yaw for compensation for the damage done as the fire originated in his shop and he removed a large amount of his property before giving the alarm.
Over a mile of the new 16-feet road to Ukong was completed and there is great competition to get the contract to make the Limbang to Panderuan road. It is hoped that work will start on this section early next month.
LAWAS AND TRUSAN.
August, 1928.
The Acting Assistant District Officer reports :—
On 4th I went to Punang to inspect land, returning on 5th via Sualai where I saw the Kadayans in connection with the possible working of their gardens on the co-operative system.
On 7th I went to Trusan overland, returning to Lawas on 10th. On 13th I again left for Trusan overland. Having heard all cases and checked the books I left for Sundar on 20th. On 23rd I left for Awat-Awat, returning to Lawas on 24th. On 25th I went to Merapok, returning to Lawas the same day. On 30th I left for Kuala Lawas en route for Limbang.
F. H. KORTRIGHT, Wing Resident, Fifth Division.