WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 1, 1928.
Births.
At Sibu. on 11th May, 1928. the wife of ABANG YAN bin Datu Bandar Haji Usop of Sibu, of a son.
At Sibu, on 15th June. 1928. the wife of ABANG OTTON bin Datu Bandar Haji Usop of Sibu, of a daughter.
Acknowledgment.
Messrs. Lim Kim Siang, Lim Ghiui Swee and Lim Kim Guan beg to thank their relatives and friends who kindly assisted and attended the funeral of their beloved mother and also those who sent wreaths and July
NOTES
His Highness the Rajah with the Chief Secretary, Mr. H. B. Crocker, and the Judicial Commissioner, Mr. T. S. Boyd, left by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 10th on a visit to outstations. Oya, Dalat, Mukah, Bintulu, Miri, Limbang, Trusan and Lawas have been visited and His Highness is expected in Kuching at the end of the month; however, we understand that owing to bad weather the yacht is at present detained at Brooketon. Mr. Boyd left the party at Miri on a visit to British North Borneo. THE Ranee of Sarawak attended the special Ascot Week dance, cabaret and supper which was held in aid of the Fire Fund for King Edward VII Hospital at “Great Fosters,” Egham, on June 20. At the races earlier in the afternoon, the Ranee, who was with her children, wore a brown brocaded short jacket over a yellow chiffon frock, and carried a long cane.—(China Express.) ACCORDING to the 1927 Report from the Sadong Colliery a financial loss for the first time for many years occurred. This was due to an all-round increase in the cost of labour.
Two of the oldest employees of the Mines retired on a pension, Shaw Foo, foreman smith, and Chu Kang Yu, washing mandor, the first with 46 and the latter with 39 years' service.
INFORMATION has been received from the British Post Office that parcel mails are now being despatched from Great Britain for Sarawak by the steamers of the Holt Line in addition to the parcel mails despatched by the steamers of the Peninsular and Oriental Company whenever it is probable that the additional mails so forwarded will reach their destination at least three days earlier than if they were retained for despatch by the Peninsular and Oriental fortnightly service.
This means that a parcel mail will be received from Great Britain every week instead of as at present every fortnight.
THE particular attention of subscribers to the Sarawak Library is invited to that section of the rules which limits the number of books which they are entitled to borrow and to the period' of time that such books may be retained.
It should be appreciated that outstation subscribers have not the same facilities as Kuching members and their interests should be considered accordingly.
THE Acting Director of Education (Mr. F. G. Day) informs us that the following is the correct list of books on Sarawak which may be loaned out for study and reference—
Life of Sir James Brooke, 1 vol., by Spen ser St. John, 2 copies; Life in the Forests of the Far East, 2 vols., by Spenser St. John, 2 copies; Sarawak—Its inhabitants and Pro ductions (also known as “Low’s Notes on Sarawak”), 1 vol., by Hugh Low, 2 copies; Letters and Journals of Sir James Brooke, 3 vols., edited by Templer, 2 copies; Natives of Sarawak and B.N.B., 2 vols., by Ling Roth, 2 copies: My Ten Years in Sarawak, 2 vols., by Charles Brooke. 2 copies; Expedition to Borneo of H.M.S. Dido, 2 vols., by Keppel, 2 copies; Pagan Tribes of Borneo, 2 vols., by Hose and McDougall, 2 copies; Malay Beliefs, 1 vol., by Wilkinson, 1 copy.
WE regret to report that the death took place on the 14th July at the Singapore residence of her brother, Dr. Farleigh Clarke, of Mrs. Jessie Taylor, wife of Mr. A. D. Taylor, of Sibu, Sarawak, and youngest daughter of the late Mr. Francis and Mrs. Augusta Clarke, of Singapore.
This new type, called the “Moth” G., embodies many modifications and improve ments on the 1927 “X” Type. The power unit will be a “Gipsy” engine, which is on the same principle as the popular “Cirrus,” being a four-in-line air-cooled direct drive engine, but is more powerful, developing 100 H.P. at 2100 R.P.M.
Two seaplanes have been purchased by Government and are due to arrive from England early in September. It will inte rest our “air-minded” readers to know that these machines are the latest type of “Moth” seaplane with metal floats, constructed by the De Havilland Aircraft Company.
The new “Moth” has a higher cruising speed while its “get off” and climb are substantially improved.
A temporary slipway and hangar is under construction at Satok where, if the site is found satisfactory by the pilot (who,-with an engineer rigger, will arrive with the ma chines), a. permanent base will be constructed. The machines are intended for use in land development and mail carrying. It is suggested that these two machines should be named “Royalist” and “Jolly Bachelor” in perpetuation of the memory of their more famous, if slower, predecessors. WE learn from a Singapore paper that a Government contract which amounts to roughly $350,000 has been given to the firm of Messrs. Gammon & Co. of Singapore for rebuilding the Sibu Bazaar. The work, which has started already, will take about fifteen months to complete. The bazaar will be rebuilt in ferro-concrete, and according to a lay-out on modern lines. A full list of competitions to be held by the Sarawak Club during Race Week has reached this office too late for publication and will appear in full in our next issue. The follow ing have been arranged, golf (bogey), bowls, optional pool, billiards, tennis (men’s and mixed doubles with draw for partners); the entry fee is two dollars in each case. Out station members are requested to notify the Honorary Secretary by post if possible.
We would again refer our readers to a notice which has appeared on the front page of the Gazette for many years. Communications intended for insertion should reach this office at least three days before the publication of each issue.
Brightening Village Life.
Scattered throughout the length and breadth of Britain, from Land's End to John o’ Groats, are numerous villages where a section of the com munity must live. Life in hundreds, of those villages is lacking amusement, excitement, or social pleasures and comforts of any description. The people are lethargic, stunted in outlook, cramped in house-room, and with no variety to break the monotony of their lives.
But a man must live where his work is, and so long as the land is worked and cultivated we must have our miners, workmen, and agricultural labourers. Village life will go on, although its stagnation so often drives the brightest spirits to seek the towns, and its problems puzzle all those interested in humanity. Man—even the villager.
is a gregarious animal, and something of a convivialist, and anything which works to give his nature true outlet must be for the general good.
It seems to me that workmen’s clubs are, to-day, a necessity of village life. Your townsman with his many interests has his club, but your villager, all too often, has no place where he may go after a hard day's work in field or workshop for a rest, a quiet pipe, and a friendly chat with his fellows. The comfortless alehouse draws many a man, not because he wants to drink, but because there is no other place where he may meet his male companions. His cottage home is cramped and often over-populated, there are squalling children at bedtime, and the average village house-wife is quite glad to get her man out of the way for an hour while she puts the little ones to bed and gets supper on the way.
A workman’s club would meet a very real need in many a village. Where clubs are already established they are thoroughly appreciated.
Some excellent work has been done by the Village Chib Associations, in establishing club-like institutions up and down the country, but although the associations provide lectures, entertainments, and cheap courses of study, they do not provide buildings. Working in conjunction with the Gil christ Trust, Carnegie Trust, the British Drama League, Workers’ Educational Association, and other organisations, they certainly accomplish something in the way of brightening village life. We have, too, the socials which are given in schools and parish halls by Old Scholars’ Associations for the amusement of the villagers.
The idea of bringing gentry and village folk together in mutual enjoyment of games, amateur theatricals, concerts, and so on, is good. Any method by which means can be found to bridge over the gulf yawning between the classes must be encouraged by all educated men and women. Class distinctions cannot survive in this democratic age without breeding evil. We want the link of human and personal sympathy between all classes, if the red rags of revolution are not to flutter in our beautiful land.
But, all too often, a village "social” is the last word in snobbery. Attend one and what do you see ? First come the gentry in rows at the top of the room, behind them the better-to-do farmers and shopkeepers, then the higher servants of the squire’s establishment, followed by the labourers, their wives and families, and so-called lower servants of the big house. And, between these "sections" is hauteur and well-marked conde scension. The squire's lady condescends to the farmer’s wife, who in her turn patronises the squire's housekeeper or butler; these assert their personal dignity over the minions of the great house, and the villagers come in for general patronage from all. Among the clergyman moves as general peacemaker, but his work is sometimes hindered in its usefulness by the standoffishness of his wife and daughters, who often ignore even the names of the poorer folk of the village.
Yes, we are a long way yet from complete understanding between the classes. That under standing can only come through a mutual sympathy —a personal sympathy. The brotherhood of man
does not be by the way of patronage and class distinction. And it is in our villages that one sees class distinction in its worst form. Here and there we have great and small land owners whose lives have been devoted to the well being and comfort of their tenants, poor and otherwise, on their estates. Without a trace of patronage or seeking after popularity, these have endeared themselves to all who dwell on their land, proving what can be done. Maybe, too, they have established club-rooms and parish halls for their tenants, according to their needs. These places cannot be put up by the gross. But we need to distinguish between the parish hall and the workmen’s clubs. The former is a place where men and women can meet for recrea tion and amusement. But beyond a quiet game of cards or billiards, men don't want amusement where they can smoke a peaceful pipe, read their paper, and talk if they feel inclined. One such club I know. It is situated in a remote village in a western country, and this is the story of its birth and growth. Some well-wishers, friendly with the village folk and realizing the need of a club-room, found the small sum of money needed to build a room, furnish it with a billiard table, a piano, a small library of reference books and a few novels, and then presented the place and its furniture to the village. Three trustees were appointed from amongst the most respected villagers. These trustees appointed a secretary, a treasurer and a committee, and they instituted themselves an admirable set of rules. To-day the club pays its own expenses, is absolutely independent of any interference from Church or gentry, and the men are proud of it, happy in its possession, and it is a very great success. Sometimes they give entertainments and invite the gentry to attend, but, as the clubmen issue the invitations and the gentry are the guests, the thing goes smoothly, and there can be no objectionable patronage. In my opinion that is how the village workmen’s clubs should be run.—H.H. Ranee Margaret of Sarawak.—(The Evening Dispatch.) “Manners Makyth Man.” The mono of the old Oxford College is familiar to all of us. From our earliest childhood we were taught what were " good maimers,’’ what were “bad maimers.” How many of us must remem ber the smacks and cuffs of our Nannies for not behaving like a little lady or little gentleman and in what a vast measure we differed from her former charges, who were always such perfect little children. They never told a lie ; they never smeared jam over their faces—and they never smacked each other or pinched—in fact such paragons that it is difficult for us to determine what must have happened to all these little marvels when they grew up? Most of our contemporaries are quite ordinary people with just that amount of old Adam without which, like risk in sport, they would not be worth knowing. The manners of to-day are criticized by the clergy, by those old ladies who still retain their hair and long skirts, by pompous old men whose liver forbids them the pleasures of life and by the naturally pes simistic. They say that the English manner of to-day is self-consciousness—vastly different from that epitaph of a lady, quoted by Gilbert Murray: “ Bland, passionate, and deeply religious, she was second cousin to the Earl of Leitrim ; of such are the Kingdom of Heaven.”
It was while pondering over this subject that we came across a small book one day In these lonely parts the only literature still unread were two copies of Whitaker's Almanack 1919 and 1920; Dr. Montressor's Own I land book (invaluable for those who own babies) ; a Field Service Pocket Book; n Sarawak Library Catalogue, circa 1912; Practical Auction Bridge; Married Love by Marie Slopes and The Etiquette of Party Giving by	no I the
name of the authoress remains with me. These books had been left behind by my predecessor and represent you will see, a very large field of thought.
The Whitakers were partially devoured by insects and left one hanging in mid-air, so to speak, at critical moments. Dr. Montressor's book might be most useful to mothers and those who hope to be mothers; to a bachelor, however, the story palls. The Field Service Book smells too much of the pomp and pageantry of war for this Country ; Auction Bridge is a game which we play for amusement albeit it is mostly on our own side—our partners seldom see the joke ; Married Love, well! well! we admit to having read this, hut its discussion in these columns might be too domestic. Sarawak Library Catalogue, interesting, but again devoured by ants. There remained the book on etiquette. With whiskey by our side and pipe going we lay back to examine this work.
First of all the date of publication is 1893. Not so very long ago my readers—well within the recollec tion of many, and in the times of our fathers and mothers even when you were babies. It is illustrated by four delightful pictures of life in those times. Firstly a river picnic where gentlemen in cloth caps and striped flannels offer food to girls in pork-pie hats; secondly, a dance showing fiercely moustached men begging dances from maidens in leg of mutton sleeves and flowing dresses; thirdly a tea-party where a bevy of women sitting on stiff upright chairs aredrinking tea, the while two frock-coated and monocled gentlemen are evidently having a political argument; and lastly a tennis party where mixed doubles are evidently just over and the partners are discussing the game. The girls are dressed in long skirts trailing on the ground, wasp waists, high collars entirely concealing the neck and most of the chin, and a hat shaped rather like the lid of a sauce pan upside down. The men are clothed in flannel trousers strapped over boots, one wears a cloth cap and the other evidently a postman's hat. All the racquets are the same size and about the pro portions of a ping-pong bat. Two ladies, on lookers, are sitting apparently on the court. Whether they impeded the play is not certain, but possibly their sunshades helped to ward oft the balls.
There are no less than thirty-five chapters or headings, varying from " tea and talk” to “ supper on the stage.” Amongst social functions which the modern girl will perhaps not recognize are “ a clover tea,” “a cobweb party,” ‘‘the apron party,” "a grey luncheon," and ‘‘a strawberry tea." These are not really very serious gastronomic ordeals, but a delicate way of entertaining in those late Victorian days. Clearly, and not without humour, the autho ress explains the idea of these entertainments.
“ Tea and Talk,” ns one might imagine, is quite a simple affair but the authoress wisely cautions her readers that “—the bore and the limpet must be studiously avoided—" Surely just as applicable in these days. It seems to us, however, that the advice to put “no music" on the invitation cards is going rather too far—unless, of course, the hostess is afraid that the inebriating effects of her tea might encourage the guests to break into song. A “ Straw berry Tea" is, as the authoress naively writes “to give strawberries the amount of attention which is due to them.” Personally, we much prefer to eat our straw berries privately and dirtily. Still, tastes differ, and it must have been a pretty sight to witness the guests preparing for the gorge. The "Apron Party,” however, is rather more complicated. The idea appears to be for the guests in mixed couples to fit together and sew an apron, for which prizes are presented. A flaw in the scheme seems to be the rule that “prize winners keep together all the even ing." Needlework and charm do not always go to gether. At a “ Clover Tea” the guests are presented with nosegays of sweet-smelling flowers with a card attached bearing a simple little quotation such as "In clover ! ” ' Whether this is intended to forecast the approaching feast is not clear. The main idea of the "Cobweb Party” is for the ladies to find the end of a bit of coloured string which is unravelled for them by their partners. Not so many years ago this pleasant entertainment was prepared for us. There being no ladies except our hostess we had no one to unravel at all. One of the guests, unfortunately rather unpopular, was shown his string and instructed to follow it. First of all it led him under the bungalow where he crawled perseveringly. It then took a turn under the dapor and then led to quite unmentionable places. Perseverance won. however, but the winner was kept on the lee side for the remainder of the party.
As regards out-of-door amusements, what could be better than a tennis party, although we cannot but keep thinking that “although only a few can play, the rest of the company can find amusement in looking on" is rather a pointed remark. The costume, too, appears to us to be a trifle formal “ladies wear light dresses, high to the throat and leave their hats and bonnets in the. cloak room"— "Gentle men come in morning dress,—frock coat, white waistcoat, light trousers, tall hat, and a flower in the button-hole." “A Water Party,” however, seems rather an ordeal, as we are told at the beginning “ good temper is an important consideration in a water party.” This rather hints at catching crabs and other disasters by the male guests to the detriment of the ladies' dresses which are described as “a flannel or serge dress, with a loose reefer jacket-." “ Shooting Parties ” too are considered an important item of country hospitality. The sportsmen should be dressed in tweed suits, with knickerbockers and gaiters, and cap to match, although some prefer velveteen suits and a kind of slouch hat." At times the authoress deigns to be cynical and her final instructions for a successful Garden Party “it is no use to attempt an entertainment of this kind unless some really nice people are invited " seems to us to savour of bitter personal experience!! Weddings, as is correct, takes up a considerable amount of space in this valuable vade mecum. Here the authoress lays down precise instructions to the guests. “ It would be very incorrect for a lady to take off her bonnet at a wedding.” She, however, “ takes off her gloves at a sit-down breakfast but not at tea. The refreshments on these occasions are minutely described, but we beg to differ that “ it is customary to have tea anti champagne going at the same time. '' No doubt this mixture compels the authoress to admit “people always feel more or less tired after a wedding."
Dinners in those days must have been really
worth going too, not only for the viands (here the
authoress lets herself go) but for the pleasure of
witnessing such a pretty sight as - the other
tallies following, two and two." the elephant and
the kangaroo!!
Readers will be interested in “ Bachelor Parties." Here the authoress shows great condescension for those mortals who, happening to he born male and bereft of a wife, wish to entertain. Lady guests are advised that “when they arrive, they should come determined to be pleased, and to 'make up their minds to overlook all deficiences." Rather previous, we think. Hosts when presenting bou quets to his guests are warned to think of "the feelings of a lady when she receives a present of a bouquet of crimson roses when she is wearing a nasturtium coloured gown." And hosts are shown the stupidity of producing “a scared aunt dragged up from the country " ns a chaperone. This advice, no doubt, prompted Brandon Thomas to write his famous play.
Morals, they tell us, are merely matters of
climate. Manners, too, are a matter of sur-
roundings. The methods employed by the fair
ladies of the Plantagenet times when eating a spring
chicken for supper would probably make the modern
girl, to put it plainly, sick. The oriental way of
showing appreciation of a meal disgusts the ears of
the occidental.
The morals of 1893 were probably no different from those of 1928—the manners, however, were vastly. different. Life was not so restless, the little trivialities of courtesy were rigidly adhered 10. Invitations were written in correct and formal language, and there were no telephones to tie the unwilling down to accepting unpopular invitations. Edwin and Angelina were just as bad (or good) as the modern couple. If Edwin did come to tennis in a costume we associate nowadays with Good wood, musical comedy or an undertaker, we are sure that he felt bewitched at the presence of Angelina m her pork-pie hut. And even if Angelina was not allowed to remove her bonnet at a wedding she must have looked just as nice us some of the Eton crops we have seen. Edwin in his velveteen shoot ing togs and cap to watch was a manly and awe -inspiring spectacle, and Angelina was not backward in letting him know it.
We have been poking fun at this little hook of etiquette, but remember that it was read very seriously in 1893. Just as seriously as we read Lady Eleanor Smith's tittle-tattle in the Weekly Dispatch. Hats off, then, to those men and maidens of 1893, who were very natural people for all their stiff little ways, and who lived a gentler and perhaps more gracious life than we live in these post war days.—THE OPTIMISTIC FIDDLER.
A New P. and O. Steamer.
The particulars that are now available regarding the new P. and O. steamer, Viceroy of India, indicate a distinct move forward in the matter of luxurious travel Eastwards. There, must always be a difference between what is possible on East-bound
steamers and those that ply on the western ocean, for the simple and all-sufficient reason that there is far more money available by the travelling public to call on in the case of the Atlantic than there is when it is the Indian Ocean or the China Sea or Australian waters. We are here alluding to the passenger side of the question. Those who go Eastwards in the normal way. apart from the limited number of pleasure travellers, are of the official, commercial, banking or other working classes, who naturally are not prepared to pay the large sums for passages that are quite easily obtained on Westward routes. An attempt has been made, by the P. and O. to bridge some of the dis tance that separates the two categories, and the ex periment will be watched with considerable interest, The chief departure from former custom is provided by the provision for the entire first-class cabins to be single cabins, arrangements being made for intercabin communication in the ease of married couples and families. This is certainly an innovation and a distinct departure from previous custom, even if we have advanced somewhat from the conditions of years ago, when four shipmates had to do the best they could in a cabin none too large to accommodate them The new conditions should be much appre ciated, and all routes served by the, company will doubtless wish time they too will soon participate in what India alone will have the benefit of for the present. There is only one matter we should have liked to see tackled in a more resolute manner; that is in the provision of a greater number of cabins being provided with their own bath-room accommodation. We would suggest that the num ber of private bath-rooms might well have been increased to add to the popularity of the ship. We can scarcely look for the same proportion that is now provided by the modern hotel ashore, though the latest liners for the Atlantic do in fact provide almost as many. Bet ween the" number of such bath-rooms in the new P. and 0. steamer and other up-to-date steamers there might have been a medium struck. Anyway, the single berth cabins will assuredly be a popular feature, whilst the public rooms are to be of unusual size and luxuriously appointed. Another feature to note in connection with the Viceroy of India, is that the propelling machinery will be on the turbo-electric system, thereby ensuring the minimum of vibration. Alto gether she is a departure for vessels whose course is via the Suez Canal.— (China Express.)
Saratok Regatta.
The first Regatta to be held at Saratok took place on the 11th and 12th of July and proved a success, the entries being good. The following is a list of successful boats and owners. Race No. I. - Open to Bongs limited to 15 men First prize Silver Cigarette Box and Cash $30 Second prize 5 15. Third prize $7 50. A Football competition was also held on the New Football Field behind the Fort The field was somewhat spoiled for the final owing to heavy rain the previous night. Datu Abang Haji Dulrasid's Simanggang Team proved the winners. F. A. W. PAGE-TURNER. The Sarawak Museum.
We have to acknowledge with thanks the eighteenth report on the Sarawak Museum for 1927, from which we cake the following extracts:—
"Mr. C. Jee Koo, formerly the Museum Taxi dermist, retired on pension in June this year. Joining the Museum when it first opened in 1891 be has served under seven Curators, ail of whom have 1 believe expressed their appreciation of his skill and industry. He was largely responsible for collecting and preparing the mammal and bird collection, whether mounted or as skins; lie also assisted in catching and setting prodigious numbers of insects, turned his attention to fish, to ethnological objects and to many small groups, all of which bear tribute to the care and zeal he displayed. It is safe to say that the exertions of Mr. C. Jee Koo have been responsible for the nucleus of the collections for when the Museum is justly well known.
“Sarawak Museum Journal.— Early in the year Vol. Ill, Part HI, No. 10, was published, containing ten papers with five plates, describing material, chiefly insects, obtained by Dr. Mjoberg four and five years ago.
“Travelling included a journey to Belaga and to the Ulu Sadong, Short trips were made to Pulo Satang, Pulo Satang Kechil, Kuala Sadong and on October 10th I visited Pulo Burong. On all the small inlands off the Sarawak Coast occur the black and white pigeon (Myrislicivora bicolor) known as “Rawa.” Somewhere I believe in Sumatra, and again on Pulo Burong, out of all the world, is found as well a grey and black pigeon (Columba grisea) just like a “Rawa” only grey where that is white; on the occasion of my visit none at all of this "Rawa klaboo” were seen. Our last record of them was in March 1914 when numbers of both species were nesting and I wish to suggest that, if none or only a few of this grey kind be found nesting in March 1928, all these islands be made sanctuary (as Satang and Satang Kechil al ready are for deer) so that the remnant if any may be preserved, and the ordinary “Rawa" be spared the fate of its companion at the hands of presumably Chinese shooting parties.
“The thorny question of the Bornean Badger was referred to MT. Oldfield Thomas, of the British Museum, who came to the conclusion that all the specimens examined by him are of one kind, viz , Mydaus lucifer.
“Bos Banteng, Raffl. An adult pair were ob tained near Beluga and their entire skins preserved.
“A total of 21,654 persons visited the Museum during the year “
Sarawak Library.
His Highness the Rajah has kindly presented the following books:—
RULES.
FOOTBALL TOURNAMENT 1928—9-
"BLACK & WHITE" TROPHY.
Kuching Football Club.
Extracts from Monthly Reports.
Fifth Division.
KUCHING.
June. 1928.
The Resident, First Division, Mr. F. F. Boult, reports:—
In the case of Government vs. Ian Yak Quee where the prisoner appealed against the conviction, the conviction was upheld by the Supreme Court but the sentence of eighteen months was reduced to one of three months' R.I. and a fine of $100. Abdul Lamit, Forest Guard, was sentenced at Bau to six months’ R.I under section 409 I.P.C. The case of Hana Maioda (f.) vs. Pundok, where, defendant was charged under section 326 I.P.C., was again adjourned, as were two other criminal cases.
Resident's Court—(Civil).—There were six cases, the total claims amounting to $14,618.
General There being no European Officer to spare T. K Sudin and Arbi were sent to collect the Land Dyak Tax in the Ulu Samarahan. Owing to the smallpox a few months back several villages have been given extra time in which to pay. The total amount collected was $1,600.25.
I inspected, with Mr. Edwards, the Dyak track to Quop from the 10th mile to where the Dyaks have made up the road as far ns Sungei Semongoh.
I went to Ban for the day on the 20th instant and visited Lundu from the 22nd to 26th, returning to Kuching on the 27th via Simatan, Telok Serabang and the Talang Talang islands.
DISTRICT OFFICE. The District Officer, Mr. J. C. Swayne, reports:— There was a slight falling off in litigation during the mouth. A total of 295 cases were settled in the Magistrate's, Police and District Courts, and sixty cases were carried over to July. Three hundred and fifty-four summonses were issued, seventy of which were for non-payment of Exemption Tax.
Two cases were sent to the Resident's Court on appeal, one a dispute about wages and the other with reference to the transfer of a business.
A visit was paid to Batu Kawa and in two cases a personal inspection was paid to land in dispute.
LAND OFFICE. The Acting Superintendent of Lands, Mr. F. F. Boult, reports: —
Pegs removed and displaced on the trace between Sungei Bubo and Sungei Angus were replaced.
Grants.—One hundred and one applications for land were received during the month and seventy- nine examinations were carried out.
LUNDU. The District Officer, Mr. J. B. Archer, reports :— The Resident, who was accompanied by Mrs.
Boult., visited Bandit on 22nd and returned to Kuching on 26th via Simatan, Telok Serabang and Talang Talang.
Abang Zamhari, late of the Police, was appointed to do duty as Native Officer in this district and arrived on 13th. Later he took over all Native Court affairs from Abang Merali and is now in charge.
On the 9th and 10th two river tragedies took place. Tan Ah Kam, Liew Chew, was drowned in the Lundu river on the 9th, and Dann, a Dyak, was taken by a crocodile at Tanjong Apong on the 10th. Both bodies were recovered.
A Sungkar Dyak named Itam, aged about 60, bung himself to a tree on the 2nd.
UPPER SARAWAK. The District Officer. Mr. J. B- Archer, reports: — General.—On the 8th Orang Kaya Laseh, of Sennah, accompanied by others, reported an affair in which a young husband and wife of that district, named Dachen and Risok, had been found dead. It appears that the couple had gone off pig hunting, and not having returned for a week a search was made and their bodies, much decomposed, were found on a mountain path near the Dutch frontier. The woman had been shot through the lower part of the trunk, and the man through the throat.
Police were sent off immediately and returned on the 16th. From all accounts the affair appears to have been an accident and a suicide. The general opinion is that the husband, whilst ascending a hill, either slipped or caught his gun in some creeper and shot his wife, who was walking behind him, through the body. Horrified at what he had done he lay down beside her and shot himself through the throat. All appearances point to the probability of this theory. The couple were reported as being especially fond of each other, and there is no sus-picion of foul play.
During the night of the 7th a deliberate attempt
was made to block the main Buso road where it
passes through the Malay Kampong. Big logs had
been rolled across the road and were reported to the
police early in the morning and removed. None of
the Malays will admit any knowledge of the affair,
although it seems probable that they must have
heard what was being done. No one has yet solved
the reason for this blocking of the road, although it
is suggested that it may have been an attempt to
wreck motor cars passing during the night.
The night of the 11th was suddenly disturbed by
a long fusilade of crackers in all the bazaars.
Inquiries next morning showed that the Chinese
were celebrating the capture of Pekin by the South-
ern Army, someone in Kuching having telephoned
the news.
On the 11th Mr. Carrie, Acting Manager of the
Dahan Rubber Estates, Ltd., brought in his recently
appointed head clerk, a Burgher named C. I.
Struys, who had apparently become insane.
The Upper Sarawak Gold Mining Syndicate were
given permission to start work at Paku, and use the
old fish pond which reverted to Government many
years back. Another syndicate called the Bull Gold
Mining Company have made written application to
start work at Bidi. The matter has been reported
to headquarters.
Much of the land between the District Officer's
bungalow and the bazaar has been felled and cleared,
and a charming view is now obtainable and mosquitoes
far fewer in number. This work was done principally
by prison labour with the help of Dyaks for two days.
One of the roller bullocks from Kuching died
apparently from eating something poisonous. 1
cannot help thinking that there is still danger in the
grazing near the old gold works in Bau and it is
unsafe to allow valuable racing ponies to eat any of
the grass near the station.
Land.—The Orang Kaya of Senggi has requested
me not to give out any more rubber land to his
people at present as they do nothing but squabble
over it.
Many Dyaks are coming in for their free 3-acre
lots, although I do not think they will all be planted
up.
SADONG.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter,
reports:—
A contract was made for a new bridge at Kampong
Sageng This is to be of very sturdy construction,
being cross-tied both laterally and lengthwise. All
timber above low water mark will he planed. Work
was started on this during the mouth.
The clearing for a padang which was done by
Dyaks last month, was burned off on the 5th and
levelling and stumping was started on the l5th.
The Manager of the Colliery has kindly consented
to allow his sawmill to be used for cutting round
timbers into posts and planks. This will enable us
to obtain timbers of all descriptions at below half
the market rate. Accordingly, some contracts were
put out for Mian and meranti logs to be used in
new buildings next year.
Medical.—The nominal register of patients shewed
121 and the number of attendances was 281.
Jeriah, mother-in-law of T. K. Dirin Sunong, was
taken by a crocodile on the 15th ; part of the body
was later recovered.
The District Officer’s bungalow was burgled in the
early morning of the 27th when property valued at
about $500 was stolen. About one-third was re-
covered on the 30th in sack near the jail fence.
The new m.l. Vava arrived from Kuching on the
30th, having made the journey in 43/4 hours. M. L.
Rimba was returned to Kuching.
F. F. BOULT,
Resident, First Division.
Sadong Colliery.
June, 1928.
The Manager of the Collieries, reports :—
The output, export, local consumption, conversion into coke and coal stock figures for the month were as follows :—
There was a good deal of sickness resembling influenza amongst the labour force during the month.
Three Chinese labourers were discharged, and thirty-f our new men joined during the month.
A report was received from Limbang of the death of ex-mandor Masu, pensioner, at Brooketon on May 6th. Deceased joined the Mines at Brooketon thirty years ago and was granted a pension last year.
J. W. EVANS, Manager.
Second Division,
July, 1928.
BATANG LUPAR.
The Resident, Second Division, reports:—
Resident's Court. Three cases came up forbear ing during the month.
District and Magistrate's Courts.—Fifty-three cases came up before these Courts but none call for special mention.
General.- On the 6th m.l. Elisabeth arrived from Kuching with Mr. R. D. Binnie, Divisional Engineer, P.W.D. His visit to this Division was connected with various matters dealing with the Public Works Department.
The m.l. Santosa arrived on the 6th with the Rev. Father Hopfgartner who next day pro ceeded to Engkilili in order to visit a number of Roman Catholic converts.”
On the 8th I left for Betong at 830 in m.l. Anne, accompanied by Mr. R D. Binnie, Divi sional Engineer, P.W.D., and Datu Abang Haji Dulrasit. Betong was reached at 7.30 p.m.
The next two days Mr. R. D. Binnie was em ployed in fixing levels for the new bazaar road. Mr. Binnie was of great assistance in giving advice about matters connected with the Public Works Department.
Resident Court was held on the 9th when two appeals from decision of the Magistrate's Court Civil were heard, and decisions in both cases were upheld.
On the nth I left for Pusa where I found Mr. H. E. Cutfield. A.D O., awating my arrival Mr. R. D. Binnie proceeded direct to Kabong in m.l. Elizabeth. Mr H E. Cutfield, A DO., and Abang Sedik, N.O , reported that there were no Court cases and nothing of importance was brought to my notice.
On 12th we left for Debak at 8.30 a.m. and reached there at 10 04 a.m.
Sedik, N.O, and Penghulu Mon had nothing of importance to report. Next morning all Tuai Rumahs of the Rimbas being present, they were asked to select a new Penghulu in place of Mon who has continually asked to resign his Peng- huluship, and one ex-Penghulu Sujang was unanimously re -elected. This appointment awaits the sanction of His Highness the Rajah.
On the 13th we left for Kabong which was reached at 4 p m. and walked with Mr R D. Binnie to the site of the waterworks Next day we left for Saratok and on arrival were met by Abang Abu-Talip, N.O, Penghulus Nyalu and Undom. In the afternoon I walked a consider able way along the Saratok-Rohan road which has been greatly improved, the swamps having been filled in and bridges erected where necessary. This road if broadened would faciliate the trans port of garden produce by light motor trucks.
Next morning Court was held but no cases call for special mention.
On the 16th we returned to Kabong arriving at 9 a.m. when Mr. R. D Binnie and Mr. H E Cutfield visited the new proposed site of the waterworks and on their return Mr. R. D Binnie left for Kuching in m. 1. Elizabeth and Mr. H E. Outfield and myself for Roban.
Mr. R. H. P. Langton visited Engkilili during the month to attend to Court work and other matters.
Mr. E. W. Oswald, with a number of Chinese coolies, arrived at Lingga and proceeded direct to Selantik in order to start operations dealing with the Selantik Coal Prospecting Syndicate. Agriculture - There have been numerous appli cations from Debak and Saratok for young pep per plants, but up to date these have not been obtainable, the demand in the vicinity of Eng kilili being so great.
A total of 243 persons were treated in hospital during the month as follows : —I yaks 165. Malays 50, Chinese 26, European 1 and Javanese 1.
SARIBAS.
Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, Officer-in-Charge, Betong, reports :—
General.—Penghulu Unji came down from the Spak on the 17th. He reported that a favourite trick amongst Dyaks in the Ulu Layar is to ask leave to go to Baram or Limbang or elsewhere to work jelutong or visit relations and on arrival start farming, finally removing without getting permission through the proper channels. He sug-gests that everyone taking out such passes should be made to put in a pledge of twenty catties and that these pledges revert to Government should the man not return to his own home in a specified time.
KALAKA.
Mr. H. E. Cutfield, Acting District Officer, Kalaka, reports-
General.—Headquarters of the Kalaka District Avere transferred from Kabong to Saratok as from the 1st of the month.
F. A. W. PAGE TURNER, Resident, Second Division.
Third Division.
May, 1928.
The Resident, Third Division, reports :—
General.—I returned to Sibu from Singapore on the 4th of the month, the District Officer leaving for Kuching on the 6th. On the 16th H.H.Y. Maimunah arrived from the north and sailed the same afternoon for Kuching. Passengers from Sibu were Mr. and Mrs. Kidd and child, and Messrs. Boyd, MacPherson, Harnack, Lowry, Mudford and Humphreys and Mr. Anderson from Rejang.
The Divisional Engineer returned from Singapore on the 20th. Mr. G. Poushkine relieved Mr. Humphreys in charge of the Electrical Station, the latter returning to Kuching. I regret to say that No. 1 engine stripped her gears in the early hours of the 10th and we have been running on one engine since that date.
The Acting Assistant District Officer of Kapit reports :—
The Divisional Treasurer, Mr. Cotterill, and the Assistant Superintendent of Surveys. Mr. Harnack, arrived here by S.S. L’Aubaine on the 9th instant. Mr. Cotterill audited the accounts of the station and left for Sibu the next day by S.S. L’Aubaine.
The Rev. Father Klerk also returned to Kanowit by the same boat having arrived back from Pala Wong on the 8th instant. Mr. Harnack stayed here till the 16th instant and during his visit made a survey of the whole of the Chinese and Malay bazaar areas including the Chinese cemetery.
On the 23rd instant Native Officer Abang Indih left for S. Mujong, returning here on the 31st instant. He reports that during his trip he vaccinated 496 Dyaks, although two houses refused vaccination. The Mujong and Mirirai have fairly good padi harvests this year.
Song.—I paid a visit of inspection to this station on the 8th instant with Native Officer Abang Abdul Gapor and settled an appeal case from the Native Court and returned to Kapit the next day by S.S. L’Aubaine. During the month the Song accounts were audited by a Sibu Treasury Clerk. The Song Court Writer’s new house was finished.
The Divisional Medical Officer, Sibu, reports :—
There were 110 in-patients during the month, 78 being new admissions—amongst these 8 deaths occurred.
754 people were treated as out-patients and 106 N.A.B. injections were given. 618 passengers were inspected on the Singapore vessels and 163 people vaccinated.
During the month there was a decided increase in cases of dysentery and diarrhoea, due to the filthy conditions of the present "temporary” bazaar. All possible steps are being taken to improve these conditions, but owing to the lack of the necessary health staff we are handicapped.
During the month the building of the Leper Hut was sufficiently completed to house up to 10 or 15 lepers, and I consider it admirably suits its purpose, having kadjang walls and roof which can easily be burnt and replaced, and a floor of boards which can be removed and disinfected from time to time.
The Acting Resident of Mukah and Oya reports :— On the 5th Mr. Aikman came over from Oya for the sports and opening of Mukah Recreation Club.
The sports and final of the football competition took place on 5th.
Three lepers from Oya and one madman have been sent to Kuching.
The new bungalow was occupied for the first time on the 12th and, save for some additional cement work, is now completed. The old bungalow was dismantled and the work finished on the 21st.
A new site for the jail was selected and levelled preparatory to removal and on the 28th the con tractor started work on this job. As the sea is still rapidly encroaching on the road to the beach it is evident that a section of this road will have to be moved inland before the landas begins and with this end in view a preliminary survey of the proposed new route was made on the 23rd. It is hoped that the work will be put in hand before the end of next month.
On the 17th a personal inspection was made of the numerous rubber gardens in S. Kut and certain extensions to existing gardens were approved and arrangements made for them to be surveyed early next month.
June. 1928.
The Resident, Third Division, reports
Court..—In the Resident’s Court, Dol, Customs Supervisor, was sentenced to two years' imprison ment for accepting bribes and falsifying his books. Charges against Bazaar Chinese in connection with the above case were preferred on the 30th, the cases being adjourned for inspection of books.
General.— I left for Kapit on the 15th instant, returning to Sibu on the 24th. The Assistant District Officer returned to Kapit from Belaga on the 21st. Everything at Kapit was very quiet and, with the exception of a few Dyak inquiries and interviews, there was little to do there. On my return I landed at Song and dealt with some matters requiring attention.
I spent a night at Kanowit on my way down. The new police barracks are in course of erection and should be completed in September. A flat rate was fixed for assessment of the new bazaar, most of the shops in which are still unoccupied. I cannot understand why the Chinese at Kanowit suddenly decided to extend the bazaar there as I can see no immediate prospects of any great increase of trade in this part of the district. A great improvement in the state of the Sibu bazaar is noticeable, a number of the temporary huts having been cleared away and the sites levelled up. Work on the new road continues. The completion of the police station has been still further delayed by the necessity of demolishing part of the walling which had developed dangerous cracks, presumably from the effect of the fire.
A further batch of clerks' quarters was com pleted, the buildings being immediately occupied.
The foundations for Candy filters were put in hand and completed. Work on the new jail is progressing. The warders’ barracks are now ready for occupation.
The District Officer, Sibu, reports :—
General.—Pengulu Laja was again found to be misappropriating fine-monies and also abusing his position. He was given the opportunity to resign and took it. A new Pengulu has not yet been appointed. Briak, a Kanowit Dyak, was fined a picul for interfering with the Pengulu in the course of his duties concerning a land dispute.
A boat containing three Foochow Chinese was rammed and upset by the m.l. Kanowit and one of the Chinese was drowned. The juragan and a Chinese passenger were found to be responsible and have been dealt with under section 304a.
A Dyak named Kudi amoked at Binatang on the night of the 2.3rd and cut up seven Chinese, none of whom fortunately is likely to die. The Dyak, who was arrested the following day, seems to be mentally deficient.
Education.—An application by the R.C. Mission to open a school at Doren was forwarded to the Director of Education.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Rejang, reports :—
I visited Belawai on the 13th and found every thing there in order. Selalang was visited on the 14th and from there I proceeded to Matu and returned to Rejang on the 18th via Daro.
The Chinese at Matu agreed to deposit half the sum required to build ten new shops in the bazaar, the other half being put by Government. These shops will be taken up by five firms, the others are apparently unable to build, even with the half of this loan, owing to lack of capital.
General.—One, Sait, was killed by lightning while paddling in a boat at Sungei Limut on the 21st. The matter was reported by a youth named Oya who was the only other occupant of the boat. Apparently a flash struck the water near the boat temporarily blinding Oya, who next found that Sait had disappeared. Two dogs sitting behind Sait, who was in the bows, were lying dead and there was a hole in the caulking in the bows causing the boat to fill with water. The body of Sait was recovered two days later somewhat above this point, but there were no signs of his having been struck by lightning. The boat was examined and the hole in the bows did not seem caused by lightning as it was not charred and very small. There is no reason to suspect foul play in this matter and it. seems probable that deceased must have died of shock, and fallen overboard.
The Divisional Medical Officer, reports :—
65 people were admitted into hospital, making a total of 93 treated as in-patients, amongst these four deaths occurred.
671 people were treated in the out-patient depart ment, and 144 N.A.B. injections were given.
351 passengers on the Singapore vessels were inspected at Rejang, several being detained at Sibu Hospital for minor ailments.
There has been a slight decrease in the number of cases of dysentery and allied complaints, due in great part I consider to the pulling down of a considerable number of the langko erections in the bazaar, as in spite of all endeavour it seems impossible to make the inhabitants of these keep their huts and surroundings in anything approach ing a clean condition.
On the 24th of the month a Dyak “cut up” various people in Binatang Bazaar. Fortunately all the wounded (numbering seven) were not seriously hurt, and only one patient had to be given an anaesthetic. The wounds were all on the arms, chest and back and the victims were progressing favourably.
During the month I was absent from the station at various times.
Cases of malaria are becoming more frequent amongst the Rangers and prisoners, etc., at Kapit. When I was there I found eight cases and the Assistant District Officer states that there are a number continually reporting sick. I have arranged for a weekly prophylactic dose of quinine to be given to all the prisoners and Government servants and the usual methods to be employed to combat the anopheles.
The Acting Assistant District Officer. Kapit. reports :—
Accompanied by Native Officer, Abang Abdul Gapor, I left for up river on the 5th instant, and arrived at Gal Fort the next day, where I met Penghulus Koh. Grinang and .Tugah and mata mata Leman, Tanjong and Langut.