MONDAY. OCTOBER 1. 1928.
NOTES.
(September.)
THE latter half of September in Kuching was a particularly festive-time including as it did His Highness the Rajah’s birthday, the Autumn Meeting of the Turf Club and the Chinese Chingay procession. The latter took place on the 19th and 21st and was remarkably picturesque. We hope to give a detailed account in our next issue. A very large number of outstation officers, Native and European, were present, while all the schooners and steamers from nearby ports were crowded with Chinese, Dyaks, Malays and Melanoes who came to biken ramai A dance and supper at the Residency on the 18th served as an official opening and from this to the end of the month was an uninter rupted round of entertainments. The Sara wak Club Dance was given on the 24th after the second day’s racing. A dinner to out station officers at Astana proved a very popular innovation. THE 26th, His Highness the Rajah’s birthday, was celebrated with exceptional brilliance, this being the first time His High ness has been in Kuching on this date since his accession. At 8 a.m. the Council Negri met at Astana where a proclamation was read by which the new Order “The Star of Sarawak’’ was in-stituted. After other proceedings to which we refer later a move was made to the Rangers’ ground where the combined forces of the Rangers and Police paraded. At two o’clock sports were held on the Church of England’s School field and proved highly popular though a heavy storm at four o’clock prevented the completion of the programme. At seven there was a gathering at the Clock Tower where Chinese and Malay processions marched past and loyal addresses read. At 9.30 guests numbering 176 and includ ing representatives of all communities met for dinner at Astana. The grounds and build ings as far as Fort Margherita had been illuminated with coloured lights by the Electrical Department with admirable effect. After dinner a firework display was given in the grounds. Coming as they did from England, they proved a pleasant change from the usual local products. Special films were shown at an open air cinema while music was poured forth by four Bisaya bands, more or less concealed in the gardens. Dancing to native music outside and to the Rangers’ Band in Astana followed till about 3 a.m. the following morning when one of the most delightful and strenuous days that Kuching has known for many years came to an end.
His Highness, after making known that an Order of Honour to be called the Most Excellent Order of the Star of Sarawak had been instituted, conferred upon Mr. Ong Tiang Swee the first companionship of the Order. At the same meeting the following appointments were made: Inche Mohamad Zin to be Datu Mentri, Abang Suleiman to be Datu Amar and Tuanku Drahman bin Tuanku Zin to be a Datu.
MR. Ong Tiang Swee has been a very well-known figure in Sarawak for many years. Born in Kuching in 1864 he entered the firm of Ong Ewe Hai & Co. in 1882, five years later becoming director of the Sarawak and Singapore Steamship Company
He was elected Chairman of the Company
in 1919, and Chairman of the Sarawak Farms
Syndicate in 1914.
His public service started when in 1887 he
became a member of the Chamber of Com-
merce and his advice and experience have
always been at the disposal of the Govern-
ment. Since then he has held the honorary
posts of President of the Chamber and also
of the Chinese Court and later he was elected
a member of the Board of Trade.
During the War he was on the Food
Control Committee and it was due largely to
his activities that the Chinese responded so
generously to the various War Charities.
However, it is not only as a public-spirited citizen that he is known, but also as a very genial host and the owner of the best model farm in Sarawak and it is very sincerely that we congratulate him on the signal honour that has been conferred on him.
ON Saturday 29th Mr. H. B. Crocker, Chief Secretary, with Mr. P. M. Adams and C. E. J. Pascoe, left for Singapore by S.S. Vyner Brooke. A large gathering was present to wish them a pleasant voyage.
We understand that during Mr. Crocker's absence the office of Chief Secretary will be in abeyance and His Highness the Rajah will take temporary control of matters normally dealt with by the Chief Secretary.
MR. Ho Eng Seng, Chief Cashier of the Sandakan Treasury, who retired on well- earned pension on completion of 25 years of loyal and faithful service, passed through on s.s. Darvel on Tuesday the 11th inst., en route for Kuching via Miri, Sarawak. While iu Jesselton, Mr. S. W. Russells, in conjunction with Mr. A. Hamid and some other friends, gave a dinner to Mr. Ho at Wing Hap Restaurant, the well-known caterer of Jesselton. After dinner Mr. Russells, as an old friend of the guest of honour, spoke well of Mr. Eng Seng and concluded by wishing him long life and happiness in retirement. Mr. Ho replied by thanking Mr. Russells for all kind expressions and to all present for having so kindly given him this honour which he never expected. While ending his speech, the honoured guest wished his friends “Health, wealth and prosperity.’’ At 10 p.m. we motored to the Customs and left our parting guest safely on board. Finally, we bade good-bye and bon voyage.—(B.N.B. Herald). THE supply of water to Kuching from the Matang Range was seriously diminished by the drought in August, no rain (with the exception of a small shower) being recorded on the mountain for a period of 26 days.
Special arrangements were made to con serve supplies and to reduce waste and the public was informed of the necessity for avoidance of waste by public proclamation by a temporary “Town Crier.’’
The deficiency of supply was met for 16 days by pumping from the town storage reservoirs, pumping being continued until the drought ended with a welcome fall of rain on 8th August. A new sub-fluvial pipeline, four inches in diameter, was launched on 19th August, 1928. at Padungan, at which point the river is approximately 1000 feet in width.
This pipe will serve as a further connection between the town mains and Kampongs Samarang and Buah. DR. Krol, the well-known geologist from Western Borneo, reached Kuching in August overland from Pontianak, via Selantek and Lingga and, after a short stay in Sarawak, returned by permission of His Highness the Rajah in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna. A party, which included Mr. and Mrs. Pitt-Hardacre, Mrs. Gillan and Messrs. Middlemas, Skrine and Swayne, went as Dr. Krol’s guests to Pontianak to attend the celebration of H.R.H. the Queen of Holland’s birthday. WE understand it is likely that a visit to Kuching will be paid by the British R.A.F. Far East Flight, now stationed in Singapore, in the near future on their way to Hongkong. MR. E. V. Andreini, District Officer, Ba ram, who has just returned from over a month’s stay in the Kclabit country, reports the finding of some very interesting stone remains, further particulars about which we hope to publish later. A successful operation for appendicitis was performed on Mrs. Pitt-Hardacre at the General Hospital during the month and the patient, we are glad to report, is making a satisfactory recovery.
Chinese Address to His Highness
the Rajah.
KUCHING, SARAWAK, 36th September, 1938.
YOUR HIGHNESS,
On the occasion of Your Highness Birthday, we,
the Chinese Community in Kuching, wish to offer
Your Highness our humble and respectful con-
gratulations. The event holds the more significance
as it is the first time that Your Highness has been,
as Rajah, in the country on Your Highness’ Birth-
day.	,	1 he Chinese Community note with gratification
that great progress has been made in the country
since Your Highness succeeded to the Raj in 1917.
Strife among the native communities bus entirely
ceased, and not only has the country developed com-
mercially, but the communities have enjoyed many
more of the resources of civilisation. Communica-
tions by sea with Singapore have vastly improved,
and the system of communication by wireless tele-
graph has also been developed to perfection. We
also note with gratitude the introduction of elec-
tricity for light and power, which is an incalculable
boon to the city, and we also view with immense
satisfaction the proposal of Your Highness to open
up the country with roads, which we consider will
be of great benefit to trade and to the community
generally.	Good and wise Government is a gift of incalculable
value, and the people of Sarawak must indeed con-
sider themselves fortunate in possessing it. Tolera-
tion, a strict impartiality, and a firm and progressive
policy are a few of the qualities of the ideal ruler,
and these the Government of Sarawak possesses in
a high degree.
Sarawak is an independent sovereign State, whose
independence is fully appreciated by us, and we feel
this is increased rather than diminished by the fact
that it is guaranteed by the British Empire. And
from that independence comes Freedom, the greatest
gift that can be given to man, and every person in
the State of Sarawak can claim that he enjoys free-
dom in the fullest sense of the word.
We must also refer to Your Highness decision to
found the Order of the Star of Sarawak, and we note
with the greatest satisfaction the leader of the
Chinese Community, Mr. Ong Tiang Swee has been
selected by Your Highness to receive this great
honour. We were always aware of Your Highness
condescension to good-will and we therefore venture
to think that this benevolent act sets the seal of
Your Highness’ gracious approval on the duty and
loyalty of the Chinese Community in the country.
Your Highness has now been thirty-one years in
the country, of which eleven have been spent as
Sovereign. We wish Your Highness, Her Highness
the Ranee, Their Highnesses the Dayangs and Hl
Highness the Tuan Muda long life and continued
prosperity, and we cannot allow this auspicious
occasion of Your Highness’ Birthday to pass by
without expressing to Your Highness.
satisfaction at the progressive state of the country
which, for the people and for the country itself
holds so bright a hope for the future.
We have the honour to be,
Your Highness’ humble and loyal
subjects, ONG TIANG SWEE,
For the Chinese Community of
Sarawak
Sir John Hewat.
Cape Town, Aug. 21,—The death is announced of Colonel Sir John Hewat, Chief Whip of the Union Party. He was South African delegate to the Coronation of King George.—Reuter.
Sir John Hewat, who was born at Sarawak, Borneo, in 1863, was the son of Captain John Hewat, Dock Superintendent of Cape Town. He was a member of the medical profession and a graduate of Edinburgh University. In 1904 he became a mem ber of the Cape Legislative Assembly, and continued to hold his seat for the. division of Woodstock till 1920. He served in the South African War and in the Great War, and was awarded the 1914 Star and mentioned in dispatches. In South Africa he had many varied interests—politics, insurance, the Turf, and athletics.
A Trip to Pontianak.
On Tuesday,28th September, at 2 p.m., H.H.M.Y. Maimuna sailed from Kuching for foreign parts. She bore a goodly company of guests of Dr. Krol, who kindly invited us to Pontianak to take part in the celebrations for the Queen of Holland's birthday. As Kuching, Pending, Santubong slipped behind us. we began to feel like adventurers setting Out into the unknown, for none of us, except Dr. Krol, knew what Pontianak would he like, how big it was, or what we should do there. We even had some vague apprehensions whether we should have to speak Dutch.
The sea remained calm, and wo arrived without mishap off the mouth of the Pontianak river at 2.30 p.m. the following day. Our first impression of the new land was that it was dead flat and well planted up with coconuts.
We reached the, town at about 4 30 p.m. The Har bour Master came aboard and brought the Maimuna safely up alongside the Resident’s Jettv, where we lay very comfortably and conveniently during our whole stay. Here we were greeted by Mr Van Wyk the Controleur, and Mr. Van Mayenfeld, the Secretary, while a charming touch was added to our welcome by a bowl of roses sent by Mrs. Krol.
We were then taken ashore and conducted round the town in cars. Pontianak proved to be about the same size as Kuching. It is very flat, and for this reason and because of its lack of gardens, we thought it less pretty than Kuching. But the canals which run down many of the streets, with their innumerable little bridges, and their seething mass of small boats and bathers, lend the town a quaintly picturesque air.
Our tour of inspection ended up at the Pasar Malum This splendid native exhibition was indeed a surprise to us. It consisted of long covered galleries of booths and stalls built round the sides of an open central space There were exhibitions of Malay, Dyak and Javanese work, an Agricultural section and an intriguing display of electrical gadgets. At the corners, natives theatres laced in upon the central space, Chinese Wayang, a Javanese Wyang Wong and Malay Bangsawan. At one end a large two- storied Chinese Restaurant served as Grand Stand and Rendezvous for the Europeans.
Returning to the Pasar Malum after dinner we found the place alive with gaiety and excitement. The natives were thronging round their various shows, crowding out the eating-houses and even disposing themselves on swings and giant strides. Bands were playing and a free cinema show was in progress. In the Chinese Restaurant we met the. Resident Mr. Larive and his wife, and others of the Dutch com munity. They welcomed us most kindly, all of them speaking excellent English Before long we were dancing together to strains of the Savoy Orpheans and Jack Hylton's Baud, very successfully broadcasted from a gramophone by a system of loud-speaker discs hung round the walls. An attempt was made to pick up on the wireless a special birthday programme broadcasted from Kootwyk in Holland. We heard some speeches and a little music, the weather conditions being unfavourable for very successful results.
We began the following morning by a visit to Dr. Krol's house boat the Water Geus, and we were much impressed by the combined comfort and com pactness of his floating home. Thence we proceeded to the Pasar Malam and were shown the agricultural section in more detail. We were interested in a service of illustrated posters for eradicating plant pests; in school books and health pamphlets printed in Malay; in a suit case made from crushed bark ; but the writer, for one. was even more interested in the delicious Java coffee and cream with which we were served.
That night we were invited to a dance at the Club.
This is a small building, but prettily situated by the
river so that two sides look over the water. For
this occasion the ladies of Pontianak had ingeniously
decorated the walls with huge orange sunflowers,
growing out of a foliage of bamboo. On a raised
platform one end of the room was an amusing,
carbaret-like champagne-bar, presided over by two
pretty girls dressed like Dutch boys, the name on
whose caps proclaimed them to be “piccolos.”
With charming feminine blandishments the piccolos
persuaded everyone to buy books of champagne
tickets. Need it he added that everything went
with a swing from a word “go.” The revelry was
kept up till late in the morning. We returned to
the Maimuna at 4 a.m. and were lulled to sleep by
the strains of the untiring dance band.
Rising early next morning two of our party, in
full dress, attended the official speech-making at
the Residency, when the whole Dutch population
and representatives of all communities listened to
loyal addresses made by the Sultan, the Resident,
and the Senior Controleur.
We next visited Mr. Blackett, the only English man living at Pontianak, whose friendship added much to the pleasure of our stay. After a much- needed siesta we repaired to the K.P.M. steamer, Van Geus, where the. Captain was holding a large reception and plying his guests with delicious lobster salad, ice cream pudding and champagne. The Van Geus seemed to us a splendid example of what can be accomplished in a small steamer. The cabins were large and fitted with every modern convenience and the saloon was decorated in excellent taste.
From the Van Geus we hurried back to the Pasar Malam in order to see a display of fireworks. Excitement was added to this programme by a spark falling on the leaf roof of the Grand Stand and causing a certain alarm. The fire brigade was on the spot immediately, and if there had been any danger it was but momentary. By this time it was too late to return to the Maimuna for dinner so we decided to have it in the Chinese Restaurant. This
was not a successful venture. We had to wait about an hour and a half to get served and even a free picture show, a band playing, and the general lively atmosphere of a Lyon’s Corner House did not contrive to the ward off the pangs of hunger.
The next day found us once more at the Pasar. Malam, this time to witness a Military tournament and tatoo. The native soldiers are amazingly efficient and the whole display was excellent. After this came a rice-taffel with the Krols, which still remains one of the most pleasing memories of our visit. For the sake of those not already familiar with the rice-taffel I must give a short, though I fear totally inadequate, description of it. First came rice accompanied by a sort of soup with richly variegated sambol, to these were added fried fishes, generous portions of cold roast fowl, savoury ome lettes, salad, fried prawns, kropok and last but not least incredibly delicious salt; the whole accompanied by lashings of good Kloster beer.
At 6.30 that evening we were invited to the Re-; sidency to watch a magnificent native procession. Chinese with gorgeous banners and lanterns and, of course, beating gongs and drums, Malays, Dyaks, Javanese, and veteran soldiers. They made a splen did pageant. Every now and then the procession was stopped while a group of natives gave a short programme of singing and dancing. Of these we were most pleased by a Javanese ballet, the “Jeram- gan,” in which the dancers are seated on baby horses and look just as if they were on horseback. The costumes of the dancers were perfect in colour de sign and their technique quite strangely modern. The procession ended with a group of Kayan dan cers, clad in costumes of banana leaves and hideous masks They danced a sort of Charlston with all the zest and enjoyment that should inspire every kind of dancing.
We awoke on Sunday, the 2nd, a little saddened by the thought that it was our last day. Some of our party went across river and explored a little of the hundred miles of road leading to Sengkawang. The rest of us made a last visit to the Pasar Malam to watch an amusing obstacle race run by taxis.
We then went to the Club where a gay scene greeted us. The hand was playing and a few couples dancing, others were sitting at small tables round the dancing floor drinking and chatting while in an adjoining room roulette was in progress. When some of us had lost enough and others had had sufficient Dutch gin, we returned to the Maimuna. Then a curry tiffin to a few of our new friends and alas! our visit was over.
The Call.
The fact is that the ordinary call m Sarawak is simply unnecessary If carried out sincerely it is a waste of time to all concerned, just when one wants to be out taking exercise, as it serves no purpose that cannot equally well be served by going to the club and meeting people there. If it is not carried out sincerely (and who has not occasionally hoped that the other people would be out so as to get round quickly), then it is simply submitting to a custom which one feels to be a farce. Unfortunately if not carried out it sometimes creates misunderstand ing.— (Contributed.)
A tendency is being shown in India and Burmah to limit calling to a few official ones; only such as may be necessary and desirable. The idea is said to be spreading and most of us will agree that the sooner it comes this way the better.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
Singing Rivers.
KUCHING,
12th September, 1028.
To
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching,
Sir,
I should be very glad if you or one of your readers could enlighten me. about a common pheno menon in this country which is, I suppose, familiar tp many. I refer to the fact that a rising tide is sometimes accompanied by a noise which I should describe as “booming," which varies in pitch and volume but which is very distinctive. I remember a good many years ago asking a native the cause and was told it was made by a fish (ikan buntal) or possibly a prawn. My easily aroused curiosity was equally easily allayed by what appeared a reasonable ex planation. I have never given the matter further thought until a short time ago, while in Pontianak, I again heard the noise and was told the river was “ill song” and this occurred rarely and was due to the meeting of fresh and salt water. This was said to be an established scientific fact. I should like to know when and by whom this was established?
Yours, etc., “FLEVO.”
[The fish theory has always appealed to us, hut in one of the few Dutch books available we find other Europeans astonished by this noise. “ The Dayaks consider it an ordinary phenomenon which they called riong or sometimes rivoet haroesan breath of the stream—there is a legend that it is music played by some damsels drowned by Djatu, the Crocodile God. The missionaries attribute it to the friction of two currents—one, the advancing tide from the sea and the other, the down-flowing water of the stream. Local conditions influence the amount of friction. The correctness of this theory is proved by the fact that the sound is only heard at certain points when the sea meets the swift river water.” Extract from "Ran Away from the Dutch,” N T H., Perelaer, 1887.
We shall be glad to hear the views of our readers. —Ed.]
KUCHING,
12th September, 1928.
To
The Editor.
Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
Sir,
There are rumours current in town that some people have approached Government for permission to open a few brothels in Kuching. It is sincerely to be hoped that these rumours are baseless. At present one of the prides of Kuching is the absence of houses of ill fame. Time and again visitors to our town have expressed appreciative surprise at their non-existence and have carried away good impressions of our morals. Such a reputation is worth while upholding.
Commercialised vice is frowned on in all enlightened countries, and in enlightened Sarawak it should be the same. Prostitution has been said to be the oldest profession in this world. That may or may not be so; it does not concern us. If a woman is so abnormal us to deliberately let herself out for hire, then perhaps we cannot do anything to help her, but in the average brothel in the East the inmates are not willing partners in the scheme of things. The poor unfortunate girls are either tricked or bought outright and they are so terrorised by those abominable creatures—the brothel keepers— that they dare not complain to anyone, however much they are encouraged to do so.
Enclosing my card.
I remain, Yours, etc.,
W. W.
OPTIONAL POOL TOURNAMENT.
( Final.)
F. A. W. Page-Turner and J. B. Archer, Out stations, beat C. Pitt-Hardacre and J. C. Swayne, Kuching.
BILLIARD HANDICAP.
(Final.)
H. B. Crocker, Kuching, beat C. Pascoe, Out-stations.
TENNIS HANDICAP (MIXED DOUBLES).
( Final.)
Mrs. Hayward and Mr. Stirling Boyd beat Mrs. Fenwick and Mr. Boult 7—5. 4—6, 6—0.
TENNIS HANDICAP (MEN'S DOUBLES)
( Final. )
Dr. Walsh and Mr. Allman beat. Mr. Stirling Boyd and Major Cunynghame 13—11, 6—4.
E. M. MARJORIBANKS, Hon. Secretary.
Cricket.
KUCHING v. CEYLON.
Saturday 22nd and Monday 24th September.
The Autumn Meeting of the Turf Club was held on the 22nd and 24th September, both afternoons being favoured by good weather, the course being in fine order and the going firm. As a consequence, it is not surprising that several local records were broken, no less than five previous best times for various distances being eclipsed. There were several upsets of form, noticably so as regards Mr. Ed. Hardell's stable, Azab on two occasions beating Akai when the latter went out of the paddock a pronounced favourite.
Another local record time for the distance broken by 1 of a second. Awang Damit, the jockey of the winner, was subsequently brought before the stewards, severely censured for dangerous riding at the road, and cautioned as regards his riding in the future. A considerable amount of jostling took place half way up the straight, Pengarah being shut out by Osaka swerving across to Black Pirate on the out side. Pengarah. pulled out and round the others, was fast making ground at the finish. Brahim, the jockey of the winner, was subsequently severely censured and cautioned by the Stewards as to his future riding.
Lee Mah and Sakhon tied for fourth place and Billy Buster was last.
Nugget, a hot favourite, threw his jockey at the start and returned riderless A very close finish, of which only the judge could accurately tell the result.
Singa was fourth and Nugget, riderless, last.
Flying Fox was leading from White Knight at the distance, when the latter weakened and Black Pirate came up on the outside to win cleverly from Flying Fox by the smallest of margins in the last few strides. Azab, Untong and Shooting Star were racing together in front nt Sekama Gate, but when they re-appeared by the G-furlong post, Shooting Star held a clear lead which he never lost, though being over hauled by Ta’sangka at the finish. Another record for the course, the previous best tune being beaten by no less than 51 seconds.
Adham was fourth and Kismet last.
Second Day
A desperate finish, only soluble from the judge's box— Kismet, after being slow into hie stride, coming up with n strong finish to win by the shortest of heads from White Knight and Azab, who did not improve their chances through the former swerving across to the latter, on the outside, within the distance Yet a further record for the course broken by 1g seconds.
Flying Fox was fourth
Ardan bolted with his jockey when at the post, and finished the course alone, not returning to the start. An easy win for Vug et, carrying 21 lbs. more than he did on the first day.
Also ran:—Apa Kena 8 10, Black Pirate 9.7, OT Man Kiver 9.0, Azab 9.0, Kim Mah 9.5, Kismet 9.7, Beaver 7.10. Pengarah obtained the lead shortly after the start, and retained it to the end. Lee Mah's girths broke half way down the straight, but his jockey managed to retain his seat and finish close up third.
Sisit was fourth and Little Tommy Tucker last. Nugget and Gruda raced together clear of the others up to the road, where Nugget drew out and, resisting a late challenge from Bagaimana, won by a length.
Ardan was fourth and Singa last.
Run in the dusk. Ponies drawn in the centre of the field, Altai, Shooting Star, Osaha and Kismet, appeared to get slightly the better of the start. Coming up the straight Akai held the lead closely followed by Shoot ng Star, being challenged by Azab at the distance, the latter, finishing strongly, getting up to win by half a length in 2/5 second better than the previous record for the course. The fastest run race of the meeting.
Extracts from Monthly Reports. First Division. July, 1938. .
The Resident, First Division, reports:—
Resident's Court—(Criminal).—There were five convictions and two acquittals.
Pundok, a Dyak, was sentenced to seven years' R.I. under section 326 I.P.C. He attacked and wounded Hana Maioda, a Japanese woman, who was so seriously injured that the left leg had to be amputated.
There were three appeals from the District Court to the Resident's Court, two of which were dismissed and one was allowed.
KUCHING.
DISTRICT OFFICE. The District Officer, Mr. J. C. Swayne, reports: — A total of 542 summonses were issued, 433 cases were tried leaving some 40 to carry over to August. This is exclusive of the large number of writs sent to Outstations.
Owing to the long spell of dry weather several claims were put forward by owners of plantations for damage done by fire; these are being investigated by the Native Magistrates and the Land Office.
The Public Works Department completed the annual whitewashing and painting of the Govern ment Offices.
The District Officer, Mr. J. B. Archer, reports:— The Acting Director of Agriculture, accompanied by Mr. Allman, visited Lundu during the month.
The night of 14th I spent at Talang Talang in the Lucile anchored off the bigger island. I he turtles are under the supervision of a Malay employed by the Datu Shahbandar and there is a little neatly kept kampong. Coconuts are planted ail over the islands and the turtle egg industry seems to be a well-run and paying business.
LUNDU
Chia Kui Chai took over the duties of Court Writer again on 21st and D. J. Lan returned to Upper Sarawak.
During my visit I sent off police again to watch for the escaped prisoner Nobit, but no trace of him could be found.
The builder of six unfinished shops in Lundu bazaar was given a time limit in which to complete them.
BAU. UPPER SARAWAK.
1'he District Officer, Mr. J. B. Archer, reports:—
On the 5th, a Chinaman from Punk, named Sim Peng, went to Buso and, running along to the wharf, flung himself in the river. A Malay named All very pluckily went to the rescue and pulled him out. Sim Peng is a Hylam and was sent to the Kuching Asylum A fire on the 9th destroyed a Dyak house of eight doors at Grogo Upar. During the month the usual topekong celebrations have been taking place in the Bau bazaar, and a big wayang engaged. The bazaar Was crowded all the time. A cinema show at Siuiawau also attracted many. A dreadful accident occurred at Siniawan on the 26th when a boy named Tai Leong, aged about fourteen years, attempted to open a 4-gallon tin of methylated spirits by melting the solder with a piece of lighted char-coal. The spirits exploded and the lad was badly burut. He was brought, up to Ban and attended by the Government Dresser and sent straight down to Kuching Hospital that night by motorcar. He died, however, soon after admission.
In the District Court, three cases which took up a considerable time were those in which an Indian dresser named J C. Matthews, employed on Dahan Rubber Estate, was concerned.
The criminal cases Mary, wife of J. C. Matthews, vs. M. L Carrie, and Rami (f.) vs. J. C. Matthews were dismissed. The civil case of J. C. Matthews vs. Dahan Rubber Estates. Limited, was heard and a decision given. Plaintiff has appealed against this judgment.
The motor lorry was out of action practically the whole month on account. of broken parts.
The bullocks for the roller are to be dispensed with at the end of this month. The main water pipe at Bau is becoming a source of trouble, as new leaks break out nearly every day.
The ferryman at Batu Kitang reports that the big boat is in had condition.
The Bidi Gold Mining Company have started prospecting, and I have given them permission to pur-chase a half ton Ford Lorry. The Upper Sarawak Gold Mining Syndicate are progressing well with their new works at Baku. A considerable amount of land has been cleared, and work has started on constructing a new piece of road. The local Chinese still pan for gold round about the old Bau works. As gold streamers' licenses are still taken out re gularly, it is evident that gold is still to be found.
In this district, Owing to the scattered rubber gardens, it is difficult to find an area of any size for a pepper reserve. Much of the old pepper land has been planted with rubber, and the Chinese are now regretting this act.
F. F. BOULT, Resident, First Division.
Sadong Colliery .
August, 1928.
Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager, Sadong Colliery, reports: —
The output, export, local consumption, conversion into coke and coal stock figures for the month were as follows:—
Fifth Division.
LIMBANG.
August, 1928.
The Acting Resident of Limbang reports: —
The Sth, being His Highness the Tuan Muda’s birthday, was observed as a general holiday. I spent the day at Brunei where the Resident kindly took me by car to Tutong to see the new road, in all motoring 90 miles in the day. The Acting Assistant District Officer of Lawas and Mr. (look came over, the former to discuss general affairs, and the hitter make arrangements for hiring a timber store at Labuan.
I regret to report that the bazaar at Ukong, con sisting of five shops, was entirely burnt down on the night of the '28th. The cause of the fire is unknown but appears to have originated in the roof of the end shop belonging to one Mah Yaw and rapidly spread to the others. Only very little of the stock was saved.
His Highness the Rajah having kindly sanctioned certain expenditure on new roads, work was com menced on extending the Sungei Poyan road to Berawan; competition to get work on this road is great and at present Mandore Mulok is doing some very excellent work and as everyone appears so interested it is anticipated there will be no trouble in the future with regard to buffaloes which have always hitherto been a source of much friction.
I visited the Buang Tawar Oil Workings with the object of examining the conditions, as at present these are being worked at a loss and with practi cally no object. I am writing under separate cover to suggest that work be discontinued and the State rights allowed to revert back to the Brunei Govern ment.
LAWAS AND TRUSAN.
July, 1928.
Mr. F. H. Pollard, Acting Assistant District Officer, reports: —
On 19th H.H.M.Y. Maimuna with His Highness the Rajah, the Chief Secretary, the Commissioner of Trade and Customs, the Resilient Fifth Division and Mrs. Kortright arrived off Kuala Trusan at 11 a.m., when I went on board, but the heavy sea on the bar precluding ail possibilities of getting into
the Trusan we proceeded direct to Lawas. A call was made at the Vamco Timber Company’s saw mill at Tagai where His Highness was shown round the mill by the Managing Partner, Mr. C. J. Cook. Lawas was reached at 6 p.m.
F. H. KORTRIGHT, Resident, Fifth Division.
Agriculture.—The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Es tates, Ltd., exported 30,570 lbs. of dry rubber to Labuan during the month.	j
Customs.—Mr. J. A. H. Hardie, Commissioner of Trade and Customs, visited the Customs stations at Lawas, Kuala Lawas, Kuala Trusan, Sundar and Trusan.
Public Works.— Chiu Yong was employed in level-ling the Trusan road between 1st and 2nd miles and Entong was still engaged on the Melusok Read. The fort wharf at Law as was re-erected the timber being used again. Lt is proposed to put in a concrete retaining wall to prevent erosion of the bank which is the cause of the constant repairs to the wharf.
I accompanied His Highness to Labuan and Brookston on 21st and on 22nd visited Trusan and Sundar with Mr. Hardie, who returned to Limbang on 23rd. I walked back to Lawas on 24th.
After a false start at 4.30, when we hud to turn back, I eventually left Punatig at 7, going through the loba. At Awat Awat I changed boats and even tually reached Kuala Trusan at 10.30. We were un able to reach the Maimnna and bad to turn hackbut fortunately met m l. Sanang coming out of Kuala Trusan and went out by her to the Maimuna. The Saripah was unable to get out of Lawas till 22nd,
As it seemed probable that the launch would be un-able to get out of Lawas on 19th owing to the sea, I left for Punang on evening of 18th en route for Kuala Trusan to meet His Highness the Rajah.
On 27th I went to Punang to pay out the cession money and from there went on to Trusan to attend a very successful tuba fishing in the main river, returning to Lawas via Punang on 30th.
In the District Court, Tadam Sigar and Umang Bina (f.) were fined 3200 each or in default one year's R.I. for cohabiting during the period of mourning for Umang's late husband. As this is the. first case settled according to accepted Murut custom the finding and sentence are subject to confirmation or otherwise by the Resident's Court.
It is a matter for great regret that His Highness was unable to visit Trusan in the Maimuna on account of the weather, but I am satisfied that the yacht can get in given satisfactory weather condi tions and hope that it may be possible to prove this in the near future.
At 6 a m. on 21st His Highness left Lawas for Labuan, and after a stay of a few hours went on to Brooketon for the night.
Next morning His Highness came ashore at 9 a.m. and, after meeting the local headmen in the Fort, went round the bazaar and inspected some of the new roads. In the afternoon a visit was paid to the Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Ltd., where His Highness was met bY the Manager, Mr. G. F. W. Clifford.
