VOL. LIX.
No. 906.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Friday, March 1st, 1929.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette	FRIDAY MARCH 1st 1929.
MOTOR TRAFFIC.
It is surprising to us, and possibly to many others, that the fatal motor accident on the 4th instant is the first of its kind in Kuching- that is to say a pedestrian being killed outright on the road.
Although there certainly are a few good and careful native drivers, the fact remains that the majority of native drivers have not yet attained that valuable attribute known as "road sense." Moreover there appears to be an idea that all other motor vehicles are rivals and must therefore be raced.
The biggest offenders, in our opinion, are the bus drivers who seldom have any consideration for pedestrians, bullock carts, rickshas, ponies or any such small fry.
Overtaking at corners and cutting in are frequent offences, but the most annoying is when two busses pull up opposite to each other while the drivers have a animated chat, or an argument, as the case may be. The impatient hoots of the cars waiting to go on are disregarded and the road is blocked until the rancous exchange of words is finished. The busses then start off and keep to the crown of the road just as long as they think fit, or in proportion to the importance of the occupants of the following car.
These may seem hard words, and to reflect
adversely upon the work of the Municipal
Department and the Police. This is really not
so. Government may make regulations, but no
Government can instil "road sense" into brains
which are incapable or unwilling to receive it.
All motor drivers have to pass a Municipal test,
and drivers of busses a medical test as well. This
is, we believe, conscientiously carried out, but the
successful candidates seldom take the trouble to
drive like that again. The Police are also in a
difficult position. The offences described above
nearly always take place outside the town limits,
where there is seldom a policeman on the spot.
The remedy, in our opinion, lies with those who
witness such discourteous and dangerous behaviour.
They should report the matter to the Police, and
attend Court and give evidence. Many may say
that it is not their affair- why should they take the
trouble? And they do not like coming to Court.
That is a very wrong opinion to take. It is the duty
of every good citizen to see that the laws are kept,
and because of this, it is their duty to become
informers. It would not require more than a dozen
or so of such cases to be dealt with by the Court,
before drivers would remember that their crude and
overbearing methods on the roads outside Kuching
were possibly being watched and that it might pay
them to obey the rule of the road. In this way
"road sense" might filter through the brains of
many, whilst the few who were deaf to all
regulations would in course of time be eliminated
by the simple process of cancelling their driving
licences.
NOTES.
February.
THEIR Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee, the Dayang Leonora, and a house party spent the Chinese New Year week-end at Ban. Mr. C. Willes Johnson and Mr. J. A. H. Hardie were in Simanggang for the same period.
HIS Highness the Rajah sailed for Simanggang and Coast Stations on the 26th in the Maimuna. Accompanying him was Mr. J. A. H. Hardie who is proceeding to Mukah and Oya to take charge of those districts. Mr. Hardie wwwill be missed in Kuching, where his many activities, especially in connection with the Turf Club, were much appreciated.
MR. C. Willes Johnson left on the 16th on his way back to England. We wish him a quick and safe passage.
THE S.S. Vyner Brooke, which sailed for Singapore on the 2nd instant, at 9.30 a.m., was crowded with friends wishing Messrs. H. L. Owen and W. F. de V. Skrine good-bye on their retirement from the Service, and Mother Clare, Mr. G. T. Bates, Mr. J. W. Evans and Father Epping, who were going on leave, good wishes and a safe return. In other column we give an account of Mr. Owen's farewell celebrations.
Mother Clare, of the Dalat Mission, goes home for the first time in 40 years of faithful and pious service to the Roman Catholic Mission. Father Epping has been in the Dalat and Mukah Missions, and has done valuable work amongst the Melanaus there.
A little Tamil boy, aged about a year and a half, was drowned in a ditch near Mr. Ong Tiang Swee's cattle ground on the 10th. His parent were working nearby, and the child appears to have crawled to the ditch and fallen in.
A Chinese man was drowned in the Samarahan on the 9th owing to the boat in which he and two others were paddling capsizing in a squall. The other passengers were picked up. CHINESE New Year was the cause of several hired car drivers being brought up into the Police Court on Tuesday morning for disobedience of the traffic regulations. These, and an incautious bicyclist who knocked Mr. Bathurst over, were all fined.
ONE of our readers, after gazing at the electric clock in the Sarawak Club for ten minutes, the while sipping his lime-juice and soda, suddenly seized the "ping-pong" and burst into rhyme :-
"Dickery dickery, dock.
What fault is worse in a clock
Than lack of virility cum immobility?
Dickery, dickery, dock!"
A second lime-juice and soda produced another gem- but in this paper we do not call a spade a spade- and the blue pencil descended.
AT six o'clock on Sunday evening a salute of seven guns announced to Mohammedans that the great fasting month of Ramadan had begun, when the Islamic tenets exhort all its followers to keep certain fasting rules between the hours of sunrise and sunset.
MR. and Mrs. B. J. C. Spurway were amongst the passengers who arrived in the Vyner Brooke on the 12th February. This is Mrs. Spurway's first arrival in the country, and we can assure her of a very hearty welcome.
THE Police made raids om gambling tables on the morning of Chinese New Year, and a number of Chinese who had attempted to evade payment of their licences were brought before the Police Court and fined.
WE hear that the St. Andrew's Society held an animated meeting the other day, when lengthy speeches were made on the important question of "Sassenachs, or no Sassenachs" to be asked to tackle the haggis on the great day.
We understand, too, that the question of the rules and regulations caused a spate of orations, but that the suggestion of a late arrival that every member should recite the entire rules on the 1st of each year, rather checked those who favoured a rather too meticulous code.
THOSE interested in local racing will be interested to hear that "Workman" and "Adil," the two new ponies belonging to His Highness the Rajah, "Ol'Man River" and "Pengarah," owned by Mr. Hardie, and "Akal," recently purchased by Mr. Parnell have gone to Mukah and Oya, in which stations they will be trained for the Spring Meeting. Mr. Archer's ponies, "Apa Kena" and "Popacatepetl," have arrived from Bau.
His Highness the Rajah's other ponies "Wembley," "White Wings" and "Hopeless" are now in Kuching. "Jorrocks," owned by a Simanggang Kongsi is also in Kuching, but will probably not remain here. DR. H. N. Whitford, Manager of the Crude Rubber Department of the American Rubber Association Incorporated, made a short visit to Kuching during the month and stayed at the Residency. Dr. Whitford, who was on business, was shown round by Mr. Allman of the Rubber Improvements Department and expressed himself as most interested in all he saw.
A meeting took place recently with regard to the formation of The Sarawak Malay Tennis Club. A committee of seven is to carry on the work for one year.
The following were elected to constitute the committee: resident, The Datu Amar EEHon. Secretary, Rakawi bin UsopEEHon. Treasurer, Ahmat Bisunie bin SedinEEHon. Auditor, Zen bin Malek; Tennis Captain, Ali bin Abang Hadji Hassan EECommittee Members, Abon bin Taha and Bujang Yahya bin Hadji Suti.
IN connection with the Mohammedan fasting month, we are informed that His Highness The Sultan of Perak has issued a decree forbidding immoderate eating during the hours in which food may be taken- It may have been overlooked, too. that the Christian fasting month began at practically the same time. In these days, however, few observe any rules of abstinence, and in this part of the East it is possible that a reduction in the ordinary amount of food consumed might be objected to on grounds of health.
PASSENGERS by the incoming Vyner Brooke on the 25th included The Revd. and Mrs. Hoover, and Mrs. Baird.
Mr. Hoover has been in the hands of the doctors but has, we understand, made a complete recovery. Mrs. Baird comes out to rejoin her husband.
FROM Sibu we hear that the new bowling alley at the Club is practically finished, and a consignment of balls from the Sarawak Club have been sent up there pending the arrival of their own from England.
THE Seaplane "Venus" has made various flights during the month including one to Limbang and back via Sibu and Miri. The mechanic on this trip was a Sarawak Malay.
MR. W. F. Dick, who has recently arrived out from furlough, has left for Sibu to take on the duties of District Officer there.
ANOTHER motor fatality occurred on the 19th near the entrance to the General Hospital about six in the evening, when a young Chinese named Lee Boon Sin fell heavily to the ground whilst attempting to jump off a motor bus in motion. He was taken into the Hospital, but died the same night from fracture of the skull.
MR. Song Keng Hai, the well-known Towkay, has most generously presented a piece of land behind his residence in Padungan Road to Government for the purposes of making a public recreation ground. It is well known how essential it is to reserve open spaces in towns, where old and young may breathe fresh air away from the crowded streets where smell and congestion are difficult to avoid.
RECENT Gazettings areEEMr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas to do duty in Simanggang, Mr. E. O. Bruce to be District Officer of Upper Sarawak and Lundu, Dr. W. Hutchison to act as Principal Medical Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck to be Officer-in-Charge of Oya and Dalat, Mr. H. D. Aplin to be Resident of the Fourth Division, Mr. F. H. Kortright to be Resident of the Fifth Division, Mr. C. D. Adams to act as Resident of the Third Division, and Mr. H. M. Calvert to be an Officer of Class IB. Mr. T. Corson to be Divisional Forest Officer, Fourth and Fifth Divisions, Mr. J. 0. Gilbert to do duty at Sibu, Mr. J. B. Archer to be District Officer, Kuching, Coroner, Kuching, and Editor, Sarawak Gazette, Mr. T. W. Goodban to be Ground Engineer, Mr. D. C. Hudden to be a Cadet and to do duty in the Department of Trade and Customs, Mr. E. S. Holl to be Curator of Gardens, Mr. E. H. Elam to be a Cadet, and Mr. P. Murray-Scott to be a Cadet and to do duty in the District Office. Kuching.
Mr. A. A. Rennie, Treasurer of Sarawak, and Mr. B. J. C. Spurway, Assistant Conser vator of Forests, returned from leave of absence and resumed their duties.
MESSRS. P. Scott-Murray and E. H. Elman, who arrived from Singapore on the 12th, have joined the Sarawak Civil Service as Cadets.
CAPTAIN Le Sueur, Sarawak Rangers, arrived from Miri on 19th in order to take over the Command at the Fort on Major Cunynghame's approaching departure.
EXTENSIVE filling and levelling operations have been taking place on the playing ground belonging to St. Thomas' School, Kuching. The swamp as far as the boundary of the old Rest House has been raised, and the Rev. Mr. Hollis, the Headmaster, informs us that the far corner, near the new schools, is to be dug out and squared off. When completed this will be the finest ground in Kuching, and a welcome addition in view of the large number of boys now in the school.
ON the 27th January several racing ponies were sold by public auction, including the winner of last meeting's Winner's Handicap.
Azab was "bought by Mr. Ong Eng Hin for the very moderate sum of $155, bidders no doubt remembering the 11 stone which this pony may have to carry at the next meeting!! Akai, which was bought by Mr. Parnell,
fetched $480, which shows that this pony is still considered the better of the two. Mr. Hardie's Little Tommy Tucker and an unnamed and unraced pony were bought by Chan Bros, and Mr. Ong Eng Hin for $100 and $50 respectively. The latter pony was recently purchased in B.N.B. for more than three times its auction price.
ON 1st February four old Sarawak seamen retired on pension. Nandak lately in com mand of H.H.Y. Maimuna, and prior to that of H.H.Y. Zahora, Jerman well known both in Government's and the Sarawak Shipping Company's vessels, Seman, late of the Sulong, and Hassan, a Mohammedan Dyak, who commanded the L'Aubaine for more years than we can remember.
These four jeragans were good examples of locally trained sailors. In spite of a lack of knowledge of theoretical navigation they handled their ships in a thoroughly practical manner, although not, perhaps, in a way which would satisfy a martinet of the European school of seamanship.
THE Resident, Fourth Division, reports that a large whale, some sixty feet long, was washed up near Kuala Suai. It was said to have a harpoon sticking in it.
WE older residents are glad to see M r.
Ernest Hose in our midst again after an
interval of practically a decade.
Mr. Hose first arrived in Sarawak in 1893,
when he devoted himself to the collection of Natural History Specimens in the Baram District.
Some three years later he joined Mr. H. H.
Everett in the Santubong Cutch Company.
In 1901 he supervised the planting of
gambier for The Borneo Company in Upper
Sarawak, and later, gutta percha at Poak.
In 1903 he started Dahan Estate. Two
years' later saw him engaged in the Com-
pany's sawmill ramifications in the Rejang.
Sungei Tengah Estate, now the property
of the Sarawak Rubber Estates, Limited,
was started by him in 1907.
Mr. Hose leaves for home again on 2nd
March. It may be that later he will again
hear the East a' calling, and we hope that one
day he and Mrs. Hose will return to the old
and favoured haunts of Sarawak.
Editor's Note.
IN a paper like the Sarawak Gazette where the Editor is perforce chief contributor and reporter, a change in the occupant of that hypothetical piece of furniture, the editorial chair, generally means a change in
the style and composition of the paper. For
the first two or three numbers the new Editor
attempts to introduce something novel, some-
thing of which it cannot be said "Oh!
another of these Silly Answers to Correspon-
dents," or " I suppose the Editor thinks his
"Mainly About Nothing" is funny! Try
and be humorous, and the stodgy readers
become caustic-write up local colour and
the cynical ones say "Is'nt it about time this
outpost-of-empire-slush became obsolete."
Home-made poetry merely invites ribaldry,
whilst reprints from more fortunately placed
papers simply beg the question "How the
dickens does he have the nerve to draw his
pay for this sort of stuff!"
Again, in Sarawak, our memories are apt
to betray us. What sparkling bits of wit are
banded about in the Club over the pahits and
cheese biscuits-what confidences are poured
into one's ear. In the morning, alas, all is
forgotten, and one is left to the task of
reading through fortnight old papers with
a pair of scissors handy, or surreptitiously going to the row of old gazettes and cribbing
articles written by former contributors in the old days.
To the ribald, our paper is known as The
Parish Magazine-to another sort of reader
it is a publication which, on arrival, is
immediately filed away neatly and sent to the
Printing Office to be bound in half leather
and marble paper at the end of the year.
To the few readers (we proudly imagine) who
really look forward to the Gazette, and rely
upon it as a. record of doings in Sarawak, it
must be a disappointment nine times out of ten.
On 1st April,1922 (of all foolish days on
which to start!!) we sat ourself in the
hypothetical chair and appealed for "copy.''
Let alone the "Optimistic Fiddler" joke,
which like most other amateur jokes should be lost in oblivion, we say it here that "copy''
did come in-and from most unexpected
quarters. The publication of this "copy''
was approved by some and sneered at by
others, but the latter, we know, were a
minority, and the contributors should comfort
themselves by remembering "Thev say! what
do they say ?-Let them say!!"
All this is simply leading up to another
request for "copy." Even Bernard Shaw or
Hiliare Belloc would become dull if they had
to write a whole magazine-the society
snips-the account of the local bean-feasts-
the hatch, match and despatch- the honours
list-the accounts of murder and sudden
death the arrivals and departures-and all
the tittle-tattle of the parish pump. Why
even an acrimonious correspondence fills up a column or two!! Well then readers!
before it goes for the last time, recall the
answer of the optimistic fiddler, and have a
shot at it and send us "copy."
Birthday of Her Highness the Ranee
Sunday tbe 24th February, the birthday of Her Highness, was marked by a public holiday on the following day.
On the evening of the 23rd Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee, the Dayang Leonora and more than a hundred guests were invited to a dance by the Resident and Mrs. Boult.
Before dancing began, the Resident proposed the health of Her Highness, remarking that he was following the native custom of imagining that the day began at six o'clock in the evening before, and that they were therefore correct in wishing Her Highness on this her birthday many happy returns of the day.
The Sarawak Rangers and the Police paraded on their respective parade grounds at eight o'clock in the morning of the 25th, and a Royal Salute was fired from Fort Margherita.
Mr. H. L. Owen's Retirement.
More than fifty guests were entertained to dinner
by the Resident and Mrs. Boult on the night of the 31st ultimo, the occasion being the departure
of Mr. H. L. Owen, late Resident of the Third
Division, who is retiring on pension.
On the conclusion of dinner the Resident rose, and
said that before having the honour to ask all those
present to drink to the health of Mr. H. L. Owen,
the senior Resident in Sarawak, whom they all
regret is retiring after more than 27 years' loyal and
faithful service to the Raj, he should like to say
that it was not for him to praise Mr. Owen's high
administrative abilities, his intimate knowledge of
the country, its peoples, their customs and their
languages. Particularly he referred to the Sea
Dyaks who Mr. Owen knew so well, and in which
language he was a scholar. Facts spoke for them-
selves (applause). Mr. Owen had held the high
offices of Acting Resident of the Second Division,
Resident of the Fourth Division and finally Resi-
dent of the Third, the largest and most important
Division in the country.
Some of them might perhaps think that life in Sarawak was dull and uneventful. Mr. Owen, he knew, could tell a different tale. He had been through the two great fires in Sibu, the one in 1902 and the other last year. He had been through cholera and smallpox epidemics, and had been on many expeditions into the interior against refractory tribes in the days before motor boats, wireless telegraphy and air-ships. In 1909 Mr. Owen very nearly lost his life when he so effectually put a stop to the Pangeran Omar scares, which at that time were causing the Government so much anxiety in the First and Second Divisions. Again, it was his prompt action that put a stop to the Chinese troubles at Miri a few years back. Before this Mr. Owen was once within an ace of drowning off the Mukah-Oya coast. In all these difficult situations Mr. Owen had extricated himself by his pluck and ability.
He did not mention these few incidents in Mr. Owen's career to embarrass him, simply to show a type of administrative Officer the Sarawak Government had been fortunate to possess-a type, lie hoped, that was still in our midst, and the type, he hoped, it will always be able to obtain. That type of man who, when faced with difficult
problems, knew what to do-how and when to
do it-and what is more-did it!! That type of
man was Mr. Owen. (Applause.)
He could not help thinking that Mr. Owen
possessed as many and more lives than a cat, which
should be taken as a happy omen, and mean he
will live to draw his well-deserved pension for a
great many years. In fact, he hoped he will beat
Major Rodway's record, which gentleman drew his
pension for over 40 years!!
He now asked those ladies and gentlemen
present to drink to the health of Mr. H. L. Owen
and wish liirn the very best of luck in the future.
The health was then drunk with musical honours.
Mr. Owen, rising to reply, said that the Resi-
dent had apologised for having embarrassed him.
This was quite true, he did feel rather embarrassed.
He had lived so long in Sarawak that on an
occasion like this, he did not quite know what to
say. It was naturally a big break in his life, and
he would tell them of a meeting with an old Malay
friend of his the other day. This old man had
wished him good luck on his retirement on pension,
and said that how nice it must be to feel that he,
the speaker, was returning to his own country
again, and would live amongst his own people.
He replied that it was true that he could still talk
his own native language, but had forgotten most
of his native customs. "Oh! don't worry," said
the old man, patting him on the shoulder in a
friendly manner, "You will soon pick them up!!" (Laughter.) In all seriousness, however, he did
feel that he would have some trouble in settling
down in his own land. He had experienced so
many kindnesses in Sarawak, not only from his own
countrymen, but from natives as well. In fact,
people seemed to have gone out of their way to
be kind, when they had no reason, really, to be
kind at all.
He would illustrate his difficulty in summing
up his life in Sarawak by mentioning that at
this table there were present many who had
served in the trenches during the Great War.
They had undergone the most horrible, revolting
and dreadful experiences-yet, in speaking of their
war days, these gallant men, almost without
exception, could only remember the cheerful side,
the humorous side or the comparatively pleasant
side of war. Nature, in her wisdom, draws a
merciful cloud over such horrors, and leaves but the
pleasant recollections behind. He, like many others in Sarawak, did not share in that great sacrifice, but in the same way he only remembered the pleasant times in Sarawak. The Resident had mentioned that he, the speaker, had been in various hazardous adventures, and had not always had an easy or comfortable time of it. That might be true, but his memory could only recall the brighter side of these adventures, and the good fellowship and kindness of his friends. (Applause.)
He would remind his listeners that it had been a great honour to serve in Sarawak, and he felt sure that that spirit pervaded the minds of all those who were still serving (applause). In conclusion he could only say ''good-bye." No! He did not like that word-"au revoir," no, that was French-"aufwiedersehen," no, that was German and therefore anathema to all, he would simply say what "good-bye'' really meant "God be with you!"(Applause.)
The rest of the evening was devoted to cards, and those who were invited did not leave until the early hours after a most pleasant and eventful evening due to the kindness of the Resident and Mrs. Boult.
Fatal Motor Accident at 2nd Mile.
On the 4th, at about 5.30 in the afternoon, an
old Chinese named Tan Ah Yik, whilst walking
along the Rock Road near the 2nd mile, was
knocked down by a motor-bus and killed instan-
taneously. It appears that another bus had pulled
up at the side of the road at the signal of deceased,
who wished to go to Kuching. The other bus was
coming up from behind and the driver, apparently
misjudging the distance, attempted to pass the
stationary vehicle and knocked the old man down
with the back mudguard.
An Inquest was held next day by the Coroner,
Mr. J. B. Archer, and, after a lengthy hearing,
a verdict of death by misadventure was brought in.
A rider was added to the effect that the deceased
appeared to have been old and feeble and possibly
deficient in sight and hearing, but that the driver
of the bus was guilty of negligence in a minor
degree for not taking every precaution to see the road was clear.
The driver of the stationary bus was summarily fined $10 by the Coroner for failing to attend the
Inquest, having to be fetched from his house.
The next morning this man. Tan Ah Tee. was
brought before the District Court for giving false evidence at the Inquest, and received a severe
reprimand from the Bench and released.
Spanish Terror for Motorists.
Six YEARS IF PEDESTRIAN IS INJURED.
By a stroke of his pen General Primo de Rivera has apparently solved the problem of how to save the pedestrian from the motor-car. Since 1st January of this year there have been no motor accidents in the Streets of Madrid and, judging from the reports from other districts, Spain has become a paradise for the pedestrian, according to Reuter's Madrid correspondent.
The vexed problem has seemingly been solved by an extremely simple expedient namely, the im mediate arrest of anyone guilty of the crime of knocking down and injuring a pedestrian, without regard to circumstances. If the injured person is certified, after medical examination, to be suffering from hurt of any but the lightest kind, this means the imprisonment of the offending driver for a period of not less than six years. If the injured man dies the crime is homicide, and the punishment, imprison ment for not less than twelve years. It has been made plain, and in the most unmistakable terms, that neither social position nor any other conditions will be taken into, account, and, of course, political influence will not be available. There will be no escape from the new law, and bail is not allowed.
The effect has certainly been electrical. The atmosphere has been charged for some months with dreadful misgivings as to what was Income, and much anxiety has been expressed by the more nervous drivers. Steady practice in the use of the horn, especially among taxi-drivers, leaves no room in the world of sound for further and more effective warn ings to stubborn walkers across crowded streets. In Barcelona the taxi-drivers threw up the sponge by the way of a protest and abandoned work. Whether they have returned to work again is not known in Madrid, no doubt owing to the censorship, for strikes are not allowed, which means that when they occur they are not reported in the capital.
However, drivers and pedestrians now meet on equal and even on friendly terms. Motorist have been seen to stop their cars and invite their old enemies to take the right of way, almost with a bow and a polite "After you." The result is that blocks at nearly every street crossing in central Madrid have become almost permanent, though the police force on duty must have been doubled. Though its many members blow their whistles until one shrill noise seems to catch up with another, they achieve little more than to exhaust their own patience and that of the excited crowd eager to move on. As to the motorist -he offers prayers to his protecting saint that no pedestrian may cross his path or run into him, and secretly asks if the petrol monopoly is not behind it all.-The Malaya Tribune.)
Mainly About Nothing.
The Prince of Optimists is the gentleman who
bravely subscribes his name to the assertion that
"we guarantee our guts to last at least six
months!!"
This may sound rather coarse to some of our
readers-let us assure them, however, that we have
a precedent for mentioning such an essential part
of our anatomy.
That eminently respectable paper "The Gloucester Journal" in its edition of 9th April. 1722, mentions in the London Weekly Bill of Mortality "Griping in the guts, 8 deaths" and "Twisting of the guts, one death."
It is amazing how rash correspondents are in airing their knowledge of Malay. In a contemporary are two letters to the Editor signed by "Sedikil Sakit" and "Tida Boleh Dengah" respectively.
To our mind, however, the plaint of the dis gruntled correspondent in a sort of cross-word- acrostic-limerick competition demands sympathy. This gentleman complains that the rules and regulations are unfair, and makes the extraordinary statement that he and his friend "would be entitled to a duck egg each." It is just possible that the recent Test Match has penetrated the celestial mind and he means that he should have "got a duck" or failed!!
Whiskey (or whisky, the experts still disagree) is generally supposed to be the national beverage of Scotland. Most Scots, especially those of the Lowlands, would be very aggrieved, and probably bellicose, if this assertion was disputed.
Graham's "The Social Life of Scotland," which is a standard work, however, differs. Discussing the food Graham says "	at	seven or eight o'clock came supper-a substantial meal of the dinner type, with ale and claret	Later
on we read " Eight o'clock was the break fast hour, with its substantial meal of mutton, callops and fowl, with libations of ale and sometimes sack, claret or brandy" And again" Ale was not so potent as the,
whisky that came into vogue after 1750 "
Indeed a hardy race !! Moreover in these days it is said that most of the whisky manufactured in Scotland is exported-and the biggest exports are to the East.
From the Sarawak Gazette 50 Years' Ago
THE
SARAWAK GAZETTE.
No. 150. W'DAY, FEB. 19th, 1879. Price 5 Cts.
A General Meeting of the Shareholders of the Sarawak Steamship Co., Limited, was held at the Offices of the Borneo Company, Limited, on Saturday the 8th February, at 2 p.m., where a dividend of 7.5% was declared for the half year ending 31st December, 1878.
There appears to have been very boisterous weather outside. We learn that a large schooner belonging to a Nakoda Lebah of Kaluka has been swamped off the Batang Lupar river. She had on board about 600 tampins of Raw Sago. The Nakoda and crew swam ashore. We trust that this is the last blow of a monsoon that has lasted quite long enough, and has been most un usually wet.
A MEETING of gentlemen interested in racing was hold at the Hotel on the 25th ultimo.
It was proposed that a standing Committee be appointed to settle any matters that may occur from time to time connected with the Regatta.
The following gentlemen were then appointed : Hon. the Resident, Messrs. E. P. Houghton. M.D., John Hardie and O. C. St. John and the Datu Tumonggong; Mr. C. S. Pearse consenting to take the post of Hon. Sec.
It was then proposed, and carried that in pursuance of the proposals made at the time of the last Regatta, a race for boats, crews limited to 15 men, should be held on the 3rd June next., the Rajah's birthday.
There being a considerable surplus from the last Regatta, a prize consisting of a silver Salver, value £20 will be given to the owner of the winning boat. No money will be given to the Crew from the Race-funds, and the owner will have to pay them, said pay ment not to exceed $20. The crew of the second boat will receive $10 from the race funds. Entrance $2 for each boat.
NOTICE.
I
IT is hereby made known for general information that it has been proved by soundings
the rock marked "OTTER" in the Admiralty
Charts of the Sarawak River does not exist,
it having been mistaken for the Belcher
Rock (correctly marked in the Charts) situate
off Jernang Village; A buoy painted white
has now been placed close to these rocks.
W. KIRK.
Captain, H.H.S. "Aline."
Chinese New Year.
Sunday, the l0th February, was the first day of the first moon of the year Ki Su, or 6th year of the Cycle. The Chinese year, as its name denotes, is a lunar one, but its commencement is regulated by the sun.
To those who are astronomically, inclined, it may be
interesting to know that New Year falls on the first
new moon after the sun enters Aquarius, which
makes it come not before 21st January nor after
19th February.
The celebrations, peculiar to this period of the year amongst Chinese all over the world, were observed in Kuching ; owing, possibly, to the absence of the usual wayang, the general opinion seemed to be that these were rather less than in former years.
During the whole day, however, visits were ex-
changed ;many Europeans and Malays calling on
the principal Chinese, who displayed their customary hospitality. The brightly-coloured dresses of the
Chinese ladies were conspicuous as they made their round during the evening.
Perhaps we do not suffer from the cracker-firing
nuisance over here to the degree which afflicts
residents m Singapore or Hongkong at this season. The corresponding columns of the newspapers of those ports are filled with the plaints of Sleepless residents, cursing the custom by which the Chinese hope to put to flight the fell and foul spirits that
lurk about the haunts of men.
Still, the nuisance is bad enough, especially to those
of us who happen to live within "ear-shot" of the
bazaar, or who take an early morning "liver-shaker"
on an high-spirited piece of horse-flesh. May the
new Chinese Government quickly dispel such
superstitious as still remain amongst the teeming
multitudes of their subjects!
Talking of which, we hear that that very progressive Government at Nanking wishes to introduce
the Gregorian Calendar, under which the Western
New Year -1st January-will be observed by
Chinese, instead of that of the old Chinese Calendar. It is not difficult to realize that the closer the
contact between East and West in commerce, etc.,
the greater will become the necessity of having an
uniform system of Calendar.
Our Chinese friends are clever enough to appreciate
this fact, and there is little doubt that in countries
where our interests are so closely interdependent, the old custom will very soon die out.
Cocktails and Their Effect.
The practice of cocktail drinking appears to be
almost as prevalent in medical circles as in other
society gatherings, and might, therefore, be supposed
to have been condoned rather than condemned by
the profession. We have, indeed, heard the custom
defended by one grave authority on the plea that it
was a stimulant to the endocrine system. In the
current issue of the "British Journal of Inebriety,"
Professor W. E. Dixon of Cambridge describes the
composition and effects of this American importation, which has largely taken the place of sherry
and bitters or gin and bitters as an aperitif before
meals. The cocktail usually consists of a solution
of volatile oil, more rarely bitters, with vermouth
and spirits, such as gin, whisky, or brandy. The
most important constituent in each case is alcohol,
the oils serving mainly as a mild irritant to the
stomach. The spirit is very rapidly absorbed from
the empty stomach, and the race of absorption is still further facilitated by the irritant action of the
oils. Having reached the blood it is absorbed into
the tissues, and especially the central nervous
system, where it produces a stimulation of the nerve
cells which continues until the tension of alcohol
in the nerve cells and blood becomes equal, after
which the alcohol exerts its ordinary action on the
central nervous system. The action of the cocktail,
unlike that of ordinary alcoholic beverages, is imme diate, but its duration is transient, being limited to fifteen or twenty minutes at the most. This form of drinking, Professor Dixon maintains, is particular ly pernicious for young people of either sex, who form a large percentage of cocktail drinkers, partly to lose their shyness and partly in the spirit of bravado. Not only does it impair their stomach, but it helps to promote the habit of excessive drinking more than any other type of beverage." (British Medical Journal.)
The Chinese Rebellion.
Monday the 25th was the seventy-second anniver sary of the rebellion, when Chinese from Upper Sarawak attacked the capital, and for a time paralysed the Government.
It is difficult in these days of roads, motor busses, seaplanes and wireless telegraphy to realize how easily such a raid could be attempted, and in the absence of communication, how difficult to repulse.
The rebels were in command of Kuching for a time, in spite of the very gallant defence put up by Europeans and loyal natives.
Henry Nicholetts, the brother of Colonel Nicholetts who had married a sister of the late Rajah, was murdered before the first Rajah's own eyes. Two little boys, John and Charles Middleton, aged six and four years, were killed and ''the fiends kicked the little heads with loud laughter from one to another.'' Richard Wellington, a clerk in the Borneo Company, lost his life in gallantly attempting to defend Mrs. Middleton and her children. In the old Kuching cemetery is the grave of that stout- hearted Irishman, Charles Adare Crymble, who commanded the stockades which contained the arsenal and the prison. St. John gives a stirring account of the defence where Crymble in a frieze coat wielded a cutlass with effect.
The arrival of the Dyaks from the Second Divi sion. and the discomforture of the rebels is too well-known for repetition; and this rebellion was the first and last of its kind.
On the site of the old bazaar at Bau Lama may to this day be seen the remains of a flagstaff, which marks the traditional spot on which the rebels first raised the banner of rebellion.
Shark Fishing Scheme.
COMPANY's HOPES IN NORTH BORNEO.
A Company has been registered in Singapore which hopes to exploit shark fishing in British North Borneo and Labuan waters on a large scale. An exclusive licence has been granted by the Government of British North Borneo for the export of sharks' hides from waters within 15 miles of Sandakan, Kudat and Tawan for a period of three years. The proposal is to erect a fishing station at Kudat and it is estimated that the cost of equipment, including shark nets, hooks, motor boats, reduction machinery and construction of jetty and various premises would be $35,000.
The claim is made that a minimum haul of 80 to 90 tons of sharks, together with rays, turtles and various other kinds of fish may be expected. It is stated that over 1000 tons of sharks a year are already being caught by native fishermen in these territories.
Experiments with special shark nets have proved a failure in Malayan and New Guinea waters, owing to strong tides and scarcity of sharks Moreover, an Australian company opera ting in Carnarvon Bay, West Australia, closed down, though large numbers of sharks were caught. It is stated, however, that high labour costs were the main cause of the Australian failure.
The promoters of the Borneo scheme have made careful investigation of the waters in which they propose to operate and they are evidently- satisfied that the conditions are favourable. There is no doubt as to the markets for their products provided the catches are large enough to give an adequate return on the capital employed. -Straits Budget.
Board of Visitors Inspect Leper
Settlement, General Hospital
and Pauper Camp.
The Board of Visitors made one of their periodical visits to the Kuching General Hospital, Leper
Settlement and Pauper Camp the other day. At the first-named institution the Board was struck with the general air of cleanliness and light. The Acting Principal Medical Officer exhibited a number of X-ray photographs showing how useful these are for determining the position of foreign objects in the body, or the exact nature of a fractured bone, The maternity ward, perhaps, roused the
most interest and here there were four infants recently born. The Board was informed that fifty-five babies have been born since the ward started, and in uo single case have any complications
occurred. Most of the mothers are Chinese or Sikh,
but the Malay members of the Board expressed
their astonishment at the workmanlike way in which matters are arranged and the very moderate charges made, and it is likely that the better class Malays will begin to take advantage of this ward. Another thing which caused satisfaction was the ward reserved exclusively for Mohammedans, and in charge of a Mohammedan dresser.
The lunatic asylum was inspected, and the unfortunate patients seemed to be happy and contented
in spite of their sad. state. Private wards in the hospital may be rented at a comparatively low charge, and the medical authorities informed the Visitors that more and more of the better class of Asiatic patients are taking the opportunity of treat-
ment. For those, however, who cannot pay exactly the same treatment is meted out, though of course he wards are public ones. The dietary scales show that Government spares no expense in maintaining an efficient and comfortable hospital.
Later the Board proceeded to the Leper Settle-
ment where the Chief Health Officer, Dr. Gilbert
Brooke, showed them over the place. Mr. Clunies Ross the Superintendent, explained how the settlement was divided into Mohammedan, Dyak and Chinese districts-each district being kept entirely separate. The Chinese have all made good vegetable gardens and appear to be very happy in spite of their
misfortune. On all sides these people welcomed
the Visitors the and spoke in the highest terms of the very kind treatment they were given. They had built their own "Topekong"
The Mohammedans do not seem to take advantage of the excellent opportunities of working the land, and the crops planted were either poor or overgrown. The Mohammedans Visitors impressed upon them the necessity of growing their own Vegetables, pinang tebu, sireh and so on. A request for a mosque was made, and the matter is receiving the attention of the Kuching Islam Chiefs.
The Dyaks are a large proportion of the patients and seem to be a light-hearted lot. They, again, might do more planting.
Near the eutrance to the settlement is a hall, disinfecting station, store, etc., all built by the lepers I themselves, whilst in the office are bookshelves and other furniture made on the spot. The Superin- tendent showed the Board a very interesting register which has been compiled, in which complete records of every patient are entered. A small dam has been built and a good supply of water is now obtainable.
There is nothing of the usual idea of a leper camp about this settlement. The lurid South-Sea Island stories bear no relation to this orderly and happy settlement at the 13th mile. Naturally the marks of the disease were noticeable in some cases, but on the whole it was difficult to realize that we were walking through a leper camp and not a peaceful village of healthy people.
The next move was to the Pauper Camp at the 10th mile, where Government keeps about 100 indigents, mostly Chinese. Again, the Board found nothing there to compare with the ordinary idea of a poorhouse. Most of the inmates were eating!! and all were unanimous in their appreciation of the way in which they were looked after. A good business is done in basket making, and the contents : of the stewpans seemed to indicate that the poor feed themselves remarkable well ! !
Lawas Rubber Estates, Limited.
Club News.
The negotiations for the acquisition of a further estate, referred to at the last General Meeting, have now resulted in the Batu Apoi Property having been taken over as from January 1st last. The necessary transfer of the Titles is now in course of registration.
The Estate is situated on a tributary of the Temburong River in the State of Brunei in North Borneo, which is included in the group of Unfederated Malay States, and is about twenty-five miles distant from Lawas Estate. IL has been reported on by the Manager of Lawas Estate, and the acreage is given, as follows :"
The Company takes over the Estate as a going concern for an issue of 10,500 Ordinary Shares of $1 each fully paid to the Vendors, ranking for dividend from January 1st, 1929, that is for half of any dividend paid for the current financial year.
The purchase includes two launches, the larger of which is capable of carrying 250 cases (25 tons) of Rubber and will assist in the Company's general transport arrangements.
As a result of the issue of the 10,500 Shares, the subscribed Capital is now $111,400 Ordinary and $24,180 Preference Shares.
The revised estimate of the total crop for 1928-29, is approximately 1,070,000lbs of Rubber. In a complete year the new property will fully maintain the present rate of output per £1 of Capital involved, whilst by the acquisition the (Company's par capitalisation (including Preference Shares) is reduced from over $34 to $31 18s. 5d. pe planted acre.
With the crop for December, the output of Dry Rubber for the first six months of the current financial year is 534,389lbs. out of an original estimate of 1,020,000lbs.
Extracts from Monthly Reports.
First Division.
KUCHING.
January, 1929.
Mr. E. F. Boult, Resident, First Division, reports:-
Resident's Court.-(Criminal). There were five
convictions as follows: -Chua Ah Hoo two years'
R I- under section 457 I.P.C., G. Samy, Store and
Book-Keeper to the Medical Department five years
for criminal breach of trust, under section 408
I.P.C., Seh Yam Choon ten years for rape, section
376 I.P.C., Kho Ah Kim a year's R.I. under section
379 and Aujir bin Haji Ajis also a year for forgery,
for the purpose of cheating, Rection 466 I.P.C,
Resident's Court.-(Civil). Seven claims were
lodged amounting in all to $13,112 50.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
January, 1929.
The District Officer, Mr. J. C. Swayne, reports:-
The Coroner's Court held four inquiries during the
month ; Sasaji, a Japanese cake-seller, was found to
have committed suicide by hanging himself; this
man, who had lived in the country for over twenty
yours, was known by the medical authorities to be in ill-health which probably accounted for his act.
Two Chinese, Tan Ah Kuan and Chim Ah Sim, were
both found to have died from natural causes (pneumonia), Ho Jit Sang, a school-boy, died as the result of falling from a fruit tree.
A visit, to Batu Kawa was paid during the month ;
the extensions promised last year, a new block of
shophouses and a brick and cement picture house, are not likely to materialize (though the foundation and bricks for the latter are ready) until a further increase in the price of rubber.
LAND OFFICE.
January,1929.
The Superintendent of Lands, Mr. C. S. Griffiths,
reports:-
A scheme was prepared for the re-settlement of
certain Malays who owned a block of gardens
between Nanas Road. The land had been laid out
in lots several years ago by the Survey Department,
but the owners of the gardens had been loath, hither-
to. to determine the allocation of these lots among themselves as they seemed unable to assess the
various sums of money that each should pay or
receive.
The following method was therefore worked out.
Each garden was valued as to its contents by Land Inspector and was assumed to have been purchased by Government at that valuation.
The contents of each lot were then valued and assumed to have been sold by Government to the
owners of the garden, at that valuation.
The total of these two valuations was of course
identical and therefore no money passed as between
the Malays and Government.
The lots were then allotted acre for acre, so that
the area of each new holding corresponded as nearly
as possible with that of the old.
The difference in value between the new and the
old holdings were then worked out and those whose
new holdings were more valuable than their old
ones would be called on to pay the difference into
this Office. These moneys would then be distributed among those of whom the reverse was true.
The people concerned were then called to the
Office and the scheme was explained to them fully.
They expressed approval of it and the Datu Amar visited the place with them in order to remove any doubt that may have existed as to the boundaries, etc.
There the matter rested at the end of the month,
but it may be recorded here that early in the current
month settlement was effected in this Office precisely as outlined above and the Malays seem entirely satisfied.
The above incident is reported somewhat fully as
it is thought that the same method might be adopted
in similar circumstances elsewhere. It is a laborious method but its main advantages are that the
people are enabled to build houses having frontages
on a road or road reserve and that the community as a whole can see for themselves that, although certain of its members are called on to pay, yet the money so paid is distributed completely among the others and Government neither gains nor losses.
Lands on the Lundu Road.-Mr. Davidson began
the work of demarcating the land along this road into suitable areas for various cultures.
He reports that some 565 chains of rentis were
cut, roughly surveyed and plotted, between the
Sungei Rayu and Sungei Billian.
This land is suitable for pepper growing and the
area at present blocked out amounts to some fifty
lots of six acres each. The demarcation of these will be completed and further areas will be similarly dealt with.
Some 140 chains of rentis were also cut along
the right bank of the Sungei Rayu.
SADONG.
January, 1929.
The District Officer, Mr. Frank G. Carpenter,
reports:-
Land.-It is proposed to sell bazaar lots to the
present occupants this year, and a letter has been
sent to the Chief Land Officer with suggestions
regarding this and requesting sanction from His
Highness the Rajah to sell these lots for fixed prices.
No land assessment bas ever been paid in the bazaar
here.
Agriculture.-The padi prospects at Uln Sebangan are reported to be good with one exception.
Mr. G. St. F. Dare visited the station from 23rd to 28th and made a report on coconuts.
On the 24th Mr. Goodall arrived to make a report on wet padi in the district. He brought some rat poison with him, and this has been in great demand. He left again on the 30t.h for Pendam, Stok and Sebangan.
Mr. S. W. Harris returned from furlough on the
8th and MK J. W. Evans proceeded on the 30th.
Mr. C. D. Le Gros Clark visited the station from
the 17th to 21st in connection with labour affairs.
Due largely to having discharged seventy-nine
coolies at the beginning of the month, most of whom
were skilled long-service employees, the output
reacted unfavourably as compared with December.
Mr. S. W. Harris arrived from leave on the 8th,
and Mr. J. W. Evans proceeded on furlough
The Protector of Labour and Secretary for Chinese Affairs paid a visit about the middle of the month.
Second Division.
BATANG LUPAR.
January, 1929.
Mr. F. A W. Page-Turner, Resident, Second Division, reports:-
Awang Sapudin and Abang Bunsu commenced work as Native Officers, Class II, dating from 1st .January.
Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas arrived at Simanggang on the 8th to do duty.
The resignation of Penghulu Embuas was accepted by His Highness the Rajah, and Penghulu Ingkas was called upon to resign.
On the morning of the 12th a huge crowd had assembled in order to view the arrival of the first seaplane. At 7.30 the seaplane Royalist flew over Simanggang, but on attempting to alight crashed into the river. Fortunately Flight-Lieutenant Phillips and Leading Air-craftman Goodban were able to extract themselves. The seaplane was salvaged, but the damage was considerable.
On the 26th at 7.40 am the seaplane Venus arrived with Flight-Lieutenant Phillips and Mr. W. Clark. After a short stay here she left for Engkilili, and at 10 30 a.m. passed over Simanggang on her return journey to Kuching. A mail was received and despatched.
On the 29th Messrs. Langton and Ditmas proceeded to Sabu in order to attend the presentation of a gold watch to the Rev. W. Howell after fifty years' service in the S.P.G. Mission. The watch was subscribed for by numerous Dyaks and Chinese
Christians in the Second Division, in appreciation of
his work amongst them. The Rev. W. Linton and Rev. A. W. Stounton were present.
SARIBAS.
January, 1929.
Mr. R. W. Hurst made two visits during the month in connection with the Agriculture Improvement Fund.
KALAKA.
January,1929.
Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, Officer-in-Charge, reports:-
On the 5th Mr. Cutfield left by m.l. One for Kabong to meet H.H.M.Y. Maimuna, which was to take him to Mukah. The m.1. One returned bringing Mr.*Banks (Curator of the Sarawak Museum), who left the next day for Ulu Awek to search for Mr. H. H. Kortright, who was also a passenger, called in here to collect his property preparatory to his return to England on pension. The Maimunah sailed again on the 8th. Other passengers by her were Messrs. Aikman and Horton. The former on transfer from Oya to Bintulu and the latter on transfer from Sibu to Miri.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Oya & Dalat, reports:-
Health.-The health of the station, particularly the prisoners, has been far from satisfactory; the Dresser from Mukah has visited the station three times during the month.
Trade.-Three hundred and thirty-nine piculs of gutta jelutong and 37 piculs of para rubber were shipped to Kuching.
The trade returns for the month and for comparison with those of the same period last year are as follows:-
The Acting Divisional Medical Officer, Sibu, reports:-
There were seventy-four in-patients during the month, fifty-seven being new admissions; amongst these two deaths occurred due to the following causes: one from phtbisis, one from typhoid fever.
Five hundred and ninty-nine people were treated as out-patients and their repetition making it 877 attendances. One hundred and ninety-four N.A.B. injections were given. One hundred and forty-one passengers were inspected on the Singapore vessels. Fifty-six people were vaccinated at Sibu Hospital and forty-nine at Rajang, making a total of 105.
Seven operations were performed, six under local anaesthesis and one under general.
Fourth Division.
Miri.
January, 1929
Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident, Fourth Division, reports:-
The District Officerr visited Bekam and chose a site for thirty-five Kadayans, who had come over from Brunei to settle in Sarawak. The place chosen was at S. Braya.
Several complaints were made by the Suai people that they are unable to work jelutong as all the roads are being worked by Bintulu people. I will look into the matter when I can visit the COast. The fault originally lies with the Suai people themselves who, up to the beginning of last year, were renting out their roads to people from Bintulu. This has been stopped but the Bintulus have now got a footing in that district and it is hard to turn them out. Owing to the increased price of jelutong, all roads on the Coast and in the Baram are being worked. There is no rooms for Dyaks from other countries arriving in this Division with the object of working jelutong.
Very good reports on this year's padi crops were received, but I could get nothing definite about engkabang.
A great number of the Foochows are unemployed owing to the low price of rubber. Native owners are not keen on employing these men as tapperss, as they have learnt from experience that their trees are badly damaged through the bad tapping of these men. A gang of about fifty men has been employed on a Government road commenced from L. Nibong to Poyut with the intention of joining up the Linai and eventually on to Limbang. Owing to the high cost of this labour I have given instructions that this work must stop in the meanwhile.
I also visited Long Lama, where a small new station has been started. The Agricultural Department have a small nursery here and thousands of oil palm seeds have been distributed amongst the natives. I do not think that the attempt to educated the natives to plant this product will meet with much success.
Baram.
January, 1929.
The District Officer, Baram, Mr. E. V. Andreini, reports:-
Mr. Morse visited Long Lama on the first instant and walked across via S. Tru to the Tinjar river visiting Tru Dyaks en route and then went up the Tinjar as far as Sungei Toyut where he met Native Officer Tuanku Mohamat, returning to Baram on the 9th. He also visited the Bakong Ulu and accompanied the District Officer to Baram and Tutoh during the month.
A case of interest is pending following a raid on a shop in the bazaar where many opium pass books were found and where, apparently, many people who had given up smoking handed in their opium for sale to non- registered smokers and others.
Petty thefts were constantly reported from Lubok Nibong, but by the time police can be sent to investigate the thieves have got well away. The population of this place is in the neighbourhood of 600 people, of which some three to four hundred are Foochow Chinese, whilst bordering it are a number of Dyaks villages.
There is also now a bazaar of eleven shops and applications to build more. Owing to the rise in price of rubber there is less unemployment.
Land.-Land was demarcated for Christian Dyaks in the Sungei Sit (Tinjar) and the Land Inspectors were busy in the Tinjar, Puyut and Dabai.
Bintulu.
January, 1929.
The Acting Disctrict Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports.-
The pile driver from Kuching started work during the month, and by the 31st all the piles save three had been driven and work on the wharf extension proceeded satisfactorily.
Mr. R. G. Aikman arrived on the 8th and took over the station from Mr. R. L. Daubeny, who proceeded on vacation leave on the 17th. Mr. Summer of the Sarawak Oilfields Limited passed through on his way to Balingian.
Mr. H. H. Kortright on his way from Limbang to Kuching in S.S. Auby, spent a day here and left again on the 17th.
Shipping.- The following vessels entereds and cleared the port during the month.
Trade.-Trade is still slack. Jelutong averaged $11.37 per picul during the month and of this commodity 6,729.94 piculs were exported. Of billian attaps 263,250 pieces were exported this month, the price being $110 per laksa f.o.b. Bintulu.
Above are the value of exports and imports, local and foreign, for the month.
Rainfall.- Rainfall for the month was 9.27 inches. Fifth Division.
LIMBANG.
January, 1929.
The Resident of the Fifth Division, Mr. F. H. Kortright, reports
H.M S. Kent paid a visit to Labuan between the 18th and 20th and a party of her officers paid a short visit here.
Public Works.-Work on new road making was temporarily suspended, but a further two miles of rentis on the Lubai road was completed.
The Recreation Club building was completed and handed over for the use of the members.
The rainfall amounted to 10 66 inches and the Trade and Shipping Returns show as under:-Buffaloes shipped to Kuching, forty-three head.
