VOL. LIX.
No. 909.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Saturday, June 1st, 1929.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette
SATURDAY, JUNE 1st.1929.
Notes.
May.
AMONGST the arrivals by the Vyner Brooke
on the 6th were Mr. P. M. Adams, Mr. and
Mrs. C. S. Pascoe, Dr. A. D. Hutchison
and Miss W. J. Horton.
Mr. Adams and Mr. Pascoe were returning from leave after having seen Easter Hero
run so gamely at Aintree, whilst the latter
had the unenviable job of seeing his famous
brother-in-law. F. B. Rees, come a terrific
cropper at the Canal. Mrs. Pascoe arrives
in Sarawak for the first time, and we wish
her every happiness in this country.
Dr. Hutchison is a brother of the Acting
Principal Medical Officer, and is joining
the Government Medical Service, whilst
Miss J. Horton-ah! thatfs another story, which the Acting P.M.O. himself will probably be able to explain later.
THE S.S. Sulong sailed for Sibu on the 7th with Mr. P. M. Adams, en route for Mukah where has been appointed District Officer, Mr. and Mrs. Pascoe for Sibu where Mr. Pa6coe resumes his work as Divisional Land Officer and Mr. Hill, who is investigating the engkabang in connection with Rowntrees Chocolate.
WE are glad to announce that Mr. S. Harris is out of Hospital, and has returned to Sadong.
He informs us that, in view of the fact that the peripatetic buffaloes were partly in his own charge, he does not intend to sue the Collieries for damages.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1,1929.
Miss Rosa Silcock, who joined the Sarawak Service as Assistant Matron, European Hospital, in April 1927, left Kuching on the 4th en route for England, having resigned her appointment.
Miss Silcock, who eventually became Matron at the General Hospital, will be missed in Kuching, where she was of a bright and energetic disposition.
CHUA Chui Poh, belonging to the Roman
Catholic School, was drowned on the 1st
under tragic circumstances. It appears that
a party of some twenty lads went to the lake
on the estate of Mr. Ong Tiang Swee, C.S.S.,
to bathe. On coming out about 3.15 p m it
was noticed that deceased was missing. A
thorough search was made, but it was not
until 5 p.m. that the body was found some
distance away from the bathing place.
Medical evidence pointed to the fact that
the deceased had been suffering from valvular
disease of the heart for some time, and he must have collapsed in the water.
At the inquest, which took place on the 7th,
a verdict of accidental death was returned.
THE Native Officer of Tambirat reported that a Malay named Bakar and his wife Minah were caught in a whirlpool whilst paddling through Loba Genda on the 30th April. The boat capsized and Bakar was drowned, Minah managing to swim ashore. The body was picked up near Goebilt three days later.
THE body of an unknown male adult Chinese was found floating in the river near Kampong Pulo on the 1st. All efforts to identify the body. which was much decomposed, have failed.
IN the District Court, Kuching, on the 8th.
Orang Kava Ruyoh of Quop was sentenced
to one year's imprisonment and fined $100 for
accepting illegal gratification in respect of
the allotment of land in his district, and was
sentenced to another 3 months' imprisonment
for removing a Government boundary mark.
In connection with the same case Rajak of
the Land Office, who is well-known as a professional jockey, was sentenced to three
monthsf imprisonment for accepting illegal
gratification in the execution of his duty
SuRGEON-Commander Buddle, R.N attached to the Singapore Naval Base, arrived by the s.s. Kuching on 13th, returning again to Singapore two trips later.
THE Customs Department have moved into their new quarters in the reconstructed
buildings which were once the Main Jail.
The Forestry Department have also removed
to the old Opium Monopoly Quarters, their recent offices being absorbed by the Medical
Department.
MESSRS. G. Aikman and B. Trechman
arrived by the Auby on the 12th. The former is undergoing medical treatment and the latter was passing through on transfer to Sibu. to
ALI and Talet, out-of-work Javanese, and Mohomat, a Bugis, were tried before the Residentfs Court on the 9th on a charge of housebreaking by night on the part of the first two, and of abetting the crime on the part of Mohomat. The present case concerned the burgling of a Malay house near Tanjong Paoh in the Siniawan district. Evidence showed that these men are part of a gang who have been operating in the Kuching and Upper Sarawak districts for some time. All three men were convicted and sentenced to three years rigorous imprisonment each. Two others are coming up for trial shortly.
THE Sunday Graphic of April 7th has an article by Her Highness the Ranee called gWhy Shouldn't We Gossip?h
Her Highness says that conversation, in the old sense of the word, is dying-if not already dead. This is the result of gramophones, wireless, bridge, kinemas, and a dozen other distractions.
Her Highness admits that men do not really gossip, because the subject of gossip is usually personal and domestic.
The article defends gossiping and Her Highness quite rightly attributes the real motive to a human weakness-common to most of us-the desire to create a sensation. Much as we hate ourselves, the truth is that we would rather have bad news to spread than none at all!
THE Sarawak Association played their
first game of football in Singapore on the 12th
May, when they met and defeated the D.R.C.
on the College ground by four goals to two
ON the evening of the 19th illuminations
and crackers announced the festival of Hari
Raya Haji. This day marks the end of the
time allotted to pilgrims to perform the rites
laid down for those who visit Mecca and
Medina.
MR. G. M. Allman left on furlough by the
Kuching on the 18th, and was seen off by an
enthusiastic crowd of friends. He will be just in time to sec the fate of England
swayed by the flappers at the General
Election.
CRICKETERS are preparing for the expected
change in the weather. The Indian community are practising both on the football
field and on the Police parade ground.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1,1929.
THREE more Javanese, concerned in the recent burglaries, were tried before the Residentfs Court on the 21st, when Osman, Kejart and Karno were sentenced to three yearsf rigorous imprisonment each for belong-ing to a wandering gang of persons associated for the purpose of habitually committing theft, and for dealing in stolen property.
This makes a total of six convictions in this affair, but the Police think that the chief offender has got away with most of the stolen property. It is satisfactory, however, to think that six of these pests will not trouble us for three years, and it is thought that the gang has now broken up permanently. The Police are deserving of much praise for their work in this matter.
Another man, a Chinese named Chin Chen, was also tried for house-breaking and pleaded guilty to two offences. In view of his poor intellect sentence of six months only was passed.
MR. J. B. Simpson returned from leave on the 20th, and has gone back to Sungei Tengah Estate. Apparently, we gather from Mr. Simpson, America is not so dry as might be expected.
A total eclipse of the sun took place on the 9th, but apart from a period of semi-darkness for about an hour there was little to observe from an ordinary point of view. The very little cracker firing and other noises this time points to changed ideas in the native mind.
His Highness the Rajah returns
to Sarawak.
His Highness the Rajah, G.C.M.G., attended by Mr. G. M. T. MacBryan, Private Secretary, and Mr. and Mrs. Bean, returned to Kuching by the s.s. Vyner Brooke on the 201h.
There was no official landing, His Highness being met privately by the Officer Administering the Government.
On the 22nd His Highness resumed the Administration of the Government, and Mr. F. F. Boult returned to his duties as Divisional Resident.
"We notice that His Highness is looking the better for the change, and all will join with us in welcoming His Highness Visit of H.M.S. gHeraldh to Kuching.
H.M.S. Herald, which had been expected, arrived off the mouth of the Kuching river in the early hoars of the 23rd. and was met by M r. G. J. D. Walters and Captain Benfield, who had gone down in the Lucile to lay off and wait. Captain Benfield then piloted the ship up to Pending, where she is anchored. The same afternoon Commander P. S. E. Maxwell called on His Highness the Rajah, G.C.M.G. being received by a guard of honour drawn up at the Astana entrance. On Saturday the 25th, His Highness dined on board. The opportunity of visiting Kuching was taken by the Officers and ratings, and games were arranged.
The Herald was built in 1918 as a convoy sloop, and was in that class known as the 24 (Derby Winners). As the gMerry Hamptonh she was so designed that German submarines would find it difficult to distinguish her bows from her stern, and thus be uncertain in which direction she was proceeding. Her dimensions are length 268 feet, beam 344 feet and draught 16.5 feet. She is 1,690 tons displacement and has a complement of 110, including 8 officers and 2 warrant officers. In addition she carries Chinese servants. On speed trials she reached 13.5 knots, and she carries one 3 pr. gun.
Lieut.-Commander A. M. Hughes, the navigator, kindly showed us over the ship which, in view of her special work, differs in appearance from the average British warship. There are sounding machines where bottom is announced by an electrical apparatus which warns the listener by sound. The Herald left; again on Tuesday the 28th, leaving a party of 2 officers and 13 men ashore. Quarters for the latter have been arranged in the old Trade and Customs Offices.
Marriage of Dr. W. Hutchison and
Miss W. J. Horton.
Many friends attended at the Pro Cathedral of St. Thomas on the morning of the 28th, when Dr W. Hutchison. the Acting Principal Medical Officer, was married to Miss W. J. Horton, only daughter of Dr. and Mrs. Horton of Chasetown, Staffs, who had arrived recently from England.
At half-past eight sharp the bride arrived on the arm of Mr. E. E. Boult, attended by Miss Phyllis Scott as bridesmaid. The short Service was performed by the Venerable the Archdeacon of Sarawak. The bridegroom was supported by Mr. L D. Kennedy, as best man. The bride looked charming in a white lace frock, and wore a wedding veil lent by friends in England. She carried a bouquet of roses made with much skill by Miss Tait. After the Service, the Resident and Mrs. Boult held a reception at the Residency where, besides His Highness the Rajah, nearly eighty guests were present, including the Datu Shahbandar and Mr. Ong Tiang Swee, c s.s.
The health of the bride and bridegroom was proposed by the best man, and Dr Hutchison responded. The wedding cake was supplied by the G.H. of Singapore, and was a wonderful piece of confectionary of three tiers.
Later Dr. and Mrs. Hutchison left by car for Bau, having to run the gauntlet of a fusilade of rice projected by enthusiastic friends A dastardly attempt by the happy couple to abstract a pair of the Resident's best golfing shoes was only just prevented, and the bridal car left with the customary white shoe flying proudly at the stem. Dr. and Mrs. Hutchison have our very best wishes.
Captain W. T. Clark leaves on Pension.
Many of his friends were on the wharf on the morning of the 4th to see Captain Clark off, and to wish him Godspeed.	.
As the ship moved off the troops lined the Fork hills and the band played gAuld Lang Syneh and the Regimental March. The buglers had massed on the lawn of Captain Clark's house and sounded a special call.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1,1929.
Captain Clark joined the Sarawak Rangers on 1st March, 1912, as Instructor, was promoted Lieutenant on 1st September, 1915, and Captain on 1st September, 1923. Except for a period of seven months in Miri as Officer Commanding Sarawak Rangers and Police there, all his service was spent in Kuching, where he has acted as Commandant on various occasions.
Captain Clark served on several expeditions and was awarded the Sarawak Military Long Service Medal in 1929. Before coming to Sarawak Captain Clark served for twenty-one years with the Royal Marine Light Infantry, and had the Long Service Medal.
As a soldier and as a very good friend Kuching will miss Captain Clark. Much of the present day efficiency of the Rangers is due to his persevering and zealous work.
In Club life Captain Clark was always to the front. At the now defunct Social Club, he won the billiards competition with the greatest regniarity-and at the present Club his nightly game of pool became almost a rite-and an example of steady scientific play to any youngsters who cared to look on. We believe Captain Clark was a flautist of ability, but increasing years apparently put an end to such frivolity-albeit we remember that he once tried to calm the savage breasts of the rebel Dyaks in the 1915 expedition!
To became statistical, Captain Clark has done Military Service under one Queen. two Kings and two Rajahs; he has earned two Long Service Medals and two pensions-and that is no mean record!
Captain and Mrs. Clark take with them our best wishes for many happy days spent in their retirement at home.
Arrival of Two Single Screw Steel Ships for the Sarawak Government.
On the 16th May the new Government steamer Margaret arrived in Kuching, and was immediately berthed near the Brooke Dock. We had an opportunity of inspecting the new vessel and saw part of the Keppel, which she had brought out, being landed.
The Shipping-Master has kindly supplied us with the following details :-
On 16th May the s.s. Margaret, the new Government steamer, arrived in Kuching from England, having been on the way some 58 days. She was brought out of Captain C. Van den Bergh with a crew of nine, including the Master, of whom five were Europeans. She was met off Po Point by the s.L Lucile and brought up the river by Captain , W. J. H. Smith, of s.s. Kuching, who very kindly offered to act as pilot.
Captain Van den Bergh reports that he had a comparatively good voyage. They encountered the worst weather of the trip in the Red Sea, except for the usual swell of the monsoon. All on board were beginning to feel the monotony of the restricted spites available on board.
Leaving Dartmouth, England, on the 19th March the Margaret called on her way out at Center, Port Said and Suez, Colombo and thence direct to Kuching. She is reported to be a good sea boat and reasonably steady.
The official trials were run at Dartmouth on the 12th March. The mean speed obtained for six runs over the measured mile was slightly over 9 knots. Maneuvering trials and duration trials were also run, and all gear was satisfactorily tested. After trials she was dry-docked for further inspection and painting.
The Margaret was built by Messrs. Philip and Son at their shipbuilding yard, Dartmouth, Messrs. Wells and Rickinson being the Consulting Engineers. She measures :-
Length, O.A. 115, Length, B.P.110f Breadth, mid. 25f Depth, mid. 10'.6" Draught, fully loaded 6f 6".
The engines are of the compound inverted direct action surface condensing type, having the cylinders and valves in line, and measure 13 inches by 26 inches by 18 inches. A cylindrical single-ended multitubular marine type boiler for a working pressure of 1401bs. per square inch is fitted for burning oil fuel. She is provided with combined steam and hand steering gear and is electrically lighted. Sand excluding gear is fitted between the end of the stern tube and the propeller base to prevent salt water getting into the stem tuba, and a special oiling system arranged in the engine room with a pipe connected to the stern tube ensures that the shaft is always running in oil.
The Margaret is now in the Brooke Dock to be overhauled and fitted preparatory to being placed on a run similar to that the s.s. Sulong. She appears to be a well-built ship, and when finished should look very well and be a comfortable ship to travel by on the short runs along the coast. There is accommodation for about six first-class passengers, about the same or a few more second-class. The cabins, though small, appear to be comfortably fitted. A useful part of the ship to passengers will be the promenade deck which is now being covered by a permanent awning. There is accommodation for a crew of about 16.
When the s.s. Margaret arrived on the 16th, she brought as cargo the engines. boiler, metal parts find fittings of a new Government launch to be called the Keppel. Built by Messrs. Philip and Son, Dartmouth, the hull was temporarily erected in the builderfs yard before being dismantled and packed for shipment. All woodwork will be constructed locally. She is now being assembled on a site alongside the workshop, the keel plate having been laid on the 22nd May,
and will have a speed of about 8 knots.
A cabin is to be fitted forward, probably with four berths, and on deck there is a steel house built and arranged as a dining saloon. Another cabin will be placed on deck aft.
The Keppel will be fitted with engines and boiler of a similar type to those in the Margaret, and will also use oil fuel. Steering, however, will be by band only, and no electric lighting installation is contemplated. She should prove a very useful launch and very comfortable, and will probably be stationed at Kuching.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1,1929.
Mainly About Nothing.
Recent issues have seemed to contain far too large
a proportion of obituary notices and retirements.
This is a mournful business, but unless the doctors,
or the bone-setters, or the Christian Scientists or
the Bishops can invent anything to arrest the laws
of nature, people will continue to die and continue
to be put out to grass.
Someone tells us, however, we cannot remember
who. but it was probably on the gdon't tell a soul.
Ifm simply telling you onlyh system which, as you
know, is calculated to beat Marconi to frazzle
when it comes to spreading news, that a couple of marriages are in the air.
Now a marriage is a difficult thing to report.
In obituary notices the gnil nisi bonumh idea is a
wise one to follow. Retirements remind of us of
the sere and yellow-and. a gentle rnellowness
pervades these announcements.
Our reporter does quite well with death and
retirements. He has certain stock phrases which are quite safe. Where he is not sure of his facts he
draws a herring across the trail and disguises his ignorance with a certain crude ability. Grammarians might take exception to his methods-and at times his style is rather n mixture of The Church Times, John Bull and The Winning Post.
When it comes to a wedding we are rather
doubtful of our man. We can but hope most
sincerely that he jots down the names of the
guests, the presents, the costume of the bride
and the usual sacred-edifice-voice-that-breathed-ofer-Eden details before the champagne comes round.
Even the conservative Melanau seems to have noticed the meteoric movements of the Civil Service lately. A class of little Mukah Melanau boys were being instructed in general knowledge by a patient Father.
Cocktails, or no cocktails; readers must be getting rather tired of this liquid discussion. Throughout the ages there have been people who have railed at strong drink. The mead of our very early forefathers-the strong wines of a century or two on-the port of our grandfathers-and now the cocktails which are mainly consumed by the sleek-beaded dainty little things in abbreviated skirts and silk stockings. In our mind The Manchester Guardian approaches the subject in the neatest way. Says. J. B. in that paper:-
The case against the cocktail, that gill-bred drink,h has been put finally by the greatest wine merchant in London in these terrible words. He was speaking of the end of wine-drinking in America. gThe Americans are a curious people,h he said, gvery strange people. To let you understand. they took gin and brandy and vermouth and whisky and lemon and oranges and cherries and olives and sardines and anchovies and goodness knows what, and they mixed them up with ice-and put them into their stomachs. They were not worthy of Godfs great gift of wine. And God punished them, and condemned them for the rest of their lives to drink nothing but-raw spirits.
The Editor of Mirage has kindly sent us a copy
of the second issue of that new quarterly magazine
published by Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., in Miri.
Apparently some notes of ours which appeared a
few months ago have upset the feelings of our
contemporary. On no less than seven pages that
person who is described as gthe captious critic of
the Sarawak Gazetteh is admonished for expressing
his opinions on the first number of Mirage.
We suppose that age has much to do with
over-sensitiveness (our first number dates back to
the days of the Franco-Prussian War)-and is it not
possible that our new contemporary has taken our
notes a trifle too seriously?
Moreover, in one instance. gCaptious Critich
has been blamed for something which cannot
possibly be his fault. He is taunted with having
made three spelling mistakes and two misquotations
in one column. Now, if this accusation is true,
surely you know, Mr. Editor of the Mirage, that the
man to be hauled over the coals is the Editor!
However, we all like our little joke-and it is
these shafts of wit just tinged with acrimony
that make life worth living.
We will not spoil our readersf enjoyment by quoting from this number of Mirage., which, in a
new cover most ingeniously designed.by Mrs. Noble,
may be purchased for 75 cents a single copy or $2
per annum.
A Guilford doctor had a surprise the other night
savs The. Sunday Express when be found two
Horse Gunners seated at his dining table helping
themselves to his food and drink. The intruders
had consumed one bottle of creme de menthe, a
bottle of cyder, half a bottle of claret and a third
of a decanter of whisky. Rather a peculiar
cocktail-you will admit-but not much worse than
many we have swallowed.
In connection with the last issue of Mirage, one of our vulgar correspondents writes and suggests that the misspelling of Major Cochranefs name was owing to the absence on leave of our office boy. Comment is needless. Vulgarity is not wit.
Kuching.
It is now many years ago since the writer paid his first visit to the Capital of the romantic State of Sarawak. The present amenities of life were then largely lacking. Most of the personnel of those days have vanished with the years, and the figure which leaves the greatest blank is that of His late Highness, Sir Charles Brooke, whose death in 1917 was mourned by all alike. His while hair and blue eyes, and stately courteous manner of an olden day, will ever linger in the memory of those who were privileged to have known hinm. I was recently much touched when a clerical friend from one of the Sarawak Mission told me that, on hearing of the death of Sir Charles, he was irresistibly reminded of those fine words spoken by Antony in the fifth Act of Julius Caesar :-
gHis life was gentle, and the elements
So mixfd in him that Nature might stand up And Say to all the world, gThis was a rnan! eh Truly a grand epitaph.
But this reminiscent mood (a frequent failing of the very old!) is leading me away from the etymological category of treatment originally intended.
It was not until sometime after mv first visit that I began to wonder about the origin of the name of the Capital. It was a puzzle on which I pondered fruitlessly amidst the cataclysm of Singapore life!
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1,1929.
At last about a year ago, the Goddess of Fortune led my residential footsteps hitherwards, and it wanted but a week or two before the true inwardness, or catalysis, of the puzzling problem was solved!
There were CATS everywhere (needless to say, no reference is of course intended to any two-legged variety)-cats in the kitchens, and cats in the kampongs; cats brown and white and yellow; but above all, cats of a colour darker than the coal of Sadong, which, as I understand, are reputed to emanate from an inexhaustible source named gGeorginah-a Catanian spring which bids fair, ere long, to inundate the entire and otherwise peaceful State of Sarawak.
From prehistoric times-certainly from the days of the Egyptians-all right-thinking people properly believe that the evil which animals absorb with their mother's milk, gravitates to the most distal part of their posterior appendages. Hence the Romans cut off the tips of their catsf tails, and Englishmen the similar part of their dogsf anatomy. Possibly Nature itself may be endeavoring to secure the same object in the grotesque abbreviation of some of the Malaysian felines ! Be that as it may, we entered our new Kuching home full of hope and without a cloud on the horizon-I mean, without a cat in the offing. A week or two later, our next-door neighbour went away leaving his house vacant-or nearly vacant-and, without any hesitation, George XXV adopted us. We became his father and his mother (hush ! Georgiua !) and all his relations!! Tidfapa!
Alas, in a weak moment, my wife promised to adopt another black cat whose master was about to depart. This was George XLIII. His shortly-to- depart master brought George round in a basket, when on his way to office. The basket was duly opened and, quick as a wireless message, George XLIII fled across the lawn like a black ghost tail vertically extended-followed by the entire domestic staff. The earth, however, opened and swallowed him, finally disgorging him again at his old home (covered with yellow mud) a day and a half later. George XXV mean while trod the earth in triumph, and was heard to cough twice!
The experiment was repeated, but, in order to obviate further extension of the hours of domestic idleness, the process of basket-opening this time was conducted in a locked bathroom. George XLIII sprang with one leap to a stance in proximity to the roof, arid persuasion from the top of a step ladder failed, alas, to effect any result except the emission of a ceaseless noise resembling nothing so much as the efforts of a bus-driver proceeding along Rock Road-a catachresis of caterwauling. He was therefore left to his incarceration with a saucer of milk for company.
George XXV waited in a restless mood. George XLIII eventually escaped into the roof. George XXV followed him.
And then began a period of terror, lasting for a couple of months, which words would fail to describe, and which threatened to throw the whole household into a state of catalepsy. At all times there was vociferous war to the teeth; at one time the ascendency fell to one. At another to the other--but at no time was there any cessation of the strange and harsh concatenation of sounds emitted (both by day and night) by George XLIII.
My wife went away on a visit-whether from fear or not, I was unable to discover by catechizing her. But, naturally, I entered at once into financial negotiations with my Malay gboyh to remove XLIII to the region of his kampong on the north side of the river, whither he nightly repaired to the bosom of his family. Yet the cat's noise still filled the house, so that obviously the bait had been insufficient, and it was necessary to extend it on more than one occasion.
At last, all parties (except George XLIII) were satisfied. The latter went off once more in a basket, and the motor-bus sound gradually died away into the distance. I confess that 1 have not yet been brave enough to report the matter to his late master; but I heard later that, when let out, a catastrophe occurred and George violently scratched Mat's band, and fled into the jungle and the night. I fully believe that, by now, XLIII has reinforced the cooking-pot-or feline catafalque?of some Chinese pepper planter. Certain it is that otherwise we should have been aware of his continued existence, since the glandash gets from that quarter!
By the way, talking of cats, is their love of milk really a catoptric manifestation ? Did not Harold Munro say, when he so far fell from grace as to devote his Muse to this categorical subject,
gA long dim ecstacy holds her life;
Her world is an infinite shapeless white.h
It is, however, a somewhat remarkable fact that the two articles of feline dietary dear above all things to its heart (or stomach) are milk and fish-neither of which are cantered for in its wild state. We can only suppose that it is another example of the contrariness of the beast which is said to have bestowed the name of its own intestine (cat-gut) on that very useful material which is derived from the intestine of many other animals, but never from that of the cat!
Our curiosity, in this catena, will probably never be satisfied, but it is devoutly to be hoped that Felis vulgaris is itself not devoid of a speculative mind, for how does the old proverb run?-Curiosity killed the Cat, is it not? If the proverb has any foundation of truth, might not the lace of nature perhaps be pleasantly changed, if the name of Sarawakfs Capital were altered to gMELITh?!!
ANAK SUNGEI.
Gruesome Find in Kuching.
On the 24th, the decomposed bodies of an elderly Chinese couple were discovered in their lonely hut on their rubber garden near Simpang Tiga.
On investigation it was found that they had apparently been brutally done to death about six days previously. In both cases their heads had been severely battered in by some heavy instrument.
The Police are making vigorous inquiries into this tragic affair. A reward of $300 is offered for any information.
Attempted Murder in Kuching.
As we stated in our Iasi issue a bad case of stabbing occurred on the 21st of last month, when Ng Lai Kian was stabbed by a another Chinese at No. 64, India Street, and, escaping, was pursued by the same man as far as No.15, Gambier Road, where he collapsed.
On the 14th Eo Ng Seng was tried before the Residentfs Court, Kuching, on a charge of attempted murder.
Ng Lui Kiau, who is still suffering from the severe wounds that he received, gave evidence to the fact that whilst folding up his clothes in his room at No. 64, India Street, at 6.15 p.m. on the evening in question, the accused suddenly walked into the room and made a brutal attack upon him with a carving knife. He managed to get out of the room and, bleeding profusely from his wounds, ran to Gambier Road with accused at his heels. Reaching No.15 he dashed into that shop and collapsed on the floor inside. See Kia Chui, the Towkay of Chop gYong Hon,h No.15, Gambier Road, pluckily seized the accused's wrists and induced him to throw the knife away. Police arrived and the accused was arrested.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1,1929.
The accused admitted the offence. He said that Ng Lai Kian owed him S10 which he refused to pay. Early that morning, after a quarrel, he stole the knife from a shop and deliberately waited for his victim. At 6.15 he traced Ng Lai Kian to his room and rushing in stabbed him. He admitted chasing him all the way from India Street to Gambier Road.
Medical evidence proved that Ng Lai Kian was extremely lucky to escape death. Four dangerous wounds were inflicted in different parts of his body. The Court sentenced Eo Ng Seng to 10 yearsf rigorous imprisonment.
Towkay See Kia Chai, who is an old man, was informed by the Acting Resident that he had behaved in a very plucky manner, and that His Highness the Rajah would be informed of his conduct.
Matters Municipal.
A correspondent has sent us some statistics calculated on the total estimated population of the new Kuching Municipal Area.
It seems that one out of every ten persons owns a push bike, and anyone who has attempted to walk from the Football Club to the town after a match will bear out this statement. Again, one in seventy-four owns a motor vehicle or motor bicycle. This figure, we take it, is on the assumption that Baby Austins and Morris Minors are reckoned as motor vehicles and not mechanical perambulatorsG
It may surprise our readers to learn that one out of thirty-eight persons can drive a motor car. Our correspondent with Caledonian caution, however, adds the naive comment gat least they are licensed to do so.h
The population is made up of 43.2% males, 28% females and 28.8% children. These figures give the lie direct to those Occidentals who insist that the menfolk in these parts are polygamous. Indeed, assuming that all native female marry sooner or late (the only unrnarried one of mature age we remember remained so owing to the fact that she had the curious knack of pushing a spear through the abdomen of any man she met) it is clear that many natives have perforce to lead the miserable life of a bachelor.
Our correspondent gives other statistics of a most interesting nature-but, alas, they are too domestic to admit being published, always supposing we could get away with it through that curb to an unruly wit-the censor.
St. Theresa's Convent.
RESULT OF RAFFLE.
1st prize, No. 2036, Gold Wedding Ring and Keeper, Mr. W. Avery; 2nd prize, No. 1648, Cover with deep Crocket Lace, B. B s.s. Kuching; 3rd prize, No. 529, Hand Painted Cushion. Ed Pawle; 4th prize, No. 1727. Babyfs Knitted Suit, Mr. N. Mace; 5th prize No. 2391, Table Centre, Chan Kui Seng; 6tb prize No.1241,Box of Cigars, Tshook Thlea.
Alas! Fortune is invariably fickle. Many a bachelor might have gained sufficient courage to pop the question if had won the ring - while Mr. Mace toddling down Rock Road in his newly acquired baby's suit- it is not fair!! - Ed. S.G.J
From the Sarawak Gazette 50 Years Ago.
THE
SARAWAK GAZETTE
1879.] TUESDAY, 24th JUNE.1879. [Price 5 Cts,
The 3rd of June opened with a brilliant morning, giving every prospect of a pleasant day; a very unusual amount of interest had been excited by the new racing, which threw open a chance of a Cup to many who did not care to incur the expense of a long boat.
At a little after eleven the majority of the European Community assembled at the residence of our hospitable Resident, at which all were to breakfast, towards the end of the meal the first gun of a salute of 21 guns was fired, and the Resident proposed the heaths of their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee and family.
The price of rice has, we are glad to hear fallen very much. Good Saigon rice being quoted at from $78 upwards. Clean Sambas rice of first quality was lately sold here for $78 per koyan. This is excessively favorable for our Gambier industries.
A Complete Rest.
He felt he needed a change,-a complete rest.
Too many dinner parties and consequently too
many pahits. Too many stengahs. Too much
club life because of too much rain. Too much
bridge, too much pool, too much bowls, too much
poker. Why were they given such names anyway.
Why bridge? One didn't cross anything. And pool?
There was nothing liquid about it but the drinks to
be paid for at the end. And bowls? Bowls were
things to contain flowers or porridge. While poker I
Did some one poke her to give it such a name
originally?
All of which foolishness makes it apparent that
he was really requiring that change, a condition not
unusual during a torrential landas.
The Government didn't take his ailment seriously,
but consented to his going to Santubong for a weekend, going on Friday and returning on Sunday.
Friday was excessively hot. For once in a way
it didn't rain. There was so much to arrange for-
bargaining for a small launch, and then the consultation with Mr. Chong Kim Eng, or the successor
of Chong Kim Eng the 1st, as to provisions.
gHow long was the Tuan to be awayh? g Two days.h
gHow many Tuans in the partyh? gSatuh
The successor of Chong the 1st proceeded to draw
up a list.
Tea, coffee, milk and sugar, etc., etc.
gLimoh? No, Tuans didn't require limo. Only Mems drank ayer limo.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1,1929.
gWhat! All that for two days-and just one Tuanh!
gAt Santubong Tuans always eat and drink more. Besides the Tuan can return to us all that is not consumed and it will be deducted from his bill.h
Aha! One bright spot in an ominous outlook! The joy of having something deducted from expenses. What a rare experience!
Hours spent in preparation, reduce him to exasperation, perspiration and profanation !
However, at three o'clock he boards the miniature launch, and finds that, with his barang, his Boy and his Boyfs barang, there is barely room to sit, but he finally disposes himself on the shady side of the boat, legs stretched over provision boxes, a couple of pillows to ease his discomfort-and a good book.
The launch refuses to move. The jeragan suddenly remembers he has forgotten petrol. Another long wait. A launch in motion is one thing, but at four on a boiling afternoon a launch tied to the pengkalan is very like the lower regions.
But at last, he is off. Good-bye for two whole days to anything like exertion. The town slips past him on the right. Labouring coolies, labouring oxcarts. He is going to rest.
Five minutes pass in comfort and bliss.
What! Getting hot Again. Of course, he has rounded a bend. The sun pours in on him. The other side is shady. He removes himself, his cushions and book with difficulty, and settles on the other side.
Who would stay in Kuching? With such a glorious spot as Santubong so near for a holiday,- he breathes content.
Good gracious, another bend-more sun-more change. This continues every ten minutes or so. A drink would help but it is discovered that the cases of drinks have been put under the numerous other cases, and are impossible to get at in the very limited space.
By the time he reaches his destination he feels peevish and ill-used. The Government should build a road and one could run down by car. This launch business, on a river that is about as straight as a corkscrew!
More difficulty landing all the barang, but a gorgeous view and a dip in the sea. By Jove, that will compensate for all discomforts.
On reaching the beach after hurriedly undressing, he finds the tide is out. He wa1ks and walks and walks. Sibu Laut cannot be far off, and even then the water only ripples about his ankles!
Disgusted, he returns to the bungalow where dinner awaits him. The lamp smokes. He turns it down. The light is then too dim for him to pick out the grasshoppers, moths and various other insects that drop in the soup or stick to the butter.
Dinner over, he lies on a long chair and tries to imagine be is enjoying himself, but the mosquito and sandflies soon banish any peaceful soliloquies, and he is driven to bed.
His net is the ordinary mosquito-proof one. Sandflies soon discover that a large gmakanh awaits them.
After lighting his lamp several times in an endeavour to discover and annihilate his tormentors, which proves impossible as they are practically undetectable, but nip out of all proportion to their size, he shouts for his Boy. No answer, as his Boy has gone down to gamble in the village.
No citronella, no obat nyamok.
He fans himself with the back of a magazine, but soon tires of that.
2 a.m. Boy still absent. In desperation a brilliant
idea suggests itself to him. If these-sandflies must have meat! He lights his lamp for the
umpteenth time and goes to the pantry, opens all
his tins of ham and sausage. and brings them back
to the bedroom. Removing the contents of the tins
he places them on the bed-a chunk of ham for the
head, sausages for fingers and toes, and tucks his net
down about this improvised and tasty substitute.
He blows cut his lamp, wraps himself in his sheet
and lies down on the floor, and falls into a sound
sleep.
gTuan ! Apa macham.h A startled exclamation
awakens him.
He sits up, surprised for the moment at finding
himself on the floor till his mind recalls the
experience of the night before and he groans aloud
as he discovers he is aching in every bone and
muscle from lying on the hard boards.
His Malay is insufficient to explain, in fact he
feels too exhausted to attempt it, and he leaves the
Boy to imagine he was drunk, and to clean up the mess made by the greasy sausages and ham.
He would bathe. That would buck him up. But
he had quite forgotten that the tide would again be
low, and the illusive sea-dip is abandoned,
A good breakfast and strong cup of coffee, and he
feels more himself. Decides to go for a walk along the beach. To feel really at the seaside and on holiday he goes barefoot, wearing only shorts and a shirt open at the neck.
It proves to be another excessively hot day. By
the time he returns to the bungalow, he finds his
feet beginning to tingle from the hot sand, his legs
red and burning; also the back of his neck where the
sun has penetrated beneath his topee.
The tide at last is in, but the bathe proves more
than unsatisfactory as the salt water stings his
badly sunburnt limbs intolerably.
As he limps back to the bungalow, having cut his
foot on a shell-covered rock, he swears roundly and
freely in his best golf language, denouncing changes
and so-called rest. With the prospect of another
night similar to the last, he gives orders for his Boy
to pack the barang. He is returning to Kuching.
Lying out on a long chair on his own verandah
that evening, an oscillating fan cooling the air and
disposing of mosquitoes, long cold drink by his
side, he reviews his excursion and finds not one
item of pleasure to console himself. But wait, there
would be one. That joyful deduction of uneaten
provisions.
gBoyh he calls, and upon his appearance:
gTake all those unopened bottles and tins to Chong
Kim Eng and get a surat for them.h
gThere are none left, Tuan,h-is the reply.
gNone left!h He springs to his feet outraged.
gDo you mean to tell me I ate all that in one dayh?
gCan the Tuan not remember? The boxes are here but they are empty. What the Tuan did not eat, he put in his bed!h
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1,1929.
This is the Sad Story of
The Greatest
The Most Beautiful
and
The Most Wonderful
HORSE THAT EVER WAS.
Reigh Count, the American crack four-year-oldy which has been brought over to challenge the best British horse in the Ascot Gold Cup. finished eighth in. the Lingfield Handicap his first race in this country?yesterday, although he was made favourite for the race.
gIt is the greatest horse in America,h said Mrs. John D. Hertz.
gUndoubtedly,h agreed Mr. John D. Hertz.
gAnd the most beautiful," said Miss Hertz.
gTo say absolutely nothing of being the pluckiest.h said Mr. Jimmy Allen.
And every one from Mr. Herbert Bayard Swope, of General Electric fame, to Larry Mills, a stableman with a pea-green coat and a Trappist complex, agreed heartily that he was the kindest, the most beautiful, the most high-souled horse that ever ate an oat.
TONS OF FODDER.
We were grouped round Reigh Count in the paddock at Lingheld to-day just before the start of the handicap. Reigh Count is not so much a racehorse as an exhibit. He had arrived with Mr. Mitcbell.
his trainer, Messrs. Jimmy Allen, Ernest Humphreys,
and Larry Mills, his watchers-by-night, Fairball, a
stable companion, several tons of special fodder, and
an exhibition complex.
Mr. John D. Hertz, the millionaire owner of the
Chicago yellow cabs, gazing proudly at the horse
which was going to win everything except the Football Final and the Ramsgate Chess Tournament,
said, gI bought that horse for 1,200 dollars when he
was a two-year-old, and we have refused 60,000 pounds for
him. He is the most beautiful horse in America.h
gWe guard him day and night, and he has won
the Kentucky Derby, the Saratoga Cup. the Belmont
Handicap, and he is the most wonderful horse in
America.h concluded Chick Lang, the jockey.
We let Reigh Count out. We led him out in a
yellow robe that reached to his heels. Hardened
racing men in the paddock dropped their cards and
stared at the yellow apparition. There was no doubt
that he was beautiful. Bookie began to shout gseven to four that circus horse.h Around the course
the cry went, Circus horse! Circus horse!h gHe
is the most wonderful horse in America, and then some.h said Mr. Mitchell happily.
gAPPLESAUCE!h
And then off they went. The most wonderful horse in America went with them. So far that was all correct. It was where he went to that mattered. He went from first to second place, dropped delicately back to final, and then, with his jockey imitating St. Vitus on his back, had a look at Lingfield.
1 tried to see him afterwards. I stepped over his monogrammed buckets, past his beautiful brushes and cloths to where a man in a pea-green jumper was sitting on a bucket disconsolate.
gPlease, which is the horse they say is the most wonderful in America?h I asked politely.
gAw, applesauce!h said the pea-green one. -
(Sunday Express.)
Reflections on the Calcutta Sweep.
Now is the time of year when men become afflicted with a strange complaint, saying amongst themselves at frequent intervals, as if it were a chorus to their thoughts, or perhaps a magic formula. gIf I win the Calcutta Sweep!h If, ah, ifc
If wishes were horses, beggars would not ride, poor things, but be trampled underfoot by a plague of horses that would make Pharaohfs plague of frogs look like two small tadpoles in Bau Lake.
gIf I win the Calcutta Sweep!h We repeat the magic words but there is no faith in our hearts. We know it wonft be us. Can you ever imagine yourself actually opening a telegram and reading gYou have drawn the favouriteh? At such a moment surely some great gift of expression should descend upon us G we should burst into long like a blackbird, or dance a mad bacchanal, or declaim mighty verses suitable to the occasion :
Is this a fortune that I see before me?
Come, let me clutch theec
or something like that. But if it came to the point, we should probably only murmur politely, gOh, how nice!h
Well, why worry? It is sure not be us.
And in this matter, I have a small bone to pick with the fates.1 don't; think that on the whole they select their darling with discrimination. Either they choose some rich business man to whom the few odd thousands are a paltry drop in the ocean ; or a city clerk who says. gI love my work and shall not give it uph; or a native child who would much prefer, I am sure, to stay in a nice leaf-atap house and beat a tom-tom.
Perhaps I might write to the Sweep Committee to this effect: -
Dear Sirs,
Far be it from me to influence you in any way to depart from your usual habits of equity and justice. But I think that if you would mark my number with a large red cross and endeavour to draw it (any horse will do if you cannot manage the favourite) you will be of great assistance to the Fates, who are not quite up to their job. This would be nice because-
(1)	I am young, poor, gifted and charming, and in every way eminently suited to spending money.
(2)	I shall not say, gI love my work, etc., etc.
Yours, etc.,
P.S.--Also I am not Scotch and will give away a hundred or two.
gOf course,h says one side of me to myself, gyou must realize that all this scurrying after filthy lucre is highly immoral. Money must be earned by service. This lottery business is all part of the modern scramble to get something for nothing.h (Nothing in this case being seven ill spared dollars, mark you.) To which I reply, gOh, Sir (or Madam), you are forgetting how much glory the lilies of the field got for nothing. Besides you miss the essential romance of this thing. Here, before our very eyes-figuratively speaking, of course-is enacted a magic deed a faery legend, a tale to draw old men from the fire-and dollars from our pockets One turn of the wheel (or shake of the hat, or whatever they do) and lo! a poor man is transformed into a rich one, like a pumpkin turned into a golden coach, or poor beast into a fairy prince.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1,1929.
These competitions might induce our Agricultural Department to consider the matter. As a method of educating Malays in taking a pride in their personal belongings, and at the same time appealing to their sporting instincts, these might be tried in this State.
A useful article on gardening is written by F. S. Benfield. Particularly so as the writer discusses only those plants which can be grown on the plains in this climate, Celosia Coriopsis, Cosmos, Gaillaidia, Petunia and Zinnias are only a few of the numerous plants mentioned. A few paragraphs on native gardeners are useful-and most appropriate is the writerfs conclusion-
gAnd some can pot Begonias, and some can bud a rose,
And some are hardly fit to trust with anything that grows;
But they can roll and trim the lawns and sift the the sand and loam,
For the glory of the garden occupieth all who come.
The Pagans of North Borneo. Owen Rutter, F.R.G.S,, F.R.A.I., with an introduction by C. G. Seligman, F.R.S., with 75 plates printed in two colours.11 diagrams and 2 maps. Hutchison and Company limited-Price 30/--
The author needs no introduction from us, being well-known as the writer of perhaps the best work on B.N.B. and numerous books of poems and learned articles. This book deals entirely with the pagans of British North Borneo, and gives a very comprehensive account of customs, rites, personal characteristics, jungle and river craft, folklore, etc. There is an appendix giving a comparative vocabulary in no less than thirteen pagan dialects.
The book is filled with excellent illustrations, and some good maps, and the inevitable gsamenessh of such a work is avoided by a whimsical sense of humour, which is ever present. A book to buy-and a book to keep.
We have received copies of a new weekly paper called The Eastern Courier, printed and published in Penang for the proprietors, The Kwong Wah Yit Poh Press, Ltd.
The object of this paper is clearly printed on the cover gdevoted to dissemination and elucidation of the Three Principles as enunciated by Dr. Sun Yat Senc to the promotion of trade and industries,
and to the solution of the economic problems of Malaya, China and the Far East.h
If the present standard is maintained, we have no hesitation in foretelling a successful career for our new contemporary. The paper is well got-up, and contains interesting articles on this part of the world, an editorial, telegrams and many other articles of useful information.
The object of this paper is, as we have shown, instructive and informative; and its desire is to encourage the printing of accurate news from China, and to circulate articles and leaders on subjects which must be of interest to all Chinese living in this part of the world.
The price is 20 cents a copy, or $10.40 per annum, post free to Sarawak.
THE SARAWAK. GAZETTE, JUNE 1,1929.
The Calcutta Sweep.
LIST OF SARAWAK NUMBERS.
The Honorary Secretary of the Sarawak Club has asked our assistance in publishing the following list, of tickets which were obtained by mean of the Sarawak Club and the local branch of the Chartered Bank. We print the list as it was sent. In many cases the absence of initials gives the names rather a headless appearance, but if the name draws the favourite, he or she will not mind the unintentional decapitation!
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1,1929.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
Kho Hong Bee, Singapore.-Your letter has been received. It seems to be merely the airing of a private grievance and a self eulogy. We do not think, therefore, that its publication would be of interest to our readers.-Ed. S.G.F
Mr. Rennie drew the winner in the sweepstake but sold his chance for fifty cents to the gowner.h
We know the Scots are a canny race, but we think Mr. Rennie might have valued his fellow countrymanfs chances a wee bittie higher. It was a sad day for England, only two of her representatives in the first seven.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1,1929.
LIST OF HANDICAPS FOR 18 HOLES.
The Golf Committee of the Sarawak Club informs us that the list of handicaps that was sent to us for publication in our last issue is all rubbish (this had to be censored. -Ed. S.G.)
A new list has been sent, which we now publish. This, however, is the last and only intimation!
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1,1929.
The Hon. Secretary asks us to remind Members that they are only allowed to introduce one gentleman or two ladies into the Club enclosure. Non- Members will be charged $5 at the gate.
As far as possible tickets will be issued to Members before the day, but an official will be at the gate to hand tickets to Members as they arrive.
Owners have been training their ponies in the early mornings, but owing to the secrecy maintained (or the mist!) little reliable information is available.
Of the new ponies none seem to be of outstanding merit. Gasak might win a short race if he refrains from trying to embrace his rider. Of the old lot, the veteran Sakbo, in spite of his rather hat-rack appearance, is going remarkably well. The highly priced Akai has been off colour for some time, whilst the clumsily named Popocatepetl will probably win his races if everything else fails down.
At the time of writing, however, none of the outstation ponies have been seen out, and we will leave it until the last day before publication, and give our readers the gToutfs Selectionsh then.
Entries for the coming meeting are quite good, considering the short time that has been available to arrange details. His Highness the Rajahfs ponies Workman and Adil have arrived from Mukah, whilst Messrs. C. D. Adams and J. Anderson have sent down their respective ponies Flying Fox and Ghalib.
The amateur ridersf race has only attracted five entries. It may have been a mistake to make this the first race on the card, as owners seem chary of letting their ponies carry 11 stone over 4 furlongs because it might ruin their chances in the Division races. Had the amateur race been run last, and open to post entries, it is possible that a large field might have resulted.
His Highness the Rajah's ponies Workman and Adil have arrived from Mukuh. Both are looking rather light, and Adil seems very young to race.
Jorrocks is down from Simanggang, and Flying Fox and Ghalib are expected any day.
There will be the usual totalisators on the course at $1 and $2 tickets, a $2 Cash Sweep on every race, and an Unlimited Sweep on the Iasi race. Tickets for these Sweeps may be on the course
Owners are reminded that only two grooms per pony will be admitted to the paddock. Badges for these can be obtained from the Honorary Secretary. No others except members and jockeys will be admitted.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1,1929.
Extracts from Monthly Reports.
First Division.
KUCHING.
April, 1929.
The Acting Resident, Mr. J. B. Archer, reports:-
I was in the Sadong District from the 23rd until the 28th. One appeal against the decision of the District Court was heard and dismissed.
A deputation of Chinese waited upon me to ask for the release, on payment of a fine, of Ah Hai, a Sadong trader who had been convicted by the District Court for receiving stolen property and sentenced to six monthsf imprisonment. Their request was refused.
There were a number of applications by ex-Colliery employees for pensions or gratuities. In most cases there were no valid reasons to re-commend these applications to His Highness the Rajah.
No matters of importance were brought forward. Great improvements were noticed on the roads and grounds near Simunjan Station. Mr. J. J. Hill, Acting Assistant District Officer of Upper Sarawak and Lundu, was in Kuching on the 29th and 30th in connection with a serious burglary case near Siniawan.
There were five criminal cases before the Residentfs Court this month, all of which were convicted. (1) Kee Keng Siong was sentenced to 1.5 yearsf imprisonment for breach of Societies Order No. 8-1. On expiration of the sentence he is to be banished if the banishment is confirmed by His Highness the Rajah. (2) Tabib bin Inchi Hussen was sentenced
to two years' imprisonment for incest under Malay Undang- Undang, section 15, subsection 50. (3) Ah Swee was found guilty of illegal trafficking in opium under section 1 of Order No. XLVII, 1924, and was fined $200 or in default to six monthsf imprisonment. Defendant having been unable to pay the fine, a sentence of six months was imposed. (4)Sim Ah Bee and Teo Kim Hock were both found guilty of housebreaking by night, under section 457 I.P.C, and sentenced to one yearfs imprisonment each.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
April,1929.
Th Acting District Officer, Mr. G. J. D. Walters, reports :-
District Court. -Sixty-five cases were heard, forty-seven of which were criminal and eighteen civil. Of the forty-seven criminal cases, thirty-six convictions and eleven acquittals were adjudged. There were eleven cases of assault, seventeen contempt of Court, two of theft, one of cheating, one breach of Customs and Shipping Regulations and fifteen other offences.
Fines imposed amounted to $517.44, and fees collected totalled $40.25. The civil claims involved amounts totalling $3,951.67, while fees amounted to $363.75.
Magistratefs Court. -One hundred and forty-five civil suits were brought for hearing for which fees of $308.50 were collected.. The total value of claims was $3.811.
Police Court. -Fifty-three summary cases were brought before the Court. Fifty convictions and three acquittals were obtained. The principal charges were seven of assault, four of theft, two of breach of Municipal By-laws and forty minor cases. A total amount of $999 was paid in fines and $31 was collected in fees. In addition eighty-seven judgment summonses were dealt with. About sixty-nine cases were carried forward for hearing in May.
Batu Kawa was visited on the 3rd. The new meat and vegetable markets were nearing completion.
A complaint was received that Dyaks had been trespassing in the Leper Camp Reserve, cutting down trees and stealing fruit. The Dyaks were warned that if they were again found trespassing inside the Reserve, they would be severely dealt with.
LAND OFFICE.
April, 1929.
The Superintendent of Lands, Mr. C. S. Griffiths, reports :-
This mouth the land inspectors have been largely employed on land disputes, investigations and examinations for Court, there having been an unusual influx of these cases, ln consequence, the ordinary routine work of inspecting land for the issue of titles has not progressed as quickly as could be wished, more especially since the department is, at the moment, very shorthanded, five apprentice land inspectors being attached to the Survey Department for training.
During the month I paid two visits to Kuap in connection with Dyak land disputes which had been reported by the surveyor working in the district. I also went to Padungan to see if it would be possible to lay out some new Malay lots close to the race-course. This I found to be quite practicable. and about twenty lots should soon be completed and ready for occupation.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1,1929.
Land on the Lundu Road.-During the month all the available land immediately on the true right bank of the Suugei Rayu has been demarcated into forty-seven lots of roughly six acres each, making with the forty-five lots also completed during the month a total of ninety-two lots suitable for the the cultivation of pepper. This exhausts all the suitable land on each bank of the Sungei Rayu except that actually inside the Sampadi Forest Reserve.
A total of some 887 chains of rentises have been cut during the month, the cost of labour on which was $218.50, giving a cost of $24.63 per chain.
It will be noted that this figure is considerably less than of last month, this being accounted for by the fact that no inspection of these lands was done during the month. Also, the jungle was easier to rentis through. The actual cost of rentising has been kept as a separate item.
SADONG.
April, 1929.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter
reports:-
An appeal case, Lim Eng Kuan vs. Chui Seng,
was dismissed by the Acting Resident.
Arrangements were made at Tabekang for the
building of Clerk's Quarters and repairs and
extensions to the Native Officerfs house. Unfortunately, no opportunity has yet occurred for sending
timber from Simunjan.
Two more bazaar bridges were repaired and
widened and it is now possible to cycle through the
village without dismounting.
The Acting Resident inspected the goal and prisoners and ordered that a new scale of rations be
given in future.
Mr. G. M. Allman, Acting Director of Agriculture
visited the station in connection with the Javanese
padi-plantersf settlement. He inspected the site
and returned to Kuching on the 14th. I now understand that some hitch has occurred in this scheme.
I visited the Land Dyak districts to the west of
Tabekang, proceeding along the southern aide of
Gunong Sadong and thence to Lubang Undang in the Ulu Samarahan, where I had hoped to meet
Mr, Binnie but did not. I returned along northern side of the same range and boarded m.l. Vava at
Pengkallan Tengga and proceeded to Gedong on
the same day
The lengthy rainy season seems to have played
havoc with what would probably have been a record
harvest, and the bill padi is reported to have survived better than the swamp product.
The Acting Resident. Mr. J. B. Archer, visited
the station from the 23rd to 27th and dealt with all
outstanding matters requiring his attention. A number of applications for grants or pensions were
made to him by old Colliery employees.
The Acting Resident also took the opportunity of
inspecting the kampong roads with reference to my
previous report.
Trade and Shipping. -Trade volume is still on
the increase in spite of slump considerations and it is pleasing to note that exports have risen considerably while imports Are on a decrease.
UPPER SARAWAK.
April, 1929.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports.-
The work on the roads has gone forward rapidly, but the contractor has found it difficult to transport sufficient stone as the Morris lorry only has been in use. Repeated inquiries have been made with regard to the Trojan lorry but the garage has not yet received the necessary spares from England.
The new Health Department; premises were nearing completion at the end of the month.
The Government School at Bau was visited during the month. Numerous complaints were made about Bol Hassan, the schoolmaster; a report on this has already been forwarded.
SADONG.
The Bidi Gold Mining Kongsi began work the 24th of March. No figures have yet come to hand as to the amount of gold obtained.
LUNDU.
April,1929.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports:-
Dyak villages of Kampong Siling and Tanjong Apong were called out to repair the Kampong Siling road on three occasion during the months
I visited the district on the 8th by s.l. Lucile and, after having checked the books and cash, etc., I proceeded to Simatan on the 10th.
Trade.-The returns for the month as compared with the corresponding month of last year as under:-
Rainfall.-The rainfall for the month was 4.61 inches
Sadong Colliery.
April, 1929.
Mr. D. Evans, Acting Manager, reports:-
The output, export, local consumption, conversion into coke and coal stock figures for the month were as follow:-
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, JUNE 1,1929.
Nothing of an unusual nature occurred underground, and the accumulation of water at the No. 8 and 12 Mines, due to the heavy rainfall in March, gave no further anxiety.
Good progress was made in driving two levels in the Buffalo Mine on an altered bearing, with a view of intersecting the No. 8 Mine workings so to improve the ventilation in both places. There is very little output from this source, however, as old workings and barren ground is met with.
Seeing no hopes of a reasonable output from the Top Mine, owing to a lot of malingering, piece work rates were resorted to on the 10th, with gratifying results.
The Acting Resident, First Division, paid a visit on the evening of the 24th.
Second Division.
BATANG LUPAR.
April, 1929.
The Resident, Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner, reports: -
I left Kabong on the 3rd for Samaindam, a large Malay fishing village with perhaps some fifty Chinese ail interested in the trade of prawns, sessar. A Native Officer is required here as Court work is greatly on the increase. The m.l. Bintang Trang makes frequent visits to Samaindam from Kuching. Having left Samaindam I anchored off Meranti and met the Tua Kampong there.
Sebuyow was reached later. Here I meet Tuanku Haji Omar, a very old and dignified Malay. He has recently settled at Sebuyow. Next morning, I reached Lingga.
Simanggang was reached at 1 p.m. Mr. R. H. P. Langton reported all well during my absence.
On the 5th a fire alarm was sounded in Kampong Hilir. The kitchen of Dayang Jeriah, widow of the late Datu Abang Haji Tamin, was found to be well alight. Malays and Police turned out and the house was saved.
Penghulus Labang of Upper Skrang and Mumin of Lower Skrang were called upon to resign by instructions from His Highness the Rajah.
An unfortunate boating accident took place below Pulo Seduku. A party of Dyaks meet the bore which capsized their boat and a woman, by name Suit, was drowned.
Penghulu Entree of the Seblak returned from his visit to Penghulu Karna on the 12th. During his stay there he planted out a number of young para rubber plants. This will be one of the first gardens started in the Ulu Ai. The Dyaks there somehow will not take up the cultivation of rubber and depend in obtaining coolie work at Johore or Miri. They are a most restless tribe.
On the 17th, accompanied by Abang Dulatip, Native Officer, I left for the Saribas, calling at Lingga to pick up Mr. D. E. Calver, Conservator of Forests.
On the 20th I left Betong, stopping at Spaoh on the way down, examining the new Police barracks and Bazaar. On arrival at Kampong Bungin I went ashore and walked through the kampong accompanied by Tua Kampong Drai. This is a prosperous Malay Kampong. I visited the Tua Kampongfs house and he was most entertaining, having worked as Tua Kampong for some thirty years.
The Nan Shen & Co. Saw-mill has started at last. At the present they are using a six-cylinder motor and turn out about 200 planks per day. In three monthsf time the Company hope to erect proper machinery.
Dyaks on the 27th reported death of a youth by lightning.
A contract was given to Mood, a Kuching Malay, to erect the new Vernacular School at Sebuyow at a cost of $725, Government supplying the billian posts and ataps.
Shipping. -Nineteen motor vessels and one bandong arrived and nineteen motor vessels cleared the port during the month.
SARIBAS.
April, 1929.
The Court Writer, Betong, reports :-
On 11th Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, Assistant District Officer, arrived here in order to meet the Divisional Resident.
Ah Seng, a hawker, was shot dead on the night on the 18th in his trading boat up river, and his body was brought down by Penghulu Jabieng. After examination by the Dresser-in-Charge, it was found that deceased had been shot from behind at close quarters. A shot gun and buck shot had been used. The Acting District Officer, Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, Penghulu Jabieng and Abang Omar, Native Officer, proceeded up river at once to investigate, but no evidence could be obtained. Next day all Dyaks in the vicinity of the murder were questioned and suspicion fell on one house, and two Dyaks ut on remand. A thorough search was made near this house and a steel box found hidden containing $10 in copper. Ah Seng was said to have $60 in silver and this was missing. Ah Seng is the Chinaman who was attacked and wounded severely some twelve years ago by two Padeh Dyaks, the motive being robbery.	.
Shipping. - Fourteen motor vessels entered and cleared during the month.
Trade.-The principal exports were :-
KALAKA.
April, 1929.
Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, Acting District Officer, Kalaka, reports :-
On the 4th I returned to Saratok. For the next few days nothing of importance occurred.
On the 19th a dead Chinaman named Ah Seng was found by Penghulu Jabieng floating down river in his trading boat, a short way above Tanjong Remban. The Penghulu brought him down to the Fort. An examination proved that he had been murdered. He had been shot with a shot gun, the shot, buck shot, entering at the point of the right shoulder and penetrating to the heart and liver. Immediate inquiries and searches were made resulting in the arrest of four young Dyaks from Tanu and later two more from Jungkal. A certain amount of stolen property was found hidden in one of the Tanu gardens. Sufficient evidence for the conviction of any one man has not yet been found but certain people of Tanu and Jungkal are strongly suspected to be in the know. This is the second time this unlucky man has been the victim of an attack of this kind. Some years ago he was cut about by two Dyaks when staying at Peedanom Penkalan and left for dead. The motive of this latest murder was clearly robbery.
Shipping.-The returns for the port were :-
3 bandongs and 7 motor schooners entered and cleared during the month.
Trade-The trade statistics for the month were as follows:-
Third Division.
SlBU.
March, 1929.
Mr. C. D. Adams, Acting Resident, reports:-
Resident's Court. -One criminal case was heard, Hadji Rapa-ee, Tua Kampong, Semah, being imprisoned for five years under section 109 I.P.C.
Two Civil cases came up for hearing.
General:-His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by the Private Secretary, Mr. MacBryan, arrived on the 5th instant, having made an unsuccessful attempt to visit Matu owing to the rough sea.
During His Highness stay here a meeting of the Chinese was held to discuss the New Town Planning scheme, and it was decided that the payment for new shophouses would be $1000 down and $1000 a year for 8 years, interest payable monthly. All old Grants to be recalled and new ones according to the New Plan issued. His Highness left on the 7th instant for Kuching.
The Secretary of Chinese Affairs paid a visit during the month and visited Sarikei.
Penghulu Nibong resigned, and his District was taken over by Penghulu Sureng. Linggoh, Imai and Udin were appointed Penghulus, and Penghulus Jantin, Saba and Ugak dismissed. Meringai, Agam and Orang Kaya Dana retired on pension.
The District Officer, Sibu, reports: -
Courts.-District Court, 50 Civil cases and 13 Criminal cases heard; 15 convictions.
Magistratefs Court, 50 Civil cases heard. Police Court 14 cases heard.
General.-His Highness the Rajah arrived by H.H.M.Y. Maimunah on the 5th, accompanied by Messrs. J. A. H. Hardie and G. T. M. MacBryan. Captain Le Gros Clark arrived on the 6th, Flight-Lieut. Phillips arrived on the 10th from Kuching and returned the same day. Mr. Kool arrived on the 19th to help in the work of the American Methodist Mission. I returned from Baram on the 14th instant. Haji Gapor, lately Tua Kampong of K. Datu, was promoted Native Officer as from the 1st. Wan Brahim, Native Officer, Binatang, was transferred to Sarikei vice Haji Karrim retired and Abang Abu Bakar transferred from Sibu to Binatang.
There were very heavy floods during the month and the water rose higher than has been known for 30 years. The offices were closed on the 13th, Hari Rava, but the usual salute could not be fired until midday owing to the high water.
A fire broke out in the first brick shop in Island Road on the 19th at about 6 p.m. The cause of the outbreak was the bursting of a cheap pressure lamp. The flames were quickly beaten out with sacks and little damage was done.
April, 1929.
The Acting Resident, Mr. C. D. Adams reports :-
On the 4th instant, accompanied by the Divisional Treasurer, the stations of Rejang, Daro and Matu were visited. The Acting Assistant District Officer was ordered to visit all kampongs in the delta between Bruit and Rejang and make a full report. The padi harvest in these districts has been very good indeed.
Notices recalling of grants were issued, and also the new allotment according to the New Town Planning Scheme was posted in the bazaar. Only some 38 complaints have been received, the remainder accepting the new terms. The chief complaint, or practically the only one, is that they wish to keep the old site; this of course, is impossible.
The District Officer, Sibu, reports :-
On the 16th the headless and legless body of a Dyak was found floating down river. There were numerous spear wounds on the chest but the body could not be identified. An inquest was held and a verdict of murder against some person or persons unknown arrived at. Inquiries have been made, but up to date no information as to whose body it was has been obtained.
On the 29th instant I visited Mrs. Hooverfs
Girls' School during a test in Malay, which most of
the pupils passed creditably. It is incredible that
Chinese children born in Sibu should be unable to
speak any Malay and have to be taught the simplest
words.
On the 10th instant the prisoners removed to the
new jail at Green Road.
The Divisional Engineer reports :-
Bazaar Rebuilding. -Government Scheme 41F
houses.-The plastering and finishing to twenty
houses remains to be done. It is expected that the
contract will be completed two months hence.
Nine Houses in Bank Road.-The reinforced
concrete framework to the ground floor is complete
and the work on the first floor is proceeding.
The allotment of the new bazaar sites will soon
be completed and it is expected that a considerable
amount of private building will be taking place.
Buildings.-New Market.-Piling has commenced
on this site.
The old jail is being demolished with the intention of using the timbers for the new wharves.
Bazaar Roads.-Practically all the land in the
bazaar between the Cross Road and the wharves is
now filled in to the required level.
Sundry repairs to Government buildings and
roads have been carried out as usual.
The affairs of the department will be handed
over to Mr. Flood Page on 1st May.
The Acting Assistant District Officer. Kapit,
reports :-
Forty Sut Dyaks went to work with the Johore
Survey. Another 60 Dyaks came down hoping to
find work. Work for 15 was found at Baram.
Most of the men are still away in the jungle.
The harvest is not yet all in.
Chinese Hawkers are still buying engkabang at
5 gantangs to $1 up river in spite of fall in price.,
$7 per picul was being paid in the bazaar at the
end of the month.
The Acting District Officer, Mukah, reports :-
Mr. Poushkine, Electrical Engineer. Sibu, arrived
here on the 1st via the Cut and Oya. accompanied
by two wiremen to start the wiring of the station
for electric light. The supply of electrical material
received from Kuching was checked and stored by
Mr. Poushkine. The latter returned to Sibu via
Oya and the Cut on 4th. The wiring of all
Government building was completed during the
month with the exception of the District Officer's
bungalow and Native Officers and other quarters in
the kampong. A start was also made on the R.C.
Mission and Church by the end of the month. The plant for the electric light was received from Kuching by m.s. Kim Chin Teck.
On the 16th I left on a visit up river by m.L Leonora, accompanied by Datu Awang Udin, and Sikat was reached the 1st day. The next day the journey was continued by boat to Penghulu Gagatfs house. A policeman had been sent up previously to collect the Penghulus and all Tuai Rumahs to Penghulu Gagatfs house. They were nearly all present on my arrival.
I returned to Mukah on the 18th, arriving about 4 p.m., having stopped for a short while at Penakap both on the way up and down river. The Dyaks have mostly completed their gNegtauh and the Ulu people report a fair crop but the down river crops were somewhat spoilt on account of four heavy floods during the landas which completely submerged the padi for 10 to 15 days on each.
KAPIT.
March, 1929.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Kapit, reports:-	"
Dyaks are still away from their houses after engkabang. Penghulus from the Balleh and Katibas came down expecting to meet His Highness the Rajah. Penghulus from the Rejang did not appear. The padi harvest was reported to be excellent. From later reports I fear the constant and heavy rains will rot a good deal of the grain before the women, who have no men to help them, can reap it.
Duties on exports rose to $2271.18 owing to engkabang.
Prices at Song were round $10 per bag (guni bras). Malay and Chinese hawkers were paying $1 for 3 to 3.5 gantangs up river.
Bazaar prices varied between $8 and $12 per picul. The Chinese appear to be indifferent to prices ruling in Singapore. Their idea appears to be that shipping large amounts to Singapore will enable them to obtain more credit from the towkays there later on.
Floods were very high at the beginning of the month. Chinese in the bazaar were driven to the upper floors.
A party of 34 Lepu Djalans came from Dutch Territory to trade. This is the first visit since the peace-making in 1924.
The Divisional Medical Officer reports :-
On the 6th March His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by hie Private Secretary. Mr. G. T. M. MacBryan. visited the hospital.
The health of the European community and the Government employees, with the exception of minor ailments, still remains good.
The Divisional Engineer, Sibu, reports :-
The whole of the framework and walling to the forty-one houses being built by Government is complete. The concrete floors are expected to be completed at the end of the month. Fifteen houses are ready for occupation and plastering is proceeding on the remainder. The framework and foundations to the ground floor of the nine shops in Bank Road are complete. The cinema hall and shophouse in Cross Bond are ready for occupation.
Plans have been submitted for further houses on various sites.
The new jail is occupied.
The new Customs quarters are almost ready. Quarters have been prepared for five warders near the new jail.
Tenders have been invited for the construction of a new market and the proposed new wharves.
The two motor lighters have been in constant service transporting gravel and piles. One lighter was docked at the end of the month and a new shaft fitted.
Exceptionally high tides were experienced and the waterworks pumps were stopped for a few days. No damage was done. The pumps have been subsequently raised. The filter tanks are in operation. The chlorinating apparatus is stopped owing to the failure of the chemical pump.
Sundry repairs and maintenance of roads and bridges have been carried out as usual during the month.
REJANG.
March, 1929.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Rejang, reports :-
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by His Highness' Private Secretary, Mr. G. T. M. MacBryan, visited the district during the month, but owing to bad weather His Highness was unable to visit Matu on the 4th instant as intended, and so anchored near Daro where some Kampong Saifee people went on board H.H.M.Y. Maimunah and made various requests of His Highness. His Highness arrived at Rejang on the 7th instant, but left for Kuching the next morning without coming on shore.
Owing to the carelessness of a policeman in not tying her up properly, the Government beda boat got adrift on the 7th instant and, although the Resident, Second Division, and the people of Matu, Paloh and Serik, have been informed, the boat at the time of writing has not yet been recovered and it is feared that she is a total loss.
On the 21st instant a new short wave wireless broadcasting receiving set and aerial were installed for the purpose of receiving broadcasting programmes, but by the end of the month no satisfactory results had been obtained.
MUKAH.
MARCH, 1929
The District Officer, Mukah, reports:-
Shipping.-The s.s. Sulong called off the mouth twice on her way north and once on her way south during the month.
Seven motor schooners,12 sailing schooners and 3 motor launches entered with tonnage of 1,074, and 6 motor schooners, 4 motor launches and 10 sailing schooners cleared the port of Mukah with tonnage of 997.
OYA AND DALAT.
March, 1929.
On the 19th the interesting ceremony of bakaul was carried out, a large number of decorated boats joining in the river procession to the ulu end of the kampong and returning to the kuala where the sea was blessed and prosperity prayed for.
Trade.-35 koyans of raw sago, 30 piculs of para rubber and 333 piculs of gutta jelutong were shipped to Kuching.
The trade returns for the month and for comparison with those of the same period last year are as follows:-
April, 1929.
The progress on the new road has been very satisfactory this month. The section is now open to traffic from end to end, and the sides have been given a good slope down to the ditches. This sloping portion is being turfed from the old road.
Regarding the outlet of ditches on either side of this section, it has been found inadvisable to allow any water to flow out towards the Kuala except from Sungei Madong at the Mukah end, and from a nameless stream at the Oya end of the section, any outlet in between these ditches will only result in further extensive erosion of the Kuala front.
It is difficult to know what means to take to prevent erosion on this front. I have so far built a stout pagar on the laut side of the old road over the affected portion, and have had the inner bank on the darat side of the road sloped towards the river, and I hope that by next landas grass will have grown in sufficient quantity to prevent further erosion of this valuable land.
Four motor schooners and seven sailing vessels entered during the month, three motor schooners, and three sailing schooners cleared.
One hundred and eighty koyans raw sago, 231 piculs gutta jelutong and 48 piculs gutta para were shipped to Kuching.
The trade returns for the month and for comparison with those of the same period last year are as follows:-
Fourth Division.
April, 1929.
The Resident, Mr. H. D. Apiin, reports:-
Accompanied by Mr. R. D. Horton, Collector of Customs, I left tor Bintulu in La Follette on the
3rd, arriving there the same evening. The Acting
District Officer reported that a Chinese, Tiang Sia
Long, had been murdered in Tabau Bazaar by
another Chinese, Ah Soon, on the 1st. The case was held but had to be adjourned to call more witnesses at the request of accused.
An appeal case against the decision of the District Court in a fruit tree dispute had to be postponed
owing to the absence of the principal appellant.
The Government wharf has now been completed, and it is suggested that steamers using this wharf should pay a rent to help towards the upkeep.
I visited Sebauh. This place has not gone ahead as expected, owing probably to the low price of
rubber. Large numbers of Dyaks were there to meet me. Permission was given to the R.C. Mission to start school. The Foochows and Dyaks have been petitioning for one for some time.
Abang Bujang, Native Officer at Tatau, reported that the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, representative had informed him that he had struck oil in the Tatau below the Government Station.
I have decided that Kuala Baram and neighborhood should be included in the Miri district for administration. The actual boundaries between the two district will be defined on my next visit to Baram.
It was reported from Baram that a Dyak named Atok had died from the result of being assaulted by another Dyak, named Dungan. They appear to have quarreled during a begawai whilst moving into a new house.
A torrential rainstorm occurred between 3.30p.m. and 6.30 p.m. of the 17th. The Government rain gauge overflowed at 11.13 inches. Several parts of
Miri were flooded and great damage done to bridges. Flooding was partly owing to, I think, the river
being high at the time and the water from the hills at the back being unable to get away. Such a storm has never before been experienced at Miri.
H.M.S. Herald arrived in the roads on the 27th, under the command of Commander P. S. E. Maxwell, R.N. Official calls were exchanged. Whilst. surveying in this vicinity she will continue to make Miri her base for the week-ends.
BARAM.
MIRI.
April,1929.
The Officer-in-Charge, Baram, Mr. L. K. Morse, reports:-
I visited Bakong and Buluro with Datu Tuanku Drahman and Tuanku Mohamad from the 5th to the 9th instant. A number of Chinese coolies from Kuching, Miri and elsewhere had gone to Buluro. Having no work there, they employed their time in quarrelling with the Dyaks. Measures were taken to prevent recurrence of this.
Arrangements have been made for the collection of the Kelabit taxes. I regret to report that during my absence from the station a Dyak named Atok, Rumah Manchu, died as the result of injuries received in a drunken brawl.
BINTULU.
April,1929.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports:-
There has been a good deal of work in the Courts this month.
The Resident of the Fourth Division, Mr. H. D. Aplin, accompanied by the Collector of Customs, Mr. R. D. St. J. Horton, arrived in SS. La Follette on the 2nd. Many important matters were discussed with the Resident during his visit. On the 7th I accompanied the Resident and Mr. Horton to Sebauh, returning the same afternoon The Resident and Mr. Horton returned to Miri in La Follette on the 8th. On the 2nd Abang Metali, the Native Officer at Tubau. accompanied by The Kayan Penghulu Ovat Mereng, arrived at the Fort with a dead body and a man under arrest. The dead man proved to be a Chinaman named Tia Siang Long who had been brutally stabbed by Ah Soon the man under arrest. Ah Soon was later charged with willful murder and tried in the Residentfs Court, the case being adjourned.
On 16th Mr. D, S. MeLeod arrived in S.S. Gladys in connection with the reservation of billlian areas in this district. The same day, accompanied by Datu Haji Abdullah and Mr. Tan Sum Guan, I left for Tubau and up river stations.
The following vessels entered and cleared the port during the month.
Trade.-Trade is still slack. Jelutong averaged $10 per picul during the month and of this commodity 1,831.235 piculs were exported. Of billian attaps 268,000 pieces were exported this month, the price being $110 peer laksa f.o.b. Bintulu. lllipe nuts averaged $5.70 per picul during the month and of this commodity 3,104.43 piculs were exported.
Rainfall. Rainfall for the month was 8f85 inches.
MIRI.
April, 1929.
The District Officer, Mr. E. O. Bruce, reports:-
The Courts have been busy during the whole month, principally on account of the numerous outstanding cases still being dealt with.
Complete sets of Land Office books and forms have now been received from Kuching and distributed for ultimate use especially in Sibuti, Niah an Suai. Although there is no local staff at present, it is hoped that some progress in preliminary routine will be effected in these substations.
Owing to the flood caused by a heavy rain on the 17th April, a great deal of damage to roads and bridges was done. Over 9 inches of rain fell within 3 hours. This will cause considerable expenditure. Apart from this, the Salome Stream which, on both sides, is of rubble-work in cement bonding, gave way in three places and will require repairing.
I visited Sibuti, Niah and Suai on the 21st, returning on the 26th. Many outstanding matters and cases were dealt with.
The matter of Jelutong road disputes was also looked into with the help of the Deputy Conservator of Forests. In response to inquiries by the Government Agricultural Chemist, details of information were obtained regarding guano deposits in Niah caves.
Fifth Division.
LIMBANG.
April,1929.
Mr. R. L. Danbeny. Assistant District Officer of Lawas, returned from local leave by the s.s. Sulong on the 24th, and proceeded to Lawas the next day to assume his duties in that district.
Mr. J. R. Combe visited the Lubai. and was still away at the end of the month.
The Pamieruan road was clean weeded from end to end by the Kadayans whose kampongs are alongside it, and a contact made for the future upkeep.
Several applications for planting on land opened up by the new roads were received, but none are being granted until the area has been surveyed and marked out in plots.
The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Limited, exported 26,124 lbs of dry rubber during the month.
The rainfall amounted to 7f71 inches.
Trade and shipping returns show as follow :-
