
Vol. L1X.
THE
No. 908.
Sarawak Gazette
PRICE
KUCHING, Wednesday, May 1st. 1929.	20 cents
Contents.
i
Notes
His Majesty the King's Gracious Message to His Su
jects
Why did you Marry? ...
The Mela'naus ...	...
Mainly about Nothing
From the Sarawak Gazette 50 Years Ago
Paper Chase Trouble ...
Sarawak Museum
Indians and Chinese Entertain Mr. 8. R. Ratnnni
Death of Datu Sheriff Hamid
Death of Mr. John Mathie
The Bev. G. Dexter Allens Death in England
Late Mr. G. H. Webster
Sailing Schedule of a.s. Vyncr Brooke
Our Competition
A Single Acrostic
CorrespondenceWomans' Emancipation ...
Club News
Sarawak Club Bowling Averages for March, 1929
Howling Handicap for March. 1929
Result of the Easter Bogey
Competition ...	...
Revised I.ist of Handicaps for
18 Holes ...
Sarawak Turf Club
Kuching Market Price List
Extracts from Monthly Reports:
First Division
Second Division
Fourth Division
Fifth Division
WEDNESDAY, MAY 1st, 1929.
Notes.
.April.
The Dayang Muda of Sarawak is writing a hook oi memoirs, which she is calling Relations and Complication. One of the most interesting parts is that in which she describes the wonderful musical nights given in Grosvenor Square by her father and mother, Sir Walter and Lady Palmer. It was in Lady Palmers drawing-room that Kubelik laid the foundation of his fame. The Dayang Muda also introduces scores of famous people she has known in England. France and Sarawak.
Many in Sarawak will regret the departure of Mrs. Clark, wife of Captain W. T. Clark, Sarawak Rangers, who left for good in the Vyner Brooke on the 12th instant Mrs. 07 Clark came out to Sarawak with her husband early in 1912 and, except for a short period in Miri, has spent all her time in Kuching, o Captain Clark retires on pension in Jund 71 i next.
n As an advertisement for the climate of 73 Sarawak, Mrs. Clark is a splendid example;
72 and few. meeting her for the first time, would think that she had spent seventeen 73 years in a country barely one and a half 73 degrees from the equator'. We wish Mrs;
'3 Clark all good luck and long life in England;
The new European bungalows across river : are progressing apace. In addition to the 74 : bungalow inhabited by Captain Le Gros 74 Clark, one married and two bachelor 75 bungalows are completed whilst a rather 77 larger house of a special type is being built for The Treasurer. For quite a distance 77 roads are being metalled, and a telephone 79 exchange has been built.
81	It is surprising that many Europeans in
Kuching are ignorant of the fine open country which is distant a bare mile from
. their doors.
Beyond Mr. Rennies new house bridlepaths lead in all directions and stretches of open country dotted with small woods, and I here and there a rubber garden, make a most enjoyable walk.
Mere one is free from the ubiquitous motor, and the relief to jaded nerves is felt immediately.
Dr. Krols many friends in Sarawak will be pleased to hear that he has been promoted to the rank of Chief Geologist and appointed Chief of the Geological Survey of Java. Dr. Krol is leaving his work in Western Borneo and proceeds to Batavia and Bandoeng, where the Fourth Pacific Science Congress is to be held in May. He is to work out all details and to prepare the finishing reports.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, APRIL 2, 1929.
63
A Chinese fishing boat, whilst; leaving Kuala Sibuti on 23rd, was upset by heavy seas and three Chinese are reported drowned. Their bodies have not yet been recovered.
A 60-feet whale in a decomposed state was washed up on the beach at Kuala Sr.ai.
Baram.
February, 1929.
The Officer-in-Cbarge, Baraiu, Mr. L. K. Morse, reports
On the 6th instant I returned from L. Malinau having attended the Ptman Meeting there. The greater part of the taxes were paid in. A number of Puiians did not appear owing to sickness. The travelling dresser, Mohamad Lazaroo, gave eighteen injections to those present who required it, and seven to the L. Para people. The Dyaks of the Limn were visited and several small matters discussed. Wan Taba.N.O., went to Long Lama from the 1st to 4th instant, Tuanku Mohamat, N.O., visited the Tinjar from 1st to 5th. I visited Bakong and Bluru from the 9th to 12th. Datu T. Drahman arrived at Bakong on 12th and went into the Bakong Dyak affairs with me. Wan Surer, N.O returned from Lio Matu via Tinjar on the 13th. As the result of a disturbance in the clerks quarters on the 17th instant, Cheow Kim was detained pending the arrival of the Resident. T visited Long Lama from 22nd to 24th instant. On the 26th instant it was reported that Ajan, Dyak, of Bakong, had been accidentally shot in the back by Seleban, Dyak, while bunting in the jungle. The Land Inspectors were kept busy in the S. Tinjar, S. Tutoh and locally.
Bintulu.
February, 1929.
Trade Trade is still slack. Jelutong averaged $11.37 per picul during the month and of this commodity 790.02 piculs were exported. Of billian attaps 30,000 pieces were exported this month, the price being $110 per laksa f.o.b. Bintulu.
Below are the. value of exports and imports local and foreign for the month.
Rainfall. Rainfall for the month was 11.92 inches.
Fifth Division.
LIMBANG.
February, 1929.
The Resident, Mr. E. H. Kortright, reports:
At Trusan a, Murut named Sarak, charged with attempted murder and abetting suicide, was found guilty on both charges and sentenced to fifteen years' imprison meet.
The first visit of the seaplane Venus on the 14th caused much interest, and people crowded in from all the outlying kampongs to see the machine take off on her return to Kuching the next day.
I visited Sundar and Trusan on the 12th, and from there went to Labuan to go into the Agency affairs.
Three bridges and 26 culverts were built on the new Panderuan road, which enables it to be open to traffic for five miles.
The Acting District Officer, Bintulu, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports:
On the 12th and 13th Sebauh was visited and a large number of minor cases heard and settled.
The Government seaplane Venus" passed over Bintulu at 11.20 a.m. on the 14th flying north and again at 8.20 a.m. on 16th flying towards Kuching.
Shipping..The following vescels entered and cleared the port during the month.
M.S. Lang Nyambar on the 3rd, 15th, 22nd and 28th.
M.L. Sri Maharani on the 4th, 23rd, and 28th.
S.S. Auby on the 6th and 23rd.
M.L. Bintulu on the 13th, 14th and 21st.
S.S. Sulong on the 15th calling at Kuala.
M.T. Chin on the J 6th and 27th.
S.S. Jnpas on the 16th.
The Bazaar road whs completed, including the two approaches to the Customs wharf, for the estimated figure of $3,000, with the lorry in perfect condition remaining as an asset. The services of the lorry will now be put to the upkeep and improvement of the other roads.
The rainfall amounted to 7'43 inches.
Trade Returns show as under:
Buffaloes exported to Kuching	... 76 head
Buffaloes exported to Bintulu	... 7 ,,
83 Foreign
Coasting
Exports. $20,732 19,039
$39,771
Imports.
$17,931,
6,601
$24,532
66
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1929.
Dr. Krol adds that he wishes to come on a visit to Borneo in a years time, when he will certainly not miss out Sarawak- He adds that anyone from Sarawak visiting Bandoeng will find him only too ready to be a guide and interpreter and that his address is Head Office, Mining Department.
We congratulate Dr. Krol on his new honours, which are merely the reward for valuable and painstaking work for many years in Borneo.
Mr. M. L. Carrie, of the Dahan Rubber Estates, left Kuching on the 12th en route for long leave in Scotland- We expect that the bracing air of Arbroath will do him all the good in the world, but hope that too much porridge will not ruin our only light-weight amateur jockey.
That rare phenomenon, a runaway roller, was observed on the 11th, when one of the P.W.D. motor rollers took the bit in his teeth and bolted down the causeway known as Pengkallan Sapi and fell at the water. Whether he mistook the river for Bechers Brook or the Canal Corner, it is not certain, but he is evidently not the stuff Aintree horses are made of.
That dilapidated row of houses in Main Bazaar Road, popularly known as Venice has been purchased by Government, who intends to demolish them. This is in accordance with the new Town Planning Scheme. A fine broad roadway will be made in place of the tortuous thoroughfare which is now such a danger to motors and pedestrians alike.
The N.Y.K and the Cunard Line have concluded an agreement, whereby the Nippon Yusen Kaisha will represent the Cunard Steamship Company in the Orient as its General Passenger Agents, and the Cunard Steamship Company will similarly represent the N-Y.K. in America and Europe.
This arrangtment was discussed in New- York and England, when Mr. N. Ohtani. the Managing Director of the N.Y.K., made a round-the-world trip last year, accompanied by Mr. Y. Nagashima, Manager of the Passenger Department of the Tokyo Head Office.
The N.Y.K., with its fleet of 150 vessels of 886,000 gross tons, operates services on almost all the principal ocean trade routes, except between the East Coast of the United States and Europe, where the Cunard Line maintains its splendid Transatlantic passenger service. Hence, the alliance of these two great, world renowned steamship companies will significantly enhance the facility of the passenger traffic across the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans.
The Sarawak Association, Singapore, at the annual general meeting held on the 7th April elected the following office-bearers for the ensuing year :
President, Wee Kheng Watt; Vice-Presidents, Song Teck Ghee and Koh Kim Loh; Hon. Secretary and Treasurer, Song Lian Siong; Assistant Hon- Secretary, Lim Teck Seng; Hon. Auditor, Kueh Ah Bee; Committee, A. J. Geikie. Wee Kheng Hong, J. S. Chong and Koh Thye Jin; Employment Committee, Matthew Lim and Koh Ten Shaw; Sports Superintendent, Tommy Tan.
An unfortunate accident occurred at Sadong on the 18th, when Mr. S. W. Harris of the Sadong Government Collieries, was thrown violently from a motor bicycle and sustained injuries to the head.
It appears that Mr. F. G. Carpenter, the District Officer, was taking Mr. Harris back to the Colliery on the pillion, about nine oclock at night. When near the Colliery two buffaloes jumped on to the road. Mr. Carpenter, unable to stop, chose the buffaloes in preference to the railway line, and after hitting one of the animals a glancing blow, the subsequent swerve unseated Mr. Harris.
Medical aid was found at once, and later Mr. Harris was sent to Kuching Hospital, where we learn that he is making good progress.
In the Supreme Court Chong Chee ap pealed against a fine of 81000. inflicted upon him *by the Residents Court for trafficking in opium. After a long hearing the Judicial Commissioner dismissed the appeal
A serious affray happened at No. 64, India Street on the 20th instant when Ycong Eng Seow stabbed Ang Lai Keng with a large knife, inflicting dangerous wounds in the back, side and arm. Ang Lai Keng fled to No. 15, Gambier Road with Yeong Eng Sew at his heels. The assailant was caught there by the Police before he could do more harm. The wounded man is in the hospital, and Yang Lai Seng is detained pending his trial.
Amongst recent Gazettings are the appointment of Mrs. W. G. Tait to act temporarily as Matron of the General Hospital, and the resignation of Miss R. Silcock and Mrs. R. E. Edwards as Matron and Assistant Matron respectively.
Mr. A. C. Street left for home leave on the 27th. We wish him good luck.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1929.
67
Mr. R. L. Daubeny returned to Kuching on 15th after tropical leave. On the 18th he sailed for Lawas to take over the charge of that and the Trusan districts.
The Officer Administering the Government and Mrs. Boult were in Bau from 12th to 15th instant. In spite of the closing down of the goldworks there, Bau is still a charming place in which to spend a few quiet days. About 46 miles of road is available for a Baby Austin, and there are miles of footpaths. The Bidi caves and bathing in the Kajang Lake are other attractions, whilst the journey from Kuching to Bau is under two hours by car
The designs of the shops are simple but on modern lines.
W ith the opening of the new road passing by the Borneo Company offices and the filling up of Sungei Kuching, it is easy to see that the new area is not so ungetatable as many persons prophesied and in years to come Carpenter Street may lose much of its present glory.
His Majesty The King's Gracious
Message to His Subjects.
A party of seaside trippers had some exciting adventures the other day when, avoiding the Easter holiday in Kuching, they journeyed to Santubong.
First of all the launch broke down, and for I two hours they drifted about on a nice hot afternoon. Then, after dark, the mast-head light caught fire. This was quickly lowered ? to the deck where it at once disintegrated, i pouring streams of lighted oil over the decks. The passengers gallantly kicked the remains 1 of the wretched lamp overboard, and trod out the flames. The next day, having got ashore, the party went down to the sea for the usual . bathe. They had barely started to really enjoy themselves when a whale appeared on i the scene and chased the unhappy bathers on to the sands again. Inquiries, however, seem to show that the monster was possibly an ikan empesut, but the attacked say that a mammal by any other name won d look as nasty! !
Mr. J. R. Barnes returned to Kuching by I s.s. Vyner Brooke on the 9th. We understand that Mr. Barnes has arrived to settle
up his affairs in Sarawak preparatory to retiring in England.
By the same ship Mr. Parnell arrived
back from Singapore.
Mr. W. V. Hanson, a.c.a., has been appointed an Assistant Treasurer in the Sarawak Government.
The Jail, once the cynosure of all eyes when approaching Kuching in the steamer, is now being converted into the more kindly home of the Customs whilst the prisoners are tern- j porarily housed in the Old Hospital. We do not know who has got the better of the exchange. Will the Customs searchers be haunted by the shades of gang robbers and murderers or will the present malefactors be , kept awake by the ghosts of past patients , being led into the awful horrors of the operating theatre.
The new bazaar at Padungan is progressing well, and most of the completed housesare now occupied. The lay-out is a vast 1 improvement on the old bazaar, and allows I wide streets and back lanes. At present, of course, the main road is in a rudimentary state, but the old ditches are being filled in I steadily.
His Highness the Rajah has received, through His Excellency the British Agent for Sarawak, for publication the following message from His Majesty the King Craigwell House, April 22nd, 1929.
In looking back on my long illness and recovery my heart is full of thankfulness of far deeper origin than any mere sense of relief.
I have been brought back from the danger and the weariness of the past months by the wonderful skill and devotion of my doctors surgeons and nurses. Help has come from another source of strength : as month after month went by I learned of the widespread and loving solicitude with which the Queen and I were surrounded. I was able to picture to myself the crowds of friends waiting and watching at my gates and to think of the still greater number of those who in every part of the Empire were remembering me with prayers and good wishes. Tho realization of this has been among the most vivid experiences of my life.
It was an encouragement beyond description to feel that my constant and earnest desire had been grantedthe desire to gain the confidence and affection of my people. My thoughts have carried me even further than this. I cannot dwell upon the generous sympathy shown to me by unknown friends in many other countries without a new and moving hope. I long to believe it possible that' the experience such as mine may soon appear no longer exceptional : when the national anxieties of all peoples of the world shall be felt as a common source of human sympathy and a common claim on human friendship.
1 am not yet able to bear the strain of a public ceremony but I look forward on some appointed day to joining with my people at home and overseas in thanking Almighty God not merely for my own recovery but for new evidence of a growing kindliness significant of the true nature of men and nations.
In the meantime I hope that this message may reach all those even in the remotest corners of the world from whom I have received words of sympathy and goodwill.
GEORGE, R.I.
68
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1929.
It is supposed that the Melanaus are a purely
Kelemantan tribe. Anyone who has heard the
? Kayan language will recognize at once its similarity
i to Melanau in as far as the curious intonation,
clipping and hesitation is concerned.
In appearance the average Melanau man is much
like a Malay but, except for fishermen, probably a
trifle lighter in shade. He is generally short,
sturdily built and heavier and squarer-built than a
Malay. In face he is (to put it nicely) not an oil
painting, and ages quickly.
On the other band the women are leputed to be
the "belles of Sarawak. They are often very fair,
especially those who work sago. Former writers
have compared their complexions with those of
Italian girls. They usually have rather broad faces,
and the old Melanau custom of pressing the fore-
heads of infant girls causes a curious flattening of
that part of the face. It is remarkable that there
are more cases of squinting amongst Melanau girls
than amongst Malays. This artificial head flattering
has been suggested as the cause.
Melanaus are conservative, not open toquick friend-
ship, rather suspicious and generally improvident.
The men make good sailors (in fact 75% of the crews
of coasting vessels are Melanaus), splendid fisher-
men, expert sago workers and good boat-builders.
They have no superior in sea-fishing lore and have
yet to be beaten as paddlers.
The women are adept at basket work and many
of them perform that very hard work of converting
the sago pith into raw sago flour, known as inesap.
The basket work made at Seduan, Banyok and
Kanowit is unsurpassed in Sarawak, and beautiful
specimens have been sent to England.
In religion the Melanaus were originally Pagan,
but many are now Mohammedan. At present the
numbers are about equal. The old Pagan Melanau
men wore long hair and loin cloths, and the writer
remembers one of the last of these in the village of
Medong. Nowadays all the men wear short hair,
but the Piiga'ns usually wear a cloth instead of the
ordinary Malay cap.
Pagan Melanau women do not cover their heads
like their Mohammedan sisters and frequently wear
long Coats without the usual opening in front.
Both sexes wear the trindak, sometimes elabo-
rately plaited. The small 'trindak of Matu and the
big ones of Bintulu are well Known.
At a moderate estimate, the population must be
ap'pToacbing 100,000. The big stations of Mukab,
Matu, Bintulu, Dalnt, Rejang, Igan and Balingiau
lire all Mebiiau. Other Melanau districts are Oya,
Seduan, Banyok, Daro, Niab, Sibuti, Talau,
Seinah, Telok Luhok, Snai and others. A wrong
impression is sometimes gained of the numbers of
the Melanaus by the fact that many Mohammedan
Melanaus call themselves Malay. It only requires
a minute or two of hearing them talk amongst
themselves to convince me that this is uot so. Of
later years the Roman Catholics have converted
many Pagans, and thriving missions are dotted
about.
These few lines are not to be taken as any real
account of the Melanau race. They are merely a
few facts strung together (and very loosely at that ! )
by one who has had actual experience of this curious
people. A people of many faults, of a fondness for
litigation, and of peculiar morals yet a people of
many good qualities. The best fishermen, the best
sago workers, the best basket workers, the best
paddlers, possibly the best boat builders, and (to
my mind) the prettiest women I I
To which Sarawak Replied.
Private Secretary
His Majesty The King
Buckingham Palace London
. Tn the absence of His Highness the Rajah of
Sarawak on behalf of Government and people of
Sarawak 1 wish to acknowledge the receipt of His
Majesty the King's gracious and inspiring message
which has been received here with great satisfaction. I
Please assure His Majesty the King of the
continued affection of the people of Sarawak. It is
our earnest hope that His Majesty may shortly be
restored to full health and vigour and that a personal
affection for His Majesty and the Throne may long '
unite in a fellowship of faithful and willing service the many races and peoples of the Empire.
Officer Administering the Government.
26th April 1929,
Why Did You Marry?
In the Daily Exprcss of 22nd March is an
article entitled Why Did You Marry?" by Her
Highness the Ranee of Sarawak.
Her Highness discusses fully the reasons why
most people marry, and concludes that being in
love" is but a passing phase. For that reason
Her Highness thinks that the marriage of con-
venience or the marriage for any other serious
reason can be, and often is, successful. One thing,
says Iler Highness, that partners in such a I
marriage will miss the keen ecstasy of falling in love but in any case this ecstasy docs not last.
A large number of people will not agree with
Her Highness but then how dull it would be if .
everybody agreed with each other! One thing, i
however, most people will admit, when Her I
Highness says that it is just as well that man '
and woman do not remain actually in love for any length of time the work of the world would
never be done.
Think of villages, towns, cities and nations full
of love-sick couples kissing and cuddling the year
round whilst the old world slowly reverted to its
prehistoric state ! !	,
The Melanaus.
The decision of His Highness the Rajah to include
any of the Melanau dialects as a voluntary subject
for the Sarawak Government Officers Examina-
tion, may in a timely reminder to many Europeans
in Sarawak of the existence of this large tribe.
i Except these whose duty it is to work amongst
the Melanaus, most Europeans think that the country
outside Kuching is inhabited by Dyaks in fact a i
generific name for natives who are not Malays. Few
appear to realize that right along the const from
Kuala Rejang to Miri live a numerous people, to the
a most entire exclusion of other natives, known as
Melanaus (sometimes spelt Milanos or Milanoes,
but more properly Ijcmnnaus).
This people is composed of a number of sub-tribes
who speak different dialects. It is not difficult,
however, even for a European to pick up the other
dialects, if he knows one of them. The Melanaus
themselves all converse readily together.
70
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1929.
Red Riding Hood.
"Get a move on, says the wolf. "You've been
long enough coming through that wood. What
have you been doingplaying three-legged race
with a crab or something?"
Red Riding Hood looks surprised. Why,
what's worrying your chords? she says. "Your
vocal organ is making noises like the double bass
in the circus hand during the lion act. Let me
examine your throat. Open the piano wide and
say 'Ah.' The wolf obliges, thus bringing Little Red Riding
flood within easy distance.
- "Golly, that's a Cue new set youve got, granny,"
remarks Red, taking a survey of the wolfs chew-
gallery.
The most painstaking observation has convinced
an assiduous motorist in Detroit Saturday Night
that the significance of a drivers hand protruding
straight out from the larboard window of his car
is as follows, possibilities being given in order of
their inherent likelihood :
(at Driver is shaking ash front actual
cigarette,.
(b)Is pointing out aeroplane, woodchuck
or humming bird to his wife.
(c)nesting cramped arm from long
driving.
(d)Stretching himself before proceeding.
(e)Rubbing mosquito-bitten elbow on
window frame.
(f)Shaking ash from imaginary cigarette.
If the driver is of the female persuasion, our
observer says, this list must be completely revamped
and re-arranged.
The Singapore Free Press has noticed some, of
our meanderings, and adds a bit more to the story
of the Right Reverend the Bishop, his trousers.
Under the heading "The Bishops Bags" the part
of the anatomy whieji the beige flannel unmen-
tionables cover is once more pulled.
From tin Sarawak Gazette 50 Years Ago.
Paper Chase Trouble.
Diplomatic Impasse .
THE
SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 158. FDAY, 1st Mat, 1879. [Price 5 Cis.
We have searched the Ollice files for our issue for May, 1879, but have drawn blank. Sa rawulc Gaectte, No. 153, is merely three blank pages!! Once more the mysteries of the past enthral us. Did the Editor take a months leave and forget to make arrange- I meats for a deputy ? Or did he decide to I chance it, hoping that the readers would not notice the omission? Frankly, we have often thought of trying the latter. As the daysof the month go by, and the only "copy" has been the rainfall statistics for JJ&doug (lollierv, the Euchiug Mortality Returns, the Market Price List, and the Bowling Averages, we have begun to panic What is the limit our readers can stand ?Do we think by careful spacing that two and a half pages is worth
I 20 cynls,. or will the public ask for their money back ?But duty recalls us, and we issue our usual columns of trite truisms and doubtful grammar 1
Chinese Protest at Shanghai.
The Shanghai Paper Chase, or Paper Hunt Club,
has again got itself into bad odour with the Chinese,
says the Morning Post. The first occasion was some
time ago when the huntsmen refused to call the
hunt off because a battle was about to take place.
As Shanghai was then full of British troops, who
would certainly have spoiled the battle if any of the
huntsmen had been killed, the warring armies bad
to wail.
The present trouble, however, is more serious,
and has been the cause of an exchange of diplomatic
correspondence between Mr. Wunsz, the Com-
missioner of Foreign Affairs, and the senior foreign
representative, in this case Mr. E. Cunningham,
the American Consul-General, who was formerly
stationed in Singapore.
The Chinese authorities maintain that foreigners
' on horseback have no right to chase a paper track
outside the borders of the settlement which is Chinese
territory. Since, however, the settlement itself is
nothing but buildings and roads, the two Hunt
Clubs must immediately cease their activities.
The Consular body replied that the Hunt had now
existed for over 60 years, that little or no damage
was done to the lands or crops of the local farmers,
whose personal consent to the Hunt was always
obtained, and that for any damage done liberal
compensation was paid.
Foreign Invasions."
The Department of Foreign Affairs replied that
this had nothing to do with the question. The Hunt
frightened and disturbed rhe children and cattle,
and that, the use of Chinese territory for these violent
invasions of mounted foreigners, both mule and
female, was a form of foreign aggression, ami on a
par with rhe unequal Healies, mid that in this the
Foreign Department was supported both by the
Shanghai Municipality and the Committee of Public
Safety
Matters are at present al a deadlock. The ver-
nacular press are reminding the people that they
are now a poliiically-conscious nation, and must
protect themselves against the arrogance of foreign
Powers.
The Public Safety Bureau is urging the Municipality to apply for warrants of arrest against any huntsmen who trespass on land outside their jurisdiction.
Personally, we have every sympathy with ths Chinese soldiery.
Taking it for granted that the Chinese battles are more or less on a par with the old pre-Boer War combats on Daffon's Plain, it seems distinctly hard, such well rehearsed and carefully thought out displays should be spoilt by silly foreigners galloping about on ridiculous ponies Ed. S.G.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY J, 1029.
71
Sarawak Museum.
The Nineteenth Report of the Sarawak Museum ,
is now before us, and it makes most interesting ;
reading Parts of it are obviously for the cognoscenti I
only, but other portions have a lively interest for the less erudite mortal. Members of the Societn i
Italians di Sicienze Naturale, of Milan, for instance, !
may well lament, the fact tuat Glyphotes Simus "
was wrongly labelled Sciurus notalus iimu, although it leaves us unmoved.
The purely scientific aspect of the Report, there-
fore, may be left to those better qualified to deal
with it. The rest may, perhaps, be divided into
two parts, the one dealing with the Museum itself
and the other with some of the results of its work.
The first point, possibly, that strikes the new-
comer to the Museum is. the. overcrowding of the
exhibits. Many of them, indeed, have " for long lam
in drawers and,on that account,can hardly be termed
exhibits It is good, therefore, to learn that new
cases have been purchased, but it is even better Io
know that His Highness the Rajah has authorized
the preparation of estimates, for submission to him,
for the extension of the building itself in 1930.
The fact that 23,960 visitors were recorded during
the year and, more remarkable still, that 21.440 of
them found their way up the spiral staircase to the
Upper Rooms, is good evidence of the local interest
taken in the Museum.
Turning now to the other side of the u pon, how
many of us knew that Bioks" are exported to the
Natulias for coconut picking? Or that Mias are
said still lo reach Singapore from Sarawak, though
their export lienee is forbidden. It would seem
that some of our local deniers are expert smugglers,
indeed.
The short accounts of methods of fishing adopted
by the Milanos and by the Dyaks are full of interest
and, in this connection, the suggestion that a few
articles dealing with Sarawak Natives may appear
in future issues of the Journal is most welcome.
Too little has been written on these matters. It is
true.that Dr. Chas. Hose has dealt with them in monu-
mental fashion and has also published some smaller
works on Hie same subjects, but it is no disparage-
ment to them to say that they are for the earnest
student rathe, than .for the average man seeking
entertainment as well as knowledge.
As a whole, rhe lieport seems to us to fulfil its
funCtioBS admirably. The currants have been mixed
with the suet by a skilful hand, and it is hoped I that
the consumption of the resulting pudding will bring
about au increase in the number of European
visitors to what is generally allowed to be the best
Museum of its size in the East.
Indians and Chinese Entertain
Mr. S. R. Ratnam.
Dr. Krishnas residence was the venue of a tea party on the 8th instant, where several Indians and Chinese gathered to wish good-bye to Mr. S. R. Ratnam on the eve of his departure from Sarawak. After tea a group photograph was taken with Mr. Ratnam as the central figure.
Dr. Krishna, in addressing his guests of the evening, said that Mr. Ratnam came to the E.M.S. about 27 years ago and devoted the past 19 years in serving the Sungei Tengah Rubber Estate. In citing a few lines from the testimonial given by the estate to Mr. Ratnam. the speaker said that the
management of the estate not only regretted Mr. Ratnams departure, but also thought that one like him, who was with the estate from the time of jungle clearing to the bearing period, and who was in sole charge of 800 acres of bearing area for the past 8 years, was difficult to replace. The host finally wished Mr. Ratnam bon voyage and prosperity in his new field of activity at home. Mr. Chai All Jap and the Rev. E. G. Proctor also expressed their views regarding Mr. Ratnam, who replied suitably. Later the gathering dispersed having spent an enjoyable evening.(Contributed.)
Death of Datu Sheriff Hamid.
We regret to announce the death of Data Sheriff Hamid Jiin Sheriff Akil of Simanggang, who died at Baram on 2nd March, aged 65 years.,
The late Datu entered Government Service when Mr. Deshon was Resident at Simanggang. He was appointed Native Officer at Kuching, Baku and Mukah, from which last station he resigned. On ; the death of his father he was re-appointed Native Officer at Baram, and was promoted Datu in June, 1916. He retired on pension in October, 1921, having completed 19 years Government Service.
The late Datu had been bedridden since his retirement.
Datu Sheriff Hamid (or, as he was more widely known, Tuanku Hamid) was one of the old type of Native Officer, faithful to the Raj and jealous of her old traditions.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1929').
Sarawak Museum.
The Nineteenth Report of the Sarawak Museum
)S now before ns, and it makes most interesting
reading Parts of it are obviously for the cognoscenti
only, but other portions have' a lively interest for
the less erudite mortal. Members of the Societa
Italians di Scienze Nacnrale, of Milan, for insiance,
may well lament the fact that Glyphotes Simus "
was wrongly labelled Belarus notalusiiniu, although it leaves us unmoved.
The purely scientific aspect of the Report, there-
fore, may be left to those better qualified io deal
with it. The rest may, perhaps, be divided into
two parts, the one dealing with the Museum itself
and the other with some of the results of its work.
The first point, possibly, that strikes the new-
comer to the Museum is the overcrowding of the
exhibits. Many of them, indeed, have " for long lam
in drawers and,on that account,can hardly be termed
exhibits It is good, therefore, to learn that new
cases have been purchased, but it is even heller to
know that His Highness the Rajah has authorized
the preparation of estimates, for submission to him.
for tiie extension of the building itself in 1930.
The fact that 23,960 visitors were recorded din ing
the year and. more remarkable still, thai 21,440 of
them found their way up the spital staircase to the
Upper Rooms, is good evidence of the local interest
taken in the Museum.
ruining now to the other side of the report, how
many of us knew that Broks are exported to the
Niitimas for coconut picking? Or that Mias are
said still to reach Singapore from Sarawak, though
their export hence is forbidden. It would seem
that Some of our local deniers are expert smugglers,
indeed.
The short accounts of methods of fishing adopted
by the Milanos and by the Dyaks are full of interest
and, in this connection, the suggestion that a few
articles dealing w.th Sarawak Natives may appear
in future issues of the Journal is most welcome.
Too little has been written on these mutters. It is
true that Dr. Chas. Hose has dealt with them in monu-
mental fashion and has also published some smaller
works on the same subjects, but it is no disparage-
ment to them to say that they are for the earnest
student rathei than Jor the average man seeking
entertainment as well as knowledge.
As a whole, the Report seems to us to fulfil its
functions admirably. The currants have been mixed
with the suet by a skilful hand, and it is hoped that
the consumption of the resulting pudding will bring
about an increase in the number of European
visitors to what is generally allowed to be the best
Museum of its size in the East.
Indians and Chinese Entertain
M-. S. R. Ratnam.
management of the estate not only regretted Mr. Ratnam's departure, but also thought that one like him, who was with the estate from the time of jungle clearing to the bearing period, and who was in sole charge of 800 acres of bearing area for the past 8 years, was difficult to replace. The host finally wished Mr. Ratnam "bon voyage and prosperity in his new field of activity at home. Mr. Chai Ah Jap and the Rev. E. G. Proctor also expressed their views regarding Mr. Ratnam, who replied suitably. Later the gathering dispersed having spent an enjoyable evening. (Contributed.)
Death of Datil Sheriff Hamid.
We regret to announce the death of Datu Sheriff
Hamid bin Sheriff Akil of Simanggang, who died
at Baram on 2nd March, aged 65 years. ,
The late Datu entered Government Service when
Mr. Deshon was Resident at Simanggang. He was
appointed Native Officer at Kuching, Paku and
Mukah. from which last station he resigned. On
the death of bis father he was re-appointed Native
Officer at Baram, and was promoted Datu in June,
191(5, He retired on pension in October, 1921,
having completed 19J years' Government Service.
The late Datu had been bedridden since his
retirement.
Date Sheriff Hamid (or, as he was more widely
known. Tuanku Hamid) was one of the old type of
Native Officer, faithful to the Raj and jealous of her
old traditions.
Dr. Krishnas residence was the venue of a tea party on the 8th instant, where several Indians and Chinese gathered to wish good-bye to Mr. S. R. Ratnam on the eve of his departure from Sarawak. After tea a group photograph was taken with Mr. Ratnam as the central figure.
Dr. Krishna, in addressing his guests of the evening, said that Mr. Ratnam came to the F.M.S. about 27 years ago and devoted the past 1!) years in serving the Sungei Tengah Rubber Estate. In citing a few lines from the testimonial given by the estate to Mr. Ratnam. the speaker said that the
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1929.
Death of Mr. John Mathie.
Late Mr. G. H. Webster.
A letter has been received from the Special Commissioner for Sarawak in England informing Government of the death of Mr. Mathie on the 16th March, details of which, however, were not available.
Later a correspondent sent us a cutting from ? a Scotch newspaper in which it appears that : Mr. Mathie died at Saltcoats in his 78th year. I The article goes on to say that deceased was an active member of the Parish church and also of the Kirk-Session. He was a native of Arran.
Mr. Mathie was born on 3rd October. 1851, and joined H.H.S. Aline in England as Chief Engineer I in October, 1875, and served in her for nine years, except for temporary duty in other vessels. He brought the Lorna Doone out in August, 1881. and superintended the building of p.s. Adeh at Port ? Glasgow in 1884. In 1885 he assumed charge of that steamer until January, 1897. On 1st February, 1897, he was appointed Engineer-in-Chief to the Government, and retired on pension 31st January, 1899.
Afterwards he superintended the building of p.s. Kaka at Port Glasgow, 1900 1901, and brought her out in August, 1901, remaining in her until January, 1902.
Mr. John Mathie was the oldest Government pensioner, and after over 24 years faithful work for the Raj. lived to enjoy his pension for . 32 years. His name is still remembered in i Kuching by Mathie's Hill and Mathie's Road. i
The Rev. G. Dexter Allens Death
in England.
Body sent for Burial in Jersey
The Jersey Evening Post of yth March, makes the following reference to the tragic death of Mr G H Webster in Sarawak early in March : We regret to learn that news was received yesterday by Mr. and Mrs. J. A. Webster, of Fairlawn, St. Saviour, that their son. Mr. George Herbert (Sunny) Webster, had been accidentally killed in Sarawak.
Mr. Webster, who was twenty-two years of age, was born in Singapore in 190b, and was educated at Trent College, Derbyshire On leaving college, three years ago, he joined the administrative staff of the'Shell Transport and Trading Co., and was for 14 months at their London office. In May, 1927, he was posted to Sarawak and was stationed at Belait in that State when he met his death.
From details of the accident received by the parents, it appears that Mr Webster died of shock resultant upon burns received from the bursting of a methylated spirit drum which was being soldered. As Mr Webster was on the administrative side of the staff it is thought he must have been passing near the drum when it burst and so met his untimely death He was buried yesterday, but we understand that Mr. Webster, sen., is arranging for the body to be brought home for final interment in Jersey.
Young Mr. Webster was well known in Jersey, where he had many friends, and the news of his death will be received with deep regret.
The Jersey Marni' g News of 23rd March records the death two days previously at Fairlawn, St. Saviour's, Jersey, of Mrs. J. A. Webster, wife of Mr. J A. Webster, formerly o Singapore. Ti is tragic occurrence followed closely upon ti c death in Saraw ik only a fortnight before of Mr. and Mrs. Webster's only son. The Jerse" paper records that Mrs. Webster never recovered from the shock of her son's death.
Sailing Schedule of s.s. Vyner
Brooke.
As we go t i press, ti e Home mini brings the news ' of the death of . the Bev. G. Dexter Allen from pneumonia	*
The deceased came out East in 1904 to join the I Society for the Propagation of the Gospel in this State. For many years Mr and Mrs. Dexter Allen lived at Banting, where, there is a prosperous Mission station and school for Dyaks. In 1914 the deceased was transferred to Singapore where he held various ecclesiastical appointments. During the tmeute in 1915, Mr. Dexter Allen promptly enrolled himself in j the Defence Corps, and we believe he was responsible for either shooting or capturing one of the rebel ' Sepoys of the 5th Infantry.
In the Second Division, Mr. Dexter Allens death will he received with regret, and to Mrs. Dexter Allen, who is still in Singapore, we express our sympathy.
May to December, 1929.
LEAVE
SINGAPORE.
Arrive
Kuching.
Leave
Kuching.
Arrive
Singapore.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1929.	7a
Our Competition.
Nnmerous replies were received, of which two were from lady readers. Unfortunately none of these solved the third question--and several came to grief at the other two.
Question number one is obvious. Even in these days of advanced science and votes for women, no peacock as yet has been induced to lay an egg. That useful function is left to the pea-hen. In shortthere was no egg!
, One competitor says that the egg "belonged to the peacock in common usuage. Another says "if this is a peacock of the. World-End days, as the book the World-End Says that the cock-birds will lay eggs at that time, he may lay eggs. So we may discuss this whin such a time comes For the time being as the peacock is a male bird he cannot lay any egg, which will belong either to the owner of the garden or of the the bird " Well ! well!
Number two of course is simple. The key has gone into the locked letter-box. This stumped several. One said "no letter arrived for him." Another suggests that a key could not be placed in a letter" therefore no key arrived. This is certainly a reasonable solution. The key was placed in an envelope and yet a third suggests that the man in Paris forget to send the key at all I
Number three brought everybody down. It is quite easy. The girls all sold their oranges at tuppence a dozen, and the odd ones at one penny each. If you work this out, each girl brought back ten- pence.
One ingenious competitor says that "the girls eat up some of their oranges." whilst others went into intricate figures on the algebraical system. Some even hinted darkly at profiteering. ! !
The prize of $5 will be divided between the first two solutions opened, containing two correct answers. These were, in order, Mr. C. Pitt- Hardacre and Mrs. Pitt-Hardacre. And now other literary experts arc invited to compete again for the solution of the acrostic in this issue. The same prize of $5 will be offered. Solutions to be sent in before noon on 25th May.
A Single Acrostic.
My first, an arch-apostle had Some thought him sage, some thought him mad;
But if you want it not to trouble you, Pray do not spell it with a W.
My next, an asset somewhat rare, Which lifts a man above the press
By sea or land or in the air. Or even in a game of chess.
My third, a well-known writer held. Alone secures the price of peace
Amid the 'Unrest' of a world;
The obligation cannot cease.
The lust, a note of fiery zeal
To bid the wheels of life go round ;
Monotony's dull wounds to heal, Martyrs to make, or empires found.
My whole is either short or long; May seem all right, or all go wrong.
Whatever be its usual span
It needs all these to make a man.
Anak Sung ei 1929.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
Womans' Emnne.ipniion.
Kuching,
April 10th, 1939
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.
Dear Sir,
After reading the correspondence under heading To Crookshauk Road, which appeared in the last issue of the Sarawak Gazette, it seems to me that your correspondent "Not Cut-Throat is somewhat of a conservative narrow-minded type of die-hard, with having a strong tendency of making mountains out of mole-hills.
Airing his reactionary views on any slight indication of feminine emancipation which of course, I particularly refer to the part played by those educated girls in Sarawak; who in the past have been compelled through ignorance and obsolete customs, to exist like hermit-crabs, are now essaying to free themselves from these shackles. But, a wiseacre like Not Cut-Throat, who could only see things through smoked glass, misinterprets these healthy signs for gross misbehaviour; would at once raise the alarm, broadcast his rusty opinions with fantastic exaggerations; and then eagerly gloating over the discomfiture of the hermit-crabs backing to their shells again.
The only criticism that I can offer to those nice girls, is that they should be less standoffish, and cultivate more of that tantalizing vivacity which captivates. But as to such characters depicted by Not Cut-Throat, as damsels who live like landslides, or go beyond gross negligence," etc., allowing exceptions of a. very few who make mistakes'' me comparatively as rare in this slow-going country, as oases in the heart of Sahara Desert.
But if Not Cut-Throat should have the audacity to infer to that little band of pioneer girl wage- earners, who, with much trepidation, have discarded that peep-as-you-pass-by demeanour; braving the uncharitable prying eyes and wagging tongue of Mrs. Grundy, in order to engage in tbeir limited callings in the school, or Government, as those damsels who live like landslides, etc.; then Not Cut-Throat has nothing, but my abject pity. All I could advise him to do is to go beyond the shores of Sarawak. Knock about a bit. Till some horsesense is instilled into his befogged noddle, thus then to enable, him to air bis opinions more rationally next time!
A.last,tip, before concluding, that is, I sincerely hope that Not Cut-Throat is not pulling some ones' legs by writing that illogical letter. Otherwise, he has to develop biceps of a blacksmith, and limbs of a ricksha puller to perform that unwonted office! !
I am, dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
Salah Paham.
74
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1929.
Club News.
Revised List of Handicaps fob 18 Holes.
G. J. 1) Walters ... 51 6 45 (Winner.)
A. M. Forrest	...	F. F. Boult	...	Dr. Lc Sueur	...	It. D. Binnie	...	Rajah, H. H. The	...	...	14
Adams, C. D.	...	...	8
Adams, P. M.	...	...	4
Aplin, 11. I)	...	...	10
Baughan, A. F.	...	...	8
Baird, J. P.	...	...	12
Bates, G. T.	...	...	14
Bean, J. 8. W.	...	...	10
Binnie, R. I).	...	...	6
Bishop, The Rt. Rev. The ...	18
Boult, F.F.	...	...	14
Bruce, E. 0.	...	...	12
Carpenter, F. G.	...	...	10
Chater, R. W.	...	...	18
Clark, Capt. W. T....	...	18
Crocker, H. B	...	...	4
Cntfield, H. E.	...	..	14
Cotterill, W.	...	...	12
Danbeny, R. L.	...	...	12
Dick. W. F.	...	..	18
Davidson, H. C.	...	...	12
Edwards, R. E.	...	...	14
Fenwick, C.	...	...	12
Forrest, A. M.	...	...	18
Flnod-Page, P. 11.	...	...	12
Hardie, J. A. If.	...	...	4
Hayward, P. FT.	...	16
Hill, J. J.	...	...	6
Kidd, G. D.	...	...	12
Kortright, F. II.	...	...	18
Kay, R. C.	...	...	18
Kennedy, L. D.	...	...	18
Lowe, Capt. C. P.	...	...	12
Pollard, F. H.	...	...	14
Pilt-Haidacre, C.	...	...	18
Rennie, A. A.	...	12
Spnrwayflfi J, C.	...	...	6
Swayne, J. C.	...	...	18
'Hechinan, B. A.	...	14
Walters, G. J. D.	...	...	14
Worxlwatd, E. M	...	...	4
Yeager, Dr. H. C	...	18
Ladies;
Dayang Leonora	...	...	24
Mrs. Aplin	...	...	24
Mrs. Bean	...	...	24
Mrs Danson	...	...	24
Mrs. Fenwick	...	...	14
Mrs. Le Sueur	...	...	18
Mis. Yeager	...	...	24
Note (i) Handicaps may be revised at the discretion of the Committee.
(ii) Members having no Official Handicaps may not enter for Competitions.
(iii) Three certified Cards must be submitted to obtain a Himdienp.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1929.
Sarawak Turf Club.
75
The Committee have decided to hold a one day Meeting in Kuchingon June 3rd, In view of recent events the regular Spring Meeting was abandoned, but at the Request of many owners, it was thought desirable to give the ponies a gallop, even if for only moderate prizes. This Meeting will in no way take the place of the usual one and will be on far less pretentious lines
Details are not yet ready, but the prizes will probably be the value of the stakes, plus a share of the tote. Large fields may occur, but this is inevitable and may the best pony and rider win.
The following changes on the Committee have been made. His Highness the Rajah, o.c.m.g., has approved the appointment of Mr. J. B. Archer to be
one of the Government Representatives vice Mr. J. A. H. Hardie. Mr. E. 8. Holl replaces Mr Archer, and Mr. B. J C. Spurway fills up the vacancy in the Outstation Members.
Mr. McLaine of the Treasury has been appointed Honorary Treasurer-
Below we publish a Statement of Accounts, which was laid before the Committee on the 22nd ult., and ,' approved for publication.
Owing to the absence of any Cash Book or any I Statement after June, 1928, Mr. McLaine has had extreme difficulty in making up any figures.
It is requested that any Member wishing for further explanation will apply to the Honorary Secretary, Mr. J. B. Archer, or the Honorary Treasurer, Mr. A. L. McLaine.
Account of Income and Expenditure for Six Months to 31st December, 1928.
INCOME.
I. Income as far as lodgments in Bank are concerned, after adjustment of outstandings Of which the following can be traced:
Forfeits
Donations of Prizes Coffee Donations Bar Receipts Coupons. etc.
Programmer, sold by Sarawak Club
Commission on Selling Lotteries ...
Commission on Unlimited Cash Sweep ...
Commission on Totalizator Government Grant
EXPENDITURE.
813.003.42
11. Balance
2,599.02
Balance ShEEt as at 31st DECEMBER. 1928.
LIABILITIES.
ASSETS.
Reconciliation of Difference.
85,288.37
246.48
1,874.99
80,859.84
Difference us shot e
Made up of:
"Cash in hand and in transit1' shown in Balance Sheet as at 30th June, 1928
Actually there was a Bank overdraft on that date of ...
1,374.93
786 33
588.66
Sundry Debtore aa at 31JSM.
Forfeits
Selling Lotteries Bar Receipts ... Coffee Donations ... Subscriptions ...
Unlimited Sweepstakes ...
4103.00
103.98
12.50
9.00
10.00
800
4246.48
1,874.99
76	THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1929.
Sundry Creditors as at 31.1X.98.
Government Printing Office	...	$607.20
Cycle and Auto Garage ...	...	204.74
Police and P.W.D. for car and lorry hire	...	..	...	120.92
Repairs io and Upkeep of Course ...	238.72
United Engineers, Ltd.	...	...	738.87
Robinson & Co., Ltd.	...	...	804.50
Unlimited Cush Sweep	...	..	77.10
H. B. Crocker...	...	...	86.45
Stationery ...	...	...	12.25
Sundries ...	...	...	305.15
S3.195.70
The foregoing Balance Sheet and income and Expenditure Account were prepared wholly from information contained in the Bank Pass Book and the preceding Accounts of the Club.
Account of Income and Expenditure for the Period from 31st December,
1928, to 15th April, 1929.
INCOME.
'EXPENDITURE.
, Balance Sheet as at 15th April, 1929.
LIABILITIES.	ASSETS.
84,265.30
94,265.80
Sundry Creditors at at 15th April, 19X9.
Government Printing Office	...	...	...	$ 21.00
Sundry Debtors as at 15th April, 19X9.
Forfeits (Spring and Autumn 1928 Meetings)	...	...	9103.00
Selling Lotteries	Do.	...	...	...	103.98
Bar Receipts	Do.	...	...	...	12.50
Coffee Donations	Do.	...	...	...	9.00
Unlimited Sweepstake Do.	...	...	...	8.00
$236.48
Subscriptions for 1929 still outstanding	...	...	440.00
S676.4H
The foregoing Balance Sheet and Income and Expenditure Account were, prepared from the Books of the Club.
Kuching, 15th April, 1929.
A. LYN'I'ON McGAINE,
Hon. Treasurer.
78
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1929.
Land Office.
The. Superintendent of Lands, Mr. C. 8. Griffiths,
reports: Three Apprentice Land Inspectors completed
their training during the mouth. They will remain
here fora short period iu order to become thoroughly
acquainted with Land Office routine, after which
they will go to Bau, Sadoug and the Second
Division, respectively.
Five Apprentice Land Inspectors were passed to
the Survey Department for training. This leaves
the Land Office very short handed, but opportunity
served and some of these Apprentices have been
awaiting a chance to qualify as Assistant Land
Inspectors for over a year.
One Assistant Land Inspector was transferred to
the police.
During the month 1 visited the Javanese settle-
ment at the 111 mile. These people appear to be
doing very well.
I also visited the small Malay community on the
Pending Road. The few houses that already exist
me on plots of land unnecessarily large for a kam-
I pong area and it might be advisable to arrange lots,
? us has been done elsewhere. The few people
I spoken to on the spot seemed to be in favour of the
idea, but it has not yet been taken further.
Mr N. E. Hughes. Cadet, who arrived on 25th from England, was posted to this department and began his duties on the following day.
, Land on the Lundu Road Mr. Davidson reports that during February about 500 chains of rentis were cut and 200 to 300 acres of land inspected.
Tiie demarcation of the first forty-live lots was 1 continued.
Mr. N. Hughes and Mr. A. L. McLaitie arrived on
26th, the former to join the Cadet Service, and tiie
latter to join the Treasury. Mr. Hughes is at present
attached to the Land Office.
Major Cunynghame, late Commandant. Sarawak I
Rangers, left on pension on 2nd. Captain R. E. Le Sueur assumed Acting Command.
Resident's Court. Sbaik Daud was sentenced to
six months imprisonment under section 477a I.P.C.
He has appealed against this sentence. Lee Chui
Choon, who was concerned with the death of Francis
Escoto, was bound over for one year to come up for
judgment if called upon to do so. Lin. Teck Seng,
of the Electricity Department, was imprisoned
for three months for criminal breach of trust and ?
Cbooug Chee fined $1,000 for breach of the Opium
Orders (XLVII, 1924).
In the Civil Court seven cases were heard, con-
cerning claims totalling $6,687.90. Fees were
$130.25.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. G. .1. D. Walters,
reports:
District Court Forty-nine cases were heard,
twenty-one of which were criminal and twenty-eight
civil. Of the twenty-one criminal cases, twenty
convictions and one acquittal were adjudged. There
were four cases of assault, one of cheating, eight con-
tempt of Court, four breach of Municipal By-laws
and four other offences.
Fines imposed amounted to $181.42 and fees
collected totalled $41.75.
During March this work was completed and the
above lots are ready for occupation A further area,
which will cut up into between thirty and forty
lots, was surrounded by rentis and it is hoped that
the complete remising of these lots will be approach-
ing completion by the end of the current month.
UppER SaRawak.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. J.
Hill, reports The Seniawan water-supply pump has been out
of order from the 1st until the 20th and has caused
great inconvenience to the bazaar people.
The bad weather which for many months has
prevailed in Bau and district seems to have taken a
change for the better and in consequence the work
i on the roads has, during the last week, gone forward
rapidly. The Morris truck has been in continual
use by the road contractor Owing to bad weather
no other I.W.D. woi k has been undertaken.
The Government School at Bau was visited
during the month. The attendance is at present
eighty-five, which includes sixteen Malays and sixty-
nine Chinese.
B. A. Johari ended his service with the school on
the 31st instant and is now retiring on pension.
Chung Chee School, Huso.The old teacher, Lee
Hock '1 hen, left the school on Chinese New Year
and it has only recently been possible to obtain a
new master, one Lim Sin Chong, who started teach-
ing from the 28th instant.
1 be Bidi Gold Mining Kongsi have now, it is
learnt, got all their machinery installed and the
promoters hope to start work at an early date.
I took over charge of this district on the 21st
instant from the Assistant District Officer,
Mr. G. J. D Walters, who left on the 22nd to
take, up his appointment in Kuching.
\\ hut might have been a serious accident occurred
on the Paku/Bau road on the 24th instant. Car
No. 18 was on its way from Paku to Bau when at
one of the corners it skidded into the ditch, finishing
up with its wheels in the air. The occupants, three
Chinese, were unhurt, although the hood and wind-
screen were damaged beyond repair.
The civil claims involved amounts totalling
$7,758.17 while fees amounted to $269.
Magistrate's Court One. hundred and three civil
suits were brought for hearing for which fees of
$209.79 were collected. The total value of claims
was $2,845.58.
Police Court. Thirty summary cases were brought
before the Court. Twenty-four convictions and six
acquittals were obtained. The principal charges
were four of assault, eleven of theft, one of cheating,
seven of breach of Municipal By-laws and seven
minor cases. A total amount of $189 was paid in
fines and $47.75 was collected in fees. In addition
ninety-eight judgment summonses were dealt with.
About eighteen cases were carried forward for hear-
ing in April.
Court's General. Ong Kiang. Ong Bomig and Ong
loi were sentenced to one month each for assault
under section 352 I.P.C.; Lim Teng Seng, Haji
Razah, Ah Kwan, Valasamy and Jaimal to one
month each for contempt of Court; Eow Kiok Chan
Ah Chin, Tan Kie Fab, Chang Siak, Ripin, Chau
Boot Hou, Chou Ah Swee and Boon Km to three,
two, four and six months respectively for non-pay-
ment of fines; Lee Ah Seng to one year for dis-
clai'm in Court, under section
209 I.P.C. and lined $100 or three months extra in
default; Lim Chee Tee to three months for
voluntarily causing hurt with dangerous weapon
under section 304 I.P.C.; Bong Chon and Ng Ah Tong
to six months each for criminal breach of trust, under
section 406 I.P.C.; Emon (Java) to three months
for cheating, under section 418 I.P.C.; Emat (Java)
to one month for abetment, under section 109 I.P.C.;
Karamndi to six months for receiving stolen property
under section 411 I.P.C.; Tan Teck Seng and Kie
Seng to six and three months respectively for theft
under section 379 I.P.C.
I took over charge of the District Office from
Mr. J. B. Archer on the 22ud instant, on being
appointed to act as District Officer and Coroner,
Kuching.
78
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1929.
Mr. N. Hughes and Mr. A. L. McLaiue arrived on 26th, the former to join the Cadet Service, and the latter to join the Treasury. Mr. Hughes is at present attached to the Land Office.
Major Cu'iynghame, late Commandant, Sarawak Rangers, left on pension on 2nd Captain R E- Le Sueur assumed Acting Command.
Resident's Court. Sbaik Daud was sentenced to six months' imprisonment under section 477a I.P.C. He has appealed against this sentence. Lee Chui Choon, who was concerned with the death of Francis Escoto, was bound over for one year to come up for judgment if called upon to do so. Lim Teck Seng, of the Electricity Department, was imprisoned for three months for criminal breach of trust and Cboong Chee fined $1,000 for breach of the Opium Orders (XLVII, 1924).
In the Civil Court seven cases were heard, concerning claims totalling $0,687.90. Fees were $130.25.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. G. J. D. Walters, reports:
District Court.Forty-nine cases were heard, twenty-one of which were criminal and twenty-eight civil. Of the twenty-one criminal cases, twenty convictions and one acquittal were adjudged. There were four cases of assault, one of cheating, eight contempt of Court, four breach of Municipal By-laws and four other offences.
Fines imposed amounted to $181.42 and fees collected totalled S41.75.
The civil claims involved amounts totalling $7,758.17 while fees amounted to $269.
Magistrate s Court. One hundred and three civil suits were brought for hearing for which fees of $20959 were collected. The total value of claims was $2,845.58.
Police Court Thirty summary cases were brought before the Court. Twenty-four convictions and six acquittals were obtained. The principal charges were four of assault, eleven of theft, one ofcheating seven of breach of Municipal By-laws and seven minor cases A total amount of $189 was paid in fines and $47.7.3 was collected in fees. In addition ninety-eight judgment summonses were dealt with About eighteen cases were carried forward for hearing m April.
Court's General.-O,ls Kiang, Ong Boong and Ong
1 oii were sentenced to one month each for assault
under section 352 I P C.; Lim Teng Seng, Haji
Razah, Ah Kwan, Valasmny and Jaimal to one
month each for contempt of Court; Eow Kiok, Chan
Ah Ohm, lan Kie Fah, Chang Siak, Ripin, Chan
Boot Hou, Gbon Ah 8 wee and Boon Kin to three
two, four and six months respectively for non-pay-
ment of fines; Lee Ah Seng to one year for dishonestly
making false claim in Court, under section
209 I.P.C and fined $100 or three months extra in
default; Lim Ghee Tee to three months for
voluntary cauinfi hurt with dangerous weapon
under section 304 I.P.C.; Bong Chon and Ng Ah Tong
to six months each for criminal breach of trust, under section 406 I.P.C. ; Emon (Java) to three months
for cheating under section 418 I.P.C.; Emat (Java)
to one month for abetment, under section 109 I P C Karmnudi to six months for receiving stolen property;
Under section 411 I.P.C.; Tan Teck Seng and Kie
Seng to six and three months respectively for theft,
under section 379 I.P.C.
1 took
Mr. J. B
appointed
Kuching.
over charge of the District Office from
. Archer on the 22nd instant, on being
to act as District Officer and Coroner",
Land Office.
The Superintendent of Lands, Mr. C. S. Griffiths, reports:
Three Apprentice Land Inspectors completed their training during the month. They will remain here fora short period in order to become thoroughly acquainted with Land Office routine, after which , they will go to Bau, Sadong and the Second Division, respectively.
Five Apprentice Lund Inspectors were passed to the Survey Department for training. This leaves the Land Office very short handed, but opportunity served and some of these Apprentices have been awaiting a chance to qualify as Assistant Land Inspectors for over a year.
One Assistant Land Inspector was transferred to the police.
During the month 1 visited the Javanese settlement at the 11th1/2 mile. These people appear to be doing very well.
I also visited the small Malay community on the Pending Road. The few houses that already exist are on plots of land unnecessarily large for a kampong area and it might be advisable to arrange lots, as has been done elsewhere. The few people I spoken to on the spot seemed to be in favour of the idea, but it has not yet been taken further.
Mr. N. E. Hughes. Cadet, who arrived on 26th from England, was posted to this department and began his duties on the following day.
Land on the Lundu Road. Mr. Davidson reports , that during February about 500 chains of rentis were cut and 200 to 300 acres of land inspected.
I The demarcation of the first forty-live lots was I continued.
I During March this work was completed and the above lots are ready for occupation. A further area, which will ent up into between thirty and forty lots, was surrounded by rentis and it is hoped that the complete rentising of these lots will be approaching completion by the end of the current month.
Upper Sarawak.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. J.
Hill, reports:
The Seniawan water-supply pump has been out
of order from the 1st until the 20th and has caused
great inconvenience to the bazaar people.
The bad weather which for many months has
prevailed in Bau and district seems to have taken a
change for the better and in consequence the work
on the roads has, during the last week, gone forward
rapidly. The Morris truck has been m continual
use by the road contractor. Owing to bad weather
I no other P.W.D. work has been undertaken.
i The Government School at Bau was visited
i during the month. The attendance is at present
I eighty-five, which includes sixteen Malays and sixty-
1 nine Chinese B. A. Johari ended his service with the school on
the 31st instant and is now retiring on pension.
Chung Chee. School, Ruso.--The old teacher, Lee
Hock 1 hen, left the school on Chinese New Year
and it bus only recently been possible to obtain a
new master, one Lim Sin Chong, who started teach-
ing from the 28th instant.
The Bidi Gold Mining Kongsi have now, it is
learnt, got all their machinery installed and the
promottrs hope to start work at an early date.
I took over charge of this district on the 21st
instant from the Assistant District Officer,
Mr. G. J. D Walters, who left on the 22nd to
take up his appointment in Kuching.
What might have been a serious accident occurred
on the Paku/Bau road on the 24th instant. Car
No. 18 was on its way from Paku to Bau when at
one of the comers it skidded into the ditch, finishing
P with its wheels m the air. The occupants, three
Chinese, were unhurt, although the hood and wind-
screen were damaged beyond repair.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1929
79
Sadong.
March, 1929.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G- Carpenter, re-
ports :
P.W.D.The approved Estimates having been
received, a number of new matters were put in hand,
principal of which is a new linking road including
a bridge between Kampongs Kelaka and Nanas.
Work was started on this on the 8lh and good
progress had been made by the end of the month.
inquiries were made from Kuching with re-
ference to two fire hoses for the bazaar, but details
as to pressure, which cannot yet be given, are
required before these can be ordered.
Repairs to the Police Barracks were put in hand,
but the buildings are in such a rotten stale that it
would have been a waste of money to spend much
on them The dapor will have to be pulled upright
again with ropes. A new bridge linking the bazaar
and jail roads was completed. The overhauling of
Kampong Nanas Road was put in band, but work
on this is progressing all too slowly owing to lack
of shale supplies. The part of the bazaar drain
which fell in was repaired excepting the required
cement work. All round soft-wood timbers were
completely milled by the end of the month, and the
products entered in stock. Planks work out at 22
and 23 cents each.
Agriculture. Mr. Goodall, who has been about
the district for some time, has selected a site at
Tanjong Bluku suitable for the settling of Javanese
padi planters. If this scheme is approved I hope
a start will be made by sending some of the pro-
posed immigrants here this year in time for the next
planting season.
It will be interesting to see if the local Malays and
others will pay any heed to the new methods
about to ba employed, but every effort is being
made to bring to the notice of the local people
the fact that a more modern planting system will
soon be started here, and they have all promised to
learn what they can from it.
I proceeded up river to Tabekang on the 29th
and was still away nt the end of the month.
Trade and Shipping. A certain amount of keen-
ness has now been established regarding the working
of darner, and a number of working permits have
been issued. Only one man, a Malay from Kabong,
is taking up the collection of damar daging how-
ever, but it is thought that as soon as his efforts
appear successful his example will be followed by
local people.
Comparative trade returns are as follows : Imports Export.
March, 1928	...	$33,379	$14,474
March, 1929	...	17,256	26,015
To date 1928	...	85,264	61,725
To date 1929	...	70,960	75,819
17 vessels entered and 18 cleared during the month.
Second Division.
Batang Lupar.
March, 1929.
The Resident, Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner, reports: Bong Jee Kiau of Siniawan appealed against the decision of Lower Court concerning claims made against the estate of Bong Hee Chong, deceased. The minutes of the case were sent to the Supreme Court for an opinion.
_ Kumbut (f.) vs. Hamdan, breach of Order No,
XXVII, 1911. Case adjourned for a ruling from the
Supreme Court.
Kria, Malay, Sebuyow, was sentenced to two
years' R.l. under section No. 50 of the Malay
Undang Undang."
On the 1st His Highness the Rajah and party
left at 9 a,tn. in m.l. Betty, and on reaching Lingga
boarded H.H.M.Y. Maimuna and sailed for Se-
buyow. This is the first time a vessel of this size
has entered the Sebuyow river. Next morning His
Highness left for Kalakii.
On the 7th Mr. G. St. F. Dare, of the Agriculture
Improvement Fund, arrived in the m.l. Mermaid.
His visit is in connection with the cultivation of
coconuts. Mr. Dare left next day for Kuching, via
Lingga and Sebuyow.
At 8 a.m. on the 13th a salute of 14 guns was fired
to announce the end of Bulan Puasa." A great
number of Malays, beaded by Datu Abang Haji
Dulrasid, visited the Fort. Afterwards visits were
paid by myself and other Officers to the houses of
the various Malay chiefs.
On the 15th Mr. G. M. Goodall, of the Agriculture
Improvement Fund, arrived in the m.l. Jean from
Sadong. His visit is in connection with the im-
provement of farming. Next day Mr. G. M. Goodall
visited Penghuiu Renang's house, and talked to
Dyaks about various matters dealing with the plant-
ing of padi, disease, etc.
Mr. R. W. Hurst, of Agriculture Improvement
Fund, returned fr mi Kuching on the 16th and
proceeded to Engkilili.
On the 19th I left in m.l. Anne for Engkilili.
During my visit I examined the soap-palm nursery
which appears to be doing very well, the young
palms being about four inches high. I examined
the new kerosene oil store which the Chinese have
built at the back of the bazaar.
The Chinese have already started building their
new school-house for which the sum of $3,000 has
been subscribed by the various Chinese.
A great number of Lemanak Dyaks were down
selling engkabang nuts, obtaining about $9 per
picul.
Mr. Richardson, of the Borneo Co., Ltd., arrived
on the 21st in connection with starting an agency for
selling kerosene oil. He visited Engkilili, and
returned to Kuching on the 23rd.
Nyambang, Tuai Rumab, reported on the 22nd
that a party ot Dyaks were paddling up river just
beyond Stero when their boat capsized and Sulang
and Engon, husband and wife, were drowned.
Their bodies were recovered next day.
Penghuiu Engkamat, by instructions from His
Highness the Rajah, was called upon to resign, and
in future the Dyaks in the Sblak and Nyabor will
be under the. Penghuluship of Entree and Abang
Mohamat, Native Officer.
A contract to build a Malay Court House was let
to Ahmad for tire sum of $675.25, Government
supplying billian posts and billian attaps. The rest
of the building materials to be supplied by the
contractor.
The Simanggang herd at the end of month
numbered 75 head. Five head were slaughtered for
sale during the month. Dyaks and Malays were
bnsily employed harvesting, but the continual rain
did a good deal of damage to the crops.
Twenty-three Occupation Tickets for pepper and
eighty-six for rubber were issued during the mouth.
Nineteen motor schooners arrived and twenty-two
motor schooners and one bandong cleared the port
during the month.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1929.
81
Lallang, of Long Palai, complained against the restrictions on the collecting of birdsnests. She was told that the regulations made by Mr. W. F. Dick arc to be followed.
1 visited Long Lama and came to the conclusion that it was not necessary to have a clerk permanently stationed there and so he was returned to Baram.
Whilst there I received instructions from the 1 Agricultural Department to shut down the oil palm nursery. I quite agree that the scheme was ill I advised.	Mr. E. O. Bruce arrived on the 5th to take up 1 his duties as District Officer, Miri.
On the 7th Sir Neil Malcolm came ashore on his ' way to British North Borneo.
Mr. Harnack also arrived to obtain details from the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, of the proposed survey of the Sarawak-Brunei boundary.
Visitors to the station during the month included Messrs. A. L. T. Richardson, R. H. W. Hamilton. P. H. Flood-Page, W. Harnack, R. Y. Ames and the Reverend Father Jansen.
Trade is still slack. Jelutong averaged $10 per picul during the month and of this commodity '1116.58 piculs were exported. Of billian attaps 143,000 pieces were exported this month, the price being $110 per laksa f.o.b. Bintulu.
Illipe nuts averaged $8.20 per picnl during the month and of this commodity 1564.95 piculs were exported.
Below are the value of exports and imports, local and foreign, for the month.
1929.	1928.	1927.
Imports $ 35,053.00 $40,583.00	$ 65,171.21
Exports 67,113.00	36,255.15	57,580.71
$102,166.00	$76,838.15 $122,751.92
Baram.
March, 1929.
The Officer-in-charge, Mr. L. K. Morse, re- I ports :
Data Sherif Hamid died on the 2nd instant after a long illness.
The Resident, Fourth Division, together with the ' Treasurer. Fourth Division, visited the station from : the 17th to 22nd instant, going up river us far as j Long Lama.
Many matters in connection with the estimates for the year 1929 were discussed. Arrangements were made for the withdrawal of the Court Writer at Long Lama; it being considered unnecessary to keep one there.
Wan Taha, Native Officer, visited Long Lama once during the month. I visited Long Larna and T.ong Palai from the 28th to 29th instant, making arrangements for the collection of the birdsnests there.
Engltabang crops in the Ulu Baram appears to be excellent.
BINTULU.
March, 1929.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports :
There has been an average amount of work in the Courts this month.
Among the more important cases were Gemok j imprisoned for four months for non-payment of , brian; Bakir and Umpe (f) fined $150 and $75 respectively for incest; Basang and Liong fined $20 and $10 respectively for breaches of the Forest ; Rules.
The main wharf extension was finished during 1 the month and the whole wharf will be open for traffic as from 1st April.
I returned from Miri in s.s. Auby on the 2nd.
On the 9th T proceeded to Tatau in m.l. Joan, ; returning to Bintulu on the 12th.
Owing to the fact that the majority of the Dyaks, ! Punans and Bukitans were either collecting eng kabang or farming there were very few people i down ut Tatau, and consequently, not very many ' cases and none of importance.
On the first night of my stay at Tatau there was a very severe electrical storm and a kerosene oil i store belonging to Chop 8nng Guan was struck bv lightnini and set alight. Fortunately the Chinese acted with great prompitude, and the blaze was soon extinguished. Had the store not been isolated from the bazaar there might have been serious damage done.
While at Tatau ,a visit was paid to the Sarawak i Oilfields diamond drill camp at Sungei Ateng, : where Mr. G. McFadzean was in charge of operations.
Fifth Division.
March, 1929.
Limbang.
The Resident, Mr. F. H. Kortright, reports:
There were liiree chalges of buffalo stealing . brought before the Court, which resulted in five persons being c.uvicted. Three of these were youths aged about 16, who subsequently confessed to having stolen and disposed of no less' than four annuals in the last two months.
Hari Kaya was observed as a public holiday and a salute of 14 guns was fired in the morning.
The Deputy and Assistant Conservator of Forests Messrs. T. Corson and D. 8. McLeod, visited the Division and inspected all work of their Department.
1 visited Lawns on the 24th and attended to several matters in connection with the station routine. There was no Court work of anv importance awaiting settlement so I returned again mi the 26th.
I went to Irasan in the Mernpok river, and was shewn round the now garden which is being opened up by the enterprise of Messrs. Cook and Taylor. A vast amount of work has been done during the past three months, and to date one hundred acres have been cleared and drained and seven thousand coconuts planted in a nursery. A big ares is fenced for pig breeding, and an oil mill is in course of erection.
I paid a short visit to Brnnei.
Work on the bridges and culverts mi the Pnmierniin road still progressed and the road is now open for seven miles from the station.
Tilley lamps suspended from standards made from 3" pipe were elected along the bazaur road and give very satisfactory illumination.
The rainfall amounted' to 8'41-incbes.
Trade and shipping returns shew as under:	Buffaloes shipped to Kuching ... 20 head.
Exports.	imports.
Foreign	...	$15,651	$16,489
Coasting	...	5,733	6,105
$21,384	$22,594
Shipping
S.S. Auby from Singapore via Kuching	...	J	trip
S.S. Sulang from Kuching viA Ports	...	2	trips
S.S. Sulong from Lawns ...	...	y	trip
S.L Kwong Yick from Labuan vid Brunei	...	2	trips
M.L. Adele from Labuan Via Brunei ... 1 trip
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE, MAY 1, 1929.
81
Lallang, of Long Palai, complained against the restrictions on the collecting of birdsnests. She was told that the regulations made by Mr. W. F. Dick are to be followed.
1 visited Long Lama and came to the conclusion that it was not necessary to have a clerk permanently stationed there and so he was returned to Baram.
Whilst there I received instructions from the Agricultural Department to shut down the oil palm nursery. I quite agree that the scheme was ill advised.
Mr. E. 0. Bruce arrived on the 5th to take up his duties as District Officer, Miri.
On the 7th Sir Neil Malcolm came ashore on his way to British North Borneo.
Mr. Harnack also arrived to obtain details from the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, of the proposed survey of the Sarawak-Brunei boundary.
Baram.
March, 1929.
The Officer-in-charge, Mr. L. K. Morse, re-
ports :
Datu Sherif Hamid died on the 2nd instant
after a long illness.
The Resident, Fourth Division, together with the
Treasurer, Fourth Division, visited the station from
the 17th to 22nd instant, going up river as far as
Long Lams.
Many matters in connection with the estimates
for the year 1929 were discussed. Arrangements
were made for the withdrawal of the Court Writer
at Long Lama, it being considered unnecessary to
keep one there.
Wan Taha, Native Officer, visited Long Lama
once during the month. 1 visited Long Lama and
Long Palai from the 28th to 29th instant, making
arrangements for the collection of the birdsnests
there.
Engkabang crops in the Ulu Baram appears to
be excellent.
BINTULU.
March, 1929.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman,
reports :
There has been an average amount of work in the
Courts this month.
Among the more important cases were Gemok
imprisoned for four months for non-payment of
brian; Bakir and Umpe (f) fined $150 and $75
respectively for incest; Basang and Liong fined
$20 and $10 respectively for breaches of the Forest
Rules.
The main wharf extension was finished during
the month and the whole wharf will be open for
traffic as from 1st April.
I returned from Miri in s.s. Anby on the 2nd.
On the 9th I proceeded to Tatau in m.l. Joan,
returning to Bintulu on the 12th.
Owing to the fact that the majority of the Dyaks,
Punans and Bukitans were either collecting eng
kabang or farming there were very few people
down at Tatau, and consequently not very many
cases and none of importance.
On the first night of my stay at Tatau there was
a very severe electrical storm and a kerosene oil
store belonging to Chop Sang Guan was struck by
lightning and set alight. Fortunately the Chinese
acted with great prompitude. and the blaze was soon extinguished. Had the store not been isolated
from the bazaar there might have been serious
damage done.
While at Tatau a visit was paid to the Sarawak Oilfields diamond drill camp at Sungei Ateng, where Mr. G. McFadzean was in charge of operations.
Visitors to the station during the month included Messrs. A. L. T. Richardson, R. H. W. Hamilton. P. H. Flood-Page, W. Harnack, R. Y. Ames and the Reverend Father Jansen.
Trade is still slack. Jelutong averaged $10 per picul during the month and of thia commodity 3116.58 piculs were - exported. Of billian attaps 143,000 pieces were exported this month, the price being SI 10 per laksa f.o.b. Bintulu.
Illipe nuts averaged $8.20 per picul during the month and of this commodity 1564.95 piculs were exported.
Below are the value of exports and imports, local and foreign, for the month.
1929.	1928.
Imparts $ 35.053 00 $40,583.00
1927.
$ 65,171.21
57,580.71
Exports 67,113.00
36,255.15
$102,166.00
$76,838.15
$122,751.92
Fifth Division.
March, 1929.
Limbang.
The Resident, Mi. F. H. Kortright, reports:
There were, three charges of buffalo stealing
brought night before the Court, which resulted in five
persons being convicted. Three of these were
youths aged about 16, who subsequently confessed
to bavii g stolen and disposed of no less than four
animals in the last two mouths.
Hari Kava was observed as a public holiday and
a salute of 14 guns was fired in the morning.
The Deputy and Assistant Conservator of Forests,
i Messis. T. Corson and D. S. McLeod, visited the
Division and inspected all work .of their Department.
1 visited Lawas on the 24th and attended to
several matters in connection with the station
routine There was no Court work of any im-
portance s waiting settlement so I returned again
on the 26th.
I went to Irasan in the Merapok river, and was
shewn round the new garden which is being opened
up by the enterprise of Messrs. Cook and Iaylor.
A vast amount of work has been done during the
past three months, and to date, one hundred acres
have been denied and drained and seven thousand
i coconuts planted in a nursery. A big area is fenced
i for pig breeding, and an oil mill is in course of erection.
I paid a short visit, to Brunei.
Work on the bridges and culverts mi the
I Pnndernan road still progressed and the road is
now open for seven miles from the station.
Tilley lumps suspended from standards made from
3" pipe were erected along the bazaar road and give
very satisfactory illumination.
The rainfall amounted to 8'41 inches.
Trade and shipping returns shew as under:
Buffuloes shipped to hitching
Foreign Coasting
Exports.
$15,651
5,733
$21,384
Shipping
20 bead.
Imports.
$16,489
6,105
$22,594
S.S. Auby from Singapore via	Kuching	...	1	trip
S.S. Sulong	from Kuching via	Ports	...	S	trips
S.S. Sulong	from Lawas	...	...	1	trip
S.L Kwong	Tick from Labuan vii Brunei	...	3	trips
M.L. Adsle from Labuan viii Brunei ... 1 trip
