The Sarawak Gazette
MONDAY, DECEMBER 1st, 1930.
Marriage. MB. REGINALD D. ST. JOHN HORTON, Sarawak Civil Service, was married on 3rd October, at St. Patrick's, Soho Square, W., to Catherine Marian, only daughter of Mr. J. Gillies, of Inverness.
Local and Personal.
November.
Details of special facilities for the despatch of Christmas letter telegrams conveying the season's greetings are notified in the Sarawak Government Gazette of 17th November.
We understand that certain passengers to Singapore were recently, interrogated at the Police Court there as to the reasons why they landed without passports. Prospective travellers should note that the Straits Settlements Passport Ordinance of 1920 definitely lays down that no person coming from anywhere outside the Malay Peninsula shall enter the Colony unless he produces a valid passport or certificate of nationality.
It is also stipulated that unless the word "France" is specifically mentioned on page 4 of the passport it is necessary for an endorsement to be applied for in England if a person desires to travel across France on the journey from England.
We read that Mr. R. D. St. J. Horton, now on leave, was married in London on 3rd October. We offer our best wishes and hope to see them both in Sarawak next February.
A large congregation at St. Saviour's, Walton Street, London, on September 23rd, witnessed the wedding of Miss Elyne Frances Tufnell, a niece of the Earl of Mar and Kellie and the daughter of Lady Frances Tufnell, and Mr. Frank Hugh Pollard, of the Sarawak Civil Service, younger son of the late Inspector-General E. R. H. Pollard, R.N.
The bride, who was given away by her brother, Mr. Henry Tufnell, wore an attractive gown of deep cream-coloured satin beaute, fashioned with a long-flounced skirt, decorated with insertions of Brussels lace. Her long fan-shaped train of old Brussels lace-fell from the shoulders. Brussels lace also formed the veil. A bouquet of white roses was carried.
Three children were in attendance. After the ceremony, Lady Frances Tufnell held a. reception, and later Mr. and Mrs. Frederic Pollard left for their honeymoon in Norfolk. The guests included the Ranee of Sarawak and Miss Brooke.—Malaya Tribune.
We extend a hearty welcome to Mrs. F. H. Pollard, who arrived in Sarawak for the first time on 3rd November, together with her husband, who has resumed his duties as Acting District Officer, Baram.
To those readers of an economical frame of mind, the Kuching Market Price List, issued by the Municipal Department and published in this issue, should be of interest, especially if compared with the prices ruling twelve months ago. Practically everything, with the exception of Fish, Meat and Rice, has been very considerably reduced in price.
The building in Rodway Road recently owned by Messrs. McDougall & Robertson, Ltd., has been purchased by Government. Renamed the Grange Hospital, it has been completely refitted with furniture and modern sanitary arrangements. It was opened on the 19th November for use as a European Hospital to be run on similar lines as the old Grange, Miss I. C. Wallace, the Matron in charge, residing on the premises.
The main street and Government bungalows at Sarikei were, successfully illuminated by electric light for the first time on the night of the 13th October.
A movement of great interest to Malayans has been inaugurated by Mr. Elmore Jayetilleke, a Sinhalese and former District Judge in Ceylon, who has started in business together with a Mrs. Macnaughton to run hotels specially for visitors to London from the tropics. Mrs. Macnaughton has herself been manageress of a big guest-house at 55,
Highbury Hill, Finsbury Park, and intend to make this establishment the nucleus of a "chain" of such guest-houses in London, so that if a visitor should not happen to like Highbury, he will only have to order the management's car and drive off to the guesthouse at, say, Ealing! Both Europeans and Asiatics will be welcomed. The scheme has been started at the special request of a number of planters.
A large rubber smoke-house belonging to Chop Eng Hin in Ban Hock Road caught fire about 9 p.m. on November 19th. The building was gutted and, but for the prompt action of the Fire Brigade, a serious conflagration would have spread amongst the dwelling-houses in the vicinity.
We understand that one or two inquisitive spectators managed to extricate themselves from neighbouring pig ponds, ditches and barbed wire entanglements without injury, while the semaphore exhibition of a stalwart P.C. on point duty at the cross-roads was rudely interrupted by the headlights of a well-known owner driver. Luckily the car was small enough to enable the half blinded acrobat to take the bonnet in one leap.
We understand that the proposed Census (1931) will probably be postponed until the following year.
We hear the Island Trading Company is stopping the manufacture of Cutch at Selalang for a period of six months.
As an experiment, His Highness the Tuan Muda is taking home with him to Europe six ripe durians enveloped in latex.
Apropos of this His Highness informs us that he was told by a native that Porcupines are said to bury durians after first coating them with clay, and they (the durians!) have been dug up as long as a year later as fresh as when buried.
It is suggested that Porcupines might be instructed to refrain in future from either coating them with clay or digging them up again.
Further, what a boom to mankind if Porcupines would only treat skunks in the same way.
Our readers are reminded that daylight saving ceases at midnight December 13th/ 14th, and clocks should therefore be put back twenty minutes.
Departure of His Highness the Tuan Muda.
FAREWEL DINNER AND DANCE AT THE RESIDENCY.
An "At Home" was given by Mr. J. C. Swayne, Acting Chief Secretary, at the Residency on Saturday, the 22nd. His Highness the Tuan Muda and the Dayang Anne were the guests of honour. A representative gathering of the European com-munity was present, and a very enjoyable evening spent with dancing and cards as the amusements. The full band of the Sarawak Rangers rendered an excellent programme of music. Soon after midnight the toast of His Highness and the Dayang Anne was honoured by all present who bid the travellers bon voyage, after which His Highness and the Dayang Anne proceeded straight on board the s.s. Vyner Brooke which sailed at day break for Singapore.
Death of Mr. Lau Qui Lock.
By the death of Mr. Lau Qui Lock at his residence in Crookshank Road on the 20th November, 1930, the Government lost one of its oldest and most faithful servants. Born in Sarawak fifty-six years ago he joined the service in 1903 as a clerk in the Public Works Department. He was transferred to the Municipal Department in 1914 and was still on the staff of that department on the day of his death.
His unfailing courtesy and upright character were appreciated by all who came in touch with him, while his efficiency and knowledge of the Municipality were of great utility to the Govemment.
To his wife and relations we extend our sympathy.
An Apology.
Owing to unforeseen circumstances the Editor of the Gazette was absent from Kuching during almost the whole (i th) month. As a result of this, several regular features have had to be omitted from this issue which, it is hoped, will make their appearance again in the January number.
Indeed, had it not been for the efforts of a volunteer editor who threw himself nobly into the breach and made up the paper as it now stands in the course of a very few days, it seems probable that no Gazette would have appeared at all. "A merciful release! "—we hear the critics grunt; Possibly. But all the same the anonymous editor deserves our thanks, and our readers deserve this apology for the incomplete appearance of the paper to which they subscribe.
Atmosphere and Association of Words.
J. C. SQUIBB, IN The Listener.
Listen to this: a poem, in the pre-Raphaelite manner (with a slight Shakespearean cross) in which the names of diseases are used for knights, ladies and flowers. If you do not realize from this poem (1) that some words are more musical than others, and 2 that association obstructs as it also assists our enjoyment of words, this resounding passage of blank verse will have been written in vain.
The Mirage.
The October issue of the Mirage is now out and is, as usual, packed with good things. Perhaps the most notable feature is the new series of "Personal Recollections' which are outstandingly good and which well bear out the wisdom of Mr. Somerset Maugham's suggestion, which, we believe, first brought the idea into being. There is also a story by Mr. A. H. Noble, which is deserving of praise, and under the pseudonym of "Mons 1914," a contributor has written an article on modern youth which should give some of our exquisites a good deal to think about; it is a particularly lively flea for exquisite ears.
There are photographs—incidentally, much better reproduced than formerly—of Sir Cecil Clementi's visit to Miri and of the Sports meeting on H. H. the Rajah's birthday, and an article entitled "The Blowpipe" by the late Dr. Charles Hose is illustrated by photographs describing the whole process of blowpipe-making,—to those of us who have read Dr. Hose's books these will no doubt be familiar. "For the rest, it is. enough to say that the literary fare provided designed to suit every taste and attains its object.
Armistice Day in Kuching.
EX-SERVICE MEN'S DINNER HELD IN THE RESIDENCY.
This day was observed in Kuching as an official holiday as in previous years, and all Government Offices were closed. Poppies were sold by a number of ladies, including the Dayang Anne, on Monday 10th, owing to the 11th being a holiday, and Europeans, Chinese and others very nobly contributed their quota to this deserving Fund.
At 11 o'clock a gun from the Fort gave notice of the two minutes' silence, on the conclusion of which, buglers of the Sarawak Rangers, stationed on the flat roof of the Pavilion, sounded The Last Post
In the evening a very successful ex-Service men's dinner was held in the Residency, by the kind permission of the Acting Chief Secretary, Mr J. C. Swayne, when 27 ex-Service men of whom the majority saw active service during the Great War, assembled together in commemoration of the Great Day. His Highness the Tuan Muda, who is himself an ex-Service man, attended.
In addition to ex-Service men who actually saw active service or who served their country during the Great War, there was a sprinkling of the younger generation who, although too young to serve during the War, served in one of His Majesty's Forces after the War, and their presence was welcomed. They congregated at the Residency at 8 pm; punctually when the first Officers' Dinner Call was blown by the buglers of the Sarawak Rangers; from 8 p.m. to 8 30 the Regimental Marches of the representatives of the various regiments present, were played—and extraordinarily well too—by the Sarawak Rangers Band. At 8 30 or thereabouts all adjourned to dinner. During dinner some selections were played by the Band
The usual toasts were honoured, including the Rajah's, the King's, and the toast to Fallen Com-rades, to the accompaniment of the Sarawak Anthem, the National Anthem, and the Last Post. Although no speeches were arranged or expected, Mr. D. E. Calver made a short speech, thanking the President of the Sarawak Kuching Branch of the British Legion, Mr. P. H. Flood-Page, and the Honorary Secretary, Mr F. O. Blagg, who, together with Mr. A.W.G. Gibson and Mr. W.L.P Sochon, were responsible for all the arrangements in connection with the dinner, and also Mr. J. C. Swayne for the use of the Residency.
After dinner the band played most of the old marching songs and other old English ditties which were very lustily sung by everyone present, but the crown of the evening for the lead in the vocal music must undoubtedly be given to Mr. B.W. Talbot, who not only seemed to remember all the words, but whose voice has not been permanently impaired by Prussian gas or other vile atrocities Now and then Mr. C.S. Griffiths must have thought he was back at his tunnelling, for he came in very lustily at times when he saw daylight ahead or the junction of one trench with another, or, in plain English, knew the words, and almost—no one could completely—drowned the loud boom of our vocal leader, Mr. B.W. Talbot. Others also contributed contributions, and did it well. This community singing, however, was a great success, and seemed to be much appreciated by His Highness the Tuan Muda.
The party broke up at about 12.30 a.m. or soon after, and all who attended agreed that it was a very successful evening, in fact the best ex-Service dinner they had had in Sarawak,
Before leaving the account of the dinner perhaps it should be mentioned that the health of the ladies who had helped to decorate the table so attractively, was also drunk by all, in appreciation of their services and gifts. The toast was to Mrs. Blagg and Miss Sheila Edmett who decorate the table, and Mrs. MacDonald who very kindly gave a wonderful assortment of roses, fresh that morning from their garden at Sungei Tengah.
In addition to the ex-Services dinner there was a dinner which took place in their respective Messes for Sikhs and Sepoys who served in the Great War. This, as in former years, was rendered possible by donations from European residents in Kuching, who kindly contributed towards it.
Greater pains were taken this year for the circulation of poppies, which travelled as far afield as Limbang, Lawas and Bintulu, in addition to Sibu, and the proceeds front the sale of the poppies is particularly good, and constitutes a fresh record. The total actual takings last year — which was a record—were $ 1,103.80, which, after deducting loss on exchange and a few overhead charges and a few bad coins, meant that the British Legion Headquarters in London, received $1,08282 for which they were very grateful. But this year, up to the time of going to Press, about $1,626.26, has already been collected or promised, and there is more to come.
Perhaps it should be mentioned here that Miri have their own branch of the British Legion and have their own collection for Poppy Day.
For this marvellous response we have partly to thank the ladies of Kuching, and probably Sibu too, who were largely responsible for the amount collected. The ladies who collected so energetically in Kuching, and who systematically worked in pairs, were the Dayang Anne and Mrs. Baird; Mrs. Blagg and Miss Sheila Edmett; Miss Tait and Mrs. Edwards; Mrs. Were and Miss Street; and Mrs. S. M. Tan and Mrs. A.F. Law who, between them, collected $887.06.
There are some people—but luckily not many —who wonder why they are asked to contribute annually to this worthy Fund since it is now twelve years since hostilities ceased, but they would surely change their views if only they would stop to reflect, that altogether over 7,225,000 men perished during the War on both sides, of which there were about 1,090,000 from the British Empire alone; in addition there were over 20,690,000 wounded, of which over 2,400,000 were men from the British Empire, with the result that there must be tens of thousands of British and British Empire families from whom the father has given his life for his country, leaving a widow and children behind him destitute except for the benevolence of those who are alive to day.
In addition to that, in thousands of cases the men came back maimed and unable to earn money for themselves and their wives and families. Others returned to find they had lost their jobs because C 3 men and girls had stepped into the gaps in the civil employment ranks.
No; Armistice Day may not be a day for rejoicings, but rather a day of thanksgiving and remembrance, a reminder and a warning to the younger and coming generations of the futility and horror of modern warfare, and an indication that future economic and national and other troubles, due partly to desire to find outlets for their national surplus of humanity and trade, can better be gained by peaceful international arbitration than by bloodshed.
"If ye break faith with us who die we shall not sleep, though poppies grow in Flanders Fields."
Beads from Sarawak.
Through the kindness of H. H. the Ranee Margaret of Sarawak and of Captain Bertram Brooke, I have been enabled to examine a large number of the highly-prized beads which are collected and hoarded by the natives of Sarawak, more particularly by the Kenyahs and Kayaks.
A few of the simpler forms of these beads are similar to the ones found in the deserted village site of Kuala Selinsing in the Federated Malay States, and to those found in South India, but the majority are very difficult to place.
A few of the specimens show such great simila-rity to early types found in Europe that I think they are early European beads which have travelled to Sarawak. Others appear to be copies of European beads, but made in a different manner, whilst a few others are closely allied to the antique glass beads found in a small area in Southern Formosa.
It has been suggested that these beads are of Chinese, or Japanese origin. As regards the former country this seems to be very improbable, as the rare specimens of Chinese glass which are more than a couple of centuries old have a very high specific gravity. The majority of the Sarawak beads have a very low specific gravity and, although some of them have a high one, they have not nearly such a high one as the early Chinese beads.
As regards Japan as a possible country of origin, I have no evidence; but if such large numbers of these elaborate beads came from there, one would have expected to find them also amongst the ojime on the medicine case strings.
Amongst the beads that I believe to be early is a white bead with a purple manganese band round it. This is so strikingly like the little white bottles with purple decorations found in various parts of South Italy and the Eastern Mediterranean which are dated to the fourth and third centuries B.C., that I think it is probably of the same date.
Again, a cylinder bead, with black base and blue and red zones, is very similar to La Tine beads from Corsica, sometimes dated to the third and second centuries B.C. and sometimes earlier.
I think this bead may date from that period.
A composite eye bead is made of ernes in which each has an eye with a yellow centre, a red outer ring, and then a layer with about 17 yellow tubes in a green base. These canes are fused together to make the bead. Beads of different shapes but made of identical canes, even to the number of tubes in the green base, come from Cumae, and are thought to date to perhaps as recently as the second century A.D.
Evidence, however, is now available to show that canes of this type were made at least five hundred years earlier, so that these three types of early beads might have been imported together.
Another fact which lends probability to the theory that some of these beads were imported at an early date, is that beads of undoubted Greek origin, which date to about the fifth century B.C., are now being found in China, and beads believed to be Roman are found in early graves in Korea.
The chevron bead, with red and white bands on a blue base, is of exceptional interest. This is evidently a copy of the cane chevron beads found in so many parts of Europe, Africa and the Near East. The cane chevron bead is made from an elaborate cane, with a radiating pattern in it, so arranged, that when the cane is chamfered at the ends, or is ground spherical it forms a series of chevrons. In these Sarawak beads a very similar effect is got by taking a blue base with a small white centre and then elaborately reproducing the red and white chevrons by applying threads of red and white glass. In some cases this is so skilfully done that a casual observer could easily mistake it for a cane chevron bead. On one necklace there were six beads like the one illustrated and several similar beads as well as number of smaller ones were bn other necklaces examined:
It seems obvious that these are copied from European beads, but there is no evidence of their place of origin. Probably many, if not most, of the other elaborate beads were made in the same place, but where? and when? The majority of the beads show considerable signs of corrosion when examined critically, so I judge they are of considerable age. The makers of these beads had very considerable skill of a kind that one would not expect to find amongst the natives of the archipelago. If made elsewhere why is there no sign of them in other places? Many varieties of Indian beads are known, but none of them are like the elaborate beads here. Then nothing similar is found amongst the Venetian beads, whilst we know that the true cane chevron bead was made in the islands near Venice from a very early date, probably before 900 A.D., and has been made there ever since.
An elaborate eye bead shows the method by which it was made, rather plainly. It is entirely built up from canes. Owing to the insufficient heating the joints have not completely fused and show clearly.
Some of the beads have very elaborate patterns, such as the swirled bead which is very suggestive of Roman work but probably a later copy.
There are several elaborate chequer beads. In these the canes from which the bead was finally made were formed by fusing together more than a hundred small square section canes. The compound cane thus formed was broken up into short pieces which were fused together so as to form a bead. By some curious manipulation the pattern showing inside the perforation is nearly as good as that outside. This can be seen in the drawing of a broken bead.
The purple-eye bead with white eyes is made by cutting off two pieces of eye cane and then binding them together round a wire, possibly they were bent round the wire before they were cut off. The white tubular part of the the cane then shows as bands oh one part of the surface and as eyes an another part, the effect being rather like pieces of macaroni.
The beads illustrated are good examples of folded beads, the pattern having been arranged by "joining canes together and bending them whilst in the flat, and then the piece of' glass whilst plastic has been folded round a wire and the ends butted and fused together.
The mosaic cylinder bead is a well-known Roman type, but whether this is a Roman bead or a copy is difficult to say.
The zone bead and a similar kind with a red base are extremely like the trade beads sent to Africa about a century ago. These trade beads were often copies from beads already valued by various natives, and it is impossible to say with absolute certainty whether these are trade beads or the beads that the trade beads were copied from, but probably they are the former.
A type of bead similar to the Formosan has a blue base. The white band is wound round the blue whilst both are partially plastic and then by means of a wire the pattern is drawn or combed into the required shape.
Again the crumb bead is very similar to the early beads of the Mediterranean area, but I think it is probably a relatively modern copy.
After the imitation cane chevrons perhaps the most distinctive beads are the "rosette" beads. These are made in many varieties, black, green, dark blue, light blue, yellow, and almost colourless glass being used to make the base, whilst many varieties of thread and combination of rosettes are found. These are of a type which the makers have originated bn their own. I know of no other beads which are at all the same. The idea of making a rosette or eye with a thread consisting of two coloured glasses twisted together so as to make spirals is very old, and was used considerably in Egypt during the eighteenth Dynasty, but the results were quite different from these. Again, in Ireland a large number of beads appear with various designs made with spiral threads. These are generally dated to about 200 B.C., but the results are not like the specimens from Sarawak. Some of the rosette beads are very highly prized by the natives, as much as fifteen pounds being given for a good specimen.
A peculiar type of eye bead of which there were several in the collection is shown. Such beads were sent out in great quantities from England to Africa about 80 years ago for the palm oil trade. They were doubtless also sent to other countries and possibly more recently.
Amongst the collection there were a number of zone beads with a black base and a white zone; some of these are approximately spherical, others are barrel shaped. The two spherical beads, although, almost identical in appearance, are made of completely different kinds of glass, and I expect that there are of different dates, one being early and made from a non-lead glass, whilst the second is a later copy in a fairly heavy lead glass. The same applies to the two barrel-shaped beads. One of these spherical beads is indistinguishable from a bead on a Ptolemaic, or early Roman necklace in the British Museum.
The twisted square beads in manganese glass is a type of bead very common in Roman times and although I suspect that they have also been made much more recently I have no actual proof.
Some of the beads with coloured zones or spirals such as the ones already referred to seem very early, Others show various degrees of technical skill and probably belong to different periods. A spiral variety is apparently identical to a bead from Africa supposed to be an early trade bead. Mr. Ivor Evans (‘‘Journal of the Federated Malay States Museums," Vol- XV, p. 29) describes similar beads as having been discovered in a site at Santubong off the coast of Sarawak. According to Messrs. Everett and Hewitt this site contains remains belonging to two periods, one being 600 to 900 A.D., and the other 1660 to 1850 A.D.
Another series of beads are those decorated with longitudinal stripes. Some have a black base and white stripe. Others have black or blue bases with coloured stripes, some of these are segmented or double. It is very interesting to note that a bead very similar to this last but not double has been found at Kuala Selinsing, Malaysia, where it is supposed to date betwee then Sixth and ninth centuries A D
Amongst the beads decorated with spots or eyes is a black variety with spots made by impressing a bent up thread of two colours. This is quite a different method employed in making stratified eyes where spots of different coloured glasses are superimposed In some cases these impressed threads are carelessly inserted so that it can easily be seen how they are made, as in the one illustra-ted. In other cases the ends are so neatly joined that it is extremely difficult to be certain how they were made. These beads are called Kelam Buang, or bear beads, and are sought after by the natives and worn oh the girdles of girls.
Amongst the types of rosette beads not yet mentioned is a rather frequently found one with a yellow base and three rosettes, of varying colours whilst in between each rosette is a row of three black spots.
Another case of copying an old model occurs in some small eye beads with three large white eyes on which are yellow centres with five green spots round it. These beads, which I believe to be relatively modern, are evidently inspired by a type which started in Greek times. Mr. Ivor Evans states that five of these beads have been discovered at Santubong.
One of the most frequent types of bead are some small short cylinder beads of blue and yellow glass. These are almost disc beads the diameter being about two-and-a-half times the length. They are highly prized by the natives and are very difficult to place as they do not seem to be so old as the Malay beads. I should think that they were probably made by the manufacturers of the elaborate eye beads.
Among the beads which are not of glass there are a few of shell which are not very distinctive and might be of any period, and one granulated silver bead which, whilst not unlike the early Greek beads might be of any period. The stone beads also are not very numerous. A cylindrical carnelian with many small facets is a rough piece of work and probably local, another approximately spherical is of an unusually dark red. Amongst the onyx are two spherical beads very well made which look modern except that the perforation which is bored from one side has broken out a considerable amount when it reached the further side. There are also some very small onyx cylinders that look modern. One agate bead is of considerable interest as it closely resembles a series of agate beads found in many parts of Europe and Africa, and of which some seem to have a very early date.
The place of origin of the third group, and their date, are extremely difficult to find. A few, but only a few, agree with the beads found in Formosa. From the similarity of the chevron beads to the cane chevron beads of Europe and Africa, it seems certain that they were made in Europe or copied from European models, if made in Europe why do we not find them in European countries? So far as I know they are unknown there. The rosette beads also are a group by themselves and so attractive in appearance that it seems inconceivable that they should not be found in Europe if originally made there. China has been suggested as a possible source, but I think this improbable as, in addition to the fact that no specimens have been found there, the glass does not, appear similar to the only specimens of early Chinese glass that I have had an opportunity of testing. I hope that the publication of this paper will bring forward further evidence which will settle this question.—Horace C. Beck—From "Man."
The Reason why Alligators are Afraid to eat Dyaks.
A STORY OF MOUNT PENINJAUH By REV. W. CHALMERS.
"One upon a time, a Dyak belonging to the Peninjauh village was returning home after his day's labours, and, as he wended his way up the steep ascent which leads to the houses, what was his astonishment to find himself preceded by a large and comfortable looking male alligator ‘Where are you off to? said the Dyak to the 'buai' alligator—he was not at all afraid, for in case the ‘buai' made himself disagreeable, he had his sword, and had, moreover, an advantage in the steep rocky ascent, to which the beast's legs were plainly unaccustomed. ‘I am merely taking a walk for my amusement.' ‘Why not pay our village a visit?' asked the Dyak; ‘we shall be glad to see you' (He thought it best to be civil, at all events.) ‘Most happy,' answered ‘buai;' so on they jogged together—bathed together at ‘the spout,' at the entrance to the village—and ‘buai' became the Dyak's guest. He made himself so agreeable to the family, and related so many wonderful stories about himself, what he had done, and especially what he could do, that the credulous Dyak thought it would certainly be no bad ‘spec' to offer him his daughter in marriage. He did so, and ‘buai' became his son in-law. Be it here observed, that it is customary among the Dyaks, when a youth marries a girl, for him to enter his father-in-law's family, who, after supplying necessaries, enjoys the profit of his son-in-law's labours. The Dyak, however, soon had cause to repent of his bargain. Not one stroke of work, not even in the way of fishing, would ‘buai' do, and when remonstrated with, he merely opened his mouth, showed his teeth, and grinned in a threatening manner. All day long did he lie basking in the sun, and at mealtimes (O ye store-boxes of padi !) how he did eat ! The Dyak's treasured hoards of corn, laid up against a rainy day, were soon devoured utterly, and then ‘buai' began to run in debt for rice with the neighbours, exacting forced loans by significant displays of his saw-like grinders, to the shame and disgrace of his father in-law and all the family. (It is one of the greatest of shame among the Dyaks to be in debt.) At last matters got so desperate, that one day they all laid wait for 'buai,' caught him unawares, and hacked him to pieces. The news of their brother's shameful conduct and merited punishment soon reached the ears of alligator' ‘society,' and so deep a feeling of ignominy was felt thereat, that to this day an alligator will never stay to look a Dyak in the face—much less will he presume to eat him."
A rival historian of the same tribe, however, affirms that the following is the correct account of the matter:-
"In the olden time a certain Peninjauh. Dyak was walking by the side of the Sarawak river, when he saw an alligator lying on a mudbank, apparently in great distress, and evidently not shedding ‘crocodile tears.' ‘What news?' ‘What is the matter with you ?' asked the Dyak. ‘O my poor brother ! boo-oo-oo-oo.' ‘What is the matter with your brother ? '
" ‘He is lying at the point of death, and no medicine that we alligators have is of any use to save him. Oh, my friend, do you know medicine. ?
"‘A little,'replied the Dyak.	"‘O do come and cure him'
"‘You alligators live in the water, and how am I brave enough to venture down to your house —I, who cannot swim a stroke?'
"‘O, I will manage that.'
"‘But then consider the trouble,' it was objected.
"‘Only come and see the treasures of our house gold and silver, gongs and jars, mats and weapons; and, if you doctor my brother success-fully, you shall have your pick-we will make you the richest man in Peninjauh—only come.'
"Vanquished by these lavish promises, down went the Dyak, on the alligator's back, to the alligator's house, which was built in a hole of the rock on which Belidah Fort now stands. The house was decent and comfortable enough, there was no lack of necessaries, but there was, at the same time, no appearance of wealth. ‘The valuables are no doubt stowed away in the garret,' thought the Dyak. The sick beast was stretched on his back in the midst of the floor,—almost at his last gasp. The Dyak bade him open his mouth; he did so; down went the Dyak's hand into his gulf of a gullet, and up he brought a leg of a Malay, still covered with portions of a very ditty pair of trousers, half-strangling the sick alligator in his determined efforts to effect a clearance. The cure was complete; the thanks of the alligator-family were profuse, but no mention was made of tangible reward to the expectant and impatient doctor; at length he ventured to mention that he would like to see the riches of which he had heard so promising an account, and was gruffly told that they did not exist, and that, instead of asking for anything, he ought to be thankful that he was not eaten for supper. He was then bidden mount the back of his deceiving guide, who set him ashore, angry, wet, frightened, and dirty, then laughed in his face, and finally dived off. From that time to this, however, alligators always run away when they see a Dyak, lest the debt then incurred should be demanded, and a very dirty action of their pro-genitors be thus unpleasantly forced-upon their recollection."
Sarawak Library.
Presented by Mr. Bates ‘‘Poor Relations" ... Compton Mackenzie F 12‘20c —PiircfiasedbyComtnittee:— "Mistress of Men" ... F. A. Steele F 1785a First Division News.
October, 1930. .
Extracts from tho First Divisional Reports for October, 1930, by Mr. P. M. Adams, Acting Resident:—	/	.
Resident's Court.—There were seventeen cases before the Court during the month, of which six were criminal and eleven civil. Of the six criminal cases, five resulted in convictions and one in an. acquittal.
General.—I arrived from Mukah on the 19th to take over the First Division from Mr. Swayne on his appointment as Acting Chief Secretary. Mr. Murray-Scott came down from Bau to discuss the proposed census. Officials from Secretary Native Affairs were sent to Sebayor and Samarahan districts to inquire into the alleged padi shortage and general poor condition of the Dyaks in that district. They were still away at the end of the month.
DISTRICT OFFICE. October, 1930.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. W.S.B. Buck, reports:— Magistrate's Court.—Eighty-eight cases were heard, fifteen of which were criminal and seventy- three civil.
District Court.—Thirty-one cases were heard, all civil.	Police Court.—Twenty-one summary cases were brought before the Court. All resulted in convictions. $78 was paid in fines. In addition 104 judgment summons cases were dealt with during the month.Travelling-—Batu Kawa was visited three times during the month, once in company with the Acting Superintendent of Government Stores, Mr. C.J.Cook, and twice with the Acting Commissioner of Police, Mr. L.N. Reynolds. On the last occasion the station was in an unsatisfactory condition and the Capitan China was called up and warned. On 7th instant a trip was made to Kampong Munggu Babi in order to elect a new Orang Kaya. Manggoi anak Orang Kaya Bar was almost unanimously elected and his appointment now awaits confirmation.
I returned the following day to Kuching after going to the 38th mile Simanggang Road to obtain information likely to be useful in the forthcoming census.
Coroner's Inquests.—On the fifteenth a juvenile Chinese male was reported as having died onboard the m. s. Hong Soon Huat on the way down to hospital from Simanggang. Death being certified due to natural causes, a burial certificate was issued.
An inquest was held on the body of a Javanese coolie of Sungei Tengah Estates and a verdict of death from misadventure entered.
General.—At the present time foreign passports and border passes are dealt with by this, office for persons wishing to leave the State; The Police Department, however, check and indorse all incoming passports, and I should like to suggest that the entire control of passport work be taken over by that department. This would greatly facilitate the arrest of absconding debtors and other persons wanted by the police. As things are at present these persons can obtain a passport in this office— of which the police have no knowledge—and can go straight on board any vessel leaving the State.
LAND OFFICE. October, 1930.
The Land Officer, Mr. A. K. Brown, reports:— Owing to the possibility of the discharge of many Javanese coolies from the Dahan Estates on account of the slump, and the fact that they would be likely to remain unemployed, an attempt is being made to find land suitable for the cultivation of wet padiby these men. There appears to be no suitable landin the neighbourhood of Dahan but a promising site is being investigated elsewhere.	Most of the work in the office was of a routine nature and little comment is necessary.
UPPB it. SARAWAK, BAU. October, 1930.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. P. Murray-Scott, reports:
General.—The Acting Resident, First Division, and the Superintendent of Lands , paid visits to Bau on the 8th and 10th of the month respectively. Mr. Mace, Survey Department, was transferred to Lundu on the 7th from Kuching. I was at Lundu from 20th October to 24th October. The station itself is very well kept, and the harvest is expected to be fairly good. Engkabang in particular is very plentiful.
Court—No cases of any importance came before either Court.
Prison.—Prisoners were for the most part occupied on the upkeep of roads, etc., within the station. It was suggested by the Acting Resident, First Division, that they might be employed on making blaits. In this connection advice was asked from the Superintendent of Prisons, Kuching, and a reply is awaited. Health improved greatly, and it was quite obvious that there had previously been a great deal of malingering.
P.W.D.—All roads me in good condition. Several bridges have been repaired, and in one case almost entirely renewed.
Telephone. — The system suffered a lot from heavy rains during the month, and at one period was out of order for nearly two days.
Health.—The general health of the station was good. ; ...
Rainfall.—-Heaviest recorded in 24 hours 1.92 inches on 3rd October. Total rainfall for the month 11.01 inches.
Bidi Gold Mine. —133.66 ounces of actual gold were obtained for the month of September and 225.73 ounces for October.
SADONG. October, 1930.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports:
Court.—Court work has been below the average during the month and most of the cases were of a trivial nature.
P.W.D.—The Government carpenter was employed on repairs to the Government School Building and latterly on repairing, bridges in the bazaar and kampong areas. The contractors of the Gunong Ngili-Saging Road have now finished the road in a satisfactory manner. Final payments will be made early in the next month. On the 31st a contract was made with thirty-four Malays to procure Kayu Bahru and stud the river bank from the boat-shed on the up river side to the end of the new padang on the down river side. Each contractor is responsible for some 648 logs.
The Government pipe-fitter was employed on general upkeep of the pipe line.
Medical.—At the Government Hospital six patients were admitted, four were discharged, one was transferred to the General Hospital, Kuching, and one died. The hospital was empty at the end of the month.
At the Dispensary 114 out-patients made 223 attendances for treatment. Eighteen N.A.B. injections were given of which nine were for tertiary yaws and nine for secondary yaws.
Travelling.- I arrived back from Kuching on the 6th, after race Week.
On the 15th I left the Station for the Ulu Sadong.
At both Gedong and Tebekang numerous Court Cases were heard. It was proposed to do a short trip in Ulu Tebekang but this was found to be impossible.
There were prospects of a good fruit season, but from all accounts the engkabang is only a fair crop. It is still, however, too early to make any definite statement as the engkabang is, in many parts of the district still in flower. I arrived back in Sadong on the 24th.	Agriculture. —Mr. G.St.F. Date visited the station on the 8th and 3lst in connection with the Bugis padi planting scheme and the Government Controlled Coconut Garden.
School.—The school was opened on the 8th after the midsummer holidays.
It is pleasing to note that during the last month or two, four Chinese have been enrolled.
Prison.—The health of the prisoners was fair. The prison gang was employed on the general upkeep of the station.
General—On the 5th Mr. R.L. Moir of the Borneo Company, Limited, Kuching, arrived by the s.s. L'Aubaine. He left the following morning.
On the 22nd Mr. J. M. Kennedy arrived by the S.L. Lucile and was entertained by Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager, Sadong Colliery. He left again for Kuching on the 24th at 6.30 p.m.
Sadong Collieries Report.
November, 1930.
Extracts from the Smiting Collieries Reports for October, 1930, by Mr. J.W. Evans, Manager:—
Output obtained from the shallow outcrop workings was very much reduced owing to the change of season, and the onset of heavy rains during the second week of the month.
Mr. Kennedy, of the Selantek Coal Prospecting Syndicate, visited the mines on the 22nd and returned on the 24th.
Sixteen Javanese contract labourers who had completed their agreements were repatriated on the 24th.
The river bank was further strengthened with baru piles and the work is still proceeding.
The rainfall for the month was 13.29 inches.
Sarawak Regatta.
Entries close midday, Tuesday, 16th December, 1930
GREASY BOOM-PILLOW FIGHT— DIVING DUCKS,
RULES FOR THE SARAWAK RERATA, 1931.
1.Any boat not at its post at the time appointed for starting shall be liable to be disqualified by the Umpire.
2.If the starter considers the start false, he shall at once recall the boats to their stations, and any boat refusing to start again shall be disqualified.
3.No fouling whatever shall be allowed, the boat committing a foul shall be dealt with by a Committee appointed for the purpose.
4.It shall considered a foul when, after the race has commenced; any competitor by his paddle, boat, or person, comes in contact with paddle, boat, or person of another competitor, unless in the opinion of the Umpire such contact is so slight as not to influence the race, or shall be proved to the satisfaction of the Umpire to have been accidental or unintentional.
5.No boat shall be allowed to take another boat's water until it shall have a clear lead of that boat ; a boat shall be held to have a clear lead of another boat when its stern is clearly pant the bow of that other boat.
6.The Umpire shall be the sole judge of a boat's own water and proper course during the race.
7.In case of a foul, the Umpire shall have the power:— 1st—To place the boats except the boat committing the foul which is disqualified in the order in which they come in;
2nd—To order the boats other than the boat committing the foul to pull over the course again on the same or another day;
3rd—To re-start the qualified boats from the place where the foul was committed.
8.The Umpire may during a race caution any competitor in danger of committing a foul
9.Every boat to abide by its own accidents.
10.Any competitor refusing to abide by the decision of the Umpire or to follow his direction shall be disqualified.
11.The jurisdiction of the Umpire extends over the race, and all matters connected with if, from the time the race is specified to start until its final termination and his decision in all cases shall be final and without appeal.	12.In the event of a dead heat taking place the same crews shall contend again, and any crew or crews refusing shall be adjudged to have lost the winning place.
13.Stations count from the Town side of the river.
14.Entries for the coming Regatta will close at midday on 16th December. Any boat entering between 16th and 27th December will have to pay double entrance fees. No boats may be entered after 10 a.m. on the 27th December under any pretext whatsoever.
In the event of there being more than 12 entries for either the 30 or 15-men races two classes will be formed named Class A and Class B respectively.
Drawing in Classes A and B for the 30 and 15-men Boats, and the draw for places at the Start in all the races for boats with crews of 15 men and over will take place on 27th December, at the District Office, 12 midday.
15.Any boat after winning His Highness the Rajah's Cup for the third time, not necessarily in succession, shall be ineligible for entry in this Race for the next two regattas following the third win.
16.Entrants shall not claim or receive free passages from Government vessels for crews or boats from Outstations.
17.Any winning boat, with crew of fifteen, on competing in another race must limit its crew to fourteen.
18.Any winning boat, with crew of thirty, on competing in another race must limit its crew to twenty-eight.
19.Any second boat, with crew of thirty, on competing in another race must limit its crew to twenty-nine.
20.Subject to the conditions of sections 17, 18 and 19 there shall not be more or less than 30 persons in a 30 men boat, including Flagman and bailer. The latter may paddle. Likewise there shall not be more or less than 15 persons in a 15 men boat.
Offices Race.-- All boats must be named as in other races.
W.S.B BUCK, Honorary Secretary.
Malay Schools Prize Giving. GIRL SCHOLARS PRESENT FOR THE FIRST TIME.
On Thursday, 14th November, the children of the Kuching Malay Vernacular Schools were entertained by His Highness the Tuan Muda at the Astana on the occasion of the Annual Prize Giving.
His Highness was accompanied by the Dayang Anne. The Datus and Dayang-dayang were present and also the following:- Miss Tait, The Acting Chief Secretary, Mr. J.C. Swayne, The Acting Resident, First Division, Mr. P.M. Adams, Mr, E.S. Holl, and the Director of Education, Mr. H. Jacques.
For the first time girl scholars were present— the children of the newly-opened Sekolah Permaisuri under the charge of the Head Teacher, Miss Ah Chee.
Sekolah Merpati Jepang also sent its contingent. This also is a new school and, as the head-boy is a patriarch of only eleven years, it was a matter for congratulations that the children stood the long march from the school to Pengkalan Batu so well.
Immediately after the distribution of prizes the boys of the several schools read their loyal addresses.
The Datu Shahbandar then addressed the assembly, thanking His Highness for the oppor-tunity to be present, and expressing the appreciation of the Malay Community of the efforts which the Government is making to improve the educational facilities of the Malays. The Datu spoke with much pleasure of the inauguration of the Malay Girls' School.
Song by the children followed.
His Highness the Tuan Muda then spoke, ex-pressing pleasure at meeting so large gathering, about 500 children and teachers being present. His Highness reminded his heaters of the importance of sending their children to school when young, insisting upon regular attendance and full completion of the course of study offered by the Vernacular Schools.	His Highness concluded by expressing the hope that a similar meeting as the present might take place next year.	The singing of the Sarawak Anthem followed after which the Datus, Scholars, and Teachers adjourned to enjoy a curry.
Second Division News
October, 1930.
Extract from the second Divisional Report for October, 1930, by Mr. J.B. Archer, Resident:—
I arrived back in the Division on the 4th, reaching Lingga that day and Simanggang the following day. Public Work in the Division have been hampered to a great extent by the lax methods of the contractor Tan Teck Boon, who is working on four buildings. Lack of foresight in ordering materials and unsatisfactory arrangements for paying his men are the chief faults. In this connection Mr. Flood Page, Public Works Department, arrived in Simanggang on the 17th, and returned again on 19th, leaving a Malay overseer to help in the Division.
A contract was signed for an addition to the Police Barracks at Engkilili. Minor work was in progress at various stations.
Mr. Ditmas, Acting Assistant District Officer, Engkilili, arrived from there on the 17th, and sailed for Kuching the same day for medical attention; returning on the 24th.
The Curator of the Sarawak. Museum, Mr. E. Banks, arrived on the 15th and left next day for the Ulu Ai. He was still away at the end of the month. Mr. G.M. Goodall, Agricultural Field Officer, Second Division, paid two visits to Simanggang during the month. A report on his trip to the Lingga district has been received.
The Land Officer, Mr. Bowen Summers, left on the 24th for a tour of the Division.
Search was made for land on which to move the Chinese and others at present living in miserable huts at the back of Simanggang Bazaar. It is only a question of time before these people, against their wish, must be moved. It is thought that a piece of land near. Bukit Sabun can be cleared and prepared and a settlement started.
I paid a flying visit to Engkilili on the 21st, mainly in order to urge on the contractors coolies there.
Mr. M.L. Carrie was a visitor to Simanggang.
During the month there was heavy rain, but evidence points to the likelihood of a good padi crop. Malays and Dyaks are planting hard. The low price of rubber has had the effect of bringing down the style of living of most of the Malays to a more normal position, and many are now glad to work for wages at which a year ago they would have scoffed.
The Saribas Dyaks are feeling the situation perhaps more than other natives in this Division, and I think that many of them regret the impulse that prompted them to plant rubber on much good padi land.
Chinese throughout the Division are not unduly despondent, although it is surprising how many of them manage to keep their shops open and exist. Luckily most of them have padi farms, or shares in them, and unless prices get worse I do not anticipate any very serious trouble.
Owing to most natives being on their farms, work in all Courts was light, and no cases call for any special mention.
Appended are extracts from the reports of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Simanggang, Mr. D.C. Hudden, the Acting Assistant District Officer, Engkilili, Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas, the Assistant District Officer, Saribas, Mr. B.L. Daubeny, the Acting Assistant District Officer, Kalaka, Mr. L. K. Morse, and the Land Officer, Second Division, Mr. B. Summers.
SIMANGGANG.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D.C. Hudden.
Court work was very light as most of the inhabi-tants were busy clearing and planting their padi.
On the first, some unknown enemy of Sergeant Lani's attempted to set fire to his house in kampong Lemanak, but very fortunately it was noticed before the flames had secured any hold and was easily extinguished. The instrument, a torch made of straw, was discovered, but inquiries have elicited no trace of the instigator.
. On the l5th there was a smallpox scare up the Undup and four men were reported to be inflicted. However, on investigation by the Dresser it was found, to be chicken-pox, and a very mild form at that.
On the 20th, two gangs of kampong Malays were started on the Sabu-Temudok road, clearing and remaking where necessary, and a contract was made for repairing the bridges which had been allowed to get into a very bad state. It is hoped soon that one will be able to ride as far as the foot Temudok hill at least.
On the 21st the new wireless posts arrived from the Skrang. The Penghulu's orders had either miscarried or been misunderstood, and that, coupled with some bad staff work on his part, resulted in close on six hundred Dyaks suddenly inundating the bazaar. The share out on the price of the posts did net amount to very much per man.
Abang Sedik reports that the Lingga Malays are very eager to start a school, and say that if only Government could supply the teacher they will build a temporary school themselves.
Two appeal cases were heard in Lingga and one in Sebuyow, all three farming land disputes.
ENGKILILI.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W.P.N.L. Ditmas.
On the 16th Messrs. B. Summers, Divisional Land Officer, and E. Banks, Curator, Sarawak Museum, arrived on the m.l. Triso. The former to inspect land work and latter intending to go up river as far as Lobang Baya, and over the watershed between there and Ulu Katibas, and then go down the Katibas, and return to Kuching via Rejang and Sibu. Mr. Banks was to look for various specimens to collect or the Museum.
On Friday morning 17th I went to Simanggang, as I had been unwell for some time; from there the Resident sent me to Kuching, returning on the 25th.	Most of the Chinese who wish to plant padi say it is not possible to plant any more this year, but a large number wish to plant padi next year. If possible a piece of land or two or three areas will be given over for use of the Chinese. This matter is being discussed with the Resident and Agricultural Field Officer.
As far as can be ascertained the approximate number of unemployed in this district is about 60.
On the 30th I left Engkilili overland for Lubok Antu, accompanied by Abang Abu-Talep, Native Officer. We crossed the river and proceeded to Kumpang where we recrossed and proceeded to R. Biju, Changkol.
I left Rumah Biju the following morning and reached Lubok Antu at 11 a.m.
The grounds and paths were in far better condition than previously and the fort was clean and tidy. The books and cash were checked. The police were smarter on parade, and all uniforms and equipment were clean.
SARIBAS
Extracts from the report of the Assistant District Officer, Mr. B. L. Daubeny.
Amongst cases heard during the month were Assam, sentenced to two weeks' imprisonment for non-payment of Forest Timber dues; Nyap Moi fined $20 costs under section 334 I.P.C. voluntary causing hurt under grave provocation; Ah Nyan sentenced to six months' imprisonment for lurking house trespass by night, section 456 I.P.C.; Ketan sentenced to six months' imprisonment for theft of rubber, section 379 I.P.C.; Tunkoi sentenced to one year for incest under the Malay Undang Undang.
A gang of 15 Chinese has been employed, dating from 15th instant, on the extension and enlargement of the main road leading past the Government quarters to the bazaar. Good progress has been made and the road (14 feet) now extends from the bazaar to the police quarters.
The Assistant Controller of Government Mono-polies visited, the station on 25th and left for Kuching again on 27th, having checked the opium books and stock. Owing to the number of thefts reported during the early part of the month it was found necessary to start police patrols at night, and I am glad to report that since then thefts have apparently stopped.
Shipping, 9 motor vessels entered and cleared during the month.
KALAKA.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. L.K. Morse.
I returned from leave on the 5th instant.
Mr. H.C.P. Adams, Assistant Controller, Government Monopolies, arrived Saratok on the 21st instant and left again on the 23rd instant for Saribas, via Roban and Kabong.
The Divisional Land Officer, Mr. B. Summers, arrived in the district on the 25th instant and was still here at the end of the month. I visited Roban and Kabong twice during the month; on the first occasion I checked the books at both stations.
A Chinese by name Wee Kah Yong was drowned in the Awek on the 27th instant. His body was recovered on the 29th instant. Owing to my absence the inquest, had not been held at the end of the month.
The Gambling, Arrack and Pawn Farmer at Saratok stated that he was unable to pay his rent for October, he was given seven days in which to pay, and I am glad to say he did so. The Divisional Land Officer examined all land books in the District. Plans for the collection of the outstanding rent were discussed and the people are being called in.
I visited Roban on the 26th instant. Having checked books, cash and opium and settled some cases I left again for Kabong on the 17th.
Shipping entered and cleared as follows : —
Seven motor schooners, four motor launches and two bandongs entered, and seven motor schooners, three motor launches and two bandongs cleared.
LAND OFFICE.
Extracts from the report of the Land Officer, Second Division, Mr. B. Summers.
Saratok.—On the 27th October I left for Saratok in the m.l. Anne, arriving the same day.
All departmental books were examined again and, owing to the unreliability and bad work of the previous inspector, I deemed it wise to call in and cancel all Occupation Tickets issued previous to David Chulo's transfer to Saratok. These Occupa-tion Tickets, numbering over 40, will therefore all have to be re-examined.
Roban.—On the 29th October, accompanied by the Assistant District Officer, 1 sailed for Kabong en route to Roban in the m.l. Anne; owing to the tides being unsuitable we remained the night at Kabong.
On the 30th October we left Kabong for Roban returning the same day.	As no Occupation Tickets have been issued since my last visit in August, all books were, speedily examined.
Kabong,—The total number of Garden Registra-tion Certificates amounts to 37. Half this number have paid rent, the remainder are being called in and ordered to pay immediately.
Whilst out at Kabong, it was reported to the Assistant District Officer that some Malays were occupying land reserved by the Government for cattle grazing; this on examination, was found to be the case, in one or two instances.
On information received from the Native Officer, it appears that this reserve extends for a distance of some 10 miles, running parallel with the shore; but the depth of same, is apparently unknown.
This matter I propose to put before the Resident, suggesting the demarcation of a definite boundary.
Betong.—On the 3rd November, the tide being suitable, I sailed for Betong in the m.l. One, arriving the same day.
Land Disputes.—The land disputes appear to be almost endless in their frequency, thereby making it almost impossible for the inspector to examine any applications, especially since in addition to his ordinary duties he also works as a part-time clerk.
On the completion of David Chulo's leave, Abang Spawi is being transferred permanently to Betong; this addition should produce results shortly.
Pusa.—On the 6th November, accompanied by the Assistant District Officer, I sailed for Pusa in the m.l. One en route for Debak.
Betong.— On the 8th November, I again returned to Betong, preparatory to my return to Simanggang. On the morning of the 10th I left Betong for Simanggang, walking overland to Pengkalan Jungkong, where I was met by prahu.
Remarks.—The results of this recent visit has enlightened me, as in my previous visit to all stations, to the necessity of an increase of staff, before any results can be expected, and then some time will elapse before any results are shewn. The matter of a clerk as estimated for in 1931, for Saribas and Kalaka is of almost as much importance as inspectors; and unless the clerk understands his work properly, he is quite useless.
Second Division Regatta, Sports and Football.
A regatta and land sports will be held at Simanggang on Christmas Eve. The regatta will take place in the morning, and a provisional programme includes races for boats limited to 30 paddles, 15 paddles, 8 paddles, 6 paddles and 1 paddle, and consolation events for the longer boats. Six Cups and numerous money prizes will be competed for.
The Simanggang, Challenge Cup open to any boat in Sarawak is expected to attract many competitors. All entries will close at 12 p.m. on 15th December.
The afternoon will be devoted to Land Sports. Events will include all the usual, flat races, high jump, pole jump, broad jump, obstacle race, sack race; three-legged race, tug-of-war, greasy pole, whilst the more serious minded are catered for by a greasy pig hunt.
There will be an European Officers' handicap race but it is expected that this event will appeal to the spectators rather than the competitors.
The final of football will take place on Christmas Day when the Resident's Cup, presented by J. B. Archer, Esq., will be played for. Medals will be awarded to the winning team and to the runners up. Entries, for the Regatta, together with a fee of $1 per boat, to be sent to J.C.H. Barcroft, Esq., Honorary Secretary.
Third Division News.
October, 1930.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports for October, 1930, by Mr. C.D. Adams, Resident:—
Resident's Court.—Criminal cases one and one conviction. Civil cases three, claims $9,736. Fees $387.60. One appeal case, decision of District Court reversed.	'
General.—I returned from Kuching on the 5th instant.
All other matters have been reported officially under separate cover.
MATU.
The District Officer, Mr. E.V. Andreini, reports:—
From the 3rd—6th I accompanied Mr. Gilbert to Rejang, Selalang and Belawai, these places now being incorporated in the Sarikei district and handed over to him as from that date.
I spent from 14th—21st at Daro and moved the office, etc., into the new Court House during my stay.
The Divisional Engineer, Divisional Treasurer and Divisional Medical Officer visited the Matu and Daro districts in connection with the work of their departments from 20th—22nd.
P.W.D., Matu.—Dwelling houses for sago coolies and other Chinese were erected at the back of the old bazaar and roads and drains constructed. Work is still continuing on this site. The first ten shops in the new bazaar are now erected and will be occupied next month when the remains of the old bazaar will he pulled down.
P.W.D., Daro.—The back area of the bazaar was drained and cleared by the shopkeepers and all pig-geries moved out of the bazaar area.
Land, Matu.—Demand notes were sent out for arrears of quit rent. P.C. Hose is now entirely occupied on work as a land inspector, there being no land staff in this district. He can use a compass and is generally capable of doing the work, and I suggest that he be transferred to the land department.
Daro.—There is considerable arrears of land work in this district but no staff available to cope with this.
Court.—There was practically no Court work.
Forestry.—The forest guard was sent to make a thorough exanimation of the jelutong area in Matu district, and has completed a survey of Bawang jelutong and is now proceeding to Jimoreng and Tian. He reports some 250 jelutong trees ranging from 15 feet in circumference to two feet. Twenty-five of these trees were not yet tapped.
MUKAH.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. A. Macpherson, reports:-
Courts.—Two cases of theft under section 380 I.P.C, were heard. Both defendants sentenced to nine and three months' imprisonment respectively. There were no other cases worthy of mention.
Dairy Farm.—The herd numbered twenty-nine head at the end of the month. Some Napier grass was planted on the cattle ground where the coarse grass has been burnt and changkoled-up.
Prison.—The gang numbered thirty-seven at the end of the month. They were employed in taking coal to the waterworks, fencing off the new fodder grass on the cattle ground, and on the roads.
Land.—The trouble with the Arip Dyaks over demarcation of their gardens was settled by a visit to N. Arip.
Balingsan.— was visited on 11th. The dresser was also taken.
General.—The District Officer, Mukah and Oya, returned from Kuching on 8th by the Chamois, accompanied by Mr. A. Macpherson, who has been appointed Acting Asst. District Officer, Mukah, and the Divisional Electrical Engineer who returned with Acting Assistant District Officer to Oya on 9th thence proceeding to Sibu. Handing, over was completed by 14th, Mr. P.M. Adams proceeding to Sibu on 15th.
Trade.—Two hundred and fifty-one koyans of raw sago and 139 piculs of gutta jelutong were shipped to Kuching.
Rainfall.—The total rainfall for the month was 11.97 inches.
OYA.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E.H. Elam, reports:—
Visitors to the station were Mr. Moir, Mr. W.L. Clark, and the Rev. Father Dunn. Mother Clare returned to Dalat on the 5th after being away for more than a year. Two new sisters from Europe also arrived with her, the convent, being opened afresh on the 7th.
Court.—There were no cases worthy of mention.
Travelling.—I went to Mukah on the 2nd to close the September accounts and attend to any other business there, the District Officer not having returned from Kuching. I returned on the 9th and, after a few days at Dalat, proceeded up river to elect a new Penghulu for the Baoh and Tamin districts. I then went on to Penghulu Medan's and returned to Dalat on the 29th.
P.W.D.—The bridge over the Sungei Parit at Oya was pulled down and erected anew for the cost of forty dollars; the roof of the bungalow was also repaired, this needing the Dalat carpenter to mend it as it has been a continual source of trouble.
The pagar at the Kuala was made afresh by the kampong people as the sea being rough had started to cause erosion there again.	Rainfall.—The total rainfall for the month was 20.18 inches. The greatest fall in any one day being 3.55 inches.
SARIKEI, BlNATANG AND REJANG.
General.— On the 4th I proceeded to Rejang to take over this station, together with Belawai and Selalaug, froth Mr. Andreini, these stations now being run from Sarikei. Mr. Parker later took over the land office affairs of these stations, in addition to Sarikei and Binatang.
The Survey Department has been concentrating on the surveying of the pepper gardens at Sarikei; until recently there has been no real records of how many there are in the district, and as to where they are.
On the 19th I proceeded up the Ulu Sarikei with Mr. Hammond, we walked to Bukit Tabujang (1,000 feet) and from the top we were able to see Matang, Santubong, Kuala Krian, Rejang and Sadok. We were informed that had it not been raining we should have been able to see Bukit Aup behind Sibu.
On 28th I made a trip by outboard boat to Sema T. Belatok on to Belawai and Rejang then on to Selalang.
Rain has been very heavy during the month. P.W.D., Local.— Work was aa usual on the roads.
On the 13th Mr. Whiteside, Divisional Engineer, visited the station to take over the new wharf from Mr. Nadig.
On the 31st, the first time the wharf had been used, s.s. Angby hit the end of it, taking away one terantum pile and damaging a few square feet of the concrete; the damage was small.
Electric lighting for the bungalows and street lighting was first switched on on the 14th, this has been a great improvement. The power is obtained from Ah Pong's plant.
At Binatang the wharf is not yet in commission, the godown and area having to wait for earth filling. This should be ready by the middle of November.
Unemployed have been working on the Kropo Road gravelling and making bridges.
Trade and Customs.—Pepper has been coming into the bazaar in fair quantities, the market has been steadily rising and so they are only sending out sufficient to get provisions back from Singapore.
The quality has been fair, but on account of the high standard required by Government it was not paying them to make fair average pepper, and most of it is going out at double duty.
A new pepper grading machine has been received from the Agricultural Department, but it has not yet been used.
KAPIT.
The Court Writer, Mr. Law Ah Kui, reports:-
Court.— No cases of any importance were brought before the Native Court during the month.
Dairy Earm.—The herd numbers 42.
General.—The relief squad of Sarawak Rangers, under Corporal Jawa, arrived from headquarters in the beginning of the month and the old squad, under Corporal Lawang, sailed for Sibu en route for Kuching.
Abang Kushairi and party of the Survey Depart-ment arrived and later left for Belaga.
The Inspector of Schools arrived on the 17th and left again next morning.
Dresser Julius Chung arrived on the 29th and was still here at the end of the month.
P.W.D.—The new quarters for Native Officers were nearly completed.
SIBU.
The District Officer, Mr. W. E. Dick, reports:—
Courts.—Criminal. No cases call for special comment.	General. —A report of a case of child murder was received on 3rd mat. and Mr. F. L. Crossley proceeded to Song, accompanied by a dresser, but owing to lack of evidence the case was dropped. A Malay by name of Lias murdered his wife at Stubah on 19th.
There were many reports of an engkabang crop this year and Abang Enjab, Native Officer was sent to the Ulu Julau and Sarikei with a Forest Guard to report on the crop.
A big demonstration of Foochow unemployed took place on the 13th and food was stolen from a number of shops in the bazaar. The Secretary for Chinese Affairs arrived, with Mrs. Le Gros Clark, on 15th per H.H.M.Y. Maimuna to inquire into the unemployment question.
Police.—The police were called upon to do extra work when guards were doubled in the bazaar from 13th to 8th. The number of thefts reported were fewer than during September.
Kindergarten Entertainment at Sibu.
On Monday the 27th of October, 1930, a delightful entertainment was given by the children in the kindergarten section of the Methodist Mission School, Sibu. The Hall was charmingly decorated with wistaria and yellow roses, very cleverly made out of paper under Mrs. Hoover's able tuition by the elder girls of the school. The programme consisted of 18 items, comprising recitations, songs and dances.
Many of the numbers were "dressed" and deservedly were far the most popular. The dresses with one exception, were also made of paper, most cleverly designed to represent robins, bees fairies and daffodils; the exception proved very rightly, to be the Queen of the fairies, a dainty little figure who wore rose coloured satin and silver and resembled nothing so much as a little rosebud herself. The children obviously enjoyed the performance as much as the audience. Proud mothers and fathers watched little mites of four years old reciting in Mandarin, dancing and miming; no one broke down, and, no prompters were necessary. A wonderful achievement when one realizes that the childrens' native language is Foochow and the eldest mite is but seven years old! Mrs. Hoover, after weeks of work and infinite patience, must have felt tremendously proud of her little band of workers and was well rewarded, for her tireless activity. After the performance, which in spite of the 18 items we found all too short, the entertainment concluded with the singing of the Sarawak National Anthemn.
On leaving the hall the European ladies were each presented with roses, in memory of a very successful and enjoyable evening.
Fourth Division News.
September. 1930.
Extracts from the Fourth Division Reports for September, 1930, by Mr. H.D. Aplin, Resident:—
On the 2nd I left for Baram. Wan Taha, N. O., reported that all was well with the exception that two prisoners had escaped from the working gang the previous week.
One Ah Chok, was caught the following night and received the usual punishment. The other Then Chen Hu (Saribas) was eventually caught at Brooketon with the kind assistance given by the Brunei Government	,
Engkabang was reported to be blossoming every-where, and if only the fruit will form this should be a great benefit to the people of this district, who are beginning to feel the effects of hard times.
There is not a great deal of unemployment, but the Foochows and some Khehs made applications for work. I was able to employ the Foochows on road-making by extending the present Lubok Nibong-Poyut road through the Foochow Colony to the Sebatang. Baram Foochow labour is not all satisfactory and these people do not deserve much sympathy. Ah Leong has a contract for road-making by extending the old Limbang road to the Dabai. He is employing Khehs. It is eventually hoped to link up this road with the Lubok-Nibong road in the vicinity of the Sebatang. A large tract of country will be opened up on soil that appears to be very favourable for pepper plaining.
As I considered that I had sufficient evidence I arrested Ah Bak, Government Clerk, under I.P.C. section 469, as being the writer of several petitions received recently.
Instructions were given that all the oil palm seedlings in the nursery at Long Lama were to be planted out. This will be done by prison labour.
Notices were issued drawing the attention of the people to the penalties attached to the adulteration of gutta jangkar and also to the fact that all boats using the Government wharves must pay rent.
There are still a number of unemployed in Miri but they appear to be quite contented, as there is a certain amount of casual work to be picked up.
Dr. Brooke, Chief Health Officer of Sarawak, arrived on 12th and visited all the stations of the Division. As a result of his visit, I hope to be able to put Health and Municipal matters on a sounder footing. Means and ways of taking the 1931 Census were discussed.
I 1eft for Kuching by the Maimunah on 22nd and was still away at the end of the month.
Mr. Hanson, Divisional Treasurer, visited Baram during the month and checked all books.
Mr. H. C. P Adams of the Monopolies also arrived at Baram and checked Opium stocks.
MIRI.
The Acting District Officer, Miri, Mr. J. G Anderson, reports: —
District Court.—Criminal 18 cases heard. Civil 10 cases heard.	'
Magistrate Court—Criminal 17 cases heard. Civil 27 cases heard.
P.W.D.—The Stall-holders' market was satis-factorily completed and this will provide accommodation for some of the stall holders at present blocking up the streets.
Work on re-levelling bazaar drains was progressing. Municipal.—A meeting of the Miri Municipal and Sanitary Advisory Board was held on the 17th, at which Dr. Brooke was piesent. Dr. Brooke had previously made a tour of the whole Municipal area and he and Dr. Schneider reported that they consider it is quite impossible to put in pit latrines in the kampong, as there are too many people living in the houses and not sufficient ground space to accommodate such latrines. It was therefore resolved that proper housing regulations should be brought into force to remedy this overcrowding, and that each house must allow at least 300 cubic feet per person. Dr. Brooke promised to send up a copy of the Kuching Housing Regulations and these could be modified to suit local conditions.
It would be at least a year, however, before the benefits to be derived from such rules would be felt, and in the meantime, if pit latrines are not practicable. another form of sanitation system is urgently required.
A parade was held on the 26th, under command of Assistant Superintendent of Police, being the birthday of His Highness the Rajah.
The salute was taken by the Acting District Officer, in the absence of the Resident. All Government Officers, the Captain and some officers from H.M.S. Herald, the General Manager and some members of the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, were present.
H.M.S. Herald finally left Miri on the 28th on the conclusion of the surveying season in these waters.
Report of Sanitary Inspector, Miri, for September.
A census of the Malay and Chinese kampongs, south of Sungei Merabau was taken out at the beginning of the month with a view to determine a water rate on householders. This was completed on the 5th instant with the help of assistant Inspector Nyuk Foh. The figures obtained were:— 1,263 Malays, 1,504 Chinese, counting two children as one adult.
The two reservoirs, Snngei Liku and Sungei Dalam, were visited by the Chief Health Officer.
On the 20th the Chief Health Officer, accompanied by me, left for Baram, and on the 21st a general inspection of the Baram bazaar, Government Quarters, Dispensary, Hospital and the Arrack Farm was carried out. A complete census of the inhabitants of the Baram bazaar was also taken. The same afternoon we left for Bakong and, after staying the night over, reached Kuala Baram by the La Follette at noon of the 22nd instant. From the Kuala we returned to Miri via the overland route, passing through Lutong. That some night the Chief Health Officer left for Kuching per s. s. Margaret after staying here for 11 days.
During the latter part of the month a lot of my time was taken away in acting for the Dresser who was away up country. At the end of the month he was still away.
All the water meters in the bazaar were unsealed and the old records put back to zero, as it was decided to bill bazaar shops on the number of gallons of water used as from the beginning of October.
BINTULU.
The District Officer, Bintulu, Mr. H.E. Cutfield, reports:—
Court.—Court work was light during the month.
The outstanding feature of the month was the visit of His Highness the Tuan Muda and Dayang Anne, who were accompanied by the Chief Secretary and Mrs. Boult, and Mr. and Mrs. Baird. His Highness and party arrived per H.H.M.Y. Maimuna at 6 a.m. on 5th.
His Highness was officially received ashore at 8.30 a.m., where he was met by representatives of Melanaus, Dyaks, Kayans, Punans, Penans, Kadayans and other natives. His Highness, with the Chief Secretary, were then in attendance in the Fort interviewing people until 10.30. a.m., but nothing of importance was brought to his notice. At 11 a.m. His Highness went across river and walked up through kampong Kalang and kampong Haji Drahman to inspect Mr. Avery's' factory and the Bintulu Sawmill belonging to Mohd. Akbar Khan and Son, returning to the Maimuna at l o'clock.
At 4.30 p.m. His Highness was pleased to examine the work being undertaken at S. Nyabau in the erection of waterworks scheme. At 9 p.m. His Highness and party inspected the kampongs and bazaar which were decorated and illuminated. His Highness returned to the Maimuna at 11 p.m. and sailed at 12 midnight for Mukah.
Mr. Corson, Deputy Conservator of Forests, who arrived last month, returned to Miri per s.s. Auby on the 8th. Mr. Corson was here with regard to the proposed Rasan Reserve and for a general inspection. Mr. McLaine, Auditor, arrived by s.s. Gladys on 15th and returned to Kuching per H.H.M.Y Maimuna on 22nd. The Resident, Fourth Division, and Mrs. Aplin, Mr. Justice Stirling Boyd and Mr. Hanson were also passengers by her.
Tatau was visited from 1st to 2nd and Sebauh on 23rd—24th in conjunction with the road-making by Foochows through their Colony.
P.W.D.—The prison gang were early in the month employed with Carpenter Mamoh erecting lighthouse-keepers' quarters at Kedurong. This building was completed early in the month. They were then employed on whitewashing and painting the Datus new quarters and in ditching and general upkeep of the station.
Carpenter Mamoh, after erecting the quarters at Kedurong, was employed on the rebuilding and extension of two rooms to the police barracks, formerly Sarawak Rangers Barracks.
Progress was made with the rebuilding of the police barracks at Sebauh and of Tatau Court House, which was almost completed by the end of the month.
The waterworks scheme at S. Nyabau progressed satisfactorily. The dam was completed, the tunnel through one hill was almost completed, work progressed on the building of concrete piers, but this work was somewhat held up owing to a shortage of cement which was later received from Kuching. Work of levelling and pipe laying was also carried out.
October, 1930.
General.—I returned from Kuching by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on 6th, the District Officer, Mr. J.G. Anderson, reporting that nothing of importance had occurred during my absence.
The Chinese in Miri celebrated the 10th of October, Anniversary of the Republic, and at night held a large lantern procession on a very much bigger scale than ever before. The day passed off quietly and, though meetings were held amongst the various communities, no political speeches were attempted. The Chinese and Malays living in the kampongs complained at the system of rating them for water at so much a head for the use of the stand-pipes. They had a certain amount of reason for their arguments and so an attempt will be made in the Kampong China, to charge on the type of house with a minimum and maximum rate. The Malay Kampong presents more difficulties but it is thought that if the present jambans are condemned and the Government build a certain number of public bucket latrines, it will not be essential to make the order to close all wells. Houses with water laid on will be charged by the meter readings.
The Assistant Superintendent of Police reported that he had to send many cases of malaria amongst the Police and Rangers to hospital. It was thought that malaria had been stamped out of Miri, and I understand the Company's Health Officer is investigating the matter.
It was also reported that whooping cough was rife in the bazaar.
Mr. P.A.B. McKerron, British Resident, Brunei, came ashore from the boat from Singapore on 28th, and I took the opportunity to discuss with him one or two matters concerning people travelling backwards and forwards between here and Kuala Belait. He proceeded to Brunei by car on the same day.
I left for Baram on the 15th, accompanied by the Assistant Superintendent of Police, Mr. Murphy, who went to make an inspection of the police. His report was not good and he is therefore making arrangements to transfer some to Miri for training.
Engkabang fruit was reported to have formed and a heavy crop is expected. A plague of caterpillars were said to be destroying the young padi and a sample of them has been sent to the Agricultural Department.
As the contractor had reached to the end of the clearing done by Dyaks on the Limbang road, about three miles, instructions were given not to proceed further but to make up properly that already done.
A contract was given to some Khehs to stump and level the plain behind the clerks' quarters.
Mr. G.A.C. Field arrived at Miri on the 25th to take over the duties of Shipping and Customs Offices of 4th and 5th Divisions vice Mr. R.G. Aikman who is being transferred.
Miri.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J.G. Anderson, reports:—
P.W.D.—Drains in the bazaar were still being renewed by Lim Ah Soon but this man's work is not at all satisfactory, he uses the wrong mixture of concrete and this is consequently liable to crumble.
The new District Officer's bungalow on Tanjong Lobang was progressing satisfactorily and should be completed about the middle of December.
Meters were used for calculation of water rate for the first time. This is not found to be a very satisfactory method.
A meeting of the Miri Municipal and Sanitary Advisory Board was held on the 29th, minutes of which have been submitted. It was recommended that a bucket system of latrines should be installed as soon as possible in the kampongs, and that conservancy in the kampongs should be undertaken by the Government. This has been approved.
Travelling.—I visited Niah and Sibuti on the 20th and dealt with all outstanding cases, which were not numerous as the local people were busy planting padi. I returned to Miri on the 24th.
Passport Office.—All emigrants and immigrants are now dealt with in this office (as from 30th October) instead of being half in the Police Office and half in this office as heretofore. This ensures a central control over all questions of immigration and emigration.
General.—A new squad of Rangers arrived on the 4th under command of Lieutenant Yeatts.
Prisons.—Prisoners averaged 36.27 and were engaged on levelling, etc., at Tanjong Lobang and in the usual routine work.
BINTULU
The District Officer, Mr. H.E. Cutfield, reports:—
Court.—Court work was light during the month.
General.—I regret to announce the death during the month of Penghulu Tama Gran, for many years head of the Punans in the Tatau and Kakus. I got news that Penghulu Tama Gran was in the Tatau Bazaar seriously ill with dysentery and forwarded the dresser immediately. The following day I happened to be visiting Tatau and on arrival the Dresser reported Penghulu Tama Gran seriously ill and very weak. I persuaded the Penghulu to come back with me the next day for treatment at Bintulu. He was not long in hospital before he made every effort to return to his own house as he complained that the sea breeze did not agree with him. I detained him, however, until the Dresser discharged him as being cured of dysentery but still weak.
He returned home and it was not long afterwards that I heard he was dead.
Sebauh was visited on the 3rd and 16th in conjunction with the road being built by Foochows. Tatau was visited on 7th—8th.
Visitors to the station during the month included Messrs. Calver, Conervator of Forests, Yeatts, Black, Combe, Day, Kay, and Fathey Hopgartner.
P.W.D.—The prison gang averaged 15.86 during the month. Some of these were employed with Carpenter Mamoh rebuilding the former Sarawak Ranger's Barracks and building an extension of two rooms. This was nearing completion at the end of the month, the main building being finished and work commenced on the dapors.
The remainder of the gang were employed on the Tanjong Batu Road, kampong roads, and in general upkeep of the station. The mowers were employed as usual.The contractor completed the rebuilding and alteration of the Tatau Fort, and the Sebauh Police Barracks were also completed.
Good progress was made with the waterworks scheme at Nyabau. The tunnel near the dam was completed and pipes laid and fitted up from the dam to middle of Tanjong Batu. Only a small portion now remains to be joined up on Tanjong Batu to Silai, when connection will have been made from the dam site to Fort. A large amount of local labour is being employed on this work.
The Foochows at Sebauh commenced work on the building of roads at Sebauh in payment of a loan received from Government.
Rainfall.—The first wet month since the end of 1929 was experienced, and it would appear as if the weather has at last broken. 29.49 inches were recorded during the month.
Fifth Division News. October, 1930.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports for October, 1930, by Mr. E.O. Bruce, Acting Resident:—
General.—On the 2nd a relief squad of Sarawak Rangers arrived in the charge, of Corporal Lanjan. They are noticeably smarter than the old squad which returned to Kuching the following day by s.s. Auby.
Mr. Morice, Cadet, visited up river as far as Tana Merah for a few days on the 9th. Mr. Chon Thadd, Government Dresser, Customs Assistant Supervisor Elek and Mr. Fam Tain Min, Divisional book-keeper, visited all substations, returning on the 21st. Mr. Corson, Deputy Conservator of Forests, arrived from Miri via Labuan on the 15th on a tour of inspection, also the Rev. Collis for a short visit from British North Borneo. Unemployment figures increased slightly during the month. Seventeen vagrant Chinese were rounded up in Limbang, and fourteen in Lawas and, after interrogation, were given temporary employment on general P.W.D. work. Vagrant Javanese have also been filtering in from Temburong without passes. Several were caught and returned at once, and notices issued to prevent recurrence. Similar measures were adopted at Merapok near the British North Borneo boundary.
I visited Lawas on the 17th thence overland to Trusan aud Sundar, after dealing with all affairs outstanding. I am glad to report that the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J.R. Combe, returned from sick leave on the 22nd, having been off duty for about 3 months. Having discussed matters to date I returned on the 26th. Messrs. Aikman and Field arrived on the 29th vid Labuan on a four of inspection preparatory to the former handing over the affairs of the Customs Department in this Division.
Messrs. Southwell and Aiken from Sungei Prangga visited Limbang regarding arrangements for a new Mission Substation at Limpasong, and selection of the site. On the 31st I visited the British Besident, Brunei, to discuss various questions, and to attend to the execution of the Deeds of Extinguishment of certain Annuities payable by this' State to Brunei subjects, as reported under separate cover. Heavy rains have been prevalent during the month, 27.44 inches being registered at Limbang.
Court.—Court work has been heavier this month. Trade depression and the attendant unemployment has no doubt been the cause of increase in the number of vagrants and subsequent thefts reported.
Simultaneous raids on five establishments led to the recovery of stolen property connected with four separate thefts during the last few months, and revealed several clues the investigation of which occupied a very great deal of time. There appears to be some system of concerted action whereby stolen property is disposed of, under hawker's license, among the more credulous natives. The Brunei Malay and his daughter, who disappeared from Sundar when called to answer a charge of incest, were traced from Brooketon to Limau Manis, where the daughter was apprehended, but the father Draman bin Bagol had absconded to Miri. A case of incendiarism up river proved to be the accidental result of a drunken festivity. A difficult case of libel and a counter allegation of procuring abortion was adjourned pending medical evidence.
P.W.D.—The usual routine work was carried out by the prison gang; Thirteen chains of Sungei Poyan Road were widened, graded and surfaced with laterite, as also were 12 chains of the main road. Two small bridges were raised 2 feet to avoid inundation.
The lorry has needed continual minor repairs, and was fitted with new springs. Old kajang walls of the hospital ward were replaced with planking. New quarters for Forest Ranger, S.C., and clerk were completed and occupied during the month.
Prisons.—The average daily number of prisoners was 25; health and discipline normal.
Land and Agriculture.—The new Land Office is now in full swing, and notices have been issued for all Tua Kampong that correct Land Office procedure will be strictly adhered to in future. Fifty gardens have so far been demarcated, and 17 applications for new land issued. I inspected a proposed new pepper garden reserve at Sungei Kubong which is in process of being demarcated. Payments to the second proposed group of 20 subsidized planters is withheld meanwhile, pending reference to the Resident, Fifth Division, regarding certain newcomers who had already cleared and commenced planting apparently without any authority whatever. The Borneo Evangelical Mission have applied for a small area at Limpasong with a view to establishing a small Mission Substation among the Bisayahs. The area is now being demarcated. The patch of Government padi is doing well, though some was destroyed by recent floods.
Medical and Health.— Dr. Swapp, Medical Officer, Brunei, paid the usual monthly visit on the 28th, and Dr. Chetty arrived from Kuching on the 31st to examine and check Government stocks in the dispensary. Dresser Chon Thadd visited Lawas and substations during the month.
Limbang Dispensary.—Nominal roll of patients 92. Attendances during the month 107. Two patients were admitted to hospital and two discharged. Thirty-six N.A.B. injections were given. Buffaloes and pigs were examined before slaughter, and the regular weekly sanitary inspections of the bazaar, open markets, schools and pupils, were carried out.
Trade and Shipping.—Old channel marks were renewed and all are now complete. Messrs. Aikman and Field arrived from Miri on 29th and visited all Customs Stations in the Division.
LAWAS.
October, 1930.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J.R. Combe, reports:—
General.—I returned from convalescent leave in the s.s. Auby on the 22nd instant, and found the Acting Resident awaiting my arrival. On the 24th Acting Resident and self proceeded to Trusan by foot. The Trusan road is in a very bad condition, partly owing to the heavy rains which have been experienced here lately, and partly owing to the contractor finding himself in financial difficulties over the contract.
After spending one night at Trusan the Acting Resident proceeded to Sundar. On the 26th Mr. T. Corson, Deputy Conservator of Forests, arrived at Sundar in the m.l. Saripah, when the Acting Resident and Deputy Conservator returned to Limbang in m.l. Sylvia and myself to Lawas.
On the 29th the Assistant Superintendents of Customs, Messrs. Aikman and. Field, arrived from Miri with the object of touring the 5th Division, as the latter is taking over from the former. I accompanied them to Merapok and Punang, returning to Lawas by foot, whilst Messrs. Aikman and Field proceeded to Sundar and Trusan en route for Limbang.
On the 10th, being the Anniversary of the Chinese Republic, the bazaar was gaily decorated and sports and rongeng were provided by the Chinese School.
On the 21st Tan Boon En, a local Chinese Trader of long standing, died.
Visitors to the station included Father Jansen from Miri, and Mr. Middlemas, Superintendent of Surveys, the latter arriving here in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 7th and leaving on the 10th, after paying a visit to both Trusan and Sundar.
The Forest Office and staff have now been transferred to Limbang; this was done under the supervision of the Deputy Conservator.
Staff.—Clerk Yap Kit Siong was sent over to Sundar on 31st to take over from Court Writer Martin Chin, who has proceeded to Trusan to relieve Kong Kian, Court Writer, now on annual leave.
P.W.D.—Two new wireless masts have been erected this month, mechanics coming up from Kuching to carry out the work.
Court.—Lee Ngee was sentenced to 6 months' R.I. under section 379, whilst two Chinese, Wong Chai and Ah Yong of Sundar were sentenced to 3 and 4 months' R.I. respectively, for breach of Opium Regulations No. XLVII, of 1924.
There were the usual number of Magistrate Court Civil cases.
Unemployment.—An employment gang has been arranged and now numbers 17. These men receive 40 cents per day and are employed in clearing and working round Government buildings.
Agriculture.—The padi harvest of this year promises to be very good. Far more padi has been planted than previously, which is accounted for by the present depression in trade.
The Lawas Sarawak Rubber Estate; Limited, exported 37,352 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.