The Sarawak Gazette. MONDAY, JUNE 2nd. 1930. Birth. EDWARDS.—To Mr. and Mrs. Edwards, on 23rd April, at a Nursing Home in London, a son, still born.
Suara Sarawak. May. On May 1st, Mr. Michael Osmond Brabazon Blagg was the recipient of a Nominal Decoration. A levee was subsequently held at “The Hill” to which a large number of friends came to offer their congratulations.
The Spring Race Meeting was held on May 3rd and 5th under the patronage and presence of His Highness the Tuan Muda and the Dayang Anne. The weather on the whole may be said to have been quite propitious. It was very largely a favourites meeting, and there was consequently nothing startling to record from the “Tote” point of view— although it sustained its interest throughout. The notes on the event from the pen of the energetic Hon. Sec. Mr. F. O. Blagg, will be found in our Columns, as well as other notes from several other contributors.
The Right Rev. Bishop and Mrs. Danson left for England on a well-earned holiday on May 3rd—though the programme in front of them does not presuppose much in the nature of “dolce far niente.”
Kuching has been enlivened during the month by a number of outstation visitors, amongst whom we recall:—Mr. C. D. Adams, Mr. P. M. Adams, Mr. J. G. Anderson, Mr. J. B. Archer, Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, Mr. E. O. Bruce, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, Mr. D. C. Hudden and Mr. B. J. C. Spurway.
The Health Department has been augmented by the arrival from England on May 19th, of Miss G. E. Collinson who takes up the duties of Matron to the Child Welfare Branch. She has had considerable experience in India and England, and should be a good asset to Kuching.
On May 26th two flying boats S. 1149 and S. 1419 (Squadron Leader Livock) and Flight Lt. Nidioletts and Fying Officer Grierson arriving during the course of a cruise to Miri and British North Borneo. They expect to leave Kuching on May 30th.
At the Tenth Annual General Meeting the Sarawak Association, 56, Desker Road, Singapore, held on May 4th, the following gentlemen were elected office-bearers for the ensuing year:—President, Mr. Wee Kheng Watt; Vice-Presidents, Messrs. Song Teck Ghee and Koh Kim Loh; Hon. Secretary, Mr. Song Lian Siong; Assistant Hon. Secretary, Mr. J. S. Chong; Hon. Treasurer, Mr. Koh Thye Jin; Hon. Auditor, Mr. Michael Tie; Committee, Messrs. Lim Teck Seng, Goh Soon Kheng, Sim Chiew Liat and Tan Ah Seng; Hon. Sports Superintendent, Mr. Augustine Unpu; Employment Committee, Messrs. Matthew Lim and Koh Ten Shaw.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has approved the suggestion of Datu Shahbandar that the new Government School, at Jalan Patinggi Ali, shall be called “The Merpati Jepang School.” Datu Merpati (or, in Javanese "Adipati”) was a leader of the first Javanese to settle in Sarawak; and his wife was a daughter of the then Sultan of Johore. He died and was buried at the place since known as Cape Datu. From him was descended Datu Patinggi Ali—great-grandfather of the present Datu Shahbandar.
Mrs. Middlemas and infant leave on May 31st for a short visit to Australia. We shall be glad to see them return, brimming with health and vigour.
In the domestic announcements column will be seen an entry of sad news from Mr. and Mrs. R. E. Edwards now on leave in England. The sympathy of their many friends in Sarawak will be extended to them in their misfortune. We are glad to hear that the latest news of Mrs. Edwards was very reassuring.
Mr. F. G, Carpenter, District Officer at Sadong, proceeded on home leave on 26th April; and Mr. W. Harnack, Survey Department, on May 10th. Mr. Hayward, the Registrar, and Mrs. Hayward also left on the same date. We wish them a fine and cheery holiday.
An Acknowledgment. Mr. and Mrs. Wee Hock Kee and family desire to thank all friends and relatives who sent letters of condolence and also those who attended the funeral of the late Mr. Wee Peng Chuan.
BELLES-LETTRES: April Best Sellers.
The following list of “best sellers” has been compiled from information kindly supplied by a number of well- known book-sellers to John O' London's Weekly.
Fiction.—Warwick Deepings “Exiles” (Cassell, 7s. 6d.); John Ferguson's “Murder on the Marsh” (Bodley Head, 7s. 6d.); J. L. Campbell's “The Miracle of Peille” (Collins, 6s.); Barbara Blackburn's “Courage for Martha” (Secker, 7s. 6d); Lady Eleanor Smith's “Red Wagon” (Gollancz, 7s. 6d.); R. C. Sherriff’s and Vernon Bartlett's "Journey's End” (Gollancz, 7s. 6d.) ; Victor Bridges’s "The Secret of the Creek" (Hodder and Stoughton, 7s. 6d.); Mary Agnes Hamilton’s “Special Providence" (Allen and Unwin, 7s. 6d.); Hugh Walpole’s “Bogue Herries" (Macmillan, 10s. 6d.); W. J. Locke's “The Town of Tombarel" (The Bodley Head, 7s. 6d.); Thornton Wilder's “The Woman of Andros" (Longmans, 6s.); “W.A.A.C.” (Werner Laurie, 7s. 6d.); Margaret Irwin's “None So Pretty” (Chatto and Windus, 7s. 6d.); Joan Sutherland’s "Secret Places" (Cassell, 7s. 6d.); Jane Dashwood’s "Three Daughters" (John Murray, 7s. 63.); Richard Keverno’s “The Man in the Red Hat" (Constable, 7s. 6d).
Miscellaneous.—Emil Ludwig’s "Lincoln" (Putnam, 21s.); E. A. Rheinhardt’s “Eleonora Duse" (Martin Sacker, 10s. 6d.); Andre Maurois’s “Byron" (Cape, 12s. 6d.); Ronald Knox's "Caliban in Grub Street” (Sheed and Ward, 7s. 6d.); Hilaire Belloe's; "Richelieu” (Benn, 21s.); Ronald Knox's “Caliban in Grub Street” (Sheed and Ward, 7s. 6d.); P. D. Hurd and W. Lewis Root's “The Truth About Wagner" (Cassell, 7s. 6d.); William Bolitho’s “Twelve Against the Gods” (Heinemann, 10s. 6d.); Ella Hepworth Dixon’s “As I Knew Them” (Hutthinson, 21s.); R. Macnair Wilson’s “Josephine: The Portrait of a Woman" (Eyre and Spottiswoode, 15s.) ; Edith Sitwell’s “Alexander Pope” (Faber and Faber, 15s.): Andre Maurois’s “Byron" (Cape, 12s. 6d.); Tamara Karsavina’s "Theatre Street” (Heinemann, 25s.); Moray McLaren's “Return to Scotland" (Duckworth, 8s. 6d.); Francesco Nitti’s “Escape" (Putnam, 10s. 6d.).
The Enchanted Wood. O! I must go again to Kostland Wood, Where cool shade lies upon the hottest day, And where, in Spring, the violet doffs its hood, And old splayed fir-cones scatter all the way On autumn days when winds have swept it thro'. But it is after rain I love it best; When every branch is bowed low with the weight
Ol drops, that singly fall, and leave the rest A quivering, and the branch beneath its freight Swaying, till all the wood is moving too;
When every rough wet scaly trunk gleams red, And tawny brown the needle-covered ground. The torrent down the gully fills its bed To overflow, and with its wild white bound From rock to rock, mists ail the air about. And then it is the salamanders, gay In shining coats of black with orange pied, Come out and crawl along the sandy way,
Or close among the twisted tree-roots hide With tiny black four-fingered hands spread out;
And I salute them as they blink at me I like to think each was a gorgeous knight, That once rode out to deeds of gallantry In livery of black and orange flight (That’s how my thoughts will play in Kostland Wood.)
But, yonder where that clump of ruins lie, A sorceress lived in her castle grey. Who heard the troop that passed with merry cry And jest, and turned the brilliant array To sleepy, spotted lizards, as they stood
O, Kostland Woods, you hold me spellbound too! Tho’ witches long are dead they taught a rune To the tall pine trees, who with murmurings woo The vagrant winds, and with their magic croon Forever call to me in wild enchantment.
Notes on Tropical Gardening No. 5.
SOILS AND MANURES.
When the world consisted of vast open rocky spaces and oceans, the formation of soil was a gradual thing, brought about by the weathering action of sun, wind, rain, frosts, glaciers, rivers, etc.
In the march of evolution, plant life gradually adapted itself to, this primeval soil; and, in the course of ages, the life and death of the plants, the action of bacteria, mud brought down by rivers, the raising of parts of the ocean bed, as well as many other factors, have contributed to the formation of a comparatively thick covering of non-rocky (or only partially rocky) material over most of the earth’s surface. This covering consists of a top layer varying from a few inches to a few feet in depth—known as the "top-soil;” and a lower layer, often of considerable depth, which we call “subsoil.” The top-soil consists chiefly of two different substances which we know as (1) Leaf-Mould (or humus), and (2) loam. “Leaf-mould” consists of age-long products of decomposing vegetable matter; and can be found as a layer of 6 or more inches in any jungle—or it can be artificially made by any kebun. “Loam” is the name given to top-soil which has been turned over, and cultivated, for a long time; and it consists of humus intimately mixed with various subsoil products such as sand, clay, chalk, etc., subjected to the influence of oxygen from the air, nitrifying bacteria in the loam -itself—all aided by the disintegrating action of earth worms.
The subsoil, in the flatter and alluvial lands of Borneo for instance, consists chiefly of a fairly thick layer of yellow clay mixed to some extent with sand. Below this is a water-bearing layer of blue clay and shaly material containing carbonized relics of older vegetation. Below this again, we often come to a more rocky formation —but the geological outcrops will of course vary in various localities.
When we come to consider the actual growing of the plants in our gardens, almost the first thing that will occur to us is to inquire about the soil.
A plant, it is to be remembered, is a living, creature, having a sort of double life. It has a root, which is its anchor or hold fast and absorbent organ, by which it obtains water and soluble salts necessary to build up the plant body, and to form flowers and fruit—this root is buried in the ground—and a stem with leaves; the latter forms the above-ground portion of the plant. The stem serves to support the leaves, and to conduct the substances absorbed by the root to the leaves; whereas the leaves are the factories, which form the organic matter needed by the plant. The main object of the leaves is to spread out as large an expanse of tissue to the air and light as is convenient, so to obtain as much carbon dioxide from the air as they can deal with and, at the same time, to utilise the daylight as a source of energy.
If we take a little garden soil into our hand, we see it is composed of gritty particles,—small stones, sand and finer stuff, and bits of vegetable matter, roots of plants, etc.
It may be assumed that our problem is to find out:—
1. Whether the soil of our garden, as it is at present, is a good medium in which to grow plants and,
2. Whether it can be improved in any way:— (a) by cultivation, and/or (b) by the addition of substances to it.
The first thing that will occur to us is to get an analysis of the soil, and then to compare the analysis with that of a known good soil. The analysis however will be of little use to us unless we know how to interpret it.
Let us see what information it will give.
A chemical analysis will tell us the total amount of nitrogen, phosphoric acid and potash in the soil; and a citric soluble estimation will inform us, to some extent, as to the amount of potash and phosphoric acid present in the soil, which is “available" for the use of the plant— provided of course the plant can get at it, i.e., that there are no influences preventing the plant’s roots from spreading through the soil.
As a rough guide we may take it that if the soil contains less than 0.1% total nitrogen, 0.2% total phosphoric acid and 0.5% total potash; and, on the other hand, shows less than 0.02% citric soluble phosporic acid and potash respectively—(a fair percentage of organic matter in the soil implies a good nitrogen and potash supply, and probably a fair phosphate content) then it will be advantageous to supply the constituent or constituents in which there is a deficiency.
The percentage of organic matter in the soil, however, besides influencing its water holding capacity, will indicate somewhat the power which the roots of the plants will have in penetrating the soil, since the presence of organic matter not only, like a sponge, increases its water retaining capacity, but also opens up the soil.
The roots of plants need air as well as moisture and soluble salts and, if the soil is very fine grained, as are most of the soils round Kuching, during heavy rain the particles will run together and the soil will become compacted, so that the roots may suffer from loss of air.
The presence of organic matter in the soil of course checks this compacting effect, and benefits the plant. It may be taken as a truism that the fertility of a soil is dependent, within limits, on the amount of organic matter present in the soil.
In tropical soils bacterial action is vigorous, and organic matter is rapidly disintigrated.
Soil science, as it bears on the growth of plants, is a most complex subject, since we are not dealing with a process of chemistry, but considering the requirements of a living creature.
As regards improving the soil, the appearance of the growing plant will tell us whether the land is impoverished or not and, if so, the main thing will be to see: first, that there is a good depth of soil, at least 9 inches; and secondly, to dig in a fair dressing of rotted dung.
Grass cuttings and hedge clippings and other garden refuse should all be collected into a heap and allowed partially to rot, and buried when making up fresh flower beds. It is rather a waste to burn the vegetable refuse and to apply the ash to the soil—unless of course the plants we are burning are diseased—since the soluble matter in the ash will soon be washed out of the soil by heavy rain; whereas if the somewhat decayed matter is buried, bacterial action will slowly liberate the plant food potential in the organic matter, and provide a continuous supply of nutriment, "on tap" as it were, for the roots of the growing plants.
If the surface of the ground round growing plants is stirred every few days the plants will be benefitted, as air will be let into the soil by the breaking up of the surface crust.
MANURES.
As has been seen above, the three main food requirements of plants, are: nitrogen, potash, and phosphorus.
While these three chemical products are used by most of the plant structure, the Nitrogen is mostly concerned with the growth and foliage of the plant. The Potash is used in considerable quantity by the fruits, flowers and woody structures of the plant; while the Phosphorus promotes its fruitfulness and general well-being.
There are certain subsidiary products, such as burnt earth, lime, charcoal, etc., which have also to be considered.
We have now to consider how to supply these requisites:—When a plant is lacking in nitrogen, the leaves tend to turn yellow : if in phosphorus they turn a bluish colour; if in potash, they become spotty.
Nitrogen is a very vital product. It may be given to the plant in the form of organic animal and vegetable manures (which also contain the bacteria necessary for soil fer-tilization) or it may be supplied in artificial inorganic form as sulphate of ammonia, nitrate of potash, etc. Cattle manure, and horse manure, and poultry manure, are easily obtained. Horse and poultry manure are the hottest and richest. These manures should be allowed to decay and dry for several months, under shelter to prevent the solvent action of rain; and it is better thereafter to slightly bake them on a piece of old corrugated iron, over a fire to kill moulds, grubs, and eelworms, after which they should be rubbed through a sieve and then mixed with the soil. Poultry manure should only be used in sparing quantity owing to its caustic action, and should be thoroughly mixed with the soil. Organic vegetable manures are best made in a pit about 6 x 6 x 4, by storing, leaves, grass, etc., and keeping them wet for some time to hasten decomposition —branches, sticks, etc, should not be admitted, for they encourage fungus and white ants. Another pit should always be made for burning garden refuse, some of the grass cuttings, branches, sticks, intractable clay soil, etc. This should be kept always smouldering.
The products of the two pits mentioned can finally be mixed with the soil in the potting shed.
Nitrogen can be artificially supplied to hardy herbaceous plants by using ounce to the gallon of water.
Potash and Phosphorus may be obtained by fish guano—rotten remnants of fish, chopped up and mixed with the soil which should not be used for two or three weeks. Wood-ashes serve the same purpose, and a box should be kept in the kitchen for the cook to fill with his ashes; but here again they must be intimately mixed, some time before use Soap-suds are another excellent source of soluble potash manure, and a supply of old soapy bathwater is a most useful thing in a garden, and one which is appreciated by most plants—especially roses. It should be applied once or twice a week; and, if watered over the leaves now and then, will help to keep off noxious insects. Bone-meal is another excellent manure of this class. Another fine thing is Liquid manure made by mixing about of a kerosene tin of dried and powdered cow manure with of water: This should be stirred occasionally for a couple of days and then used sparingly for pot plants once a week, after the ordinary watering.
In agricultural manuring with artificial manures, Nitrate of Soda in the strength of three parts per thousand, is one of the most valuable products.
In all these manuring efforts, care should be taken to avoid concentration; and never under any circumstances give manure to any seedlings until their roots are well developed, except such previous preparation of the soil some time before the sowing.
The subsidiary soil adjuncts are:—Lime, soot, sand, burnt-earth, etc. Lime is useful for neutralizing the acidity of old humus soils. It should be sparingly dug in, and left for some time before use in the rainy season.
Burnt-earth has considerable value, but its effects wear off two months or so after the dressing has been given. It is the top-soil that is burnt, and it seems an effective way of imitating artificially the natural partial sterilizing process which goes on in nature.
Mah Jong Magnified.
Editorial Note:—The following humorous sketch has been sent us by a Correspondent, and will doubtless serve to enliven the passing moment.
By kind permission of the author, the Rules for "Fall-sized” or Magnified Mah Jong are set out hereunder. This interesting pastime combines the intriguing qualities of a parlour-game with healthy outdoor exercise. It is easily comprehended and can be played by old or young.
A game is actually in progress in Kuching at the present time and those who wish to learn merely need to provide themselves with— (a) An open field or padang. (b) The output of several brick-factories. (c) An opponent or “Kon Trakta."
Stakes.—1. Stakes, to be agreed upon before the game commences, shall be driven in upon all open spaces. This constitutes “Joo Na Pooh" (Joo Path).
Play.—
1. The object of the game is :— (a) To build as many walls as possible. and (b) To collect as many of the above-mentioned articles as possible in the smallest possible space.)
2. The player shall invariably keep his own seat which shall point North (magnetic). He may wear trousers and one discarded tile. This is called the "partial one suit game” and entitles the player to score the Limit or "Bats in the Belfry.”
3. Should a wall be declared broken, the Player shall call the Opponent ( Kon Trakta) who shall halve his original bid.
4. A Bong ( Swanpond) must invariably be accompanied by a Bung if Hoo ( Water) is to be collected.
5. A Player, having used all available bricks and/or tiles shall call loudly “'Wang." If no more "Wang" is forthcoming, the Player must retire from the Game.
6. "Chong” or "Moo" may be used to fill a hidden "Pung" ( Hole).
7. All Joo ( Paths) must be filled with— (a) Moo (b) Pung (c) Chong but any exposed Pung ( Hole) may be converted into a Bong ( Swanpond).
8. The play shall follow the usual procedure thereafter.
These are the main outlines of this agreeable pastime. Any point not covered by the foregoing shall be settled by reference to the “Queensbury Rules." Many other interesting features may, of course, be added by persons with anything at all above the ears.
First Division News. KUCHING METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS, FOR MAY, 1930. Note.—The Kuching Meteorological Station is situated at Latitude 1.33.29 North; and Longitude 110.20.31 East. The height above Mean Tide Level is 29.5 feet.
Sadong Collieries Report. April, 1930. Report by Mr. J. M. Evans on the Sadong Mines, April, 1930. The comparatively fine weather prevailing during the month had a salutory effect on output obtained from the shallow crop workings.
Having ample unskilled labour for underground work local recruiting was temporarily discontinued at the end of the month.
Mr. S. W. Harris returned from temporary duty at the Government Workshop, Kuching, on the 22nd. The rainfall for the month was 8.76 Inches.
The Sarawak Malay Tennis Club. SINGLES TENNIS TOURNAMENT. The President of the above Club, Datu Amar Abang Suleiman, has kindly presented two silver cups for the above tournament, one to be awarded to the winner and the other to the runner-up.
The first round of this tournament will commence on Sunday, lst June, 1930, from 9.30 a.m. to 12 noon and from 3 p.m. to 6 p.m.
The ties are as follows:— Abong v. Bismie, Hassan v. Marican, Abon v. Yahya, Bolhasan v. Hasbie, Suleiman v. Ali, Tan Soon Tye v. R. Koo, and Rakawi v. winner of Suleiman v. Ali.	Chinese Recreation Club. The Chinese Recreation Club is holding a Singles and a Doubles Open Championship Badminton Tournament for Silver Cups and Medals kindly presented by Messrs. Law Brothers. Entries close on the 20th instant and play will commence early in June.
Sarawak Union Club. In the Final of the Sarawak Union InterClub Tennis Tournament for 1929, Ong Eng Hin and Lim Ah Bee beat Wee Kheng Chiang and Chan Kim Leong, 6—4, 4—6, 6—0, 6—3.
The Final was played off on Wednesday the 22nd May and both contestants showed fine form, though Mr. Mong won two clean sets at 6—3; 6—4. The winner was steadier in judgment and more accurate in placing than Mr. Koo. Nevertheless the looser fought gamely, and even kept on leading in the second set up to 4—3 when Mong took full honours for the 8th, 9th and 10th games, to win the final set at 6—4.
The play in general was very good and many fine shots were witnessed by the enthusiastic spectators. Both finalists were congratulated on their fine exhibition and proved a credit to the Club.
A group photograph was also taken by Mr. Robert Koo of all contestants, together with the Vice President Mr. C. Ah Pow and the Secretary Mr. C. 8. Were.
The Secretary, before asking the President, Rev. Father Heidegger, to distribute the prizes, gave a fairly long speech on the Tournament. Rev. Father Heidegger, upon giving S. M. Mong the first prize, congratulated him in winning his own Cup back, and also congratulated the runner-up Robert Koo who received another Cup presented anonymously. The Club and Winners then spent their time in the festivities appropriate to the occasion.
Club News. Sarawak Club. BOWLING AVERAGES FOR APRIL, 1930. BOWLING HANDICAP FOR MAY, 1930. RACE WEEK COMPETITIONS. SARAWAK CLUB DERBY SWEEP, 1930.
Cricket. The cricket season opened on 5th April with a match between the Nondescripts and Kuching Football Club.
The Football Club batted first and put up the excellent score of 151 for 7 wickets. The featured the innings was a partnership between Moir nd Barcroft which produced 80 runs, the ultimate scores of the two men being 65 and 47 respectively.
The first three wickets fell cheaply in the innings of Nondescripts, but Nadarajah and Pereira stopped the rot by adding 93 runs before the game was abandoned as a draw.
Nadarajah gave a solid display for 20 not cut while Pereira played an excellent innings of 77 not out.
KUCHING FOOBALL CLUB VS. NONDESCRIPTS. This game, played on 26th April, afforded an excellent example of the penalty which attends missed catches.
The Nondescripts batted first and scored 49. The Football Club could only reply with 33 and were thus beaten. Had a few of the five catches that were offered by the Nondescripts been accepted the story might have been a different one.
Fernando finished off the Football Club’s innings in remarkable fashion by taking the last four wickets for one run.
Kuching Rifle Club. The Club is now affiliated to the National Riffle Association, which has represented the Donegall Bronze Badge for competition among members.
The Badge will be competed for on Thursday, 19th June, 1930. at 4.30 p.m.
Conditions : - 14 shots at 200 and 7 shots at 500 yards. Bisley scoring no handicaps. Sighting shots allowed but not convertible.
The Badge becomes the absolute property of the winner, and entitles him to enter for the Donegall Cup and money prizes at every succeeding Annual Bisley Meeting.
The next monthly Handicap will take place on Sunday, 1st June and Thursday, 5th June, at 4.30p.m.
Sarawak Turf Club. Spring Meeting, 1930. The Spring Meeting was held on Saturday 3rd and Monday 5th May, both afternoons being favoured by good weather, the Course being in fine order and the going firm.
His Highness the Tuan Muda and the Dayang Anne were present throught the whole of both afternoon's racing.
The Officers and ratings detached from H.M.S. Herold, who have been making a survey of the Sarawak river, were well represented each afternoon, Mr. Baker very kindly assisting in the Scales Room and Mr. Stakes with the Semaphore. The band of the Sarawak Rangers gave us some cherry music which was much appreciated, and excellent order was maintained on the Course and approaches by detachments of Police assisted by the detachment of the Sarawak Rangers.
As usual, the hats lining the Course for the last two furlongs were crowded with gaily-dressed Malay women, which always lends a touch of local colour.
The lower stand which has been lately repaired by the Turf Club and the new building joining the Cash Sweep building with that of the $1 Totalisator were much appreciated.
A special bar had been arranged for the Naval rsliiiiK/ and drinks were supplied to them as at the last Meeting through the generousity of the Sarawak Club and the Sarawak Turf Club.
Partly owing to the good going, and partly, of course, to good training, four previous local records were lowered, two by Flying Fox, who did the 6 furlongs in 1 minute 35 2/5 seconds, the previous best being 1 minute 36 3/5 seconds, and the mile in 2 minutes 12 1/5 seconds, the previous best being 2 minutes 14 2/5 seconds, are by Akal who did the 5 furlongs in 1 minute 18 3/5 seconds, the previous best being 1 minute l9 seconds, and the other by Azab wbo did the Race Course (about 1 mile 2 furlongs and 150 yards) in 2 minutes 56 seconds, the previous best being 3 minutes 59 seconds.
Flying Fox was the champion pony of the Meeting, winning 4 firsts and two seconds and thus securing for Mr. C. D. Adams the Championship Cup for the second time in the career of Flying Fox.
The runner-up for the Championship Cup was Jorrocks, who only entered for 4 races in the Third Division and won them all, one of them being a dead heat with September. As a result of his victories he has been raised to the 2nd Division.
The pony who showed the best form in the 2nd Division was Adham, who has now been raised to the 1st Division.
The surprise packet of the Meeting was to be found in Akal who was alleged to be lame, so much so that, good pony that he is, hardly anyone backed him with the result that when he romped home in the first race of the 2nd Day he not only created a record for the 5 furlongs but paid $53 on the $2 Tote.
There seemed to be an epidemic of lameness just before the races, which was very unfortunate for the owner of the ponies concerned, perhaps the ponies were suffering from the melody known among human bipeds as cold feet.
Kismet and Burak both appeared to be off colour and did not come up to their usual form.
Azab, being the stayer that he obviously is, won the race of the Meeting, namely, the Race Course or The Rajah’s Cup.
Gatak, Workman, Sarikei II and one or two others appear to have joined the Racing Ponies Union, for they evidently would not run faster than their union prescribed.
There were some very close and exciting finishes, the closest being the finish of the 5th race First Day and the 6th race on the Second Day, being dead heats between Adham and Beaver, and Jorrocks and September, respectively.
The Jockey’s prize, a silver wrist watch, was won by Wakijan, who had 4 wins to his credit, while Brahim was runner-up with 3 wins.
The Dayang Anne very kindly and charmingly presented the Cups to the owners of the ponies who had won them, after each race, and Mr. C. D. Adams in his usual generous and sporting style filled up both his cups—the ones given by His Highness the Tuan Muda and the Penang Turf Club—with champagne, and handed them round to all and sundry who happened to be in the Grand Stand at the time and thereby caused some amusement, for some of the ladies found some difficulty in imbibing the sparkling liquid without removing their hats. Mr. Ong Eng Hin also very sportingly handed round His Highness the Rajah’s Cup which he won with Azab in the last race of the Meeting.
The Meeting was pronounced by all to lift a great success, in spite of the fact that times are bad, due to the rubber and tin slump, and the fact that many people were away on leave, including His Highness the Rajah.
Mrs. Chater had charge of the tea-room, and is be congratulated upon the charming decorations and the success of the arrangements made by her.
Others, who are to be specially thanked for contributing towards the success of the Meeting, are those gentlemen who officiated as Starters, Paddock Stewards, Clerks of the Scales and Semaphore, not forgetting the Judge and Official Handicapper and Time-keeper; Mr. Tan Soon Guan and Mr.
Merrells and their Staff are to be complimented and thanked for the very efficient manner in winch the Totalizators and Cash Sweeps were run. The new Lottery wheels were a great assistance to the drawing of the Unlimited Cash Sweep.
Another, whose hard work in connection with Race Meetings deserves mention, is Segin, who gives the rolentic of Kuching a few days' holiday.
The European Community were unlucky in not having a single representative who drew a Starter even, in the Unlimited Cash Sweep, the first prize in which amounting to $4,531 was won by Liew Khi Chong of Bau, the second of $1,812 by P. Thimmiah Gnetty of Kuching, and the third of $906 by Mohd. Yacob of Sibu.
In another column will be found a notice concerning the suggested purchase of griffins from British North Borneo.
The two days takings for the Totalizator amounted to $19,357 of which $7,636 was taken by the $2 Tote, and $14,721 by the $1 Toto.
The two days taking for the Cash Sweep amounted to $13,350 mid the Unlimited Cash Sweep to $9,006.
There was one ticket (No. 109) taken on the 4th race Second Day, the value of which ammounts to $22.40 which was unclaimed, and unless the owner of the ticket produce it within six month from the 6th of May, 1930, this sum will be irrecoverable.
RESULTS. First Day. Saturday, 3rd May, 1930. (GOING EXCELLENT.) RACE 1.—2 p.m. THE TUAN MUDA'S CUP. 6 furlongs. DIVISION I. Also ran:—Kismet 10.4. Burak 10.0, Talisman 8.12, Gasak 8.12.
Flying Fox made the running all the way to win in record time.	4 lengths, 3 lengths.
TIME— 1 minute 35 2/5 seconds, record.
Totes: $3.50 and $2.50.
RACE 2.—2.30 p.m. THE SATOK STAKES. 5 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
Also ran; — Workman 10.0, Kim mah 9.7, Sarikei II 9.3, Mudahan 8. 12, Sisit 8.13, Pengarah 8.4.
A bunched field to the three furlongs post, after which Adham had it all his own way. Ta’sangka was making up ground fast at the finish.
6 lengths, 3 lengths.
Time— 1 minute 20 seconds.
Totes: $4.40 and $2.50.
RACE 3.—3 p.m. THE PADUNGAN PLATE. 6 furlongs.
DIVISION III.
Also ran: Almas.
Jorrocks was badly bumped by September at the fall of the flag, but settling down into the lead soon afterwards was never headed.
lengths, 1 length. Time —41 4/5 seconds. Tote: $5.30 and $2.00.
Race 4.—3.30 p.m. THE B.C.L PLATE. 3 furlongs.
Division I.
Also ran:- Untong 9.2, Talisrman 9.0, Gasag 9.0, Azab 8.12, Akal 9.11.
Flying Fox came thru' at the road and the issue was never in doubt.
2 lengths, 1 length.
Time—46 seconds.
Totes: $4.20, $2.80.
RACE 5.-4 p.m. THE PENDING STAKES. 4 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
Also ran: Workman 10.0. Water Polo 9.8, Kim Mah 9.7, Sarikei II 9.4, Gruda 8.13, Ta'sangka 8.0.
Beaver went away at once with Kim Mah and Water Polo in close attendance. Adham was badly drawn on the outside and could not make his effort until after coming into the straight. Adham’s jockey then sat down and rode a remarkably good race to catch Beaver on the post to dead heat.
Dead heat. 1 lengths.
Time—1 minute 4 3/5 seconds.
RACE 6.—4.30 pm. THE TOWN PLATE. 3 furlongs.
DIVISON III.
Also ran:—Sakbon.
Jorrocks again showed them his heels all the way in spite of his penalty.	6 lengths, 4 lengths.	Time—48 2/5 seconds.	Totes: $2.70 and $1.30.
RACE 7.—5.15 p.m. THE PENANG Cup. 1 mile.
OPEN TO ALL DIVISIONS.
Also ran:—Burak 10.7, Azab 10.7.
There was a short delay at the post caused by the jockeys of Kismet and Burak trying to force the start. When the field was finally let away Flying Fox settled down in front almost immediately. At the four furlongs Wembley went up to Flying Fox and these two lead together to the road. Coming into the straight Wembley found the pace too hot for him and he gradually faded out and was caught by Kismet who beat him by a neck for second honours. Flying Fox broke his second record for this distance and completed his hat trick for wins.
1 length, neck.
Time—2 minutes 12 1/5 seconds, record.
Totes: $3.90 and $2.
Second Day.
Monday, 5th May, 1930.
(GOING EXCELLENT.)
RACE 1.—2 p.m. THE STEAMSHIP STAKES. 5 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
Also ran:— Ol’ Man Racer 8.3, Kismet 9.3, Happy Boy 8.3, Azab 8.7, Gasak 8.0.
Flying Fox raced to the front but at the 3furlong past Akal started to come through and joined him at the road. Akal took the lend to win from Flying Fox by a length. Talisman was the best of the rest, half a length away. Akal broke the record for the distance and paid the biggest dividend of the meeting.
3 length, length.
Time —1 18 2/5 seconds, record.
Totes: $53 and $22.20.
RACE 2.—2.30 p.m. THE RANEE'S CUP. 6 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
Also ran: Mudahan 8.0, Workman 9.3, Pengarah 7.7, Ta'sangka 8.6, Sarikei II.
Workman, Water Polo and Wembley jumped off in front. At the 3 furlong past Kim Mah came up on the outside and raced together to the distance. These two raced together to the distance. Kim Mah then went ahead and Wembly gave up response when his jockey asked him to come again. Water Polo was third three lengths away.
5 lengths. 3 lengths.
Time—1 minute 30 3/5 secs.
Totes : $10.70 and $6.20.
RACE 3.-3 p.m. THE SARAWAK STAKES. 5 furlongs.
DIVISION III.
Also ran :—Almas 8.0, Sakbon 8.4.
Jorrocks again satisfied his connections and won comfortably by a length and a half.
1 lengths, length.
Time—1 minute 25 1/5 secs.
Totes : $3.50 and $2.40.
RACE 4.—3.30 p.m. THE BANKERS' PURSE. 4 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
Also ran:—Azab 8.10, Akal l0.0, Untong 8.11, Happy Boy 8.12, Ol’ Man River 8.9.
Flying Fox came through at the road from a field and resisting Talisman won nicely by three parts of a length. Adit was timid, one and a half length away. length, 1 length.
Time:—1 minute 3 3/5 sec.
Totes: $6.10 and $3.30.
RACE 5.-4 p.m. The CHIEF SECRETARY'S STAKES.
3 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
Also ran:—Pengarah 8.10, Adhthn 10.0, 11 urk- man 0 10, Sarikei JI 8.12, Grudi U.7.
A very ragged start. All the fancied ponies being left at the post. Beaver made up a tremendous amount of ground to finish third only two and half lengths behind the winner. Kim Mah had a very lucky win and would have been hard put to it to catch the judge's eye first had the ponies been let off together.
2 lengths, length.
Time: - 4m 3/5 secs.
Totes: $9.10 and $5.50
RACE 6.—4.33 p.m. THE TURF CLUB STAKES. 2 furlongs.
DIVISION III.
Jorrocks went off in front as usual but was caught at the road by September. These two ponies had a lively duel up the straight which ended in a dead heat. One of the most exciting finishes of the meeting.
RACE 7.—5.15 p.m.- THE RAJAH’S CUP. Race Course.
A HANDICAP FOR ALL DIVISIONS.
Also ran:—Kismet 9.0, Untong 8.0, Bagaimana 7.0, Gasak 7.7, Ol’ Man River 8.0.
At Sekama gate the field was being led by Talisman and Azab. When the field came into view again at the 5 furlong post Azab was out in front. At the 3 furlong post Talisman went up to Azab but dropped away again. Flying Fox then started a fine run which brought him into second place although he could not catch the winner. Azab jockey is to be congratulated on a fine piece of running as both his girths broke two furlongs from home. Both Azab and Flying Fox beat the previous record for the distance.
2 lengths, 3 lengths.
Time—2 minutes 56 seconds, record.
Totes: $11.40 and 7.80.
SARAWAK TURF CLUB.
The Committee of the Sarawak Turf Club are considering the idea of importing griffins from British North Borneo in order to introduce new blood into the racing stables, but unless at least eight persona signify their desire to purchase griffins nothing will be done in the matter. The total cost of a griffin to a purchaser, including transport and other charges delivered Kuching, will not exceed $150—any excess being defrayed by the Turf Club.
Will members therefore who would like to purchase a griffin kindly notify the Honorary Secretary forthwith.
F. O. BLAGG, Hon. Secretary, Sarawak Turf Club.
Race Day Notes. BY OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT. We saw gay patches of colour on and by the granstand at both race days this year. Mesdames and M’amselies, despite the rain on the first day, arrayed themselves in Sunday bibs and tuckers and sal_ed forth to back their luck for perchance it was their husband’s in the case of the former. Floral georgettes and voiles seemed to be the ladies’ favourites, and lovely indeed they were.
White was the Dayang Anne's choice, and she looked particularly charming on both occasions. Her frock, a fairly large floral design on a ground of white georgette, was one which we all admired.
Father Sun was in much sportive mood at the second day’s races and added his splendour to the already gay scene.	Fashion at home decrees a vogue for brighter colours in men's attire. Why not add then a snappy touch in that line at the September races? The ladies, bless them, nobly do their bit!
It is with regret that we have to announce the demise of Hopeless, a well-remembered racing pony, on 16th May, 1930. One of the first batch of griffins imported from British North Borneo in 1922, he won a race in the meeting of that year in the colours of Mr. H. B. Crocker. In the Spring Meeting of 1925 Hopeless beaded the 1st of winning ponies with a total of four wins and stakes valued at $950. In the whole of his racing career he had thirteen wins to his credit. A big pony, standing 12.3 , he always came in for liberal treatment by the handicapper, but in spite of this, as anyone will find who cares to look up his record, he was always, there or thereabout at the finish. After the Spring Meeting of 1927 Hopeless entered the stable of His Highness the Rajah, but leg trouble started soon afterwards and he never carried the colours of the stable, as he broke down in the training for the two subsequent meetings. At one period of his career he took to shying at the starter's flag, which proved disastrous to his connections on several occasions when he was fancied. Apart from which he was a good ride, both hacking and racing. May he rest easy.
Race Week Echoes.
Things we would like to know:
Who were the well-dined gentlemen who found a forgers' den in Carpenter Street which only turned out to be the automatic ice-plant on closer inspection with the aid of Sikh Constable.
If all the Kuching’ ponies are being sent out to stations for their preparation for the Autumn Meeting. Does beer taste better out of a Fireman's helmet.
Who lost a tame tiger on the Pending Road.
Whether Sir William Morris realized what the Morris Minor would have to stand up to when he designed it.
What is the normal working load of a rotan setiee.
Whether eggs and mushrooms are improved by being fried in a loud speaker.
Calcutta Turf Club Derby Sweep 1930. D. B. Calver, Honorary Secretary, Sarawak Club.
Second Division News. Divisional Reports. Second Division Report for April, 1930, by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident:—
I left on the 6th for a visit to the Kalaka District, returning to Simanggang on the 13th. At Kabong, where the Officer-in-Charge, Mr. D. K. Morse, was awaiting me. I found little to do. The Malays were questioned about the poor attendance at the Government School, and promised to send their children. I am glad to say that in the time of writing the number of pupils has been risen from 20 to 60.
Four new shops were in course of eraction, but the old bazaar appears to be very neglected.
A deputation of Malays approached me with regard to their tax, and it was agreed that no tax should become due and directly after the harvest.
I made a flying visit to Roban.
At Saratok I held one appeal ease.
Several Dyak complianed that the rubber instructor was cutting up their sheet rubber without cause. I made inquiries and the matter was settled satisfactorily. Later on in the month, Mr. G. M. Allman, Acting Director of Agriculture, visited Saratok, and there has been no further trouble.
During my stay in Saratok I visited the school; where I found seven boys and one adult male under tuition. The master, Haji Daud, is apparently incompetent and thoroughly unpopular. Arrangements are being made to relieve him.
The snu of the present cattle shed was chosen for the new bungalow, and the cattle will be moved back again to Kabong. Not only were they a dead loss but, owing to insufficient passenger, the herd caused damage to roads and gardens.
The cinema hall, factory, and wharf, belonging to Tong Lee Wing, were purchased by Government. The cinema hall will be transformed into a school whilst the factory will become a dispensary. A dresser arrived during the month, and for the first time a Government dispensary has been opened.
Penghulus Nyalu and Undom came down to see me, but had little to report. Prospects of the padi crop were fair.
I also visited St. Peter’s Mission at Saratok, which 1 found was kept in very trim condition. There are 35 boys at the school.
On my way back to Simanggang on the 13th I called in at Sebuyow. Here I visited the school and other Government buildings.
On my return to Simanggang I found a petition from Chinese and Lingga traders protesting against the regulations regarding the export of wet rubber. The Secretary for Chinese Affairs forwarder me a similar petition which had been sent to him. I most of the petitioners the next day and eventually it was arranged that Government should build a public smoke-house in Simanggang Bazaar, half of the cost of which is to be repaid by the Chinese later.
On the 2nd Mr. W. Sochon, A.S.P., left Simanggang, accompanied by Mr. Ditmas, and arrested Tan Gek Cheng. Court Writer of Lingga, on a charge of opening registered letters. The latter was taken to Kuching and is to be sent here for trial next month.
During the month regulation rations were started in all jails in Batang Lupar and Kalaka Districts, with good results.
On the 15th I accompanied the Right Reverand the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak and the Rev. W. Stonton to view certain land at Bukit Sabun, Simanggang with a view to its acquisition by the S.P.G. for a new Mission Station.
After meeting most of the occupiers I suggested a certain sum of money for compensation, which has been agreed to by both parties.
The Sibu Mission will be gradually moved to this new site when opportunity and finances permit. The Bishop stayed at the Residency for the night and left for Kuching the next morning.
A great improvement is noticed in the Simanggang herd of cattle since, the two Malay co men were dismissed. The work is now done by Tamils.
Datu Haji Dulrashid was away from the 8th to 23rd visiting Singapore on medical grounds.
During the month. Mr. G. M. Goodall, Agricultural Field Officer, Second Division, spent a few days in Simanggang, chiefly to supervise building the new Smoke-house.
Work on the new bungalow in Simanggang is progressing slowly, and in all the districts minor building operations are being started in accordance with the estimates.
The Simanggang mail contractor started work on the 1st of the month, and is doing well.
Reports of the padi harvest vary. The Ulu Ai complain of ravages made by pig and none of the up-river padi is said to be good. Malays have had very fair corps—and the down-river Dyaks have few complaints.
In consequence of the harvest, cases in the Courts were few.
I left for Kuching on 27th, accompanied by Mr. D. C. Hudden, and was still away at the end of the month. Mr. R. L. Daubeny, Assistant District Officer, Saribas was granted leave to go to Kuching towards the end of the month.
The low price of rubber has had a depressing effect on all the Chinese traders in the Division, although I am of opinion that their financial difficulties are nm_ns great as are made out. There was general opposition to the order forbidding export of wet rubber, but this seems to have died down as soon as it was realized that Government meant to enforce the order. Reports from Saratok as to the quality of rubber being exported from there are very encouraging, and it is hoped that Chinese and others see that it is to their own advantages to produce and export good rubber, of a regular standard, instead of the very mixed lot which had been exported previously.
Below I add extracts from the reports of Mr. W. P. N. D. Ditmas (Simanggang); Mr. R. D. Daubeny, Assistant District Officer, Saribas; Mr. L. K Morse, Acting Assistant District Officer, Kalaka; and Mr. G. M. Goodall, Agricultural Field Officer, Second Division.
BATANG LUPAR.
On the 2nd the Resident ordered me to go to Lingga, by m.l. Anne with Mr. W. L. P. Sochon, A. S. P. to inquire about registered letters which had been tempered with. On arrival an inquiry was held about the Court Writer. I then checked the books, opium, and cash, till of which I found to be correct.
At 9 p.m. I left for Sebuyow, which was reached 2 hours later.
Next morning I checked the cash and opium, and then locked up all the hooks. I left the station in charge of Pangeran Azit, N.O. and took Beniy Uje the Court Writer, back to Lingga, where he took over the duties OF Court Writer temporarily.
Mr. Sochon left for Kuching by s.s. L' Aubaine at 2.15 p.m., the Lingga Court Writer, Gek Cheng, with him.
I arrived back at Simanggang at 7.35 p.m.
On Tuesday 29th, at about 4 p.m., a large post which was being elected fell on the contractor, Jee Wan, and another man who were working on the new Native Officers’ quarters. Jee Wan was unconcious until the next morning, and the dresser reported him to be suffering from concussion. Now, however, he seems to be rapidly recovering. The other man it seems received a nasty blow on the side of the head.
The prisoners have been employed on the usual routine, weeding and up-keep of roads and grounds and levelling a site for a new clerk's and a new Native Officer's quarters.
There were in the District Court, two criminal cases, which were set tied with a fine of $20 and six months’ imprisonment for bribing a Government servant, and civil claims amounting to $409.35.
In the Magistrate’s Court were 15 criminal cases, 12 of which were settled with a fine amounting to $135.00.
There were sentences of two and three months for theft, and one year for non-payment of fine $100.
There were 15 civil claims amounting to $201.43.
KALAKA.
I left for Kabong on the 5th to meet the Resident who arrived from Simanggang the following day. After a short day at Kabong we proceeded to Roban and from thence to Saratok, where we arrived on 9th April.	The case of Malaka, who had appealed against the decision of the District Court, was adjourned by the Resident, who left orders for further inspection of the land.
With reference to the case of Igu and Jeliboh, the parties concerned agreed to Berslam Ai, and in accordance with this the diving took place on the 22nd, Jeliboh being the winner.
I have since been informed that Igu was a Christian, but as he took part in the diving of his own free will, there is nothing more to be said.
The Acting Director of Agriculture arrived here from Sibu on the 26th and left again for Betong on the 27th. During his visit Mr. Allman examined the smoke-house in the bazaar.
It is gratifying to find that there is no wet rubber being exported from Saratok now; this is due to the efforts of Low Ah Tat, Instructor.
The cattle from Saratok were shipped down to Kabong per m.v. Ban Wah Seng on the 15th, it being considered unnecessary to keep a herd there any longer.
Work was begun on the bazaar road, and considerable progress had been made at the end of the month.
The contractor had not started work, on the schoolmaster's house at the end of the month, but stated that he would begin on the 1st May.
Tenders were asked for the construction of the Roban Road; the tenders had not been opened at the end of the month. A contract for the construction of a schoolmaster’s house at Kabong has being made out, and awaits the Resident’s approval.
With reference to the Native Officer’s house at that station, I have reported on this under separate cover.
Dresser Leong Ah Heng reported for duty on the 23rd, and temporary quarters and dispensary were found for him, pending the construction of a permanent dispensary later in the year.
Experimental Garden Engkilili.—The weather during the last few weeks has been much wetter than the corresponding period last year; dining the month up to date of writing it has rained on eighteen days, often very heavily.
The young coffee shows remarkable growth, mainly owing no doubt to the favourable weather. There are no signs of any pests and the plants have suffered very little from insect attacks, except in one or two cases where the common black ants have for some reason or other chosen a particular plant as a swarming place. The indigo fern cover-crop planted some months ago has now formed a very fair carpet on the east side of the hill, with good effect as far as soil-wash is concerned.
The Sisal hemp transferred from the river-bank site to the west hill appear much happier on well-drained ground, and it is intended to plant up a further area on this hill with the new suckers just received from Kuching.
The case of the areca palms planted out in two rows, 8' apart on the river bank, it is noteworthy that the row further from the river is thriving well, while the other row shows next to no growth. Of the 393 nuts put out in tampins a large percentage have already sprouted, so we shall have plenty in reserve. As before reported, the tea seed sown at the end of last year proved a failure, but within the last few weeks quite a number of seedlings of two of the six varieties have come up and been transferred to tampins. Will you please send further supplies of seed, for the present in small quantities, of each variety?
As reported, a hill-top at Lubok Tedong was cleared and cut to the required size between 8th and 16th April; this necessitated a lot of earth work. Contractor started on construction on 18th April, and at time of writing the frame, floor and kajang ceiling are finished. I expect the walling and bathrooms to be completed within two weeks, then the house will be ready for occupation.
Despatch of oil palmlets to Kanowit was held up for some weeks owing to quarantine restrictions, and in one week during the last three, by lack of boxes. Provided boxes are expeditiously returned, weekly despatches will continue to be made until palmlets at Engkilili are finished.
Rubber, the general position remains as it was. The new smoke-house, for which a grant of $500 was made at Simanggang, is being put up under the supervision of Mr. Blaydes. I understand that the smoke-houses at Betong are completed.
Third Division News.
Divisional Reports. April, 1930.
Third Division Reports for April, 1930, by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident:—
Resident’s Court.—One criminal case, one conviction. Civil cases, four claims amounted to $3,802.66 and fees $125. Appeal cases two.
General.—On the 1st I was at Kapit regarding the killing of two escaped prisoners and the harbouring of two others by Katibas Dyaks. The Mujong Dyaks were highly excited since one of the deceased was a relation. They were ordered to return and were told that the Acting Assistant District Officer, accompanied by Native Officer, Abang Aboi and Orang Kaya Temunggong would proceed to Katibas and hold a full inquiry at Song afterwards. I returned on the 2nd instant.
The Acting Assistant District Officer arrived at Sibu, accompanied by Orang Kaya Temunggong, on the 16th last, and reported that a full inquiry had been hold and the Katibas Dyaks concerned had been fined eight piculs and out of this the relatives were awarded $100 Pati Nyawa. The other two escaped prisoners were brought in and sentenced to the usual punishment. This affair, can now be considered settled.	I visited the districts of Mukah, Balingian, Oya and Dalat between 11th and 16th instant.
The Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., have ceased boring operations at Balingian and taken away all machinery, etc.
At Mukah I inspected the Chinese School as regards the teaching of English, and allowed the grant as sanctioned by His Highness the Rajah.
Mr. Kidd handed over the affairs of Rejang Plantations, Ltd., to Mr. Bertram Gray and proceeded on home leave.
Mr. Hill proceeded on transfer to Sadong on the 17th instant.
I left for Kuching on the 24th instant and was still away at end of month.
The District Officer, Sibu, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports:—
Court.—Court work has been rather lighter than usual during the month.
General.—An inquiry was held into certain complaints against the Electric Department Stores Clerk, who was dismissed. A Kanowit, by name of Lanyuk, was reported to have murdered a Chinaman on the 7th at Kanowit; the Registrar went to Kanowit on the 8th to inquire into the circumstances. The Resident, accompanied by Dr. and Mrs. Gange and Mr. E. H. Elam, left on the 11th instant for Mukah per s.l. Chamois. An inquiry was held into a very serious case of assault at Sungei Merah and three persons put on remand. Another serious assault was reported on the 14th, the victim had two fractured ribs and various bruises; his assailant was sentenced to one year imprisonment. On the 15th a man came to the Police Station with a long length of chain round his neck; he said that his relatives had put him in this chain as they said he was mad; he was sent to the hospital for observation. The Resident returned from Mukah on the 16th together with the District Officer Mukah, Mr. P. M. Adams, the Divisional Medical Officer and Mrs. Gange.
The offices were closed from the 18th to 21st inclusive for the Easter Holidays. Advantage was taken of this to have the inside walls of the offices knocked down, the change is a great improvement and distinctly cooler. Sixty Dyaks left on the s.s. Rajah of Sarawak on the 19th to work with the Colonial Survey Section R.E. in Johore.
On the 24th the Resident, Messrs. P. M. Adams, Middlemas, Kidd, Spurway and Mrs. Spurway and child, left for Kuching per m.s. Sri Mukah. Mr. G. M. Allman left on the 25th per m.l. Para for the Second Division.
Visitors to Sibu during the month included Messrs. Middlemas, Allman, Calver, MacPherson, Chadwich, Stone, Owen and Hebb.
General.—A report was taken from Kanowit on the 8th that Chu Yew Hang, a male Foochow about forty-two years, had been killed by Lanyuk. Mr. Crocker, Registrar, and Sub-Inspector of Police went up river by m.l. Young Harry. Mr. Crocker held an inquest and found that the deceased was murdered by Lanyuk, who was arrested and charged with the murder of Chu Yew Hang. On 22nd inst. Lanyuk was convicted in the Resident's Court and sentenced to death subject to confirmation of Supreme Court.
Prisons.—There were eight men and one woman im-prisoned and sixteen prisoners released during the month.
The daily average working was 75.5.
The Divisional Engineer, Mr. J. W. Whiteside, reports:—
Buildings.—Sibu Bazaar.—Ten shophouses in Cross Road are completed and the reinforced concrete framing and roof are finished in the remaining twenty-one houses, which all being erected by Messrs. Gammons. Good progress is being made on the five brick shops erected by local merchants. Repairs to Government buildings have been carried out during the month. One European bungalow is in the course of erection and one clerk’s quarters has been completed in Green Road. Earth filling and the laying out of concrete drains to various Government quarters has been continued during the month.
Roads and Bridget.—A concrete culvert has been laid in Green Road. The gravelling and filling to Telephone Road and Green Road has been completed.
Wharves—The new concrete wharf was completed towards the end of the month and earth filling is being added so as to place the whole area above flood level.
Waterworks.—The erection of the 3rd filter tank has been carried out by the Government Workshop Stiff and, as soon as the necessary mains are connected it will be put into operation. The Kampong Datu main has been connected to the Green Road main, thus connecting the New Jail to the Sibu supply.
Outstations—Sarikei and Binatang.—Alterations have been carried out to the Binatang Fort. Good progress has been made on the concrete wharf at Binatang. The preliminary works on the Sarikei wharf have not been started owing to the decision to alter the site of the wharf. Gravelling and forming Repok Road has been continued during the month.
Daro and Matu. —Contracts have been let for the erection of the new jail at Matu and the new Court House at Duro.
The Electrical Engineer, Mr. H. Strong, reports:—
Station.—Units generated 25,098, units consumed in P. Station 3,109, useful units 21,996, fuel oil consumed 2,431 gallons, lubricating oil consumed 422 gallons.
Staff.—A. G. Biakz, Storekeeper, was dismissed from the service on 9th and Dennis Mowe has been engaged to replace him on three months’ probation.
The Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. C. O. Gange. re-ports:—
There were 303 now out-patients and their repetition, making a total of 523 in all.
Four hundred and one passengers were inspected on the Singapore boats and 893 vaccinations were performed in various stations in the Third Division, including Sibu district and surroundings.
During the month one leper was transferred to Kuching Leper Camp, and one Dyak female, by the name of Selaim, was transferred to Kuching Asylum for incarceration.
Fifty-three N.A.B. injections were given and thirteen operations were performed, four under general anaesthetic and nine under local anaesthesia.
During the month Dresser B. Broke proceeded to Lassa from 12th to 15th instant, doing vaccinations in Dyak villages and returning on 15th instant.
I paid visits to Mukah, Oya and Balingian from 11th to 16th April, returning on the 16th instant.
The Divisional Land Officer, Mr. C. E. Pascoe, re-ports:—
Quit rent payments slumped badly from the end of March, as was only to be expected, and an opportunity occurred to catch up with some of the back work inside the office.
The compilation of new Mortgage and Transfer re-gisters is progressing only slowly, as the clerks’ time is fully taken up in the more pressing work of registering quit rent payments, issue of new titles, cancellation of old titles, preparation of statistics, Land Inspectors forms, etc.
In company with the Land Officer, Binatang Sarikei, I paid a visit to the Ulu Sarikei, and examined the country between Sungei Repok and Sungei Ribong on the Ulu side of Peninjau. It is now possible to ride a bicycle out as far as Repok on a good road about 20 feet wide, along which motor lorries will shortly be able to ply for a distance of 8 miles from Sarikei. The intention is to carry this road as far as Jakar and thence across in the direction of Roban to link on with the Roban-Saratok roadway. On the up river side of Jakar there are pepper gardens only planted by Cantonese.
We walked all over the area and it was the Dyaks and pepper planters seemed on good terms. Of pepper gardens, in the course of circular walk of about ten miles, we came across some 60-70 gardens mostly in bearing and in splendid condition, and usually in groups of two or three with jerami in between. The Dyaks reported more gardens on the ulu side of the Ribong, but not very many. From Jakar we proceeded on further up the Sarikei river and spent one night there. Along the river bank are some surprisingly good rubber gardens, the property of Dyaks, worked by Cantonese coolies on behalf, of the Dyaks. Unfortunately all the Dvaks were out on their farms, and we could not gather much information with regard to Chinese activity above this point, but it is in my opinion that if there are any there are very few and far between. The survey parties are working round Peninjau, and all the gardens between that hill and Sarikei have now been completed.
There still remains the pressing need of a Foochow pepper reserve, and on my way down river, I stopped it Morudu, the site formerly granted to Chin Nang, and of course found the place deserted and overgrown. As this locality is well reported on as being suitable for pepper, it would seem that here is the site—700 acres already demarcated—for a pepper reserve for Foochows. Possibly more land would be available on the inland side of this area, but examination would, of course, be necessary to verify this.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Kapit, Mr. A. Macpherson, reports:—
General.—The Resident paid a visit to Kapit, spending the night of the 1st. I left for Tekalit on 9th with the Temmunggong and other Penghulus, took Layang and Ragun and brought them down to Sibu on 16th, having settled the case against Penghulus Sirai and Briak on that day. I spent four nights at Sibu, returning on 20th, and left for Mujong with Temmunggong on 24th to settle the Dyaks there, returning on 29th. Abang Aboi left for Pala Wong on 30th, Awang Samsudin came down from Belaga on 18th and left on 30th.
The Officer-in-Charge, Sarikei and Binatang, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports:—
General.— Work in the office this month has been considerably less thin in the previous months, probably on account of all taxes having been paid in March. Reports of Dyak and Malay padi harvests have been good and there should not be the same difficulty over rice that the Dyaks in this district experienced during the last two years. At Binatang, but not so much at Sarikei, the Foochows have grown a considerably amount of padi with great success, and the headmen say that next year they will be planting a lot more. This should prove a very good thing, and the Foochows should have every encouragement to open up padi land. They are also planting pepper both at Sarikei and Binatang and so will no longer depend on rubber alone.
Lands.—The Divisional Land Officer was down during the month to choose a suitable place for the Foochows pepper reserve at Sarikei, they having already one at Binatang. The site chosen was a piece of land, about 603 acres, in Sungei Marudu off Sungai Sarikei. This is very good land but they will be at a disadvantage with the Cantonese because they have no billian near at hand, as the Cantonese have in the Nyelong district.
Treasury.—Divisional Treasurer Mr. McGinn visited the station on the 14th, checking books, cash, etc.
Rain during the month was heavy.	P. W. D.— The new wharf at Binatang is progressing speedily, the piling is nearly finished and the low water beams are in place. Supposing that the site for the Sarikei wharf at the end of Sarikei old bazaar is correct this time, work should start in a week or so. A place for a football ground at Binatang has been cleared, burnt and changkoled, most of the work was done by the Kampong who are very keen about it.
The Repok road has reached S. Repok, about 8 miles, in its rough state. Work is now proceeding on graveling it, and adding more good earth from the hills on the 3 miles of road that run from the bazaar to Bukit Timbang Buah, which is very low lying. Bukit Timbang Buah was cut through during the month.
Another large tank has been erected by Bungalow No. 2, so we should now not have any difficulty about water during the dry season, Ten strong billian bridges have been built on the Repok Road, and the Austin 7 lorry can now reach Bukit Timbang Buah without difficulty.
Trade and Customs.—Trade was on the whole slack, due to the slump. It is said that in six weeks’ time there will be a great deal of pepper to export, about twice as much as last year. The following are the statistics for Sarikei.
The District Officer, Lower Rejang, Mr. E. V. Andreini, reports:—
General.—I visited Bruit on the 2nd and again later in the month in connection with a land dispute. Tuanku Mohamat, Native Officer, visited Jerijeh, Paloh and Belawai. Haji Brahim, Native Officer, Daro, visited Sa-ai and Kort to inspect land and check Tua Kampong’s books:
The sum of $6,839 from Matu and $4,500 from Rejang was sent to Sibu Treasury.
A Sumatra Malay arrived at Matu to go into the prospects of obtaining snake skins, but the kind he required do not appear to be obtainable here.
Land and Agriculture.—A start was made to try to interest the people in co-operation in planting, etc., at the Tian village, on similar lines to those in the Oya started in 1923, which have been a success and will shortly be bearing fruit.
The Datu Shahbandar’s cattle, 86 in all, were taken over by Government. Daro.—The road from the bazaar to the police barracks was raised above flood level and drains constructed behind barracks.	The Officer-in-Charge, Oya and Dalat, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports:—	Judicial.—There were no cases worthy of mention in the Oya Courts during the month, but at Dalat three Dyaks were imprisoned for two months each for refusing to assist the Forest Ranger in the execution of his duty.
General.—The Resident, Third Division, together with District Officer of Mukah and Oya and Dr. and Mrs. Gauge, visited the station on the 15th and proceeded to Dalat the same day. The Chinese inquired about a grant for their school but were told to engage an English-speaking master first. This they are going to do when they have finished enlarging the present school building. The few outstanding affairs were discussed and settled and the party returned to Oya, leaving next morning at 5 a.m. in m.l. Chamois for Sibu.
I arrived back from Sibu on the 12th, the District Officer having visited the station during my absence. I went to Mukah for Easter with the Rev. Fathers Epping and Bunck and after, in the absence of the District Officer, held Magistrate's Court there.
The Divisional Medical Officer vaccinated several people during his visit to Dalat, and the dresser from Mukah came over later and gave soma injections to Dyaks. One Dyak leper was sent to Kuching on the 26th.
Rainfall.—The total rainfall recorded during the month was 5.66 inches, the greatest fall in any one day being 2.20 inches.
Shipping.—Four motor schooners and seven schooners and four motor schooners and four schooners cleared.
Trade.—212 koyaus raw sago, 95 pikuls jelutong and 69 pikuls gutta para were shipped to Kuching.
The District Officer, Mukah and Oya, Mr. P. M. Adams, report:—
General.—The Resident, Third Division, together with Dr. and Mrs. Gauge, visited the station on the 11th when the few outstanding affairs were discussed. The party proceeded to Balingian on the 13th and left for Oya and Dalat the next afternoon. The District Officer accompanied and returned to Sibu with the party. The Officer-in-Charge of Oya and Dalat came over from Oya with the Rev. Fathers Epping and Bunck to spend Easter here and attend to the affairs of the station, and returned on the 24th. Native Officer Awang Juli, of Balingian, was transferred to Mukah and Abang Mustapa was sent over to relieve him.
P.W.D.—During the month Hamdani made great progress with the erection of the new Electrical Quarters which stand on the site of the old Tamil lines next to the hospital. All the wood used is good and the whole building is a good piece of workmanship.
Shipping.—Eleven motor schooners and 15 schooners entered during the month and the same number cleared.
Trade.—606 koyans of raw sago and 71 koyans of jelutong were shipped to Kuching during this month.
ECHOES FROM THE WORLD OUTSIDE. The Naval Conference Ends.
Mr. Alexander, the First Lord of the Admiralty, delivered a speech on the work of the Naval Conference at Sheffield on Friday night.
Mr. Alexander, in the course of his speech, said:—"We are all, of course, sorry that up to the present we have not secured complete agreement on all the points discussed at the Conference between the whole of the five Powers; but an examination of the facts makes it clear that we have good reason to be thankful for the definite advance which has been made.”
At the Geneva Conference of 1927—in which France and Italy were unable to take part—the United States, Japan, and Great Britain failed to arrive at agreement. Now, however, there was a complete agreement with Japan and the United States on all classes of ships, and upon very much lower figures than the last proposals made to the Geneva Conference. For cruisers, destroyers, and submarines together the total tonnage proposed for the British Empire and the United States in 1927 was 590,000 each plus 25 per cent. Over age, a total of 737,500 tons, a figure which was to remain in force till 1936. Now in these categories we were to have a total of 541,700 tons by 1936, a reduction the Geneva propposals of 195,800 tons. The United States figure now was 526,200, a reduction of 211,300 tons. The small extra American reduction in total tonnage was in recognition of the larger number of heavy 8in. -gun cruisers which the United States may build. The Japanese figure proposed at Geneva for these categories was 481,250; the provisional figure now agreed on was 367,050, a saving of 114,200 tons. The reduction of the three Powers in these categories as compared with the proposals on which the Conference broke down in 1927 was 521,300 tons.
CAPITAL SHIPS.
Mr. Alexander continued:—“Moreover, the Powers have mutually agreed to waive, pending a further conference in 1935, their rights under the Washington Treaty to build any of the capital ships provided in that treaty to be laid down from 1931 onwards. It has also been agreed by the three Powers to reduce the numbers of their capital ships to the minimum figures provided for in the Washington Treaty with the least possible delay, instead of waiting until 1936. This means the early scrapping of five British battleships, three American, and one Japanese.
“Another great achievement has been the rectification in this agreement of the world tendency to build the largest-size cruiser permitted under the Washington Treaty. When we entered into office last year the American authorized programme in 8in. 10,000-ton ships was not less then 23. In the case, of Britain there were 17 8in. ships built and building, and one further ship authorized in the total programme, which, if carried to its completion, would have been not less than 20; and as Japan might quite naturally have been expected to build pro rata, even these figures might not have been the maximum. To-day we have definitely agreed among the Three Powers that the maximum number of ships of this class shall be 18,15, and 12 respectively.
Under the agreement now reached the approximate tonnage figures of the three Powers will be as follows:-
In the case of cruisers, Mr. Alexander explained that last year there were 63 cruisers built, building, and authorized, in connexion with a programme which aimed at a general goal of 60 under-age cruisers and 10 over-age, or 70 in all. Under the agreement now arrived at the maximum number of cruisers would be 50, and the saving thus effected, during the period up to 1936, would amount to many millions.	In submarines there would be a saving in construction up to 1936 of about £3,400,000 and in maintenance of about £450,000, a total of £3,850,000.
“It is safe to estimate,'' said Mr. Alexander, "that up to 1936 the saving involved by the Three- Power Treaty will be at least between 60 millions and 70 millions sterling."—(Times.)
International Law. NEW RULES FOR SUBMARINE WARFARE.
The following are accepted as established rules of International Law:—
(1) In their action with regard to merchant ships submarines must conform to the rules of International Law to which surface war vessels are subjected.
(2) In particular, except in case of persistent refusal to stop on being duly summoned or of active resistance to visit or search a warship, whether surface vessel or submarine, may not sink or render incapable of navigation a merchant vessel without having first placed the passengers, crew and ship's papers in a place of safety. For this purpose the ship’s boats are not regarded as a place of safety unless the safety of the passengers and crew is assured in the existing sea and weather conditions by the proximity of land or the presence of another vessel which is in a position to take them on board.
(3) The signatory Governments invite all other Governments to express their assent to the above rule.
The maximum unit displacement of submarines is fixed at 2,000 tons, but each nation will be permitted to maintain not more than three submarines of 2,800 tons. These three must be included in the total tonnage allotted to the submarine category. —(Times.)
Restriction in the Tea Industry. TEA OUTPUT. After a long period of excessive production the tea-planting industry has followed the lead of rubber and tin and embarked on a scheme of restriction which has been put into operation forthwith. Protracted negotiations affecting the industry in India, Ceylon, Java and Sumatra reached a successful conclusion at the end of last week. The details are somewhat involved, but, put briefly, the basis of the scheme is that the cut in production is to be based on the average price level obtained from the different gardens over the past three years. Where the average price is a high one, which in itself indicates the growth of a preponderance of fine tea, the cut will be relatively small; while, on the other hand, where the average price is low, the cut will be heaviest. By this means the chief object of the scheme will be achieved, viz-, the elimination of a larger amount of the poorer quality teas in the general scale of reductions, there being always a better market for the finer grades than there is for common kinds. The scheme is expected to result in a reduction of 57,000,000 lbs. on last year’s output of over 800,000,000 lbs., or a cut of about 7 percent. This will be divided as follows:—Northern India, 32,500,000 lbs.; South India, 4,000,000 lbs.; Ceylon, 11,200,000; and Java and Sumatra, 8,500,000 lbs. The existing supplies are abnormally heavy, and it is likely to be some time before the effect of the scheme is felt —(China Express and Telegraph.)
SHIPPING INTELLIGENCE. Port of Kuching. LIST OF FIRST-CLASS PASSENGERS.
By s.s. Kuching to Singapore on 3rd May:—
Mr. and Mrs. Rignell, Bishop and Mrs. Danson. Mr. G. D. Kidd, Miss Pease, Messrs. W. K. Heytman, Hebb, Lim Peng Chye, Owen, Edmett, Yap Ah Bee, Song Thian Cho, Augustine Chong, Lau Chin Gee.
By s.s. Vyner Brooke from Singapore on 5th May:—
Messrs. H. C. Cummins, B. Tarring, Mrs. Robert, Messrs. T. Mohri, Matsumoto, Mr. and Mrs. W. Kheng Hong and two children, Mr. and Mrs. John Lim, Mrs. Lim Peng Koon, Madam Choo Kiaw, Mr. C. Chai Gan.
By s.s. Vyner Brooke to Singapore on 10th May:—
Miss Hallowes, Lieut. and Mrs. T. W. Goodban, Messrs. Chas V. Phipps, Cummins, Mr. and Mrs. P. H. Hayward, Messrs. R. Tanning, W. Harnack, Anna Suleiman, Ali, Chiang Chai Gam.
By s.s. Kuching from Singapore on 12th May:—
Messrs. O. F. Ricketts, W. G. Johnston, Takasaki, A. Chong, Mr. and Mrs. Lim Kim Guan.
By s.s. Vyner Brooke from Singapore on 19th May:—
Messrs. N. E. Hughes, Edmett, Mrs. J. R. Smith, Miss Collinson, Mr. McTavish, Lieut. Postlethwaite, Lieut. Kirkbride, Mr. and Mrs. D. Arca, Messrs. F. Tecson, F. Sosa, E. Crisistomo, E. Tecson.
By s.s. Vyner Brooke to Singapore on 24th May:—
Dayang Anne, Mrs. Brooke. Dr. P. T. A. Chette, Messrs. J. W. Evans, McTavish, S. 8. Tang, Lau Ah Yam.
By s.s. Kuching from Singapore on 26th May:—
Messrs. M. H. L. Lejuine, L. Perkins, Teo Choon Hian, Mr. and Mrs. Yap Ah Bee, Messrs. Ali bin Dollah, Ana Suleiman, Master Mohd. Osen.
LIST OF CABIN PASSENGERS.
By s.s. Gladys from Miri on 6th May:—
Messrs. Chin Tet Su, Awatig Zainie, Misses Rosa Wong and Mary Chong.
By m.v. Sri Mukah from Sibu on 9th May.—
Messrs. A. J. Nadig, Chai Lian Siong, Lau Yong Pin, H. Brodie, Wong Leong Chee, Mrs. Ngui Ah Thiam.
By m.v. Sri Mukah from Sibu on 16th May:—
Mother Helen, Dr. Hutchison. Capt. Smith (s.s. Kuching), Messrs. Ong Wee Hiang, Daud bin Ismail, two Malay Ladies.
By s.s. Auby from Singapore on 23rd May:
Mrs. Baird. By m.s, Sri Mukah from Sibu to Kuching on 25th May :—
Mr. E. Parnell, Mrs. Hutchison, Mr. McTavish, Capt. Lowe, Mr. Hock Seng and 2 children, Mrs. Wee Peng Swee and 1 Chinese woman, Mrs, Holl and son, Mr. Ting Ming Kang.
SAILINGS TO EUROPE. P. AND O. COMPANY. (Passenger Agents—Borneo Co., Ltd.) (Freight Agents—Sarawak Steamship Co.) Passage money to London £33 First and £31 Second-Class.
BLUE FUNNEL LINE. (Agents —Borneo Company, Ltd.) NIPPON YUSEN KAISHA. Calling at Aden, Naples, Marseilles, Gibraltar and London. (Passenger Agents—Sarawak Steamship Co., Ltd.) (Freight Agents—Borneo Co., Ltd.) [ The tonnage of the fleet is not given by the Agents.- Editor.]
NETHERLAND STEAMSHIP CO. (Agents—Borneo Co., Ltd.) Calling at Balawan, Sabaug, Genoa, Algiers and Southampton.
EAST ASIATIC CO., LTD. (Agents—Borneo Co., Ltd.) These vessels sail from Bangkok, calling at Singapore, Penang and London. All doable cabins have got private bathrooms, Doctor and Stewardess are carried.
Official and Semiofficial Announcements. APPOINTMENTS. His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. R. N. Baron to be Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Fifth Division, with effect from 16th April, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. J. J. Hill to be Officer-in-Charge, Sadong, with effect from 19th April, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Mr. E. L. Crossley to be a Cadet in the Sarawak Civil Service, with effect from 21st April, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Mr. W. H. C. C. Morice to be a Cadet in the Sarawak Civil Service, with effect from 2lst April, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Mr. G. F. J. Pegler to be a Cadet in the Sarawak Civil Service, with effect from 21st April, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Mr. T. E. Parker to be a Land Officer, with effect from 21st April, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. F. L. CROSSLEY, Cadet, to do duty in Kuching, with effect from 22nd April, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. W. H. C. C. Morice, Cadet, to do duty in Kuching, with effect from 22nd April, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. G. F. J. Pegler, Cadet, to do duty in Kuching, with effect from 22nd April, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. L. K. Morse to act as Assistant District Officer, Kalaka, with effect from 1st April, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. E. H. Elam to act as Assistant District Officer, Oya, with effect from 1st May, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. J. O. Gilbert to act as Assistant District Officer, Sarikei and Binatang, with effect from 1st May, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. C. E. L. Blagg to act as Registrar, Supreme Court, and Official Assignee, in addition to his other duties, with effect from 10th May, 1930, inclusive.
LEAVE. Miss I. C. Wallace, Matron, General Hospital, has been granted five days' sick leave on full pay, with effect from 10th April, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to grant to Mr. F. H. Kortright, an Officer in Class IB of the Sarawak Civil Service, seven months’ leave on full pay, with effect from 17th April, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to grant to Mr. H. M. Calvert, Commissioner of Trade and Customs and Shipping Master, seven months’ leave on full pay, with effect from 17th April, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to grant to Mr. J. K. Beasley, Superintendent of Government Stores, seven months’ leave on full pay, with effect from 17th April, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to grant to Mr. C. Pitt-Hardacre, Assistant Municipal Department, seven months’ leave on full pay, with effect from 17th, April, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to grant to Mr. F. G. Carpenter, an Officer in Class II of the Sarawak Civil Service, seven months’ leave on full pay, with effect from 1st May, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. W. L. Clark, Assistant Electrical Engineer, Kuching, has been granted one month and twelve days' vacation leave on full pay, with effect from 19th March, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. F. H. Pollard, Acting District Officer, Baram, has been granted five days’ sick leave on full pay, with effect from 24th April, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. R. L. Daubeny, Assistant District Officer, Saribas, has been granted thirteen days’ vacation leave on full pay, with effect from 25th April, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. B. Summers, Land Officer, has been granted five days’ sick leave on full pay, with effect from 28th April, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to grant to Mr. W. Harnack, Surveyor, Survey Department, seven months’ leave on full pay, with effect from 16th May, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to grant to Mr. P. H. Hayward, Registrar, Supreme Court, and Official Assignee, seven months’ leave on full pay, with effect from 16th May, 1930, inclusive.
LEAVE AND RESIGNATION.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to grant to Second-Lieutenant T. W.Goodban, Quartermaster, Sarawak Rangers, three months' leave on full pay, with effect from 8th May. 1930, inclusive, at the expiration of which he is permitted to resign his commission in the Sarawak Rangers and " his appointment in the Sarawak Government Service.
CORRESPONDENCE. [The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
SCOTTISH NATIONAL INSTITUTION FOR BLINDED SAILORS AND SOLDIERS EDINBURGH, 31st March, 1930.
DEAR SIR, I have much pleasure in acknowledging receipt of your letter of 26th alt. received to-day, enclosing Bank Draft for £14.17.2, being amount very kindly contributed by the members of the Sarawak St Andrew’s Society, as a donation towards the funds of Newington House. Formal receipt herewith. On behalf of the Committee of Management, I desire you to convey to your members, their most grateful and sincere thanks for this very kind contribution to the funds, and to express their appreciation of the continued sympathetic and kindly interest taken in the work done at Newington House on behalf of the men blinded in the service of their country. I am, Yours faithfully, (Sgd.) D. DRUMMOND, Treasurer.
JAS. P. BAIRD, Esq., Kuching, Sarawak.
Note.—A farther £6.6.0 was forwarded in March, acknowledgment not yet to hand. —J.P.P.
Dutch Geological Survey of Borneo. BANDOENG, 28th April, 1930.
The Editor, The Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
DEAR SIR, Some of your readers will be interested to hear that the Geological Survey of West-Borneo will be taken up again in June of this year. L. H. Krol, accompanied by his Assistant G. ter Bruggen, and a large native staff of surveyors and collectors, will go first to the Upper-Kapoeas river, where the expedition will be split up into several smaller brigades. Krol will try to reach Long Nawan in the Upper-Kayan river and will return along the Baloi in the Upper Rajang from where he will float downstream, to Kapit and Sibu. Mr. ter Bruggen will cross the border in the very utmost Kapoeas and will paddle down the Bali river as far as Kapit, from whence he will return to Putus Sibau along the Katibas and Sibau rivers.
Several important questions about the geology of Borneo will have to be solved on these excursions, especially the real stratification position of the radiolaria-bearing Danau formation, its facies (deep-sea or shallow water deposit), its position towards the older state formation of the boundary mountains and the marine deposits of the older tertiary formation. Further an attempt will be made to explain the direction of the Rajang river, for which there must be some tectonic reason. Also the delta of that river will have to be visited to get some further information about the faultlines that are noticed in the Upper Sadong and are expected to follow the direction of the coastline of Sarawak, and which faultlines may be the reason of the earthquakes that are noticed from time to time in some coastal stations.
A collection of the several rock specimens of the First Division, all petrographically determined, have been sent to the Curator of the Sarawak Museum, where they will be unpacked and classified by Mrs. and Mr. Krol as soon as they can come to Kuching.
The most important of these rocks have been polished to show the inner structure, and to demonstrate the possibility that the material can be used for domestic purposes.
With kind regards, Yours faithfully, L. W. KROL.
KUCHING, 5th May, 1930.
The Editor, The Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
DEAR SIR, In the May copy of the Sarawak Gazette there appears a paragraph stating that two men were killed during the demolition of Kuching Venice.
This is not accurate, as one of the men concerned, in spite of three broken ribs and other injuries, is now convalescent in the General Hospital.
Yours faithfully, W. HUTCHISON, Chief Assistant Medical Officer.