The Sarawak Gazette. THURSDAY, MAY 1st, 1930. Suara Sarawak. April. A contemporary has an interesting article on “Rowing Blues in After Life.” Mr. McKenna, the politician, rowed bow in the Cambridge crew of 1887; and Mr. S. M. Bruce, a former Prime Minister of Australia, rowed No. 2 in 1904. Of the 1900 boat, His Highness the Tuan Muda rowed 3. Bow, was a diplomatist who entered the R.F.C. and died in Sinai. No. 2, is a master of Eton. No. 4, is a doctor at Eastbourne. No. 5, was Etherington Smith, the brilliant young surgeon whose career ended by accident. No. 6 was a Colonel in the R.F.A., who was killed in France. No. 7 is a former Liberal M.P. The stroke is Colonel Gibbon, a well-known horseman. The Cox was G.A. Lloyd—since, Governor of Bombay and High Commissioner for Egypt.
The Committee have recently added a book to the Library (M 61a) which may be of interest to some of our readers: “Strange Stories from a Chinese Studio,” by H. A. Giles. We welcome the arrival of the April issue of the Mirage—packed with good things as usual. On April 6th, Miss Marian Jill Middlemas held an “At Home” which was attended by her many friends to convey congratulations on her presentation to society.
Mr. Page-Turner, left for England on the 12th April. A farewell dinner in his honour was given at the Astana on April 9th.
The Kuching Venice has finally disappeared—except for the coconut tree! Unfortunately, during the demolition, a wall of one of the houses fell on two of the contractor’s workmen, and caused their speedy and untimely end.
His Highness the Tuan Muda accompanied by the Dayang Anne, Capt. and Mrs. Le Sueur, Mr. and Mrs. Forrest, and Mr. Arundell, A.D.O., Upper Sarawak, paid a week’s visit to Lundu district during the month.
The Easter holidays from the 18th to the 21st passed off with favourable weather, and the usual exodus to seaside resorts, etc.
We hear that a Dyak lad was taken by a crocodile at Simanggan. Considering the number of these pests in the rivers of Sarawak, fatalities are remarkably few.
We are glad to hear that Mr. Scott has practically recovered from his serious illness and returned to Sibu Laut on the 20th April.
Obituary. SJR JOSEPH WEST RIDGEWAY. LONDON, APRIL 14. The death has occurred of the Rt. Hon. Sir Joseph West Ridgeway, the former Governor of Ceylon and for over 17 years, the president of the Court of Directors of the British North (Chartered) Company.—Reuter.
The late Sir West Ridgeway was, in every sense of the word, an “Empire builder” and the story of his career is so full of romance that it reads more like a far-fetched novel of thrilling adventure than a staid record of individual achievement.
The son of the Rev. Joseph Ridgeway of Tun-bridge Wells, he chose the Army as a career, be-came a Lieut. Colonel in 1886 and the following year was promoted Colonel for distinguished service. He served through the Afghan War of 1879-80—during which time he was political secretary to Lord Roberts—and was awarded the Diamond Star of the Afghan Order of Chivalry.
H.M.S. Herald paid a short but welcome visit to Kuching en route for Miri, whence she intends to return and remain for some time in these waters. An At Home was given on board on the 27th to some of their Kuching friends.
On the 26th a soccer team from the Herald played a match against Kuching, which resulted in a draw 1—1.
A most enjoyable dance was given by the Chief Secretary and. Mrs. Boult on St. George’s day.
The Right Reverend Bishop Danson has been paying a round of visitations to his diocese during the month. On the 29th April, he concluded his official out-district duties by consecrating the chapels at the Leper and Pauper Camps.
Sarawak has recently contributed its small quota to the making of history. Here, has recently been born a new version of the ancient game of Mah Jong—introducing an ‘Auction.’ variation and other features of interest. By arrangement with the author of the copyright we are able to include the new rules of the game in this issue for the benefit of our readers. We understand that it will shortly be on sale in London.
Thereafter appointment followed appointment, and adventure was piled upon adventurer with almost bewildering rapidity. His energy was boundless, his versatility amazing and in almost everything, to which he turned his hand his success was phenomenal.
He resigned his appointment under Lord Roberts to become Under-Secretary to the Government of India in the Foreign Department, a post which he held for nearly four years (1880-84).
Two CROWDED DECADES.
Between 1884, and the day when he relinquished his last Government appointment as Governor and Commander-in-Chief of Ceylon in 1903, this amazing man had been engaged on special diplomatic duty in Petrograd, acted as H.M Commissioner for fixing the frontier between Russia and Afghanistan, gone as Envoy Extra-ordinary to the Sultan of Morocco, and filled the offices of Governor of the Isle of Man and of Under-Secretary for Ireland.
THOUGHT FOR THE MONTH.
A sense of humour is the most hard-worked and most frequently misapplied phrase in our language. It has no connection whatever with a sense of the ridiculous or superficial appreciation of it. I prefer to regard it as the philosophy of the unbeaten.—(N. K. Strange, in “Kenya Dawn.”)
But, even so probably the most important portion of his life’s work remained to be done. After serving as chairman of the Committee of Constitutional Inquiry in the Transvaal and Orange River Colonies, and unsuccessfully contesting the City of London seat in the Liberal interest, Sir West joined the Court of Directors of the British North Borneo Company in 1906.
To day it is 48 years since the Royal Charter was granted and Sir West had been a member of the Court of Directors for very nearly half that period and president of the Court for the 17 years. And it is during those 17 years that most of the developments of which he speaks have occurred
With the possible exception of the late Mr. W. C. Cowie no man has done more for North Borneo than has Sir West Ridgeway. He it was who was largely responsible for overcoming the City of London’s prejudice against the Country.
Of course, the the rubber slump has hit North Borneo as it has hit every other rubber producing country, but there can be little doubt that the change of policy, for which Sir West was mainly responsible, did give a considerable impetus to the rapid development of the Territory.
IN CEYLON.
In Ceylon, where Sir West was Governor and Commander-in-Chief from 1896 to 1903, he will be remembered as one of the most able administrators the Island has ever had. His speeches were so brilliant, and so crammed full of information, that they were collected and published in book from his many voluminous reports on the progress and development of the Colony are still in more frequently quoted than those of any Governor.
Sir West married in 1881 a daughter of Mr R. Calverly Bewickle of Coulby Manor, Yorkshire, Lady Ridgeway, who was much loved in Ceylon, died in 1907. He leaves one daughter.
BELLES-LETTRES: Notes on Tropical Gardening No. 4.
OCHID CULTIVATION FOR AMATEURS.
For purposes of cultivation, orchids may be roughly divided into three classes: terrestrial, climbing, and epiphytic. The epiphytic species are those like the common pigeon orchid, which grow on trees, without any contact with the ground; they are not parasites, having no connection with the living tissues of the trees on the surface of which they live. In the garden, several of the terrestrial and climbing species are very useful ornamental plants, and are also valuable for providing cut flowers.
Terrestrial Orchids.-The commonest, of these is the purple or white Spatoglotist plicata. commonly cultivated in pots. Plants of this species require a sunny position, a soil chiefly consisting of sand and leaf-mould, and when well established in their pots, a weekly watering with dilute manure water improves their growth considerably. They may also be grown successfully in beds, in which case an occasional top-dressing with manure and leaf-mould, is desirable. A small yellow beetle is a serious pest of these plants, the larvae attacking the bases of the young leaves. The beetles should be watched for and destroyed. The other most useful ground orchids are of the genus Arundina, or Bambusifolia, two or three kinds being found in local gardens. They are called in Malaya the " Tapah weed." The flowers are mauve or white with a purple lip, with or without yellow markings. They also require a sunny place, and will not flower much in the shade. A well-drained bed of good garden soil will suit them, and they will respond to manuring, though heavy manuring is not required. Though a bed of these plants rarely makes a considerable show of colour, it should yield from time to time a pleasant bunch of flowers for the table.
There is another group of terrestrial orchids which are often cultivated, belonging to the genus Calanthe. These are nearly all forest plants, which will not stand much sun, and are best cultivated in pots in a sheltered position. The best known is the white flowered C. veratrifolia, which grows naturally in swampy forests, its roots growing horizontally in the thick layer of wet decaying leaves. It should accordingly be potted in a mixture of leaf-mould with some sand, and the soil kept moist. A little liquid manure may be given. A small black beetle is a pest of this plant in Singapore; if not guarded against, this beetle may seriously damage the flower bud in the centre of the plant, causing blackening of the petals before they open. There are also other species of Calanthe, some with yellow flowers, which may be cultivated in a similar way. They grow and flower throughout the year. On the limestone rocks in Lower Siam occurs a different kind of Calanthe, C. rubens, which is seasonal in its flowering. It produces its leaves in the wet season, after which the leaves die, leaving a fleshy pseudobulb from the side of which a flowering shoot grows in the dry season. This plant can be successfully cultivated in pots, water-being provided during the leafy phase and withheld during the leafless phase. For soil, broken coral and a little leaf mould is suitable.
The lady's slipper orchids (of the genus C. Cypripedium) are also terrestrial, but they are somewhat more difficult to cultivate than the species of Calanthe. There are two groups of Cypripedium most frequently grown; one with more or less greenish flowers, of which the best known species is C. barbatum, and one with white (or spotted white) flowers, of which C. niveum is the commonest. The group of C. barbatum are mountain plants, usually growing in mossy places on the ground in moderate shade. They are difficult to establish in cultivation in the low country, and appear rarely to flower when established; the flowers like II those of the genus, are long-lived when they do appear. C. niveum and its allies arc the most useful species to cultivate. They grow on limestone rocks, and can be cultivated in pots containing broken coral and leaf-mould. Before the plants are properly established in their pots they need great care. They should be protected from sun and rain, and kept if possible in an airy place, and watered very sparingly; they can easily be killed by over-watering at this stage. When they begin to grow, more water can be supplied; and when growth is well established they will respond remarkably to a weekly dose of dilute liquid manure and daily watering, the pots being kept well-drained, so that the roots cannot become waterlogged. Well grown plants of C. niveum flower frequently.
Climbing orchids-—Under this heading come nearly all the remaining kinds of orchids which are useful as garden plants. Among them are the scorpion orchids and the well-known Vanda Miss Joaquim. Of scorpion orchids there are two common kinds, the large flowered one with yellow-green petals blotched with purple-brown, and the smaller flowered one with cream coloured petals. The former, known botanically as Arachnis mosehitera, is the more robust plant climbing very vigorously. It blooms usually twice a year. The smaller cream-flowered species is known as Arachnis alba, and flowers almost continuously in Singapore; its flowers also are very much in demand for decorative purposes. There is a third species, rather like the common large scorpion orchid, but with somewhat smaller flowers blotched with pink instead of dark purplish brown; it also has leaves distinctly shorter and more closely placed. This species, A. maingayi, is the least useful of the three, as it flowers very rarely.
All scorpion orchids, and also the climbing Vandas, need a place fully exposed to the sun, failing which they will not flower as freely as they should. They should be provided with wooden supports up which they can climb. They attach themselves to these posts by means of their roots, which grow abundantly all along the climbing stems. Some roots also may grow downwards to the ground; growth of these roots can be encouraged by keeping a heap of grass-cuttings round the base of the post. The descending roots will grow into the heap of grass, and if it is kept moist a steady growth of the plant will be assured. If the descending roots have no such protection and supply of moisture, growth will be checked in dry weather. The plants will also grow more rapidly and vigorously if provided with manure which is particularly desirable for the cream-flowered species; watering, in dry weather is specially necessary if value is to be obtained from the manure. The cream-flowered species (usually described as the white scorpion orchid) grows best on posts about three feet high, a group of which may be put together in a bed; as soon as the plants grow above the posts, they will flower. The common species (A. moschifera) is much stronger in growth, and needs larger supports. Its rapidly elongating stems trail about and hang down, so that some sort of framework rather than separate posts is most suitable for it.
The climbing Vandas should be treated as described for the white scorpion orchid. They grow in the same way, but their leaves are almost cylindrical instead of flattened. The most commonly cultivated Vanda is the hybrid called Miss Joaquim, so named after the lady in whose garden it first appeared in Singapore in the year 1893. It appears to be a hybrid between the species V. teres from Burma and V. Hookeriana from the Malay Peninsula and Borneo, both of which have been long cultivated. The former has beautiful flowers, but only blooms at all freely in unusually dry seasons; the latter is a more delicate plant, with flowers mottled with deep purple produced rather sparingly throughout the year. Both are worth a place in the garden, if one has room for them, but neither gives such a return of flowers as the hybrid, which blooms heavily throughout the year if properly treated. The great thing with all these plants is to give them a sunny position. Then, even with no further attention, they will flower; but their growth and flowering can be improved considerably by attending to the points above mentioned.
Epiphytic orchids.---Of these there are an enormous number of species, but comparatively few of them have sufficiently showy flowers or bloom with sufficient frequency to make them popular subjects for cultivation. However, if anyone is interested in them, the variety of their vegetative form, and the beauty of their flowers (even though small) will repay the trouble of collecting local species for cultivation. Epiphytic orchids differ chiefly, from the point of view of cultivation, in the amount of shade and moisture they require. Some will flourish in very exposed places; others require deep shade and moisture for proper growth. Nearly all grow on trees, and most of them in places where they have the shade of the crown of the tree during the heat of the day, in the garden, they may either be tied to branches of suitable trees or tied to pieces of wood and hung in an airy place which is protected from full exposure to the sun. Most species will benefit front a daily syringing with water, unless they have had rain; some how-ever when well grown need less moisture. A great mistake made by many people in growing epiphytic orchids is to smother their roots with coconut husk, keeping the husk moist; roots will not grow healthily in the sodden husk and often rot. The plants should be tied on to their wood firmly with fibre or wire, and their roots allowed to grow freely exposed to the air. (Some species, like the white Phalaenopsis, will grow well in a whole coconut husk; in this case the husk must not be kept too moist). Many of the larger epiphytes can conveniently be grown in wooden baskets, with or without some broken bricks and charcoal, and some in pots.
It is not possible to deal in detail with all the possible epiphytic types, but a few may be selected for remark. The commonest of our orchids, the white flowered fragrant pigeon orchid, well repays cultivation. Plants gathered and put into a coconut husk, hung in some odd corner (not too shady), will bloom from time to time, with little attention, and for a day are as beautiful as one could wish a flower to be. Other species of the same genus (Dendrobium) are often cultivated. Some of the finest of these are from Burmah, notably D. dalhousieanum, D. thyrsiflorum and D. chrysotoxum; also the Malaysian species. D. phalaenopsis and D. superbum are very beautiful. Most of these are conveniently grown in pots or hanging wooden baskets, with broken bricks and charcoal. Probably the most frequently cultivated epiphytic orchid is the white flowered Phalaenopsis grandiflora. This species flowers quite frequently, and has a fine inflorescence of white flowers, which last for some time. The allied species P. violacea has smaller rose-coloured flowers on a short stalk. These plants will grow on a piece of wood, or on a coconut husk. They will grow more rapidly and flower more finely if the roots are dipped into manure water once a week. There are several species of Vanda belonging to the Malaysian region which have fine flowers, the commonest being V. tricolor; they are most conveniently grown in pots, with broken bricks and charcoal, and need some shade. They donor flower very frequently. The allied genus Aerides also provides some beautiful species; these are best grown in hanging wooden baskets and really need nothing in the basket whatever. There are several large-flowered species of Cuelogyne in the Malayan region. These are best kept in pots in a shady place. The large genus Bulbophyllum has also many beautiful species (though many have small, flowers) but most of them flower rather rarely and the flowers are of short duration. The same remark applies to other genera.
In the Malay Peninsula there are about 700 kinds of orchids now known; in Borneo there must be considerably more than that number. To collect these plants, to watch them develop and flower, is most fascinating hobby. One must try to give them approximately the same conditions of growth as they have in nature. The smaller species are just as interesting in their way as the larger ones, and take up less room. In fact, a considerable number of them can be grown on one mossy log brought from the jungle. For the enthusiast who will search diligently there are still many new kinds to be discovered; probably many even in the lowlands of Borneo, and more still on the mountains. But to know these plants intimately needs much time and patient study, and access to scattered literature. However, even for one who has no time for such study the cultivation of the more free-flowering and decorative species, especially the terrestrial and climbing ones, can bring a rich reward of beauty. R. E. HOLTTUM.
AUCTION MAH JONG. COPYRIGHT RULES, 1930.
COUNTERS. 1. Five pips 500 units; one pip 100; two pips 20; ten pips 10.
2. Scores reckoned to nearest 10 points before calculating fahns and before settling up.
3. Value of stakes to be agreed upon before the game commences
4. The minimum stake for an ante, or for a bid, shall be 10 pips.
5. It is recommended that each player commence with counters to the value at least 2.500 units, any shortage being made up with ordinary card counters.
LIMIT.
Unless otherwise predetermined or unless all players agree beforehand to play an unlimited game (“with the roof off") the limit shall be 300 [E. liability, 600.]
SEATING AND TILES.
1. The position of the players shall be determined by a throw in turn of two dice, counter clockwise: the highest shall be Jong (East Wind); the second highest shall take South, and the lowest North.
2. The set of tiles shall consist of the usual 144 pieces including eight “flower-seasons."
3. The tiles shall be “washed" (i.e., shuffled) by East and North Winds only.
4. Proper walls shall be built and approxi-mated before throwing for the break.
5. On the conclusion of the round of any one Wind, the players shall again dice for seats; the highest thrower retaining his previous seat, and the other players moving their seats as necessary.
PLAY.
1. An “all-in" game shall be the rule unless at least three players agree to a “partial one suit game” or all four players agree to a whole one-suit game. 2. In an “all-in” game, the deal shall pass if Mah Jong has not been declared when only seven pairs of tiles remain in the wall.
3. In a "partial one suit game,” the suit shall be determined by a player’s first Chow. Any player not declaring a chow shall be at liberty to play an “all-in” game.
4. In a general "one-suit-game,” the wall may be used to its end.
5. A single throw of the dice by Jong shall be deemed sufficient both to indicate the wall to be broken and the position of the break.
6. The Ante. Before any player shall draw his tiles at the beginning of each deal he shall contribute one ten-pip counter to a Kitty bowl or “Wan" kept in a convenient place.
7. The Joker. The holder of either or both of the No. 1 seasons may use the said season or seasons either as a “season” or as a “Joker”; but, if the said season or seasons be once exposed on the table, qua season, and a loose tile drawn therefor, the said season or seasons may no longer be used to represent Jokers.
8. A No. 1 season used to represent a joker may not be counted as a season when the value of the score is being reckoned.
9. The play shall follow the usual procedure thereafter except in the case of the two rules next following.
10. Bidding. When a player in the ordinary course of a game discards a live tile, and the said tile is not legitimately required by any other player for purposes of a Kong, Pong, or Chow, the subsequent players in turn may bid for the discarded live tile whether required for a chow or merely to improve their hands, the highest bidder securing the tile and discarding a dead tile in exchange.
11. The amount of the winning bid shall be added to the wan forthwith; and the play is then resumed as usual by the person on the right of the player who last discarded the live tile
12. Neither a discarded live tile, nor a tile obtained by bidding, may be used to convert an exposed pong into a kong; but in either case such tile may be used to fill a hidden pong.
13. All seasons drawn in the course of play must be immediately exposed and replaced by a tile from the open end of the wall, unless such season be retained in the hand as a “Joker” in accordance with rule IV (7) above
14. “Woo" or “Mah Jong” is secured by the person who first obtains four sets and a pair. The winner of the Mah Jong pays nobody, but receives the whole contents of the Wan after the three losers have contributed the Mah Jong total thereto.
15. The other three players then settle, between themselves, the difference between their respective scores.
16. A player who wants only one tile to ‘Woo’ can take it for that purpose no matter which player discards it; but if two players want the same tile to "Woo," it shall fall to the person who wishes to fill the “eyes" in preference to the person wishing to fill a pong or chow; and to the person wishing to fill a pong in preference to one wishing to fill a chow. Otherwise the person next to the discarder would have the tile, rather than a more distant player who wanted it.
NOMENCLATURE.
For the sake of uniformity, the use of the following terms is recommended:—
Characters mahn
Circles tung Bamboos sock A double fahn Completing hand for Mah Jong To Woo
Player of E. Wind hand Jong.
PENALTIES.
1. A player who has a foul hand (i.e., too many tiles) at the end of a game, scores nothing and pays in full to the other three players
2. A player who has stale hand (i.e, too few tiles) at the end of the game, pays Jong in full as usual and scores normally in relation to the other two players.
3. If the number of tiles in the hand is found, during the course of the game, to be incorrect, the matter cannot be rectified and the game must proceed to a conclusion as usual. If however a deficit be due to a forgotten Kong compensation, a loose tile may be drawn at any time provided that no Kong has been declared in the interval.
4. If a player calls a “Woo” when the hand is not ready for such call, he shall be entitled to withdraw the declaration, unless it has resulted in the exposure of any part of another player’s hand. In the latter case he shall pay half the limit to all the other players, all hands being then abandoned and Jong passes.
5. If a player "lets off a cannon" [i.e., discards a tile which enables another player to Woo with a three-fahn or a limit hand when that player has already exposed nine or more tiles of one suit, or three sets of honours or terminals] the player so discarding shall pay to Jong the amount due from all three losers. There shall be no settlement between the other three hands.
Scores and Fahns for ALL hands.
[Major tiles Honours, winds, ones, and nines.]
RULES.
Any point not covered by the foregoing rules shall be settled by reference to Foster's Laws in so far as the latter are not incom-patible with these rules.
First Division News. KUCHING METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS FOR APRIL, 1930. Note. — The Kuching Meteorological Station is situated at Latitude 1.33.29 North; and Longitude 110.20.31 East. The height above Mean Tide Level is 29.5 feet.
Divisional Reports. Extracts from the First Division Report by Mr. J. C. Swayne, Acting Resident, First Division, for March, 1930.
Hari Raya Pusa fell on Sunday the 2nd, and the following day was observed as a public holiday.
The Manager of the Nanyan Hotel was convicted of forgery and received three-years’ imprisonment. No other cases call for special comment.
Both Mr. F . G. Carpenter, District Officer, Sadong, and Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, Acting Assistant District Officer, Upper Sarawak, came to Kuching during the month on duty.
Two visits to Bau and Dahan were paid and the Bau-Dahan road inspected. Some improvements were suggested which I understand will be carried out during the year.
In the case of His Highness the Rajah vs. Ganju, Land Dyak, on a charge of murder, the accused was sentenced to death with a recommendation for mercy; subsequently the Supreme Court reduced the charge to one of homicide and the sentence to ten years’ imprisonment.
The examination of Government candidates was concluded early in the month and the results published on the 8th March.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports:—
Judicial.—Among important cases during the month was the conviction of Lee Kay Siang for rash and dangerous driving, under section 279, in which a fine of $50 was imposed.
Offences under the above section are exceedingly numerous and it is difficult to know how to reduce them.
Travelling.— Batu Kawa was visited on the 14th instant in company with Assistant Superintendent of Police Mr. W. L. P. Sochon.
Notice was given to the pork market sweeper at the month end and his services dispensed with. The job of keeping the market in a clean condition will now be taken over by the bazaar sweeper, who can manage both jobs with ease, at less cost to the State. Batu Kawa was again visited on 17th with the Director of Public Works, Captain C. P. Lowe, with a view to certifying the safety of some of the new shophouses for the purpose of a wayang. After inspection permission was granted to Siang Hap Huat to hold a wayang in the bazaar for the space of ten days, subject to certain conditions. The drainage system of the bazaar was inspected, together with the pork market, and it was agreed to carry the bazaar concrete drains down to the river on either side of the road.
The question of a turning place for motors at the end of the Batu Kawa Road is also under consideration.
LAND OFFICE.
The Land Officer, Mr. B. Summers, reports:—
During the third week of the month I went to Santubong, accompanied by two Inspectors. The object of this visit being to examine all applications for land, and any disputes in the near vicinity. Previous to this, no Land Officer had visited that locality. After four days, it not being necessary for me to remain longer, I returned to Kuching with one Inspector, leaving the other to examine the remainder of the applications.
There was a decrease in the number of applications over the previous month, but an increase in applications for pepper.
Simanggang Road Land Reserves.—The work of investigation was continued during the month. With very few exceptions, all gardens within the Land Reserves as far as the 16th Mile have been inspected and demarcated. The exceptions are being dealt with.
In addition a considerable amount of preliminary work has been carried out between the 16th and 20th Miles.
Up to the 16th Mile an area approximating 400 acres has reverted to Government while a reserve of about 120 acres has been reserved to the Sekarrak Dyaks.
BAU, UPPER SARAWAK.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. G. R.
H. Arundell, reports:-
General.—Nothing of any importance has happened during the month.
The 3rd was observed as the Hari Raya holiday. On the 5th the Resident, First Division, arrived at about 10 a.m. He interviewed several people and also examined the road to Dahan, about the state of which a complaint had been made. He found it in good condition.
The Resident returned to Kuching the same afternoon but arranged to come up again the next day.
On the 6th the Resident come up again but made a day trip of it. On the 9th Messrs. W. S. B. Buck and E. M. Woodward, Acting Assistant Secretary, arrived, but returned the same day.
On the 10th Messrs. G. M. Allman, and C. J. Cook, who were on their way back to Kuching from Dahan, found the road near Seniawan impassable as the roads were badly flooded. They therefore returned to Dahan by way of Bau and made the attempt successfully on llth. On the 15th I had intended to start overland to Lundu but it rained very heavily in the morning and I postponed the journey until the next day.
As in February, a considerable number of cases were heard, about thirty-five altogether. The most important was Haji Aweng Dewa vs. Abang Merah, Native Officer; plaintiff charged defendant under I. P. C. Section 284.
Agriculture.—Nearly all the Land Dyaks have started harvesting and many have finished. The padi crop in the Grogo, Tembang, Stengang and Stungkor districts seemed to be very promising indeed. It is to be hoped that it will turn out as good as it looks.
Court.—Court work has been about the same as usual this month.
In the Resident’s Court, Ganju was sentenced to ten years for culpable homicide. He was sentenced on the 6th March and unfortunately made good his escape the same day.
Prisoners averaged 41.
Fines and fees amounted to $100.75.
Health.— Fairly good.
Rainfall.—The rainfall was very heavy in the early part of the month, many of the roads being about 3 or 4 feet under water in places. The main Kuching road near Seniawan and Tundoug roads were the worst affected, but the others were all affected in a lesser degree. The statistics for the month were 19.18 inches.
SAPONG. The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports:-
Court.Few cases were heard during the month, and these were mostly trivial.
Public Works.—The bazaar Lux Lamps were all replaced by Tilley models, the old Lux standards being converted to take these.
A contract was signed for the making of a new road between Kampong Saging and the Colliery. This will open up the Native Holding Land Reserve, and will be nearly two miles long and mostly, through jungle. The finished cost will be $2.96 per fathom.
A contract was given for the construction of a new bridge over the Simunjan River. The new structure will be seventeen feet in width and the middle posts ten inches square.
The fire hose was tested during the month and certain slight alterations which were found to be necessary were effected.
The Government carpenter started work on extending the Store. This will not include a drawing office for the Land Inspectors as originally intended.
A contract was made for the construction of a new bridge on the Court-Bazaar Road at Tebakang to replace the very rickety and dangerous structure which exists at present.
Instructions were also given for a temporary atap extension to the Tebakang Police Barracks which should be pulled down and replaced next year.
Medical.—At the Government Hospital twenty-one in-patients were admitted and eighteen acre discharged, leaving eight remaining at the end of the month.
At the Dispensary 172 out-patients made 223 attendances for treatment.
Thirty-four N.A.B. injections were given of which twenty-eight were for yaws, five for muli and one for gumma.
Staff.—Clerk Teo Ek Thai arrived from Kuching on the 7th to replace the Court Writer, Tebakang, Lim Shin Hin, who ceased to be employed on his resignation as from the 31st.
One Lance-Corporal and one extra P.O. were sent to Tebakang for permanent duty.
Travelling.—I left the main station on the 15th for Gedong and Tebakang, and from there visited a number of the Land Dyak villages between the Ulu Kayan and Ulu Kedup. returning again on the 31st.
The Dyaks were still busy on their farms and the crops were uncertain as usual. The general opinion, however, is that the harvest is not a poor one.
Sprinklings of Chinese throughout this area have planted pepper which all seems to be doing well. The Land Dyaks, however, are quite apathetic about these good examples of profitable planting.
General.—I returned from Kuching on the 7th.
M. L. Vava was received from the Workshop on the 7th after overhaul; but contracted pump trouble on her first trip and can only be run at slow speeds.
Mr. S. W. Harris of the Colliery proceeded to Kuching on temporary duty on the 12th.
Sadong Collieries Report.
March, 1930. SIGNED BY J. W. EVANS, MANAGER.
Further good progress was made with the re-opening of the North Crop workings, and there was an appreciable improvement in output.
Recruiting was satisfactory. The young Malays who had taken up underground work during February are doing well, and a few more joined daring the month. A building for their accommodation is being erected on a site adjacent to the Top Mine entrance.
Mr. S. W. Harris left for Kuching on the afternoon of the 12th in order to take up three weeks’ relief duty at the Government Workshop.
The rainfall for the month was 11.13 inches.
Kuching Rifle Club. The next Monthly Handicap will take place on Thursday the 1st and Sunday the 4th of May at. 4.30 p.m.
Members who have not yet returned a card for 200 and 500 yards are placed at scratch.
The President, Mr. F. F. Boult, has kindly presented a trophy for competition under such conditions as the Committee may determine.
It has therefore been decided that this trophy be presented to the Member having the highest average with handicap in the Monthly Handicap Competitions from February to December, 1930, inclusive, a minimum of five cards to be returned to qualify. From 1st May Mr. E. S. Holl assumes duties of Hon. Treasurer and Mr. R. W. Chater remains Hon. Secretary.
Sarawak Turf Club. First day, Saturday 3rd May, 1930.
9 p.m.—THE TUAN MUDA’S CUP.—Kismet 10.4, Burak 10.0, Flying Fox 9.12, Ol' Man River 8.12, Talisman 8.12, Gasak 8.12, Shooting Star 8.10, Azab 8.7, Happy Boy 8.0.
2.30 pm.—THE SATOK STAKES.—Workman 10.0, Water Polo 9.8, Kim Mah 9.7, Adham 9.4, Sarikei II 9.2, Mudahan 8.12, Sisit 8.12, Ta’sangka 8.7, Pengarah 8.4.
9 p.m.—THE PADUNGAN PLATE.—September 9.7, Bagaimana 8.7, Jorrocks 8.0, Almas 7.7.
8.30 p.m.—THE B.C.L. PLATE.—Flying Fox l0.0, Akal 9.11, Untong 9.2, Happy Boy 9.1, Talisman 9.0, Gasak 9.0, Azab 8.12, Adil 8.3.
4 p.m.—THE PENDING STAKES.—Workman 10.0, Water Polo 9.8, Kim Mah 9.7. Beaver 9.4, Adbam 9.4, Sarikei II 9.4, Gruda 8.13, Pengarah 8,12, Ta’sangka 8.0.
4.30 p.m.—THE TOWN PLATE.—September 9.7, Lee Mah 9.0, Sakbon 8.9, Jorrocks 8.0.
5.15 p.m.—THE PENANG CUP.—Post Entries.
Second day, Monday, 5th May, 1930.
2 p.m.—THE STEAMSHIP STAKES.—Akai, Flying Fox, Gasak, Burak, Kismet, Happy Boy, Ol’ Man River, Talisman, Azab, Shooting Star.
2.30 p.m—THE RANEE'S CUP.—Workman, Sarikei II, Adham, Mudahan, Water Polo, Kim Mah, Pengarah, Ta’sangka, Sisit, Wembley.
3 p.m.—THE SARAWAK STAKES.—Sakbon, Bagaimana, September, Almas, Jorrocks.
3.30 p.m. — THE BANKERS' PURSE.—Akal, Flying Fox, Gasak, Untong, Adil, Happy Boy, Ol' Man River, Talisman, Azab. 4 p.m.—THE CHIEF SECRETARY'S STAKES— Workman, Beaver, Sarikei II, Adham, Water Polo, Kim Mah, Pengarah, Ta’sangka, Gruda.
4.30 p.m.—THE TURF CLUB STAKES.—Sakbon, September, Almas, Jorrocks, Lee Mah.
5.15 p.m.—THE RAJAH'S CUP.—Post Entries.
In another column will be found the programme for the Spring Meeting which takes place on 3rd and 5th May.
There will be the usual $2 and $1 Totalisators, Cash Sweeps on each race and an Unlimited Cash Sweep on the last race of the second day.
The Sarawak Club have kindly undertaken to run the bar as at previous meetings, and tea will be obtainable in the tea rooms under the efficient management of Mrs. Chater, who has on many previous occasions kindly undertaken the duties of catering and supervising, and there will be a special bar for the Naval ratings of H.M.S. Herald.
The Stand below the Grand-stand has been repaired and a new building has been erected which now connects the Cash Sweep building with that of the $1 Totalisator, which will be available for use by the public and which will serve as an additional shelter in the case of inclement weather.
It is hoped that all communities will avail themselves of the amenities offered, and that this and succeeding race meetings of the Turf Club will receive the whole-hearted support of all those who are interested in racing and others, in order to make the meetings, the social success which they deserve to be.
It is also hoped that the Autumn Meeting will see other improvements and alterations, not the least of which may be picturesque shelters or canopies on the lawn where tea may be served instead of in the tea rooms. It is also suggested that, perhaps to add a further touch of brightness to the proceedings, some young ladies may be invited to offer their services in tea tents?
Training started in earnest on the Course on 24th March, since which date enthusiastic owner riders have constantly been seen enjoying their matutinal gallop or watching others do so.
Flying Fox, who has on the whole been rather unlucky lately, should have quite a good chance of carrying off the first race, but Ol’ Man River who could carry a stone more but who is actually carrying a stone less, should be ashamed of himself if he is beaten, while Kismet cannot be left out of the picture, for he has done it before carrying more then 10.4.
Gasak may also be a dark horse at this Meeting; he has done some surprisingly good gallops during training.
Adham should have quite a good chance in the second race, but Kim Mah and Ta’Sangka are carrying light weights and any other pony, owing to efficient handicapping, might easily secure the Padungan Plate.
The third race might go to Jorrocks, if he is as good as his name, and he has any oats in his tummy, but his chances would be more certain with the sound of the horn in his ears and a fleeing (no not flying) fox in front of him.
The fourth race might go to Akal if he gets a running start.
Water Polo might win the four furlongs if the Course is by that time sufficiently under water, but he has yet to learn the crawl stroke.
Lee Mah might stagger along to get his tongue in front of others in the hectic bustle of 3 furlongs.
If these predictions should prove to be incorrect, Robin Goodfellow might perhaps compensate any person who can prove that he or she followed the above advice implicitly without success?
The seventh race of each day’s racing is post entries, the mile being Divisional handicaps and the Race Course individual handicaps; the latter should produce a large field and, if owners will enter in time, should give the handicapper some hard thinking for ten minutes or more, and should produce an exciting finish.
People who would like to win a nice little nest-egg should remember that there is an unlimited cash sweep on the last race of the 2nd day, and that they will lose the chance of doing so if they do not pay for their tickets in good time before the draw takes place.
All persons who are not yet members of the Turf Club and who would like to contribute their quota towards the well-being of the Club are reminded that they may do so by becoming members.
The entrance fee being only $10 and the annual; subscription $10 for residents of Kuching and district, and $5 for residents of outstations. Proposers and seconders can generally be arranged by the Committee quite easily. Members of the Club will greatly assist the Honorary Secretary and Committee if they will kindly pay their subscriptions as early as possible in the year, and, if they do not do so, they may run the risk of being refused admittance to the Course until they have paid.
SARAWAK TURF CLUB. SPRING MEETING—3RD AND 5TH MAY, 1930. 1st Day.
PROVISIONAL PROGRAMME. RACE NO. 1. THE TUAN MUDA'S CUP. Value $150. A piece of plate of the value of $100 presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda with $50 added. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee $10. A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 6 furlongs.
RACE NO. 2. THE SATOK STAKES. Value $150. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee $10. A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 6 furlongs.
RACE NO. 3. THE PADUNGAN PLATE. Value $150. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee $10. A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 6 furlongs.
RACE NO. 4. THE B.C.L. PLATE. Value $150. $50 subscribed by Messrs. the Borneo Company, Ltd., with $100 added. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee $10. A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 3 furlongs.
RACE NO. 5. THE PENDING STAKES. Value $150. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee $10. A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 4 furlongs.
RACE NO. 6. THE TOWN PLATE. Value $150. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee $10. A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 3 furlongs.
RACE No. 7. THE PENANG CUP. Value $200. A cup presented by the Penang Turf Club. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee $10. A race for Divisions I, II and III ponies. Division I ponies to carry 10 stone 7 lbs. Division II ponies to carry 9 stone 7 lbs. Division III ponies to carry 8 stone. Winners of any race at this Meeting to carry a penalty of 7 lbs. for each race.
2nd Day. RACE NO. 1. THE STEAMSHIP STAKES. Value $150. $100 subscribed by the Sarawak Steamship Company, Ltd., with $50 added. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee $10. A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 5 furlongs.
RACE No. 2. THE RANEE’S CUP. Value $150. A piece of plate, value $100 presented by Her Highness the Ranee with $50 added. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee $10. A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 6 furlongs.
RACE NO. 3. THE SARAWAK STAKES. Value $150. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee $10. A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 5 furlongs.
RACE NO. 4. THE BANKERS’ PURSE. Value $150. $100 subscribed by the Bankers of Kuching with $50 added. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee $10. A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 4 furlongs.
RACE NO. 5. THE CHIEF SECRETARY’S STAKES. Value $150. A piece of plate value $50 presented by the Chief Secretary with $100 added. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee $10. A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 3 furlongs.
RACE No. 6. THE TURF CLUB STAKES. Value $150. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee $10. A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 4 furlongs.
RACE No. 7. THE RAJAH’S CUP. Value $200. A piece of plate value $150 presented by His Highness the Rajah with $50 added. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee $10. A race for Divisions I, II and III ponies. Distance Race Course.
REGULATIONS. 1. All nominations, accompanied by Entrance fees $10 each, description of ponies and declaration of Colours to be made to the Honorary Secretary not later than noon Saturday, 5th April, 1930. $5 will be returned if scratchings are notified in writing to the Honorary Secretary before 5 p.m. on Friday, 2nd May, for Races 1st Day and before 5 p.m, oirSunday, 4th May, for Bices 2nd Day.
2. No second prize will be awarded if there are less than 3 runners and no third prize if less than 5.
3. No whip used in any Race shall exceed two feet in length.
4. If spurs be worn these shall not have rowels.
5. Any objection shall be accompanied by a deposit of $10.
6. The penalty for a win, after publication of the handicaps shall be 7 lbs. except in the case of the last Race on the 2nd Day.
7. The Handicaps for the 1st Day will be published on the 26th April, 1930. 8. The Handicaps for the 2nd Day will be posted on the Notice Board of the Sarawak Club at 12 noon on 4th May, 1930. 9. The maximum weight shall be 11 stone and the minimum 7 stone subject to regulation 6. 10. Any Jockey, native of Sarawak, who has not already won two races shall be entitled to an allowance of 5 lbs.
11. The maximum fee to a winning Jockey shall be $15 in the absence of any agreement to ride for a lower sum.
12. Where not otherwise especially mentioned the Rules of the Race Course shall be the same as those adopted by the Straits Racing Association.
13. The decision of the Committee of the Sarawak Turf Club shall be final in all matters of disputes.
14. All communications and inquiries must be addressed to the Honorary Secretary.
15. Registered Racing ponies in B.N.B. Division III shall be eligible for entry in Races open to Sarawak Division I ponies and shall be handicapped for the 1st day’s racing in which they participate at not less than 11 stone.
16. Ponies from B.N.B. which have not been raced at any Meetings of the British North Borneo Turf Club, other than subscription Griffins imported by the Sarawak Turf Club, shall classified in Sarawak Division I, and shall not carry more than 21 lbs. below top weight in the 1st day’s races in which they participate, subject to the provisions of regulation 6 above.
17. Registered Racing ponies in B.N.B. Divisions I and II are ineligible for entry in Races at Meetings of the Sarawak Turf Club.
18. eligible for entry in Races on 2nd day.
19. The Course will be opened for training on Monday the 24th March, 1930.
F. O. BLAGG, Hon. Secretary, Sarawak Turf Club.
Traffic Regulations.
SPRING RACE MEETING, 1930.
1. After the hour of 11 a.m. on 3rd and 5th May, 1930, all Motor Vehicles, must proceed to the Race-course via Padungan or Ban Hok Road only, and up to the hour of 7 p.m. on these days, must return by the Sekama Road only.
Exceptions:—
1. His Highness the Tuan Muda’s Cars.
2. The Chief Secretary.
3. The Resident, First Division.
4. The Principal Medical Officer.
5. The Honorary Secretary—Sarawak Turf Club.
6. In cases of extreme urgency permission may be obtained on the course for other cars to return via Ban Hok Road.
2. After depositing passengers at the Grandstand, vehicles will line up on exteme left-hand side of the Grandstand road, one behind the other, and within three yards of each other, facing away from the Grandstand.
3. Rickshaws and Bicycles may proceed to the Race-course at any time, and by any road, and may park on the Bandstand plot. They will not be allowed to remain on any part of the road leading to the Grandstand.
4. All vehicles must move to their parking grounds without delay, as directed by the Police.
WARNING:—
5. The driver of any vehicle endevouring to turn in Grandstand road, will be prosecuted for causing an obstruction.
Chinese Recreation Club. A SILVER CUP AND A MEDAL WERE PRESENTED BY MR. C. P. LAW.
The final of the Singles Handicap Tennis Tournament of the Chinese Recreation Club was played off on 1st April, 1930, the finalists being Chan Kim Hin (—15) and Lim Ah Bee (scr.).
Kim Hin was playing a steady game throughout and won the first set comfortably by 6 to 4. Ah Bee did some useful work at the net and, although he seemed in distress, he managed to secure the second set by 6 to 4. Ah Bee was leading 5 to 2 in the third set and had the game well in hand but Kim Hin made a splendid recovery and secured five games in succession and thus won a keenly contested and exciting match.
A good number of spectators turned up, amongst those present were Mrs. Boult, Messrs. Swayne, Gillan, and Hardacre. Mrs. Boult gave away the prizes to the winner and runner-up.
Divisional Reports. March, 1930. Extracts from the Second Division Report for March, 1930, by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident:—
The most important event pf the month was the visit of His Highness the Rajah; G.C.M.G., who arrived in Simanggang on the morning of the 6th, accompanied by Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner and Mr. G. T. M. MacBryan, Private Secretary to H. H. the Rajah.
His Highness left again on the 8th, and during his stay saw a large number of persons on various matters. Visits were made to the houses of the principal Native Officers, and to the Bazaar and Malay kampongs.
During his visit, His Highness settled finally several important matters regarding public works in Simanggang.
A large block of modern offices is to be built on the present Astana site, and the headquarters of the Adminis-tration moved there; after which Fort Alice will be converted into temporary jail.
The Astana is to be rebuilt, with improvements, on a site nearer the Residency; and a bungalow for the District Officer will be built upon the small hill opposite the Malay Court House. A small bungalow is to be constructed for the junior, administrative officer near the present top cowshed, which will be demolished and built elsewhere. The present jail will be pulled down.
These works will take to the end of the year to complete Furthermore a contract has been signed for the upkeep of the Simanggang Roads.
His Highness visited the Recreation Club and promised to give them a billiard table.
A guard of honour on the arrival and departure was furnished by Police under the command, of Assistant Sub-Inspector Abang Mustapa.	Messrs. W. P. N. L. Ditmas and D. C. Hudden, Cadets, returned to Simanggang on the 1st, having sat for their examinations in Kuching. Mr. L. K. Morse, Cadet, returned to Saratok on the 4th.
On Hari Raya large numbers of Malays visited me at the Residency in the morning, which visits I returned later in the day.
In the afternoon a big party of Malay ladies called upon me. The next day was observed as a holiday. The usual salutes were fired on Hari Raya.
Several Penghulus came to Simanggang during the month including Jaul, Imong, Lambai, Angkon, Goiang, Renang Sait and Linang; whilst Abang Abdul Talip, N.O., and Draup, N.O., were also visitors.
On the 10th I left for Engkilili, accompanied by Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner, returning the next evening. At Engkilili the Chinese presented Mr. Page-Turner with a gold cup.
Mr. T. A. Reid, Assistant Executive Engineer, P.W.D., arrived from Betong on the 16th and left again on the 18th via the Tisak. The plans for the new public works were discussed.
Mr. Page-Turner left Simanggang on the 16th, after a series of public and private dinners. Datu Haji Abdulrashid was absent in Kuching from the 16th until the 27th.
Mr. W. L. P. Sochon, A.S.P., arrived suddenly from Selantek on the 30th and was still here at the end of the month.
In the Resident’s Court the only case was that in which four Chinese were charged with committing a gang robbery on the premises of the Revd. W. Howell at Sibu. All the four accused were found not guilty and discharged.
Throughout the whole Division most of the able-bodied native population have been away on their padi farms. Reports vary, but on the whole a fair harvest is expected. There were the usual complaints concerning padi pests and, on His Highness the Rajah's instructions, I caused specimens of the various alleged pests to be collected and forwarded to Kuching in a preserved state.
In pursuance of the programme for 1930, minor building operations are being started in the various stations.
On the 22nd Juragan Jais of m.l. Anne made a plucky rescue of two Chinese who were in danger of drowning in the river off Simanggang Bazaar.
I add below extracts from the reports from Batang Lupar Districts (Mr. D. C. Hudden), Saribas District (Mr. R. L. Daubeny, A.D.O.), and Kalaka District (Mr. L. K. Morse, Officer-in-Charge).
BATANG LUPAR.
On the first day of the month all the able-bodied men in kampong Hilir spent six hours searching for a lost child. They had almost given up hope and come to, the conclusion that it had been taken by a crocodile, when it was discovered amongst some padi, playing hide and seek, vary effectively, with the searchers.
On the 17th the m.v. Hong Lee Huat arrived several days late. It appears her engines failed near the mouth of the Sadong river, and before they could be started again, she had drifted almost as far as Santubong.
They broke down again in the Batang Lupar and she drifted into Simanggang on the tide. She is now undergoing repairs in Kuching.
On the 31st one, Anjat, came down and reported a tragedy that had occurred at Bangat, Skrang. A boy of about seventeen was taken out of the back of a boat by a crocodile, whilst carrying wood down river with a Chinese boy as companion. The victim was Luing, the son of Tuai Rumah Munau and Jenat of Isu, Bangat.
SARIBAS.
Court work has been light during the month the following cases only being worthy of mention. Chop Seng Lee fined $10 for contempt of Court and damages totalling roughly $60 to plaintiffs for cutting a ditch through their padi crops. Bujang sentenced to three months for non-payment of fine. Dalang vs. Engkareng appeal against decision of Penghulu Unji in re tuba fishing, decision of Penghulu Unji upheld and appeal fee reverted to Government.
Two contracts were made out for bazaar clearing during the month and work completed by the end of the month. The bazaar ditches were practically finished by the end of the month at a roughly estimated cost of $8,405. During the month Mr. Reid paid this station a visit when various matters in connection with Special Expenditure items for 1930 were discussed, such as roads, lighting and new buildings. Mr. Reid returned to Kuching to draw out plans and contracts for the approval of Resident, Second Division.
The sub-stations wore visited from 21st to 24th. By kind permission of the Officer-in-Charge of Saratok, Mr. L. K. Morse, I was able to make use of the m.l. One for the round trip and thereby made a saving of 48 hours as compared with using the local boats.
The padi harvest has started this month and in most parts the crops appear to be fairly good. From all accounts the Sungei Rimbas Dyaks appear to be the worst off, their padi being very poor.
KALAKA.
On the 4th instant I returned from Kuching. Dr. A. D. Hutchison, Assistant Medical Officer, accompanied me to give medical attention to the natives in the district.
I left for Kabong on the 21st instant in connection with the new shops there.
During my stay the cattle were brought in and inspected. They numbered fifty-four head, and seemed to be in good condition.
I checked the books and cash at Kabong, and left for Roban on 27th instant, checked the books and cash there and returned to Saratok on the 29th March.
The m.l. One was lent to the Acting District Officer, Betong, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, for a few days, I am sorry to have to report that on the way to Debak she struck a sunken log, and sprung a rib and one plank. Repairs have been done and will hold until she next goes to dock.
While in Kuching there were certain small repairs done to the engine of One and I am informed that she was in use in Kuching for a short time.
Tenders were asked for the construction of (1) Newhouse at Kabong for the Native Officer ; (2) The Saratok Bazaar road.	The Malays appear to be in a desperate position for money and very few have as yet paid their tax; a few extra days have been given in the hope that they will be able to pay, but it is extremely doubtful that they will.
The average daily number of prisoners 125.
The gang was employed on the roads around the station, and a new path was made by them from the office to the road leading to the clerks' quarters.
The rifles were sent to Kuching in February for repairs.
Orders were received from Divisional Headquarters to re-number the Police in the Kalaka, and an indent was placed for the new numbers, 63—79 inclusive.
Drahman, Headmaster of Simanggang Government Malay School, visited the schools in the district during the month.
It is surprising to learn that there are only about thirteen boys attending the Kabong School daily.
Abang Zen informs me that the people of Saratok are dissatisfied with the schoolmaster, and that accounts for the bad attendance here.
At Kabong the Pengrih season is in full swing, and about 160 boats were launched for this purpose. On the 14th instant a heavy gale blew from the south-west unexpectedly with the result that about 17 Pengrih boats were capsized. Fortunately no lives were lost, only one boat and some Pengrihs were missing. The crew of the missing boat swam ashore off Paloh.
The following figures show the total imports and exports for the month also comparison as against the same month in 1929.
Divisional Reports.
March, 1930.
Extracts from the Third Division Report for March, 1930, by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident:—
Resident's Court.—One criminal and five civil cases heard.
General.—Mr. L. D. Kennedy, Acting Superintendent of Trade and Customs, Third Division and Superintendent of Shipping, Sibu, arrived here on the 5th instant to take over the duties of Trade, Shipping and Customs from Mr. W. Lowry, who proceeded on home leave on the 13th instant.
Mr. B. A. Trechman, Divisional Treasurer, proceeded on home leave on the 15th instant, his place being taken by Mr. D. O’C. McGinn.
The District Officer, Sibu, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports:—
Court.—A number of launch owners fined for carrying passengers and cargo in excess of licence.
Magistrate's Court.—No cases call for comment.
Court fees amounted to $481.25 and fines $643.10.
General.—The offices were closed on 3rd instant for Hari Raya, which fell on Sunday, the 2nd. A sad drowning fatality occurred at Ensurai on 12th when a little child by name Tiong Wong Hin aged four fell into a ditch while returning from school. There was a various assault case at Sungei Merah on the 20th when a man by name Yong Chieh Kong had his skull fractured rod is in hospital undergoing treatment, one of his assailants has been arrested but another is still at large. On the 24th a faction fight arose between Henghua and Foochow tongkang coolies in the bazaar, the cause of fight appears to have been that about eleven tongkangs tried to unload sand and gravel at the same time and as there was no room for all the tongkangs at once, a row started. One Henghua had his skull fractured and is undergoing treatment in the hospital.
Mr. J. G. Anderson Acting District Officer, Sibu, visited Kanowit from the 13th to 16th to hear cases and also to arrange for a contract to keep the roads and grounds clean.
On the 21st Mr. J. G. Anderson left for Oya to attend to work accumulated since the Officer-in-Charge left for Kuching, he returned on the 30th and left again on 31st on transfer to Miri.
The Resident left on the 31st for Kapit.
Visitors to Sibu during the month included Messrs. G. D. Kidd, A.A. Bonnie, A. Humphreys, C. Fenwick, F. A. W. Page-Turner, G. Taylor and Bishop Danson.
The Officer-in-Charge, Police and Prisons, Sibu, Mr. J. J. Hill reports:—
Crocodiles.—Sixteen crocodiles brought by Tair Udin of Tanjong Leba’an and rewards paid to him.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Kapit, Mr. A. MacPherson, reports:—
Courts.—Chendang, Dyak, was fined one picul for setting a trap which wounded Nagi (f).
Dairy Farm.—The entire Belaga herd has now been brought down to Kapit. The herd numbered forty-four head at the end of the month. Two cows from Belaga died, one of sores, one after miscarriage. Two bull calves and one cow calf were born.
Prison.—Health was fair. Twenty-eight prisoners remained at the jail at the end of the month.
Song.—	I visited Song on 26th returning the same day.
Travelling.—On the 4th I left for N. Putai to attend the Penghulu Temmonggong’s begawai. It is believed to be the biggest show of its kind on record. There being twenty-five Kenyalang. I returned on the 7th. On 20th I left for ulu Kapit intending to go overland to Sut. The path was so overgrown by damun that it was impracticable and I returned on 22nd.
Dyaks.—	At a meeting of Penghulus and headmen in the Temmonggong's house it was decided not to allow Dyaks to move above N. Putai unless they build within reasonable distances of each other in an unbroken chain. Orders have since been received to forbid it altogether for the present.
The engkabang is a failure. The unripe fruit having been knocked off by the heavy rain. The reports on padi harvest are conflicting.
The Land Officer, Sarikei and Binatang, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports:—
Sarikei.—At this station work proceeded as well as can be expected with our present staff. The Land Inspectors here were largely occupied with disputes and investigations, so the ordinary routine work differed accordingly.
Quit rent payments were fairly satisfactory, totalling $3,800 for the month, this being more than expected. Up to date we have made out and issued about 350 now Sarikei Occupation Tickets mostly for pepper gardens.
The Chinese here are asking for a pepper reserve similar to that at Binatang. This will be attended to as soon as a suitable place can be found.
Binatang.—Owing to the very slow rate at which quit rent was coming in at Binatang I went out on the 18th with a Chinese interpreter and made a tour of the Krupok, Mador and Tulai concessions. All heads of areas were interviewed and warned that the consequences of non-payment of quit rent would be serious, and all accessible houses were entered and the inmates spoken to. We also spoke to all Chinese whom we met on their gardens in the course of our walk.
Towards the end of the month quit rent came in with a rush, the total reaching just over $4,300. This is quite satisfactory; the total quit rent paid this year comes to about $5,250 so there cannot be so much outstanding as we had feared.
Lower REJANG.
The District Officer, Lower Rejang, Mr. E. V. Andreini, reports:—
Court.—Kawi and Senussi were imprisoned for a serious assault on the T.K. of Bawang whilst he was engaged on Government duty ordering a leper to proceed to Kuching.
Sergeant Basah was reduced to Corporal and Lance- Corporal Mendrah dismissed and imprisoned for irregular conduct in respect of prison rations.
Land.—Progress was made with the collection of outstanding rent due on land which has not yet been inspected. For the present I am collecting this revenue on the old basis and it can be adjusted as staff is available to measure up same, otherwise much revenue would be uncollected for some years.
P.W.D.—	Further progress was made on road round new bazaar at Matu.
At Tekajong the people are constructing a road and drain through the Sungei Nipa where there is another small village.
Selalang bazaar is nearly completed, one or two of the new shops being already occupied.
Agriculture.—Excellent crops of padi were obtained all round the coast.
Health.—Dr. C. O. Gange, Divisional Medical Officer, visited the district during the month and I accompanied him to the various villages and to the Island Trading Company's concession.
Staff.—Tua Kampong Haji Samat, of Paloh died on 13th March. Haji Metaim, Tua Kampong Kuala Matu, was retired on account of old age and Takedor appointed in his place.
OYA, AND DALAT.
The Officer-in-Charge, Oya, and Dalat, Mr. E. H Elam, reports:—
February.—Court.—Eighty Dyaks were summoned for ringing jelutong.
Certain areas might be set aside for tapping to death before the trees become completely barren as they are bound to do before long. But until some ruling is laid down by Forest Department penalties must be inflicted, as at present it is impossible to determine whether fresh cases of improper tapping are occurring or whether they are found in areas mentioned above.
No other cases at Oya or Dalat call for special mention.
Prisoner.—Averaged 15.21 in number.
General.—The District Officer of Mukah and Oya,
Mr. P. M. Adams, visited the district from the 6th to 9th and again on 21st to meet Mr. H. B. Crocker, Registrar, Sibu, returning to Mukah with him the next day.	The Officer-in-Charge of Oya and Dalat visited Dalat from 12th to 16th and heard all cases there. He left for Sibu en route for Kuching for the Government examinations on the 21st and was still away at end of month.
Rainfall.—The total recorded during the month was 5.75 inches, the greatest fall in any of one day being 1.90 inches.
Shipping.—Three motor schooners and two schooners entered and three motor schooners cleared.
Trade.—Ninty-nine koyans of raw sago, 415 pikuls of jelutong and 56 pikuls of para rubber were shipped to Kuching.
The Divisional Land Officer, Mr. C. E. J. Pascoe, reports:—
March, which should be and usually is the busiest month in the year, opened in a very slack manner—and it was considered necessary to warn the people through the headmen that payments of quit rent were not coming in fast enough. Notices were put out and warnings issued that immigration passes would be held up until payments had been made.
The net result of all this was a record collection for one month, and a catch up in the previous year’s figures.
A number of Bawan Assan Dyaks have surrendered land which they say is no further use to them—rubber refusing to grow. Examination of the sites has proved their assertions correct. A few surrenders on the part of Chinese have come in, but in every case of land they hadn’t started to clean.
The new Matu Bazaar, was demarcated on the down river side of the Court House, but from what one hears the Matu traders are as hard up as anyone and it does not look as though much of a new bazaar will be forthcoming.
Ten more shophouses in Blacksmith Road, Sibu, were completed during the month and those of the prospective occupants living in wooden houses on the loba warned that their wooden houses must be removed, as soon as they remove in.
One Land Court case or interest occurred when Agong, of Sungie Spa’aw, sued a Kong Foo Chinese for encroach-ment. Examination of the site proved without question that there was no foundation for the action.
Reports from Binatang indicate occasional unpleasantness between the Cantonese and Foochows in the newly-created Foochows reserve.
SARIKEI AND BINATANG.
The Officer-in-Charge, Sarikei and Binatang, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports:—
General.—I and Mr. N. E. Hughes returned to Kuching by the Sri Mukah on March 4th. On March 17th Mr. I. S. Hammond Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Sibu, arrived and stayed a few days while he was doing a traverse survey along the Repok road. Mr. Daly visited Sarikei towards the end of the month on business Mr. Nadig, of Gammons, had been to Binatang several times to supervise work on the new wharf there.
Rain has been plentiful and there have been some very bad thunderstorms.
The office has been very busy with the usual rush that occurs to pay in tax, etc., at the end of the first quarter, the new planning of the office proved very useful although crowded. Everybody seemed to be able to get what they wanted.
On 10th I went up the Sungei Meradong re the Sarikei and Binatang water supply. As a result of this all Dyaks above Rh Anggot are to cease farming on the banks of the Meradong and the tributaries, and several Chinese have to move their houses. After this a sample of the water will be taken and we shall see whether this will prove any good.
P.W.D.—The Repok road is progressing satisfactorily.
We have now a 24-feet road from the Sarikei Bazaar to the source of Sungei Repok. This is about six miles and it takes in nearly all the rubber gardens round about. This is also on the edge of the pepper growing districts.
A large steel tank has been erected by No. 1 bungalow which will hold a considerable amount of water. Another one is being erected for bungalow No. 2.
A new flagstaff is being made to take the place of the old one, which is very dilapidated.
At Binatang about a mile and a half of Kropok road has been made. This is more difficult road to make than that at Sarikei on account of all the earth having to be, lifted from hills a fair distance away, and also this road has no foundation at all.
The work on the wharf at Binatang, under Gammons of Singapore is proceeding slowly. Six piles had been driven by the end of the month. The earth near the banks proved softer then expected and these piles had to be lengthened.
A strike took place among the Tamil coolies here during the month, but they were only out for half a day.
Work has started on the alteration to Binatang Fort and should be finished in a week or so.
Prisons—Number of prisoners at the beginning of the month was 18 and at the end of the month was 24.
The Divisional Engineer, Third Division, Mr. J. W.
Whiteside, reports:—
Buildings.—The ten new shophouses in Blacksmith Road are completed and are being occupied., Ten shophouses in Central road are approaching completion.
Progress has been made on the remaining twenty-one houses in this scheme.
Repairs have been carried out on the following buildings:—Residency, three police barracks, bungalow No. 8. Brooke Fort.
Twenty-four latrines have been constructed for Government quarters.
Roads and Bridges.—Minor necessary repairs to Sibu roads and bridges have been carried out during the month. The bazaar roads are being covered with gravel and rolled. The gravelling and filling of Telephone
Road and Green Road is proceeding.
Wharves.—The new concrete wharf at Sibu is almost completed. Work on the Binatang wharf has been hindered by high water, but fair progress is being made.
Work on the new billian wharf at Sibu is progressing very slowly owing to difficulties with the contractor.
Waterworks Sibu.—The old steam pump has been dismantled and packed for shipment to Mukah. The erection of the 3rd fitter tank is proceeding. Water Services have been laid to the new houses in Blacksmith road.	Outstations—Sarikei and Binatang—Progress is being made with the Repok road. One water tank has been erected for the European bungalows and we have commenced the erection of the second one. The jail is completed and in use.
The District Officer, Mukah and Oya, Mr. P. M. Adams, reports:—
General.—Mr. D.O'C. McGinn, Divisional Treasurer, audited the Mukah and Balingian books and proceeded to Oya and Dalat on the 6th. The Balingian Chinese traders applied for assistance to build a communal smokehouse for their rubber, but it was pointed out to them that this would add to their petty quarrels, which are already sufficiently annoying.
Two small children were accidentally drowned at
Mukah and also a sailor from M.S. Kim Chin Soon whilst inspecting the bar in a small boat prior to sailing.
Medical.—The Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. C. O. Ginge and Mrs. Gange, visited Mukah from 27th to 29th. Dresser Reggie was relieved by Chakraverty.
Electrical.—The Superintendent, Electricity Department, Mr. A. Humphreys, visited Mukah from 9th to 11th, arriving and returning overland via Oya. The Electrical Engineer, Sibu, Mr. H. C. Strong, paid a visit from 17th to 29th. The plant is in good order. Wee Ah Loo arrived from Kuching to take over the clerical duties of this Department.
Marine.—The M.L. Leonora was out of action from the 14th owing to her shaft being bent. The damaged parts have been sent to Kuching and it is hoped will be repaired early next month.
Probate.—Over forty estates have been reported for probate this year to date, as against a previous average of about 12 a year. Each one brings an average of half a dozen sago lands under the land regulations. Since a few examples have been made Tua Kampongs now report all deaths together with a list of property.
Prison.—Prisoners averaged 32.58 and were employed in making up the bazaar kampong road and general upkeep of the station.
Dyaks.—Are still harvesting. So far no news has been received regarding the crops, but weather has been favourable.
Land.—Thirty-nine Occupation Tickets were issued.
Seventy-five new applications were made for demarcation.
Arms and Ammunition.—Twenty-five rounds and 8 fine gun powder were sanctioned.
Three hundred and thirty koyans of sago and 810 piculs jelutong were exported.
Rainfall for the month of March was 10.95 inches.
Oya—Treasury.— The Divisional Treasurer, Mr. D. O'C. McGinn, visited Oya from 6th to 10th and checked all books. In the absence of the Officer-in-Charge, Mr. E. H. Elam, the Court Writer signed all vouchers and cash accounts.
General.—H. Brodie and Mohamat Pie, Government vaccinators, arrived on 11th and carried out a campaign of vaccination. Mr. A. Humphreys passed through to and from his way to Mukah. Mr. J. G. Anderson arrived on 21st and left via Mukah on the 28th after attending to all outstanding matters. Office was closed on the 3rd being Hari Raya.
Prison.—Averaged 10.90 prisoners.
Court.—There was practically no Court work during the month.
Rainfall.—The total rainfall recorded during the month was 10.32 inches, the greatest fall in any of one day being 3.90 inches.
Shipping.—Four motor schooners and two schooners and five motor schooners and three schooners cleared.
Trade.—Two hundred and thirty koyans raw sago, 436 piculs jelutong and 32 piculs para rubber were shipped to Kuching.
There were 211 new out-patients.
Three hundred and sixty-five passengers were inspected on the Singapore boats. 6415 vaccinations were performed in various stations in the Third Division, including Sibu and its surrounding districts, excluding those done by Sanitary Inspector Harry Brodie.
Fourth Division News. MIRI.
Extracts from Fourth Division Reports for February and March, 1930, by Mr. Aplin, Resident:—
I was away at the beginning of the month on duty in Kuching, returning to Miri by the Gladys on 10th.
The District Officer, reported that Chinese New Year had passed off quietly.
I visited Sibuti. acoompanied by Mr. S. G. Hansom, to collect evidence.
Mr. Corson, Deputy Conservator of Forests, who was visiting the Coast Stations, reported on his return that whilst entering Niah river in the Doreen, about the same time that I proceeded to Sibuti, the launch was very nearly swamped. This is a notoriously bad bar.
Accompanied by Mr. E. O. Bruce, District Officer, I visited Kuala Baram to choose a site for the Police Station and also inspected the various gardens.
Though several applications at the end of the year were made for land, very little to date has been done in clearing the jungle.
The District Officer was away at the end of the month visiting the Coast Stations.
Contracts were given out to clear the felled jungle for the residential site on Tanjong Lobang. The local natives were employed in clearing away all the cut timber and a contract has been given to some Baram Foochows for stumping and levelling.
The Offices were closed on Her Highness the Ranee's birthday.
Lieut. Goodban, Sarawak Rangers, visited the station in connection with his duties. He was accompanied by Mrs. Goodban.
The Curator of the Sarawak Museum, Mr. Banks, arrived by the Gladys on 23rd en route to Baram.
Kong Fah, late clerk in the First Division, was appointed to this Division for duty.
Only .81 inches of rain fell during the month. The last date that rain was recorded was 21st January. Though the drought continues, the heat has not been oppressive, as on most days there has been a strong cold N.E. breeze and the evenings and nights have been very chilly.
BINTULU.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports:— Court.—Court work was very light during the month, and no cases call for special mention.
General.—The most outstanding feature of the month has been the weather. A drought has been experienced now for two and half months. In January 3.82 inches was recorded which was chiefly due to heavy mists and dew. In February only .99 of an inch was recorded, these two months following an exceptionally dry December. Old men who have lived all their lives here state that they have never experienced so serious a drought in Bintulu. Com-plete rainfall records in Bintulu do not seem to go back further than 1922, but since then nothing less than 3 inches has been recorded in one month.
It is interesting to compare Bintulu January rainfall of 3.82 with the First Division report for the same month, which records Sungei Bawang as 38.35 inches and Matang 29.75 inches. This, followed with less than an inch during the whole of February, is most unusual. The land is exceedingly hard and dry and a serious shortage of water is being experienced.
The amount of sickness in the kampong in consequence is considerable. The proposed waterworks when completed should be greatly appreciated. It is to be considered fortunate, however, that no serious fires have occurred.
Monday 24th, being the birthday of Her Highness the Ranee, the flagstaff was dressed and a holiday observed.
P.W.D.—The prisoners averaged 20.04. The gang were employed most of the month on the new road across river which is progressing satisfactorily.
Mosque.—I regret to announce the death of the Tuan Imam, Haji Abdulsamat, who has been Tuan Imam at Bintulu for about twenty years.
Rainfall.— The rainfall, as mentioned in the General Report, amounted to .09 of an inch only.
The District Officer, Miri, Mr. E. O. Bruce, reports:-
Courts.—Ninety-three civil and forty-six judgment summonses, thirty criminal and eight warrants and seven Native Court summonses were issued during the month.
Prisoners;—The daily number of prisoners averaged 28.
P.W.D.—Good progress continues with the clearing of Tanjong Lobang site.
General.—I left on the 25th for visit to Sibuti, Niah and Suai districts, and was still away at the end of the month.
Rainfall records show .81 inch only during February.
March, 1930.
Extracts from Fourth Division Reports for March, 1930, by Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident:—
All the principal Malays called upon me in the morning of Hari Raya and I returned their calls in the evening. The kampong was brilliantly illuminated. Hari Raya falling on a Sunday, Monday was kept as a holiday.
Miris and Kedayans were engaged to clear the Government site at Tanjong Lobang, and a contract was given out to some Baram Foochows to stump and level the area.
Jong Kwee has now completed his road over Tanjong Lobang ridge and will very shortly open his taxi service to Bekam.
The Miri taxi owners petitioned to start a motor service to Kuala Belait along the sands. This has become leasable owing to the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, allowing them the use of their ferries across the Miri and Baram rivers. I am in communication with the British Resilient at Brunei on the matter.
News was received from Baram that a Javanese named Kerata had killed a Daro woman named Ayang at the Bakong Sawmill and then committed suicide. Mr. R. O. Bruce, District Officer, was instructed to proceed there to hold an inquest, in the absence of Mr. F. H. Pollard, Acting District Officer, Baram. A verdict of murder and suicide was brought in. It appears that Kerata was desirous of marrying Ayang, who was still in her “aidah” and was very jealous, as Ayang did not appear to have reciprocated his desire to marry her.
Two fatal accidents occurred to two Chinese coolies employed by the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited. In one case, whilst unloading timber from a tongkang alongside the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, wharf, the rope broke and the load fell on the coolie. In the other case, a contractor’s coolie was killed by a tree falling on him whilst felling a rentis for the new sea-pipe line at Lutong.	A site was chosen for a small Police Station at Kuala Baram. It is also proposed to build a small Customs Station. This has become necessary owing to the considerable amount of traffic between Miri and Kuala Belait:
Mr. E. O. Bruce returned from a visit to Sibuti and Niah on 4th. Arrangements were made for the re-building of Niah Court House.
Messrs. F. H. Pollard and E. Banks, Curator, Sarawak Museum, arrived from Baram on the 3rd, returning again on 6th. Mr. Pollard came for medical advice. He arrived again on 21st having been taken ill at Long Akar with dengue.
On the 25th, accompanied by Messrs. F. H. Pollard and A. L. McLaine, Assistant Treasurer, I visited Baram, returning with Mr. McLaine on the 28th. The Chinese traders petitioned that Batang Rejang Dyaks should be prohibited altogether from being allowed to work jelutong in the Baram. The local Dyaks work very little jelutong, which is nearly all worked by "Kampars.”
It was reported that there were prospects of a poor harvest in the whole of the Baram.
Mr. D. V. Murphy, Assistant Superintendent of Police, Miri, reported his return from Kuching on the 9th. He experienced a rough trip by the Gladys, which arrived about 16 hours late.
Mr. R. D. Horton, Collector of Customs, returned from the Fifth Division on the 14th.
The Honourable T. G. Cochrane and Mrs. Cochrane left Miri on 24th by a “Beetle,” travelling to Brunei en route for Labuan where they were to pick up the Straits boat for British North Borneo, from where they would connect with boats for England via China and America. Mr. Cochrane has been General Manager of the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, since the middle of 1928 and all were very sorry to say good-bye to him. On Mr. Cochrane’s departure Mr. A. H. Noble became General Manager with Mr. F. F. Marriott as Assistant General Manager.
On the night 25th 3" of rain fell, making a total of of 4.20” for the month. This is the first real quantity of rain that has fallen since the 21st January.
BINTULU. March, 1930.
The Acting District Officer, Bintulu, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports:—
Court.—A normal amount of cases came before the District and Magistrate's Courts during the month.
General.—A salute of 7 guns was fired from Fort Keppel on Sunday 2nd, being Hari Raya. Monday 3rd was also observed as a public holiday.
Tatau, was visited on 14th and 15th when a number of cases were dealt with.
Tubau, Labang, Pandan and Sebuah being visited from 17th to 20th.
The visit to Tatau was made in s.s. Keppel belonging to the Sarawak Steamship Company, which is now stationed at Bintulu and keeps up communication between Bintulu and places along the Coast to Miri and also Tatau.
On Sunday 9th the whole Melanau population turned out on the sands to pray for rain and for a good fishing season and to take part in a general Makan Selamat. A dense crowd congregated, extending from the Fort Pengkalan to beyond the District Officer's Bungalow. Many highly-coloured sarongs were in evidence and the festivities were concluded with a long-boat race between the kampongs, which was arranged amongst themselves.
The Right Reverend L. Danson, Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak passed through the station during the mouth, other visitors being Mrs. Webster and Mr. J. R. Combe, Acting Assistant District Officer, Lawas and Trusan.
Mr. T. Corson, D.C.F., arrived by the s.s. Auby on the 26th on duty and was still here at the end of the month.
Agriculture.—The Dyaks in the Bintulu and Tatau districts have not yet quite completed the gathering of their crops but reported a very successful harvest, especially in the Tatau, but in this district they have been badly interfered with by pigs.
The Kayan and Punan crops in both districts have been a failure as usual.	Young rubber gardens and farms in the Tatau district, although fenced in, have been much damaged by deer.
P.W.D.—The prisoners, averaging 20.16, were again employed across river, continuing the new road parallel to the river as far as the point near the month and then across the point, along the edge of the jungle, to the open beach. This was completed by the end of the month except for some small bridges which are yet to be built.
A lot of attaps were received from Tubau, where they are obtained, mostly from Kayans, for $45 a laksa.
Education.— Nineteen new pupils were enrolled in the Government Vernacular School at Bintulu during the month, making total of 115 boys on the books.
Rainfall.—After 2 months' drought from the middle of December to end of February, it appeared as if the weather had at last broken when some rain fell on two consecutive days early in the month. This, however, was unfortunately not the case, and another dry month has been experienced with total rainfall of 8.05 for the month.
There has been no heavy rain and not enough to affect the streams which are mostly dried up. Both the sawmill and Mr. W. H. Avery’s factory were forced to close down for a period owing to lack of water.
Mr. W. H. Avery was still unable to commence work at the end of the month owing to the stream from which he obtains his water supply being too dry. If he were to use the small amount of water that is in the stream the inhabitants would have nowhere to obtain their drinking water.
The lack of water is becoming somewhat serious. On my visits to Tatau and Tubau I found that rain had been plentiful, so it would seem that only Bintulu was suffering.
Fifth Division News. Divisional Reports.
February, 1930.
Extract from the Fifth Division Report for February, 1930, by F. H. Kortright, Resident:—
There is very little to report, the station being very quiet owing to the harvesting of padi.
P.W.D.—A long spell of dry weather having definitely set in, it was considered advisable to remake the temporary dam at Sungei Poyan and this was done by the prison and road coolie gangs together.
Very good work has been done by the Contractor on the Brunei road as far as Gadong, the surface is so good that bicycles could be ridden through already.
General-—The 24th, the Birthday of Her Highness the Ranee, was observed as a General Holiday.
I paid a visit to the Resident of Brunei on the 13th returning on the I4th with the mails.
Four crocodiles, measuring in all 42 feet 3 inches were caught by the professional Matyassin.
Medical.— No patients were admitted into hospital but some 148 patients were treated in the dispensary for various ailments.
The rainfall recorded was 0.68 inches only.
The number of buffaloes exported to Kuching were 48 head.
LAWAS.
February, 1930.
Extracts from the Lawas Report for February, 1930, by Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe:—
On the 24th, the Birthday of Her Highness the Ranee was observed as a Government Holiday.
Surveys.—The Survey Department this month have measured 2,190 chains of garden boundary at an average cost of 15 cents per chain.
Agriculture.—The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Ltd., exported 24,726 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
LAWAS.
LIMBANG.
March, 1030.
Extracts from Fifth Division Report for March, 1930, by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident: —
Court. —There were a number of Magistrate’s Court cases, principally for the recovery of debt. In the Resident’s Court there were three convictions for buffalo stealing.
General.—Mr. R. D. St. J. Horton, Collector of Customs, came from Miri and inspected the Customs work of the Division, visiting Lawas, Merapok, Trusan and Sundar.
Mr. T. Corson, Deputy Conservator of Forests, also visited the Division on a round of inspection.
Messrs. Combe, A.A.D.O., Lawas, and Harnack, Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Lawas returned from Kuching, where they had been sitting for their examinations, and proceeded direct to Lawas.
The steamer Kwong Yick has been taken off the weekly Labuan-Brunei-Limbang run and has been replaced by a vessel the Eng Guan the property of the Straits Steamship Company, for whom Messrs. Harrisons and Crossfield, Labuan, are Agents.
P.W.D.-The Land Office, having acquired the Recreation Club for their offices, work was commenced in building a new Club House on a site on the river bank. The concrete pillars have been cast by prison labour under the guidance of Carpenter Kow
Nui, and the timber for the building will be supplied by the Vamco Sawmill early next month.
A contract was let for raising the ground above swamp level below and around the Customs Officers’ quarters. This undertaking was very badly required as the houses must be very unhealthy under the present conditions.
The new Brunei road is now through to Kampong Pandan which is the limit of this year's estimate, and work is now in hand on the bridges and culverts.
A very long spell of dry weather, which started in January and is still being experienced, has greatly facilitated the making of this road, which runs through a swamp practically the entire length.
The rainfall for the month amounted to 5.90 inches only.
Medical.—Dr. Veerasingham paid his usual monthly visit of inspection and reported that everything was satisfactory, and very little ordinary sickness prevalent. There were 5 patients admitted into hospital and 87 out-patients treated. Twenty-five injections were given for yaws, etc.
Buffaloes exported to Kuching. 42 head.
LAWAS.
March l930.
Court.—On March, 10th the Resident came over from Limbang.
There were no cases of any importance during the month. On the 23rd I paid a visit to Trusan. On the 26th I left for Sundar.
Prison.—The prison gang, averaging 10, were mainly employed on the upkeep of grounds.
General.—I arrived back from Kuching on the 10th with the Resident, Mr. F. H. Kortright. The Resident returned to Limbang in the s.s. Margaret on the 12th, Mr. R. G. D. St. J. Horton, Collector of Customs, paid a visit to the district at
the beginning of the month, visiting Trusan, Sundar, Awat Awat, Punang and Merapok. He left for Limbang on the 7th. Mr. and Mrs. Clifford, of the Lawas Rubber Estate, left on leave for England on the 10th, where they expect to be away for five months. Mr. Porter acts as manager during the absence of Mr. Clifford. Mr. Strike, of Lumadan, and Mr. Claridge, Acting District Officer of Sipitang, paid a visit to Lawas on the 8th; also Father William. P.W.D.—This month a contract for the Trusan Road has been let out to one, Entong, Javanese, at $450 per mile; the work has already started and, if the weather continues favourable, the first two miles should shortly be completed. The road is being opened to the extent of 16 feet.
Wong Kiaw, Contractor, is making a boat-shed for the Saripah and should be ready by the end of April. The shed is being made across river in order to avoid the heavy timber which comes down during a “fresh"; also the bottom of the river is of firmer soil.
At the end of the month I paid a visit to Trusan and Sundar.
On March 2nd Hari Raya was observed as a holiday.
Surveys.—The Survey Department this month have measured 1,762 chains of garden boundary at an average cost of 23 cents per chain.
Agriculture.—The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Ltd., exported 24,080 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
Rainfall.—The following rainfall was recorded.
ECHOES FROM THE WORLD OUTSIDE.
Channel Tunnel Still an Enigma.
“The project of a Channel tunnel has been before the British Islanders for a good many generations now, but it has never yet succeeded in becoming a popular enthusiasm," says The Times.
“A strong instinct, which is certainly something more powerful and more rational than a prejudice, has always kept them reluctant to abandon their traditional insularity.
“Based in the past on a vague fear that a tunnel would make invasion simpler, it has not been diminished to any serious extent by the close friendship which has grown in recent years with our nearest continental neighbours or by the comfortable conviction that war in Western Europe can henceforth be ruled out of our calculations.
“On the contrary, the general dislike of the project seems only to have increased with the years; and the grounds for it are becoming more clearly defined. If war has become an anachronism, so, it is felt, has the tunnel, and to a far more demonstrable degree. The passage to the Continent for men and for merchandise is incomparably simpler and swifter in these days than it was when first the scheme took shape.
“New methods of transit are being developed every year. The air may not yet have superseded the sea, but it is rapidly becoming an effective rival, and its possibilities are almost incalculable.
To most of us—leaving every other consideration out of account—it has come to seem incredible that at this time of day we should fall back upon primitive expedient of digging expensive holes in the ground.
‘‘At any rate, nothing could justify it but unmistakable proof that a tunnel would add to our comfort and prosperity, promote our foreign trade, and relieve our burden of unemployment.
NO CERTAINTY OF ENORMOUS GAIN.
“The Channel tunnel is not to be compared with the Suez Canal, or with the Panama Canal, or even with such a venture as the first London tube. For all these undertakings private enterprise was rightly prepared to venture, and if it had losses to suffer there was, as events have proved, a genuine economic gain in view in which the public interest has shared. The Channel tunnel presents no such certainty of ultimate economic gain and of private and public enrichment.
“It seems more than likely that the last word about the tunnel has been said by a Committee which will be recorded as having reported in its favour.”
“Is it to be supposed that public opinion--on whose movement the whole scheme turns—will spend £30,000,000 for nothing except the removal of sea-sickness from the tourist's week-end in Paris?” asks the Observer. “There is imperative need for vision in this matter.
“The tunnel will react more powerfully upon the general economic structure of Britain than any work undertaken since the Suez Canal. It will make this country a part of the European system. To-day we can contribute no more than an impotent philanthropy to the Continent's present spasmodic efforts to impose some order upon its incoherent and wasteful organisation for production.
“But when the tunnel is made, and when the whole force of our by then presumably rationalised industries is behind the movement for its proper exploitation, the power and example of British policy will be felt from the Baltic to the Mediterranean.
“These are the sort of considerations to be set against the headshakings of pusillanimous vested interests.” ENTANGLED IN FISCAL PROBLEM.
“Lord Ebbisham points out very forcibly in hit Minute of Dissent,” comments the Daily Telegraph, “the balance of economic advantage would be very largely on the Side of the Continent, and certain very important British interests would be prejudicially affected.
“That is also the view of most British Chambers of Commerce, viz., that there would be a much larger inflow of goods than outflow. Naturally, too, the project alarms British agriculture.
“The natural advantages of the French growers of early fruits and garden produce must necessarily be increased, nor is it enough to say that the home grower ought to be able to neutralise this by proximity to the home markets. It is dismal to think of the tunnel problem, which so many people are apt to consider in terms of personal con-venience and comfort in travel, being entangled in the fiscal problem, but entangled it is."
“The real opposition,” asserts the Daily “comes from interested parties—farmers who fear that if the tunnel is built food will become still cheaper and shipping interests who think that their pockets also may be affected.
“Most people will consider the fact of this opposition a point rather in favour than against the tunnel. They will be disposed to say that if the tunnel means more and cheaper food, and more and better conveniences for the traveling public, so much the better.
“The contrary argument would justify the forcible reduction of the train services in order to keep up the price of food in the towns and secure custom for the motor-bus companies.
“Assuming that the Channel Tunnel will increase Continental trade—and we have no doubt at all ourselves that it would, if only by obviating the ‘broken ’journey which transhipment involves —there can be no case on public grounds against it. But if it will do that, there is good reason for the State undertaking what is plainly an important public utility enterprise.”
“The Channel tunnel will do more for British prosperity than any other work of engineering that could be undertaken. It has greater economic value than all the road schemes put together," says Viscount Rothermere, writing in the Sunday Pictorial.
“America was warned that the Panama Canal would never pay, yet it is already so thronged with traffic that the scheme of building a parallel canal through Nicaragua is well advanced.
“A few years ago the States of New York and New Jersey decided to link themselves by twin tunnels for motor traffic beneath the River Hudson. The toll charge for a car was fixed at two shillings. The scheme was laughed at.
“To-day these ‘Holland Tubes,' as they are called, after their builder, are so busy that police are stationed in them to keep the traffic moving at not less than thirty miles an hour. Two more tunnels are to be constructed, and a huge new bridge across the Hudson River as well.
“We shall see the same thing with the Channel Tunnel. The stream of traffic that it will bring to this country from the Continent will amaze the most optimistic. Instead of the two and a half million passengers a year who face the discomfort and inconvenience of a Channel crossing, we should find three or four times as many using the Tunnel. Hundreds of thousands of tourists from the United States, deterred by the dreaded Channel crossing, now leave Europe without visiting England.
“Hardly one would fail to do so when a three-quarter-hour train journey through the Tunnel and its approaches would bring them here. At present three Englishmen travel to France for every foreigner who lands upon our shores. When England can be reached by train from any point on the Continent of Europe, the number of foreigners coming here is practically certain to exceed the greatly increased total of Britons going abroad. Parisians, for instance, will be able to leave their city at eight in the morning, have lunch and spend the afternoon in London, and be back in Paris by midnight.
A PAYING SEQUEL.
“A tour in Britain will be the goal of every Continental motorist, and of all the Americans who bring their cars to Europe in the summer. Special automobile trucks will be waiting at Calais to be attached to trains going through the Tunnel, in the same way as they are taken through the Severn Tunnel now. In the height of summer we could expect a thousand cars a day to enter this country, 95 per cent, of which would otherwise never have come here at all. One of the first necessities after the opening of the Tunnel will be to double the Dover Road.
"Our hotel industry will undergo enormous development. The shops at London and of all the tourist centres of Great Britain will be lifted to a new level of prosperity."
SHIPPING INTELLIGENCE.
Port of Kuching.
LIST OF FIRST-CLASS PASSENGERS.
By s.s. Kuching to Singapore on 5th April:—
Mr. E. Parnell, Mrs. Chan Cheng Fatt, Mis. Yap Ah Bee, Mrs. Lim Kim Guan, Mrs. Chan Weng Yen, Messrs. Teo Cheng Hoon, Wee Boon Chew, Mrs. A. F. Law, Messrs. Chua Bak Hin, Chan Pak Mau, Miss Fenoulher, Messrs. Wee Kheng Chiang, Lam Chin Heng, Lim Hian Hoi, A. D. Chadwick.
By s.s. Vyner Brooke from Singapore on 7th April:—
Mrs. Paton. Messrs. Owen, D. Brodie, W. S. G. Sutherland, J. N. Fernando, Heng Chaw, Poh, Sim Ming Siang, Chee Guan Cho, Song Thian Choo, Wee Yew Woh, L. K. Neo.
By s.s. Vyner Brooke to Singapore on 12th April.— Mr. and Mrs. Pitt-Hardacre, Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner, Mr. and Mrs. Calvert, Messrs. J. K. Beasley, Heng Choo Poh, O. F. Ricketts, W. D. G. Sutherhand, Madam Lim Kim Nio, Datu Haji AbdulRashid, Haji Osman.
By s.s. Kuching from Singapore on 14th April:—
Capt. and Mrs. A. W. G. Gibson, Miss Pease, Messrs. Stone, O. C. Smalley, Samuel Donan, Y. Ichikawa, Mrs. Lim Cheng Kiah, Miss Lim Bit, Messrs. Kuah Hong Choon, Chan Heng Jit, Wee Kheng Chiang, Teo Cheng Hoon, Lan Chin Heng.
By s.s. Kuching to Singapore on 19th April;—
Mrs. J. G. Barraclough, Messrs. Lim Kim Guan, Sim Minh Siang, Mr. and Mrs. Teo Chin Thiam, Mr. Stone, Miss A. Turner, Miss A. Baptiste, Mr. Tan Lak Joo.
By s.s. Vyner Brooke from Singapore on 21st April:- Messrs. Ed. Parnell, F.L. Crossley, W. H. Morice, T. E. Parker, C. F. J. Pegler, Miss M. L. Hallowes, Miss Lily Ha, Mrs. C. Joon Jaw, Mr. and Mrs. Tan Wee Chiang, Mr. and Mrs. C. Kia Meng, Mrs. Wong Siang Kuan, Master Lim Meng Teck, Messrs. C. Kia Puat, Png Guan Cheng, Chee Heng Kheng, Ditu A. Rashid, Haji Osman.
By s.s Gladdys from Miri on 23rd April:-Cpt. C. P. Lowe.	By s.s. Auby from Limbang and Miri on 24th April:— Mr. Harnack, Datu Hj. Wadie.	By m.v. Sri Mukah from Sibu on 25th April:—
Messrs. C. D. Adams, E. B. Owen, P. M. Adams, X. A. Middleman, B. J. C. Spurway, G. D. Kidd, Mrs. Spurway and Child.
By s.s. Vyner Brooke to Singapore on 26th April:—
Messrs. O. C. Smalley, F. G. Carpenter, Miss Lily Ha, Miss. Paton, Messrs. Kwah Hong Choon, Lim Siow Ngiap, T. Mohri, Matsumoto.
By s.s. Kuching from Singapore on 28th April:—
Messrs. W. H. Heytman, C. B. Hebb, G. K. Roberts, W. H. Kelley, C. V. Phipps, Lim Teng Chye, Mr. and Mrs. Lim Mui Chye, Mr. and Mrs. Chia Kwang Hung, Mr. Ang Chin Hock, Mrs. Chan Kui Seng, Mrs. Chan Won Yen, Mrs. Chan Cheng Fatt, Messrs. Chua Bak Hin, and Chan Kui Seng.
SAILINGS TO EUROPE. P. AND O. COMPANY. (Passenger Agents—Borneo Co., Ltd.) (Freight Agents—Sarawak Steamship Co.) Passage money to London £38 First and £34 Second Class.
BLUE FUNNEL LINE. (Agents—Borneo Company, Ltd.)
NIPPON YUSEN KAISHA. Calling at Aden, Naples, Marseilles, Gibraltar and London. (Passenger Agents—Sarawak Steamship Co., Ltd.) (Freight Agents—Borneo Co., Ltd.) [The tonnage of the fleet is not given by the Agents.—Editor.]
NETHERLAND STEAMSHIP CO. (Agents—Borneo Co., Ltd.) Calling at Balawan, Sabang, Genoa, Algiers and Southampton.
Official and Semi-Official Announcements. PROCLAMATION BY HIS HIGHNESS THE RAJAH OF SARAWAK.
WHEREAS it is now the custom in nearly all countries of the world to hold a Census, or Enumeration of the population, at intervals of ten years, it is OUR Wish and Pleasure that a Census of OUR People of Sarawak shall be held during the month of March, 1931, and thereafter at intervals of ten years.
WE HEAREBY appoint the Chief Health Officer of Sarawak, DR. GILBERT EDWARD BROOKE, to be Our Superintendent of Census (1931) for OUR State of Sarawak; and direct that all correspondence in connexion with the said Census shall be addressed to the said Superintendent (care of the Health Department, Kuching), by whom all arrangements for the said Census shall be made and carried out, and whose instructions in connexion therewith it is OUR Wish that all OUR Subjects, and other persons resident in this OUR State, shall duly carry out and perform.
WE FURTHER appoint the following Officers to be Deputy Superintendents of Census, namely: for the town of Kuching, the Municipal Commissioner; for the remainder of the First Division, the Resident, First Division; for the Second, Third, Fourth, and Fifth Divisions, the respective Residents of the said Divisions.
Given under Our Hand at the Astana, Kuching, Sarawak, this 20th day March, 1030. C. V. BROOKE, Rajah.
APPOINTMENTS. His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Mr. L. D. Kennedy to act as Superintendent of Trade and Customs, Third Division, and Superintendent of Shipping, Sibu, with effect from 11th March, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Mr. D. O’C. McGinn to act as Divisional Treasurer and Divisional Postmaster, Third Division, with effect from 12th March, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Mr. G. M. Allman to act as Director of Agriculture, in addition to his other duties, with effect from 23rd March, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Mr. F. L. Hansel to be Officer-in-Charge, Government Rest House, with effect from 23rd, March, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Mr. W. S. B. Buck to act as District Officer, Kuching, with effect from 1st April, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to delegate the powers of a Magistrate’s Court Magistrate, under Order No. XXX, 1922, to Mr. P. Murray-Scott within the limits of the Third Division, with effect from 1st April, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. G. St. F. Dare to be Coconut Field Officer in the Department of Agriculture, with effect from 1st April, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. G. M. Goodall to be Field Officer in the Department of Agriculture, with effect from 1st April, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to approve of the appointment of the following gentlemen to be Members of the Advisory Board to the Department of Agriculture, with effect from 1st April, 1930, inclusive:— The Rev. Father A. Hopfgartner, Abang Haji Abdullah, Datu Shahbandar, Mr. Tan Sum Guan, Mr. Chan Kee Ong, Mr. Lau Chen Hiang. His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. E. O. Bruce to act as Resident, Fifth Division, with effect from 5th April, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. J. G. Anderson to act as District Officer, Miri, with effect from 7th April, 1939, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. J. G. Anderson to be Chairman, Miri Municipal and Sanitary Advisory Board, with effect from 7th April, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Mr. K. H. Gillan to act as Commissioner of Trade and Customs, in addition to his other duties, with effect from 12th April. 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Mr. K. H. Gillan to act as Shipping Master, in addition to his other duties, with effect from 12th April, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. A. A. Rennie to act as Controller of Government Monopolies, in addition to his other duties, with effect from 12th April, 1930, inclusive,
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to Appoint Mr. C. J. Cook to act as Superintended of Government Stores, with effect from 12th April 1930, inclusive.	LEAVE.
Mr. G. J. D. Walters, an Officer in Class III of the Sarawak Civil Service, has been granted six weeks’ vacation leave on full pay, with effect from 14th January, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. W. V. Hanson, Acting Divisional Treasurer, Fourth Division, has been granted forty-seven days’ sick leave on full pay, with effect from 19th January, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. P. Murray-Scott, Passed Cadet, has been granted eighteen days' sick leave on full pay, with effect from 2nd March, 1930, inclusive.
Dr. E. Le Sueur, Pathologist, has been granted seven days’ vacation leave on full pay, with effect from 3rd March, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. R. N. Baron, Assistant Surveyor, Survey Department, has been granted twenty-one days’ sick leave on full pay, with effect from 3rd March, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. G. Taylor, Acting Superintendent Engineer, Government Workshop, has been granted four days’ sick leave on full pay, with effect from 17th March, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. F. H. Pollard, Acting District Officer, Baram, few been granted six days’ sick leave on full pay, with effect from 20th March, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to grant to Mr. B. A. Trechman, Assistant Treasurer, seven months’ leave on full pay, with effect from 21st March, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to grant to Mr. W. Lowry, Superintendent of Customs, seven months’ leave on full pay, with effect from 2lst March, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to grant to Mr. G. T. M. MacBryan, Private Secretary to His Highness and Secretary for Native Affairs, seven months’ leave on full pay, with effect from 25th March, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to grant Mr. J. S. W. Bean, Director of Agriculture, seven months’ leave on full pay, with effect from 25th March. 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been please to grant Miss M. Tait, Manageress, Government Rest Home, seven months’ leave on full pay, with effect from 25th March, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. E. H. Elam, Officer-in-Charge, Oya and Dalat, has been granted twenty-five days' sick leave on full pay with effect from 2nd March, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. C. E. J. Pascoe, Divisional Land Officer, Third Division, has been granted seven days' vacation on full pay, with effect from 27th March, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. A. Humphreys, Superintendent of Electricity Department, has been granted seven days’ sick leave on full pay, with effect from 29th March, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. R. D. Binnie, Executive Engineer, Public Works Department, has been granted six days’ sick leaves full pay, with effect from 31st March, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. A. W. G. Gibson, Harbour Master, has been granted fourteen days’ vacation leave on full pay, with effect from 1st April, 1930, inclusive.
THE AGRICULTURAL IMPROVEMENTS FUND.
It is hereby notified as follows:—
(i) The Agricultural Improvements Fund ceases to exist with effect from 31st March, 1930, inclusive.
(ii) The assets of the Agricultural Improve-ments Fund are transferred to the Department of Agriculture, with effect from 31st March, 1930, inclusive, from which date the Government Undertakes to discharge all liabilities in this connection.
British Legion. The Honorary Secretary of the Sarawak-Kuching Branch of the British Legion, sends us the following Statement of Poppy Day Receipts, 1929, for Malaya.
Air Mail. KARACHI-LONDON AIR MAIL SERVICE. Further deceleration of delivery of correspondence for Great Britain, Northern Ireland and Irish Free State. Notification has been received that, commencing with the flight leaving Karachi on Tuesday, April 15th, 1930, the weekly air mail now due in London on the following Wednesday week will reach London on the following Monday. Air mails to connect with this service will continue to leave Penang as at present but the delivery in London will be effected within 16 or 17 days after despatch from Penang. POSTMASTER-GENERAL.
CORRESPONDENCE. [The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.] PENDAMARAN ESTATE, PORT SWETTENHAM, SELANGOR, F.M.S., 30th March, 1930.
The Editor, The Sarawak Gazette, Kuching, Sarawak, DEAR SIR, My attention has been drawn to an article which appeared in the Malay Mail of the 22nd January under the heading “Sarawak's Air Service.” I enclose a copy of a letter which has to-day been posted to The Aeroplane, and which explains itself. Yours faithfully, W. H. PHILLIPS.
PENDAMARAN ESTATE, PORT SWETTENHAM, SELANGOR, F.M.S., 30th March, 1930. The Editor, The Aeroplane, London, DEAR SIR, I enclose herewith a cutting from the Malay Mail of the 22nd January, to which my attention was drawn on arrival in this country, a week ago. Incidentally, this is my first intimation of the article in The Aeroplane. I am the only pilot concerned, and to say that these statements emanated from me is untrue. The inormation, which appears to have reached you fourth or fifth hand, is also incorrect, as witness the following example:-
“The pilot found that the country abounds in disused and flooded mines ....” This is absurd, as there are none suitable in Sarawak. I certainly did land a seaplane on a mine pool in Kuala Lumpur, a town in the centre of Malaya, at least seven hundred miles from Sarawak. Under these circumstances I must ask you to give the same publicity to this letter as you have given to the article in question. I am also enclosing a copy of this letter to the Sarawak Gazette. Yours faithfully, W. H. PHILLIPS.
Acknowledgments. We record with thanks the receipt of the following Journals and Periodicals:-
The Straits Budget; The Singapore Weekly Free Press; The Weekly Straits Echo; The British North Borneo Herald; The China Express and Telegraph; The Eastern Courier; The British and Colonial Printer and Stationer; The Printers Engineer; Paper and Print; Panduan Truna.
A wider exchange of Journals would be welcome.