The Sarawak Gazette. SATURDAY, MARCH 1st. 1930.
Births. HOWARD-SMITH.—On 1st February, 1930, at the General Hospital, Kuching, to Mr. and Mrs. Howard-Smith, a son. SPURWAY.—On 27th January, 1930, at the General Hospital, Kuching, to Mr. and Mrs. B. J. C. Spurway, a son.
Suara Sarawak. February. MONDAY 24th February, 1930, Her Highness the Ranee's birthday. “Hail to thee, lady! and the grace of heaven, Before, behind thee, and on every hand, Enwheel thee round!” BY the s.s Vyner Brooke on 2nd February, several people left Kuching—including Mr. and Mrs. R. E. Edwards, and Miss Andrews, who were proceeding on long leave. MRS. Kortright, who had recently been staying at the Astana on a visit, also left for England. Her husband, the Resident of the Fifth Division, follows later. May the weather be kind to them all! MR. H. D. Aplin, Resident of the Fourth Division, paid a visit to Kuching for a few days this month, staying with the Chief Secretary and Mrs. Boult. We hear that their charming house at Miri has caught the avaricious eye of Mother Ocean, demanding a hasty removal to a safer site. A flying visit was paid to Kuching by Mr. Spurway on 14th February, to fetch his wife, and her new possession, who begins his travels by a voyage to Sibu. MRS. Gange arrived from Sibu on a visit to Mrs. Danson. We are glad to see her again in Kuching. MR. G. F. Chaplin arrived by the s.s. Vyner Brooke on the 10th instant to join the Borneo Company, Ltd. CONGRATULATIONS to Miss Richardson, sister of Mr. Richardson of the Borneo Company, on her engagement to Mr. A. F. Baughan of Sime Darby & Co. Mr. Baughan, who has been transferred to Malacca, left Kuching on 22nd February. DR. A. D. Hutchison and Mr. Kay left on the 2nd instant on a short visit to Singapore, returning by the Vyner Brooke on the 10th. THREE new Government Officers arrived by the Kuching on the 4th instant: Mr. S. Hammond, Mr. Stroup, and Mr. G. A. C. Field, who are attached respectively to the Survey, Electrical, and Customs Departments. BY the Vyner Brooke on the 10th instant, Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft arrived, and has been appointed to do duty in the District Office, Kuching. MR. L. D. Kennedy returned from leave by the Vyner Brooke on 24th February. WE have not seen many of the new Ford Cars about in this part of the world. The Ford Motor Company of Malaya, Ltd., send us a “News Release” indicating that the sales of the Ford Company (U.S.A.) reached a total of 2,000,000 cars and trucks during 1929, and that they maintained their lead against all other makes in every State during July, August and September. IT would be interesting to have some particulars of the sales of “Beetles” from the Austin Company—giving statistics of the output to Sarawak compared with that to the rest of the East, on a basis of comparative open-road mileage. THE Right Rev. Bishop Danson left for Singapore by s.s Kuching on 25th January en route for B.N.B. where he was to consecrate the new church at Kudat prior to the departure of the Rev. E. Parry on retirement. The Bishop was expecting to visit Sandakan Jesselton, Labuan, Brunei, and Miri, and hopes to be back in Kuching about the middle of March. WE hear that the infant son of Mr. and Mrs. Spurway was christened at St. Thomas’ Church on Sunday, 16th February. MR. Kennedy, of the Selantik Coal Co. arrived on 4th February, and proceeded on prospecting duty. Miss Joyce Brooke, daughter of Dr. and Mrs. Gilbert Brooke, is now on a visit to Mrs. Deshon at Constabelle, near Hyeres, in the South of France. Mrs. Deshon will doubtless be remembered by old friends in Sarawak where she and her husband spent so many years of service. MR. Mactavish, of the Wakefield Castrol, Co., paid a short visit to Kuching, from the 10th to the 15th instant. The Judicial Commissioner and the Legal Adviser left for Sibu in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on Sunday, 12th January, and returned to Kuching on Sunday, 19th January. A sitting of the Supreme Court was held in Sibu on Thursday, 16th January, when one civil and two criminal appeals were heard. NEIGHBOURING Malayan countries are seeing a general-post of senior officers, following Sir Hugh Clifford’s retirement. Sir Cecil Clementi, K.C.M.G., nephew of the late Sir Cecil Clementi Smith, a former Governor, came to the Straits Settlements from Hong Kong as Governor on 11th February- Chief Secretary of the F.M.S.—Sir William Peel—goes, we hear, as Governor to Hong Kong. IT is officially announced that Mr. A Frederick Richards, at present acting as General Adviser, Johore, has been appointed to succeed the late Mr. J. L. Humph as Governor of British North Borneo. Mr. Richards, who joined the Malayan Civil Service as a cadet in November, 1908, when he was posted the Selangor secretariat, has had a varied career in Malaya, for he has held appointments in most parts of the country. As an old friend we offer him a sincere welcome to Borneo and to his wife who is a daughter of Mr. Basil Whitehead, formerly of the Straits Settlements Police. MR. G. J. D. Walters arrived from Singapore on the 24th after short leave, and was admitted to hospital. His many friends will anxious to hear of better news of him. CONGRATULATIONS on the birth of the Kuching Rifle Club which commenced its existence on Friday, 10th January. A review of the Club will be found in the First Division notes. We wish it every success. THE long suffering Post Office have often much to contend with, though flashes of humour must occasionally brighten their horizon. A week or two ago, a blue envelope, sealed up, was included amongst the correspondence reaching Kuching. On the envelope there was no address whatever, but the following legend was written on it by a fair hand:—“I am sending you a pr. of ?s which were too large for me. I made them from rather a nice pattern and thought perhaps you might find a use for them.” The P.O. first tried the envelope on a young male resident who must have been suitably thrilled!! We learn that the missive eventually reached its proper destination—skilful staff work that! —but we are credibly informed that the ?s have not yet arrived !! THE keen and energetic Postmaster- General, Mr. K. H. Gillan, sends us an interesting note with regard to Air Mails for Europe which secure an acceleration of five w six days over the ordinary routes. This note will be found later in our issue (see Announcements Section.) MR. F. O. Blagg, the Hon. Secretary of the Sarawak Branch of the British Legion, sends copies of letters of thanks from the Organizing Secretary for £136.6s.7d. collected locally. These letters will be found in our Announcements Section. THE Poet Horace has a phrase dimidium facti qui coepit habet. The Editor of this Journal finds, however, that, when he has to collect material for the monthly issue, it is by no means half done, and he earnestly appeals to his readers for contributions, and to the various Missions, Tools, Schools, Clubs, etc., to send in copies of their Annual Reports, accounts of sports, sales, examinations, concerts, etc. Such contributions are of much interest to many of the public, but are very difficult for the Editor to collect in person!
Obituary Notices. HUMPHREYS. His Excellency J. L. Humphreys, Governor of B. N.B., whose tragic death occurred at Tientsin last December, will be remembered here for the short visit be paid to Kuching not long before going on leave last year. We quote the following leader from our contemporary—the BN.B. Herald of 2nd January— which was received too late for insertion in our last issue.
DEATH OF HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR.
It is with profound regret that the death of His Excellency the Governor, which occurred at Tientsin on the afternoon of Sunday, 15th December, is recorded.
His Excellency left North Borneo on furlough on 26th September with the intention of visiting the Netherlands East Indies, Hong Kong, China, Japan and the United States of America on his way home to England. After visiting Bali, Java, Hong Kong, Canton and Shanghai he intended to proceed to Peking, Mukden and Korea and to sail from Yokohama for America in the latter part of December.
His Excellency wrote from Shanghai on 18th November and was evidently in good health, having won the Open Golf Championship of China on the two preceding days ; he had arranged to leave by boat for Tientsin on 19th November ; it must have been after this date that he contracted the pneumonia which proved fatal.
The first intimation that reached North Borneo was a cable from London, received on 28th November, stating that His Excellency was critically ill with pneumonia in hospital at Tientsin; the course of his severe illness has been closely followed with the deepest sympathy by the whole com-munity, whose one hope was for his recovery.
John I.isseter Humphreys was a Senior Classical Scholar of Brasenose College, Oxford, where he obtained a First Class in Classical Moderations in 1902. In 1905 he joined the Civil Service of the Straits Settlements where his ability quickly won recognition ; in 1915 after ten years' service he was appointed to act as British Agent, Trengganu. For over nine years the State of Trengganu had the advantage of developing under his able	administration and on two occasions his exceptional services were recognised by the Secretary of State; in 1919 the appointment of British Agent, Trengganu, was raised to the rank of British Adviser, Trengganu and in 1924 the post of British Adviser, Trengganu was made a Staff appointment. In 1925 Mr. Humphreys was transferred to act as British Adviser, Kedah, and in September, 1926, as Staff Officer of the rank of British Adviser, Kedah, he was seconded as Governor of the State of North Borneo.	In 1925 he became a Commander of the British Empire and in 1928, while Governor of North Borneo, the Companionship of St. Michael and St. George was bestowed on him.
His death at the early age of 48 years, in the full vigour of exceptional intellectual faculties, is deplored by all; evidence of his marked abilities as an administrator can already be seen, and North Borneo will increasingly benefit in future years from the knowledge, wisdom and experience that he brought to bear upon the problems of this State. Those who came in contact with him could not fail to realise the personality and power that lay within him; by his straightforward and unaffected character he gained the affection of those who knew him and served him ; he never spared himself in his work; he loved his country.
Just as he was eminent in his work so he succeeded in all that gained his attention; he had a great range of interests; he was a deep reader with a wide knowledge of many subjects; he was an admirable host; he was always ready to take part in all forms of sport, but at golf, his game, he excelled.
While all mourn the untimely passing of one who must take a pre-eminent place in the history of North Borneo, to many there is an added grief in the loss of a great friend.
PRATT-BARLOW.
From home papers we learn that the death occurred on 6th January, at the Forbes Fraser Hospital, Bath, of Ethel, widow of the late George Pratt-Barlow, after a long illness most patiently borne. It will be recalled that her husband, who died at 18 Rivers Street, Bath, in May 1928, was for 28 years in the Sarawak Civil Service, during nearly all of which time he was stationed in the Third Division, mostly at Mukah, Bintulu, and the Lower Rejang. He retired on pension in May .1906, and settled in Bath where for five years he acted as Secretary to the Bath and County Club, and later served as a Special Constable during the war.
GOMPERTZ. Reuter cables news from London of the death on 8th February, of Sir Henry Hessey Johnston Gompertz, who retired from the Chief-Justiceship of the Federated Malay States last year.
Sir Henry started his Civil Service career as a Cadet in the Straits Settlements in 1890 and spent seven years in various capacities in the Malayan Service before, in 1907, he went to Hong Kong to take up the position of Assistant Registrar General. He was called to the Bar, Lincoln’s Inn, in 1899 and became Assistant Colonial Secretary Hong Kong in 1900, President of the Land Court in 1902, Senior Magistrate 1907 and from 1909 was Puisne Judge of the Hong Kong Supreme Court till 1935 when he come back to Malaya in the premier judicial capacity of the F.M.S.
Sir Henry, married Rosalie, only daughter of the Rev. L. C. Briggs, formerly the Colonial Chaplain of the Straits Settlements in Penang. Born in 1867 he was educated at Bedford and Exeter College, Oxford, of which college he was a Scholar. He was Knighted in the King’s Birthday Honours in 1926.
Glowing tributes to the late Sir Henry Gompertz, formerly Chief Justice of the F.M.S. were paid in the Supreme Court by the Chief Justice (Sir William Murison) and members of the Bar.
Sir William Murison, who was accompanied on the Bench by Mr. Justice Thorne and Mr. Justice Stevens, said:
“You have no doubt heard of the death of Sir Henry Gompertz, late Chief-Justice of the F.M.S. He spent most of his life in Hong Kong, where he was for a long time Puisne Judge and many times acting Chief Justice. Eventually, in 1925, he was appointed Chief Justice of the F.M.S. I do not think that he ever sat on the Bench in the Colony, except once in Malacca, so we have not had that association with him, but there are some of us here who have had his personal acquaintance. Being associated with him in the work of the Bench in Malaya, we all know that he was very sound both in judgment and in his dealings.
His dead is a very great grief to his late associates on the Bench of Malaya, and we would like to express our deep sympathy with his widow in her bereavement. He will be remembered as a great judge and a very genuine than. We extend our deepest sympathy to Lady Gompertz.”
BELLES-LETTRES.
Our ‘Easy’ Language.
When the English tongue you speak, Why is ‘break’ not rhymed with ‘freak’ ? Will you tell me why it’s true We say ‘sew’ but likewise ‘Jew,' And the maker of a verse Cannot cap his ‘horse’ with ‘worse’ ? ‘Beard’ sounds not the same as ‘heard’;
‘Cord’ is different from ‘word.’ ‘Cow’ is ‘cow’ but ‘low’ is ‘low,’ ‘Shoe’ is never rhymed with ‘foe.’ Think of ‘hose’ and ‘dose’ and ‘lose’; And of 'goose'—and yet of ‘choose.’ Think of ‘comb’ and ‘tomb’ and ‘bomb’; ‘Doll’ and ‘roll’; and ‘home’ and ‘some.’ And since ‘pay’ is rhymed with ‘say,' Whey not ‘paid’ with ‘said,' I pray ?
We have ‘blood’ and ‘food’ and ‘good’; ‘Mould’ is not pronounced like ‘could.’ Wherefore ‘done’ but ‘gone’ and ‘lone’? Is there any reason known ?
And, in short, it seems to me
Sound and letters disagree.
Notes on Tropical Gardening No. 2.
PERSONEL AND LAY-OUT.
The personel of the garden is naturally of primary importance, but it is a subject which bristles with difficulties. The gardeners in Malaysia may be of different nationalities, such as Malay, Javanese, Chinese, or Tamil; but they have two common bonds of union—one is that they seldom do any proper work when they are not being carefully supervised, and the other is, that scarcely any of them know the first thing about gardening! More years ago than I like to remember, I had a Javanese kebun who came to me, lacking in any chits, but full of a rather unusual energy—especially as the first pay day came near! His energy, however, discharged itself in a very unpleasant direction to which Javanese seem especially liable. It might be called a “cacoethes effodendi” or “itch to make holes” ! Our house had a small lawn in front of it—a beautiful bit of satisfying green, fringed with a few narrow canna beds. On coining back from work one evening I found a large starshaped bed cut in the middle of the lawn. The Kebun was hastily summoned from his cubicle and made to demons the bed and replace the grass.	Nothing daunted the same process was repeated in various sites at intervals of a few days. Finally in sheer self-defence, he was given the “Order of the red morocco” ; when lo! within a week, I saw him driving a friend’s private gharry!! Let us hope he knew more of horses than of a garden, rather doubt it!
In those early days the Kebun’s wages were $7 a month! Now the usual price seems to vary $17 to $22, and occasionally a dollar or two more.
If, however, you have an intense love of your garden, and an ardent wish for results, it is no good to engage these dawdlers about whom I have been speaking—you will have to get a really good man who has been properly trained in some botanic garden. This will cost a lot, for really skilled men can command anything from $30 to $40 a month. The best men are usually Chinese though I have known some admirable Tamils. Good Javanese are not so common and Malays very rare. The only other advice I can offer, with regard to personel, is to devote as much time to it yourself as you can possibly spare from tennis or golf. Further, always give your kebun or kebuns a definite scheme of work for the following day, and see that they do it. The work of a garden comprises such various things as:- Pruning of trees and shrubs, cutting of hedges, weeding of drives, weeding of flower beds, cleaning of drains, mailing and stocking of beds, continual potting and repotting of plants, sowing in seed boxes, making burnt earth and leaf mold, manuring, daily watering, care of pergolas, screens, etc., daily sweeping of leaves, and, last but by no means least, grass-cutting. With regard to the latter, I recommend engaging the services of a contractor who will probably keep all the grass cut for a monthly sum of $4 to $10, according to the size of an ordinary private house domain. This leaves your Kebun free to carry out the multitudinous duties of a garden, since grass cutting is an exacting occupation which absorbs a considerable amount of time. Lastly, with regard to the absence leave of your gardener, if he has always been used to a half holiday or whole holiday each week, you will, I suppose, usually continue this habit—but I strongly advise that the holiday be any day except Sunday, for Sunday is usually the day when most people can themselves devote most time to their garden; and to be without the services of your kebun when you most want him seems to me to be a great mistake. His own National Holiday must of course be free, but not necessarily all bank-holidays. Then of course his grandmother will die (frequently!) or his sister get married. It is well to keep a count of these domestic occurrences in order to ensure that they do not occur more frequently then the require-ments of nature dictate.
LAY-OUT.
A garden, however small it may be, can always be made a thing of beauty, and will well repay the most meticulous care that can be lavished on it. Even a small town house (such as a clink's) with a few square-feet of frontage grass, may be turned into a tiling of joy to gladden the hearts of passers-by. Undoubtedly one of the most pleasurable occupations is the creation of a garden out of an arid-waste, or out of a jungle wilderness, surrounding a newly-built house; but it is perhaps almost equally a triumph to make the desert of a neglected bachelor's garden to blossom like the rose of Sharon. Putting on one-side (for the present) the subject of vegetable growing, there are two things we require from a garden—or viridarium as the Romans would call it. One is : a spectacular effect; and the other in economic output of cut flowers for table decoration. The spectacular effect is the most important; and this can be secured most easily when the ground is undulating in character. We have to consider the lay-nut as it will be seen (a) from the house itself; (b) by persons approaching the house; and (c) by those walking to the garden. Plan everything with a view to beautiful vistas (however short), harmonious colour schemes, and tasteful decorative adjuncts such as: arches, pergolas, screens, brick walls summer-houses, and seats. Rockeries can also be made a most attractive feature of any garden however small.
First of all let us think about trees. They are very beautiful things, and make a magnificent setting to any garden; but they should not be planted too near to the house, or they may impede the circulation of air and their fallen leaves and branches may clog the caves gutters or damage the roof. Of the larger and taller varieties of trees, it is well to have only a few, unless wide spaces are available, e.g the Peltophorum with yellow flowers; Poinciana (Flame of the Forest); Chempaka, with superb scent; Lagerstroemia with its mauve flowers; Albizzia—a quick-growing tree with foliage rather like the Poinciana, which spreads out branches in cedar-like fashion and is best seen silhouetted on a ridge; Tembusus with their charming, almost lace-like foliage; Casuarinas which should be planted in a windy situation where the charm of their natural beauty is enhanced by the haunting and mysterious plaint of their rustling leaves; some members of the extensive “fig” family ; the Spathodea (tulip trees) with its well-known scarlet blossom; the Jacoranda covering the ground with a mauve snow; some of the taller palms—even the coconut and pisang have a useful place. But, as I have said, only a sparing number of these bigger trees should be employed, and they are more effective if planted in a clump of two or three, as a background. I should scarcely advise the selection of fruit trees for an ordinary garden unless the depredations of the populace do not disturb the owner.
Amongst the smaller trees we have a wide selection to choose from. Perhaps the most useful are:—Cassia fistula, or Indian laburnum; Cassia nodosa, a beautiful pink variety; the Japanese Cherry (Malpigphia glabra) which incidentally is neither Japanese nor is it a cherry!; Baeckia—one of the most graceful of trees with an acicular leaf like the casuarina, and a drooping habit like a willow; white Baubinia; the Murruya exotica, or Kamuning tree, has a well-known white scented flower; Brownes, with scarlet clusters of blossom like Rhododendron flowers. Lastly, of the smaller trees we have one which is perhaps the most useful of all—the Rhapis palm—It grows in clumps which spread very nicely, and attains a height of not more than about ten or twelve feet. It forms a pleasant, decorative feature and, if planted in a semicircular lay-out, will form a pretty arbour for a garden seat. The stems are often used as walking sticks. Having thus touched on what might be compared to the heavier furniture of a house, we have to think about the carpet! A grass lawn, whether big or small, is an essential in every garden—the more extensive and well-kept, the more beautiful it is. It should not, as a rule, be cut up with flower-beds except at strategic points. A flower border round the edges, and some well-chosen shrubs form an admirable setting to the lawn. The well-kept appearance is secured by weekly mowing—in any case the mowing should not be done, at longer intervals than a fortnight.This concludes the Notes for the current month. The next month's Notes will deal with the decorative adjuncts of a garden, indicating now to make pergolas, screens, brick walls, rockeries, etc. This series of Gardening Notes will be concluded in 12 articles altogather....	My readers will be interested to read the following review of a small new gardening-book, as given in the Straits Budget of 13th February :—
MAKING A GARDEN. Amateur Gardening. By Mrs. W. S. Gibson. Kyle Palmer, $1. “Enthusiastic amateur gardeners who wish to pursue their hobby in Malaya usually find themselves up against many strange problems which never arise at Home, and which may even discourage them from the “purest of ail pleasures.” This need not-be so if he or she is armed with Mrs. Gibson's book and is wise enough to profit by her experience. The process of transforming a patch of ground, from a wilderness into a delight to the eye is explained so clearly that anyone, even if completely ignorant of horticulture, could do what the writer did and give pleasure to themselves, and to others. The book, which is modestly priced, is on sale at most European bookshops in Singapore.” F.R.H.S
Silhouettes.
[After The Manner OF JAPANESE ‘UTA']
1.Gleam of leaves new-born;
Shadows that race o'er the fields;
Voice of rain-wet thrush;
Scent of pink almond far-flung—
Awake! O my love, ‘tis Spring!
2.Roses shimmering red;
Droning of bees through long hours;
Scent of new-mown hay;
Lengthening shadows which lead
To cool dusk, and stars, and night!
3.Hayricks, bearded, gaunt;
Hiss of strained leaves on bowed trees;
Puddles hold the sky;
The daylight wanes, and the mists
From sogged meadows rise like ghosts!
4.Snow falls silently:
Grey, through white trees, lour the clouds;
Lamp-gleams pierce the gloom;
Crackle the legs on the hearth —
Draw near, O my love, and dream!
Boro Budur.
We had been travelling through Java Rich though the vegetation of the tropics is, it would be impossible to find any such single large area with such intense cultivation. The dominant feature is rice. Rice fields abound everywhere over the immense alluvial plains, in the highlands, and even up the steep mountain-sides. This is all done by terracing and irrigation; but even so, not enough rice can be produced to meet the needs of the 30 million inhabitants.
From the coolness of the hills we descended by comfortable express, with vistas of teak and tea; of rice, and coconuts, and bananas; of bamboo, sugar, and maize; of indigo and india-rubber; and, winding through the plains, at last reached the venerable town of Djokja, formerly one of the most powerful Sultanates in the island.
The afternoon shadows were beginning to lengthen as we set out on our 25-mile pilgrimage, in a comfortable motor. The expedition was most enjoyable, though sustained conversation was impossible owing to a peculiarity of car-driving early remarked on by visitors to Java. There is no chauffeur. There is, indeed, a native who turns the starting handle and sits beside his master, but he is not a chauffeur—he is a "trumpeter.” He is furnished with a tripartite mouth horn of which the three rich notes are emitted in varying sequence and with astounding force and frequency, until the car finally comes to rest again. He seems, however, to be otherwise harmless.
As the town was left behind, rice fields and sugar fields opened out on both sides of the road, punctuated with the tall chimneys of sugar factories, till Moentilan was reached. The most striking thing about this route was the presence, at a long interval, of two covered gateways over the road, with stables and stalls attached —a relic of the old posting days.	From Moentilan we began to reach the higher lands of Kedoe, with vistas of the great volcanoes— Merapi (9,000 feet) and Merbaboe (10,000 feet).
The first surprise in this paradise of beauty the sudden finding of a wayside shrine—the Tjandi Mendoet. This is a square structure early Indian style of architecture, with ornate bas-relief carvings, and a single flight of steps on one side, giving access to the inner chamber or shrine. Within this shrine, and facing the door-way, is a large Buddha statue, while on the one side is a statue of the Buddhist Monarch who built the great Boro Budur Temple, and on the other a statue of his father, who was of the Hindu religion, and had not received Buddhism. The date of these two kings is not known, but was probably towards the early centuries of this era and possibly their ashes are interred in this way-side architectural gem.
Thence we passed over the river Progo, the road gradually ascending and winding in and out amongst the trees, with nearing glimpses of the mountains.
And then all at once, unheralded, the wonder happened. A sudden turn of the road round the base of an isolated hill—up to then hidden by trees—and the Boro Budur opened out before us bathed in the golden glory of the westering sun!
There are, perhaps, few occasions in life when one could be so taken by surprise, and forced to hold one’s breath in sheer awestruck wonder. For there had been no previous preparation ; no distant view ; no clue to what was in store.
The Boro Budur! How it baffles description! One is dumb before it. It seems a sacrilege to speak. And the more one looks the more one's wonder grows. Its massive solidity, its perfect proportions, its beauty of detail, its gorgeous setting—these are all-compelling. But there is another voice that calls to us. Standing there on its solitary hill, grey and weather-beaten, it has gathered repose from the passing centuries. To see it, is to gaze at history through weird shadows and dim lights of mysterious colours, and to watch realities behind a glowing opalescent mist.
On the summit of the hill is a broad platform on which the temple is built. It rises in five rectangular bastioned terraces of diminishing size, each terrace enclosing a processional gallery, covered on both sides with bas-reliefs, which are no less than three miles in length.
Capping these five terraced walks, are 436 domed alcoves, in which life-sized Buddha statues keep their long vigil, watching the sunrise and sunset, looking at Nature as voiced by the eternal hills and by the far-stretching fertile plains, and gazing with impenetrable calm at the shifting scenes of human drama.
Above these five rectangular terraces are three circular ones of diminishing size, flanked by seventy-two latticed dagobas, or inverted lotus buds. On looking through the perforations each is found to contain a life-sized Buddha which, in this case, does not face the world nor keep a watch over the mutability of human affairs (as in the terraces below), but is turned in silent meditation towards the great central cupola, which represent Nirvana. This final shrine is fifty feet in diameter, and is closed in—not latticed. It was once opened, and within it was found a Buddha in exaltation above a deep central well which probably contained some relics.
Through these deserted terraces we walked in wonder, surprised at the loving care and intimate sympathy with which the work of restoration had been carried out.
But day was dying fast. Over the distant rice fields the evening mists were beginning to gather. Slowly the scarlet and orange and amber lights faded from the sunset sky. A little cool breeze, soft as an infant's sigh, stole down from the mountains and played through the quiet darkening galleries and latticed dagobas, as if in evening benediction Nightfell. Silent, isolated, sublime, the massive pile loomed darkly in the tropical starlight, standing like a last out-post in an alien land—a mute witness of a living faith amongst peoples who have for centuries been apostate—a glorious memorial to the Great Teacher who died so long ago, and whose tenets of high endeavour and universal lovingkindness have guided over life's burning marl, for over twenty centuries, the faltering footsteps of more than half the world’s population. Anak Sungei.
There are Goblins at the Foot of Rodway Hill. [WITH APOLOGIES TO THE AUTHOR OF “THERE AVE FAIRIES AT THE BOTTOM OF OUR GARDEN.’’]
AVE FAIRIES AT THE BOTTOM OF OUR GARDEN.’’]
There are goblins at the foot of Rodway Hill,
You can see them if you're passing by that way ;
But they’re often in the ditches, a'hiding from the
witches
Who sometimes come along and stop their play.
There’s a horrid swamp with bamboo clumps and
lalang
And lots of water always trickling through,
You wouldn’t think they’d dare, to come mischief-
making there—
Well, they do!
Oh. those goblins at the bottom of that hill
You'd never guess the mischief they can do ;
The prank they love the most is to pinch the
Judge’s post
And once they stole a crested cockatoo!
Would you like to know who leads that goblin
band?
(For goblins all must have a King you see)
If you won't tell anyone, I’ll whisper just for fun—
Well, —it's ME ! ( Contrib.)
First Division News.
KUCHING METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS FOR FEBRUARY, 1930.
Note.—The Kuching Meteorological Station is situated at Latitude 1.33.20 North; and Longitude 110.20.31 East. The height above Mean Tide Level in 29.5 feet.
This Station (Sadong) is the driest in the State as far as our present records show. The Sarawak Rubber Estates Limited, Sungei Tengah, Sarawak.
Rainfall during 24 hours for January 1930.
Divisional Reports.
January, 1930.
Divisional Report by Mr. J. C. Swayne, Acting Resident, First Division.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports :—
District Court.—Twenty cases were heard, two of which were criminal and eighteen civil. The two criminal cases resulted in convictions. There were two cases of breach of Municipal By-laws.
The civil claims involved amounts totalling $5,618.69, while fees amounted to $211.79.
Magistrate's Court.—Eighty-one cases were heard fifteen of which were criminal and sixty-six civil. Of the fifteen criminal cases, fourteen convictions and one acquittal were adjudged. There were four cases of assault, two contempt of Court, three breach of Municipal By-laws, five breach of Customs and Shipping Regulations and one other offence.
Fines imposed amounted to $90 and fees collected $41. The civil claims involved amounts totalling $1,944.93 for which fees collected amounted to $184.
Police Court.—Thirty-eight summary cases were brought before the Court. Thirty-six convictions and two acquittals were obtained.
A total amount of $236 was paid in fines.
In addition sixty-six judgment summons cases were dealt with during the month.
Court's General.—Eleven cases were dealt with resulting in each case in imprisonment.
General.—The 1st and 30th being New Year’s Day and Chinese New Year respectively, offices were closed.
I took over the duties of Coroner and the District Office as from the 1st from Mr. J. B. Archer, on his appointment as Deputy Resident, Second Division.
Coroner’s inquiries were held on the bodies of Jais bin Satu drowned whilst watching the Kuching Regatta, and Ong Peng Sia, who was involved in a motor accident on the night of 9th.
In the latter inquest a verdict of death caused by a rash and negligent act of Chan Ah Ang (Chawan) was returned.
Batu Kawa was visited during the month and appeared to be in a quiet and clean state. It would be of advantage if the concrete drains in the bazaar could be carried down to the water as originally intended since there is now an interval of some 30 yards of parit containing refuse and green slime. The bazaar parit also wants levelling in some places, the water not being able to run off more than to a depth of two inches in cases.
The pork market was in a clean state, but has extensive vertical and horizontal cracks in the south wall. Mohamedans in Batu Kawa ask that the vegetable market be entirely separated from the pork market.
It would be of advantage if the road on the Kuching side of the river could be widened at the water edge sufficiently to enable motor cars to turn here, as at present they have to back into a shop to get round and the traffic is steadily on the increase.
LAND OFFICE.
January, 1930.
The Land Officer, Mr. B. Summers, reports :— Two new Apprentice Land Inspectors joined the department early in the month.
One Assistant Land Inspector returned to Sadong, having completed his training.	There was a large decrease in the number of applications over the previous month.
It is gratifying to note that the increase in the number of examinations was maintained and that this is rapidly decreasing the number of applications outstanding. The work of the month was mostly of a routine nature, and calls for little comment.
SlMANGGANG ROAD LAND RESERVES.
Investigations in connection with the above continued, and temporary dwellings for the accommodation of the Land Inspectors were erected at Bukit Pum by local Dyaks.	A small block of sites for shophouses selected at 15th mile and it is proposed to undertake drilling in connection with a water supply.
Notices prohibiting further planting within the land reserves have been sent from this exhibition and distribution.
UPPER SARAWAK.
January, 1930.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. G. R.
H. Arundell, reports :
On Friday 3rd I rode up from Kuching to take over the affairs of this station. Starting from Kuching shortly after 7 a.m. I reached Seniawan at 11 a.m. and stopped for an hour to rest the ponies. I reached Bau about 1 p.m.
On the 8th a good many Land Dyaks appeared in Court. Orang Kaya Pa-Jamin reported that Nambier’s hut had been burnt down and all his property has lost. He asked for Government help and was given $5.
On Friday 10th Mr. Mansel, of the Treasury, arrived to audit and stayed till Monday.
On Monday 13th the Resident of First Division and the Postmaster-General arrived on a visit and left again next day. The Resident looked into one or two outstanding cases while he was here and settled various other matters requiring attention.
On 15th Dr. A. D. Hutchison arrived to inspect a Dyak on remand charged with killing his wife. Dr. Hutchison decided to take this man back to Kuching and keep him under observation for signs of insanity. Dr. Hutchison went to Dahan the next day and returned to Kuching from there.
On the same day P.C.’s Johari and Rumboi returned from Dutch Borneo, bringing with them three school-boys who had run away from Kuching. The boys were sent to Kuching next day.
On Friday 17th the gaol was examined and found in good and clean condition.
On 22nd I went round Tundong, Buso and Seniawan barracks and found one or two minor repairs necessary. Otherwise barracks were all clean and in good repair.
On 24th Capt. Le Gros Clark came up to interview Bau, Buso and Seniawan Chinese and returned to Kuching the same day.
On 27th Mr. MacBryan came up in the afternoon to see about preparation for His Highness the Rajah’s visit.
Their Highnesses the Rajah and the Tuan Muda were unable to leave on 29th as intended owing to bad weather, and eventually His Highness the Rajah unfortunately had to cancel the visit but His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by the Dayang Anne, Mrs. Kortright and Miss Tait, arrived at Seniawan on the 30th and were welcomed by Mr. Ong Seng Chai of Seniawan.
During his short visit His Highness paid a visit to Panjang’s fish pond and witnessed the catching of two large fish. A visit to Dahan had to be cancelled owing to bad weather and His Highness the Tuan Muda and party left again for Kuching on the morning of the 1st of February, after an all too short visit.
Court.—Court work has been fairly light in the whole during the month.
Fines and fees amounted to $328.05.
Roads.—I have regularly gone around all the roads during the month and the contractor and his coolies have kept these in very good condition considering the hopeless weather conditions.
Prisons.—The average of prisoners during the month was 31.
Rainfall.—Rainfall recorded for the month was 16 inches.
LUNDU.
January, 1930.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, reports :—
Court.—Only two Civil cases were brought before Court during the month.
Fines and fees collected during the month were 139.
General.—Offices were closed on New Year’s Day. With the approval of the late District Officer a Regatta was being held on that day.
Offices were also closed on the 30th being Chinese New Year.
In accordance with instructions from the Extra Assistant Conservator of Forests, Mohamed Arabi, the Forest Clerk, was to ordered to proceed to Kuching on the 2nd. He returned on the 7th.
Three crocodiles measuring four feet eleven inches were destroyed during the month.
Mr. F. L. Mansel, of the Sarawak Treasury, and Auditor’s Clerk J. T. Cecil de Silva, paid a surprise visit on the 18th.	Hong Choon Kim and Kho Thian Soo (fishermen) arrived from Simatan on the 23rd reporting that their kotak No. 282 was wrecked near Tanjong Dato on the night of the 6th when they encountered very bad weather. All the goods were lost.
It has been reported that the engkabang harvest at Jangkar and Samunsam commence in the middle of the month. The crop has been very poor this year. Engkabangs in other localities in the district have not flowered this year.
Monopolies.—Kho Kim Liang, the opium agent of Sampadi, was reported dead on the 22nd. Kho Liang Kim, the brother of Kho Kim Liang, has been acting as temporary agent. He applied to become agent in place of his brother, which has been telegraphed to the Controller, Government Monopolies, for his approval.
8,203 packets of opium were sold at Lundu, Simatan and Sampadi during the month. There being 17,648 packets remaining in stock at the end of the month.
The prisoners were chiefly engaged on the general upkeep of the station during the month.
Rainfall.—The rainfall for the month was 20.57 inches.
Shipping.—The s.s. Maleng, s.l. Ulu, m.l. Lundu and m.v. Sri Merbo made two, three, four and one trip each respectively during the month.
Trade.—The returns for the month as compared with the corresponding month of last year were as follows :—
SADONG.
January, 1930.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports:—
Courts.—Exceptionally few cases were heard during the month, probably due to the fact that most of the people are busy on their farms.
Public Works.—The carpenter was employed on extending the bungalow used by the Sanitary Inspector. This was not quite finished, at the end of the month.
Housing for the fire hose was finished, but has not yet been installed.
A quantity of planks were sent to Tabekang as building stock.
Nothing new was undertaken under this heading in the absence of approved estimates.
Medical.—At the Government Hospital eleven patients were admitted, twelve were discharged and one was transferred to the Kuching Leper Camp, leaving one remaining at the end of the month. At the Dispensary, 126 patients made 165 attendances for treatment.
The table of diseases shews that one patient was being Weaned of the opium habit.
Forty-five N.A.B. injections were administered of which four were for muli and forty-one for yaws.
The accounts shew Revenue $237.25 and Expenditure, including salaries and rations, $200.80.
Marine.—M.V. Vava again gave trouble when in use and the magneto was sent to the Government
Workshop for repairs. When returned again and fitted the engine still would not go. Application has been made for an expert, fitter to come here and tender assistance.
Prison.—From the 17th the prisoners averaged five only, and there was no gang. This shortage of labour does not enhance the work of the station which has suffered considerably regarding road repairs and drain cleaning.
On the 31st a Dyak, Lanchang, who was serving a sentence in irons and was employed on cutting hedges, escaped and is still at large at the time of writing.
Agriculture.—Mr. G. St. F. Dare paid a short visit from the 4th to 6th in connection with the
Government controlled coconut plantation.
The Sea-Dyaks in the Ulu Simunjan started harvesting their padi at the beginning of the month.
They report a wonderful crop and are employing Malays to assist in the gathering.
Reports of other padi throughout the district shew that good crops are expected everywhere, with the exception of a few Land-Dyak villages above Tebekang. Staff.—Abang Arda, clerk, arrived on the 4th to relieve Abang Drahman who returned to Kuching on the 8th.
Sait, who has acted as Native Officer, Semrah, for some years, reverted to Tua Kampong as from the 1st.
Native Officer Abang Alek took over the Semrah district in addition to his own as from the 1st.
Forest Clerk Alfred Jamuh proceeded to Kuching on the 8th to learn a new Forestry accounting system, and returned again on the 11th.
Sanitary Inspector S. V. Selvaduray was returned to his Department with a letter on the 12th.
The two Land Inspectors were busily employed during the month, but difficulty is now experienced in getting the owners of new lands to pay for their newly made out Occupation Tickets.
Travelling.—I left for Tebekang on the 19th and arrived on the 21st, having been held up two days at Gedong owing to engine trouble.
The Land Dyaks say this has been the heaviest fruit season within living memory and many thousands of durians have been left in the jungle to rot. This fruit had practically no price in Tebekang and they were being sold at three for one cent.
A contract for extending the gaol and making a bathroom for the Native Officer's house was made.
The Native Officer was told to have a new bridge made over a small river on the bazaar road.
I returned to the station, accompanied by the Rev.
Fr. Staal, on the 27th, having spent one night at Gedong on the way down.
General.—I returned from Kuching on the 4th and found that the station had been very well kept by the
Court Writer, Mr. G. Muk Kim, during my absence.
Mr. and Mrs. D. Evans returned from short leave on the 11th.
The 30th, being Chinese New Year, the offices were closed and a salute was fired from the office gun.
Twenty-seven ships entered and cleared.
Sadong Collieries Report. Production was hampered seriously by heavy falls of roof, as well. as the crushing of the shallow workings in the lower seam as the result of the previous month's rainfall, accelerated by the lack of skilled workmen in sufficient numbers to deal with them promptly and effectively.
No output was obtained from the upper seam, as the miners had been transferred to the lower seam where the labour shortage was most acute.
The coal remaining in N . 9 has now been completely worked out and that mine has therefore been dismantled.
The Manager returned from Kuching on the 11th January.
The underground workings were temporarily suspended on the 29th on account of Chinese New Year celebrations.
The rainfall for the month .was 14-55 inches.
Chinese Chamber of Commerce.
On Saturday, 8th February, the inaugural meeting of the members of the Chinese General Chamber of Commerce was held at the office of the Chamber (late Customs Office), when 105 members attended out of 161 enlisted, and the following were elected to constitute the General Committee for the year 1930.
Messrs. Ong Tiang Swee, C.S.S., Tan Boon Siew Tan Sum Guan, Ng Siak Kiong, Wee Kheng Chiang; Tan Sia Kim, Song Kheng Hai, Lau Cheng Hian, Teo Joon Kiew, Lee Eng Tong, Lim Hian Hoo, Lee Yeng Hoi, Jong Phoong Chong, Lau Chin Heng, Chua Bak Hin, Chai Heng, Jong Tze Khee, Eng Siak Kee, Teo Kuan, Chan Qui Cho, and Lim Peng Khoon.
The following seven members were elected as Reserve General Committee for the purpose of filling up occasional vacancies:—
Messrs. Lau Cheng Phuang, Leong Chook Keun, Chan Kee Ong, Wee Boon Chiew, Cheng Hoon, Poh Yong Long, and Ho Toon Seng.
Out of the 21 members forming the General Committee the following were re-elect Managing Committee:—	Mr. Ong Tiang Swee, C.S.S.,Mr.Lau Cheng Hian, Vice-Chairman; Mr. Tan Boon Siew, Honorary Secretary (English); Mr. Eng Siak Kee, Hon. Secretary (Chinese); Mr. Wee Kheng Chaing, Hon. Treasurer; Mr. Ng Siak Kiong, Hon. Accountant; and Mr. Lee Eng Tong, Hon. Auditor.
Kuching Football Club. The match on Saturday the 1st February, was a somewhat hastily arranged one against the Sarawak Police. It was quite a good game in the beginning, slackening off gradually towards the Police is their continual and quite rapid progress. Their greatest fault has always been the follow through after kicking at the ball, whether successfully or not. This is a contravention of the rule to prevent dangerous play, and will one day cause a serious accident. It is good to note that the fault is on the whole disappearing, though one or two individuals continue it.
Combination was once more attempted by the K.F.C., but was not so successful as on the two preceding Saturdays. The Police have put aside their old rash kicking, and taken up accurate passing, which of course makes them a far better side
The play was fairly even in the first half, and no goals were scored. There was repeated attacking, and both sides were unlucky not to score.
In the second half, Moir soon obtained a goal with a cross shot helped by a bump from the ground, which defeated the goalkeeper. Later, Calver, who had taken on the post of goalie, was hard-pressed on the line by a large crowd. Tucking the ball under his right armpit, and restraining an impulse to hand-off, he executed a fine run along the goal-mouth, and came through the crowd beaming. His joy was soon cut off, and a free kick given, a yard from the goal-line. A gang from each side gathered round the ball and as soon as the whistle went, elbows went into stomachs, opposition ones being preferred but not everywhere obtained. While the glorious scrum was still going on the ball appeared in midfield and Moir proceeded to score a second goal. Despite determined efforts on either side, no further scoring occurred.
Kuching Rifle Club.
The inaugural meeting was held in the Sarawak Club on Friday, 10th, January, 1930, when the following were elected Acting Members of Committee:— A. M. Forrest (Chairman), C. Fenwick, C. P. Lowe, E. S. Holl, and R. W. Chater, Honorary Secretary.	The following competitions have been arranged:—
A Monthly Competition for a small prize will be held on the first Thursday and Sunday of each month, commencing with whichever day may come first in the month.
The first competition will be held on Sunday, 2nd March, and Thursday, 6th March.
Conditions.—Ten rounds each at 200 yards and 500 yards targets.	Two sighting shots allowed to test rifle.
These monthly scores to count towards an additional prize to be presented at the end of the year for the highest average.
As between March and December there should be 10 shoots, minimum number to qualify for average 5 shoots.
Conditions.— Entrance fee 50 cents.
Two sighting shots allowed to test rifle.
5 rounds deliberate 200 yards
5 founds snapshooting 200 yards. Target exposed 6 seconds for each shot
10 rounds rapid. Target exposed for 60 seconds.
As competitors will squadded for the above event, will those intending to enter please forward their names and the date on which they wish to shoot to Mr. R. W. Chater, the Honorary Secretary. The squadding notice will be posted up at the Club.
A General Meeting of the Kuching Rifle Club was held in the Sarawak Club, by kind permission of the Committee, on Wednesday, 19th February, 1930, at 6.30 p.m., the business being—:
1. To consider and, if thought fit, confirm the Draft Rules of the Club.
2. To elect four Ordinary Members of Committee for 1930.
3. To decide any other business that may be brought before the Meeting.
The following Committee was elected:— Messrs. A. M. Forrest, R. W. Chater, C. P. Lowe, and E. S Holl.
RULES.
1. The name of the Club shall be KUCHING RIFLE CLUB.
2. The object of the Club is to provide instruction and practice in the use of the Rifle.
3. The officers of the Club shall consist of a President, Vice-Presidents, Hon. Secretary and Hon. Treasurer. The President, Hon. Secretary, and Hon. Treasurer, with two elected Members, shall collectively form the Executive Committee, by whom the Club and its property shall be managed. There shall be an Annual General Meeting of the Members of the Club in the month of January in each year, at which the Officers and Members of the above Committee shall be elected to hold office until the next Annual General Meeting. At the same Meeting the year’s accounts of the Club shall be submitted, and also any report which the Executive Committee may desire to present to the Meeting.
4. The Members of the Club shall be either Honorary, Ordinary or Outstation Members. The subscription of Ordinary Members shall be $2 per month, i.e., $1 subscription to the Club and $1 towards upkeep of Range. The subscription for Outstation Members shall be 50 cents per shoot with a maximum charge of $2 per month, plus cost of ammunition.
5. Subscriptions shall be payable monthly.	6. No Member whose subscription remains unpaid after two months shall be allowed to use the range, until such subscription be paid.
RANGE RULES.
1. Only Service Rifles and .303 Ammunition shall be used.
2. The Committee shall appoint a "Range Officer," who shall always be present during practice, and be in sole authority and responsible for the observance of all rules for the conduct of the shooting.
3. No one but the “Range Officer,” or person authorized by him, shall be allowed to go in front of the firing-point during the course of a meeting.
4. The “Range Officer” will be responsible that all safety precautions are carried out.
5. He will count the number of rounds arrival, before firing, and return any rounds left over after firing with a note to the Quartermaster, the Sarawak Rangers.
6. He will make application, in writing to the Quartermaster, the Sarawak Rangers, for all supplies of ammunition.
7. Flags.—A red flag will be hoisted above the “Stop Butt" during the time the range is being used. The red flag on the “Firing Point’’ will be lowered during firing and raised after each relay has ceased firing. This flag shall not be raised until each member firing has ceased to fire and has left his rifle lying on the "Firing Point" with the bolt open. (See Range Rules 8.)
8. Rifles will be laid on the firing point, muzzles towards the Targets and bolts open. After firing each relay will open the bolts of their rifles and leave them lying on the “Firing Point.”
9. Ammunition will be served out as soon as each relay has taken its position on the “Firing Point.” Any member who fails to fire the total number of rounds served out to him will immediately report to the “Range Officer” the number of rounds he has left and hand them over.
10. Empty shells will be counted and collected by the range "Orderly.” The “Range Officer” is responsible that the number of empty shells agree with the number of rounds fired.
11. Relays will not commence firing until the word is given by the “Range Officer."
12. There must be no talking on the “Firing Point” during the firing, except for the “Range Officer” or “Spotters.”
13. After all firing has ceased for the meeting the “Range Officer” will inspect all rifles on the range and see that no rounds are left in the breeches or magazines.
14. It is the duty of the “Range Orderlies (1) to take rifles, targets, etc., to the range and bring back same after firing. (2) to set up and bring in targets after each relay has fired.
15. After firing has commenced there must be no handling of spare rifles behind or on the “firing point” except by the “Range Officer” or with his permission.
16. Any member pointing a rifle, loaded or unloaded, at any person under any circumstances, or being guilty of any practice which in opinion of the Committee is dangerous, will be liable to expulsion from the Club.
17. No competitor may load until he has up his position on the firing point, and no person may leave the firing point without first unloaded his rifle.
18. At the word “Cease Fire” all rifles must be unloaded, and remain so until All given.
19. Any complaints with regard to the ammunition shall be made, in writing, Quartermaster, the Sarawak Rangers.
Annual Inter-Club Tennis Tournament. Sarawak Club, Sarawak Union Club, St. Michael’s Club—Secretary of the Tournament, Mr. Cheng Soon.)
Second Division News. Divisional Reports. January, 1930.
The Resident, Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner, reports:— Court.—Court work was normal during the month and no cases of any importance were brought up for hearing.
General.—A party of Skrang Dyaks in charge of Jelani left for Limbang via Kuching on the 3rd. Their visit is to examine the Brayaun and Bab country situated in the headwaters of the Trusan. The idea is to form a colony of Dyaks, as the land is considered most suitable for padi cultivations. On the 6th Mr. L. K. Morse, accompanied by Awang Sepudin, Native Officer, left on a visit to the Lingga and Sebuyow districts to attend to Court work generally. They returned to this station again on the 25th. Mr. D. C. Hudden, accompanied by Abang Bunsu, Native Officer, left on the 7th, for Engkilili and Lubok Antu. From Lubok Antu they visited the Ulu Ai Dyaks. They both returned to Simanggang on the 28th. On the 8th Mr. J. Beville Archer, Deputy Resident, arrived from Kuching in the s.l. Lucile. Most of the Penghulus visited this station in connection with various cases and to pay in fines imposed on Dyaks.
Mr. R. D. Binnie, Executive Engineer of the P.W.D., arrived from Kuching on the 22nd in order to see what possible means can be taken to stop a serious landslide on Fort Alice Hill. He also thoroughly examine the Fort building and found most of the billian posts eaten away between earth and air. Mr. R. D. Binnie, returned to Kuching on the 24th.
For the last three months a number of Malays have arrived from Palembang, Netherland Indies, in order to collect the skin of a snake called Pai.
The skins are for export, and no doubt will be used for the manufacturing of ladies shoes.
On the 27th, accompanied by Mr. J. Beville Archer, Deputy Resident, we paid a short visit to Engkilili.
On the 30th, being Chinese New Year, seven guns were fired at 8 a.m. and the day observed as a holiday. In the evening at 6 p.m. seven guns were fired, being the commencement of Bulan Puasa.
I hereby append the reports of Mr. L. K Moise and Mr. D. C. Hudden on their visits to the Lingga and Sebuyow and the Ulu Ai respectively.
I proceeded to Lingga on the 6th instant, per Hong Heng Huat, I found the station fairly well kept but the kampong roads were very much overgrown. These were cleared during my stay.
The posts of the wharf had sunk in places; a carpenter and coolies were employed for a few days to repair it.
In the bazaar there has been some work done on the road, and the Chinese shop-owners say that they will finish it soon.
There were no cases in Court of any importance.
Abang Madaut, Native Officer, went up river on the 8th instant, and returned again on the 21st. He was told to send his report to the Resident.
I visited Sebuyow from 19th to the 21st instant. There was no Court work there.
I returned to Simanggang on the 25th January, per m.l. Anne.
Mr. D. C. Hudden reports:—
We left Simanggang in the boat Nam Choi at 9.30 a.m. and on the 7th of January arrived Engkilili 3.50 p.m.	All the books, the opium and the cash, were checked and everything was in order. We reached Lubok Antu on the afternoon of the llth and found the grass on the lawns nearly ankle deep.
The The books and chash were checked and I should like to point out that Lubok Antu still has the old pattern wooded safe.
The billian from the old cow shed and from the fences is rapidly, disappearing. Abang Draup now has orders to pull everything up and store it in the Fort until required elsewhere.
We proceeded up stream on the 14th, taking Abang Draup, and spent that night in Rumah Gani, and the next night in Rumah Timbang, Nanga Telaus. From there we went a short way up the Sungei Meniang by boat and then walked. The night of the 16th was spent in Rumah Sawing, Sungei Betong, the 17th in Rumah Penghulu Sambau, Sungei Jirak, the 18th in Rumah Penghulu Barroh, Sungei Sumpah.
From Rumah Barroh we went down the Delok and spent one night in Rumah Penghulu Kana, and took him on with us to Penghulu Ramba’s house, where we spent two nights. On the morning of the 21st, we continued up stream to Nanga Mujang and, by orders of the Resident, fixed a white board to a tree as a sign that no Dyak is allowed to live or farm above that point.
is Sanggong, substitute of Penghulu Barroh, who very old, deaf, and quite unable to work, reported that a man from his house and Maiah (f.) Rumah Abong wished to dive about a jar. They both said that a Court case would not settle the affair. Penghulu Kana suggested that they should dive there and then, and appeared surprised when he was informed that diving was only permitted at Simanggang and could not take place without permission of the Resident.
The night of the 22nd was spent in Rumah Gelau Nanga Engkari, and that of the 23rd in Rumah Salleh, Nang Tutong. From there, we walked across the watershed between the Batang Ai, and the Lamanak and spent the next night in Rumah Anggi, Sungei Kapu, descending the Kisit and the Lemanak the next morning. That night we stayed in Rumah Penghulu Suel and reached Engkilili about 12 p.m. on the 26th.
Every head of houses we visited were told that all deaths and births must be reported, and that every door must pay the tax of one dollar per annum. All the Penghulus and the Tuai Rumahs agreed that it was perfectly reasonable excepting Penghulu Kana. Not very much notice was taken of this objection as it was anticipated.
I spent one day at Engkilili, checked the opium again and returned to Simanggang on the 28th. Public Works.—The prisoners, averaging 72.22, were employed on the general upkeep of roads, ditches and ornamental grounds. The contractor finished cementing bazaar ditches. A contract was drawn up to raise the level of the bazaar road. The new Recreation Club was completed towards the end of the month.
Medical.—A total of 273 persons were treated in hospital during the month as follows:—Dyaks 201, Chinese 31, Malays 34, Europeans 3, Sikhs 4.
210 cases of N.A.B. injection for yaws, etc., were given; 31 head of pigs were inspected and slaughtered for sale during the month.
Land.—Twenty-three Occupation Tickets were issued at Engkilili during the month.
SARIBAS. January, 1930. Mr. R. L. Daubeny, Assistant District Officer, Saribas, reports :—
Court.—The following cases were held: Godom and Sabai fined $25 each and pledge $15 under section. 160 I.P.C.; Sabai was later sentenced to two months’ S.I. for non-payment of fine; Abang Jamir, sentenced to two months' S.I. for non-payment of fine; Thai Chong fined $15 under section 509 I.P.C.; appeal by Thai Chong against decision of Malay Court, Debak, upheld; Lai Choot sentenced to one year’s R.I. for theft, section 379; Karim one month for contempt of Court. An appeal at Debak against the decision of the Malay Court was also upheld.
Prisons.—The prison gang, averaging 11.6 in number, have been employed on the usual routine work.
Public Works.—Work on the bazaar drains is proceeding well although a few difficulties have been met with regard to the flow of some of the drains.
A small local contract was made out for the erection of a hospital kitchen, a clerk’s latrine, re-lifting the police well-roof, and shifting the hospital latrine to the back. A platform for the Court table was also constructed.
Travelling.— I was away at Pusa and Debak from 24th to 29th, where various outstanding matters and adjourned cases were settled. A complaint was made by the Chinese in reference to the work of the Native Officer at Debak with the result that the Native Officer has now been changed to Pusa. The mistakes made by the Native Officer I am sure were the results of ignorance.
General.—Mr. Richardson, of the Borneo Co., Ltd., arrived here on 16th and left for Kuching again on 20th.
Shipping.—Fifteen motor vessels entered and cleared during the month.
Shipping.—Thirteen motor vessels and twenty nine bandongs entered and sixteen motor vessels and thirty-one bandongs cleared the port during the month.
KALAKA. Third Division News. January, 1930.
E. Jerah, Court Writer, Saratok, reports:—
General.—The Government Mohammedan School was closed at the beginning of the month for the usual fifteen days’ holiday.
On the 15th, Wee Chong Kui, Court Writer, Roban, was granted special leave and left for Kuching to visit his mother who is seriously ill. He returned on the 29th.
M.l. One returned from Kuching on the 16th having had her motor thoroughly overhauled.
Rev. W. Linton arrived from Debak on the 17th on a visit to the Mission station here.
Abang Zin, Native Officer, and Clerk Ghin Kwang Choo left for the Ulu Awek and Risaw respectively on the 17th to assess Dyak estates, returning again on the 20th.
Court.—An average number of cases were dealt with during the month.
Fines and fees amounted to $442.84.
Public Works. — Prisoners averaging 10.8 were mostly employed in, the general upkeep of the station.
Third Division News. Divisional Reports. January, 1930. The Resident, Mr. C. D. Adams, reports:—
Resident's Court—Four Criminal cases came up for hearing and in each convictions. Four Civil cases settled, claims amounting to $1,673.52. One appeal was heard, a Civil claim, decision of District Court reversed.
Fines and fees amounted to $204.10.
General.— Janin, Foo Ee, Foo Chew and Foo Teck were executed during the month for murder.
The Judicial Commissioner and Legal Adviser arrived on the 13th inst., returning on the 18th inst. The Judicial Commissioner held Court on the 16th inst.
Mr. Waimerright, of Messrs. Guthrie & Co., paid a visit. Messrs, Macpherson and Gilbert returning from local leave on the 22nd inst. and Mr. Trechman on the 6th inst.	The Chinese New Year was very quiet indeed; a salute of 7 guns was fired.
Mr. Dare, of Agriculture Department, arrived on the 25th inst. and I paid a visit to the Delta with him with regard to reserving of land suitable for coconut planting, and was still away at end of month.
On the 30th inst. 7 guns fired to announce commence-ment of Bulan Puasa.
Mr. Whiteside returned from Home leave on the 15th inst. and took over the duties of Divisional Engineer on the 21st inst. from. Mr. Flood-Page, who returned to Kuching.
Messrs. Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, are commencing operations at Sungei Tawak, Daro District, with a core drill. The District Officer, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports:—
Court.—Criminal. Hj. Urai, Tua Kampong of was fined $50 and dismissed for failing to report fines which he had imposed. Nyelai, Dyak, was sentenced at Sarikei to 6 months for theft, and Enpena to 1 year R.I. for causing grievious hurt. No other cases call for comment.
Civil.—In the District Court 25 cases were dealt with, total value of claims being $3,876.59, and in the Magis-trate’s Court 48 cases were dealt with claims amounted to $1,278.71.
Fines amounted to $685.93 and fees $258.
General.—Several cases of drowning were enquired into during the month, in one instance, that of Law Soong Ngo (f.), the circumstances were very suspicious, but in spite of careful inquiries nothing was discovered which could incriminate anyone. Penghulu Ikau reported that T. R. Amboh’s house of 17 doors was burnt down while most of the people of the house were attending the Regatta here. Mr. J. G. Anderson proceeded to Binatang and Sarikei on the 5th inst, and returned on the 9th. Ting Ngo Moi (f.), came down from Kanowit and reported that she had been assaulted and her house robbed by 6 Dyaks. On 23rd I left for Kanowit, accompanied by Mr. H. B. Crocker to enquire into various matters.
Mr. D. O’C. McGinn arrived here on the 29th inst.
The weather for the most of the month has been exceptionally dry for this time of the year.
Owing to the continued low price of rubber numerous thefts have been reported from gardens around Sibu, it is very difficult to trace these thefts.
The Officer-in-Charge, Police and Prisons, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports:—
Police-Recruits. —On the 1st Abang Leman (Malay) joined the Police Force and signed his first agreement and his previous service 3 years counted towards pay and pension, vide Order No. VI, 1927.
Signed Agreement.—P.C. 73, Mapang and P.C. 51, Ibrahim signed their second agreements and received a bonus of $40 each.
Health.—Six men admitted to hospital and 16 men off duty during the month. P.C. 30, Tota Singh was discharged from the force as medically unfit and received a bonus of $49.50 and passage to India.
General.—On the 8th Janin anak Empeni, Dyak of Julau, was executed at Sungei Bata-ee by 6 shots at 6 a.m. for the murder of Sim Chiew Hock. On the 18th Foo Ee and Foo Chew, Cantonese, were executed at Sungei Bata-ee by 6 shots each at 6 a m. for the murder of Lim Ah Teng. On the 24th Kong Foo Tek, Cantonese, was executed at Sungei Bata-ee by 6 shots for the murder of Fong Ng, Cantonese, of Sungei Mulong on the 29th July, 1929. Chiew Moi, wife of deceased, and Kong Mok Lim were sentenced to 10 years’ imprisonment each on the same charge with Kong Foo Tek. Sentences of death and imprisonment have been passed by the Resident’s Court and confirmed by the Supreme Court, Kuching. On the 27th Langi, Dyak, was prosecuted by Ting Ngo Moi, wife of Wong Ka Kui of Jih for robbing and assaulting her in her house while her husband was away. There were 6 robbers including Langi. This happened on the night of the 10th. Case was heard at Kanowit and adjourned sine die. On the 29th at 12 midnight 7 guns were fired for Chinese New Year. On the 30th at 6 p.m. 7 guns were also fired for Bulan Puasa which commenced on the 31st. On the 30th Nyandang and Rueh, Dyaks, were charged for the murder of Yot on the 4th December, 1929, at Sungei Krubong and the case was heard at Kanowit. Both of them were sentenced to death, passed by the Resident’s Court but waiting for confirmation from Supreme Court, Kuching. On the 30th at 5 p.m. Tol, Dyak of Menyan, was killed by his own gun while he went out for hunting pigs. This matter has been reported to the District Officer, Sibu.	Police Court Cases.—Only on important case was heard during the month:—On the 27th Teng Pee Song, Foochow, was sentenced to one month's imprisonment and Ho Lek Lek (f.), was fined $25; both were charged for theft under section 373 I.P.C.	Prisons.—During the month there were five men imprisoned and 9 men released. Eighty-eight prisoners remained in the jail at the end of the month.
Health.—The daily average of prisoners sent during the month, to the hospital, was 5.8, while that of those treated in jail was 1.8.	General.—Chiew Moi (f.), prisoner was transferred to Kuching to serve her sentence there, and four prisoners arrived from Kuching during the month. Prisoners were employed on various jobs.
The Electrical Engineer, Mr. W. Clark, reports:—
Station—Units generated 22,410, units consumed P.S. 2,800, useful units 19,610, Fuel oil used 2,144 gallons, lubricating oil used 422 gallons.
Repairs and Breakdowns.—There were no breakdowns during the month. Inlet and exhaust valves of both engines were ground. It was found necessary to " Lathe ” all inlet valve bonnet facings 3/32’’ owing to Beatings having worn below facing.
Wiring Gang Jobs—Percy Mowe installation 6 points; Hock Chu Hoe installation 24 points; Teo Guan Boon installation 16 points; for Delco lighting set; H. B Crocker’s Bungalow, repairs to installation; Wireless Quarters No. 24, repairs to installation; B. A. Trechtnan’s Quarters, repairs to installation; B.C.L. Bungalow, shifting position of 1 lamp; B. J. C. Sparway's Quarters’ shifting position of 1 lamp; Gammon, Ltd., shifting position of P.D. motor; The Resident’s Quarters, repairs to electric bells ; Law Jee Thai, fixing temporary lights; Island Club, repairs to electric bells; Gammon, Ltd., connecting up P.D. motor.
Six transmission standards were erected along the new Island frontage road with a sufficient number of lanterns attached thereto for public lighting.
Staff.—Switchboard attendant, Spannie bin Mallaca and wireman Eady bin Jack have been granted 3 weeks’ annual leave as from the 22nd January.
I regret to have to report the sudden death of Batchee Tan (wireman, Mukah Station) on the night of the 10th. The District Officer reports that death appears to have been due to heart failure.
The Divisional Engineer, Third and Fourth Divisions, Mr. J. W. Whiteside, reports:—
Sibu.— Buildings.—Private Enterprise .— The ten shophouses being erected in Blacksmith road by Messrs. Gammon, Limited, are approaching completion. The ground floors and finishings remain to be done. The reinforced concrete work on the ten shophouses in Cross Road, being erected by this him, is completed and the brick panels are being filled in. Piling and the erecting of columns is proceeding on their sites in Market Road for the remainder of the shophouses in their scheme. Su Chin Nang has been allowed to erect two blocks of shophouses with reinforced concrete roof and first floors without submitting reinforcement details for approval. I have warned him that he has been ill-advised to carry out the work in this manner and have pointed out some of the difficulties which may arise.
Repairs to Public Buildings. — Minor unavoidable repairs have been attended to.
Roads and Bridges.—The earth filling and gravelling of Court Road has been completed.
Wharves.—Piling driving on the new reinforced concrete wharf is proceeding satisfactorily. Reinforce-ment for the first group of bracing and beams has been placed. The second instalment of the billian wharf is not proceeding satisfactorily. I am negotiating with the contractor for an improvement in the work.
Waterworks.—One 9 h.p. motor is still being repaired.
The chlorinating plant has been started up but is no giving entire satisfaction.
Sarikei and Binatang—No. 2 bungalow at Sarikei has been completed. Jail at Sarikei will be ready for some time in February. Preparation for the construction of the new reinforced concrete wharf at Binatang is in hand. Piles for the foundation of two water tanks bungalows at Sarikei is progressing.
KAPIT. January, 1830. The Acting Assistant District Officer, Kapit, Mr Macpherson, reports:—	December Courts—Seven But Dyaks were sentenced to six months' imprisonment for being on the warpath. There were no other cases of importance. Dairy Farm:— Kapit herd numbered 28 and Belaga herd numbered 18 head at end of the month.
Prison.—Twenty-one prisoners remained at the jail the end of the month. Health was fair.
Song.—I did not visit Song during the month.
General.—The Pala Ghiam Kayans and Kenyahs are reported to have settled down to their farming.
A Dyak named Sumok, who had just returned from hospital attacked another Dyak named Nepok with an axe, inflicting a severe wound. Abang Ahmat later captured Sumok single-handed showing great courage. The Rangers would have shot Sumok had he not volunteered to make the attempt. On my return from Belaga I held an inquiry and found that Sumok was insane and died of his injuries later.
The Resident arrived on 12th and sentenced seven Sea Dyaks to six months’ imprisonment each for being on the warpath, and left on the 13th.
I left on short leave on 19th, accompanied by Abang Ahmat, who was proceeding to the Tekalit to investigate a rumour that the escaped prisoners from Mukah were hiding there.
Abang Sleh arrived from Belaga on 21st.
The Badangs who have newly moved into Sarawak from Dutch Territory came down to Kapit to trade this month.
Travelling.—Abang Aboi went up the Balleh on 16th to investigate warpath rumours, returning on, 18th to report all quiet.
Dyaks.— The sale of guns and ammunition to Dyaks is stopped till all Dyaks have returned from the ulu Balleh.
The price of jungle produce has fallen so low that the Fort is always full of Dyaks still hoping to be allowed to look for work outside the Division.
January Courts.—No cases of importance were heard. Dairy Farm.—Kapit herd numbered 26 at the end of the month. The bull from Saratok, which cost this farm $90 in all, died on 22nd. It was a sickly creature on arrival. Five calves were brought down during the month from Belaga. These are still counted as part of Belaga herd which numbered 18 at the end d the month.
Prison.— Health was fair. The prison gang is down to 23 men.
Song.—I spent the night of 23rd at Song, leaving for Kapit at noon the next day.
Native Officers—Abang Sleh took over from Awang Samsudin at Song on 24th, the latter proceeds to Belaga. Abang Ahmat left for Kanowit on 26th on transfer. He has not yet been replaced.
General.—I returned to Kapit on 24th from local leave. A Foochow was found dead by hanging on 8th. The minutes of the inquest are attached. The traders at the bazaar are complaining of increases in rents though trade is very bad. A meeting will be held the minutes of which will be forwarded shortly. The old jelatong was replaced on 15th.
Travelling.—Abang Indih was sent up to the Sam on 2nd to inquire into the report that a party of Dyaks were on the warpath. The report proved to be unfounded. Abang Indih returned on the same day. Abang Indih was away from 28th to 30th examining gardens ob the banks of the Batang Rejang.
SARIKEI AND BINATANG. January, 1930. The Officer in Charge, Sarikei and Binatang, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports:—
General—I arrived in Sarikei on 23nd after three weeks’ local leave what with the English New Year and the approach of the Chinese New Year there was little in both stations.
The Acting District Officer, Sibu, arrived on 5th to settle a few cases and generally checked the books, etc. On 9th a body of a Chinaman was found in Sungei inquiry was held by Acting District Officer, Sibu, and Divisional Medical Officer. The body was proved to be that of Su Pang Luk, Foochow, and a verdict of accidental death by drowning was passed.
Land Officer Sarikei and Binatang moved his headquarters in Binatang to Sarikei as from 16th.
During January there was a considerable shortage of water owing to the fact there was no rain.
P.W.D—During the month the Fort has been made into a respectable office with a separate place for the Land Department; the old Fort Quarters are now the provides ample room for everydody; it is hoped that the same thing will be done to the Binatang Fort later on.
During the month Mr. Nadig came down to Sarikei and took some levels for the new wharf, which will soon be in the course of construction.
The new jail is progressing and should be finished at the end of February. It appears that a dapor for this building was not included in the agreement.
Both bungalows are now completed and in use. Work is progressing satisfactorily on the new bazaar road.
Two large sectional tanks have arrived to be put one for each bungalow. This will be a very great help to solve the water question, and it would be a good idea to have an even larger one erected, in some place near the fort, that could be fed from the roofs of the Court House, Police Barracks and Jail.
Trade and Custom.—Trade was, on the whole, fairly slack for January, the reason being low price of rubber and also the two New Years coming so close to one another. The following are the returns for Sarikei.
Forests-—Deputy of Forests, Third Division, arrived at the end of January in order to come to some under, standing on the pepper post question. It was arranged that the Land Department would report any gardens that they found with non-chopped posts, and Foresters would report any gardens they came across without application tickets.
Court.—Nyelai, Dyak, was imprisoned for 6 months for theft of money ; Empunak, Dyak, was sentenced to one year imprisonment for assault, Bandak, Dyak, was sentenced to three months for theft of property; and Ah Meng was sentenced to six months for breach of Weights and Measures Order and Gee Tuan and Ngee Chiong fined $15 each for aiding defendant.
LAND OFFICE.
The Land Officer, Sarikei and Binatang, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports :—
Early this month the interior of the Fort at Sarikei was reconstructed so as provide a Land Office. On the 13th Abang Latip came from Sibu to Binatang to take over the duties of Mohd. Kadir, the senior Land Clerk, who proceeded with me to Sarikei on the 16th to open up the Land Office there. With him went Asst. Land Inspector Epo, Messrs. Baron and Udin being left to carry on at Binatang.
The first job at Sarikei was to make out Occupation Tickets for the 400 odd pepper gardens inspected by Bandong during October and November. These were all plotted in Sibu and the new Land Inspection Books, and application books sent down to Sarikei for signature.
During 1929 there were over 1,300 applications for new land at Sarikei, and of course there remain many 1928 and even 1927 applications yet to be dealt with. Also nearly all the old gardens in the Sarikei area must under the new Land Regulations, be re-inspected, the old title cancelled and a new one issued and noted in the Sarikei register. As there are several thousand of these old gardens it is obvious that with only one Land Inspector little or no progress can be made, especially since, in addition to the inspection of the new gardens mentioned above (about two thousand), he must tackle all disputes, sub divisions and investigations, of which there are a good many on hand at the moment. Altogether it is estimated that there are about twelve thousand gardens, old and new, awaiting inspection and the issue or replacement of titles and with a total field staff of one man it is hardly surprising that the Chinese grow restive at the delay in all land affairs. With an adequate staff the increase in revenue would be enormous, since few of the old gardens have as yet paid premia, which alone would total a large sum, and of course the quit rent on the new gardens not yet issued with O. T. would also come to a large amount.
On the 27th the Deputy Conservator of Forests arrived from Sibu and discussed with me a plan of cooperation between the Forest and Land Departments with regard to pepper gardens. It was agreed that if, in the course of his rounds, the Forester came across pepper gardens whose owners had no application tickets he would report them to me, while in the same way Land Inspectors would report any garden on which royalty for posts had not been paid. This scheme should benefit both departments as soon as we have sufficient staff to enable our side of the agreement to function.
To sum up, no progress can be expected at Sarikei until we obtain some more Land Inspectors. The survey now proceeding will help matters as soon as the results are issued, but at present the ratio of one Land Inspector to twelve thousand gardens is ridiculously disproportionate, more especially when one considers that more than half of his time is taken up with disputes and investigations.
At Binatang work proceeded smoothly during the month. Many Malay gardens were inspected across river as well as the usual quota of Chinese gardens, and there were no disputes to hold up the routine work. Owing to the extensive survey in the Binatang district Land Office work is greatly facilitated and, even with two Land Inspectors, a certain amount of progress can be recorded. Also, with two clerks the office work proceeds at a more or less reasonable rate and there is no excessive delay in issuing new Occupation Tickets.
LOWER REJANG.
The District Officer, Lower Rejang, Mr. E. V. Andreini, reports:—
General.—Daro, Rejang, Selalang, Paloh, Belawai, Sarih, Sa-ai, Tian and Nangar were visited during the month.
Staff.—P. C. Yahia who was taken on as a policeman last month was found to have been an ex-prisoner and discharged.
Daro.—There is a lot of work at this station and, with the coming of the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, it will become more and more important. There is every indication of a large oilfield in this district, spreading to Matu. The Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, have made arrangements for a driller to commence work next month. Mr. Hamilton, of their administration staff, has been at Sungei Pawak for some days building quarters. The road from the Court House to the bazaar and through the bazaar was raised and ditches dug.
Sa-ai and Nangar.— Both these kampongs were asked to clear their gardens and rivers, which are getting choked up.
Jerijeh.— Whilst at Rejang I visited Jerijeh. Here an abandoned Chinese kedah was ordered to be pulled down.
Rejang.—There were a large number of Court cases mostly in connection with advances. The school was inspected and seems to be very well run and good progress being made. There were over ninety boys. The building and position is inadequate for any extension. Efforts have been made to clean up the kampong and bazaar, which was in an appalling state, but the conditions are against much being done except at considerable expense.
Selalang.—Here again the conditions are bad and sanitary arrangements, etc., primitive. I held Court in the police station here.
Sarih.— I spent one night with the Dyaks here, who appear to be prosperous, many of them own rubber gardens which are tapped by Chinese.
Paloh.—At this place a Chinaman from Sibu had started a charcoal kiln and shop right against the Malay Kampong. This being against orders, he was ordered to move.
A site for a bazaar for the whole five Chinese shops it being prepared apart from the kampong. Belawai.—The site for eighteen Chinese shops and dwelling-houses, etc., was measured out.
There are a large number of fishing boats constantly in harbour here, and I suggest it might be visited by the Customs from time to time. On the occasion of my last visit were some sixty boats there.
Main — Site for new bazaar was cleared and a roar started to connect same with Court House.
OVA AND DALAT.
The Officer-in-Charge, Oya and Dalat, Mr. E. H. Elam reports:—	Judicial.—In the Criminal Court at Oya one case under section 385 of I.P.C. was heard. It appears that either the Dalat Forest Guard, while inspecting jelutong in the Sungei Baoh, demanded money from the Dyaks that he would make no adverse report, or the Dyaks gave the money of their own accord as hush money. The case was adjourned, and the Forest Ranger from
Mukah proceeded to the Sungei Baoh to hold a through examination of the jelutong. The case was still adjourned at the end of the month. Also one case defamation of character was heard in which Penghulu Buan, as plaintiff, proved himself totally inadequate as a Penghulu. This was also adjourned for the next visit of the District Officer, Mukah and Oya. At Dalat six cases of breach of Weights and Measures Order were heard and fines amounting to $15 were imposed, two cases being dismissed. One contempt of Court case was heard and defendant fined $7.
Prison.—The prison gang, averaging 11.64, was employed in the general upkeep of the station.
General.—The District Officer, Mukah and Oya, and myself arrived at Dalat from Sibu on the 3rd and next day proceeded to Oya in m.l. Leonora. Mr. Clark passed through on 8th on his way back to Sibu from Mukah Penghulu Buan came down to Oya on the 16th as a party concerned in the Forest Guard Bichara. His whole bearing and manner was thoroughly unsatisfactory and the complaints made about him by his people shew that he is quite useless to serve as a Penghulu. His behaviour will be examined by the District Officer Mukah and Oya, when the adjourned Bichara is heard. The probationary Native Officer proceeded to the Ulu on 23rd and was still away at the end of the month. Dalat was visited twice and Medong once, where a large estate case needed investigating and some trouble over the collection of quit rent settling.
Land.—A contract on the same lines as last year was made with Awang Lai to supply 2.000 billian pegs. He was given a specimen to follow, and was to produce 500 in two months. By the end of the month he had produce a thousand for which he received half the contract money ($140).
Education.—The daily average attendance at the school was seventy-nine, which is again an increase. On 1st sports were held under the supervision of the Schoolmaster and Chief Clerk; these were a success, in spite of the uneven padang, which has since been levelled partly by prison labour and partly by the boys themselves.
Rainfall. — The total rainfall recorded during the month was 20.31 inches, the greatest fall in anyone day being 5.50 inches.
Shipping.—Two motor schooners entered and the same number cleared. Trade.—Eighty-eight koyans of raw sago and ten pikuls of para rubber were shipped to Kuching.
The District Officer, Mukah and Oya, Mr. P. Adams, reports.	General—I returned from Sibu via Oya on the 4th an, found everything in order. The Divisional Electrical Engineer, Mr. Clark, arrived the following day the power plant. The leaf attap bazaar was demolished and the inhabitants have moved into the new shophouses. Messrs. S. Temple-Waite and G. Macfadzean of Oil Company, arrived overland from Balingian and spent a few days at Mukah. The former brought in the body of one of the Company coolies who had been accidentally shot by another coolie whilst out after pig.
I regret to report that the sudden death of wireman Batchee of the Electrical Department on the night of the 10th from heart failure.	Mr. Temple-Waite inspected some gas seepages, during his stay and Mr. Macfadzean kindly gave technical advice concerning the waterworks machienary.
A Malay theatrical troupe arrived from Bintulu on the 21st.	About eighty-eight coolies arrived at Balingian from Miri. Mr. Jenkins, of the Sarawak Oilfields, is expected shortly to continue the gravity survey in the district.
The office was closed on the 30th, being Chinese New Year’s day. Mr. Temple-Waite came in from Penipeh to Miri during the latter part of the month awaiting transport to Miri for medical treatment.
Court —The only case, of importance were those in which Etika and Simba, Dyaks, step-father and step-daughter, ware fined $100 and $50 respectively for incest, and Jakong for negligence in causing the death of Empaling was sentenced to six months. Several people were imprisoned for two weeks for non-payment of water rate and contempt of Court.
P.W.D. —	The road from the bazaar to the Kampong was again patched up and unless this is taken in hand seriously it will disappear altogether. I suggest building out billian buttresses to prevent the stream from eating away the bank. It would then be easier to fill by in by degress. The could be done at a cost of about $350.
The boilermakers completed their work at the pumping station but, owing to rough seas, had difficulty in getting back to Kuching. There are still some repairs to be done.
Dyaks.—Probationer N.O. Dan visited the ulu Mukah and ulu Bakau from 8th to 25th and reports progress has been made in inducing Dyaks to build long houses. Penghulus Umpoh, Gagat and Selan visited the station. The former is living too far up river and beyond a post put in by Government a few years ago. He is a long way from his people and should move down to Kuala Slangau. Orders were given for the Bakau and Kenyana streams to be cleared. Rumah Sio, Penipah, a house of nine doors, was destroyed by fire.
Treasury.—The sum of $10,000 new notes was received from Divisional Treasury, but this is not sufficient. At least $15,000 more is required. The new Treasury Circular arrived too late for advice to be obtained on points which were not clear but it is, hoped it has been correctly interpreted.
Prison.—Prisoners averaged 31.96 and were employed in the usual manner.
Electrical.—The engine ran without interruption. 37 street lamps had to be changed, which seems to point to the fact that they were not new stock.
Police.—The method by which police bonuses were paid in 1927 on the publication of the new Order, appears to have been wrong, but as the interpretation of the Oder came from headquarters, Kuching, and actual agreements were signed, it was decided to make no alteration. The vote for this subhead will probably be effected.
Land.—Several lands were advertised to be auctioned as rent and fees were long overdue, this had the desired effect in most cases.
Excessive rain has hampered field work. Haji Osman took the place of Austin Drus as inspector. A book has been started showing all titles held by a land holder at a glance. This, if kept up to date, should greatly assist the probate department.
Probate and Bankruptcy.—Several estates were at last wound up.
Arms and Ammunition.—338 rounds of ammunition, 3 lbs of fine and 4 lbs of coarse powder were sanctioned to be purchased locally. A special book is being kept for this information as a check against dealers and to rate returns if required.
Rainfall for the month was 20.02 inches.
The Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. C. O. Gange,reports:—
There were 270 new patients and their repetition 194, making a total of 464 in all.
Sixty-eight in-patients ware treated during the month, 27 being new admissions and 41 transferred from 31st December, 1929. Amongst these 4 deaths occurred at the hospital due to the following causes:—
One from pneumonia, one various abscess, one typhoid, one hemiplegia following lacerated wound of brain.
Seventy N.A.B. injections were given during the month.
Seventy-five and seventy-nine passengers were inspected on the Singapore boats and 15 vaccinations were performed. Six leper were transferred to Kuching Leper Camp. On the 7th January, 1930, Dresser Abdu Ghanie was dismissed from the service for gross neglect of duty.
On the 20th January, 1930, Dresser Chong Ah Onn was transferred to Miri for duty. On the 15th Dresser Nahrawi and Joseph Ho arrived to do duty at Sibu.
On the 5th Dresser Lau Chiap Meng arrived from Rejang to Sibu for duty and Edward Domingo was posted to Rejang for duty prior to the former's arrival at Sibu.
During the month three post-mortems were performed, one on the body of a male Foochow named Wong Tiong Hun on the 11th inst. at mortuary, one on the body of an unknown Chinese at Sarikei on the 11th inst., and again on the body of a female Cantonese named Lau Shin Ngo on the 14th inst. at Sibu Mortuary.
The Divisional Land Officer, Mr. C. E. Pascoe reports :—
Staff..—Abang Latip, Clerk, Grade III, proceeded to Binatang for duty at that station until further orders. Hj. Osman, Asst. Land Inspector, proceeded to Mukah for duty and Bandong, Asst. Land Inspector, proceeded on 3 weeks’ annual leave with effect from the 13th inst. inclusive.
B. Kisun, Asst. Land Inspector, proceeded on 3 weeks' annual leave as from the 24th inst. inclusive. Austin Druce, Asst. Land Inspector, returned from Mukah for duty at Sibu as from 2nd inst.
Early in the month a number of Bawang Assan Dyaks complained that the Chinese were encroaching on their hill land in the ulu Empawah area. Examinations were made and the Dyaks told to take out summonses so that the disputes could be settled once and for all in the District Court. This resulted in the Chinese being ordered to pay compensation to the Dyaks for having planted around the foot of the Dyak hills where, in some instances, there were small patches of jeramei.
Then arose the question of a reserve in this area for the Dyaks—and an arrangement was arrived at between this office and Penghulu Ikau that a suitable reserve of
say 400 to 600 acres should be marked off and kept for the Bawang Assan Dyaks. Survey of the Chinese headlands was immediately put in hand—and in the meantime no further extensions were allowed. At the close of January the survey had reached the ulu Empawah from Lebaan—and this line will form the southern boundary of the Dyak reserve. The work proceeds.
The Resident then intimated to the Divisional Land Officer that he was anxious to have 4 or 5 reserves of 1000 acres each demarcated for pepper growers in the ulu Rejang round about Song, some for Cantonese and soma for Foochows. The Assistant District Officer, Kapit, was approached on the subject and requested to markdown what he considered suitable localities. From my knowledge of this part—the reserves will have to be above Song and probably on the true right bank. The land here is hilly and should be suitable for pepper.
The clearing up of the various lot areas proceeded, and it is gratifying to note here that gardeners have entered these lots in surprisingly uniform order. The assistance of headmen is partly responsible for this. The lower portion or riverside lots at Telok Bango and at Salim still require a good deal of combing out.
The Assistant District Officer, Matu, informed us during the month that he was anxious to make a commencement on the new Matu bazaar. He had chosen a site on the opposite side of the river to the old and not far down stream from the present Court house.
Actually this same site was demarcated two years ago by the writer, the plans being still in this office.
It has been arranged to re-demarcate the area—and the land has been purchased for $400 odd, which amount the Assistant District Officer is refunding this office when collected from the builder.
Generally speaking there is very, little dispute now in this Division and it is noticeable that once survey billian pegs are down, there are seldom any further boundary arguments. I regard surveyed areas as being in the main not likely to cause us much more trouble from the disputing point of view. In this connection, last year (1929) 24,000 acres were covered.
Of recent months it has been noticed that the substations Matu and Daro are submitting better cash returns. This is undoubtedly due the energy of the District Officer, Mr. Andreini. There can be no doubt that a good deal of revenue which should come in, is not doing so, but with our increased staff this matter will have to be seriously looked into.
Mukah is another station which, thanks to the keenness of Mr. P. M. Adams, is steadily coming into line from a state of confusion.
Fourth Division News. Divisional Reports. December, 1929. The Resident, Mr. H. D. Aplin, reports:—
The Resident, Mr. H. D. Aplin, reports:—
On the 3rd I left for Bintulu by the Auby, returning again to Miri by the Margaret on the 12th.
The principal cases heard were two house-breaking charges against Foochows in the Bintulu Bazaar. Convictions were obtained in each case. An appeal from the District Court (Civil) was dismissed.
Accompanied by the District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, I visited Tatau where all the Penghulus were present and a large crowd of Dyaks. The question of allowing Dyaks into the Kakus was the principal subject discussed.
Dyaks are allowed to work in the Kakus as far as N. Penjarai, which is the boundary laid down by Mr. H. H. Kortright.
A good start was made in clearing the jungle on Tanjong Lobang for a proposed site for Government bungalows. The situation is ideal and now that the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, have macadamised a road to the end of the Brighton area, the distance from the offices is not very great.
It was reported that the Kadayan padi had been seriously damaged by insects (empangan) between Luak and Bekam. I have received a circular from the Director of Agriculture on the best method of destroying these pests and am having this translated into Jawi Malay, to be distributed amongst all the districts.
The offices were closed on Christmas and Boxing days.
Mr. T. Corson, D.C.F., returned from leave on 12th.
Mr. D. V. Murphy. Assistant Superintendent of Police, returned from Kuching on the 14th.
Mr. E. O. Bruce, District Officer, proceeded on leave to Kuching on 18th.
Mr. F. H. Pollard, District Officer, arrived from Baram on 24th and proceeded on leave to Limbang on 26th.
Messrs. Trechman, Macpherson, and Gilbert, arrived by Auby on the 26th, the two latter on their way to Limbang.
Mr. E. C. F. Pretty, M.C.S. passed through by Straits boat on his way to Brunei.
BARAM.
December; 1929.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports :—
Prisoners.—The prisoners averaging 21.9 were employed on the general upkeep of the station.
P. W.D.—The Native Court House was nearly finished at the end of the month. No other work lading for mention was undertaken.
Travelling.—I was at Long Akah at the beginning of the month. The Penans arrived on 2nd bringing jangkar and a few guliga. On 3rd Wan Taha, N.O., accompanied by Hassan, upriver agent, and the dresser, left for Lio Matu and on 4th I left for Baram, calling at Long Kesih to meet the Penans there who had not arrived when we passed on the way up. I reached Long Lama on 6th, where I found that the price of all jungle produce had dropped since I went up river and I fear that some of the traders up river will lose money, I reached Baram on 7th. Wan Taha, N.O., and the dresser returned on 11th, and Galau, N.O., arrived from Linai on 13th, He has now been passed as fit and left on 22nd for Long Akah to take over temporarily from Hassan.
On 19th, accompanied by Wan Taha, I left, Bakong and Bun returning on 20th.
On 24th I left for Miri to spend Christmas there. Datu Tuanku Haji Drahman accompanied me for medical treatment.	The Very Reverend Father Dunn and Father Jansen, of the R. C. Mission, arrived on 17th left for Miri on 19th.
The Sebop Penghulus, P. Ballau Deng and P. Tingau Saong, came down from the Tinjar and Tama Jalong Tingan, the Murik Chief at Long Tamala, also visited the station during the month.
Medical.—Sixty-nine out-patients and three in-patients were treated during the month.
Shipping.— S.S. Gladys made two trips during the month.	Rainfall.—The rainfall recorded was 3.15 inches.
BINTULU.
December, 1929.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports:—
General.—The Resident, Fourth Division, paid a visit to the District from 4th to 12th, when Tatau was also visited and all outstanding matters dealt with. Sebauh was visited from 18th to 19th when a number of outstanding cases were dealt with.
The sawmill at Sebauh was opened on the 14th and commenced work for the first time.
The 20th and 26th, being Christmas Day and Boxing Day respectively, the offices were closed and a holiday observed.
The s.s. Auby arrived on Christmas Eve but owing to rough sea and the low state of the tide until after dark she was unable to enter. She continued her journey north in the evening of Christmas Day. The launch got out in the morning to take off mails.
Early in the month a Chinese boy, aged between two and three years, disappeared from the Pandan Bazaar and has not been heard of since. It is thought that be must have been taken by a crocodile and his body was never recovered.
P.W.D.—The prisoners, averaging 22.65, were variously employed during the month. The gang at the beginning of the month were employed round the Fort in repairs to paths, flower-beds, etc.
They then commenced rebuilding and making road at the back of the kampong across river and extending same to the sawmill on the Ulu end and to the sands on the Hilir end.
There was formerly a road there many years ago but it had been abandoned.	They were employed on this for the remainder of the month. Mowers on wages were dispensed with and their work undertaken by prisoners. Men were also employed with carpenter Mamoh, as carpenters, and the general upkeep of the station.
Carpenter Mamoh, after completion of the extension and alteration to the fish market, build two large bridges on the road across river and was also employed in general maintenance of buildings, wharf, and furniture.
The price of Jelutong locally dropped down from $8 to $4 and the trade in this commodity is practically at a standstill for the time being pending a rise in price.
Rainfall. — The rainfall during the month mounted to 10.14 being an unusually dry month for this time of the year except for a fall of 3.02 inches on the 9th instant.
Fifth Division News.
Divisional Reports.
January, 1930.
The Resident, Mr. F; H. Kortright, reports:—
Court.— There was no Court work of any importance.
General.—The Annual Regatta and Sports were held on New Year’s Day and attracted an unusually large crowd of visitors from up river and the neighbouring districts. There were numerous visitors from Brunei, including the past and present Residents, Messrs. E.E.F. Pretty and P.A.B. McKerrou, other visitors from Sarawak were Messrs. Macpherson, Gilbert, McLeod, Walters, Pollard, and Cook.
Another child was taken by a crocodile at Sungei Melaban but as yet the marauding reptile has not been captured.
A number of Kelabits, now settled at Fah Paru a tributary of the Sungei Medit, came down to make arrangements for selling their produce and paying tax in Limbang instead of at Baram, as they state that it takes them seventeen days to get to Marudi whereas they can reach Limbang in three days, travelling by boat only. This subject has been take up with the Resident, Fourth Division.
Mr. J. R. Combe was appointed temporary A. A. D. O., Lawas, vice Mr. G. J. D. Walters, on the 21st January, and I accompanied him when he took over his duties.
Land.—A party of Saribas and Skrang Dyaks came via Kuching to inspect the land in the ulu Trusan and Bah country with the object of forming a big settlement there, the party left immediately, accompanied by Mr. Combe, but returned within 6 days reporting unfavourably on account of the inaccessibility by river to the most suitable land.
Surveys.—The Assistant Superintendent moved his establishment to Lawas which will be his headquarters for the present, two surveyors only were left to finish off certain work in the Limbang area.
Public Works.—Good progress was made on the Limbang-Pandam road and work commenced on building the principal bridge, that over the Sungei Bunot, a span of approximately 90 feet. This is being built by prison labour under the supervision of Carpenter Kaw Nui. The prison gang, averaging 16, were chiefly employed in raising the approach to the ferry at Sijampak.
Medical.—There were seven patients admitted into the hospital and 5 discharged as cured and 83 out-patients treated for various maladies.
The Medical Officer of Brunei paid his usual monthly visit of inspection.
The rainfall amounted to 12.44 inches.
Buffaloes exported to Kuching ... 49 head.
LAWAS. January, 1930.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe, reports:—
Court.—Sixteen persons charged before the Magistrates Court with breach of Land Regulations were all fined $10 each with costs, and ordered also to pay up all the arrears.
There were also several Civil cases of minor importance heard.
Prison.—Prison gang, averaging 6.0, were detailed for work mainly on the upkeep of the grounds about the station, and other minor odd jobs, including the dismantling of the Saripah shed, which was of nibong structure and had collapsed during the latter part of the year owing to the ground giving away due to flood and other causes.
Health —Several of the Government staff were down with fever of some sort and the assistance of the estate dresser had to be called for.
General.—Mr. G. J. D. Walters was away in Limbang for Christmas and New Year and did not return till the 3rd instant.
On the 24th, Mr. Walters and Mr. D. S. McLeod left the station in the Saripah for Brooketon to meet the H.H.M.Y. Maimuna for Kuching. The former on local leave and the latter for duty in Simmanggang.
Mr. W. Harnack, Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, arrived here on the 13th by the s.s. Margaret from Limbang with his staff to carry out certain surveys in the District.
Mr. Combe with a party of Saribas Dyaks came over from Limbang on the 16th by the m.l. “Saripah," and proceeded to Trusan overland.
On the 19th, the party left for the Ulu with a view of finding a suitable place for their future settlement, but they did not find a suitable locality.
Abang Haji Zuhaili, who was commissioned by His Highness the Rajah to visit Lawas, Trusan, and Sundar, on affairs connected with the Mosques, arrived here from Limbang on the 16th, after visiting Kuala Lawas, Trusan, and Sundar. Abang Haji Zuhaili returned to Limbang by Datu Pangeran Haji Matusim’s launch on the 18th instant.
The Resident, Mr. Kortright paid an official visit arriving here on the 30th with Mr. Combe, who has been appointed to do duty here as Acting Assistant District Officer during the absence of Mr. G. J. D. Walters.
Chinese New Year, falling on the 30th, was observed as a holiday. The celebration was distinctly dull this year, due most probably to the depression of trade in general and the absence of Chap Jee Kee in particular.
The Bulan Puasa was ushered m by the usual firing of 6 guns from the Fort on the evening of the 30th.
Visitors from Labuan to the Lawas Rubber Estate and Vamco Timber Company were Mr. Curtis the British Resident, Mrs. Shepard, Doctor Winchester and Mrs. Winchester, who came over by m.l. McArthur on the 14th and returned again on the morning of the 16th.
Surveys.—The Survey Department since their arrival have measured 1,146 chains of garden boundary at an average cost of 13 cents per chain.
Agriculture.—The Lawas Sarawak Rubber Estates, Ltd., exported 32,786 lbs., of dry rubber during the month.
ECHOES FROM THE WORLD OUTSIDE.
Books Published January to December, 1929.
The Publisher and Bookseller publishes the following interesting table, giving details of the books of the year.
This Week’s Tenth Birthday of League and its Big Record.
“There ought to be a banquet in the famous Glass Room the Palace of the Nations, where so many Council meetings have been held, to celebrate the tenth anniversary of the League of Nations. For it was on January 10, 1920, that the Treaty of Versailles came it to force and with it the Covenant of the League of Nations. The League really deserves a little flutter on that day." —TRUTH.
“The puling infant which then came to birth after such labour at Versailles, to make is first appearance the world’s stage at the Council meeting on January 16,1920, is now a flourishing youngster,” adds Truth, in spite of all the difficulties which it had to face during the first years of its existence. The League of Nations might have accomplished more. But that is hardly its fault, because it was not allowed to give more than a kick or two to show that it was alive during the ante-Locarno period,
But although it was carefully kept in long clothes by its kind nurses (the Supreme Council and Ambassadors’ Conference), it managed somehow to get on its feet and impress the world in August, 1923, by proclaiming it had a right to intervene in a dispute between two members of the League, when Italy seized Corfu in her quarrel with Greece.
"Two years later, the league had its first triumph in the settlement of the quarrel between Bulgaria and Greece, by preventing hostilities on its own initiative. This perhaps afforded no test of the capacity of the League to deal with the big fellows when they misbehaved themselves.
“But the great war came because a lighted match was dropped into the powder magazine of the Balkans, and no one can say what might have happened if the emigration on the Greco-Bulgarian frontier had not been stamped out. This was after Locarno, which acted as a tonic to the League, when it became the fashion to appeal more constantly to the Council of the League to pick the chestnuts out of the tire, notwithstanding its theory that the League had nothing to do with the adjustments arising out of the peace treaties.
"In the meantime the League had been building up in technical organisations and training a first-class secretariat to study the economic and social problems of Europe. The Financial Committee did excellent work in providing guaranteed loan for Austria and helping Hungary to put its finances in order, and in assisting Greece and Bulgaria to deal with their refugee problems.
“In collaboration with the International Labour Office, the Social Section of the League carried its researches into the sweating dens of Europe and Asia to improve the conditions of night work for women and children. It was presently to dive into the underworld and to throw a light on the traffic in women and children.
The drug evil was also tackled, so that Governments were at last goaded into taking concerted action against the illicit traffickers in opium and cocaine. “There is nothing comparable to the effort made by the Health Section of the League, in medical conference after conference, to combat such scourges as typhus, malaria, cancer, and influenza. For the first time “’ wnscombined to promote the common welfare of humanity by evolving effective machinery to deal with the social and economic troubles which afflicted them. For the first time the doctrine, of the interdependence of nations found practical expression in the departmental work of an international society.	“Without the slow working of the leaven of Geneva in the conscience of humanity, the treaties of Locarno, was their network of arbitration and the proclaimed intention of their signatories to refrain from force in the settlement of their differences, would have been impossible. Locarno opened the door for the entry of Germany into the League and enabled Stresemann to get into personal touch with Briand, so that they learned to understand one another and thus laid the foundation of the politics of reconciliation which led to the Hague Conference and the agreement on reparations, in which the paying of fantastic sums was no longer to be enforced on Germany, but her assent was obtained to the contribution which she should make to the liquidation of the debit side of the war.
“Now, when it is considered that the League is not a super-State, and has no power to enforce its decisions, except in so far as they reflect a common purpose, the stripling has not done badly. There is not now a nation which would not think twice before it would plunge into war in defiance of the Covenant which imposes on it the obligation to seek the peaceful settlement of a dispute and observe the prescribed period of delay. The league has, in fact, succeeded in lifting international relations on to a higher level of morality.
“The Covenant of the League will always be in danger of being wrecked on the fears and suspicions which armaments give rise to. Hence the supreme need, if the League is to survive, of an all-round reduction of armaments on land, sea, and in the air. The year which starts with the London Naval Conference may well prove one of the most critical for the League.” (Public Opinion, Jan. 10th.)
Singapore Base.
LORD BRIDGEMAN'S VIEWS.
Lord Bridgeman, who was First Lord of the Admiralty in the last Conservative Government, addressed a meeting of the Navy League in Chelsea Town Hall on January 15, and referred to the Five-Power Naval Conference and British naval requirements.
Referring to Singapore, Lord Bridgeman said the proposed base was not a menace to the peace of the world, and it was an unsatisfactory sign that the Government decided to suspend work upon it without waiting for the consent of the Malay States, New Zealand, and Hongkong, who had given substantial contributions. The Singapore base was meant to give mobility to the Fleet in Eastern waters, to save the time and expense of going to Malta for repairs. If the Conference resulted in no reduction of cruisers the need for Singapore would be the same as now. If there was a reduction, Singapore would be all the more necessary, because mobility would be all the more important to a smaller fleet.—(China Express and Telegraph.)
Traffic in Opium.
REPORTS FROM THE FAR EAST.
The League Advisory Committee on the traffic in opium began on January 21 its examination of the annual reports from member Governments on opium traffic and consumption. As is customary a number of questions were put to national representatives upon points in the report, which seemed to require explanation.
Sir John Campbell (India) asked for an explanation of the figures recently published by the Chinese Government on the authority of the National Opium Suppression Committee purporting to show that the Chinese Customs had seized 40,000,060 oz. of Indian opium— an amount certainly much greater than the whole Indian output. It was agreed that important errors had been made in calculation.
Sir Malcolm Delevingne (Great Britain) desired to know how various consignments of opium had managed, contrary to the existing agreement, to pas, the Customs officials at Shanghai. The Chinese delegate stated that he was equally interested in this question, and promised to make special inquiries.	The Chinese report placed the number of drug addicts in Shansi Province alone at 1,000,000 in a population of 10,000,000, and estimated the money wasted in drugs at over £20,000,000. Germany, Japan, France, and Swit-zerland were stated to be responsible for the supply of morphine, and what was seized by the Customs was only a very small fraction of the amount smuggled into the country.
The Hongkong report stated that there were no signs of the much hoped-for awakening of Chinese public opinion against opium smoking.
The report of the Netherlands East Indies, on the other hand, recorded a growing anti-opium campaign, including the distribution of 40,000 anti-opium pamphlets in Malay and Chinese by the Netherlands East Indies Grand Lodge of the International Order of Good Templars.
CHINA’S INTERESTING SUGGESTION.
The Chinese delegate, Mr. Woo Kaiseng, made a speech in which he described the appointment of a national Chinese committee to carry out prohibition of the sale of opium and the efforts which the Chinese Government was taking to oppose the distribution of narcotics. The delegate appealed for the collaboration of Europe in this work.
The Chinese report will be examined when the Commission begins its discussion of the general situation in the Far East. Its principal suggestion is a request that the League should set up an international factory for narcotics at Geneva which should be directly administered by the League and should supply the whole world with those narcotics necessary for legitimate purposes.
In the course of the session the French delegate presented a note explaining the general principles which might serve as the basis for a general convention aiming at the limitation and apportionment of the production of narcotics.—(China Express and Telegraph.)
The 1930 Howlers.
The Howlers Prize Competition of The University Correspondent is always an appreciated annual event. A selection from the entries received is given below :—
Lord Macaulay suffered from gout and wrote all his poems in lambic feet.
School boards were not introduced until 1870. Previous to this small slates had to be used.
Magna Charts was good and kind and everybody liked her. She was strong.
George Washington was the founder of steam. His first steam engine was called the locomotive.
The opposite of evergreen is nevergreen.
Lady Godiva—a jockey.
The population of London is a bit too thick.
The only signs of life in the Tundras are a few stunted corpses.
Joan of Arc was called Joan of Arc because after taking Orleans she married Noah.
Definition of “Craft Guild”—This is when a man makes a poor thing, shines it up, and sells it to the people for twice as much as it is worth.
A skeleton is a man with his inside out and his outside off.
Quinine is the bark of a tree; canine is the bark of a dog.
Parallel lines never meet unless you bend one or both of them.
When zinc reacts with hydrochloric acid it gives an “F of essence.”
To take the King’s shilling is to take the dole.
A poetic licence is a licence you get from the Post Office to keep poets. You get one also if you want to keep a dog. It costs 7s. 6d. and call it a dog licence.
The opposite of flat-chested is humpbacked.
A witch is a woman who has to earn her own living, and has no husband or anything.
A damsel is a little plum.
R.I.P.—Return immediately please.
Syncopation is emphasis on a note which is not in the piece.
Post-mortem After twelve o’clock.
A compliment is when you say something to another which he and we know is not true.
Foreigners are neutralised when they settle in England. Q.—Fill in the gaps in the following quotations: “You cannot make a —— out of a sow's ear.” A.—rasher: “Caesar’s wife is above —— ,” A — forty: "I awoke one morning to find myself —— " A.—dead.
Q.—Write a sentence containing the expression “cool and collected.” A.—“The man was cool before the explosion but unfortunately he was collected afterwards.”	Q.—What do you know of the Bill of Pains and Penalties? A.—It was passed to punish people who broke windows.'
Q.—Explain “sarcasm.” A.—When I say "God bless teacher.”
Pontius Pilate Polished.
Some time ago Reuter communicated the following amusing bill of charges for a painter's renovation in a little Parish Church in Sweden in 183G.
“In the archives of Nyed, a small Swedish village the following receipted bill, signed by a Painter’ A. P. Bjoerklund, is to be found. Apparently the total cost was only seventy/kronor :—
“To:-
Altered the ten Commandments and repaired the sixth.	Made a new nose for one of the robbers on the cross and straightened his fingers.
Polished Pontius Pilatus, put new furs on his bonnet and painted him front and back.
Put a new pair of wings on the Angel Gabriel and gilt the front ones.
Painted the pontiff’s maid three times.
Put a new tooth in St. Peter’s mouth and repaired the feathers of the cock.
Expanded Heaven and put in several new stars.
Improved the fires of Hell and made the Devil's face more awful,
Improved Saint Magdalena, who was absolutely spoilt.
Made new hair for the chaste Susan.
Prolonged the end of the world.
Cleansed the Red Sea, which was very dirty.
Made new shoes for the horses of Elijah's carriage and carefully marked the way to Heaven.
Put some more wisdom in Joseph’s face and varnished Potiphar’s wife.
Made new birds’ dirt on Blind Job’s eyes.
Received with thanks.
Ullerud, Nov. 3, 1836.
A. P. BJOERKLUND, PAINTER.”
The cost of this rather imposing work was most moderate since the total amount of the bill was only seventy kronor in the present Swedish currency.
SHIPPING INTELLIGENCE.
Port of Kuching.
LISTS OP FIRST-CLASS PASSENGERS.
By s.s. Vyner Brooke to Singapore on 2nd Feb.:—
Mr. and Mrs. R. E. Edwards, Messrs Willie Lowe, Chan Khiok Leng, R. D Binnie, Mrs. F. H. Kortright, Master W. G. Clunies Ross, Miss J. E. Clunies Ross, Mrs R. E. Holitum, Miss Andrews, Mr. Lau Theng Keng, Master Lau Qui Piak, Lim Ah Liong, Miss Maggie Brodie, Messrs. Song Thian Cha, R. C. Kay, Dr. A. D. Hutchison, Madam Lim Ah Giok.
By s.s. Kuching from Singapore on 4th February:-
Messrs. C. Fenwick, S. Hammond, Strong, J. M. Kennedy, G. A. C. Field, S. S. Tan.
By s.s. Kuchiug to Singapore on 8th Februay:-
Miss Jacques, Miss Lim Nya Chee, Mrs. Khoo Eng Kheng, Chua Swee Yeow, Lee Swee Ling, Wah Chin.
By s.s. Vyner Brooks from Singapore on 10th February:—	Dr. A. D. Hutchison, Messrs. R.O. Kay, Mactavish, G. E. Chaplin, J. C. H. Barcroft, Ong Guan Swee.
By S.S. Vyner Brooke to Singapore on 15th Feb.:— Mr. Mactavish, Mrs. W. L. Vanderslott, Miss C.
Vanderslott, Miss M. Vanderslott, Messrs. M. William, P’ng Ah Liang, Ong Tuan Hoo.
By s.s. Kuching from Singapore on 17th Feb.:— Messrs. R. D. Binnie, S. Nishiate, H. D. Mackay, Father Epping, Miss Ong Choon Goh, Miss Ong Choon Tin, Messrs. Kho Eng Kh’ng, Foo Wah Chin.
By s.s. Kuching to Singapore on 22nd February:—
Mr. and Mrs. H. M. Calvert, Messrs. A. F. Baughan, D. S. McLeod.
By s..s Vyner Brooke from Singapore on 21th Feb:— Messrs. G. J. D. Walters, J. R. Barnes, L. D. Kennedy, Mr. and Mrs. J. W. Rignell, Mr. and Mrs. Ong Chip Yang and 3 children, Mr. and Mrs. Wee Kheng Hong and 2 children, Mrs. Wee Kheng Huat and 2 children, Messrs. Tan Boon Poh and 1 child, Chia Cheng Kang, Lee Yu Lok, Tan Oh Nam.
SAILINGS TO EUROPE.
P. AND O. COMPANY. (Agents—Sarawak Steamship Co.)
Passage money to London £88 First and £51 Second Class.
BLUB FUNNEL LINE. (Agents—Borneo Company, Ltd.)
NIPPON YUSEN KAISHA. Calling at Aden, Naples, Marseilles, Gibraltar and London. (Agents—Sarawak Steamship Co., Ltd.)
It may be of interest to those homeward bound to know that the N.Y.K. are improving their Japan-Europe Service in 1930.	With a view to bettering the service this Company is putting on two vessels of 11,800 tons each, the Terukuni Maru and the Yasukuni Maru. Both these vessels are motor driven and capable of attaining 17 knots. They have accommodation for 121 first class and 68 second class passengers.
The Terukuni Maru commences her maiden voyage on 30th June, 1930, and the Yasukuni Maru on the 22nd September, 1930.
After these vessels have been placed in commission the 8,000 tons class of steamer will be withdrawn. These comprise the vessels Kamo Maru, Kitano Maru and Atsuta Maru.
According to the new schedule these vessels will arrive in Marseille 22 days after leaving Singapore and will call at Naples en route.
NETHERLAND STEAMSHIP CO. Calling at Balawan, Sabang, Genoa, Algiers and Southampton.
It may interest our readers to learn that the last named motor ship, named after the celebrated Dutch Mathematician and Astronomer (1629-1695), only started hth maiden voyage in Eebruary, 1928, She has a length of 570 feet, beam 68 feet and can travel at 17 knots. The complement of passengers is 653, and she has a crew of 270.
Official and Semiofficial Announcements.
APPOINTMENTS.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Mr. D. S. McLeod, Assistant Conservator of Forests, to do duty in the office of the Conservator of Forests, Kuching, with effect from 19th January, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Second Lieutenant G. A. Yeatts, Instructor, Sarawak Rangers, to be Adjutant, Sarawak Rangers, with effect from 1st February, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Mr. G. A. C. Field to be Assistant Superintendent of Customs, First Division, with effect from 4th February, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Mr. H. C. Strong to be Assistant Electrical Engineer, Kuching, with effect from 4th February, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajab has been— pleased to appoint Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft to be a Cadet, with effect from 10th February, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft to do duty in the District Office, Kuching, with effect from 10th February, 1930, inclusive.
LEAVE.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to extend the leave of absence granted to Mr. J. W. Whiteside, Divisional Engineer, Third Division, for twenty-five days with half salary, commencing from 17th December, 1929, inclusive.
Mr. D. Evans, Assistant, Sadong Mine, has been granted fourteen days’ vacation leave on full pay, with effect from 29th December, 1929, inclusive.
Mr. R. G. Aikman, Acting Superintendent of Customs, First Division, has been granted five days’ sick leave on full pay, with effect from 31st January, 1930, inclusive.
Dr. A. D. Hutchison, Assistant Medical Officer, has been granted nine days’ vacation leave without pay, with effect from 2nd February, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to grant to Mr. R. E. Edwards, Executive Engineer, Public Works Department, seven months’ leave on full pay, with effect from 6th February, 1930, inclusive. Mr. J. P. Baird, Municipal Commissioner, has been granted six days’ vacation leave on full pay, with effect from 10th February, 1930, inclusive.
British Legion.
EARL HAIG’S BRITISH LEGION APPEAL FOR EX-SERVICE MEN OF ALL RANKS.
[Mr. F. O. Blagg, Honorary Secretary of the Sarawak Branch of the British Legion, sends us the following letter received from the Organizing Secretary at headquarters, acknowledging with grateful thanks the very generous response, to last year's appeal, on the part of many residents of Kuching and Sibu—Europeans, Eurasians, Chinese and others—a response which is very highly appreciated by the Benevolent Committees of the Legion. Editor.]
F. O. BLAGG, ESQ., Honorary Secretary, Sarawak Branch, British Legion.
26, ECOLESTON SQUARE, LONDON, S.W.I.
DEAR SIR, I have to acknowledge with many thanks your letter of the 30th November with which you so kindly send Draft for £126. 6s. 7d. being the amount collected in Kuching and Sibu on Remembrance Day for the benefit of Earl Haig’s British Legion Appeal Fund, and have pleasure in sending herewith our official receipt N4425.
This excellent response to the Appeal will enable the British Legion, through its Benevolent Committees, to continue its work of alleviating the great distress which unfortunately still prevails amongst so many of our ex-Service men and their dependents, and the amount so generously contributed in your part of the world proves that there are still many who do not forget the men who endured the hardships of war, and now with their families suffer the privations of unemployment.
I sincerely hope that you will be able to convey the thanks of our President, Lord Jellicoe, to all those whose individual gifts make up this collection, and I would specially ask that you accept yourself and convey to the Members of your Branch an expression of His Lordship’s sincere appreciation of your splendid help and interest in our work.
It is hoped that the amount collected this year will again exceed that of any previous year so that our Relief Committees may not be compelled to refuse assistance to any deserving cases during the coming year.
With renewed grateful thanks.
Believe me,
Yours very truly.
(Sgd.) W. G. WILLCOX, Captain, Organizing Secretary, Appeal and Publicity Department, British Legion.
Air Mails.
KARACHI-LONDON AIR MAIL SERVICE.
Correspondence for Egypt, Palestine and Iraq will now be accepted for transmission by the Air Mail Service operating between Karachi and London.
An acceleration in delivery of from four to five days for correspondence for Egypt and Palestine and of two days for correspondence for Iraq will be obtained by taking advantage of this service.
The Air Mail fee for correspondence for Egypt and Palestine is 30 cents per HALF OUNCE, and for correspondence for Iraq 25 cents per HALF OUNCE. In addition the ordinary postage rates must be prepaid. These rates are 6 cents per ounce for correspondence for Egypt and Palestine, and 12 cents for the first ounce and 6 cents for each additional ounce or part thereof for correspondence for Iraq.	Air Mail correspondence for the Continent of Europe generally is now being forwarded to Karachi for despatch from that office in direct Air Mails for Athens, Belgrade, Budapest, Vienna and Nuremberg. This arrangement provides for a more rapid disposal of continental correspondence generally than was obtained by the previous direct despatch of such correspondence to Switzerland for onward transmission.
Air Mail correspondence for Great Britain and Nothern
Ireland and the Irish FreeState and for the countries of Lettonia and Lithuania will be included in the direct Air Mail bag for London despatched from Penang.
This useful announcement is sent us by the Postmaster-General.—Editor.]
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
The Government Scholarships.
The Editor, Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
KUCHING, 10th February, 1930.
DEAR SIR,
Practically nothing was mentioned in the recent issues of the Sarawak Gazette, on the results of the examination held in December last for the Government Scholarships.
An event of such importance in the educational line of this country, should be passed off without comment, is received not without disappointment by many of your readers.
A little publicity duly given to the school which produces the most successful candidates will doubtless enhance its prestige; thereby helping to whet up greater interest in the scholastic work, and at the same time creating a healthy rivalry between the schools, which may be a means of raising the standard of education in Sarawak.
Yours faithfully, A PEDAGOGUE.
[The Gazette would welcome, from all school authorities, frequent reports of intellectual or sporting prowess—but they do not seem often to come our way!!—Editor.]
Education in Sarawak.
The Editor, Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
KUCHING, 16th February, 1930.
DEAR SIR,
It is gratifying to find the increased interest that the Government of Sarawak is taking in education. For the past two years it has established scholarships open to Sarawak boys who desire to go to Singapore for higher education.
But, on the other band, one could not help deploring the fact that instead of proceeding direct to Raffles College for further studies, the scholarship boys were obliged to enter one of the Secondary Schools in Singapore, is an indication that the education in Sarawak has not made much progress since the inception of the local schools.
The highest standard attainable in any of the schools in this country is the seventh, that is up to the preparatory stage; and, by no means a very up-to-date one at that.
The apparent stagnation of the educational work has been greatly due to poorly paid teaching staff. For this condition better teachers do not always stay long in this profession. The incompetent ones soon fill their places.
I have known one or two capable teachers in one of the well-known local schools, who have been conscientiously working for the past twenty odd years, and yet they still receive a remuneration comparatively less than a second grade clerk gets in the Government service.
Should they retire in the course of a few years, and without any visible means of support, either from a pension system, or a provident fund, their prospect of well-earned rest is none too, rosy.
If no provision is made for retiring, aged, or infirm teachers, the machinery of the school is bound to clog up with inefficiency.
There is a growing conviction among intelligent persons in this country as to direction for improvement in common education, and, as an encouragement to the teaching profession, and one that has a direct bearing upon efficiency, the authorities should see that the teachers are decently paid, or at least bring the scheme of pay equal to, if not better than that of the Government subordinate staffs.
Yours faithfully, A SCHOOLMASTER.
[It should be remembered that highly qualified and trained teachers do not often come our way. If they did, higher, salaries would of course be justified. Education is progressing steadily and it should not be lost sight of that the Preliminary Examination of the University of Cambridge was held in Sarawak last December for the first time. We understand that the training of teachers for Vernacular Schools is being vigorously pursued this year.—Editor.]
Acknowledgments. We record with thanks the receipt of the following Journals and Periodicals:—
The Straits Budget; The Singapore Weekly Free Press; The Weekly Straits Echo; The British North Borneo Herald; The China Express and Telegraph; The Eastern Courier; The British and Colonial Printer and Stationer; The Printers’ Engineer; Paper and Print.
A wider exchange of Journals would be welcome.