The Sarawak Gazette. TUESDAY, APRIL 1st, 1930.
Births.
WAN.—On 4th March, 1930, at General Hospital, Kuching to Mr. and Mrs. Michael Wan Chin Hock, a son.
PASCOE—To Mr. and Mrs. C. E. J. Pascoe at the General Hospital, Kuching, on 15th March, a daughter.
Suara Sarawak.
March.
Sunday, March 23rd,1930—His Highness the Rajah leaves us on a well-earned holiday amid the expressions of ‘selamat belayar’ front the many inhabitants gathered to see him off.
On the eve of his departure, His Highness gave a farewell dinner-party at the Astana, followed by a dance and cards, to the strains of the excellent Ranger’s Band. The tasteful illuminations, and the intriguing charm of the ladies’ 'creations,’ added to the gaiety of a memorable occasion.
In our “Official Announcement” columns will be seen His Highness’ Proclamation appointing His Highness the Tuan Muda as Officer Administering the Government.
The Spring exodus is very much larger than usual this year. In addition to Mr. and Mrs. Bean, Mrs. Gillan, Miss Tait, and Mr. MacBryan, who accompanied His Highness on the 23rd, we gather that we are shortly to lose Mrs. Calvert, Mr. and Mrs. Pitt-Hardacre, Mrs. Barraclough, and Mr. Page-Turner.
Saturday, March 1st, saw the end of the exacting Bulan Puasa, and the night witnessed the usual decoration of the many Malay Kampongs. Coloured lights and lanterns, fireworks, and general conviviality, enlivened the miles of kampong roads, nestling beneath the starlight of the tropic night; and the festivities were continued for the two subsequent days.
This month has, we believe, established a time record for the Kuching-Singapore run. The s.s. Vyner Brooke covered the 429 miles March 1—3, in 33 hours and 30 minutes, the average speed being 12.8 knots.
Last year’s Birth and Death Returns would seem to have established another record, for a Malay inhabitant of Kampong Mentawak died on August 3rd at the age of 116. A Malay lady of Kampong No. 5 died on June 22nd aged 100, and two ladies of Kampong Tanjong both died in September aged 95 years. Who says that Kuching is not a health resort?
We hear that a revised edition of the Civil Service List is now in the press, and will be ready for issue early in April.
The Ford Company are certainly smarter than some other Motor firms, in the matter of “News Release.” The production of Ford cars and trucks for 1929 amounted to 1,951,092, or an increase of 138 per cent over 1928. Of this output, 87,796 were produced in Canada and 153,351 in other foreign plants. What have the British firms, such as the Austin, Morris, Wolseley, etc., got to say to this?
The Leipzig broadcasting firm of Mitteldeutsche Runafunk A.G. send us a belated notice of a very fine concert which was to have been sent out from the Konigswusterhausen Station at 0.30 o’clock (Central Europe time) on March 12—13, on a wave length of 31.33 metres! The concert by the Dresden State Orchestra was to include the Oberon Ouverture of von Weber, Wagner’s Siegfried Idyll, and Beethoven’s II Symphony. It must have been very fine. Perhaps some local enthusiast may have picked it up?
The Right Reverend the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak came back to Kuching by the s.s. Auby on Monday, 31st March, after an extended trip in the Northern portions of his Diocese—including visits to B.N.B., Limbang, Brunei, Labuan and Miri. He intends to visit the Second Division and Lundu before sailing for England with Mrs. Danson on May 3rd.
The mysterious Kuching epidemic, referred to in our recent issue, seems to be almost finished—but it is in the category of things about which one can never be certain.
By the way, we must congratulate Mr. and Mrs. Cecil E. J. Pascoe, to whom a daughter was born on March 15th, a charming baby as we hear. May a propitious future be her lot.
The East is keeping up its usual reputation for the seasonal occurrence of smallpox between December and April. We had a small and fortunately short epidemic up the Rejang River lately, fifteen cases in all. Reports from the League of Nations, in Singapore, recently showed 233 cases in one week in Bombay; 106 in Calcutta; 39 in Moulmein; 12 in Hongkong, besides odd cases in Java and, in the Sambas district.
Saturday, March 15th, was declared a public holiday for a big tuba fishing. An early start was made under rather weeping skies—which, however, smiled later. The tuba tongkangs were moored some distance above Satok Bridge and became busy soon after the arrival of His Highness the Rajah in the m.l. Betty at 7 a.m. Many other launches added to the bright gaiety of the scene, along the beautiful stretches of the Sarawak River where we imagine at least 2,000 tambangs, kolehs, etc., must have been present. As unusual amount of tuba was used, and the catch that resulted was a very large one. It is wonderful how fishes increase in size after death—a 25 catty fish weighed 125 catties on the following day, we hear!!
We are informed that the "Seventh-Day Adventist School,” 3rd mile, will henceforth to known as the "Sunny Hill School.” Let us hope that the change in nomenclature will herald the advent of a long and sunny future for the enthusiastic headmaster and his colleagues.
We understand that Miss Joan Elizabeth Fenwick held an At Home on Ash Wednesday, March 5th, but rumour has it that her charms are so great that her parents would not allow her to invite any of the inferior sex!
Our readers should note that a partial Eclipse of the Moon will take place on April 14th, and a Central Eclipse of the Sun on April 29th. The astronomical information at the Editor’s disposal, does not disclose the extent to which the phenomena will be locally observable.
We hear that a whale over 48 feet long was stranded sometime ago near Selalang and was examined by the Manager, the Island Trading Co., and others. The monster had apparently been caught by the tide and left behind near a lot of young trees and, in spite of frantic efforts in which many trees were knocked down, it was unable to get away.
Unfortunately the bones were not collected at the time, but some have now been obtained and one fowarded to the Museum. This is the second whale to be stranded near Selalang in the last few years.
A crocodile catcher who went to the scene shortly after the whale expired, reaped a harvest of 26 crocodiles in a short while,— many of these brutes having collected to devour the carcase. His Highness the Rajah visited the Museum Gardens on March 19th, and inspected the various works in progress, expressing satisfaction at the results. The majority of the structures are now well advanced; and the general effect, and increased amenities, seem to be highly appreciated by the large numbers of the populace who frequent the Gardens daily. Work on the Swan-Pond will be in hand before the end d March.
Talking of a swan-pond, recalls a happy little story which recently came to our notice. In a certain town was a park; and in the park, ornamental lake. The Municipal Committee in charge of the park was composed of members not all highly literate; and at one of their meetings, a member proposed that a gondola might be procured for the lake. Another member immediately got up and said he thought it would be more humane if a pair of them were procured, and a proper built for their nesting!!
BELLES-LETTRES!
Old Sarawak.
In January of the year 1843 H.M.S. Samarang, survey vessel, set out from Portsmouth bound for the Eastern Archipelago on a roving commission that was to entail visits to Sarawak, Brunei, Sulu, Celebes, China, Japan, and the Philippines. Ostensibly the object of this voyage was to make a general survey of the islands in the Samarang’s cruising grounds, starting with the North Coast of Borneo, but actually their orders were to do all in their power to bunt out and suppress the pirates that then infested the Eastern Seas. The proposed survey was a secondary consideration but a very necessary stalking horse. On one occasion the Dutch sent an impassioned protest to the Governor of Singapore after a very spectacular little fight off the island of Gillolo.
On board the Samarang there happened to be a gallant Midshipman named Frank Marryat, who possessed considerable talent for drawing and a great capacity for describing in an entertaining manner anything of interest that he chanced to see. Seven months after leaving Portsmouth the Samarang paid a visit to Mr. Brooke at his town of “Kuchin,” and Mr. Marryat had plenty of op-portunities of using both his pencil and pen, of all of which he fully availed himself. The following extract is interesting as a description of the first Astana:—
"The residence of Mr. Brooke is on the side of the river opposite to the town as for the most, part, are all the houses of the Europeans. In structure it somewhat resembles a Swiss cottage, and is erected upon a green mound which slopes down to the river bank, where there is a landing place for Kats. At the back of the house is a garden, containing almost every tree peculiar to the climate in a state of most luxurious wildness. “The establishment consists of six Europeans, and the house contains one large receiving-room and several smaller ones, appropriated to the residents as sleeping apartments, besides Mr.Brooke’s own private rooms. The large room is decorated with rifles, swords and other instruments of warfare, European and native; and it is in this room that the European Rajah gives his audiences; and it is also in this room that every day, at five o’clock, a capital dinner is served up, to which we were made heartily welcome.”
And later we have a short account of the first Government Officers and of the town they inhabited:—
“I have already stated that the native houses are built on the left side of the Sarawak river, and those of the Europeans on the right. These latter are pretty commodious little bungalows, built of cedar and pine wood. At present there are but three, belonging to Mr. Brooke, Mr. Williamson the interpreter, and Hentig, a merchant who has lately settled there. Rupell, Mr. Brooke’s superintendent, and Treecher, the surgeon, live in a large house on the native side of the river. Each of these European houses has its chatty bath adjoining to it, and this luxury is indulged in at all hours of the day. At nine o’clock a gong summons all the Europeans to the breakfast table of Mr. Brooke. When breakfast is over, they all separate, either to follow business or pleasure, and seldom meet again until five in the evening, when dinner is served, and the time is passed away until all retire to bed.
“Let me describe the view in front of Mr. Brooke’s house: the schooner lying half-way across the river is the Julia belonging to Mr. Brooke; she sails every month to Singapore laden with antimony ore, and thus at the same time she forms a mail packet between Sincapore and Kuchin. On a point near the bend of the river is the fort. It is a strong building of large timbers, and mounts eight 24 lb. iron guns, in very excellent condition. The building whose top just appears above the trees is the Chinese Joss-house, or temple; for there are many Chinese settlers at Kuchin; who are very useful in their capacities of blacksmiths, carpenters and agriculturalists. Sweeping with the eye a range of dwelling-houses built on stakes, you stop at one of tolerable proportions which has a platform on top of it on which are mounted about twenty small guns, and there is a flagstaff, on which is hoisted a red and yellow flag; that is the palace of Rajah Muda Hassan (Hasim). Take a canoe and cross over to it. You will find Muda sitting cross-legged in the centre of it: he shakes hands with you and offers you segars and tea. You will also meet his brother, Bud-ruddeen (Bedrudin). You take your leave of the Rajah and amuse yourself with a walk round the town, during which you examine the natives and their wives, their customs, their houses and their gardens.”
During the Samarang’s stay in the Sarawak River the officers went on many picnics and expeditions into the interior, mostly organized for their benefit by Mr. Brooke. Mr. Marryat reveals himself as a gentleman uncommonly susceptible to feminine charms, and was apparently very favourably impressed by certain of the Land Dyak ladies that he met in the course of his rambles:—
“They were much shorter than European women, but well made; very interesting in their appearance and affable and friendly in their manners. Their hair was superlatively beautiful, and would have been envied by many a courtly dame. It was jet black and of the finest texture, and hung in gracefully masses down the back, nearly reaching to the ground. A mountain Dyak girl, if not a beauty, has many most beautiful points; and at all events is very interesting, and I may say, pretty. They have good eyes, good teeth, good hair,—more than good: I may say, splendid. And they have good manners, and know how to make use of their eyes.
“As it was getting late I bade my new friends farewell by shaking hands all round. The girls laughed immoderately at this way of bidding goodbye, which of course was to them quite novel. I regretted afterwards that I had not attempted the more agreeable way of bidding ladies farewell, which; I presume, they would have understood better.
There was, too, a trip to Santubong on a wild pig hunt, which apparently ended very comfortably in an alfresco dinner of excellent pork chops. After which:—“We had plenty of wine and segars, and soon found ourselves seated on the sand, still warm from the days of the burning mid-day sun. Towards the end of a long repast we felt a little chilly, and we therefore rose and indulged in games of leap-frog, fly-the-garter and other venturous amusements!!
One rather wishes that one could have been included in that party on the hot sands ninety years ago, wine (plenty of it!), “segars” and leap-frog, not to speak of “Fly-the-garter," whatever that may be—! Evidently they managed to amuse themselves in old Sarawak, even without the aid of tennis courts, a bowling alley and a bar. Eheu. fugaces!
Later on “Sincapore” was visited, and Mr. Marryat was by no means pleased with the town, the society of which was snobbish and the amenities none of the best. Plus ca change, plus ca rests le meme chose. In a few months’ time we find him at Brunei, having conveyed Mr. Brooke there to make a treaty with the Sultan for the mutual suppression of piracy, and a very good description of this ceremony is given. It was during this visit, too, that—“on the occasion of a dinner given to us by the Sultan of Brunei, the whole party were seized a fit of very indecorous and immoderate laughter, by finding the centre dish, which was a curry, served up in a capacious vessel with a single handle...!! The curry, nevertheless, was excellent: and what matter did it make? What’s in a name?"
Here we had better leave Mr. Midshipman Marryat, and at our farewell bid him a hearty vote of thanks for giving us such a vivid picture of Sarawak two years after the accession of the first Rajah, when bluff King William had been dead only six years and a young queen at Windsor was but newly married to her darling Albert; when it was still possible to enjoy the hospitality of Rajah Muda Hasim at his house with the twenty small guns and the flagstaff, and when reigning princes and respectable post-captains threw away their “segar” to play at fly-the-garter with Dyaks, blue-jackets and midshipmites on a moonlit beach. Regretting the old times is a peculiarly vapid amusement in these days of hustle, Tom Mix lists, and the gospel according to Mr. Henry Ford; one can only wipe away an alcoholic tear and continue to prop up that bar that was unknown when a wooden building “resembling a Swiss cottage’’ housed the first European Rajah and the first Government Officers. Ah well, again and yet again—Eheu fugaces! BIAWAK.
Madrigal.
All that is aery and sweet, Bodiless rapture bringing.
All colours misty, fleet, Far chimes a-ringing—
Gently the senses greet
Quicken the sad heart’s beat Like tenderest April, sweet Happiness bringing, oh sweet
Contentment bringing
Softness of baby feet, Swiftness of light birds winging;
The young lambs’ trembling bleat,
Clear water springing—
Smile when shy lovers meet,
Kiss when they briefly greet— Make all the sad world sweet, Happiness bringing, oh sweet
Contentment bringing.
J.M.B.
The Origin of the Term “Sea Dyak."
After considerable research and extensive travelling Borneo and elsewhere I have come to the following conclusion, and as it has considerable beating on the reason of our many and diverse tribes and peculiar geographical and botanical riddles. I venture to publish same in order that specialists may have the advantage of look at the island from this point of view.
1. That at the end of the 13th century this island was split up from Sarawak a number of northwards into a number of islands big and small. Sarawak would seem to be have joined through a peninsular town that disappeared under the sea to Palembang in Sumatra winch in turn may or not have been joined to the Malay Peninsular, probably so.
2. That between the islands of Sebuyow and Lingga was a channel which ships from China used to go to the capital of Java.
3. That it is known the Batang Ai was on the res.
4. That the sea was round the following modern places. Sibu, interior of Baram river at least as as Bakong, Ulu's Bintulu, Tatau, Pelagus, Gat (Pila being an island) Batang Kayan, Ulu Limbang near Batu Lawai.
5. That Penrissen was then an island.
6.That Kalaka was an island of considerably larger size.
A series of eruptions and hurricanes would appear to have taken place somewhere about the end of 13th century which completely altered this part of the world.
At the same time there was internal war in China and the Sung dynasty fell. Intercourse with these parts being cut off for a considerable period. When intercourse was started with the Ming dynasty the geographers mistook the present straits of Lingga near Singapore for the straits between Lingga and Sebuyow, with the result that present day geographers have been misled by differences between their early accounts and later ones, and accused them of inaccuracies that did not exist. Whether the peninsula went on Eastward from Sarawak through Java and Batang Kayan I am not absolutely sure but am inclined to think so.
Shortly before this catastrophe Kublai’s great armada had been shipwrecked on islands just through these straits of Lingga, and had spent four months refitting on the islands and no doubt brought many woodcutters, shipbuilders, soldiers, etc., from native provinces such as Assam, etc., many of whom remained on the islands, intermarrying with the islanders or others, and their hereditary disposition to their trades remain to this day (i.e., Undup and Balan soldiers and shipbuilders, Batang Ai woodcutters) whilst Kenyahs would appear to be Chinamen left behind sick, etc., on what is known as Karimata island to geographers, who also sought wives on these islands or on the mainland in South East Borneo, and some became chiefs of their tribes, adding their different religions to the previous mixed ones existing.
From the place names and hereditary disposition of the people it would appear that Kanowit was a penal settlement as perhaps where many others, but I venture to suggest that amongst those in what, is now know as the Baloi were artists and craftsmen, etc. who had previously been imported to develop the islands by Modjopahit.
Space does not allow me to give more than what is a rough idea of what I am trying to explain, but if one reads old Chinese records of islands in the Southern seas and take Lingga mountain as in Sarawak instead of near Singapore it will perhaps clearer to those interested. And if people, interested in folklore, will read of or ask natives such as Kanowits, Nangkas, Srus Kayans, Batang Ais, etc., they will be able to further understand what happened:—	I have based the data on—
1. Chinese report that Brunei was destroyed by earthquake in 1292.
2. Genealogical records of natives which agree roughly with the date.
3. Chinese break in relation with this country and beginning of descriptions of different character. 4. Occnrance of serious floods in southern China about that time.
No doubt geologists will be able to tell the exact dimensions of these islands, and prove or disprove any conclusions.
I have reason for believing that there was another group of small and large islands above Bintulu of which Brunei was one, the town being situated in what is now the Ulu Trusan-Lawas. Brunei formerly being a pirate island but was used as a base by Kublai, and one of his followers stayed behind not as is generally recorded one of Cheng Ho’s. Kilan was the name by which the seven leaders were known, hence Penkilan later Pengiran. Each of these leaders seem to have been based on a different strategic point, where the others were is doubtless known by historians.
This would explain also the variegated tribes of the Baram. The Barawans in the Tinjar would appear to be untouched by this expedition, perhaps out of fear of the magic which they are supposed to be masters of. The old name for Brunei would appear to have been Bidukan (Padukan.)
In the Ulu Mukah Bintulu there would appear to have been a town of some importance that many years before had been more important still, and as this would appear from folklore to have been connected by road with the Batang Kayan, it would look as though this might have been the continuation of the peninsular especially as the mountain range would appear to be part of the main line. From Bintulu to the Ulu Baram would then look a likely continuation. Here we have another port that must be identified as soon as Chinese history can be made clearer, and the people of this place would seem to have connection with the people of Szechuan who must have been trading or connected in some way.
E. V. ANDREINI.
The Piper.
This poem was written by the late “Donn Byrne, Bard of Armagh," and is included in his Life under that title by Thurston Macauley (Sampson Low, 7s. 6d). The poem first appeared in Harper’s Monthly Magazine in 1912.
"I will take my pipes and go now, for the sandflower on the dunes, Is a-weary of the sobbing of the great white tea, And is asking for the piper, with his basketful of tunes, To play the merry lilting thing that sets all hearts free.
"I will take my pipes and go now, and God go with you all, And keep all sorrow from you, and the dark heart’s load; I will take my pipes and go now, for I hear the summer call. And you’ll hear the pipes a singing as I pass along the road.
"I will take my pipes and go now, for the bees upon the sill Are singing of the summer that is coming from the stars. I will take my pipes and go now, for the little mountain rill It pleading with the bagpipet in tender, crooning bars.
"I will go o’er hills and valleys, and through fields of ripening rye, And the linnet and the throttle and the bittern in the sedge Will hush their throats and listen, at the piper passes by On the great long road of silver that ends at the world's edge."
Notes on Tropical Gardening No. 3. ROSE GROWING IN MALAYA. Br H. T. STIVEN.
A footnote in the September (1928) number of the M.A. H.A. entitled “Rose Cuttings" prompts me to offer an article on the subject of Rose Culture in this country— as I have experienced it during the last dozen years or so. Exception may perhaps be taken to many of my conclusions; but conditions very throughout the country, and I may say I have had to buy my experience in as much as I have imported many varieties, some of which have proved most unsatisfactory here from some important point of view or other. Mr. Murray Robertson, in his footnote, gives the impression that imported home roses are cuttings; this I consider misleading. Roses sent from a temperate country, Great Britain or Australia, are varieties budded on briar cuttings, seedling briars, or other stocks the year previous to despatch, and lifted in the following winter and distributing season. There are two better known methods of despatch, parcel post and through freight. In the case of modest consignments, up to (say) six dozen varieties, the former method is much to be preferred. The fully rooted plants are pruned before despatch to suitable lengths to conform with postal requirements, packed twelve to fifteen plants per parcel in well-damped sphagnum moss, wrapped in oiled paper, covered again with ordinary brown packing paper, and are despatched accordingly. If the exporting firm pays due attention to the sailings of the outgoing Far Eastern Parcel Mail, the actual time taken by the parcel or parcels on voyage from door to door should not exceed four weeks. The other method of packing in cases for freight has the disadvantage of the delay caused at this end to outstation people and others by the necessary handling of bills of lading and smaller documents. When ordering, it is advisable to ask the exporting firm of nurserymen to attach permanent labels to each plant to ensure identification. I know of no better label for this purpose than Carter's small size “Neeta” label (l/3d. per dozen). Most rose plants can be obtained at l/6d. each, only the novelties costing more, and, in the case of purchasing the latter, one is experimenting on the strength of the catalogue descriptions of the raiser, which can prove very tempting but often turn out disappointing.
I have no axe to grind so far as the many firms of rose specialists are concerned; but I am assured that all those in the following list are firms of good repute and can be relied upon:—
The last-named firm has probably raised the greatest number of Gold Medal roses in the world. There are, of course, many other firms who may be relied upon to supply excellent stock. Always buy British-grown stock and eschew Continental Bargains; the writer has been "stung” but only once! Since 1922,1 have dealt entirely with Messrs. Walter, Easlea & Sons, Ltd., Leigh-on-Sea, Essex, and I must own that they have proved eminently satisfactory from my view point, the plants in nearly every case arriving 100 per cent green and fresh.
The full address of any of the above firms can be obtained through the Secretary, National Rose Society London, who would forward any communications. In this connexion, I would strongly advise anyone contemplating rose culture, on however small a scale, to tend a subscription of half-a-guinea (full membership for one year) to the National Rose Society; for this sum, the subscriber receives post-free a number of very useful illustrated books on the subject of Rose Culture, such as "Select List of Roses and Instructions for Pruning," Enemies of the Rose,” and "Hints on Planting,” together with the “Rose Annual," with beautiful coloured illustrations and a number of transferable tickets to the Spring, Summer and Autumn Rose Shows in England. These tickets, if unused by the subscriber, can be given to friends going on leave.
As regards the best time for ordering, it should be remembered that the home season for lifting for distribution is from late October to early April. The writer has found, however, that plants arriving here from December to late January do best. Roses from Australia should be ordered for June to July delivery here. Messrs. Yates & Co., Sydney, are a reliable firm and can supply most known varieties.
A would-be purchaser of home grown stock is well advised to make his plans early and to wiite for catalogues (issued about July) in plenty of time to enable him to send an early and definite order for autumn despatch. In dealing with Walter Easlea, I have been very much helped by the information contained in their annual catalogues with regard to the habit of growth of the named varieties. They tabulate the habit of growth under numbers and sub-numbers 1 to 6, i.e., from vigorous Ramblers to weak-growing Dwarfs. I have found from experience that varieties numbered 4 and 4a can be relied upon to grow and to bloom satisfactorily out here, whilst those marked 3 grow well but cannot be depended on to bloom at all. This information may save many a disappointment.
I have experienced this failure to bloom in the case of many varieties which are great favourites at home, such as J. B. Clark, J. G. Glass Ford, Avoca, Florence H. Veitch, Johanna Sebus, Juliet, Miss Marion Manifold, Reinard Badecker and others. Those marked 5 are just less satisfactory than numbers 4 and 4a in that they are weaker growers and are more liable to die back. The one class of rose which seems to be more or less a complete failure out here is the old Hybrid Perpetual; it simply will not bloom, in fact it is more obstinate than the time-worn curfew! Out of some thirty plants of this class (a three years' trial) I obtained two blooms only from three plants of the very popular Frau Karl Druschki.
Hybrid Teas and the Pernetianas (which originated from a cross between the Persian Yellow Briar an a Hybrid Perpetual) are, on the other hand, most reliable if the habit of growth is studied. Tea Scented roses an old and lovely class, can be grown here successfully if the large-flowered varieties are chosen; they are few in number, but include Molly Sharman Crawford (white, with eau-de-nile shading), Mrs. Foley Hobbs (white, tinged with pink), and White Maman Cochet (creamy-white). When choosing a variety for this country not let yourself be deluded by some wonderful roses you saw at home unless the said favourite has plenty substance, size and fullness in its make-up. Roses such as Shot-Silk, Betty Uprichard and Madame Butterfly, , so charming at home, open up into single roses at the first glimpse of dawn here.
The most difficult colour to obtain in conjunction with size in the three classes Hybrid Teas, Pernetianas and Tea Scented would appear to be yellow; and I think it would be advisable to go for this colour to a still further class, namely Polyantha (Dwarf) or Pet Rose class, the flowers of which are miniature and born in clusters, but are almost perfect in form. Dwarf Polyanthas are very suitable for pot culture.
It is essential to have substance, fullness and lasting nudity for your roses in the tropics, and many of the best successes out here are considered to be too large heavy for home favour. This is a pity, for many of my favourites are becoming difficult to obtain, as nurserymen are ceasing to grow them for home trade. I have had little success with climbers and pillar roses; growth, yes—but no blossoms. However, the climbing Noisette, Marechal Niel (golden yellow), proved a pleasant exception to this rule. It does very well in a tub.
For the enthusiastic beginner, I gave a list of 12 varieties, to all of which I have given an extended trial. The four marked with an asterisk may be a little difficult to obtain; but, if your nurseryman is given an early order (say three months before the lifting season begins) he should be able to get them from some friendly source if he himself has not the varieties in stock.
I have tried in all over 200 varieties and many different classes of roses, and could name many others which yield beautiful specimen blooms: but, in the first instance
I would recommend the above-named collection in duplicate or triplicate rather than that the beginner should go too far afield and court disappointment.
Some novelties of recent origin in the home price lists which promise well for this climate include Dame Edith Helen, a glorious flower of pure glowing pink (awarded the National Society’s Gold Medal in 1926 and the Clay Cup for a fragrant novelty); Everest (1927), one of the largest roses yet raised, flowers ivory-white shaded at times with lemon, high-centred, expanding to huge peony-like blossoms when fully developed;
John Russel (1924), deep velvety crimson, overlaid black, flowers large, very double, but not always coming to a good shape; Mrs. A. R. Barraclough (1926), probably the best of its year, bright sparkling carmine pink of even shade throughout, turning to yellow at the base, large and full of great size, fine substance and perfect form; Roselandia (1924),.a sport from Golden Ophelia, better than the latter under glass, and giving larger flowers when outdoors. These five novelties, although promising, must (so far as mv experience goes) be put into the "non-proven” category.
There appears to be an entirely mistaken idea out here that imported roses revert, in the course of time, to the wild dog-rose type. It stands to reason that the plant cannot maintain, its strength under unnatural strain of perpetual flowering imposed upon it by our climate, but my experience has been that the not over-vigorous plant just dies a natural death. I have had instances of La France blooming continually for seven years with little or no variation in the quality of bloom, only to die back finally down to the roots without obvious reason.
I may be wrong, but I think that the problem of a suitable soil for rose-growing is given an exaggerated importance. There are, admittedly, one or two essen-tails (which cannot be over-emphasized) in the preparation of the rose plot: (1) deep cultivation, two to three feel of the ground before the roses arrive, and (2) care that no very rich soil or manure comes into contact with the roots of the plant in the early stages of its growth. A rich mixture of soil and well-decayed cattle manure may be put down at a depth of about 18 inches so that the young rootlets of the new plant may gradually work their way down to the richer feeding ground after the plant has become established. Top dressing and liquid manure may be given safely six months after planting. To anyone about to start a small rose garden, I would recommend the choice of an oblong, or square, open plot in the ‘kebun’; the size can be worked out to accommodate the number of plants ordered, allowing an interval of three feet between each plant. The ground should be dug up thoroughly some three months before the plants are due to arrive, kept cultivated and free from grass (a harbinger of hoppers), holed as for rubber two feet deep but only three feet apart, a rich compost being put in the base of each hole. The area should be surrounded by a fine-meshed galvanised wire fence five to six feet high, a surprisingly effective defence against flying insects, with a door or gate for entrance and exit purposes. Before the plants arrive, it would be as well to have the National Rose Society's booklet “Hints on Planting,” which illustrates the planting level and correct method of putting in the plant; also a small load of jungle soil, so that everything will be in readiness when the plants arrive.
The plants should be carefully removed from the packing and freshened in tepid water. Dead shoots should be cut back to the green; while long, straggly or misshapen roots should be clipped back to suit convenience. Care should be taken, in planting, that the roots are well spread out, with a downward tendency, and firmly pressed into the soil; much harm may be done by allowing roots to bend upwards, contrary to nature, and any that persist in this tendency should be cut off at the upward inclination. A little jungle soil should be added to each plant as a top dressing and root bed. It will always pay to give personal attention to the planting operation eyen if it be that of supervision only. Shading may be resorted to, although I myself have not found it to be necessary.
Another method is to plant in pots, under shade, and gradually bring the plants to the open, when they can be easily transplanted to their permanent homes after, say, two mouths' interval. All the plants should be in full bloom within two to four months after planting. It is a good plan to nip off the earlist buds before they develop.
Insects may prove troublesome; but keeping the rose plot free from grass and surrounding it with fine-meshed fencing will do much to mitigate this nuisance. If beetles or other insect pests are the bugbear, scrutiny with a torch at night of the dwarf plants as sent from home will be found a much less arduous undertaking for each plant than the same task performed later on, on our more vigorous and much beleafed domestic (can we call them?) rose trees.
An early outlook must be kept for shoots of the original briar stock; these should be traced underground as soon as they appear and duly cut off, as they take sap from the proper growth. They are easily distinguished by the large number of closely-knit prickles or thorns, and are quite dissimilar from the true rose stems.	I have not found that dwarf plants out here require a great deal of pruning back. Blooms as they arrive should not be allowed to die on the tree, but should be cut off for table decoration—as close to an eye as possible.—
It may be said that any keen gardener taking up rose culture in this country on whatever scale will get lasting enjoyment from his. hobby and will always want to go “one better” next year. Thera is no end to the fascination to be derived from the cultivation of the Queen of Flowers.
The writer knows of one case where Standard Roses have been grown successfully out here, in one of the coastal districts of Selangor, but has not yet tried them himself. He was assured, when last on leave, that they could be packed satisfactorily for export to the tropics. Standards and half-Standards cost, on an average, four or five shillings per plant, exclusive of packing, etc., and would probably be best brought out m the late autumn on board the ship on which one was travelling.
In conclusion I should like to say that my first easay in growing roses in this “warm clime without variations was with the very old, but none-the-less beautiful, La France. I am sure there is no better trial rose throughout the world. [By the Courtesy of Malayan Agri-Horticultural Association.]
First Division News.
KUCHING METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS FOR MARCH, 1930.
Note.—The Kuching Meteorological Station is situated at Latitude 1.33.29 North; and Longitude 110.90.31 East. The height above Mean Tide Level is 99.5 feet.
RAINFALL AT LEPER CAMP. 13th Mile, Penrissen Road, Kuching.
Divisional Reports.
First Division Report for February, 1930, by Mr. J.C. Swayne, Acting Resident.
There has been an increased activity in the illegal traffic of opium and three persons were convicted and fined. Konsin, a Land Dyak, pleaded guilty to a charge of rape and was sentenced to a term of imprisonment. The Manager of Chop Guan Moh Heng was prosecuted under Order No. E. 2 (Estate Duties). 1929, for failing to report the death of Sim Kay Teng, a partner, and was fined.
I visited Sadong from the 12th-15th. Two appeal cases were heard. In Seniah vs. Cherurai, an Iban inheritance case, the decision of the District Court was upheld.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports:—
General .— There was a slight decrease in the Court work in general during this month, and no cites that call for particular mention. Theft cases have doubled as compared with January.
On the 11th instant Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, Cadet, was appointed to do duty in the District Office.
Batu Kawa was visited on the 5th instant, and appeared to be in a clean and quiet state.
On 21st, I made a trip down to Sambir, in company with the Land Officer Mr. Summers, to settle a land dispute, and after inspecting the kampong there, returned the same day.	Coroner's inquiries were held on the bodies of three persons during the month and a verdict of death from natural causes returned in each case.
The 24th instant, being the birthday of Her Highness the Ranee, offices were closed and the day observed as a public holiday.
LAND OFFICE.
The Land Officer, Mr. B. Summers, reports:—
One new Assistant Land Inspector joined the department in the middle of the month.
One Assistant Laud Inspector having completed his training in the Survey Department was sent to Lundu, he being the first Inspector to be posted there.
One Assistant Land Inspector was dismissed for refusal to obey orders.
The new clerk was posted to Sarikei early in the month.
Three Chinese were fined by the District Court, at the instance of this office, for not evacuating their gardens in a stated time, they having encroached on Dyak land.
There was a large increase in the number of applications over the previous month, and a decrease in the number of titles issued.
Simanggang Road Land Reserves.—The examination of the lands within the Simanggang Road Land Reserves was continued during the month and it is expected that the investigations on both sides of the road will be completed to the 15th Mile by the end of March.
A considerable number of titles have been called in and will be replaced by new titles covering the areas actually under cultivation, the uncultivated portions reverting to Government.
UPPER SARAWAK AND LUNDU.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, reports:—
On the 21st February His Highness the Tuan Muda, the Dayang Anne and party, left for Kuching by way of Seniawan.
For the first few days of the month nothing of importance occurred.
On Thursday the 6th I started for Lundu by the overland way and reached Lundu at about 6 p.m.
At Lundu there were several complaints and requests of various natures and I found 60 outstanding cases awaiting settlement. A large and presumably representative party of Malays complained against the Tua Kampong Abang Merali on various grounds, and further tasked for Government help in building a new mosque and in paying a “Hatib” and "Belal” for it. At present there is only an "Imam” and no other official. I told them that all these matters would be looked into and granted them a site for the new mosque should it be sanctioned.
On the 10th the whole day was spent hearing cases and I held a preliminary inquiry into case Panang vs. Kunsen (Rape). The 11th and 12th were also spent in Court, as was the morning of the 13th. On the 13th I checked all the cash and found it correct.
On the 14th, I left for Pengkallan Stungkor at 2 p.m., and reached there at about 9.30 p.m., and the next day returned to Bau; The road by Pengkallan Stungkor is not to be recommended, being far inferior to that by Stum and very round about.
Probably the most important case heard at Lundu was that of Abang Merali (Tua Kampong) vs. Wan Mohamed, Gindar (Dyak) and Sulong (Dyak) for defamation of character.
Plaintiff complained that defendants had spread untrue rumours that he had been trying to find some poison to poison Haji Dewa. The case was dismissed for lack of evidence for plaintiff. On my return to Bau I found that all was well but that Sergt. Bakri had left for Gumbang to look into a Dyak shooting case. Sergt. Bakri returned on the 16th and the case was heard on the 18th. The wounded man, whose name is A-on, was not very badly wounded though somewhat painfully. The wound was caused by one buckshot entering by the side of the chin and inflicting a flesh wound passing out the other, side of the face. Fortunately no harm was done to the bone. The culprit was let off lightly with a fine of $50 his gun being confiscated and being forbidden to attempt to buy another gun for 5 years. The affair was a pure accident but due to great carelessness.
On the 19th I went to Seniawan and found one or two repairs necessary in the Police Barracks there.
On 20th the Director of Education arrived from Kuching by road—some of which he covered by car but a good deal on foot. Several matters concerning his department were gone into thoroughly and Mr. Jacques left again by the same way on 2lst.
On Sunday 23rd Messrs. Barcroft and Field came up from Kuching and returned the same day.
The weather has been extremely wet all the month but the roads have held up very well indeed throughout.
The rainfall for the month was 5.97 inches, the average daily being .22 inches.
Agriculture.—The padi crop in the Tembawang, Stengang, Stungkor and Lundu district seems to be very promising indeed, though should the present wet weather continue it will no doubt have a very bad effect on the ripening crops. It is to be hoped, however, that conditions will change for the better in the next few days.
Court.— Court work has been fairly light at Bau though there was a great deal at Lundu.
The fines for the mouth were $220 and these with fees amounted to $283.75.
SADONG.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports:— Courts.—In the Lower Courts few cases were heard, and none call for comment.
In the Resident’s Court two appeal cases were disposed of, one of these being dismissed and one upheld. A Resident’s Court case under section 452 was adjourned.
Public Works.—The carpenter finished repairing the bungalow occupied by the Sanitary Inspector, and was later employed on making new lamp posts. The new fire-hose housing was installed in the bazaar and painted.
Tenders were invited for the construction of a new bridge over the Simunjan River, and also for making the new Saging-Ngili Road.
Medical.—At the Government Hospital seven inpatients were admitted and three were discharged, leaving five remaining at the end of the month.
At the Dispensary 125 out-patients made 174 attendances for treatment.
Thirty-seven N.A.B. injections were administered of which thirty were for yaws and six for muli.
The accounts shew Revenue $185.99, and Expenditure including salaries and rations $266.29.
Staff.—Mr. A. Harry arrived on the 4th to do duty as Sanitary Inspector.
Corporal Awang Bujang was promoted to Sergeant and P.O. Wan Amat to Lance-Corporal as from January list.
Agriculture.— Padi prospects are distinctly hopeful and few cases of severe damage are reported. The usual pests—rats—have again accounted for a fair quantity of the crop, but not to the same extent as they bad done in former years.
Mr. G. M. Allman of the Agriculture Department visited the district from the 9tb to the 14th with reference to the Javanese padi scheme, which has been the subject of correspondence for at least eighteen months.
Forestry.—Forest Ranger Abang Daud reports that various quantities of billian timber have been worked and left in the Krangan area. Notices have been issued that this will be seized and auctioned if the owners do not lay their claims within a specified time limit.
Travelling.—I left, on the 18th intending to visit the Sea Dyaks in the Ulu Sebangan. At Kepayang however, it was found that there was no water in the river and no path through the jungle. The visit was abandoned and I returned to the station on the 21st.	Marine.—Two experts from the Government Workshop arrived to attend to m.l. Vava. They could not improve matters, however, and the launch was shipped to Kuching for overhaul.
General.—The Acting Resident, Mr. J. C. Swayne visited the station from the 42th to the 15th, and settled all outstanding matters requiring his attention.	The 24th, being the anniversary of Her Highness the Ranee's birthday, the offices were closed and the flagstaff dressed.
Two second-hand outboard motors were received on trial from the Agriculture Improvement Fund. It was intended that they should be used by the two outstation Native Officers, but the engines hate not been made to run yet.
On the 28th I proceeded to Kuching on duty.
Trade and Shipping.—The new industry—snake skins—proved a useful asset during the month when $1,308.60 was collected in export duty on this item. Some of the Chinese are now making inquiries in Singapore as to possible markets for these skins.
Sadong Collieries Report. February, 1930. SIGNED BY J. W. EVANS, MANAGER.
RACE NO. 2. THE SATOK STAKES., Value $150. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee $10. A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 5 furlongs.
RACE NO. 3. THE PADUNGAN PLATE. Value $150. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee $10. A handicap for Division in ponies. Distance 6 furlongs.
RACE NO. 4. THE B.C.L. PLATE. Value $150. $50 subscribed by Messrs. the Borneo Company, Ltd., with $100 added. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee $10. A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 3 furlongs.
RACE No. 5. THE PENDING STAKES. Value $150. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee $10. A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 4 furlongs.
RACE No. 6. THE TOWN PLATE. Value $150. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee $10. A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 3 furlongs.
RACE No. 7. THE PENANG CUP. Value $200. A cup presented by the Penang Turf Club. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee $10. A race for Divisions I, II and III ponies. Division I ponies to carry 10 stone 7 lbs. Division. II ponies to carry 9 stone 7 lbs. Division III ponies to carry 8 stone. Distance one mile. Post Entries.
RACE NO. 1. THE STEAMSHIP STAKES. Value $150. $100 subscribed by the Sarawak Steamship Company, Ltd., with $50 added. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee $10. A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 5 furlongs.
RACE No. 2. THE RANEE'S CUP. Value $150. A piece of plate value $100 presented by Her Highness the Ranee with $50 added. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance, fee $10. A handicap for Division II poniee. Distance 5 furlongs.
RACE NO. 3. THE SARAWAK STAKES. Value $150. Second to receive $50. — Third to save entrance fee $10. A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 5 furlongs.
RACE No. 4. THE BANKERS' PURSE. Value $150. $100 subscribed by the Chinese Bankers of Kuching with $50 added. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee $10. A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 4 furlongs.
RACE NO. 5. THE CHIEF SECRETARY’S STAKES. Value $150. $50 subscribed by the Chief Secretary with $100 added. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee $10. A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 3 furlongs.
RACE NO. 6. THE TURF CLUB STAKES. Value $150. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee $10. A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 4 furlongs.
RACE NO. 7. THE RAJAH'S CUP. Value $200. A piece of plate value $150 presented by His Highness the Rajah with $50 added. Second to receive $50. Third to save entrance fee $10. A handicap for Divisions I, II and III ponies. Distance Race Course. Post Entries.
REGULATIONS.
1. All. nominations, accompanied by Entrance fees $10 each, description of ponies and declaration of Colours to be made to the Honorary Secretary not later than noon Saturday, 5th April, 1930, except the entrance fees in respect of the 7th race on each day which should be paid on the Course. $5 will be returned if scratchings are notified in writing to the Honorary Secretary before 5 p.m. on Friday, 2nd May, for Races 1st Day and before 5 p.m. on Sunday, 4th May, for Races 2nd Day.
2. No second prize will be awarded if there are less than 3 runners and no third prize if less than 5.
3. No whip used in any Race shall exceed two feet in length.
4. If spurs be worn these shall not have rowels.
5. Any objection shall be accompanied by a deposit of $10.
6. The penalty for a win, after publication of the handicaps shall be 7 lbs. except in the case of the last Race on each day.
7. The Handicaps for the 1st Day will be published on the 12th April, 1930.
8. The Handicaps for the 2nd Day will be posted on the Notice board of the Sarawak Club at 12 noon on 4th May, 1930.
9. The maximum weight shall be 11 stone and the minimum 7 stone subject to regulation 6.
10. Any Jockey, native of Sarawak, who has not already won two races shall be entitled to an allowance of 5 lbs.
11. The maximum fee to a winning Jockey shall be $15 in the absence of any agreement to ride in lower sum.
12. Where not otherwise especially mention the Rules of the Race Course shall be the same those adopted by the Straits Racing Association.
13. The decision of the Committee of the Sarawak Turf Club shall be final in all matters disputes.
14. All communications and inquiries must addressed to the Honorary Secretary.
15. Registered Racing ponies in B.N.B. Division III shall be eligible for entry in Races open to Sarawak Division I ponies, and shall be handicapped for the 1st day's racing in which they participate at not less than 11 stone.
16. Ponies from B.N.B. which have not been raced at any Meetings of the British North Borneo Turf Club, other than subscription Griffins imported by the Sarawak Turf Club, shall classified in Sarawak Division I, and shall not carry more than 21 lbs. below top weight in the 1st day's races in which they participate, subject to the provisions of regulation 6 above.
17. Registered Racing ponies in B.N.B. Divisions I and II are ineligible for entry in Races at Meetings of the Sarawak Turf Club.
18. Ponies must have run on the 1st day to be eligible for entry in Races on the 2nd day.
19. The Course will be opened for training on Monday the 24th March, 1930.
F. O. BLAGG, Hon. Secretary, Sarawak Turf.
Sarawak Club: Tennis Tournament.
GOVERNMENT versus NON-GOVERNMENT.
Tennis Tournament between Government and Non-Government members of the Sarawak Club came to a conclusion oh 7th March.
In the Mens’ Doubles Forrest and Moir had a difficult task in taking the odd set off Baird and Griffiths and after a hard fought game won by 2 sets to 1. It was unfortunate that Baird was off his game. Boyd and Birt were the victors in their very even match against Kay and Edmett. We understand that Kay wishes for a friendly replay with a few tins of cigarettes at stake! Champion and Talbot took all three sets off Howard-Smith and Hayward. At 11 games all in the second set we rather wondered if they intended making a night of it, as night had almost set in when they decided to resume play the following day. Reid and Selous won their match against Fenwick and Collier in three straight sets. All the matches were fairly evenly contested and resulted in a tie at 6 points each.
Of the Singles perhaps only two matches require particular mention, namely Kay versus Selous and Boyd versus Talbot.
In the former there were some determined rallies, and although Selous won all three sets, the play was interesting to watch. Probably the most interesting feature was Selous’ placing and his foresight in following up a shot to the net at the right moment.
Boyd and Talbot had a good match and both looked utterly exhausted at the finish. Talbot won the first and last sets at 6.3, Boyd taking the second set after a good struggle at 8.6.
The result of the Tournament was a win to the Non-Government Team of 23 points to 13.
Kuching Rifle Club.
The first competition was held on Thursday and Saturday, the 20th and 22nd February. The conditions were 5 rounds deliberate at 200 and 500 yards, and 10 rounds rapid at 200 yards, target exposed for 60 seconds. Highest possible 70 points.
A Bowling Competition.
Kuching vs. Outstations, was held at the Sarawak Club on Friday, 28th February, 1930. The Acting Resident, Mr. J. C. Swayne, kindly presented a Cup for the highest score, which was won by Mr J. J. Hill.
March Competitions.
The Monthly Competition of the Kuching Rifle Club took place on the 2nd and 6th of March. Conditions: 10 shots each at 200 and 500 yards. Highest possible 80 points. A Sweep Competition was held on Thursday, 27th March. Conditions: 10 shots each at 200 and 500 yards. The next Monthly Competition will be held on the 3rd and 6th of April. Handicaps will be posted on the Club notice board. H.H. the Rajah and H.H. the Tuan Muda have become Patrons of the Club and the Chief Secretary, Mr. F. F. Boult, President.
Divisional Reports.
February, 1930.
The Resident, Second Division, Mr. J. B. Archer
reports:—
Accompanied by the late Resident, Mr. F.A.W. Page-Turner, and Datu Haji Abdulrasid, I left for the Saribas and Kalaka on the 3rd, returning on the 10th. Short stays were made at Sebuyow, Betong, Spaoh, Pusa, Kabong, Saratok, and Lingga.
At Betong the rapid construction of the bazaar drains was noted, and the new arrack distillery was nearly finished. Trade seemed poor and the bazaar was not full.
Spaoh Bazaar was rather depressing, and the Chinese complain that trading boats up river snatch their business.
At Pusa there was nothing much to report. Here again, trade was slack.
The recently-built police kitchens were examined and found to be badly constructed.
The Saratok Bazaar is in a bad state of repair, and the Officer-in-Charge, Mr. L. K. Morse, reported that several shops were actually a danger to the public. He was instructed to warn the landlords that they would be responsible if death or injuries were caused.
The electric lighting plant is about to close down. The Chinese wish it to remain but, as unfortunately they still owe the plant much back rent, their request does not bear much weight.
Kabong Bazaar has been recently repaired, but it is said that under half the number of shops are occupied.
A petition by the present traders to prevent a new man building shops was refused by the late Resident. The old traders would not allow the new man to rent their shops, and it was only when he had bought all his timber and started work on it, that they did hurried repairs to their empty shops and offered them at high rents.
There is too much road for the present P.W.D. staff to keep up.
At Lingga there was little to do. The Chinese com-plained that a new bazaar was being made at Munggo Embawang to the detriment of the Lingga Bazaar. The late Resident ordered this to be stopped.
On the 16th, the late Resident left for Kuching and was still away at the end of the month, on which date he was granted seven months’ leave, on the expiration of which to be permitted to retire on pension.
In Simanggang, and in the various stations, Mr. Page- Turner was given Chinese banquets and enthusiastic tokens of farewell as he embarked. Kabong Malays gave him a musical send-off, whilst at Saratok crowds of Chinese and Dyaks assembled.
Messrs. Ditmas and Hudden left for Kuching on 23rd and were still away at the end of the month sitting for their examinations.
Mr. G. M. Allman arrived on 22nd, visited Engkilili and the Skrang and returned to Simanggang on the 28th, accompanied by Mr. G. M. Goodall, A.I.F.
Mr. L. K. Morse left the Kalaka for part of the month to proceed to Kuching for his Government examinations.
Many Penghulus visited Simanggang during the month, and various matters were discussed.
Nanang was appointed Penghulu of the Engkari.
There were very few cases in the Division, as most of the Malays and Dyaks are on their farms. Padi prospects are good in most places, but there are the usual reports of pests.
The Simirnggang Sawmill started operations during the month.
Bunyau and party returned to the Skrang from their travels to the Upper Trusan country. They found that the absence of water transport and the nature of the country was unsuitable for them to move there. They mentioned the great kindness show to them by Mr. Coombe. The Saribas party returned at the same time.
Soh Jock Siang, Court Writer of Sebuyow, was arrested by Mr. Ditmas on the 17th and tried before the Resident’s Court later in the month on a charge of criminal breach of trust of Government monies. He was convicted and sentenced to 3 years’ R. I. Eliab Bay has arrived to fill the vacancy.	Panjang, a Bau roads contractor, visited Simanggang during the month with a view to taking up a contract.
BATANG LUPAR.	The following are extracts from Mr. D. G. Hudden’s report:—
Very few cases were heard in the Courts, probably because the Dyaks were still busy with their farms. There were, in all, sixteen cases, four civil and twelve criminal. Of the latter nine were settled by fines, two charges of theft by sentences of three months and one month, and A charge of contempt of Court by a sentence of one month.
On the 11th the new Native Officer's quarters near the hospital reported finished. A certain number of prisoners were employed here, making a path, digging ditches round the house, levelling the ground underneath, and making latrines at the back.
Prisoners were also employed in this general upkeep of the grounds, mowing, weeding road, cleaning ditches, etc., the usual routine.
The daily average in the Batang Lupar district was 58. Seventeen were admitted to hospital.
The Dresser-in-Charge of the Hospital reports that 172 out-patients were treated during the month 128 injections given. The number of in-patients was six, five of whom were subsequently discharged. Amongst the out-patients may be numbered one cow which was, apparently, cured of its ailment.
The Court Writer Sebuyow reports that ten unimportant cases were heard. None were heard at Lingga. The reports from Engkilili and Lubok Antu have not yet arrived.
SARIBAS.
The following are extracts from the report of the Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny:—
Several cases were heard during the month. One case of paternity and one of adultery adjourned for permission from Resident, Second Division, to settle by diving.
The prison gang, averaging ten in number, have been employed on the usual routine work.
There is little to mention under the heading with the exception of the bazaar drains, work on which is proceeding well.
The substations were visited 21st to 26th instant. Various small matters were settled and cases held. The padi crop in the upper Rimbas is not promising and, failing a rise in rubber, the inhabitants will be very badly off this year.
Mr. Goodall, Field Officer, arrived here in ml. Rubber Neck on 10th and left again on 11th, having inspected various smokehouses in the vicinity. Mr. Macleod arrived on 14th in connection with Forestry affairs and left again for Kuching in m.l. Mermaid on 15th instant.
The following are extracts from the report of Officer-in-Charge, Mr. L. K. Morse:—	But few cases of interest in the Courts were heard. Resident’s Court.—George Ah Gat vs. Wong Kim Ong alias Hong Eng Hong and Dora (f.) section 365 I.P.C. case dismissed. George Ah Gat later opened proceedings in the Civil Court for Divorce.	District Court.—Jeliboh vs. Igu, Land Office Dispute. This case was re-heard by order of the Resident, and has caused a lot of excitement amongst the Dyaks. The minutes of the case are to be sent to the Resident, Second Division, for a decision.	It was found that the buildings erected last year by Yaman, Contractor, were very badly done, and did not by any means comply with the terms of the contract. Yaman was informed that he would be expected to re-build such parts as did not comply.
The asbestos ceiling in Roban Fort Quarters has been badly done, the unpainted asbestos sheets being only laid un-nailed on a rough framework, and I consider a further expenditure necessary to finish it.
The prisoners were employed during the month about the station, there is more work to be done than they can manage.
On the whole the Police squads in the district are very slack, and the N.C.O.’s do not seem to be able to enforce discipline. I arrived in the district from Simanggang on 2nd February.
Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner, Resident, Second Division, accompanied by Air. J. B. Archir, Deputy Resident, Second Division, visited the district from 6th to 8th February.
Messrs. MacLeod and Buxton, of the Forest Depart-ment, arrived from Simanggang on the 10th and left again for Betong on 13th February.
I left for Kabong and Roban on the 13th instant, and held Court and checked the books at both stations.
At Kabong I found the cattle-shed in a very bad condition. Orders were given for some temporary repairs to be done, but I fear more extensive repairs will have to be done in the future. I returned to Saratok on the 17th instant.	A Dyak from Rumah Penghulu Nyalu, Awek, was shot in the arm on the following day; a rough dressing was put on his arm and next morning he was sent to Betong Hospital and he is reported to be doing well.
The old Tilley lamps were taken out of the Store and inspected but it was found that they were in a very rusty condition, and it will be necessary to replace many of the parts before they can be used.
A large number of Minimax Fire Extinguishers were found lying about the Store, these were taken out, cleaned, tilled and hung in the various Government buildings.
The shipping returns for the month were as follows:— Seven motor schooners, five bandongs, two motor launches and one steamer entered; eight motor schooners, six bandongs, two motor launches, and one steamer, cleared.
“And ‘Ave, Ave, Ave,’ said ‘Adieu, Adieu,’ for Evermore.”
On the 12th of August, 1929, the Subordinate Staff of the Second Division gave a dinner to the Resident, Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner, on the occasion of his approaching retirement. The dinner was held in the house of Ah Ho, the Gambling Farmer. Many speeches were made, all expressing regret at the Resident’s departure; followed by the presentation of an illuminated address with the signature of every member of the Subordinate Staff. He regretted that a silver rose-bowl, which they had intended to present, had not arrived. This was given on a later date, and was inscribed with the names of the donors.
The Resident made a suitable reply; thanking them and saying how sorry he was that he was leaving Simanggang, etc.
On the night of the 28th January, 1930. the Datu Abang Haji Dulraschid and the Native Officers of the Second Division gave a dinner to the Resident, Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner, in the Datu’s house.
Towards the end of the dinner Abang Mustapha, speaking for the Datu, arose and read out a speech in which all the Native Officers expressed their deep regret at the Resident’s approaching departure, and wished him long life and prosperity in England.
Presented to F. A. W. Page-Turner, Esq., by the Datu and Native Officers of the Second Division on his retirement, 1930.
The Resident replying said that he felt very nervous speaking before such an important assembly. No one but himself could know how deeply he felt the necessity of leaving Simanggang after so many years. He would always treasure their wonderful gift to him and hoped that in the future he would be able to return and meet them all again.
At 8 p.m. on the 30th of January, 1930, the Resident, Mr. F. A W. Page-Turner, gave a dinner to the Subordinate Staff, the Native Officers, the Towkays, and elder members of the Malay community—in all forty-four persons.
The occasion was the opening of the Simanggang Recreation Club and as the Resident approached the Club he was greeted by fusillades of Chinese crackers. A tape of Sarawak colours was stretched across the porch and after he had served this with a Dyak parang, the door was opened and everyone entered.
There were two long tables—one Malay and one Chinese—and Chinese lanterns and decorations.
The speeches were short and to the point—the Datu took the opportunity of welcoming the Deputy Resident, Mr. J. Beville Archer, and the proceedings terminated in singing and dancing.
On the night of the 16th February, 1930, another dinner was given to the Resident, Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner, in the Hua Khiaw School, Lingga, by the Head Chinese, Ang Soon, and the Towkays of Lingga.
Speaking for everyone present, Lance-Corporal Kabar, in charge of the Lingga police, delivered a short speech from the headmaster’s pulpit. He spoke of the deep affection all people had for the Resident—his goodness of heart and his habit of forgetting a man’s mistake as soon as he had been suitably punished—sometimes mulut masam tetapi hati manta. Ang Soon then gave the Resident two inscribed silver vases, and after a short speech of thanks and appreciation the latter returned to the Fort, accompanied by the school band. Rumour has it that a bugle was borrowed en route, and that the strains of ‘‘Come to the Cook-house Door Boys” were heard to echo into the night!
Third Division News. Divisional Reports. February, 1930. The Resident, Mr. C. D. Adams, reports:—
Resident’s Court,—Two criminal cases, no conviction. No civil cases; one appeal which was dismissed.
General.—The Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., commenced operations with a core drill at Sungei Tawak in the Daro district.
The Director of Public Works and Harbour Master arrived in connection with new wharf at Sarikei.
The Postmaster-General paid a visit.
Messrs. Hill, Hughes, Gilbert, Baron, Elam, and Murray-Scott proceeded to Kuching for the examination.
Two Dyaks of the same family from Sungei Tukut were found suffering from the disease and a case was reported at Sungei Jih. The members of both, these houses were all vaccinated and cases isolated and all passenger traffic to and from Kanowit held up. By the end of the month no further cases had occurred and the epidemic had died out.
Mr. and Mrs. Gray arrived from Singapore. Mr Gray is taking up appointment as Assistant on Rejang Plantations, Kanowit, vice Mr. Miller.
General.—Thrity-one doors of R. Saieng Penasu were burnt down on the 13th. Messrs. C. P. Lowe and Le Gros Clark visited the district, the latter visited all the upriver districts, also Sarikei and Binatang.
The 24th was observed as a holiday, being Her Highness the Ranee’s birthday.
The Officer-in-Charge of Police and Prisons, Sibu, Mr. J. J. Hill reports:—
Health.—Six men admitted in hospital and twenty-nine men off duty during the month.
General.— On 6th the child of one Ho Ah Chok was found suffering from smallpox and was reported to the Divisional Medical Officer at once, and later Ho Ah Chok with two of his children, and all of them were put on board the s.s. Soon Ann at Tanjong Engkilo under quarantine and then removed to isolation camp at ulu Sungei Bata-ee. Seven policemen were put on guard. On the 28th Ho Ah Chok was taken by the Divisional Medical Officer to the hospital where he died in the night. Ho Ah Chok and his children returned from Kanowit to Sibu on the 4th per s.l. Soon Ann and the child of Ho Ah Chok was the first person when suffering from smallpox kept in the Sibu Bazaar without reporting to the Divisional Medical Officer or Police Officer.
On 24th offices were closed, being Her Highness the Ranee's birthday, no parade had been taken on account of heavy rain.
The Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. C. O. Gauge, reports:-
There were 190 out-patients and their repetition 245, making a total of 435 in all.
Sixty-four in-patients were treated during the month, thirty-eight being new admissions and twenty-six transferred from 31st January, 1930. Amongst these twelve cases of typhoid were treated during the month with one death.
Fifty-three N.A.B. injections were given during the month.
Four lepers were transferred to Kuching Leper Camp and one lunatic, Kalong, was sent to Kuching to be incarcerated into the Kuching Asylum.
Three thousand three hundred vaccinations were performed during the month.
On 14th February, 1930, 1 was away at Kapit, Song, Kanowit, Sungei Luput and Durin on health inspection and also doing vaccinations, Dresser Paul Chiew Chai accompanying me and returning on the 18th instant.
Smallpox— On the 7th February, 1930, three cases of smallpox were isolated from s.s. Soon Ann, the following day three further cases were discovered in the bazaar. The Soon Ann was diverted to a quarantine station and anchored in mid river while the P.W.D. erected a temporary camp on the opposite side of the river whither cases in contacts were removed on the completion of this building.
On the 21st February, 1930, I discovered three cases at Kanowit. These were isolated in a godown across the river and during the ensuing week they were joined by six more cases. Eleven contacts were quarantined alongside. A very careful vaccination campaign was carried out in Kanowit and Durin areas and no further cases arose.
KAPIT.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Kapit, Mr. A. Macpherson, reports:—
Courts.—No cases are worthy of mention.
Dairy Farm.—Kapit herd numbered twenty-five at the end of the month. One old cow died of dysentery on l1th. Three head remain at Belaga, all the rest have been brought down. The cowman was dismissed for incompetence.
Prison — Health was fair. Twenty-three prisoners remained at the jail at the end of the month.
Song.—I went down to Song on 1st to inspect sites for two reserves of 1,000 acres for pepper. I also visited Dyaks between Song and Ngemah.
Genial. —Mr. McGinn, the Secretary for Chinese Affairs, the Divisional Medical Officer, and Mr. Anderson, visited Kapit during the month.
Dyaks. -Penghulu Temmoggong Koh reported all quiet and sale cartridges was resumed.
MUKAH AND OYA.
The District Officer, Mukah and Oya, Mr. P. M. Adams, reports. —
General.—It appears the pagan Melanoes seldom register their marriages or divorces though all Tua Kampong have the necessary books. They have been ordered to insist on such registration in future and levy fines, vide the Malay Undang Undang, on all persons who fail to comply.
Court.—The only eases of importance were those in which Lias bin Hj. Lee was sentenced to six months for theft and Si Eng Hui also sentenced to six months for assisting in disposal of stolen property knowing it to be stolen. Several persons were imprisoned for one month for contempt of Court and non-payment of fines.
Treasury.—$10,644 Straits and old Sarawak notes were remitted to Divisional Treasury and $15,000 new notes received.
Forests.—Seventy Dyaks were fined over $2,000 for ringing 360 jelutong trees in ulu Oya, over 50 of whom were given various sentences of imprisonment, were later released on security being found. Had they resisted it would have been impossible to enforce the sentences and at one time it appeared that they might do so. Their attitude and remarks bear out my remarks in December report. Mr. Reutens is now in Mukah and Balingian district on a tour of inspection and reports that so far nearly every tree he has seen has been ringed.
Estates. —Several new estates were reported for probate and the sago lands in connection with them demarcated, land rent collections have increased accordingly.
Travelling. — I visited Oya from 6th to 9th and again from 20th to 23rd spending a day at Dalat on the latter occasion inspecting the probate books.
Prison—Prisoners averaged 34.85 and were employed in the usual manner. Mee Chong was given one year extra imprisonment and six cuts for theft from District Officer’s bungalow.
P.W.D.—The usual upkeep of grounds and roads was maintained, also the supply of coal to the waterworks.
Health.—Lymph was received from Sibu and a vaccinator arrived from Kuching. He is still touring the district.
Rainfall for the month was 8.08 inches.
SARIKEI AND BINATANG. The Officer in Charge, Sarikei and Binatang, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports: —
P. W.D.—The hill at the end of the new bazaar was cut through, thus providing some good surfacing soil for the bazaar road and road in front of the bungalows. The 2nd hill was started, but up to the end of the month not finished on account of the rain
Work is proceeding satisfactorily on the road for proposed site of the new bazaar; this is being made by prison labour only.
Rumours have been heard that the suggested site of the new wharf in the Nelong (where a certain amount of work has been done) would be abolished, on account of it not being suitable. If this happens and the wharf has to go into the main river, I think it will be difficult to bring it into line with present bazaar planning scheme.
At Binatang work is proceeding with the new wharf under Mr. Nadig. A structure is completed ready for the cement piling.
General.—Trade at Sarikei and Binatang is very bad at the moment, although pepper is still standing at about $70 per picul. The slump in rubber has caused a great deal of unemployment and at the moment labour is very cheap.
During the month the Director of Public Works, Divisional Engineer, and the Harbour Master, Kuching, together with Mr. Nadig, of Gammons, Singapore, visited Sarikei to have a look at the site of Sarikei wharf. They did not condemn it, but did not seem very pleased.
On 22nd Mr. Hammond, Asst. Supt. of Surveys, Sibu, came down to Sarikei to make a proper survey of the main river banks, and also those of the Nelong, in order that the best place for the wharf might be chosen.
On the 11th the Land Officer and myself visited Sereding, Semah, etc., with the view of dividing up the Segalangs and Malays and making two separate kampongs. The places for the kampongs have not yet been decided upon.
Trade and Customs.—Less rubber has been shipped this month on account of the slump, but on the 24th 600 bags of pepper went out from Sarikei. This was what had been held up on account of its bad quality.
The pepper having been stopped, Sarikei Towkays went and complained to the Supt. of Customs, Third Division, saying that if the pepper could not go out they could not get supplies from Singapore, and that there would be a shortage of food in Sarikei later. Samples of this pepper were sent to Kuching, and all were allowed to be exported, even though they certainly were not up to the samples that were sent round as “good white pepper” earlier in the year.
Trade return for Sarikei as follows :—
White pepper pikuls 912, duty paid $3,087, value $60,820; Black pepper pikuls 193, duty paid $436, value $7,207; Rubber pikuls 677, duty paid $223, value $20,811. Total value of all exports $92,587.
Binatang. Jelutong, etc., pikuls 150, value $1,246; Sago pikuls 3,410, value $14,778; Rubber pikuls 377 value $11,461. Total value of all exports $28,339.
LOWER REJANG.
The District Officer, Lower Rejang, Mr. E. V. Andreini, reports:—
General.—The Resident, Third Division, accompanied by Mr. Dare of the Agriculture Department, visited the district during the month, as also Mr. McGinn of the Treasury.
Court.—There was no case of importance.
Education.—Ex-P. C. Rambli arrived to take up his appointment as schoolmaster at Matu. The school will be opened after the Mohamedan New Year.
The Divisional Land Officer, Mr. C. E. Pascoe, reports:—
I visited Kuching, proceeding down on the 1st February returning on the 12th inst. One of the objects of this visit was to observe the methods of procedure in the Kuching Land Office with a view to synchronization in Sibu office. As a result several new forms in use at Kuching have been introduced into this office; also numerous questions regarding land affairs generally were discussed resulting in a better understanding between the head office and this one.
Quit rents are coming in slowly this year and there can be no doubt that the majority of the gardeners are genuinely hard up. A number of persons who are known to this office as steady payers, have not yet appeared, and the same di-fficulty is being encounted at Binatang and Sarikei. As a counter to this, it has been decided to issue notice extra early this year, and to impress upon the headmen that they must exercise their influence in bringing the people in.
The Land Officer, Binatang and Sarikei, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports:—
Sarikei.—Early in the month a quantity of notices were prepared in Chinese and given to the Head of Areas for distribution among the Chinese in the upriver districts.
On the 11th I accompanied the Officer-in-Charge on a tour of kampongs in the Delta. At Serding the Malays were still applying for land at Sibu, a practice which must cease forthwith. There were thirty applications here, mostly for rubber, and it seems a pity that these people leave the cultivation of coconuts in this area entirely to the Chinese; there seems to be an idea among them that quit rent is charged for coconut lands, whereas, of course, the reverse is true.
Quiet rent payments were very unsatisfactory, totalling only eleven hundred dollars as against two thousand five hundred for February last year. The headmen attribute this to the general trade depression, but this is largely nonsense since trade has been brisk and pepper has fetched a good price during the whole year and the people are not as short of money as they make out. The truth is that the headmen need gingering up, the Chinese generally at Sarikei being far too casual about their land taxes.
Binatang.—During the month there was a large accumulation of new Occupation Tickets in the office, the Chinese being unwilling to come and claim their titles and pay up premium. Warning notices in Chinese were circulated round the various mess with good results, more than half of the Occupation Tickets having since been taken up. These who have not yet come forward are being sent a final notice, after which drastic treatment will be resorted to, defaulting gardens being auctioned over the owners’ heads.
Quit rent has not come in at all well, takings amounting to only $672 as against $686 for last year, when only a small percentage was paid at Binatang, most of it being paid direct to Sibu. It is possible that the trade depression may really have something to do with this, since the Binatang people have no pepper to fall back on and ninety per cent of the rubber gardens are not yet in bearing.
The Divisional Engineer, Mr. J. W. Whiteside, reports:-
Sibu Buildings.—The shophouses in Black-smith Road are completed. Ten shophouses in Cross Road are approaching completion, and work is proceeding rapidly on the remaining twenty-one houses in Messrs. Gammon’s scheme.
Three new houses are under construction in Channel road.
The site for the proposed new Arrack Factory near Pulo Babi is being filled in.
Repairs to Public Buildings.—General repairs to Government Quarters have been carried out during the month. Concrete drains are being laid to Government Quarters where insanitary conditions prevail through lack of them.
Road and Bridges.—Telephone Road and Green Road are being reformed and gravelled. A small concrete culvert is being constructed in Green Road to replace the billian bridge. The work of filling and gravelling has been continued on the bazaar roads. A new drain to the Lanang Road area has been cut and old drain leading to the Waterworks are being filled in.
Wharves.— Work has almost ceased on the new billian wharf and the contractor appears to be failing to carry out his obligations. The piling on the new concrete wharf is almost completed and one half the decking has been laid.	Waterworks.- A new pump is being installed for dealing with the chlorine. The filters are satisfactorily with the water and the third tank is being erected with the intention of using it solely for sedimentation.	Sarikei and Binatang.—Work has commence on the wharf at Binatang but the high water which is being experienced is interfering with the work.
Fourth Division News. The Bintulu rainfall for January, was only 3.82 inches—an unusually dry month causing scarcity of water. At Baram 4.6 inches were recorded.
Divisional Reports. Divisional Reports by Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident, Fourth Division, for the month of January, 1930.
Courts—several cases were heared and adjudged. New Year’s Day was kept as a general holiday.
Accompanied by the Hon. T. G. Cochrane, General Manager, and Dr. Schneider, Health Officer, of the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, I made an inspection of the Kampong China area with a view to improving the sanitary conditions.
The Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, have proposed that this area, which is in their concession, should be taken over by .the Government and controlled by the Municipal Board. I am willing to do this, subject that satisfactory arrangements can be agreed upon as to compensation to be paid should the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, require this land in the future for production purpose.
As Rayup, Court Writer Sibuti, had not come to headquarters at the end of last month, I ordered Mr. S. G. Hansom, Cadet, to proceed there to make inquiries and to bring him back with books and cash. The Divisional Treasurer, Mr. W. V. Hanson, was then suspicious that Rayup had not brought up the cash that he had collected for the current month, and so he was instructed to proceed to Sibuti and Rayup was ordered to stay here and work in the District Office in the meantime.
Next morning I. noticed that Rayup was absent from the office and could not be found I gave instructions for the police to go towards Sibuti by land and if they met Rayup to arrest him, which they did at Tanjong Lobang. Mr Hanson in the meanwhile had returned and reported that the cash was correct. Rayup admitted that he had been to Sibuti and put the cash in the safe. The case is still sub judice and, besides other defalcations which have come to light, he was short of 3,000 packets of opium from his stock.
Bujang, Native Officer, also visited Sibuti and Niah to settle Native Court cases and to investigate the possibilities of allowing Dyaks to pinda to the Niah.
I went to Baram on 18th. There was an appeal case against the decision of the District Court which was upheld.
A rather interesting case of Tugong was reported to me amongst some Dyaks in the Bakong. In all my experience I have never actually heard of a case of this and I understand that such practice has been given up for years. As I considered that the accused liar had a perfectly legitimate complaint, I have referred the matter to the Resident, Second Division, for his advice on the matter.
On my return to Miri on the 22nd, I stopped at Bakong and visited the S.O L. Sawmill, being shown over by the Manager, Mr. Hamilton.
It was reported that the Baram lighthouse keepers' quarters was burnt to the ground at 3 a m. of the 23rd. The keepers lost all their effects. An inquiry was held but there was no evidence as to the cause of the fire. The dapor was the first building seen alight and so I suspect that it was carelessness in not damping the dapor fire.
Mr Corson, D.C.F., visited Baram from 9th to 17th.
Mr. E. O Bruce, District Officer, Miri, returned from leave in Kuching on the 14th.
Mr. H. E. Cutfield, District Officer, Bintulu, arrived here on 23rd to discuss official matters with me. He returned to his station on the 28th
I left for Kuching on 29th, sailing by the ss. Gladys, on business.
BINTULU.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports:-
Court— Court work was light during the month. One Chinese and one Malay were sentenced to one month each for contempt of Court. A Dyak was sentenced to four months for theft and a Malay to three months for non-payment of fines. No other cases call for special mention.
General.—Mr. McLaine passed through the station on his way to Miri to take over the duties of Divisional Treasurer. Other visitors who passed through during the month were Messrs. Trechman, MacPherson and Gilbert.
The 1st and 30th were observed as holidays and the offices closed. On the latter date a salute of seven guns was fired in the morning to celebrate the Chinese New Year and in the evening one gun was fired to usher in the Bulan Puasa.
Rumah Tom, a Dyak house of five doors, was burnt down during the month with total loss of property.
On the 22nd I left by s.s Auby for a visit to Miri, returning by the same boat on the 28th.
During my absence Abang Naga, the former Native Officer here, and his wife were attacked and wounded by a woman who is believed to be insane. The woman was arrested and forwarded to Kuching for medical observation. Luckily none of the wounds inflicted were of a serious nature.
P.W.D.—The prisoners averaged 21.19 during the month. The gang was employed in making a road across river. This has been completed from Mr. Avery's factory, through the kampong and on to the old road below Sungei Sebuan. They were still employed on this at the end of the month.
Mamoh. Carpenter, with prison labour was employed on repairs to buildings at the beginning of the month. They then started the erection of new Clerks' Quarters which were nearing completion by the end of the month.
Mowing and general upkeep of the station was also undertaken by prison labour.
One prison carpenter was employed in making various billian tongs for use in Government quarters and for sale.
The small export return is accounted for by the low price of jelutong and the clearance of s.s Auby for Singapore coinciding with Chinese New Year.
MIRI. The District Officer, Mr. E. O. Bruce, reports:-
Courts—Seventy-three civil and thirty-nine judgment summons, forty-three criminal and nine warrants and five Native Court summons were issued during the month.
151 civil cases were dealt with in the District Court, involving claims totalling $2,054.97 and $1,676.57 in the Magistrate's Court.
Forty-nine criminal cases were tried, forty-five, convictions and four acquittals.
Fines and fees amounted to $668.59.
The sum of $2,122.57 was received into, and $3,126.29 was paid out of deposits.
Court Revenue $876.05 was collected.
P.W.D— An area of about five acres on Tanjong Lubang has been cleared of undergrowth and burned in preparation for sites for erection of government bungalows.
Road frontage of new parade ground at Sarawak Rangers Barracks was fenced and wired, and two main gateways with bridges erected.
The block of old Sarawak Rangers barracks is in the course of demolition, the old timber having been sold.
Carpenters have been engaged with considerable repair work to various bungalows.
Water supply has been extended to the blocks of new shophouses recently completed in the bazaar.
General.—I returned from Kuching on the 14th.
BARAM.
The District Officer Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports:
Court —In the Resident’s Court Chai Tong was sentenced to six months’ R.I. under section 335 and 4 others bound over to keep the peace. Ah Tiau, of Beluru, was successful in his appeal against a decision of the District Court by which he was convicted of illicit gambling and fined $50. The only important case before the Lower Courts was that of illicit gambling mentioned above.
Travelling.—The Resident, Fourth Division, Mr. H. D. Aplin, visited the station from 18th to 22nd, calling at Bakong on his way down river. The Deputy Conservator of Forests, Mr. T. Corson, was working in the district from 9th to 17th. On 25th I left for Long Palai, intending to return on 26th. On 31st I left for Bakong en route for Miri to obtain medical attention.
Native Affairs.—Penghulus Aban Wan and Aban Pingan visited the station during the month. Aban Jau, a former Kenyah Penghulu, came down for the first time Since 1924. A letter was received from Galau, Native Officer, from Long Akah reporting rumours of a raiding party of Kelabits from over the border having been seen at Fa Bengar. Galan is still away in the Kelabit country investigating the matter.	P.W.D.—No new work was undertaken pending sanction of the estimates submitted. A contractor was engaged to maintain the Foyut Road, a distance of 2 miles, at $50 per month.
Prisoners.—The prisoners, averaging 18 men, were employed on the general upkeep of the station and in cleaning the road ditches.
S.L. La Follette;—The launch broke down at Kuala Tutoh on 25th, the piston rod breaking and carrying away the cylinder head. Through the courtesy of Messrs. Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd , arrangements were made to tow her to Miri where it is hoped that the necessary repairs can effected.
Agriculture—Harvesting started during the month and from reports received the crop is better than last year. The land inspector examined land Tanjong Upar where the Malohs have applied to plant pepper. Quit rent and rubber assessment were paid in during the month.
General-—Messrs. Tiedeman and Hutchison, of S. O. L., visited the station on 5th. Mr. Tiedeman's gravity survey party have now moved to Tasong. Dr. Braendlin, Chief Geologist, visited the geological camps in the Bakong.
Shipping. —S.S. Gladys made two trips during the month.
Trade. —Trade was slack throughout the month. The engkabang crop is reported to be a failure again. Reliable investigators state that this is the first time that they have seen fully formed unripe fruit falling off and they suspect that it has been attacked by some pest. With the exception of the Apoh there has not been an engkabang crop in this district since 1923.
Fifth Division News. METEOROLOGICAL RETURNS.
ECHOES FROM THE WORLD OUTSIDE.
The Skull of Peking—A First Description.
With reference to the skull of a man recently discovered in Peking excavations, and which may prove to be the most ancient of such discoveries, a correspondent of the Manchester Guardian writes:—
"On its arrival at the Peking Union Medical College, Dr. Davidson Black began the task of excavating the skull. It was at once clear that this skull, unlike previous material, was in so undamaged a condition that little, if any reconstruction will be needed. As a precaution Dr. Black made a cast as soon as the brain-case was exposed. With this safeguard the lower parts of the skull could be worked clear.
“The skull has been prepared down to the eye-sockets. The lower face is apparently missing, but the ear-hole and the back of the skull are present. Looking from below one can see the massive jaw-sockets, which suggest a biter of no mean power. The brain capacity is clearly larger (by perhaps one-quarter) than that of Pithecanthropus, the Java ape-man.
“At the same time it is still a skull of small type, definitely inferior in size to that of Neanderthal man--in fact, taken as a whole, the skullcap very strongly suggests a very primitive Neanderthal type. The skull is that of a young adult. It bears out strikingly the ‘intermediate’ characteristics shown by the teeth and jaws, the teeth being of definitely human type, the jaw being ape-like.
“More detailed description and discussion must await Dr. Black’s report in the spring of 1930. But the discovery already justifies his earlier prediction as to the position of Sinanthropus close to the main stem on the human family tree.
“Opinion is still divided as to the relative geological ages of the Java Ape Man (Pithecanthropus erectus) and the Piltdown Man (Eoanthropus dawsoni). But according to the most recent theories all three possibly may prove to be very nearly of the same age.”—(Public Opinion.)
Sir Robert Hart’s Birthplace.
In reply to an inquiry in the “Belfast News- Letter" as to the birthplace of the late Sir Robert Hart. Inspector-General of Customs in China for nearly fifty years, Mr. Robert Hart Maze states that Sir Charles Prestwood Lucas, K C.B., K.C.M.G, some time Assistant Under-Secretarv of State, Colonial Office, mentions in “The Dictionary of National Biography” that Portadown was Sir Robert's birthplace. Further, Mr. Maze observes that a small yet fascinating volume from Juliet Bredon's gifted pen, published in 1909, and entitled "Sir Robert Hart: The Romance of a Great Career,” contains the following information: “He was born on February 20, 1835, in a little white house with green shutters on Dungannon-Street, in the small Irish town of Portadown, County Armagh, and was the eldest of twelve children" Miss Bredon, he adds, is the daughter of the late Sir Robert Bredon, K.C.M G., MD, of Peking, who was a brother-in-law of Sir Robert Hart.
Taunts in a Will.
Amongst the remarkable wills recently admitted to probate in the United States is that of a Wall-street broker. It reads:
To my wife I leave her lover, and the knowledge that I was not the fool she thought I was.
To my son I leave the pleasure of earning a living; for 35 years he thought the pleasure was mine; he is mistaken.
To my daughter I leave £20,000; she will need it—the only good piece of business her husband ever did was to marry her.
To my valet I leave all the clothes he has been stealing from me for the past ten years.
To my chauffeur I leave my cars; he has nearly ruined them and I want him to have the satisfaction of finishing the job.—(Eastern Courier.)
New use for Tin. METALLISING BANK NOTES.
A remarkable process for making bank notes which, it is claimed, cannot be worn out, torn, or ignited, has recently been perfected by a Swiss scientist, M. S. Schoop, of Zurich. The process consists of coating paper pulp with tin.
All previous efforts to metallise paper have injured its fibre, but this problem has been overcome by the new process. Other metals, such as copper and aluminium, can also be applied to paper. The metallised paper plates, which despite their hardness are elastic, will find, it is stated, wide employment in telephone and radio technique, but the inventor's primary object has been to produce a bank note that cannot be worn out or easily damaged.
By use of definite alloys for metallising the note paper, the counterfeiting of such bank notes can, it is claimed, be made impossible. — (Eastern Courier.)
Malayan Trade Increase.
Figures covering the Malay States and Straits Settlements, but not Labuan. Brunei and Christmas Island, reveal that, mainly due to the very large shipments of rubber following the removal of restriction, there was an all-round increase in Malayan trade last year, the value being $100,608,000 more than the trade of 1928. The total declared value of imports last year was $ 880,226,000, as compared with $859,838,000 in 1928, showing an increase of $20,388,000. The value of exports last year was $921,791,000, as compared with $841,569,000, showing an increase of $180,220,000. The total value of Malayan trade last year was thus $1,802,017,000, or £210,235,000 sterling. It is interesting to note that the value of trade per person in Malaya last year basing calculations on an approximate population of four millions, reached the remarkably high figure of £52, which compares very favourably with the £45 per head for Great Britain in 1927. Again, as in preceding years, a satisfactory feature of Malaya’s import trade is that the United Kingdom is the principal country of supply. Of the products of the federated Malay States, the United States of America is still the biggest purchaser, the United Kingdom coming second. Rubber exports rose from 408,693 tons in 1928 to 577,202 tons, and their gross value from $329,000,000 to $432,000,000, and that in spite of a 16 per cent fall in price. On the im-port side there was a marked increase in the quantity of petrol and oils. and work on the Naval Base contributed largely to a heavy increase in machinery imports, these also in hiding a number of costly dredges for the tin mining industry which has lately suffered the inevitable effects of overproduction.
Rubber Annual Review.
A chart issued with Messrs. Lewis and Peat's report on para and plantation rubber for 1929 shows prices of rubber in London and Singapore during the year, together with data of shipments, etc. In the review itself, they state the past year has been an unhappy one for rubber. Every estimate made a year ago of the 1929 production has proved far too low, forced resting of trees during restriction has been much more beneficial than anticipated, and with more scientific methods of tapping outputs have far exceeded expectations Native rubber has also increased more than was generally calculated.
It is somewhat of a paradox that the various associations in the planting industry are discussing schemes to reduce production to the level of consumption, at the same time boards of directors of the individual companies are busy finding ways and means to increase their estates’ outputs by budgrafting or by planting selected seed. The latest estimate of acreage under plantation rubber is 6,050,000 acres, comprising 2,120,000 British, 610,000 Dutch. 450,000 other European and American, and 2,870,000 under Asiatic control. The native area is uncertain but probably is nearly half the total of the world's plantations, and the problem of their actual and potential production is really the key to rubber’s whole future.
Much has been said about damage or destruction of trees by bad tapping, but it is generally conceded that natives who are planting new trees every year at little or no cost are relying on new rubber coming into bearing year by year instead of troubling about bark renewal on the old trees; consequently it matters little if they do damage or kill their trees as long as they can get-large yields.
With possible restriction our estimate of production for 1930 must be most uncertain. As far as consumption is concerned we have allowed for no increase over the American and Canadian 1929 figure owing to the bad state of trade, but estimate an increase in European consumption of about 5 per cent. Our estimates are based on 7 d. per lb. for spot rubber. Our estimate for 1930 consumption only allows for a comparatively small increase over 1929, as we consider world's conditions particularly in the U.S.A. following the serious slump there may materially affect the motor trade.
World’s stocks at the end of the year were approximately as follows:—London and Liverpool, 73,174 tons, against 22,565 in 1928 ; America, 105,118 tons, against 66,176 in 1928; Singapore, Penang, etc. (including Harbour Board), 37,098 tons, against 34,432 in 1928; Continent, etc. (estimated), 25,000 tons, against 20,000 in 1928; total 241,290 tons, against 143,173 in 1928.—(China Express & Telegraph.)
Far Eastern Government and Municipal Loans. FEBRUARY, 2. JAPANESE ISSUES. SIAMESE ISSUES. COLONIAL ISSUES. DUTCH BAST INDIES ISSUES.
SHIPPING INTELLIGENCE. Port of Kuching. LIST OF FIRST-CLASS PASSENGERS.
By s.s. Vyner Brooke to Singapore on 1st March;—
Messrs. Chia Cheng Kang, V. A. Lavender. R. N. Baron, Dr. E. M. Marjoribanks. Capt. R. E. Le Sueur, Mrs. R. E. Le Sueur, Mr. G. J. D. Walters.
By s.s. Kuching from Singapore on 3rd March :—
Mr. and Mrs. H. M. Calvert, Mrs. J. A. McCullagh, Mr. A. M. Sellar.
By s.s. Kuching to Singapore on 8th March:—
Mr. Sellar, Madam Chan Buan Neo, Mr. A. L. T. Richardson, Mr. and Mrs. Wee Kheng Hong, Madam Lee Eng Ah, Miss Wee Bee Cheng. Mr. and Mrs. Chan Kni Seng, Mrs. Wee Kheng Huat, Mrs Tan Boon Poh, Mr. Tan Oh Lam, Haji Bol Hassan.
By s.s. Vyner Brooke from Singapore on l0th March: —
Mr. and Mrs. J. G. Campbell. Capt and Mrs. Le Sueur, Dr. Marjoribanks Mr. O. C. Smalley, Miss Mowe, Messrs. Teo Soon Song, Koh Han Beow, Madam Lim Ah Geok and daughter, Messrs. Chew Teh Lin, Lee E. Kok, Tan Swee Lin, Miss G. Chan.
By s.s. Vyner Brooke to Singapore on 16th March:—
Miss Richardson, Mr. and Mrs. J. G. Campbell, Mrs. J. A. McCullagh. Mr. Lim Peng Khoon, Mrs. S. Mowe. Mr. Lee Yew Lok, Mrs. Lim Cheng Kua, Messrs. J. R. Barnes, Lowry, S. S. Tang, R. Varelia, E. M. Selous. Smalley, Master Bill Crocker, Charlie Crocker, Henry Crocker.
By s.s. Kuching from Singapore on 17th March:-
Messr.s. W. Keylard, Voou Than Chong, Ong Guan Swee, Voon Siew Fatt, Mrs. Tan Eng Neo, Miss Lucy Tan, Mr. Soh Choo Liew.
By s.s. Kuching to Singapore on 23rd March:—
His Highness the Rajah, Mrs K. H. Gillan, Miss M. Tait, Mr. and Mrs. J. S. W. Bean, Capt. Le Gros Clark, Messrs. W. Keylard, G. T. M. McBryan, J. C. Hockaday, Voon Swee Fatt, Teo Chong Song.
By s.s. Vyner Brooke from Singapore on 21th March:—
Mr. and Mrs. J. G. Campbell, Messrs. O. C. Smalley, Baron, G. Donald, Haji Bol Hassan, Mr. S. S. Tang.
By s.s. Vyner Brooke to Singapore on 29th March :-
Mr. and Mrs. John G. Campbell, Capt. C. P. Lowe, Mrs. C. P. Lowe, Messrs. O. C. Smalley, Donald, Ang Chin Hock, and Chang Chong Theng.
By s.s. Auby to Kuching on 31st March:—
From Miri: The Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak, one Dyak lady.
From Sibu: Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner, Mr. Nadig.
By s.s. Kuching from Singapore on 31st March:-
Capt. Le Gros Clark, Miss Fenoulhet, Madam Chan Buan Neo.
Official and Semiofficial Announcements.
PROCLAMATION. WHEREAS WE are about to leave the State to-day, and whereas WE shall be absent from the State for a period of about six months.
Now, therefore, Know Ye All Men whom it may concern that We hereby appoint His Highness the TUAN MUDA OF SARAWAK to administer the Government of the State during Our absence, and WE enjoin that all respect and obedience be paid to him in this position.
Given under Our Hand and Seal at Kuching, Sarawak, this 23rd day of March, 1930. C. V. BROOKE, Rajah.
APPOINTMENTS. His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Mr. I. S. Hammond to be an Assistant Surveyor, Survey Department, with effect from 27th January, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Mr. H. C. Strong to be Electrical Engineer, Sibu, with effect from 12th February, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Mr. I. S. Hammond to be Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Sibu, with effect from 15th February, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Capt. C. D. Le Gros Clark to the Board of Examiners for Government Officers as Examiner in Chinese, with effect from 20th February, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Mr. J. B. Archer to be Resident, Second Division, with effect from 1st March, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Mr. J. C. Swayne to act as Secretary for Native Affairs, in addition to his other duties, with effect from 15th March, 1930, inclusive.
APPOINTMENTS VACATED.
Mr. R. N. Baron ceases to be Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Sibu, with effect from 15th February, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. W, L. Clark ceases to be Assistant Electrical Engineer, Sibu, with effect from 12th February, 1930, inclusive, and resumes the duties of Assistant Electrical Engineer, Kuching, with effect from 20th February, 1930, inclusive.
LEAVE.
Mr. R. D. Binnie, Executive Engineer, Public Works Department, has been granted seventeen days’ vacation leave on full pay, with effect from 1st February, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. F. H. Pollard, an Officer in Class III of the Sarawak Civil Service, has been granted eight days’ sick leave on full pay, with effect from 3rd February, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. E. M. Woodward, Passed Cadet, has been granted seven days' vacation leave on full pay, with effect from 17th February, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. L. D. Kennedy, Superintendent of Customs, reported his arrival at Singapore from leave of absence on 22nd February, 1930, and resumed duties on 24th February, 1930.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to grant to Mr. D. S. McLeod, Assistant Conservator of Forests, leave of absence for seven months on full pay and one month on half pay, with effect from 28th February, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. B. J. C. Spurway, Deputy Conservator of Forests, has been granted seven days' vacation leave on full pay, with effect from 13th February, 1930, inclusive.
Captain C. D. Le Gros Clark, Secretary for Chinese Affairs, has been granted five days’ vacation leave on full pay, with effect from 4th March, 1930, inclusive
LEAVE AND RETIREMENT.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to grant to Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner, Resident. Second Division, seven months’ leave on full pay, with effect from 1st March. 1930, inclusive, at the expiration of which he is permitted to retire on pension.
Air Mail.
By the courtesy of the Federated Malay States and Straits Settlements Postal Administration the Air Service between Singapore, Palembang and Java is now available for correspondence posted in Sarawak addressed to these places.
Correspondence should be prepaid at the usual postage rates, namely 12 cents for the first ounce and 6 cents for each additional ounce or part thereof, and should bear in addition stamps to cover the Air Fee of 20 cents per half ounce or part of that weight. POSTMASTER-GENERAL.
CORRESPONDENCE. [The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
Club Jottings. The Editor, Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
DEAR SIR,
Perhaps the following Club Jottings they amuse yours readers:—
Safely settled in a chair on the lawn at the Club with a long L J.L.S in one hand and a “Tatler” as cover front unwanted visitors, we can watch the world roll up. By the way, speaking of the Club lawn! We bear it is to be spared to us and aren't we glad! How our hearts sank when we heard rumours that an ornamental garden was to uproot our precious piece of green —our one touch of old England. For several days nasty-looking wooden pegs appeared all over the turf and pungent remarks were overheard: "Why don’t the Committee do something”? "Who really wants a rock garden"? However, Providence, in the shape of a landslide, has arranged matters very satisfactorily.
A shadow falls across the "Tatler’’ and a solemn voice Says: “What about a game of Mahjong”? But the owner of the voice isn’t the first comer. Several bashful males have dived into the bar as a hunted man might rush for sanctuary.
Mosquitoes and darkness and the L.J.L.S. coming to an end drive us inside.
What a gay scene! Table after table of Mahjong and Bridge and the remarks are flying. There is the lady who presides at the Mahjong table. She may be in a chronic state of “doubling.” “Double for red dragon —double for all clear and you all pay me double for I’m East”! Groans from the three victims.
Then perhaps at the next table may be an annoying gentleman who will tap the table with his finger nail if he spots an error in his extremely nervous partner's lead. Or a lady who insists on hiding from the wrong hand. “Dummy please”— says the nail-tapping gentleman; “Dummy please,” his extremely nervous, partner, until the poor opponent is almost carried out a blithering idiot!! At the table by the door is a gentleman vehemently assuring his bridge partner that she could not have made another trick and that her playing was marvellous—“Believe Moi”! he adds, as though constant repetition would eventually make her a player.
One hears rumours that there is even a Ludo table, but so far no one has attached that game, though a lady was overheard to say that Ludo “thrilled” her!!
The Big Four; silent and earnest are at a table “far from the madding crowd.” Bridge is ready serious with them and perhaps one of the ladies is wondering if she dare go 4 spades or should she double her opponents “4 diamonds”? She doubles —they get it—“Game and—thank you partner —Boy—ping pong”! At the reading table is the inevitable crossword fiend. She fully imagines she does the puzzle unaided. Perish the thought! Anyone near her is continually bombarded with “a word of 7 letters beginning with f and ending with z —a town in Bulgaria “No! it can't be. Yes. it is’’!!
We have yet another member who bleats “Oh it’s not fair. . I meant to play my ace—The trick should be mine—You are a pig” ! !	But what would we do without the Club!
SCRUTATOR.
Beetles.
The Editor, Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
DEAR SIR,
With reference to your paragraph in the Sarawak Gazette relative to “Beetles,” it may interest you to know that the Birth Rate is about 800 little Beetles per week. During the period January-July, 1929, 37% more emigrated than over the same period of the previous year. Yours faithfully, BEETLE.
Cruelty to Animals. The Editor, Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
KUCHING, 26th March, 1930.
DEAR SIR,
Yesterday afternoon on my way back from office I was one of the unfortunate beholders of a painful incident. On a border of a noisy road along the Main Bazaar a Chinese Lady (1) burned alive rat which was caught in a trap. On seeing this I shouted to her but she either paid no heed or did not hear me. As the sight was so painful that I did not stop to speak my mind to her. I realized I was wrong for not reporting the matters to the Authorities but as it was probably due to her ignorance and that this was her first offence I thought it better to let the matter slide.
Now Mr. Editor, in my haste to write to you I have not made enquiries whether or not there is a S.P.C.A. existing in this country. If in the negative, perhaps some Ladies and Gentlemen, especially European whom I believe are animal lovers, will consider founding one so as to help our dumb friends. Of course subscription would be raised and I as a poor working man will be willing to head the list with $l0.00.
If you think this letter is worth appearing in your valuable paper will you kindly give me a space.
Yours faithfully, KESIAN.
Education in Sarawak.
The Editor, Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
SIR,
I notice in your columns a letter under this heading and an Editorial Comment that Schoolmasters of sufficient training to justify high wages are difficult to get, you also mention that Education is progressing steadily and that the Preliminary Examination of the University of Cambridge is now being taken.
I am rather inclined, after a survey of the existing schools, to ask the question. What are we training the youth, of this country for and whether aiming to get them to pass the Cam-bridge Examination is going in all cases to do them or the Country any good in the future?
We have the opportunity in this country to learn by the mistakes of others. It is getting more and more realized by other countries that their education has been along the wrong lines for backward races and that the type of education which we are now starting in villages and towns in Sarawak will sooner or later flood the country with a number of people trained to be clerks or allied clerical classes, and who will lose the desire to work at trades other than those, and who from not having enough positions to fill up will sooner or later become discontented with their lot Agitation follows.
In villages in outstations where there are schools it would seem to be of the utmost importance that schoolmasters of the highest character and training should impart to the grow-ing generation something in the way of ambition in such walks of life as their pupils appear to be most suited, or if these are not available mark time and rely on their religious teachers until a supply of good school masters can be trained. As it is at present there is a tendency amongst the boys to think that their highest aim is to become a krani or such like, and to look down upon their fellow beings who work on the land, etc. It would appear to the writer that before putting un-trained schoolmasters into outstations it would perhaps be better to concentrate on one or two centres, building up a strong foundation with technical and agricultural training and, when able, branching out into outlying districts.
I am, Sir, Yours faithfully, OUTSTATIONER.
Acknowledgments.
We record with thanks the receipt of the following Journals and Periodicals:—
The Straits Budget; The Singapore Weekly Free Press; The Weekly Straits Echo; The British North Borneo Herald; The China Express and Telegraph; The Eastern Courier; The British and Colonial Printer and Stationer; The Printers Engineer; Paper and Print; Panduan Truaa.
A wider exchange of Journals would be welcome.