Sarawak Gazette. KUCHING, Friday, August. 1st, 1930. Suara Sarawak. July. His Highness the Tuan Muda paid a visit to Miri, with Mr. Boult the Chief Secretary, leaving Kuching by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on July 16th and returning on the 21st. Miss Valerie Brooke, daughter of the Ranee of Sarawak, was one of those who took part on July 1st in a delightful children's performance at the New Scala Theatre, in aid of the Princess Louise Kensington Hospital for Children. On July 4th Kuching welcomed the two flying boats (which paid us a visit in June), on their return from British North Borneo. They reached Mukah on the 1st instant via Miri and Bintulu, and proceeded to Kuching, after paying a visit to Sibu on the 2nd. His Highness the Tuan Muda flew as a passenger from Pending and alighted in the river just opposite the Astana, where the public had a convenient opportunity of inspecting the interesting craft. A cable from Sandakan announces the birth of a son to Mrs. A. F. Richards, the wife of Mr. A. F. Richards, the Governor of British North Borneo. Congratulations to them. Mr. N. E. Hughes paid a short visit to Singapore, in connection with the arrangements for the forthcoming visit of His Excellency the British Agent for Sarawak and British North Borneo, leaving Kuching on July 6th and returning on the 14th. A short provisional programme of the visit will be found elsewhere in our issue. On Wednesday, July 16th a most successful At Home was given by St. Mary's School, on the occasion of their annual sports. They were favoured with fine weather, and the afternoon passed all too quickly to the interested friends who were present. A listof the items and results is given on a later page.
Mr. P. Cobbold of the Borneo Company, Limited, in Sibu, arrived on a visit to Kuching on July 16th.
Never in its history, we imagine, has the Prefecture Apostolic of Sarawak known so great a gathering of clergy and nuns as occurred this month during the Annual Retreat held in Kuching, presided over by Mgr. A. Wachter, the Superior of North Borneo. In addition to the local Mission and Convent staff, the visitors were :—Mgr. A. Wachter, North Borneo; Very Rev. H. Jansen, Miri; Rev. A. Klerk, Kanowit; Rev. V. Halder, Sibu; Rev. A. Mulder, Mukah; Rev. W. van Odyk, Durin; Rev. L. Vanden Bergh, Binatang; Rev. J. Staal, Sadong, and Rev. C. Epping, Dalat and Oya.
Sisters were:—Mother Mary and Sister Clotilda, Kanowit; Mother Peter and Sister Dorothea, Sibu; Mother Clare, Dalat and Oya; Mother Alphonsus and Sister Lucilla, Mukah.
We hear that during the great thunder-storm which occurred at Kuching on July 28th, the Convent came in for an unexpected share in the programme, receiving some damage which might have had more serious results for Mother Clare of Oya. The injury caused to Mother Clare's foot necessitated an amputation of a toe, but we are glad to learn that the patient is progressing satisfactorily.
On July 23rd the King and Queen of England greeted three hundred Bishops, at Buckingham Palace, during their presence in London for the Lambeth Conference. It will be interesting to have the impressions of the Right Reverend Bishop Danson on this great assembly, when he returns towards the close of the year.
The Bishop of Singapore, the Right Rev. B. C. Roberts, who has been attending the Lambeth Conference in London, is now on his way back to Singapore in the P. and O. s.s. Mantua, due in Singapore on August 7th.
Programmes are out for the St. Thomas' School Concert on July 29th and 30th. The programme of ten items promises well. The profits will be devoted to a fund for starting a School Magazine.
The revised Handbook to the State of North Borneo, has just been published by the British North Borneo (Chartered) Co., and is sold at 2/. There are 14 chapters dealing with the following which are of particular interest: History, Geography, Population, Climate, etc., Natural and Forest Products, Agriculture, Timber, Geology and Minerals, Sports and Natural History, Administration, Principal Towns, Communications, Opening for Capitalists and Settlers, and General Information.
There is a copious supplement of 30 pages giving statistical and other information, and a very excellent map, besides some good photographs.
We learn from Third Division reports that 180 crocodiles have been brought in during the month of June, for the usual rewards. A comparative crocodile return from the various divisions, during the past few years, would be of interest.
The Rock Road Steeplechase course was dismantled about the middle of the month. The list of winners does not seem to have reached us!
Much of the work of reconstruction in the Public Gardens at Kuching is now completed. The band-stand is now being re-built; on its old site. The floor will be raised about 18 inches above the old level, and the interior will be a foot more lofty than before. The architecture will be in a simple neo-classical style, with a projecting plinth and two pillars at each of the eight corners. The outer Columns will be of the Ionic order, and they will be connected by a frieze which will hide the roof from sight.
Kuching has been suffering from an unusual drought during recent weeks. From June 22nd to July 19th practically no rain fell at all, and since then there has not been sufficient to make up for previous misdemeanors!
The annual badminton American tournament of the Sanitary Inspectors Union was held at "Aloha," Rock Road, on July 16th and 17th. The Western division (Messrs. Suleiman and Marican) were winners—scoring a possible. The n division (Messrs. Swee Hock and Gueek Cheng) were second.
We hear that the genial skipper of s.s. Kuching was married in Singapore on July 17th at the Presbyterian Church to Maude Edith Rust. Our warm congratulations and good wishes to Capt. and Mrs. Smith.
On the third attempt, the Medical Department proved victorious over the Police in their League match on July 25th by 3 goals to 2. It proved to be an exciting and well-fought game.
Our sympathy is extended to the fair land of Italy, the Southern part of which, Reuter tells us, has been devasted by a serious earthquake.
Colonial Office Conference. At the official dinner that took place on Monday, 23rd June, at Lancaster House, St. James', to welcome the Representatives of the Crown Colonies, Protectorates and Protected States on the occasion of the Colonial Office Conference, the following announcement was made by the Rajah Hon. Lord Passfield, Secretary of State for the Colonies:—
I have now an important announcement to make and one which is most appropriate to this occasion. His Highness the Rajah of Sarawak has offered to His Majesty's Government the sum of one hundred thousand pounds in recognition of the friendly relations between Sarawak and His Majesty's Government. On behalf of His Majesty's Government I propose to accept this gift and to express to His Highness their appreciation and gratitude.
"His Highness wished the gift to be applied to some object definitely connected with the Colonial Empire, and, after considering various suggestions which had been submitted to him, he decided that the greater part of his gift (£75,000) should be employed as a fund to assist in the education of Colonial Civil Servants' children. It is proposed that this fund shall be vested in the hands of trustees to be nominated by the Rajah and the Secretary of State for the time being. The income of the fund will be employed in aid of the education of children of either sex of European Civil Servants of any rank (serving, retired or deceased) of any Colony, British Mandated Territory, Protectorate or Protected State, at schools in the United Kingdom or in any other part of the Empire selected by the parents or guardians and approved by the trustees.
"The full details of this scheme, as also the arrangements for the disposal of the remainder of the Rajah's gift, have still to be worked out, but it is a scheme which will be greatly appreciated by all Colonial Civil Servants, and which will bring relief to many individuals in one of their gravest anxieties, as well as, I hope, helping us to increase in the Colonial Services that hereditary element which has in the past been so conspicuously valuable a feature of the Indian Civil Service.
"The Rajah has conferred a signal benefit on the whole Colonial Civil Service and, in presenting this gift, has expressed a sentiment which we on our part fully reciprocate.
"The name of the Rajah does not appear in our Toast List to-night, and he is unfortunately unable to be present with us and respond to the Toast I am about to propose, but I think that you will all wish to join with me in drinking to his good health."
It has since been announced that His Highness the Rajah, in consultation with Sir Laurence Guillemard, G.G.M.G., and the other members of the Committee appointed by the Right Honorable the Secretary of State for Colonies to offer suggestions concerning the appropriate allocation of this donation, has approved of the balance £25,000 being devoted towards the provision of a building to accommodate the Imperial Forestry Institute.	Mr. G. T. M. MacBryan, Private Secretary and Secretary of Native Affairs, attended the meetings of the Conference in the capacity of Sarawak Observer.
Obituary. Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, the famous author, died at home at Crowborough on 7th July. He has been ill since November, due, it is thought, to the exhaustive nature of the work he did in Scandinavia, lecturing on spiritualism.
Lady Conan Doyle, the two sons and one daughter were present at the bedside.—Reuter.
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, who was 71 years of age on 22nd May last, was the eldest son of the artist, Charles Doyle. He was educated at Stonyhurst College, in Germany, and at Edinburgh University.
He graduated as M.B. in 1881 and M.D. four years later. Sir Arthur, however, quickly forsook medicine for literature after the success of his historical romance, The White Company (1891). WOULD FAMOUS CHARACTER.
Shortly afterwards he produced the first Adventures of Sherlock Holmes, a character which soon became famous.
The old thing is that, though there was immediate popularity for Sherlock Holmes, his author had great difficulty in getting a publisher to accept the first story about him-A Study in Scarlet. James Payn declined it for Smith, Elder, because it was too long for the Cornhill and too short, he thought, for a book.
"Arrowsmith," wrote Sir Arthur, "returned it unread. Two or three others sniffed and turned awav." Finally one firm offered £25 for the copyright, and, "heart-sick at repeated disappointments," he accepted that and "I never at any time received another penny for it."
He accepted that small sum not only because he was heart sick, but because he needed the money. Not the least interesting part of his record is that of the early days when he was struggling to make a start as a medical practitioner and writing fiction in his spare time.
He came of a family of artists. His grandfather was that John Doyle who became famous in his day as a caricaturist over the initials "H.B."; his uncle was the more famous Richard Doyle, of Punch; and his father was an artist of great gifts. Nevertheless, the road to success was not made easy for Conan Dovle, as it some times is for those who are born in such an atmosphere. He had to face poverty and make his own way with difficulty enough.
BELLES-LETTRES, ETC. June 1930 Best Sellers. Best Sellers for June, compiled from information kindly supplied to John O'London by a number of well-known booksellers.
Fiction—J. Keith Winter's "Other Man's Saucer" (Heinemann 7s. 6d.); Philip Macdonald's "The Noose" (Collins 7s. 6d.); Aldous Huxley's "Brief Candles" (Chatto and Windus, 7s. 6d.); G. U. Ellis's The Hungry Road" (Duckworth, 7s. 6d.); Compton Mackenzie's "April Fools" (Cassell 7S. 6D.); Baroness von Hutten's "Swan House"; Charles Williamson's "War in Heaven" (Gollancz, 7s. 6d.); G. D. H. and M. Cole's "Burglars in Bucks" (Collins, 7s. 6d.); Aldous Huxley's "Brief Candles" (Chatto and Windus, 7s. 6d.); Stephen Hudson's "A True Story" (Constable, 7s. 6d.); Philip Macdonald's "The Noose" (Collins, 7s. 6d.); E. Snell's "The White Owl" (Hodder and Stoughton, 7s. 6d.).
Miscellaneous.—Leon Trotsky's "My Life" (Thornton Butterworth, 30s.); Norman Douglas's "How About Europe?" (Chatto and Windus, 7s. 6d.); Edmund Blunden's "Leigh Hunt" (Cobden Sanderson, 21s.); Neville Cardus's "Cricket" (Longmans, 3s. 6d.); Doris Arthur Jone's "Life and Letters of Henry Arthur Jones" (Gollancz, 25s.); H. C. Wilson and E. R. Mitchell's "Vaga-bonding at Fifty" (Hutchinson, 18s); Edward Step's "Nature Rambles" (Vol. 1, Warne, 2s. 6d.); and "The Collected Poems of John Masefield" (Heinemann, 8s. 6d); H. Scott's "Good Manners and Bad" (Benn, 10s. 6d.); Oliver Madox Hueffer's "Some of the English" (Berni, 10s. 6d.); Arthur Waugh's "A Hundred Years of Publishing" (Chapman and Hall, 15s.); E. N. da C. Andrade's "The Mechanism of Nature" (Bell, 6s.).
Commentary on the Month by Our Special Correspondent. A commentary on the happenings of the month!
Really, Mr. Editor, Sir, when you suggested that one should undertake this, one was all taken aback, like, and instant recourse was had to what Dick Swiveller would have culled a modest quencher.
The ownership of a "Remington portable." mark you, does not constitute one a journalist. Or, as an old acquaintance of ours would probably put it— "cucullus non facit monachum."
Use has been made above, in one's agitation, of a nautical expression—"taken aback." This may be ascribed to the influence of a recent visit of H.M. Navy. Outstanding questions, resulting from this visit, and so far unanswered, are—Was the Account Book found? Did the motor-car really breakdown at Bukit Pam? Who is the Mayor of Pending? and Who wins the Divinity Prize?
Ono was glad of the privilege of assisting in wel-coming the two Royal Air Force flying boats back to Kuching after their cruise of over a month's duration. During their all too brief stay at Pending, numerous visitors were shown over the boats, one of whom was heard to observe—"Of course, you must find it hotter when flying, as you are then so much nearer the sun!"
They left Pending after an early meal and arrived in Singapore in ample time for tillin the same day.
Now, vorwaerts, Sarawak shipping! [magnates. What about stepping into the breach on behalf of those who, like bur friends of the Herald, are prepared to "ascend up"—give us an aerial service to Singapore!!
Shop in Singapore by Southampton Supermarine Short stays Snappy, sights. SELETAR IS SO BRACING.
At the time of writing, a drought is upon us, no rain having fallen for days. In consequence of the resulting hardness of the ground a Rugby match arranged between the Football Club and H.M.S Herald, was unfortunately postponed. One's sympathy also goes out to those two horsemen who parting comany with their respective mounts, struck the soil of Sarawak two resounding blows with divers portions of their anatomies.—Shades of Artaxerxes!
Anon, one hears sinister tales of the chlorination of our water supply. Apropos,—this is not a Kuching story—rumour tells us of a certain Government officer, well known for his hospitality, who, forgetting to turn his bathroom tap on for 24 hours, registered a complaint with the waterworks that he'd got nothing to drink.
One bears that yet another Government bungalow at Miri is doing it's best to float to China. Is it a (act that the late occupant is now living in a "Taukau" on the beach? And what are the P.W.D. doing about it?	Mention of houses recalls a bright little extract from the "Code of Hammurabi" which one found recently and which runs as follows: —
BUILDING CODE FROM THE CODE OF HAMMUBABI, KING OF BABYLON, ABOUT 2250 B.C.
228—If a builder build a house for a man and complete it, (that man) shall give him two shekels of silver per sar (approx. 12 sq. ft) of house as his wage.
229—If a builder build a house for a man and do not make its construction firm, and the house which he has built collapse and cause the death of the owner of the house, that builder shall be put to death.
230—If it cause the death of a son of the owner of the house, they shall put to death a son of that builder.
231—If it cause the death of a slave of the owner of the house, he shall give to the owner of the house a slave of equal value.
232—If it destroy property, he shall restore whatever it destroyed, and because he did not make the house which he built firm and it collapsed, he shall rebuild the house which collapsed from his own property (i.e., at his own expense).
THE ABBOT.
233—If a builder build a house for a man and do not make its construction meet the requirements and a wall fall in, that builder shall strengthen that wall at his own expense. Now, what a lead for our City Fathers! Why not a few similar regulations, with death where necessary, to deal with such transgressions as "Grousing on the tennis court"; "Taking the free ball when the white is on"; telling Scotch stories and quoting Ovid in the Bar.
An item of news for motorists is that the Municipality are to put while lines on the roadsides to indicate where the ditches are. (Sibu papers, please copy.)
And so one goes on! If one wrote down here all the gossip one has heard this month well, you
wouldn't believe it!
But—one Very Confidential piece of news. Did you hear about the and and said?? .
No? Well, perhaps its just as well. THE ABBOT.
The Motorist's "If".
If you can drive from John o' Groats to Devon And not tell lies about your average speed;
If you can treat the modest "baby-seven"
With all the care a limousine would need;
If you can thread your way through thickest traffic;
Nor cease from caution down the loneliest lane, Aware that, once removed to realms seraphic, No hen or duck will come to life again;
If you respect your tyres and springs, and soften
What might have been a pot-hole's hideous bump;
If you can use the grease-gun well and often, And keep to safety level in the sump;
If you can smoothly change from top to bottom
When faced with "one in seven" on your route;
If you apply all warnings as you spot 'em,
And always give cross-roads their passing hoot;
If you avoid the sins of stunt contrivers,
Of "cutters-in" and breakers of the code;
If you can bear in mind that other drivers Are just as much entitled to the road;
In short, if you behave with due discretion As just one item in a mighty host:—
You'll be, if I may give you my impression, A dashed sight better motorist than most.
Peter Niblick.
The Story of Virgil's "Aeneid".
Virgil has been described as the Poet Laureate, in his own time, of the Roman Empire; and the age of Augustus is the Golden Age of Roman poetry. The "Aeneid" was written to glorify Rome; the Rome which hid no such past as Homer in the "Iliad" and the "Odyssey" had created for Greece. These great epics of the early heroes of the race served as a magnificent ancestry for Rome's predecessor, Greece. Therefore Virgil wrote an epical, if imaginary, history of Rome's origin and ancestry that would exalt her people into descendants of the Homeric heroes, and impute to her a mythical Trojan origin.
Virgil began his poem where Homer had ended the "Iliad," with the fall of Troy. Aeneas is the hero, chosen by Virgil to be the founder of the Latin race. He endows him with gifts and adventures not unlike the heroes of the "Odyssey." We all remember what we have read in Homer, how Troy fell after a siege of ten years. Virgil takes up the tale, and it is Aeneas who relates (to Dido) how he escaped from Troy. How with his aged father on his shoulders, and his little son Iulus trotting by his side, he makes his way out of the city, from the midst of fire and slaughter and the crash of towers and temples, and with a brave band escaped by sea, and followed many strange wanderings until they arrived at the mouth of the Tiber. And the colony they founded there was the germ of the Roman Empire.
Queen Dido. But not before they had undergone many strange adventures. They had to pass the island of the Harpies, monsters with the heads of women-hags and vultures' bodies—past Etna, where the Cyclops, Polyphemus, is raving, blind, upon the hills—and so at last to Carthage, where the beautiful Queen Dido presides over a newly-rising city. This tale of his adventures he relates to Dido. She listens; she falls passionately in love with him; she went through something that she called a form of marriage with him, and planned to keep him with her for all time. It was not to be. The gods' messenger, Mercury, warns him that his lot is elsewhere, that his destiny is to found a city—Rome. He informs Dido the Queen that it is the will of Heaven that he shall leave her—and she is distracted with a passionate fury.
In vain Aeneas tells her he is not his own master, that he must obey the commands of the gods. He would fain stay and console her, but bows nevertheless to Heaven's command, and "swiftly hies him to the strand." In the first dim streak of morning light Dido sees the fleet set sail; she curses Aeneas and his city, and vows eternal enmity. Her love and wrath are terrible. We have the picture of a night of lonesome anguish;—
'Tis night: earth's tired ones taste the balm,
The precious balm of sleep.
And in the forest there is calm,
And on the savage deep:	The stars are in their middle flight:
The fields are hushed: each bird or beast That dwells beside the silver lake
Or haunts the tangles of the brake In placid slumber lies, released.
From trouble by the touch of night:
All but the hapless queen: to rest
She yeilds not, not with eye or breast
The gentle night receives:
Her cares redouble blow on blow;
Love storms, and, tossing to and fro, With billowy passion heaves.
And thus she breathes the thoughts that roll Tumultuous through her lonely soul;
"What shall I do? ...	"Great Jove! and shall he go?" she cries, "And leave our realm a wanderer's mock?
Quick, snatch your arms and chase the prize, And drag the vessels from the dock!
Fetch flames, bring darts, ply oars! yet why? What words are these? or where am I?
Why rave I thus? Those impious deeds— Poor Dido! now your torn heart bleeds. Too late! it should have bled that day When at his feet your sceptre lay."
All the world knows the story of Dido's death; the passage is too long to quote here. Landor wrote: " Never was there such a whirlwind of passions as Virgil raised on those African shores, amid those rising citadels and departing sails No, not in Homer is there anything so impassioned and therefore so sublime as the last hour of Dido." Under the pretence of burning on a pyre the armour of the traitor, she builds a pile of logs, heaps it with the relics of the false Aeneas and their marriage-bed. But instead of setting it in flames, she mounts the summit of the pyre, draws the hero's sword, and drives it through her heart.
" To die I and unrevenged I " she said, " Yet let me die: thus, thus I go Rejoicing to the shades below. Let the false Dardan feel the blaze That burns me pouring on his gaze, And bear aibng, to cheer his way, The funeral presage of to-day."
Aeneas lands on the western shore of Italy and hurries to the cavern of the Sibyl. He tells the prophetess that he is bound for Hades to see the face of his sire, Anchises, and with her as his guide he decends to the shadowy homes of the dead. "Now, man thyself, Aeneas, and follow me."
The Land of Spirits. They are ferried across the Styx by Charon, the gloomy ferryman, passing the realms of despair, haunted by phantoms and monsters, where Aeneas sees many of the heroes of the Trojan War, and where he meets Queen Dido, hate burning unquenchable in her eyes. At last they reach Elysium, where Aeneas' father reveals to him the future glory of his race. He bids him behold the spirits of his descendants, the Romans that are to be. "the breed of heroes" destined to return to earth to fill the world with their glory. Leaving the land of Spirits, Aeneas arrives at the mouth of the Tiber. He is welcomed by Latinus, king of the Laurentines, whose daughter Aeneas marries, and founds a fabled city—and thus the poet evolves the mythical origin of Rome.
Thus, as Professor Mackail says, "In the 'Aeneid,' Virgil became the voice of Rome, the spiritual founder of the Holy Homan Empire .... He drew the picture of such a world's ideal ruler, the first servant of the commonwealth, regardless of fame, of pleasure, brave, patient, and merciful. He portrayed in him human strength and weakness, the vicissitudes of fortune, the tragedy of unhappy love, the deeds of war, and the glory of peace .... He touched human things with the Virgilian magic, and enfolded them in the supreme Virgilian pity; 'stretching out his hands' in a final pathetic gesture of doubtful hope, ‘to the further shore' of a Paradise in which life should find fruition. The ‘Aeneid' is the voice not only of Rome but of mankind."
That Rome, whose glories through the world shall shine:
Far as wide earth's remotest boundary lies, Her Empire shall extend her genius to the skies.
Seven hills her single rampart shall embrace. Seven citadels her girdling wall contain. Thrice blest, beyond all cities, in a race
Of heroes, destined to adorn her reign.
See now thy Romans; thither bend thine eyes. And Caesar and Iulus race behold, Waiting their destined advent to the skies. This, this is he—long-promised, oft foretold— Augustus Caesar. He the Age of Gold, God-born himself, in Latium shall restore, And rule the land that Saturn ruled of old.--[John O'London's Weekly]
First Division News. KUCHING METEOROLOGICAL RETURN FOR JULY, 1930. Note,—The Kuching Meteorological Station is situated at Latitude 1.33.29 North; and Longitude 110.20.31 East. The height above Mean Tide Level is 29.6 feet.
Divisional Reports. May, 1930. Extracts from the First Division Report for May, 1930, by Mr. J. C. Swayne Acting Resident:—
Two criminal and one civil case only came before the Resident's Court, none of which call for notice.
The Spring Meeting of the Sarawak Turf Club was held on the 2nd and 5th of the month and attracted the usual number of visitors to Kuching. The 24th, Proclamation Day, was observed as a public holiday.
Two aircraft from the Royal Air Force Base, Singapore, arrived at Kuching on the 26th and left again on the 30th. H.M.S. Herald also paid a short visit to the port.
I was at Sadong from the 8th—11th. Tambi Ksssim was tried on a charge of murder, convicted, and after confirmation by the Supreme Court, sentenced to death.
Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, who had been attached, to this office, was transferred to the Second Division. The usual sentries supplied by the Sarawak Rangers have been replaced by civilian watchmen, to far successfully.	DISTRICT OFFICE. The Acting District Officer, Mr. W.S.B. Buck, reports;—	District Court.— Nineteen cases were heard, three of which were criminal and sixteen civil.
Magistrate's Court.— Seventy-two cases were heard, eleven of which were criminal and sixty-one civil. Of the eleven criminal cases, nine convictions and two acquittals were adjudged.
Police Court.— Twenty-three summary cases were brought before the Court. In all convictions were obtained.
In addition 108 judgment summons cases were dealt with during the month. Judicial.—An interesting case were heard at the Leper Camp, where two lepers (Chinese) pleaded guilty to house-breaking by night, I.P.C. section 457. Accused had broken into the Camp Office and stolen a tin containing about 890 packets of opium, practically all of which was eventually recovered. Accused were sentenced to six months in the Camp Lock-up, the Superintendent of Leper Camp undertaking to find work for them during this period. Another case of importance was heard on the 27th, when Gan Teng and Chua Hiang Tea (f) were lined for keeping a gaming house and allowing Pak Kan to be played without a licence.
General.— Offices closed at 11.30 on the 5th. The 24th, being Proclamation Day, was observed as a public holiday, offices being closed.
Staff.—Mr. J. O. H. Barcroft, Cadet, was transferred to Simanggang, leaving in company with the Resident, Second Division, Mr. J. B. Archer, on the 8th. Six watchmen, viz., Satem bin Haji Seman, Abang bin Alan, Bong bin Resat, Haji Nibong bin Mat, Bakar bin Sibat and Haji Mat were engaged on 27th, signing a contract with the Government for one year. These men are replacing the Rangers Guards at nights, are on duty whenever offices are closed.
Coroner's Court.—No inquests were held during the month. The site selected for tire Public Mortuary at Padungan was inspected on the 9th, the Director of Public Works, Captain C. P. Lowe, and Mr. T. A. Reid accompanying me.
Travelling.—Batu Kawa was visited on the 21st and again on the 30th in company with Assistant Superintendent of Police, Mr. Kelley. On the occasion of the first visit the bazaar generally wax in a dirty condition, and the contractor responsible for upkeep was warned that his contract would be cancelled, unless a marked improvement was shown. The difference was noticeable on my second visit.
The turning place for cars at the end of this road could do with extension and a little metal, being very soft on wet days. On 22nd I left for Bukit Pam, where I joined the Executive Engineer, Simanggang Road construction, Mr. R. D. Binnie, and walked over the surrounding district during the week end. A number of disputes were settled and kampongs visited notably Kampong Bahru. I returned to Kuching on the following Monday.
LAND OFFICE. The Land Officer, Mr. B. Summers, reports—
On the 22nd of the month I went to the 24 Mile Simanggang Road to complete my visiting of Kampongs Panchor, Merang and Tampoi, in connection with the land applied for a Japanese in the vicinity of Bukit Pam.
This work has been found more complicated than was anticipated. The Dyak Kampongs in this district are both numerous and in close proximity to one another, and a very close examination has been found necessary before it is safe to alienate so large a block as one thousand acres. On the 27th of the month I returns to Kuching, having given further orders to the inspectors re the work to be carried out.
Simanggang Road Land Reserve.—Mr. T. M. Griffiths reports that he expects to complete the investigation into the titles of all gardens in the Simanggang Road Government Land Reserve up to 20th Mile by the end of June.
During the month he pushed through to Kamayo, on the Sadong River, at approximately 40th Mile, for the purpose of inspecting some gardens through which the road will run.
The matter of Dyak lands in this region is receiving attention. Numerous kampongs exist all along this road and many applications for land have been received from Chinese. They have all been rejected and no more such applications will be received until such time as the situation shall have been thoroughly clarified.
UPPER SARAWAK, BAU. The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, reports:-
During the month good work has been done on the Native Officer's quarters, the dispensary and the Dresser's quarters. The first mentioned is now completed and seems a very satisfactory piece of work. Until the 19th I was busy clearing up arrears of work and this finished, started for Lundu. I walked overland and arrived at Lundu on 20th at about 5 p.m., where I found Mr. Dare of the Agricultural Department, who had arrived there the day before in the Mermaid. Mr. Dare left for Sibu Laut and Kuching on 21st.
On the 23rd I walked to Simatan, using the inland road in order to avoid as much of the walk along the sand as possible. I arrived at Simatan at 3 p.m. after a walk of six hours. At Simatan I checked the Stocks, etc., and the next day walked to Pengarah Kueh's village at Sebaku at the foot of Poi Mountain. I was able to compliment the Pengarah on the excellent state of his roads which were well cleared and properly bridged where necessary. All the Dyaks in this region are Slakau Dyaks and are obviously many grades above the usual Land Dyaks. Their houses are well built and cleanly kept, and they themselves were clean and decent looking. They appear to be energetic and progressive, many having prosperous and well kept pepper gardens.
On 25th we started up Poi Mountain, our objective being the peak known as Brumput. It came on to rain during the afternoon and we stopped at 3 p.m. under Batu Pensiong, where we stayed the night. Batu Pensiong is a splendid natural shelter formed by two huge granite rocks propped up against each other. It affords plenty of shelter for about twenty men. The next day we went up to the top, which is about 1 hours from the above-named shelter. A very fine view of Dutch Borneo is to be seen from the summit but the view of Sarawak territory is practically nil. The same day, after spending about two hours on the hill, we returned to Sebaku and the next day to Lundu by way of Serayan.
On 30th I returned to Kuching by m.l. Jean.
Agriculture.—The Dyaks of Stengang and Stungkor districts are just finishing the harvest which has been a great success. Some doors have got as much as 400—500 pasus, and hardly any less than 200.
The Slakau Dyaks have also had a good year, but the quality of the Lundu Dyaks and Malay's padi was disappointing.
Prisons.—The prisoners have averaged at 42.61 during the month, and have been occupied on the general upkeep of the station.
SADONG. The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports:— Court.—In the Lower Courts a number of cases were heard but none call for comment.
In the Resident's Court one case was heard under section 302 in which Tambi Kassim was sentenced to death, subject to confirmation from the Supreme Court.
Public Works.—The Government carpenter made several alterations to the store; fitting shelves, etc., and was later employed on repairing the Native Officer's quarters.
The contract for the new bridge over the Simunjan river was completed during the month, and the final payment was made on the 16th instant.
The new Kampong Saging-Colliery road is progressing slowly and it is hoped that it will be finished in some two months' time.
The Government pipe-fitter was employed during the later part of the month on the extension of the Kampong Saging water supply.
Travelling.—On the 7th I arrived back from the
Sebangan, accompanied by Native Officer Abang Hamdan.
It appears that the padi harvest in the Sebangan has been on the whole good, although soma houses appear to have been luckier than others.
The upper reaches of this river are completely overgrown with different species of grass in the main Rasau, Purun and Bakong. It is proposed in the near future to call out the Dyaks in this district to clear the stream.
A big trade in snake skin (ular plaie) is carried on in this district. Medical.—At the Government Hospital 10 patients were admitted, 9 were discharged and 2 died in the hospital, leaving 2 remaining at the end of the month.
At the Dispensary 134 out-patients made 197 attendances for treatment.
Agriculture.—Mr. Dare visited the station on the l0th and inspected Sahari's experimental garden, and also inspected the proposed padi area at Gunong Sedilo.
General.—The Acting Resident, Mr. J. C. Swayne, visited the station from the 8th to the 11th, and settled all outstation matters requiring his attention.
Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager, Sadong Colliery, left for Kuching by the L'Aubaine on the 21st.
The 24th, being Proclamation Day, the offices were closed.
Trade and Customs.— During the month twenty-five vessels entered and twenty-six cleared the port.
Sadong Collieries Report. June, 1930.
Report on Sadong Mines for June, 1930, by Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager. The output produced during the month was satisfactory, despite the damage caused to shallow working levels as the result of excessive roof pressure following heavy rains, which also flooded the dip workings of No. 12 Mine, where progress is temporarily held up, pending the dewatering of the area and the recovery of the submerged pump.
The old No. 9 haulage engine was removed and re-erected at the No. 12 Mine entrance.
There is still a serious shortage of skilled labour. Our efforts at local recruiting has been given a futher impetus by the continued trade slump, and we have, it present, a force of 66 Malays, 4 Dyaks, and 2 Indians respectively, employed on various jobs belowground.
The total rainfall for the month was 18.42 inches.
Traffic Arrangements, etc., for 4th and 5th August, 1930.
ON THE OCCASION OF THE VISIT TO KUCHING OF HIS EXCELLENCY THE BRITISH AGENT FOR NORTH BORNEO AND SARAWAK.
No Cars will be allowed to park at the Pangkallan Batu from 10.30 a.m. on 4th August to midnight on 5th August, 1930.
(This does not apply to residents across river who have private garages at the Pangkallan Batu, or to the Chief Secretary and Resident, First Division.)
2. Guests attending Dinner at Astana at 7.45 p.m. on 4th August, 1930, will park their cars in the space between the Customs Offices and Steamship Company's godowns at the foot of Rock Road. A European Police Officer will be on duty to superintend the parking of cars.
3. No cars will be allowed to precede the car conveying His Excellency and His Highness the Tuan Muda during the drive through the bazaar and kampongs after Dinner at Astana.
4. A small car convoying a European Police Office will proceed slowly along the route to be followed and warn traffic control men ten minutes before His Excellency and His Highness the Tuan Muda start.
5. All traffic will be stopped or diverted until the Astana party have passed along the route which is as follows:— Start (9 p.m.).—Pangkallan Batu, Rock Road, India Street, Market Street, Datus' Road, Blacksmith Road, Haji Taha Road, Jawa No. 2, Jawa No. 1, Mosque Road, Market Street, Gambier Road, Pangkallan Batu.	6. Anyone wishing to join the procession of cars; to view the illuminations in the Kampongs and bazaar may park their cars in Main Bazaar until the official cars leave the parking square between the Customs Offices and Steamship godown, when they can follow on.
Black and White Trophy. DRAW FOR FIRST AND SECOND ROUNDS. The Police again had no luck in the draw and had to strip for the first round for the third consequent time in this tournament; The match was played on the 19th and resulted in a draw—one goal each. The football served up in this game was a trifle disjointed and only individual efforts roused the enthusiasm of the spectators. It was such an effort which led to the scoring of both goals, Bujang in the first half taking the ball from the centre of the field and, after beating one or two opponents, finished up with a very acute shot from the line which the Medical goal keeper misjudged, the ball dropping behind him into the net. The goal scored by Pa'ee for the Medical was exactly similar except that the finishing shot grazed the bur and screwed over the line. Both these players were outstanding on their sides and the Police were well served by Kelley, who time and again skilfully stopped dangerous looking attacks. On the whole the Police were the better balanced team, each line doing fairly well. The Medical forwards were handicapped by getting no support from their halves, who had as much as they could manage to hold the opposing forwards.
The replay took place on the 23rd and ended in another draw, no goal being scored. On this occasion both teams produced better football and it was a fast game throughout. The Medical forwards were strengthened and their halves kept in touch with them better. The Police did most of the pressing but their shooting was wild and many likely looking chances were spoiled. The Medical had bad luck on more than one occasion and strenuous appeals for a goal in the second half were turned down.
In the third game both teams went all out from the start and play was transferred with great regularity from end to end. The Police were the first to be successful, Bodal putting across a high ball which the Medical goal keeper got his hands on but not sufficiently to keep it from going through. After this reverse the Medical pressed strongly and were rewarded by a shot from Kim Leong glancing off the inside of the post into the net. The teams were very evenly matched and no time could be wasted while on the ball or it was. lost. A break away by Pa'ee resulted in the Medical's second goal the shot coming in with great force from the wing and the goal keeper was unable to stop it although his frantic dive deserved better luck. Shortly after this Suhai put the Police level with a hard drive from well out, the goal keeper's view being obstructed. Half time was called with the score at two all.
The second half was not so full of thrills as the first one, the Police appeared to be taking things too easily and the Medical were handicapped by their goalkeeper, who was suffering from a bruised ankle, having to go to outside left where his antics caused the spectators great amusement. The Medical seem to be well supplied with goal keepers as it was on exceptionally well timed action on the part of the substitute which kept a high lob from the wing from counting. The Police did most of the pressing in this half and the Medical forwards who where reduced to three men and two crocks could only respond by one or two raids, none the less they should have had a goal when Kim Leong found himself almost under the bar with only the goal keeper to beat but skyed the ball over the bar. It was in another of these raids that Pa'ee broke through and steadied himself in front of the goal giving the keeper no chance with his shot. The Police pressed herd for the remaining minutes of the game but lusty clearing kept them at bay and the whistle went with the score standing at 3—2 in favour of the Medical.
The Police were disappointing in the second halt and the pace seemed to tell on some of them more than on their opponents, at least there were "bellows to mend" in the Police left defenders, and one or two of the others never seemed to get going. However, it was a good and fairly clean game quite worth watching.
The football served up by the Public Works Department and Land and Survey was disappointing and, while the score of 3—0 slightly fatters the Land and Survey, they were decidedly the better team. The first score was a high ball from the wing which the Public Works Department keeper allow to land in front of him and bounce over his head into the net, a very soft goal. There was little combination in either team but if the Public Works Department forwards had made use of the passes given to them by Chater from centre half the result might have been different. Middlemas in goal for the Land and Survey did all he was called on to do and his weight certainly saved a goal when he got rushed while holding the ball, practically on the line. Mace and Eddy Lim were the outstanding players on their side and were mainly responsible for the win. For the Public Works Department Chater was about the only one who did creditably, although the backs put in some useful work.
The match between the Medical and Merchants produced good football on both sides, but the Merchants combined very much better, and on play throughly deserved their win of 3—1. The game was fast all the time and the Merchants did well to stand the pace. The Medical were handicapped in having to find substitutes for their goal keeper and outside left; none the less on paper it looked a fairly easy victory for them, but they were certainly much below the form which gained them entry into the second round. The first goal was the result of a well placed free kick, which struck the edge of the bar and bounced on the line. Bates, who was standing near, beat the goal keeper in the race for the ball and put the Merchants one ahead. The rest of the half was evenly contested, both goal keepers being called on to deal with dangerous shots, but no further goals resulted.
The second half started off with a rush by the Medical, but they did not get far and play was transferred to their goal, where McDonald had hard lines with a shot which grazed the wrong side of the post. The game then settled down into even play with only occasional shots at goal, and after fifteen minutes play Pa'ee put his side level with a hard drive from outside the box, which the goal keeper could not hold. Soon after this McDonald got the ball from Moir and cut across the goal, his finishing shot striking the uneven ground in front of the goal keeper and jumping out of his reach. The Medical were unfortunate to lose this goal as their keeper had the ball covered and the score was lucky, none the less McDonald must be given credit for the clever way he worked for the position before shooting. Not long after this Moir squirmed past the defence and, from a few yards out, struck the goal keeper but missed the rebound, the curl of the ball, however, gave Fenwick a chance to rush in and net from amongst three defenders. Pa'ee and others made strenuous endeavours to make up the deficit, but the whistle blew with the score at 3—1 in favour of the Merchants. The result we think come as a surprise to most people, but the Merchants combined very well and the majority were playing above their form. Each line did well and it was a case of each member of the team being equally responsible for the result. The goal keeper, however, should clear his line as quickly as possible, and not stand and give his opponents a chance to bundle him into the net.
The Medical team were inclined to leave too ranch to one mon, he did a lot of work but could not penetrate the defence often, and there was not enough go in the others to profit by his exertion.
All holders of Kuching Football Club Debentures have not yet been reimbursed and have not withdrawn their claim, ore requested to notify the Honorary Secretary and to send in their Debentures before 31st October, 1930.
St. Mary's School Sports.
The annual sports were held in the school grounds on Wednesday, 16th July, in the presence of the Dayang Anne, Mrs. Boult, and a number of friends who all heartily enjoyed the entertainment provided for them.
A Skipping Race for the juniors was won by (1) Mollie, and (2) Jessica; ‘Threading the Needle Race for seniors, by (1) Shui Ishin and Hope, (2) Jennie and Linyang; Dressing Race for the little ones, by (1) Lily Ang, and (2) Gin Yian; Potato Race for the seniors, by (1) Jennie, and (2) Ivy; Three-legged Race for the juniors, by (1) Judy and Henrietta, and (2) Molly and Jessica; Flat Race for seniors, (1) Shui Ishin, and (2) Ivy; Bun Race for the little boys, (1) Frank, and (2) James; Frog Race for the little girls, (1) Puri, and (2) Jean; Flat Race for the juniors, (1) Ah Yoon, and (2) Ada; Egg and Spoon Race (seniors), (1) Ivy, and (2) Hope; Ditto (juniors), (1) Ada, and(2) Jessica; Dash Race for the littlest ones, (1) Nee Yiong, and (2) Margaret; The open Obstacle Race was won by Kim Thui, with Shui Ishin second; Balance Race for seniors, (1) Ah Chick, (2) Shui Ishin; Lily Chia and Ah Chick for the seniors, and Ah Yoon and Molly for the juniors, carried off the Sack Race prizes; The Relay Race for House Teams was won by the Owls, with the Robins a good second. Perhaps the 'piece de resistance' was found in the last item—the Net Ball Match between the 1st Kuching Ranger Company and S. Mary's School. This proved to be most closely contested and resulted in a win for the Girl Guides by 14 goals to 12.
The Dayang Anne then gracefully gave a way the prizes after which Venerable Archdeacon Champion proposed a vote of thanks in a happy speech. The school authorities are to be congratulated on the results obtained, which shewed how much care must have been spent in training the young people to such a standard of excellence.
Club News.
Sarawak Club.
BOWLING AVERAGES FOR JUNE, 1930.
Turf Club Notes.
The attention of Members is drawn to the accounts for the past year and Balance Sheet as at 30th June, 1930, as shown in this issue of the Gazette. The Annual General Meeting will be held at the offices of The Borneo Co., Ltd., on 30th September next at 11 a.m.
Mr. McLaine, the quondam Hon. Treasurer, has kindly agreed to audit the accounts before that date.
The Balance Sheet shows that the financial position of the Club is sound and it is hoped that from now on the Club will be self-supporting and that the grant hitherto kindly given by Government towards the upkeep of the course and buildings, can be dispensed with as from the beginning, of 1931.
On another page will be seen the proposed programme of the forthcoming Races. An extra race has been added to both days.
It will be noted from the Balance Sheet that the sum of $230 is still due by certain members for 1930 subscriptions and the Committee trust that this pathetic paragraph will catch the eye of those to whom it may especially concern.
The active membership of the Club at date is 178.
The Committee would like to see this improved upon, and if any sportsman is desirous of becoming a member he has only to notify the Secretary who will be happy to arrange the requisite sponsorship.
Kuching Rifle Club.
SARAWAK TURF CLUB.
PROVISIONAL PROGRAMME FOR THE AUTUMN MEETING, 1930.
FIRST DAY, SATURDAY, 27TH SEPTEMBER, 1930. 1st Day, RACE NO. 1, 2.0 p.m. THE SEKAMA STAKES. Value $150. Second to receive $75. Third $25. A handicap for Divisions II and III ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 2, 2.30 p.m. THE TUAN MUDA'S CUP. Value $150. A piece of plate of the value of $100 presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda with $50 added. Second to receive $75. Third $25. A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance. Fee $10.
RACE No. 3, 3.0 p.m. THE SATOK STAKES. Value $150. Second to receive $75. Third $25. A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 5 furlongs Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 4, 3.30 p.m. THE PADUNGAN PLATE. Value $150. Second to receive $75. Third $25. A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 5, 4.0 p.m. THE B.C.L. BOUNTY. Value $150. $100 contributed by The Borneo Company, Ltd., with $50 added. Second to receive $75. Third $25. A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 8 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 6, 4.30 p.m. THE CHIEF SECRETARY'S CUP. Value $150. $50 presented by Mr. F. F. Boult, with $100 added. Second to receive $75. Third $25. A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 7, 5.0 p.m. THE PENDING PLATE. Value $150. Second to receive $75. Third $25. A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 8, 5.30 p.m. THE RANEE'S CUP. Value $150. A piece of plate of the value of $100 presented by Her Highness the Ranee with $50 added. Second to receive $75. Third $25. A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance 1 mile. Entrance Fee $10.
SECOND DAY, MONDAY, 29TH SEPTEMBER, 1930. 2nd Day, RACE NO. 1, 2.0 p.m. THE STEAMSHIP STAKES. Value $150. $100 contributed by The Sarawak Steamship, Company, Ltd., with $50 added. Second to receive $75. Third $25. A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE No. 2, 2.30 p.m. THE COUNTRY CUP. Value $150. Second to receive $75. Third $25. A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 8, 3.0 p.m. THE CHINESE BANKERS' PURSE. Value $150. $100 contributed by The Kwong Lee, Bian Chiang and Sarawak Chinese Banks with $50 added. Second to receive $75. Third $25. A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 4, 3.30 p.m. Value $150. Second to receive $75. Third $25. A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE No. 5, 4.0 p.m. THE STATE SPRINT. Value $150. Second to receive $75. Third $25. A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE No. 6, 4.30 p.m. THE TOWN TRAY. A silver tray value $150. Second to receive $75. Third $25. A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE No. 7, 5.0 p.m. THE COMMITTEE'S CONSOLATION. Value $100 contributed by the Members of the Turf Club Committee. Second to receive $50. Third $25. A handicap for any pony in Divisions I and II which has not won a race in Kuching since Spring Sky Meeting, 1929. Distance 3 furlongs. Post Entries $5.
RACE No. 8, 5.45 p.m. THE RAJAH'S CUP. Value $200. A piece of plate value $150 presented by His Highness the Rajah with $50 added. Second to receive $80. Third $35. A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance Race Course (about 1.1/3 Miles). Entrance Fess $10.
REGULATIONS.
Penalties.—Winners of any race at this Meeting shall carry a penalty of 7 lbs. for each race with a maximum of 11 stone 7 lbs.
Allowances.—Professional Jockeys who are Sarawak subjects and have never ridden more than two winners at any meeting under Sarawak Turf Club Rules, may claim an allowance of 5 lbs.
Entries.—All nominations, accompanied by Entrance Fees, description of ponies and declaration of colours to be made to the Honorary Secretary not later than noon 31st August, 1930.
Scratchings.—Owners scratching ponies before 5 p.m. on 26th September for the first day and 5 p.m. on 28th September for the 2nd day, will receive back half their entrance fees.
Handicaps for the 1st Day will be posted on the Notice Board at the Sarawak Club at noon 13th September, and for the 2nd Day at noon on 28th September.
Course will be open for training on 14th August, at 5.30 a.m.
Classification.—With the exception of Hopeless, Blazes and Sakbon who have run their last race and Penghulu who we are advised will not compete again the official classification remains as stated in the Sarawak Gazette of 2nd June, 1930-
Ponies must have run on the 1st Day to be eligible for entry in Races for the 2nd Day.
Totalizators and Cash Sweeps as usual except that 20 per cent of the former instead of 10 goes to the Club.
Communications to be made to C. FENWICK, Honorary Secretary, Sarawak Turf Club.
Precis of Reports from the Third Division for June 1930. By Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident; Mr. E. V. Andreini, District Officer, Sibu; Mr. C. E. Pascoe, Divisional Land Officer; Mr. J. W. Whiteside, Divisional Engineer; Dr. A. D. Hutchison, Divisional Medical Officer; Mr. P. M. Adams, District Officer, Oya and Mukah; Mr. A. Macpherson, Assistant District Officer, Oya and Dalat; Mr. J.O. Gilbert, Assistant District Officer. Sarikei and Binatang.
The chief event of the month was the visit of His Highness the Tuan Muda, who arrived by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 11th inst., accompanied by the Dayang Anne, the Chief Secretary, and Mrs. Boult. His Highness met all the principal Malays, Dyaks, and Chinese in the Court House and then inspected the offices and bazaar. On the following day a tuba fishing was held, attended by His Highness and party but on this occasion it did not prove to be the success which it usually does. His Highness later proceeded to Kapit where he met the Dyak Penghulus. From Kapit the party went down stream to Sarikei where an inspection of the Repok Road was made, and later, an audience given to the Malays and Chinese. In the evening of the 15th inst., His Highness embarked for Kuching.
Nothing of especial note occurred in the Courts during the month.
The chief event of the month was the visit of His Highness the Tuan Muda, who arrived by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 11th inst., accompanied by the Dayang Anne, the Chief Secretary, and Mrs. Boult. His Highness met all the principal Malays, Dyaks, and Chinese in the Court House and then inspected the offices and bazaar. On the following day a tuba fishing was held, attended by His Highness and party but on this occasion it did not prove to be the success which it usually does. His Highness later proceeded to Kapit where he met the Dyak Penghulus. From Kapit the party went down stream to Sarikei where an inspection of the Repok Road was made, and later, an audience given to the Malays and Chinese. In the evening of the 15th inst., His Highness embarked for Kuching.
Nothing of especial note occurred in the Courts during the month.
The Sibu Bazaar now nears completion. The last of the wooden houses are being evacuated. The new bazaar looks well, and there are only fifty-one alienated lots not yet built on. The remaining ten shophouses of the forty-one undertaken by Messrs. Gammon, Limited, are completed, and work is proceeding on the five brick shops in Channel Road which are being erected by local merchants. The new European Bungalow erected near the Residency is almost completed. New water services have been laid to the bazaar shops as completed.
Dr. A. Hutchison arrived on the 4th inst. to take over as Divisional Medical Officer from Dr. Gauge, who proceeded to Kuching. The Divisional Medical Officer reports 575 out-patients and 111 in-patients treated during the month.
Sarikei.—The new bazaar lay-out has now been demarcated. The staging for the new wharf is completed. A Sanitary Inspector is now stationed at this place, and pays a regular week-end visit to Rejang to inspect the incoming steamers from Singapore, and 222 passengers were inspected. There has been a small outbreak of dysentery at Rejang which is being taken in hand.
The wharf at Binatang is nearly completed.
The General Manager. Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, arrived at Mukah from Miri on the 14th inst. on his way to Ulu Kenyana. He recruited thirty-one Melanos and twelve Dyak coolies.
At Matu six towkays are commencing the erection of a block of six bazaar shops on the new site. They are to be built of timber with party walls of galvanized iron.
Visitors to the Division, from outside, comprised amongst others the following during the month. H. H. the Tuan Muda, the Dayang Anne, the Chief Secretary and Mrs. Boult, Mr. Treasurer A. A. Bennie, The Secretary for Chinese Affairs and Mrs. De Gros Clark, the General Manager, Sarawak Oilfields., Limited, and Dr. Braendlin.
Fourth Division News. Divisional Reports. May, 1930. Extracts from the Fourth Division Report for May, 1930, by Mr. Aplin, Resident
General.—I held a meeting of the people from the various villages in the district of Miri with the object of explaining the importance of planting padi. The Kadayans on the coast do not need any encouragement, as they never fail to plant padi and as a rule have good crops, but padi planting by those living near Miri town is getting less and less each year, the population preferring to find jobs with the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, and buy their rice in the bazaar.
Those present professed to understand my arguments for the reasons of planting padi, and agreed that they would make fauna this year, and I promised them that the Courts would take into consideration in passing judgment in debt cases on all those who could prove that they were making legitimate attempts at padi farming.
1 left for Baram on 13th, with my wife and child, to wait the arrival of His Highness the Tuan Muda in connection with the regatta, which was to be held at that place. His Highness, accompanied by the Dayang Anne, the Chief Secretary, Mr. F. F. Boult, and Mrs. Boult, arrived on the evening of the J5th.
The regatta must have been one of the most successful ever held at Baram.
On the 17th His Highness sat in Court and interviewed the Penghulus on the Maimunah.
His Highness left for Kuching on the 18th, dropping me at Miri on the way.
The Sarawak Oilfields. Limited, have arranged to lay water into the Kampong Dagang and Kampong China areas at an estimated cost of $5,600. This is an essential necessity, if the sanitary conditions are to be improved.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, returned from Kuching on the 9th, and left for a visit to the Coast Stations on the 20th, returning to Miri on the 24th.
Prizes for the 1929 examinations of the Native School were given away by Mrs. Aplin in the Court House.
The offices were closed on the 27th, Proclamation Day.
H.M.S. Herald, Commander P. S. Maxwell, R.N., paid his first visit to Miri for the year on the 1st.
Capt. B, E. Le Sueur, Messrs. Aikman and Adams, arrived on duty visits by the Gladys on 28th.
Mr. Aikman has come to take over the duties of Shipping Master and Collector of Customs, Fourth and Fifth Divisions, from Mr. Horton, who is shortly proceeding on furlough.
On the 30th Flying Boats S1419, Squadron Leader Livock, R.A.F., and S1149. Flight-Lieutenant Nicholletts, R.A.F., arrived from Kuching via Sibu, and anchored in the river opposite the golf links. S1149 left the following day for Kuala Belait, S1419 leaving on 1st June for Brunei via Kuala Belait.
The heat during the month has been very oppressive and only 32 inches of rain were recorded.
BINTULU. The Acting District Officer, Bintulu, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports:—
Court.—Court work was light during the month.
General.—On 9th I returned from Kuching by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna after attending the Races there. On 14th His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by the Dayang Anne, the Chief Secretary and Mrs. Bonk, and Mrs. Beard, called in unofficially at Kedurong in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on their way to Baram.
In consideration of a proposal to build a road along the coast towards Miri, doing a small amount each year, I left on 21st, walking to Kuala Suai. The start was made from S. Pla-an, the Bintulu side of Kedurong. It is a beautiful but rugged and almost uninhabited part of the coast.
Kuala Suai was reached after two days and half a night's solid walking. The going was hard except for Breaker Bay and the Suai end. Kuala Nyalau to Tanjong Payong and Tanjong Payong to Kuala Suai. The only habitations met with on the journey were two fishing huts belonging to Mukah Melanau's, one at Kuala Likau and the other at Kuala S'melembah, and the large fishing village at Kuala Nyalau.
The men of this village are also Mukah people and originally only came here during the fine season. Owing to the mild landas that have been experienced the last few years they are building more or less permanent houses and have started vegetable gardens, etc.	There are 20 boats of 5 men each, making 100 men, and many have their wives and families with them. The number of crocodiles in this river was most noticeable, and the brutes could be seen in the evening floating about on the surface of the river below the houses, waiting for a feed of fish heads and tails which are thrown into the water. Many parts of this coast would be difficult to make a road on, and I suggest that the scheme might be left for the moment but kept under consideration. I returned from Kuala Suai to Bintulu in m.l. Joan.
Mr. Birt, of the P.W.D., arrived per s.s. Auby on the 25th with 500 lengths of pipes for the waterworks. He brought two pipe-fitters and work was commenced. Mr. Birt returned to Kuching by s.s. Sarawak on 31st.
P.W.D.— The prisoners averaged 18.70 during the month. They were variously employed. The gang was mostly employed on whitewashing and tarring of Government buildings, They also handled a number of Government attaps, advantage being taken by Government Departments to buy attaps at their present low rate. The bazaar price does not seem to drop considerably, but by buying attaps from up river, and thus giving the Natives some work and ready cash, the quotation has been $65 per laksa F.O.B. Over 22 laksa (220,000) have been shipped for Government Departments during the month.
About 40 Foochows from Sebauh concession, who have no means of livelihood during the present slump in trade, have been employed by Government.
The cattle plain and tanjong across river have been cleared by them, and rentis and levelling has been done for the laying of the pipe line as far as Tanjong Batu. The carrying of pipes and sleepers and the stringing out of same has also been undertaken by Foochows.
Their contracts have been very reasonable and their work, when sufficiently supervised, quite satisfactory.
Rainfall.—The rainfall for the month amounted to 8.23 inches.
This is deceptive as there has been no proper rain during the month except for two short local showers.
The total has been chiefly accounted for by dew and dampness.
The drought, heat, and shortage of water, is getting definitely serious, as no heavy rain has been experienced here since the middle of December.
Miri. The Acting District Officer, Miri, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports:—
Court.—There were no cases worthy of special mention during the month.
Prisons.—Prisoners averaged 33 during the month and were employed on mowing and sanitary gang work, etc., as usual.
General.—H.M.S. Herald paid her first call of the season on the 2nd instant.
On the 30th two Flying Boats arrived from Kuching with Sqr. Leader Livock and Lt. Nicholetts.
Municipal.—A new Municipal Inspector, Mr. Pereira, arrived at the beginning of the mouth and is proving himself very useful.
A meeting of the Sanitary Advisory Board was held on the 13th minutes of which have already been submitted to you. Part of the drainage scheme for Kampong China has been started by a ditch which has been put through the south end of this kampong.
The new bazaar scavenging contractor is doing quite good work, and has a contract with the Sarawak Oilfields. Limited, for the top half of Kampong China under Company's administration, as well as the bottom or Municipal half, with the result that this kampong is looking a little cleaner than before.
Travelling.— I visited Niah and Sibuti and Suai from the 20th to 24th. Nothing much could be done at Niah as the Court house is still uncompleted.
Visitors.—On the 28th Capt. R. E. Le Sueur, of Sarawak Rangers, Mr. H, C. Adams, Monopolies, and Mr. Aikman, arrived. Mr. Aikman is relieving Mr. Horton in the Customs.
BARAM. The District Officer, Baram, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports:—
Travelling.— His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by the Dayang Anne, Mr. F. F. Boult, the Chief Secietary, and Mrs. Boult, visited the station from 15th to 18th, The Resident, Fourth Division, Mr. H. D. Aplin, and Mrs. Aplin, arrived on 13th returning on 18th.
The Deputy Conservator of Forests, Mr. T. Corson, arrived on 13th and was still here at the end of the month. The Curator, Mr. E. Banks, returned from the Kelabit Country on 6th and went to Kuching on 18th. I returned from Miri via Bakong on 6th, and again visited Bakong from 30th to 31st.
General.—The regatta was held on the morning of 16th, followed by sports in the afternoon and dancing and a firework display in the evening. His Highness the Tuan Muda was pleased to present a challenge cup with miniature to the winner to be raced for by long boats every two years. It is estimated that about 5,000 people from up river were present. Others present were Mr. and Mrs. Noble, Messrs. Parry, Tiedemann and Stickland from Miri, and Messrs. Weigall and Henderson from Bakong.
Public Works.—A preliminary survey was made for the proposed road from Marudi tu Lubok Nibong round the tanjong.
The new fort at Long Akah is reported to be progressing satisfactorily.
Prison.—The prison gang, averaging 25.6 men was employed on the usual upkeep of the station.
Medical.—One hundred and fifty-nine out-patient and thirty-four in-patients were treated during the month. Two hundred and forty-three out-patient and one in-patient were treated under the auspices of the Professor Harrison Smith Fund.
Rainfall.—The rainfall recorded during the month was 2.05 inches.
Shipping.—S.S. Gladys made three trips during the month.
Fifth Division News. Divisional Reports. May, 1930. Extracts from the Fifth Division Report for May, 1930, by Mr. E. O. Bruce, Acting Resident:—
General.—I returned from Kuching on the 10th, together with Mr. W. H. C. C. Morice, who has been appointed to do duty in this Division.
Court.—Several cases ware dealt with, mostly theft of buffaloes, and none of special interest.
P.W.D.—Carpenters have continued the rapid progress with the additional offices and new quarters for Land and Forest Departments, which should be ready for occupation within a month. Work has commenced with the annual scraping and re-washing of outbuildings. Bazaar shop-owners have followed suit, and have also been persuaded to renovate their somewhat dilapidated topekong, and the sago and jelutong factories, at present prominent eyesores. During one of the recent abnormal high tides an attempt was made to drive a small oar the length of the new Limbang-Pandam road. I was, however, held up at one spot near Singkarai by a flooded bridge, which is now being adjusted.
About a mile of the road between Bazaar and Kampong Limpaung has been surfaced with laterite and rolled.
Weekly fire drill by the squad of Rangers has been reorganized so as to combine interest with rapid utility. From the initial efforts it was obvious that an attempt to deal with a serious fire would have been a pure harlequinade.
Prison.—Average daily number of prisoners 24. They were employed with the usual routine and P.W.D. labour, and health has been good.
Land.—Four Occupation Tickets were issued for rubber. There were also four Chinese applicants for coffee planting along the new Limbang-Pandam road. The Land Office building should be ready for occupation next month, and the arrival of proper staff should greatly assist in the needed development and supervision.
Medical and Health.—One patient was admitted to hospital and three discharged. Nil remained at end of the month. Ninety-six out-patients were treated, mostly for C. Yaws, T. imbricata and ulcers.
Regular inspections were made of cattle and pigs for slaughter, and bazaar back areas and markets.
LAWAS. May, 1930. The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe, reports:-
Court.—Litigation this month has been light, there being no cases of any special note.
Prison.—The prison gang, averaging 12, have been mainly employed this mouth clearing the jungle round the Government quarters, and the engkudok from the far end of the golf course. Besides this, was the usual routine work in the grounds.
P.W.D.—Contractor Wong Kian has completed the boat shelter for the Saripah, and is now engaged in building the new Forest Checking Station. The road to Trusan is progressing favourably, being completed to the 7th mile, and the 12th mile is also nearly finished. The long spell of dry weather experienced here, is giving every opportunity for the construction of the road.
Travelling.—I visited the substations from the 20th to the 24th but there was nothing of outstanding importance. The police barracks at Trusan have now been repaired, and covered in pathways have been extended to the kitchens. I paid a visit to Limbang on the 8th, meeting the Acting Resident on the 10th.	General — Mr. Baron, Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, proceeded to Labu on the 20th in order to complete the boundary survey.
Father Janson paid a visit to the station on the 23rd and proceeded to Trusan and Sundar.
Malaria fever has been very bad at Lawas this month, and it is difficult to cope with these patients, there being no hospital or dresser, mid one has to rely entirely on the Lawas Rubber Estate dresser, who is not always able to visit when there is an urgent call.
Agriculture.—The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Ltd., exported 23,102 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
ECHOES FROM THE WORLD OUTSIDE.
Sir Oliver Lodge on the only brush "with which I admit being Tarred." IN HIS SURVEY OF MODERN PHYSICS, SAYS PROFESSOR ANDRADE, THE AUTHOR POSTULATES "ETHER AS THE SHRINE OE SOUL."
The latest book by Sir Oliver Lodge, "Beyond physics'' (Allen & U win, 5 s.l, is described as "a survey sf modern physics in a philosophical and phylosophical direction." Sir Oliver, almost by way of preliminary, says:-
"I AM supposed to be tarred with the brush of unorthodox researches into psychic and psychophysical phenomena. The only brush, however, with which I admit being tarred is a brush which has been dipped into facts of experience. I admit that they are facts at present unadmitted by the majority of my colleagues, but a minority have assured themselves that they are facts; and, if so, they cannot fail to be of the utmost importance in any complete or philosophic scheme.
"On that basis I make an incipient attempt to unify physics and psychics; and towards this, unification I wish to emphasise the importance of the universal connecting medium the ether of space. I believe that this substance or substantial entity will ultimately be found to be of the first importance both in science and in philosophy; I believe that it will act as an instrument of unification between mechanism, on the one hand, and spiritual guidance, on the other.
VEHICLE OF MIND AND SPIRIT.
"If the ether is a substance of universal prevalence as in physics it appears to be—then it may be the real vehicle of mind and spirit. If so, then it must be by or through the process of what we call incarnation—a connection between ether and matter which has still to be understood—that the undifferentiated mind develops into separate personality. It proceeds by ultilizing the essential discontinuity of matter to partition itself off into free and independent units, so that in association with matter they may acquire an individuality of their own, and thus by free and personal development enhance the value and complexity of the whole.
"If mind always requires a physical vehicle (as our experience seems to show that it does), then, since a material form is inadequate, the Absolute Mind, whether differentiated or not, must exist in the continuous ether; for that is the only physical entity with perfect propert es known to us. Mind transcends the ether, yes, but utilizes it as its instrument and vehicle, as will be argued later	Later Sir Oliver Lodge deals with some notions, "in the hope that posterity," as he expresses it, "if it ever reads them, may perhaps be either interested or amused."
"I postulate." he goes on "as the one all-embracing reality on the physical side, the Ether of Space. And I conceive that in terms of that fundamental physical entity everything else in the material universe will have to be explained. To me the ether is a continuous substance, far more substantial than any matter.
"It fills all space; though we have no real knowledge of its constitution, for it is too fundamental to have its constitution expressible in terms of anything else. It seems to be analogous to a perfect incompressible fluid in a violent state of minute circulatory motion, imperfectly conceivable as ultramicroscopic vortices circulating or spinning with the velocity of light.
"MY SPECULATION IS......"
"If the ether is constituted as I suggest, it must be the seat of enormous energy; not necessarily infinite, but far beyond any amount of which we have any conception. All the energies that we experience in matter are but a minute or residual fraction of the ethereal energy of which they are a feeble manifestation.
"My speculation is that this boundless other, thus full of energy, is utilized and is impregnated throughout with something that may be called Life and Mind in excelsis, that it is the home of the ideal and the supernal, and that all the life and mind we are conscious of is but an infinitesimal or residual fraction of this majestic reality. I contrive of the ether as the vehicle or physical instrument or concomitant of Supreme Mind."
His conclusion, based on "elementary facts." is that Personality - when it exists— including Character and Memory, is a persistent reality. "I reach that conclusion." he states, "not by argument, but by direct personal experience, as simple as are the experiences of daily life."
Professor Andrade, Quain Professor of Physics, London University, fommenting on Sir Oliver Lodge's book to a Morning Post representative, said :—
"The problems which Sir Oliver Lodge discusses are emphatically of a kind that is, as he admits, ‘beyond physics,' and I much doubt if the physicist as such is any more competent to comment upon them than any other man.
"In spite of the physical robe in which Sir Oliver has clothed his mighty ideas, they seem to be essentially of the kind which must for ever rest on intuition and direct Apprehension rather than upon argument—as he says, ‘I not only conjecture, I feel as if I knew, that portions of the ether are, so to speak, individualized.'
"The ether hypothesis in Sir Oliver's vast and fascinating conception takes on a substance and a reality which make it for him suitable to be the one ultimate entity. To many physicists the attribution of a life-content to the ether may seem to be explaining the unknown in terms of the unknown and attributing reality to the shadow of a shadow.
‘The indestructibility of a vortex in an ideal, perfectly frictionless, liquid, as proved by Helmholtz, may seem to some a sure argument for immortality; to others the ideal liquid may seem more unreal than the soul; and to others again the analogy may convey nothing at all.
"To make the ether the shrine of soul and the repository of seeds of matter is a vast unification, but it is doubtful whether the physicist, bewildered and helpless as he is at the present moment before problems much simpler than that of the origin of life—for example, the nature of radiation —will feel that science can help him far in the imaginative effort required."
Sir Oliver's book will provoke discussion.
The Derby 1930 from Reuter's Press.
EPSOM. The sun crept out after the moon mist had melted. His Majesty arrived with the Queen, Prince of Wales. Duke of York, and Duke of Gloucester, adding completeness to England's great racing festival. They were cheered by hundreds of thousands on the downs including a mile long line of bookmakers, thousands of police, detectives and "pearly Kings." The downs was amass of picnickers but as the time of the race approached the crowds took up their positions. Drums were sounded by bookies and tipstors rallying their thousands of clients. The Aga Khan with his wife saw Blenheim win him his first Derby. Silver Flare was fractious at the start but calmed down. The horses were despatched evenly, Diolite breaking the line first.
Diolite came on from Ballyferis, Rustom Pasha. Trews, Parthenon, Silver Flare, Dick Swiveller, Iliad and Tetragem, with Noble Star last. Before reaching the top of the hill Rustom Paspa raced to the front followed by Diolite, Ballyferis, Trews, and Dick Swiveller Rounding Tattenham corner Rustom Pasha and Diolite were leading from Ballyferis, Trews and Iliad. Ballyferis and Rustom Pasha then weakened and Diolite came on from Iliad with Blenheim gradually coming on A quarter of a mile from home Iliad and Diolite were challenged by Blenheim who, finishing strongly, took the lead in the last hundred yards and won excellently. Silver Flare was fourth, Trews fifth, Star sixth, Noble Star seventh, Ballyferis eighth, Dick Swiveller ninth, Sponger tenth, and Parthenon last. Time two minutes 38 and one-fifth seconds.
Air News. Packed in ice, a specimen of malaria blood, sufficient to inoculate two patients, was recently carried by a Qantas plane from Sydney to Goodna, Queensland, for the treatment of patients suffering with general paralysis of the insane. Commenting on the occurrence, the medical authority of Goodna stated that aerial transport in this case was invaluable. "The blood would have been useless," he added, "if inoculation had not been effected quickly, and the aeroplane was the only means of getting the blood to Goodna within the required time."
IMPERIAL AIRWAYS. Five million miles of cross-Channel flying were recently completed by the fleet of Imperial Airways. This represents approximately 20,000 flights across the Channel, during which over 100,000 passengers have been flown between London and the Continent.
"WHY DO YOU FLY?" "Why do you travel by air?" was the question put by the American Air Transport Association to 568 air travellers flying between Boston and New York. The majority were found to be flying for business purposes and to save time. More than one-third, however, flew to attend the theatre in one of the other cities or merely for the enjoyment of the flight. The full results of the survey are as follows:—
Time saving, 136.
Business appointments, 117.
Preference for air travel, 103.
For the "joy ride," 146.
Visiting friends, 30.
Theatre or social, 23.
Touting, 1 .
ENGINEERING EXTRAORDINARY. Remarkable figures now available relating to the Rolls-Royce Schneider Trophy engine, show that per brake horse-power developed, the weight of this engine was only 12 ounces, as compared with between 5 and 10 lbs. for the average motor-car engine. In its standard form, this engine was designed to give 825 b.h.p., but the Schneider Trophy version, which holds the world's speed record, actually delivers 1,900 h.p.l.
WORLD'S FASTEST BOMBERS. No. 33 Bombing Squadron of the Royal Air Force, stationed at Eastchurch, is now equipped with the fastest bombing aeroplanes in the world, the latest type of Hawker Hart. A2-seater, fitted with a 550.h.p. Rolls-Royce "F" type aero engine, the Hart is capable of a speed of 190 m.p.h. at 10,000 feet, and can climb to this height in only 7 minutes. The machine, which is built throughout of steel, is faster than any single-seater in use by the air services of any other nations in the world.
Schoolboy Howlers. Here are a few schoolboy howlers from a recently compiled collection:
Finally James the second gave birth to a son so the people turned him off the throne. William Pitt considered that he was a very suitable undertaker for the war with France.
Queen Elizabeth refused to marry anybody.
She was one of the wisest Queens that ever reigned.
Wolsey saved his life by dying on the way from York to London.
Raleigh died in James 1's reign and started smoking.
Joan of Arc was a pheasant's daughter.
The South Sea Bubble was a scream for lending money to the Government.
Edward III went to war with France. One reason was that he wanted his revenge on the French because Edgar Wallace had fled there during the Scottish wars. In India a man in one cask cannot marry a woman in another cask.
Opening of a play, written as a literary exercise by a small scholar: Scene One. The Count and Countess are seated in the lounge. Enter Butler. "Countess, a son has been born to you."
King John lost all his clothes in the wash and afterwards died of shock.
The spies who brought a report of the City of Jericho said the land was flowing with milk and honey, and brought a big bunch of grapes to prove it.
Lloyd George is the chief Socialist next to Sidney Webb. His motto is Liberty, Equality and Maternity. He was a supporter of the Primrose League and is a historic personage.
The Pope laid John under an interdict and stopped all births, deaths, and marriages until his death. He also closed the churches.—The Straits Budget.
SHIPPING INTELLIGENCE. Port of Kuching.
LIST OF FIRST-CLASS PASSENGERS.
By s.s. Vyner Brooke to Singapore on 5thJuly:—
Messrs. Chan Weng Yen, Hughes, Mr. and Mrs. Goonetilleke and six children.
By s.s. Kuching from Singapore on 7th July:— Mr. and Mrs. W. F. Dick, Dr. Kurup.
By s.s. Vyner Brooke to Singapore on 19th July:— Mr, and Mrs. John G. Campbell, Messrs. S. Hara, Chong Joon Kiew, G. H. Daly.
By s.s. Kuching from Singapore on 21st July :—
Mrs. Habekost, Master Habekost, Mr. Lim Song Kee, Mr. and Mrs. Lim Peng Koon, Messrs. Chia Whee Kheng, Lim Pek Hiow, Tan Chong Chik.
By s.s. Kuching to Singapore on 26tb July:—
Misses Bong Kim En, G. E. Collinson, Messrs. K. H. Gillan, Chia Hui Kheng.
By s B. Vyner Brooke from Singapore on 28th July:—
Messrs. J, D., Mead, E. H. P. Bengtsson, Revd. Amstutz, Messrs. H. Lazarus, Lim Thian Liang, Revd. A. Cheng. Revd. S. Ding, Messrs. Lim Kheng Seng, Chan Kee Yew, Eng Si Chi, Chan Wen Yin, Chan Quai Tang, S. S. Tang, Taj Oon Boon.
LIST OF CABIN PASSENGERS.
By m.v. Sri Mukah from Sibu on 4th July:—
Mr. Bruce Than, Mrs. Bruce Than and child, Messrs. J. Radig, Sim Sim Leng, Malay Lady and two children, Messrs. Teo Guan Piang, Ang Kiat Seong, Mrs. Mason, Madam Teo Ah Nio.
By s.s. Margaret from Limbing, Lawas, Bintulu, Sibu and Sarikei on 8th July:— :
Mr. Usop, Limbang, Mrs. Francis Lim and daughter, Bintulu, Messrs. P. Cobbold, Sibu, Durai, Lawas, Abang Saini, Lawas, G. F. Dare, Sarikei, H. J. W. Habekost, Sarikei.
By s.s Gladys from Kuching to Miri on 8th July :—
Lieut. G. A. Yeatis, Lieut. Murphy. Messrs. W. V. Hanson, Cheng Joon Kee, Harry Brodie.
By m.s. Sri Mukah from Sibu on 11th July :—
Messrs. Boyd, Ping Ming Kang, W. Clark, Yap Ah Wee, Bryon Broke, Lim Huan Boo, Suleiman, Li. Chiap Meng, Fathers Klerk, Mulder, Berghi, Odyk, Messrs. Lim Chin Kuan, Tong Peng Hock, Choo Chung Sin, Wee Teng Hiu, Wee Siaw Hoon, Wee Siang Teck, Lee Cheng Leong, Lim Kui Choon.
By S.S. Gladys from Miri on 16th July :—
Mouseigneur Wachter, Rev. Father Jansen, Mrs. Woodfow, Mr. Chong Joon Kee.
By m.s. Sri Mukah from Sibu on 18th July :—
Capt. Le Gros Clarke, Mothers Peter, Mary, Mr. G. N. Daly, Sisters Lucilla, Clotilda, Dorothes, Alphonsos, Mr. F. Chaplin. Mr. and Mrs. Mohd. Chi and child.
By m.v. Sri Mukah from Sibu on 25th July:—
Mr. H. Strong, Mrs. Pawak and two children, Messrs, Seng Ah Si, Gol, Awang Badar, Salleh, Mrs. Gol and five children, two Malay Ladies.
By s.s. Margaret front Lawas, Bintulu and Sibu on 27th July:—
Messrs. D. E. Calver, Sebel, Liewa, Lawas, Mr. Andrew Law, Bintulu, Messrs. Sahari, Kim Pee, Muan Shiew, Sibu.
Port of Miri. PASSENGER MOVEMENTS, MIRI, JUNE, 1930.
Per m.v. Murudu from Singapore, 3rd June :—
Mr. W. Smallwood, Mrs. Maxwell and Mr. J. Gibson.
Per m.v. Marudu to B.N.B., 3rd June:—
Mr. and Mrs. T. R. Jones and family, Mr. G. R. Bailey, Mr. A. L. McLaine.
Per s.s. Kajang to Singapore, 6th June:—
Mr. C. H. Olmsted. Per s.s. Darvel to B.M.B., 10th June:—
Messrs. J. C. Lynn, J. Caird and E. E. Eager.
Per m.v. Marudu from B.N.B., 13th June :— Mr. A. L. McLaine.
Per m.v. Marudu to Singapore, 13th June :— Mr. H. Hodson.
Per s.s. Kajang from Singapore, 17th June :—
Mr. and Mrs. H. G. Gray and family.
Per s.s. Kajanq to B.N.B., 17th June:—
Messrs. C. W. P. E. Green, T. H. Whiting and W. Drake.
Per s.s. Darvel from B.N.B., 20th June:—
Mr. and Mrs. T. R. Jones and family, Messrs. Bailey and Bamford.
Per s.s. Darvel to Singapore, 20th June:—
Mr. and Mrs. H. F. Landgraf and family, Mr. and Mrs. S. L. Roberts and family, Mrs. W. C. Green and Messrs. T. M. Browne and H. Barton.
Per s.s. Kajang front B.N.B., 27lh June:—
Sister Rose.	Per S.S. Kajang to Singapore, 27th June:—
Mr. W. M. Johnson.
Per s.s. Marudu to B.N.B., 24th June:—
Mr. J. M. Rodger.
SAILINGS TO EUROPE.
P. and O. Company.
(Passenger Agents—Borneo Co., Ltd.)
(Freight Agents—Sarawak Steamship Co.)
P. & O. NOTICE.
New interchange arrangements have been made between the Blue Funnel Line and the P. & O. S.N.Co.
Blue Funnel Line or P. & O. S.N. Co. ticket holders may, over the Far Eastern routes, utilise their tickets, subject to any smalt adjustment of fares that may be necessary, for travel in a vessel or vessels of the other Company. Both single and return tickets are interchangeable.
1 Passage money to London £33 First and £31 Second Class.
Blue Funnel Line.
(Agents—Borneo Co., Ltd.)
S.S. ANOHISES.
We have pleasure in announcing that the Blue Funnel Line "A" class passenger steamer An Rises has now been scheduled to leave Singapore for Marseilles and London on or about 28th April, 1930, one week after the departure of the regular April "A" class sailing.
A considerable amount of extra accommodation is thus made available at the busiest time of the homeward season.
Netherland Steamship Co.
(Agents—Borneo Co., Ltd.)
Calling at Balawan, Sabang, Genoa, Algiers and Southampton.
[Editor's Note:—No sailings have been supplied to us, with regard to this fine line of steamers.]
East Asiatic Co., Ltd.
(Agents—Borneo Co., Ltd.)
These vessels sail from Bangkok, calling at Singapore, Penang and London.
All double cabins have got private bathrooms. Doctor and Stewardess are carried.
Glen Line Limited.
(Agents—Borneo Co., Limited.)
Nippon Yusen Kaisha.
Calling at Aden, Naples, Marseilles, Gibraltar and London.	Passenger Agents—Sarawak Steamship Co., Ltd,)
(Frieght Agents—Borneo Co., Ltd.)
[The tonnage of the fleet is not given by the Agents.—Editor.]
Two gigantic motor liners, the Terukuni Maru and the Yasukuni Maru of the N.Y.K. Line, are now being built by the Mitsubishi Shipbuilding and Engineering Company, Limited, at their Nagasaki establishment, which recently turned out the Asama Maru and Tatsuta Maru, two of the N.Y.K.'s new motor liners for the trans-Pacific service.
The Terukuni Maru, which was launched on the 19th December, 1920, is to be delivered to the company on 3lst May next and to sail from Yokohama for Europe on 30th June.
The Yasukuni Maru, was launched on the 16th February. She is to be-delivered to the company on 31st August, and to start for her maiden voyage to Europe leaving Yokohama on 22nd September.
These vessels of 11,800 gross tonnage are specially designed and equipped for the European service of the company, and there can be little doubt that the new liners will play an important part in the further development of the traffic service between Europe and the Orient.
The Suite de Luxe is situated on the starboard side and at the front part of A deck. It comprises a sitting-room a bedroom a private bath, etc.
Except the rooms for 3 persons which have two beds and one pullman berth, all the rooms are equipped with beds of the land type with Simmons " Beautyrest " mattresses. The decoration of the rooms is neat and most pleasing.
Royal Dutch Indian Airways K.N.I.L.M.
From 1st May, 1930, a weekly air service has been established between Singapore and Java. The machines are triple-engined Fokker-monoplanes each been provided with 8 armchairs for passengers.
The fans are: Singapore to Batavia, $135; Batavia to Singapore, via Semarang and Sourabaia, $185. Departure from Seletar Aerodrome, Singapore is at 7 a.m. on Wednesdays, reaching Batavia, via Palembang, at 14.30. The return journey starts at 7.20 a.m. each Tuesday.
Official and Semi-official Announcements.
APPOINTMENTS.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. R. G. Aikman to act as Superintendent of Customs, Fourth and Fifth Divisions, and as Superintendent of Shipping, Miri, with effect from 14th June, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Mr. F. Harding to be an Assistant in the Department of Telegraphs and Telephones, with effect from 16th June, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. N. E. Hughes, Passed Cadet, to do duty in the Secretariat, Kuching, with effect from 20th June, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. P. Murray-Scott, Passed Cadet, to do duty in Kuching, with effect from 21st June, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to delegate the powers of a Magistrate's Court Magistrate, under Older No. XXX. 1922, to Mr. P. Murray-Scott within the limits of the Kuching district, with effect from 21st June, 1939, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Dr. W. Hutchison to act as Principal Medical Officer and as Registrar of Births and Deaths of British Subjects, Sarawak, with effect from 23rd June, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda ban been pleased to appoint Dr. G. O. Gauge to act as Chief Assistant Medical Officer, with effect from 23rd June, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to delegate the powers of a Magistrate's Court Magistrate, under Order No. XXX, 1922, to Mr. S. G. Hansom within the limits of the Fourth Division, with effect from 26th June, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to appoint Mr. A. K. Brown to be a Land officer, with effect from 30th June, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to appoint Mr. B. Summers to be Land Officer, Second Division, with effect from 26tb June. 1930, inclusive.
PROMOTION.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to approve of the promotion of Mr. H. E. Cutfield, an Officer of Class III, Sarawak Civil Service, to be an Officer of Class II, with effect from 21st June, 1930, inclusive.
APPOINTMENT VACATED.
Dr. G. O. Gauge censes to be Divisional Medical Officer, Third Division, with effect from 10th June, 1930, inclusive.
LEAVE.
Mr. G J. D. Walters, an Officer in Class III of the Sarawak Civil Service, has been grunted four months and three days' sick leave on full pay, with effect from 25th February, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. A. L. McLaine, Assistant Treasurer, has been granted ten days' vacation leave on full pay, with effect from 3rd June, 1930, inclusive.
Dr. C. O. Gauge, Assistant Medical Officer, has been granted eight days' vacation leave on full pay, with effect from 11th June, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to grant to Mr. G. J. D. Walters, an Officer in Class III of the Sarawak Civil Service, six months' sick leave on full pay, with effect from 28th June, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to grant to Dr. E. M. Marjoribanks, Principal Medical Officer, three months' full pay leave on special duly, with effect from 28th June, 1930, inclusive.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has been pleased to grant to Mr. R. D. St. J. Horton, an Officer in Class II of the Sarawak Civil Service, seven months leave on full pay, with effect from 28th June, 1930, inclusive.	Mr. W. F. Dick, District Officer, Sibu, has been granted two months' vacation leave on full pay, with effect from 10th May, 1930, inclusive.
Mr. F. O. Blagg, Legal Adviser, has been granted twelve days' vacation leave on full pay, with effect from 23rd June, 1930, inclusive.	Mr. W. S. B. Buck. Acting District Officer, Kuching, has been granted eight days' vacation leave on full pay, with effect from 23rd June, 1930, inclusive.	Mr. E, M. Woodward; Acting Assistant Secretary, has been granted eight days' vacation leave on pay, with effect from 23rd June, 1930, inclusive.
Visit of His Excellency the British Agent for North Borneo and Sarawak.
Provisional Programme for the forthcoming visit of His Excellency the Governor of the Straits Settlements and British Agent for North Borneo and Sarawak : —
Monday, 4th August, 1930.
H.E.Y. Seabelle II is due at Tanjong Po at 8 a.m. The Harbour Master will go on board, and will pilot the yacht to Kuching.
On passing the Fort a salute will be fired and the Pengkalan guards will present arms.
At 11 a.m. the Seabelle will m_or in mid-stream almost opposite the Astana. The Siamese State barge, which will be manned by Police, will go alongside with the Chief Secretary and the Treasurer, who will meet His Excellency on board Uniform will be worn.
The barge will take His Excellency, who will be in uniform, to the Astana pengkalan. As he reaches the top of the steps the guard of honour will present arms and the band will play the British National Anthem.
His Excellency inspects guard of honour.
At the Astana, His Highness the Tuan Muda meets His Excellency at the top of the entrance stairs. His Highness the Tuan Muda then introduces the Resident, First Division, and the Datu Bandar, who introduces other Datus.
His Highness the Tuan Muda presents Mr. Ong Tiang Swee and Capt. Le Gros Clark, who introduces other leading Chinese.
4.30 p.m —His Excellency will drive round with His Highness the Tuan Muda to get a general idea of the place.	Dinner will be at 7.45 for 8 p.m. Only Heads of Departments and some of the more prominent residents will be present.
Dress.—White mess jackets and white waistcoats. Orders and decorations will be worn. Those wearing decorations will wear white ties, remainder black.
Toasts.—The toasts will be as follows and in this order : —
"His Majesty the King," proposed by His Highness the Tuan Muda.
"His Highness the Rajah," proposed by His Excellency the British Agent.
"Sir Cecil and Lady Clementi," proposed by His Highness the Tuan Muda.
These will be the only toasts proposed, and His Excellency will not make a speech.
After dinner His Highness the Tuan Muda and His Excellency will drive round the bazaar and kampongs, which will be illuminated.
His Excellency and Lady Clementi will stay the night at the Astana.
Tuesday, 5th August, 1939.
9 a.m.—His Excellency and His Highness the Tuan Muda will go across river and meet the Datus in Chief Secretary's Office, after which the Chief Secretary will take His Excellency round the Government Offices. Later His Excellency will drive round the Dock, Fire Station, Workshop, Markets, School, etc., finishing up, if possible, at the Hospital.
Evening.—His Excellency will go for a drive.
7.45 p.m.—Dinner. Only the Astana party will be present.
After dinner the Astana party will go to the Fort to see some Sea-Dyak dancing. Should it be raining, this will take place in the Astana dining room.
After the dancing. His Excellency and party will embark in launches for Pending, where they will go on board the Seabelle. Wednesday, 6th August, 1930.
H.E.Y Seabelle II will leave Pending at daybreak.
Tender.
Tenders are invited for the erection of an Aquarium in the Public Gardens at Kuching, for which the foundations are aleady in situ. Plans and specification can be inspected during Office hours at the Health Department. Tenders will close on 14th August. The Government does not bind itself to accept the lowest, or any tender.