VOL. LXI.
No. 937.
The Sarawak Gazette.
Price
KUCHING, Thursday, October 1st, 1931.
20 CENTS.
The Sarawak Gazette.	THURSDAY, OCTOBER 1st, 1931.
Contents.
Birth.
OPENG. -At Kampong No. 2, Datu’s Road, Kuching, on 3rd September, 1931, the wife of Abang Openg clerk of District Office, of a son.
Acknowledgment.
Mrs. H. Jitam and family are deeply grateful to all relatives and friends for their kind messages of sympathy, floral tributes and attendances at the funeral of the late Mr. H. Jitam.
Local and Personal.
September.	,
His Highness the Rajah’s Birthday, Saturday the 26th of September was observed as a public holiday.
A Review of the Sarawak Rangers and an investiture were held by His Highness the Tuan Muda at 8.0 a.m. on the Parade Ground.
A full account of the celebrations appears elsewhere in this number.
We understand that, owing to the unprecedented trade depression, a phrase of which everyone is weary, there will be no Regatta in Kuching at New Year as it is considered unlikely that sufficient funds will be available.
Interest in the Regatta this year was poor and it is anticipated that as the arrangements must of necessity be somewhat curtailed, it is likely to excite even less interest then heretofore.
It is a pity to forego, such a time-honoured event even tor one season but it is a matter for still greater commiseration that the world is at present financially lop-sided.
Kuching becomes more modem every day. The latest innovation is “The Talkies” which were introduced at the Globe Theatre early in September, and had a successful run throughout most of the month.
Many people saw (and heard) this form of entertainment for the first time, and the proprietors of the show are to be congratulated on their enterprise, even if some of their stop press news items were a trifle archaic!
We cannot help remarking however that Mr. Maurice Chevalier would look better if he wore anything rather than a “gent’s straw boater” with evening dress when appearing in the role of an ambassador in Paris! However as a friend of ours remarked, he looked better in “The Big Pond.” Well! If he will wear marine headgear after dinner we are forced to agree that he would look better in any big pond.
Additional excitement was provided by the visit of a Football team from Miri.
The team, which included several members of the S.O.L. European staff was accompanied by Mr. F. G. Carpenter, District Officer, Miri and Mr. D. V. Murphy, Actg. Supt. of Police of that town; the latter we understand, in the capacity of business manager to the team.
Two games were played, one against the K.F.C. and another against a representative eleven chosen from some of the best players in the Kuching league. (We say some of the best players, please.) Results of these matches will be found on another page, (unless our reader has used it ere now, to wrap up the mutton chops.)
Tremendous crowds turned up to watch the matches and we hope that now transport is no longer a problem, such contests with teams outside Kuching will become annual fixtures.
Mr. H. E. Cutfield returned from home leave by the Vyner Brooke on the 7th and proceeded to Sibu, to which District he is appointed Travelling District Officer, and Mr. H. E. Davidson returned from a visit to Singapore on the 18th by the same vessel.
Mr. G. R. H. Arundell returned from Singapore, when he has been receiving medical attention, and left shortly after for England for further treatment to his eyes.
We hope that Mr. Arundell will soon return to duty in normal health.
Various changes have taken place recently in the personel of the Sarawak Steamship Co.
Capt. R. E. Borton left Singapore on the 28th on home leave and Capt. A. C. Benfield returned to resume his appointment as master of the Vyner Brooke.
Mr. F. E. Page Assistant in the Kuching Office has left the country, and Mr. W. A. Kimpster has been appointed a director of the Company and will act as Secretary.
Mr. J. C. Hockaday relinquishes his appointment as local Superintendent and goes back to sea, his place being taken by Capt. James, late of the Vyner Brooke.
Mr. J. P. Baird Municipal Commissioner and Capt. C. D. Le Gros Clark Secretary for Chinese Affairs left Kuching for England on seven months’ furlough on September 5th.
A serious fire took place at the house of Mr. Barnabas in Nanas Road on the night of September, 2nd. Barnabas himself received very severe burns from which he died a few days later. He is said to have sustained the burns while handling a bucket which, so he though contained water. Actually, it is believe to have contained benzine, undoubtedly placed there deliberately by some person unknown, who also probably ignited the house.
The Police are offering a substantial reward for information leading to a conviction.
One Bong Ah Poh a Kheh Chinese, was executed on the 3rd, having been found guilty of a particularly callous murder of a woman half Hylam, half Dyak; the motive was believed to have been jealousy.
The “Landas,” running close to its official starting time, October 1st, announced its arrival with a short hurricane on the 27th which blew down several trees and put telephones and lights out of action for a few hours.
Mr. A. A. Rennie, Treasurer of Sarawak who has been across to Singapore on official business, returned to Kuching on the 28th.
It is understood that the S.S. Coy’s Darvel is replacing the Pangkor on October 10th, until further notice.
Ven. Archdeacon Graham White came over to Kuching on a short holiday and returned to Singapore on the 12th.
The weather at home continuous in its arctic monotony, we hear. In spite of this, it is reported that hundreds of ice-cream merchants throng the streets of sea side towns with barrows mutely requesting the frozen citizen to “Stop me and buy one.” (Ice bricks from 4d-most inappropriate.) We also notice that Lady-whose four daughters are among the ugliest and most unpopular of this years Debutantes, attends all social functions in London in a car to which has been affixed the legend “Stop me and buy one!”
This sort of thing makes one realise how near is the Pole to the country we call home, and how incidentally it is also nearly “up the pole” as the saying goes, and we cannot help wondering what Mr. Ghandi feels about it.
In this connection we have pleasure in publishing this month an article from the pen of our correspondent the Optimistic Fiddler who gives an account of his voyage with the Mahatma, to London.
We read in the Sadong monthly report that a severe thunderstorm occurred in that station, lightning struct the flagstaff and killed a boy in a building nearby.
We hear on good authority that the Band of the Sarawak Rangers is to be, well, disbanded (no pun is intended), as a measure of economy. Even music apparently has to be regarded as a luxury in these days and the time is fast approaching when everything will come under this category-when enterprise and trade will cease altogether and we shall all lead the simple life, plucking dandelions from the fields for sustenance in the manner advocated by Lenin, Ghandi and Mr. Eustace Miles.
On the other hand we are informed that Government are reducing the water rate by ten per cent from October 1st which shows that the authorities have taken the lead in reducing the cost of living.
We hope that the local (especially Singapore) shops whose prices remain as ever, sky high, will follow suit. This action of Government should at least bring about a reduction in the price of soda water!
Snipe should be coming in very soon now. We hear that a few were seen in Sibu as early as August 27th. A few “Padi Birds” have been seen already. We appeal to local sportsmen to refrain from armed onslaughts on the birds as soon as they arrive as they are generally thin and meagre at this time, and it always pays to allow them at least a month in which to settle in and fatten up. We refer to the snipe of course. (Padi birds cost 5/- a time if shot!)
His Highness the Rajah’s Birthday Celebrations.
On Saturday the 26th of September, His Highness the Rajah’s Birthday, a Public Holiday was observed in Kuching and throughout the State.
At about 7.30 a.m. many people began to assemble on the Fort Margherita Parade Ground, around which stands had been erected for the convenience of spectators of the Review of Troops and the Investiture. Punctually at 8 a.m. His Highness the Tuan Muda drove up to the ground, accompanied by Mr. J. C. Swayne Resident, First Division.
His Highness, on arrival at the Saluting Point, was received with a Royal Salute and then proceeded to inspect the Battalion.
A leu-de-Joie and an Artillery Salute of it guns were then fired, and the troops gave three cheers for His Highness the Rajah, after which the Battalion marched past by companies, returning in close column to form a Hollow Square on the Inspection line, for the presentation of medals which followed immediately.
His Highness the Tuan Muda presented Long Service Decorations to 23 recipients and Long Service medals to six Rangers, five Police and one Fireman.
The Battalion then advanced in Review Order and Presented Arms, thus concluding the Parade.
The movements of the Battalion were carried out with a “snap” and precision which does credit to themselves and their Officers.
Sarawak and India. A Comparison.
There are two items appearing in this number of the Gazette which, taken side by side bring to mind very forcibly the very wide gap existing between two schools of thought, namely justification of Imperial rule on one side and encouragement of Home Rule on the other.
The two items referred to are firstly the speech of the late Mr. Maxwell, reprinted from the Gazette of 1889 and secondly an account of Mr. Ghandi’s voyage to England to take part in the Round Table conference.
It is not the intention of the present writer to hold a brief for those who castigate Ghandi with phrases such as “seditious agitator” and “unscrupulous fanatic” or to side with those who talk of the “soul force” of this “saintly minded man.”
It is obvious that he and his followers have done an immense amount of harm and that they have been, indirectly at any rate, responsible for the instigation of many callous and foul murders. On the other hand one cannot but express a certain begrudged admiration for a man who is allowed to hobnob with Viceroys on equal terms and who indeed, “has got the whole world guessing.”
It is merely intended in this article, however, to compare the facts set forth in the late Mr. Maxwells speech with the attitude which prompts Ghandi and his followers to demand Swaraj.
Let us refer to a paragraph in Mr. Maxwell’s speech: -
“The country (Sarawak) under the corrupt rule of a Malay Rajah was in a State of Anarchy; the seas infected by Pirates, rendered trade impossible, whilst on the coast and also in the interior head hunting and murder were carried on without check.”
Such was the State of this country prior to the intervention of Sir James Brooke. And such, though probable a good deal worse, was the state of India before the British took control.
To quote Mr. Maxwell again: -
“On looking round now we find the Sarawak of to-day with her coasts free from Pirates and head-hunting stamped out.”
This was done in Sarawak in spite of bitter opposition and hindrance on the part of what was known as the “Little England Party” which had considerable influence in England during a part of the past century. The same peace was obtained at great cost for India by British Rule, although it must be admitted that it served a double purpose in the opening up of India’s vast resources to British Trade.
In Sarawak there is a complete lack of factional animosity. In India this is not so, through no fault of the British who spend vast sums in Police and troops to protect the Indians from each other. Most of those who have spent a life-time in India will say with conviction that if the British withdrew, Moslem and Hindu would rush at each other’s throats in no time at all.
But the congress party and their supporters at home say they disagree They are alone in this opinion, among those competent to judge. Yet looking at what has been accomplished in Sarawak and India and other countries by white rulers and comparing their positions now with those of one hundred years ago, surely there is a great justification for Imperial development? Yet a great many statesmen at home, of “Little England” tendencies, do not think so, apparently.
The spirit in which Ghandi and the congress are arguing seems not only dangerous to themselves but definitely lacking in gratitude and utterly devoid of reason.
It is amazing to hear of the concessions granted to them under the policy followed by the British Governments of recent years, a policy which fully intends to bring about the none too gradual introduction of Indian Home Rule.
If a small country such as Sarawak cannot be fairly administered by Oriental methods of rule, still less surely can India be so governed, with it’s better inter-caste and inter-religious factions.
It would be interesting to talk to a “Swarajist” two years after the withdrawal of white rule in the East, if such an eventuality should ever come to pass.
The Domestic Problem.
The latest news from home shows that the unemployment figures are now well above the two million merit and of these at least one quarter are women.
Nevertheless the difficulty experienced in obtaining reasonably efficient female domestics is rather more acute than it was in the comparatively halcyon days when this figure was merely sprouting to its present height. On the continent nearly every house is blessed with a chef (or a cheffe?) that knows his or her job in no uncertain manner, yet one has as little chance of finding one in England as of picking up the historic snowball in the nether regions.
The reasons for this one manifold-A cook merely has to say there are not sufficient cinemas in the district and proceed so break all the crockery, put the spinach in the teapot “by mistake,” mix the glauber salts in the hot cross buns instead of sugar (etc, ad lib) until her wretched employer is forced to give her one week’s notice and her fare back to Shoreditch in desperation. The cook does not suffer in many cases. She even goes on the “dole” -The fun then starts-domestic agents are appealed to; the lame and the halt and the feeble minded are sent along at the rate of one per month, their fares paid to (and from) the proposed place of work and a commission is extracted from the employer.
There is very seldom anyone available who is at all familiar with the work applied for or if, as in rare cases, this is so, the applicant is either (I) slightly mad (2) will only work in a town with cinema (3) asks colossal wages and will demand same or remain on the dole, doing nothing for something.
In short the domestic has the whip hand and the employer is not in a position to argue, chiefly as a result of the legislation introduced by the late lamented labour Government.
Doubtless the new National Government (which, if they can agree, should be a blending of the best points in the policy of all three parties) will put a stop to these malpractices. They are already taking measures to destroy the abuses and wastage enjoyed under the Unemployment Insurance Scheme.
There are therefore several known reasons for this lack of capable domestics at home.
The same extreme difficulty in obtaining capable servant obtains in this part of the world.
It is not so acute as at home it is true, but that is no compliment to the local workshy. There is no dole on which he can fall back if he does not like his allotted task.
Unemployment is however rampant and there should be a glut of efficient workers from which to select a boy or cook.
Cooks and boys, chiefly Hylams, there are, dozens of them, but extremely rarely does one have the good fortune to find one both willing and efficient.
Most of them require a six months course in their work before they are fitted to draw pay. In fact there is a sort of local ring of really bad servants who go the rounds “trying it on.” They will often work quite well on a month’s probation and when that is over and they are fairly safe they flop back into the rut hoping that it will be too much bother for the employer to find a substitute if they just do enough to get away with it. This is generally the case -the employer returns from his work probably somewhat weary and has to give every order at least three times before it sinks in. The order is carried out eventually in a half hearted way by which time the said employer is mentally exhausted, probably having done half the job himself.
What is wanted is a little new blood-China (not necessarily the island of Hainan) is famous for it’s excellent servants but we see few of them here.
A domestic agency would be welcome, if run by conscientious and efficient people. The usual commission could be levied for good servants obtained in the mutual advantage of all concerned.
Another practice which is somewhat abused is the giving of “characters.” The chief requirement in making out a character that if should be a true one, in common fairness to any future employers. Very few of these “characters” are really at all valuable in giving all indication of a servant’s worth. The employer’s patience is exhausted and in a heated moment he gives his servant notice. A month passes and his ire has cooled. Meanwhile the startled pursuivant has been electrified into sudden and unaccustomed activity.
“Poor chap” says the master of the house, “he wasn’t so bad really, it’s bad luck or him if we don’t give him some sort of chit.” Bad luck to him! What about the poor devil who takes on his cast off knave on the strength of this miserable sentiment? A typical form of character given to a cook who has had notice for doing everything short of poisoning his master is as follows: -
“Ah Sit is a good plain cook and I have always found him clean and honest.”
This probably in spite of the fact that the employer has never compared his accounts with market prices or even entered his kitchen where he would probably see seven bits of shark lying on seven bits of dirty newspaper all ready for the seven breakfasts he will risk his life eating during the ensuing week. He would see a clot of coffee grounds tied up in a piece of his own cast off pyjamas, -from which clot, if only he knew it, he. has drunk the second brew of “coffee,” the good plain cook and his vary plain friend from the bazaar having had the first. Unless the servant is a good one and deserves a good character it is only fair to give him no “chit” at all or merely a statement of the time employed with reasons for leaving or it thoroughly bad something similar lo the historic “chit” which is said to have run as follows. “If you must give bearer a berth, let it be a wide one.”
Only one Filipino lives in the British. Oil Colony of Sarawak.
[Extract from “The Manila Bulletin” (Fiction column?)].
“Did you ever know that there is but one single Filipino, struggling for his existence and hobnobbing among whites and nomadic hunters representing the lowest type of culture, in Sarawak, the only place in the world where a white rajah can be found?
Mr. and Mrs. H. K. Fortune, of the Shell Oil Company at Borneo, say so. They arrived in the city from Borneo where they stayed more than four years and are now on their way to the United States.
Sarawak is a British protectorate on the northwestern coast of Borneo. It has an area of 42,000 square miles and a population of about 600, one-third of whom are Europeans, mostly British. It has extensive oil wells owned and managed by the government of Great Britain.
Mr. Fortune, who had been in that unique place, stated that there is only one Filipino there. He said that the Filipino is a barber. He said that he knew before of a Filipino garage mechanic but that he had never heard about that boy during the past three years. It is his belief that the Filipino mechanic had sailed for the Philippines.
It was indicated by Mrs. Fortune that place in Borneo is under the direct control and supervision of C. B. Brooks, the only white rajah in the world. She said that rajah is living like a king. He has a family which lives luxuriously. The foreign populace of that place is made up mostly of Europeans and few Americans. There were more than 350 Europeans at that place two years ago but the number had been decreased considerably.
Mr. Fortune said that no person, except when expressly authorized by the government of Great Britain, can land in that small but rich oil country. He said that all boats calling at that place are required to stop more than 21 miles from the shore. No passengers, under ordinary circumstances, are allowed to go to that land.	.
Smoking is prohibited. Mrs. Fortune said. That is one reason why the government of Great Britain is taking all steps to avoid letting any visitor go to that place for fear that the cigar stubs of the foreigners may set fire to the oil there.
No resident of Sarawak is allowed to leave the place for more than 21 days a year.
Mr. Fortune said: “When you are entitled to what we call ‘local leave,’ you can visit Java and Sumatra for 21 days but not more than that under ordinary circumstances. Some of the residents are entitled to ‘home leave’ in which case they can take a vacation to their respective countries for about eight months.” Mr. and Mrs. Fortune are on a “home leave” vacation in the United States. They are stopping in the Philippines to visit Mr. Fortune’s brother who has been residing in Iloilo for the past 24 years.”
(The above Fairy Story appeared in the Manila Bulletin on 7th August, 1931. We are safe in saying that this article represents the largest printed collection of “Terminological Inexactitudes” since Ananias published his memoirs. The Filipino “struggling for his existence.” runs a prosperous barber’s shop and we have never seen him hobnobbing with any “nomadic hunters;” no, sir, all wrong. We are expecting at any moment to hear that in the city of Manila, locked up in the local Zoo, there is a Sarawakian aborigine of the lowest culture, flapping his wings and yawning through his hideous proboscis as he reads with sorrow and pity the latest Manila Bulletin; winks at a passing Pterodactyl and eventually flops down dead, having realized that there are only 599 of his kind left in his tobaccoless homeland, a home which he will never again approach nearer than 21 miles, and also that he should have visited Java or Sumatra for not more than 21 days.
Did Mr. Fortune really tell the Editor M.B. all these things? If so the credulity of Editors is incredible-and it might be of use if a series of lectures are delivered in Miri for the benefit of certain people about to leave it, the subject being “The Land we live in” or “The Truth at Last together with a few Pardonable Embellishments for the American Press.” -Ed.
Things it would be Rude to Ask.
Who is the motorist who drove his car into the ditch on Club Hill, then fell out and let her rip down to the bottom over the sixth tee?
Has he found the car yet?
Or is he still looking for his glasses?
It is rumoured that this wanton act was done in an attempt to save the life of a black and white cat; let us hope that this was the only black and white object which took part in this performance.
What were Lxxxy’s views when Bxxt rang him up at 2 o’clock on a Saturday afternoon to ask whether he would accompany him home on leave, via Siberia?
Saturday afternoon is a convenient time to dismiss leave via Siberia, as the mind is relaxed and one can concentrate properly on the price of black bread and the number of Samoyeds to be hired, etc.
Is Bxxt’s bruised eyebrow connected with this episode?
Television is an accomplished fact but has “teleassault” or “telebattery” arrived also?
Why is not the Government dairy farm the financial success it deserves to be ?
The reason, according to that well-known bucolic authority Mr. Dxxe, is that many of the purchasers of milk in Kuching care little or nothing whether it is delivered to them in a sterilized jar with a hermetically sealed top or whether it is brought round in an old beer bottle with a Tamil’s thumb stuck in the top to prevent the milk spilling.
Where did Mr. Mxxxxxxe get the tie with the one inch diameter spheroids?
What do these spheroids represent?
Dunlop maxflis? or star dust from Jesselton?
When asked for the story of the super tie Mr. Mxxxxxxe became bashful.
"Corban, it was a gift,” he remarked in the Gaelic and blushed.
Who was the visitor from Singapore who was so “Shirty” at a recent lunch party?
Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in Askalon.
Who is the Officer with the asbestos ears?
The Optimistic Fiddler’s on furlough,
Nero!
Leaving you, though.
Modest Hero.
Is there anything in the rumour that there is an armed confabulary afoot to mechanize the Police Force?
We hear that Messrs. Vickers have just put on the market a new miniature tank designed for use in disturbed areas.
We trust our areas are not unduly disturbed.
A certain citizen of Kuching was recently sued for non-payment of monies due in regard to a “Crab Stance.”
Is this an offence? and does it occur in cricket, golf or boop-la?
“What d'you want to bring that up for?” a remark originally addressed to the whale by the beneficiaries under Jonah’s will.
History Without Tears.
For all these acts of folly James II must be held responsible, but then there happened something for which James could not be held responsible. His wife bore him a son.
Napoleon came and said Veni-Vidi-Viei. He was able to say this through his devilish chicanery.
There was nothing about Cavour to show that he was the greatest statesman of his time, for he had a common face and a habit of blinking from behind large horn rimmed spectacles.
The long tedious ministry of Hugh Walpole stretched out for 21 years.
Pitt was upright and incorrupt, and also incorruptible, neither corrupting nor being corrupted.
People who belonged to Trade Unions would pay their money in till they had a goodly sum in their particular Trade Union. They would then have a glorious strike and live upon the money they had saved till then. “The Times.”
[There’s many a true word spoken in ignorance. -Ed.]
Why do Crocodiles swallow Stones?
A Most interesting letter on the subject of stones in crocodiles has been addressed to The Times by Surgeon Rear-Admiral Charles M. Beadnell, who writes: -
“May I suggest a likely purpose for the stones swallowed by crocodiles, and support it with evidence by analogy from the motif underlying the pebble-swallowing habit to which attention has recently been drawn by Mr. Cherry Kearton after a long and intimate study of the black footed penguin in its native haunts? When moulting, this bird is unable to take the initial dive requisite to submergence because the air entangled in its be draggled feathers keeps its afloat. To get over a difficulty that would entail starvation the enguin takes in ballast in the shape of half a dozen pebbles or so if the sea is calm, more if it is rough, weighing itself until it can submerge quickly and chase its prey below water without wasting energy in counteracting the cork-like action of its disordered plumage.
“Crocodiles often have to lie motionless at the bottom of a strong current. Once going up a swift-flowing river in the Tanganyika country I saw a crocodile leap half out of the water, seize an egret perched on an overhanging branch, fall back again, and submerge with scarce a splash. Now the mean specific gravity of the body of one of these creatures only just exceeds that of water. Any factor, therefore, which assisted it, first in maintaining a fixed position at the bottom of the river, and, secondly, in submerging itself and its struggling prey more rapidly, would possess immense survival value. While probably the smaller stones that normally lie against the thick muscular gizzard like stomach of the crocodile exercise a food-triturating role surely the large ones lying in remoter parts of the alimentary canal must have a quite other function-namely, that of sinkers and stream anchors.
“The stone swallowing habit of crocodiles and other allied reptiles is not only very ancient, but is one that has long been familiar to man. There is an old belief among the Natives of the Nile that the crocodile swallows one pebble every birthday so that its age can be computed from the number of stones in its inside! Swallowed stones have been found in connexion with the skeletons of the extinct crocodiles, Teleosaurs, as also with those of the old Plesiosaurs. Seeley, the paleontologist, found in one plesiosaurian skeleton a whole peck of siliceous pebbles which, in his opinion, had undoubtedly been intentionally swallowed. Since then other authorities have recorded similar finds, some of the stones being half a pound in weight. Your correspondent, Mr. Brander, alludes to cases in India of pebbles found inside crocodiles ‘hundreds of miles from the nearest available pebble.’ How history re-peats itself! Some years ago there were found inside the skeleton of a plesiosaur discovered in W. Kansas many siliceous pebbles which, according to Professor Williston, could only have come from the shores of the old cretaceous seas about the Black Hills, hundreds of miles distant.” -East Africa.
Musings from Simanggang.
Like Gaul the opening of the new Government Offices in Simanggang was divided into three parts-the official or stodgy part, the sporting or sweaty part, and the terpsichorean or bestbehaviour part.
At seventy thirty a.m. on the 27th July, a salute of seven guns was fired from Fort Alice battery, and precisely at eight o’clock a procession of European and Native Officers headed by the Resident and Datu Haji Dulrashid, arrived in front of the new offices.
Here were assembled guards of honour furnished by the Police, under the Command of Assistant Sub-Inspector, Joini, and pupils from the Malay Government School, St. Luke’s School and the Simanggang Chinese School, under their respective masters. The latter school paraded with drums and bugles. In a space provided for them were stationed Malay and Dyak Chiefs, representatives of the Chinese Community and many Government servants. A large crowd filled practically the entire space.
At eight o’clock the flag was hoisted on the new flagstaff and the guards presented arms.
The Resident, accompanied by the Datu and the Administrative Officers, then inspected the guards. On the conclusion of this ceremony the Resident advanced to the main entrance, and taking a Malay sword handed to him by Penghulu Lambai cut the cord stretched across the entrance and declared the offices opened. Haji Yaman, the contractor, then handed the keys of the several offices to the Resident, who in turn gave these to the respective chief clerks, who opened all the doors.
The whole assembly then entered the offices.
After inspection by the public, including a large gathering of Malay, Chinese and Dyak ladies, the Datu in an eloquent speech detailed the transfer of Divisional headquarters from Fort Alice to the new building. He reminded his audience of the great part played by Fort Alice in the past and the regret that all must feel that present day conditions had necessitated a change to a more commodious building. At the same time he stressed the fact that a change had to be made, and all would agree with him that the offices just opened were a credit to Government and would be a great convenience to the public. Fort Alice, he added, would remain outwardly as it was, but would be transformed into a jail and Police office, and that Government had no intention of doing away with such an historic building. It would remain a permanent memorial of the old days in Simanggang and the Second Division as a whole.
Refreshments were then served, and the proceedings concluded shortly after half-past eight.
The new offices is a substantial and imposing block of buildings which can compare favourably with any other Government building in Sarawak. In this respect mention must be made of the excellent plans prepared by the Public Works Department, the careful supervision of temporary clerk of works, Matnor, lent by that Department, and last but not least Haji Yaman, the contractor, who displayed energy promptness and care during the comparatively short time in which such a big building was constructed.
At nine o’clock the regatta started and continued until noon. Owing to the present state of trade this event did not include the usual races for boats with unlimited crews, and the prizes were modest.
Nothing, however, will ever prevent natives from joining in one of their favourite sports, and Dyaks and Malays eagerly contested all the events.
As usual the judges and the umpire (and in most cases the starter too) were bombarded by disappointed runners, all assuring those officials, that they indeed were the winners. An arrack bar, however, did much to dispel the disappointed ones, whilst several generous Chinese gentlemen added to the supply, which early in the proceedings threatened to run out.
Perhaps the greatest event was the offices race which, owing to Mr. Harnack’s doubtful tactics in including in his selections, everyone who had carried his pegs, was won by the Survey Department. The crew of Tua Tua Kampong, however, gave them a close race. The struggle for last place was a contest of giants, but the Datu and his brother Native Officers stayed the course better than the European Officers, who steered by one who should really have been in a bath chair, zig zagged their way arriving at the wharf before anyone else in an exhausted state. The greasy pole had no difficulties for the boys until it was put at an impossible angle.
The land sports began after tiffin which may account for the poor times made in the first few races. On the system of push-as-push-can, however, most of the events went to the strongest, whilst the tug-of-war, twelve aside and as many as could be tailed on without comment, was won by the team who managed to evade the umpire’s eye.
The greasy pig hunt produced the customary mud scramble.
After tea the finals for the Recreation Club competitions took place, when prizes for tennis, table tennis (commonly called ping pong), billiards and badminton were won.
Fort Alice mess, the oldest in Sarawak, held its farewell dinner at eight o’clock.
Now a days it is difficult to write about old Sarawak. Perhaps it is better so. Nothing is so boring as to read or listen to the ways and graces of a past generation Or is it not that we are not so minded to do so. Progress is ever ruthless and the cherished ambitions and manners of a past age are only so much junk to the present age. Did they “do their stuff”? Assuredly they did-and the record of past members of the mess, now kept and framed, is surely a reminder of the many Officers, known and almost unknown, who have at various times been members of the mess, and who have in their different ways made so much of the history of Sarawak.
After a short speech by the senior member the Loving Cup, acquired by the mess in 1916 to commemorate its 50th anniversary was passed round for the last time.
The party then proceeded to the old Court Room of Fort Alice where a monster Malay and Dyak main had been arranged. Many were unable to gain admission owing to the press, but those who did were still there until the early hours of the next morning.
It is a moot question whether it is wise to educate the Ulu Ai Dyak. I know that this statement will rouse the ire of many educationalists-but if you do want to teach them something stick to the A.B.C. and such useful sentences as “The Snow-white lamb plays on the green grass” “the rat runs down the road. Run, rat, run!!,” but it is dangerous to teach the elements of science.
The other day a diving contest was about to take place. A deputation of Tuai begged us to be careful and examine the diving poles before the contestants descended into the water. Believing in their childlike nature we could not see how anything unfair could happen as long as the divers kept under the water. “Oh no” said the Tuai “You don’t know all the tricks. The dirty devils (or words to that effect) use hollow poles now-a-days and cut a hole at the lower end. Under they go and immediately gumsuck the hole, thereby obtaining air from the heavens above.” Lo, the poor Indian.
THE OPTIMISTIC FIDDLER.
A Message from Malaya.
I have reading in your most useful periodical of contemplated broadcastering to Colonis overseas. May I please push this with all hardship to persevere on this plan. Each night I listen, I hark, I hear nothing. My Motherland is dumb, her children goes to bed soundless. Other many continents I hear like as Moscow but I am not larning Russian talk but what use it propererga anyhow? P.C.J. I also hear, this is Happy Station, damn funny talker, very friend-like but he don’t speak my name but I write him, I hark to him too Thursday is best. With best wishes and don’t forget to talk my name on wireless message.
Pahang, Malaya.
“Radio Times.”
[We cannot talk your name on wireless message, O Hasan, but we will push this with all hardship in useful Periodical. -Ed.]
Matters of Muslim Interest.
PERLAWATAN DATO-DATO DAN TUA-TUA KAMPOMG.
KA-MADERASAH MELAYU SARAWAK.
Pada 26 hari Bulan August jam pukol 9 pagi yang Berhomat Dato’ Amar, Dato’ Bentara, Tuan Khatib, Tuan Bilal dan Tua-Tua Kampong telah melawati ka-Maderasah Melayu Sarawak yang di-temani oleh Tuan Haji Bol Hassan, Nadzir Sekolah-Sekolah Melayu memasoki ka-dalam bilek-bilek pelajaran Maderasah itu, kemudian murid-murid itu pun berhimpiin di- dalam Dewan di-tengah-tengah Maderasah itu mendengarkan uchapan yang di-uchapi oleh yang Berhormat Dato’ Amar sebagai yang tersebut di-bawah ini.
Bermula pada hari ini. ia-lali han yang mula-mula kami melawat ka-Maderasah Malayu ini, pada mensaksi kan jenis-jenis ke-hebatan dan ber-bagai-bagai pelajaran yang telah di-aturkan. Mana-kala ter-pandang oleh kami akan aturan-nya yang sangat-sangat di-chita-chita-kan pada beberapa zaman yang lalu. Maka serta merta ter-bayang-bayanglah ka-suka'an dan ka-gemaran di-hati kami sahingga mengaku-lah kami ini lah sabuah tempat pelajaran besar yang mula-mula di-diri-kan di-dalam bandar ini untok hak bagi putera bumi. Maka dengan hal yang demikian ber-banyak-banyak lah kami menerima shukur kahadzrat Tuhan Seru Sakalian Alam dan men-junjong ber-ribu ribu ter-ima kaseh kapada Seri Paduka Duli Yang Maha Mulia Tuan Raja atas ka-negerahan-nya yang ter ma'alum itu, khusu-san kapada Tuan Penguasa Pelajaran yang berhormat Tuan H. Jacques yang ber-penat lelah bagi meikhtiar-kan per-aturan yang sangat di-gemari itu serasa-rasa membangun kan putera bumi-ini dan-pada lelap ka-tiduran-nya. Maka kami harap mudah-mudahan dengan per-usaha'an itu, Maderasah ini jaya dengan ka-mashhuran, dan anak-anak, Maderasah-nya mansang dengan ke-rajinan.
Bagai penutup per-kata'an yang singkat ini kami ber-seru-lah kapada kaum Guru-Guru yang bijak-sana ia-itu didek-kan-lah anak-anak bang-sa kita supaya menjadi manusia yang ber-guna kapada per-gerak-an bangsa-nya yang akan datang, dan dari-sebab itu di-kehendaki Guru-Guru itu ber-muka manis, pengaseh, penyavang dan ber-sifat adil ya’ani sama timbang dari-sa-orang murid kapada sa-orang murid dan jua mahu-lah selalu ber-sifat tenang dan sabar di-dalam se-barang perkara ajaran mereka-itu. Dengan jalan yang demikian dapat-lah kelak memasok-kan pengajara'an kapada utak kanak- kanak dengan senang-nya.
Dan demikian jua, hai kanak-kanak (murid-murid) Suku Singa, Suku Harimau, Suku Serigala dan Suku Beruang. Ta’at-lah kamu akan penga-jara'an guru kamu supaya ber-oleh ber kat-lah kamu bagai menuntut ‘Almu kerana ‘Almu itu- lah kelak-boleh membawa kamu hidup di-dalam ka-menusia’an dan ka-senangan segia-nya ber-hati benar-lah kamu berlomba-lomba akan pela-jara’an kamu.
PERBALASAN UCHAPAN DARI-PADA HAJI BOL HASSAN.
Yang Berhormat Dato’-Dato’ dan Tua-Tua Kampong, maka dengan beberapa kesuka’an dan kegemaran di-hati murid-murid Maderasah Melayu Sarawak pada hari ini, khususan Guru-Guru mereka-itu menjumpai akan perlawatan segala yang ber-hormat itu, berserta dengan uchapan mereka-itu yang telah di-lafadzkan yang berhiasi dengan beberapa nasihat-nasihat yang sangat di-gemari.
Maka di-harapkan perlawatan dan uchapan yang terma’alum itu menjadi Sulohan mereka-itu dari pada gelap kebebalan dan pedoman dari-pada pelayaran penuntutan. Maka di-chita-chita mudah-mudahan mereka-itu boleh mempaku dan mempeterikan segala butir-butiran nasihat itu pada peringatan mereka-itu kerana perbidalan di-dalam buku-buku ada-lah pelajaran itu tangga bagi pengetahuan dan pengetahuan itu kunchi bagi kehidupan. Maka oleh yang demikian, Hey Murid-Murid.’ Bersunggoh sunggoh-lah kamu meninggikan pelajaran kamu maka dengan pelajaran itu dapat-lah kamu menchapaikan barang sebagai chita-chita yang di-kehendaki.
A Miri Macaronic.
(WITH APOLOGIES TO OVID.)
Spoil and his men came down to the town for a spot of main bola.
(Miri’s a long way away, t’other aide of the bay.) Murphy himself didn’t play; Anno Domini’s bowled him over;
(Not that that is to say, he hasn’t had his day.) Lilley the flower of the Team and Jock and the rest of the “egg club”
Barring Jimmy Bowie-he spent his leave on the tee.
Harold who played fallback and kicks as kuat as a camel,
Him they tried to do in, at a curry tiffin;
Chillies and curry and gin and turtle eggs banyak didalamnya
Yet he helped to win and the punters lost their tin.
Two mighty games they played versus Kuching’s strength and beauty,
Saturday night was a draw; Sunday Miri got more.
Now that they know the way down the coast to Muara Santubong,
Miri’s not very far-once your’e over the bar.
Back to their oily toil these stalwarts sailed (The Marudu),
Spud to his parade, laments and lemonade.
When shall we get our revenge? It depends on the price of the minyak?
Come again, sirs, come again, thunder lightning or rain.
“SATINKA.”
To England With Gandhi.
Gandhi and me-I and Gandhi-me and Gandhi-oh, I don’t knew what it ought to be are travelling to England in the same ship. There are of course a few other passengers as well, but the ego me cannot resist the thought of the reflected glory which I must attain by treading the decks with the man who has got the world guessing, and who is the cause of much heated argument in the smoke room.
Long before the hour of sailing Ballard Pier began to attract the populace. Apparently admission to the quay itself was restricted to the select two or three thousand; the teeming millions of India having to catch a glimpse of their saviour behind strong steel bars.
Contrary to custom. the first arrival was a bevy of ladies all dressed in the magenta (other descriptions were salmon-pink, orange, nude and poached egg) robes which, I am told, denote adherence to Gandhi. After that, however, matters began to move. An Indian Prince drove up in a most expensive Rolls Royce followed by a Super Buick carrying his hand baggage. Droves of men of all ages appeared wearing that peculiar white headdress, which reminds one so much of a miller’s cap. Parsees in even more peculiar hats gentlemen in frock coats and exceedingly tight jodhour. Fat men in sports coats and their nightshirts tucked up between their legs. Youths carrying suit cases labelled in large letters Mr... B.A. Crowds of the more austere clothed merely in a blanket. On the roofs of the godowns were the entire clerical staffs of such important offices as the Customs, Police and Excise, whilst behind the railings could be heard the murmurs and growlings of the immense crowd outside.
As well-known Indian passengers arrived and walked up the gangway they were greeted with cheers and clapping (at least, the select few thousand on the pier had been carefully chosen)
It was nothing, however, to the noise which broke out when Gandhi himself was steered through the crowd by a posse of Police and approached the ship.
Very few heroes come up to our expectations in their personal appearance. Nelson was probably a C.3. man. Wellingtons nose surely earned him the nickname of “Conk” at school: It Is hard to believe Winston’s head until one actually sees it, whilst if one met Henry VIII, Maryborough, or Dr. Johnson on a dark night nine men out of ten would report to the nearest Police Station the presence in the neighbourhood of a suspicious character.
Gandhi, therefore, is no beauty. Imagine a bent little old man, wearing a sort of dirty coloured sheet wrapped insecurely round his figure, and a watch dangling from his waist attached in some miraculous manner to his person. Very active for his appearance, he sprinted up the gangway, propelled, pushed and pulled by fervent friends. Over his shoulders was a garland of bright flowers.
The odd thousand or two on the wharf now attempted to board the ship, and for the next half hour the passengers made every effort to avoid being trodden to pulp by the coloured invasion. Excited followers climbed onto precious places whilst those who were unable to get on board spent their time in what would be an equivalent for three cheers for Gandhi.
It is comparatively easy to get a crowd of friends on board but it is another thing to get them off (as we know in Sarawak). Our Captain, who stands 6 feet 4 inches and is just about as broad, solved the difficulty by abducting his famous passenger and taking him up to the bridge. A detachment of stewards and deck hands linked arms and assisted by the Captain and his Officers, not only was Gandhi saved from his friends, but the aged Mrs. Gandhi was escorted ashore before she was trampled to death.
Gandhi. as you know, is travelling 2nd class, there being no steerage. He is accompanied by his son, Gandhi Junior, and a small personal staff including Admiral Slade’s daughter. This lady is described as the Official-in-Charge of Mr. Gandhi luggage. I fancy, however, that her duties will not be very arduous as her master’s wardrobe is light. One blanket, one sheet (at present on), and some bottles of goal’s milk, which the kindly P. & O. put on the ice free.
There are many other famous Indian politicians on the ship, including, Mrs. Naidu. Most of these, however, still adhere to the fleshpots, and are travelling 1st Class, albeit the motion of the Rajputana has no doubt convinced many of them that as regards food the difference between the two saloons is negligible.
Anyway, here we are on our way to England and the evenings are getting chilly. Now and again Mr. Gandhi marches up from the 2nd Class deck, and disdaining the barrier perambulates amongst the idle rich. He has not yet been seen playing deck quoits or bull board, and he does not attend the smoke room. There is a fancy dress dance in a few days, however, and we are looking forward in hopes. For instance he might borrow a uniform tunic from an Officer, the Captain’s R. N. R. Sword, and purchase a pair of the barber’s property bags and go as his friend Lord Willingdon.
However, as I have hinted above, all is happy and Mr. Gandhi’s departure from Bombay was a very grand affair and it must have given him the utmost gratification.
It is true, of course, that the wireless telegrams next morning mentioned that a slight bickering had taken place in the streets during the send-off, and that some dozens of stupid people had got themselves into Hospital. Apparently, too, a day later some Moslems were unaccountably apprehensive of the possible withdrawal of British protection and actually started to be noisy about it.
Why worry about such trifles, as Mr. Gandhi says, the human element will prevail, and all will live in peace as soon as that obnoxious Civil Service is withdrawn, and the Hindoo, the Moslem, the Sikh and the Parsee are allowed to settle their little differences in the old fashioned way.
THE OPTIMISTIC FIDDLER.
Something About Malay Women.
By JAWI PERANAKAN.
The Malay women of Sarawak are famous for their skill in handiworks such as weaving sarongs, knitting and trimming. But regarding the question of housekeeping, nursing babies and cooking or any other point in the food problem, they are, probably owing to the receiving of no proper training, a little backward compared to the women of other lands.
Extravagance is still practised by the local Malay women, so also superstition. These two practices are like the germs that do harm to the growth of a young plant Consequently the movement of the Malay race is very, very slow. The way of remedying this national sickness is described in the coming paragraphs of this article.
The Native entertainment Gendang Prempuan is always thought much of by the Malay women of this country. They seldom miss it on such occasions as weddings and engagements, and even after escaping from sudden accidents or recovering from serious illness. Sometimes a play lasts seven nights, beginning from 8 p.m. till the rising of the sun. Just think how much money had been spent for managing it, and what an injure was to the health of the youngsters for not sleeping nightly. I would agree to the views expressed by the Muslim leaders in the matter of stopping this practice But, on the contrary, however, I would also say that it is quite impossible to stop it entirely, as it is national. Why not? Because there is not a race in this world found to be without entertainments or amusements. Then the play of that sort is best to be performed by the young men on any occasion. But, as a rule people must remember to stop at a limited lime, and must not so against the religion they embrace.
Now. the one way of leading the Malays to the field of progress is to advise them to give education to their little girls. They should be told that an educated girl is in any way. quite different from her uneducated sister. That is to say that she is more intelligent and more civilized. Her mind is as bright as a well illuminated chamber. And too. unless she cares to control her character, her name will be odorous. Then I wonder why some people would say that giving education to the Malay girls is a disturbance to Mohamedan religion. The truth is that all Muslims should furnish themselves with education, especially the present generation. Hence, the Muslim leaders and the well to do Malays should also take interest in the matter of education for the daughters of the soil.
We all know that the girls are the future mothers of men and women, who will shoulder the responsibility of managing their houses. Should the Malay girls be given no chance of learning I think, they are sure to follow the style of their ignorant mothers.
Finally, I would suggest that, in order to make bigger accommodation, the Malay Girls’ School at Jalan Haji Taha should be extended or rebuilt and, if circumstance permits, some other three or four more schools of the kind should be opened in other Kampongs, that is to shorten the long walk of the small girls. For the sake of the Malay Community I hope the Director of Education and the Malay Inspector of Schools will put this matter under their sympathetic consideration.
A Tragedy of the Tropics.
Picture to yourself a typical Public School Class room dingy, with high imitation gothic windows reaching to the ceiling some 20 feet above. Each window has a long blue blind rolled up at the top. These blinds can be let down gently or at the run, like a mainsail on a cutter running into a squall.
Five long benches are placed at each side of the room, and at each of these sit five small boys who are making a creditable pretence of taking notes of a lecture on “Surds” delivered by the master, a small man with a bullying manner and a walrus moustache.
The small boys are tired of surds. They have been kept in an extra half-hour already because they cannot master the wily surd. In fact it is absurd, the whole business.
Suddenly at a given signal, unobserved by the walrus eve, all six blinds come crashing down with a noise like a stampede on an ostrich farm.
Darkness reigns all is confusion and babel.
Some occurrence of this nature has been, and will be, a bi-weekly event for years, and one Winterbotham minor has been the culprit in most cases.
Winterbotham has also been bottom of the form and President of the School Anti surd Society for a number of terms.
At length the cry of the walrus rings out in the dim irreligious light.
“Winterbotham come here at once, I saw you let down the window blind.”
Winterbotham minor feels his way toward the steps of the magisterial platform but crashes into black board, upsetting it upon the magisterial corn.
“How dare you, Sir,” the walrus shrieks “to behave in this deplorable manner?”
“Oh no Sir, please Sir, it wasn’t me Sir” Wails Winterbotham.
The out-come is that the youth is ordered to write out 200 lines of Virgil without the option of a beating, for the walrus knows too well that the Winterbotham epidermis is well nigh shell-proof.
The modefactor retires unabashed by this sentence for he holds both lap records (prose and verse) for speed writing.
This accomplishment however is destined to be his ruin for weekly doses of this penance have nipped in the bud the early promise of his copper-platehand , a hand which in it’s early stages was both legible and graceful.
Many years passed and Winterbotham accepted a responsible post in a Colonial Administrative Service; he had a great deal of writing to do; he had to sign his name at least 200 times a day on shoals of Vouchers, Schedules, Statistics and Returns which form, even in these enlightened days most of the routine of the smallest Government Office. He had to perform the duties of a Magistrate and commit to paper the distorted and rapid burbling of the evil doer.
Alas! He himself could scarce read his own writing; when he attempted to decipher it so that others might read what he had written, he failed. His script resembles the last will and testament of an ancient in the final grin of the palsy or a doctor’s prescription written in a French Railway carriage.
His right hand has become emaciated and horribly disfigured and very soon he will be able to write no more.
He attempted to ward off disaster by addressing a letter to his superior asking for one month’s leave for his right hand. Slowly and carefully, he wrote his M.S. which ended quite illegibly “I therefore beg leave to apply for one month’s leave as a precautionary measure, as I fear I am slowly losing the use of my right hand. I have, etc.”
His clerk, the poor zany, typed it as follows: - “I thereupon bug beans to apply for once, moth’s lean, as a probationary museum, or I pear I am surely, loving the use on my light hand, I have, etc.” The clerk was sacked and a laboured manuscript (resembling the gyrations of an inky beetle) was sent to the superior officer instead.
He did not get the leave applied for, and was told in reply that under Order No. XYZ of 1902, schedule R.I.P. Section (1 para (a’ his application for a supply of moth balls had been forwarded to the Director of Stocks and Stores, for his approval.
Very very sad. Winterbotham resigned and became an orator.
Speed.
A Westerner and an Oriental were travelling together in a London Tube train to a common destination.
They were deep in conversation when the train pulled up for one of it’s brief halts at a station. Suddenly the Oriental was jerked to his feet by his companion, bustled out of the train, and propelled at a great pace through numerous corridors and into another train.
“By doing this we save a minute and a half,” explained the Westerner.
“What shall we do with it?” Inquired the Oriental.
Mainly About Nothing.
Another Race Week has passed and many punters passed cut at least they have passed out of our ken for the time being of these I was, able to say nothing last month as I was unfortunately detained by a trivial incident while on my way to the press. I had reported at length on the creations displayed at our local Ascot; how smart did Mrs. Bodger Bottleworthy (and friend) look in her beautiful cerise and carraway crepe de chine dress, shoes of priceless peau de Python and orange Pekoe toque, etc., etc,; “sic transit gloria mundi” (and Saturday) the fashions have changed and so have I, therefore all this will never be made known to the world.
According to the Turf correspondent. Capt. Eric Spotaway, most peoples’ apple carts were upset by the Official Handicapper.
The Apple in one cart, which was a bit Dicky, fell into the Mire; (I saw it).
The handicapper who was on Holiday, offered the owner one Buck, but the latter spoke very Crossly and threw some Crockery at him; he was Caught right in the neck and had a fearful Bruise-Strong language ensued but a reconciliation was effected on the Course on the Monday. (How dreadful).
Shortly after this when the meeting had transferred itself “en bloc” to the club and I was going round collecting bar coupons which had been thrown away in mistake for dud tote tickets, I came upon a wretched specimen, a person of no visible means of sustenance except a flat horse’s neck which he was drinking (not eating).
He distilled himself into the surrounding atmosphere at my approach, dropping at the same time a tattered race card.
After I had finished the horse’s neck I picked up the race card and discovered the following fragment scribbled on the fly leaf, under the legend, “Please scratch.”
GEE FEVER.
(With apologies to the Poet Laureate).
I must go down to the Course again
To the Turf and the Sweeps and the Tote;
For I’m becoming a pauper,
And my overdraft’s not so remote.
My horses were all in the rear again
Through faulty training;
It’s the owner’s fault, it’s the jockey’s fault,
But I’m not complai ning.
I must go down to the Bank to-day
For the Treasury’s getting my goat
(They recently wrote me a “Snorter”
Though on me they usually dote;
My creditors (sic) have just found the again.
By sleuthlike trailing
It’s the cook’s fault, it’s the boy’s fault.
They both want brai ning.
I have returned from the course again
On the surf (I’m asleep on the boat)
We are soon to be sailing for Sibu
And Iv’e pawned my trouse’s and coat.
The stewards’ forgotten the gin again
Through faulty training
It’s the owner’s fault, it’s the captain’s fault
That my spirit is fai ling
His apples were obviously all upset If I had met him again I should have remarked, in the words of the Tamil station master “You must not drop your facetious matter here, please.
The Royal and Ancient game of Pool as generally played in this country differs somewhat from the orthodox method, mainly by the inclusion of the white or twenty-one point ball.
What a fearful hypnotic influence this wee timorous pollute casts upon the average player.
Strong men quiver and gulp strong waters as they roll her up the cushion to the top pocket, where she usually sticks waiting for the next player to collect 42 points.
Weak women whimper as she wobbles wistfully.
Some experts say that the substitution of red for white would destroy the hoodoo, nevertheless this wicked willock in it’s white whimsicality uses up more chalk than all the grammar schools in Great Britain.
Below are a few expressions commonly heard on the pool table.
IRREGULAR POOL TABLE EXPRESSIONS.
What about it partner?
Meaning that the speaker is about to giveaway 21 points in an attempt to pot a volunteered "white."
You can’t play against that!
Meaning that the speaker’s opponent has potted a ball in one of two ways-either (a) By an exceptionally good stroke for which the speaker allows no credit to the striker or (b) By a lucky strike for which the striker himself would ask no credit.
The “white” is free!
Meaning that the speaker’s opponent has just potted a free ball and left his own ball in such a position as to render the chances of potting the white with the next stroke extremely remote.
It’s risky but I’ll take it again!
Meaning that the sneaker’s has just potted the white and is left with another perfectly simple white but wishes to appear sporty.
I think I should bank that, partner!
Meaning that the speaker’s partner has just made a successful stroke at a fairly valuable ball and there is a possibility of his volunteering a baII with his next stroke. The speaker has no confidence in his partner and not infrequently hails from Aberdeen or some other place on the Scottish Railway.
Well chaps what about a few free balls?
Meaning that the hour is rather late and the speaker is a married man who has just received his umpteenth and final demand note from the other side of the Club.
And finally:
What about a few free drinks?
This means that the speaker has (a) Potted too many whites and is the winner (b) has received the final demand note and has been married 5 or more years.
(This is quite a regular expression).
It is reported that a Snail Fund has been floated and a scheme formulated to deal with the Giant African Snail, commonly known as the “Creeping Peril” among planters.
Rewards are offered per gallon (dry) of Snail and Snail’s eggs. It is suggested that all Government Departments should enter teams of six persons to compete for a cup, to be known as “The Inter-Departmental Snailing Challenge Trophy.” This should take the form of a silver snail shell tungkup, supported by three silver salt spoons as a pedestal. Competitors should note that the reward offered is solely for Snail’s bodies, shells and eggs-no remuneration is allowed for Snail’s nests, or other appurtenances of the snail. Royal Hunt Rules in all cases of dispute with a one dollar penalty for bumping or boring.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 42 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
Price. MONDAY, SEPTEMBER 2, 1889. 10 Cts.
At the anniversary dinner given by His Highness the Rajah at Astana on the 15th ultimo. The Hon'ble F. R. O. Maxwell, proposed the health of His Highness, and success to Sarawak in the following terms: -
“Ladies and Gentlemen -
We are assembled here tonight by the invitation of His Highness the Rajah to celebrate the both anniversary of the landing of Sir James Brooke in Sarawak on the 15th August. 1839, a day destined to be one of the highest import to the people of this Country. On that day Sir James Brooke arrived in this town and was saluted and received by the Malay Rajah, Muda Hassim. We have most of us read in “The life of Sir James Brooke” bv Sir Spencer St. John and Miss Jacobs, of the state of Society in Sarawak at that period. The Country under the corrupt rule of a Malay Rajah was in a state of anarchy; the seas, infested by pirates, rendered trade impossible, whilst on the coasts and also in the interior head hunting and murder were carried out without check.
From the day of Sir James Brooke’s arrival in this Country he set to work to fight against this state of things, and how gallantly he did it we also know from the books I have already quoted.
After a short time in Sarawak the title of Rajah was conferred on Sir James Brooke, and then commenced a reign devoted entirely to the interests of the people and the advancement of the Country, Piracies were put down with a strong hand, with the assistance of the British Navy; head hunting on the coast was checked and many other reforms were carried out. This work absorbed the whole of Sir James Brooke’s time and thought to the hour of his death when he was succeeded by the present Rajah, Sir Charles Brooke. Of His Highness the Rajah’s work in this Country since his succession, it would be presumptuous of me of speak but whereas few of us present knew the late Rajah and know of his deeds only from books, all of us have for a shorter or longer period lived under the rule of the present Rajah and have been able to watch the growth and development of the Country under his guidance.
On looking round now. we find Sarawak of to-day with her coasts free from Pirates and head hunting stamped out; security for life and property to the most remote corners of the territory, and consequently a steadily increasing trade. At peace internally, respected abroad. Sarawak owes this to the wise and just rule of her Rajah, Sir Charles Brooke. Ladies and Gentlemen, I ask you to join me in drinking the health of Sir Charles Brooke, Rajah of Sarawak, and prosperity to Sarawak.
Sarawak Library.
Kindly presented by His Highness the Rajah: -
First Division News.
July, 1931.
Extracts from the First Divisional Reports for July, 1931, by Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division: -
Resident’s Court. -Four criminal and five civil cases came before the court.
Among the criminal cases heard the most important was one in which Chiong Ah Hap and Lau Pu (f.), parent-in-law, and Chiong Lak Yee, husband, of a girl were prosecuted by Secretary for Chinese Affairs for breach of Order No. XXVII, 1911, (Chinese Betrothals and Marriages) Section 2. The question of computation of years in that section was raised and after Mr. Ong Tiang Swee, c.s.s. had given evidence that the Chinese Court always interpreted paragraph 2 “16 years of age” as by Chinese computation, the case was withdrawn. August, 1931.
Resident’s Court. -Four criminal and nine civil cases came before the Court.
Bong Ah Poh, a Kheh Chinese, was sentenced to death for the murder of his wife, Chang Tang Kek, and the sentence, having been confirmed by the supreme Court was duly carried out.
There were two appeals from the Police Court, Kuching, one in connection with a charge of continuing in an unlawful assembly after having been ordered to disperse, the other of joining an unlawful assembly with a deadly weapon. The findings in both these cases, however, were reversed and the accused were bound over for six months to keep the peace.
General. -His Highness The Rajah left Kuching for Europe on the 10th of August and His Highness the Tuan Muda arrived on the 17th, during the short interval the Committee of Administration was in charge.
The August Meeting of the Sarawak Turf Club was held at the beginning of the month and was attended by a majority of Outstation Officers.
His Highness the Tuan Muda’s birthday on the 8th was celebrated as a public holiday and the offices closed.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
August, 1931.
The Acting District Officer, J. G. Anderson, reports: -
District Court. -Fifteen cases were heard, two of which were criminal and thirteen civil. Of the two criminal cases, all were convictions. There was one case of concealment of properly, etc., to prevent distribution among creditors and one Contempt of Court. The civil claims involved amounts totaling $2,623.11 for which fees collected amounted to $121.
Magistrate’s Court. -One hundred and twenty-seven cases were heard, fourteen of which were criminal and one hundred and thirteen civil. Of the fourteen criminal cases, twelve convictions and two acquittals were adjudged. There were five
cases of assault, four Contempt of Court, one Breach of Municipal By-laws, one Breach of Customs and Shipping Regulations and three other offences. Fines imposed amounted to $46 and fees collected $42. The civil claims involved amounts totalling $2,908.63 for which fees collected amounted to $286.60.
Police Court. -Eighteen summary cases were brought before the Court. Fifteen convictions and three acquittals were obtained. The principal charges were four of theft, two of assault, two of being in possession of stolen property, two Breach of Municipal By-Laws and eight other offences. A total amount of $215 was paid in fines. In addition 79 Judgement Summons cases were dealt with during the month.
General. -His Highness the Rajah left Kuching for Europe by S.S. Vyner Brooke on the 10th and His Highness the Tuan Muda arrived by the same vessel on the 17th.
Datu Abang Haji Moasili was transferred from Limbang as Datu Hakim, Kuching, as from the 10th.
Abang Haji Zulaihi made a tour of the Samarahan district during the month. Lau Soon Thai. Divisional Treasury clerk proceeded on three weeks annual leave on the 12th. His work was done in his absence by Lucas Aboi assisted by Aloysious
Ho of this office. Chief clerk (District Office] Teo Teng returned from two and half months grading leave on the 17th.
Visitors. -Mr. J. B. Archer parsed through Kuching en route for Europe on furlough. He sailed on the 15th. Major W. C. Adams, Commandant British North Borneo Police arrived on the 15th.
Coroner’s Court. - Date 4/8/31/ (1.) Inquest held on the body of Ah Chin male Chinese (Lienchiew) found in the river at Kuala Buntal Sungei Empangi.
Verdict. -Accidental death by drowning caused by deceased’s Tongkang running into a storm. A rider was added that it would seem advisable that such Tongkang should bear a Plimsoll loading mark if running in such rough weather.
7.8.31.(2.) Inquest into death of Chang Tang Kek (f.) at 24th mile Simanggang Road. Verdict. -Murder by Bong Ah Poh (with whom she was living) by cutting her with a parang. Latter tried in Resident’s Court and found guilty of murder. Sentenced to death.
13.8.31. (3.) Inquest into death of Gui Kau Sam male Chinese (Hockian). Verdict. -Suicide by taking tuba while temporarily insane.
13.8.31.(4.) Inquiry into death of Yong Doo alias Hok Siew Hap who collapsed and died in a rickshaw on his way to Hospital from Secretary for Chinese Affairs. Body viewed-no visible cause of death. Post mortem revealed deceased died of heart failure. The verdict was in accordance with the evidence.
UPPER SARAWAK, BAU.
July, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports: -
District Court. -Fourteen cases were heard, thirteen of which were criminal cases, eleven resulted in convictions and two acquittals.
Magistrate’s Court. -Seventeen cases were heard, three of which were criminal and fourteen civil. Of the three criminal cases, two convictions and one acquittal were adjudged.
Fines imposed amounted to $114 and fees collected $47.50. The civil claims involved amounts totalling $370.29 for which fees collected amounted to $9.26.
Judicial. -The only notable cases during the month were that against Bong Nyan and Kim Joon who were sentenced to one year and six months’ imprisonment respectively for lurking house-trespass or house-breaking by night. Both accused gave notice to appeal against the decision which has been granted.
General. -On the 16th instant I arrived from Kuching to take over the affairs of the district from Mr. E. M. Woodward who proceeded to Kuching on the 18th. Visitors to the station during the month included the Superintendent of Lands, Mr. C. S. Griffiths, The Commissioner of Police, Mr. R. N. Reynolds, Messrs. McLaine, Leach, Simpson and Davies.
On 4th instant O.K Nagoi reported four doors of Kampong Subah destroyed by fire and an ex-gratia payment of $5 per door was paid to assist the families concerned.
During the month an application was made and approved for a vote of $400. Special Expenditure to purchase new plates for twenty cells of the electric light plant. The plates have now been ordered from Singapore.
A number of old type (white) receipt books were found to be in existence on my taking over and upon these being called in, they were found to have counterfoils missing. This necessitated an inquiry and a criminal charge of conversion is now pending against a Government servant.
On 28th instant the dresser reported an alleged case of small-pox in the female jail here. All prisoners and Police and Prison staff were segregated and other precautionary measures taken including vaccination of 257 persons round about the jail and in the bazaar. I am glad to be able to report howover that the case was diagnosed by the Principal Medical Officer. Dr Marjoribanks as being chicken-pox and not small-pox ax originally suspected and the health of the station is now to be looked upon as normal. In this connection S.I. South, Soon Hock arrived from Kuching and supervised the construction of a dangau for the suspects and assisted the dresser in vaccination, etc.
On the 29th instant an inquest was held on the body of Liew Ah Nyuk (f.), Buso and a verdict of suicide entered.
I left for Kuching to attend the Autumn Meeting of the Sarawak Turf Club on 31st and was away at the end of the month.
Gold Mining. -673.2 ounces of actual gold were obtained by the Bidi Gold Mining Company during the month.
Rainfall. -Highest recorded in twenty-four hours 1’49 inches, daily average '19 of all inches and total for the month 5’80 inches.
Prisons. -At the end of the month the female prisoners numbered 32 and the male prisoners 40. Total 72.
During the month the prison gangs were employed on the roads and on the general upkeep of the station.
One male prisoner was sent to The General Hospital Kuching for medical treatment during the month.
August, 1931
Resident’s Court. -Two criminal cases were heard, one resulted in conviction and one acquittal.
District Court. -Eight cases were heard, four of which were criminal cases, all resulted in convictions.
Magistrate’s Court. -Eleven cases were heard, seven of which were criminal and four civil. Of the seven criminal cases, all resulted in convictions. In addition eight Judgment Summons cases were dealt with during the month. Fines imposed amounted to $90 and fees collected $37.50. The civil claims involved amounts totaling $832.36 for which fees collected amounted to $18.
Judicial. -Notable cases during the month were: -(1) State vs. P.C. Musa, who was charged under section 409 I.P.C. and sentenced to three months’ imprisonment. (2) Causing hurt by rash and negligent act in which a Dyak of Kampong Singghi, Ra-an was ordered to pay blanja mati to the extent of $50 to the widow of Niah, who was accidently short dead by Ra-an. (3) An appeal case, in which Bong Nyan and Kim Joon who were sentenced to one year and six months’ imprisonment respectively under section 456 I.P.C. was made and the decision of the District Court, Bau set aside.
General. -I was away in Kuching at the beginning of the month for the Race Week. The 8th instant was observed as a Public Holiday in celebration of the birthday of His Highness the Tuan Muda.
I left for Lundu on 15th via Kuching on a visit to that station which has since been taken over by Mr. E. H. Elam. Simatan was visited on 19th and I was able to return to Bau on 22nd after having checked the books and cash of both stations. Orders were given in Lundu for the repair of the Government wharf which is in a dangerous condition and a number of other similar matters were dealt with.
Visitors to the station included the Resident, First Division, Mr. J. C. Swayne, the Principal Medical Officer, Dr. Marjoribanks, Major W. C. Adams of British North Borneo Constabulary, Mr. H. G. Keith, Conservator of Forests British North Borneo, Messrs. Calver, Reynolds, Combe and Simpson.
Health. -I am glad to be able to report that the suspected case of small-pox was identified by the Principal Medical Officer as being chicken-pox and that there has been no recurrence or spreading of the disease. The health of the station apart from minor fevers is remarkably good.
Public Works. -Work was set in hand towards the end of the month on new bathing places for the male and female prisoners and progress has been satisfactory.
Tenders have been called for, for the construction of a new extension to the female jail and also for 4 doors of Warders Barracks.
The Ferry at Batu Kitang was reported to be in a rotten condition and was taken down to Kuching on 15th instant for repairs being away at the month end. In consequence of this the lack of a telephone at Batu Kitang has made itself felt more than ever and it is hoped that something can be done in this connection to supply an undoubted public want.
Gold Mining. -Two applications were received during the mouth from persons of standing to take up land for the purpose of working gold and their applications are receiving attention.
A certain amount of trouble is being caused by gold streamers who are making unsightly holes all over the district and who have taken to breaking down and damming up Government ditches.
New regulations have now been formulated which it is hoped will stop this abuse.
618.81 ounces of actual gold were obtained by the Bidi Gold Mining Company during the month.
Rainfall. -Highest recorded in 24 hours 1’02 inches, daily average ‘11 of an inch and a total for month 3’45 inches.
LUNDU.
August, 1931.
The Court Writer, reports: -
General. -The offices were closed on the 8th being His Highness the Tuan Muda’s birthday.
On the 19th Mr. W. S. B. Buck, Acting Assistant District Officer, arrived in the rentis and after settling outstanding cases and looking into matters requiring attention, he returned to Bau via Kuching by the same boat on the 21st.
On the 29th Mr. E. H. Elam arrived in the Lucile and took over the station as from that date.
Visitors to the station during the month were the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak and Mrs. Danson.
Ten crocodiles measuring 44’5’’ were caught and destroyed by Drahman, the professional crocodile catcher from Samarahan during the month.
Court. -Ah Hian of Chop “Eng Hong Leong” was fined $25 and costs under Section 417 I.C.P.; Tera, Dol, Lani, Narudin, Drahman, Lilik and Bidin were fined $1 and costs each under Forest Reservation Order F-1 Section 11 Part 11-1.
Tahir (Malay, fined $5 under Malay Undang Undang Section 34; Jimah (f.) fined $22.14 under Malay Undang Undang Section 20; and Bugoh (Dyak) fined $6 for divorcing his wife.
Sugat and Mat (Dyak) were sentenced to three and six months each respectively under Section 379 I.P.C.; Hessen (Malay) was sentenced to three months’ imprisonment for non-payment of Native Court fine $44.28.
Ten civil, cases were dealt with claims amounting to $1,623.30.
Fines imposed and fees collected during the month amounted to $10.42 and $21.75 respectively.
Rainfall. -The rainfall for the month was 3’55 inches.
Monopolies. -Comparative statement of sales show: -
SADONG.
July, 1931.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports: -
Court. -Court work on the whole was heavier than usual but most of the cases were of a trivial nature. Cheng Kim on a charge of Falsification of Accounts section 477A was sent for trial to the Resident’s Court. Numerous Malays and Dayaks were fined for working forest produce without a licence.
A Coroner’s inquest was held into the death of Serai.
P.W.D. -The river erosion, although held back by the kayu bahru is still going on and it would appear necessary that some further studding be done in the near future.
Hospital. -At the Government Hospital one patient was admitted and was still there at the end of the month.
At the Dispensary 48 patients made 132 visits for treatment.
Only one N.A.B. injection was given during the month for Tertiary Yaws. It would appear that the Dyak and Malay are too busy with their padi farms to come down to Simunjan for treatment.
The accounts show revenue $90.40 an expenditure including salaries and rations $167.52.
Agriculture. -Mr. G. St. F. Dare. Field Officer, First Division arrived at the station on the 14th instant by m.l. Para. Together with Mr. Dare, I visited the Bugis padi farm, Ensingei, Gedong, and Tanah Puteh. Mr. Dare left for Nonok and Kuching on the 21st instant.
The Director of Agriculture and Mr. Dare again visited the station on the 29th instant in connection with the arrival of the new Bugis from Kuching.
Telegraphs and Telephone. -The Acting Superintendent Mr. W. G. Tait paid a visit to the station arriving on the 5th instant and returning to Kuching again on the 7th instant via the Simanggang Road.
Travelling. -I arrived back from the Ulu on the 5th instant having made a trip into the head waters of the Kayan. The Dyaks although all appearing to feel the slump do not complain and are now making preparation for their new padi farms.
General. -The old Capitan China, Ah Foh at Tabekang proving useless was dismissed on the 3rd instant and at a meeting of the Chinese in the district Kwan Siong Luk was appointed to fill the vacancy.
On the 17th the Superintendent of Surveys. Mr. N. A. Middlemas paid a short visit to Tebekang via the Simanggang Road.
On the 26th the Sadong Station experienced a very severe thunder storm lightning striking the flag staff and also the Officer-in-Charge’s dapor where a young boy was instantly killed.
On the 29th the Manager Sadong Colliery and myself left for Kuching by s.l. L’ Aubaine. The Manager returned by m.l. Betty on the 31st instant.
Trade and Customs. -Comparative Trade Returns are as follows: -
During the month eighteen vessels entered and seventeen cleared the Port.
August, 1931.
Court. -Although the Court work during the month has been fairly heavy only one case calls for mention. Daka, Dyak, was sentenced to two years imprisonment for causing death by a rash act Section No. 304a.
P.W.D. -The Government carpenter was employed on repairs to the Officer-in-Charge’s bungalow, bridges in Kampong Saging and latterly on the Station long boat.
The pipe-fitter was employed on general up-keep of the pipe line.
Hospital. -At the Government Hospital three patients were admitted, one was discharged, one died, leaving one remaining at the end of the month.
At the Dispensary seventy-two patients made one hundred and twenty-one visits for treatment.
Seventeen N.A.B. injections were given during the month of which two were for Primary Yaws, one for Crab Yaws, thirteen for Tertiary Yaws and one for Chronic Ulcer.
The Account show revenue $133.35 and Expenditure including salaries and rations $138.71.
Agriculture. -Mr. G. St. F. Dare visited the station from the 16th to the 21st and on the 25th instant with regard to the Bugis Padi Reserve at Sungei Apin.
Travelling. -I left for the Ulu on the 26th instant to settle up the Ris-Tarat boundary dispute. I was still away at the end of the month.
General. -On the 11th I arrived back from Kuching having attended the Turf Club Autumn Meeting.
On the 19th Mr. W. S. Harris left by s.s. L’ Aubaine for Kuching prior to his proceeding on home leave.
Trade and Customs. -Comparative Trade Returns are as follows: -
During the month seventeen vessels entered and eighteen cleared the Port.
Sadong Collieries Report.
August, 1931.
Extracts from the Sadong Collieries Report for August, 1931, by Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager: -
The output, export, local consumption, and coal stock figures for the month were as follows: -
Coal shipments exceeded output to the wharf by 27 tons 15 cwts.
The lower workings of No. 12 mine were dismantled, and the pumping plant has been removed to the surface.
The ventilating fan of this mine was also taken down, and stored away with the rest of the dismantled machinery.
A large area of the rough cattle-grazing-land cleared during the month was successfully burnt off on the 27th. Earlier in the month The Director of Agriculture and myself discussed the preliminary proposals regarding the transfer of the cattle and buffalo herds together with the mine reserve land to the Department of Agriculture at the end of the current year.
Mr. S. W. Harris, Mechanical Engineer, left here on retirement by the s.s. L’ Aubaine on the 19th.
The rainfall for the month was 3’93 inches.
Football.
VISIT OF MIRI TEAM.
Under the Auspices of the newly-formed Kuching Football Association two matches were played against teams from Miri during the week-end 12th and 13th September. This is the first occasion on record that such matches have taken place and naturally considerable local interest was aroused thereby.
The Miri party arrived by the s.s. Pangkor on Saturday afternoon and that same afternoon fielded a team against the Kuching Football Club.
Heavy rain just prior to the match and a continued drizzle throughout made conditions somewhat unpleasant but in spite of this a large crowd gathered to watch the match.
Kuching won the toss and Miri kicked off on a ground that was soft and water-logged and with a ball that was soon very heavy and greasy and consequently difficult to control. Really good football was out of the question but under the circumstances a most creditable performance was put up by both teams. The exchanges throughout were fairly even and a draw of two goals each was a satisfactory result.
The teams were as follows: -
Mr. Strathdee (Miri) refereed.
On Sunday afternoon on the Padungan Ground a match was played between teams representing the Kuching Football League and the Miri and District League respectively.
A record crowd turned up to watch the match but again as on the previous evening rain spoilt the play.
Through the courtesy of Lieutenant Murray-Scott, Acting Commandant of the Sarawak Rangers, the Band of the Sarawak Rangers played selections on the ground before the match and again during the interval.
Kuching won the toss and after about 10 minutes registered their first goal through Father de Vos from a free kick taken by Weng Sheng from just outside the penalty area. From the resulting kick-off the Miri forwards took the ball down the field and after a few exchanges Bridgewood equalized for Miri with a splendid long drive from mid-field. Gardner scored a second goal for Kuching just before the interval.
Half time-Kuching 2. Miri 1.
Five minutes after the resumption Kuching were another goal up through Yaw Joo who cleverly headed in from an excellent centre from Weng Sheng with a score of 3-1 against them-the outlook was rather dark for Miri but they did not lose heart in the slightest. On the contrary, they spurred themselves on to further effort and the Kuching defense had a most grueling time from that stage onwards. Miri’s second goal came off Chater who, in an attempt to clear, unfortunately deflected the ball through his own goal. Three more goals for Miri followed in quick succession Dullah scoring one and Sirat two. Towards the end of game Kuching rallied and Lilley in the Miri goal had a busy few moments. One of the saves brought off by him is particularly deserving of mention.
Gardner put in low shot from abort range and the ball would have entered the goal near the upright Lilley with perfect timing and sound judgement threw himself forward and cleverly deflected it out for a corner.
Full time was called with the score 5-3 in favour of Miri.
The Miri team is to be complimented on the excellent way in which it pulled the game together and turned the tables. To change the score from 3-1 against them to 5-3 in their favour within 25 minutes is a most creditable performance.
The teams were as follows: -
Mr. Kelley was the referee.
It is hoped to pay a return visit to Miri with teams from Kuching in the near future.
Kuching Football League.
PRESENTATION OF SHIELD AND MEDALS.
On Wednesday, 26th August on the K.F.C Ground a match was played between the Sarawak Rangers team as Winners of the League, and a team representing the rest of the League.
Thanks to the courtesy of Lieutenant G. Murray-Scott, the Band of the Sarawak Rangers was present and played selections on the ground before the match and again during the interval.
The match was keenly contested and some good football was displayed by both teams. The Rest won by one goal to Nil.
His Highness the Tuan Muda was present and presented the Shield and Medals to the Sarawak Rangers team after the match. His Highness congratulated the Sarawak Rangers on winning the Shield and complimented the two teams playing that day on a good clean hard game. His Highness further expressed His appreciation of the generosity of the Datus of Kuching who presented the Shield for annual competition.
“James Buchanan Cup Competition.”
FINAL.
The final match of the “James Buchanan” Cup Competition was played on the K.F.C. ground on Saturday, 19th September, the competing finalists being the Merchants F.C. and the Medical F.C.
Previous rounds of the Competition have produced some very interesting and well fought matches but this, the final match, was a most disappointing game. Neither team played up to its usual form and very little good football was shown. Both teams were fairly sound in defence but the forwards lacked combination; of the two, the Medical forwards played the better game, the Merchants confining their efforts almost entirely to individual rushes.
The game resulted in a victory for the Medical by the only goal scored.
Awi of the Medical team is to be complimented on the splendid game he played. He appeared to be the only player on the field who was really “all out.” Guilty perhaps of leaving his position at Right Half rather too frequently he was a “spoiler” all over the field. One spectator is reputed to have remarked that with Awi’s energy and his own build he would be prepared to play either team on his own.
His Highness the Tuan Muda who was present during the match, presented the Cup and Medals to the Medical team on the field after the game.
Second Division News.
August, 1931.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports for August, 1931, by Mr. E. O. Bruce, Acting Resident: -
I arrived at Simanggang on the 7th. and on the 9th took over from Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident, Second Division, who left for Kuching the next day prior to proceeding on home leave.
Mr. Hudden, Acting Assistant District Officer also proceeded by the same boat on special leave.
During the remainder of the month I have been busy acquainting myself with the affairs of the Division, being somewhat handicapped by the temporary lack of any officer with District Court powers.
Credit is due to Mr. Barcroft, Cadet, for the energetic manner in which he has coped with the extra work unavoidably thrown upon him.
His Highness the Tuan Muda’s birthday was observed on the 8th as a public holiday and offices closed.
There have been requests from many Dyaks in the Batang Ai and Saribas rivers to move in toto to the less thickly populated areas of the Niah District, in Fourth Division. Some have already proceeded, and the applications of others will be reconsidered next year.
Penghulus Lambai and Sait were down during the month.
An attempt is being made, with prison labour, to plant sufficient padi now to supply the requirements of the jail next year.
Preliminary demarcations have been made over other suitable padi land in the proximity of the station, with a view to issue, in small lots, to vagrants, and others, who will be removed from their present hovels near the bazaar, or dealt with under the Vagrancy Order.
A Government clerk at Saratok has been remainded on a charge of falsifying Forest Department permits, and the case will be heard during my forthcoming visit to Kalaka.
A brutal murder was committed in the Saribas upon a Chinese bandong trader. The crime was not discovered until about a week had elapsed, after the drifting boat had run aground, half submerged. Inquiries are still proceeding, and a reward has been offered for information.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Kalaka, Mr. Morse, returned to his District on the 28th after three weeks local leave.
The prolonged dispute between pepper planters and traders, at Engkilili, whose vacillations have so far nullified every attempt at compromise by various arbitrators, is being rapidly forced to a head by the ripening of the crops, which are reported to be unusually good this harvest.
Planters, however, still refuse to deliver their accumulating stocks to the Bazaar until a settlement is reached.
Both sides have legitimate grounds for complaint, but the grievances are solely a matter for adjustment between themselves without interference from Government, otherwise the only remedy is for creditor traders to take action through the Courts, failing which the impasse is likely to lead to serious consequences not only to the peace of the locality, but to the pepper industry in general.
I informed representatives of both parties accordingly, and ultimately persuaded them to avoid further inconsequent debates, and waste of time, by exchanging written statements.
However, in spite of the untiring efforts of Mr. Tan Boon Siew, of the Chamber of Commerce, complete agreement was not reached, and he returned to Kuching on the 27th.
Traders were then warned that I would visit Engkilili on the 2nd proximo, and that their further prolonged delay in obtaining obvious remedy against debtor planters through the Courts, coupled with requests for further Police protection, could only be regarded as mischievous under the circumstances.
On the 30th several traders returned to Simanggang and applied for summonses in the Resident’s and District Courts. The cases will all be heard when I visit Engkilili on the 2nd.
On the 15th a Sebuyow Dyak was accidentally shot with a 12 bore gun by a Malay, who was out hunting at day break. Although no serious wound was inflicted, the Malay was severely punished and his gun confiscated.
Hospital monthly Returns show that four patients were admitted. 294 out-patients treated, and 74 N.A.B. injections administered.
During eight days, 3.42 inches of rain were registered.
SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Officer-in-Charge, Police and Prisons, Simanggang (Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft): -
District Office. -On the 1st of the month I took over the District Office work from Mr. Hudden who left for Kuching on the 3rd.
On the 5th a detachment of Rangers returned from the Ulu Ai where they had been ordered for duty pending settlement of the Asun affair.
On the 8th the clerical staff gave a farewell dinner at the Recreation Club to Mr. J. B. Archer who was shortly proceeding on leave, and on the 9th Datu Haji Dol gave a farewell curry tiffin.
On the 10th the Resident. Mr. Archer accompanied by Messrs. Hudden and Parker left in the Lucille. Mr. Hudden is also proceeding to England having obtained three months’ leave. Mr. Parker has been transferred as Land Officer to Sarikei.
On the 13th Mr. Goodall arrived in the Para with the Rubberneck in escort. The Agricultural Officer left a few hours later for Lubok Tedong.
During the month a great many Dyaks applied for permission to pindah. Andam moved forty doors to Niah, Fourth Division.
Reports from Lingga suggest that Penghulu Angkon has not been carrying out his bi-annual visits.
There appears to be some difference of opinion amongst Penghulus as to the correct fines for offences under Dyak adat.
A certain amount of exemption tax has not yet been paid, but it is gratifying to note that many Malays are applying for any sort of work on any pay. It has been decided to play a football competition next month with finals on His Highness the Rajah’s birthday. There will be one open Cup and one Cup solely for Dyaks.
There is a very serious shortage of water and the drought still continued at the end of the month.
ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Officer-in-Charge, Engkilili, (Mr. S. G. Hansom): -
Traveling. -I visited Lubok Antu from the 24th to the 27th instant. The river was very low, and travelling above Lubok Antu, slow and difficult. There was one case only in Court.
The condition of the Bazaar and Kampong there is still very insanitary and unsatisfactory, but a slow improvement is noticeable.
I was in Simanggang from the 7th to the 9th instant.
Court. -There were very few cases during the month. There were no criminal cases of note.
District Court. -Nil.
General. -On the 1st instant Mr. B. Summers, Divisional Land Officer, visited the station, returning the following day.
The nine Sarawak Rangers who have been posted in the Ulu Ai during the Asun affair, were recalled during the month, and returned to Simanggang.
Saturday the 8th instant, the birthday of His Highness the Tuan Muda, was observed as a Public Holiday.
There was a tuba fishing in the river at Engkilili on Sunday the 16th instant. Very poor results were obtained, an unexpectedly strong pasang raising the level of the river above the tops of the abau.
During the month, six Lamp Standards have been erected in Engkilili Bazaar. Street lighting will be commenced from the beginning of September.
Pepper. -On the 9th instant. Mr. Tan Boon Siew, Chairman of the Kuching Chamber of Commerce, arrived here, in order to make a final attempt to bring the Pepper Planters and Traders into agreement. Several Mass Meeting of Planters were held, and during the following ten days. Mr. Tan Boon Siew visited a large number of Pepper Gardens in order that he might explain conditions direct to the Planters themselves, many of them have but the haziest idea of what is happening, and are blindly following the instructions of their headmen.
Mr. Tan Boon Siew then reported that he was within reach of an agreement, and proceeded to Simanggang on the 20th instant, with a representative body of Planters and Traders, in order that he might meet the Resident, Second Division. I understand, however, that last-minute objections were raised, which caused the negotiations to be abandoned without hope of an immediate agreement.
It is estimated that nearly half of the total crop of pepper is now ripe, and large quantities are now held back by the planters, in their houses, pending a settlement of their differences.
Gold. -Blasting is still in progress at Marup, but the proportion of gold won to date is small. Most of the workers have pepper gardens, and many have left the gold workings temporarily, to attend to their pepper crops.
Trade Returns. -
Exports for the month totalled $17,810.
Imports for the month totalled $6,497.
Rainfall. -Rain fell on three days, when 2.04 inches were registered.
SARIBAS DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the District Officer, Saribas (Mr. R. L, Daubeny): -
Court. -Court work has been very light this month. An assault case between Chinese and Malays at Spaoh has been adjourned for further inquiries to be made.
In the Civil Courts, one appeal against the decision of Penghulu Sujang, Debak, was heard, the appeal being dismissed.
A Coroner’s inquest was held at Pusa on 15th instant in re the discovery of the corpse of one Ah Soon, boat hawker, who was found dead in his half-submerged trading boat at Kampong Tambak, Rimbas. A verdict of murder by person or persons unknown was brought in. Further inquiries are being made in an endeavour to trace any person connected therewith.
Travelling. -I was away at Simanggang on 8th-9th. The substations were visited from 21st-24th.
General. -Mr. B. Summers, Land Officer, Second Division, arrived here on 19th and returned to Simanggang on 26th instant having visited the substations.
The usual fanning disputes have started again, both in the Saribas river and the Rimbas although considerably fewer than last year. Increased survey fees and the general shortage of money has discouraged most people from opening up cases.
On 20th a Chinaman from Spaoh reported that he and five others were set upon by between 20 to 30 Malays when returning to their pepper gardens at 9 p.m. Further inquiries elicited the fact that one of their assailants were recognized with the exception of one Malay. The complainant had a slight cut in his forehead but no other casualties occurred. The case has been adjourned until the whereabouts of the 6th man Teng Koo, is discovered.
Trade. -
Shipping. -Six motor vessels entered and cleared during the month.
KALAKA DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Kalaka (Mr. L. K. Monte): -
I returned from local leave on the 28th having been absent from the District from 25th July.
While I was on leave a wire was received from the Assistant Forest Officer, Saratok, asking me to detain Lim Lian Choon, Junior Clerk, Saratok (then on leave in Kuching) on a charge of embezzlement.
Lim Lian Choon accompanied me to Saratok on my return and now awaits trial.
During my absence the Court Writer reports as follows: -
The Police moved into their new quarters early in the month, while the border garrison was withdrawn. the men returning to Kuching.
Ed. Jerah, Chief Clerk, returned from leave on the 12th instant.
Mr. O’Hara, Assistant Forest Officer, arrived on the 17th from Simanggang, after checking the Forest books, left again next morning.
Ujang, Penghulu Dalam, Batang Rejang, arrived from Sibu at the end of the month in connection with a property dispute of long standing between his wife Endon (f.) and Majang of Sebetan.
The prisoners were kept busy during the month, raising the surface of the ground under the new barracks and in general upkeep of the station.
The Dyaks all over the District are busy preparing their padi land.
LAND OFFICE.
Extracts from the report of the Divisional Land Officer, 2nd Division (Mr. B. Summers): -
From the 3rd to 7th instant. Mr. K. E. Parker was absent from office having contracted influenza.
Engkilili. -On the 4th instant I visited Engkilili returning the following afternoon.
Bakar, Assistant Land Inspector is apparently doing good work in that District. He understands and can speak sufficient Chinese for his work; but like all Inspectors unless very carefully watched, he is inclined to spend too much time in office.
Rent in the Engkilili district is being collected slowly, and it is expected that a certain increase will shew itself for August and September as the pepper is picked and sold.
On the 10th instant Mr. K. E. Parker, returned to Kuching, on his way to Sarikei.
On the 14th instant Abang Omar, Assistant Land Inspector returned from inspection of Dyak disputes after an absence of ten days, and produced very good plans.
Saribas District.
Betong. -On the morning of the 19th instant I proceeded to Betong on foot, to visit all stations in the Saribas District.
All books, registers, etc., were examined and found correct.
Rent. -About 54 per cent of rent has been paid, and as many Dyaks apparently know that the “time limit” has been extended until 30th September, it is hoped that they will pay without having to be called in.
Pusa. -On the 21st I accompanied the District Officer proceeding to Pusa and Debak.
At Pusa all land work is at a standstill, and rental is very slow to be paid, at least 60 per cent yet to be collected, the majority of this from Malays.
Debak. -All books, registers, etc., were checked and found correct; rent to the extent of 75 per cent has been collected, the other 25 per cent as yet unpaid being mostly Malay gardens.
On the morning of the 26th instant I returned to Simanggang.
General Rent. -At the end of July 64 per cent Estimated Revenue had been paid, there now remains 36 per cent to be collected to five months; August revenue is as yet unknown.
Inspections. -Practically all local gardens, have now been examined, which means that the inspectors will now be working further afield, and so increase the number of the inspections per month.
Disputes are not frequent.
Dyak Land Disputes, are not very frequent it is pleasing to state, as seven to fourteen days at least are spent examining the parcel of land in dispute, and adjoining lands.
Kalaka District. -This District has not yet been visited since my return to Simanggang in July, owing to Mr. Morse being absent on local leave; I intend to visit it early in September.
Third Division News.
July, 1931.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports for July, 1931, by Mr. F. W. Dick, Acting Resident: -
Court. -One civil and two criminal cases came before the Court, the only case calling for comment being Moi (f.) vs. Ngo Ching Koh who was sentenced to one year house breaking by Highland Luk Nguoh Ing (f.) sentenced to six months for being in possession of stolen properly.
General. -The District Officer, Mr E. V. Andreini reported on 1st that the rebels in the Binatang had dispersed but soon after their dispersing a 3 pronged srampang was sent to him with a threat that Binatang and Sarikei or Kanowit would be burnt. I proceeded to Kuching by m.s. Sri Mukah on 2nd instant to explain the whole position to His Highness the Rajah, the Resident. First Division, Mr. J. C. Swayne and the
Secretary for Native Affaire, Mr. P. M. Adams, and it was decided that an expedition of one hundred Rangers and four hundred irregulars should be sent to Kuala Julau. I returned to Sibu by s.l. Lucile on 6th. The Secretary for Native Affairs, Mr. P. M. Adams, the Superintendent of Wireless, Mr. W. Tait arrived at Sarikei on H.H.M.Y. Maimuna at 11 p.m. on 9th instant where I met them, the following day we proceeded to Binatang where the Rangers under the Acting Commandant, Mr. P. Murray-Scott embarked and then proceeded to Kanowit stopping at Sibu on the way. The Government force arrived at Kuala Julau on the afternoon of 12th instant. The following day Mr. P. M. Adams proceeded up the Julau and Mr. Arundell up the Kanowit to Entabai to call down the disaffected Dyaks. Mr. Adams arrived back on afternoon of 16th with some of the disaffected heads of houses and most of the other disaffected heads of houses from the Julau arrived the following day and handed in their guns.
An inquiry was held into the causes of disaffection and all the Julau Chiefs admitted complicity in waging war against the Government for which they were duly fined. Mr. Arundell arrived back at Kuala Julau on 20th with the Entabai Chiefs excepting Asoon and his brothers who had run away into the jungle but had been found, they refused to come to Kuala Julau. In view of the fact that Asoon’s main supporters in the Julau had been disarmed and fined, it was not considered necessary to waste time and money chasing Asoon around the country so the force left Kuala Julau on 21st arriving back at Kanowit the same evening. The following day H.H.M.Y. Maimuna sailed for Kuching with Messrs. Adams, Arundell and Murray-Scott and about eighty Rangers. A force of forty-five Rangers left Binatang on 20th inst. under Messrs. Goodall and Pegler and proceeded to ulu Julau in two parties via Sungei Wak and Pedanum collecting a few remaining guns which had not been brought down. The party returned on 29th instant and Mr. Goodall reported that T.R. Nyalin of Sugai was likely to cause trouble, other tuai had been quite amenable.
I regret to report that Mr. J. O. Gilbert. Acting Assistant District Officer, Sarikei, was taken seriously ill during the month and had to be sent to Kuching on 13th instant suffering from pneumonia. Messrs. E. M. Woodward and N.E. Hughes arrived on 22nd July on their way to Mukah and Oya to take over these two stations from Messrs. Bruce and Elam who have been appointed to duty at Simanggang and Lundu respectively, Messrs. Woodward and Hughes left on 25th per s.l. Chamois for the Coast.
I left for Kuching on 30th per m.s. Sri Mukah to attend the Races and was still away at the end of the month.
SIBU.
The District Officer, Mr. E. V. Andreini, reports: -
General. -I returned from Binatang on the 6th and resumed my ordinary duties.
Visitors included Messrs. Goodall, McLaine, Woodward, Hughes, Crossley, Tait and Gilbert, who with the exception of the latter who was passing through sick, all were on duty. In addition there was considerable activity in connection with the expedition.
The Sibu Recreation Club building was opened by Mrs. Dick on the 28th. Mrs. Dick also presented a cup to Abang Adeng, Inspector of Police, for the best kept garden in the Malay Kampong.
Bishop and Mrs. Lee of the Methodist Mission arrived on a tour of inspection on the 20th.
There was a double drowning fatality near Ensurai when one Su Li Wong fell off the motor launch Hua Ah Soon. The Juragan Lim Tu Sing jumped in to try and save him and was pulled down by the first named and both were drowned.
Court. -A case which caused a lot of feeling against the Indian Community was brought up where a Mohamedan man was accused of adultery with a Hindu woman.
There were numerous civil cases and the Courts were fully occupied.
Mr. Crocker assisted in the District Court on several occasions.
Education. -Haji Bol Hassan, Inspector of Malay Schools, from Kuching visited the Malay School in the Division accompanied by Tuanku Haji Ali, Inspector of Schools, Sibu. and examinations were held.
KAPIT.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports: -
Court. -There was practically no Court work during the month and there were no cases that call for comment.
Dairy Farm. -The herd numbered 52 at the end of the month. A cow calf was born during the month.
General. -I returned from Sibu on the 7th. Native Officer Wan Hussein visited the Melipis, Yong and Ibau rivers from 15th to 22nd Mr. W. G. Tait. Superintendent of Telegraphs, arrived on the 25th to inspect the Wireless Station and to arrange for the Operators to learn the Postal work with a view to amalgamation in the near future. Mr. Tait returned to Sibu on the 27th.
A party or Japanese gentlemen headed by Mr. K. Oseki, a Director of Nissa Shokai, Ltd., arrived on the 30th. They intend to visit the Pala Wong and Majawa coal areas.
Native Affairs. -A meeting of Dyak tuai tuai rumah was held on the 24th to elect a Penghulu in place of Jingga who died last month. Their choice fell on Manok Manchai of the Wong and this appointment now awaits confirmation.
This has been a quiet mouth with a steady procession of Dyaks coming down to pay in door tax.
There has been little demand for outside work and the Dyaks in this district do not appear to have been in any way affected by the disturbances in the Kanowit area.
Penghulus Temonggong Koh and Jugah were down during the month.
Song. -Song was visited on the 14th, 20th and 21st. I left for the Katibas on the 15th, going right up to Kerangan Rangkang and also visited the Bangkit and Musah tributaries returning to Song on the 20th.
Rainfall. -Rainfall for the month was 18’86 inches. The river has frequently been in flood during the month.
MUKAH AND OYA.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. E. M. Woodward reports: -
General. -On the 25th instant I arrived at Dalat from Sibu via the Cut accompanied by Mr. N. E. Hughes who took over the affairs of the Dalat district from the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, the same day. The following day Messrs. Hughes, Elam and myself proceeded to Oya where we met the District Officer, Mukah and Oya, Mr. E. O. Bruce. Mr. Hughes, took over the affairs of the Oya district from Mr. Elam on the 27th instant on which day Mr. Bruce and myself proceeded to Mukah.
On the 28th instant I took over the affairs of this district from Mr. Bruce who accompanied by Mr. Elam from Oya proceeded to Sibu by s.l. Chamois the following day.	On the 1st instant the Superintendent of Telegraphs and Telephones. Mr. W. G. Tait and Mrs. Tait sailed for Kuching by m.s. Chin Teck Lee by which boat two boxes containing $4,950 silver dollars were shipped to Kuching Treasury.
On the 6th instant m.l. Joan called in at Mukah en route for Bintulu after docking in Kuching.
Mr. Elam visited Mukah on duty from the 8th to the 13th instants and Mr. Bruce paid a visit to Oya, Dalat and Medong from the 13th to the 16th instant.
On the 27th instant s.s. Angas arrived from Miri with the Assistant General Manager Sarawak Oilfields Limited, Mr. Marriott, who was accompained by Mr. Hamilton and Dr. Braendlin of the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited. They proceeded to Kenyans the same day in order to visit the Sarawak Oilfields Limited Camp near Sungei Wong, Ulu Mukah, of which Mr. Summer of the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, is in charge.
The two former returned to Mukah on the 30th instant and proceeded to Miri the following day. Dr. Braendlin remaining upriver with Mr. Summer.
Court. -Milly (f.) binti Aput, Mark Kim Hin (Wireless Operator) and John bin Aput were each sentenced to three months’ R.I., and fined $25 each or in default were each sentenced to a further three months’ R.I. for dishonest misappropriation of property under I.P.C. Section 403.
Teng Eu Tuan and Goh Tong Seng were each sentenced to imprisonment and Lim Eng Bin was fined for illegal trafficking in opium under section 1 of Monopoly Order No. XLVII, 1924. This case was the outcome of a very successful night raid which was carried out by the District Officer, Mr. Bruce, on the premises of the convicted persons who were practically caught red-handed in the illegal trafficking in opium and who it appeared had been in the habit of selling opium to prisoners. Their consumption of opium was reduced to one tube per diem and a reward of $50 was paid to three informers in this case.
Nahawi bin Sayeng was sentenced to 4 1/2 months’ R.I., for non-payment of Native Court fines and brian.
Manang Kuang was sentenced to six months and one week’s R.I., for non-payment of “Kandong” fine, etc.
Police and Prison. -The Police were drilled daily by the District Officer, Mr. Bruce, and on taking over this district I found as a result that they were exceptionally smart. On the 27th Corporal Idi and Lance Corporal Matnor returned from a course of training in Sibu and Sergeant Yahya who had also undergone a course of training in Sibu was transferred temporarily to Balingian on 17th June in order to smarten up the Police at that Station. He returned to Mukah towards the end of the month. The daily number of prisoners averaged 56.3. They were employed on roads and on the general upkeep of the station.
Land. -During the month six of the chief sago garden owners in the Mukah district declared their sago gardens and had the new regulations on this subject explained to them.
During the month Exemption Tax defaulters were employed for 14 days each on clearing the Petanak pipe Iine rentis, on making a new by-pass rood above the Main Bazaar owing to the rapid erosion by the river of the old road and on clearing the “Kuala” padang. This work is done by these men in lieu of payment of Exemption Tax which they are unable to pay.
Forests. -During the month the Divisional Forest Officer, Mr. Spurway and Mrs. Spurway visited the district. The Divisional Forest Officer’s visit was primarily in connection with proposed forest reserves.
Agriculture. -Pamphlets in Jawi received from the Department of Agriculture concerning padi stem borers were issued to the Government Lay School.
Education. -During the month the Government Malay School Inspector, Haji Bol Hassan, accompanied by Tuanku Haji Ali from Sibu visited the district and inspected the Government Lay School in Mukah. The pupils at this school have been informed that any pupil in future whose average number of days of attendance at the school on school days is less then 65% per mensem must leave the school unless he has a good excuse for not complying with the attendance percentage required.
Telegraphs and Telephones. -On the 15th instant Wireless Operator, Mat bin Serang, relieved Ex-W.O., Mark Kim Hin, who on the 8th instant was sentenced to a further three months’ R.I. for dishonest misappropriation of property under I.P.C. section 403.
Balingian. -During the month a few Exemption Tax defaulters were employed on clearing roads and ditches.
On the 7th instant the Wireless broke down temporarily.
OYA AND DALAT.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports: -
General. -On 25th July Mr. Woodward and myself arrived at Dalat via the Kut. I took over the affairs of Dalat from Mr. Elam the same evening.
On the 26th we arrived at Oya, where we met Mr. E. O. Bruce, District Officer, Mukah and Oya. Mr. Woodward and Mr. Bruce left for Mukah on the following morning. I took over Oya from Mr. Elain on the 97th. Mr. Elam left for Sibu on 29th July.
Court. -No cases call for comment.
Public Works Department. -The road to the Lighthouse was cleaned by Kampong Sna’o people toward the end of the month.
Police. -Sergeant Awang Lai and PC. Hamin and P.C. Tapa returned from Sibu on 26th having completed a course of drill instruction. Other police will be sent to Sibu to take this course as opportunity arises.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall recorded for the month was 12.13.
MATU AND DARO.
The Officer in-Charge, Mr. F. L. G. Crossley, reports: -
Court. -Work was very light, consisting almost entirely of re-opened land cases.
P.W.D. -Prisoners have been engaged on upkeep of roads and grounds, and in cutting the Bruan rentis.
Land. -An encouraging spirit of enterprise has arisen in Daro, where over sixty applications were received for land at Itol, the intention being to plant fruit and vegetables. The applicants have made a good road through the land, and are cleaning and burning following a preliminary measurement by myself.
Travelling. -I visited Brait on the 4th, to settle a dispute between the Tua Kampong and the local Chinese, returning the same day. On the 9th I proceeded to Daro on my monthly visit, spending the 11th and 12th at Paloh. On the 14lh I proceeded to Sibu, being instructed to do duty at Sarikei prior to my taking local leave to Kuching.
Medical. -On hearing a rumour that cholera had broken out in Paloh. I wired Sibu, and a dresser arrived on the 5th. Fortunately, the reports were untrue, pneumonia being diagnosed in all cases.
Report for Sarikei. Binatang and Kejang districts is not yet to hand, it will be included in August report.
Fourth Division News.
BARAM.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F H. Pollard, reports: -
Court. -In the District Court Ah Boo was sentenced to one year R.I. under section 456. Bian Tee and Ah Kheng were fined $50 and $100 respectively for being in possession of false dachings. A Foochow Chinese named Tin Thiam Fock charged a Dyak named Linggang with robbery whilst Linggang took out a cross summons for theft from his sulap. After a long hearing the Court came to the conclusion that Tin Thiam Fock stole the property from the sulap and was overtaken by Linggang who took back his own property and also $5 from Thiam Fock as compensation. The rest of the property was left in the jungle and recovered later. Thiam Fock was sentenced to one year R.I. under section 380 and Linggang fined $50 and costs for taking the $5. Eng Khoon, charged with deliberate breach of upriver trading regulations immediately after having been warned was required to fined security of $100 to come up before the Resident on his next visit. This man has two previous convictions. In the Magistrate’s Court two Malays were sentenced to three months’ R.I. for wholesale breach of jelutong regulations, another being fined $25 for the same offence in a lesser degree. Salleh, a Narom, was sentenced to one month R.I. for working jelutong without a permit after having been warned by the Forest Guard and Nglambai, a kampar. sentenced to six weeks’ R.I. for non-payment of fine imposed by Penghulu.
Travelling. -I returned from Kuching via Miri on 8th. On 20th Mr. Mcleod. D. C. F. arrived from Miri intending to visit the upriver timber workers, Mr. Banks,
Curator Sarawak Museum arrived on 25th. On 28th accompanied by Mr. Banks and Datu Tuanku Haji Drahman. I left for ulu Tinjar. Mr. Mcleod leaving for the Tutoh with Galau the same day.
Prisoners. -The prisoners averaging twenty-one men were employed on the ordinary routine work of the station.
P.W.D. -Tan Bak Noi, signed a contract to construct bridges on Limbang road for $75. This contract has been open for some months but in spite of hard times the lowest tender till now was $150 an absurd price, which would seem to indicate that local people are not as hard up as they pretend to be.
Medical. -Seventy-two out-patients and two in-patients were treated during the month. Under the Professor Harrison Smith Fund one out-patient was treated and one N.A.B. injection given.
Rainfall. -1’37 inches of rain fell on seven days.
Shipping. -S.S. Gladys made two trips during the month.
Trade. -Trade continues slack. It is hoped that it may be possible to find a market for timber already worked in the ulu and for which there is no local market. Trade returns are as follows: -
Miri.
August, 1931.
The Resident, Mr. H. D. Aplin, reports: -
I was absent from my Division for the whole month of July, having been granted local leave, and returned to Miri on 10th August.
Mr. F. G. Carpenter, District Officer reported that no matter of vital importance occurred during my absence. There have been some cases of persons being waylaid, assaulted and robbed of any money that they may have on their persons. The Police have taken steps in the matter and it is hoped to round up the gang.
Owing to curtailment of their operations by the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, there must be a considerable amount of unemployment, and the absence of more serious crime is remarkable.
The Gambling Farm complained against a licence being given to another person to open a bagatelle board in the bazaar, where prizes are given for a small charge for each shot. I could not see that this was any infringement of their rights and on making further inquiries I find that those frequenting this place are not habitues of the gambling farm.
Arrangements were made that five doors of ex-Rangers may build a house at the 10th mile Riam Road to be extended to ten doors at a future date. Only ex-Rangers with their wives and children will be allowed and no other relations will be allowed to join in with them.
Whilst I was in Kuching arrangement were made for forty doors of Skrang Dyaks under Andam to move into the Niah this year. On their arrival, boundaries will be pointed out to them. Mr. T. Corson, Divisional Forest Officer made a tour of inspection of this river and reported on two good stands of billian which he advised should be reserved. The Country is empty of inhabitants. There is plenty of land for Dyaks who wish to pindah, but I consider that the Government should go slowly in allowing Dyaks into this district and those from the Second Division, who are reported by the Resident of that Division as deserving cases, should have preference over others.
Mr. P. A. B. McKerron, Resident of Brunei, called at Miri on his way through to Brunei and advantage of this was taken to sign the agreement of the Sarawak Brunei boundary from the coast to Pagalayan on behalf of our respective Governments.
A special grant having been sanctioned antimalaria work was commenced on Tanjong Lobang.
I left for Bintulu by s.s. Gladys on 28th for Bintulu and on the 31st for Tatau to hear the case against Glagat (Dyak) on the charge of the murder of Lugat (Dyak). I was still away at the end of the month. The new Bintulu Recreation Club, the building which
has been built at Government expense, was opened by myself. Visitor to Miri included Messrs. Banks for Baram, Tait, who has come to inspect the Wireless Stations of this Division and make his report on the proposed amalgamation of the Post Office and Telegraph Departments, and Mr. and Mrs. Edwards.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports: - Court. -Work in the District Court was exceptionally light but this was more than compensated in the Magistrate’s Court where an unusual number of Criminal actions were dealt with.
The most serious case was one of house-breaking by night in which three Sibuti Chinese were involved.
Accused wore sentenced under Section 411 I.P.C., two of them receiving three years and the other six months.
In the Magistrate’s Court various sentences up to six months were inflicted for theft, and a shop-keeper was fined $50 for tampering with a water meter.
The District Court Magistrate presided over one Court martial.
Health. -Forty-six vaccinations were undertaken by the Sanitary Inspector, these being performed mostly on children.
Two notices to abate nuisances were issued and three prosecutions were instituted resulting in convictions in each case.
Land. -Three new applications were received, these being for 4 3/4 acres of coconuts and three acres of vegetables. Six demarcations were made and Occupation Tickets issued in respect of these, which comprised 20 3/4 acres of coconuts.
Medical. -One hundred and sixty-one out-patients made 524 attendances for treatment. No N.A.B. injections were given. Five-patients were transferred to the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, Hospital for treatment.
Outstations. -Mr. Morice visited Niah and Sibuti from the 16th to 21st and visited the Dyaks in the former district. At Niah the second gathering of nests was started on the 12th. A sample of tobacco, which appeared out of the ordinary for this country, was produced from Sibuti and forwarded to Kuching.
General. -Visitors during the month included Messrs. Cole-Adams, Keith, Griffiths, Reynolds, Calver and Blagg who all arrived in the H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 30th, the former three leaving again for Jesselton on the following day.
The Resident returned from local leave ria Kuching in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna accompanied by Mr. and Mrs. Pollard and Mr. Corson on the 10th.
The 3th, being the anniversary of His Highness the Tuan Muda’s birthday, was observed as a holiday.
A travelling talkie company was showing on the Padang during the whole month.
On the 28th the Resident left for Bintulu by s.s. Gladys.
BINTULU.
August, 1931.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. A. Macpherson, reports: -
Courts. -Fines amounting to $477.10 were imposed.
Dairy Farm. -The herd numbered 50 head at the end of the month. Condition is good. The herd was split up under two bulls, but arrangements have been made to send the old bull to Kuching.
Staff. -The Court Writer Mr. Francis N. Lim was transferred to Limbang, a clerk has arrived from Kuching to fill the junior vacancy which occurred.
Visitors. -Messrs. Keith, Calver, Corson and Tait visited the station. The Resident who arrived on 28th was still in the District at the end of the month.
Travelling. -Native Officer, Awang Abil settled a farming dispute between Slezu Bintulus and the Dyaks.
I visited Sebauh on 13th to inspect Foochow padi farms. One hundred and ninety out of 240 men are planting padi this year. I was recalled to go to Tatau the following morning. I investigated the death of a Dyak named Lugat .A Dyak named Glagat was committed for trial on a charge of willful murder. I returned to Bintulu on 16th.
General. -Tua Kampong Agau Penan died this month. A case of what the Dresser stated was modified small-pox occurred. The family was isolated. No further cases were reported and the patient recovered. The Resident arrived by a s.s. Gladys on the night of 28th. No matters of any considerable importance were brought to his notice during his stay in Bintulu. The Resident accompanied by myself went to Tatau on 31st, spending one night. The Resident tried Glagat on a charge of murder, he was found guilty and sentenced to death subject to confirmation from the Supreme Court.
Trade and Customs. -Trade statistics for the month were as follows: -
Rainfall. -The rainfall for the month amounted to 1’24 inches.
Fifth Division News.
LIMBANG.
July, 1931.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports for July, 1931, by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident: -
Court. -There were few cases and none of any importance.
General. -The Acting Commissioner of Police, Mr. L N. Reynolds, paid a short visit in order to inspect the police and the conditions of barracks, etc.
The Director of Public Works on his return from British North Borneo paid a visit, and inspected the roads and water works, he returned overland to Miri via Brunei, Cars being kindly put at his disposal by the Resident of Brunei.
The Divisions Book-keeper, Mr. Fam Tain Min was transferred to Miri for medical treatment, but it is regretted that he since been invalided out of the service suffering from acute Tuberculosis.
I left the Division on the 27th accompanied by Mrs. Kortright and Mr. J. K. Combe to attend the Autumn Race Meeting.
P.W.D. -Prisoners averaging 15.06 were employed on the Brunei Road, where owing to unprecedented high tides much work needs to be done in raising the road level.
The Acting Assistant District Officer of Lawas walked through from Trusan to Panderuan, making a rough survey of the route chosen. The Superintendent of Surveys is kindly connecting this work with existing roads, and it is hoped that in better times work may be commenced on the remaining section of unmade road and so link Lawas, Limbang and Miri.
Medical and Health. -The Medical Officer of Brunei paid his usual visit and reported the health of the District was good. Sixty-one patients were treated at the Dispensary, and thirteen N.A.B. injections were administered.
Trade and Shipping. -The m.l. Saripah was up on the Slipway and fitted with a new tail shaft and also the new cutless rubber bearings. Sheathing was also replaced where necessary.
August, 1931.
Court. -Work as usual was light there being only six cases brought up.
General. -I returned from Kuching where I had been attending the Autumn Race Meeting in the s.s. Auby on the 12th. On the 11th H.H.M.Y. Maimuna arrived from Kuching with passengers, The Conservator of Forest, and The Divisional Forest Officer, Messrs. D. E. Calver and T. Corson on a visit of inspection.
Mr. R. E. Edwards accompanied by Mrs. Edwards and child also arrived from Kuching. Mr. Edwards to inspect the Siang Siang bridge and conditions of roads, etc.
The Panderuan Pepper Planters frequently reported that their vines were being maliciously cut down and vegetables rooted up and destroyed by a Kadayan Lunatic named Hassan, and this destruction became so much that steps had to be taken to arrest the man. Hasson has long since been known as a dangerous Lunatic and has been living the life of an outlaw building himself a hut high off the ground, and in the middle of a waist deep swamp, and to effect his arrest was no easy matter. However, this was effected by fulling the house with him in it but unfortunately apart from several blows from stones hurled by Hassan, one Liew Tham received two bad parang wounds, as when the house came down, Hassan came out and caught him in the swamp unable to retreat. Hassan has since been sent to Kuching for detention, and it is hoped he will not be permitted to return to this District even should his insanity be cured.
I left for Trusan and Lawas accompanied by Mr. Edwards on the 31st.
Mr. F. A Moore accompanied by Sergeant Jaya left for a prolonged visit up river on the 16th, and was still away at the end of the month.
A party composed of Ulu Ai, Skrang and Saribas Dyaks from Simanggang also proceeded up river to examine land at Kuala Seridon with the object of moving in some one hundred doors and had not returned by the end of the month.
P. W. D. -Prisoners averaging 13.07 were employed on the Brunei road raising the surface level. Four miles of the extension of this road have now been taken over from the contractor, leaving only three miles to complete to reach Brunei Town.
Medical and Health. -The Medical Officer of Brunei paid his usual visit and reported well on the health of the District.
Two patients were admitted to the Hospital and seventy-four out-patients were treated.
The rainfall amounted to 4’65 inches.
Trade and Shipping: -
LAWAS.
July, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe, reports: -
Court. -There were no cases of any importance during the month, with the exception of Pangkat bin Salam who was sentenced to six months’ R.I. under section 417 I.P.C.
Prisoners. -Prisoners averaged 22.87 for the month and were employed in the usual work of upkeep of Government grounds.
P.W.D. -Contractor Wong Kiaw proceeded to Sundar on the 21st of the month in order to rebuild the bungalow kitchen, police kitchen and also repair, where necessary, the Government bungalow.
The wharf at Sundar was washed away owing to an exceptionally strong fresh, arrangements for repairing have been made.
General. -On the 8th I left for Trusan and from there walked overland to Limbang, making a compass traverse of the route taken. This journey took two days one night being spent at the Labu Rubber Estate and the other at the Batu Apoi Estate. I returned to Lawas via Trusan on the 17th accompanied by Mr. F. A. Moore, Cadet, the latter returning to Limbang on the 21st. On the 25th I left the station for Limbang to proceed to Kuching by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna for Race Week. Visitors during the month were Mr. P. A. B. McKerron, British Resident. Brunei, and Mrs. McKerron, Mr. Reynolds. Acting Commissioner of Police, Mr. Summers. Land Department, and Mr. Gibson of the straits Steamship Co., came up to Tagai in the Auby on the 1st of the month.
Rainfall. -The following rainfall was recorded during the month.
August, 1931.
Court. -There were no cases during the month worthy of mentioning.
P.W.D. -The Government and Police Kitchens at Sundar were completed and also the repairs to the Customs Quarters and dapor at Merapok.
General. -On the 9th of the month Brauk Tai younger son of Datu Taidied of consumption. The next in descent is Tui Umang nephew of the deceased.
H.H.M.Y. Maimuna called into Tagai on the 14th with Messrs. Calver, Corson and Keith aboard, the latter being Conservator of Forests in B.N.B. The party proceeded to Bintulu on the 15th. On the night of the 16th a hurricane of unusual severity was experienced, resulting in great damage to houses and trees, there being over 1,000 trees destroyed on the Lawas Estate. A Dyak who happened to be out during the hurricane was struck dumb for some 36 hours.
Nearly all the Tagals from the Ulu Merapok came down during the month to pay their head tax and arrears of land lax.
Agriculture. -The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates. Limned, exported 17,920 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
Rainfall. -The following rainfall was recorded during the month: -
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
Imprisonment of Creditors.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,	Kuching.
SIBU,	7th September, 1931.
DEAR SIR,
Will you allow me space in your columns to express my hearty agreement with the views of the writer of the article headed “abuses of the credit system in trade” which appeared in your last issue?
I have always felt that something should be done to put a stop to the objectionable practice of demanding payment of debts incurred by the, purchase of goods on credit.
Quite recently my tailor had the impertinence to write me a begging letter, his excuse being that I have not yet paid him for the clothes that he made for me in 1926.
I now see that he is in reality no better than a blackmailer, and I am writing to tell him so. He had good reason to know that I have no intention of paying him and that his letter would consequently cause me acute mental distress.
Hitherto I have had a hazy notion that the dunning creditor might escape conviction on a charge of blackmail by pleading that the money I was in fact owing to him, but I see now that this really makes no difference, and I only hope that the article referred to will catch the eyes of those responsible, for the promulgation of our laws when we may yet see a new section added to our Penal Code providing for the punishment by imprisonment of creditors who attempt to coerce their debtors into paying them something on account of what is due to them.
Yours hopefully.
INDIGNANT.
P.S. -I should like to add that I am strongly in favour of taking no action to prevent the sale of goods on credit. How else can I obtain the little luxuries to which I am accustomed for which I cannot afford to pay?
[We are glad to publish this letter from “Indignant” and we are sure that the author of the article mentioned will be gratified to learn that his remarks have relieved the distress of at least one poor debtor. We also fervently hope that when “Indignant’s” tailor hears that he is a blackmailer of the dirtiest water, he will regard the statement as privileged!
Perhaps it would be better if “Indignant” replies to his Tailor with the following lines written by J. C. Squire in me “Spectator.”
“As for you, Mr. Snip, you’ve a very thick hide. And are utterly blind to the claims of noblesse.
Were you not you would know that I’m hopelessly tied: Can’t you see. you dam fool, that a fellow must dress?
It’s grossly uncivil thus often to press,
You ought to be proud that I’m one of your debtors:
I may settle at last il it comes to duress,
But you mustn’t expect me to answer your letters.” -Ed.
Durians in Tahiti.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
16th May, 1931.
DEAR SIR,
I am glad to learn from your letter of 23rd March, that the Gazette will again be coming to me by the next mail from Sydney; and I thank you for the kind invitation to contribute an article. Really I do not think I have anything to write about.
But it might interest some of your readers, if they remember the amusing verses by Nordhoff which you published a few years ago, to lead a note to the effect that the second excellent crop of durian oil one of the tree, which I brought here from Sarawak ten years ago has just been harvested. This year’s durian season ended, in fact, at 8.11 a.m. 6th May when I consumed the last fruit.
Until other trees come into bearing (two bloomed, but did not bear this year) I shall not know for certain, but I think the tree which has already borne gives fruit decidedly superior to any I ever ate in Sarawak. I may have a new variety. Unfortunately the odour is a bit more ghastly than I remember from previous experience; yet this is not wholly unfortunate since many people have thus been deterred from partaking of my limited supply. So far only one Englishman, 2 3/4 Frenchmen, 1 1/2 Americans (including myself) and a few Tahitians have shown that aesthetic discrimination which the enjoyment of this fruit undoubtedly demands. The local manager of Al. Capone’s importing house, who tasted the fruit, did not show the keen appreciation of the finer things of life for which his employer, according to the recent biography, is so distinguished.
Incidentally I think, after all, the durian may possess some tonic and invigorating qualities. It should be worthy of scientific study, and when my crop is large enough, I intend to invite a very able chemist, who lives here, to look into the question of extracting the active principle.
Faithfully yours, HARRISON W. SMITH.
The One Shift Day.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
SIR,
Has it never crossed your mind as you sit sweltering in your swivel chair at say 2 p.m. on a hot day, that the said hour of 2 p.m. is a most unfortunate, ill timed and unnecessary hour to so sit and swelter? As you unstick your liquifying limbs front the paper which lies on your office desk and which contains, may be, a few lines of laboured composition stunted in their growth like beautiful young plants sprouting on a slagheap; and when five minutes later you attempt further perspiring pen pushing at the bottom of the page, the ink runs wild, making your heated efforts look like a very decayed collection of long deceased beetles; at such times Sir, I say, have you never contemplated on the fact that this hour at which you sit and labour emulating a semi-poached egg in all it’s liquid horror, is the hottest of all the 24 hours allotted to each calendar day?
At this time the Natives of this country are to be seen taking their “Siesta” at ease upon their verandahs-Chinese traders sit back in the cool of their shops, exchanging idle backchat (probably midly financial), boatmen cease from boating, planters plant themselves in long chairs and bootleggers unboot their legs and take it easy. Dogs demonstrate the origin of the phrase “dog tired” and cast themselves panting into shady marks, and cats capitulate calmly on the carpet.
Yet you, Sir, and I, although we have 18 other hours of cooler temperature in which to complete our daily labours, choose the very ones when the mercury tries to burst through the roof. If you have considered this at all you may have heard that Napoleon said that the number of hours of human sleep should be as follows; Six for a man, seven for a woman and eight for a fool.
We will therefore allot 6 hours for sleep, 2 for meals and including 4 hours work already done in the morning, this makes 12 hours already booked, leaving the remaining 12 from which a selection may be made of 2 1/2 hours to replace those at present set apart for the remainder of the working day.
In all seriousness I suggest that the time has come to improve the present schedule and institute a new timetable more in keeping with the climate.
This amendment would of course entail early rising to which many people are averse. “The early morning is the best time of the day” you hear them say, “once one is up and the face fungus is removed, but it is such an effort to get up.”
Quite-And the reason? Many people who complain of this difficulty in early rising usually partake of heavy meal about 8.30 or 9.0. p.m. or later, soon after which they retire to bed, surfeited like a python which has just got outside a good sized goat.
This difficulty can be overcome if one has a light meal, after exercise and a bath, at 6.30 to 7.0 p.m.
One can then rise at 6.0. a.m. feeling like one million dollars free of income tax, bath shave and devour a large breakfast consisting of porridge fish and a few well turned kidneys, with bacon, at 6.30 a.m.
Work could be started at 7.0 a.m. sharp in a cool fragrant atmosphere. This would induce a cool and collected frame of mind in addition to, and because of, increased bodily comfort.
At present most offices open up round about 8.30 a.m. and continue work til noon, and then again from 1.30 to 4.0 p.m., a total of six hours.
If work started at 7.0 a.m., and continued straight through until one p.m., hours worked would be the same, but percentage of mental output per working hour would be increased and the bother of going home and back in the oxyacetelene rays of the sun, avoided.
These hours were in force in certain stations in this country at one time and it would be interesting if any of your readers know why they were abolished and what objections, if any, are attaching to such hours.
I am, Sir,
Yours faithfully, HARRY PANAS.
[Although we object to being compared to a semi-poached egg, we are inclined to agree with a good deal of what Mr. Panas has to say.
Perhaps readers of the Gazette whether agreeing with or differing from the opinions contained in this letter, would care to state their views in a similar manner. There are many people the nature of whose work would not allow of such amendments. -Ed.]
A Moot Point.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
SIR,
I wonder if any of your readers can tell me the correct way of referring to an adherent of the faith of Islam?
One sees Mohammedan, Mahometan, Muhammaddan. Muslim, Moslem, Mussulman, etc., etc., used indiscriminately.
Surely then is one correct way of describing a follower of the faith of Mahomet?
Yours faithfully,
“INTERESTED.”
