VOL. LXI.
No. 933.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Monday, June 1st, 1931.
20 CENTS.
The Sarawak Gazette	MONDAY. JUNE 1st. 1931.
Contents.
Deaths.
On 12th April in Burma, Rupert Vyvyan Palfreman, late of the Sarawak Civil Service.
On 15th May, Richard Binnie, father of R. D. Binnie, late executive engineer of the Public Works Department, Sarawak.
Engagement.
The engagement is announced of Gilbert Roger Harris Arundell, of the Sarawak Civil Service, only son of the Rev. Gilbert and Mrs. Harris Arundell, of Lew Trenchard, Devonshire, and Sheila, only daughter of the late Gilbert Robertson Austen of Kindeace, Ross-shire and Mrs. Austen, of Devoran, Cornwall.
Acknowledgement.
Mr. Wee Hong Kee and family are deeply grateful to relative and friends for their kind messages of sympathy, floral tributes and attendances at the funeral of the late Mrs. Bertha Wee.
Local and Personal.
May.
A slight influenza epidemic has been making itself felt just recently. Among the first victims were His Highness the Rajah, Mr. A. A. Rennie, and Mr. E. S. Holl, all of whom caught the infection in Singapore.
Mr. Rennie returned to Kuching on May 4th, travelling in the Marudu as far as Tanjong Po. where he was met by the Maimuna. With him came Mr. G. R. H. Arundell, who returns from home leave.
Mr. Arundell, who enjoyed an excellent season’s hunting, comes back to us engaged to be married. An announcement of the engagement appears at the head of this column.
Weddings seem to be in fashion at the moment. We hear unofficially that the ranks of Sarawak bujangs have lost Mr. J. G. Anderson, who was married last month to Miss Geraldine Grace Wheeler, of Boscastle, Cornwall.
We extend our heartiest congratulations to Mr. and Mrs. Anderson, who are due to return to Sarawak about 13th July next.
Owing to the illness of Mr. G. A. Yeatts, Mr. P. Murray-Scott has been appointed Lieutenant-in-Charge, Sarawak Rangers.
Mr. E. M. Woodward takes Mr. Murray- Scott’s place at Bau as Assistant District Officer.
On May 1st the Government Store ceased to function as a separate department and was placed under the control of the Public Works Department.
On the same day the European Hospital in Kuching was closed down. European patients will now be accommodated in a special wing of the General Hospital.
We note from the Third Division monthly report that considerable progress has been made in tobacco planting in the division, some of the locally-grown product having appeared on the market. The Bintulu report also states that the Foochows at Sebauh are growing tobacco, the quality of which is said to be surprisingly good.
British North Borneo produced excellent tobacco for a number of years, and if sufficient encouragement is given to tobacco growing here there seems to be no reason why a profitable industry might not be built up in Sarawak.
During the month the Right Rev. Bishop Biermans paid a visit to Kuching. The Bishop, who was accompanied by the Rev. Father Van Den Deyssel, is making a world tour in the course of which he proposes to visit all the different mission fields entrusted to the care of the Foreign Missionary Society of St. Joseph, Mill Hill, London, of which he is the superior.
During his stay in Sarawak Monseigneur Biermans consecrated the new Roman Catholic Church at Miri and presented the prizes at the annual prize-giving at St. Joseph’s School, Kuching. Full accounts of both ceremonies appear on another page.
Monseigneur Biermans and Father Van Den Deyssel left for Singapore by the Kuching on May 26th. By the same boat I sailed Mr. C. Fenwick, who goes home on leave. Mr. Bates is to act as Manager of the Borneo Co., Ltd., during Mr. Fenwick’s, absence.
In the Sarikei report for April we road that insect pests are doing considerable damage to the pepper crop. The insects, which are described as a sort of empanggau, attack the flower, which turns black and dies.
We understand that the Department of Agriculture is taking steps to help Sarikei gardeners deal with the pest.
Noxious insects seem to be on the increase in Sarawak.
Only recently war was relentlessly declared on the Giant African Snail, and now comes the news that offensive measures are, to be taken against a bug known as the “sap-sucker,” which rejoices in the Latin name of Podops coarctata. One way of putting a stop to podops’ malignant activities is to creep up quietly behind him while he is indulging in his morning suck of sap and beat him over the dome with ping-pong bat.
It is interesting to note that gold working on a small scale has again started at Marup, near Engkilili. Many years ago, several Chinese Kongsis were actively engaged in gold-mining in this locality, but the industry as long died out.
We wish this new venture all success.
We have been asked to broadcast an appeal for the score book used for the cricket match which took place during the recent examination week. Some keen cricketer, intending no doubt to study the scores at his leisure, removed the book from the pavilion and has not yet returned it to its rightful owner.
On May 2nd Naranier, an elderly Tamil, appeared before the Magistrates’ Court in Kuching on a charge of being drunk and disorderly in Khoo Hun Yeang Street on the previous night.
Naranier stated in his defence that May 1st was pay day, so naturally he got drunk: what else was to be expected? This admirable reasoning, sound though it undoubtedly was, failed to impress the court, which fined him one dollar. Naranier, however, had made such a thorough job of his pay-day celebration that he had not the wherewithal to settle the fine, so he was sentenced to one day’s imprisonment in default. Possibly it was worth it.
Lieut.-Commander A. C. Baker, late of H.M.S. Herald. writes to say that his next hydrographic job is likely to be in the neighbourhood of Greenland, -certainly a change from the Sarawak River. The words of the famous hymn about coral strands and icy mountains immediately occur as being particularly applicable.
Lieut.-Commander Baker had an interesting journey home. Leaving Hong Kong, he travelled to California via Shanghai, Japan and Honolulu; from California he went through Arizona. New Mexico, and Texas right through the centre of Mexico to Mexico city, whence he travelled to Vera Cruz by air. At Vera Cruz he embarked in a Honduras tramp steamer 32 years old which took him across the gulf of Mexico up the Mississippi delta to New Orleans, he then went by rail to Jacksonville, then down the Florida coast to Key West, then to Havana in Cuba. From Havana he travelled to New York by the Panama canal steamer Pennsylvania, and finally, after a visit to Niagara Falls, he sailed from New York for Europe by the Bremen.
Lieut.-Commander Baker’s many friends in Sarawak will be glad to hear that his equatorial is now permanently orientated. After his adventurous trip, this is hardly surprising!
It is with regret that we record the death, on April 12th last, of Mr. R. V. Palfreman, late of the Sarawak Civil Service.
Mr. Palfreman joined the service in 1921, and resigned in 1927. He was stationed at various times at Baram. Sibu, Mukah, Kuching, Simanggang and Tatau.
Return of His Highness the Rajah.
His Highness the Rajah returned to Kuching on 11th May, having been unfortunately delayed in Singapore by illness.
His Highness travelled in the Darvel, one of the Straits Steamship Company’s vessels. and met at Tanjong Po by H.H M Y. Maimuna and M.L. Betty. With His Highness came Mr. E. S. Holl, Mr. and Mrs. Somerville and Mr. MacTier.
Mr. Somerville is Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Straits Steamship Co., Ltd.
Sternutation Among Pepper Planters.
LATENT ENERGY IN THE HUMAN SNEEZE.
When will our scientists and engineers realize the vast possibilities latent in the human sneeze? Sitting in a theatre the other night, and listening to the fusillade of tisboos emitted by my fellow-playgoers,
I was distressed to think of the amount of power that was running to waste. We harness the winds. We harness the tides. Why not make the best of a bad epidemic and harness the neglected nose?
I am reminded of an excellent passage in the works of Oliver Wendell Holmes, whose breakfast-table needed no daily paper to make the meal endurable. Speaking of the Island of Sumatra, he soberly remarks: “During the season of gathering the pepper, the persons employed are subject to various incommodities, the chief of which is violent and long-continued sternutation or sneezing. Such is the vehemence of these attacks, that the unfortunate subjects of them are often driven backwards for great distances at immense speed, on the well-known principle of the aeolipile. Not being able to see where they are going, these poor creatures dash themselves to pieces against rooks or are precipitated over the cliffs, and thus many valuable lives are lost annually.”
Steam succeeded horse-power and electricity steam. I look forward to the day when electricity, in turn, will be succeeded by snuff. “Aitcheff” in The Graphic.
An Expensive Guest at the Zoo.
COBRA WHOSE MEALS COST £4 A TIME.
To persuade, the Zoo’s snakes to feed regularly is not always easy. Some of them require a careful choice of food, and others sometimes go on hunger strike. It is a long time, however, since the Reptile House had such an exacting feeder as the hamadryad, or king cobra.
This snake is an exceptionally fine example of his kind, and measures 16ft. 9 ins. As the hamadryad does not take kindly to captivity, every effort was made when this snake arrived last summer to provide him with food he liked. In his natural state the king cobra lives on a variety of other reptiles, but during his first months in the Zoo this one refused to eat anything but monitors.
His diet of monitors was expensive and difficult enough, but recently the hamadryad has become worse. He suddenly took an aversion to monitors, and, although several kinds of snakes were offered to him, he refused to feed at all until at length he was given a Malayan black-and-yellow snake.
Now he touches nothing except these black-and-yellow snakes, and as each costs £4 and the hamadryad is often hungry; he is an expensive inmate of the menagerie.
Another awkward aspect of the problem is that he has almost exhausted the Zoo’s stock of black-and-yellow snakes, and a new supply of his rations will not arrive till next month. And. unfortunately, king cobras will cheerfully starve to death if they are not tempted to eat! The Zoo recently lost a specimen that went without food for ten months.
Most inmates of the Reptile House, however, are, not so fastidious, and at present feeding-time is a lively event, for the reptiles are waking from their winter’s sleep and are. therefore, hungry. The large pythons have begun to take three chickens each Friday, and the Komodo “dragons” have developed enormous appetites. On Friday-the official feeding-time the “dragons” each make a meal of two pigeons, one chicken, four rats and about 4 lbs. of meat; and a few days later, to help them to carry on until the following Friday, they eat a few more rats and a dozen or so eggs. As both these giant lizards are tame enough to come out of their den to be petted by visitors, they have numerous friends who call on them and bring eggs to place in their ever-ready months. -Sunday Times.
[The black and yellow Malayan snakes mentioned are presumably the variety known as chin chin emas, which are fairly common in this country. If the London Zoo are prepared to pay £4 each for them, it seems that a profitable export trade might be built up. To ensure a steady demand, however, a necessary preliminary would be the presentation to the Zoological gardens of a number of hamadryads with similar expensive tastes in their diet. This seems a question which the Curator of the Museum might investigate with profit. -Ed.]
The Perils of Stenography
OR
DON'T BELIEVE ALL YOU HEAR.
Life, that lively American journal, says the Singapore Free Press, reproduces the following letter taken down in dictation by Literal Lil and reproduced for official signature.
Dear Mr. Umpstead:
Let’s see. What’ll I tell the old jackass. In reply to yours of the sixteenth we are surprised to learn the super-power two-ton used truck you purchased from us is not giving perfect satisfaction. We had to sell it quick before it fell to pieces.
As you know, Mr. Umpstead, we inspect all used cars thoroughly before turning them over to the purchaser. Your truck was in excellent condition when it left our garage. That’s a swell dress you have on. New, isn’t it?
It is possible your driver is at fault. Four miles to the gallon is very poor mileage for a truck in such good condition as yours. Four gallons to the mile would be about right. I never noticed before you had a dimple in your chin. Bring it around and we will have our expert mechanic make the proper adjustments.
Sincerely yours.
Just sign it yourself.
The letter reproduced above brings home forcibly the danger of using stenographers who are too conscientious. Beware of clerks just in receipt of shorthand allowances, for in their enthusiasm for their new acquirement they are apt to emulate “Literal Lil” and produce the following kind of letter. How very, very awkward it would be if one of them were to be despatched!
The District Officer,
Umpteenth Division.
Sir,
I have the honour to where the devil is that file? No, not that one. wake up, please! Oh, here it is after all. Honour to acknowledge your letter quote the blasted number he uses some comic-filing system that no one except himself can understand and to inform you in reply that your action regarding the disposal of the spare mosquito net in the Government Store is not understood. Let me see. who did it go to? -Mr. Jones, wasn’t it? Yes, it would. Mr. Jones should be instructed to return the net immediately and should be debited with any charges incurred. That’ll shake him, he’ll have to make half-a-bottle of Black Label last till the end of the month now.
It is further pointed out that under no circumstances no in no circumstances, that’s belter or is under right? No, put down in should you have permitted the net lo leave the store fat lot of use it is pointing out anything to him he hasn’t the foggiest idea what’s happening under his own nose half the time and it is hoped that a stricter supervision will be exercised in future.
I have the honour to tell the office boy to get me a glass of ice water and finish up in the usual way. That’s all.
A Tropical Interlude.
SUN HELMET IN THE POLICE COURT.
An unconventional attire was adopted by Mrs. Cecilia Emily Burton (42), of the Great Caravan, Sutton Court Drive, Rochford, when she appeared before the Justices at the Southend Police Court, on Friday, wearing a white pith helmet several sizes too large for her and Russian boots. She was charged with being drunk and disorderly in the High Street, Southend, the previous night.
“I suppose I must be guilty,” she said in answer to the charge.
P.C. Bunn said at 8.45 p.m. he was on point duty at the Alexandra Street crossing when he heard someone raving and shouting at the bottom of the High Street. He saw the prisoner kneeling on the ground and shouting. “Down with the Germans!” Witness took her to the Police Station and on the way she fell down several times. She was searched by the police matron and found to possess £1 3s. 4d., two quart bottles of beer, a dog licence, and sundry other articles.
Prisoner: I came out of the Royal Hotel and I was opposite to where the German eagle used to lie.
When the Chairman (Mr. F. F. Ramuz) asked whether there were any previous convictions against prisoner, Supt. Crockford handed a list to the Bench, remarking “A pretty hopeless case, I’m afraid.”
Prisoner was fined 10s., the Chairman saying, “Be careful you do not get into this state again.”
[A Sibu correspondent sends us this extract from a Home paper with the comment that the authors and playwrights who specialize in portraying “the glamorous East” have a lot to answer for. The lady in question seems to have attended a Chekhov Matinee and an evening performance of “The Letter.” -Ed.]
Main Ajat.
One’s first night in a Dyak house is an unforgettable experience. If the house is far enough up river to be on the gravel-bed, there are the delights of a bathe in clear, sparkling water; then in reply to the ‘stengah bird’s’ insistent call, one leaves the. darkening house for the tanju or outside verandah, there to spend the cool of the evening with such creature-comforts as whisky and tobacco.
Dusk falls over the jungle with soft splendour. One by one the stars appear, heralded by the shrill whirring of cicadas in the tree-tops. As the sun sinks, the neighbouring hills are tipped for a moment with living fire, and the distant mountain-range turns to a deeper purple, then to black. Soon the mountains are merely jagged black shapes outlined against a screen of crimson and gold, which fades as one watches to a luminous blue. More stars come out, individual trees become blurred in the surrounding mass of forest, and the short twilight is over.
The jungle is never silent, and now as night falls the roar of the river tumbling over the rocks seems to grow louder. It is a soothing sound well in keeping with the time and place, and seems to add an air of comfort to the house, in which lights are already winking into life. The bamboo flooring creaks as parties of men and women walk to their rooms laden with the spoils of farm or jungle, weary after a full day’s work; girls step adroitly down the notched pole which serves as a ladder, exchanging greetings with other women as they walk down to the river to fill their water gourds. From underneath the house comes the drowse grunting of pigs and the duck of fowls: a shout heralds the arrival of a boat bringing workers from a distant padi, farm, and as they trudge slowly through the gloom, their backs bent under heavy loads, one is forcefully reminded of Gray’s “Elegy.”
For the moment, all is peace. To quote the Sea Dyak Mengap -
The verandah
Grows dark.
As though wrapped
In a blantan blanket.
And our house loft.
Friend Budi Nsirimbai.
Grows dark, as though covered
With a paia pukan.
The whole house
Trembles, buried in gloom.
And now our resin lamps
Make glowing spots
In the village pathway
In half-an-hour the Dyaks have finished their evening meal, and some of them, headed by the Tuai or head of the house, join their visitor on the verandah for a smoke and a chat. After a while it grows chilly, and one moves inside to the ruai where mats are already laid out opposite the headman’s room.
The house is dimly lit with many naked wicks, each one a point of wavering yellow light, throwing fantastic shadows on beams and on the clusters of dried and blackened human heads which hang above the hearths The hum of many voices mingles with the yelps of scavenging dogs and the whimper of babies: opposite the door of each room members of the family are busy with a variety of occupations. -mending spears, splitting rattans for mat or basket making, repairing old fish-traps or deer snares; inside the room, the women gather for their evening gossip. At intervals along the ruai groups of young men laugh and chatter noisily, rolling palm leaf cigarettes. Others look up from their task for a moment to join in some discussion, then turn their attention again to the work in hand. Here, a lad carefully whips together two curved slats of wood for a parang sheath; another sharpens a knife on a stone, testing its edge with his finger. Beside him sits an old man dandling a child in his lap and proffering advice in jerky sentences punctuated by pauses for the proper mastication of sireh; his teeth are gone, so he has to pound the lime, leaves and areca-nut to a pulp in a little brass mortar.
Dogs growl and whine, wandering up and down searching for trifles of food, every now and again coming into snarling collision. If they venture too close to their masters a blow from a cane sends them yelping away; but Dyaks are surprisingly tolerant of their hunting dogs, and will put up with a great deal before striking them. To Europeans, though, they are an infernal nuisance.
Some mats are now laid in the middle of the floor, and from one end of the house comes the soft thud of a gong. A dozen heads turn simultaneously, questioning; the tuai, all smiles, tells you that there will be dancing to-night, and orders the young men to make ready. In a few moments the orchestra is assembled, -kromong, a series of small gongs slung on rattans in a long wooden frame, not unlike a xylophone; a number of larger gongs (tawak) of various sizes, and some drums. A Dyak squats in front of the kromong, a cigarette drooping from his lips, and tries over a series of notes with two soft-wood sticks; the large gongs are hung from the beams, and the drums are taken by individual players. These drums are about three or four feet long and six inches wide, and are played by slapping the head-usually made of monkey skin-with the tips of the fingers and the ball of the hand. The drum is held in the player’s lap, being steadied by a rattan loop hooked over one big toe.
At a signal, the orchestra tries over a preliminary “burst.” Some young men advance to the mat’s and shyly practise a few steps, coy as children asked to perform at a party, laughing affectedly and pushing one another to the fore. Eventually, one of them consents to start the ball rolling, putting on a fine war coat and headdress and laying a parang ilang and a shield on the floor.
Suddenly the music starts up in earnest. Drums thud, gongs rhythmically boom and the kromong, keeping perfect time, supply an elusive Pan-like lilt which seems to breathe the very spirit of the jungle. With a yell the dancer leaps into the centre of the mat. balancing on one heel and slowlv revolving with a kind of heel and toe motion, his arms swaying with wonderfully supple grace. Slowly he crouches and postures, his slim brown body gleaming in the lamplight, black and white hornbill plumes nodding in his headdress, silver bangles rattling at his wrists. His arms ripple like snakes, he crouches low, then, with a shout he springs across the mat and snatches up the parang and shield. Twisting, turning, swaying to and fro but always keeping his balance, he goes through the motions of attack and defence in single combat; arms out-flung, one hand grasping the parang, the other guarding his body with the shield. If he is a really clever dancer he may kneel down and sway backwards until the plumes of his headdress sweep the floor: then, like an uncoiled spring, he leaps to this feet holding the parang between his teeth or balancing it upon his shoulder, and continues the dance. It should be remembered that the parang is razor sharp, and that one slip might result in a serious injury.
At last the music stops, and the dancer, panting and glistening with sweat, comes to a halt and divests himself of his trappings, laughingly acknowledging the applause evoked by his skill, or replying suitably to jokes made at his lack of it. Another man takes his place, the gongs and drums thud into life, and the dance goes on.
There are many forms of this Dyak dancing, in all of which the performers have an opportunity to display the flair for acting which seems inherent in their race There is ajat munyiet, for instance, the monkey dance, which can be very amusing and also very Rabelaisan, especially if the performers have a good quota of tuak inside them! In this dance two or three Dyaks swing and clamber round the posts in the middle of the house pretending to be monkeys, and their performance is vividly realistic; for those of us who have been forced hurriedly to remove female relatives from the monkey-house at the Zoo, no further comments are necessary!
Then there is ajat timbang anak in which the actions of women nursing children, pounding padi, or busy with other domestic tasks are caricatured with great effect; the Dyak is a born mimic, and to see one of them imitating a gruff old lady or a coy maiden occupied with house-hold implements can be very funny indeed. There is ajat puar kesah, literally the “itchy blanket dance” which portrays a sleepy man struggling with the terrors of a blanket full of fleas; ajat nyumpit burong, which, as its name implies, depicts a hunter shooting a bird with a blowpipe; and many others too numerous to describe.
Even impromptu exhibitions of ajat sometimes continue into the small hours of the morning. At the close of the entertainment a meal is usually provided; then, one by one the lights snuff out, the married men retire to the privacy of their rooms and the bachelors, wrapping themselves in their woven blankets, lie down to sleep on the ruai. In the words of the mengap -
The children
Cease their noisy games and quarrels.
The mothers
Cease to nurse their latest-born.
The village maids
With giggle and noisy laughter
Seek the padong
In the loft above.
The old men
Cease to feed the evening fire.
The long house sleeps and theoretically, silence should reign until cockcrow. But in a Dyak village cockcrow begins about midnight and carries on without intermission until dawn, so one’s first night is not always as comfortable as it might be.
Maligned Malaya.
Under the above heading a letter to the Morning Post protests strongly against the habit certain play-
wrights and novelists have of grossly misrepresenting the life led by the white man in the tropics. He mentions in particular a play which obviously refers to Malaya, in which it is suggested that a senior government official is always at the bottle in a leading club, and that he is frequently in a pitiable state in front of his friends. Now, of course, those who have lived in Malaya know that this is very far from the truth, and they will agree with the writer of the Morning Post letter when he says that “plays and novels giving these impressions might conveniently be banned as libels.” Further, he suggests that the time has come when these ridiculous aspersions on the life led by white men in the Colonies, the hot portions of the Empire, should be less frequently splashed about the theatres. The theatres and also the picture houses are visited by men from the Colonies and Dominions, white, native and coloured, and the impression these folks get of the life of their rulers or business heads is often altogether an erroneous one. -China Express and Telegraph.
This Modern World.
BROOKLYN. -Thousands of street loungers stared in amazement at the funeral from Traitaganza outrivaling anything yet seen in the way of gangster obsequies when Johnny Guistra, the undertaker star of the underworld who was “put on spot” Sunday last, was buried. A procession of hundred-thirty-two cars, eighteen whereof were packed with wreaths, solemnly proceeded from Guistra’s “funeral parlour” to the cemetery. The coffin which was borne by six gunmen, colleagues of Guistra, was valued at well over two-thousand sterling. One huge heart-shaped trophy of roses had a fierce looking dagger thrust through the centre whence streamed a trail of blood-red ribbons. -Wireless news, May 16th.
Can You Do It?
TEASER THAT WAS PUT TO CIVIL
SERVICE CANDIDATES.
Here is a real teaser-a problem set in a recent Civil Service examination. Can you solve it?
A railway train was manned by three men, named Smith, Robinson and Jones, who were guard, fireman and driver (but not respectively).
On the train were three passengers, Mr. Smith, Mr. Jones and Mr. Robinson.
Mr. Robinson lived at Leeds.
The guard lived half-way between Sheffield and Leeds.
Mr. Jones earned £100 2s. 1d. per annum.
The guard’s nearest neighbour, a passenger, earns exactly three times as much as the guard.
The guard’s namesake lived at Sheffield.
Smith beat the fireman at billiards.
What was the name of the engine driver?
This is not a “catch,” nor is there any prize for the solution, but it may improve your opinion of the Civil Servant. Try it. -Daily Mirror.
Morals in the M.S.V.R.
One question which is asked in a circular recently issued to members of the M.S.V.R. really is a little unusual. First the volunteer is asked to state whether he married or single, and, if married, the number and sex of his children. Then his eye falls upon the following query:
Any other European female living with, stating relationship if any. (If domestic state so.)
Well, well! They are frank about these matters in the Army. We can but hope that the relationship will always be recorded as “platonic.” -Straits Times.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 60 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 18.] WEDNESDAY, 31st MAY, 1871. [Price 5 Cts.
ITEMS.
SANTUBONG.
We are glad to hear the bungalow at the mouth of the Santubong entrance has just been put up in thorough repair by the Government. There are now three Sanitaria, one at Sirambu Mountain 1,300 feet above the sea, one on Matang Coffee Estate 1,000 feet, and Santubong with good sea battling within a hundred yards.
WINE TARIFF ON STEAMERS.
The following new Regulations as to passengers per steamers to Suez are published to the Maulmain Advertiser.
“There is no intention of transhipping passengers from Calcutta and Madras at Galle, the same steamers will continue the voyage to Suez. Ice will be carried as here-tofore for cooling fluids. The tarif of wines is not high. -Burgundy three shillings, claret the same: port and sherry four shillings and two shillings per pint: brandy five shillings: soda water four pence. Wines will only be served in the saloons, and drinking will not be allowed elsewhere. Account to be settled weekly.”
DOG NOTICE.
The Singapore Police, in accordance with a notice made public on the 28th ult., have been making a raid upon vagrant and ownerless dogs in that place. On Monday and Tuesday, the 1st and 2nd inst, 335 are said to have been executed. Some regulation about the same animals in our bazaar might not be amiss, as more than one complaint of the annoyance caused by them to Europeans at night has reached us.
REUTER’S TELEGRAMS.
Paris, 2nd April. Several sharp engagements took place this morning near Courbevoie between the Insurgents and the Troops from Versailles, the former were shelled out of a village from Fort Valerien. The Insurgent prisoners were shot as rebels; the moral effect of the victory is excellent.
6th April. The Insurgents have arrested the Archbishop of Paris. Several Churches have been pillaged. Heavy fighting in front of Vauvres and Issy continued on Tuesday and Wednesday. The Insurgents were repulsed everywhere.
London, 11th April. The Insurgent Batteries on Paris Ramparts are silenced. It is believed the Versailles forces will make an assault tomorrow. Cannonading occurred yesterday between Forte Valerian and Maillot. Insurgents attacked plateau Chatillon but were repulsed.
Sarawak Library.
The following books have been kindly presented by His Highness the Rajah: -
Mirage Number Ten.
We can safely say that Mirage No. 10 which arrived too late for review in our last issue, is the best that has yet appeared. We understand that Mirage has found new printer, and whoever he is, he knows his job. The general “make up” of the paper is a great improvement on previous issues, the reproduction of photographs and illustrations being particularly excellent. Also, we earnestly invite the attention of our local merchant princes to the advertisement pages, which are very striking and remarkably well printed. This issue confirms our previous impression that in the field of amateur journalism in the Far East Mirage leads easily, the rest being nowhere. The rest, we might add, includes Straits Produce.
There seems to be an idea current in certain sections of the European community that the interest of Mirage is centred solely in Miri: nothing could be farther from the truth, and we would like to take this opportunity of dispelling this-false impression once and for all. On looking through the issue under review, we can find only two or three pages devoted to purely local topics, and even these, owing to the lively style in which they are written, will interest those who have never seen Miri and who never expect to do so. The remaining articles, which form far the larger part of the letter press, are of interest alike to readers residing in Kuching, Buenos Aires or Kamchatka to all of whom they can be thoroughly recommended.
Notable contributions in this issue area descriptive account of Brunei by Mr. P. A. B. McKerron, British Resident; an article on Switzerland, illustrated with beautiful photographs; an account of a Malay wedding; an article “on the philosophy of Tida apa,” also illustrated with photographs, by Mr. Philip C. Coote, author of Peeps at the
Malay States; “personal recollections.” which are as good as ever: and a most attractive essay entitled “Birds and Memories.”
In conclusion, we can only say that those who have not yet read Mirage are missing a good thing, and we advise them to beg, borrow or buy-preferably buy-a copy at the earliest opportunity.
First Division News.
April, 1931.
Extracts from the First Divisional Reports for April. 1931, by Mr. J. C. Swayne. Resident, First Division: -
General. -Three R. A. F. flying boats arrived from Singapore on the 13th on their way north.
Film censorship was taken over by the new board.
Applications for tuba fishing having become too numerous, the issue of permits had to be restricted. The same applies to rallies.
I regret to report the death of Datu Imaum Abang Haji Halil which occurred on the 20th.
Abang Haji Zulaihi. N.O., made a tour of the Samarahan district which took two weeks. His report shows that though the harvest was not up to expectations the local natives have little of which to complain.
Judicial. -Three criminal and nine civil cases were dealt with.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
April, 1931.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports: -
District Court. -Twenty-three cases were heard, three of which were criminal and twenty civil. Of the three criminal cases, all resulted in convictions.
Magistrate’s Court. -One hundred cases were heard, seven of which were criminal and ninety-three civil. Of the seven criminal cases, six convictions and one acquittal were adjudged.
Police Court. -Nineteen summary cases were brought before the Court. All resulted in convictions.
In addition, one hundred and seven judgment cases were dealt with during the mouth.
Judicial. -I am glad to be able to report a marked drop in criminal cases during the month compared with March, but the number of civil claims down for hearing is still rising.
Coroner. -Two deaths occurred during the month, both being the result of motor accidents. The first was that of Ngui Kap Sen, Towkay, of Bukit Pam, Simanggang Road who met his death at 18 1/2 mile owing to the car in which he was travelling getting out of control and overturning. In this connection the driver of the car was prosecuted on a charge of criminal negligence and convicted. The second case was the death of Bertha Ho (wife of Wee Hong Kee, the Kuching Auctioneer) who was riding on the pillion of a motor cycle from which she fell, sustaining injuries to the head from which she died.
General. -Offices were closed from 3rd-6th inclu-sive for the Easter Holidays, and a successful tuba fishing was held in the Sarawak River on the 4th.
LAND OFFICE,
April, 1931.
The Land Officer, Mr. T. M. Griffiths, reports: -
Quit Rent. -A summary of outstanding quit rents for 1930 is being made in order to locate debtors. After completion it is hoped that with a little pressure these unpaid quit rents will be collected.
Registration Investigation. -A commencement has been made on the investigations of block boundaries in connection with the New Land Registration Scheme. Where possible, natural boundaries are followed.
Simanggang Road. -A start has been made on a new house at 39th mile, where a suitable site on a small hill overlooking the road has been found.
As a measure for the prevention of malaria all the coolies working here have now been supplied with mosquito nets.
As there are only three Land Inspectors available at present moment, work is necessarily slow and attention is being concentrated on finishing the rentises far as the Sadong River.
UPPER SARAWAK AND LUNDU.
April, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer. Mr. P. Murray-Scott, reports: -
General. -The month was devoid of incident at both stations. The Government Auditor was in Bau from April 21st to April 23rd on duty.
Courts. -There were no important cases.
Prisons. -Prisoners averaged 39.23. Discipline was fair, and health good.
Medical and Health. -There was very little sick-ness in the station, and health work is progressing well under the new scheme.
P.W.D. -The general office was slightly altered in order to increase the available space for clerks, and also to make access to the prison tool store possible from outside. All bridges and roads are in good order.
Forest Department. -The forest guard was with-drawn at the end of the month, there being in-sufficient work to justify his retention, and the forest quarters were taken over by the Administration.
Rainfall. -Heaviest recorded in 24 hours 2’31 inches. Daily average ‘29 inches. Total for the month 8’85 inches.
Gold Mining. -327.5 ounces of actual gold were obtained by the Bidi Gold Milling Company for the month of March, 1931.
SADONG.
April, 1931.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports: -
Court. -Court work during the month has been very light.
Land. -On the 17th Lim Teck Dee, Chief Clerk of the Land Office. Kuching, arrived from Kuching, and he has been employed in getting the Land Office books up to date. It was estimated that the work could be finished within a fortnight, it now appears that it will take at least another three weeks.
Agriculture. -The padi harvest in this district is now almost completed and it would appear that a fairly good crop has been obtained. The price of this commodity in Kuching, however, is so low that some difficulty has been experienced by the natives in finding purchasers.
Prison. -The health of the prisoners was good.
General. -On the 14th I visited Tebekang and Land Dyak Kampongs in Bedup. Some of the Kampongs had not been visited by a European during the last six years. I returned to the main station on 27th.
On the 23rd at 11 p.m. a fire broke out on board m.l. Vana. The fire was put out within an hour of the outbreak and little damage was done.
On the 30th Mr. A. L. McLaine, Auditor, arrived by s.s. L’ Aubaine.
Sadong Collieries Report.
April, 1931.
Extracts from the Sadong Collieries Report April, 1931, by Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager: -
The output, export, local consumption, and coal stock figures for the month were as follows: -
The No. 9 outcrop was completely worked out at the end of the month, and the workings have been abandoned.
The inner workings of the top seam struct the fault encountered years ago at the rise workings of nos.1 and 2 mines further north.
One Hee Chew, a Teochew Chinese miner employed with Kim Chai’s kongsi at the Buffalo Mine, was instantaneously killed by a fall of roof on the 22nd instant.
Kuching Football League.
No small amount of interest has been shown by football enthusiasts and followers in the League since its introduction at the beginning of the month. Good crowds have turned up to all the matches on the Kuching Football Club and Padungan grounds, whilst teams crossing the river to play on the Rangers’ ground have not by any means been lacking in supporter.
The general standard of football has been good, the competition most keen and there has been a pleasantly marked absence of rough and dangerous play. It was feared that the introduction of possible “point-snatching,” might lend to increase the roughness of the play but so far it would seem that any such fears may be ruled out.
The teams in the League appear to be fairly evenly matched and the League will not be a “walk-over” for anyone. The Rangers have not, so far, lost a match, but each of their victories has been the result of a well-contested game. The Police on the other hand have not yet managed to bring off a win, but in their match against the Rangers on the K.F.C. ground the result was in the balance right up to the end, and the Rangers only just managed to scrape home to win by the odd goal in five, after a most exciting and keenly contested game.
The League table up to the morning of Saturday, May 30th, is given below: -
Distribution of Prizes at St. Joseph’s School, Kuching.
On Wednesday, 20th May, all the boys of St. Joseph’s were gathered together in the top storey (no other room being capable of holding the number) in order to receive His Lordship, Bishop Biermans, who had kindly consented to distribute the prizes.
At 9 a.m. the Bishop, accompanied by Mr. Jacques, Director of Education, Mgr. Dunn, the Prefect Apostolic, and all the Fathers that happened to be in Kuching, entered the assembly hall. Here, an address of welcome was read and presented to His Lordship the Bishop. Then in a few chosen words Father Haidegger gave a resume of the actual condition of the school at the end of last year. The number of pupils on the rolls was 486, of whom 468 joined the examinations, and of these 75% passed, which shows that teachers and boys have done their work well.
His Lordship then handed over the prizes to the successful ones, saying a few kind words to each in turn. This finished, the Bishop addressed the boys, who listened with great attention. He had heard that the ceremony had been postponed so as to enable him to be present. He felt gratified, and assured the boys how pleased he was to be amongst them.
His congratulations went out first, he said, to those who had been successful in obtaining prizes. He praised their diligence which enabled them to do so. But the Bishop went on to say, the prizes were comparatively few, and not all could gain them. Hence that did not take away the fact that there must be many amongst the boys who had worked with equal, if not superior diligence and perseverance, and those also the Bishop congratulated most sincerely.
Furthermore, he asked the boys always to remember what was done for them by the Fathers and teachers, who did hard work in instilling into them the best they had themselves, and by the Government, which showed us appreciation of what was done in and by the school by the allocation of substantial grants. Moreover, he urged them to keep in mind that now was the time for them to prepare themselves for their future lives, for they never could to retrieve the time now wasted.
Further the Bishop remarked that the main thing for them to acquire in the school was character. Hence their obligation of always maintaining the discipline of their school, and be impressed upon them the duty of obeying their superiors, than which there can be no better way leading to the formation of a good character, by which they would become true servants of God and law-abiding, loyal subjects of the Rajah.
The Bishop then proceeded to convey his thanks to those who had made the school the success it was. He expressed the pleasure he always felt in the reports sent home to him at Mill Hill, by Mgr. Dunn. But there was one person whom His Lordship wished to single out, and that was Father Haidegger, who, for more than forty-eight years had borne the brunt of the educational battle, and was, as it were, the soul of the school. How many difficulties had to be overcome, financial burdens to be carried, now happily much decreased through the generosity of the Sarawak Government. All these gradually disappeared, and the school is what it is, mainly through the strenuous and unswerving zeal of
Father Haidegger. The Bishop, as Superior General of the Society, congratulated and thanked him for all he had done.
His Lordship was very pleased that the Director of Education showed his interest in the school by his presence.
Another pleasurable fact the display of the three shields the boys had carried in their sports and the Bishop wished them the best of luck in trying to win a fourth one, if so they deserved. Naturally a holiday was granted and with that the impressive little ceremony terminated. -Contributed.
Concert at St. Theresa’s Convent.
On the evenings of 4th and 5th May, a Concert was given by the pupils of St. Theresa’s Convent in aid of the Mission.
The large hall belonging to the Convent in which the Concert was held was crowded each night, and a very enjoyable entertainment was given.
It opened by a poem “Welcome” recited by seven of the Infant girls. Then came a song by even smaller children entitled “The Clock.” A dance by the Baby Girls completed the first part of the programme.
An Operetta “Zurika” was next presented by the Senior Girls who sang and acted most admirably from start to finish.
Miss Mary Solosa as the Prince of Kola and Miss Elisabeth Solosa as the Princess Zurika both had strenuous parts to play, as had also Miss Maria Bong as the King of Kola, but everything went with a swing and the pupils appeared to be enjoying themselves as much as their audience.
On Tuesday. May 19th. the Concert was given privately in honour of the Right Rev. Biermans who, as Superior General of the St. Joseph’s Foreign Missionary Society, has been visiting the various Missions belonging to the Society.
His Highness the Rajah was present, and when the Concert was over the Bishop made a short speech in which he thanked His Highness for the help and sympathy which he and the Sarawak Government have so often extended to the Catholic Missions in Sarawak. -Contributed.
Kuching Rifle Club.
Donegal Badge, 23rd April, 1931: -Messrs. C. P. Lowe and H. Linton both tied with a score of 81, and on the shoot off the badge was won by Mr. C. P Lowe.
The duties of Hon. Secretary have been taken, over by Mr. D. L. Leach of the Survey Department.
Cricket.
KUCHING FOOTBALL CLUB VS. THE OUTSTATIONS.
Advantage was taken of the presence of a number of Outstation Officers in Kuching during “Exam Week” once more to try conclusions with them on the cricket field, and the game took place on Sunday, 22nd March last. The fact that this report is three months late is due to the criminal activities of the individual who purloined the Scoring Book. Its absence entailed the use of a sheet of foolscap, which the Captain promptly mislaid and which has only just come to light. But better late than never.
On paper. the Outstations had good team out and most of the Kuching people expected a hammering. The uncertainty of cricket is proverbial, however, and this game was good illustration of it.
Kuching won the loss and put the other side in; but the other side seemed to resent this action, for they proceeded to get themselves out as fast as they could.
Moir and Heid opened the bowling for Kuching and sad to relate, seldom has Moir bowled worse. But it did not matter. Long hops, grounders and full tosses: they all hit the stumps somehow. Hudden, Barcroft and Mace alone seemed capable of dealing with a half-volley. The rest simply got out. Perhaps they had not rid themselves of “that Exam feeling” and were obsessed with the possibility of being asked to translate “Stumped” into Malay. Be that as it may, they got out with uncanny facility.
After a good deal of persuasion, Mr. C. D. Adams consented to go in as last man but sternly refuse to take the field afterwards; he had not been wrestling with examinations, either! The upshot was that the side was out for 27.
When Kuching went in Moir batted a great deal better than he had bowled and retired after scoring 42, which included a 4 and two 6’s in succession. Everyone had a bang and the innings closed for 74.
No extras appear to have been scored by either side: whether the scorer credited them to the batsmen or forgot entirely to put them down is not clear. Perhaps the scorer’s labours as examiner during the week had shaken him. also? Nevertheless, his services were appreciated, though the wicket-keeping could hardly have been as good as all that!
It was all very good fun and the people seemed to enjoy themselves and (You’re not describing a School Treat! -Ed.)
Everyone was delighted to see Her Highness the Ranee and the Dayangs Elizabeth and Valerie among the spectators; and as they stayed right to the bitter end it may be assume that they too got some fun out of it; we hope so, at any rate, and hope that they will come again next time they are in Sarawak.
Second Division News.
April, 1931.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports for April, 1931, by Mr. J. B. Archer. Resident: -
In the Resident’s Court a Forest Guard was sentenced to eighteen months’ imprisonment for criminal breach of trust. The appeal by a Chinese man from his sentence of one month for assault on a woman by the Engkilili Magistrate’s Court was upheld, and the conviction and sentence were quashed. An appeal in a civil case from the Engkilili District Court was dismissed. Two Chinese were fined for contempt of Resident’s Court.
A curious case was reported by the Acting Assistant District Officer, Simanggang, Mr. D. C. Hudden. It seems that a rich Lingga Dyak having lost some properly apparently by theft. engaged the services of a “theft diviner.'” an Undup Dyak. This man performed various ceremonies and named a certain Dyak present as the thief. The loser of the property then proceeded to Simanggang and obtained a warrant for the arrest of the supposed culprit. This unfortunate man was arrested and remanded for some days until the case was heard. No evidence of theft being forthcoming, the accused man was discharged. The complainant is being prosecuted for making a false charge, and the accused man is proceeding against the two accusers for damages.
Mr. S. G. Hansons arrived in Simanggang on the 9th, and proceeded to Engkilili on the 11th to take charge of the district from Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas. The latter left for Kuching on the 18th to do duty there.
The Director of Education. Mr. H. Jacques, paid a short visit to Simanggang in order to discuss educational matters. There seems to be a desire for a Malay Government School at Lingga, but in so many case, the enthusiasm is short fired. A good example is the present defunct Betong School.
The Acting Assistant District Officer of Simanggang, Mr. D. C. Hudden. and Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft spent part of the month travelling in the Skrang, Lingga, Sebuyow and Undup districts. They report that the padi was bad in parts, but on the whole the state of affairs is not so depressing as was expected.
Mr. C. S. Griffiths, Superintendent of Lands, arrived in Simanggang on the 15th. After visiting Engkilili he left on the 20th for the Saribas and Kalaka districts, accompanied by Mr. B. Summers, Land Officer. Second Division. During his visit many important matters were discussed.
On the 17th, Mr. T. A. Reid, of the Public Works Department arrived in Simanggang overland from Kuching. He left again by the same route on the 22nd. He reports that the track in parts was very bad owing to the heavy rains.
The Simanggang Wireless Station broke down on the 3rd but was repaired later.
The new offices in Simanggang are progressing fairly well but the contractor, like so many others, is bad at organization and the work is constantly being held up for essential material. The Simanggang Recreation Club re-opened on the 1st, and so far, is running well.
During the whole month I was unable to get out very far owing to injuries to my leg.
An interesting item of news is the start of gold workings at Marup as mentioned in the Engkilili district.
Abang Dulatip. Native Officer, was appointed to Roban as Native Officer.
The m.l. Elizabeth had to proceed to Kuching during the month for repairs to her machinery and was still away at the end of the month.
Towards the end of the month the Sarawak Steamship Company withdrew their motor ships Triso and Kidurong, running between Kuching and Engkilili and Kuching and Betong respectively. The absence of those two regular vessels will be felt, as they had good passenger accommodation and ran regularly.
SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Acting District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hudden: -
There were two criminal charges in the District Court and civil claims amounted to $1,883.87.
In the Magistrate’s Court there was one criminal charge; civil claims amounted to $333.26.
On the 15th, accompanied by Abang Omar, Native Officer, I started up the Undup to visit the Dyaks in that river, returning to Simanggang on the 22nd. The number of persons suffering from yaws and skin diseases, was amazing, especially in the ulu, where they are a considerable distance from Simanggang.
On the 27th Mr. Barcroft proceeded up the Skrang and was still away at the end of the month. On the evening of the 29th it was reported by the police on duty in the bazaar that the game of Chap Jee Kee was being played. All materials were seized, but on examination it was found that only nine pieces had been used instead of the usual twelve. Nevertheless, as it appeared to be merely a variation of Chap Jee Kee, the Monopolies Department was informed, and I understand, the matter is still under consideration.
The Malays in Lingga have recently repaired all the Kampong bridges of which there are nearly thirty.
Towards the end of the month a contract was given out for the upkeep of the Temudok Road, from the long bridge near Sabu Church to the shed on the top of Temudok Hill.
Work was also started on the Sabun palms in Simanggang Station. There are a considerable number of these and they have not been touched for years, with the result that they are all covered in parasites.
The harvest, such as it is, isi now all in; the Malays and Dyaks farming in the Batang Ai seem to have had an average crop, but the reports from the Skrang. Undup, Entulang, Lingga and Sebuyow are that in most cases they have just sufficient for their needs as regards food. Nothing is left over for bartering purposes.
ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Officer-in-Charge, Mr. S. G. Hansom: -
On the 11th instant I arrived from Simanggang by m.l. Anne accompanied by Mr. B. Summers, Land Officer. Mr. Summers left in the Anne a few hours later.
On the 13th instant I proceeded to Lubok Antu with the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas by boat, staying the night at Batu Bini.
On the 16th instant I returned to Engkilili with Mr. Ditmas on the same day I took over the District and checked the books, cash and opium.
On the 19th instant a complaint was received from the Arrack Farmer that bottled arrack from Kuching was being sold in the bazaar by a person other than himself; a Civil case in Court will result.
On the 26th instant I proceed to Marup with reference to an application received to reopen the gold workings there. I discussed the matter with the headman, who appears to have had experience at Bau and Bidi and inspected the rough workings commenced on the mountain for purposes of test.
During the month, I ordered the Chinese in the bazaar to clean the site of the recently burnt-out shops, the accumulation of rubbish being extremely untidy. This work has been completed by them.
Chinese pepper gardeners at Marup reported, that some of their plants had been maliciously burnt by some person unknown. An investigation was made but no offender has been found to date.
Owing to recent heavy rains the river became very high towards the end of the month. Parts of the road from Engkilili to Lubok Tedong were under five feet of water at one period.
There has been very little Court during the month, probably, to the Dyaks being busy with their harvest.
SARIBAS DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Acting District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny: -
The Superintendent of Lands, Kuching, and Land Officer, Second Division, arrived here on the 27th instant via Debak and Pusa. Various matters in connection with quit rent and garden tax were gone into and on the 29th instant a general meeting was held in the Fort when the Dyaks were given an opportunity to put forward their requests. Two minor requests were dealt with summarily and the two other major requests, i.e., reduction of quit rent and the exclusion from the new regulations of all gardens registered before 1.1.28. were referred to Kuching for consideration. A full report is being forwarded by the Superintendent of Lands. As a result of various applications by Dyaks for farming land between Pusa and Kuala Saribas the Field Officer, Second Division, spent several days examining land applied for at Sungei Sebulin and Sungoi Meleban.
Eight motor vessels entered and cleared during the month.
KALAKA DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. L. K. Morse: -
There were no cases of importance before the Courts during the month.
The m.l. One broke down some miles below Saratok on the 23rd. She was towed up to Saratok the following day and is now lying up until a new pump can be obtained.
Suntong and Nis, two Mohamadan Srus, again laid claims to the Srus land in the Krian. They were informed that they had no claim.
At Saratok the Dyak door taxes, gun taxes, weights and measures fees and garden taxes are coming in much better than I expected; at Roban and Kabong, however taxes are not coming in well. Instructions were left at both stations regarding this.
The Malay taxes are not coming in at all well, end it is a difficult to know what is to be done in this matter.
Abang Latip, Native Officer, reported for duty in this district on the 21st and is stationed at Roban.
A contract was signed during the month for the dismantling and reconstruction on a new site of the old Police Barracks, Saratok and the work was well under way at the end of the month.
While at Kabong I again inspected the waterworks.
I visited Kabong twice and Roban once during the month, there was little to do at either station beyond checking the accounts.
Mang, a Dyak prisoner, escaped on the 27th from Saratok jail but was captured by Dyaks at the 6th mile on the 30th.
The Police at Kabong report that three seaplanes passed over the mouth of the river on the 15th, flying very low.
It was reported from Sessang that Liak bin Dul while paddling in a prahu with his mother had an epileptic fit and fell overboard and was drowned, his body was found two days later.
LAND OFFICE.
Extracts from the report of the Land Officer. Mr. B. Summers: -
At Saratok it was pleasing to note that about half the garden assessment has already been paid.
At Pusa it was noted that about fifty per cent of the garden assessment had been paid, all payments having been made by Dyaks.
At Belong all registers and quit rent books, etc., were examined, and found correct.
It is a good sign that at Betong nearly sixty per cent of garden assessment and quit rent has already been paid, in fact payment throughout both the Krian and Saribas is very much in advance of the Batang Lupar district, which goes to prove that many of the inhabitants are really not so poor as they are understood to be.
Third Division News.
April, 1931.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports for April, 1931, by Mr. W. F. Dick, Acting Resident: -
Court. -Three criminal cases were dealt with, the principal one being His Highness the Rajah vs. Wong Ho Tieh and eight others for being members of an unlawful society. Wong Lee Ching was sentenced to seven years, Wong Ho Tieh to five years, Law Chin Kuan, Wong Kieh Ming, Wong Siong Yeng and Wong Tuong Chai were sentenced to two years’ imprisonment each, and all are to be deported on expiration of their sentences.
General. -Dr. Hertz, of the German Consulate General, Singapore, left on the 2nd by m.s. Sri Mukah for Kuching. I visited Sarikei on the 7th instant and shopkeepers there were given six weeks to apply for sites in the new bazaar, after which time they would not be given preferential treatment. On the 10th Mr. Crossley left for Matu, to which station he has been appointed, and I left for Kanowit where some District Court cases were settled; Abang Ahmat and Pengarah Nglambong left on the 12th for Ulu Julan. I returned to Sibu on 13th. On 20th Penghulu Endu the Entabai came down and reported that Asoon was still at his house, and had apparently no intention of coming down as ordered by His Highness the Rajah. On 27th the District Officer, Mr. Andreini, reported that Asoon was trying to get together a number of heads of houses to go with him to Kuching. On 29th I walked along the Selalu-Tulai road with the Divisional Land Officer; much filling and drainage is required before the road can be really useful. Visiters to the station during the month included Capt. C. D. Le Gros Clark. Secretary for Chinese Affairs. Mr. and Mrs. Kidd of Tanah Estates, Limited, Kanowit, Mr. D. E. Calver, The Conservator of Forests, and Mr. Humphreys, The Superintendent Electrical Engineer.
SIBU.
The District Officer, Mr. E. V. Andreini, reports: -
General. -I visited Matu, Daro, Bruit and Paloh from the 2nd to 6th in order to hand over to Mr. Crossley. Three R.A.F. seaplanes came down for a few minutes on their way north on the 15th instant.
Judicial. -I held a preliminary inquiry on a number of people accused of belonging to a secret society, with the result that fourteen men were committed for trial to the Resident’s Court.
Agriculture. -Considerable progress has been made by Chinese in planting Chinese tobacco, and some is now coming on the local market for sale.
Education. -The following schools were inspected by me during the month: -
R. C. Mission Schools at Sibu, Kanowit and Durin. Methodist Mission Schools at Sibu, Ensurai, Lobok Ang, Engkilo and Bukit Lang.
The new Chinese School in Sibu (Tiong Hua School) was opened by the Acting Resident on the 22nd. This is an imposing building built of concrete and has accommodation for about 300 boys. There are at present 201 boys there.
Administration. -Abang Haji Gapor, Native Officer, accompanied by the Penghulu Dalam, visited Penghulu Linggoh’s district, settled outstanding cases and met all Tuai.
Abang Ahmat, Native Officer, accompanied by the Penghulu Pengarah, visited Penghulus Inggong, Entili and Busang’s districts in the Kanowit area, and was still away in the Julau at the end of the month. He reports that Asoon has been misled by others and is afraid to come down in consequence. Mr. Gilbert, Acting Assistant District Officer, Sarikei, accompanied by the Assistant Land Officer, came down the Julau via ulu Sarikei. He reported that he come across a meeting of Tuai who were discussing the position of the Dyaks who are affected by the orders issued in connection with ex-penghulu Asoon, and said it was apparently called with the idea of asking Government to reconsider the position.
Police. -Mr. W. H. Kelley, Assistant Superintendent of Police, was in Sibu for some time in connection with the Secret Society case.
Sub-Inspector Wan Bujang inspected the Kanowit squads, and Inspector Abang Adeng the Binatang and Sarikei squads.
Prisons. -Prisoners were variously engaged with Public Works Department and other departments, and numbered 67 at the end of the month.
MUKAH AND OYA.
The District Officer. Mr. E. O. Bruce, reports: -
General. -On the 15th three seaplanes passed at a low altitude heading Eastward.
Penghulu Gagat and Selan came in with the usual reports. It appears that Gelegan and his brother Mamat, Balingian, Dyaks, decline to comply with orders issued by the previous District Officer to join on to a long house, preferring to live nomadically in isolated farming huts, bakar Julu as they term it.
Their obstinacy is apparently the result of pique at previous punishment, and it is hoped to round them up when padi is harvested.
On the 28th I went up river as far as Sungei Kua, spending nights at Sungei Taroh and Penghulu Gagat, where outstanding cases were settled. The use of a Government outboard motor would be very much appreciated in Mukah and Oya, and would save a tremendous amount of time travelling to isolated areas, especially in the Balingian, where more frequent visits are very necessary but impracticable so long as there is only one officer in Mukah.
Monthly rainfall registered at Mukah Fort was 16’09 inches.
The weather throughout the month has been particularly trying, the thermometer registering 72’ and 97’ F. (wet bulb).
Court. -Cases were more numerous this month.
A reported theft from a trading handling up river elicited the fact that the owner had discarded his boat and built a small shophouse in the kampong which had been burgled. Further inquiries resulted in several Chinese ex-traders being prosecuted for living in native bouses with Melanau mistresses. The Tua Kampong concerned were also punished, for neglect of duty.
Wan Akil, of Balingian, was sentenced to maximum term of imprisonment and a fine under I.P.O. 417, for cheating upriver Dyaks by obtaining substantial cash loans on the security of an English £1 note, which he alleged to be a $100 Sarawak, note, and failed to redeem.
The charge of incest between two Liko Melanaus, brother and sister, was dismissed, and witness Pug (f.) was punished for malicious slander.
Land and Agriculture. -The Divisional Land Officer, Mr. C. E. Pascoe visited the district in connection with new regulations concerning sago lands owned by natives.
Tua Kampong were called and informed that in future neither quit rent nor demarcation fees would be charged to natives, but that sago land titles would be transferable to anyone provided negotiations were registered in Court Lands acquired by those other than natives of Sarawak would be chargeable at the same rates as hitherto.
The demarcation of 29 lands was completed, and 123 new applications were made.
Trade and Shipping. -There was an increase in the export of sago and illipe nuts, about 50% in the latter case, although the local price decreased by over $1 picul. Exports of gutta jelutong decreased Padi harvests are good with a few exceptions.
Medical and Health. -A supply of dustbins was made locally and distributed amongst all Government quarters.
The new trench system of latrines at the jail Das proved a distinct improvement on the previous bucket system.
Forty-six outpatients were treated in the dispensary, with fifty-seven repetitious. Fourteen patients were admitted to hospital, and twelve discharged. Eighteen N.A.B injections were administered, and twenty-one microscopic examinations made.
Balingian. -The Divisional Treasurer, Mr. McGinn, visited Mukah and Balingian, returning on the 14th via Oya. after inspection of accounts, etc.
Beliang, Dyak, was slightly wounded by accident while out pig shooting with Malana.
OYA AND DALAT.
The Acting Assistant District Officer. Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -General. -The Divisional Land Officer visited the station, and the new regulations concerning sago lands were put into force.
The Divisional Treasurer accompanied the Divisional Land Officer and checked the cash and accounts finding them all correct. The new filing system was explained and put into force both at Oya and Dalat. A large sum of silver dollars was taken back to Sibu, but on examination some were found to be slightly chipped and were rejected. Silver dollars therefore in the district are accepted by nobody since the Treasury is an critical.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall recorded for the month was 9’03 inches.
SARIKEI, BINATANG AND REJANG.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports: -
General. -On 2nd, near S. Sledap, there was a collision between m.l.’s Lee Chiong and Kiang Ann; the Kiang Ann sank at once but there were no casualties. An inquiry was held by the shipping Department and m.l. Lee Chiong was found to be in the wrong.
On 22nd the Land Officer and I, with Native Officer Tuanku Mohamad, started up ulu Sarikei whence we walked to S. Wak, a tributary of S. Julan, then on to R. Umpor of S. Julau, here we stayed two nights; we met Pengarah Nglambong, Penghulu Entili and Abang Ahmat, Native Officer, Kanowit; Penghulu Busang arrived later.
The revenue for this month dropped to about half the usual amount. Malay and Dyak taxes still continue unpaid, also the Land Office revenue is not forthcoming as usual.
The pepper crop for this year is not looking very hopeful, as a sort of empanggau is eating away the flower, and as yet the gardeners have no measures to fight this. Tobacco juice is considered the only thing, but the import duty on bad tobacco is so high that they cannot afford to pay for it. When the flower is attacked by this insect it simply turns black and dies.
Public Works. -No work has been carried out on the roads, except monthly maintenance. At Binatang the Gamuan bridge was started, but lately the contract has been postponed. The Gamuan is ninety-six feet wide, and fairly deep, and has a very swift current when in flood.
Trade and Customs. -Although the Singapore steamers have been clearing with good cargoes, Sarikei trade returns are at a record low level. This is on account of no engkabang having been shipped from Sarikei.
MATU AND DARO.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. F. L. G. Crossley reports: -
General. -I visited the district with Captain E. V. Andreini from the 3rd to the 6th, to take over from him. On the 10th I arrived to take charge.
On the 20th, the Conservator of forests, Mr. D. E. Calver, and the Divisional Forests Officer, Mr. Spurway, arrived at Matu, and checked the Forestry books. On the 21st I accompanied them to Daro where several forestry cases were heard.
There is still a lot of exemption tax outstanding in the district. As an effort to collect this as soon as possible, I have issued a notice allowing payment in two monthly instalments. The position is complicated by a large number of petitions for release from payment on grounds of old age.
Court. -There has been a good deal of Court work, many cases having accumulated during the absence of a European Officer.
A test case concerning party wails in the bazaar at Matu was settled in accordance with the usual custom. Fines amounted to $80.92, and $30.50 was collected in fees.
Land. -The rubber owners are finding great difficulty in paying their annual tax. On the 28th I received a deputation of over one hundred Matu Malays, asking that the tax be reduced to twenty-five cents per acre. I could hold out to them no hope of this reduction.
KAPIT.
The Acting Assistant District Officer. Mr. R. G. Aikman reports: -
Courts. -There was very little litigation during April.
Dairy Farm. -The herd numbered forty-nine head at the end of the month. One cow calf was born during the month.
Song. -Song was visited from the 27th to the 29th.
The Malays expressed their desire to move across river and to form a proper kampong as soon as possible.
There seems little likelihood of the Chinese following them unless trade gets better.
General. -The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, returned from Belaga on the 22nd.
Trade in the Belaga bazaar is virtually non-existent and there is no damar being brought in at present.
In spite of an almost universal desire for vaccination only some four hundred people were treated, the majority being too lazy to come down from the ulu.
The Badangs have now settled down at Long Linau and are farming there, though it is possible that at a later date they may move into the Belaga where there is a large stretch of empty land.
The only people to report a good harvest in the Belaga district were the Skapans and Kejamans, the others all complaining of failure due to various pests.
Native Officers, Abang Aboi and Wan Hussein returned from a visit to the Katibas on the 9th.
They visited the Tekalit, Bankit. and Musah tributaries and reported all well throughout the Katibas area.
A Foochow, named Ting Kong Choo, was drowned in the Majaw rapids in the Mujong on the 20th. An inquest was held and a verdict of death by misadventure returned.
Penghulu Temmonggong Koh and Penghulus Atari, Jingga, and Ansi were down during the month.
Very good harvests are reported in the Balleh and Amang, but reports from Pala Wong are not so favourable.
Large quantities of engkabang continue to come down to the Kapit bazaar but the price still remains low.
Fourth Division News.
April, 1931.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports for April, 1931, by Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident: -
On the evening of Good Friday, a message was received from s.s. Marudu that she had met the m.l. Jun Soon belonging to Bintulu drifting out at sea about sixty-one miles from Miri. The crew were picked up and taken on to Singapore, it appears that the launch was on its way from Tatau to Bintulu when the engine broke down. Why they drifted so far out to sea has not yet been ascertained.
Messrs Pollard and Macpherson arrived on 5th from Baram.
Mr. Noakes, Assistant Surveyor, arrived by the Gindys, and immediately proceeded to Sungei Tujoh to check up some points of last year’s survey of the Sarawak-Brunei boundary.
I inspected Lau Ah Meng’s jelutong refining factory. He appears to be turning out very good pressed jelutong for the Singapore market, whence he has good testimonials as to quality.
The R. A. F. Flying Boat S2116 flew over Miri on 1st making towards Brunei. It returned again on the 8th but did not alight.
Various priests of the R. C. Mission collected in Miri towards the end of the month for the opening of the new R.C. church, which was recently built by private subscriptions. The opening ceremony was performed by the Right Rev. Bishop Biermans.
I visited Baram from the 14th to 18th.
Certain Poyut Oyaks, whose turn it is to pay their tax in padi this year, complained against the present rate of two pasus to the dollar. The majority of the Dyaks were quite reasonable, but one Ba of Dabai, who has no followers, was inclined to be truculent.
The District Officer was instructed to send for the Foochows and find out from them what they considered doing in regard to their loans from Government, as the time has now expired. There is no chance of them paying so I consider that the only course is to renew the mortgages.
The Baram Gambling Farmer petitioned that their agreement with the Government should be cancelled at the end of June as they were running it at a loss. They were told to wait until the end of this month and if they were of the same opinion to send in a petition with a proper statement of their affairs.
I arranged with the Resident, Fifth Division, that the District Officer, Mr. Pollard, should proceed in May to the ulu Medihit and there meet Mr. Combe to discuss Kelabit affairs. He was also told that he could investigate any complaints regarding compensations not yet settled for former tribal murders. It is rejected that certain fines have not yet been paid, which rankles in the hearts of the aggrieved and might lead to further retaliation. This part of the district has now been quiet for some years.
BARAM.
The District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
Travelling. -On 1st I returned from Lower Tru and Peking, accompanied by Mr. A. Macpherson. Acting District Officer. Bintulu, who had walked over via the Tisam. On 4th we left for Kuala Baram and Miri, whence I returned on 11th Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident, Fourth Division, visited the station from 12th to 18th. I accompanied him as far as Bakong on 18th. returning next day. On 24th I visited the Dyaks at Sibatang, Poyut. Sungei Babi and Dabai On 29th. accompanied by Wan Taha. I left for L. Lama and was still away at the end of the month. It was arranged that 1 should meet Mr. Combe, Acting Assistant District Officer, Lawas in the ulu Medihit on 15th May to discuss Kelabit affairs.
P.W.D. -The Government carpenter was em-ployed on alterations to the Fort quarters to enable them to be used as offices, the part of the present office below the Fort being required as store.
Medical. -Seventy-eight out patients and four in-patients were treated during the month, one of the in-patients being discharged during the month. Fifty-four out-patients were treated under the Professor Harrison Smith Fund forty- five N.A.B. injections being given.
Rainfall. 3’28 inches of rain fell on 13 days.
BINTULU.
The Acting District Officer. Mr. A. Macpherson, reports: -
Courts. -Fines amounting to $249.28 were im-posed during the month.
Prison. -The gang was employed on the general upkeep of the station. Prisoners numbered ten at the end of the month. Health was good. The vegetable garden is now producing
One, Lidi, an escaped prisoner from Gat, was recaptured at Tatau and will be sent to Sibu.
Dairy Farm. -The herd numbered forty-eight head at the end of the month. The cattle are in good condition.
Travelling. -I returned from Miri on 11th and left for Tatau on 17th.
General. -Messrs. Field and Sinclair, of the Customs Department, visited the Station.
The Sebauh Foochows again appealed for assistance, and it was arranged that they should clear sago gardens in return for sago logs. There is quite a considerable number now engaged in this way.
I sent the Foochow clerk Lik Huang, Awang Abel and Matnoon, of the Agricultural Department to Sebauh to investigate Foochow affairs. They returned after a tour of some days round the concession with a comprehensive report.
It was found that the Foochows have made good vegetable gardens as ordered, which will keep them from starvation.
They are also growing tobacco, the quality of which is surprisingly good. Samples have been sent to the Agricultural Department. It has been impressed on them that they are not to grow anything in bulk till they are assured of a market.
Further it was found that the land allotted for sago within the concession is eminently suited for padi cultivation. It was therefore arranged that the Foochows should farm this year.
It is strongly recommended that assistance be obtained from the Agricultural Department in the form of expert advice and guidance as well as seed. It is thought that no experimental seed should be distributed but only seed of known suitability, as it is of first importance that no effort is spared to make their farming a success
At the time of writing the Foochows are dividing up this land under supervision preparatory to felling.
Rainfall. -The rainfall for the month amounted to 10’40 inches.
MIRI.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports: -
Courts. -Litigation was below normal in the various Courts.
There are two coroner’s views. At an inquest on Lai I.oi who was found dead in the jungle, an open verdict was returned.
Health. -The usual inspections were satisfactory carried out by this department. There were eleven prosecutions from which ten convictions were obtained.
Kampongs China and Dagang having been handed over to Government by Messrs. Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, an extension of the bazaar scavenging contract was arranged to include these areas. The new contract price is $660 per annum less than the total previously paid for the whole area.
At the requests of parents thirty-four vaccinations were performed on children by the Sanitary Inspector.
Medical, -At the Government Dispensary 198 out-patients made 430 attendances for treatment. Five cases were sent to Messrs. Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., hospital and four were discharged.
Of the 198 out-patients treated 119 were on military and police accounts and 21 on prison account.
Municipal. -Three meetings of the Municipal Board were called, when the new estimated revenues and expenditures were discussed. It was decided that the Chairman should apply for special votes so that an hygienic system of conservancy and disposal could be put in hand.
Outstations. -Padi harvesting at both Niah and Sibuti is reported to have finished, and the crop, although not too plentiful, is reported satisfactory.
At Niah two collection of the seasons nests was completed and the total export of this commodity was 170.92 piculs.
Public Works. -Sites were chosen for and work started on the erection of two blocks of clerks quarters. Satisfactory progress on these had been made by the end of the month
The road from Brighton to the foot of Tanjong Lobang Hill was completely remade and asphalted by the contractor.
The small remaining area in the Tanjong Lobang compound was cleared and stumped but has not yet been levelled.
Contracts were prepared for repairs to the Salome Stream where the stone pitching had broken up through erosion and high water, and for building the remaining Sikh warders' barracks.
Minor repairs were effected to the police barracks, store wharf and certain clerks’ quarters.
The question of petroleum licences in the bazaar was looked into and several traders were prosecuted for storing kerosene oil without licences or in excess of them. Regulations have since been made regarding the type of building which petroleum may be stored in.
Visit of the Right Rev. Bishop Biermans to Miri.
OPENING OF NEW ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH.
The Catholic Community of Miri were very pleased to receive within their midst the Right Rev. Bishop Biermans accompanied by Fr. V. D. Deyssel. The Bishop is making a world-tour, visiting the different mission fields entrusted to the care of the Foreign
Missionary Society of St. Joseph, Mill-lull, London, N.W. of which he is the Superior. They arrived on 24th April, and His Lordship graciously agreed solemnly to bless and dedicate to St. Joseph the beautiful church, recently erected under the direction of the Construction Department of “Sarawak Oilfields. Ltd.,” according to the plan of Mr. Rae, its head.
The parishioners, with the help of a handsome donation from the above Company, had been collecting for several years, and the crown was put on their endeavours on Sunday, 16th April. At 8 a.m. the Bishop, in procession, blessed the outside of the church, the congregation meanwhile standing round. After the liturgical rites had been performed at the main door, His Lordship and attendants entered, to perform those appointed for the interior. During the singing of the Litany the congregation streamed in, and soon filled the benches to overflowing. The Bishop then confirmed a number of the congregation, after which Mgr. Dunn, the Prefect Apostolic of Sarawak, sang the High-Mass, accompanied by the local choir led by Fr. Feldbragge. The sermon was preached by Fr. Morris, well-known in Miri.
At 11 a.m. the Bishop and the seven priests that were gathered for the occasion, proceeded to the Midfield club, whores reception was held and some pretty music given by the amateur string hard under the leadership of Mr. Miller. A short speech by the Bishop was much appreciated especially the sentiment “Happy to meet, sorry to part, sub happy to meet again.”
Before leaving Miri. the Bishop and fathers partook of a curry and rice. Then came the inevitable packing up and the Company’s launch bring ready, all the visitors proceeded to the s.s Gladys on their way to Kuching, very grateful for the reception accorded them by the Miri Community, for the hospitality of the General Manager, Mr. Noble, and for all the facilities of transport put at their disposal. -Contributed.
Fifth Division News.
LIMBANG.
April, 1931.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports for April. 1931, by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident: -
Court. -There were very few cases and none of any importance.
General. -I visited Lawas to discuss affairs with the Acting Assistant District Officer. Mr. J. R. Combe, before his departure on a visit to Bab Country.
Mr. J. R. Combe, accompanied by Mr. E. Banks, Curator of the Museum, left Trusan on the 21st, and by arrangement are to meet the District Officer of Baram in the Ulu Medibit on the 14th of next month, whence they will return by the Limbang River visiting the Medamit on their way.
I paid a visit to Tanah Merah and the Borneo Evangelical Mission at Sungei Prangga, also to the new Mission Station about to be opened at Limpasong. The members of this Mission appear to be doing good work, and are very well liked by all natives.
P.W.D. -Accompanied by the British Resident of Brunei, I walked through the finally selected route of the Brunei-Limbang Road, from Sungei Kabun via the valley of Sungei Pakis, and found that the construction of the remaining 6 1/2 miles should afford no considerable difficulty, and the amount of bridging required will be remarkably little. A final trace is now being made and construction will commence early next month. Work was continued in metaling the soft places in the position of this road which has been already constructed.
Prisoners, averaging 16.01, were employed in making a new approach through a rubber garden to the hill road behind the bazaar.
Medical and Health. -The dresser reports the health of the district good.
The Medical Officer of Brunei, Dr. Winchester, paid his usual monthly visit.
One patient was admitted and two discharged. Sixty-nine out patients were treated and fifteen N.A.B. injections were given.
The rainfall amounted to 11.97 inches.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents]
Sarawak Athletics.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.	SINGAPORE,
5th May, 1931.
SIR,
I was very pleased to read the announcement in the papers that Sarawak would be represented in the Malaya Chinese Sports Meet held at Singapore during the last Easter holidays, but was greatly disappointed when I observed that only two Sarawakians were taking part in the sports and, on inquires being made. I was informed that they were not even selected by any responsible Clubs or Schools in Sarawak to represent the country, but they came on their own accord.
If this is correct. I think you will agree that it is only proper that drastic steps be taken by the Athletic Clubs in Sarawak to deal with the above and prevent a recurrence of this nature.
I wish to make it quite clear that it is not at all my intention to discourage the sporting spirit of the Sarawakians; on the contrary, I hope that in the near future more “selected” athletes from Sarawak will represent the country in the Malaya Chinese Sports Meet, and I feel sure the Sarawak Association in Singapore will be pleased to give them every assistance possible.
Yours, etc.,
S.L.S.
Education for Natives.
SUARA MALAYU.
The Editor, Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
KUCHING,
18th May, 1931.
SIR,
As a Native of Sarawak, I have read with interest the articles regarding education for Natives, which appeared in your last three issues.
In my opinion, however, Sir, that all Malay children (both sexes) should learn their own language. The knowledge of one’s own language, I might say, if properly taught, is the foundation of progress. The old Malay saying had already said, Bahasa menunjok-kan bangsa (Language shows nationality).
Foreigners from Europe, Arabia, India, China or Japan are obliged to learn Malay speaking, that is the only convenient way for them to converse with Natives. Therefore, then, that Malay is the lingua franca in this country is undeniable.
On the contrary, there is no objection on the Malay parents sending their sons and daughters to the English Schools. This means that the English language is also essential in the State of Sarawak. Malay children who wish to become clerks, officers, court-writers, teachers, interpreters, surveyors, translators. inspectors, dressers and dispensers are necessary to learn English; while those who wish to become planters, carpenters, smiths, builders and other kinds of handy workers may satisfy themselves with their own language. Malays should also under-stand that the clerical field in this country is very small, especially during this hardest time.
The way of winning progress is not only learning foreign languages: but, in fact, if we are intelligent, industrious, co-operative and economical the gate of progress will readily open itself.
I hope you will find space in your valuable paper for inserting this letter. Thanking you in advance.
I am, Sir,
Yours faithfully,
“NAHAR EFFENDI.”
