VOL. LXI.
No. 939.
The Sarawak Gazette.
Price
KUCHING, Tuesday, December 1st, 1931.
20 CENTS.
The Sarawak Gazette.	TUESDAY, DECEMBER 1st, 1931.
Births.
POLLARD. -On November 16th, at Miri to Mrs. Pollard, wife of Mr. F. H. Pollard, Sarawak Civil Service, a son.
ELLEY. -On November 27th, in Kuching, to Mrs. Kelley, wife of Mr. W. H. Kelley, Sarawak Police, a son.
Local and Personal.
November.
Mr. and Mrs. C. D. Adams arrived in Kuching from Europe by the Vyner Brooke on the 9th.
Mr. Adams proceeded to Sibu with Mrs. Adams the following day to resume his appointment of Resident, Third Division.
This is Mrs. Adams’ first visit to this country and we extend her a hearty welcome.
Capt. C. P. Lowe, Director of Public Works, proceeded home on furlough on the 2nd.
Visitors to Kuching during the month under review included Mr. C. J. Cook of Lawas and Mr. W. H. Avery of Bintulu.
The State of British North Borneo held their Jubilee Charter Day on November 2nd. The celebrations included a ceremonial parade at 7.45 a.m. and sports, at Jesselton.
Armistice Day, November 11th was observed as a Public Holiday and the customary two minutes silence was signalled by one gun fired from the Fort, at the conclusion of the silence the last post, was sounded by buglers of the Sarawak Rangers from the roof of the Pavilion. A special cinema show at the Globe Theatre was arranged for the benefit of the Earl Haig Appeal Funds and in the afternoon Police sports were held but were hampered somewhat by the weather.
Full details of donations collected and other items in this connection will be found in a special article in this number.
We are informed that Mr. G. M. Allman, latterly of the Agricultural Department, has settled in Nice where he is growing vegetables and making wine.
We are sorry to be unable to state the name of his house but we hear a rumour, probably untrue, that it is known as the Villa “Vino de Potato.”
Mr. F. L. Webster, F.R.C.S., Senior Medical Officer, Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., Miri, paid a short visit to Kuching on the 14th and stayed over the week end.
This is Mr. Webster’s first visit to Kuching and we hope to see him here again many times in the future.
Mr. T. S. Boyd, Chief Justice of Sarawak, and Mrs. Boyd, Mr. K. H. Gillan, Postmaster-General. Mrs. Gillan and Miss E. C. Christie arrived in Kuching from Europe by the Marudu on the 16th.
Mrs. Boyd accompanies her son to this country for the first time and we hope she will be able to make a long stay.
Many Government Officers we hear, have, gone on leave lately and this will necessitate one of the periodical changes of appointment in many stations in the country.
Among these are Messrs. Macpherson, Hill and Murphy all of whom left at the end of the month.
We congratulate Mr. and Mrs. F. H. Pollard on the birth of a son at Miri on November the 16th and Mr. and Mrs. Kelley on the birth of a son in Kuching on the 27th.
We hear that Capt. and Mrs. Le Gros Clark have published, in England, a work entitled “Selections from the Works of Su Tung-Po” (the Chinese Poet A.D. 1036-1101).
The works of the Poet have been translated by Capt. Le Gros Clark, with notes and commentaries and with eighteen engravings by Mrs. Le Gros Clark.
The Police moved into the new Police Station which has been erected opposite the Government Printing Office, on the 23rd.
Mr. E. V. Andreini arrived in Kuching on the 20th en route for Bintulu to which station he is appointed District Officer.
Mr. Andreini gives place to Mr. W. F. Dick as District Officer, Sibu, the latter we understand having ceased to act as Resident Third Division on the return of Mr. C. D. Adams from furlough.
Mr. P. Cobbold, manager of Messrs. The Borneo Co’s., branch at Sibu, paid a short visit to Kuching during the month.
Mr. C. F. C. Macaskie, Acting Chief Justice, British North Borneo, paid a visit to Kuching during the month and stayed about a week.
Mr. Macaskie returned to British North Borneo on the 23rd by the Darvel.
Recent telegrams state that H.M.S. Petersfield is a total loss but all hands have been saved.
H.M.S. Petersfield, tender to H.M.S Kent flagship of the China Station, is a minesweeper of 710 tons and ran ashore in a storm off Tungyung island.
Vice-Admiral Sir Howard Kelly, K.C.B., C.M.C., M.V.O., Commander-in-Chief, China Station was on board at the time.
H.M.S. Petersfield visited Kuching last January with Admiral Sir Arthur Waistell, K.C.B., and Lady Waistell, on board.
HIS HIGHNESS THE TUAN MUDA VISITS MIRI.
His Highness the Tuan Muda accompanied by Mr. A. A. Rennie, Treasurer of Sarawak left Kuching on the 23rd by the s.s. Darvel, on a visit to Miri. His Highness returned to Kuching on the 28th.
The Ranee Margaret gave an At Home at her house in Albert Road on the 15th October. Among those present were a number of Sarawakians-His Highness the Rajah and the Dayang Leonora, the Dayangs Jean, Betty and Anne, Sir Percy and Lady Cunyughame, Mr. and Mrs. F. F. Boult, Mr. and Mrs. K. H. Gillan, Mr. Justice Stirling Boyd, Mr. F A. W. Page-Turner, Professor and Mrs. Le Gros Clark, Capt. R. E. Le Sueur, and Mrs. Gilbert Brooke. There was some very good music.
Obituary.
We regret to announce the death of Mr. H. H. Everett in England at the age of 82 years, on 4th October.
Mr. Everett had a long and varied career in Sarawak from 1869 and to 1918-Mr. Everett joined, the Borneo Company, Ltd., shortly after his arrival in Sarawak and acted as their Manager at Busan for some years. When Busan was shut down, he undertook the management of Cutch works at Santubong for the same Company. These closed down after a few years and Mr. Everett then went to Labuan where he took on work for some years with the Labuan Coal Company.
Later he joined the United Malaysian Co., whose headquarters were at Goebilt. This Company had a branch at Pulo Kerimon, near Singapore of which Mr. Everett had charge.
This work he was forced to leave owing to ill health and after some months he returned to Sarawak.
In 1914 he took on a contract for the Government Railway and at the conclusion of this he became Messrs. McDougall’s agent for the working of Tuba root.	Mr. Everett held this post until his retirement in the early part of 1918 when he returned home, after a long and interesting career of nearly fifty years in this country and its immediate vicinity.
Economy in High Circles.
This Economic Fervour was aptly illustrated the other day, when two passengers, said to be lads of the Old Jewry, travelled on one of the latest large and magnificent luxury air liners. After wandering through a number of spacious halls, they came at length to the Steward’s private suite where they borrowed about half a pound of butter and requested the loan of a knife. They then unfurled from a brown paper parcel, a loaf of unleavened-looking bread and something which has been variously described as a smoked haddock, a mummified halibut, and a kippered tunny fish.
Next they proceeded to celebrate a piscatorial passover while crossing the Channel, after which the Steward, with some difficulty, got his knife back. It is reported that the two economists afterwards indulged in a free wash, but this is doubtful. Borrowing the Steward’s comb, however, they had a brush up which consisted of combing fish bones out of the kinks in their hair. Later the comb was cremated and the urn containing the ashes was sent to Mr. Snowden.
In happier times, such an incident would have been punished with that form of legerdemain (or legerdepied) also known as La Savate, which according to the Marquess of Queensbury’s rules is a species of sleight of foot consisting of butting the adversary in the solar plexus with the head, but to-day it must be hailed as a spirited example of National Economy, and certainly deserves a hearty pat on the back. Where practicable this should be delivered with a two-handled maltster’s shovel preferably when the funny bone of the tunny fish is athwart the tonsils of the economist.
By the way, beer now being beyond the reach of any but Air Line Pilots and the immoderately wealthy, the average citizen has to content himself with a couple of measured drops of the staff of life on his handkerchief. This he sniffs in chastened rapture as many times a day before and after meals as the delicious but volatile aroma will stand for. Another method is to keep a slice of froth in a matchbox wherewith to moisten the parched lips from time to time.
What with this and the fact that Income is now merely the dreg, heeltap or grounds left after the Government has collared the rest, many of us, having no money to spend, welcome the National Economy campaign as a means of keeping our minds oft of the beer.
In a recent American novel, we came across some reference to a Moth owned by the hero, who was, of course, a famous gangster. This machine cruised at “better than two hundred miles an hour.” With a little hotting up and the fitting of a supercharged wisecrack, there seems to be no reason why its owner should not have lifted the Schneider Trophy.
A movement has been set on foot of late, to pay honour to various aeronautical inventors who might otherwise be lost to fame. As soon as it is known who did it and when, centenary celebrations and a bronze statue will be perpetrated, it is learned in honour of the inventor of the paper bag as an artful aid to air sickness. Only a genius could have thought of applying the principles of the nose bag to humanity in such an ingeniously inverted way, but we have often wondered why paper bags were never fitted with loops to go over the ears. This would leave the victims hands free to clasp in prayer or for signalling to the steward in dumb crambo that a double brandy would not be amiss between the rounds. -The Aeroplane.
The Tunic of Mohamed.
A relic claimed to have been the tunic of Mohamed was shown to day to a select audience at the Paris flat of the Dayang Muda of Sarawak (the title held by the wife of the heir presumptive of the Rajah), in whose possession the garment is.
It is impossible for anyone other than a highly competent Orientalist to form an opinion as to the validity of the claim, but nobody can examine the garment, as I have already been given the opportunity of doing, without being convinced that it is an object of great beauty, curiosity, and antiquity.
The possibility often present in such cases, of a fake, may here be ruled out; it would be altogether too difficult for a forger to construct such a remarkable object as this.
To describe the tunic briefly, it is a short, wide shirt of cream colour, with very short arms, and entirely covered with inscriptions in red and black ink that in places has paled with time so as to be nearly invisible.
The stud of which it is woven is most curious, and it is impossible to tell by eye or touch what it is. It would certainly seem not to be wool or cotton nor vet silk.
In the belief of those who claim the garment to be in very truth Mohamed’s shirt, it is made of “Bysus,” a stuff extant in ancient Egypt, the secret of which had disappeared before the Thirteenth Century, but, according to legend, made from the hair on oyster shells.
The inscriptions on the tunic are in Arabic characters, and are said to comprise the whole of the Koran, from the first verse to the last, together with the prayer of the 12 Imams. Traces of gold are also visible on the tunic.
In front the inscriptions, which start on the left shoulder and run round the entire body, are formed in a series of 23 rectangular or rose shaped divisions. On the back there are 26, and, considered merely as an objet d’art, the tunic ha the appearance of a lovely Oriental carpet of which the pattern is made by the finest writing imaginable. When the colours were fresh, it must have been gorgeous.
In the opinion of M. Castagne, a French Orient, employed at the Quai d’Orsay as Translator of Eastern Languages, and of M. de Pattoff, a young Russian who has worked on the subject with him, the tunic is none other than the shirt sent to Mohamed in the sixth year of the Hegira by El Macausus, the Governor of Egypt.
The embassy from the Prophet to Egypt and the gifts sent from Egypt to him are surrounded by many curious Mohamedan legends.
Ali, Mohamed’s favourite disciple, inherited the tunic and bequeathed it to his son Hussein, who was killed at the battle of Kerbela while actually the story runs, wearing the shirt; and sure enough, as may plainly be seen the tunic has a rent in the front of it such as would be made by a spear thrust. There are even traces of something very much like a bloodstain round the hole.
After Hussein’s death the tunic became a sacred object and was kept at Medina until the treasures there were pillaged by the Wahabites at the beginning of the Nineteenth Century.
If M. Castagne’e reading of history is correct, the tunic was then saved from destruction by a French diplomat, travelling in Persia, who brought it back to France, and in the possession of his family it has remained until our own time.
Such is an outline of the report read yesterday, by M. Castagne, and presented by him to the International Congress of Ethnology and Archaeology the same morning at the Sorbonne.
Whatever the tunic may be, it is a most rare and admirable thing; and if this piece of stuff is in reality the Prophet’s own tunic, then it is beyond contest one of the most precious religious and historical relics in the world. -Morning Post.
[It should be explained that the tunic is temporarily in the custody of Her Highness the Dayang Muda. -Ed.]
The Fish Ring.
The contemporary press of recent months has contained many strong arguments in favour of the policy of “living on the country;” that is to say the substitution in our diet of local food products, where this is possible, for the long deceased tinned cow or the haunch of petrified pterodactyl from the cold storage.
If the producers of some tinned foods were forced by law to put a date on their tins of long silent sheep’s tongues or bottles of gooseberries, gathered possibly amid the turmoil and strife of the Wars of the Roses, no one excepting possibly the curators of our museums would dare to purchase them.
It is not our intention however to condemn in so sweeping away the tinning and freezing fraternity. They provide us with many luxuries and some necessities otherwise unobtainable in the tropics. Unfortunately however our local grocer has an unhappy knack of buying up such stocks as have become mere relics of a bygone age.
In any case we are told that a diet consisting mainly of locally produced foodstuffs is just the thing to warm the cockles of the heart and drape them in vitamin B. One is recommended to live chiefly on the local buffalo, whose meat, if properly cooked on the Bastinado System, is very tolerable. Vegetables are cheap and plentiful and these can be grown in the home garden with little trouble, in fact the growing of them definitely gives an added interest to life. Many European species, including vegetable marrows and french beans, respond to sympathetic treatment and yield well. Pork, poultry, eggs. etc., can be obtained with ease at reasonable prices.
There remains fish-this article of food could easily form the basic item in the diet-vitamins abound in it. There are numerous varieties of supreme excellence to be had in this country including mullet, sole, and many other species common to European waters. They are caught in large quantities far exceeding the demand or could be caught, at any rate, if it were worth the while of the fishermen. The facts unfortunately are that the latter are paid such a low price that one wonders why they fish at all.
Prices of fish however are absurdly high and gross profiteering is going on in this business, more so probably than in any other local product.
Market prices are controlled but in many cases fish cannot be obtained at the set prices and few people trouble to take the matter up. This refers to the retail trade, of course; wholesale prices are not controlled, except by the middlemen and this is where the profiteering occurs. Fishermen are paid in some cases as little as 3 to 5 cents for a catty which is sold retail at 30 or so; in some cases much more has been demanded, especially where no control is exercised by authority.
A few years ago fish caught at the mouth of the Rejang were paid for at 9 cents a catty and sold in Sibu at 55 or 60 to consumers.
The reason for this is quite simple and as simply eradicated. It is the same old story-there is a “Fish Ring.”
The rights to buy up fish are confined, under the protection of old orders, to certain people who have put out capital in the form of loans to fishermen who are forced to deliver their catches to their bonded creditors and to no other. The creditor of course sees to it that the fisherman is kept in place with a good fat debit balance against him and is well supplied with cash, the sight of which makes him lose any sense of proportion he ever possessed.
The result is only natural. The said creditors form a “ring.” arrange the price to show a profit of about 300% and thus prevent healthy competitive trade.
The remedy should not be difficult. Repeal the orders giving encouragement to the advancing of huge binding loans to producers and the monopolisation of all their products and treat such advances, if reasonable and easily repayable, as ordinary trading debts and let the lenders take an equal chance of recovery with other possible creditors, in the Courts. The fishing community would then have a free hand to trade in the best market and the public would have the satisfaction of paying the price which the demand has set upon the goods, instead of being forced to buy at an artificially inflated price.
By all means let us live upon the land but let us first of all take steps to cut out the profiteer from our midst, as the surgeon cuts the canker from the vitals of his patient.
Bedtime Stories.
The exigencies of travel brought me to an Iban long house, not often visited by Europeans. After the evening meal, mats were spread in front of the Headman’s room, tobacco and sireh were produced, and the whole population of the bouse gathered round; men and boys squatting in a circle on the floor, and the women and girls standing a little back in the shadows, or clustering in the doorways of the adjacent rooms.
Talk turned on the Great War, and questions came thick and fast about that strange kind of fighting. Presently the Headman asked “Did the women fight too in that war. Tuan?” “No,” I answered. “They didn’t exactly fight, but they helped the men behind the lines.” “I see, Tuan,” said my questioner, “ no doubt the women stood behind the battle-line and helped the men by yelling the war-cry!”
Questions followed about the size of the armies, the number killed, aeroplanes, submarines, and a score of other things; and although my stilted replies were received with a grave courtesy, it was clear that the reputation rapidly being assigned to me was that of splendide mendaz.
Confirmation, however, was forthcoming from an unexpected source: a middle-aged man in the circle took up the tale, announcing that he had followed a Tuan to America as Boy, and with his own eyes he had seen just such ships, and buildings, and crowds of orang puteh, as their present visitor described!
At the end of the day’s work, we gathered-myself, a Malay assistant, and some twenty Land Dyaks coolies-in a small atap house found conveniently empty.
One of the party was an old man with a wisp of beard recalling irresistibly a billygoat. I had wondered previously how he came to be included among the coolies, since his age would have seemed fairly to excuse him from the heavy work of felling or carrying a load: but it now transpired that he was the story-teller in chief.
With little persuasion be launched into a seemingly interminable tale of princes and fair ladies, dragons and dangers, adventures and magic spells. He spoke in rather bookish Malay, the phrases of which were strangely familiar to me, through an enforced acquaintance at the time with the Sejarah Melayu, and other classics. Presently the story did
end, and, after compliments, it was indicated that a story from the Tuan would be appreciated.
Now to ask or answer a few questions is one thing, and to tell a connected story is another. First find your story. By some whim of memory there came to my mind “A Dissertation on Roast Pig.” and straightway I was launched on the retelling of Lamb’s masterpiece, in very indifferent Malay.
Strange to relate I got it across, and more than one chuckle greeted the misadventures of the clumsy Bo-Bo, whose inveterate tendency to play with fire secured for humanity the first knowledge of cookery.
DECCA.
Off the Gold Standard.
WHAT IT MEANS AND WHY IT HAPPENED.
BY HARTLEY WITHERS.
Many very clever people have been telling the public about the crisis and the pound sterling and its par value, and being “pushed off the gold standard;” but it may be suggested with all deference that in their explanations they have not allowed for the fact that the mart and woman in the street do not know what these things mean. Having received a request from the Spectator to put the matter so clearly that everybody can understand it, this is what I am trying to do.
Under the gold standard the Bank of England notes that we used for buying and selling gave us the right to turn them into gold. In fact, most of us never wanted to do so, and this right had no meaning for us. All that we want from our money is that when we take it to the shops it shall provide us with as much as possible of the good things that we want to buy. But the right to get gold, that the Bank note gave its holder, was of considerable importance to those who are engaged in foreign trade, and also, indirectly, to all of us; because it, through the working of what is called the “gold standard,” kept English money steady in what is called its “exchange value,” that is its value when it is turned into the moneys of other countries, and it also tended to maintain its value at home for us, when we turn it into food and clothes and anything else that we want.
Let us see how it worked. A pound could be turned into 113 grains and a tiny fraction of gold. That was the rate at which the Bank of England was obliged to convert it, if we took enough pounds to it to buy not less than 400 oz., which cost us about £1,600. (This limit was imposed so that gold should only be taken out to be sent abroad, and not for use in daily transactions at home, for which we cannot now afford to use it.) The Bank of England was also bound to buy any gold that was brought to it, at a fixed price.
In most other countries the same, or a very similar, system works. For instance, the gold value of the American dollar is 23.22 grains. And so when the pound and the dollar were “at par,” the pound exchanged into rather less than five dollars-4.86 2/3 dollars, to be exact. And as long as these two countries remained on the gold standard, the rate of exchange between them could not vary far from par.
The rate of exchange between London and New York, which means the price at which pounds can be turned into dollars and vice versa, varies with the number of pounds and dollars that are offered and bid for in the foreign exchange market, which is composed of a number of specialists in both centres who are engaged in this business of international money-changing. Americans who have sold things to England for pounds naturally want to turn the pounds into dollars to spend at home, and so have pounds to sell; Americans who, through purchases in England, have to find pounds to pay for them, have pounds to buy, and these sellers and buyers, through the dealers who do the business for them, arrive at the price which is the rate of exchange for the moment. If sellers of pounds offer more than the buyers want, the dollar price of pounds will fall, just as wheat falls when there are more sellers than buyers. But whereas in the case of wheat there is no limit to the extent of the fall, the working of the gold standard prevented the pound from falling below a certain point, owing to this fact that the pound could be turned into gold, and gold could be turned into dollars. For if the price of pounds in dollars fell to a certain point, it paid an American holder of pounds to turn them into gold in London, bring the gold across the ocean and turn it into dollars in New York; and so as long as England was on the gold standard, the dollar price of pounds could not fall below a certain point, which varied with the cost of transport, insurance and the loss of interest on the money during transit, and was called the “gold point.”
In the same way the price of pounds in New York could not rise beyond a certain point, because it would be cheaper for those who have to buy pounds to send gold from New York and turn it into pounds in London. And the same system worked, with different rates to suit the different gold price of the different moneys, with all the chief countries of the world; and so foreign trade was able to work with the convenient advantage of stable rates of exchange, which enabled those who buy and sell abroad to calculate, within narrow limits, the value of the money that they were earning, or had to pay. on foreign transactions. Without this system foreign trade may be a gamble, as was seen in the after-War years, when the gold standard was in abeyance and rates of exchange went up and down like Jacks-in-the-box. And so we see why, if the pound is pushed too far down, serious dislocation in our foreign trade might have to be faced; and this dislocation would also affect all other countries, owing to the great number of foreign trade transactions that are settled in pounds, through London’s position as a leading centre of world trade and finance.
It is true-and this truth has been rather ignored by those who have described for us the horrors of relapse from the gold standard-that a fall in the exchange value of the pound will help our export trade. If the pound, instead of being worth nearly five dollars, fell to four dollars, our manufacturers who sell to America would have a great advantage, at least for a time; because if they sold 1,000 dollars’ worth of goods, they would get £250 instead of about £206, as before. And so with other countries. This is why some high authorities have long thought that it might be good for our trade to lower the value of the pound. If it had been done deliberately it would have implied partial repudiation of our debts to those who have lent us money and would be repaid in pounds of a lower value. But since, as will be shown in a second article, devaluation has been forced on us by foreign panic, we may accept the benefit so conferred.
But what will be happening to prices at home? This is the question that touches us all as spenders of our incomes Those who sell abroad will benefit. as we have seen; those who buy goods abroad will have to pay more in pounds owing to the pound’s lower exchange value; and so the price of imported goods may rise. This will help to check imports, which is one of the things that has to be done; and so, with exports stimulated and imports checked, we may hope to restore our balance of trade and so strengthen our financial position, lately weakened by the fact that we were buying too much and selling too little abroad. As to retail prices in the shops, they ought not to rise to an extent that will hurt us seriously, in view of the recent fall in the cost of living.
There was another danger, so long as the Budget was unbalanced, that if the pound were no longer based on gold, there would be no limit to the number of notes that might be printed, if the Government chose that method of paying its way. If they were multiplied too fast, their buying power would inevitably fall, as we saw in the War, and we might even suffer from what is called “inflation.” when money is poured out so quickly that it loses value every day and every hour, and the price of everything rushes up and there is general chaos and panic. These things ought not to happen in a decently governed country that does not lose its head; and now that the Budget is balanced, we may be sure that they will not happen here. -The Spectator.
[The above lucid explanation of the abandonment of the gold standard and its effect, by a well-known economist may be of interest. Needless to say, this measure has affected our own economic structure. The prices of many things have risen, including potatoes which come from Java, etc. -Ed.]
Armistice Day in Kuching.
November 11th, 1931, marked the thirteenth anniversary of the end of the Great War, and was observed as a holiday in Kuching. The usual simple but impressive ceremonial was again carried out. One gun was fired from the Fort and a silence of two minutes was maintained, at the conclusion of which the “Last Post” was sounded by buglers of the Sarawak Rangers from the roof of the Pavilion.
The activities in connection with the F. M. Earl Haig Appeal Fund, although curtailed to a certain extent owing to the trade depression were entered into with zeal, and the four ladies who kindly consented to sell Poppies on the 10th November obtained excellent support from all to whom they appealed. Up to date the amount derived from the sale of poppies totals $417 and it is hoped that, when contributions come from the outstations, this amount will be substantially increased. This sum from Kuching alone is however remarkably good, and thanks are due to Mrs. Bean, Miss Tait, Mrs. Harding, and Miss Haywood, for their readily given help in collecting, and also to all those who made their contributions towards this total.
On 9th November a Cinema performance in Aid of the Fund took place in the Globe Picture Theatre. The pictures were enjoyed by a large and enthusiastic audience, and the music supplied by the Bintang Sorai Wanderers, who kindly gave their services free of charge, added to the success of the show. The thanks of everyone are due to Mr. Lim Soon Kan, the Manager of the Globe Picture Theatre for his generosity in not only giving the Hall free, but in paying half of the film hire, a very considerable contribution. By this charitable act the sum of $173.60 was raised, and added to the “Poppy Collection” brings Kuching’s total to $590.60. Mr. Lim Soon Kan was most helpful to the organizing committee during the arrangements for the performance.
A few words about the Fund in general may be of interest. People have been frequently heard to say that it is curious that no balance sheet is issued by the British Legion, but this is a fallacy, and the Balance Sheet for the year ending 30th September, 1930. may be examined on application to the Honorary Secretary of the Kuching Branch. Roughly the position as shewn by the Balance Sheet is as follows.
There are two main accounts covering charities, and are called respectively the British Legion Benevolent Fund, and the British Legion Relief Fund, and both are dependent on Poppy Day Collection and other such Collections for their income. The total income for the two Funds for the year 1929-30 was £818,728 while the cost of collecting this money and subsequent administration expenses totalled £235,932, leaving a balance of £572,796 which amount was distributed in relief work with the exception of £45,784 carried forward to 1931. Included in the cost of collection is the sum of £73,666 the cost of poppies, a large proportion of which represents wages paid to the 326 badly disabled Ex-service men who are permanently employed in making the flowers The Remembrance Day Appeal has had a steady rise since its inception in 1921, and the figures show a steady ascent from £106,000 in 1921 in £600,000 in 1929, an average increase of almost £62,000 per year, and the appeal is now considered to be the largest and most
efficiently organized collection of its kind, that has ever been known.
LEST WE FORGET.
St. Mary’s School Annual Sale of Work.
The Annual Sale of work was held in St. Mary’s School on Saturday, 31st Oct. from 9.30 to 12 in the morning, and from 4.30 to 6 in the evening.
H. H. the Tuan Muda kindly honoured us with a visit in the morning and quite a number of patrons seemed to find the morning a convenient time to come. The arrival of a case of Woolworth’s goods which were sold as fast as they could be put on the stall, rather reminded one of Summer Sales. The lady stall-holder however firmly held her ground.
At the present moment the gross takings amount to $807.83 which, with some special donations sent during the month, have increased the Building Fund to the extent of $1,146.
We are exceedingly grateful to all who by their gifts, their personal help, and their patronage made this most surprisingly good result possible.
Things it would be Rude to Ask.
Why is Mxxxxl known as “The Movie King” although he denies any connection with Hollywood or Elstree?
Incidentally the same gentleman recently presented such a moving picture of distraction and despair that some land Dyaks mistook him for a ghost.
Why does Mr. C. Gxxxxxxxs dispute the boundary between his domain and that of his neighbour at Aloha?
Perhaps he was merely trying out a new method of demarcation by indentation when he started tunnelling operations through the hedge?
Which of the new offices was mistaken for an “Icedrome”? Was Sxm Cxxk disappointed when he turned up with his roller skates? The alternative theory that Mr. Jxxxxxs is proposing to conduct a series of dancing classes for the Malay scholars in “The Marble Hall” is also quite unfounded in fact.
Is Mxxxxy really going on leave? To cut a long story short we hear that he is actually proposing to do so.
The rumour that he is going home via Chicago to put things right there, is incorrect.
Who remarked that if Mr. L. K. Mxxxe fell down he wouldn't have to pay his fare home, he’d just be there?
Does Gxxxxn dislike ants? The answer is in his dispensary.
Does Mr. Axxxy like being looked at in the early morning? Apparently not but he is so seldom visible at any other time, in fact he is becoming positively planetary.
Who pinched a distinguished passengers topee when he was having one for the road on the Marudu (?)? Too too sad-making.
Who took the dentist’s boast too literally and jumped on his teeth?
Who gilded the sign outside the Highgate Pub?
“Have you been practising reels lately for St. Andrew’s Nicht?”
“No, I’m Scotch.”
Notes on Birds Nest Caves.
One of the strangest forms of food is the soup made from the nests of certain small Swifts found in many of the caves of Borneo and elsewhere; as a soup it is not as tasty as might be expected, merely a clear, pale yellow, odourless liquid but so much is it prized by Chinese in other parts that the State of North Borneo derives an income of sometimes $50,000 yearly in Royalty and export Duty.
The nest is made of coagulated saliva, either pure or mixed with feathers, being known as “white” nests in the former instance and “black” in the latter; it has been shown that the “white” nests are the work of one species and the “black” of another, both nests on occasion being found in the same cave, but usually only one kind per cave. Naturally the purer “white” nest is the more valuable, having attained from $15 to $20 per catty, “black” nests only about half that; the nests are as a rule a half saucer shape, two or more inches long and not as broad, running anything from thirty to sixty nests per catty, so that an incredible number must be collected every year.
The industry is dependent on the fact that if the nest be taken before the eggs are laid the bird obligingly builds another and even a third if that is taken again before any eggs are laid. The season of rest for the birds is variable and the first nest they make after it is a good one, rather small but thick; the second nest is often a hit larger but always thinner on account of the drain on the birds’ salivary glands whilst the third nest is so poor as to be hardly worth taking. The second nest takes about sixty days to build after the first one is taken but there is no particular uniformity in their making and first and second nests seem to be taken at the same time.
The life history of the birds themselves is most unusual and infant mortality is the chief limiting factor against their increase; often laying only one egg, the young has to make a successful first flight, for to fall to the ground from which it is quite unable to rise again is certain death and it would perhaps pay a few people at favourable seasons to assist such young birds by hanging them on the nearest wall or just throwing them into the air for another chance. How some of the young get out of the cave at all is a mystery and not a few fall victim to birds of prey wailing at the entrances for just this occasion Every cave has swarms of bats and though one would think they would harm the birds there is as yet no evidence that they affect the nest at all. The birds feed on minute insects, mostly of an evening and may often be seen flying to and fro over rivers or flitting in and out of the trees in old jungle-it is now rather late but the presence of reasonable size Forest Reserves in the neighbourhood of the caves would have been useful to the birds as close-found food supply. As regards the nests it can hardly affect the birds to take the first crop before the eggs are laid-in fact the industry depends upon it; nests which have been fouled by the young up to the time they have flown undoubtedly do net fetch such a high price as “clean” ones and one way of increasing the stock of birds might be to limit the taking of No. 2 nests to those from which the young have already flown. Third nests can and should be taken after the young have flown for they only occupy available nesting sites which would have been used next year. Not more than three collections of nests should be made, “black” or “white,” the last when the birds have flown, and an effort to increase the stock of birds might be made by temporarily only making two collections a season, the second when the birds have flown.
As far as methods of collecting nests go they are pre-Heath Robinson, merely a few long bamboos upright on a scaffolding or a nightmare net-work of twigs dwindling away high up into the roof of the cave where the nests are; any improvement such as permanent climbing irons must not only add to the safety of the work but enable the people on sound engineering advice to reach at present inaccessible spots. Lighting arrangements might be called proto-Tom Websterian and mainly consist of a candle to be stuck in one’s hat or even mouth at frequent intervals and the introduction of say cheap acetylene lamps such as were used in the Sadong Coal Mine would provide a feeling of security and a number of nests usually so far overlooked.
The renting of the products of the caves by Chinese for so many years at a fixed sum advanced to the Dyaks or others is hardly a sound proceeding, for if the nests are fewer one year or the price drops the wretched collector has to take every nest he can find at any time, irrespective of season, in the hope of paying off his debt-he seldom succeeds, and often doesn’t know how he stands and the system is bad for the industry. Some sort of register should be kept by the buyers from each cave, date, quality and weight of nests, the collecter being paid accordingly and not in advance, any marked falling off in the yield of a cave being met by investigation and if necessary restriction-paying debts in nests is like going back to the old days before the price of the Dollar and Mr. Snowden were fixed.
The Birds which build “White” nests are commoner in N. Borneo than in Sarawak, where they are found in Baram and perhaps in Tatau. Black nests abound in Lawas, Niah, Ulu Sadong and Upper Sarawak, some in the last area being fairly easily accessible. Most people visit Bidi Caves at some time but though the birds formerly nested there in small numbers there is no sign of them now. Bukit Jawang, about three quarters of an hours walk from the Bau to Dahan road is as accessible as any, though the descent is perilous-after walking some way up the side of the hill a large hollow some too yards across is met and on climbing down into this one is presented with a couple of manholes, just about big enough to accommodate the perspirant. One hole goes straight down 40 fathoms and is used by the Serambu Dyaks to lower down their scaffolding and “barang” generally; the other goes straight down but twists about a bit and can be descended eventually by means of the usual thin crazy ladders, perfectly safe, though the bark and rotan lashings give one momentary feelings of the “Willies.” Having got down there, feeling like a paper angel and what seems like hours of a consuming thirst, one can walk about in a large gallery some too feet high with numerous tunnels and the like down which goes water, ladders, birds and all sorts of indu ulai. Long bamboos are lowered down the other shaft, to be erected upright on a scaffold, their far end resting against the side of the cave, when a Dyak ties hit feet loosely together puts his candle in his mouth and in half a dozen jerks is messing about up in the roof examining the nests.
The Jawang Caves produce from a picul to a picul and a half per year of four collections and one cannot but feel some sympathy with the Dyak for the comparatively poor return after the amount of labour he has put in; he carries his wood all the way up the maintain side, making fresh ladders every time for fear of thieves and goes to the trouble of blocking up the one entrance for the same reason. Birds do really come up the vertical shaft from nearly 100 yards below but there are no doubt other as yet undiscovered exits; in any case the ladders have always to be taken away after use for they prevent the birds using the narrow passage. Numbers of men are employed for a week and more every time they collect, involving a good deal of trouble and a certain amount of danger, the returns at the present low price of nests being poor in comparison with the time and trouble taken.
Lest anyone think me an expert on the subject I am indebted for much of the above information to Mr. F. N. Chasen who reported on the Caves of North Borneo and a similar examination of those of Sarawak would at least lay the industry open to organization with a view to improvement. -E.B.
Singapore Snapshots.
(From the Straits Times.)
There is one Malayan commodity of which production does not appear to be in excess of consumption. That is almost the only cheering fact to emerge from a study of the figures con-tained in the Administration Report of the Department of Statistics, S.S. and F.M.S. for 1930 which has just been issued. The commodity concerned is pineapples.
The s.s. Siljestad. the vessel chartered by E. A. Barbour Ltd. to take rubber to New York in defiance of the Shipping Conferences, sailed this afternoon.
In an interview Mr. E. A. Barbour said that the boat was leaving with 7,100 tons of rubber, all the cargo belonging to E. A. Barbour Limited. The whole shipment was packed in cases and all ribbed smoke sheet. This was the largest consignment of rubber ever to leave Malay in one shipment, and the Siljestad was the only vessel to carry 7,000 tons of rubber all of one grade all in boxes.
Did you know that Pahang had a Turtles Eggs Enactment? It has, and tenders are now being invited “for the exclusive right to take turtle eggs during the year 1932” in three districts of Kuantan. A condition is that seven per cent of all eggs must be left to hatch out in the nest. Once upon a time turtles laid their eggs at Tanjong Katong, in the bay which is now full of shipping and fringed with Singapore’s long and imposing waterfront. Today we can only think of the lonely beaches and clear waters of Pahang with a sight of envy-and bring the wandering imagination back to the drab confines of Cecil Street, where the nearest approach to marine life is the stinking fish laid out to dry by our unkind neighbours.
The price of mutton in Kuala Lumpur has been brought down from fifty to thirty cents a catty in less than a month as the result of the opening of a branch in that town by the Oriental Cattle Trading Company, of Singapore, who are outside the local “ring.” In Klang the price of the same commodity has been forced down in the same way and again by an Indian firm, Mohamed Kassim and Company. These facts deserve the widest publicity.
To the Editor of the Straits Times.
Sir, -Your Note on food rings is rather interesting but what a pity the same cannot be said of Singapore. I am sure that if some enterprising Indian, or any other firm were to start here and bring down the prices, they would be assured of hundreds of customers. Since coming “off the Gold Standard” the Chinese have put up everything in the food line, in some case by as much as 50 per cent. In this they are all standing shoulder to shoulder and not by all the “going into another shop” will you find one cent reduction, as could be done once upon a time.
The Cold Storage balance sheet was just about the last straw! Why meat (to mention only one item) has not been reduced when there has been for months now, nearly $2 difference in the £, buying in the Australian market is beyond me. Surely we can expect a little benefit, we of reduced salaries! -Yours, etc.
“A MEM.”
A very unreliable correspondent says he overheard both the remarks given below, this morning, but in the absence of corroboration, we give them with a considerable amount of reserve:
“Can I sign a chit for one?”
“Here, lassie, I gi’ed ye ten cents, whaur’s ma change?” -Nov. 10th.
In reply to Mr. Grenier, the chairman stated that the matter of the humane slaughtering of pigs was still “resting” but he promised to find out what the Singapore Municipality was doing.
Mr. Grenier handed in an advertisement from The Spectator relating to this subject which he said he would like the authorities to see. -Straits Times.
(From the Singapore Free Press.)
A sum of nearly $8,000-$7,865 to be exact-was received at the Europe Hotel, the headquarters of the Poppy Day Committee up to 5 p.m. yesterday towards Poppy Day Funds in Singapore.
“Buy canned not bottled foods” is the slogan in a letter to the Press by Mr. Harold Huntsman, director of several tin companies in Malaya, who, commenting on the tin situation, points out that an alarming degree of tin containers are being ousted by other methods to the detriment of the mining industry.
At the annual meeting of Singapore Cold Storage Company. Ltd., a profit of $198.863 was declared, the reduction being due to a loss of $96,000 due by Sarkies Bros.
There are no fewer than 460 different species of flea, it was stated during a conference at Scarborough. The Topicist would have thought the number would have been much greater, since, according to the poet
Great fleas have little fleas upon their backs to bite ‘em
And little fleas have lesser fleas, and so ad infinitum.
And the great fleas themselves in turn have greater fleas to go on,
While these again have greater still, and greater still, and so on.
Mainly About Nothing.
The Festive Season is at hand and kindly wireless officials all over the world arrange that those wishing to radiate their seasonable sentiment across the water, may do so at sale prices for a limited period only. Such messages must of course be couched in strictly seasonable terms and the bashful or secretive greeter may not convert his Christmas caption to cold and crusty cede.
Think what the fond relation, nursing her chilblains by some freezing fireside would imagine if she received something of this sort: -
To Mrs. Marmaduke Whistletooth Plopton-in-the-Wortleberry, Warts. Fogwhiskig klonkstizy globskowch wigofozwiz hozwozzhoh ziswasahotspot yoboanda bottlarumski-Eustace.
She would undoubtedly think that her poor Eustace had fallen into the bands of a gang of droski drivers who had driven him to drink.
She would certainly fall to realise that what the niggardly Eustace was trying to do was to save five cents a word in saying that he hoped that she and all her girl friends in Ploton Woberry would have a fruity Christmas and a juicy New Year.
The public should also be warned that any attempt to convey a double or ciphered meaning through the honeyed words of the Christmas greeting will be dealt with under the Portuguese Parliament Wireless Amendment Act introduced by Pizarro in 1842.
For instance the punter who wishes to put a “monkey” on Mistletoe in the Pimlico Handicap and double up on Bertie Brassbit’s mounts for the whole of the Bucklersberry meeting cannot get away with,
“Happy Christmas sending you monkey with mistletoe give blue cross double case whisky to Bertie Brassbit Bucklersberry.”
Such attempts at defrauding the revenue will not be allowed that privilege so often accorded to measures adopted in the sacred name of economy.
The attention of the press has been drawn to the existence of a “Oui Oui Club” in the following letter.
OUI OUI CLUB.
Sir, -A Glasgow professor has shown me a gold finger-ring he wears, which ring was given to his mother upon her engagement, in the year 1851. On the inside is a circle or shield with lettering, somewhat difficult to decipher, as it has worn con-siderably-but seems to be, “Separated not divided.” The centre words are very distinct, and are, “Oui Oui Club.”
Can any reader say if there existed a club of this name in Great Britain, or, if it is-as the words suggest-a French club? And also if such a club exists to-day? -Yours,
EDWARD A. J.
Guilford-street W.C.I.
We have been asked to give an explanation of the meaning of the inscription on the ring and to say if possible what is a “Oui Oui Club.”
We are not quite clear as to what connection exists between the name of this club and the legend, also in the ring, “separated not divided.” The only similar motto we can call to mind is that of the famous P. & O. line, “Quis Separabit” or as every schoolboy hardly ever knows “who will separate or divide” (“us” understood).
What this rather truculent “us” (understood) is frightened of being separated from is not stated but usually there is depicted above this slogan a camel or elephant or other oriental fauna going at full bat across the Sahara. Possibly this is designed to effect a contrast between present and past modes of transport and the idea of the motto was applicable in the early caravanning days when the pioneer loudly proclaimed his refusal to be separated from his camel.
But we are mainly concerned to ferret out the meaning and functions of Oui Oui Clubs, and as far as we are aware they have nothing to do with camels.
We have therefore consulted a famous occidentalist who is employed in our information bureau chiefly to keep a check on the amount of moonshine imported into the U.S. He informs us that “Oui Ooi Clubs” were of course of French origin and were formed by what were known as “Yes Men” in fact the O.O.C. was a kind of Trade Union for such people.
“Yes Men” were usually employed at the Courts of the petty continental monarchs in the middle ages. Their main duties were to instil into these monarchs the necessary superiority complex required for them to carry out their frequent depredations on one another. For instance, a monarch would announce to his vizier that his neighbour of Wachtenstein had an ugly face and his daughter a pretty one and that on the morrow he would sally forth, slay the one and abduct the other. The vizier who had long contemplated doing the same himself would look grave and tell the King that it would be dangerous and, to boot, dirty.
The King would then dismiss the vizier in a rage and summon his “Yes Man.” He would recite his intentions all over again and the “Yes Man” would say “Oui Oui, mon Roi” or “Ja Ja, Herr Koenig” and sing an extempore doggerel poem, ex-tolling the virtues of his Lord whose conscience would then allow him to carry out his dastardly plan. These chaps naturally had to stick together and see that they got their overtime and weren’t told to work too hard etcetera, so they formed these “Oui Oui Clubs,” but as they always agreed with each other, from force of habit, they did not leave much of value to modern thought and philosophy. We are given to understand by a somewhat unreliable authority that these clubs exist all over the world to-day, but they have degenerated into mere gatherings for the purpose of playing Mahjong, a game played with wooden bricks and Chinese swear words, of a very sinister nature.
Next month further details concerning these clubs will be given.
A FOOCHOW LOVE-LETTER.
TO RELATE SORROWFULLY AND STIR UP.
To Hong King. -Since I have got close to you it forms a love to a fragrant flower. This makes a lonely bird and a sad thought. However it is an iron heart that cannot be changed to a mind of kindness.
In olden time Thai Ngiik and Poh Ngiik had intimate friendship. They loved and helped each other.
To hate the go-between, having no good chance, so it stopped at half way. This made people grieve in various ways.
So in the morning and evening Poh Ngiik cares in her heart and praying for very earnestly.
At night in dream to raise up the shoulder by loving each other how deep the love is; How much does he long for;
As ‘Ngiew Lang’ (m.) and ‘Chick Nii’ (f.) (being stars) are living separately by a river they may meet together in the time of the night of the 7th of the 7th Moon.
As I am living by next room of you, I cannot get a little time to talk. This make people’s blood cool and come to a condition of sigh. Hong King please think over this carefully and attentively.
It is to try to get for people the dew from the bottle of ‘Kuan-Ing’ (idol) to wash man’s heart and making happy, to a perfection.
Therefore the merit of ‘Siong Tu’ will be seen in the love of Hong King.
Please reply immediately and urgently.
(Sgd.) Ku NGAN
Writing with this tears.
What Kungan was trying to say to the Hongking (lady of his choice) was probably, to quote chapter and verse of an obscure poet, somehow as follows: -
“A lonely bird and a sad fool, A jug of dew and thou;
Without all these the blood runs cool,
Like “dew” without the “ar.”
Yet if I had a jug of wine
With or without thee now,
These sentiments would not be mine, I’d still be in the bar.”
The New Rubaiyat of Satinka Khan
Vol. XXX Stanza, ccc
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 54 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
1877.] MONDAY, 16th APRIL, 177. [Price 5 cents.
CORRESPONDENCE.
To the Editor of the Sarawak Gazette.
SIR, -It may not be uninteresting to some of your readers to hear an account of the mode in which the pomfret fishing is conducted by the Bintulu Milanos.
At this season, the sea is often too rough for the boats to go out, but for the last few days there has been a lull, the result of which is a comparatively calm sea. I therefore took the opportunity of going out in one of the barongs, to see how the pomfret-which have lately come in-were caught.
To begin with I fancy a short account of the “barong” for those of your readers who are unacquainted with that boat, would not be amiss. The barong is especially adapted, on account of its great beam and short length, to resist the heavy seas which are so prevalent on the river bars along the coast. The common measurement of a barong is about thirty feet in length and eight feet beam. It has crew of from eight to twelve men, who propel the boat with oars of eight feet long and very broad blades. There mode of rowing is very different from what one has been accustomed to, their stroke being very short but deep, and they pull with a short jerk instead of a long swing, and it is quite surprising at what a rate they send the heavy looking boats along. The men sit on separate boards slopping away towards the bow. A most uncomfortable seat, and very awkward if one misses his stroke, or the rattan with which his oar is fastened breaks.
The boat is also supplied with a tall mast and a large square sail. On the port side are rigged two strong stanchions, with a cross bar, on which the net is rigged. The net itself is forty-two feet in length and thirty-six in breadth at one end, from which it decreases to a breadth of about two feet. This net is stretched across two poles, in the form of a triangle. These poles are then laid across the bar and the two end fastened by a catch in the boat. On the starboard side are also two stanchions-on which the mast, &c. &c. are laid when not in use.
Each boat owns about seventy rattans of 16 fathoms long. These rattans are sunk with a stone at the end. A bunch of nipa leaf is fastened to the rattan, at five fathoms depth, and it is floated by a piece of the nipa stalk. Under these leaves the fish collect, to enjoy the shade.
The fishing now commences, the men row up to a rattan, and as they pass it, a man standing in the stern catches the nipa stalk, at the end of a hooked pole which he holds. He pulls it gently towards him, until he can make out the leaf below, when he sees whether there are any fish or not. If there are the net is then let down. He then fastens the stake to a long rattan, which he hands across the net to a man standing in the bow, the boat then makes a short circuit, during which the man in the bow gently pulls the leaf up, so as to come across the net, when just over the net, three men dive underneath. One on either side and one in the middle, and drive any struggling fish, into the net. As the leaf comes over the net, the men in the boat, who have all been standing on the port side, make a rush to starboard, which brings up the net with the fishes enclosed. I was amused at seeing one of the divers who remarked a rather fine fish making away. He dived after it and after chasing it for some distance, without being able to turn it, came up with an aggrieved countenance, and said, “Diya tida mahu.”
We were not very fortunate, and only tried twenty-five rattans, when being some distance out, and a squall coming up, we hoisted sail and steered for the river.
During the sail back, the fish are divided, and then commences the preparation of the “Umai” of which I partook, and enjoyed. “Umai” is simply raw fish, which has been very carefully scraped, and cleaned, it is then cut into thin strips, and dried for about half an hour, when it is eaten with the “buah bawang” and pearl sago, and, with an appetite sharpened by the sea air it is not at all bad.
In conclusion, I noticed, having been out both at Muka and Bintulu, that the only difference between the two in their mode of fishing, is that whereas the Bintulu men dive and drive the fish into the net, the Muka men are content to let the fish follow the leaf or not, without attempting to drive in the stragglers. 1 wonder if this has anything to do with the saying here, that a shark will not touch any one between Semalajau and Tatau. In the memory of the oldest man here no fisherman has ever been taken between those two rivers, although the Bintulu men very often come in contact with them whilst diving.
I remain, Sir,
Yours truly,
E. P. GUERITZ.
Bintulu, 16th Feb., 1877.
Sarawak Library.
The following books have been kindly presented by His Highness the Rajah: -
Kindly presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda: -
Purchased by the Committee: -
First Division News.
RESIDENT’S OFFICE.
October, 1931.
Extracts from Divisional Reports for October, 1931, by Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division: -
Resident’s Court. -Three criminal and five civil cases were dealt with during the month.
A Dyak youth named Maribah was found guilty under Section 377 I.P.C. with which he was charged and sentenced to a whipping.
Goh Joon Kiaw, wife of Ang Kian Chiang deceased was fined $500 for Breach of Estate Duties Order (E-2) Section 11 (ii). In addition double duty was imposed on the undeclared property.
In connection with the above case Sim Kheng Jiang, a step son of the deceased, was fined $25 for giving false evidence in the course of the proceedings before the Court.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
October, 1931.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports: -
District Court. -Twenty cases were heard, 2 of which were criminal and eighteen civil. Of the two criminal cases, both were convictions. There were two cases of Contempt of Court.
Fines imposed amounted to $6 and fees collected $2 (Criminal matter).
The civil claims involved amounts totalling $4,224.07 for which fees collected amounted to $243.50.	.
Magistrate’s Court. -144 cases were heard, 16 of which were criminal and 128 civil. Of the sixteen criminal cases, fifteen convictions and one acquittal were adjudged. There were seven cases of assault, two Contempt of Court, one Breach of Municipal By-laws and six other offences.
Fines imposed amounted to $43 and fees collected $35.
The civil claims involved amounts totalling $3,558.43 for which fees collected amounted to $319.97.
Police Court. -Twenty-three summary cases were brought before the Court. All were convictions. The principal charges were 8 of theft, 2 of assault, 1 of cheating, 1 House-breaking by night, 3 Breach of Municipal By-laws, 2 Breach of Customs and
Shipping Regulations and 6 other offences.
A total amount of $25.50 was paid in fines.
In addition 103 Judgment summons cases were dealt with during the month.
Court's General. -Sa’at bin Taha was sentenced to two years, See Choon Kiat, and Chua Ah Kow to six months each, Hussin bin Pangiran Harun Brunei to three months, and Lee Jing to one month all for theft, under I.P.C. Section 379; Choo Chui Ee to three months for cheating, under I.P.C. Section 417 ; Ling Liang Hob to three months, for House-breaking by night, under I.P.C. Section 456; Liew Jew to nine months, for attempted carnal connection with a girl under the age of 15, under Order W-1 (Woman and girl’s Protection) Part A. Paragraph 1; Eo Ah Kiaw to three months, for criminal misappropriation of properly, under I.P.C. Section 503; Liew Ah Hong to six months, for voluntarily causing hurt with a dangerous weapon, under I.P.C. Section 324 ; Geok Hock and Eau Ah Nyan to one month each, for failure to pay a Judgment debt, under Section 7 (ii) of Court’s Order, 1922, Part II; Foo Hoi and Tan Siak Lan to one month each, being stowawas in the s.s. Vyner Brooke, under Notification No. 197 of 16.3.31; and Chang Ah Chuan to one month, for vagrancy, under Order No. V-1, 1931, Paragraph 2 (b).
General. -His Highness the Tuan Muda, Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division and Mr. E. S. Holl returned from a visit to outstations on the 7th.
The Auditor audited the accounts of this office on the 26th.
Coroner’s Court. -There were four inquests and verdicts were as follows: -
1/10/31. -(1) Inquest on the body of unknown male newly born child found in the river at Batu Kawa Bazaar on 1st October, 1931.
Verdict-Death due to natural causes.
14/10/31. -(2) Inquest on the death of Sulai and Gali (Dyaks) reported killed by falling tree at Labai Estate. Samarahan (Manager T. Mohri of Nissa Shokai, Limited).
Verdict-Accidental death due to misadventure in both cases.
12/10/31. -(3) Inquest on the body of Han Ah Tun male Hylam Chinese aged about 40 years reported by Assistant Superintendent of Police, Mr. W. H. Kelly found death in a rickshaw in charge of three men at 3 a.m. on 19th October, 1931, corner of McDougall Road.
Verdict-Death due to suicide by taking tuba in accordance with medical evidence with a rider that the case has some unexplained points and further information would be beneficial. The evidence points to the fact that although it is not alleged that
Chuang Ah Chiang did away with deceased, he did give false evidence being afraid, and that he was trying to get deceased out of the house as quickly as possible-Therefore Police and Assessors are asked to pursue the matter further with inquiries.
21/10/31. -(4) Inquest on the death of Sim Lai Ho (Teochew Chinese male) found death in Topekong, Carpenter Street on the 19th October, 1931.
Verdict-Death due to natural causes.
UPPER SARAWAK, BAU.
October, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports: -
Resident’s Court. -Two cases were heard, one of which was criminal case and resulted in conviction.
District Court. -Seven cases were heard, six of which were criminal cases, all resulted in convictions.
Magistrate’s Court. -Thirty-nine cases were heard, six of which were criminal cases, and thirty-three civil. Of the six criminal cases four resulted in convictions and two discharged.
In addition one judgment summons was dealt with during the month.
Fines imposed amounted to $38. The civil claims involved amounts totalling $327.17 for which fees collected amounted to $17.75.
Judicial. -Notable cases during the month were: -(1) State versus Nylaw Ah Leong, who was sentenced to six months’ imprisonment for house-breaking. (2) Mong was sentenced to three months’ imprisonment for making a false charge of offence with intent to injure T. K. Susan of Kampong Singghi.
Rainfall. -Highest recorded in 24 hours .81 of an inch; daily average .12 of an inch; total for month inches.
Visitors to the station during the month included the Resident, First Division, Mr. J. C. Swayne, Mr. and Mrs. J. W. S. Bean, Mr. and Mr. J. G. Anderson and Mr. Simpson.
Heavy winds have been experienced which has resulted in much damage to the telephone service which has just been re-braced throughout.
A curious case was reported towards the month end of three Chinese who had intentionally burnt down their own houses at Tundong and inquiries were instituted. All three admitted the fact but could give no good reason beyond that the houses were worth nothing. However since the loader of the clique claimed to be the Emperor of China all were sent down to Kuching for mental observantion.
After discussion with the Superintendent of Lands it has been decided to allow gold prospectors to take an option on land for mining purposes up to 100 acres for a period not exceeding three months. The details of land rental in these circumstances has not yet been settled.
PublicWorks. -All bridges in the district are being numbered so as to facilitate identification and four bridges have been taken up and widened so as to permit of a lorry being sent down as far as Batu Kitang. This will mean that stone can now be put on the stretch of road between Siniawan and Batu Kitang. One or two dangerous corners have been cut back on the main road and turning place for cars made at the over end.
The Siniawan waterworks have been closed down for two weeks owing to a fracture in the ignition bulb of the waterworks plant, which has been sent to Singapore for repairs.
The new female jail is now ready for occupation only the construction of parits remaining.
A new latrine baa been put up for the Police barracks at Paku.
Prisoners have been repainting the annex to the Government Bungalow which has not been done for years.
Jail. -New hours have been instituted in the jails here viz. from 6 a.m. to 11.30 a.m. and 2 p.m. to 5 p.m. This allows prisoners to rest during the heat of the day and shortens the evenings for them. The experiment has met with success and the new times will be kept to in future. Prisoners were drafted to Siniawan, Buso and Paku during the month to clean up these stations.
At the end of the month the female prisoners numbered 25 and the male prisoners 48. Total 73.
LUNDU.
October, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer. Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
General. -I returned from Kuching on the 1st I and on the 7th left for Sampadi and Rambungan where it was reported the Chinese were trafficking opium. Later in the month these suspicions were continued and three Chinese were convicted of theft of opium. I proceeded up river on 22nd and returning on the 28th. The Dyaks were all busy burning off, being very late this year up river; Down river most of the people have planted out. Simatan was visited by the Native Officer from 23rd to 26th. A dresser arrived on the 29th to examine the many who wish to be let off Exemption Tax on account of illness.
Courts. -In the criminal courts three Chinese were convicted of theft of opium at Sempadi and sentenced to one year’s R.I. each and three Chinese were convicted of trafficking opium in the Lundu Bazaar and all three were fined $20 each. In the civil courts over 100 people were summoned for non-payment of Exemption Tax: there were the usual amount of ordinary debt claims.
Forests. -A. Gardner arrived on 13th and checked the books finding them all correct, except that only one cent, instead of ten, had been changed for royalty oil pepper poles: this error has now been corrected.
Land. -Quite a number of gardeners paid their quit rent at the beginning of the month but there still remain over 1,000 outstanding. Demand notes were issued to some towards the end of the month. The Land Inspector proceeded up river on the 15th to Pasir and had not returned at the end of the month.
Agriculture. -The lease of the Government pepper garden expired on 13th and the same man agreed to lease it for a further year but at the reduced rate of 145 katties pet year. The Government rubber garden lease expired on 3lst and was not renewed it being thought advisable to stop tapping during the period of low prices. The lease had to settle his last three months payments by deducting the amounts from his deposit.
Prison. -The gang averaging 5.27 were employed in cleaning the ditches on road No. 1 and in the general upkeep of the station. Two prisoners were put on to keep the Government compound clean in place of two paid men.
Police. -The police force were very slack and Corporal Samat was severely reprimanded and sent to Simatan; P. C. Bojet was fined $3 and transferred to Simatan and Awang Edi was warned. L/C Busri was transferred to Lundu in place of Corporal Samat.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall for the month was 5.27 niches, the greatest fall in any one day being 1.37 inches.
Trade. -The total returns for the month and the comparison with those for the corresponding month last year were as follows: -
SADONG.
October, 1931.
The Officer-in-Charge. Mr. J. J. Hill, reports: -
Court. -Court work on the whole has been below the average this month owing probably to the Malays and Dyaks being occupied with their padi farms.
Udin bin Daud and Tra bin Kamis were both sentenced to six months’ imprisonment in default of payment of their Native Court fines and Brian.
Ex Orang Kaya Suayang was sentenced to three mouths’ imprisonment under section No. 186 and two months’ imprisonment under section 174.
Yahya and Jangkaw were sentenced to one month imprisonment each tor Contempt of Court.
P.W.D. -All necessary repairs to buildings were done at the Gedong and Tebekang Stations. The buildings were also all whitewashed.
No other works were undertaken during the month.
Hospital. -At the Government Hospital no patients applied for admission. Two patients were discharged leaving the Hospital empty at the end of the month.
At the Dispensary fifty-eight out-patients made ninety-nine visits for treatment.
The accounts show revenue $76.25 and expenditure including salaries and rations $152.55.
Agriculture. -Mr. G. St. F. Dare, Agricultural Field Officer visited the station from the 13th instant until the end of the month.
The Bugis padi planters complaint was looked into and a temporary settlement made pending bearing from Kuching. It is to be noted that the only Bugis who are complaining are those who appear to understand nothing about their job.
The Chinese padi planters at the Colliery who are using experimental seed, specially obtained, have now planted up their nursery. I understand that they will be planting in their sawah in about forty days time.
Survey. -Mr. N. Mace, Assistant Superintendent of Surveys Sadong visited the station on the 8th and after inspecting all plans, etc., in the station accompanied me to the Ulu on the 13th instant.
Land. -Accompanied by Mr. J. G. Anderson, Acting District Officer, Kuching, and Mr. T. M. Griffiths and the Orang Kaya Ris Tangga, Ris Tamawang and Tarat. I walked over the Ris-Tarat boundary. This boundary should give no further trouble in the future as at no place is the distance between boundary posts more than 10 chains.
The Meringgu-Bedup boundary was also walked over by Orang Kaya Meringgu and Bedup, Native Officer, Abang Samsudin and myself. Boundary posts were placed at two points and a Land Inspector has been sent up to take the necessary compass bearings.
A big settlement of Chinese wet padi planters was visited at Lubok Tapang Tangga. The Chinese have been cultivating padi here for some seven years. I would suggest that this be made into a Chinese padi reserve.
Travelling. -I left the main station on the 13th instant accompanied by Mr. N. Mace and returned alone on the 29th instant having visited Gedong, Srian, Tebekang and Meringgu.
Prison. -The health of the prisoners was fair.
The prison gang averaging 11.06 was employed on the general upkeep of the station and in finishing the main Gunong Road repairs.
General. -Visitors to the station during the month included Mr. E. Banks, Curator Sarawak Museum, Mr. J. K. Beasley and Mr. D. E. Calver, Conservator of Forests.
Trade and Customs. -Comparative trade returns are as follows: -
During the month thirty-one vessels entered and thirty-one cleared the Port.
Sadong Collieries Report.
October, 1931.
Extracts from the Sadong Collieries Report for October, 1931, by Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager: -
The output, export, local consumption, and coal stock figures for the month are as follows: -
Coal exports exceeded output to wharf by 782 1/4 tons.
The Sarawak Steamship Company’s vessels were engaged in transporting 897 tons of coal for Storage at Kuching by Government Stores Department, during the month.
The upper seam mine was closed down at the beginning of the month.
Two Malay Limes (Nos. 2 & 3) were taken down and removed.
The re-opening of the Ngili stream; which is the main drainage Artery of the mine area was commenced, and the work is still proceeding. The Railway padang was also cleared of jungle to its furthest extremity.
Nearly 500 tons of shale was dumped behind the timber reinforcement to protect the coal heaps on the river-bank at the jetty.
The rainfall for the month was 8.38 inches.
Second Division News.
October, 1931.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports for October, 1931, by Mr. E. O. Bruce, Acting Resident: -
As the result of litigation last month, the tense feeling between Engkilili pepper planters and traders has subsided, except in a few isolated instances and exports recommenced steadily.
On the 5th the new Government Lay School at Simanggang was completed, and the new design is a distinct improvement.
The layout of approach paths to the new Offices was designed, and whole area cleared of debris.
Reports of dysentery have been prevalent during the month, and Dresser Benjamin Franklin has made trips to areas in several directions.
In view of the soft state of the unmetalled roads and the prevailing wet season, an application to import a small car was not approved meanwhile.
With the aid of a small P.W.D. lorry, however, which was applied for in 1932 estimates, it would be possible to prepare the surface of a considerable mileage of road for light traffic.
During my last visit to Kalaka, I was informed that the wind vane pump installation for supplying drinking water to Kabong bazaar and kampong, about three years ago fell into such a shocking state of neglects, that it has been completely out of action ever since. The connecting pipe was therefore sawn off short and the seized up portions of the pump head sent enbloc for renewal, with a hope of being able to re-start the machine. Meanwhile the small steel tank and tower me being scraped and painted to avoid total loss.
A Survey party erected a trigonometrical point at Bukit Balau near the Dutch Border, for Divisional survey purposes.
At Simanggang and Engkilili, Chinese cemetery areas have been defined for demarcation, not such an easy undertaking as one would imagine.
A further smaller experimental area of Government land close to the station was cleared and planted with padi for future prison stock.
It is reported that Rubber garden assessment is difficult to collect, and not at all popular while tapping is ceased.
Tuai Rumah Imbit came down to report that he had assaulted and wounded his wife and her paramour whom he caught in flagrente delictu. He has been charged accordingly in the District Court.
I returned from short leave on the 26th.
Rainfall recorded at Simanggang during the month was 34.17 inches.
SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
October, 1931.
Extract from the report of Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas (Simanggang): -
The Acting Resident was still away at the beginning of the month. On the 7th I went to Engkilili to hear District Court where there were a number of Civil cases. The Dresser accompanied me.
The raised plank portion of the Simanggang to Betong road was in a very bad state of repair. This portion is repaired and tebassed twice yearly by Skrang Dyaks. Fifteen Kayans who had come from Mahakam, N.E.I. passed through Simanggang on their way back from Kuching, during the middle of the month.
On Wednesday. 21st Mr. D. E. Calver, Conservator of Forests arrived for a visit of a few days. The following day Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft proceeded on a visit to Lingga, Sibuyow and Ulu Samaludam.
On the 26th the Resident arrived back. Mr. Barcroft was still away at the end of the month.
During the month T.R. Imbit of Slepong reported he had wounded his wife and another for adultery. He has been charged under Section 334 I.P.C.
M.L. Anne was repainted towards the end of the month. The glazing of the window of the New Offices was also finished.
A telegram from the Shipping Department received on the 9th stated that Sri Sadong had foundered off Pulo Burong.
Penghulus Goiang, Kalong, Lambai visited the station during the month. Also, Penghulu Imong from Engkilili District.
The Government School was completed during the month.
District Court. -One Criminal case was heard. Civil claims amounted to $1,990.90.
Magistrate’s Court. -One hundred and twenty-one cases were heard, one hundred and twenty of which were civil, and one criminal.
The Court Writer, Lingga reports that all taxes have been settled to date, with the exception of some arms tax. 187 crocodiles were caught during the month.
Trade Returns for the month are as follows: -
ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
October, 1931.
Extracts from the report of the Officer-in-Charge Engkilili, (Mr. S. G. Hansom): -
Court. -Was heavier than usual.
Five Criminal cases, and civil claims totalling $2,053.40 were heard.
Travelling. -Lubok Antu was visited from the 13th to the 18th instant. It is noted that outstanding fines are very liable to accumulate there and that Dyak Door Tax for the current year is coming in very slowly.
General. -A “snatch and grab” raid at the Gambling Farm was reported, at the beginning of the month to have been perpetrated by an alleged masked man, who succeeded in escaping with a box containing $130. The man who is probably a coolie from a local pepper garden, got clear away and inquiry failed to elicit any clue as to his identity.
On the 7th instant Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas arrived, staying two nights. A number of District Court cases were heard.
An area has been demarcated for a Chinese Burial Ground.
Medical. -The Government Dresser came up from Simanggang on the 7th. Fifty N. A. B. injections were performed. There is still a good deal of dysentery in local Dyak houses.
Prison. -Prisoners have been engaged in the usual routine and Public Works. The number is still insufficient, averaging 5.
Trade Returns. -
Amount of pepper exported during month 2,378 piculs 60 catties.
Amount of pepper during corresponding month in 1930. 1,043 1/2 piculs.
Rainfall. -Rain fell on 10 days when a total of 16.63 inches was recorded.
SARIBAS DISTRICT.
October, 1931.
Extracts from the report of the District Officer, Saribas, Mr. R. L. Daubeny.
Court. -The following cases were heard during the month, Arip 2 months for contempt of Court, Lim Si Giok 6 months for cheating section 417 Indian Penal Code. Nyantong and Endin Dyaks fined $3.00 and costs for committing an affray in the bazaar, Omar 4 months and fine $25.00 for voluntarily causing hurt to a woman by name Dayang Halimah (f)), Ah Moi and Foo 2 months each for non-payment fine $22.14 and costs.
In the Civil Courts there were several debt cases and also some land cases, one of which was still adjourned at the end of the month.
On 26th instant a Coroner’s inquest was held on the body of a Chinese by name Ah Whai found dead in a well near Bukit Lempaong. A verdict of suicide while of unsound mind was recorded.
Prisons. -The prison gang has been employed on the usual routine works during the month.
P.W.D. -Various small repairs and alterations were made to the clerks and Native Officers quarters at Debak, Pusa and also Betong.
Travelling. -I was away visiting the substations from 15th-18th various outstanding matters being settled. Exceptionally high water occurred on Wednesday 14th instant at Pusa, there being 2 to 3 feet, of water in places on the Government compound.
On 13th instant I proceeded to Sungei Bankit, Paku to look into a land dispute between Chinese and Dyaks. Taking into consideration the fact that neither side can generally understand what the other says, it is surprising that there are not more of these disputes. I can foresee, however, that these cases will undoubtedly increase when trade revives and more gardens are laid out, unless, some system of partialling out the land is adopted, i.e., as reserving certain areas for Chinese only, as done in other parts of the country.
General. -Dr. Hutchison paid a visit to the station from 1st-2nd instant and from 10th-12th instant. A.S.I. Awang Joini from Simanggang did a tour of the district visiting all Police from 1st-10th instant.
Trade. -
Shipping. -Eight motor vessels entered and cleared during the month.
KALAKA DISTRICT.
October, 1931.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Kalaka, Mr. L. K. Morse.
Judicial. -No case of importance came before the Courts during the month.
P.W.D. -The Native Officer’s house at Roban was completed and occupied while the Kabong School was reported finished, and now awaits inspection. I am informed by the Public Works Department that certain parts will have to be ordered for the Water-works at Kabong, until they arrive no repairs can be effected.
Land. -All Stations in the district were visited by the Land Officer and an effort made to collect outstanding rent. Malays forming the majority of the defaulters in each place. The S.P.G Mission have applied for a reserve of land at Roban, the matter is still being considered.
A case where a Chinese by name Jong Choon Chai was reported to be holding up a large area of farming land at Sungei Parit, Seblak was investigated by myself and the Land Officer. Choon Chai denied that he was holding up the land, and stated that he allowed Malays and Dyaks to farm the land if they wished. He was informed that the question of whether Malays or Dyaks should, or should not, farm there had nothing to do with him, and that he had no claim to the land, with the exception of 7 acres of coconuts for which an Occupation Ticket has been issued.
General. -Abang Mansor, junior Native Officer, Kabong visited Saratok during the month for instruction.
I regret to report the death of Mandore Sait in Hospital on the 11th instant Ex-L. Cpl. Saun has been engaged to fill this vacancy.
On the night of the 14th instant Saratok experienced the highest tide for some twelve years, the bazaar and kampong being flooded. I understand that the water at Kabong rose to a depth of some 2 feet under the fort.
Accompanied by Mr. B. Summers, Divisional Land Officer, I visited the substations from October 3rd to 8th. The herd at Kabong now number 96.
Medical. -One in-patient and 89 out-patients were treated in the Hospital during September. 8 N.A.B. Injections were given. Numerous people in the district require treatment, but cannot afford it.
Customs and Marine. -There is a strong suspicion that certain Chinese Kotak owners are engaged in smuggling between Kabong and Dutch territory. Customs Officer Amit bin Sapong visited the district during the month to investigate and assist the Police. 1 suspect that Maludam and Sebuyow are also concerned, but it is difficult to find definite proof.
SIMANGGANG.
Extracts from the report of the Officer-in-charge, Police and Prisons, Simanggang, Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft: -
1. -Police.
(a) Personnel. -During the month the Divisional strength was one man below authorized amount.
(b) Drill and Training programme. -Owing to the large number of recruits also men transferred from sub-stations for training a recruit’s programme was applied to all ranks. The standard of efficiency and general smartness was not very satisfactory, but it is hoped that a considerable approvement will be noticed next month. Instruction in musketry was given to the more senior constables.
During the early part of the month, assisted by the Assistant Sub-Inspector, I gave a short lecture to N.C.Os on the Civil Duties of the Police.
A system of periodical examinations in Police duties has been inaugerated and it is thought that this system will be very useful for imparting general knowledge.
All constables attended Police school three times a week; instruction was given in Jawi and Romanised Malay.
(c) Crime. -A large number of petty thefts was reported, but Police investigation was not very successful. It is intended that as soon as the Police are released from their duties as orderlies in the new offices, that kampong areas, etc., will be more frequently patrolled and a more comprehensive system of crime investigation instituted.
There was no serious crime reported.
(d) Sub-stations-During the month I visited Lingga, Sebuyow and S. Ludam.
The discipline at Lingga appeared rather unsatisfactory and arrangement have been made to send a new detachment to that station early next month.
L.-Cpl. Alam appears to be doing good work at Sebuyow and all was in order there and P.C. Unau has been useful at S. Ludam.
(e) General. -Early in the month the Assistant Sub-Inspector returned from a visit to the Saribas district, it is gratifying to note that the District Officer, Betong, sent an excellent report on Awang Joini’s work in that district, and the latter will be sent to visit Kalaka by the first available Government launch.
The general health of the Police was very fair.
2. -Prison.
The number of prisoners at Simanggang is not sufficient for the work of the station. The total number is appro. 40% less than it was this time last year. A request for more has been sent to the Acting Superintendent of Prisons, Kuching.
15th ultimo a prisoner escaped in irons from the Simanggang. On the 17th instant he was recaptured in the Tisak and brought back to Simanggang by two Dyaks who were suitably rewarded. As a result of this escaped special attention is being paid to the rivetting of prisoners irons.
During the month gangs were employed on usual routine work.
The health in the jail was very good.
SIMANGGANG HOSPITAL.
Returns.
Number of patients admitted during the month 2-3; Number of patients remaining on 31/10/31 2-3.
A total of 305 out-patients were treated during the month. A record of forty-three N.A.B. injections were administered.
LAND OFFICE.
Extracts from the report of the Divisional Land, Land Officer, Second Division. Mr. B. Summers.
On the 1st of the month. I proceeded to Saratok, to visit Stations in that district.
The total number of gardens to be called in amounts to 351.
In all stations where assessment is due, the majority in default are Malays.
Roban was visited on the 6th instant, in company with Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. Morse.
Of a total of 437 gardens, 216 had not paid assessment.
Pepper gardens appear to be increasing in this locality, and requests for eamination had been made by the planters, so the Land Inspector was again sent there to finish examining these gardens.
The Acting Assistant District Officer has been informed that a Chinese has a coconut garden situated near the left bank of the Sungei Seblak, and distant from Kabong about 45 minutes by launch.
This man had originally been given permission by letter from the late Resident, Mr. Page-Turner to plant coconut. It was reported that he was claiming a very large area of padi land, and on inspection this was found to be the case, in fact the area he claimed appeared to cover roughly three quarters of a mile square, title for the coconut garden was made ready for issue.
Sebuyow was visited on the 9th instant on my return from Saratok.
Some Chinese with garden numbering about 2,000 trees were allowed time in which to pay assessment.
Lingga was visited also on the 9th instant and it was found, that the Court Writer had not made any attempt whatever to call in “Assessment.” With regard to pepper assessment, the towkays who are the best informants, had stated that all assessments would be paid at the end of this month, owing to the crop having just ripened and at last one month later than the Engkilili district.
Abang Omar Assistant Land Inspector, had been sent to examine land in dispute at Sungei Tatai, and the defendant in the case, Sumpin, refused to rentis his land, because he thought it had nothing to do with the dispute. He was exceedingly rude at first: the matter was then explained to him, and he was informed, that if he did not rentis, the Land Department would take proceedings against him.
The M.L. One is still in dock. I understand extensive repairs have been carried out and that she will shortly be in commission again.
Clerk Endawi proceeded on 21 day’s leave during the month, his place at Roban being taken by Wee Chong Kui, leaving only two clerks at Saratok, latter stations cannot, even in those slack times be run with less than three clerks, and had it not been for the assistance of the Wireless operator I do not know that we would have done.
Trade. -Trade Returns for August are appended herewith: -
and the chief Exports were: -
During the month, one Land Inspector was examining applications in the Undup, one was on local leave, and the other examining land in dispute.
As all local applications have now been examined. Inspectors will now work the Undup area regularly each month until all applications there have been examined; it is to be hoped that no more disputes will arise to prevent this.
Collection of Pepper Garden rent is not difficult owing to the majority of Chinese and Dyak planters paying without having to be called in.
All owners of Rubber gardens dislike paying, and cannot understand why they must pay, if they are not tapping; the Saribas district being large, suffers most, there being few pepper gardens practically all rubber; but in most cases the Dyaks when sent for have sufficient money with which to pay the amounts due.
The number of Occupation Tickets issued during the month, shews a very large increase, over previous months, the majority of these being for Dyaks and Chinese Tepper gardens.
During the previous two months 89 Occupation Tickets for total acreage of 297 acres were issued at Engkilili. there is a large number still ready for issue, but certain difficulty is experienced in calling in the respective planters; due partly to the recent financial trouble between planters and traders.
Third Division News.
September, 1931.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports for September, 1931, by Mr. W. F. Dick. Acting Resident: -
Court. -The only cases calling for comment were (1) Divisional Treasurer vs. Tan Su Liong, and Wong Moh Teh under section 109, 511, and 417, the accused were fined $250 each or in default three months’ imprisonment. (2) Divisional Land Officer vs. Ann Kit Juan alias Ah Tong and Saripah under sections 389 or 457 and 109, 380 or 411 respectively, the accused No. 1 was sentenced to four years’ imprisonment and accused No. 2 was discharged.
Agriculture. -Reports from most districts shew that natives generally but Dyaks in particular did not take advantage of the drought in August to burn off their clearings, and as there has been little dry weather since, most clearings lire only partly burnt off and the prospects for the next harvest are distinctly poor.
General. -I left Ova on 2nd by s.l. Chamois and towed the m.l. Nellie to Sibu for repairs.
Abang Abu Bakar 2nd Native Office. Kanowit returned from the Machan on 2nd instant and brought down sixty-four guns.
I left on 7th instant for Dalat via the Kut and returned on the 9th.
Mr. H. E. Cutfield arrived on the 9th from home leave and took up his appointment of travelling District Officer.
Reports were received on 16th instant that Asoon was again interfering with the Dyaks in the Ulu Binatang, the reports were subsequently found to be very exaggerated. I left on 17th on a visit to Binatang, Sarikei, Rejang and Selalang and arrived back on 22nd.
Penghulu Endu of Entabai arrived down on 24th and reported that all Dyaks in his river were busy farming, including Asoon.
The offices were closed on 26th in honour of His Highness the Rajah’s birthday.
I left on 29th tor Mukah via Kut and Oya and arrived the same night. Various matters were discussed with the District Officer Mukah preparatory to His Highness the Tuan Muda’s visit.
October, 1931.
General. -His Highness the Tuan Muda accompanied by the Resident, First Division, Mr. J. C. Swayne, the Registrar, Third Division, Mr. H. B. Crocker and Mr. E. S. Holl arrived at Mukah by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna at 7.30 a.m. on the 1st. His Highness and party came ashore at 8 a.m. and after meeting the local chiefs and headmen sat in Court to listen to any complaints, etc., which might be brought up, nothing of importance was brought before His Highness who then inspected the R.C. Mission Convent, R.C. Mission School, bazaar and Chinese School, His Highness and party left at 5 p.m. for the North.
I left on the 2nd for Sibu via Oya and Dalat and arrived hack at Sibu on 3rd.
The Principal Medical Officer visited Sibu on 7th to discuss the proposed plan of the new Sibu Hospital.
Mr. F. L. G. Crossley left on 7th accompanied by the Penghulu Dalam on a tour of inspection of the Pasai.
I left on 8th for Kapit, stopping at Kanowit on the way and returned again on 12th.
Mr. J. M. Hoover held an exhibition of work at the Methodist Mission Girl School on the 14th, the standard of work exhibited was very high and most of the article displayed were sold within a short time of the opening.
Mr. F. L. G. Crossley arrived back on 16th and reported that Penghulu Sureng had been misappropriating Government money.
I left on 19th for Sarikei and Binatang and returned on 20th.
Some Chinese have been trying to get a big tract of farming land from Dyaks in the Igan with a view of bringing a tractor into the Country and farming properly, the Dyaks were sympathetic but no definite agreement had been reached at the end of the month.
Foo Shen Jin, a Clerk in the Electrical Department was dismissed without notice on 28th for abusing his position as a public servant.
I left on 30th with the Divisional Engineer Mr. J. W. Whiteside to inspect the dam erected in Sungei Kut. this has had the effect of raising the level of the water in the centre so that boats can go through at any time. It is hoped that it may be possible to put in simple locks at some future date which would allow Sago bandongs to come through from Dalat to the Igan.
A report was received from the Travelling District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield that Asoon refuses to meet him but is willing to pay his fine when he can, Asoon is farming in the Ulu Munus and has made no effort to pay his fine yet.
Court. -Hong Tai Toew and Tong Ka Na alias Yong Chiong Si were sentenced to one year’s imprisonment each under section 363. Tang Leh Chong fined $100 or three months under section 201. Penghulu Sureng was dismissed from his position and sentenced to 6 months imprisonment and also fined $200 or a further 6 months imprisonment under section 409.
Mok Chok and others appealed against the decision of the District Court in their case against Lai Man, the appeal was dismissed.
No other cases call for comment.
SIBU.
September, 1931.
The District Officer, Mr. E. V. Andrein, reports: -
Administration. -Mr. H. E. Cutfield Travelling District Officer arrived from Home Furlough on 8th. Mr. Pegler left on the 4th for short leave.
Visitors. -Visitors to the station during the month included The Ven. Archdeacon Graham White, Messrs. Humphreys of Electrical Dept. Kuching, Aikman, Gilbert, K. E. Parker, Crossley and Lamplugh.
Haji Yaman, Native Officer, Matu, left for Matu after undergoing training here.
Abang Haji Gapor, Native Officer, Sibu, who had been doing duty at Matu returned.
A Police Parade and usual salutes took place on 26th September when medals wore presented by the Acting Resident to Tuanku Mohamat bin Tuanku Tibu, Native Officer Sarikei; Mambang bin Liman, Tua Kampong Trus, Oya; Nyalong bin Tuad, Tua Kampong Kekan, Oya; Haji Sapar bin Tair, Tuan Belal, Sibu; and Wazir Ahimat Khan, Sergeant No. 4, Sibu.
Abang Abu Bakar, Native Officer, Kanowit, reported sick and was admitted to Hospital and on discharge proceeded on leave.
The s.s. Rajah of Sarawak after being anchored off Sibu for some months left, I understand to be broken up.
Mr. Siaw Ah Koon, Chief Clerk, Sarikei, was transferred to the Registrar’s Office, Sibu, vice Mr. Goh Chong Seek who proceeded on leave.
Judicial. -Court work was heavier. Messrs. Crossley and Crocker helped in the District Court on several occasions.
Capt. Dyason the Master of the s.s. Kuranda was fined $300 for overloading his ship, second offence.
Penghulu Ikau was fined $15 for Butang.
Inspector Wan Bujang $10 for assault under provocation on Mr. Chakavatry, clerk in Messrs. The Borneo Company, Ltd., Sibu Office, who was himself fined $25.
Three Coroner’s inquests were held the verdict in each case being accidental death by drowning. All the deceased were Foochows.
Education. -I visited the Kwong Hua School, Sadit, the Kinang School, Ensurai, Sui Lai School, Ensurai, the Tiong Hua School, the R.C. Boys School and the Malay School, Sibu, at various times.
Organised games and drill were started at the Sibu Malay School.
On the 26th September, the Tiong Hua School held their Sports meeting and some excellent performances were registered. Mrs. Dick kindly presented the prizes.
October, 1931.
Administration. -Mr. F. L. G. Crossley accompanied by Native Officer, Wan Hussein and Penghulu Dalam visited the Dyaks in the Pasai and Igan districts who were under the jurisdiction of Penghulu Surieng.
As one result of their visit Penghulu Surieng was committed for trial for Criminal Breach of Trust. He had been defrauding his people and Government over a period of years but owing to no European Officer being able to visit the district it had not been found out.
Mr. G. F. J. Pegler returned from short leave on the 12th and resumed his duties.
Mr. F. L. G. Crossley who had been doing temporary duly returned to Matu on 19th instant.
Mr. Pegler left on the 21st for Menyan and went round Penghulu Imai’s district. He reports Dyak houses very delapidated, paths overgrown and rivers blocked up.
Visitors on duty included Drs. Marjoribanks and Hutchison, Messrs. Gilbert and Middlemas.
Court. -Principal cases: -
Three Dyaks from Sungei Assan were sentenced to one year for attempted housebreaking by night.
Three Foochows were sentenced to nine months’ R.I. for assault with weapons.
Two Pontianak Malays $100 fine and 9 months for cheating Government in obtaining crocodile rewards.
Two Foochow 6 months for defamation.
Two Cantonese 6 months for theft pepper
A Julau Dyak one year R.I. for incest.
Foo Shen Jin, Electrical Department, dismissed for misdemeanour.
Education. -A small school for Malay girls was started in kampong Datu.
The Sin Ann and Ngko Kian School at Telok Assan, the Cantonese School Tai Kwan at Lanang, the Kwong Wha Foochow at Sadit, the Tiong Heng School (Heng-hua) at Aup, Eng Tek and Ek Tai in Lanang district and the Telephone Road and Sungei Merah Foochow Schools were visited. Playgrounds were constructed or improved at several Schools.
KANOWIT.
September, 1931.
The District Officer (Travelling), Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports: - Court. -Two Chinese were sentenced to six months each for theft of pepper, another to nine months for theft of Kerosine Oil. One man to three months for assault and another to six weeks for non-payment of fine. No other cases call for special mention.
General. -I reported my arrival at Sibu from home leave on the 9th. On 16th I proceeded to Kanowit. Outstanding cases and etc, were dealt with here and I left on Saturday 19th accompanied by Abang Ahmat, Native Officer and Penghulu Skudan for the Sungei Kaba. From the Ulu Kaba overland to the Tada, a branch of the Kaba. Up the Tada and overland to the Mapai. Down the Mapai and returned to Kanowit on 23rd.
Several matters were gone into with the Dyaks and Government orders and regulations explained to them. Their opinions were asked regarding (1) the amount of Butang fines, whether $16 for the man and $12 for the woman as the old custom used to be or whether they preferred $15 each. They unanimously decided that they preferred the fine to be $15 each for man and woman. (2) whether the whole of, say, a Berangkat should be paid to Government for re-division or whether the Government share of $11 should be paid to Government and the $22 settled among themselves. It is pointed out that it practically amounts to the fine being only $11 for Berangkat for although they promise to pay the two-thirds share to the injured party it is doubtful whether their payments are often paid in full.
Births and deaths are seldom if ever reported in this district and they were warned about this and it was pointed out that no hardship was attached to reporting and that anyone could do so whenever they went to the bazaar within a reasonable period provided the Tuai Rumah remembered to give instructions when they left and they get paid for their trouble.
It was also pointed out that their children in time to come would have trouble in obtaining applications for land, Occupation Tickets and gun licenses if they were unable to give their ages. This makes them think.
They are also very bad at passing tongkats. It was pointed out that those were to their advantage and to their own disadvantage if held up. The Penghulu was instructed, in front of the Tuai, that he was to punish anyone who held up a tongkat for more than one night.
On the 25th I left for headquarters at Sibu to interview the Resident and for His Highness the Rajah’s birthday. I returned to Kanowit again on the 30th.
Agriculture. -The Dyaks are very late with their farms and many of them have been unable to burn off owing to the constant rain. Many burns were also very poor. Only a very small percentage have finished their nugal which should have been completed more than a month ago.
KAPIT.
September, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports: -
Court. -Wong Sing Ho was fined $15 for assault and Chua Ah Moh was imprisoned for 3 months under Order No. XLVII, 1924, section (5). There were no other cases of any importance.
Dairy Farm. -The herd numbered 53 at the end of the month. A bull calf was born during the month.
Song. -Song was visited on the 23rd and 24th. The Ma1ays have felled a fairly large area of jungle across river from the Fort and propose to move their kampong over there in the near future.
Native Officer, Abang Sleh left for the Katibas on the 29th.
General. -I returned from Belaga on the 18th, Native Officer Awang Samsudin arrived from Belaga on the 21st to pay in Government monies and to obtain stores.
I left for Sibu on the 25th returning to the district on the 30th.
Native Affairs. -I met the Punan Busang at Long Kajang and the Punan Lusong at Lusong Laku. They asked that Dyaks might be kept out of their area. No further matters of importance were brought up.
The Kayans and allied tribes in the Belaga district took advantage of the short period of fine weather at the end of August to get good burns. When I left Belaga in the middle of September the Sakapans had planted their padi which had already grown about eighteen inches.
The Dyaks in many places have not yet planted up and some even have not yet burnt off their land.
It is noticeable, especially in the upper Rajang, that very large areas of land are being farmed this year which seems to indicate that the people are realizing that in the absence of any market for jungle produce their farms are of more importance than ever.
Twenty Ukits and seventy Pehengs came over from Mahakam towards the end of the month.
A reported clash between the Mujong Dyaks and the Pehengs was found on investigation to be only the result of some Dyaks, who had formerly taken Peheng heads, talking rather indiscreetly and their words being misinterpreted by others to mean more than they really did. The persons concerned have been severely reprimanded for starting unauthenticated rumours.
The removal of the witch doctor Nyipa Jan from the Belaga river has undoubtedly given great satisfaction as he had put great fear into the people living in that river and there was a likelihood of the Sabops moving to another river if he remained there. There are still large humbers of Dyaks who seem to think that Johore and Miri are still Eldorados and who are very skeptical when told that there is no work to be obtained there. Returning Dyaks are partly to blame for this.
Eight Dyak Penghulus came down during the month. Manok Manchai was formally appointed as Penghulu vice Jingga deceased.
Rainfall. -Rainfall for the month was 19.16 inches.
October, 1931.
Court. -Tedong T. K. was imprisoned for two months
for non-payment of fine.
Dan was fined $50 for “ngachau.”
There were no other cases of any importance.
Dairy Farm. -The herd numbered fifty-three at the end of the month. Work was started on the new wire fencing designed to protect the hill road from damage by the cattle.
Song. -Song was visited on the 6th, 26th and 27th. Lu Chi Choon from Kapit relieved Wee Tao Ping as Court Writer.
Four lots have now been taken up on the new kampong site across river but it is difficult to get the Malays to follow the proper boundaries laid down. They prefer to make their kampong in the same “slipshod” manner as of old and fail to make full use of the area at their disposal.
General. -The Acting Resident, Third Division, Mr. W. F. Dick accompanied by Mrs. Dick, Mrs. Pascoe and Miss Pascoe visited the station from the 9th to the 12th. A visited was made to Nanga Pelagus on the 11th.
Native Officer Wan Hussein was transferred to Oya and left on the 1st.
I paid a visit of inspection to the Kheh pepper gardens in the Sungei Bleti, these gardens are in fine condition and an excellent crop is expected in 1932. While waiting for the pepper vines to mature the planters are supporting themselves by market gardening on a small scale.
Surveyor Abang Bohan arrived on the 5th and commenced the survey of the rubber and pepper gardens around Kapit.
Clerk, Joseph Chin Siong arrived from Sibu on the 10th to take the place of Lu Chi Choon now at Song.
Messrs. G. H. Daly and Kempster of the Straits and Sarawak Steamship Companys together with Monseigneur E. Dunn and Rev. Father Klerk of the R.C. Mission visited the Station on the 27th.
The two latter remain in Kapit for the meantime.
Native Affairs. -Native Officer, Abang Abu Semen was at Fort Vyner, Nanga Gat from the 15th to 24th.
All Penghulus and tuai tuai rumah were informed of the proposed aum and regatta in Sibu in January.
Reports from various rivers show that, even now, there are still some Dyak communities which have not yet planted their padi and in a few cases have not yet even burnt off their farming land. On the other hand, reports from Belaga show that a bumper harvest is expected from that district.
Penghulu Temonggong Koh visited the Mujong, Batang Rejang. as far as Nanga Pila and Katibas during the month and is still in the Katibas the time of writing.
Most of the other Penghulus report having been round their districts during the month.
Native Officer, Awang Samsudin returned to Belaga on the 2nd and latter left for Tubau to meet the District Officer, Bintulu, Mr. A. Macpherson to try to come to some arrangement whereby the constant movement of Kayans between the Baloi and the Tubau-Tatau areas may be checked.
Rainfall. -The rainfall for the month was 7.94 inches.
The Belaga rainfall for September, was 9.61 inches.
MUKAH AND OYA.
September, 1931.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. E. M. Woodward, reports: -
General. -On the 1st instant the Resident, Mr. W. F. Dick, and the Divisional Electrical Engineer, Mr. H. C. Strong, left for Sibu by a s.l Chamois and on the following day Mr. Sumner of the Sarawak Oilfields Limited, returned to his camp near Kenyana.
On the 4th instant accompanied by the Divisional Land Officer, Mr. C. E. Pascoe, and Native Officer, Abang Suhaimi, I visited Oya returning to Mukah on the 7th instant. On the way over to Oya the roads and bridges between Mukah and Sungei Penat were inspected. The roads were found to be much overgrown and require clearing and the bridges are in need of minor repairs.
Other vision to the station during the month were the Divisional Treasurer, Mr. D. O. McGinn, who audited the Mukah and Balingian accounts and the Resident, Mr. W. F. Dick, who arrived on the 29th instant in connection with the visit of His Highness the Tuan Muda on the 1st October.
The anniversary of the birthday of His Highness the Rajah on the 26th instant was observed as a public holiday and the Government offices were closed on that day.
Court. -In connection with the murder of Kidar (Dyak) for which crime Langkau (Dyak) was sentenced to death last month under I.P.C. section 302. I ascertained that Langkau’s wife, Simah, who was largely responsible for the crime being committed in that she committed adultery with the accused is replied to be a woman of loose morals and has already been divorced twice previously from two former husbands. The Dyak themselves were of the opinion that she should be sentenced to imprisonment for being the cause of the murder. An attempt to obtain witnesses who saw the accused and Simah (f.) together on the day of the murder proved unsuccessful. Langkau’s sentence of death was however commuted to six years imprisonment under I.P.C. section 304 by the Supreme Court who on the evidence considered that the crime was culpable homicide not amounting to murder.
Lai Seng was sentenced to one year’s R.I. for house-breaking by night with attempt to commit theft under I.P.C. section 456.
Travelling and Dyaks, -From the 18th to the 25th instants I visited the ulu Mukah and Penipah districts using a beda boat with an 8 h.p. Johnson Outboard Motor most of the time, I proceeded up the Mukah river as far as Penghulu Umpoh’s house which is the last Dyak house in the ulu Mukah. All the Dyaks appeared to be quite contented though they complained about the trade depression which has affected them as well as everyone and about the continued high price of commodities such as salt, etc., which they purchase from upriver hawkers.
The Asoon trouble in the Kanowit district does not seem to have had a detrimental effect on the Dyaks of the Mukah district who all appear to be perfectly loyal to Government.
During my visit they were busy planting this year’s padi and I noticed that some quite good quality Dyak Tobacco was being cultivated by several houses because they say they cannot now afford to buy Siamese tobacco as formerly. The trade depression is therefore not without it’s beneficial effect on the Dyaks since it certainly tends to make him more self-supporting than formerly which in it's turn may also eventually tend to make him lead a more quite and less nomadic life.
As a point of interest, I also noticed during my visit upriver that Tua Rumah Sanggau in whose house the murder of Kidar occurred in August has at a result of the murder vacated his old house and built a new house some distance from the old one.
On the 30th instant the long outstanding Serupai Dyak boundary dispute was settled by the District Officer, Bintulu. and myself. This dispute arose some years ago as a result of quarrelling between certain Tataw and Balingian Dyaks over the ownership of some land, fruit trees, etc., situated in the vicinity of the Serupai boundary which was laid down as part of the boundary between the Tataw and Balingian district, in 1924. It has now been arranged that Tataw and Balingian Dyaks are in future forbidden to berimbau across the Serupai boundary but may farm their own temuda and retain ownership of their own fruit trees, etc., even though these may be situated on the other side of the boundary to which they are living.
Forests. -During the month the Divisional Forest Officer, Mr. B. J. C. Spurway, accompanied by Mrs. Spurway and child, visited the district primarily in connection with the S. Bawan and S. Sekai Forest Reserves.
On the 13th instant m.l. Rentis arrived from Kuching en route for Baram and continued her journey thither on the 15th.
During the month the new deep water channel at Mukah mouth was marked out with channel marks. From seaward the channel now run, approximately due South for a distance of about two hundred cards and then turns approximately Southeast for about 1/4 of a mile before entering the mouth of the river.
There is another deep water channel which from seaward runs due South for about 1/4 of a mile straight into the mouth of the Mukah river. This, however, is a narrow channel and has not been marked out with channel marks since it might be confused with the deeper channel already marked out.
It is possible however that owing to the continual changes in the location of the deep water channel on Mukah bar this unmarked channel may on inspection be found to be the deeper and better channel of the two in the near future in which care it will be properly marked out with channel marks and the present channel will be abandoned.
Balingian. -During the month Mr. Avery visited this station and inspected the Sungei Bawan Jelutong Reserve. It is believed that he was dissatisfied with the potential jelutong out-put of this reserve.
During the month the professional crocodile catchers, Karim bin Udin and Seman bin Mohamat, killed 34 crocodiles.
Trade: -
October, 1931.
General. -On the 1st instant His Highness the Tuan Muda visited the Station accompanied by the Resident, First Division. Mr. J. C. Swayne, and Messrs. Crocker and Holl. His Highness and party landed about 8 a.m. and shortly afterwards His Highness sat in Court and heard a few minor requests made by local Chinese, Melanoes and Dyaks. Subsequently His Highness visited the Roman Catholic Mission and Convent, the bazaar and the Chong Boon Chinese School. His Highness and party sailed for Limbang by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna at 5.30 p.m. the same day.
On the 2nd instant the Resident, Third Division, Mr. W. F. Dick, who came here in connection with the visit of His Highness the Tuan Muda, the Divisional Forest Officer, Mr. Spurway, accompanied by Mrs. Spurway and child, left for Dalat and Sibu.
On the 15th instant Dr. Braendlin of Messrs. The Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, visited the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, Camp near Kenyana and returned to Miri, accompanied by Mr. Summer, by s.s. Angby on the 20th instant.
From the 15th to the 17th, I was off duty suffering from Malaria.
Court. -Maro (f.) was sentenced to six months’ R.I. for illegally selling opium to a prisoner and for being in possession of opium without being a registered opium smoker under sections 1 and 5 of Opium Monopoly Order No. XLVII, 1924, and Sim Siew Kok, husband of Maro (f.), was sentenced to three months’ R.I. for abetment of the offence of illegally selling opium to a prisoner under section 1 of Opium Monopoly Order No. XLVI1, 1924.
Mat alias Tan Lai was sentenced to three months’ R.I. also for Monopoly Order No. XLVII, 1924.
Badang bin Apeh was sentenced to three months’ R.I. for housebreaking by night under I.P.C. section 456 and to one month’s R.I. for criminal intimidation under I.P.C. section 506, the sentences to run consecutively.
Maya bin Nyanggau was sentenced to three months imprisonment for non-payment of brian under Fasal No. 14 of the Malay Undang-Undang.
Nyalong bin Buso was sentenced to fourteen days imprisonment for theft of two sago palms under I.P.C. section 379.
Shipping. -At about 2 p.m. on the 7th instant the schooner “Soon Huang Ann” became stranded on Mukah bar in trying to enter the month of the Mukah river by the old channel on an ebb tide and by disregarding the new channel which was marked out with channel marks last month.
Balingian. -Lee was sentenced to three months’ imprisonment of brian under Fasal No. 14 of the Malay Undang Undang, and a number of Dyaks were fined for working jelutong without permits. During the month a number of sago gardens were demarcated by the Land Inspector, Taha, who is stationed at Balingian.
Trade: -
OYA AND DALAT.
September, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports: -
General. -Mr. W. F. Dick, Acting Resident, Third Division, arrived from Mukah on 1st with Mr. Strong, and left the following, day for Sibu. Mr. Dick later visited Dalat, arriving via Sungei Kut, in order to settle a Resident’s Court case that awaited hearing.
Court. -The only case of interest was one in which Buan a Dyak, and Ijo, his mother, were convicted in the Resident’s Court at Dalat of incest committed 13 years ago. Buan has been an outlaw for many years and though captured four times, he escaped on each occasion and was therefore never brought to trial. A charge of rape against Buan was dismissed, and charges of escaping from legal custody were not proceeded with.
Dyaks. -On 10th September I left for the Ulu Oya, returning on the 30th. In the course of this tour every house in the Batang Oya. Ulu Oya and tributaries was visited and all outstanding tax, fines or Government shares of fines were collected in cash, goods and pledges. Also, all outstanding cases were settled, and since there has been no penghulu in the Ulu Oya since June, there were many of these.
On 26th September all Tuai-Tuai were assembled at Rumah Palus and after consulting each Tuai personally, Untol was elected Penghulu in the place of Medan, who was dismissed in June. Following the announcement of Untol’s appointment the health of His Highness the Rajah was drunk, since the occasion was His Highness’ birthday, and soon celebrations were in full swing dancing and community singing concluded a delightful evening’s entertainment, which was much enjoyed by all present.
Police. -Three policemen were sent to Sibu for a course of training, but were recalled at the end of the month, as a result of the epidemic of house-breaking which broke out again at Dalat while I was upriver.
This continued house-breaking is becoming alarming, and the Dalat police have been strengthened in order to ensure sufficient bazaar guards. A reward for the capture of the burglar has been offered.
P.W.D. -Repairs to the bungalow at Dalat were completed during the month, and the grounds were drained. The old flagstaff, a solid batang of merbau wood, was taken down, cut into two lengths and made into a proper flagstaff, which was erected on the waterfront, where it can be properly seen.
In future all Government buildings, boats, etc., at Dalat are being painted a light man-of-war grey: the fumes of raw sago do not have a deletorous effect on this colour as they do on white paint, and the grey looks very smart.
Visitor. -Visitors to the station during September included Mr. and Mrs. Dick, Mr. Strong, Mr. and Mrs. Pascoe and Miss Pascoe, Mr. McGinn. Mr. and Mrs. Spurway and Master Spurway (en route for Mukah), and the Right Rev. Mgr. Dunn, who arrived at Dalat via the Kut, and proceeded from Oya to Kuching by motor schooner.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall recorded for the month was 8.43 inches.
Shipping. -Two motor schooners and four schooners entered and two motor schooners and four schooners cleared during the month.
Trade. -238 koyans raw sago, 219 piculs raw jelutong and 23 piculs para rubber were shipped to Kuching.
The trade returns for the month and for comparison with those of the same month last year is as follows: -
SARIKEI, BINATANG AND REJANG.
September, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports: -
Court. -In the Magistrate’s Court Civil claims amounted to $997.09. In the District Court Civil claims amounted to $1,381.38.
In the Magistrate’s Court Criminal, Agop (Dyak) was sentenced to 6 months’ imprisonment for theft under I.P.C. section 379 and Chiong Lai Hong (Foochow) and Dahlan (Milano) were each sentenced to 3 months’ imprisonment for theft also under I.P.C. section 379.
General. -On the 3rd, the Divisional Engineer, Mr. W. J. Whiteside visited Sarikei, during which time he checked up the New Bazaar Survey for the Town Planning Scheme, and returned to Sibu on the 5th instant.
On the 14th Land Officer, Mr. Parker and I visited the New Stubah Lots across the Sarikei river. The whole reserve is on a small scale at present, but if it works it is hoped to extend it. Some Dyaks complained that it interfered with their padi lands, but the Dyaks are few and there is plenty of land so no difficulties were encountered.
On the 17th the Resident and Mrs. Dick visited Sarikei and Binatang. On the 19th we proceeded to Rejang, from there we proceeded to Selalang, returning to Sarikei on the 21st.
There were rumours of further interference in the Ulu Binatang during the month, Abang Haji Mohamat T. K. Binatang proceeded upriver, and on his return he reported all was well, the Dyaks being busy farming, and that the rumours were false.
Penghuluu Nyambar and Umpor visited Sarikei on the 20th, they reported all was quiet in the Wak and Pakan districts.
P.W.D. -The 2 1/2 miles of road between Timbang Buah and the Bazaar had to be made up during the month as it was getting rather like a battlefield, also along the same stretch the bridges were replaced with concrete culverts numbering 12 in all. The prisoners were working on the road most of the month, gravelling and levelling between Timbang Buah and the Bazaar. A necessary cutting was made in the Peninjau road, as this road is very helpful in getting out the pepper from the ulu Jaka district.
Trade and Customs. -Pepper was still being shipped to Singapore in fairly large quantities each trip, the quality on the whole was fairly good.
The following are the returns for the month.
October, 1931.
In the Magistrate’s Criminal Court al Binatang, Wong Hee was fined $60 for breach of Education Order, 1924, teaching while not being registered.
There were no other criminal cases of mention during the month. Civil claims amounting to $1,796.28 passed through the Magistrate and District Courts at Sarikei Fees collected for the month amounted to $122.50.
In the Resident’s Court, Wong Foh and Wong Kim Sen vs. Kwong Joo Leong appeal case was heard, the Sarikei Court’s decision was reversed. Kwong Joo Leong has since appealed to the Supreme Court again.
In the Resident’s Court Binatang, a Land case-Ngelambong (Dyak) vs. Haji Kadir was heard, and adjourned, the case was completed at Sibu, when the decision of the Binatang Court was reversed.
Town Plan. -A new Town Plan has been made for Sarikei by the P.W.D., Sibu, which provides for everything and looks well ahead, this has provisionally been passed, and it is hoped that demarcating will start in the near future. It is proposed to do the same thing at Binatang.
Custom Sarikei. -The following are the returns for the month: -
Rejang Court. -There were no Court cases at Rejang which call for special mention.
General. -Having been told by the Rejang Malays that it was impossible for them to pay their Exemption Tax. I proceeded to Rejang in the P.W.D. Lighter “Big Bill,” to collect defaulters, which numbered some 50 odd, and bring them to Sarikei to work on roads. I arrived on 12th and by 12 o’clock on the 13th there was only one man who had not paid his tax, so I had to bring the lighter back with only one man.
On the 13th I visited Jerijeh and Belawai, some Chinese have asked to be allowed to build more shops at Belawai, their request was disallowed, as it is considered there are sufficient shops there already, for the amount of trade at present.
On the night of the 16th Rejang experienced a bad storm, which did much damage to boats. The water was under the Government bungalow. The road to the bazaar was washed away, also a Milano (Likau) was unearthed by the waves. The bones were reburied.
Mr. Noakes, Assistant Surveyor has been Surveying at Rejang throughout the month.
MATU AND DARO.
September, 1931.
The Officer-in Charge, Mr. F. L. G. Crossley, reports: -
Court. -Work was very light. An inquiry into allegations of fraud in connection with Government receipts against Haji Kassim, T.R. Sirik, was not concluded at the end of the month.
Public Works. -Prisoners were engaged on the up-keep of the roads and grounds, and on the levelling of the padang at Daro.
Travelling. -On the 1st I visited Paloh, staying one night. On the 21st I paid my usual visit to Daro. On the 26th I proceeded to Sibu for H.H. the Rajah’s birthday celebrations. I was still in Sibu at the end of the month, being retained for special duty in the ulu Pasai.
General. -Haji Yaman, Native Officer returned to Matu from duty in Sibu on the 18th, relieving Haji Gapor. The latter’s investigation into Native Court affairs had discovered everything to be in Order.
There has been some trouble in connection with the Matu pawn-farm, allegations of substituting other property for the pledge having beenn made against the farmer. The matter was settled out of Court, but the farmer was warned that in future he must write a full description of the pledge on the pawn ticket. It was also ordered that all transfer of pawn-tickets must be registered at the pawn-farm.
October, 1931.
General. -I returned to the Station on the 19th after doing special duty in the ulu Pasai, in connection with the affairs of Penghulu Sureng, as reported to the District Officer, Sibu. Court Writer Spencer Cheyne was replaced by Court Writer Wee Tao Ping on 15th.
Court. -The perennial case of Matnor vs. Dagang was up again, this time for revised costs, all appeals having failed. Ah Seng was fined $25 or three months for illicit opium smoking.
In the Bankruptcy Court, the assets of Chop Guan Ha Huat, Daro, were realized, and a first dividend of 30 cents declared. This bankruptcy was caused by failure of Chop Guan Seng Huat of Kuching. The amount realized is insufficient to meet the claims of even the local creditors in Daro. A first charge on the property was Government probate duty of over $300 due since 1929.
Travelling. -I visited Daro from the 26th October to the 1st November.
Land. -Land Inspector Lias arrived at Daro from Sibu on the 25th to mark out the allotments on the new Itol road. Some forty-acre plots were demarcated, and a little of the outstanding work was dealt with, Lias being still in Daro at the end of month.
Methodist Girl’s School, Sibu.
During the hours from 9 a.m. till 4. pm. 1,145 people visited Mrs. Hoover’s inhibition of work which was held in the main hall of the School, on Tuesday, 14th October last. We were welcomed on arrival by Mrs. Hoover and her girls and walked straight into a veritable bower of flowers-all made by hand.
The exhibition comprised examples of the girls work during the summer term-basketry, carried out in cane, bambo, ralha and crepe paper rope. Stenciling, chinese brush work, sealing wax painting and sealing wax beads, plain sewing and embroidery, crochet, plasticine and paper modelling. Table mats made of raffia, cane and raffia and crepe paper rope. Hand painted menu and name cards, passe-par-tout picture framing. Twenty different kinds of flowers. Paper cutting and folding for the little ones. The exhibits were most tastefully set out. each stall in charge of several girls, who were kept busy explaining the work and taking orders for fresh supplies.
The exhibition was largely attended by Malay ladies who were most interested in the flowers and stenciling. Their delightful sarongs of every hue lent colour to an already bright and animated gathering.
There are many aspects of the work all of which I deserve the most careful consideration. I should like to say a word about them all, but I will just I mention one. That is the care taken in instructing the girls in domestic duties and homecraft. This is a science which cannot be exhibited in one day, and Mrs. Hoover is warmly to be congratulated that due to her training, she has enabled her girls to build up so many good and comfortable homes.
Jottings from Sibu.
A month of floods as usual but nothing too high although it is rumoured one fair lady has been recommended for a life saving medal for saving one of our merchant princes from a watery grave.
A large gathering to meet the Sri Mukah on the 11th and welcome the Resident and his bride. Matey was on board and passed one night in Sibu but he was not allowed to sing for more than an hour or so but the last seen of him was somewhere in the forepart of the Gladys singing nautical chanties.
Tom Pascoe won the bowling handicap, perhaps fortune was kind as he is rumoured to be off to Kuching before the next one and only wanted one more to make a set of egg cups for the family.
Mrs. Hoover held another entertainment, her smallest children shewed us how schools should be conducted amongst other things. The boy scouts are coming, oh yes, oh yes.
I understand the preliminaries having been completed we shall soon see the familiar uniform in Sibu and I hope a lot of daily good turns which no doubt in return will mean free trips on the Angby or Sri Mukah and quick returns on the former at least.
The great attraction to all visitors here is that they learn to cycle again. One man who came over the other day had not been on one for twenty years and the first night had to cycle back about a mile to his host’s house in pitch darkness which he declared was a bigger thrill than boarding the Sri Mukah at Sarikei at low tide. Rickshaws are increasing. There are three motors here now-one goes-two more have gone once-and one auto-cycle will go sometimes (the Power Station one goes always so can’t be counted until it drives the island away as some say it is doing). Can you jump on your teeth?
THE JOTTER.
Fifth Division News.
LIMBANG.
October, 1931.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports for October, 1931, by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident: -
Court. -There were very few cases and none of any importance.
General. -On the 3rd His Highness the Tuan Muda accompanied by Messrs. J. C. Swayne, H. B. Crocker and E. S. Holl arrived from Kuching on a short visit. His Highness was welcomed by all the District who assembled especially to meet him, and personally interviewed all who wished see him. There were no matters of importance to discuss and His Highness and party returned on the 6th.
A party of Officers from H.M.S. Herald, anchored in Labuan came over on a short visit.
The Rev. S. W. Collier paid a visit from Jesselton and returned via Brunei.
I paid a visit to Brunei to discuss matters in connection with Inter-State Boundaries with the British Resident.
Two Crocodiles in all measuring 23.5 foot were captured by the professional catcher (Matyasin) and rewards duly paid.
P.W.D. -Prisoners averaging 16 were employed on maintenance and improvement of Roads which suffered through the continual weather which has been experienced.
A two ton Motor Roller Kindly supplied by the Public Works Department was safely landed ex-s.s. Auby and put into commission immediately.
The extension of the Limbang-Brunei Road is progressing very satisfactorily, and I was able to walk through the whole distance without experiencing any difficulty.
Medical and Health. -The Medical Officer of Brunei, Dr. Winchester paid his usual monthly visit and reported satisfactorily on the Hospital, etc.
The Dresser-in-Charge reported that there has been about twenty cases of chicken-pox. but the epidemic had cleared off.
Two patients were admitted into Hospital and two discharged, and fifty-eight out patients were treated.
The rainfall amounted to 11.41 inches.
Trade and Shipping: -
LAWAS.
October, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe, reports: -
Court. -There were no cases of particular importance during the month-Ha Guan was sentenced to a fine of $15 and goods confiscated for breach of Customs Regulations. At Trusan there were several cases of Muruts not paying their poll tax over periods extending to eight years, these were sentenced to various terms of imprisonment up to four months.
Prison. -Prisoners in the district for the month averaged 21.5 and were employed in the usual work of upkeep of the ornamental grounds.
P.W.D. -At the beginning of the month a mould for making concrete pipes was sent up from Limbang and is proving of great value for making culverts on the roads. The local contractor has made two more moulds of the same design and some 100 pipes are turned out during the month. The consignment of bilian from Bintulu is being used for bridges on the Trusan Road. Owing to no lorry being available transport is very slow, and with the use of a lorry expenses would be halved and work completed in half the present time.
A Merryweather Fire engine was sent over from Limbang and has given every satisfaction fire drill being carried out once a week.
A Hay-cutter was also received here but owing to the extremely wet weather and also the apparent unwillingness of the local buffalo to pull it, it has not proved a great success so far although up to the present it has hardly been given a fair trial.
General. -The substations were noted from the 19th to the 23rd, when all outstanding matters were settled and books checked. Owing to the changing course of the Trusan River at Sundar, trouble is being experienced by two kampongs over lack of water. Arrangements are being made to deal with the situation and necessitates the migration upriver of the kampongs in question.
Francis Lim, Divisional Treasury Clerk paid a visit to the district during the month and went into the methods of book-keeping on more modern lines than had been adopted hitherto.
Visitors during the month included Mr. Strike, from Lumadan Estate, who is returning home on sick leave, and Mr. Bullock, District Officer, Sipitang, the latter staying for the week end.
The Auby paid a visit to Tagai on the 14th.
Agriculture. -The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Limited, exported 26,574 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
Rainfall. -The following rainfall was recorded during the month.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
The One Shift Day.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
SIR,
I notice that there has appeared very little serious criticism of the letter on the One Shift Day by your correspondent Mr. H. Panas, which you published in the October issue of your paper.
Possibly the replies were too vituperative for publication?! However a simple solution of the whole problem has occurred to me, namely to advance the clock by two hours.
We should then start work at (what is now) 6.30 a.m. which would of course become 8.30 a.m.
We should return for a midday break at 10 a.m. and cease work for the day at 2 p.m. or so (present time) thus avoiding work during the hours (2-4 p.m.) of which your correspondent complains.
I am Sir, etc.,
SIMPLEX.
[With all due deference to our correspondent “Simplex,” his solution does not cover the more vital part of the proposed revision, namely that contained in the title accorded to this controversy, the One Shift Day. -Ed.]
KUCHING, SARAWAK,
26th November, 1931.
Intimation has been received from the Secretary for Postal Affairs, Straits Settlements and Federated Malay States that commencing with the mail to be closed at Penang on Friday the 27th instant for connection at Alor Star with the homeward bound aircraft of the Netherlands East Indies-Europe Dutch air service, air mail correspondence will be despatched in direct mails for the following places: -
Bangkok, Rangoon, Calcutta, Allahabad, Baghdad and Cairo as well as to Amsterdam and London.
2. The conditions governing the despatch of correspondence to Europe by the present services will apply generally to air mail correspondence for Siam, Burma, India, etc., which must reach Penang not later than Friday evening each week.
3. The air mail fees which are additional to the usual postal charges and the manner in which correspondence is to be superscribed for the various destinations is shewn hereunder: -
4. The aircraft leaving Alor Star on Saturdays is scheduled to reach: -
5. By the courtesy of the Straits Settlements and Federated Malay States Postal Authorities arrangements have been made to include correspondence from Sarawak in the mails in question.
6. Such correspondence will be forwarded from Sarawak as opportunity occurs in time to reach Penang as indicated above.
