VOL. LXI.
No. 936.
The Sarawak Gazette.
Price
KUCHING, Tuesday, September 1st, 1931.
20 CENTS.
The Sarawak Gazette.	TUESDAY, SEPTEMBER 1st, 1931.
Contents.
Births.
KIDD. -At Tanah Estates, Kanowit, on 19th August, to Mr. and Mrs. George D. Kidd, the gift of a daughter.
GIBSON. -On 25th August, to Capt. And Mrs. A. W. G. Gibson, a daughter.
Death.
REVD. MOTHER MARY. -On 24th August at St. Teresa’s Covent, Kuching, the Reverend Mother Mary, after a long illness.
Local and Personal.
August.
His Highness the Rajah left Kuching for Europe by the Vyner Brooke on the 10th of August.
Many Government Officials went on board to take leave of His Highness who left Singapore on the 12th by s.s. Antenor.
His Highness the Tuan Muda arrived in Kuching from Europe on Monday, August 17th by the Vyner Brooke.
Other passengers arriving at the same time were Mr. E. M. Selous, who has been studying the language in China for the last two years, and is appointed to the Secretariat for Chinese Affairs, Mr. McArthur and Mr. Roger Altman.
A very enjoyable meeting of the Turf Club was held on the 1st and 3rd of August and a large number of outstation visitors were in Kuching for this event. Among them were Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident, Fifth Division, Mrs. Kortright and Mr. J. R. Combe.
The Resident, Fourth Division. Mr. H. D. Aplin and Mrs. Aplin, Mr. and Mrs. F. H. Pollard and Mr. T. Corson came down from Miri and Baram.
A large party arrived from the Third Division, including the Acting Resident. Mr. W. F. Dick and Mrs. Dick, Mr. H. B. Crocker, Mr. E. V. Andreini, Mr. B. J. C. Spurway, Mr. E. O. Bruce and Mr. Strong.
The Second Division sent Messrs. Morse and Harnack and Messrs. Buck, Hill and Mace came from Bau, Sadong and Lundu respectively.
Mr. D. C. Hudden came from Simanggang for one night-we understand that Mr. Hudden has been granted special leave to proceed home for a short time.
His Highness the Rajah was “At Home” at Astana on August 1st. Nearly one hundred guests had the honour to be invited and dancing and cards were enjoyed very much by all those present.
Mr. J. C. Swayne, the Resident, First Division was “At Home” on the 7th. Many guests from outstations and from Kuching itself enjoyed an excellent evening, thanks to Mr. Swayne’s hospitality.
There were many other entertainments during the week including the club dance to the success of which Mr. W. Clark and his band contributed in no small measure.
Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident, Second Division, arrived in Kuching on the 11th en route for Europe on furlough.
Mr. E. O. Bruce, we understand, will act for Mr. Archer at Simanggang during the latter’s absence at home.
It is reported in the Straits Times that a certain gentleman has discovered a means of rejuvenating old rubber. Rubber is, indeed, an unlucky industry. Not content with the fall in demand and over-production of this commodity, learned chemists burn their fingers on the ruthless test-tube in the endeavour to apply thyroid treatment to the decayed product which supplies what small demand there is.
Sir, have you no rubber shares?
We regret that owing to inaccurate information being received a statement was made in this column last month that there was a case of smallpox in Bau jail.
Our attention has been drawn to the fact that this case was chicken-pox. Apologies are therefore tendered to the Medical authorities for this error.
Among new appointments of Native Officers are Datu Abang Hj. Moasili to be Datu Hakim, Kuching, and Abang Haji Zuhaili to be Native Officer, Samarahan.
Datu Haji Moasili comes from Limbang where his charm of manner made him the friend of everyone in that District, in which he served for 19 years.
It is now sixty-one years since the Sarawak Gazette was first published and in another column will be found an extract from the first number produced.
The Malayan Exhibition was opened at Kuala Lumpur on August 1st by H. E. the High Commissioner, Sir Cecil Clementi. His Excellency in his opening speech laid stress on the need for more crop cultivation from within as a remedy for and protection against trade depression.
Special reference was made to the pine-apple industry and its value as a catch crop with rubber.
This is of course a fruit for which Sarawak is famous in quality rather than quantity and there should be no reason why planting and even tinning of this popular commodity on a large and scientific scale should not be undertaken by those with sufficient capital.
We have received the first copy of a new journal entitled “Informations Mussul-manes” which purports to supply a long felt want of an independent organ of Moslem information.
It is divided into Bulletins of news from every country where Moslems live. It is entirely in French and whether the majority of Moslems read French (“Romanised” French at that) is a doubtful point. The only reference to Sarawak is an extract from the April issue of this Gazette, giving the amount of oil exported from Miri. Hardly a matter for Islamic excitement, but still we wish them success.
Fly fishing appears to be a sport which is receiving encouragement in Malaya and those interested in this pastime will be glad to hear that the Perak Administration Report states that it is hoped to stock the waters above the new Chenduroh Dam with game fish.
There are apparently excellent fish which will take a fly or spun bait already in the lake. Further details of experiments in this direction are reprinted in this number.
After one or two preliminary trials a humane killer was introduced into the pig slaughter house on the 11th August, and has proved successful. Surprisingly little opposition was given to its introduction, the action and effect of the pistol having been explained to the butchers previously.
The pistol fires a bolt, stunning the pig and thus allowing the veins to be opened with a minimum of pain and loss of time. The operation takes about two minutes. To those who have witnessed the previous method of killing with its long drawn-out struggle between man and beast lasting on an average 15 minutes, the new method will be welcome if only from a humane point of view. But its advantages are more than that, the meat being more tender and better drained than previously.
We congratulate Messrs. Sochon, Baron and T. M. Griffiths on winning the unlimited cash sweep.
One of these three favourites of fortune is reported to have startled the other two by saying he had heard the money was not to be paid out!
Rest easy, Croesus, the Labour Government cannot penetrate here.
Talking of Labour Governments reminds us of a story told in England concerning a prominent Socialist Minister. This gentleman was visiting an asylum and was talking to one of the inmates. Apparently, the man was not paying sufficient respect to the high official who remarked “I suppose you know to whom you are talking, my man-you are addressing Mr. McRed, the Minister for Mobs” “Oh,” said the lunatic “you can’t get away with that ‘ere-I was Napoleon when I came in and I’m nout now.”
The Rt. Rev. E. D. L. Danson Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak and Mrs. Danson left Kuching on August 20th for Europe, to take up a new appointment as Assistant Bishop in the Diocese of Carlisle. The Bishop has worked in this diocese for fourteen years and will be missed by his many friends. We wish him and Mrs. Danson the best of good fortune in their new surroundings.
Major W. C. Adams Commandant of the B.N.B. Police arrived by the Marudu on the 15th August and Mr. H. G. Keith, Conservator of Forests, B.N.B., by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 19th.
We extend to them a hearty welcome to Kuching.
Mr. J. O. Gilbert arrived from local leave at Frasers Hill by the Marudu on the 24th August.
The latest Scots story, a true one, is contained in the annual report of a certain London club.
The chairman stated that if the provisions of the Bill for Taxing Site Values goes through, several London clubs would be saddled with very grave financial burdens. He therefore wrote to the chairmen of these clubs asking them to support a request for an amendment exempting clubs from the tax. They all agreed with the exception of the Caledonian club, who wished to know if there would be any charge in connection with the amendment!
A recent wireless message states that Mr. Ramsay MacDonald has tendered his resignation to H.M. the King, who has asked him to form a new National Administration.
It is reported that Mr. MacDonald is in conference with Mr. Baldwin and Sir Herbert Samuel who are co-operating with him in the formation of the new government which proposes to deal with the present financial emergency in England.
We congratulate Capt. and Mrs. Gibson on the birth of a daughter at the General Hospital on August 25th and Mr. and Mrs. G D. Kidd on the birth of a daughter at Kanowit.
This is the first European child to be born above Sibu.
Departure of His Highness the Rajah.
His Highness the Rajah left Kuching on 10th August, for Europe on the Vyner Brooke.
The Resident, First Division, Mr. J. C. Swayne and Treasurer of Sarawak. Mr. A. A. Rennie together with other Heads of Departments went on board to take leave of His Highness.
We understand that His Highness the Rajah sailed from Singapore on the 12th by the s.s. Antenor.
On behalf of all readers, we wish His Highness a safe passage and a speedy return.
Arrival of His Highness the Tuan Muda.
His Highness the Tuan Muda arrived in Kuching by the Vyner Brooke at 5.30 p.m. on the 17th August, a Royal salute of 21 guns was fired as the ship passed the Fort.
His Highness was met on board by the Resident, First Division, Mr. J. C. Swayne and the Treasurer of Sarawak, Mr. A. A. Rennie and was then paddled to the Astana Pangkalan.
Here the members of the Committee of Administration were waiting to welcome His Highness, who then proceeded up the steps to the Astana in front of which a Guard of Honour of the Sarawak Rangers, under the command of Lt. Murray Scott, were drawn up. His Highness the Tuan Muda inspected the guard and then entered the Astana where Government Officers and leading members of the Malay and Chinese Communities were assembled. Mr. J. C. Swayne welcomed His Highness back to Sarawak and proposed the toast of His Highness’ Health which was drunk by all present.
His Highness appeared to be enjoying excellent health and we feel sure that all our renders will combine in wishing him a long stay among us.
Obituary.
It is with great sorrow we announce the death of Revd. Mother Mary, which occurred on the 24th instant at St Teresa’s Convent, Kuching, after a long period of ill health.
Mother Mary a convert to the Catholic Church, spent forty-six years of her life in Borneo, forty of which she spent in the Kanowit Mission among the Dyaks. She lived an unnoticed, hard, self-sacrificing life, never happier than when among the poor old women consoling them in their many troubles and helping them in their sickness. She perhaps felt her end was not far off and in June asked to come to Kuching, perhaps to die.
Her life was an example to all her Sisters and after receiving all the rites of Holy Church died a most peaceful death surrounded by all the Sisters, R.l.P.
Mother Helen and the Sisters offer their heartfelt thanks to all friends for their sincere condolence in their bereavement and kind attendance at the Requiem Mass on the 25th.
A CONTRIBUTOR.
Abuses of the Credit System in Trade.
In a period of acute trade depression such as we are passing through at the present time, the weak points in the system under which the trade of a country is carried on stand out in much bolder relief.
There are many weak points in the credit system which we venture to think could be remedied without great inconvenience and to the advantage of many.
The method of trading on credit customary in the East is, by a special set of circumstances, the only method which can be employed.
Trading on credit is of course carried on in European and other countries where commerce is on a much larger scale than it is here. In these countries and states, if goods are purchased, credit for payment up to a reasonable time is allowed provided the buyer is known to be in a position to make the payment at the time.
But if an unknown man enters a shop or commercial house of any kind and purchases goods, cash on the nail is usually demanded and with good reason, unless the purchaser can produce sufficiently good security.
But the Chinese trader is more generous and less particular.
He will allow almost anyone to walk into his shop and order goods up to unlimited amounts, on credit, and with no references whatsoever.
A case in point is that of a certain trader in this country who took out Judgment summonses regularly once a month against several Malay villagers for sums due to him varying from one to four hundred dollars. He waxed indignant because the Court refused to commit the debtors to prison but ordered them to pay small sums per month within their paltry means.
In England, for instance, any firm would require references even from the well-to-do. before allowing credit to such an extent.
But the local shopkeeper will not do this. He allows the poorest of the poor to get himself really into a financial mess and then he swoops down on him with a summons.
To put the blame on the Native for his lack of thrift is begging the question. Everyone knows that the average poor class of native is notorious for his extravagance and lack of perspective in such matters. The shopkeepers know it and trade upon it, and when they consider the time is ripe they come along to the Courts and expect them to do their debt collecting for them and wring the last ounce from some unfortunate pauper.
In our opinion such procedure is little short of blackmail; there is really not much difference between the trader who allows this over extended credit to paupers, and a man who puts a marked ten dollar note in another man’s pocket and then sues him for theft of it.
The moral stigma of the debtor being labeled “thief” is all that is missing to make a perfect corollary.
Actually, the trader himself loses by this system, as naturally unless it can be proved that the man is. or was, able to pay at the time of the transaction, very few Magistrates, we think, would commit the debtor to prison; unless of course he deliberately represented himself as a wealthy man, and went out of his way to obtain the credit. This does not happen very often.
You may retort-that is all very well-but in this country any man can get down to it and fish or cut firewood to repay his debt. True, he can within reason but the argument is that if the trader allowed credit only to such an extent as would allow the debtor to work for a few days to repay the debt, all would be well. But they will not do this. Most of the trading Chinese are at the moment very hard up for cash, the result is that sheaves of summonses and Judgment summonses are served on all and sundry. In many cases the defendants are coolies or the poorer natives, some with work on small wages, some with none at all-many of them appear on Judgment summonses for the fourth or fifth time. They have possibly paid all they can afford-what remedy can the Court give the creditor? Put the debtor in jail? Why should it? Surely it is much more reasonable to say to the creditor. “This amount is more than your debtor can be expected to pay in a reasonable time. Can you prove that when you allowed credit, this man was able to pay this sum within a reasonable time? No? Then you have no remedy in this Court.”
Government servants on small pay are protected against extended credit of over $5-why should not this protection be extended to all small wage earners, allowing recovery of debt only up to say one month’s wages?
Such procedure on all occasions would surely put an end to this abuse and eventually would simplify or possible help to abolish altogether the expensive and time wasting mechanism of the Court Deposit system.
Sarawak Association.
His Highness the Tuan Muda of Sarawak was in the chair at the annual dinner of the Sarawak Association, which was held at the Trocadero, London. The following were also present:
Sir Gilbert Grindle, Sir Laurence Guillemard, Mr. C. D. Adams, Mr. R. Y. Ames, Dr. Gilbert E. Brooke, Mr. R. D. Binnie, Mr. F. F. Boult, Mr. T. Stirling Boyd, Mr. Herbert La Chard, Prof. W. E. Le Gros Clark, Capt. W. T. Clark, Mr. D. B. Crane.
Sir Percy Cunynghame, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, Capt. C. W. Daubeny, Mr. H. R. A. Day, Mr. R. S. Douglas, Mr. David Evans, Mr. P. H. Flood-Page, Dr. C. O. Gauge, Mr. Ernest Hose, Lt.-Comdr. A. M. Hughes, Mr. C. Willes Johnson, Mr. H. Wyndham Jones, Dr. W. Kusel.
Capt. A. S. Lowe, Mr. Chas, MacAlpine, Mr. Sydney Malkkin, Mr. S. R. Maw, Mr. J. P. Mead, Mr. H. L. Own, Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner, Mr. R. Pawie, Major F. W. Richards, Eugr. Lt.-Comdr. L. R. Rickinson, Major H. W. V. Scott, Mr. J. A. Smith, Mr. W. H. Smith, Mr. P. J. Stewart, Mr. Kenneth Thorburn, Mr. G. J. D. Walters and Mr. A. B. Ward.
SARAWAK ASSOCIATION OF SINGAPORE.
At the annual general meeting of the Sarawak Association, Singapore, held on the 16th August, 1931, the following gentlemen were elected officer-bearer for the ensuing year: -President, Mr. Wee Kheng Watt; Vice-Presidents. Messrs. Kho Kim Luh and Phang Chiap Song; Hon. Secretary, Mr. Song Lian Siong; Hon. Asst Secretary, Mr. J. S. Chong; Hon. Treasurer, Mr. Kho Thye Jin; Hon. Auditor, Mr. Michael Tai; Hon. Sports Superintendent, Mr. Tommy Tan; Hon. Asst. Sports Superintendent, Mr. Vonn Thiam Joon; Committee, Messrs. Matthew Lim, Charles William, Voon Shak Leong and Yeo Joon Fatt; Employment Committee, Messrs. Kho Ten Shaw and Tan Thian Sang.
Departure of the Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak.
After twenty years in Malaya, -fourteen of which have been spent as Bishop in Borneo, -the Rt. Rev. E. D. L. Danson, D.D., sailed for England on 20th August. His resignation as Bishop of the Diocese takes effect on 30th September and in October he will take up fresh work as Assistant Bishop in the Diocese of Carlisle. The Bishop’s departure is a distinct loss to Sarawak and to parts of Borneo beyond it where his work has lain. His gift of quick and ready friendship, his limitless fund of jolly stories and his true sympathy when sorrow takes the place of laughter have made for him a host of friends far beyond the limits of his ecclesiastical jurisdiction. With a well-chosen and devoted staff he has carefully organised and shepherded the Mission’s increase so that in the fourteen years he has opened nine new churches and enlarged four. Ten new schools have been started and seven schools enlarged. It is unfortunate that the new building for St. Mary’s School could not be built before the Bishop left but hard times are responsible for the delay In the course of 245 confirmations within the Diocese he has confirmed 3,171 candidates. Bishop Danson has ordained twelve priests in the Diocese, -seven Chinese, four Dyak and one Indian, -whose work is done almost entirely through the medium of Asiatic languages. In accordance with the Catholic principle of building up a native ministry the policy of the Diocese has been to encourage promising sons of Christian families to find a vocation in the Priesthood. When posterity views the work of a missionary Bishop it will be a satisfactory answer to the question. What did he do to encourage the people to stand alone? That will be his best testimonial. The Bishops aim has been unswervingly in that direction, and before leaving he paid a high tribute to the devotion of the people amongst whom his chief work has lain.
A round of farewells marked the last few weeks of the Bishop’s and Mrs. Danson’s stay in Sarawak: Most of the farewells were of an informal nature so that in order to say “Goodbye” to as many as possible in one place the Bishop and Mrs. Danson were “At Home” on 10th August when nearly 200 people assembled in the garden of Bishop’s House. It was there that a handsome presentation was made to the host and hostess so that when they reach England they may purchase with the money something which will be useful to them in the Old Country. Two speeches were made, -the first by Mr. Tan Sum Guan who in a capital manner voiced the appreciation of the general public towards the Bishop’s personality and good work, together with the appropriate good wishes. Mr. Tan Sum Guan made a special point in emphasising the value of the Mission’s providing sound schools to which parents may send their children have them well educated. Mr. Tan Sum Guan contrasted the former expensive and anxious alternative of having to send boys and girls to Singapore schools and he assured the Bishop that inasmuch as his fostering care had been over all this development the parents concerned were extremely grateful.
The Rev. Father Proctor also spoke, more particularly in praise of the steady progress which has attended the Mission’s evangelistic work during the Bishop’s tenure of office. As a true Father-in-God he loved all his people so that they worked together with enthusiasm for the greater honour of Our Lord Jesus Christ.
Mr. Kuek Choo Seng, in the name of the many subscribers, then made the presentation which was received by Mrs. Danson.
The Bishop, on behalf of Mrs. Danson and himself, thanked everybody for their kindness and the speakers for what they had said. He modestly disclaimed any special virtues and declared that all success had been due, under the blessing of God, to his staff throughout the length and breadth of the Diocese. He was leaving Sarawak not to “retire” but to be very busy indeed as Assistant Bishop of Carlisle. Twenty years in the East had left him hopelessly in love with these lands and the people but his superiors had wanted him to return to the Homeland and so the matter of a decision about leaving them had been taken out of his hands. With his close knowledge of Borneo conditions and his affection for the people he would have many opportunities of stirring up interest in England which later on, he hoped, would benefit the cause for which the Mission existed. His successor had not yet been announced but His Grace the Archbishop of Canterbury would in due course send a Bishop to this Diocese and he hoped that the same support and co-operation would be given to the newcomer as had been given to him.
A delightful garden party made all the happier by two amusing and well-acted sketches performed by the girls of St. Mary’s School under the direction of Miss Andrews St. Mary’s School and the girls’ schools generally throughout the Diocese, as well as the lady teachers, are under an enormous debt of gratitude to Mrs. Danson for the interest and great help she has always given them.
The Old Boys of St Thomas’s made their formal farewell at a Chinese dinner given at Mr. Tan Sum Guan’s residence, The Terrace. A fusillade of crackers greeted the arrival of the Bishop and Mrs. Danson and, before entering the house, they were garlanded, (as a mark of respect from the Indian members of the party). Mr. Chin Shin Sen and his string band provided music and Mr. E. Tiang Lok showed several reels on his portable cinema. No detail was spared to make the dinner what it certainly was, a complete success. After the loyal toast of “His Highness the Rajah” some speeches were made expressing regret at losing from Kuching such good friends as the guests and assuring them that they, personally, and their good work would always be remembered gratefully by the Old Boys of St. Thomas’s.
On his last Sunday in Kuching Bishop Danson celebrated High Mass in the Cathedral and gave his blessing to the people.
New Bishop of Labuan.
NOTABLE RECORD IN THE WAR.
London, Aug. 20.
It is officially announced from Lambeth Palace that the Archbishop of Canterbury has nominated the Rev. Noel Baring Hudson, vicar of St. John’s, Newcastle-on-Tyne, to the Bishopric of Labuan and Sarawak in succession to Bishop Danson, who is resigning on Sept 30.
Mr. Hudson has been in Newcastle since 1926. Previously he was vicar of Christ Church, Leeds, when he played Rugby for Headingly and Yorkshire.
He graduated from Christ’s College, Cambridge, in 1915. During the War he commanded the 8th Royal Berkshire Regt, and won the D.S.O. and the M.C. He was ordained in 1920.
Mr. Hudson is a son of the former vicar of Wendover and a brother of Countess March.
Bishop Danson has been Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak since 1917. He was Cathedral Chaplain, Singapore, 1911-12, acting Chaplain, Java, 1913-14, and Chaplain of Negri Sembilan, 1914-17. -Straits Times.
FAREWELL DINNER TO THE VERY REVEREND FATHER HAIDEGGER.
On Saturday. 1st August, the old school-boys and members of St. Michael’s Club gave a farewell dinner to Very Reverend Father Haidegger.
These was an animated spirit amongst the 104 persons that sat down in the club, which had been decorated better than ever before!
Father Haidegger only came in after dinner, when an address was read by Mr. Boon Siew. Mgr. Dunn then spoke wishing his old friend-they have known each other since 1877-a pleasant stay in Labuan and he hoped that Father Haidegger might soon come back to his old Mission which he has served so well.
Then the old Father rose amid loud cheers and hand clapping, resting on the table he humorously excused himself for not attending the dinner. Compared to Ancestor Adam and Admiral Noah he, though 76 years, was still a young man. He did not want praise, as he only has done his duty. The only thing he asked for was a little prayer when they should hear of his death. Admonishing his boys to do their duty always, to God and man, he might perhaps meet them again in Kuching, certainly in the valley of Josaphat and let us hope, in our Heavenly home.
Mr. Sam Guan spoke on behalf of new members of the congregation who had known Father Haidegger as a man always and ever ready to help, irrespective of religion.
The rest of the evening passed all too quickly with music and song. -Contributed.
Hot Air in the Hinterland.
The recent expedition to the Entabai and Julau tributaries of the Rejang was fraught with very little excitement, nevertheless it is proposed to give here a very brief synopsis of what occurred, or to be more accurate of what did not occur.
The word “expedition” has a war-like smack about it, but it is difficult to imagine anything more peaceful than this affair which was really nothing more than an escape of Dyak gas.
There are some people who cannot live without a grievance; they emanate chiefly from Southern Ireland, Russia and the Labour back benches. Asun Nuri and various other Dyak tuai appear to be such men as these.
Whether or no they had a legitimate grouse is beside the point. In actual fact their main demand seems to have been that old customs should continue and this probably meant that they wished to evade payment of some form of lux, (it is reported that quit rent ou rubber gardens was the theme of their hymn of hate). These men were however invited, not once but several limes, to attend a Parley, in other words to come forward and discuss in an amicable way any matter that lay heavy on their frenzied minds.
Asun for some obscure reason, flatly refused to do so, saying that he would be executed if he came down to meet the Government.
As there were obviously no grounds for this assertion, the only explanation is that he hoped by means of this statement to adorn himself with a halo of pseudo-martyrdom and thus collect round himself any other hot heads in the offing and have a bit of fun. He successfully did this and announced in Napoleanic fashion that he would attack either Binatang, Sarikei or Kanowit, thus hoping presumably to baffle the Government with a sort of super three card trick.
His brother then threw out a bluff in the shape of a three pronged “Srampang” which he sent to the European Officer at Binatang, as a threat.
The officer found the weapon very useful in cooking his toast, but no attack on Binatang or anywhere else was carried into effect.
The Government had by that time started a campaign of peacefully collecting all guns in the affected areas.
The Julau Dyaks oozed loyalty and were unable to produce anything very substantial in the shape of a grievance.
They stated that if the Government went up the Entabai to collect Asun and his guns there would certainly be spirited resistance and possibly bloodshed; they therefore offered to go themselves and persuade the hot headed Asun to come down.
The Government accepted their offer as up to that time there had not been a shot fired. (There was, in fact, no bloodshed and no firing during the whole affair).
It appears therefore that no one except Asun and a few others had any grievance and this man intimidated the whole of this area into an hostile attitude.
The only excitement experienced by the Government detachments was the rising of the water, (not soda water!) in the Julau by 36 feet in 24 hours.
A wireless transmitter was taken up and an aerial erected at Nanga Julau, from a flagstaff to a tree across river, using the river below as an earth.
The Resident took great pleasure in pointing out this arrangement to the Dyaks but it was beyond their comprehension to understand why the river should be necessary for wireless in this case. A short wave receiver and loud speaker were taken as an experiment in jungle reception and although the dry batteries suffered from an over dose of rain, Chinese music on the headphones was heard quite well.
The Dyaks alone were intrigued by these noises and several of them put on the headphones in turn. One bright lad referred to the outfit as “itu gramophone” but was sternly rebuked by another of his tribe, complete with “chawat” “itu bukan gramophone, itu wireless.”
It is a pity that Asun himself did not attend this musical tea party as the sweet strains of some Chinese lullaby would certainly have soothed his fevered brow.
Things it would be Rude to Ask.
What was the centre of attraction round the refreshment tent at the races?
Possibly one of the ladies failed to “weigh in” correctly.
At a certain party in race-week, a division was taken in the Gin Lobby and several guests were found to respond to the labour whip.
How was it the host omitted to give notice of the division beforehand?
The answer is that the said host narrowly missed joining them by a hastily won tie in the first round.
Who is the cruel mother who feeds her che-ild on chilies and beats her baby with a beebat?
And why is this infant looking like a bunch of roses on a snowball instead of an advertisement for Stephens’ famous ink?
Who was it that thought that the Sarawak Railway took passengers to the top of Matang and that it started from the General Hospital?
C’est magnifique mais ce n’est pas la gare.
Whose brief (or drink) was Bxxxs holding when he was called to the bar, after the races? And why did he fall, jump, leap, crash or gravitate off it? Was he demonstrating the “indicthability” of the new Austin 7 in spite of the owner losing his equatorial?
Who was the amateur gardener who grew so many cauliflowers that they overcrowded and died before anyone could see them?
Why did not this gentleman buy cauliflowers, cold storage, and plant them in his patch cabbage patch of course)?
He could alternatively have evaded the point by saying they could be seen growing on Pitt’s Hard Acre (Padungan)-no one goes down there during race week.
What was the Trophy displayed in Dxxkk’s Henry Heath Hatting at the races?
Was it Assoon’s brush?
And where, incidentally did the said Assoon get the rockets he is said to have locsed off in the late war?
Perhaps he was on the Committee of the Sibu Regatta Fund last year.
Is it true that Axxxxxxi has a Theory that they were found in a buried Portuguese coast-guard station at Nanga Julau?
What did Hxxxxxxxn say when he received a copy of “Woman and Home”?
Who was the punter who mistook Sxxxxxy for Robin Goodfellow’s younger brother and why should not a lame burse win a race?
Who has to buy ice io keep his refrigerator cool?
Does Mrs. Kxxxy like egg marmalade? Is this preserve the recognized antidote to the “Police whistle” cocktail?
What happens to a woman who wears woolen stockings? As this is a purely impersonal question it is not rude to answer.
“Nothing.”
What’s in a Name?
When one happens to enter into occupation of a house it either has a name or no name or perhaps merely a number. As the name of a house is liable to reflect upon the personality, habits or peculiarities of the tenant, it behaves the latter to pause and consider before allowing himself to be dubbed as “The bloke that lives in Windy Hollows” or some such target for misplaced wit.
Similarly, no self-respecting human being can be expected to remain in, “Mon Repos,” “Cheznous,” “Catsmeet” “The Cache” “Pons Asinorum” or “Prenez Gard.”
It is equally impossible to have one’s house called Lot No. 6 or even merely “No. 6” for this reveals the owner to be in the first case, bankrupt or in the second case a bolshevik or a robot with no imagination (which is much the same thing).
Supposing therefore that we have to give our home a name, it is necessary to consider the suit-ability of the proposed caption to various requirements.
There are different methods of choosing the name. The easiest is to fix the eye upon the surrounding country or neighbourhood until it alights, with horror or with joy, upon some prominent feature in the vicinity. For instance in an industrial town the object which in all probability would hold the gaze of the householder would be a large and smelly factory chimney.
He would then label his front gate “Smokestack Shack” and Gracie Fields would probably sing a song about it, thus elevating him to public prominence.
This title would also ensure the impossibility of his being able to give his correct name and address to the police if had up as a drunk and disorderly. Again, if the proposed domicile is in a country district one would very likely notices a river or lake nearby consequently pick on “Waterways.” if one happened to be afflicted with chronic dribble or if one’s name chanced to be something hydrocephalous such as Damper-Wetmore.
In fact any name which will supply a butt for the wit of idle persons must be thoughtfully avoided.
Many people like to give their homes a name reminiscent of some district where they have lived happily before.
In choosing names taken from outlandish parts such as the Highlands, Wales or Cornwall it is well to avoid a similarity to some patent medicine or antiseptic gargle mixture.
Therefore, do not attempt anything similar to Pertarion, Llywnygolios, or Ochterknocklochlin otherwise some rude fellow will ask whether you sell it in one-and-nine or three-and-six penny bottles.
If you continually return late from the club or see pink peacocks on your office desk, do not live in “Swallow Grange” “Corkskrew Cottage,” “The Junipers” or Hickory House -you will regret it. And if you have a harelip reject such titles as “Thislethwaite.” Froglingthorpe, or Oswaldtwistle.
No one living in this country however should have any difficulty in performing this simple set of domestic duty, for there are many and beautiful words and phrases in the vernacular ready to hand.
In order to assist the desperate householder who has perhaps occupied a nameless abode to his shame and horror for a day or two, a few suggestions are given below, beautiful Malay names that will lend a touch of oriental splendour to the mansion of one’s choice.
Perhaps it is better, after all to allow, oneself the best of three shots with the eyes shut at an open page of Mr. Nuttali’s Dictionary.
One may be lucky and find the perfect name for the Ancestral Pile.
Our Jungle Wealth.
It is not too much to ask the most confirmed adherents of town and suburban life among our reader to consider once a year what scientific forestry is doing in the jungles through which they drive in their occasional excursions into rural or primitive Malaya. Only 16.1 per cent of the 27,500 square miles which make up the Federated Malay States have been alienated in other words, with all the planting, mining and urban development that has taken place in these States 58.4 per cent of their total area is still owned by the States and 25.6 per cent is made up of reserved forests which are not being exploited at present. When it is remembered that a great part of the State land is under forest (and is now being worked commercially), the present and potential importance of these vast areas which are in the care of the Forest Department will be appreciated. The essence of the matter is contained in the statement made by the High Commissioner at the budget meeting of the Federal Council nearly a year ago that “Government is satisfied that its policy in maintaining an adequate proportion of land under forest and providing for the treatment of such forest to secure a permanent and increasing yield, will be abundantly justified in the not very distant future, when the effects of the wholesale destruction of forest, which is going on in so many countries, becomes apparent in a world scarcity of timber.” We may be thankful that in Malaya the exploitation and preservation of our forests are being carefully controlled and studied, and it is by no means impossible that the day will come when Malaya will be a timber-exporting country. All that the ordinary man in Singapore knows about forest activities in the ulu is that regular supplies of firewood mysteriously arrive from unknown places and keep his kitchen stove in action. But all architects and contractors know that there are excellent hard woods in Malayan forests, and that if the constitution of those forests can be so changed as to include a much larger number of valuable species to the acre a great addition to the natural wealth of Malaya will have been made. But a change such as is visualised above can only be made on a strictly scientific basis, and a brief account of the work which is being done to collect the necessary information appeared on this page recently.
Perhaps the most important new material which appears in the annual report of Mr. J. P. Mead, the Director of Forestry, is that which relates to the timber extraction and saw-milling scheme which his department started at Palong, in Negri Sembilan. and abandoned some months ago. Much was hoped of this scheme, which was intended to apply the high-efficiency and big-scale methods in use in the forests of North America and the Philippines to the jungles of this country. A sawmill was erected, light railways were laid down, Canadian foremen imported, and a considerable amount of money spent, but the conclusion has been that the old ways of extracting and preparing timber must be retained for the present. “After exhaustive consideration.” Mr. Mead writes “it was decided, in view of the heavy expenditure involved, the difficulties anticipated in regenerating forest subjected to mechanical logging uncertainty with, regard to the disposal of the output, and the probability that the scheme, if proceeded with, would have adverse repercussions on the local timber industry, to recommend to the Government that it should be abandoned, and this recommendation was accepted. The second of the considerations enumerated above is really the most important. Unlike other tropical countries with vast areas of country under forest and likely to remain very sparsely populated for a long time to come, Malaya must consider the prospective requirements of her inhabitants, and cannot afford to exploit forest to destruction on any considerable scale. Artificial restocking of logged over forest in Malayan conditions is not likely to be a practical proposition for a long time to come owing
to its high cost and uncertain results, and the prospects of reconciling the economic requirements of mechanical extraction with a silvicultural technique that will be successful in substituting self-sown crops of young growth in place of mature limber removed seem at present remote. That there is much scope for improvement in the methods of extraction and conversion at present employed by local enterprise is, however, fully recognised, and the department has secured the services of a forest engineer with wide experience in the tropics to study these methods and advise as to means whereby such improvement can be effected consistently with the established policy of forest conservation.”
Modern forestry is a highly technical and departmentalized profession, and the layman cannot be expected to devote much attention to the methods which are being used to increase the ratio of valuable species in the Malayan jungles so long as he knows that that is the policy adopted. The importance of this work is increased, as Mr. Mead states, by the fact that the State land forests in Perak. Selangor and Negri Sembilan are nearing exhaustion, and it will be necessary in the near future either to import timber or to open the reserved forests to the exploitation of timber. The new research institute at Kepong, Selangor, is now in full activity and the botanical, chemical, economic, silvicultural, timber-testing, zoolo-gical, educational and general work which is being done there will go far to enable the present generation in Malaya to bestow upon their grateful successors the legacy of unimpaired and improved forests for commercial exploitation. -Straits Times, July 24.
[The above article is reproduced from the Straits Times in the hope that it will be of interest in this country where Forestry is a productive industry. Mr. J. P. Mead, whose views are expressed above will be remembered by many people in Sarawak. -Ed.]
Possibilities of Pineapples and Palm Oil.
“For a good many years pineapples, grown entirely as a catch crop with rubber, have been tinned in the factories in Singapore and Johore for export. The average value of these exports during the past three years has been approximately one million pounds sterling a year.
“A market, little affected at present by competition from other countries, has been established in Great Britain which takes about 70 per cent of the Malayan output.
“In this market Malaya provides about 84 per cent of the total imports of tinned pineapples. The Malayan fruit is also becoming known, not only on the Continent of Europe, but also in Canada and other countries. An agricultural development deserving of encouragement is, therefore the establishment of pineapples as a distinct crop by making full use of improved methods of grading, packing and marketing and by utilising all by-products, as it is done in Hawaii.
“The last seven or eight years have witnessed the growth of one new industry in Malaya in the shape of oil palm cultivation.
“This new crop, in common with the older established coconut, is suffering from the rapid increase since the war in the production of both vegetable and whale oils and from the universal trade depression; but it is not too much to expect that the market for both crops will in time recover and yield an adequate return on the capital invested.
“Attention has of late been attracted by certain other crops, such as tea. pepper, ginger and and tubs root, which have been found by experience to grow well in Malaya and of which some at least offer a possibility of becoming of economic importance. -Singapore Free Press.
[The above is am extract from the speech of H. E. Sir Cecil Clementi in opening the Malayan Exhibition at Kuala Lumpur, and is of peculiar interest in Sarawak where both the products mentioned have been grown with success especially the Pineapple, for which Kuching is famous. -Ed.]
The Anonymous Letter Writer.
There, is nobody more cowardly than the writer of anonymous letters. It should be made an offence almost as serious as blackmail itself if the culprit can be found.
On the evidence of such a letter a man recently murdered his wife and commuted suicide, leaving six orphans on the public charge.
Even if there were truth in the letter, the resultant tragedy is too appalling to contemplate, and if the unknown correspondent is afflicted with remorse until his or her dying day it will be at least a lesson.
We hope that the moral of this wretched story will not be lost on the poltroons who are in the habit of sending anonymous letters and interfering with the private affairs of others. The cause of morality or justice is not best served by the informer or the spy.
An anonymous letter is the work of a coward in the first place, and nobody should care deeply what such people know or say. They are merely out to cause trouble. —John English in the Daily Mirior.
[And so say all of us. In any case the writer of anonymous letters is or should be merely a contributor to the W.P.B. However, we reprint the above in the hope that past, present and future writers of anonymous letters, libelous and otherwise, will read it and weep. -Ed.]
Our Bintulu Letter.
SIR,
It behoves me to squat down and write you a few lines and as I have nothing to say I will close. I had a battleship tattooed on my chest by a Dyak the other day, after that I started to take excercise and my chest got so big, that the battleship is now a row boat.
The purpose of this letter is to thank you for your watch. But really I was only fooling when I took it from you, I do not want it (try and get it back) by this Auby if she does not carry too much cargo, I will send it back (watch for the watch) of course if the Auby is fully loaded it will be impossible for me to ship it on to you. I’m sorry. I have been told that there is a Chinese Junk loading timber for Hong Kong, if it’s not feasible to load the watch on the flag ship Auby I will load it on the Chinese Junk and ship it via Hong Kong. I know it will take a bit longer, but what does that matter? How I have tried to get that watch to you, you will never know the trouble I have taken, I have gone down on my bended knees to people, would they take it? No! Their excuses were many but the cheese one- I-mean the chief one was that the responsibility was too great. But to cut out all fooling why did you not return this way??? You make me so ashame. How dare you give Bintulu the go-bye. I was all set for you. I had tuned up to a high note (not money) music is what I mean. I had the Gin-a-phone ready and the joy was all set for your return. I never again prepare the works for you, you have let me down badly.
Well the news here is as you know limited, nothing happens which is of the sensational, a suicide and a murder now and again, but that is not interesting, is it? Of course, we have the fair of the fair here, if they would only keep their heads covered! But, they will take a chance and drop their sarongs which they have over their heads, of course it appears to be an accident, but you can’t fool me that way. I don’t mean you, I mean them the fair of the fair.
Well I am sure you are fed up with this attempt of a letter and I sincerely hope you will forgive me for my past sins. Wishing you and yours all the very rest in the world. Please give my very best to the boys in Kuching. And it you meet anyone that knows me, give them one dollar and charge to profit and loss.
Your Bintulu,
Co-despondent.
A True Fishing Story.
A fishing story which comes from Banff, Canada is too good to miss. Tales are legion about fish of such tremendous dimensions that they almost pulled the angler into the water (they always escape, of course), but the Canadian police have authenticated the incident of a man fishing off the pier at Lake Minnewanka, near Banff, with a light rod and line, when a 20 lb. lake trout struck so viciously that the angler lost his balance and was hauled off the end of the pier into twenty feet of water. He did not lose his head, or the fish, for, still clinging to his rod and line, he fought the trout in the water until a policeman put off in a boat and landed both man and fish. We are able to give the name of the policeman. Constable James, of Calgary, but not that of the hero, or victim, of this piscatory adventure since, with unnatural modesty-for an angler-he refused to divulge it. Perhaps this is not surprising. It is a moot point whether he would ever have lived down the incident among his fishing confreres or bored them all to tears for years after with the story of how he caught a fish which was big enough to pull him into the water. -Straits Times, July 31.
Trout-Fishing Prospects.
Among the lesser speculations concerning Cameron’s Highlands and the amenities it is hoped to provide some day the question, as to whether trout fishing will be included among them is one which raises a good deal of interest, especially among those keen Waltonians who have to wait until they go home on leave to experience the delicious thrills of pitting their wits against the wily trout, playing him in some swift running stream and finally landing his gleaming body on the grassy bank. It is not yet certain if trout can be introduced at the Highlands, but a preliminary and guarded statement as to the possibilities is made in the annual report of the Fisheries Department. Before any scheme for the introduction of trout can be considered it must first be established whether there is enough dissolved oxygen in the water. A brief survey was made at the Highlands during December of last year and the results obtained, while encour-aging, require confirmation by observations extending throughout the year to see if
the temperature goes much higher, though it is believed that it remains fairly steady. Thus, at Tanah Rata, (4,600 feet), the temperature of the water was 64 deg. F. and the oxygen content per litre 5.1 c.o. If trout can live under present conditions there is an enormous amount of good stream fishing available at the Highlands. Buoyed up with this hope it does not require much imagination to conjure up a picture of the smoking room of the hotel at Cameron’s Highlands (when it is built), with men swopping fishing stories and the inevitable romancer standing with arms apart trying to give an idea of the whopper which just got away. Much the same problem had to be tackled by the Ceylon Fishing Club who put their experience at the disposal of the Department. From the information supplied it would seem that trout will breed in water about 68 deg, but when it is above 60 deg. the alevins. that is, young fish with yolk sacs, die off as a result of being hatched too quickly, or, if they do survive, do not become
healthy fish and remain sunted. At Nuwara Eliya the successful experiment was tried of placing a large block of ice under the fall into the hatchery boxes, which reduced by as much as 10 deg. the temperature of the water flowing over the ova. The Fisheries Department, however, point out that this temperature would have to be maintained for the alevins until they are able to take solid food, and it does not strike them as being an attractive proposition, and it might be cheaper to import stocks every year. The problem of stocking the water of the Highlands does not stop there however. There is just a slight doubt as to the adequacy of the food supply, and, possibly the greatest source of danger and annoyance, the constant watching and supervision to prevent poaching and poisoning. The inhabitants of these regions are often accused of having killed off all the fish, but the Department does not subscribe to this view in its entirety, preferring the explanation that the natural habits of the local account for their comparative absence from these streams which are too cold. All this seems to indicate that it is going to be much more difficult to put trout into the waters at Cameron’s Highlands than to take them out-legitimately. -Straits Times, Aug, 1.
Mainly About Nothing.
This column has a particularly happy and fortunate heading this month as it will contain for the most part nil, alias nix. nought, or nothing at all.
Nothing, a good word of early neolithic origin, meaning in no degree, not at all, or in mathematics the absence of all magnitude, is, as the heading states, what this is all about.
The only excuse for this deficiency is that unfortunately the sub-editor in charge of this section had the misfortune to be arrested last Saturday for loitering "”with intent” outside a public house.
The Prison Chaplain reports that the miserable man handed him a manuscript, obviously copy for this month’s issue, but it was so fearfully amusing that the Reverend gentleman unfortunately mistook it for a statement of defence, and as it smelt rather of stout the illusion was complete and the paper was sent to our friend’s lawyers who refuse to part with it unless a remittance for 6s. 8d. accompanies any further request. It is therefore being left where it is.
Before finally closing down and leaving this page complete in its nothingness, it would be as well to answer a question which has been flashing from the tips of many inquisitive tongues during the past month.
This question, the answer to which may affect the local stock-market to such an extent that a severe drop in the price of parrot seed and fern tops is hanging by a mere thread, is as follows. “What stopped the war”? Was it the races? Emphatically no.
Our war correspondent Mr. Hedges-Butler has just returned from the front in his auto-giro and statles that it was “soda waler” that soused the squabble.
These windy waters have stopped weightier things than wars since the data of their inception by the ancient Chaldeans who brewed them for use in their gaols and as a treatment for chronic strombosis (noises in the head).
Mr. G. K. Chesterton gives it as his opinion that they-
“Were rained like tempests down
When good drink had been dishonoured By the tipplers of the town;
When red wine had brought red ruin And the death dance of our times Heaven sent us Soda Water As a torment for our crimes.”
Nevertheless Mr. Butler says this liquid did the trick. It is only fair to warn our readers however that Mr. Hedges-Butler has not been quite himself lately as he was kicked on the dome by an infuriated transport camel in the Entabai Desert whilst trying to offer the ungrateful beast a decayed cold storage carrot he had saved up from his lunch.
It would be advisable therefore to turn to the official paragraph for information on this subject, and to any other paragraph for information on any other subject.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 60 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
No.1.] FRIDAY, 26th AUGUST, 1870. [Price 5 Cts.
The first number of the Sarawak Gazette is to-day published with a hope that it may both supply a want in the country, and be of service to those in other places who are interested in the prosperity of Sarawak and its dependencies. Its objects are thus of two kinds. In the first place it will endeavour to provide those Europeans who reside at Outstations with concise statements of official business and other matters of public interest in Sarawak, together with a summary of the latest intelligence obtained by telegram or newspaper from Europe. With this object in view, the Gazette will be, published as soon as possible after the arrival of steamers carrying mails from Singapore. Its second object will be to serve as a recognised report of the condition of the various residencies under the Sarawak Government, is their relations to the native, and to the trading interests which most of them possess, for circulation in other countries and settlements. Our columns will therefore be open to all Europeans who haveinformation to give with respect to the social and political condition, the trade and general progress of the districts where they are stationed, or with respect to any matter of general interest in their neighbourhood. Articles on the policy and foreign relations of the country may from time to time be expected, and any remarks which residents may have to offer on methods of cultivation, utilization of native labour and similar subjects will be received and inserted. As the Gazette is published with the distinct object of representing the country as a whole, and of recording only such information as may be of general service, all correspondence of a personal nature will find no place in its pages. Argument, and the statement of individual criticisms and grievances form no part of the plan on which it is proposed to conduct the Sarawak Gazette.
ITEMS.
The building at the corner of the Bazaar, now used as Government Offices is in an unsafe condition. A new bungalow has been commenced on ground adjoining the present Court House to be used as offices until the permanent building which is soon to be erected is ready for use.
The Sarawak Library and Reading Room is being repaired and partly refitted. The Committee of management wish to obtain from the Bishop a deed of gift, making over to the subscribers the ground on which it is built, which is now the property of the Mission. It is hoped that the increase in the number of subscribers to the Reading Room, and the reduced freight charged by the Ocean Steamers through the Suez Canal, will enable the Committee to obtain new books from England more than twice a year.
A series of Lithographic views illustrating adventures among the Dyaks of Borneo, and accompanied by descriptive letter-press is about to be published by the resident in charge of one of the Outstations under the Sarawak Government.
We are sorry to hear that diphtheria has been prevalent in the Tribe of Land Dyaks settled on the Quop river. Six or seven persons have died and many more have been badly attacked by the disease. Last accounts report an improvement.
A new steamer the Sri Sarawak, for the Borneo Company Limited is on her way from England. She sailed on July 16th, and may be expected in the river in a fortnight’s time.
A surveying steamer has taken soundings from Galle to Java Head, to determine whether it be possible to lay a submarine telegraph cable from Galle direct to Java. The difficulty of finding a place fit for landing the shore end at Galle, and the depth of water found over all the distance have decided the attempt to be impracticable.
Sarawak Library.
The following books have been purchased by the Committee: -
First Division News.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
July, 1931.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports: -
General. -Mr. N. E. Hughes took over Magistrate and Police Court work from the 7th instant before proceeding to Oya to take up his appointment there as Acting Assistant District Officer.
On the 13th I returned from furlough end took over the duties of this office from Mr. W. S. B. Buck who proceeded to Bau on the 16th as Acting Assistant District Officer of that district. Mr. E. M. Woodward arrived from Bau on the 18th en route for Mukah to which station he was appointed Acting District Officer. On the 17th I took over the duties of Editor Sarawak Gazette from Mr. N. E. Hughes.
On the 19th The Roman Catholic Mission celebrated their Grand Jubilee of 50 years in Sarawak.
Visitors. -A large number of outstation visitors were in Kuching at the end of the month owing to the approach of Race Week.
Mr. E. G. Walker of United Engineers came from Singapore and Mr. E. G. Farrelly from British North Borneo came on a business visit on the 27th in connection with surveys.
District Court. -Twenty-three cases were heard. All were civil. The civil claims involved amounts totalling $5,449.98 for which fees collected amounted to $205.50.
Magistrate’s Court. -One hundred end eight cases were heard, fifteen of which were criminal and ninety-three civil. Of the fifteen criminal cases, twelve convictions and three acquittals were adjudged.
Police Court. -Twenty-six summary cases were brought before the Court. All were convictions.
Court’s General. -Anzu alias Anding, Mat bin Tambi, Sim Poh and Anthony Law sentenced to one month each, all for theft, under I.P.C. section 879; Liong Hoo to one month, for dishonestly receiving stolen property, under I.P.C. section 411; Soh Hok Ha to two months, for voluntarily causing hurt with a dangerous weapon, under I.P.C. section 324; Tan Kim Kee and Eo Chai Siow to one month each, for committing an affray, under I.P.C. section 160; and Ng En, Lim Ah Bee and Ong Nya (f.) to three months each, for non-payment of fines, under I.P.C. section 64.
Judicial. -There were no cases of importance held in the District Court during the month. No criminal cases came up at all.
Coroner’s Court. -Three inquests were held: -
1. On the death of an unknown male Chinese found in the river at Satok. Verdict-accidental death due to drowning. .
2. On the death of Chai Chong, Kheh aged (44 years) killed by a branch of a tree falling on him while felling the tree.
Verdict -accidental death.
3. On the death of an unknown male Chinese found in the river at Batu Kawa.
Verdict-accidental death by drowning.
Monthly returns are attached herewith
Sadong Collieries Report.
July, 1931.
Extracts from the Sadong Collieries Report for July, 1931, by Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager: -
The output, export, local consumption, and coal stock figures for the month were as follows: Coal shipment figures for the month exceeded out-put by 79 1/4 tons.
Consignments of Stores were shipped by each outgoing trip of the s.s. L’ Aubaine to The Government Stores Department, Kuching.
I left for Kuching to discuss Mine affairs on the 29th, and returned on the 31st.
In accordance with His Highness the Rajah’s instructions to accelerate the closing-down Mining programme begun in July, 1928, it Is now arranged to close down the New Mines immediately, and abandon all the rest at the end of the present year.
The transfer of the Clerical Staff Members to other Departments at the end of the year, and other details, are now under consideration.
The rainfall for the month was 9’67 inches. Electrical Storms frequently occurred, the most violent of which took place on the morning of the 26th.
Kuching Rifle Club.
His Highness the Rajah has very kindly presented a handsome silver Cup to be competed for monthly by members of the Club during the present year.
The competitions are shot for with handicap, the cup going to the member with the highest average score at the end of the year.
Sarawak Turf Club Summer Meeting.
August 1st and 3rd, 1931.
The weather was fine for both days, and the going was good in spite of much rain recently. The Meeting was well attended. His Highness the Rajah and the Astana party arrived shortly before the first race each day. His Highness very kindly presented the prizes to the successful owners at the conclusion of the Meeting
The racing was of the usual good quality. Meeting after meeting we go down to the course thinking that we can beat the book, but Mr. E. S. Holl the Official Handicapper always seems to upset our apple cart and we return poorer and wiser in most cases. Small fields in Divisions I and II were still further depleted by an epidemic of lameness. Nevertheless, the Division I races were all a matter of heads and the first three past the Judge could be covered by the proverbial blanket.
The Datu Shahbandar was unlucky to lose the B. C. L. Stakes with Gruda after passing the Judge first, but the jockey, Biloi, could not make the weight on returning to the scales. Gruda slipped a saddle cloth during the race. The Stewards allowed Biloi to throw in his whip and bridle but he was still short weight and the race was given to Nugget who had been second three parts of a length away.
There were no objections for foul riding, but style was lacking as ever amongst the native jockeys. We noticed that Mr. Ong Hap Leong rode his own pony in one race on the second day, perhaps others will now follow his example instead of trusting too much to syces. This was rather evident in the Ranee’s Cup where stronger riding of Kismet would undoubtedly have got him home with the head margin the other way. As it was September was a lucky winner. Both the open races were taken by Division II ponies. Talisman appears to be developing into a stayer and a weight carrier. He carried top weight into a place in his own class and in the Rajah’s Cup he made all the running to win by four lengths. He has so often done this before and just failed to stay the distance. We were glad to see Beaver roll home in the Town Stakes ably piloted by Mr. Bruce.
September took the Champion Cup for the most wins during the Meeting and Biloi headed the list of winning jockeys.
The Cash Sweeps were more popular than the Tote. This is accounted for by the poor fields and the short odds offered. There was only one Tote, the Members and non- members sharing one pool. The $2 was abolished and the course side of the Member’s tote was opened to the public. The Unlimited Sweep on the last race of the Meeting closed with over $8,000 in the pool, a remarkable effort in these stringent times.
The Paddock and offices are very well cared for. The ornamental trees round the parade ring are now big enough to offer shade to those wishing to watch the parades for the earlier races.
The stewards and all other officials concerned are to be congratulated on a very successful meeting.
RESULTS.
First Day.
Saturday, 1st August, 1931.
THE TUAN MUDA’S CUP. DIVISION I.
Akal was badly left at the start and never got into the race. Kim Mah showed the way first of all to Adil and Kismet. At the road they were racing together. After pausing the Ara tree Adil was beaten and Kim Mah took the lead. Lohor brought Kismet up to Kim Mah and after a sharp struggle Kismet passed the post a head to the good.
THE SATOK STAKES.
DIVISION II.
Azab was very sticky at the start and was finally left completely when the flag fell. Water Polo made the running at once from Talisman, Mudahan, and Workman with September racing a little back on the outside. Workman went up at the road but did not head Water Polo who retained his early lead. Once in the straight however Biloi sent September after Water Polo and disposed of him without any trouble, and went on to win by a length.
THE B. C. L. STAKES.
DIVISION III.
Nugget led form Gruda, Sisit and Denver. At the four furlong post Gruda slipped a saddle cloth. Soon after this Gruda was taken to the front and stayed there never being seriously challenged. At the scales, Biloi could not make the weight and after throwing in his bridle was still 1 lb. short. The Stewards placed Nugget first.
SIMPANG TIGA STAKES.
DIVISION I.
Akal started very slowly. After crossing the road Rajak took Kim Mah to the front. Popacatapetl broke down before the road when going very well. Assan sent Adil after Kim Mah but could only just overlap on the post.
THE MATANG STAKES.
DIVISION II.
The field was well on the move when the flag fell but got away together except Azab who stuck his toes in as usual and refused to take any interest in the proceedings. With September scratched Water Polo took up the running from Pengarah and Workman. After the road Talisman was brought up on the ditch-side and had everything beaten except Water Polo who still hung on to his advantage by a half length decision.
THE PENDING STAKES.
DIVISION III.
Beaver and Gruda got off together. Biloi made no mistake this time and took the lead almost at once and held his advantage all the way home.
THE RANEE’S CUP.
OPEN TO ALL DIVISIONS.
Azab was left again. Adil led from a level start. The field appeared with Adil in the van followed by Kismet, September and Akal. At the road Adil dropped back and Kismet and Akal moved up. September and Kismet drew away and fought out a lively duel in which September got better by a short head. Stronger riding of Kismet would have put the head margin the other way or made a deadhead of it.
Second Day.
Monday, 3rd August, 1931.
THE SLUMP STAKES.
DIVISION I.
A good level start Adil made the running at first, on reaching the road they were still well together. On entering the straight Kim Mah established a slight lead. In a very close finish Kim Mah hung on to his advantage with Kismet a head away. There was the same distance between Akal and Adil, but neither were well ridden at the finish.
THE COUNTRY CUP.
DIVISION II.
Talisman started slowly. Azab refusing to leave the post at all when the flag fell. Workman made the running to the road where he was joined by Water Polo and September, the latter soon disposed Water Polo and went on to win comfortably by one and a half lengths. Talisman was brought on to the scene just too late and was travelling faster than anything else at the finish.
THE SARAWAK STAKES.
DIVISION III.
A good start. Nugget was done with at the road and Beaver and Gruda were left to fight out the issue between them. Gruda proved the winner by three parts of a length. Bobo would have done better to have sat down and ridden it out instead of pulling his hands up as he did.
THE TURF CLUB STAKES.
DIVISION I.
Akal started rather slowly but had caught his field at the road. The four ponies were bunched on entering the straight. Akal was forced to the front on ditch-side and had a bare half-length advantage at the Ara tree. Assan then set about Adil and at one time looked dangerous but Akal held him to get home by a neck. There was a head between Kim Mah and Kismet.
THE STATE SPRINT.
DIVISION II.
Talisman was baulked by Workman at the start both getting away late. Bakar got away on Water Polo as usual and led from Pengarah and Apa Kena. The order did not change on entering the straight. The Judge divided second honours between Workman and Pengarah but it rather looked like Apa Kena splitting the two from the stand with Workman just out of it.
THE TOWN STAKES.
DIVISION III.
A level start with Beaver lying a little back. Entering the straight Mr. Bruce got Beaver nicely balanced and sent him along to win a nicely ridden race from Gruda by a half length verdict.
THE RAJAH’S CUP.
A HANDICAP FOR ALL DIVISIONS.
A good start in which Azab got away with the rest of the field for once. Talisman was leading from Kismet and Akal as the field disappeared at the Sekama gate. When they came to view again Talisman was out in front with a clear lead from September, Kismet and Akal. Crossing the road Kismet was badly bumped by September. At the Ara tree Akal had the rest of the field beaten but could not catch Talisman.
Cricket.
KUCHING VS OUTSTATIONS.
On 2nd August Kuching met the Outstations at Cricket once more. Unfortunately, the latter were not at full strength. They were assisted by several members of H.M.S. Herald’s crew.
The Outstations batted first but Pollard, with 17, was the only batsman who reached double figures and the side was out for 58.
Kuching began no better than their opponents and lost 4 wickets for 24. At this point, however. W. J. Chater and Trechman came together and took the score to 68 before the former was stumped by Hill, Kuching thus winning by 5 wickets.
The Outstation side felt severely the absence of several of their best bowlers.
KUCHING vs. NONDESCRIPTS.
Cricket between the Kuching Football Club and the Nondescripts has been in abeyance for many months and the resumption of friendly hostilities on 23rd August was very welcome. The latter showed that their temporary disruption had in nowise curbed their enthusiasm for in this game they administered a very sound hiding to the Club.
The Nondescripts batted first. Trechman and Davies bowled very well to dismiss the first three batsmen for 13, but Nadarajah, first with de Silva and then with Chetty, changed the appearance of the game. Eventually after making 33, he mishit a deceptive ball from Davies and Baran brought off a well-judged catch on the leg boundary.
Rozario and Rajadurai then proceeded to flog the tired bowling all over the field before the innings was declared closed, with the score at 105 for 6.
Calvert and Middlemas opened the Club’s innings in confident style but Carrol’s slow bowling very soon had everyone guessing. The sixth, seventh, eighth and ninth wickets all fell at 41 and the last wicket added but 2 runs.
Carrol’s analysis came out at the remarkable figure of 9 wickets for 15 runs.
Second Division News.
July, 1931.
Extracts from the Second Divisional reports for July, 1931, by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident: -
On the 1st I returned from Engkilili where attempts had been made to effect a compromise between the pepper gardeners and the traders there. In spite of my efforts nothing could be arranged, and representatives of both sides proceeded to Kuching to see the Secretary for Chinese Affairs. These parties were sent to the Kuching Chamber of Commerce for another attempt at arbitration, but at the end of the month no result had been achieved.
During my stay in Engkilili I gave permission for certain Dyaks to hold a diving contest in order to settle ownership of some farming land. One of the parties asked that special precautions should be taken by the Government Officials witnessing the contest that the other side did not cheat by using a hollow pole, or constructing some other means of obtaining air by hollow reeds and other apparatus whilst under the water. This is the first occasion on which I have heard such unfair methods even suggested. The Dyaks concerned were from the far away Ulu Ai.
Penghulu Ramba and followers visited Simanggang during the month and he apologised for his rude behaviour to various Government Officers. As a matter of fact the whole affair was mainly the fault of an indiscreet Native Officer, and Penghulu Ramba, although quite wrong to lose his temper was certainly under a misapprehension. The affair is now cleared up satisfactorily.
A party of Japanese mining experts have been visiting the Silantek district.
Mr. R. L. Daubeny, District Officer of Saribas and Mr. L. K. Morse, Acting Assistant District Officer of Kalaka visited Simanggang for a few days in order to discuss Dyak affairs. The detachments of Sarawak Rangers were all withdrawn from the various head waters and no further trouble is expected.
On the 24th, 25th, and 26th, the Government offices were removed to the new building. On the 27th the new offices were formally opened by the Resident in the presence of European and Native officers from all over the Division, Malay and Dyak Chiefs, leading Chinese and others. A salute of 7 guns was fired at 7 30 a.m. and sharp at 8 the offices were opened and the flag hoisted for the first time.
After the official ceremonies a regatta and land sports were held, and towards evening Club competitions. At night the old Court Room at Fort Alice was packed with people and a successful Malay and Dyak main took place. Many persons were unable to gain admission.
The European Officers held a farewell dinner in Fort Alice Mess, the oldest mess in the State, and which has homed a long list of notable Sarawak Officers.
The Right Reverend The Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak paid farewell visit to this Division towards the end of the month, and left for Kuching on the 30th giving passage to Messrs. Morse and Harnack, on their way to the Races.
On the 31st accompanied by Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, I visited Sebuyow and Lingga. The latter station was in a dirty state.
SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. O. H. Barcroft: -
Mr. D. C. Hudden left in m.l. Anne for the monthly inspection Lingga and Sebuyow.
The Acting Assistant District Officer remarked that there were a great many people at the Sebuyow district who had not paid their Exemption Tax. On the 10th Dyaks of Temelan reported that a small boy was missing from his house. The body was recovered on the 11th and the Acting Assistant District Officer proceeded to Temelan on the 12th and hold a Coroner’s inquest, and discovered that the boy had been taken by a crocodile. A verdict of death by misadventure was returned.
ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Officer-in-Charge, Mr. S. G. Hansom: -
I have not been up-river during the month. From the 25th to 29th instant I was in Simanggang to attend the opening of the new Government offices there and to report various matters to the Resident, Second Division.
A diving contest between two Ulu Dyaks, which had been sanctioned by the Resident, Second Division, was held at Engkilili on the 15th instant. The subject in dispute was the boundary between their respective padi lands. The contest aroused considerable local interest, and the contestants remained under water for about three and three quarter minutes.
The gold workers at Marup have commenced blasting operations, which they state, will discover a richer alluvial. They appear to be quite sanguine of success.
The bodies of two Chinese were recovered, one from the river opposite the bazaar, and one in a deep pool at Runjeng, (a pepper area). Coroner’s inquiries were held and a verdict of death from misadventure recorded in each case.
Two new Chinese Motor vessels have appeared on the Kuching Engkilili run. There are now five vessels regularly engaged on this Service.
During the month, as far as time permitted, I visited the surrounding pepper areas, with a view to forming some idea of the size and quality of the crop to be expected.
It is encouraging to note that diseased vines are not common, except in one area, Sarangau, where several gardens are very badly affected by a disease which causes the berries to blacken and fall off, before ripe.
I understand that attempts have been made in previous years to cure this trouble by spraying the vine, but that an efficacious solution is not yet obtainable. Gardens in the vicinity of Lemanak, Spengal and Masong are in remarkably fine condition, and heavy crops can be expected from these areas. The gardens immediately adjoining Engkilili, are on the whole, poor. The vines in many cases, are practically worn out, and the output will not be large. Taking the district as a whole, there is promise of an exceptionally full crop of apparently good quality pepper.
SARIBAS DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of District Officer, Saribas. Mr. R. L. Daubeny: -
In the Civil Courts there were several cases including a big land case at the Ulu Entanak which has been adjourned for survey.
The Substations were visited from 24th to 27th when various outstanding cases were settled.
I was away at Simanggang from 7th to 8th.
The squad of Sarawak Rangers returned from upriver on 26th instant and left for Kuching by m.s. Yong Teck Nguang on 30th.
Outstanding exemption tax for the District amounts to approximately $1,000 (500 persons).
Contributions to the Post Office Savings Bank for the month amounted to $5,874 this being mostly supplied by the Paku Dyaks and total number of Depositors being now eighty-two as compared with forty-five last year.
On the night of 21st instant a fire broke out at Kampong Bladin below Pusa which completely demolished the Tua Kampong’s house (Haji Matahir) and seven others including a couple of boatsheds. As usual these people had built their houses with the caves practically touching instead of being the regulation five fathoms distance apart. The fire I understand broke out from the kitchen of the Tua Kampong’s house.
KALAKA DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. L. K. Morse: -
There were no cases of interest in the Courts during the month under review. There were however an exceptionally large number of minor cases for non-payment of fines and taxes.
I visited Simanggang from the 7th to the 9th instant to discuss official matters with the Resident.
Kabong was visited during the month, but it was found impossible to visit Roban.
Lim Ah Koy road cooly was found hanging from the roof of his house at the 1st mile Roban road. The was no evidence of foul play, a verdict of suicide was returned in the Coroner’s Court.
The reports from the border patrols received during the month indicated that as far as the Kalaka Dyaks were concerned everything was quiet although the disturbed state of the Julau caused some uneasiness.
The garrison was recalled towards the end of the month and returned to Kuching by m.v. Kim Chin Tong, on the 30th instant.
The Bishop, accompanied by Rev. W. Linton arrived at Saratok on the 15th and left again on the 16th, the former for Kuching while the latter proceeded to Roban in search of a site for a Mission at that station. An application was received from Mr. Linton for a grant of land there.
The new Dyak Passes were put in use during the month.
LAND OFFICE.
Extracts from the report of the Divisional Land Officer, Second Division, Mr. B. Summer: -
On the 9th instant I returned to Simanggang from local leave; and took over from Mr. Parker, who had relieved me.
From the 16th to 20th instant Mr. Parker proceeded up the Undup and as far as Dor to examine parcels of land in use and required for Mission purposes.
On the 21st instant Kampong boundaries of Kampong Hilir, Tengah, Lemanak and also the town boundary were defined by the Resident, in the Survey Office. The total area is large, but the major portion consists of the Government padang. etc.
On the 24th instant, the Land Department moved in to the New Land Office; this office is both airy, and spacious enough. I think, to meet all future requirements, and increases of staff.
Both the old and the new Chinese cemeteries have been examined, and it is hoped shortly to issue a temporary title for same; in the old cemetery many of the graves are well inside the Road Reserve area, in fact some are on the edge of the road.
POLICE AND PRISONS, SIMANGGANG.
Extracts from the report of the Officer-in-Charge, Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft: -
Police. -Two men were tried by Courts Martial sentenced to jail and dismissed the force; two Dyaks were recruited from Stumbin to fill the vacancies.
Day and night patrols have from time to time been sent to Sabu and it is gratifying to note that though no arrests have been made, no new cases of theft have been reported from Sabu this month.	.
During July only one case of theft was reported in Simanggang.
Third Division News.
June, 1931.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports for June, 1931, by Mr. W. F. Dick, Acting Resident: -
Court. -Five civil and four criminal cases were dealt with, the only case calling for comment being His Highness the Rajah vs. Wong Huk Tuck who was sentenced to two years for being in possession of material for counterfeiting coin.
General. -The Travelling District Officer, Mr. G. R. H. Arundell left for Kuching on the 4th to put the Rebel Asoon’s complaints before His Highness the Rajah. I left for Matu on the 11th instant accompanied by the Divisional Land Officer, Mr. C. E. Pascoe and Mr. Goodall of the Agricultural Department and returned to Sibu on the 15th. The Divisional Engineer, Mr. J. W. Whiteside, the Superintendent of Customs Mr. L. Kennedy and the Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. D. A. Hutchison left on the 12th instant for Oya and Mukah via the Cut. On the 18th instant the Assistant District Officer Sarikei And Binatang, Mr. J. O. Gilbert reported that the rebel Asoon was in the Binatang and had sent word instructing him, Mr. Gilbert, not to visit the ulu Binatang and threatening to shoot any Government servant who attempted to go upriver, this caused trouble in the Binatang and Sarikei with the result that Rangers were sent form Kuching under the Acting Commandant, Mr. Murray-Scott and arrived at Sarikei on the 21st. A force of 40 Rangers was sent up the Nyelong under Mr. Pegler and the remainder up the Binatang with the Assistant District Officer Sarikei and Mr. P. Murray-Scott. On 23rd the District Officer, Sibu, Mr. E. V. Andreini proceeded to Binatang to take charge of the Dyak situation in Binatang and Sarikei districts. On 30th Mr. Andreini reported that a big bala from the ulu Julaw which had collected at Rumah Enda had dispersed under the threat of being attacked. The same day the Assistant Land Officer, Mr. T. E. Parker reported that a bala of 400 strong was reported to be in the S. Strass, and the whole bazaar had been in a panic the previous night. I proceeded to Sarikei in the afternoon of 30th and found that the bazaar Chinese were no longer in a panic, thanks to Mr. Parker’s able handling of a difficult situation.
SIBU.
The District Officer, Mr. E. V. Andreini, reports: -
General. -Mr. Pegler accompanied by Haji Gapor Native Officer and the Penghulu Dalam visited the Dyaks in Igan and Pasai. He reported many cases outstanding. It is hoped to arrange that these outlying district are visited more frequently and systematically.
Mr. Arundell returned from Kuching on the 15th and proceeded upriver to Kanowit on the 18th.
Mr. Gibson of the Straits Steamship Company, was a visitor to the Station and also visited Kanowit.
Mr. H. B. Crocker, Registrar, was away in Kuching from the 11th-17th for medical attention.
Mr. Girling. A.C.F., proceeded to Kuching on retirement.
Abang Indih Native Officer, Binatang. came to report on Binatang incidents. I proceeded there on the 23rd and was still in the ulu at the end of the month.
Court. -Two Foochows were fined $100 each for illicit arrack dealings. Forest Department versus Ah Tho for breach of Forest Regulations was settled out of Court.
Various Malays and Dyaks were fined for cutting immature jelutong trees.
Counterfeit coiners found near Semah were remanded for Resident’s Court.
P.C. Chanan Singh was dismissed the service and one month R.I. for disgraceful conduct.
Two inquests were held an open verdict was returned on Ha Mia Hong, a Foochow postman, who was found drowned. There were suspicions of foul play but nothing could be proved.
The other inquest was on a Foochow woman who committed suicide by swallowing acetic acid.
Agriculture. -Mr. Goodall of the Agricultural Department inspected land in the Igan and Leba-an area with a view of improving the methods of padi planting.
Education. -Inspector Tuanku Haji Ali conducted examinations at Sarikei, Paloh and Rejang.
Prisons. -A Dyak named Egan ran away from the Fort shortly after receiving a sentence of nine months R.I. and was still uncaptured at the time of writing.
MATU AND DARO.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. F. L. G. Crossley, reports: -
Court. -The number of cases was above the average during the month, owing to the issue of Exemption Tax summonses. No cases are worthy of mention. Fines amounted to $89.80 and fees to $27.25.
P.W.D. -Prisoners have been engaged in the upkeep of roads and grounds, and in cutting the rentis from Matu to Bruan on which excellent progress is being made. The raising of Bungalow Road is now complete.
General. -From the 12th to the 15th the Resident, Third Division visited the district, together with Messrs. Pascoe and Goodall. and Datu Haji Mohidin. The Resident investigated the charges against the Native Officer of Daro, and found them to be without foundation.
Land. -Messrs. Pascoe and Goodall proceeded to Bruit and Sirik on the 13th, to investigate the possibilities of Chinese padi planting. Land Inspector Dawi visited the district on the 12th, staying until the end of the month. He was able to deal with only a little of the mass of outstanding work. Good progress is being made in the introduction of Foochows to Paloh, where fourteen Chinese are now making padi farms.
Travelling. -On the 14th I went to Daro with the Resident, Third Division, returning on the 16th. On the 23rd, I proceeded to Daro on my usual monthly visit, clearing up affairs in the outlying Kampongs. I returned to Matu on the 30th.
KAPIT.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports: -
Court. -Chua Ah Moh was imprisoned for three months for theft.
General. -Lu Chi Choon replaced Wee Tao Ping as 2nd Clerk at Kapit. Native Officer Abang Abu Seman returned from a visit to the Sut on the 7th. Mr. I. S. Hammond, Assistant Superintendent of Surveys returned from the ulu Balleh on the 14th. On the 16th I accompanied by Mr. I. S. Hammond left for the Mirirai. Native Officer Abang Abu Seman left for the Gat on the 17th accompanied by Penghulu Grinang who had returned from Sibu on the 14th. Mr. Hammond and I returned from the Mirirai on the 20th. Mr. G. M. Goodall, Padi Field Officer, arrived on the 19th and left for Nanga Pila on the 21st. He was unable to get further than Nanga Pelagus owing to high water and returned on the 23rd. Mr. I. S Hammond left for Sibu on the 22nd Accompanied by Mr. G. M. Goodall I left for Sibu on the 25th and was still away at the end of the month. The new B.C.L. oil godown was finished during the month.
Native Affairs. -I very much regret to have to report the sudden death, on the 26th, of Penghulu Jingga of the Amang. a hard working and loyal Government servant.
The harvest throughout the district has been a good one and the Dyaks seem to be realising the value of a more intensive and careful padi cultivation now that jungle products have so little commercial value.
Rainfall. -Rainfall for the month was 7’87.
MUKAH AND OYA.
May, 1931.
The District Officer, Mr. E. O. Bruce, reports: -
General. -I returned from ulu Mukah on the 1st, and learned later that on the following day a party of Kanowit Dyaks numbering about 40 had arrived in ulu Mukah and Balingian overland without passes. When collected they stated that they were en route F. M. S. to seek employment. They were duly dis-illusioned and returned to Sibu.
It is reported that the S. O. L. oil prospecting activities in the district have at had been justified by the location of rich oilsand in the ulu Penipah between Mukah and Balingian. I am informed however that drilling would not be practicable for some time yet.
On the 8th the Conservator of Forest, Mr. D. E. Calver and Assistant Forest Officer, Mr. Girling arrived via Dalat and Oya and returned to Sibu a few days later, after having visited Balingian.
On the 9th H. E. Bishop Biermans, Mgr. Dunn Prefect Apostolic, arrived to visit the local R.C. Mission.
The Acting Resident. Mr. W. F. Dick and Mrs. Dick together with Mrs. Pascoe and the Registrar, Mr. H. B. Crocker arrived on the 17th, returning to Sibu on the 22nd after visiting Oya and Dalat. The Registrar, Mr. Crocker remained in Mukah a further few days and have valuable assistance in connection with Estates matters in Mukah and Balingian.
Proclamation day, 25th was observed as Public Holiday, and offices closed.
It appears that several good padi crops in the Penipah area were spoiled at the last moment by “Empangau.”
Rainfall registered at Mukah Fort was 13’73 inches.
Court. -A normal number of cases was dealt with. As a result of a fracas between Chinese prisoners in the jail as mentioned in last month’s report, Ngo Mee Chong having been discharged from hospital was sentenced on the 18th to a further 12 months R.I. and Ngui Peng Sung a further six months R.I. both under I.P.C. 323; Ong Chiew a further 12 months under I.P.C. 335. All three have very bad prison records and will be deported on release from jail.
Public Works. -No new works of any importance have been undertaken.
Police and Prisons. -A finger print recording appliances, together with the necessary forms were received and the correct procedure adopted in conjunction with a new prison register of criminals.
Land and Agriculture. -Contiguous demarcations of Sago lands has at last commenced in earnest, and as a result of persistent persuasion owners are realising that it is to their benefit to apply for Occupation Tickets in the areas now being dealt with by Demarcators.
The possibility of Government claiming and measuring up without more ado, any sago lands which are met without a boundary rentis or apparent owner, has stirred many into conscientious activity.
Inquiries are being made from the Agricultural Department for detailed information regarding the encouragement of tobacco planting, especially by those who have to depend solely upon rubber gardens, the tapping of which is practically at a standstill just now.
Many Dyaks still seem to be under impression that there is more employment to be found, or more jungle produce to be worked in any other district than their own.
One steamship, two steam launches, seven motor schooners, three motor launches, and fourteen schooners entered, and one steamship, two steam launches, five motor schooners, two motor launches, and fourteen schooners cleared the port during the month.
Medical and Health. -A woman from Kampong Taboh had to be returned home in an advanced state of leprosy as there is no accommodation available in the Kuching camp.
It was found necessary to send Drus bin Udung to the Asylum Kuching, as he was becoming somewhat violent, and refused to wear a single stitch of clothing.
His relatives had been obliged to secure his feet in stocks fixed to the house floor.
Fifty-five out patients were treated in the Dispensary, with 128 repetitions Eight patients were admitted to hospital and one discharged. Twelve N.A.B. injections were given, and 21 microscopic examinations made.
Balingian. -I visited Balingian, together with the Registrar, Sibu. for a few days on the 26th. Court work was normal.
OYA AND DALAT.
May, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
General. -The Acting Resident, Third Division, Mr. W. F. Dick and the Registrar, Sibu, Mr. H. B. Crocker visited the station on the 24th.
Travelling. - I returned from upriver on the 7th having visited the Tamin and the Pakko. At Penghulu Medan’s house one Init (f.) was arrested on suspicion of having killed her child; also Buan was brought down accused of incest with his mother about ten years ago and of rape about two months ago. He was sent to Mukah hospital for treatment where through gross negligence on the part of the police he was allowed to escape.
The engkabang crop has been a great success but the Chinese hawkers upriver have been buying at a ridiculously low price. All of them were ordered to return to Dalat immediately as they were using unregistered measures for trading. The padi crop which promised to be very good failed al the last moment because the Dyaks left it too long whilst collecting engkabang. It was eaten up by empangau, many of the houses having barely enough for the year. The Dyaks are extremely poor and now find it difficult to pay their door tax. The
Government has agreed to accept part of the Tax in billian posts.
Other visitors to the station were Mr. Caiver and Mr. Girling; The Very Rev. Bishop Biermans and Father Van Deysel on a tour of inspection; Rev. Mgr. Dunn and Father Anthony. The District Officer of Mukah and Oya visited the station together with the Acting Resident, Third Division.
Court. -In the Residents Court one case of an unnatural offence was heard and dismissed, the tuai rumahs of the district being warned that if they arrange any more diving contests they will be heavily fined. ln the Magistrate’s Court eighty-seven Dyaks were found guilty of climbing engkabang trees. As no written notice has been posted upriver, defendants were let off on the payment of costs only but warned that next time they will be fined ten dollars each.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall recorded for the month was 6’67 inches.
Shipping. -Four schooners entered and three schooners cleared during the month.
Shipping. -Sixty-seven koyans Raw sago, 42 piculs Jelutong, 183 piculs Engkabang and 10 piculs Para rubber were shipped to Kuching.
The trade return for the month and for comparison with that of the same month last year is as follows: -
June, 1931. The Divisional Forest Officer. Mr. B J. C. Spurway and Mrs. Spurway arrived on 25th and on 29th Mr. Spurway and myself proceeded upriver to the Narub Reserve. While the Divisional Forest Officer was surveying the boundaries I went upriver in the Bujang Rimba reaching Tabau.
All the Dyaks in the lower Oya were quite contented all have now paid their Gun and Door Tax and wish to work more billian if Government will buy it.
The Divisional Medical Officer. Dr. D. A. Hutchison, the Divisional Engineer, Mr. J. W. Whiteside, and Supt. of Customs. Mr. L. D. Kennedy passed through in the middle of the month. Mr. Whiteside inspected the Dalat Court house and decided that it should be double in size.
I proceeded to Mukah on duty on the 9th and returned on 11th.
Court. -There were no cases at Oya during the month but at Dalat six men from Tanam were summonsed for Breach of Arms Order and four being guilty were fined.
P.W.D. -A large quantity of billian posts and planks were bought vary cheaply. The Dalat road was raised by the kampong people who defaulted in the Exemption Tax.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall for the month was 8’82 inches, the greatest fall in any one day being 1’77 inches.
Shipping. -No motor schooners entered. Six schooners entered and four cleared.
Trade. -The trade returns for the month, and for comparison with that of the same month last year were as follows: -
Owing to the illness of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Sarikei and Binatang, Mr. J. O. Gilbert no report was received for Sarikei.
MUKAH AND OYA.
June, 1931.
The District Officer. Mr. E. O. Bruce, reports: -
I visited the camp of Mr. Sumner, Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, Geologist, in Sungei Wong, and Penghulu Selan’s house returning on the 22nd, overland to the Coast via ulu Penipah which small river winds through primary jungle for practically its whole length.
H. M. King George V birthday, 3rd was observed as a public holiday and offices closed.
About 11 a.m. on the Mine date three seaplanes passed over the Kuala at a low altitude heading westward.
The Acting Assistant District Officer. Mr. Elam, arrived from Oya on the 7th for the weekend, and Dr. Braendlin, Chief Geologist, Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, returned to Miri, after a prolonged visit of inspection in the Penipah area.
On the 15th Dr. Hutchison, Messrs. Whiteside and Kennedy arrived via Oya, and returned lo Sibu on the 18th with Mr. Strong, after having attended to various departmental duties. Mr. S. Temple Waite, Geologist,
Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, left for home leave via Miri on the 17th.
Mr. and Mrs. Tait arrived from Kuching on the 25th for a few days.
Rainfall registered at Mukah Fort was 9’43 inches.
Court. -A normal number of cases, mostly civil, were dealt with, none of which calls for special comment.
P.W.D. -The Divisional Engineer, Mr. J. W. Whiteside arrived on the 13th to advise regarding rapid erosion of river bank above the Main bazaar, which will probably necessitate the removal of water main and electric standards in the near future.
I have not yet received his final report however.
Land and Agriculture. -The systematic demarcation of sago lands has created more work than the present two land inspectors can cope with. Seventy-four gardens were demarcated during the month, while 1,985 gardens were declared and application Tickets issued. Temporary additional Inspectors would be greatly appreciated and enable the congested areas to be effectively dealt with early while owners are still keen to co-operate. The local ring of influential land owners were interviewed and expressed their willingness to get their affairs in order, and promulgate the land regulations. Some of them declared as many as fifty sago gardens, and produced various antiquated and illegal “titles,” unstamped and unregistered. The correct procedure, somewhat involved in some cases was explained to them, for which they professed gratitude.
Mr. L. D. Kennedy, Supt. of Shipping, Third Division, visited the station on the 17th, and attended to various matters.
The m.s. Kim Chin Soon grounded on the Kuala bar on the 25th, while attempting to enter on a strong half ebb tide.
Medical and Health. -Sixty-eight out-patients were treated in the Government Dispensary, with one hundred repetitions. Sevan patients were admitted to hospital, and ten discharged. Twenty-five N.A.B. injections were given, and twenty Microscopic examinations made.
Fourth Division News.
BINTULU.
June, 1931.
The Acting District Officer. Mr. A Macpherson, reports: -
Court. -Fines amounting to $749.44 were imposed during the month.
Travelling. -Awang Abil, Native Officer, went up-river for a few days to settle some Dyak land disputes. I went up-river with him on 17th and was still away at the end of the month. I will report on this trip elsewhere.
Seventh Day Adventist Mission. -This Mission is likely to request a site in the Tatau River. No suitable site in the Bintulu being available at the price they can afford to pay.
General. -Flight Lieut. Wigglesworth with two Flying boats arrived from Kuala Belait on 1st and stayed two nights. Squadron Leader Livock arrived with a third boat on 3rd. All these boats left for Kuching shortly after. Messrs. Calvert, Le Gros Clark and Reynolds were passengers on s.s. Auby on their way to the North. Mr. Summer came through later in the month with Rev. Father Jansen. I left for Miri on 8th returning on 13th, to find Mr. McLeod back from Tatau, he went with me to Rassan and returned to Miri on 29th.
Bazaar Affairs. - Extinguishers were bought by the shop keepers and fixed in five foot-way. An effort is being made to clean up back premises. One Chin Ah Meng died on 27th. As he was suspected of poisoning himself, an inquest was held and is still adjourned.
Trade and Customs. -The trade statistics for the month were as follows: -
Shipping. -A wangkang from China came into Bintulu to buy timber, several have visited Tatau
M.L. Jean was still at Kuching, undergoing repairs, at the end of the month.
Rainfall. -The rainfall for the month amounted to 13’80 inches.
BARAM.
June, 1931.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
Court. -In the District Court Ah Phoo was sentenced 10 six months. R.I., for causing hurt under Section 321. Hau Sin was committed for trial by the Resident’s Court under Section 457.
Native Affairs. -There appears to be no doubt that a party of Dyaks have been in the ulu Muh but they have now left the District and all is quiet upriver.
Travelling. - I returned from upriver on 7th having left Galau at Long Akah with instructions to proceed to Lio Matu. A full report has been sent in separately. Wan Suror. Native Officer, left for L. Melinau on 19th to meet the Punans there, returning on 22nd. Wan Taha left on 20th to attend the Punan meetings at L. Keseh, L. Akah and Lio Matu and was still away at the end of the month. Accompanied by Wan Suror I left Baram on 27th to visit the Dyaks in the Bakong.
P.W.D. -The new offices were completed and occupied for the first time on 15th. Contractors were engaged for the upkeep of the new Poyut and Limbang roads.
Medical. -184 out patients and five in patients were treated during the month, one in-patient remaining at the end of the month. Under the Professor Harrison Smith Fund sixty-four out-patients were treated and 31 N.A.B. injections given. Influenza has been rife throughout the District and most of the Government Servants have been laid up. Several deaths have been reported from upriver but full details will not be available until Wan Taha returns.
Rainfall. -3’68 inches of rain fell on 12 days. The river has been in high flood most of the month.
Shipping. -S.S. Gladys made three trips during the month. S.L. La Follette was still away in Kuching for docking.
Trade. -Trade continues slack. Trade returns are: -
MIRI.
June, 1931.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports: -
Courts. -Two hundred and thirty-two writs were issued of which 23 were in the Criminal and 200 in the Civil Courts. One hundred and thirty-one cases were disposed of, 28 of these in Criminal and 103 in Civil categories. In Criminal actions 21 convictions were recorded.
Claims in civil suits totaled $7,890 while fines and fees in in all matters amounted to $99 and $337 respectively. The total Court revenue was $609. $2,087 was received into Court Deposits and $1,771 was paid out.
There was one Coroner’s view.
The only case worthy of mention was one in which Forest Guard, Jaya was sentenced to 18 months imprisonment under Section 161, I.P.C.
Health. -The month was marked by the beginning of an influenza epidemic which quickly spread amongst Government and Company employees; but which curiously enough only very slightly affected the bazaar and kampong areas.
In the course of routine 14 notices to perform work were issued, these mostly in connection with the closing of wells in the kampong areas where water is now laid on.
A mosquito survey of Tanjong Lobang area was undertaken by the sanitary Inspector in conjunction with Tan Poh Siong of Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, Health Department. Five species of anophelines were found breeding near the District Officer’s bungalow. This survey has been made the subject of a special report.
Land. -The inspector was demarcating gardens at Sibuti from the 16th onwards.
Only one new application for five acres of rubber was received. Fifty acres of pepper lands were sketched.
Medical. -At the Government Dispensary 207 out-patients 587 attendances for treatment. Eighteen cases were sent to the Sarawak Oilfields. Limited, Hospital.
The table of diseases treated shows 105 patients with influenza and fifteen with constipation.
Outstations. -At Niah the half-yearly caves inspection took place on the 24th when it was decided that gathering should commence on the 12th July.
At Sibuti eight Kedayans returned from a pilgrimage from Mecca.
Both these outstations were visited by the influenza epidemic, and medicines were sent from Miri to help comb it the spread of the sickness.
General. -I returned to duty on the 8th.
On the 6th H.M.S. Bridgewater arrived and stayed until the 11th when she proceeded to Kuching. Mr. W. V. Hanson took the opportunity of visiting Kuching on duty as a guest in the ship.
The Commissioner of Police. Mr. L. N. Reynolds, visited the station from the 9th to 30th. During his stay Mr. Murphy accompanied him on a short visit to Baram.
Other visitors to the station included Mrs. F. H. Kortright and Capt. C. D. Le Gros Clark.
The Resident proceeded on local leave on the 27th.
Mr. McLeod returned from Bintulu on the 30th.
Fifth Division News.
LIMBANG.
June, 1931.
Extracts from the, Fifth Divisional Reports for June, 1931, by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident: -
General. -I visited Sundar to inquire into certain complaints which had been made about the conduct of Tua Kampong Munap of Kampong Aur, it was found that the complaints were unfounded and Munap was definitely confirmed in his appointment.
From Sundar I proceeded to Lawas via Awat Awat to hold a Civil case which involved some $5,000 but on the opening of the case, the disputants came to a mutual agreement and the claim was withdrawn.
The Commissioner of Trade and Customs, Mr. W. V. Calvert, accompanied me on these visits and returned to Kuching direct via Labuan.
The Divisional Treasurer, Fourth Division, Mr. W. V. Hanson, paid a visit in connection with a slight dispute over mutilated and bad silver dollars.
On the 20th H.M.S Bridgewater anchored in Labuan Harbour, and on the 22nd a party of Officers, Commander Hoare Smith, Surgeon Cusack and Lieutenant Watson paid a visit in the s.l. McArthur returning to their ship the next day via Brunei.	P.W.D. -By arrangement I met the British Resident of Brunei, Mr. P. A. B. McKerron at Lumapas in Brunei territory, from whence we examined and agreed upon the route of the last three miles which needs to be constructed to complete the Limbang-Brunei Road. The three miles newly constructed was examined and found very satisfactory and now only awaits a spell of dry weather to harden up the surface when it will be fit for traffic. Mr. P. A. B. McKerron returned with me and the next day visited his Government’s Station at Temburong proceeding by car and bicycle.
Medical and Health. -Owing to himself being on the Sick list, the Medical Officer of Brunei was unable to pay his usual monthly visit.
The health of the District was on the whole good, a few suffered from heavy colds but fortunately we escaped the influenza epidemic which was rampant in the neighbourhood.
Five patients were admitted to Hospital and four discharged during the month, and eighty-one out-patients were treated.
Trade and Shipping. -The m.I. Sylvia was up on the slipway and lined with a new tail shaft and also the new patent cutless rubber stern bearing. It is hoped that with this bearing the tail shaft will have a longer life.
LAWAS.
June, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe, reports: -
Court. -The foilowing cases of note occurred during the month. Badus, Murut sentenced to two years’ R.I. section 379 I.P.C. Pangkat bin Salam six months section 417, Amit nine months section 379, Karto, Javanese six months section 379. Stro, Kassan and Kastro, Javanese six months each section 379, and one month each for travelling without a pass, sentences to run concurrently. Ah Chion, three months’ R.I. for breach of agreement. There was an average number of Civil cases.
P.W.D. -Arrangements were made during the month for the repair of the Government Bungalow at Sundar.
Two of the main supports of the Salo-ateng bridge gave way and necessitated replacement of new timber.
General. -Substations were visited from the 8th to the 16th when all outstanding cases were dealt with and books checked up-to-date. On the 15th I met Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident. Fifth Division at Sundar, together with Mr. H. M. Calvert. Commissioner of Trade and Customs. At Sundar inquiries were made into the appeals brought against Munap. Tua Kampong of Kampong Aru. The complaints were found to be groundless and dismissed. Party left for Lawas on the 16th the Resident returned to Limbang on the 18th and Mr. Calvert proceeded to Labuan en route for Kuching on the same day. On the 24th, a Chinese woman in the bazaar gave birth to triplets, all girls, and up-to-date appear to be flourishing. A fair number of Muruts from the Ulu Trusan came down during the month to pay their tax for this year, and in many cases (or two or three years in arrears.
Owing to the lack of demand for sawn timber, Messrs. Cook and Colins of the Vamco Timber Company have now turned their hand to supplying the Island Trading Company, Brunei with a monthly supply of boxes tor packing cutch.
Health during the month has been poor, there being a great deal of influenza and malaria. Conjunctivitis is also very common and the infection is believed to have come from Labuan. All Emigrants from foreign Porta are in future to be inspected by the Dresser-in-Charge before being allowed to land.
Agriculture. -The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Ltd., exported 9,856 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
Rainfall. -The following rainfall was recorded during the month: -
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
Matters of Muslim Interest.
The Editor, Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
KUCHING,
14th August, 1931.
SIR,
The article under the above heading, which appeared in your last issue, I believe, was heartly welcome by your Malay readers. I, being very interested in the subject, now take the pleasure of writing a few lines to express what I think.
By the way of the meeting of the lenders of the Muslim Community in Kuching, held in the Malay Court on Friday, 22nd May, 1931, presided by the Datu Shahbandar. I presume that some of the local Malays are endeavouring to modernize themselves. That is to say that they begin to value education and to practice economy.
With reference to Dr. Ariff’s appeal that the Malays should not spend large sum of money on marriage ceremonies, circumcisions and funerals, I would cordially ask the well to-do people to, make examples of abandoning the old and harmful practices; otherwise, I think there will be very few followers of Adat Baru (New Custom).
It is an excellent idea to advise everybody to be economical. Therefore the local Muslim leaders must not say that the rich people may have the right of spending lavishly on ceremonials. Whenever they endeavoured to say that many a, home of the not so-well-to-do has been wrecked owing to the folly of spending money in the extravagant way, they should also say that many rich men spent their income for their own luxury only. In my opinion, however, that, in order to follow the examples of the advanced nations, the rich people should do the philanthropy. That is to spend part of their money in encouraging ration, founding clubs and associations (social and religious) or in establishing factories for giving works to their unemployed brothers.
I remain, Sir,
Yours faithfully,
JAWI PERANAKAN.
[We agree with our correspondent that the well to-do should set an example by spending less on such ceremonial. There is however a very good maxim about cutting one’s coat according to one’s cloth. If a rich man spends a little more than a poor man on say, a wedding, it is merely foolish if the poor man feels that he is bound to spend a similar amount on the same ceremony. -Ed.]
