VOL. LXI.
No. 930.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Monday, March 2nd, 1931.
20 CENTS.
The Sarawak Gazette	MONDAY. MARCH 2nd. 1931.
Contents.
Marriage.
On the morning of the 11th February at 9.30 a.m. at St Thomas Cathedral, Miss Grace Voon Mee Hiong, second daughter of Mr. and Mrs. Voon Kon Siong. to Mr. Charles F. E. Young, the Venerable Archdeacon Champion officiating.
EDUCATION FOR NATIVES.
NEW METHODS FOR OLD.
1930 was a notable year in the history of education in Sarawak, since it was during that year that work was actually started on the construction of the new Malay College in Kuching. Though it is probable that few of us at the moment appreciate the significance of this fact, yet it is not too much to say that the laying of the foundation stone inaugurated a new era in the progress both of local education and of the State.
The Malay College, which is to replace the existing Kampong Java and Lay Schools, is to be built on the most up-to-date lines. It will provide for a course of higher Malay studies, in addition to which special attention will be paid to Native handicrafts, and it is hoped that in time courses of instruction in such subjects as Agriculture, Hygiene and elementary Engineering and Surveying will become part of the regular curriculum. No English will be taught in the College. To start with, at any rate, a large proportion of the graduates will be trained as teachers, in order that we may at last have the staff of qualified teachers which the various Malay schools throughout the State so urgently require.
The main object of the new College is to help the Malay to help himself by fitting him to take an active and useful part in the life of his own community. At present, it must reluctantly be admitted that in Sarawak the average young Malay is ill-prepared to face competition in the struggle for existence which modern conditions render inevitable. Certainly, up to the present, life in Sarawak has been easy for the Native, who has always been more or less sheltered from outside competition, but there are now signs that this protection cannot last forever, and that the day is coming when life will be less easy and when the Native will have to fend for himself with the best.
The enormous importance of education in primitive countries still developing is self-evident, and the grave effects of a mistaken educational policy are no less so. India, of course, is the classic instance of the latter, since it is to this that responsible opinion largely attributes the present unrest in that unhappy country. India has fallen into the error of opening innumerable universities while trusting largely to luck and private enterprise to provide the elementary and secondary education necessary for university admission. The consequent inferior standard of the elementary schools has forced the universities to lower their standards of admission and graduation, which has had the deplorable effect of flooding the country with a class of young men of the “failed B.A.” type, whose only qualification for any sort of work is a sketchy knowledge of the English language. These lads consider that the mere fact that they can boast a few months or years spent at a university automatically entitles them to clerical employment, and they are painfully surprised and aggrieved when they fail to get it. They then provide admirable material for the agitator and subversive propagandist, being young, impressionable and thoroughly disgruntled with the system which has made them what they are. Too proud to return to their parents’ farms or shops, yet not sufficiently qualified for the work on which they had relied, they form a class of half-baked and unproductive youths who welcome revolutionary activities, if only for the reason that they give them an occupation and restore to them a sense of their own importance.
In Sarawak, luckily, we are not yet far enough advanced to run a similar risk, but there is no doubt that this danger does to a certain extent exist, on a smaller scale, of course, and it seems probable that it is a danger which will tend to increase as time goes on.
The Mission schools have for many years done excellent work, but. if we may venture a criticism, it seems that they have concentrated on English to the detriment of other subjects which would have been of far greater value to their pupils. Here, of course, we speak only of the Native, and we are aware that the Mission Schools are concerned chiefly with Chinese, to whom these remarks do not apply, or not. at any rate, to the same extent. Whether the average Native of the country benefits from being taught English is open to doubt; we consider that in all but a few exceptional cases he does not. but that he would certainly benefit from a course of instruction in Malay, which, after all, is the dominant language and the lingua franca of the State. The effect of taking, say a Dyak or an up-river Malay and teaching him only English is to turn him into something dangerously akin to the Indian “failed B.A.” When he leaves school he tries for the inevitable clerkship, fails to get one, and then the trouble starts. What is to become of him? Where is his place in Native life?
Can he go back to his parents and work on their rubber garden or padi farm? No, that is beneath him. Can he go back to his village and build boats or go out with the fishing fleet? No. That is also is beneath him. Can he join his relatives and work jungle produce? No. He is too good for that kind of life. Can he enlist, say, in the Police force as a constable? Certainly not. He might perhaps consider a job as a Sub-Inspector, but he is far above the ranks. What, then, is he fit for? What is he to do? As far as one can see. Nothing at all. All that his education has done for him is to give him the mistaken idea that the fact that he can read and write a little English renders it derogatory for him to earn his living other than by pushing a pen. He abandons the dress and customs of his race, apes the European, and in all too many instances become a nuisance to himself, his family and the community.
What, then, is the alternative, if one exists?
As far as Sarawak Malays are concerned-and the term “Malay” embraces all native Mohamedans-the new Malay College is the answer. Here, Malays will be taught to read and write their own language; they will receive instruction in a number of practical subjects which should prove of real value to them in after life, and the religion, customs, traditions and handicrafts of their own race will be actively fostered. Thus, it is hoped that the students will cither return to their own homes well fitted to get down to a job of work, and with no false ideas about the superiority conferred upon them by education, or else will go to outstations as teachers, there to inculcate into others the principles which they themselves have assimilated during their period of training.
In the case of Dyaks and other tribes the situation is very similar. Surely a sound knowledge of Malay would prove far more useful to them than an imperfect knowledge of English, and the value of some sort of training in practical subjects is too obvious to need emphasis. A few days spent, say, in a school garden would surely be of infinitely greater benefit than the same numbers of years spent in acquiring a smattering of English and a large modicum of discontent.
We have tried, in this article, to set forth briefly the ideas-one might almost say ideals-underlying the present educational policy of the State. With the completion of the Malay College this policy will start off, so to speak, from scratch. We have the great advantage of being able to profit by the mistakes of others and learn from the experience of other Eastern countries which have “progressed” at a quicker rate than Sarawak, and it is up to us to make the most of our opportunities. It rests with us to decide whether we are going to turn out a generation of “failed B.A.’s” or a race of young men sturdily equipped to take their place in the life of the community and the development of the State.
Local and Personal.
February.
February, the dreariest month in the calendar at home, is one which has a lot to be said for it in Sarawak. This year it contains three holidays, -Chinese New Year. Hari Raya Puasa and Her Highness the Ranee’s birthday and in addition to these festivities we have a race meeting to enable us to win (or lose) a little of our hard-earned cash. For the losers, however, there is the consolation that February is a pleasantly short month, and that pay-day arrives a few days earlier than usual!
Mr. and Mrs. R. D. St. J. Horton arrived from England by the Kuching on February 6th. Mr. Horton, who returns from furlough, has been posted for duty in the Secretariat for Chinese Affairs.
We extend a hearty welcome to Mrs. Horton, who is a newcomer to Sarawak.
On the title page of this paper there appear the words “Residents at outstations will confer an obligation by forwarding to the office early intelligence of all matters of general interest, in their respective neighbourhoods.” The word “residents,” of course, is taken here in its unofficial sense. These few lines, which appear every month, have now become so familiar as to breed contempt, or rather indifference, which is a great deal worse. We would like, therefore, to call the attention of all our outstation readers to this short paragraph, in the earnest hope that they will from time to time rouse themselves and send us such news as may be available. To look at an average number of the Gazette is to gain the impression that the State of Sarawak is bounded by the Kuching Municipal limits. Strange as it may appear, there are other places in the State beside the capital. At least, we see on the map such names as “Limbang,” “Simanggang,” “Sibu” and the like, so we assume that they exist. We can but ask them, therefore, to give us some proof of this fact and break their age-long silence!
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to approve the appointment of Mr. R. C. Kay. Manager of Messrs. Sime, Darby & Co., Ltd., Kuching, to be a member of the Kuching Sanitary and Municipal Advisory Board.
We hear that Flood Tide, the Sibu periodical, is positively to make its bow to the public towards the end of March. Her Highness-the Ranee has graciously consented to launch the new paper on its way by writing an introductory note, and Mrs. Le Gros Clark has contributed a striking cover- design.
The price of Flood Tide will be one dollar per copy, and we can heartily recommend the publication as a good investment. Subscriptions should be addressed either to Mrs. W. F. Dick, Sibu, or else to the Editor, Sarawak Gazette, Kuching.
Mr. A. A. Rennie, Treasurer of Sarawak, left by the Maimuna on January 30th for a visit to British North Borneo. Although the visit is quite unofficial, we understand that Mr. Rennie proposes to study certain of the methods of the British North Borneo administration during his stay in Sandakan.
Mr. B. A. Trechman officiates at the Treasury during Mr. Rennie’s absence.
We note from the Bau monthly report that tobacco smugglers have been troublesome along the Upper Sarawak-Dutch Borneo border.
During January police patrols succeeding in intercepting two gangs of Chinese, and confiscated some five piculs of Chinese and Siamese tobacco. Four arrests were made.
Her Highness the Ranee and the Dayang Elizabeth paid a short visit to Sibu, leaving Kuching by the Maimuna on January 30th, and returning by the same vessel on February 5th.
We understand that Her Highness, who stayed at the Residency, thoroughly enjoyed her excursion to the city of the plains. From local sources we learn that the honour of Her Highness’ visit, which was the occasion for some of the festivities for which Sibu is famous, was much appreciated.
Another recent visitor to Sibu was Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident. Second Division, who spent some days of local leave at that Station.
A correspondent informs us that in spite of mistaking a dinner-table for a Christmas pudding, Mr. Archer managed to bring his stay to a happy conclusion. Apart from the above-mentioned attempt at amateur incendiarism, we gather that his visit passed off without incident. Certainly, he managed to get clean away, and is now safely back at Simanggang.
Mr. Pedro Solosa, Bandmaster of the Sarawak Rangers, has retired on pension after twenty-five years’ service. Mr. Solosa has been Bandmaster for many years, and is largely responsible for training the band to its present standard of excellence.
The cloistral calm of the Chief Justice’s Office has been rudely disturbed by the arrival of the new clock. This is being fixed in the tower of the Government Offices, and the process produced such showers of plaster and cement that the Chief Justice was forced to leave his quarters and take refuge in the old shipping master’s office at Pengkalan Batu.
Our reputation spreads, it seems. Not long ago we received a letter of praise from New York, which we were too modest to publish; now comes an inquiry about subscription rates from as far afield as Moscow. Possibly the Soviet authorities, aware of the power of the press, are making tentative efforts to control the Fourth Estate in Sarawak, -instances of editors of influential journals in the pay of foreign Governments are by no means rare. At the moment, we are busily occupied in working out how many roubles go to a dollar!
The trials of an editor are many and varied. We do not mind such routine matters as dragging “copy” out of unwilling contributors, burning midnight oil over proofs of monthly reports or taking a quota of kicks from people whose susceptibilities we have quite unintentionally offended, -these are all in the day’s work. But when it comes to being asked to trace a gentleman’s father in the Island of Ternate, or to giving advice on a prospective change of denomination to an earnest young Christian in Singapore, then we do kick! And readers who try to use the Gazette as an unpaid employment agency are not as popular as they might be.
We note from a Home paper that Mr. S. T. Ennion, late of the Sarawak Police, has been appointed Deputy Governor of Parkhurst prison. Mr. Ennion was formerly Deputy Governor of Wormwood Scrubs.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to commute the sentence of death passed on Benito Sosa, a bandsman of the Sarawak Rangers, for the murder of Delfin Arca, a fellow-bandsman, to fifteen years’ imprisonment.
Mr. H. E. Cutfield left Kuching to proceed on furlough on January 30th. Mr. A. Macpherson has been appointed District Officer, Bintulu, in Mr. Cutfield’s place.
A Mukah Melanau named Tigai was on January 24th found guilty in the Resident’s Court at Mukah of a particularly brutal murder. Tigai asked a Chinese trader to give him credit for three cents’ worth of tobacco; on the trader refusing, Tigai left his boat and attacked him with an axe, killing him in a very few moments. He was arrested immediately, committed for trial and sentenced to death by the Resident's Court, the conviction and sentence subsequently being confirmed by the Supreme Court.
Times change, with a vengeance! On February 9th a Dyak girl named Banun came before the Magistrates on a charge of driving a motor car without a licence!
It seems that Miss Banun, feeling the need of a little fresh air, hired a taxi from the owner on the “drive yourself” principle and proceeded to dash round Kuching at a rate of knots. The police had no quarrel with her driving, which was skilful in the extreme, but resented the fact that she had omitted to take out a licence, and duly stopped the car and took her in charge. On the following day an amused Court mulcted Banun in a small fine, which was smilingly paid up; is this enterprising girl the first of a line of chauffeuses? Certainly the adoption of attractive lady syces would be an innovation which would be sure of a good reception.
We hear that, the squads of Sarawak Rangers at Limbang and Kapit are to be withdrawn, since it is considered that Military Garrisons are no longer required at these stations. The duties of the Rangers will be taken over by the local police.
During 1929 the squads of Rangers were removed from Trusan and Bintulu; Kapit and Limbang, therefore (if we except Miri), are the last outstations to give up their garrisons.
We draw the attention of our readers to the amended schedule of sailing dates of the Sarawak Steamship Co., which will be found under “Shipping News.”
The alterations in the schedule are necessitated by the fact that the Vyner Brooke is to be in dock longer than was at first expected.
As we go to press, we hear that the Unlimited Sweepstake, worth about $2,600, has been won by. Mr. W. H. Avery, of Bintulu.
We tender our heartiest congratulations to Mr. Avery on his good fortune. Attaboy!
The Sarawak Civil Service List for 1931 is now available, price one dollar, and can be obtained from the Sarawak Government Printing Office.
Visitors to Kuching for the races included Mr. B. J. C. Spurway, Mr. C. D. Adams, Mr. W. L. Clark, Mr. D. O. McGinn and Mr. E. I.amplough of Selalang, all from the Third Division. The Second and Fifth Divisions stayed at home, and the Fourth Division sent us Mr. D. S. McLeod.
Another visitor who arrived by the Margaret. on February 23rd, was Mr. Hersch, Production Manager of the Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., Miri.
Now that one member of the Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., staff has successfully braved the perils of coastal navigation to come to Kuching, we hope that others will follow suit. There are at present several ex-Miri-ites residing in Kuching, and all Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., visitors may be sure of a hearty welcome.
We hear officially that the Right Rev. Logie Danson proposes to resign his appointment as Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak, having accepted the post of Assistant Bishop in Carlisle Diocese, together with a Canonry in Carlisle Cathedral. The Rev. Logie Danson, however, will visit British North Borneo and Sarawak in June, in order to make a last tour of his diocese.
The Rev. Logie Danson has held the appointment of Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak for about 14 years, and takes with him the good wishes of all his friends in Borneo when he goes to his new sphere of work.
Birthday of Her Highness the Ranee.
A salute of 21 guns fired from the battery at Fort Margherita ushered in the birthday of Her Highness the Ranee on 24th February.
Owing to the extra race meeting, the public holiday in honour of Her Highness’ birthday was held on the previous day.
We take this opportunity of wishing Her Highness many happy returns of the day and all good luck in the future, felicitations in which we are sure that all our readers will most heartily join. We are fortunate this year in having Her Highness with us on the occasion of her birthday: let us hope that we may be able to say the same every year for many years to come!
Obituary.
DEATH OF DATU PENGERAN MOHAMAT BIN PENGERAN HAJI SHAHBANDAR.
It is with deep regret that we have to record the death at Oya on 24th February of Datu Pengeran Mohamat, Datu and Senior Native Officer of Oya. A telegram from the District Officer, Mukah and Oya. States that the Datu died of pneumonia.
Datu Pengeran Mohamat joined the service of His Highness the late Rajah in 1902, being appointed Native Officer and Tua Kampong, Oya. He was promoted to the rank of outstation Datu in 1927.
By the Datu’s death Government lose the I services of a faithful and diligent officer of the old type. Datu Pengeran Mohamat was everywhere respected, and his influence in the Oya district was always of great assistance to the administration.
Snakes Alive.
SACRED VIPERS.
SARAWAK PRESENT POR THE LONDON ZOO.
By L. R. BRIGHTWELL.
“Last night the Zoo unpacked a little parcel brought from Sarawak, Borneo.
When the string was untied, we saw a coal black Temminch’s tiger-cat -normally yellow-and the first colour freak of its kind discovered.
In a separate box were temple vipers. The temple viper is a snake apart. He festoons the altars, slithers between the ankles of the officiating priests, and culls himself about the feet of the effigies of the gods.
None dares molest him. He is sacred.
The priests advertise the temple viper as living upon eggs, and so acquire, from believer and infidel tourists, much wealth which is badly needed for the aid of a thriftless populace ever threatened by famine.
The temple viper-quite unintentionally- “plays the game.” When night falls, he glides out in his thousands and eats up the “surplus population” -rats, mice, cockroaches as biga s either, poisonous centipedes-and worse.
The priests exhibit-for the benefit of tourists-neatly blown eggs proving to the satisfaction of all who know no better that the viper sucks eggs, which of course no snake of any kind can do. But it is an amiable lie and one to be forgiven.
Meantime the blue temple vipers (a rare variety) look too innocent to suck butter, far less eggs, or rats.”
More than one of our readers sent us the above extract from a home paper, wishing to know where this “Temple” is, and we are obliged to a little snake who tells us that there is no such thing in Sarawak, though there is one on an island not so very far from Kedah.
It may be that some snakes from this island got mixed up with some Sarawak ones slowly wending their way home; at any rate Temminck’s Cat has always avoided Borneo save in the imagination of the late Dr. Charles Hose, though common elsewhere.
The temple snakes referred to have, of course, been found wild even in Sarawak; They are short and green with a triangular head, deadly poisonous but most sluggish. Lest anyone might think them to have been introduced long ago and to have subsequently escaped from some Hidden Temple in a Buried City, our snakes, unlike their Malayan relatives, are still unable to instruct their grandmothers in the art of dealing with an egg when there are no spoons about. -E.B.
Oddities.
Lindbergh was the 67th man to make a non-stop flight across the Atlantic, says “Ripley” in Believe it or not. an entertaining collection of curious facts and figures This statement is hard to believe until one realizes that in addition to Sir John Alcock and Sir A. Whitton Brown, the British airmen who made the first non-stop flight in 1919, two dirigibles with crews totalling 64 crossed the herring-pond before Colonel Lindbergh made his historic dash. Thus, he was number sixty-seven.
We learn from the same volume that Francois I, King of France, issued a decree making the wearing of whiskers punishable by death.
“Qu’ils aient dedans 3 jours a faire ou oster leur dil barbe sous peine de la hart.”
Manhattan, the Indian name for New York, is derived from the words Manna-ha-ta, and means “The Place of Drunkenness.”
Francesca Nortyuege, the famous reformer of Dieze, who died in France in 1903, left her fortune to her niece with the proviso that, for the sake of decency, she kept her goldfish always clothed in tights.
Seven years ago a farmer in Iowa hungs his vest on a fence in the barn-yard. A calf chewed up a pocket in the garment in which was a gold watch. Recently the animal, a staid old milch cow, was butchered for beef, and the timepiece was found in such a position between the lungs of the cow that respiration-the closing in and filling of the lungs-kept the stemwinder wound up, and the watch had lost but four minutes in the seven years.
Madame de Maintenon, morganatic wife of Louis XIV,, had herself bled regularly twice a week in order not to blush at the stories told at Court.
Fables about breath catching fire became a fact in Lodz, Russia.
After drinking a quantity of vodka, a workman named Stobb tried to blow out a match with which he was lighting a cigarette with fatal results.
Flames shot from his mouth and an explosion followed, Stobb falling to the floor unconscious and dying shortly afterwards.
Fred Patzel, an American farm labourer is the champion hog-caller of the State of Nebraska. His cry when calling his charges home can be heard for 3 miles.
Few of us realize that the world was once up for sale and actually changed hands, yet such is the case.
After the death of Pertinax, the Roman World was offered for sale by auction by the all-powerful Praetorian Guard. Didius Salvius Julianus Marcus, a wealthy Roman merchant, outbid all others, and the world was knocked down to him after he paid the equivalent of $5,000,000 in gold on March 28th, 193 A.D. The Roman Senate took the oath of loyalty to him.
When the Roman Legions stationed in Great Britain learned of the disgraceful deal, they rose in indignation and under the leadership of General Septimus Severus hurried to Rome, where Didius was seized, deposed, and beheaded on 2nd June, 193 A.D. Septimus thereupon became Imperator of Rome.
[Didius Salvius appears to be the only man who ever lived who could furnish an apt retort to that most irritating query. “D’you think you’ve bought the damn place?” -Ed.]
Lord Edward Russell was host at a party where 6,000 men got drunk. A fountain was used as a punch-bowl into which 25 hogsheads of brandy were poured and among other ingredients used were 25,000 lemons and 1,300 pounds of sugar. This took place in London on 25th October, 1799.
[This is the kind of thing that makes us think that our Race Week visitors are not trying. -Ed.]
Retirement of Dr. G. E. Brooke.
On 15th February Dr. G. E. Brooke retired from the Government Service, having completed nearly three years as Chief Health Officer, Sarawak.
Dr. Brooke has to his credit some 34 years’ service in British colonies and Protectorates, having been appointed Government Medical Officer, Caicos Islands, in 1897. In addition to this appointment Dr. Brooke carried out the duties of District Commissioner, Police Magistrate and Coroner, Caicos Islands, until his leave in 1901.
In 1902 Dr. Brooke came to Singapore as Port Health Officer; in 1914 he became Chief Health Officer, which position he held until his retirement in 1928. In the spring of that year Dr. Brooke came to Sarawak to reorganize the Health Department.
Dr. Brooke leaves behind a record of valuable service for which he deserves the gratitude of every man and woman in the State. His efforts in the cause of public Health have been untiring, and have been attended by a large measure of success.
Dr. and Mrs. Brooke leave behind a large number of real friends of all races; everyone who at any time came in contact with them will feel a sense of personal loss when they leave Sarawak. We take this opportunity of wishing Dr. and Mrs. Brooke the best of luck in the future.
A valedictory address read to Dr. Brooke by the Subordinate Staff of the Health Department at a farewell “At Home” at “Aloha,” Dr. Brooke’s residence, appears on another page.
Commercial Courtesy.
CHIVALRY FOR DUNS.
The following brief correspondence was recently published in the London Observer and proves that even such a distasteful business as debt-collecting may be greatly mitigated by a little leaven of old-world politeness: -
A. B-, Ltd., would like to think that your unresponse in the face of repeated requests for the settlement of your overdue account is unintentional, and draw your attention once again to this matter.
The sum is Mr. C -wishes to assure Messrs. A. B-that his unresponse, so far from being intentional, is a source of continued worry to Mr. C-himself and is due solely to lack of the necessary funds. This state of affairs he hopes very sincerely-and not entirely without reason-will be remedied in a month’s time, when he will again communicate with Messrs. A. B-.
Messrs. A. B-, Ltd., thank Mr. C-for the very candid response to their request for the payment of his overdue account, and in appreciation of his difficulties, are quite agreeable to leave the matter over for another month, when they trust that his “sanguine” hopes regarding the necessary funds will be realized and mutual satisfaction ensue.
We commend this correspondence-which, incidentally, seems specially suited to the present bad times-to our merchant princes, and to all those depressing gentlemen who will not take lain bulan for an answer!
Japanese Fishing Vessel Sinks at Pending.
In the small hours of Tuesday morning, 10th February, a Japanese fishing vessel sank at Pending in rather unusual circumstances.
This boat, the Khushi Maru of 20 tons, flying the Japanese flag, arrived at Pending on the previous evening. She had sailed from Labuan with a crew of only two, being bound for Singapore, but running short of fuel she made for Kuching. She was duly examined by Customs officials at Pending, and proceeded up river, but she had only travelled a very short distance when her engine failed. The crew, being very tired, anchored and immediately went to sleep, apparently without taking soundings or any other precautions to discover whether or not the anchorage was safe. As it happened, it was not, since they had chosen a spot where the bank is dry at low water and shelves at an acute angle.
At 3 a. m. on the Tuesday morning the vessel sank, the crew fortunately being rescued by some Malay fishermen.
The crew are unable to put forward any reason for the boat foundering except that she took a sudden list and filled with water. In view of the facts of the case, however, this would appear to be the correct explanation The ebb tide must have left the boat in such a position on the sloping bank that any movement on the part of the sleepers would disturb her equilibrium, thus causing a list which would admit the water. Unlikely though this sounds it must be true, since the vessel was owned by the Juragan and not insured, so there was nothing to be gained by deliberately sinking her.
The crew were accommodated at Pending Signal Station until the boat was re-floated, this being done with the aid of two P.W.D. tongkangs.
Information received from the Harbour Master, Labuan, reveals the fact that the Khushi Maru originally left Singapore with a crew of ten, eight of whom deserted at Kudat, in British North Borneo. The owner was therefore endeavouring to take his boat back to Singapore-no easy feat, with only one man to help him-in order to sign on a new crew.
Wild Pig.
SOME NOTES ON THE JUNGLE PORKER.
The wild pig has the distinction of being the most popular game animal to non-Islamic Bornean natives, and some account of its appearance, habits and pursuit may therefore prove of interest. Incidentally, such an account may serve to show how little is generally known about this fine beast.
Anyone shooting a number of pigs might well be excused for thinking that there were several kinds, but actually the bearded pig is the only one so far known in Borneo. An old boar measures about five feet long, stands half as high at the shoulder, and weighs possibly as much as one hundred and eighty pounds; when fully grown the colour is a uniform chalky white, but in subadult specimens it is rather more yellowish the tufted bristles on the snout being darker and is distinguishing the youngsters even in the distance. At a still earlier stage boars and sows arc alike, having anything from a brownish-yellow to dark grey body the hair of the crown and ridge down the back being a much lighter yellow, -these incidentally, are the “pigs’ bristles” of commerce. I he dark tufts over the tusks and the lighter area behind are distinctive at this stage. Piglets are a dirty brown colour with three longitudinal stripes along the flanks, and it is still a matter of argument whether both striped and unstriped young occurin the same litter.
The pig, therefore, varies a great deal in its early stages, the adult boar being a uniform dirty white and being distinguished by its very bristly face and the long side whiskers hanging down under the cheeks; these form the beard from which it derives its popular name. The tame house-pig, however, is quite a different animal, being short snouted, and often having white stockings; the bearded pig is never domesticated save as a curiosity or pet by an occasional Punan. On the other hand, white stockinged house-pigs do stray off into the jungle and become more or less self-supporting, so any enthusiast shooting one will be in the wrong only it he pays for it or creates a new scientific name half as long as the beast
The pig is a game animal by no means to be despised. Starting as one of a litter of seven or eight, born usually about December or January, the little piglet may have to be on the move most of the day and night if the fruit season is poor, since his dam ranges long distances in search of food for her young.
Both in good and bad times, however, two or three sows and their may litters may combine, with the result that to the casual observer the woods seem full of squealers of all sizes which make off with surprising agility when disturbed.
When the young are about quarter-grown the litters break up into groups of twos and threes, remaining thus for the most part until the sub-adult stage. Full-grown boars are mostly encountered alone, and as a rule seem to be ill-disposed to their fellows, scoffing up with zest such piglets, wilder lame, as may come their way.
Only on one other occasion do pigs occur in numbers, and that is during their periodical migrations; I believe that those occur in times of plenty and in good fruit years, that they are usually more or less local, and that they need not necessarily be annual events. At any rate, for a week or more in favoured spots pigs pass daily in twos and threes or even larger parties, and as many as two and three hundred have been seen crossing a river together, probably thus circumventing their greatest enemy, the crocodile.
Pigs swim well and do not cut their throats with their fore-hooves as was thought at one time; swiping low in the water, with just the snout and crown showing, they offer a difficult mark to shoot at but are fairly easily speared or else killed by a blow on the snout from a heavy piece of wood These migrations become so well- known to the natives that they station themselves either in boats or on the bank at likely points along the river, and in this way secure much good meat as well as ridding themselves of pests to their crops.
Pigs in many parts are pure vermin and do great damage to crops, tearing up fences and rooting up newly-planted coconuts or rice to the despair of the owner. After a few have been shot however, the others become wary, and there is at present no real way of dealing with them on a large scale; the blatik-a sharp bamboo set on a spring beside a path is now forbidden, owing to the number of human beings who received the sharpened stake meant for the pig in their thighs. Some Kenyahs purposely leave gaps here and there in the fences of their padi fields, just inside which they dig a step with a sharp stake placed upright at the bottom. The pigs, in their eagerness to get their teeth into a good feed, crash down, the steps and impale themselves.
Even in populous districts such as Kuching, wild pig occur at night, but not unnaturally are exceptionally wary; usually they descend to the low river banks and seashore about dusk, and early risers, if they are out before daylight, may often intercept them as they retire up some mountain or small hill, where they rest during the day. In the far interior, though, pigs are so unaccustomed to guns that it is not unusual for the fall of a beast to cause its mates merely to move a short distance away and go on feeding! But the more sophisticated animal has a faculty for detecting human beings only exceeded by the ability of a few of the wilder tribes to detect the pig itself. Often one hears two or three grunts or a loud noise as a pig knocks his tusks against a tree trunk; this appears to be a warning signal from some suspicious porker to his pals putting them on the alert; by remaining perfectly still on these occasions the pigs may sometimes walk away and offer a shot, but they are certain rapidly to disappearif one makes the very slightest noise in trying to approach them.
The usual method of securing pigs is with the use of hunting dogs, though as a rule what with the speed of the pig and the agility of his native pursuers, it often happens that all is over before the European follower arrives on the scene. When cornered or wounded, large pigs are no mean adversaries, -sweeping aside the dogs, they may attack their human foes, though fortunately they usually give warning of their intention by a prolonged “chocking” or gnashing of the tusks. They are very determined in their attack, which is made in a swift fierce rush; there are not a few instances of men having been killed, and accidents to arms and legs are by no means uncommon. Nothing but a dead shot or fatal stab will turn them once the rush has started. It must however, be admitted that the average pig almost invariably runs, so it is the unexpectedness of the attack that makes it dangerous. The long tusks of the lower jaw seldom exceed eight inches (they run to ten or more in India) but they are dead weapons quite capable of inflicting a deep gash, and many a large tiger has met his match in tackling a well-armed pig.
Pigs are most often encountered loafing about on river banks up-country, and as the noise of swiftly running water is such that one can approach unheard, they are not usually difficult to shoot. Not unnaturally one aims at the shoulder, but regarding this point as “6 o’clock”, one’s rifle bullet will go trundling over the pig’s back at a range of 80 yards, and to take him in the shoulder it is necessary to aim somewhere down by his ankles. They are not difficult animals to stop with buckshot, being nothing like so hard to bring down as a deer, and if hit at all hard they are fairly easy to secure.
Though natives esteem them highly as food, it must be admitted that they do not as a rule appeal to the European palate. being nothing like toothsome as the kijang or barking deer. One is apt, therefore, to be disappointed by one’s first “wild” pork chop, but should one shoot a pig, one has the satisfaction of knowing that other people appreciate it and that none of it is wasted not even the skin! The Punan is perhaps the greatest devotee of pork: these people follow any migration of pigs which they meet, and, hanging on the flanks kill immense numbers for food, eating themselves into an actual stupor from which they emerge to a further gorge, or hastily to kill another, in fact they almost seem to get drunk on pig, and when in this state of gluttony, they offer altogether a most revolting spectacle. (E.B)
Hari Raya Puasa and Chinese New Year.
Chinese New Year and Hari Raya Puasa were celebrated in Kuching in the customary manner, salutes being fired in honour of both days. On the eve of Hari Raya, the kampongs were beautifully illuminated, and were visited by many Europeans and Chinese.
We take advantage of the unusual proximity of Hari Raya Puasa and Chinese New Year to wish both our Muslim and Chinese friends a simultaneous happy new year. May good fortune and prosperity attend them, and may the slump bogey not cast too black a shallow on the land!
Dangerous Cosmetics.
SERIOUS DISEASES CAUSED BY LEAD POISONING.
Moving that Council approve the Order made by the Governor in Council under the Sale of Food and Drugs Ordinance, prohibiting the sale and importation of cosmetics containing lead or any lead compound, the P.C.M.O., Singapore, (Dr. Hoops) said; During the past two years a number of cases of lead poisoning have occurred in Chinese women in Singapore- mostly young women of fairly good social position. Careful investigations have been made and analyses carried out by the Government Analyst of various medicines, cosmetics and so on that have been used by these ladies and estimates of the lead extracted from them have also been made. The source of this lead poisoning has been finally traced to a type of face powder which is in common use in this Colony.
The position is serious. Amongst several permanent results from the use of this face powder by ladies known to have occurred in Singapore are three cases of total blindness, two cases of advanced paralysis and a number of women are suffering from incurable kidney diseases.
Instances have occurred where infants have been born dead or die shortly after birth, due undoubtedly to lead poisoning from the use of this cosmetic powder.
Similar reports have been received from Penang and there is no doubt that these face powders are largely used throughout the Malay Peninsula.
A physician from Canton recently informed me that similar cases are occurring in that city where, by the way, most of these face powders are manufactured.
Cosmetics containing lead were in common use in Great Britain throughout the reigns of the early Georges and it is on record that so many fatalities occurred therefrom that their use was prohibited.
Samples of various face powder seized in Singapore have been found to contain over 35 per cent of lead carbon-equivalent to 28 per cent, of lead. When these analyses were made I requested Government to make the use of cosmetics containing lead illegal in the Colony and the rule was accordingly made upon January 2, 1931, by publication in the Gazelle of that date. - (Strait Budget.)
Mainly About Nothing.
There has been a good deal of talk just lately about reforming our present Calendar. Many of us who suffered from the close juxtaposition of Chinese New Year and Hari Raya consider that such a reform is long overdue; there can be no excuse for a calendar which produces three Monday mornings in one week.
At about half-past-ten on one of these mornings we took our thoughts off the prevailing aridity by bursting into song, and produced the following dirge: -
Dark brown Monday
Following a fun-day.
How bleak the outlook doth appear
Until we sink our morning beer!
This, on being forwarded to a colleague also in extremis. evoked the following reply:
Pale green Friday
Should be called a die-day
And so it damn’ well is, by Heck!
Before the breakfast horse's neck.
There’s nothing like an early start. Up with the lark and down with the first gin-and-ginger.
While in the misanthropic vein occasioned by the feeling that one has slept with one’s mouth full of old copper nails and overripe blackberries, we came across the following fable, one of All-sopp’s, which seemed to us exactly to fit in with our mood:
“Once upon a time there came to Sarawak a Young Man of pleasant mien and reasonable intelligence. Now this Young Man had a healthy liver and a fresh complexion, and lo! his head was covered with hair! For these reasons the Elders of the place frowned upon him. saying one to another, -How shall we heed his words, since the baldness of wisdom is not upon him. neither is there aught of bleariness in his eyes: and his stomach sheweth not the signs of Twenty Years’ Service.’ So, they scorned him, and when he spake they laughed aloud, crying-How shall we hearken to one who has hair upon his head, and whose liver is destitute of knobs? And every time he ventured even a tentative opinion on any subject whatever, they silenced him saying, Young Man, how long have you sojourned in this land? And when he timorously replied ‘Only one year,’ they grunted, and the fatness welled up beneath their eyes so that they bubbled, so great was their contempt. And the Young Man felt abashed and hid his head.
“But there came a time when the Young Man wearied of this inevitable snub, which seemed to him to lack variety. And privately, in the secret places of his heart, he wrote off the Elders as a set of thundering old bores, yea, he even classed them as mutton-headed coots.
“One day, as he sat in the club (which being interpreted, means the place where one is privileged to watch the Elders take their nourishment), he lost his temper; for the fattest and most lethargic of the Elders flatly contradicted him, and, when he politely remonstrated the Elder rolled a glazed and fishy eye in his direction, hiccuped a little and trotted out the usual formula, trusting in the fullness of his pride that it would have its invariable crushing effect.
“But he was mistaken, for the Young Man felt something snap within him, and turning to the Elder. ‘How long.’ he asked, ‘have you been in this country?’
“Thirty-one years.”
“Quite long enough, said the Young Man, and seizing a bottle from the bar. he smote him on the dome so that he died. And none mourned the old idiot.”
We hear that Professor Dingleberry, the eminent Zoologist has published a monograph on the wombats of Sarawak Professor Dingleberry has been able definitely to prove that these creatures do not inhabit belfries, as was formerly supposed.
Answers to correspondents: -
A E.B., Calgoordie. No
CIVEX, Strathnairn. Certainly.
‘Q’. Pekin. I should not think so.
P.L. de M., Noumea. Yes.
APPRECIATIVE, Kamchatka. Hardly.
‘X’, Chimborazo. Perhaps.
SUBSCRIBER. Reykjavik. Why?
CONSTANT READER, Tristan da Cunha.
Definitely No
Owing to the poor response to our “Potted Biographies” competition, the contest will be kept open for another month.
Up to the time of going to press we have not received a single entry from any outstation. Why this silence? Why this scorn for a possible ten dollars?
Is rhyming the difficulty? If so. then the hitch is surely not a very serious one. Although one might have to rack one’s brains to hunt up rhymes for such names as Trechman, Arundell or Bengtsson, one need not go far to find suitable rhymes for ordinary congnomens such as, say, Buck, or Dare. So get on with the good work!
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 60 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 12.] TUESDAY. 28th FEB., 1871. [Print 5 Cts.
The year 1870 shows a considerable increase both in the trade and revenue returns, as will be seen by the accompanying statements. The increase of trade is principally owing to a rush after gutta percha which was run up to fabulous prices for about 5 months, and then subsided to the usual ebb and flow in the market. Besides this, there is a steady improvement which shows every sign of lasting; and with a gradual influx of Chinese and others who find a ready market for labour, the consequent increase of consumption will ensure steady progress.
In the early months of the year the Dyaks of Rejang caused some disturbances and considerable anxiety in the vicinity of Rejang, but since the expedition in June last, the inhabitants have been quiet. These disturbances had but little effect on the trade, as gutta worked by the enemy found its way to the Chinese market. However, it is now to be hoped that these temporary and unpleasant drawbacks are stopped, and that the inhabitants will continue in obedience to the laws of the country.
Sunday, the 19th inst. was New Year’s Day with the Chinese. The festival was introduced with more than the usual beating of gongs and firing of crackers for two or three nights before. This is considered a sign of prosperity among the Chinamen. They make little noise when they have not done well in trade and business during the past year. All work has ceased for a fortnight, and thorough enjoyment-seems to be what all are set upon. Special licences to open private gambling houses during the feast have been taken out, and a row of kajang sheds with all the paraphernalia of the games have been built before the houses in the bazaar.
The Banjermassing rebel Wangkang, who has been giving much trouble to the Dutch Officials, and whose exploits at Banjermassing were wrongly reported in English Papers as having taken place at Bintulu in our territory, is dead. His last stronghold at a place called Sungei Doorachman was captured by the Dutch, and the body of Wangkang, who appears to have been dead for several days, was discovered in a morass. His own son in-law and other persons swore solemnly to his identity. The troubles of our neighbours in this direction are now perhaps at an end.
Sarawak Library.
The following books have been kindly presented to the Library: -
Presented by His Highness the Rajah: -
Presented by Dr. Gilbert Brooke: -
Directory and Chronicle of China, Japan, Malay States, Straits Settlements, Borneo, Siam, the Philippines, Corea, Indo-China, Netherlands India for 1929.
Presented by Captain Andreini: -
First Division News.
January, 1931.
Extracts from the First Divisional Reports for January, 1931, by Mr. P. M. Adams. Acting Resident: -
Resident’s Court. -Two criminal and eight civil cases came before the Court.
General. -The naval Commander-in-Chief of China Station, His Excellency Admiral Sir Arthur Waistell, K.C.B., accompanied by Lady Waistell, arrived on the 3rd in H.M.S. Petersfield sailing again on the 6th. Arrangements were made to entertain the officers and crew.
Outstation officers who had attended the Council Meeting returned to their stations on the 8th.
Benito Sosa, a Philippino bandsman, was tried and found guilty of murdering another bandsman Delpin Arca. He was, however, recommended to mercy, as it was considered he had been gradually worked into a state bordering on insanity owing to being bullied by his fellow bandsman.
The estimates for 1931 were examined by the finance committee and where possible were cut down.
A Deputation of Lepers started to walk from the Camp to Kuching to make certain complaints on the 13th, but were persuaded to return to the Camp where their complaints were investigated. The Board of Visitors subsequently obtained information concerning the faking of the labour pay sheets and an inquiry was held and the minutes forwarded to the Chief Secretary.
About sixty tamils reported they were unable to find work. This is not surprising considering their disinclination to do any if they can avoid it. Most of these people have been repatriated at their own request.
Accompanied by the Assistant Engineer P.W.D., I inspected all roads during the month.
I visited Bau on 28th and 29th and settled all outstanding cases. I inspected, the school and recommend that the Malay teacher be withdrawn, as there are only five regular pupils and no likelihood of any increase.
Samarahan was visited on 31st. The padi is very patchy and on the whole does not look promising.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
January, 1931.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports: -
District Court. -Twenty-four cases were heard, three of which were criminal and twenty-one civil. Of the three criminal cases, all resulted in acquittals.
Magistrate’s Court. -Ninety-two cases were heard, eleven of which were criminal and eighty-one civil. Of the eleven criminal cases, nine convictions and two acquittals were adjudged.
Fines imposed amounted to $64 and fees collected $34.50. The civil claims involved amounts totalling $2,419.66 for which fees collected amounted to $296.29.
Police Court. -Forty-six summary cases were brought before the Court. Forty-three convictions and three acquittals were obtained.
Judicial. -Work in the criminal courts during the month was average, the only notable case was that against Salem bin Leman of the Electrical Department who was sentenced to three terms of imprisonment for theft, three months on the first count and two periods of six months on the other two, the latter sentences to run concurrently.
Staff. -Mr. F. A. Moore, Cadet, arrived from Europe on the 5th of January and was temporarily attached to this office for duty pending appointment.
General. -Three coroner’s inquests were held during the month.
Bulan Puasa began on the 19th, and was observed by the usual salute.
Batu Kawa was visited on 9th and 23rd, the station being satisfactory on each occasion.
LAND OFFICE.
January, 1931.
The Land Officer, Mr. T. M. Griffiths. reports: -
Japanese Wet Padi Planting, Samarahan. -The application for a large area of land made by the Japanese has been withdrawn, after making extensive investigations for a suitable area of land in the Samarahan district. The area selected by them has now been found unsuitable for padi plaining and they have definitely decided not to proceed with the scheme.
Shop Lots. -Eight blocks of shophouses are now completed in connection with the verification of boundaries of alienated areas of the bazaar property.
Simanggang Road -It has been found necessary to prosecute certain Chinese for ignoring notices to quit lands for which they held no titles. These people have had more than a year’s notice and have proved most intractable.
Lack of control and supervision over a long period has apparently, and perhaps not unnaturally, bred in their minds the idea that they can resist authority successfully. This idea must, of course, be eradicated. Action by this department has been taken very gradually in the hope that each successive step may have cumulative effect, and that eventually they may realize that their attitude is mistaken. It may be added that land has been made available into which they may move it they so desire.
Mr. A. K. Brown reports that thirty gardens in the Government Land Reserve were inspected during the month and that the cutting of the northern boundary of the Dyak Reserve is proceeding.
A number of Chinese have applied for land within the Baroh Kampong Reserve. Their applications were rejected.
General. -I took over the duties of Laud Officer, Kuching, as from 7th January.
Instructions have been given that Land Office routine must be strictly adhered to, as this is essential for the purpose of cross reference and to avoid unnecessary repetition of work.
UPPER SARAWAK, BAU.
January, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. P. Murray-Scott, reports: -
General. -His Highness the Rajah, and Messrs. Crocker, Aplin, and Holl, arrived on January 2nd and stayed at Astana until the following Tuesday.
The Acting Resident visited the station on January 28th, returning on the following day.
His Highness the Rajah’s aged pony Mana Buleh was destroyed on the 31st, having broken down completely.
Courts -Four cases were heard in the Resident’s Court during the Resident’s visit, all being settled. In the District Court there were ten criminal cases -one person being convicted of being in illegal possession of arms and ammunition, one of illegally distilling arrack, one under the Petrol Orders, one for theft, and four of smuggling. A case against Chin Ah Fong, for illegally distilling arrack, was dismissed for lack of evidence, and there was a further small case of theft of Dyak fruit on the part of certain Chinese. There were in addition a number of unimportant civil claims.
Customs. -On January 12th information was at last received concerning the smuggling of tobacco from Dutch Territory, and during the two following days police patrols succeeded in intercepting two parties of Chinese, and confiscating some five piculs of Chinese and Siamese tobacco. Of the two gangs, four in all were arrested.
A body of a male Chinese subsequently found in the Sungei Bau, and unidentified, is probably that of one of those who escaped. The various roads from the border are still being watched as well as is possible with the limited number of police available, but as yet there have been no further arrests.
P.W.D. -The roads have suffered rather badly from the torrential rains during the month, but have never been impassable. Two bridges on the Seniawan Road have been repaired and widened. Both the Astana and the Government Bungalow have been fitted with new blatts.
Prisons. -Prisoners have been employed for the most part on the general upkeep of the station. Discipline, in spite of the inefficiency of the warders, has been somewhat better. Health was again bad. A six-strand barbed-wire fence has been erected at the back of the jail, there having been nothing of the sort before.
Power Plant. -This was overhauled by electricians from Kuching during the course of the month.
Health. -Apart from the jail, health was fair, and there were no further cases of malaria.
Rainfall. -Heaviest recorded in 24 hours-80 inches, daily average-27 inches. Total for the month-8’32 inches.
Bidi Gold Mine. -160.66 ounces of actual gold were obtained for the month of December, 1930.
SADONG.
January 1931.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports: -
Court. -Court work during the month has been very light.
A Coroners inquest was held into the deaths of Dayang Pin and Dayang Suhai. A verdict of death by misadventure was recorded in each case.
P.W.D. -The Saging Road, widening and heightening for which a contract was signed during December, has been considerably delayed owing to rain. This work would have been finished by the middle of the month if weather conditions bad been satisfactory. No other works have been put in band under this head in the absence of approved estimates.
Medical. -At the Government Hospital four patients were admitted and four were discharged, leaving one remaining at the end of the mouth.
Agriculture. -Mr. G. St. F. Dare visited the station on the 15th instant in connection with the Bugis Padi Planting Scheme and the Government Experiment Coconut Garden, and with regard to the latter a summons was issued against Sahari for his failure to comply with the clauses of his agreement. Mr. Dare left on the 16th instant for Sebangan.
The padi crop in the Tabekang district has turned out not so good as prospects had intimated. However, in all other districts, with the exception of one or two small Kampong, a fairly good crop is expected.
Prison. -The health of the prisoners has been fair. The prison gang averaging 9.7 was employed on the upkeep of the station.
General. -The offices were closed on the 1st January, being New Year’s Day.
Native Officers Abang Hamdan, Abang Alek and Abang Samsudin return from Kuching on the 9th instant after Council Negri. The stock of ammunition belonging to the Peng Ann Company, Limited, were taken over by Government during the month at wholesale prices, the Peng Ann Company finding that the agency for this commodity was not a paying proposition.
Sadong Collieries Report.
January, 1931.
Extracts from the Sadong Collieries Report for January, 1931, by Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager: -
The output, export, local consumption, and coal stock figures for the month were as follows: -
The mines were operated entirely with free labour-both above and below ground-during the month.
With the exception of eighteen men engaged at monthly rates of pay, all other work is now being performed at piece-work rates by local kongsis of Malays and Chinese.
The initial success of this scheme is primarily due to its introduction at a time when the trade slump, with its consequent lack of other employment, is acutely felt locally.
The cubic contents of the coal heaps were taken and checked with the actual stock figures. The stocktaking of general stores is still proceeding.
The rainfall for the mouth was 15’16 inches.
At Home at “Aloha” Kuching.
FAREWELL TO DRS. G. E. BROOKE & W. J. HUTCHINSON.
On Saturday. 7th February, 1931. the Subordinate staff of the Public Health Department, Kuching, gave an “At Home” at “Aloha” in honour of Drs. Brooke, the Chief Health Officer, and Hutchinson, the Assistant Health Officer, both of whom are leaving Sarawak.
At about 3 p.m. a group photo of the departmental staff was taken in the Kuching Public Gardens just on the other side of Rock Road and opposite “Aloha,” the residence of the Chief Health Officer.
Later on, a good number of guests, ushered by Messrs. Lim Beng Siang, Bong Ah Jin, and Yap Chong How at the entrance, went to “Aloha,” where Mr. Choo Ah Hian, the Chief Sanitary Inspector, made a short speech and then requested Mr. Lee Swee Hock, the Rural Inspector, to read the address presented to Dr. Brooke by the subordinate staff. The wording of the address was as follows: -
TO
GILBERT EDWARD BROOKE, ESQR,
M.A. (Cantab.), L.R.C.P. & S. (Edin), D.P.H.,
L.M.S. Hon. Causa (S'pore), F.R.S.I.
(Lond.), F.R.G.S. (Lond.), ETC.,
The Chief Health Officer,
SARAWAK.
SIR,
We, the Subordinates of the Health Department. Sarawak, most respectfully beg leave to express our deep and sincere regret at the circumstances that have eventuated to bring about your sudden departure from our midst.
We take this opportunity in assuring you of our grateful appreciation for your untiring and unselfish zeal as the head of this department, add for the encouraging and sympathetic attitude you have invariably assumed towards us all. The immense improvements you have effected in this State, in the matter of sanitation, and the successful and smooth working of this organization within the short period of about, three years. undoubtedly testify to your able administrative skill, deep study and an extensive knowledge of the subject, combined with your ripe and unbounded experience.
We fully realize your own disappointment at leaving some of your undertakings incomplete but we must yield to the inevitable force of circumstances. Yet, Sir, you may rest assured that the Public Gardens of Kuching are a living monument in Sarawak, and will in future serve as a fitting testimony to your great genius and your true love for artistry.
While tendering our sentiments of gratitude Sir, we wish to express our indebtedness for the unfailing courtesy and kindness you have extended to us coupled with the implicit confidence you have, vested in us, which have stimulated our nerves to put all our zeal and energy into our work with due veneration. Your unassuming manner and unostentatious dignity have afforded us an easy and ready access for advice and assistance on all occasions, and our present standard of efficiency is all due to your precepts and examples. We will miss in you. Sir, an able and kind officer and a noble-hearted gentleman which is an enormous loss to the State in general and to the Department in particular.
As a small token of our grateful regard, we request you to kindly accept this, our humble address, as a little souvenir for the occasion, with our sincere good wishes for your good self and Mrs. Brooke. It is our earnest hope that both of you will enjoy a most pleasant time among your numerous relatives and friends at home, and we pray that the Almighty may shower upon both of you, His blessings for long life, good health and happiness.
With feelings of deep regret, Sir, we bid you adieu, and at the same time heartily wish you bon voyage.
We beg to remain,
Sir,
Your most obedient and respectful servants
The Subordinate staff of the Public
Health Department.
Kuching, 2nd February. 1931.
On receiving the Address, Dr. Brooke delivered a suitable speech in reply thus: -
Aloha, Kuching, 7th February, 1931.
To Members of the Health Department, Staff, Leper Camp, Sanitary Inspectors and Office Staff.
“Gentlemen, I must thank you very sincerely for the kind and heartfelt expressions of regard which you have embodied in the tastefully printed Address with which you have just presented me, and also for the generous thought that prompted that expression.
When I came to Sarawak the path of public health seemed at first to be an up-hill one. There was so much to be done that it seemed a difficult matter to know where to start. But, as the months went by, I found that your loyal service, your zealous energy, and your tactful dealings with the public, have continually helped to smooth our road, and have contributed much to the achievement of a measure of success of which I think we may be justly proud.
Mrs. Brooke and myself will both be sorry to say good-bye to you all, and we shall always hear, of your future career with interest.
We both wish good fortune to all of you; and if you will allow me. I should like to give you a three-fold parting message: -
Firstly. Always put your work before everything, for work is life’s chief justification.
Secondly. However small your means may be. always live within them, for debt is life’s greatest handicap
Thirdly. Always play the game whether anyone is looking or not, for conscientiousness is life’s most valuable adjunct.
And so, Gentlemen, after one more week, farewell and long remembrance.”
After this the guests were regaled with refreshments; and later, at the request of the guests, another, group photo of all those gentlemen present was taken during the course of the proceedings.
Sarawak Malay Tennis Club.
The annual general meeting of the Sarawak Malay Tennis Club took place on Sunday, 8th February, 1931, and the following were elected office bearers for the ensuing year: -
The Datu Amar, Abang Suleiman, President; Allie bin Haji Hassan, Honorary Secretary; Sirat bin Haji Sa-at, Honorary Treasurer; Morshidi bin Osman, Honorary Auditor; Rakawi bin Yusope, Tennis Captain; Roslie bin Sulong and Bolhasan bin Tassip, committee members.
Fire in Ewe Hai Street.
Sudden outbreaks of fire have in the past been attributed to many causes, but we believe that a fire directly brought about by water is unique. Nonetheless it was indeed water which caused the fire at No. 94, Ewe Hai Sheet, on February 18th; it was proved that some water which had trickled down the wall gathered behind a switch and plug-socket, thus short-circuiting the wires. The resultant flash ignited the insulating materials of the wires, and the flames ran up and caught the planks of the floor above.
The Fire Brigade was promptly on the spot and soon had the fire put out, although some difficulty was experienced in connecting up the hydrant due to the depth at which the coupling is situated.
The origin of this fire should be a warning to all householders to keep a look out for any break in the insulation of electric wires, and to inform the Electricity Department directly any such break is discovered. It should be borne in mind also that all main switches should he in the “off” position whenever promises are closed or temporarily unoccupied.
In spite of every care, we cannot hope to be absolutely immune from fire, but simple precautions such as the above do a great deal to lessen the chances of an outbreak.
Entertainment at St. Mary’s School.
On Thursday, 26th February, a very delightful performance was given by the girls of St. Mary’s School in aid of the New Girls’ School Building Fund. The performance took place in a specially erected hall in the school grounds-a capacious building with a well-raised and lighted stage which gave the performers good scope.
Her Highness the Ranee and the Dayangs Leonora, Elizabeth and Valerie were present. A large number of Europeans attended and the Chinese community was well represented. The Hall was filled to capacity.
The first half of the programme consisted of a medley of songs, recitations and dances by the lower school There was a little play about Bo- Peep into which all the favourite nursery-rhyme characters were introduced-Miss Muffet and her spider, Jack and Jill, Little Boy Blue, etc. Each was a little picture, perfectly dressed, and all recited and acted their pieces charmingly. “The Undaunted Female” caused much amusement. This, is an old English ballad, which tells the story of a brave serving-maid who shot off a number of “bold and able” robbers with, such sang-froid that a noble lord fell in love with her and married her. Miss Andrews must be congratulated on her original presentation of this tale. Her use of the “Chorus” -a row of open-mouthed yokels who comment on the story as it proceeds-was most effective.
The items by the very little people were naturally very popular, both because the babies are so lovely to look at, and because they spoke so clearly and were so completely un self-conscious. If it is allowable to pick out one performer where all were so good, I should like to praise the little girl who recited Malay verses with such spirit and humour. She is a born actress.
In the second half of the programme the bigger girls gave us Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves. What a fearsome crew the forty thieves were with their black moustaches and flashing scimitars! And there really were forty of them because their leader counted them as they entered the cave-though some of the last ones looked suspiciously like the first ones! Their leader was quite a dandy, and I liked his two head-men, too. who passed ironic remarks as if they really enjoyed the joke. Ali himself was a spirited young hero, and the comic relief was ably supplied by the trembling Gina and her pet monkey. One of the prettiest scenes was that in which the little princess, in most becoming of Eastern costumes, was seen weaving garlands with her handmaidens in a really flowery flower-garden.
Miss Phyllis Scott accompanied the children and the Bintang Social Wanderers Band supplied incidental music.
All who saw the performance will agree that Miss Andrews is a wonderful producer. The costumes and the settings were charming and the standard of the acting high. The whole show went off without a hitch (although the curtains unfortunately got hitched up!).
We heartly congratulate producer and performers and trust that the show will be as great a financial as it was artistic success. There are to be two more performances on 2nd and 3rd March. These deserve to be well patronized.
Sarawak Turf Club.
I have examined and compared the balance sheet of the Sarawak Turf Club as at 31st December, 1930, with the Books of the Club. In my opinion the same is properly drawn up so as to exhibit a true and correct view of the state of the Club’s affairs according to the best of my information and explanations given to me and as shown by the Books of the Club.
The monthly current Accounts of Messrs. The Borneo Company, Limited, have been accepted as sufficient instruction of all items of revenue.
The Scrip representing the Cash held on deposit by the Post Office Savings Bank and Messrs. The Borneo Company, Limited, has been exhibited.
A. L. McLAlNE,
Auditor.
Kuching, 9th February, 1931.	Sarawak Turf Club.
FEBRUARY RACE MEETING.
The Meeting was held on Saturday 21st and Monday 23rd.
Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee and the Dayangs Leonora, Elizabeth and Valerie were present.
The first day was well attended. It was an ideal day for spectators, being dull and cool and consequently there were fewer headaches; but it was not a good day for the bar! On the second day, unfortunately, there was a heavy downpour of rain just as the first race started which lasted for about an hour, more than sufficient to send many people home and to make the going heavy for the ponies. But all the same, considerable amusement was caused by various absent-minded individuals walking into ditches and floundering ankle deep in mud. It’s an ill wind that blows nobody any good.
Various very welcome improvements have been made by the Turf Club, of which the most appreciated were, without a doubt, the covered ways leading to the $2 and $1 Totes. But the thing that struck the newcomer most, was the Paddock. Whoever is responsible for its upkeep is to be congratulated on the tasteful lay-out of the ornamental trees.
Owing to the heavy going on both days no previous records were lowered, though there was some very excellent racing. The “star turn” of the Meeting was Mr. Carrie. One would have to travel a long way to see better riding and judgment.
Mudahan was the champion pony of the Meeting, winning four firsts, one second and one third, and securing the Championship Cup for the Chan Brothers’ Kongsi. The runner-up was Akal, who secured three firsts, one second and one third. I am still looking for the individual who informed me that Akal was only a five-furlong-pony!
The Champion Jockey was Awang Bakar, with Mr. Carrie as runner-up. As can be seen by glancing at the Jockeys’ analysis, they practically carried the honours of the Meeting between them.
Flying Fox has become such a by-word now in racing circles that it seems very strange that he hardly appeared amongst the prize winners, but he had some very bad luck, between being left at the post and fouled.
Not being a racing man, I had great faith in Gruda, but it appeals, that other had too. as, after having put my last dollar on him and having the satisfaction of seeing him dead-heat with Mudahan, I struggled through the mud to collect my hard-earned winnings to find he was paying only $2.20-most distressing! Whilst on the subject of ponies, cannot something be done about Ghalib’s most distressing preference for the sides of ditches? The only time he could not get to the ditch side-Mudahan had got there first-he might have won. if Gruda hadn’t decided to take it first.
Her Highness the Ranee presented the prizes at the conclusion of the Meeting. Mr. Parnell was the lucky recipient of both the Rajah’s and the Ranee’s prizes.
A sincere vote of thanks is due to Mrs. Chater, who was, as usual, in charge of the very popular tea-rooms. They were particularly cool and pleasant this year owing to Mrs. Chater’s clever decoration with palm leaves.
Another bright spot-or rather, other bright spots-was the Grand Stand Stewards. They were there to a man, or men, I should say: anyhow I know that two of them were there, which is saying something!
In conclusion I must say and I think that everyone who was present will agree with me, that in spite of the trade depression it was a very cheery meeting, having that friendly good-tempered atmosphere which always prevails at the Kuching races.
In fact, there was only one fly in the ointment, and that was the absence of a certain popular Divisional Resident, whom a strong sense of duty tied to his station. Let’s hope that he will not suffer from this conscientiousness next time!
RESULTS.
First Day.
Saturday, 21st February, 1931.
(GOING FAIR.)
APPRENTICE STAKES.
DIVISIONS II & III.
Mudahan was left badly. Pengarah led from September and Beaver, with Workman lying well up. Pengarah led until half way up the straight, when Workman took command to win nicely by a length. Mudahan was third, half a length away running on.
THE TUAN MUDA'S CUP.
DIVISION I.
Azab started very slowly in the first hundred yards. Happy Boy was pulled right across the field, a very dangerous piece of riding. Flying Fox had to pull up and came up on the outside, and then Talisman was interfered with. Adil and Happy Boy made the running from Talisman. Just before the road Happy Boy dropped back. Flying Fox moved up and took the lead soon after entering the straight Kismet then came through on the outside and delivered a very strong challenge, to which Flying Fox could not reply, though perhaps in another twenty yards the result might have been different. Damit was warned by the Stewards and suspended for the rest of the day for his riding of Happy Boy.
THE SATOK STAKES.
DIVISION II.
Workman showed the way almost at once with Jorrocks tailing off. Water Polo, although a ranch fancied horse, was never in the running. Workman made a very gallant effort, but having finished with Nugget had to give way to September on the post.
THE B.C.L. STAKES.
DIVISION III.
Ghalib was leading when the field came into view and nearly upset a certainty. He was only caught by Mudahan in the last furlong. A pity Ghalib couldn’t be kept out of the soft going near the ditch.
SIMPANG TIGA CUP.
DIVISION I.
Happy Boy jumped off in front and just managed to hold his advantage. Akal, who was badly left at the post, came up wonderfully, taking second honours from Talisman by head.
THE MATANG STAKES.
DIVISION II.
Workman was left badly and was never in the race. Pengarah showed the way almost at once from September, Beaver and Jorrocks, with Water Polo tailing off. In the straight Water Polo moved up and Beaver challenged on the stand side. Pengarah hung on to win strongly by a length.
THE PENDING STAKES.
DIVISION III.
Ghalib bolted, and his Jockey only succeeded in pulling him up halfway up the straight. When the field was finally let away Ghalib again made the running, but was caught up by Mudahan. Better jockeyship might have given Ghalib the race.
THE RANEE’S CUP.
OPEN TO ALL DIVISIONS.
Azab got away slowly. Flying Fox, Kismet and Akal raced together to the road with Azab lying back and Water Polo in the rear. Entering the straight Flying Fox swerved badly on to the ditch. This probably cost him the race. Akal was still hanging on to Kismet, but the latter pulled right over on to Flying Fox, interfering with him badly on the post. Akal then got up cleverly to win by a short head, showing Carrie’s excellent judgment. The same distance divided Kismet and Flying Fox.
The Stewards upheld an objection to Kismet for bumping and boring. Flying Fox was placed second and Azab third. Lohor, the jockey, was warned off for the rest of Meeting.
Second Day.
Monday. 23rd February, 1931.
(GOING VERY FAIR.)
THE SEKAMA STAKES.
DIVISIONS II & III.
Pengarah went into the lead almost at once and the issue was never in doubt after crossing the road.
THE SLUMP STAKES.
DIVISION I.
A bunched field to the road, Adil, Happy Boy, Kim Mah and Akal raced together. Kim Mah was going very strongly on the outside. Adil moved up, and Happy Boy dropped back beaten. Kim Mah and Adil passed the Judge together with Akal an unlucky loser, as many thought, a neck away.
THE COUNTRY CUP.
DIVISION II.
Jorrocks and Water Polo led from Workman, who left at the post, with September lying bandy. September had improved his position at the road and was lying well up. Coming into the lead Jorrocks made a very determined effort but had to give way to September about a furlong from home.
THE SARAWAK STAKES.
DIVISION III.
Ghalib again made a plucky effort, but the ditch still held its fatal fascination so Mudahan was just too good for him.
THE TURF CLUB STAKES.
DIVISION I.
Akal was again left at the post, but, by excellent riding on Carrie’s part he caught his field at the road and, coming up on the Stand side, won very decisively from Kim Mah and Happy Boy.
THE STATE SPRINT.
DIVISION II.
Pengarah again made no mistakes and showed the way to his field from the start in spite of his penalty.
THE TOWN STAKES.
DIVISION III.
Mudahan found the weight beginning to tell and Gruda in spite of being hemmed in by Ghalib-the distressing fascination of the ditch again! -ran a wonderful race to a dead heat.
THE RAJAH’S CUP.
A HANDICAP FOR ALL DIVISIONS.
An excellent start. Flying Fox, Water Polo and Akal were in the van at Sekama gate with Azab closing up. The field came to view with Akal well out by himself followed by Azab and Flying Fox. Kim Mah overtook Flying Fox at the road. Akal continued to increase his lead and won easily. Kim Mah just managed to keep Flying Fox out of third place.
Second Division News.
January, 1931.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports for January, 1931, by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident: -
I arrived back from Kuching on the 8th. The Acting Assistant District Officer of Simanggang, Mr. D. C. Hudden, returned from local leave on the 9th.
I paid a flying visit to Engkilili on the 13th and found that the new bungalow there was finished and occupied by the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. Ditmas. The bungalow grounds are as yet bare and unfinished, but in time they should be some of the prettiest in the country.
The Court House had been altered with great benefit to all the stall. The late quarters are now offices for the Acting Assistant District, Officer and the Native Officer, whilst the prisoners are accommodated below.
The bazaar drains there had been concreted as far as the vote allowed. It is hoped to complete the work, at some future date.
I left the Division on short leave on the 19th and was still away at the end of the month.
The Land Officer was away part of the month visiting the Saribas and Kalaka districts, and the Acting Assistant District Officer, Simanggang, visited parts of his district. When I called in at Kabong on the 19th I arranged for the Acting Assistant District Officer, Kalaka, Mr. L. K. Morse, to meet me there to discuss official matters.
The new Government offices in Simanggang are progressing very slowly and practically no work has been done on them during the month. The contractor says that he is working on a framework in Kuching, but probably Bulan Puasa is the main impediment.
The Acting Assistant District Officer of Simanggang reports that Penghulu Sambau visited the station during my absence in order to see me. This is the second occasion we have failed to meet, but I hope to visit him after Hari Raya.
Several changes were made in the clerical service, and the Batang Ai Dyaks were sounded about a successor to Penghulu Renang.
Mr. Goodall, Agricultural Field Officer, Second Division, made several visit to Simanggang.
A memorable event took place on the 24th when the. headquarters of the Sabu Mission were moved from Sabu to Bukit Sabun. The Sabu Mission, about 3 1/2 miles from Simanggang, was started by the Reverend Crossland in 1863. This gentleman returned to England sick in 1877, and was succeeded by the Reverend William Howell, so well-known to many Europeans in Sarawak past and present, in 1878.
The Reverend Howell completed 50 years in charge of the Mission.
The Reverend A. W. Stonton took charge in November 1928. on Mr. Howell’s retirement.
The present site of the Mission is but half a mile from Simanggang, situated on undulating hills, and capable of extension in the future. So far, the only permanent buildings are the boys’ school, kitchens and several small quarters. There is a temporary chapel.
There are yet to be built a church, missionary’s house, girls’ school, more quarters and various other buildings. A good stream of water runs through the mission land and the highest parts of the estate are visible from the Residency. The old church at Sabu will be retained.
The reports on the padi harvest throughout the Division vary; but except in a few places the crop is not above the average, and in some places much below.
Engkabang is scarce everywhere.
There are few unemployed Chinese, most of them having left the Division. The Malays, especially those from the Saribas, are feeling the effects of the slump, and have had to modify their standard of living.
Several Government Farms were let out at greatly reduced rentals for 1931.
SIMANGGANG.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hodden: -
In the District Court there were claims amounting to $534. and one criminal charge for illegal possession of opium that had to be dismissed owing to insufficient evidence.
In the Magistrate’s Court there were seven criminal charges, six resulting in fines and the seventh in a sentence of four months for theft, under section 379 I.P.C. Civil claims amounted to $276.
The following day it was reported that the P.W.D. Contractor, Tan Teck Soon, had filed his petition for bankruptcy. His coolies, who were stranded up here, were given their fares to Kuching and one dollar each for expenses.
On the 7th the death of a Dyak boy, Melina, of Rumah Jelani in the ulu Skrang was reported. One of the many accidents of the kind that occur during the fruit season. He was up a tree, picking and eating at the same time, lost his balance and was picked up dead.
On the 15th, a fifteen-foot man-eating crocodile was brought in. Human remains were found in the stomach and the usual reward was given out.
Four days I spent at Lingga and Sebuyow checking the books and hearing a few cases. The reports of a good harvest down there, in fact all the way down from Simanggang, were quite optimistic, but the prospects in the Entulang, the Undup and the Skrang are bad. due I hear to the usual pests with a predominance of mice. The latter of course, would be checked considerably if they would only clear the ground properly and remove the tree slumps.
SARIBAS.
Extracts from the report of the Acting District Officer Mr. R. L. Daubeny: -
The following cases were held during the month. Jana was sentenced to three months imprisonment and fined $25 for theft, section 379 I.P.C.; Jemut (f.) fined $50 or two months in default for causing grievous hurt, section 335 I.P.C.; Sabeng was sentenced to six months’ imprisonment for non-payment of brian and blanja $75; Lee Boon was fined $50 for cheating, section 418 I.P.C. There were the usual number of small civil suits.
The substations were visited from 13th to 16th instant in the m.l. Rita. Various matters were seen to and outstanding cases settled.
The auditor visited the district from 6th to 16th. when the accounts were checked at all stations, including opium stock, etc.
KALAKA.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. L. K. Morse: -
The only case of interest in the Courts was that of Haji Dullah vs. Haji Bujang, with regard to the ownership of certain lands. A decision was given in favour of the plaintiff, and although I understood an appeal was to be lodged nothing further had been heard of the matter at the end of the month.
The Government Auditor, accompanied by the Divisional Land Officer, arrived from Saribas on the 16th instant, and there met the Resident, Second Division, who left for Sibu by m.l. Irene on the same day.
The m.l. One was laid up from the 10th to 24th instant, the magneto having ceased to function.
The District Officer’s bungalow was completed at Government expense, and I took possession on the 11th instant. Later in the month a telephone was installed.
The Chinese coolies obtaining relief work from the Government now number twenty-seven. They have been engaged in weeding roads, and in clearing the old cattle grounds. Several attempts to begin some much needed roads repair failed owing to the bad weather. Owing to the constant used of the hand-carts during the past few months many of the roads are in a very bad state indeed.
I have issued notices to the effect that gun licences, weights and measures fees, garden assessment, head tax, and exemption tax must be paid by the 31st March, all persons failing to do so rendering themselves liable to prosecution.
An oil store was erected by the Borneo Company Agents near the bazaar. I have informed the Chinese that Order No. II of 1901 will be enforced in Saratok as from the 15th February.
The Registration of Business Names was finished at the end of the month.
Reports from up river promised a good padi harvest, while in some cases the Malays down river have already begun to harvest.
Third Division
January, 1931.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports for January, 1931, by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident: -
Court. -Eight Civil cases were heard, including three appeals, and claims amounting to $13,434.46. There was one Criminal case in which Ijau (Dyak) was charged of rape of Ingkai(f.) Dyak. under section 376 I.P.C. Accused was found guilty according to Dyak Custom.
General. -I returned from Kuching on the 9th inst. after attending Council Negri Meeting.
The question of engkabang was discussed with the Commissioner of Trade and Customs. Mr. H. M. Calvert, and it was decided to obtain the Forestry Department’s help in sending two of the staff up river to instruct in improved methods of soaking and drying the nuts.
The Superintendent of Lands, Mr. C. S Griffiths, and Mr. Sheppard visited Sibu, Binatang and Sarikei during the month.
Mr. G. M. Allman, Chief Field Officer, arrived here on local leave and proceeded to Kanowit to inspect Tanah Estates, Limited.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Oya, Mr. E. H. Etam, paid a visit here for medical treatment.
On the evening 19th instant, a salute of seven guns was fired to announce the commencement of Bulan Puasa.
The Assistant Treasurer. Mr. F. L Mansell, arrived to instruct in the new filing system; he visited Kanowit, Song and Kapit.
The Registrar, Mr. H. B. Crocker, visited Sarikei in order to hear appeal cases.
The Teku Road to the Heng Hua concession was completed during the month.
SIBU.
The District Officer, W. F. Dick, reports
Courts. -There have been the usual large number of Civil claims before the Courts during the month, but there have been fewer Criminal cases and none call for special mention. Fines and fees totalled $583.
General. -Mr. and Mrs. G. D. Kidd arrived back from leave per s.s. Angby on the 6th inst.
There are still constant reports of thefts everywhere, and on the night of the 6th instant an attempt was made to break into the Residency; the policeman on duty heard the noise and one man was arrested.
H.H.M.Y. Maimuna arrived on 9th instant on her way north, with the Dayang Leonora on board.
The s.s Rajah of Sarawak dragged her mornings on the night of the 12th instant as a result of a heavy fresh from up river.
The Resident, Second Division, Mr. J. B. Archer, arrived on 21st instant on a visit to the station.
On 28th Abang Enjah, Native Officer left for the ulu Kanowit to deliver the Government ultimatum to ex-Penghulu Asoon, who now refuses to have anything whatever to do with the Government and is causing unrest in the Kanowit and Entabai rivers.
Her Highness the Ranee and the Dayang Elizabeth arrived on the 31st instant on a visit to the station; Mr. A. A. Rennie, the Treasurer of Sarawak, and Mr. Murphy, A.S.P., were also passengers by the H.H.M.Y. Maimuna which was proceeding to Miri.
MATU AND DARO.
The District Officer, Mr. E. V. Andreini, reports: -
General. -The dresser was withdrawn from this district. During the time he has been here he has done valuable work in improving the sanitation of the bazaars. Two mowers and the cowman were dispensed with in view of economy, and their work was taken over by prison labour.
I returned from Kuching via Paloh and Daro on the 3rd and visited these two places again during the month.
Whilst at Daro I met Mr. Girling of the Forest Department who paid a short visit to the district and we together visited Saie.
A boat manned by four Daro Melanaus was upset in rough water between Budoh and Tanjong Jol with the result that two of its occupants, Pergam and Kileh lost their lives in attempting to swim ashore. One of the bodies was brough back to Daro but the other owing to rough weather had to be buried at Bruit.
Education. -The Matu school was inspected and some eighty boys were present. The majority are able to read and write Jawi but the romanized reading and writing still leaves much to be desired. At Paloh the inhabitants have started to erect a school and will be applying for a master shortly.
SAREKEI, BINATANG, AND REJANG.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports: -
Judicial. -During the month there were three Civil appeal cases heard by the Registrar. In the Criminal Court there were six convictions for petty theft. Civil Court consisted mostly of disputed debts.
General. -A considerate amount of rain fell during the month and high floods were experienced.
Binatang was visited three times during the month and Rejang twice. Belawai has now started its own opium salesman paid by Government and the salesman at Selalang has ceased to function; this was on account of the Company shutting down at Selalang, there now being a very sparse population at this place.
The office was busy during the month, with usual including renewal of licences, etc.
All the pepper gardeners seem to be mortgaging their pepper gardens this year in order to get stores to carry them through to their next crop; over forty mortgage deeds were made out during the month, each deed anything up to six gardens.
The Divisional Forest Officer, Mr. B. J. C. Spurway, visited Sarikei and Rejang as from 26th 30th; he inspected the Bakau Reserve at Pulo Antulang, across river from Rejang Station.
P. W. D. -During the month it was noticed that the new wharf was moving slightly, since it started to drift an inch towards the buttress wall on the shore at high tide. No explanation of this behaviour is yet forthcoming. The Divisional Engineer, Mr. J. W. Whiteside, visited the station in connection with the above wharf.
Other small contracts which had been left over from last year were completed during the month.
Trade and Customs. -During the month very little pepper was reported, as it is nearly finished. Four shops, Kian Seng, Tong Aik, Kim Seng Ann and Khiam Seng were refused shipment of pepper, since they would or could not pay up their royalty on pepper posts due to Forest Department.
KAPIT.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports: -
Courts. -There was a fair amount of Court work during the month. Geluma and Rigan (f.) were imprisoned for two months and one month respectively for non-payment of fine. Tek Hoh, Lim Cheow, Ah Pit and Ban Seng were each imprisoned for three weeks and eight other Chinese were bound over under section 160 I.P.C. Lasu was fined 2 piculs for saroh and Bugieh 1/2 picul for bersudi., There were no other cases worthy of mention.
General. -I deeply regret to have to report the death on board s.s. Augby on the 8th of Mr. W. C. Perrett, Chief Officer. He was buried in the Kapit cemetery the same evening. The deceased officer had served in s.s. Augby for over eighteen months and was well known in Sibu and at the downriver ports.
I also regret to have to report the death on the 7th of ex-Penghulu Matahari of the Sut, who was over 80 years of age at the time of his death. Formerly living in S. Menuan, he had been a Penghulu for over 40 years.
From the 12th to 14th, I was away visiting the Dyaks in the ulu Kapit.
Forest Guard Sebli and Rubber Inspector Ibrahim arrived on the 15th and on the 18th left for the ulu Balleh, were they are to carry on propaganda work in connection with the engkabang crop.
A Dyak named Tangok was brough down from the Mujong on the 14th, having been badly bitten by a crocodile. He was attending to some fish traps when the crocodile took him and he saved his life by thrusting his fingers into the creature’s eyes. His wounds were dressed and he was sent down to Sibu for treatment.
The usual salute was fired on the 19th to usher in Bulan Puasa.
Native Officers Abang Abu Seman and Wan Husaien left for Pala Wong on the 31st to visit the Dyaks in that neighbourhood.
Penghulus Temonggong Koh, Semada, Jingga, Grinang, Atan and Ugak were down during the month.
MUKAH AND OYA.
The District Officer, Mr. E. O. Bruce, reports: -
General. -I arrived at Mukah via Dalat and Oya on the 13th and completed taking over on the 15th. Mr. Macpherson, Acting Assistant District Officer, who had been in charge since Mr. P. D. Adams departure in October sailed by s.s. Sarawak for Bintulu on 24th to take up his new appointment.
Total rainfall registered was 28’17 inches.
Court. -On the 24th Tigai bin Ikud was sentenced to death for the murder of a Chinaman named Wee Eng Jee at Petanak on the 20th.
No other cases call for special comment.
Dyaks. -Abang Mustapa returned from up river on the 19th and reported various matters.
With two exceptions, the order to congregate in long houses only has been carried out.
At present Dyaks are scattered attending to padi farms and collecting engkabang.
Penghulus Umpoh and Selan came down during the month.
Police and Prison. -The average daily number of prisoners was 50.1. They have been employed on the usual routine work, mowing, weeding, ditching and general P. W. D. work. Health was fair.
An attempt is being made to drill the local police force into shape before the issue of new pattern uniform. They appear to have received instructions daily and the dispatch of an N. C. O. to Kuching, or vice versa, for a short period would assist in their training. P. C. Adoh had to be discharged as medically unfit, an advanced state of tuberculosis having been diagnosed.
Land and Agriculture. -The demarcation of nineteen gardens was completed during the month and ten new applications were received.
Natives are busy with padi harvesting.
Engkabang is being collected extensively but none has so far arrived down river.
The local market offer is only $2.50 per picul, apparently about half the Singapore quotation.
Sago raw fetched 30 cents per passu, jelutong $3.50 per picul, and para rubber $9.00 per picul locally.
The sea was rough during the greater part of the month.
OYA AND DALAT.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
The District Officer. Mr. E. O. Bruce. arrived from Sibu via the Kut on the 10th and next day came down to Oya. There being no important matters to be settled, he left for Mukah on the 13th by bicycle, the sea being too rough for the Leonora to clear.
I went to Sibu for medical treatment on 18th and returned to Dalat on 21st.
Medong was visited on 25th and the Chinese hawkers were informed that their floating shops must be pulled down within 15 days, and that they must return to Dalat at the end of each month.
The Dyaks are all away at present collecting illipenuts, and two policemen have been sent up river since complaints have been received from Sibu of Oya people annoying the Dyaks in the Pasai.
Living has become slightly easier for the Oya people since the padi at Bakong and Snao is ripe also after a fortnight of very rough seas, boats have been able to go to sea again and catch fish.
At Dalat there has been a very plentiful fruit crop which resulted also in many ownership disputes. Inherited fruit trees had in many cases become enclosed in another man’s sago garden for which an occupation ticket had been issued. These disputes were settled with the aid of the Tua Kampongs. and in many cases the owner of the occupation ticket was asked to buy out the owner of the fruit trees.
At Oya most of the rubber gardens were either given back to Government or else applied for as Pesaka. The latter was only allowed if the owner had no sago gardens whatsoever.
Court. -In the Dalat District Court, Glubai. a female Dyak, was imprisoned for 6 months for non-payment of her fine for incest. Two Chinese and several Melanaus were also filled for transferring gardens without making registered documents in Court. There were no cases worthy of mention in Oya.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall for the month was 21’11.
Fourth Division News.
December, 1930.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports for December, 1930, and January, 1931, by Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident: -
Court. -There was one appeal in the Criminal Court from the decision of the District Court, whose decision was reversed.
In the Civil Courts there were several claims.
General. -The British Resident at Brunei, Mr. P. A. B. McKerron. called on me in the office and informed me that he agreed to the arrangements made about passports for those travelling between Miri and Kuala Belait.
I visited Baram on the 14th. returning again on the 17th to hold Court. There were no up-river people present since they were all busy on their farms. It was reported that the engkabang fruit had definitely set and that there would be a very heavy crop. The padi in the Baram is reported to be poor, but very good in the Tinjar; good reports also are received from the Coast Stations.
The Residency, District Officer’s and Divisional Treasurer’s bungalows on Tanjong Lobang were occupied during the month, completing the programme for the year.
An extraordinary plague of caterpillars appeared in the Residential area of Miri during one night. They appeared to attack only short grass which had been mown and did no other damage, and fortunately I have received no reports that any of the padi was attacked. They seem to have appeared also at Kuala Baram and places in Brunei.
Fifteen Kadayans from Miri and Sibuti proceeded to Kuching en route to the pilgrimage at Mecca.
There was some trouble in the Miri Chung Hua School between the headmaster and three of the teachers, with the result that the directors have discharged the three teachers and now the Kheh community have petitioned to be allowed to open a school of their own. As Captain Le Gros Clark happened to be here at the time. I asked if he would investigate the trouble, and he reported that the cause of the dispute was purely a matter for the school authorities and had no other significance. As the Khebs are the largest community in Miri I can see no grounds for not allowing them to open a school of their own, but they cannot expect to receive any Government grant, at least for the present.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. G. J. Anderson, sailed for Singapore on 5th on furlough and handed over his duties to Mr. S. G. Hansom pending the arrival of the District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, who arrived late on the night of the 6th.
The Commissioner of Police, Mr. L. N. Reynolds, paid a visit of inspection in the station.
On the evening of the 25th I proceeded to Kuching, having been invited to attend the meeting of the Council Negri.
BARAM.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
Court. -In the Resident's Court, Criminal, Nyee Ee Seng was sentenced under section 377. In the Resident’s Court. Civil, Tan Hon Chuan sued Goh Chin Siew (f.) for one shophouse valued at $1,500, the case being adjourned for one month to enable books to be examined.
P.W.D. -The Limbang and L. Nibong Roads were joined by a six-foot track with bridges, the work being done by contract by Dyaks.
Travelling. -I returned from Long Akah on 6th, having been held up by high water for three nights at Data Kelawit. The Fort is very well built and should last for years, and the grounds are much better kept than formerly. The Resident, Fourth Division, visited the station from 14th to 18th.
Prisoners. -The prisoners, averaging twenty-five men, were employed on the general upkeep of the station; Janting, escaped prisoner, was re-captured at Limbang but had not arrived here at the end of the month. His companion Tujang is said to be working jangkar in the ulu Limbang.
Medical. -One hundred and forty-eight outpatients and four in-patients were treated during the month, three of the in-patients being discharged before the end of the month. Ten pathological examinations were carried out. Under the Professor Harrison Smith’s Fund sixty out-patients were treated during the month and fifty-two N.A.B. injections given.
Rainfall. -The rainfall recorded was 12’68 niches on twelve days.
Shipping. -M.T. Chin made one trip during the month.
Trade. -The padi is everywhere reported to be good. Much timber has been brought down to Bakong during the month.
BINTULU.
The District Officer, Mr. H. E Cutfield, reports: -
Court. -Court work was not heavy during the month.
General. -Mr. McLeod, who was were at the beginning of the month with regard to the Rasau Forest Reserve, returned to Miri on 10th.
Sebauh was visited on 24th.
On Friday 26th I left by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna for Kuching to attend the meeting of the Council Negri and was still away at the end of the month.
Visitors to the station were Dr. & Mrs. Hutchison and Mrs. Le Gros Clark.
MIRI.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G Carpenter, reports: -
Courts. -In the Criminal Courts 34 cases were dealt with and 26 convictions were obtained. In the Civil Courts 91 claims were heard involving amounts totalling $12,409. Fines amounted to $219 and fees to $378.85. There was one coroner’s view.
Two Malays, Serudin and Mat Sait, were sentenced for theft of a particularly brazen nature.
No case in the Lower Courts calls for special mention.
Public Works. -The site for the proposed new military area at Tanjong Lobang was cleared and the contract was completed early in the month.
The New Residency was occupied on the 2nd.
The 2nd and 3rd bungalows at Tanjong Lobang were both finished and occupied during the month, and garages were later added to these.
The pipe-fitter was engaged in laying the water mains and fitting guttering to the new bungalows.
Clearing and general cleaning up of the new site was undertaken by the prison gang, who will be engaged on this work for some time to come.
Municipal and Health. -There were no meetings of the Sanitary Advisory Board as this was in process of being reconstructed for 1931. The Health Department continued to carry out their usual routine of inspections.
Staff. -I arrived in Miri on the 7th to take over the duties of District Officer.
Medical. -Two patients were sent to Messrs. Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., hospital for treatment, one of these being under observation as a mental case.
At the Government Dispensary 174 patients made 438 attendances. Two N.A.B injections were given for muli.
There is nothing worth mention in the table of diseases.
Prison. -Prisoners averaged 45 daily and were employed on their usual routine.
Immigration and Emigration. -There was again a large surplus of emigrants over immigrants, the figures being 126 and 45 respectively. I am informed that the main reason for this is the favourable rate on the Chinese Exchange where $100 can be obtained for a trifle over $40 Straits currency.
There is apparently no need for alarm that the labour market will dry up as there are still a sufficient number of casual labourers to meet all demands.
General. -The Resident proceeded to Baram on the 14th and returned on the 17th.
Dr. and Mrs. Hutchison visited the station from the 2nd to the 6th.
On the 9th Dr. Le Sueur came ashore for a few moments on her return from Limbang to Kuching.
On the 25th I accompanied the Resident to Kuching to attend the General Council.
MIRI.
January, 1931.
At the beginning of the month I was still away in Kuching, returning to this station by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 10th, accompanied by the Dayang Leonora, who spent a few days in Miri and Baram, returning to Kuching by the s.s. Auby on the 17th.
There were three cases in the Resident’s Criminal Court, and claims amounting to $5,864 were heard in the Civil Court. Chop Sin Fui Hin of Miri Bazaar filed a petition to become a bankrupt. $28,000 is said to be involved. The examination of the bankrupt is proceeding.
The first meeting of the newly constituted Miri Municipal Board was held during the month, and the Municipal limits were defined. It is proposed to hold these meetings weekly for the time being.
Sanction was given to the Kheh community to start a school of their own. They have chosen a light airy building in a good position.
The sea has been very rough during the month, and the motor launch Nori, plying for hire between Miri and the boats in the roads capsized on the bar with fourteen passengers, who were able to wade ashore, through a quantity of jewellery was lost.
His Excellency Mr. A. F. Richards, Governor of British North Borneo, came ashore from the Straits boat and stayed until her departure. By the same boat Sir Alan Ritchie and Mr. Lewis landed as guests of the general manager and proceeded to Kuching the next day by the Maimuna.
The A.S.P. Miri, Mr. D. V. Murphy, left for Kuching on 17th to consult headquarters on various matters.
Mr. H. E. Cutfield, after handing over the cash to the Chief Clerk Francis Lim, left Bintulu on the 20th on furlough, and Mr. A. Macpherson reported his arrival at that station on the 25th.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports: -
Courts. -225 writs were issued in the various Courts and 125 suits were heard, of which 34 were Criminal and 91 Civil. In the Criminal Courts 29 convictions were obtained. Civil actions involving a total $14,568 were instituted, of which $5,864 were brought before the Resident’s Court and $8,704 before the Lower Courts.
In the Criminal Courts there were eleven cases of offences against the person, eight against property and fifteen other offences. Fines totaled $165 and other Court Revenues amounted to $1,158. In the Court Deposits $2,462 was collected and $2,534 disbursed.
Immigration and Emigration. -The figures again show a substantial surplus of emigrants over immigrants. It must be borne in mind, however, that there is easy access across the Belait border for any one who obtains a passport to Miri from Brunei Territory and there may be a number of new immigrants nor registered as such coming in every month from that source.
Land. -The land inspectors were mostly employed in the Lopeng and Luak districts putting in boundary posts and they demarcated two plots for which three occupation tickets were issued.
Medical. -Two in-patients were sent to hospital and both were discharged during the month.
195 out-patients made 488 attendances for treatment. Of these latter all excepting eight were accounted for by Government Departments, police military and prison being in the majority.
Prison. -Discipline was still very poor and little work was done by the prisoners considering their numbers. This condition will prevail so long as the present mandors are employed and attempts will be made in the near future to secure new and better men. Prisoners averaged 40 during the month and were employed on their usual routine. The boat gang was discontinued as from the eighth.
Smail bin Pulo who escaped on the 8th, was recaptured at Kuala Belait on the 15th and dealt with accordingly. This man also received a further sentence on a charge of theft resultant from his escapade.
BARAM.
January, 1931.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
Court. -Janting who escaped from jail here in May last year and was recaptured at Limbang, was sentenced to twelve strokes and four months’ R.L. Twelve Lelaks of L. Tru were fined $15 each for living permanently at Luagan Bunut contrary to orders. The Tuah Rumah Tanis Julan Tingang was fined $50 and dismissed for concealing the names of his relations concerned and reporting the others. No other cases call for mention.
Travelling. -I left for L. Akab on 25th returning on 31st. Wan Taha went up to Luagan Bunut in connection with the case mentioned above. Mr. T. Corson, Divisional Forest Officer was here from 17th to 23rd.
Prisoners. -The prisoners averaging twenty-three men, were employed in the usual upkeep of the station.
Medical. -100 out-patients and six in-patients were treated during the month, four of the in-patients being discharged during the month. One leper was sent to Kuching. Forty-five patients were treated under the Professor Harrison Smith Fund, thirty-eight N.A.B. injections being given.
General. -The padi harvest is just starting and promises to be exceptionally good. Unfortunately, the engkabang coincides with the best of the harvest and I fear much will be left uncollected. A small boy was taken by a crocodile near Luagan Ungah. The crocodile measuring 19’ 3’’, was caught later and was found to contain relices of the Dyak taken at Ridan last year as well as the remains of the boy.
Rainfall. -16’92 inches of rain fell on 13th days.
BINTULU.
January, 1931.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. A. Macpherson, reports: -
Courts. -Fines amounting to $375 were imposed for breach of Forest Regulation.
General. -Mr. McLeod, Assistant Conservator of Forests, arrived on 7th and was still in the district at the end of the month. Mr. Baron passed through on his way to Kuching. Mr. Birt and Mr. Lamplough arrived on 11th. The former spent four days here in connection with the waterworks.
The Dayang Leonora accompanied by Captain Murphy arrived on 17th, spending three days at the station.
P. W. D. -The laying and fitting of the pipe-line was completed during the month and the service opened. It is much appreciated by the bazaar and kampong people, as well as by Government employees.
Rainfall. -The rainfall for the month amounted to 17’38 inches.
Native Affairs. -The natives are all busy with their harvests and engkabang. The latter is fetching $2.50 per picul in Bintulu Bazaar.
A little girl was taken by a crocodile at Tubau on 18th. Her body was recovered.
Miri Notes.
The opening of the very fine swimming pool which has been built close to the Padang Club, complete with dressing rooms, high diving and spring boards, had been fixed for 7th February, but owing to some unforeseen difficulty regarding the water supply, the opening had to be postponed until the 21st. We are sure that when the bath is in full working order it will be well patronized by Miri folk, as a swimming pool has long been needed. We hear that some snappy ladies’ bathing costumes will be seen. That ought to help relieve the depression somewhat!
The next thing we need badly in Miri is a Theatre, but it looks as though we shall have to possess our souls in patience for some time to come. Blow these depressions!
Jean, the daughter of Mr. and Mrs. F. F. Marriott, was christened on the 9th February, and as becomes the daughter of the Chairman of the Miri Swimming Club stood the water well.
The Amateur Dramatic Society gave two performances of “The Private Secretary” on 16th and 17th January. In the opinion of Miri-ites the production was well up to the high standard that we have learned to expect from the Amateur Dramatic Society. The producer was Mr. H. E. F. Pracy, who also was responsible for the Society’s previous production “Journey’s End.”
Miri was delighted and honoured by the visit of the Dayang Leonora. The kiddies of Miri will long remember the Dayang’s visit and we all look forward to seeing her again.
The ninth number of “Mirage,” the Miri Quarterly, which arrived from the printers rather late, contains a drawing by Mrs. Noble of H. H. the Tuan Muda. We wish that more of our friends in Kuching would become subscribers and also contribute articles, which would be very welcome.
Fifth Division News.
LIMBANG.
December, 1930
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports for December, 1930 and January, 1931. by Mr. F. H. Kortright. Resident: -General. -Mr. R. N. Baron. Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, came over from Lawas to discuss the demarcation of His Highness the Rajah’s reserve at Brooketon.
Mr. J. R. Combe, the Acting Assistant District Officer of Lawas. also came over to discuss details of the 1931. Estimates prior to my proceeding to Kuching to attend the Council Negri Meeting.
I left to attend this Meeting on the 24th and was still in Kuching at the end of the month.
The latest innovation in the Station is an ice plant which appears to be highly appreciated; this produces 360 lbs. of ice daily, and incidentally has been arranged to supply electric current for the Wireless and bungalow lighting.
I spent a day at Brunel on the 6th. when several minor official matters were discussed with the Resident.
The unemployed gang completed raising the ground above high tide level under the clerks’ quarters, and it is hoped that this will materially improve the health conditions of this area.
Prison. -The prison gang averaged 20.5 and were employed chiefly on raising and widening of the Sungei Poyan road.
Medical and Health. -The dresser in-charge reports that the health of the district was good.
Four patients were admitted to hospital and 57 out-patients were treated for various ailments
The total rainfall registered during the mouth was 5’95 inches.
LAWAS.
December, 1930
The Acting Assistant District Officer. Mr. J. R. Combe, reports: -
Court. -With the exception of the usual debt cases there was hardly any court at all this month.
Prison. -Prison gang averaged nineteen for the month and was employed on the bazaar, road, and levelling the area behind the shophouses, besides the usual work on the upkeep of the grounds.
General. -On the 1st of the month Mr. R. N Baron and myself paid a visit to the Ulu Tagas and spent one night in the house of Aking, a Tagal. The idea of the visit was to gather some definite information about the B. N. B. boundary, since there has, as yet, been no proper survey made. -The Tagal in the Ulus Merapok and Tagas have no regard whatever for Land Regulations, and practically none of them held occupation tickets for their land.
On the 2nd instant an attempt was made to set up a new leading mark at Kuala Lawas but owing to the very strong tide running it had to be abandoned. We returned to Lawas on the 2nd. On the 16th I proceeded to Limbang to discuss affairs with the Resident prior to his visit to Kuching for the Council Negri Christmas and New Year were also spent at Limbang at the kind invitation of the Resident and Mrs. F. H. Kortright. I returned to Lawas on the 24th. During my absence at Limbang communication was received from the Assistant District Officer at Sipitang with reference to three Dyaks, Bawi, Balai, and Meransan from the Ulu Merapok who are suspected of murder. These men were captured and now await an extradition warrant from the B.N.B. Government.
Health. -Health was average during the month. Dresser paid two visits to the station, once on account of a policeman who was seriously ill and again when the wife of Customs Inspector Nor became mentally deranged.
Agriculture. -The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estate Ltd., exported 42,504 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
LIMBANG.
January, 1931.
General. -The Annual Regatta and Sports held on the 1st were very successful and, in spite of the general depression, there was a very large attendance both from up river and the coast.
On the 15th I returned from Kuching where I had been to attend the Council Negri Meeting.
Court. -Several cases were dealt with, but were of very little importance.
A Dusun, Kilan bin Ukot, wanted by the Brunei Government on a charge of attempted murder, was arrested at Darat Indok, Limbang, and duly handed over.
Police. -Since it has been decided to dispense with the squad of Rangers now stationed here, six new police were enlisted and are now undergoing training.
It is anticipated that the rangers will return to headquarters at the end of March, when all the police will move into the barracks, which will be far more satisfactory than hitherto when they have been living in their own bouses in the kampongs.
Agriculture. -The pepper planters are still showing great activities there now being altogether 50 gardens on the register.
I regret to say that there has been a little friction amongst the subsidize gardeners, who lodged complaints against Mandor Liew Hiap. The chief of these complaints was the prices he was charging them for provisions, but their grievance has now been adjusted.
Medical and Health. -The Dresser-in-Charge reports that the health of the district was good.
The Medical Officer of Brunei paid his monthly visit of inspection.
Six patients were admitted to hospital and sixty-nine out-patients were treated for various complaints.
Three Chinese pepper planters became temporarily insane and were kept under observation; they were released after a week’s treatment by the dresser.
The rainfall was heavy, amounting to 24’16 inches.
Trade and Shipping. -Mr. G. A. C. Field. Acting Collector of Customs, paid a visit of inspection and found everything was satisfactory in the department.
LAWAS.
January, 1931.
Thu Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe, reports: -
Court. -Court work has been average during the month.
Prisoners averaged 11.94 for the month, and have been chiefly employed in filling in the ground behind the bazaar.
P.W.D. -The bazaar road was completed during the month, and its surface has withstood the test of the very heavy rains which were experienced recently. The Government jetty was reconstructed by Wong Kiaw, the two front piles being driven into the river bed some thirty feet as against that of seven feet previously and, provided that the course of the river does not eat any mote into the bank, there is no reason why the present structure should not last for a good many years.
General. -I returned from Limbang on the 4th, and was away again from the 18th to the 22nd visiting the substations, where several outstanding matters was seen to and books checked. On the 13th I paid a short visit to Sipitang. B.N.B. with a view to seeing Mr. Bullock, A.D.O., about three Dyaks suspected of murder, who were on remand at Lawas; ultimately these Dyaks were released as no tangible evidence could be brought to bear on the case.
On the 28th a report came through from Ulu Merapok that a Tua Rumah, Indi, had taken two Tagais, Tulang and Muntai, suspected of murder, directly over to Sipitang, B.N.B., instead of bringing them to Lawas. I proceeded to Ulu Merapok, but Indi was reported to be over in B.N.B. and all reports concerning his actions were contradictory. It is impossible to obtain definite information until Indi himself is brought down to Lawas.
On the 11th of the month P. C. Jimudin, number two policeman of the Lawas squad, died of fever. Jimudin had served for eleven years in the police, and carried a good record throughout his service.
On the 26th Mr. Field. Assistant Superintendent of Customs, Miri. and Mr. W. H. C. C. Morice. Cadet, came over from Limbang, visiting all the substations.
Wireless. -During the greater part of the month the station has had no wireless communication owing to the breakdown of the engine the repairs to which were so extensive that it had to be sent down to Kuching.
Agriculture. -The padi has nearly all been harvested, and the quantity and quality has un-fortunately not come up to expectations; this is accounted for by the heavy rains which occurred during harvesting.
The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates Limited, exported 24,388 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
Rainfall. -The following rainfall was recorded during the month: -
Limbang Regatta Sports 1931.
[Owing to the vagaries of the mail service, the following account of Christmas and New Year festivities at Limbang arrived too late for inclusion in our last issue. We therefore print it below, with apologies for its unavoidable lateness. -Ed.]
The usual Regatta and Land Sport were held at Limbang on January 1st. Despite the trade depression the meeting was very well represented, and the number of entries was well up to the standard of former years The racing produced some very close finishes, and aroused great excitement among the Chinese and Native spectators, this perhaps being due to the fact that the totalizator was no longer an object of suspicion as at the meeting last year, when the totalizator was used for the first time. The spoils of victory were not very well divided since out of seven races, prahus from the Gadong Estate, Brunei, won three and the remainder went to Lawas boats.
The Land Sports commenced at 2 p.m. and lasted for about two and-a-half hours. As usual the buffalo races aroused most excitement, although the obstacle race caused great hilarity, not so much from the competitors as the audience, With the exception of the British Resident, Mr. P. A. B. McKerron and Mrs. McKerron, the entire European population of Brunei came over to Limbang on the 31st December, spending New Year’s Eve and New Year’s Day at Limbang; in all, there were twenty Europeans present.
The Pengiran Muda, younger brother of the present Sultan of Brunei, came over for the day of the Regatta, and watched the races from m.l. Muara which had been lent for the occasion by the British Resident of Brunei.
The only mishap of a very enjoyable Christmas and New Year was the unfortunate absence of the Resident, Mr F. H. Kortright, who was away in Kuching, in order to attend the Council Negri meeting.
In conclusion, we owe a very hearty vote of thanks to Mrs. F. H. Kortright for her hospitality, which went far to make Christmas and New Year at Limbang the great success which they undoubtedly were.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching
DEAR SIR,
Would it not be possible to have the sheets of the Sarawak Gazette fastened with wire fasteners, an in the case of the Sarawak Government Gazette? Thus, we should avoid those Laocoon struggles with that otherwise excellent publication, which are occasioned by the serpentine qualities which it acquires in the post.
Yours faithfully.
“THYMBRAEUS.”
Kapar, Selangor.
[This is being done. -Ed.]
Someone Blundered!
The Editor,
The Sarawak Gazette.
Kuching.
SIR,
After reading the account of the lecture given by Mr. Carveth Wells, which appeared in your February number, I have come to the conclusion that the statement by the Lady Correspondent of the “Belfast News-Letter” to the effect that Mr. Carveth Wells’ diet for several years “consisted of lions and strawberries” has been mis-reported.
It looks very much as though Mr. Carveth Wells intended coming to Malaya but only got as far as “The Corner House” where his diet consisted of strawberries at Lyons!
I am, Sir,
Yours faithfully,
IRIM.
Sikh Taxi Drivers in Singapore.
The Editor,
The Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
SIR,
Your note regarding Sikh Taxi-drivers in Singapore is only too true. The last time I was in Singapore I had arranged to see a friend off by a boat leaving at 4 o’clock. As there was a chance of having a beer at the boat. I allowed myself a good half-an-hour from the Hotel. 1 stopped en route to make sure at which Godown the boat was and instructed the taxi-driver to “go to Godown 22.” It seemed a long way and no Godowns were in sight and on inquiring politely of the taxi-driver where the blankety blank he was going, he calmly said “Go round-go round island.” Neediest to say I lost my beer!
On another occasion it took a Sikh Taxi-driver half-an-hour to find Orchard Road!
I am. dear Sir.
Yours faithfully,
A.RICK SHAW.
More About Book Prices.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
KUCHING,
22nd February, 1931.
DEAR SIR,
Talking of book prices out here how about these: -
1. A copy of Christmas Number. Strand Magazine. including postage from Singapore cost $1.06- i.e. very nearly 2s.6d.
2. A book published at home at 16s. cost in Singapore $9 viz. 21ss., postage extra.
The usual price for a newly published 7s.6d Novel appears to be 10s.6d ($4.50) though I believe the price to the trade is only 3s.6d!!
Yours faithfully,
“X.”
