VOL. LXI.
No. 932.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Friday, May 1st, 1931.
20 CENTS.
The Sarawak Gazette	FRIDAY. MAY 1st. 1931.
Contents.
MORE ABOUT EDUCATION.
Last month we printed in full a letter received from the Rev. W. Linton commenting on our recent leading article on the subject of education for Natives. While we were very glad to give our correspondent this opportunity of stating the case of the S.P.G. Mission Schools in the Second Division, we would remind him that our article dealt not with any particular district or sect, but with the State as a whole: also, there are some of the Rev. Linton’s generalisations with which we cannot agree.
Firstly, he considers that a knowledge of Malay would not benefit the average Dyak. It might be true that Malay is not the lingua franca of certain areas in the Second Division-this could be said of many up-river districts-but at the same time it is the language of the Sarawak Courts, and the Official language of the State. Also, it is significant that all agricultural propaganda is published in Chinese and Jawi, and not in English. We are assured by the Department of Agriculture that thorough investigation in the Second Division hardly revealed a single agriculturalist who could make intelligent use of pamphlets on agriculture printed in English! It was therefore decided to issue these pamphlets in Malay. Also, our correspondent states that a Kuching Malay would not understand the Malay spoken in the Second Division Kampongs; this we absolutely deny. Apart from slight differences of dialect and pronunciation, Sarawak Malay is the same throughout the State, and the written language is uniform wherever Malay as spoken.
Secondly, regarding “trouble” when a scholar leaves school and fails to get clerical employment. It might surprise our correspondent to learn that our paragraph dealing with this question was quoted almost word for word from an article on education written by a former S.P.G. priest and teacher. It would therefore appear that the remarks queried have a certain amount of truth behind them.
Thirdly, we quite agree that character training is, or should be, the main object of any educational system. At the same time our correspondent states that the Dyak character lacks qualities such as ideas of team-work and perseverance. Surely this is not the case. In our opinion the Dyaks, who build communal houses, plant communal rice-fields, and work largely for the common good, can be taken as an outstanding example of a race with a natural team-spirit. Their very life itself is a proof of this, and we suggest that Mission Schools, by breaking op old customs, unintentionally go far towards destroying this team-spirit and imbuing the Dyak with ideas of selfish independence which are not in tune with his traditions. And we cannot think that the Dyak needs to be taught perseverance, since he is naturally thrifty and sober, and it he did not work hard continuously he would starve
This matter of character training, however, is one of considerable delicacy, which automatically raises the whole question whether we are in any way justified in arbitrarily imposing the culture and standards of the West on an Eastern race. Personally, we are of the opinion that we are not. We have tried to do this in India will, the best of intentions but with disastrous results, and we hope fervently that no such attempt on a large scale will ever made in Sarawak. So far the policy of the Rajahs of Sarawak has fortunately protected the natives of the State from such an evil.
And again, what exactly is meant by the words “character-building'”? We fear that in all too many cases the term is synonymous with the imposition on the pupil of the particular idea of his teacher, irrespective of the fact that the pupil may be fundamentally unfit to receive and absorb them. This attitude is a survival of that extraordinarily smug conviction which during the nineteenth century seemed to be inherent in the British race; namely, that we were the salt of the earth, and that our ideas and standards were the only ones worth a moment’s consideration. In those day there may possibly have been some grounds for this extremely irritating attitude, but in the light of present developments there is no excuse for it whatever. After all, who are we to state that our civilization is an example to the rest of humanity? Western civilization has hardly turned out such an unqualified success that it justifies our thrusting it bodily upon any eastern race. Surely it should now be our object not to spread western ideas among primitive peoples but to protect them as far as possible from outside influence, and to allow them to work out their own salvation uncontaminated by the specious doctrines of what we are pleased ironically to term our “civilization.” And the surest way of spreading this contamination among natives is the teaching of English. Certainly, English is desirable for those who wish to engage in commerce, and essential for those who are destined for clerical employment, but we cannot see that a knowledge of the English language is of any benefit whatever to the primitive races inhabiting the interior of this country.
Surely it is better to take the best of the native customs and traditions and concentrate on their development, rather than to teach primitive races then ideas whose real principles, in many cases, they are hardly capable of grasping? There can be no doubt about their understanding their own customs, and it seems that these afford a solid foundation for education and an admirable vehicle for character-building. This is the Educational policy now being pursued in the Unfederated Malay States, where the natives have not yet been hopelessly de-nationalised by contact with Europeans.
Our correspondent also doubts the value of school gardens and asks what he could plant in them, were he to start them up. We suggest such crops as oil palms. dwarf coconuts, coffee and padi, all of which the Dyaks could plant successfully if only they were taught proper methods of cultivation. In this connection wo might add that school gardens have proved an unqualified success in the F.M.S., and are there regarded as one of the most important items of vernacular education.
We must apologize to our readers for taking up so much spare on this subject, but our excuse is that the matter is one of large and ever-growing importance.
Local and Personal.
April.
The new clock has now been fixed in the tower of the Government Offices in Kuching, and is working satisfactorily. This clock, which is of British manufacture, is electrically wound, and the makers guarantee that it will not gain or lose more than three seconds a week.
To those of us who were used to the vagaries of the old timepiece, this accuracy is rather frightening: but we understand that rumours to the effect that Government Officers would in future be required to “clock in” on arrival at their offices may be discounted.
On April 1st Mr. A. Humphreys arrived in Kuching on his return from furlough, and the next boat brought Mr. E. M. Woodward. Mr. Woodward is to be temporarily attached to the Secretariat.
Mr. Woodward informs us that when he left England snow was lying on the ground and conditions were arctic. “Oh, to be in England, now that Spring is here!”
On the 13th a squadron of three flying boats commanded by Squadron-Leader Livock arrived at Pending, leaving for Brunei early on the 15th.
The flying boats circled over Kuching before landing, and their arrival was announced by our domestic staff “downing dishes” with a glad cry of-“Ah! Datang tiga ekor!” Since aeroplanes of all kinds are referred to by Malays either as Kapal bilun or kapal terbang, surely datang tiga buah would have been correct; we referred the point to our leading Malay purists, who regretfully came to the conclusion that the inhabitants of Kuching do not know their own language. What a pity.
Early in the month Dr. R. Hertz, acting German Consul General, Singapore, paid a visit to Sarawak. Dr. Hertz visited Sibu, Kapit, Sarikei and Kuching, arriving at Kuching just in time for the public tuba fishing which was held on April 4th.
Mr. S. G. Hansom has been appointed Officer-in Charge. Engkilili, vice Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas, who comes to Kuching for temporary duty in the Office of the Registrar, Supreme Court, and Official Assignee.
We must congratulate Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft on passing the Standard I Examination with honours, and Mr. F. L. Crossley for passing the Standard II Examination after only eleven months’ service. Mr. Crossley lowers the record previously held by Mr. W. S. B. Buck.
Mr. T. Stirling Bovd. Chief Justice, and Mr. K. H. Gillen left on home leave by the Kuching on April 4th.
On the 14th Mr. M. L. Carrie and Mr. B. W. Talbot left for home. Neither of these gentlemen will be returning to Sarawak, and we take this opportunity of wishing them both farewell and the best of luck in the future.
Mr. Carrie, who was for several years an assistant on Dahan Estate, was one of our foremost European jockeys, and Mr. Talbot is a fine all-round sportsman who will be difficult to replace. Both Mr. Carrie and Mr. Talbot will be badlv missed by the European community of Kuching.
Mr. R. J. S. Davies takes Mr. Talbot’s place in the Chartered Bank.
On Saturday, April 11th. H.H.M.Y. Maimuna paid a short visit to Singapore carrying a valuable cargo of bullion and opium. On board were Mr. J. C. Swayne and Captain W. G. Gibson.
The Maimuna returned to Kuching on the 17th, the passengers reporting a delightful trip, the sea being as smooth as glass.
It has been decided that in future examinations for Government Officers are to be held only once in each year. No further examinations, therefore, will be held until next spring.
Mention of examinations brings to our mind a story which it is possible that some of our readers may have forgotten. A small boy was being examined in poetry, the set piece being Coleridge’s Ancient Mariner. All went well until the lad got to this verse: -
“All in a hot and copper sky
The bloody sun at noon,
Right up above the mast did stand”- where he broke down helplessly.
“Come oh, my boy,” said the examiner kindly. “Try to think of the next line.”
Scarlet with confusion, the lad, wildly guessing, exploded into- “S-so did the bloody moon!”
In our last issue we were hauled over the coals for our ignorance of the correct nomen-clature for certain dignitaries of the Church. We admitted our mistake and apologised for it, but it seems that we erred in good company: no less a publication than the Straits Times recently fell into the same pitfall as ourselves regarding the Bishop, and actually referred to Archdeacon Champion- or rather, the Venerable Archdeacon Champion-as “the Archbishop of Sarawak!”
What with “Venerables,” “Right Reverends,” “Very Reverends” and just plain “Reverends” it really is a little difficult.
We have been asked to state that applications for the use of the football fields and badminton courts at Padungan should be addressed to the Clerk-in-Charge, Song Keng Hai Recreation Ground, and not to the Municipal Commissioner.
An account of the opening of this recreation ground appears in another column.
On the morning of April 22nd, the Enche Boyong Malay School at Sungei Bedil was, opened with an attendance of 75 pupils. It is expected that this number will shortly be increased, since 96 children submitted their names for entry.
On April 25th Capt. and Mrs. R. E. Le Sueur sailed for home on leave by the Kuching. With them went Mr. G. M. Allman, Chief Field Officer of the Agricultural Department, who goes home on retirement.
We understand that Mr. Allman has decided to settle somewhere in the South of France. He proposes provisionally to christen his residence “Padungan Villa,” and wherever he eventually settles down, be it Nice, Mentone. Cannes or Villefranche, he trusts that Sarawakians going home on leave will find time to get off the boat at Marseilles and pay him a visit.
Recently a journal no less eminent than the Singapore Free Press honoured us by reproducing as a leading article the account of Douglas Rinaldo’s visit to Kuching which we printed in the last issue of the Gazette.
In a short prefatory note the Editor of the Free Press expressed regret that the article remained unfinished, since on turning to page 83 as instructed no trace of an ending could be found. Is it possible that our esteemed contemporary failed to notice that the last number of the Gazette appeared on April 1st?
Mention of the phrase “esteemed contemporary” reminds us of the number of criticisms of the “journalese style” of the Gazette which have recently been levelled against us. Previously, we did not think these criticisms worthy of notice; after all, the Sarawak Gazette is a journal, and presumably a journal is the place where one expects to find journalese. -the same could be said of the Times or the Morning Post.
Recently, however, one of our tame high-brows who has written at least one book politely declined to contribute to the Gazette on the grounds that he really could not produce the kind of journalese required! This as rather annoying, so we turned up the word in a dictionary: here is the definition. - “JOURNALESE. A prose style employed to describe current events in newspapers and journals. A term used to distinguish a style remarkable for concise Hess and accuracy.”
So there you are. If this definition is correct, such men as Addison, Swift and Sterne, to go no farther, were obviously guilty of writing journalese; and to come down, to our own times, such writers as Sinclair Lewis, Galsworthy, O. Henry, the Editor of this Gazette and many others of a like celebrity seem to be included in the same category. Forty-thirty.
We regret to have to report two fatal road accidents in Kuching district during the month.
At about 3.30 p.m. on April 20th motorcar No. 172 overturned in the ditch at the 19th mile, Simanggang Road, Towkay Ngui Kap Seng, an old and respected rubber planter of Bukit Pam, being pinned in the back of the car and killed, death being due to suffocation.
From the evidence recorded at the inquest it appeared that the driver was proceeding at an excessive speed on the wrong side of the read, and that the vehicle overturned owing to one front wheel slipping over the edge of the ditch, which is very deep. The driver is to be prosecuted in the District Court for causing death by a rash act.
The second accident occurred on the evening of April 22nd. Mr. Kim Choon, who was returning from a visit to friends at 6th mile, gave a lift on the pillion of his motor-cycle to Mrs. Wee Hong Kee. the wife of the Government Auctioneer. As the motorcycle rounded a bend Mrs. Wee Hong Kee turned to wave to some friends; she fell off the pillion seat on to the road, and was picked up unconscious.
Everything possible, was done, but Mrs. Wee died in the General Hospital some hours later without recovering consciousness.
At the subsequent inquiry Mr. Kim Choon was exonerated from all blame, and at the inquest, a verdict of accidental death was returned.
His Highness the Rajah Visits Singapore.
On April 25th His Highness the Rajah left by the Kuching for Singapore. With His Highness travlled Mr. A. A. Rennie, Treasurer of Sarawak, and Mr. E. S. Holl, His Highness’ Private Secretary.
Obituary.
It is with deep regret that we have to record the death, on 20th April, of Abang Haji Halil, Datu Imam of Sarawak.
The late Datu Imam, who was born in 1861, had more than forty years’ faithful Government Service to his credit, and was a respected and influential head of the Malay community. In 1890 he joined the service of His Highness the late Rajah as an apprentice in the Land Office on a salary of only $4 per mensem; in 1896 he was appointed Native Officer, Limbang, subsequently being placed in charge of Lawas and Trusan. In 1912 he left the Fifth Division to go to Sadong as Native Officer and in 1915 he was appointed Principal Native Officer, Sibu and Rejang, in which position he continued until he was transferred to Kuching in 1920 to do duty in the Divisional Office and to be a member of the Food Control Committee.
The title of Datu was conferred on him in 1916; on 23rd February, 1925, His Highness the Rajah was pleased to appoint him Datu Imam of Sarawak. The late Datu became a member of the Council Negri in 1897 and in addition to this became a member of the Supreme Council on being appointed Datu Imam.
The late Datu’s record is in itself sufficient evidence of his character; the fact that he reached the rank of Datu Imam, Second Native Officer in the State, is sufficient proof of his loyal service and exceptional ability. By his death the State loses an officer who devoted almost the whole of his life to the faithful service of the Raj. And members of all communities whoever came in contact with him will feel that in him they have lost a real friend. The late Datu was a Malay gentleman of the best type who throughout all is long lite had for his one object the good of Sarawak.
The Datu had been failing in health for some months past, and death occurred at 12 30 p.m. on 20th April. The funeral took place at 4 p.m. on the following day and was attended by many mourners.
We extend our deepest sympathy to the Datu’s relatives in their great bereavement.
Retirement of Mr. F. F. Boult.
The Government Gazette for 1st May announces the retirement of Mr. F. F. Boult. Chief Secretary of Sarawak.
Though we must-all agree that Mr. Boult’s retirement at the end of no less than twenty-nine years’ service is thoroughly well earned, we are sure that there is no member of the Government Service but will feel a sense of real disappointment on learning that Mr. and Mrs. Boult are not returning to Sarawak. We must console ourselves, however with the thought that Mr. Boult’s retirement will not altogether sever his active connection with Sarawak affairs, since he has accepted the post of Acting Special Commissioner in London, an appointment in which his long experience and wide knowledge of the country will be very valuable assets.
Mr. Boult first came to Sarawak in January, 1902 and was posted to Limbang, a station to which he returned nearly twenty years later as Resident. Towards the end of the same year, he was transferred to Simanggang; the following year saw him at Sibu, and for the next three years he did duty at various stations in the Rejang River, including Kapit. In 1908 he was promoted Resident, Second Class, and was appointed in charge of Sadong, then a much busier and more important station than it is now. In 1912 he became a member of the Council Negri, and in the same year he took his first furlough, after nearly eleven years’ service!
On 23rd December. 1914, Mr. Boult married Miss Ellen Annette Warter, the wedding taking place at St. Andrew’s Church, Singapore.
On his return from furlough Mr. Boult was posted to Bintulu and for the next five years served at coast stations. In 1920, after a shot spell in Kuching, he went to Limbang and in January, 1921, he was promoted Officer, Class I and Resident, Fifth Division, in which appointment he continued until 1927, when on his return from home leave, he was appointed a member of the Supreme Council, a Judge of the Supreme Court and a member of the Committee of Administration.
On 1st January, 1930, Mr. Boult was appointed Chief Secretary of Sarawak, thus becoming the head of the Civil Service. This appointment was a fitting reward for twenty-eight years’ loyal and energetic service in the course of which Mr. Boult had served in every division of the State, and in almost every outstation. During the previous year Mr. Boult had administered the Government of the State for a period of two months during the absence of His Highness the Rajah.
Mr. Boult’s appointment as Chief Secretary was received with universal approval both on the part of the official and unofficial communities of the State. It was generally felt that Mr. Boult’s outstanding personality coupled with his long and varied experience of the country eminently fitted him for the very responsible post which he heId. He had the respect and confidence of every officer of the service to an almost unique degree and in addition to this he had the sincere friendship of every one with whom he ever came in contact. Junior members of the service were able not only to look up to him with respect as a Senior officer, but also to know him as a real friend; to the highest and the lowest, to Natives, Chinese, and Europeans, he was the same.
When speaking of an officer so universally popular as Mr. Boult-a popularity which was shared by Mrs. Boult, it is difficult to avoid lapsing into panegyric. Suffice it to say that Mr. Boult’s personality ready wit and keen sense of humour, which was evident even when dealing with the most prosaic everyday matters, will long be remembered in Sarawak; and Mrs. Boult whose absence will be felt just as keenly will leave a gap in the social life of Kuching impossible to fill.
Mrs. Boult was an excellent hostess with a happy knack of giving even the largest entertainments an air of delightful intimacy. None of those who were fortunate enough to have been guests at the Residency will ever forget Mrs. Boult’s kindness and her gracious hospitality. Mrs. Boult who incidentally was a musician of note, possessed in a high degree those rare qualities which go to make the perfect hostess; she held in the social side of life the same position as Mr. Boult held in its official side.
We conclude by wishing both Mr. and Mrs. Boult the best of good luck in the future, a wish in which we are sure that all our readers will most heartily join.
The Economic Situation in the Far East.
FINANCIAL ADVISER’S GRAVE SPEECH AT MEETING OF FEDERAL COUNCIL.
THE NEED FOR GOVERNMENT ECONOMIES.
For the benefit of these of us who are apt to belittle the gravity of the present economic position, we print below extracts from the speech of The Honourable Mr. G. P. Bradney, Financial Adviser to the Federated Malay States Government made at a meeting of the Federal Council on 13th April. From this speech it will be seen that in the opinion of one of the leading financial experts in the Far East there is no evidence that the end of the present trade depression is approaching.
For some years past we have been accustomed to an inflated standard of values throughout Malaysia generally, and the time has now come for us to face facts one of which is that one’s coat has to be cut in accordance with the cloth available. Since we have been living in a fool’s paradise of prosperity and security, the return to reality, now that it has come, has come with a bump; it is never pleasant to wake up and face unpleasant facts, but when this has got to be done, then the sooner it is done the better. And, as the old adage has it. there is no time like the present.
FINANCIAL POSITION.
The Hon. Mr. G. P. Bradney, addressed the Council as follows: -
I am pleased to have this opportunity of making a statement on the financial position and the measures which Government proposes to take in a position which is undoubtedly one of some difficulty.
The estimates of revenue for 1931 were $71,390,000. It is now calculated on the basis of the returns of revenue and trade for the last quarter of 1930, and the continuous and sharp decline in railway earnings, that the estimate will fall short of realisation by approximately $13,900,000. Customs and excise, it is feared, will fail by about $10 1/4 millions to reach the estimate, and, so far from receiving the estimated surplus of $1,500,000 of railway receipts, it is very questionable whether the Department will be able to finance itself without calling on the general revenue ofr assistance.
It is inevitable, moreover, that in harmony with the general depression the revenue yield from other sources will fall, and I do not anticipate that we should allow a lesser sum than $2,000,000 on that account. It will be seen, therefore, that the cuts in expenditure effected by the select committee in October last will be insufficient and it will be unsafe to anticipate, having regard to the inevitable demand for supplementary provision and also possibly a further fall in the values and quantities of dutiable commodities-I say it would be unsafe to anticipate at the end of this financial year a smaller deficit than $12,000,000.
WIDESPREAD DEPRESSION.
As you are aware, that deficit not due to any heavy and unforeseen expenditure or extravagance on the part of the Government. It is due to the widespread and deep trade and industrial depression. It is not known when that depression will end, nor is there any present evidence that the end is approaching. Our difficulty, therefore is not merely a financial one; it is also and I would say essentially an economic one. It is not a difficulty which can be met by mere financial expedients. It is a difficulty which demands for its solution that the public and I would say private-expenditure should be brought into adjustment with the changed economic conditions.
How seriously the economic position of this country has deteriorated is very clearly illustrated in the export and import returns for 1929 and 1930. In 1929 the exports were $338,000,000 and the imports $201,000,000 giving us a favourable trade balance of $137,000,000; in 1930 exports fell to $202,000,000 and imports to $168,000,000 so that the surplus had fallen to $34,000,000; and it is anticipated that for the current year exports may not exceed $171,000,000.
These figures show how gravely the purchasing power and taxable capacity of this country has been impaired and point unmistakably to the fact that the measures to meet the situation must be primarily by reduction of expenditure.
INCREASES IN TAXATION.
It is inevitable, however. that the revenue must be expanded and we cannot avoid having recourse, as far as I can see to some increases in taxation. Now, the measures which I have stated are those which are immediately practicable and I do not estimate that their combined effect will do more than reduce the deficit by $6,000,000. Clearly action cannot be allowed to stop at that point. Further drastic reductions in expenditure must be effected if we are to keep as we should keep, increased taxation at the lowest possible minimum.
REDUCTION OF ALLOWANCES.
It is with this object in view that Government decided, subject to the concurrence of the Secretary of State, to reduce all temporary allowances on salaries by fifty per cent. Reductions will also be made in acting allowances, travelling and transport allowances and payments for extra work. It was proposed that there should be an abeyance of the present liberal leave regulations, but for this the concurrence of the Colony is necessary and that concurrence has not been obtained.
It is further to be recognised that in a time of this kind we must be prepared to sacrifice to some extent our high standards of maintenance and efficiency, it is proposed that there should be ten per cent, cut in the Public Works Department annually recurrent expenditure. Other means of relieving the burden on this year’s revenue are under consideration. It is proposed that work on certain special services may be retarded and other work of a capital and remunerative nature may be transferred to loan account.
GROWING IMPOVERISHMENT.
It will be seen from what I have said that we are not faced merely by a financial emergency or some liability of a definite amount which can be met from surplus funds in our balance sheet. We are faced by a general condition of growing impoverishment. The scope of public and private expenditure must be reduced to fall into harmony with the realities of the existing economic conditions Government is organising to that end and I hope it will be agreed that the measures we are proposing to take have been conceived on sound lines. (Applause). -Straits Budget.
Salary Cuts.
HOW SIAM MAY SAVE HALF A MILLION TICALS.
The Siamese Ministry of Finance has formulated its suggestions regarding salary reductions and these are now in circulation among the different departments in the Ministries.
The Ministry of Finance, says the Bangkok Times, suggests that those drawing salaries under the following schedule may find themselves able to agree to a reduction as follows: -
One estimate. it is understood, is that universal approval of the proposition might ease the financial situation to the extent of half a million ticals a year. The budget estimate is Tcs. 450,000 - Straits Budget.
[This suggested reduction in the salaries of Siamese officials is significant in view of the fact that the Government of the Netherlands East Indies has decided to make a straight cut of 5% in the salaries of all Government employees from July 1st next.
If reductions in salaries have got to come, however, it seems to us that it would be much fairer to make these reductions on a sliding scale, as the Siamese Government propose to do. A cut of 5% would not be felt by a senior official, but it might create serious hardship among juniors and members of the clerical staff and subordinate services. -Ed.]
Trade of Sarawak.
There is to be found nowhere in the world a more peaceful and law-abiding population than the 600,000 or so of various races who live in Sarawak, on the north-west coast of Borneo. This is not to be wondered at, for the territory, some 30,000 square miles in extent, is administered under its white Rajah, Sir Charles Vyner Brooke, G.C.M.G. solely for the benefit of the people, and they, sharing in the steady development of the country’s resources, have prospered accordingly. The latest Administration Report to hand, that of 1929, shows that despite the general trade depression, trade was again satisfactory. The value of foreign imports was $22,726,657, an increase of $1,328,920, while foreign exports totalled $63,311,501. an increase of $8,783,770. The total foreign trade, excluding treasure, came to $86,038,158. showing an increase of $10,112,690 over 1928. and the balance of trade in exports over imports was $40,584,811. Agriculturally, Sarawak has avoided the mistake of placing all its eggs in one basket. Although rubber is so important product, the State policy has always been to encourage as large a variety of crops as possible, thus padi. oil palms, areca nuts, nipah, coffee, tapioca, tea and pepper are all very successfully cultivated. Pepper, an industry of very considerable importance, benefited from the high prices in the year under review. Another very valuable asset of Sarawak is its petroleum, and the Government works a coal mine. Sarawak is singularly fortunate in having reserves to fail back upon; nevertheless, in view of the possibility of lean years and expenditure which in the past has been out of proportion to the revenue, the Rajah’s recent advocacy of a campaign of rigid economy is very sound. -China Express & Telegraph.
Mr. Punch Discovers Sarawak.
ONE NIGHT OF CLOCKS.
Our Captain Bayonet’s brother, a young Major in the Hithershires, arrived in our Mess the other day on a short visit. He was not attached to us or anything like that; he was simply on sick leave from his battalion out East and had looked in to see his brother for a day or so-in spite of Bayonet’s attempts to make him stay at a hotel in Havershot, where he (Bayonet, not his brother) would find it much cheaper. Bayonet’s brother, however, said he didn’t mind roughing it in barracks. especially among such a lot of jolly good fellow; and you will understand his appreciation of us when I explain that we made a point of offering him drinks on every possible occasion, subsequently having them put down to Bayonet as a surprise for him at the end of the month.
In return for our hospitality Bayonet’s brother told us several amusing tales of peculiar hospitality he had experienced when out East, and particularly in the hinterland of Sarawak, where he had once been sent on a special job. The special job (“further explanation of which, my dear Watson, would at once plunge all Europe into war”) involved his visiting various Dyak villages; and visiting the villages implied staying a night or so as the guest of the local Headman, who used always to meet him at the edge of the jungle-clearing and escort him proudly to his house.
Now a Headman’s house in the hinterland of Sarawak is, so Bayonet’s brother explained, a big house. In fact, it is an ex-village. For a Dyak village is merely one long corridor lined on either side with rooms, the whole raised on poles above the ground and occupied by the community. When it can be comfortably filled by the Headman. his wives, children, relations and hangers on, he simply calls it his house, kicks the villagers out to build another, and proceeds to decorate his new home with tangible signs of his importance and wealth. The trouble is that wealth in the Sarawak hinterland is not measured by money. Money, the natives say. is useless in the jungle, so its place is taken by enormous pottery jars, though the fact that these too are useless in the jungle has not yet occurred to them. But if it is pointed out that money is at any rate more portable, they smile knowingly and say. “That’s just the trouble; it is.” Hence, you see. the pottery jars. which have been handed down for generations with writen pedigrees, and are now worth about four to five hundred dollars each. To possess as many as ten is to be rich, to possess more is to be a veritable. Haroun-AI-Rothschild, and necessitates spending money on something else more showy to prove it.
Now at one village where Bayonet’s brother spent the night the Headman, by name Untang, had solved this problem of what to do with his surplus cash by the purchase of clocks. Not particularly expensive clocks-indeed quantity not quality was his goal- and doubtless he had got a reduction for buying them by the dozen, a course that would never have occurred Io any of us in the Mess. For clocks had got right into his system. On every pillar, on every doorpost, in every available position in his large house shiny eight-day clocks, hanging like bunches of grapes on a vine, greeted Bayonet’s brother’s startled gaze. Not an altogether foolish choice either, for the impression given was certainly one of overwhelming opulence. Even the usual Dyak house decorations looked shoddy before such a display; and the usual Dyak house decorations, it seemed, were baskets suspended in rows like ferns on a verandah, each containing the dried head of a quondam enemy with whom by then naturally enough one was peace.
Utang’s display of time pieces. Bayonet’s brother informed us. like all ostentatious wealth, had its drawbacks. He could hardly hear himself think above the frantic ticking of the clocks which, since they were religiously wound every night, always had seven days in hand and were full of energy. In addition his host had conducted him round on his arrival and given them an extra and ceremonious wind in his honour. Any connected form of conversation of course was completely out of me question, because the connection of time meant nothing to Untang, and so each clock still registered the hour according to the original whim of its manufacturer. No sooner therefore did Bayonet’s brother begin a remark than one of the younger clocks would strike five with a shrill and breathless “spang-spang-spang-spang-spang.” Recovering from this, his ears would next be assaulted by an elderly timepiece which would solemnly clear its throat and announce “One o’clock” in a deep bass- “C-r-r-r-r-r-m-m-m-m-STONG.” A bare moment after a sort of aunt-clock would say “Twelve” and mean it, followed by small-boy-clocks, niece-clocks, sister-clocks, clergymen-clocks, with high-pitched voices and high-church chimes, and a half-witted third-cousin clock which rather dirt-dently and with much deliberation struck. Fourteen and then sounded the alarm. In between all these statements there was a constant chiming of quarters, halves and three-quarters from all the more aristocratic chronometers which had it in them. So it is easy to image what a wealthy impression Untang’s residence gave to his visitor.
By the time dinner was over, Bayonet’s brother felt that if he didn’t do something he would go mad. So, tackling his host on what was obviously his subject, he tried to teach him the idea of time and the reading of it from clocks. Untang was quite surprised and delighted to learn that clocks were useful as well as ornamental. He admitted it seemed, that he had always suspected there was something more in them than a tick and a strike. His opinion of Bayonet’s brother’s wristwatch, which up to then he had considered a poor thing without a noise anywhere about it went up considerably on learning that it alone had the correct time.
Untang proved an apt pupil, and one large gilt clock was fetched and solemnly set to the right hour as given by his guest’s wrist-watch, the two being subsequently compared every few minutes, though the host’s rather childish pleasure in finding that his own clock was winning had to be dashed by manipulation of the regulator. It was unanimously agreed that of the whole collection only the gift clock should show the correct time. The others were to be left to their own expression of individuality, for Untang didn’t at all like the idea or the poverty-indicating silence that would otherwise fall for long periods on his house, while Bayonet’s brother was spending the night and had remembered that the house, being only built on stilts, would probably collapse in a faint if every clock of his host’s vas; collection simultaneously had a General Strike at midnight. After passing a restless night, due largely to excess of clock, Bayonet’s brother transacted his business and went on his way, leaving his late host with the right time on his gilt clock and a working knowledge of timepieces in general. Unfortunately the working knowledge of time-pieces was hardly so deep-rooted as he had thought, for two days later, in another village, he received a breathless message from Untang.
The message was to the effect that the gilt clock had stopped. Would the White Man (who in the cleverness of his mind understood all clocks) please write down on a paper the correct hour by his little clock-on-the-arm and send the messenger back with it. so that the gilt clock might be once more set to the Right Time.
We were all pleased with this story that we asked Bayonet’s brother to stay a few days longer and tell us some more-a motion which was carried almost unanimously, the one dissentient being, I regret to say, Our Captain Bayonet.
A.A.
(With acknowledgements to Punch).
Journalism 100 Years Ago.
In these days when, with cable and wireless services, there is no lack of material with which to fill newspapers, it is interesting to read of the leisurely time of a hundred years ago. Even then, with praiseworthy persistence, newspaper men managed to pursue their calling under all the difficulties of work in the East. In an account of “Journalism in the Dutch East Indies” by Mr. G. H. von Faber we read of the British administration and the career of the Java Government Gazette which had a fine selection of stirring events with which to regale its readers. For example:
“It contained lengthy accounts of the European War, Napolean’s fatal march to Moscow, his banishment to Eiba and finally the coup de grace at Waterloo we find related in minutest detail But there were no correspondents on those days, and the British Indian and European newspapers arrived very irregularly. On May 9, 1812, for instance, there had been no continuous news for ten months, while in the number of May 1, 1813 the latest news dated from the middle of the previous September. Once the news was brought by a Tartar to Baghdad and thence to the coast; on another occasion it came from Koepang in the island of Timer, where it was brought by an Australian pearl fisher.”
The absence of news for months at a time must have had its advantages. At least the editor was spared inquiries from excited Welshmen and Irishmen as to who had won the Rugby match! -Straits Times.
The D.E.I.
POPULATION NOW ABOUT 60,000,000.
Amsterdam, Mar. 19.
Holland has ousted France as the second Colonial Power of the world.
According to the census of 1930, just published, the population of the Dutch East Indies is now 60,000,000. The population of the French Colonies does not exceed 59,000,000. -Renter.
New P. and O. Co. Steamers.
CORFU AND CARTHAGE FOR STRAITS LINE.
Some further details are now available of the two new steamers building for the P. and O. Company’s London-Straits-Japan service, which are to be named Corfu and Carthage. They will have a gross measurement of 14,5000 tons; length 520 feet; beam 71 feet. Their machinery will consist of twin turbines driven by Yarrow water-tube boilers with a working pressure of 400 lb., to the square inch. The latest type of silent electrical deck machinery will be fitted and each ship will have a cargo capacity of about 8,500 tons measurement including 1,000 tons of insulated space. It is probable that their upper works will be painted white, the hull and funnels wearing the black paint customary in P. and O. vessels.
Accommodation will be provided for 178 first-class passengers and 200 second class. The cabins in the first saloon will consist of 46 single-berth and 66 two-berth cabins. There will be also four two-berth cabins-de-luxe and four single-berth bathroom cabins. The second saloon will comprise 44 two-berth cabins, 16 three-berth and 16 four-berth.
The public rooms in both first and second classes will be on a generous scale. In the first saloon there will be on a generous scale. In the first saloon there will be a capacious lounge at the forward end of the lower promenade deck with two smaller corridor lounges; a handsomely designed and furnished smoking room and, abaft this a spacious and well-furnished verandah. Verandah cafes will be provided on the port and starboard sides of the lounge, all three verandah cafes being enclosed by plate glass screens and entered through wide folding doors. The dancing space on the lower promenade deck will be fitted with portable glass screens for use when conditions may make this protection desirable. A children’s nursery will be provided on the boat deck. The topmost or boat deck and the covered decks abreast of the 1st class public rooms will be available as promenade or sports decks for 1st saloon passengers.
The second saloon accommodation will include a large and comfortably furnished smoking room, a spacious lounge or music room, together with a children’s nursery. In the second class also two promenade decks will be provided; and there will be a swimming bath for the use of both first- and second-class passengers.
The first of the ships to be completed will be the Corfu which is expected to be ready for sea in September next. The Carthage will be commissioned for service in November. -Straits Times.
Our readers will no doubt be gratified to learn that two new P. and O. vessels are to be put on the Straits-China run before the end of the current year. It is possible that many of them will murmur “and about time too!” -Ed. Why Widow is Prefered.
Knowing that we are one of the same modernists nature living on this earthly tragedy world; each one has its own supposition to marry an extractive and fashionable young beautiful girl is really no means for a poor creature to attainment.
Needless to say; young girls often wonder why they are so often left and widows are taken. They need not wonder.
A widow makes a better wife than a young girl, for many important reasons. The widow takes a man at this face value-having had one husband, she knows more or less what to expect from the next. The widow also usually has a “marriage technique” -and who dare say that marriage does not require considerable technique? The inexperienced young wife, in only too many cases, chooses the wrong way is publicly to “boss” one’s husband. The wrong way again is to remind husbands of things they said before they were married: to give them bad news as soon as they get home from Iife field-work or office, to point sins of omission or commission before breakfast or supper; and to ignore their prejudices, thereby treading on their pet corns; and above all, to order them about.
The right way is invariably the widow’s way. The widow carefully takes note of her second adventure’s peculiar little tastes and habbits and idiosyncrasies. She chooses the right moment -his right moment, not hers-for the denouement; that is, when he is well fed, rested and comfortable; and then she makes him feel kind and good and noble when, in answer to her appeal to his want.
A man who has married a widow knows that, although he cannot be certain that he has got giltedged security, he is at any rate not gambling on an outside chance-as is often the case with an inexperienced young wife. He knows that a window is easier to get on with, is usually more considerate and helpful. No man wants to have to live up to the standard of a super-being indefinitely. It is as much as he can do to be human-before breakfast.
But probably the most important reason of all why a man, although possibly preferring blondes, nevertheless marries a widow-whatever her colour-is that he knows his wife will have to learned how to cook a decent meal, how to get full value for money, and how to buy the best in the cheapest market.
Socially, a young beautiful wife is an excellent-partnership-making-equipment for furnishing the inns of the social halls and generally goes out at all costs, when the pleasure seeking satisfies her return home late in the evenings; especially in the nights.
A PROFESSIONALE SINGLER.
[This very welcome article has reached us from a Miri contributor who prefers to remain anonymous and who hopes that his remarks on the subject of matrimony may be of interest to our readers. He can rest assured that his hopes will be fulfilled and we look forward keenly to receiving further articles from his pen. -Ed.].
Proverbs of Boh-Doh.
WHEREIN BOH-DOH DISCOURSETH UPON WOMEN.
1. There shall be two kinds of women, thy mother and who shall become thy wife.
2. The gulf of a generation lieth between, and who shall bridge it?
3. He who useth the worldly wisdom of his mother faceth the world with blunted weapons, for wisdom groweth from age to age. Even as the motor lorry supercedeth the bullock-cart, so doth the wisdom of new generations overpass the old.
4. Many times mayest thou fall in love, but once only shalt then wed. and the last may not be first in thine affections.
5. For a bright eye and a trim ankle may yet ensnare thee, and thy case be told unto Lord Merrivale.
6. But to freedom thou shaft not attain; for alimony shall be thy chain.
7. Even as women be wise or simple, so also are they good, bad, or merely middling. But address node as “my good woman” lest thou please her not.
8. The bad thou mayest gain with a jewel, the middling with chocolates, but the price of the good is above rubies; yea. their engagement rings are set with diamonds.
9. But whether or not a woman be bad dependeth upon the degree of goodness of she WHO calleth her bad.
10. Charity covereth many sins, but no woman useth it for dress material.
11. Every woman, desireth a husband, and with many words shall she beguile him. She shall stay him with slings and comfort him with cocktails, until she attain unto her heart’s desire.
12. Yet shall it be dust and ashes in her mouth, for can the average man be worthy of the average woman?
13. But esteem shall succeed to passion, many years may soften haired, they shall discourse platitudes unto grandchildren; and thoroughly shall they bore their sons.
14. Saul sought diligently for asses and found a kingdom, thou mayest well reverse the process.
15. By slow degrees must thou approach, even from “yours truly” to “very sincerely.” But beyond that is a leap in the dark, thou shall stake the future on a woman’s yea or nay.
16. But this l-know. It is not ever nay and a kiss in a taxi sealeth many engagements.
17. For like purpose also were made double rickshaw.
18. In due course thou shall be given a silver rose bowl, and thy friends shall drink champagne.
19. With circumspection shall thou use thy clubs, and “thick nights” shall thou avoid.
20. For she waiteth for thee, even as Patience upon a monument.
21. If she lasheth thee with many words, answer her not again, for every woman is unanswerable.
22. Above all make not the soft answer which exciteth wrath.
23. Praise not other women except comparatively, are not thy swans, her geese?
24. If thou hast a past (which is more than probable), assume not that she hath one likewise. For the wise woman knoweth her assets and scattereth not her estate.
25. No woman is considered guilty unless she laboureth to prove her innocence.
26. Many men have I known possessing wives to some came happiness, to others not.
27. One chose a doll for his wife, and as a doll did she wear. In the grave of beauty laid he his affection also.
28. My son, choose not after this manner.
29. Seek neither the pluperfect woman, life is short, but perfection even shorter, and a vain quest shalt thou not pursue. But seek rather one neither very good nor very bad, neither very wise nor very foolish, in short-co-equat with thyself.
30. For she may be found, and happy is he who findeth her. Habis.
Press News.
EXTRACTS FROM TELEGRAMS.
RUGBY. -Cheers from both sides of House of Commons greated ammouncement that Mr. Charles Chaplin had accepted appointment as Viceroy of India. Press in general comments favourably on selection which is free from all party bias and will undoubtedly have good effect on situation in India. Speaking in House of Lords, Mr. Charles Chaplin stated definitely that he would adopt familiar dress of bowler hat, baggy trousers, cane, etc., as his official uniform. “I consider that this dress is only fitting costume for New Delhi assembly,” said Chaplin. “And I shall do all I can to make its adoption by members universal. This step should greatly enhance dignity of proceedings in chamber which are at present marred by very unparliamentary outbreaks.”
JERUSALEM. -Zionist organ Kathusalem prints article describing magnificent new palace built by famous Jerusalem millionairess. This palatial building had been christened. “Shady Nook” and millionairess in statement to press representative said sole purpose of palace was accommodation of cup-tie teams which would shortly be visiting Holy Land. Arab leaders have not yet issued manifesto but one is believed to be in course of preparation. (REUTER.)
ADD TO RUGBY. -Mr. Charles Chaplin has now announced that he will not take office as Viceroy of India. “My new film will require all my energies for some time to come,” he is reported to have said, “and after all Hollywood is of greater importance to the world than India.” Mr. Chaplin left for Southampton in special plane escorted by 14 squadrons R. A. F. machines. From Southampton, Navy submarine rushed him to Cherbourg, where he will embark for New York in giant liner Bremen which he has chartered for voyage. He will be accompanied by two battalions of infantry and band of Brigade of Guards has been lent for duration of journey. It is thought that on completion of his new film Chaplin will be offered Presidency of United States if this post have not meantime been filled by Al Capone, with whom conversations are now proceedings at White House.
Prime Minister MacDonald in statement to Daily Herald said “From my heart I regret Charles Chaplin’s decision but in spite of this deep down in my heart I feel that we will find a way out somehow. Chaplin had sure appeal to hearts of Indian people.”
MacDonald then collapsed on floor of house. His complaint was diagnosed as heart disease and he was promptly hospitalized. From reports MacDonald’s present condition is serious.
LATER. -Viceroyalty of India has now been offered to Mr. N. E. Hughes.
ROME. -Mussolini has issued a decree forbidding export of spaghetti and ice-cream on grounds that continued export of these products has bad effect on stamina of members of Young Fascist League. Same decree renders use of term “wop” to describe an Italian citizen a criminal offence punishable by death. Death penalty will be rigidly enforced.
LONDON. -Mr. N. E. Hughes has refused Vice-royalty which has been offered to Colonel Barker.
VIENNA. -In Austrian Chamber today deputies came to blows, vituperation leading to an orgy of inkpot throwing. Under cover of this bombardment noises were punched eyes blacked collars ripped open and coats torn bodily off members’ backs. Dr. Schwitzlemeyer had both ears torn off and Deputy Zunk lost his left arm which was subsequently discovered under speaker’s chair. When order was eventually restored no less than seventeen sets of false teeth were found scattered on floor of Chamber.
Origin of dispute is at present unknown but it is supposed that certain caustic remarks of deputy Schinken regarding main premises of Nietzsche’s philosophy gave offence to nationalists who retaliated with shouts of Schwinehund and other opprobrious epithets. Speaker has dissolved Chamber and adjourned meetings until his black eye heals.
KUCHING. -Great interest has been aroused by appeal case now pending in Supreme Court. This relates to cause celebre held last June in which Curator of Museum was sentenced to ten years’ R.I. for using a Senior member of Sarawak Civil Service to feed his python. Grounds of appeal are that Civil Servant was found up a tree in public Gardens reading copy of Cobbett’s Rural Rides and giving vent to loud bellowing noises, therefore presumption on part of museum attendant that he was fit food for snakes was honest mistake of fact, and since mens rea could not be proved conviction of Curator on grounds of responsibility was in fact illegal and could not be upheld.
Proceedings occupied ten days and Court which was equipped with broadcasting and film apparatus, microphones, loud-speakers, soda-fountains, beer-engines and Turkish baths was crowded. On conclusion of hearing, appeal was allowed. Promulgation of Court’s decision was signal for wild outburst of cheering which could be heard as far as Batu Kawa. Curator on release was escorted to his house by band of Sarawak Rangers and procession seven miles long which had to cleave its way through dense cheering crowds blocking the road.
Lord Rothermere has cabled approval of verdict which his Lordship states drives home once again the folly of laissez faire policy and adherence to outworn dogmas of free trade. This memorable decision said his Lordship drives one more nail into coffin of Baldwin’s leadership.
BRITISH OFFICIAL. -General consternation has been caused by announcement that the four apes which escaped from London Zoo three weeks ago had been discovered on Treasury Bench House of Commons where they had been sitting for some days. Consternation is intensified by fact that these apes transacted important public business during this period and Attorney General is now being consulted as to legality or otherwise of measures which were passed owing to inclusion of apes in Government lobby.
LATER. -It has now been ascertained that apes were introduced to House of Commons by Mr. George Bernard Shaw who states that he considered, them eminently suited to take part in discussion of measures then before the House. Statement of Prime Minister MacDonald that he mistook apes for leading members of Cabinet is generally doubted and conservative organs cite this as one more instance of Labour Leader’s political chicanery. Prime Minister has appointed joint select committee to consider possible extension of franchise to simians within the Empire.
BERLIN. -In Reichstag to-day seven members of National Socialist party were shot dead by communists who had secreted machine-gun on one of the back benches. Nazis retaliated by raiding homes of nineteen communists and burning them alive. President of Reich has intimated disapproval of this breach of courtesy which infringes all accepted rules of debate.
RUGBY. -Colonel Barker has declined Vice royalty of India which has now been offered to “Bugs” Moran.
LONDON. “Bugs” Moran has refused Vice royalty of India on grounds of insufficient remuneration. “There’s bigger money in the booze racket than in hazing a bunch of Nigs,” cabled Moran, “so it’s the bootleg game for mine. Nix on this deputy King stuff.” Secretary of State for India Benn on receiving cabled refusal evinced great irritation stamping his feet and shouting-“Won’t anyone take the damned job?” After bedside consultation with Prime Minister MacDonald Benn has decided to offer Viceroyalty to Miss Hetta Chzrymp, Europe’s Beauty Queen for 1930 Miss Chzrymp until being crowned Miss Europe was employed as junior stenographer in office of Jugoslavian calomel King.
NEW DELHI. -All-India Synod to-day unanimously applauded appointment of Miss Chzrymp. passing a resolution fervently congratulating Secretary for India Benn on his choice. Speakers included Rev. Chatterjee Jhumabhoy. M.A. (Agra), D.D., Very Rev. K. Ponnish, B.A., D. D.; Right Kev. N. N. Vaiatilingam, D. LITT. (Allahabad), D.D., D.T.M.; Ven. B. N. Ram Dass, B.A.O., D.D.; Rev. Muttu Karupen, LL.D., B.A. (Madras), D.D.; Most Rev. V. Veerapen, M.A., D. PHIL. (Poona), D.D.; Rev. Rao Bannerjee, M.A. (Kholapur), D.D.; Rev. Y. Thangivaloo, B.A., D.L.I., D.D.; Rev. N. Krishnassamy, B.A., D.D.; Ven. Archdeacon Supramunnia, M.A. (Negapatam), PHIL. D., D.D.; Rev. M. Suppiah, B.A.; Right Rev. K. Sivapakian, B.A., LL.D., B.A.O., D.D.; Very Rev. N. Packirissamy, M.A., D.D.; Rev. M. Ramamurthi, M.A. (Chandernagore), D.D.; Rev. D. Chettiruppoo, B.A., D.D.; Rev. P. Tirupathi, B.A., PHIL. D. (Bombay), D.D.; Most Rev. N. Karuthavaloo, B.A., B.A.O., D.D.
TOKIO. -Daggers, short swords, inkpots. desk lids, name-plates, penknives, pencil-boxes, electric light fittings, hat-racks, road-metal bunches of keys, chairs, table-legs and typewriters ensured a lively session of the Diet yesterday, where deputies freely exchanged blows and bombarded each other with the above-named articles. Bombardment which was well-sustained and accurate concluded forceful argument between members of extreme and centre of Left wing. Baron Heiyosaki centre-forward for Right wing party scored a goal by flattening Mr. Fuyada with heavy typewriter, but Deputy Oshima levelled score by stabbing Right wing’s goal-keeper to death and braining Deputy Suzeida with cuspidor.
Proceedings terminated in disorder. -(REUTER).
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 60 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 16.] FRIDAY, 28th APRIL, 1871. [Price 5 Cts.
ITEMS.
Rumours are heard of an unsettled slate of things on the upper part of the Rejang river. The Katibas Dyaks, whose long series of outrages led to the expedition of June last in which a summary punishment was inflicted on the tribe, are reported to be again disturbing their neighbours. It is not known for certain what value is to be attached to such reports, but the movement of these Dyaks will be shortly made the subject of strict investigation. In the event of any outbreak the districts at the head of the Batang Lupar and Sakaran rivers may be expected to be the point of attack. In any case, the Dyaks there will be able to render a good account of the enemy. The present season of the year, following immediately upon the padi-harvest, is generally the favourite time with the Dyaks for any extraordinary movements they may be contemplating. The men are now able to assemble in the loug houses from their temporary homes on their padi farms, for any aggressive measure, and, their crop being safely housed, they have less to fear from the depredations of others if they find themselves attacked in turn. We trust the report we allude to may not be confirmed; or at least that nothing serious enough to call for extreme measures is likely to happen.
The pirates who lately plundered the British Schooner Sri Singapura have been condemned at Malacca. Two of them have received 10 years’ transportation: one, 7 years: the remaining 45 prisoners 18 months hard labour. It seems rather like a return to old times when Admiral Keppel had to sweep these seas vigorously, to hear of long prahus with 50 men in them cruising with the object of attacking unprotected traders. Now, however, our numerous gunboats ought to be able to render a good account of these marauders.
The Marquis of Salisbury has called attention in the House of Lords to the fact that English influence abroad is now considered nil. and desired that England should regain her position. Earl Granville protested against this as an exaggeration, and was astonished at notice being taken of the attacks of the foreign press.
THE NEW COURT HOUSE.
The ground is being prepared for the foundation of the new Court House and other Offices at Sarawak: building operations will very shortly be commenced. The edifice will stand nearly on the centre of the vacant space behind the present Government Offices, facing the stone wharf; some ICC feet are being left for grass plot and ornamental grounds, between the portico of the edifice and the roadway. The building will be a handsome one with brick pillars supporting the verandah and a broad flight of steps leading to the portico. It will probably be finished in 12 or 14 months’ time.
First Division News.
March, 1931.
Extract from the First Divisional Reports for March, 1931, by Mr. P. M. Adams, Acting Resident: -
Resident’s Court. -Eight criminal and four civil cases, came before the Court. Of the eight criminal cases three resulted in acquittals.
Haji Naaar. Tua Kampong of Batu Kinyang, was sentenced to three months’ R.I. for criminal breach of trust by a public servant under section 409, and in addition the accused is dismissed his post as Tua Kampong.
Two cases of illegally trafficking in opium were dealt with.
General. -Her Highness the Ranee visited the Land Dyak village at Sekrak and was entertained by Pengarah James.
The Tua Kampong of Kampong Misjid was retired and this kampong will in future be included with Kampong Bintangor. The Tua Kampong of Moyan took over Sambier in addition to his own kampong and Tua Kampong Santubong took over Salak. Dr. Teckeler, a geologist from N.I. Territory, paid a short visit to Kuching via Bau on the 12th.
The Dayang Leonora sailed en route for Europe on the 14th. Her Highness the Ranee, accompanied by the Dayangs Elizabeth and Valerie, sailed on the 25th.
A R.A.F. Flying Boat arrived from Singapore on the 30th, leaving for Brunei next day. Squadron Leader Livock was in command.
After repaying subscriptions towards the proposed new Mosque, $11,300 remains put the old building in a good state of repair. It is feared this will not be sufficient.
Mr. Moore, Cadet Officer, was transferred to Limbang. Owing to pressure of work I was not able to visit the outstations.
The examinations for Government Officers were held from 16th to 21st.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
March. 1931.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports: -
District Court. -Twenty-six cases were heard, two of which were criminal and twenty-four civil. Of the two criminal cases, all resulted in convictions. A total amount of $185 was paid in fines and fees collected $25.25.
The civil claims involved amounts totalling $6.066.31 for which fees collected amounted to $263.25.
Magistrate’s Court. -One hundred and sixteen cases were heard, thirteen of which were criminal and 103 civil. Of the fifteen criminal cases, all resulted in convictions.
Police Court. -Thirty-four summary cases were brought before the Court. All resulted in convictions. A total amount of $450 was paid in fines. In addition 144 judgment summons cases were dealt with during the month.
Judicial. -Civil claims are becoming increasingly difficult to deal with, the list being ready for some three weeks ahead. Orders made by the Court in judgment summons cases are for the most part nominal, since creditors are unable to show means and debtors plead inability to pay when it can be shown that they are still trading. In this connection I should like to suggest that a suitable fee might be instituted for the examination of books on a Court’s Order. A very considerable portion of the interpreter’s time is spent in certifying the correctness of books in civil claims and making abstracts therefrom. In a case of attempted suicide by a Chinese woman the Court complimented Pte. Rian of the Sarawak Rangers, who rescued the woman from drowning, and ordered a reward of $10 to be paid to him.
Coroner’s Inquest. -The bodies of two children were found during the month and inquest held, death being due to natural causes in each case.
An inquest was also held into the death of Lim Thian Lok who was killed as the result of a collision between himself and a lorry in Rock Road. A verdict of accidental death was entered.
LAND OFFICE.
March. 1931.
The Land Officer, Mr. T. M. Griffiths, reports: -
Free Land. -For the present no more Free Land Titles will be issued.
Quit Rent. -Owing to the difficult conditions prevailing at the present time the period of paying quit rent has been extended from the 31st March until the 30th September, without demand by Government. After this the owners will be subject to the usual surcharge and regulations.
Shop Lots. -All the areas requiring investigation at the moment, as to the ownership and boundaries of alienated areas of bazaar properties are now completed, making a total number of twelve blocks of shophouse.
Simanggang Road. -Very few of the owners of planted land situated in the Simanggang Road Land Reserve have answered the surats panggil, which have been served. When the owners of plumed areas apply for their titles, all particulars are at hand and titles can be issued immediately.
Mr. A. K. Brown reports that during the month the rentises of the land reserve were cut from the 32nd mile to the 35th mile; there being no gardens in this area, either Dyak or Chinese.
An application has been made by the Orang Kaya of Kakai on behalf of his kampong for permission to plant padi within the Land Reserve at 38th mile. As there does not appear to be any other suitable land for these people, permission has been granted for them to take one crop from this place, but it has been pointed out that they must evacuate the land when this is done.	.
General Mr. A. K. Brown was taken ill on the 14th and has been in his house at Kuching since then.
UPPER SARAWAK AND LUNDU.
March. 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer. Mr. P. Murray-Scott, reports: -
General. -Her Highness the Ranee was in Bau from 14th to 15th March.
Mr. Clarkson, from Ceylon, together with Mr. Dare, Agricultural Department, arrived at Lundu on 14th March. I accompanied them to Simatan on the 15th, whence Mr. Clarkson proceeded to Gunong Poi in an endeavour to find suitable land for tea-planting. He returned to Simatan on the 17th, and we left for Kuching on the following day.
The Superintendent of Lands was in Bau on 28th March, returning to Kuching the same day.
Courts. -There were no cases of importance, though a Land Dyak was accidentally shot and slightly wounded early in the month.
Prison. -There was a great improvement in health. A mandor and four prisoners were detailed to accompany the sanitary coolies on their rounds during the period of the latter’s notice. This work will in future be carried on entirely by prison labour. Prisoners averaged 44.71 men.
Medical and Health. -Health generally was good. The sanitary coolies were given one month’s notice expiring on 31st March. The dresser accompanied me to Lundu on the 10th, returning on the 14th.
P.W.D. -Roads were good at all times. A new lorry driver was engaged and the lorry is now more often available for use than formerly. There is a noticeable improvement also, in the condition of the electric lighting plant.
Gold Mining. -305.17 ounces of actual gold were obtained by the Bidi Gold Mining Company for the month of February, 1931.
Lundu. -I proceeded to this station on 10th March. There were only a very few cases up for hearing. The station was clean and well kept, and the laying of gravel underneath the police quarters and in the jail compound, had been completed.
Mr. Mace was still there on my arrival, but left for Kuching to sit for the Government Examinations on the Saturday.
On the same day, Mr. Dare arrived in the m.l. Para accompanied by Mr. Clarkson. They left for Simatan on the following morning and I took this opportunity of visiting that station, though I had not intended to do so this time, and also Telok Serabang.
I returned to Bau on the 19th, having left Simatan on the previous day.
SADONG.
March, 1931.
The Officer-in-Charge. Mr. J. J. Hill. reports: -
Court. -The Court work has been below the average during the month and most of the cases were of a trivial nature.
Medical. -At the General Hospital three patients
were admitted. two were discharged, leaving one remaining at the end of the month.
At the Dispensary fifty-eight patients made seventy-one visits for treatment. Seventeen N.A.B. injections were given during the month of which two were for primary yaws, five for secondary yaws, six for tertiary yaws, and four for muli.
The accounts show revenue $121.55 and expenditure including salaries and rations $100.87.
On the 26th instant Dresser Austin L. Reggie arrived to relieve Dresser Edward Domingo, who proceeded to Kuching by S.J Sri Sadong on the 28th instant.
Land. -On the 1st instant the Superintendent of Lands, Mr. C. S. Griffiths, arrived from Kuching. The land office routine was explained and it was found that work was very much behindhand. He returned on the 4th instant by the overland route via Srian.
Agriculture. -Mr. G. St. F. Dare visited the station on the 25th. Sahari of the Coconut Experimental Garden was proceeded against in the District Court for his failure to carry out the terms of his agreement and was ordered to pay compensation amounting to $162.50.
The Bugis padi farm was visited on the 27th and harvesting was in progress. The crop would appear to be all that could be desired.
Prison. -The health of the prisoners has shown a great improvement.
The prison gang averaging 12.8 was employed on the upkeep of the station. It has however been found impossible to remake, through lack of prisoners, the main Gunong road which is in a sad state of repair. Although repeated requests have been made to the prison authorities, Kuching only eleven prisoners have been received here during the last eight months.
General. -On the 3rd instant, a fire destroyed the whole of the Dyak Kampong at Isu. It appears that the fire spread so rapidly that nothing was saved.
On the 8th the Manager Sadong Colliery, Mr. J. W. Evans and Mr. S. W. Harris left for Kuching by the s.s. L’Aubaine. They both returned on the 13th instant.
On the 15th instant I left for Kuching by s.s. L’Aubaine to attend the Government Examination. I returned by overland route on the 25th instant.
During the month an abnormal amount of rainfall has been recorded, in all 23’48 inches. On the 1st 4’74 inches of rain was recorded which would appear to be the highest rainfall recorded at Sadong during the last three years.
Trade and Customs. -Comparative trade returns are as follows: -
During the months sixteen vessels entered and fifteen cleared the port.
Sadong Collieries Report.
March, 1931.
Extracts from the Sadong Collieries Report for March, 1931, by Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager: -
The output, export, local consumption, and coal stock figures for the month were as follows: -
I left here by the s.l. L’Aubaine on the 8th for Kuching to discuss various matters in connection with the department, and returned by the same vessel on the 13th. Mr. S. W. Harris accompanied me on this trip for a few days vacation to consult the dentist.
The stocktaking of general stores as at 31st December, 1930 has been completed. Owing to the stock-book errors discovered, stock issues for the first quarter of this year were again checked and stock quantities and values were brought up-to-date.
The rainfall for the month was 26’19 inches.
From the Kuching Courts.
In Kuching on 9th April fifty-one vagrants were arrested for sleeping in the Carpenter Street Wayang.
Fifteen of those arrested were charged under the new Vagrancy Order and some of these gave some very ingenuous excuses to account for their presence in the wayang.
One gentleman stated that although he had a house of his own he preferred to sleep in the wayang because it was nice and cool there, and his house was rather crowded, there being in all five inmates: in the wayang he only had fifty bedfellows. -a mere nothing!
Another Chinese said that the colour scheme of the wayang rested his eyes, a tribute to the interior decorations; while a third, who already had ten previous convictions for theft and vagrancy, stated that he was forced to sleep in the wayang because his landlady locked him out of his lodgings in Tabuan Road! Poor chap.
Last January a Chinese named Lai Lui Lee was sentenced to three months’ R.I. for stealing a bicycle, his arrest being brought about by a curious coincidence. He was carrying the bicycle, which had a locked wheel, through the kampong, when he was stopped by a Malay whose suspicions had been aroused by the unusual mode of procedure; after all a bicycle is designed primarily to carry its owner, not to be carried. The Malay, on examining the machine, recognised it as his own brother’s, and after that all Mr. Lai Lui Lee’s explanations of how it came to be in his possession fell a trifle flat Nor did these explanations convince the Magistrate, who decided that the cycle-carrier had better cool his heels in jail for a while.
On his release early this month. Mr. Lai Lui Lee at once proceeded to “lift” another cycle from outside the Chief Secretary’s office and ride off to Bau on it. Unfortunately, though, he omitted to take the simple precaution of removing the owner’s name-card from the tool-bag. and, having been spotted by a smart constable, he was duly arrested. When he came before the Court to tell the Magistrate all about his joy-ride it transpired that the cycle in question belonged to cousin of the man whose bicycle he had stolen three months before!
We fear that Mr. Lai Lui Lee who will not be seen about in society for nine months or so, will never make a master criminal.
Two other cases of interest came before the Courts. In one, an ex-Ranger was convicted of stowing away on board the Kuching; in the other, a Land Dyak was sentenced for manufacturing a gun which he managed to do by using bits of wood, some wire and a length of steel tubing. This was the first conviction under the new Fire Arms Order.
Cambridge Local Examination, 1930.
Of these twenty-five Preliminary Candidates and one Junior Candidate satisfied the Examiner.
St. Mary’s School did especially well. Seven Candidates entered for the Examination. One being ill could not attend, and of the remaining six no less than five passed. It is difficult to appreciate the effort required on the part of the Teachers to obtain such results.
Opening of the Song Kheng Hai Recreation Ground.
This ground, which is situated behind the houses on me south side of Padungan Road, was opened on Saturday 12th April by the Acting Resident, First Division. As the name implies, the scheme originated with the presentation of land to the Government by Mr. Song Kheng Hai for the purpose of a public recreation ground. The lack of such a place has been a great handicap on the development of games and sports in Kuching and the opportunity was taken of extending the area so as to provide sufficient space where recreation of all kinds could be pursued. The children are well provided for with swings, rocking horses, slides and other things for which we can find no name and the plant house is, I am told the coolest place in Kuching.
Two football fields are provided, one for adults and the other for boys, the bigger one having quite a useful stand from which games can be watched in any kind of weather in comfort. It is a trifle unfortunate that the pitches run east and west since at times the sun shines direct on one goal, but there was not sufficient length for a full-sized pitch to be got with any other layout.
Three badminton courts have been constructed, two of which are open for play at the modest charge of four cents per game; the other one can be booked for the whole afternoon for $1 by application to the Clerk-in-Charge, Song Kheng Hai Recreation Ground. The charge for the use of the football fields is $1 per game and anyone wishing to use the stand may do so-at a price.
The Acting Resident, First Division, on declaring the grounds open, complimented Mr. Song Kheng Hai for his public spirit in making the grounds possible and stated that it was hoped in the near future to add a cinder track and other appliances for the promotion of games. He then asked Mrs. Baird to “kick the first ball.” After this ceremony was skillfully performed a very good game of football was witnessed between teams comprising the pick of the European and Chinese players. The teams were evenly matched and it was a well-contested game throughout, ending in a draw of one goal each. Both defences played a sound game but the shooting of the forwards could have been a hit more accurate. The honour of scoring the first goal on the new pitch fell to John Goh, and Father de Vos scored the second. -J.P.B.
Kuching Amateur Association Football League.
Seven Clubs have entered teams for this League, viz, The Land and Survey Sports Club, The Sarawak Rangers F.C., The Sarawak Rovers F.C., The Medical, Health and Store F.C., The Treasury, Trade, Customs and Shipping F.C., The Sarawak Police F.C. and the Kuching Football Club.
The Datus Shahbandar, Hakim, Imam Tua, Mentri, Amar and Bentaga have kindly offered to provide a shield for annual competition in connection with the League.
It is hoped to start the matches on Saturday, May 9th and a provisional fixture list is to be found below.
Some difficulty, it is feared, will be experienced in obtaining referees, and any gentleman of any nationality who is prepared to referee occasional matches is requested to send his name along to the League Secretary, Mr. W. H. Kelley, as early as possible.
Kuching Football Association.
LEAGUE COMMITTEE.
RULES 11 TO 36.
11.The League Committee shall consist of two members of the Council together with one delegate from each Club entering the League Competition.
12. No Club shall nominate more than one delegate to the League Committee irrespective of the number of terms it may enter in the League.
13. The Secretary for the Association shall be the Secretary for the League and shall not be included in the two Council representatives on the League Committee.
14. The League Committee shall be in charge of the League Competition and shall appoint referees and other officials for the control of League Matches.
DISCIPLINARY BOARD.
15. A Disciplinary Board shall be appointed by the Council at its first meet in after the Annual General Meeting, and shall consist of a Chairman and two other members who shall be elected by the Council.
16. The duties of the Disciplinary Board shall be to investigate and adjudicate upon reports on players sent off the field and to deal with the players in accordance with the procedure of the English Football Association.
17. The decision of the Disciplinary hoard Shall he subject to appeal by the player or referee affected to the Council who may reduce, amend or increase any suspension or punishment.
18. Reports from referees to the Disciplinary Board must be in the hands of the Secretary Kuching Football Association within 48 hours of, the match, and the Secretary shall call a meeting of the Disciplinary Board within 48 hours after receiving such report.
19. Any player sent off the field is automatically under suspension until his case is investigated.
20. With the exception of the Referee’s reports upon players for misconduct on the held or field premises after a match, all disciplinary action shall be vested in the Council who shall adjudicate on reports or complaints against players or clubs.
AFFILIATED CLUBS AND PLAYERS.
21. No Club, or player may take part in any competition under the auspices of the Kuching Football Association unless he or they are registered with the Association except under special circumstances which may arise and which shall be determined by the Council in connection with competitions which were in existence before the formation of the Association.
TROPHIES, CUPS AND MEDALS.
22. All Trophies competed for in competitions under the auspices of the Association are to be the property of the Association and cannot be won outright.
23. The Association may, however, present replicas to winners should it wish to do so.
COMPLAINTS, PROTESTS AND APPEALS.
24. Any complaint, protest or appeal by a Club or player shall be sent to the Secretary Kuching Football Association within 4.8 hours (Sundays not included) and must be accompanied with a fee of $10.
25. The fee may be forfeited to the Association in the event of the protest or appeal not being sustained or the complaint considered to unreasonable.
26. All such complaints, protests or appeals shall be sent in duplicate.
REFEREES.
27. No person shall officiate as a Referee in any competition under the sanction or jurisdiction of the Association who is not on the official list of the Association except by special permission of the Association.
28. Associations, Leagues and other Combinations of clubs under the sanction or jurisdiction of the Association may appoint Referees to their own matches provided the appointments are from the official list.
29. If from unforeseen circumstances a Referee on the official list is unable to act. clubs or combinations may agree on some other prison in the emergency.
30. All candidates shall be examined as to their suitability for the duly. Such examination shall be oral. No candidate under the age of 21, shall be eligible for examination.
31. In all cases in which players are dismissed from the field or cautioned the Referee must, when the game is being played under the jurisdiction of the Association, according to Rule number 18 report to the Association.
32. Linesmen who observe incidents on the field of play likely to bring the game into disrepute, must, if such incidents have not come under the notice of the Referee, immediately report them to him.
33. Should a Referee fail to report misconduct which comes under his notice, and it is proved to the satisfaction of Council that such misconduct was of a nature that required investigation, he shall be suspended or otherwise dealt with.
34. It is misconduct tor any club, or any player, official or member of any Club to offer or attempt to offer either directly or indirectly, any consideration whatever to another Club, player or players, of any other Club, with a view to influence the result of a match. It is misconduct for any Club, player or players, to accept any such consideration.
THE ATTENTION OF REFEREES IS CALLED TO THE FOLLOWING: -
a. Many Referees habitually penalise players for charging that is neither violent nor dangerous. Attention is called to Law 9 of the game, which provides that such charging is permissible A free kick only should be given when charging is violent or dangerous.
b. Referees must observe the following Decision of the International Board: - Law 13 “If in the opinion of the Referee a player has been seriously injured, the game shall be stopped, the player at once removed from the field of play and the game resumed. If a player is slightly injured, the game shall not be stopped until the ball has ceased to be in play.”
c. The Council have also decided that Trainers must not go on the field of play unless authorized by the Referee. Referees and Trainers who do not observe these Regulations are liable to be dealt with by the Council.
d. The attention of Referees is called to an improper interpretation of Law 6. Il is not a breach of the Law for a player to be in an offside position, but only when in the position he interferes with or is likely to distract the attention of an opponent, or in any way interferes with the play. If a player who is in an offside position, advances towards an opponent, or the ball, and in so doing causes the play to be affected, he should be penalised.
BETTING.
35. An official of the Association, Club, Referee. Linesman, or player shall not bet on any Football Match, and Clubs are also required to prevent betting and the use of objectionable Language.
COUPON BETTING.
36. An official of a Club. Referee, Linesman or Flayer, proved to have taken part in Coupon Football Betting shall be permanently suspended from taking any part in Football or Football Management In the case of breach of this Rule, any player, official, or spectator may be removed from any ground, and such force used as may be necessary for the purpose of effecting such removal.
Turf Notes.
Mr. P. M. Adams has taken over the duties of Honorary Secretary from Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner as from 1st May.
The next meeting of the Sarawak Turf Club will be held on 26th and 28th September instead of 6th and 8th June as previously suggested.
Second Division News.
February, 1931.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports for February, 1931. by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident: -
I returned from local leave in the Third Division on the 3rd. The Officers-in-Charge of the various districts reported that there were no signs of the Entabai Dyak Asoon who is wanted by Government. In this connection I have sent for Penghulu Kana for an explanation of his conduct in the matter. Penghulu Ramba will be called later.
Mr. G. M. Goodall. Agricultural Field Officer, Second Division, paid several visits to Simanggang and visited the Saribas District. Later on in the month Mr. J. S. W. Bean, Director of Agriculture visited the Division, mainly with the idea of inspecting the State-aided pepper gardens in the Skrang. Reports show that these gardens are not in an entirely satisfactory condition.	Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft visited the Skrang on the 6th, returning on the 9th. Padi and engkabang reports there are poor. Skrang Dyaks are constantly asking for permission to move to the Fourth Division, particularly Niah and Sibuti, and there have been applications by Batang Ai Dyaks to move to the First Division. Penghulu Renang retired on pension at the end of the month and is replaced by Kalong. Penghulu Renang has been a faithful and loyal Chief and was particularly popular amongst European Officers. He is giving up his position owing to failing eyesight and general old age.
Dr. W. Hutchison. Principal Assistant Medical Officer, accompanied by Mrs. Hutchison, arrived in Simanggang on the 11th and returned on the 20th.
Draup. Native Officer, was transferred to Sebuyow vice Pangeran Azit, Native Officer, returned to Simanggang; and Abang Bunsu, Native Officer, replaced Abang Abu-Talip at Engkilili temporarily.
In the Resident’s Court much time was spent on a Civil appeal case from Betong. and there are a number of other Civil appeals pending. In a case from Engkilili the fine imposed on a Chinese for illicit distilling of arrack was increased.
On the 20th I received urgent despatches from Lubok Antu that Mr. W. H. E. Scheuer, Assistant Resident of Sintang, Mr. J. E. L. Burgemeestre, Acting Controleur of Semitau and Mrs. Scheuer, were proceeding to Lubok Antu en route for Simanggang, and were expected to arrive at the former place on the 26th. I left Simanggang on the 24th and on the next day accompanied by Mr. W. P. N. L.
Ditmas, Acting Assistant District Officer of Engkilili, proceeded to Lubok Antu, arriving there that evening. Here I learnt that the Dutch could not arrive until the 27th. On the 26th Mr. Ditmas and I walked to the frontier; our road is quite good except for two bad swamps which require the construction of proper log bridges and a hand-rail.
On the 27th the Dutch Officials and Mrs. Scheuer arrived, accompanied by two Malay Officers, eight Dyak Chiefs, ten Police, thirty-four coolies, and various others, having done the last stage of their journey from Badan in two hours.
The next day we left for Engkilili, which we reached in good time and where we were at the end of the month.
Another small party of Dyaks was sent to Johore for the Colonial Survey Section there. After long negotiations the Simanggang Sawmill Company has at last managed to settle its complicated affairs and has now re-opened under a new owner.
A shooting case was reported from Saratok, a Dyak having been shot dead by another whilst hunting deer with a jaring. The assailant is in custody, and at present details point to a case of gross negligence merely and no suspicion of murder.
Mr. R. N. Baron, Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, arrived at Lingga towards the end of the month and proceeded to Selantik in order to start a survey of the proposed coal concession there.
SIMANGGANG.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hudden: -
There were three criminal charges in the District Court, for illegal possession of opium, resulting in two convictions and one charge dismissed. Civil claims amounting to $494.03.
In the Magistrate’s Court, there were five criminal charges, four resulting in fines, and the remaining one being adjourned. Civil claims amounting to $244.12.
On the evening of the 1st a couple of Kheh brothers were brought into hospital by the Capitan China, Sabu. One was unconscious with bad head wounds, and the dresser was doubtful whether he would recover. As soon as he became conscious a statement was taken, unnecessarily as it turned out, for he is almost well again. They had been embroiled in a serious fight just this side of the Long Round on the Sabu road. The case has been adjourned until they are both discharged from hospital.
Abang Sedik, Native Officer. Lingga. reported the capture of a 16ft crocodile on the 12th. It was apparently immediately recognized by several of the inhabitants who declared that it had taken a man in the Lingga last year and on being opened up, human relics were found.
On the 13th two Meranti Chinese, father and son, were nearly drowned just inside Pulau Triso. They were returning home from fishing in a sailing boat when they were caught by a sudden storm and sunk by the waves. Luckily for them another boat was near at hand and able to pick them up.
ENGKILILI.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Engkilili, Mr. W. P. N. L Ditmas: -
On Friday 6th I left by boat for Lubok Antu. I was accompanied by four police who were being transferred. One night was spent on the way, as the river was high owing to heavy rain.
At Lubok Antu I checked the books and the cash, and saw to the transfer of the police. The old white equipment, and snider rifles and bayonets, have all been replaced by Enfield carbines and the new equipment. All the police in this District have now got the new uniforms and equipment.
On the 8th I walked to the N.E.I. Frontier, and put up a frontier post opposite to the one put up some years ago by The Dutch. On the 9th, at 10 a.m. I left by boat for the Ulu accompanied by Abang Madaut and one policeman.
The Dyaks in the neighbour hood of Nanga DeIok and further down river very much want to remove to the virgin jungle of the uninhabited country above S. Mujan; they say that all the land is finished where they are now. The land certainly has been stripped of trees for miles. Another thing the Dyaks ask was for a small Kubu to be made at Naga Menyang or Delok to save themselves the trouble of having to go to Lubok Antu.
There were three appeals to the Resident’s Court, one from the District Court, and two from the Magistrate’s Court.
SARIBAS.
Extracts from the report of the Acting District Officer, Saribas, Mr. K. D. Daubeny: -
By special sanction the unemployed gang of 15 men was given further work on the station roads, containing the new road extension half way down the kampong. Towards the end of the month work was transferred to the enlargement of the road leading from Bukit Lempaong. Owing to the shifting mud and heavy tides at Pusa, minor repairs had to be carried out to the wharf there.
The substations were visited from 9th to 12th instant, various outstanding matters and cases being settled.
Padi harvesting has commenced in some places and the crops, although bad in parts, appear to be above the average as a whole.
Down river certain Malay Kampongs have planted a second crop, using the quick-growing species of padi obtained from Sadong which should be ready for harvesting by the time it is necessary to start clearing for planting the Padi Taun.
KALAKA.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. L. K. Morse: -
The Chinese coolies who were granted relief work by the Government were given two days’ notice on the 9th. Since that date they have made a continual nuisance of themselves with their demands for work. It was hoped that the contractor for the upkeep of the Roban road would employ some of them. He, however, has only taken on two, as he is still employing the coolies who worked for him during 1930. The locale coolies appear to think that this is unfair, as these coolies originally came from Kuching.
The Krian and Awek Dyaks cleared the telephone rentis to Debakk during the month, and many took this opportunity to pay in their taxes. All were informed that their taxes must be paid before 31st March, 1931. The Acting District Officer, Saribas, informs me that the Debak people were greatly alarmed by a rumour that the taxes in this district had been raised by some ten or twelve per cent. The originators of this rumour could not of course be found.
On the 22nd a wire was received from Saratok stating that Jalin, Dyak had been shot dead by Diong, Dyak of Krangan Pulan, Awek. Diong having absconded with gun and cartridges. I returned to Saratok on the 23rd to find that the Native Officer had conducted an inquiry at Krangan Pulan and that Diong had been arrested. A further inquiry was held in the District Court and the minutes forwarded to the Resident’s Court, Simanggang.
Great difficulty has been experienced in the upkeep of the roads and grounds round the station, the prison gang being barely sufficient to keep the grass cut, to say nothing of weeding and repair work. Within the last year or so the grounds have increased in size by some seven acres, the greater part of which surrounds the Officer’s Bungalow.
The west room in the old Fort Quarters has been turned into a Court room, while the east end of the building is now used by the Assistant District Officer and Native Officer. The wall between the west bedroom and the dining room was removed by the prisoners to enlarge the Court room. Otherwise no structural alterations have been made.
The Malaya and Dyaks of the Krian and Awek have begun to harvest their padi. I am glad to say that the crop is exceptionally good this year.
March, 1931.
In continuation of my last month’s report the Dutch Government Officials and their party left Engkilili with the Acting Assistant District Officer of Engkilili and myself on the 1st. A short stay was made at the Agricultural Department experimental garden at Lubok Tedong. where Mr. G. M. Goodall, Agricultural Field Officer, Second Division, showed us round his estate. The Assistant Resident of Sintang appeared to be most interested in the work and expressed surprise at some of the excellent results that have been obtained. We arrived about noon at Simanggang where a police guard of honour was mounted. After inspecting the guard, the Assistant Resident accompanied me to the Residency.
The next day an informal meeting was held in the Resident’s Office to discuss various matters connected with the Sarawak and Dutch Governments. Sarawak was represented by the Acting District Officers of Simanggang and Engkilili, five Native Officers, Penghulu Ringgit and myself.
The Dutch were the Assistant Resident of Sintang, the Acting Controleur of Semitan, two Native Officers and ten Dyak Chiefs.
The Dutch Officials and party left Simanggang on the 3rd, stayed the night at Engkilili, reached Lubok Antu on the 4th, and were over the frontier the following day.
On the afternoon of the 3rd, I was compelled to proceed to Kuching by m.l. Anne owing to a wound and was under medical treatment until the 17th when I returned in the Keppel. At the end of the month, I was still unable to walk, but managed to attend office each day in a locally constructed sedan chair.
Mr. R. L. Daubeny, Acting District Officer of Saribas, arrived in Simanggang on the 11th to take charged temporary and stayed there until the 19th. Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas, Acting Assistant District Officer, Engkilili was on temporary duty at Simanggang from the 12th to 26th.
Messrs. Morse, Hudden and Barcroft were absent from their stations from the 13th until the 25th in order to sit for their examinations.
During the month Abang Latip, Native Officer, took a party of Third Division Dyaks down to Kuching in order to see His Highness the Rajah about the rebel Asoon. Penghulu Kana, too, went down to Kuching to see His Highness about this and other matters.
Penghulu Ramba arrived during my absence in Kuching and will be sent for again later. Penghulu Kalong the new Batang Ai Chief, was handed his chop, but he appears to be frightened of the late Penghulu’s relations.
On the 12th the first post of the new Simanggang Offices was raised amidst some celebration.
In the Resident’s Court, T. J. Kee Khoon late Court Writer of Lubok Antu, was convicted of criminal breach of trust and sentenced to three years’ imprisonment.
A Civil appeal from the Simanggang Magistrate’s Court was heard and dismissed. A criminal appeal from the Engkilili District Court was adjourned for further evidence and several witnesses were fined for refusing to attend Court.
Mr. F. A. W. Page-Turner visited Simanggang and Engkilili during the month and was welcomed by many of his friends.
Abang Mohamat retired from the position of Native Officer of Roban at the end of the month. He will be replaced by Abang Latip, but in the meanwhile Awang Sepudin is acting.
SlMANGGANG.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hudden: -
On the 10th it was reported by Wan Lom of Kampong Lemanak, that his brother Wan Jin, aged 16 had rescued a small Malay girl, the daughter of Elon, Kampong Lemanak, from drowning. She was apparently returning from the bazaar in a boat by herself, just after the tide had made and being unable to control the boat, crashed into the rocks by the mouth of the Sungei Simanggang. She would must certainly have been drowned if the brothers had not been in a boat nearby. Wan Jin dived in and pulled her out. Unfortunately, there was no eye-witness, and the question of a reward is still under consideration.
At 5 a.m. on the 12th, after a short ceremony, the first post of the New Offices was erected. Despite the early hour there was quite a good attendance, and a point of great interest was the presence of the grandsons of four of those people who helped to raise the first post of Fort Alice, sixty-seven years ago. Datu Abang Haji Abdulrashid, the grandson of Abang Alli of Saribas, Pusa; Abang Omar, Native Officer, the grandson of Abang Aing; Pengeran Ajit, Native Officer, the grandson of Pengeran Matalli; and Teliang, Resident’s Office Clerk, the grandson of Orang Kaya Pemancha Nanang of Saribas.
Owing to the hard times all the Malays have been given until after the harvest to pay their exemption tax for the year.
ENGKILILI.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas: -
It was reported that on the 20th a Chinese of the bazaar, a barber named Jong Nyang, had been drowned when a boat containing three others had upset while crossing the river from the down river end of the bazaar. Jong Nyang could not swim but the others could swim a little and managed to save themselves. The body was recovered about ten miles downriver on the 26th.
On Saturday 28th clerk Rozalli left by boat for Lubok Antu, to take over the duties of Court Writer there in place of Kee Khoon, who was arrested and is now in Simanggang.
On the afternoon of the 30th I walked over from Engkilili to the Lemanak, about an hour and a half’s walk. The pepper gardens in this district are poor. I returned by boat from R. Jambai Keramah, Lemanak.
SARIBAS.
Extracts from the report of the Acting District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny: -
The substations were visited from 27th to 31st when various outstanding matters were settled.
Mr. Goodall, Agricultural Field Officer, passed through this station on his way to the Krian. He has started a small nursery here for coffee seedlings to be distributed to those who wish to plant.
The padi crop appears to be quite fair in places, but mice have caused considerable damage in some parts.
KALAKA.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. L. K. Morse: -
Lance-Corporal Omar visited the Ulus of the Krian, Budu, Kabo, Awek and Seblak rivers from the 12th to the 19th instant. He reported numerous rumours regarding ex-Penghulu Asoon, but generally speaking, there was nothing of interest in his report.
Very little exemption tax has been paid, the Malays having been granted an extension of time in which to pay but I very much doubt if they can do so. Other taxes, however appear to be coming in very well.
The pengerih fishermen at Kabong do not appear to have had a good season; this is unfortunate as it would have helped them to pay their taxes, the apparatus for the jungkat fishing is now being got ready.
Suntong and Nis, the two Sru Mohamedans who made so much trouble regarding their rights to inherit the Sru lands last year, are again making a nuisance of themselves. I have spoken to the Datu Abdul Rashid regarding this matter as I believe they intend to reopen the affair.
Musings from Simanggang.
How hot under the collar people are getting over this school correspondence in the Gazette!
First of all the Editor puts his foot (and by jingo! It is a foot too!) right into it by filling up an empty column with something which he apparently takes seriously.
That of course is a great mistake. Why not follow the method of a previous Editor who used to take a pencil and the Editorial Dictionary (a volume printed two years after our victorious troops had put it across King Coffee of Kumasi, about the same time that the patent spring bustle was so popular with the ladies; opening the tome at random, he used to shut his eyes and prick: The word on which the pencil alighted formed the theme for the article.
Now and again, it is true, the first prick was unfortunate, since even in these days of Amy Johnson, Miss Bondfield, Lady Astor and other charming ladies who add so much to the gaiety of nations, unconsciously perhaps, some limit must be put upon the choice of subjects. When therefore the first prick chanced on something really too meaty for the readers, a second prick was allowed; here again, if it alighted on some word the Editor could not spell, a third and last prick was permitted. This, however, was final and meaty or not meaty, spelt wrong or spelt right, the word had to go, hence some of the extraordinary articles which that sporting Editor turned out.
Luckily, he had a certain knack of exciting the sympathy of most of his lady readers, who understood or pretended to understand, the rather pseudo erotic effusions and the positively unadulterated rubbish which month by month appeared in the pages of the Gazette.
However, having apparently picked on education. the Editor then proceeded to criticize the Mission Schools nothing of the sort, -read the article again -Ed.). This naturally started the ball rolling, and unless he is careful the Editor will be engulfed by the outpourings of the pedagogues, while of course all the “Old Boys” and other Borstallians will contribute.
It is curious how the mention of “English” has the effect of a red rag to a bull on some persons. Teach the little Malay boys Malay they say; teach the little Dyaks Dyak, and so on, just in the same way that you and I were taught English in our school days. What is the result? I have made four spelling mistakes already in this article (where? -Ed.) and the only rule of grammar remaining unbroken is the split infinitive.
I suppose the Editor regards the quality of the English taught in the local schools in much the same light as the disappointed parents who after giving their son a most expensive education including French, found to their unutterable chagrin that the wretched lad was unable to call a cab when they journeyed to Paris.
Sometimes, however, little boys understand English just a shade too well. You remember the story of the padre at Mukah who was presented with a brace of snipe by the district Officer “What shall I do with them, Sir?” asked the cook, hastening to his master’s call. “Do with them!” said the padr jocularly, “What the devil do you suppose? -why, give them to the cat, of course!” Supper time arrived. The padre hurried home after a four of bumblepuppv bridge at the donor’s house, full of all sorts of things including the thought of the dainty dish awaiting him. Imagine, therefore, his rage when up came the same old stuff, rice and dead hen! “Where are the snipe?” bawled the expectant ecclesiastic. “Why, where should they be?” replied the cook, -probably in the cat’s stomach, which they entered some hours ago!”
The number of ponies in Simanggang has decreased by 50% lately, a lamentable fact in view of the new species of big game which has been added to the Sarawak chase. I mean, of course, the Giant African Snail. Rumours of its devasting attacks have been coming through, and keen sportsmen are now ranging the hills on the lookout for this savage beast.
Opinions differ. Some carry a sawn-off shot gun, some a revolver, whilst one even goes so far as to carry an air gun. The practice of arming oneself with merely a catapult is, in my opinion, foolhardy.
The general opinion is, however, that all firearms should be barred and that the brutes should be properly hunted by red-currant jelly-dogs, tripe hounds, or, at a pinch a scratch pack composed of say five couple of garbage terriers, three couples of pork-offal poodles and any other hounds which can be picked up cheaply at the Municipal dustbins.
THE OPTIMISTIC FIDDLER.
Third Division News.
March, 1931.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports for March. 1931. by Mr. C. D. Adams. Resident. -
Court. -Three criminal cases were heard.
General. -The Resident. Mr. C. D. Adams, re-turned from Kuching on 4th instant.
His Highness the Rajab visited the station on 11th and left again on 12th on a visit to Kapit. On the 14th His Highness interviewed representatives of the Malay, Dyak and Chinese communities. His Highness was pleased to appoint T.R. Ujang of Bawang Assan to be Penghulu Dalam and Penghulu Nglambong of Bawan be Pengarah. His Highness sailed on 15th, accompanied by Mr. C. D. Adams, who is proceeding on home leave.
Mr. Kelley of the Police Department arrived on the 23rd to conduct inquiries into the activities of the Ghee Hin Society; a large number of people had been arrested by the end of the month.
The District Officer, Mukah and Oya, Mr. E. O. Bruce, arrived on 27th to discuss various matters in connection with the Coast and left again on 30th.
SIBU.
The District Officer, Mr. E. V. Andreini, reports: -
I took over from Mr. W. F. Dick on the 6th instant.
Judicial. -Some thirty Chinese, mostly Foochows were remanded on charge of being members of an unlawful society.
Several cases involving manufacture of arrack in outlying districts were brought up, at the instance of the Arrack Farmer, and fines were imposed. With the growth of padi planting by Foochows it will be increasingly difficult to detect this.
Mr. Crocker, sitting in the District Court, inflicted a fine of $300 or three months’ imprisonment on Wong Chi Yung, Principal of Se Kuang School, Sarikei, for cheating under section 417.
Administration. -Abang Haji Gapor, Native Officer. accompanied by Penghulu Dalam and Penghulu Ikau visited the Dyaks in the Batang Lassa.
Abang Indih, Probationary Native Officer, went round Penghulu Imai’s district with the Penghulu, visiting the rivers Salin, Nibong, Spauh, Menvan. He reported that the Dyaks in these rivers are breaking up into small houses and are disinclined to obey their tuai. Instructions were issued to the Penghulu to take steps to stop this.
Education. -The Director of Education held a meeting of schoolmasters in the Court House and told them the system he wanted them to work on, and discussed other matters affecting schools.
The Inspector of Schools, Tuanku Haji Ali, visited and inspected schools at Sarikei. Paloh and Bawang Assan. Schoolmasters were appointed to the first two places and the schools started.
Police. -A detective squad was inaugurated. Raids took place on several occasions in connection with the suspected formation of a secret society. A weekly parade of N.C.O.’s under the Sergeant-Major was started. Mr. Kelley, A.S.P., Kuching, arrived from Kuching on the 23rd and was still here at the end of month.
MUKAH AND OYA.
The District Officer, Mr. E. O. Bruce, reports: -
General. -I visited Balingian on the 9th, returning on the 14th after attending to all matters outstanding.
Mr. Temple Waite, of the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, paid a short visit from up river on the 20th.
With a view to decreasing cost of coal transshipments between the main dump to the pump-station, the shallow draft tukau was completed by the Government carpenter from an old temuai langkau. When fully loaded with about 1 1/2 tons, it draws less than two feet.
I visited Sibu for the week end on the 26th. and Dalat and Oya on the 30th.
On the 31st a seaplane passed over the district about 9 a.m. heading eastward.
Monthly rainfall registered at Mukah Fort was 13’19 inches.
On the 17th two open boats, containing a dozen Ilaunus from B.N.B, called in at Mukah en route to Pulau Bunguran (Dutch Territory).
Court. -A normal number of cases was dealt with.
Minor assaults amongst Chinese were more frequent, arising from disputes between coolies for whose casual Iabour there is not sufficient demand.
An involved paternity incest case was adjourned pending the opinion of a higher Court.
Public Works. -No new works have been undertaken.
Police and Prison. -New uniforms were issued to all police, and although shorts and pushes are an improvement in pattern, I do not consider that the khaki material is preferable to the old on which the stains of oil and perspiration were not so noticeable. The question of the utility of ammunition boots in outstations is doubtful.
Land and Agriculture. -The demarcation of sixty-nine lands was completed, and fifteen new applications were received.
Trade and Agriculture. -A certain number of illipe-nuts was traded, but much remains up river in the hope of a more reasonable market value.
On the whole trade is very slack compared with normal times.
Padi is available in certain areas at about three passus per dollar.
Education. -The nominal roll of pupils at Government Lay School is 124. The daily average attendance 95.
OYA.
Mr. E. H. Elam, Acting Assistant District Officer, reports: -
General. -The Assistant Conservator of Forests returned from Mukah on the 17th, and together we proceeded to the Sungei Narub on the 19th where a forest reserve is being made. After paddling up the Narub for two hours, we walked through the rentis which was just over one mile long and which had been made last December. Good stocking was evident, there being an abundance of jelutong and class one woods. Leaving the Forest Ranger with his coolies to continue the rentis through to the Baoh Chelum, we returned to Muara Narub and next day proceeded to Nanga Baon in m.l. Nellie. Having inspected the woods in the Baoh, which again seemed to be of good quality, we returned to Dalat, the Forest Ranger returning three days later, reporting the rentis finished.
The people of Kampong Bakong and Trus were allowed to start working planks again on licences since they disliked the permit system, but on the understanding that failure to report any planks worked would render them liable to a fortnight in the jail.
Deputations from nearly all the kampongs were received requesting an extension of time for payment of exemption tax. This request was allowed as the landas has only just finished and as yet the boats have not been able to go to sea regularly.
The Dyaks will have finished harvesting by the end of next month, half of the padi having already been collected. Both the quality and the quantity of their crops are well up to average.
Dalat was visited twice during the month and Medong and the Cut once each.
Land. -Many rubber occupation tickets were exchanged for free ones at Oya. Hardly any rent has been collected, but the garden owners have been allowed by the Divisional Land Officer to pay by monthly installments.
SARIKEI, BINATANG AND REJANG.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports: -
General. -On 2nd I returned from Singapore per s.s. Angbg. Mr. R. G. Aikman proceeding to Kapit by the same boat.
On Sunday 15th His Highness the Rajah visited Sarikei and Binatang and met representatives of the various communities, who all asked for taxation relief; His Highness was pleased to allow extension of time for payment of all taxes.
Mr. Crocker. Registrar, was twice in Sarikei hearing a Resident’s Court Case.
P.W.D. Local. -At Binatang, the Jabai Bridge was completed; this crosses the Jabai river which is fifty feet broad. No new contracts have been made except for maintenance.
KAPIT.
The Court Writer, Law Ah Kui, reports: -
Courts. -There was practically no Court work during the month.
Tong Chok Soon (Foochow) was sentenced to eighteen months’ imprisonment under section 380 I.P.C.
Dairy Farm -The herd numbered 48 head at the end of the month. Three cow calves were born during the month.
Song. -Song was visited on the 17th.
General. -The principal event of the month was the visit to the station of His Highness the Rajah on the 12th. His Highness, who was accompanied by the Resident, Third Division, Mr. C. D. Adams, spent the night of the 12th at Kapit and the next morning sat in Court, where several matters were brought to his notice. After walking round the bazaar, His Highness left for Sibu in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna. All the Dyak Penghulus and the principal Kayan Chiefs came down to meet His Highness.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman returned from Sarikei on the 4th.
The Acting Assistant District Officer accompanied by the Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. A. D. Hutchison, left for Belaga on the 20th and was still away at the end of the month.
Abang Abu Seman, Native Officer, visited the Pala Wong and Belaga from the 21st to 25th.
A party of 40 Lepu Djalans came down from Dutch Territory to trade and returned again.
Visitors to the station during the month included Dr. A. D. Hutchison, Mr. W. H. Avery, Mr. G. H. Daly, Dr. R. Hertz, German Consul-General, Singapore.
The Sibu Recreation Club.
1931 TENNIS TOURNAMENT.
DRAWINGS FOR OPEN CHAMPIONSHIP.
E. A. Webb vs. Kong Yu Tsan, Khoo Hing Loong (bye), Teo Kui Seng (bye). M Sirat (bve). Edgar de Rozarin (bye). Ngui Ah Thiam (bye). J. McKenna (bye), Ong Guau Tee (bye).
DRAWINGS FOR CLASS “A” (HANDICAP)
Kong Yu Tsan (-30) vs. Ong Guan Tee (-30). J. McKenna (scr) (bye). Ngui Ah Thiam (-30) (bve), E. A. Webb (scr.) (bye). E. Rozario (-30) (bye), Chu Peck Bee (-15) (bye), Teo Kui Seng (-30) (bye), K. Hing Loong (-30) (bye).
SIBU RECREATION CLUB.
REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE, AND STATEMENT OF ACCOUNTS FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31ST DECEMBER, 1930.
GENTLEMEN,
Your Committee have pleasure to submit to you their report and accounts for the year ended 31st December, 1930.
Management. -The Office Bearers for the year were as follows: -
President: -C. D. Adams, Esq., Resident, Third Division; Vice-President: -W. F. Dick, Esq, District Officer; Hon. Secretary: -J, McKenna, Esq, Hon. Treasurer: -Wong Leong Chee, Esq.; Chairman of Committee: -Edgar de Rozario, Esq.; Committee Members: -Messrs. E. A. Webb, Khoo Cheong Seng, Abang Mohamed Trang bin Abang Mohamed Noor, Lieu Khin Joon, Wan Abubakar Adrus bin Tuanku Hamid, John Siong, Wong Kim Chye.
Membership: -The total number of Members at the close of the Club year was 56 Resident Members, and 9 Absent Members.
Tennis Courts: -The two new tennis courts situated at Island Road were opened by the Resident, C. D. Adams. Esq., our President, on 10th December, 1930. It is gratifying to note that these courts are well patronized by members.
A circular has been sent round to members regarding a tennis tournament. So far the entries for both classes are encouraging and the tournament will start early after the Hari Haya.
Finance: -The Income and Expenditure Accounts show an increase of Income over Expenditure of $270.63.
Fourth Division News.
March, 1931.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports for March, 1931. by Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident: -
In the Resident's Courts Civil and Criminal there were no cases of outstanding importance, The total amount of claims in the Civil Court amounted to $6,612.05.
At the beginning of the month, I was still away at Bintulu. when I visited Sebauh and walked through the Foochow Concession by the new road which the Foochow have just completed. Several Foochows put in applications to be allowed to sell billian timber to Government at cheap rates. Unfortunately, the Govern-ment already have large stocks of the billian and I could not take advantage of their offer.
The District Officer reports that these people have applied to be allowed to built six shops in the Bintulu bazaar to use up some of the timber they have worked.
Except for the question of water rate no other matters of interest were brought to my notice.
The majority of the people were busy on their harvest and collecting engkabang. I gather that here and at Baram there is not likely to be large amount exported as the people will not bother to collect it owing to the low price. Fortunately, there are reports of a good padi harvest in most cases.
I returned to Miri by the s.s. Margaret on 5th.
Electric light was installed in the bungalows on Tanjong Lobang for the first time on the 11th.
The generating set was a second-hand one from Kuching and up-to-date it has proved most successful. I have to thank the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, for the assistance in putting the plant in order and erecting it.
Yong Kiau, contractor, proposes to carry his road over Tanjong Lobang and along the coast towards Bekam. Quite a large colony of natives is springing up at Luak who are taking up land for the purpose of planting coconuts. There are also quite a number of Chinese vegetable gardens. It is surprising how quickly this part of the district has opened up since a road capable of taking motor traffic has been put through over Tanjong Lobang.
Some years ago, owing tio the congestion in the Malay kampong, it was suggested that Malays wanting to build should go across river, and the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, allocated a site beyond the golf links on the Peninsula for this purpose and divided the land into one-acre lots. Nobody would take up the land, until, about eight months ago one man went over, since when all the lots have been occupied. All have planted some kind of foodstuffs on their pieces of land.
At a meeting of Municipal Board, it was decided that Kampong China would come under the control of this Board as from 1st of April, and a satisfactory arrangement was agreed upon with the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, as to compensation to plot holders in the unlikely event of the Company requiring this land at a future date for drilling purposes.
The matter of reducing quit rent on rubber gardens and doing away with free three acre lots was put before the District Officers and Native Officers. Both here and Baram agreed to the suggestion, but at Bintulu opinions were divided, and some thought it a pity to do away with the pesaka land, and asked for a temporary reduction during the depression.
In Miri there are very few lands for which occupation tickets have been granted as free. In this division the pesaka terms are not popular, and I consider that at Bintulu it is very probably the Milanos who object as they hate paying for anything.
The Miri Malay butchers again brought up the question of being allowed the monopoly of killing and selling buffalo meat. They were informed that I would not consider their request.
For some reason or other there have been several applications recently to be allowed to look for bird’s nests caves and if found to claim ownership. Only the caves at Niah and these belonging to the Kayans of Long Palai are registered.
On the 20th the German Cruiser Emden arrived at Miri to bunker. She arrived at 10 a.m. and departed at midnight for Labuan. Official calls were exchanged between the Officer Commanding, Captain Wittkoeft and myself and arrangements were made for some of the Officers and a football team to come ashore.
Travelling. -I left for Tuban on 26th, met the local chiefs that night and proceeded up the Jelalong on the following day.
Considering that billian abounds the housing is disgraceful. An effort will be made to improve this. I reached Tinjar on the third day at 2 p.m. and proceeded to Baram and Miri. I was still away at the end of the month.
General. -The Resident visited Sebauh and inspected the concession road and returned to Miri on the 4th.
A party of Seventh Day Adventists have been prospecting here, and intend to request leave to build a Mission near Pandan.
Rainfall. -The rainfall for the month amounted to 7’06 inches.
MIRI.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports: -
Courts. -Litigation was heavier than usual, 322 writs being issued of which 37 were in the Criminal and 285 in the Civil Courts.
Two courts inertial were presided over by the District Officer.
There were two coroner’s inquests.
Health. -This department carried out its usual routine inspections as a result of which fourteen people were prosecuted for various offences.
Thirty-one vaccinations to children were undertaken by the sanitary inspector at the parent’s requests.
Medical. -Two hundred and seven out-patients were treated at the Government Dispensary and these made four hundred and ninety-six attendances for treatment. Three cases were transferred to Messrs. Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, hospital.
Municipal. -Regular meetings of the Municipal Board were held and much useful work was accomplished. The subjects mainly under discussion were conservancy, street lighting and slaughter houses. I was also proposed that the Municipality should share the cost with Messrs. Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., of a sewage farm.
It was decided to accept the Company’s offer of Kampong China as from the 1st April, 1931, and house registration was immediately taken in hard by the District Office. An assessment survey of the bazaar area was undertaken by the sanitary inspector.
Outstations. -Reasonably good padi crops are reported from both Niah and Sibuti.
Public Works. -Repairs were effected where necessary to the police barracks, certain clerks’ quarters, customs quarters and prison fence.
Extensive overhauls to all the wireless buildings were finished.
Work on the new marine wharf was completed early in the month. This structure is capable of taking both launches at any tide and the design is a big improvement over the old pattern.
An old house was removed from the Peninsula to Tanjong Lobang for the use of the engineer on the electric plant.
Automatic telephones were installed at Tanjong Lobang on the 9th and electric light on the 12th.
Tenders were called and contract arranged for building two new blocks of clerks’ quarters to replace two old blocks which had become unsafe and have now been demolished.
Contractor Yong Kaw started remaking the approach road to Tanjong Lobang preparatory to surfacing it with asphalt.
General. -On the 20th the German Cruiser Emden, Fregattenkapitan Witthoeft, raid a short visit for bunkers, and opportunity was afforded for some of the officers and men to come ashore, A football match between the ship and Miri resulted in a victory for the former by five goals to two. In the evening a few residents were invited to dinner on board and the ship sailed for Labuan at midnight.
On the 24th Salleh bin Balak was taken by a crocodile at Lutong, his headless body being recovered later in the day. Attempts to capture the crocodile have so far proved fruitless.
On the 25th the bath attendant of the Miri Swimming Club was found drowned in the bath, having been caught by the vortex of the drainage plug while the bath was being emptied.
Fifth Division News.
LIMBANG.
March, 1931.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports for March, 1931, by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident: -
Court. -A normal number of cases was dealt with. There were two convictions in the Criminal Court for theft of buffalo and burglars.
Money is so scarce that numbers of long-standing debts are being pressed, but it is impossible to extract payment as the debtors themselves have only their padi with which to pay, and that commodity fetches a very low price.
Accompanied by Datu Haji Moasili. Native Officer. I visited Sundar to settle an inheritance dispute between Munap, Tua Kampong, and Ahmat. A petition against Munap as Tua Kampong signed by 15 persons was received, but later this was followed by another in his favour signed by a majority of 25. Munap was warned about his general attitude as Tua Kampong, and it is hoped that if he is officially appointed Tua Kampong he will be more reliable than at present.
General. -In company with the British Resident
of Brunei I visited Temburong Station by combined means of bicycle and car, via Panderuan and the new road constructed by the Brunei Government. The road development has proved so satisfactory that it is proposed to inaugurate a regular weekly mail service to Brunei by this route instead of by launch as hitherto. From this station-Bangar-there is already a very well-made road to Batu Apoi, and so it is hoped that in the near future and by co-operation with the Brunei Government an extension of approximately 15 miles will be carried out and thus will link Limbang with Lawas via Trusan by road.
Mr. A. L. McLaine audited the books of the station between the 6th and 13th when he proceeded to the Lawas and Trusan Districts.
Mr. J. W. Whiteside, Executive Engineer of the Public Works Department, visited on his way to Lawas to investigate the proposed water supply scheme.
Mr. D. S. McLeod, Deputy Conservator of Forests, came from Miri to investigate the conditions of a proposed Forest Reserve near Tanah Merah; he was accompanied by Mr. E. Banks, Curator, who is visiting the Division on his duties.
The German Cruiser Emden was anchored in Labuan Harbour between the 20th and 30lh, when officers paid visits to the various stations in the bay. A return visit was paid to the cruiser on the 29th, when a farewell party was given, and the greatest hospitality and friendliness was shown by all on board.
It having been agreed to dispense with the services of Rangers in the Division, the squad returned to headquarters and their duties were duly taken over by the Police, which force had been strengthened by six constables.
Medical and Health. -The Dresser-in-Charge reports is the health of the district was good.
The Medical Officer of Brunei paid his monthly visit of inspection.
Three patients were admitted to the hospital and sixty-two out-patients were treated. Seventeen N.A.H. injections were given.
The total rainfall registered during the month was 5’20 inches.
LAWAS.
March, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe, reports: -
Court. -There was no litigation during the month owing to my absence to Kuching for examinations.
Prisoners. -Prisoners averaged 11.55 during the month and were employed in the upkeep of grounds.
P.W.D. -Work on the hospital was completed.
General. -Native Officer Hamdan, from Mukah, arrived in the s.s. Auby and immediately proceeded to Sundar, where he has taken over the duties of Native Officer Abang Suhaimi, the latter being transferred to Mukah.
Agriculture. -The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates. Ltd., exported 27,300 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents. Ascension Day.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette.	Kuching.
KUCHING,
7th April, 1931.
DEAR SIR,
May I bring to the notice of your readers a slight error in the official Almanac published by the Sarawak Gazette!
In the months of May, Ascension Day is said to fall on Wednesday the 13th. This should read Thursday, May the 14th.
Ascension Day is one of the Great Festivals of the Church and it is apt to lead to confusion if no notice be taken of the discrepancy in the dale.
Yours faithfully,
F. SEPTIMUS HOLLIS.
Another Slip of the Editorial Pen.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
SIR,
Have you heard of this promotion in Church Circles?
From Straits Times. -The Archbishop of Sarawak and Mrs. Champion have sailed for home from Rangoon by the Kemmendine.
Sarawak is looking up!
F. G. DAT.
