VOL. LXI.
No. 938.
The Sarawak Gazette.
Price
KUCHING, Monday, November 2nd, 1931.
20 CENTS.
The Sarawak Gazette.	MONDAY, NOVEMBER 2nd, 1931.
Contents.
Engagement.
The engagement is announced between Bertram Alfred Trechman youngest son of Mr. and Mrs. F. Trechman of “Kiora” Stockton-on-Tees and Sylvia, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. F. C. Haywood of "The Wadi" Tillingham, Essex.
Local and Personal.
October.
His Highness the Tuan Muda accompanied by Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident First Division and Mr. E. S. Holl left Kuching on September 30th in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna and visited Limbang and Mukah, returning to Kuching on October 7th.
The Chartered Bank of India moved into their new block of offices on Monday the 19th. By kind invitation of Mr. A. M. Forrest and his staff many people came to inspect the new building and to drink the health of the Bank. We understand that various Government Departments will be moving into their new offices in the main part of the building about the end of the month under review.
The whole building is a very fine and imposing piece of architecture and is a credit to its designer and builders.
Mrs. A. M. Forrest returned to Kuching on the 19th just in time to be present at the above ceremony.
Mr. I. S. Hammond, of the Survey Department and Mrs. Hammond came to Kuching during the month. Mr. Hammond is appointed to do duty in Kuching, his place in Sibu being taken by Mr. Noakes who has left for that town.
Mr. A. Hanningan arrived in Kuching on September the 20th to relieve Mr. Kay of Sime Darby & Co., Ltd.
Mr. Kay, has gone to Europe on leave.
A very successful regatta was held at Miri to celebrate His Highness the Rajah’s birthday. An account of this event, with results of the races, is given elsewhere in this number.
The latest issue of Mirage is as good as ever.
The Editor of Mirage hints at this being the last issue of his paper. We hope not.
At the same time we cannot turn the pages , of this periodical (and we turn them all), without going green with righteous envy at the amount of copy which appears to flow to his desk.
It is reported trial a marriage was solemnised on August 15th 1931, between George Beresford Stooke, R.N. (retired), and late of the Sarawak Civil Service, and Miss Creenagh Richards, youngest daughter of the late Sir Henry Richards, K.B.E., K.C. and Lady Richards. The ceremony took place at Nakuru, Kenya Colony.
Mr. W. L. P. Sochon has been transferred to Miri as Assistant Superintendent of Police in place of Mr. D. V. Murphy who is proceeding on furlough in December.
Mr. and Mrs. Sochon left Kuching for Miri on the 12th.
The good ship Sri Sadong ran into a squall recently and sank off Pulo Burong with a cargo of 140 tons of coal aboard. This should solve the knotty problem of finding a suitable coal dump!
The master of the s.s. Vyner Brooke, Capt. A. C. Benfield, had an unusual experience on his last trip to Singapore.
His vessel was not far from the Horsburgh light and about 30 miles from Singapore when a small capsized sampan was sighted; on top of this sat a Chinese, crouching on his haunches-on hailing the derelict to inquire whether he was enjoying himself no reply was forthcoming. A boat was lowered and the man brought aboard in an unconscious state. Hot coffee and brandy soon brought him round however and he was delivered in Singapore quite recovered.
The Sultan of Brunei, Tuanku Ahmad Tajudin Akhazul Khairi Wadin ibni Almerhum Sultan Mohamad Jemalulam, K.C.M.G., succeeded to the full Sovereignty of the State on the 19th. An account of the Proclamation ceremony will be found in this number.
Rubber coffins, we read, are being put on the Malayan markets, presumably as a last dying effort to create a new demand for this commodity.
We hope that restriction or some other cure for the slump will avoid the necessity for such a depressing innovation.
The Datu Shah Bandar was “At Home” on the 24th on the occasion of the marriage of his grand-daughter Dayang Hadijah binti the late Abang Mohamad Taha to Abang Bisiuni bin Abang Haji Fadil.
We hear that the Miri Rowing Club have beaten the Singapore Rowing Club in a four oared race on the Miri river, by 4 lengths. This was a return match to the race rowed in Singapore last year in which Miri beat Singapore by the close margin of one foot. Well rowed Miri!
The Miri Rowing Club was formed some three years ago by members of S.O.Ltd. and at first consisted of a handful of keen but experienced oarsmen. With astonishing patience they have increased their membership by teaching others who had, in most cases, never touched an oar, with the result that last year they could turn out four four-oared crews at any time.
The feat of twice beating a club from so large a place as Singapore is one of which they may well be proud.
Mr. E. O. Bruce, Acting Resident, Second Division, passed through Kuching on his way back to Simanggang from Miri, where he had been on local leave to attend the Miri Regatta. Mr. Bruce’s crew of Dalat Milanos were beaten in a very close race for the Champion Cup by a crew of Brunei Malays.
Mr. P. M. Adams, Secretary for Native Affairs, left Kuching on the 24th on local leave at Fraser’s Hill.
We must apologise, perhaps, for giving further prominence, in this number, to the question of the Giant African Snail, but the matter is of some importance to the tillers of the soil.
We are therefore publishing some notes regarding this dangerous mollusc with a few hints for its extermination.
In view of die serious financial situation His Highness the Rajah is making a contribution of £2,000 to the Treasury from his privy purse for the year 1932. His Highness has, further, given instructions that certain expenditure, hitherto regarded as a justifiable charge on Government account, should be defrayed by himself for the same period.
His Highness the Tuan Muda has authorized a contribution of £750.
The amount allocated to Astana expenditure for 1931, of which about 7% will have been expended on casual labour and assistance towards unemployment will be reduced by $3,000 for 1932.
The Rajah of Sarawak Fund.
It will be remembered that in 1929 His Highness the Rajah in recognition of the friendly relations between the Government of His Britannic Majesty and the Raj of Sarawak made a free and unconditional gift of the sum of £100,000 to the Government of Great Britain. On the advice of His Majesty’s Ministers one quarter of this was handed over to the Imperial Forestry Institute and the remainder set aside to form a Trust, to be known as the Rajah of Sarawak Fund.
Particulars of the Fund have now been received from England. The interest on the capital sum is to be used for the purpose of the education of the children of Colonial Civil Servants. According to the Trust Deed these are to be “children of European descent whose parents are British subjects one of whom is or was a higher Civil Servant (serving, retired or deceased) of any Colony, Protectorate, or Protected State in or associated by treaty or otherwise with the British Empire or any Mandated Territory in respect of which the mandate is exercised by His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom, but not of self-governing Dominions nor the Indian Empire nor Protected States within that Empire.”
The trustees are given very large discretion with regard to the amount of any grant and the School, College or University to be chosen. Unless for some special reason no grant will be awarded to a child under the age of thirteen. Preference in the first place will be given to suitable candidates, one of whose parents is or was a member of the Sarawak Service and in the second place to a suitable candidate one of whose parents is or was in the Malayan Government Service,
The five trustees (two nominated by H. H. the Rajah and three by the Secretary of State for the Colonies) are: -
Sir Percy Francis Cunynghame. Bart., O.B.E.
Sir Lawrence Nunns Guillimard. O.C.M.G., K.C.B.
Charles Hope Willes Johnson. Esq.
Montague John Rendall. C.M.G., LLD.
George John Frederick Tomlinson, Assistant Under Secretary of State, C.B.E.
Wedding at Daru’l Kurnia, the Residence of Dato’ Shahbandar.
The wedding ceremony between Dayang Khadijah grand-daughter of the Dato’ Shahbandar and Abang Bisiuni son of Abang Haji Fadi was celebrated at Daru’l Kurnia the residence of Dato’ Shahbandar on the night of Saturday the 24th instant.
His Highness the Tuan Muda and several members of the European community were present.
Daru’l Kurnia was magnificently illuminated and decorated and many people packed the grounds and house in hopes of catching a glimpse of the proceedings.
The following are particulars of the ceremony.
1. The Dato’ Shahbandar who is the guardian of the bride gave authority to the Dato’ Hakim to perform the marriage ceremony.
2. The Dato’ Hakim then read the marriage sermon and asked the bride groom to promise to look after his future wife and to obey the marriage law.
3. The bride groom shook hands with His Highness the Tuan Muda and the ladies and gentlemen who attended the ceremony.
4. The bride and bride groom sat together resplendent in then wedding garments.
5. The Tuan Bilal prayed for the bride and bride-groom.
6. Tuan Haji Bol Hassan made speeches in English and Malay and ended with a few words in Arabic on behalf of the Dato’ Shahbandar congratulating the newly married couple.
7. The ladies and gentlemen present dropped yellow rice to the bride and bride-groom and performed other customary acts while some small girls sang.
8. The health of the bride and bride-groom was drunk.
9. His Highness the Tuan Muda made a speech to the Dato' Sbahbandar offering good wishes and thanks.
10. Refreshments were served and eventually the guests took their departure.
UCHAPAN HAJI BOL HASSAN WAKIL DARI PADA DATO’ SHAHBANDAR.
Seri Peduka Duli Yang Maha Mulia Tuan Muda, Mem-Mem dan Tuan-Tuan sakalian.
Dengan setinggi-tinggi hormat saya lafadzkan sa-patah uchapan wakil dari-pada yang Ber-bahagia Dato’ Shahbandar maka apa-apa yang terchangong atau terkhilaf harap di-ma’afkan.
Dengan kesuka’an yang tiada terhurai dan kegemaran yang tiada ternilai di-hati yang Ber-bahagia itu menyambut-kan kehadziran Seri Paduka Duli Yang Maha Mulia Tuan Muda, mem-mem dan tuan-tuan sakalian yang sudi memjak kedua telapak kaki tuan-tuan kadalam mejelis-nya yang tiada berketentuan pada mesaksi-kan perkahwinan chuchunda-nya Da-yang Khadijah binti Al-marhum Abang Muhammad Taha dengan Abang Bisiuni bin Abang Haji Fadil.
Sa-nya dengan kehadziran tuan-tuan sakalian serasa-rasa sulohan yang maha chuacha pada menyinarkan mejelis-nya yang ter-ma’dum dan jua menjadi baja kesuburan atas tanaman persan-dingan chuchunda-nya itu, perisai mereka itu dari-pada kemarbahaya-an dan pengibai mereka itu kepada aluran kesentosa-an. Dan-lagi ada-lah yang berbahagia itu memohonkan berbanyak-bayak ma’af dan ampun dari-pada tuan-tuan semua dari kerana ada-lah pekerja’an perkahwinan chuchunda-nya itu telah di-ubahkan-nya dari pada segala peraturan yang telah lalu. di-harap harap dengan yang demikian itu boleh membawa kapada kesenangan kerana telah di- ketahui oleh ramai pada masa ini ia-lah masa kepichakkan, sagia-nya dengan sa-berapa daya patutlah di-selidekkan jalanan yang mudah, supaya, tertimbul-lah kita dari pada kelemasan di-dalam lautan yang telah di ketahui besar ombak nya.
Pada penutup uchapan ini berbanyak-banyak-lah yang Berbahagia itu menjunjong terima kaseh kepada Seri Paduka Duli yang Maha Mulia Tuan Muda, mem-mem dan tuan-tuan sakalian yang berpenat lelah pada menunaikan jamputan-nya yang terma’alum dan berdoa-lah ia kapada Tuhan Seru Sakalian Alam mudah mudahan di-nugerahi-nya Duli Yang Maha Mulia, mem-mem dan tuan-tuan Sakalian berkekalan sejahtera sehat ‘afiat selama-lama nya
UCHAPAN TERIMA KASEH.
Dengan beberapa gemar saya telah menyambut akan hadiah-hadiah dari-pada segala tuan-tuan dan Tua-tua Kampong yang bersusah payah bagi menkurnia-kan tanda Keselamatan Perkahwinan chuchunda saya yang terma’alum. Maka oleh yang demikian berbanyak-banyak-lah saya menjunjong terima kaseh serta berdo’a kapada Tuhan Yang Maha Tinggi mudah-mudahan di-nugerahi-nya atas tuan-tuan semua akan pembalasan kebajikan berganda-ganda.
ABANG HAJI ABDILLAH,
Dato’ Shahbandar.
The Bishopric of Labuan and Sarawak.
NOMINATION OF THE REV. NOEL HUDSON.
The Rev. Noel B Hudson, vicar of St. John’s, Newcastle, announced to his people, at the conclusion of the solemn Eucharist on Sunday last that he had accepted the see of Labuan and Sarawak, which the Archbishop of Canterbury had offered to him. Mr. Hudson was a little overcome in making his decision known, and there was very keen and real regret mingled with the congratulations offered to him.
Mr. Hudson screed in the war with outstanding distinction. A sergeant in his old battalion summed him up as “a real gentleman and a tine soldier, even if he is religious!” The qualities that distinguished him as a soldier have distinguished him as a parish priest. A sound Catholic, he combines his zeal for the Faith with a passion for social righteousness and missionary zeal, and with the necessary gifts of wise organization and financial foresight.
First things have always been first in his ministry. He has always abhorred controversy, while he has, at the same time, been foremost as a leader and spokesman of English Catholicism in the diocese.
When the Diocesan Conference, in 1928, gave approval to the Revised Prayer Book. Mr. Hudson spoke effectively in explaining the reasons which led Catholics to abstain from voting.
Intolerant of abuse or shams of any kind, with a truly vigorous mind in an athletic body, young in years and in spirits, his work as Bishop should be blessed to his future diocese and to the Church at large.
His present parish is running, for a second year a camp for the poor mothers. Between forty and fifty of those who seldom, if ever, have slept away from home are being given a real holiday amid ideal surroundings at Cresswell, a charming village on the Northumbrian coast. Two batches are having a week each. Two Guide officers and four Guides, under a “hostess.” are doing all the work, including assistance in the care of several very young children, and a glad time of real peace and refreshment is resulting to a very often forgotten class. This is typical of the thought and care which St. John’s under Mr. Hudson’s leadership is devoting to many problems.
Proclamation of the Sultan of Brunei.
An event of some note took place in Brunei on the 19th September, when Tuanku Alhmed Tajudin Akhazul Khairi Wadin ibni Almerhum Sultan Mohamed Jemalulam, K.C.M.G., Sultan of Brunei succeeded to the Sovereignly of the State which had hitherto been under the control of the two Regents, Duli Pengiran Bandahara and Duli Pengiran Pamancha. It is interesting to observe that despite the long and checkered history of the Sultanate the present ruler is the 27th Sultan in direct line of succession. The Sultan was born on the 8th September, 1913. and succeeded to the throne on 27th September, 1924.
The ceremony of proclamation of Sovereignty was made auspicious by the act of His Highness the Rajah of Sarawak giving back the territory of Brooketon to the Sultanate.
Brooketon was ceded in perpetuity in 1807 to Mr. W. C. Cowie, the deed being made absolute in the reign of Sultan Mumin. In 1888 the rights were sold to His Highness the Rajah, conferring absolute possession of all the lands in the district with powers of selling, imposing taxes, rents, and assessments, together with certain judicial rights conjoined with authority to inflict penalties.
The ceremony of proclaiming Sovereignty took place in the Audience Chamber, a building adjoining the Astana of the Sultan, and was witnessed by the European population of Brunei, the Resident of Labuan and Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident, Limbang, the latter being present on behalf of His Highness the Rajah of Sarawak, to surrender officially Brooketon to the Sultanate. Certain natives of Brunei besides the Pengirans were also present.
The ceremony lasted over a period of some 45 minutes during which speeches were made by the Sultan of Brunei. Mr. P. A. B. MacKerron, British Resident of Brunei, Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident, Limbang, and the Regents Duli Pengiran Bandahara and Duli Pengiran Pamancha.
The scene in the Audience Chamber was of special interest in that all the ancient regalia, to wit, parang, spears, shields, etc., were born by attendants during the proceedings. The gold workings on the hilts and scabbards were exceptionally fine and would have been the objects of envy to any amateur or museum collector.
The speech-making concluded everybody adjoined to the Court House where the Health of the Sultan was drunk and presentations duly made.
On emerging from the Audience Chamber en route to the Court House, the Sultan was saluted by 17 guns and in addition to these continual explosions from the nearby houses continued for a period of approximately half-an hour. After the health of the Sultan was drunk, Mr. P. A. B. McKerron took the opportunity to make the important and welcome announcement that the A. P. C. had decided to construct a pipe line from the oil fields at Seria to the refinery at Lutong in Sarawak. This construction will, needless to say, be a source of considerable income to the Sultanate and the announcement was received with gratification. With the opening up of these oil fields the State of Brunei has in all probability reached a state of prosperity which has never been known before. This announcement concluded, the Sultan, together with the Regents proceeded to the royal “Litter” in which he was born by some 12 men back to the Astana.
The white cloth which was laid down for the Sultan to walk on from the Court House to the “Litter” was eagerly seized upon and torn to bits by the native spectators, everybody fighting to obtain a share, the scene being reminiscent of scrambling for the pancake at Westminister School.
This cloth is considered very lucky by the natives and is used as a charm for catching fish.
During the afternoon a local cricket match took place and was witnessed by the Sultan with Duli Pengiran Bandahara and Duli Pengiran Pamancha. -Contributed.
“English as She is Wrote.”
Examples of quaint “native” English from all parts of the world are legion but we cannot refrain from passing on the following gem written by a public scribe in Hong Kong for a servant who wished to inform her absent master of the death of her husband and the bad treatment meted out to her by one of the other servants. Its genuineness is vouched for by the Rev. G. E. Arrowsmith, M.A., in the article in United Empire from which this is taken.
“Dear honoured sir, I sit like Niobe, all tears, to inform your lordship of defunct of my late lamented hubby. He kicked the bucket becoming extinct as the Dodo at 3 p.m. last lunar month. No sooner than he shuffled off this mortal coil of too solid flesh, than that worm in bud, your lordships khansamah, with damn cheek, seized all Lares and Penates (including valuable ancient steed without dental append ages) this cynical act on part of this vagabond on horse-flesh leaves me relict without boodle... Unless your honour bids this Shylock disgorge pound of flesh, my babes and 1 become as sotto voce as dear departed through unfed belly Cheerio old top. Your affectionate, widow, M. L.” -Straits Times, Sept 30.
“Squeeze.”
Another good story told by Mr. Arrowsmith relates to the “old Chinese custom” of “squeeze,” which is still accepted as the most national concomitant of conducting business in that country and is demonstrated in Malaya every time “cookie” goes to market. In this case the story is more apocryphal and the writer does not vouch for its accuracy in even detail but it is almost good enough to be true in spite of the reductio ad absurdum. The story goes that the Chinese equivalent for £20,000 was allocated from public funds for the lighting of Peking. The important official who had the matter in hand appropriated half of this sum as his own personal “squeeze,” the secretary of his department, who regarded himself as of equal importance deducted half the remainder, and the balance of £5,000 was handed on to lesser underlings, who each subtracted his own “squeeze” from the amount, so that it dwindled and dwindled. When it finally reached the contractor, it had all been appropriated except 7 1/2 d, and so he told one of his coolies to go and buy a wick and a dish of oil. The coolie, with admirable conscientiousness, deducted only 2d, for his own pocket, and with the balance bought the wick and oil. A passing beggar, seeing the unwonted illumination, traced it to its source and, being thirsty, drank the oil and so ended the public lighting of Peking! It is an exaggerated story, no doubt the writer adds but it does give an idea of the wretched “squeeze” system that throttles trade and is a continual source of annoyance to the “stranger within the gate.” -Straits Times, Sept 30.
Matters of Muslim Interest.
APOLOGY.
In the Sarawak Gazette of August 1st there appeared a paragraph headed “Filming the Prophets Tomb” quoted from the Singapore Free Press. We are informed by a competent authority that the statements contained in this paragraph are without foundation. Similar announcements appeared in the European and Egyptian Press, much to the annoyance of H.M. King Ibn Saoud, of the Hejaz and Nejd who caused them to be vehemently denied, in the press of his country.
We regret having inserted this announcement, such being the case, but at any rate we have erred in good company. -Ed.
An Appeal to Outstations.
The Editorial cry for copy is age old yet about as much notice is paid to it as to the frequent bleat of that modern Borgia, the Chinese cook, for money and yet more money.
Why should this be so? Surely something of interest occurs during a whole month in most districts of a country such as this? A few enterprising oilmen from Miri have recently tried their best to make out that this is a land of rare and strange happenings, but they go too far, they do not “verify their references.”
There is little enough excitement in Kuching itself, and what there is the citizens of this town are good enough to report, but of the outstations we hear nothing, apart from monthly reports which are, of necessity, official and humdrum for the most part. It is well to realize that the citizens of Ulu Blachan may be interested in the doings of the denizens of Kuala Kumshor and even if they are not they will take a fiendish pleasure in reading of them in order that they may indulge in the retort sarcastic. Any-one who can write an ordinary letter is a potential journalist, if only in a small way. We therefore appeal to outstation readers to send in “copy” and thus make the Gazette of wider interest than it can be if merely confined to Kuching topical events. Give us your theory on the Sibu floods, the Kapit cataracts, the Simanggang bore; Sal Volatile in Sadong, or Betel-nuts in Betong. You, Sir, who read this, may be a budding Bernard Shaw; think what you may be missing by not expressing your views on paper on this paper); so, we beseech you, call for pens ink and paper and your effort, printed, will be your own reward, as well as amusing, possibly, to others.
THE EDITOR.
Economy and Economics.
There is no one who can safely say that they are out of reach of the tentacles of the depression octopus.
In this country, it is true we are not cursed with an income tax which takes away a quarter or more of our hard earn incomes; nevertheless it behoves us at the present time to practise economy, especially in the smaller luxuries, lest a worse thing come upon us, and find us unprepared.
It is extremely boring and uncomfortable, they tell us to sit upon the highway with dog and tin mug, but if we fail to read the writing on the wall we may be unable to produce even the necessary coppers required to purchase “property” for the “legless hero” act.
It is sad but true that in spite of the fact that overproduction is commonly supposed to be the root of the evil, the prices of things we wish to buy have risen, but the values of the goods we have for sale have depreciated. In Sarawak we sell rubber, pepper, timber, coconuts, sago flour and the like and we sell them for a rotten price. We buy beer, whisky, tobacco, oils, fuel provisions, groceries, cloth, etcetera and we buy them at prices which seem to indicate that someone is getting some money somewhere.
Profiteering, undue taxation, socialism and communism have crippled trade. To give an instance of gross profiteering; it was reported recently from an outstation that native fishermen were getting only 3 cents a catty for their fish, from traders; yet the market price of that same fish would be from 20-40 cents a catty; and then we wonder why there is a trade depression.
There seem to be two chief causes for the present iniquitously high prices of manufactured goods, apart from taxation and wholesale profiteering in certain places. The first appeals to be that a commodity, from the raw to the finished state, passes through the hands of so many middlemen that a falsely high economic scale has been set up by a lot of parasites who extract commissions at each stage for little or very nominal consideration and thus accumulate wealth at the expense of the producer and the genuine retailer, the two parties who contribute the most effort and the greatest expenditure of capital upon the production of the commodity.
The second cause is of course the modern craze of “big business men” for amalgamation and buying up of smaller concerns, in other words, comers. There is nothing original in this theory; it is merely the aim of the present writer to emphasise the truth of it so that consumers may be encouraged, whenever possible, to patronise the one man shows, the “legitimate” traders.
This is not socialism-that insidious and rather poisonous doctrine has had a nasty knock, for the nth time, just recently and its failure was never more apparent than it is in England to-day.
But it is obvious that capital can be misused as it is in these cases when a highly capitalized firm unscrupulously holds a pistol to the head of the public and controls market prices to suit itself and to the ruination of the community at large.
In the Singapore Chamber of Commerce discussions recently it was reported that a request had been made to New York for a reduction in freight charges to that city. The request was refused with the reply that the present was hardly the time for reductions.
In our humble opinion it is a very suitable time and an eminently reasonable request. The New York shipping lines must indeed be in a very strong position!
Such instances of applying the commercial thumbscrew are typical illustrations of the cause of the general slump.
Although impoverished by the activities of such people there are many ways open to us to effect a saving but it is well to consider the reaction which will take place from false economies. For instance one may decide to reduce the petrol bill to a limit of $5 per month. This will result in wearing out the soles of our shoes and we shall then have to order from Singapore one of those twenty shilling pairs of shoes for which they make us pay twenty dollars out here.
Similarly, many economies which may benefit the personal exchequer directly will, indirectly at any rate, cause ultimate loss if such economies are practised widely enough to affect trade. This should provide material for a very interesting economic argument.
Let us say that a whole community of people, dependent for their livelihood on the sale of coconuts. decide to economise by giving up butter. The middlemen controlling the price of this commodity are certainly not going to lose by it. They will at once raise the price of milk, cream, cheese, meat, meat extract, leather and every other product of the poor old cow to make up for their loss on the butter market. The dairy farmer or cattle-breeder will not be paid a higher price for these things; he will merely fail to sell any butter.
He will thus become poorer and will cease from buying margarine; he will forego his weekly bath and give up soap; he will cease from using coconut wash on his hair; (and so will his wife) he will refrain from wiping his feet upon coconut mats, etcetera ad infinitum until the aforesaid butterless community will be unable to sell their coconuts except at starvation prices.
A little farfetched perhaps, but beware of false economies.
“Howlers.”
The sun never sets on the British Empire because the British Empire is in the east and the sun sets in the west.
The King wore a scarlet robe trimmed with vermin.
The whole world except the United States lies in the temperance zone.
Polonius was a mythical sausage.
Artificial perspiration is what you make a person alive with when they are only just dead.
A parallelepiped is an animal with parallel legs.
A phlegmatic person is one who has chronic bronchitis.
An hypotenuse is the thing someone saw when he had a bath and he yelled “I’ve found it.”
Transparent means something you can see through-for instance, a keyhole.
A trade union is a place to which a workman goes when he gets the sack.
The chief duties of an M. P. are to go to sleep when another man is speaking, and force his party into power.
G. B. Shaw is the captain of the London Fire Brigade.
A street is a road that has a very good class of people in it.
Bau Gold.
The owner of a gold mine must, in these hard times, excite a certain amount of interest, although perhaps the Bau workings are hardly mines in the accepted sense of the word.
If one announced in Europe that one owned a gold mine, one would be expected to stay at the Ritz, wear a diamond tiepin and smoke expensive cigars. Most people would imagine vast vaults in the bowels of the earth from which sparkling nuggets could be picked for casual presentation to visitors, as souvenirs. This is a quite erroneous idea. Strange as it may seem to the uninitiated, the present writer recently visited a portion of the gold workings at Sabulan, Bau, but not a speck of gold was seen. The method employed to extract the gold, the cyanide process, will be familiar to many “old stagers” but it may be sufficiently unfamiliar to be of interest to many others, as it was to the writer of this account.
Having come by light car over n few miles of very narrow road, we eventually arrived at the base of some limestone hills, a locality known as Sabulan. Descending from the car we climbed up through a narrow defile and emerged in a rather imposing natural arena, surrounded on all sides by limestone cliffs some 300 ft. in height; at the farther end of this arena, about 200 yards distant were the sheds and buts sheltering the plant.
Half way up the steep cliff several men, looking like flies on a wall, could be seen and from this direction there came, at regular intervals, a rattling smashing roar. We were to learn the cause of this later.
An overseer conducted us up a perilous goat track on to a small ledge where several coolies feverishly shovelled a very rich brown soil into trucks. This was the gold ore which came rushing and hurtling down a long shoot into which it was thrown by the men we had seen from afar high up on the cliff face.
Several tons were let loose down the shoot at one load and were “braked” at the bottom, near which we stood, by a large sheet of metal, hence the intermittent roar we had heard on emerging from the defile.
We vainly gazed at the out hoping to see bits of gold sticking out here and there but we were sadly disappointed!
In one ton of ore the amount of gold collected, even from high yielding ore, would scarce cover the famous Kruschen six-pence.
This ore is carried along a pier in trucks and lipped into a storage room.
Below this, at the base of the cliff stood a long shed in which were some twenty concrete vats, each about 15 feet square, in which many hundreds of tons of the ore were “slewing.” When the vat is full of ore, a large pipe at the top of each vat discharges cyanide solution into the vat until the ore is submerged. It then stays there for some days what time the cyanide absorbs and takes the gold out of the ore into solution.
The gold bearing solution is eventually released by a pipe at the base of the vat and allowed to flow into secondary tanks at a lower level. In these tanks trays full of zinc filings are suspended.
A further chemical action now takes place between the gold solution and the zinc filings; the gold being deposited on the zinc which is in due course carted away and separated from the gold by heating in a kiln.
When this operation is complete out flows the gold and there we are. No wonder it is so expensive.
The amount of gold worked per month at Bidi and Sabulan is said to be about 600 ounces. This is worth about $20,000. Of course, the depreciation of the pound sterling recently gave a considerable extra profit to a concern of this kind.
It should be explained that the majority of gold workers in this district are using old “tailings” or waste ore thrown up by the Borneo Company in their gold working days.
At that time apparently it was not considered worth while working ore of less than a certain penny weight yield per ton owing to the size of plant and scale of the working. Most of these “tailings” therefore were thrown up but not completely worked out. It was all extremely interesting to a stranger to the district, in spite of the fact that not one grain of gold was seen the whole time.
Notes on the Giant African Snail (Achatina fulica. Fer.).
1. Belongs to the family Stenogyridae and is really a native of East Africa.
2. From there it was introduced into India, and thence to Ceylon in 1900.
3. In 1922 it was detected in the Northern part of the Malay Peninsula and in Singapore.
4. It is said to have been first identified in Sarawak, at Kuching, about 1929 and attracted serious attention two years later owing to its destructive habits and rapid increase in numbers.
5. The exact times of its first entry into this country is not known, but it is supposed to have been imported from Singapore by steamer, for the purpose of feeding poultry during transit, about 1928 or 1929.
6. It is a very large species and Mr. K. W. Dammermann, D.Sc. describes it as follows: -
“The shell is elongated, with a very large body whorl, measuring about 9 cm, when full grown; the colour is pale brown with many reddish brown streaks and markings, the apex having a pale pink tinge. Once a year, the eggs are laid, about 300 in number, during March and April in the Malay Peninsula; they are rather large, 5 mm. long and 3.5 mm. broad. The colour is yellow.
This snail is a serious post of vegetables and flowering plants; it eats nearly everything in the garden, Crinum and other lilies seeming to be preferred for attack, but it is not found on any perennial plant, rice, etc. The snails sometimes occur in such enormous numbers that they are used as poultry-food, especially for ducks, and they were probably originally imported into Singapore for this purpose.
They are also eaten by Malaya.
In the other Malay Islands the giant snail has not so far been noticed and every effort should be made to prevent its introduction.”
7. The snail also is partial to cover crops on estates, and in some cases has completely devoured them.
8. It was comparatively recently, in March, 1931, that the Giant Snail really began to make itself seriously fell in and around Kuching, and the Department of Agriculture issued an explanatory Leaflet to cultivators giving details of certain methods of control. Some of the following were included: -
(i) Collection by hand.
(ii) Traps.
(iii) The use of (a) Wood-ash and sawdust.
(b) Wood-ash and sawdust steeped in 16% Copper Sulphate Solution.
(c) Wood-ash and sawdust steeped in 10% Carbolic all the above used to surround planted beds.
(iv) Poison baits: - (a) Lime and Arsenite of Soda.
(b) Lead Arsenate, Sugar and Flour.
(c) Dusting leaves with Copper Sulphate.
9. It is reported from Ceylon that the big bullfrogs eat these snails, also the jungle crow, and that the larva of a species of fire-fly attacks them. At present these are the only known natural enemies of the snail, and biological control does not appear to have yet been tested scientifically on a large scale.
10. In September, 1931, certain planters appealed to the Department of Agriculture for assistance to combat this pest, and to endeavour to impress upon gardeners the gravity of the position, if they continued to allow it to spread and multiply unchecked, it was therefore decided to lead the way by offering are ward of 5 cents per gantang of snails collected for a limited period.
As a result, between 1st October, 1931, and 15th October, 1931, approximately half a million snails were delivered and destroyed outside the Agricultural Offices, and about twenty million eggs.
11. It should be noted that, to insure the destruction of unlaid eggs, all snails should be immersed in boiling water for about three minutes.
12. We hope that planters will now continue to wage war on the molluscs and make a sustained effort to keep them under.
13. There is a just possibility that some use may be made of the shell of this snail, for the lime, if prepared by kiln process, might be profitably dug into gardens in this country where most soils show an acid reaction; and in this connections it should be noted that the snail is composed on an average roughly of
Shell 44.5%
Flesh, etc. 55.5%
(The figures were taken after boiling for three minutes).
There is a loss between live and dead weight (after boiling three minutes) of approximately 36% due to evacuations of water, earth, undigested food. eggs, etc.
This question is being considered by local planters at present and if it can be worked economically will doubtless be pursued further.
14. The recent campaign must undoubtedly have made a big hole in the snail population, but it will have been of no avail unless it is followed up by planters themselves, who should take concerted action in the future.
A periodical “Snail Week” might be organised, for instance, with beneficial effect.
[The above notes were kindly supplied at our request by the Department of Agriculture in the hope that they would be of interest to the public and of service to planters and gardeners.
A good deal of joking and ribald jesting has taken place on this topic, but here we have hard facts and the truth; it will be seen from these notes that this is really a very weighty matter. -Ed.]
Music of the Weak.
The following burlesques of highbrow musical criticism, written by Ashley Sterne, originally appeared in the Radio Times. -[Ed.]
Prelude to Act XIX of ‘The twilight of the Dogs,’ by Schnarl Bluthund.
Born at Pudel, Pomerania, in 1886, Schnarl Bluthund received his elementary musical training at the offices of the Bach Gesellschaft, where, at the early age of fourteen, he won a scholarship entitling him to a week at Lovely Lucerne, six pairs of ladder-proof silk stockings, and a pint of winkles every Saturday night for three months. He was subsequently sent to Paris, where he studied composition at the Pasteur Institute and decomposition at the Morgue.
His opera, in twenty-five acts, The twilight of the Dogs, the libretto of which is based on the stud-book of the Kennel Club, is the only work he has yet had time to perpetrate. The entire score was written backwards, in red ink, and occupied him exclusively from half-past-three. 1904, till a quarter-to-eleven, 1925. The work was produced on the Easy Instalment System, in 1927, at the Opera House, Dachshund, with Fraulein Peke in the role of Dalmatia and Herr Lohschen in that of Schipperke. The Prelude to Act XIX is a vivid tone-picture of the various phases gone through by a King Charles’ spaniel suffering from an acute attack of Hall’s distemper.
The work (numbered K.9 in Dr Kochel’s catalogue) is dedicated to Rin-Tin-Tin.
Double-Concerto for Hypodermic Syringe and Nasal Guitar, by Glaubersaltz.
Although his productions are not to everybody’s taste, the name of Glaubersaltz needs no introduction to the English public, his famous ‘morceaux de salon,’ Poudre de Matin and Poudre de Soir, having been familiar to most of us from childhood. He was originally designed for the medical profession, but the medical profession did not think much of the design, and hence he took up music instead.
His early compositions, notably the first Fantasia on the Tonic, his second Fantasia on the same theme, entitled The Mixture as Before, and his Symptomic Poem in the Gregorian Modes, all show distinct evidence of his early medical training, the scores being almost entirely illegible.
The Double Concerto is unique among concertos in that the solo performers have nothing whatever to do during the whole course of the work. The suggestion (thoughtfully added by the composer in a footnote to the full score) that they might occupy the time playing halma is usually adopted, though when the work is performed in America euchre is generally substituted.
Glaubersaltz received the honorary Doctorate in Music from the Billericay Bicycling Club in 1906, upon which occasion he selected for performance as his doctorial ‘exercise’ his well-known Song-Cycle (with bawl-bearings) entitled Wheel or Whoa, which is writen throughout upon a dominant pedal, without a break of any sort.
Pavine for a Sturgera deprived of its Caviare, by Nokisblokoff.
Nokisblokoff, a pupil of the famous Pushiskonkin, is a native of Splvnsk, in the province of Splvnsk, where for the years immediately following the Revolution he was organist of the Trotsky Free Prison. Here he first gained musical notoriety by his Concertstuck for fourteen cathedral organs and the Big Bell of Moscow. After the first (and only performance, Trotsky rewarded the young genius by presenting him with a sentence of five years in the vodka mines at Skmtchsk, but the composer managed to escape across the frontier disguised in the uniform of a Russian butter-agent for Great Britain.
Folderolero, by Gravsl.
This is a little musical jeu d’esprit written entirely on one note-a new departure for M. Gravel, whose melodies are usually constructed in intervals of semistones. The interest and humour of the piece are derived from the gradual diminuendo from the ffff with which the work starts to the pppp with which it concludes. Commencing with every resource of a colossal orchestra, which includes a pair of silk saxophones. M. Gravel drops out his instruments one by one until there is only a single muted hartshorn engaged and even that finishes its part with a ‘rest’ of 254 bars’ duration.
M. Gravel is, of course, the composer of the well-known Suite of Indian Love-Lyrics, entitled Ghusi-Ghusi Gandni.
Earl Haig Appeal Fund.
SPECIAL PERFORMANCE OF PICTURES IN THE GLOBE PICTURE THEATRE-KUCHING.
Monday, 9th November, 1931.
It is anticipated, that owing to the present unusual financial difficulties, the above worthy Fund is likely to suffer this year, in that the sale of poppies may not be so productive of money as on previous occasions.
In order that the record established by Sarawak should not be lowered, the organising committee have arranged a special display of moving pictures in the Globe Picture Theatre on Monday, 9th November, 1931. The whole proceeds, less cost of film hire, will, be the generosity of the Manager Mr. Lim Soon Kow, be added to the usual Poppy Day collection.
The programme has been specially selected to suit all classes and the committee appeal to the public to attend en masse and thus not only witness a really good picture show, but by so doing, contribute towards a very excellent cause.
Canvassing for the sale of poppies will be confined to Europeans this year as it is felt that the Asiatic population have already their full share of burdens to bear, but if any Chinese or others would like to contribute something, however small, towards this worthy fund, they may send their contribution to Mr. F. Harding, the Hon. Secretary of the Local Brand, of the British Legion.
Miri Regatta.
The Rajah’s Birthday in Miri was celebrated for the first time by a regatta for native boats. Preparations had been in hand for several weeks, and in addition to a number of local views, visitors came in from various parts of the Third and Fourth Divisions and from Brunei. Two or three days before the 26th; the weather had been very stormy, and there was considerable doubt whether some of the long boats would reach Miri; in fact, the Bakong crew were unluckily enough to have their boat smashed on the journey from Kuala Baram, and the crews from Mukah, Bintulu and Brunei, experienced very rough seas and considerable risk to their boats on the journey. However, with the exception of the Bakong boat, they all managed to arrive and it was the presence of such experts as the Dalat people and the Brunei fishermen that lent additional interest to the various events in which they would compete.
On consulting the excellent programme, for which Mrs. Carpenter had drawn a moa effective cover, it was apparent that a full days sport had been planned and our sympathy went out to the starters, who were in for a very strenuous day.
Fortunately, Saturday turned out to be a perfect day, with the river in excellent condition, not too much stream but moderately high water hiding the unpleasant mud stretches which appear at low tide. Large crowds lined the banks near the finishing post, and two excellent stands had been erected for the use of the patrons of the Regatta.
At about 10 o’clock the first important race started in which a great number of local crews of 15 men were entered, but the superiority of the Brunei men quickly showed by their long lead in this race.
The main interest of, the day was in the race for the championship where the two great rivals. Dalat and Brunei, had to meet at least once. On account of the great number of entries, two heats had been arranged and the 3 best boats from each heat would compete in the final.
The first heat for the Resident’s Cup was won by the Bintulu boat Anjinq Sebieu after a very good race, with Bijak’s Meshuarat Negri and the
Kampong Daggang boat, 2nd and 3rd. Just before the lunch interval the really exciting heat for the Miri Cup was run and in this the famous Melanau boat Singa Nerais and the Brunei boat Siarau were hot favourites. Soon after the start it became evident that these two boats were much better than the local boats, and they settled down to a stern race. Singa Nerais soon took the lead which they then increased and in spite of the frantic efforts on the part of the Bruneis, they came in comfortable winners. It was most interesting to note the different styles of paddling. The Dalat crew appeared to be much better together and their short, quick stroke was most effective; on the other blind, the broad paddles and deep digging stroke of the Bruneis with their beautiful change from quick to slow and vice-versa gave them great speed. These two boats then became, the favourites for the final which took place during the afternoon. In the meantime, the respective owners of the two boats, Mr. Bruce and Mr. McKerron, had agreed to run their boats and take the place of the flag bearer. This added further interest to the competition, and the Tote and bookmakers had a flourishing time. From the start of this race it was clear that the Bruneis were all out to avenge their defeat of the morning and the two boats ran neck and neck for nearly two miles, the Dalat men having slightly the better of it. Opposite the Golf Club it appears that the Melanau boat cutting too close round a bend got out of the current and possibly into shallow water. This gave the Bruneis the lead which they increased and tables were reversed on the Dalat men who made a very plucky effort to come on terms with the Bruneis but just failed, leaving Brunei the winner by about a length and half, after a magnificent race. We must mention here the Niah boat which put up a plucky race and, although not in the same class as the experts, managed to heat the other local crews.
There were also excellent races in the second heat of the 15’s in which the Sri Bentara from Kuala Belait managed to get home first, followed by Trima Kaseh and Maimun. This was an excellent race.
The races for 8 paddles were also hotly contested, the first one being won by a Brunei crew and the second heat by Kijang Besar.
Special praise should be given to the Native School who managed to get a 2nd and 3rd prize in these races. As someone remarked when he saw these very mature schoolboys “They will be quite fine men when they grow up”.
The series of races were interspersed by a number of more or less comic events (not comic for the unfortunate Malays and Chinese who had to pull heavy fishing boats) for the local fishermen. The regatta was ended by two races for the competitors who had not won events, and a race for the Boat Club 4’s which was won by a Miri crew against a Lutong crew.
Amongst the successes of the day must be mentioned the Tote, ably run by Mr. Hanson. A large sum of money must have been handled, and payments were made quickly and to some lucky people on excellent odds.
The Regatta was organised by Mr. F. G. Carpenter, ably assisted by a committee comprising Miri Sportsmen of all races. Malay Officers and Chinese Towkays. It was a great success and should become an annual event. We hear that two enthusiasts are engaging professionals to train local crews for next year.
RACE No. 1.
FISHING KOTAKS.
Rowed by 3 men from Sungei Merbau to Slipway.
1st Ghee Heng. 2nd Ghee Heng. 3rd Hock Lee.
RACE No. 2.
THE GYMKHANA CUP.
Open to any make of boat with Crews limited to 15 men.
1st Suroi Palang. 2nd Sri Perak. 3rd Trima Kaseh.
RACE NO. 3.
THE RESIDENT’S CUP.
Open to any make of boat with Crews limited to thirty men. One Flag Bearer may be carried in addition but he must not paddle. 1st Anjing Sebien. 2nd Meshuarat Negri. 3rd Indong Delima.
RACE NO. 4.
Open to any make of boat with Crews limited to 8 men representing Offices, Firms and Departments.
1st Suroi Palang. 2nd Kijang Besar. 3rd Bujang Gila.
RACE NO. 5.
SHIP’S GIGS.
with Crews of four oarsmen and one steerman who may use a paddle. From Sungei Merbau to Slipway.
RACE NO. 6.
THE MIRI BOAT CLUB CUP.
Open to any make of boat with Crews limited to 15 men.
1st Sri Bentara. 2nd Bintang Beraleh. 3rd Maimum. RACE NO. 7.
THE MIRI CUP.
Open to any make of boat with Crews limited to thirty men. One Flag Bearer may be carried in addition but he must not paddle. Class B. 1st Singa Nerais. 2nd Siarau 3rd Sri Niah.
INTERVAL.
RACE No. 8.
Open to any make of boat with Crews limited to 8 men.
1st Kijang Besar. 2nd Bujang Gila. 3rd Sri Belatok.
RACE NO. 9.
BANDONG IRAN PUKAT.
with crews limited to ten men. Oars or paddles or both may be used according to the desires of the Crew.
1st Leong Ngee Chow. 2nd Ma Pheng. 3rd Lau Hoo Chzau.
RACE NO. 10.
THE CHAMPION CUP.
Open, to the placed boats in Races 3 and 7.
1st Siarau. 2nd Singa Nerais. 3rd Sri Niah.
RACE No. 11.
TAMBANG DAYONGS.
with crews limited to one man who must stand in the boat and use two oars. From Fish Market to Slipway.
1st Keh Thiam. 2nd Mok Yu. 3rd Osin.
RACE NO. 12.
THE LUTONG CUP.
Open to any make of boat with Crews limited to 15 men and which has not won a race at this Regatta.
1st Pulut Sibuti. 2nd Kuching Melumpat. 3rd Trims Kaseh.
RACE NO. 13.
FISHING BANDONGS.
with crews limited to 4 oarsmen and 1 steersman who must use a paddle. From Sungei Merbau to Slipway.
1st Owin. 2nd Udin. 3rd -
RACE NO. 14.
Open to any make of boat with Crews limited to 8 men and which have not won a race at this Regatta.
RACE No. 15.
THE M.R.C. CUP.
Open to any make of boat with Crews limited to thirty men and which have not won a race at this Regatta. 2nd boat in Races 3, 7 and 10 to pull with 26 paddles and 3rd boat in those races to pull with 28.
1st Hujan Tanas. 2nd Singa Raja. 3rd Singa Lipan.
RACE NO. 16. SCRATCH FOURS.
LUTONG V MIRI.
Helping the Home Government.
COLONY ECONOMIES.
MR. THOMAS’S LETTER TO THE GOVERNOR.
The S.S. Government Gazette contains the following circular letter, dated September 19, addressed by the Rt. Hon. Mr. J. H. Thomas, Secretary of State for the Colonies, to the Governor, Sir Cecil Clementi: -
“I feel it my duty to call the attention of the responsible authorities in all territories for the administration of which I am responsible to Parliament to the extreme difficulties with which His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom is faced in consequence of the present financial crisis.
“It is unnecessary for me to give an account of the circumstances which have led to that crisis or to the consequences which have followed from it in any detail. I have no doubt that you have read the statements which were made to the House of Commons by the Prime Minister and the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and that you appreciate the wholly unprecedented gravity of the situation which faces His Majesty’s present advisers.
“My object in writing this despatch is to remind you of the fact that the interests of the United Kingdom and of the Colonies and Dependencies are inseparably bound up with one another that the perils which face the United Kingdom are perils which menace the whole Empire, and that it is not unreasonable to look for some common effort and common sacrifice on the part of communities which are face to face with a common peril.
CATASTROPHE AVERTED.
You will realise how narrow has been the margin by which a great catastrophe has been averted and how pressing is still the need for sustained effort to prevent a recurrence of the danger. The proposals which His Majesty’s Government has been forced to submit to Parliament and which Parliament has now accepted involve, and were expressly designed so as to involve, a genuine sacrifice from all classes of the community in the United Kingdom. I do not overlook the fact that the Colonies and other Dependencies have themselves been suffering from the adverse financial circumstances which have effected the whole world, and that in particular their interests have been acutely affected by the general fall in prices, but it is nevertheless necessary to remember that any general collapse of British credit and decline in the exchange value of sterling must spell ruin for the Colonies no less than for the United Kingdom.
“I believe that I can look with confidence to the Governments of all territories within the Empire to make any contribution within their power towards completing the task of averting a calamity which must have such consequences.”
No DESIRE TO DICTATE.
“I do not desire to lay down any general programme or dictate any course of action to the Government of any Dependency. I rely upon you and your advisers to address yourselves earnestly to the situation with which we are all faced, and 1 invite you to make suggestions.
“I will only observe that in the case of Dependencies which are in receipt of a grant-in-aid from Parliamentary funds, the best contribution which they can make to the common cause is to exercise such drastic economics that their claims on the home Government may be substantially reduced.
“In Colonies more fortunately placed, every effort should be made to avoid or at least postpone any Government activity which may involve placing a loan upon the market. The raising of loans would be a matter of extreme difficulty for some time to come, and every loan raised will necessarily put a fresh strain upon the general structure of British credit.
“This may, I realise, involve a postponement in some cases of development works from which a Colony may expect to profit and for which it is prepare I to pay. but I feel able to assume that the common interest of the United Kingdom and its Dependencies will weigh more at this juncture with any Colony than its own individual advantage.
DEFENCE SERVICES.
“I would remind you that the maintenance of the defence services of the British Empire, which is a common interest of all its members, forms at present almost exclusively a charge on the tax-payer of the United Kingdom. His Majesty’s Government in the United Kingdom proposes to do everything in its power, by means of international action as well as of action at home, to reduce those charges to the minimum consistent with safety.
“They will nevertheless, even when reduced, constitute a severe burden, which at the present moment the United Kingdom taxpayer is bearing on behalf of the Empire as a whole. I would venture to invite the Government of every Colony and Dependency to ask itself the question whether it is making a contribution to this common service which is equivalent to its maximum capacity.” -Strait Times.
Things it would be Rude to Ask.
Does Mr. Txxxxxxn’s car battery prefer distilled water, or something lively nut of the Pharmacopocia?
Who is the President of the Reception Committee for Snails?
He dare not admit he has been elected.
Has Mr. Mxxxxxxe a sweet tooth?
Apparently so, especially for apples.
The magnetic attraction of this tooth to apples is so great that when it sees this fruit it leaps out to do a little reconnaissance work on it’s own.
What is the Teaweak club? It appears to be an association which gathers on week days for the drinking of weak tea, hence the name.
Disassociated with this and in violent opposition is the Kipper club.
What is the object of the above? Possibly it is convened to draw a red herring across the path of the Teaweaks-hence the name.
Who suggested that the Brooke Dock should be used as a coal dump?
The idea apparently was to fill the dock with coal and then flood the dock. The coal would then be safe from igniting.
What did Bxxxxxxxn say when he heard this brainwobble?
Does this explain the bruise on Txxxxr’s eye?
Possibly he is the hero who put an end to this suggestion by stopping the coal with his optic.
Who originated the latest horrible device for use in modern warfare? This crippling strategy which puts poison gas right back into it’s bottle is as follows;
The attacking army carefully select a most important transport route frequently used by enemy motor cars. They thereupon march troops over this road. The troops wear boots to which are fitted, loosely, a special brand of spiked hobnail even more knobbly than those to be found on the Colonel’s liver.
These hobnails have specially heavy flat heads so that when they fall out on the road, as they do in large quantities, they lie with the spikes upwards thus putting out of action any car that uses the road after them.
With a well trained column with properly loosened nails as many as two or three punctures per diem are guaranteed.
This ghastly innovation has been tried with appalling success.
What is the League of Nations or other authority going to do about it?
Is it true that Mxxxxl nearly shot Hxxxxxd, while on a mid-night dog hunt, instead of the offending Bonzo?
Does Hxxxxxxs prefer taking his night’s rest in his car to sleeping in his bed ?
Was he reading George Borrow at the time or composing a new tune for “Where my charabanc has rested”?
Do you know a word of two letters seldom heard in the bar?
No?
Mainly About Nothing.
The winning entries for the recent Snail Hunt entirely justified the action of the authorities who promoted it.
Hordes of competitors flocked to the special building rented by the snail reception committee to receive the entries.
The hall was tastefully decorated with aspidistras (the only plant the snail will not eat) and silver snarling prongs.
The portals were hung with the flags of many nations including that of Umchikkachikkaplongha, Africa, which was flown at half mast as a delicate compliment to the reptiles who hail from that locality. The chairman arose and cleared his throat to announce the winning entry; a second noise from the throat of the chair announced it as Mr. Yeah Sze Yu with five bullock cart loads of dry snail or 2,003,003 recurring gallons of liquid African Snail together with a small clutch of 200,000,000 eggs. There was prolonged applause when Mr. Sze Yu was presented with the first prize, an aspidistra and a silver nailing prong, with inslnicti.ms for use.
The runner-up was Mr. Awang Lambat bin Ouijah who did not, of course, do quite as well. However he produced two ricksha loads of snail and half a dozen eggs which were disqualified as they were addled.
There was further applause when Mr. Lambat received the second prize, a book written by the chairman himself entitled “Twenty-four Different Ways of Cooking Snails.”
Prolonged and loud applause shook the leaf attaps of the building when the chairman announced that in his opinion, the best way of the lot was to put the snail on the end of a match stick and soak it in a dry Martini.
Most people in England are now very scared by the inevitable fate that, according to the laws of natural evolution and adaptability to circumstances, is bound to overtake them in the near future, unless the Golf Stream gets “hotted up” or England slides a bit further down the map to avoid the immense quantity of water which falls from the Heavens for twenty-four hours in every winter and “summer” day in that country.
The penguin is a bird-it is fitted with wings; but it does not fly-its wings have therefore reverted to mere useless flappers as a natural result of its habits and as a punishment for its laziness and luck of aeronautical enthusiasm. Similarly, the people of England are worried at the fearful prospect of growing web feet and fins. The following verse, said to be in general use in English homes and schools nowadays gives a very accurate summing up of the hydrometeorological situation; it is called,
A TYPICAL ENGLISH CALENDAR.
Dirty days hath September
April June and November February’s days are quite all right (It only rains from morn till night)
All the rest have thirty-one Without a blessed gleam of sun,
And if any of them had two and thirty They’d be just as wet and just as dirty.
Printer’s errors are often numerous in the proofing of a paper, more especially when owing to lack of time or labour, the proof has to be made up direct from manuscript written by those whose hand-writing is legible only to those who have made a special study of cryptography and cyphers. Some of these have however an unintended humour.
A certain contributor to this paper had occasion to use the words “Precautionary measure”, the compositor’s rendering of which was “Probationary museum!”
Another sentence which was given a rather whimsical tone originally ran somehow as follows “The Land Office report that owing to probable hardship, the valuation of the land should be reduced to ”.
The printer’s proof converted “hardship” to “landslip.” Perhaps the best of the lot however occurred in the proof of a short paragraph announcing the return of a certain distinguished officer from Miri via Kuching to his station. By the simple omission of the word “way” this gentleman was said to have passed through Kuching on his back from Miri to Simanggang!
The latest issue of Mirage, we notice, devotes an unusual amount of space to the question of food. This is a good thing for you remember that Dr. Johnson said that people who paid no attention to their stomachs were unlikely to pay attention to anything else.
To this budding revival of gastronomic interest, we append an extract from the immortal Rabelais, whose heroes were certainly strangers lo the quick lunch counter.
“Here remark that his dinner was sober and thrifty, for he did eat then only to prevent the gnawings of his stomach, but his supper was copious and large; for he took then as much as was fit to maintain and nourish him; which indeed is the true Diet prescribed by the Art of good and sound Physick, although a rabble of loggerheaded physicians nuzzled in the brabbing-shop of sophisters counsel the contrary.”
Therefore let him who would fill his pocket at the expense of his stomach take heed, for he who faitelh in the entertainment of his tonsils, shall be left destitute.
Let him be warned by this parable illustrating the sad fate of a certain miserly man who upraided his cooks that the bills for his victuals were excessively high. He had them see to it that the culinary expenditure should he half as small again, And it was so. The cooks obeyed their master who straightway fell into an ague with vomiting so he determined to see for himself what manner of food he was eating. He therefore clad himself in lowly raiment and betook himself to the markets at an early hour. Many cooks and other serving men were gathered round the merchants bargaining for gleaming silver fish, tender joints of veal, fresh looking vegetables and other delicacies, but among them was no menial from his own house. A while later he escried a man afar off, carrying a sack. The business of the merchants was drawing to a close for the sun was waxing hot. This man however stopped at each stall, scraped up some article from the ground and received a coin from each merchant whose stall he visited. The man approached and the master at last perceived him to be his chief cook. “Pray tell me.” he asked a beggar lying by the roadside, “Who is you assiduous man carrying the sack?” “He? Oh, he is merely the man the merchants pay to carry away their offal” replied the beggar.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 26 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
Price. TUESDAY, OCTOBER 3, 1905. 10 Cts.
OUR COLD STORAGE.
PEPRINTED FROM THE “EASTERN DAILY MAIL.”
5th September, 1905.
Said the chief. “Go and write up the cold storage people!” And the slave of the pencil forth with “went and did.”
With the aid of a man-drawn vehicle the scribe located the cold storage on the left hand side of the entrance to the Borneo Wharf; a square, one-storey, whitewashed building, which at first sight might be mistaken for one of the Tanjong Pagar Dock Co.’s godowns.
Approaching the Manager. Mr. Stevens, our interviewer expressed the opinion that the promoters of the cold storage were to be congratulated upon their enterprise in having supplied a long felt want in Singapore whereby the chewing of Bangkok shoe-leather would no longer be a matter of necessity, but merely a question of taste.
SINGAPORE A POOR CUSTOMER.
“I suppose.” said the scribe, “that the good people of Singapore are now maing quite a run upon prime Australian beef and mutton, to say nothing of your hares, turkeys, and other uncommon luxuries.” “Quite the contrary. I assure you.” replied Mr. Stevens. “You will no doubt be surprised to learn that the supplies consumed in Singapore constitute a very insignificant item in the sum total of our trade. As a matter of fact we frequently have an order from a single steamer for a greater quantity of beef and mutton than we supply to Singapore in a month. As you will see from this order book, our business is almost entirely confined to the steamship calling here.” “Then you do not intend ultimately to establish butchers’ shops in order to supply house-holder?”
CHINESE COOKS TO BLAME.
Mr. Stevens laughed sardonically. “We tried that ten years ago and lost $40,000 over the operation. One or two Chinese are retailing our meat in Singapore, but we have no intention of touching this class of business ourselves. There is too much ‘squeeze’ pidgin between Chinese cooks and the retailers of native grown beef for us to be able to compete successfully. In many instances the cooks receive ten cents for every pound of meat ordered, and you may be sure that they are not going to take our goods minus commission if they can possibly avoid doing so.”
“But this difficulty might be over-come by dealing direct with European house-holder,” suggested the interviewer.
“No,” replied Mr. Stevens, “the extra expense incurred in catering for the retail trade would not pay us. We have learnt from previous experience that the Europeans here are entirely in the hands of their servants; they won’t take the trouble to look after anything for themselves. Besides, if they want our beef and mutton, they can get it from Swee Hee in Orchard, at 5 cents per pound above the wholesale price.”
“You would like to look over the premises. All right, come along and I will show yon round.” So saying Mr. Stevens proceeded to envelope himself in a thick tweed coat, at the same time handing over to our representative a thick overcoat.
THE COLDEST PLACE IN SINGAPORE.
Unbarring a door nearby Mr. Stevens conducted the scribe to the polar region within. On entering the freezing compartment our representative found that the thermometer registered degrees above zero. The chamber was stocked with huge quarters of beef and carcases of sheep piled from floor to ceiling. There was a heap of petrified oxen tails, all as straight and as stiff as walking sticks. Said the guide, thoughtfully handling one of these bludgeon-like appendages;” You might hit a man a long time over the head with this before he would laugh.
“You certainly could easily give a man a dose of indigestion with one.” said the scribe, who now began to feel that, it was time for a thaw in the adjoining chamber.
After a few more words of congratulation our interviewer took his departure out into the hot, moist, tinned atmosphere of Singapore, to discover at the end of Pasir Panjang-rd, that he had caught a cold from a frozen head.
Sarawak Library.
The following books have been kindly presented by His Highness the Rajah: -
Purchased by the Committee: -
First Division News.
September, 1931.
Extracts from Divisional Reports for September, 1931, by Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division: -
Resident’s Court. -Two criminal and five civil cases came before the Court, but none were of great importance.
General. -His Highness the Rajah’s birthday on the 26th was celebrated as a public holiday and the Offices closed.
I accompanied His Highness the Tuan Muda to Lundu with Messrs. Rennie and Holl on the 10th returning to Kuching two days later.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
September, 1931.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports as follows: -
District Court. -18 cases were heard, 1 of which was criminal and 17 civil. A case was brought by the Chief Health Officer against Jateng and Sair (Dyaks) for contravention of Order No. LII, 1924, under Sections 4 and 5, and a conviction was obtained.
The civil claims involved amounts totalling $4,273.54 for which fees collected amounted to $158.
Magistrate’s Court. -169 cases were heard. 17 of which were criminal and 152 civil. Of the 17 criminal cases. 15 convictions and 2 acquittals were adjudged. There were 7 cases of assault, 1 of theft, 4 Contempt of Court, 1 Breach of Municipal Bylaws and 5 other offences.
Fines imposed amounted to $71.70 and fees collected $30.
The civil claims involved amounts totalling $3,859.08 for which fees collected amounted to $340.85.
Police Court. -17 summary cases were brought before the Court. All were convictions. The principal charges were 2 of theft, 1 of assault, 6 Breach of Municipal By-laws and 8 other offences.
A total amount of $66 was paid in fines.
In addition, 91 Judgment summons cases were dealt with during the month.
Coroner’s Court. -There were two coroner’s inquests as follows: -
14/9/31. -(1) Inquest on the death of Mr. Barnabas, Indian Christian.
Verdict returned that Barnabas died from burns received through his house being on fire and through his handling a bucket alleged to have contained benzine. It is the opinion of the Court that the fire was caused deliberately and the bucket of benzine also placed near the bouse deliberately by some person unknown. Strong suspicion falls on Narayanan and Mutusamy in view of their unsatisfactory statements, but there is as yet insufficient evidence upon which to enter a charge-Narayanan is therefore released from custody.
22/9/31. -(2) Inquest held on the body of an unknown male Chinese found floating in Sarawak river near Padungan.
Verdict. Accidental death due to drowning.
General. -His Highness the Rajah’s birthday, Saturday 26th of September was observed as a Public holiday and all offices were closed.
On the 5th Messrs. J. P. Baird and C. D. Le Gros Clark proceeded to England on furlough.
H.M.S. Herald paid her last visit to Kuching for this season.
The Ris Tarat boundary was reported mapped out by the Land Office on the 21st but I had not been able to find time to proceed there to settle this matter by the end of the month.
UPPER SARAWAK, BAU.
September, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports as follows: -
District Court. -5 cases were heard. 3 of which were criminal cases, 2 resulted in convictions and 1 discharge.
Magistrate’s Court. -9 cases were heard, 2 of which were criminal and 7 civil. Of the 2 criminal cases, all resulted in convictions.
In addition, 2 Judgment Summonses were dealt with during the month.
Fines imposed amounted to $96.00. The civil claims involved amounts totalling $553.44 for which fees collected amounted to $10.25.
General. -The early part of the month was spent in the annual visit to the Left Hand Branch Dyaks. Starting from Batu Kitang on the 2nd Pengkallan Ampat was reached on the evening of the 4th and a stay was made in the Government quarters here until the 9th. The Kampongs of Emproh, Danau and Senah were visited tax collected and various outstanding matters settled.
With regard to Pengkallan Ampat itself the bungalow was found to be in good condition and the bazaar in a fairly satisfactory condition.
The padi crop which had been harvested some weeks previously would appear to be satisfactory particularly around Pengkallan Ampat district where the Dyaks seemed contented enough. In this connection I received very few complaints with regard to pests.
The general health of the river was remarkably good considering the age and insanitary conditions of most of the houses.
The outstanding diseases were yaws and eye-sores.
The question of currency was a very difficult one and one that delayed us throughout the trip. Scores of dollars had to be refused since they bore slight scratches and were such as would not be received by the Treasury although in the majority of cases the marks appeared to be “fair wear and tear.” The result is that the shopkeepers in the district are refusing dollars or only taking them at a discount. I have done my best to explain that they must receive dollars if they are good but am quite powerless to stop the abuse. This comes very hard on the headmen of kampongs who once they have collected tax cannot sav to whom any individual coin belongs and therefore bear the loss of many dollars each. In order to assist I was able to take a limited amount of padi at $1 per passu which I have subsequently disposed of.
Orang Kayas amongst the Dyaks are not paid and in consequence of the money trouble I was met with resignations in every kampong none of which were accepted although one or two men became rather truculent.
His Highness the Rajah’s birthday was observed on the 26th Offices being closed.
Visitors to the station included Messrs. Bates, Simpson and Potter.
Rainfall. -Highest recorded in 24 hours .66 of an inch; daily average .19 of an inch; total for month 5.96 inches.
The Electric Light Plant has broken down completely now and will only give light during periods of charging.
The Batu Kitang ferry has now been repaired and is in commission again.
The cleanliness of Bau bazaar is not all that could he desired and the parits are all being rebuilt with bricks from the old company workings and it is hoped to bind them together with cement later on with the co-operation of the bazaar people themselves.
Gold Mining. -There has been a marked interest in gold mining during the month and two new leases have been prepared for approval and a number of prospecting licences issued. Five persons were summoned and fined for streaming for cold without licences.
617.20 ounces of actual gold were obtained by the Bidi Gold Mining Company during the month.
LUNDU.
September, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
General. -His Highness the Tuan Muda, together with the Resident, First Division, Mr. Rennie and Mr. Holl visited the station on the 10th.
The Chinese requested a grant in aid of their new school and the Malays that more time should be given for them to pay quit rent on their rubber gardens. The few outstanding affairs were settled the next morning by the Resident, it was decided that an examination of the scale of pay drawn by the local Tua Kampong should be made since they are all in receipt of salaries far greater than the authorized schedule allows. Permission was granted to Ex-Sergeant Bambang of Batang Ai to settle in the Sampadi district together with his followers, in all ten doors full. The Treasurer checked up the books finding them all correct. His Highness and party sailed for Talang Talang at midday Saturday.
Mr. Lowry of the Customs Department arrived from Kuching on 22nd and checked the books.
The total amount however was quite trifling. The pepper in the district was examined and found to be of a very high average quality. Mr. Lowry returned to Kuching on the 25th having visited Simatan as well on 23rd.
Mr. Mace of the Survey Department returned to Kuching on the 2nd having completed his work. Two parties of surveyors however were left behind, one at Sebaku (Simatan) and the other at Sempadi.
Travelling. -Simatan was visited on the 16th and again on the 23rd. On the former occasion I used the overland route spending the night at Serayan and proceeding down river the next morning. Sebaku was visited en route also. I proceeded to Kuching on 25th for His Highness the Rajah’s birthday and stayed on a few days to discuss various matters with the Heads of Departments.
Courts. -A great number of civil claims were heard especially in the Magistrate’s Court.
Marine. -New channel marks were put up at the mouths of Lundu and Simatan rivers; 5 men who live at the Kuala were made responsible for the Lundu ones and will be exempted from Tax provided they keep the channel marked properly at all times. At Simatan the Tua Kampong and police were made responsible.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall for the month was 3.61 inches, the greatest fall in any one day being .93 indies.
Trade. -477 piculs of pepper was exported during the month.
SADONG.
September, 1931.
The Officer-in-Charge. Mr. J. J. Hill, reports as follows: -
Court. -A large number of trivial cases came before the Court and only the following call for mention. Pi-ee bin Sahak, Johan bin Salleh, Bojeng bin Aim and Ajar (f) were each sentenced to one month imprisonment for Contempt of Court.
The Ris-Tarat boundary dispute was again opened and the Ris Dyaks, having violated the boundary, were fined $500.
Hospital. -At the Government Hospital one patient was admitted one was discharged, leaving two remaining at the end of the month.
At the Dispensary sixty-four patients made one hundred and twenty-six visits for treatment.
Twenty-seven N.A.B. injections were given during the month of which fifteen were for Primary Yaws, four for Crab Yaws, seven for tertiary Yaws and one for Syphilitic Ulcer.
The accounts show revenue $138.65 and expenditure including salaries and rations $145.12.
Agriculture. -Mr. G. St. F. Dare visited the station from the 16th to the 26th in connection with the Bugis Padi Reserve at Sungei Apin and the new Chinese padi planters at the Colliery.
On the 26th the Director of Agriculture, Mr. J. S. W. Bean paid a hurried visit to the station. I accompanied Mr. Bean and Mr. Dare to the Bugis Padi Reserve where considerable progress has been made.
Traveling. -I returned from the Ulu on the 17th instant.
The Ris-Rayang-Lanchang-Tarat boundary took longer to finish than was, at first, expected. The end of the Rayang-Tarat boundary, where it goes into Pulo Egom, is still under dispute but it is hoped that this can be settled amicably on both sides.
Continuous rain since the beginning of the month has given the Land Dyaks very little chance, of burning on their farms but it is hoped that they will be able to plant up early in the new month.
General. -The 26th being the anniversary of His Highness the Rajah’s birthday the offices were closed.
Sadong Collieries Report.
September, 1931.
Extracts from the S along Collieries Report for September, 1931, by Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager: -
The output, export, local consumption, and coal stock figures for the month were as follows: -
Coal shipments exceeded output to the wharf by 546.12 tons.
The s.s. Rajah of Sarawak arrived on the 5th, and cleared again on the 8th, with a coal consignment of 1,318 tons for Penang.
The top mine in the upper seam was closed down on the last day of the month.
The Director of Agriculture has definitely arranged to lake over the mine reserve land, together with the cattle, find buffalo herds at the end of current year. A limited area of swamp hind, situate beyond the mine office, has already been selected for the experimental planting of path during the present season.
Heavy rains were experienced during the New Moon Spring tides, which were accompanied by day and night “bores” and strong currents, at the middle of the month. The damage done to the jetty and river-bank was fairly considerable.
The total rainfall for the month was 19’93 inches.
Club News.
Sarawak Club.
The Raffle for Morris Minor Car No. K.246 (property of Miss I. C. Wallace) was drawn publicly at 12 noon on 3rd October.
The winning ticket was No. 807 held by Capt. S. H. Belson, of the s.s. Auby.
The Sarawak Union Club.
At the annual general meeting of the Sarawak Union Club held on the 21st October, 1931, the following gentlemen were elected office-bearers for the ensuing year: -Vice-President, Rev. G. T. Shetliffe; Hon. Secretary, Rev. F. S. Hollis; Hon. Deputy Secretary, Mr. Tan Kui Choon; Hon. Treasurer, Mr. Ee Lai Watt; Hon. Auditor, Mr. Wee Leong Ah; Committee Members, Messrs. Kuek Choo Seng, Chia Teck Hak and Chan Weng Yen.
Sarawak Chinese Football Association.
Sarawak Chinese Football Association were approved and registered with effect from the 10th October, 1931, by the Acting Secretary for Chinese Affairs and at the general meeting held at Teo Kiow Club on the 23rd September, 1931, the following gentlemen were elected office-bearers: -Patrons, Messrs. Wee Kheng Chiang and Law Cheng Hiang; President, Dr. Wong Cheong Way; Vice-President, Mr. C. P. Law; Hon. Secretary, Mr. Tan Kui Choon; non Treasurer, Mr. Sim Cheng Liang; Captain, Mr. Chan Weng Sheng. Vice-Captain, Mr. Eng Jaw Joo, Committee Members, Messrs. Joseph H. Law. Choo Ah Hian and Lim Ah Bee; Hon. Auditor, Mr. S. L. Tan and Hon. Supervisor, Mr. Au Aah Lah.
Second Division News.
September, 1931.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports for September, 1931, by Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas, Simanggang: -
I arrived here, from Kuching, on the 2nd and look over the District Office from Mr. Barcroft.
The next few days were mostly taken up with estimates.
On Sunday, the 6th a tuba-fishing was held from Rumah Entebaug, Skrang, Mr. Barcroft and I accompanied the Acting Resident. On the whole it was very poor show, a very small amount of fish being caught.
On Thursday the 10th, I left for Lingga by m.l. Elizabeth, Lingga was reached at 8.15 a.m. where a stop was made to pick up Pengiran Azit, who was there as Native Officer in place of Abang Medaut, who was on leave. We then proceeded up river to Banting which was reached about throw hours later, Penghulu Angkon’s house was visited first, and then all the principal long houses were visited. There are about seven or eight long houses varying in size from about ten to forty doors. There are also a number of small houses of one, two, or three doors.
The whole place was very empty, one house being completely shut up, most of the population was away farming at Pulo Seduku and district. There were no cases outstanding for hearing by the Penghulu, most of the door tax had been paid.
After this I climbed the hill and visited the Mission, the master told me there were over thirty boys attending School at present The same afternoon we returned to Lingga.
There were no cases for hearing in the District or Magistrate’s Court.
Lingga was almost deserted, the Malays being away farming.
I checked the books, opium and cash and found all to be correct.
The Forest Guard at Lingga seems not to have enough work to do.
On the 12th Mr. Noakes of the Survey Department arrived to stay with Mr. Harnack,
On the 13th Mr. Goodall, A.E.O. arrived from Engkilili for a day or two.
On the 14th, the Acting Resident left for Saratok.
On the 17th Mr. Summers left for Engkilili. The next Mr. Noakes returned to Kuching and the Acting Resident returned from Saratok.
On the 19th the Resident left for Miri via Kuching on local leave, and Messrs. Goodall and Summers arrived from Engkilili.
The next day I went to Engkilili to hear several District Court cases. I arrived back in Simanggang on the evening of Tuesday 22nd. On arrival I found a telegram from the Resident, Third Division saying that about fifty of Penghulu Ramba’s men had visited Asoon to prevent collection of guns in the Entabai. I immediately informed the Officer-in-Charge, Engkilili, and telegraphed for instruction from Kuching. The Officer-in-Charge Engkilili is investigating this.
The Elizabeth went to Engkilili on the 25th to fetch Mr. Hansom the Officer-in-Charge, Mr. Goodall having arrived from Lubok Tedong the previous day.
In the afternoon the final of the open Football Cup Competition was played, Kampong vs. Engkilili. The cup being won by the Kampong Team.
In the evening the Bangsawan which was being held in the new school, was visited.
The 26th His Highness the Rajah’s birthday. At 8 a.m. a short parade was held outside the new offices, Mr. Barcroft Officer-in-Charge Police and myself attending Two Long Service Medals to P.Cs. Simpi and Unau were presented.
A curry tiffin was given by the Simanggang Football Association in the Fort, during the course of the meal His Highness the Rajah’s health was drunk. The Revd. A. W. Stonton was present.
In the afternoon the final of the Dyak Football Competition was won by Igah’s team R. Ugak, Skra.
This was followed by an exhibition game by two teams of “Old Contemptibles.”
The Cups and Medals were then presented. The Cup presented by the Simanggang traders being presented to the winning team by Mr. Lim Tiang the Capitan China. Mr. E. O. Bruce’s Cupp, in his absence, was presented by me, to the winning Dyak team.
Mr. G. M. Goodall then presented an envelope, containing a cash prize, to the winning team of the “Old Contemptibles.”
In the early hours of Wednesday morning about 3 a.m. a house belonging to a woman named Elun in Kampong Lemanak, was completely destroyed by fire (for full account see Officer-in Charge, Police and Prisons’ report).
Mr. Bak Tang one of the leading Simanggang towkays has approached me, and has asked whether he may run a small car or two, here, I answered that I was greatly in favour of the idea, but that the Resident must be consulted first, on his return from local leave.
The general appearance of the station is fairly clean and tidy and the roads are in good condition, the Long round was visited during the month. The now District Officer’s house is very nearly completed.
The general plan of the house is good, but with a little trouble and imagination on the part of the designers, it could have been an almost perfect building.
The carpentry on the whole seems good, but the several small things which had to be mentioned by myself should not have been necessary had the P.W.D. foreman, not been so lazy and inefficient. His measurement of the btals has been all wrong, and in fact his work is not at all satisfactory.
The Revd A. W. Stonton’s house at the S.P.G. Mission Bukit Sabun, seems to be nearing completion.
The weather during the past month has been very bad, torrential rain occurring almost daily.
District Court. -Three criminal cases were heard, one conviction under Order XI, 1910. with a sentence of four months’ R.I. and two cases were dismissed.
Magistrates Court. -Twenty-seven cases were heard, twenty-two of which were civil, and fire criminal, there were two convictions, and three cases were dismissed.
Civil claims amounted to $468.01.
Total fines imposed amounted to $149.70 and fees collected $48.60.
SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Officer-in-Charge, Police and Prisons, Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft: -
Police (a) Personnel. -Full strength was maintained throughout the month. One newly engaged constable was discharged at his own request.
Three men arrival from Saratok for training, they were replaced by Simanggang constables.
Considering the large amount of recruits at Simanggang the Standard of efficiency and general smartness was quite satisfactory.
At the end of the month the Assistant Sub-Inspector left for a visit to Saribas and I hope to send him to Kalaka in the near future. The management of the Police throughout the division certainly requires revision as at present it is extremely obscura as to what extent the Simanggang Police Office is expected to interfere with Police outside the Batang Lupar. The District Officers at Belong, Saratok and Engkilili apparently consider that the transfer of Police should be controlled by Divisional Head Quarters but it is not stated as to how I am expected to know the standard of detachments on which men require transfer. I am convinced that until a proper Divisional Head Quarters is established the force cannot be an efficient one.
Regarding sub-station Police in this district although I have a good knowledge of all individuals. I am not at all well acquainted with the routine of these detachments I have been in this office for 17 months and during that time I have made one official visit to Sebuyow and Sungai Ludam and two visits to Lingga; this, of course, is obviously inadequate and while this state of affairs exists one cannot be expected to make, or even try to make, any apprecable effort to maintain an efficient force.
(b) Crime. -During the month a certain amount of petty theft was reported; particularly cases of stolen prahus.
The disappearance of a small boy was reported but after three days the Police traced the missing boy and returned him to his parents.
An Undup Chinese suspected of distilling arrack was arrested and charged in the Court; the case has been adjourned till next month.
(c) General. -Police paraded on His Highness the Rajah’s birthday. The Acting Assistant District Officer awarded long service medals to P.Cs. Unan and Simpi.
On the evening of the 29th fire broke out in Kampong Lemanak. Police arrived on the scene but the fire had already taken hold; one billian house was completely destroyed.
Prison. -During the month prisoners were employed mowing, white-washing and planting padi. It is hoped that the latter work will yield sufficient grain for jail consumption.
ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Officer-in-Charge, Mr. S. G. Hansom: -
Court. -For the month has been, as usual, light. A number of Resident’s and District Court cases, connected with the Pepper Dispute have been heard.
Civil claims amounting to $10,491 were heard.
Court fees amounted to $214.62. One criminal case only came up for hearing during the month.
Travelling. -Except for a short visit to Simanggang from the 25th to 27th instant. I have not left the station during the month. A certain amount of time has been spent in visits to outlying pepper areas.
General. -From the 2nd to the 5th instants the Acting Resident, Mr. E. O. Bruce, visited the station, accompanied by Datu Abang Haji Dulrashid. During his stay, the Acting Resident sat in Court on Resident’s and District Court cases connected with the Pepper Industry.
Estimates for 1932 were completed and submitted to the Resident at the beginning of the month.
On the 17th instant Mr. B. Summers, Divisional Land Officer visited the station, returning on the 19th instant. During his visit, Mr. Summers completed arrangements whereby temporary, skeleton Land Titles may be issued to Pepper gardeners in cases where the land has not been demarcated (owing to lack of staff at Engkilili) in order that legal agreements and mortgages may be available to them, in connection with their transactions with local traders. Demarcation will follow and permanent titles be issued in rotation.
Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas visited the station from the 20th to 22nd instants, in order to hear a number of District Court (Civil) claims.
During the month, a number of personal inspections of pepper gardens in outlying areas were made, with a view of placing on record details connected with the output of certain gardens which have been the subject of litigation.
Sunday the 26th instant the birthday of His Highness the Rajah was observed as a Public Holiday.
The river has been in a flooded condition throughout the month, owing lo heavy rains, the resultant accumulation of batang proving a nuisance to shipping.
It is noted how extremely irregular is the service of Chinese Motor vessels from Kuching. There are five vessels engaged on the weekly run, of which three frequently arrive here on the same day. It is regrettable that the owners cannot be induced to run their vessels to some sort of schedule, when an almost daily service with Simanggang and Kuching would be possible.
Prison. -Two prisoners were transferred from Simanggang to increase the mowing gang here, which was, and is, insufficient.
Rainfall. -Rain fell on 13 days, the total registered being 14’65 inches.
SARIBAS DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the District Officer. Mr. R. D. Daubeny: -
Court. -The following cases were heard during the month. Assim sentenced to two months for non-payment of fine $22.14, Uli one month for non-payment exemption tax 1931, Siah (f.) and Cheridah (f.) two months each for non-payment fine $22.14 and costs, Salleh three months for non-payment brian $50, Abang Abu fined $20 or in default one month imprisonment for Contempt of Court.
In the Civil Courts there were several small debt cases and three land cases, including the Entanak case mentioned last month, judgement in this case being given in favour of Plaintiffs and total costs against Defendant amounting to over $90.
Prisons. -The prison gang has been employed on the usual routine works during the month.
P.W.D. -The Police barrack at Pusa have been completed. and are a great improvement on the old quarters.
Travelling. -The sub-stations were visited from 25th to 27th, at Pusa Chin Kui and Ah Kiaw were fined $25 each and costs for Breach of Opium regulation, smoking opium without a Pass Book and aiding and abetting the above offence respectively. Various other outstanding matters were seen to.
General. -The 26th, His Highness the Rajah’s birthday was observed as a Public Hobday.
On 6th instant the body of a Chinaman by name Syn Kim from Melayu was brought to the Fort, a reported suicide. Examination of the deceased’s internal organs however shewed that he died from natural causes.
Clerk Chong Jen took over from Court Writer Rauti Broke at Pusa during the latter’s absence on yearly leave from 6th to 28th instant.
Continual rain during the month has seriously delayed the burning off of padi farms, it being estimated that about two thirds are still unburnt.
Complaints of shortage of food are prevalent, especially amongst the Malays but the fact remains that the people will not work hard enough on their farms but prefer to wait and hope that the price of rubber will rise. Continual efforts are being made to get people to start small vegetable gardens to supplement their padi, but even the practical results of others seem to no effect whatsoever.
Trade: -
Shipping. -Eight motor vessel entered and cleared, during the month.
KALAKA DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. L. K. Morse: -
Judicial. -Clerk Lim Lian Choon was prosecuted and convicted in the Resident’s Court under sections 409 and 477A respectively and was sentenced to 12 months R.I. on the first charge, and 12 months R.I. plus fine of $50 or 3 months R.I. in default on the second charge. Sentences to run concurrently.
In the District Court Khai Whatt was convicted under Section 266 I.P.C. and sentenced to a fine of $50 or four months imprisonment. Gallaw, Dyak. was convicted under section 380 I.P.C. and sentenced to three and half months imprisonment. No other cases call for remark.
Native Affairs. -Everybody in the District was busy with the farming. A large amount of Exemption Tax still remains outstanding except at Kabong, where the greater part has been paid. At Saratok a large number of men were given relief work some months ago to assist them to pay, most Tax defaulters having earned sum of between one dollar and one dollar eighty cents, they now seem unable to find the balance required
The new system of Dyak Passes does not appear to work very well between here and the Third Division, as, the Dyaks always come overland while the Advices appear to be sent to Kuching, at any rate they do not always turn up here. There appear to be a large number of Kampar Dyaks in this District, mostly from Sarikei and Julaw Districts, it is impossible, however, to prevent this.
The property dispute between Penghulu Dalam of Rejang, and Majang of this District was satisfactorily settled during the month, the first case regarding this property was heard by Mr. Bailey in 1907.
Kabong was visited during the month, and a number of cases were heard. The accounts were also checked up to the date of my visit.
CONSTRUCTION.
P.W.D. -The new Kabong School was well under way at the end of the month, while the Native Officers house at Roban was nearing competion.
Marine. -The m.l. One was docked in Kuching during the month, she appears to be in a very rotten condition.
Medical. -Dr. W. Hutchison inspected the Saratok Hospital during the month and appeared satisfied with what he saw.
Land. -David Chulo A.L.I. spent the greater part of the month examining gardens in the Roban District.
General. -The Acting Resident, Mr. E. O. Bruce visited the District from the 14th to 17th instant.
It being necessary to obtain immediate dental treatment, I left for Kuching by m.l. One on the 19th instant, and arrived there on the 20th with the Acting Resident who had been met at Sebuyow. I returned from Kuching accompanied by Dr. Hutchison on the 28th by s.l. Lucile Dr. Hutchison left on the 30th for Betong by the same launch.
LAND OFFICE.
Extracts from the report of the Divisional Land Officer, Mr. B. Summers: -
On the 1st instant Utik Assistant Land Inspector owing to previous poor work, was given due warning that unless improvement was shewn during the month, dismissal would follows; he was dismissed at the end of the month, for consistently “faking” his work.
It is hoped that a more suitable men can be found to take Utik’s place.
By the 3rd instant, all inspectors were out of office, Abang Omar and Latiff examining local gardens and disputes whilst Abang Hassan was sent to Sabu with a list of 38 gardens, of which he had examined 25 by the end of the month.
On the 5th I accompanied Latiff to examine the old Chinese Cemetery; no proper road reserve is possible, owing to many of the graves being practically on the road side, and on both sides of the road.
On the 8th certain Dyaks arrived from Maludam (reference Dyak-Malay land dispute early in June) with a complaint that the Malays were taking over new land for rubber gardens, inside the area farmed by the Dyaks. The matter was gone into, and it appears that the Dyaks did not understand the surveyor, and his work of planting pegs and connecting the gardens; the result being that the Dyaks returned quite happy after the matter had been explained to them.
By the 16th the Estimates 1932 were completed and forwarded, based on the present staff; eight Assistant Land Inspectors and two Clerks.
On the 17th instant I proceed to Engkilili returning on the 19th instant; the result of a letter from the Resident with regard to Pepper Garden Mortgages. During this visit from inquiries made, I gathered that the cause of gardens not being mortgaged was due to the parties concerned (chiefly the trader) nor wishing to pay “Deed Fees.” If the trouble between traders and gardeners had been foreseen, there is no doubt that, the majority of gardens would have been mortgaged.
On the 28th instant all inspectors were in office plotting their work. It is pleasing to note that the number of Applications examined in the Simanggang District each month are increasing, this is due to the Inspectors work being further afield, than up to the present.
Inspectors. -Throughout the Division, Inspections made shew a slight increase monthly, but a decrease is now liable owing to everybody farming at present.
Issue of new Titles. -The issue of now Titles (Occupation Tickets) is a slow process, due chiefly to the majority of people not having sufficient money to pay Premium, etc., especially for rubber gardens.
Pepper gardeners at the present time have sufficient money to pay for new titles; hence 51 Occupation Tickets issued during August at Engkilili.
During my last visit to Engkilili, it was noted that seventy new titles were ready for issue, but much difficulty is experienced in calling in the gardeners.
Rent Due. -From the 1st of October all rent defaulters will be called in.
Third Division News.
August, 1931.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports for August, 1931, by Mr. W. F. Dick, Acting Resident: -
Court. -The only case calling for mention was an appeal case Matnor vs. Dagang, this case is 13 years old and has been brought up several times during this period. The appeal was dismissed as some of the most important witnesses had been dead for years. Both parties gave notice of appeal.
At Mukah a case His Highness the Rajah vs. Langkaw for murder was heard, the charge was admitted, but grave provocation pleaded, the minutes of the case were sent to the Chief Justice for consideration.
General. -I returned from Kuching by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 9th instant. On 12th reports were received that a band of Dyaks from the Poi had gone over to help Asoon in July when the Government force went to Kuala Julau, Penghulu Inggong and Abang Abu Bakar were sent up to Poi to inquire into this report and also instructed to collect guns, they returned on 17th and brought down 53 guns. I visited Kanowit on 17th and inquired into reports at the activities of the Poi Dyaks, there was insufficient evidence to prove their complicity, but further inquiries are being made. Several houses of Kanowit Dyaks were fined for not accompanying the expedition after having been ordered to do so.
On the 19th instant Mrs. G. D. Kidd gave birth to a daughter, at Kanowit.
I visited Kanowit again on the 22nd and various tuai from the Julau were given two months to pay their fines.
Mr. J. O. Gilbert, Acting Assistant District Officer, Sarikei returned from sick leave on the 26th and Mr. E. H. Elam who had been doing temporary duty at Sarikei left for Kuching on the 27th. Datu Abang Haji Mohidin, Senior Native Officer was given two months leave as from 27th instant.
I left Sibu on 27th accompanied by the Divisional Land Officer, Mr. C. E. Pascoe on a visit to Oya and Mukah and was still away at the end of the month.
SIBU.
The District Officer, Mr. E. V. Andreini, reports: -
General. -I returned from Kuching on the 9th, Mr. E. H. Elam acted for me during my absence also for a few days whilst I was away sick with fever.
The Director of Public Works. Captain C. P. Lowe, The Conservator of Forests. Mr. D. E. Calver, The Acting Commissioner of Police, Mr. L. N. Reynolds, The Superintendent of Wireless, Mr. W. G. Tait, The Superintendent Engineer, Government Workshop, Mr. E. H. P. Bengtsson, The Conservator of Forests North Borneo, Mr. H. G. Keith and The Commandant of North Borneo Constabulary, Major Adams visited the district during the month.
Judicial. -Lack of criminal cases was very noticeable. Several persons were summonsed by the Farmer for Breach of Arrack Farm Regulations. In spite of heavy penalties imposed illegal brewing of arrack is on the increase.
Kuri (f.) a Melano attempted to commit suicide after a matrimonial dispute. She was bound over on condition she returned home to Oya under care of her parents.
A Coroners inquest was held on the body of Cheng Meng Ngee, male Foochow found drowned and a verdict of accidental death by drowning recorded.
Education. -Tuanku Haji Ali, Headmaster Sibu Malay School was retired on a gratuity; Mahali from Kuching replacing him.
A School Sports meeting was held by the Sibu Malay School on 8th August.
Two Chinese Inspectors of Schools from the Education Department in Kuching inspected all the Chinese Schools during the month.
I inspected the Bawan Assan Dvak School where 46 Dyak boys now have a fair knowledge of English. The majority of these boys expressed a wish to become Land Inspectors when they leave School.
Police. -Three recruits joined the force on three months probation during the month.
Twelve men went out travailing during the month.
Four men were admitted to Hospital and thirty-five men were off duty during the month on account of sickness.
On the 14th No. 5 Sergeant Sambang (Malay) died. He joined the Police on 19th November, 1919, and was one of the best Sergeants in the Police force. He originally came from Kalaka.
On the 16th No. 433 Private Giang, Sarawak Rangers, died suffering from malaria and influenza.
On the I3th Ngo Chon Koh (Foochow) prisoner escaped while working at the end of Kampong Datu. He was arrested by L.C. 42 Karim and P.C. Abang Leman at Sungei Bakong.
On the 17th Sergeant Juala Singh, Drill Instructor, returned to Kuching. Assistant Sub-Inspector Wan Bujang was sent to substations on Police inspection.
On the 18th the detachment of Sarawak Rangers returned to Kuching per H.H.M Y. Maimuna.
On the 31st Corporal Buglar Dollah (ex-pensioner Sarawak Rangers) and P.C. No. 23 Wahap were discharged from the Police force as medically unfit and received bonuses of $180 and $144 respectively.
SARIKEI, BINATANG AND REJANG.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports: -
General. -At the beginning of the month there was no Administrative Officer at Sarikei, on 13th Mr. E. H. Elam who was on transfer to Lundu arrived at Sarikei for temporary duty. On the same date Messrs. C. P. Lowe, G. S. Griffiths, J. W. Whiteside, and L. D. Kennedy visited the station.
On the 13th Mr. K. E. Parker arrived at Sarikei to take over from Mr. T. E. Parker, who proceeded on 22nd on local leave to China.
On 26th I returned from sick leave and took over from Mr. E. H. Elam who proceeded to Kuching by the return trip of the Sri Mukah.
On 29th I visited Belawai with the Land Officer, very little work has been done there lately in the way of cleaning up the remains of the old bazaar.
The Tua Kampong reports a shortage of fish this year due probably to rough weather which is not usual at this season, he also reports that the Malays only get 3 cents per kati from the Chinese for best fresh fish.
Customs. -The Customs Officers at Rejang made an unexpected examination of datchings, etc., during the month. 4 pairs of datching were found in use, that were badly out in their weights. Shipments of pepper have been very satisfactory, but the quality is not very good this year, this cannot be due to shortage of water which was the excuse last year, a sort of “blight” did a lot of damage to the vines early in the year, this may be the cause of the smallness of the fruit. Below are the returns for Sarikei: -
MATU AND DARO.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. F. L. G. Crossley, reports: -General. -I returned from Race Week on the 10th. travelling with the Divisional Treasurer who conducted his periodical checking of books, and found everything in order.
Court. -The only case worthy of mention was against Lanchang, prisoner, who was convicted under I.P.C. section 354.
P.W.D. -Prisoners are still engaged on the Bruan road and rentis work, and on the usual upkeep of grounds.
Traveling. -On the 14th I proceeded to Daro on my monthly visit.
Education. -In accordance with the recommendations of the Education Department, the Matu Malay School-house has been enlarged and now affords comfortable accommodation for the pupils. The extension work was done cheaply, and is considered to be a temporary measure only, as a new school is hoped for in the near future.
KAPIT.
The Court Writer, Law Ah Kui, reports: -
Court. -Owing to the absence from the station of the Magistrate there were no cases heard during the mouth.
Dairy Farm. -A cow calf was born and an old cow slaughtered. The herd numbered 53 head at the end of the month.
General. -Mr. D. O. McGinn, Divisional Treasurer visited the Station and audited the accounts.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman left for Belaga on the 6th and was still away at the end of the month.
Revd. Father Klerk visited Nanga Pila during the month. Abang Abu Seman returned from Pala Wong on the 11th.
Abang Aboi visited the Mujong district from the 16th to 31st and Wan Hussein the Balleh from 16th to 25th.
Dresser Lim Thian Sang arrived on the 19th and returned on the 20th.
Mr. Van Thaw Khui, Inspector of Schools visited the station during the month.
A party of Japanese returned from their visit to Pala Wong coal areas on the 9th and left for Sibu on the 10th.
Lu Chi Choon, Second Clerk Kapit relieved Wee Tao Ping at Song for three days on special leave granted by the Resident, Third Division.
Dyaks. -Very few Dyaks were down as they are busy farming. Good burns have been reported.
MUKAH AND OYA.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. E. M. Woodward, reports: -
General. -On the 9th instant it was reported that a Dyak by name Langkau had on a previous day murdered another Dyak named Kidar in Sarggaw’s house in the ulu Mukah. Langkau gave himself up the same day and admitted the crime stating that he had killed Kidar because the latter had committed adultery with his wife, Simah, who subsequently admitted this offence. I visited Sanggaw’s house the following day in order to investigate the matter and to view the body of deceased which on exhumation was found to have a deep spear wound in the chest which must have caused almost instantaneous death. I returned to Mukah on the 11th instant and on the 31st instant Langkau was sentenced to death by the Resident’s Court for murder under I.P.C. section 302 subject to confirmation by the Supreme Court.
The anniversary of the birthday of His Highness the Tuan Muda on the 8th instant was observed as a public holiday and the Government offices were closed on that day.
During the month the Resident, Mr. W. F. Dick, visited the station in connection with the murder charge against Langkau and other official business. Other visitors to the station during the month included the Assistant District Officer, Oya and Dalat, Mr. N. E. Hughes, and Mr. Summer of the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited.
Court. -Malok bin Ayim was sentenced to 6 1/2 months’ imprisonment for non-payment of Native Court fines, etc.
Merais bin Karieng was sentenced to one month’s imprisonment in default of Native Court order to pay expenses.
Juing bin Ibang was sentenced to one month’s imprisonment under Part II section 2 (i) (c) and under Part III section 14 (i) of Forest Order No. F-1.
Police and Prisons. -Sergeant Yahya was invalided from the Force on the 1st instant after over fourteen years meritorious service and received a bonus.
During the month the daily number of prisoners averaged 44.10. They were employed on roads and on the general upkeep of the station.
Land. -During the month the Divisional Land Officer, Mr. C. E. Pascoe visited the station in connection with land affairs which he brought up-to-date.
The demarcation and reservation of possible S.O.L. railheads at Kenyana, Bulus and Jelai was completed during the month and plans were submitted.
P.W.D. -During the greater part of the month Exemption Tax Defaulters were employed on making the new by-pass road above the Main Bazaar and the road leading to the cattle shed was raised above flood level and fenced in by prison labour.
Electricity. -On the 17th instant the Electric light Plant sustained a temporary breakdown owing to a defect in the fuel pump and it was not possible to switch on the lights for two nights. The pump was however rectified on the 19th instant and the engine subsequently ran satisfactorily.
The Divisional Electrical Engineer, Mr. H. C. Strong, visited the station on the 28th instant and was still here at the end of the month. During his visit he carried out a thorough inspection of the Electric Light Plant as a result of which the engine was running much more smoothly at the end of the month.
Education. -The Government Malay School was closed for two weeks from the 13th instant for the Summer Holidays.
Balingian. -I visited this station from the 19th to the 23rd instant. There was nothing of importance to be dealt with though arrangements were made with the Chinese Shop-keepers to drain the swampy area behind the bazaar by making a ditch along the entire length of the back of the bazaar with three cross ditches draining into the river.
OYA AND DALAT.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N E. Hughes. reports: -
General. -Rainfall during the month totalled only ‘79 inches, and the station is looking very parched in consequence. Grass is everywhere so dry that fires start easily, and all natives farming near the Mukah telephone rentis have been warned that they will be held responsible for damage to the line through fire. One breakdown due to this cause took place half-way through the month.
The weather has been oppressively hot, and on one occasion when the thermometer at Dalat stood at 100 degrees in the shade the Rev. Father Epping temporarily disbanded the R.C Mission School.
Court. -A dispute over the estate of ex-sergeant Dollah, which was settled in the Resident’s Court, was the only case of any importance.
Police. -Owing to repeated cases of housebreaking and petty thefts a system of night guards was started in Dalat bazaar, and appears to be working satisfactorily.
Assan was captured and sentenced to one year’s further imprisonment under I.P.C. section 324.
Dyaks. -On August 13th T. R. Kedit reported at Dalat that Buan, who escaped from Mukah last May while on remand for incest and rape, was in the ulu Oya. I made a flying trip to the Ulu and arrested Buan at Lumbok’s house on the 17th. It appeared that Lumbok had sheltered Buan and all his family for two months; although every Tuai in the river knew about this, having been told personally by Mr. Elam, not one of them had taken the trouble to report the matter. At dawn on the 18th Buan escaped from his Police guards by remarkably clever trick: I warned each house in the Batang Oya that he was to be captured and on August 25th he was brought to Dalat by Tuai Rumah Lumbok, who is at present waiting to explain to the Resident his conduct in harbouring Buan, who he knew was an escaped prisoner. Indidentally, Buan has escaped from prison four times in the last ten years, each time while on remand, so he has never yet been brought to trial for his alleged offences.
Affaire in the Ulu Oya are in a parlous state, owing to the fact that there has been no Penghulu for the upriver district since Medan was dismissed four months ago I found tuai-tuai rumah fining for serious offences (which, of course, they knew they are not allowed to do) and not paying the appropriate shares of the fines to Government; surat panggils, summonses and Government instructions were ell equally ignored Dyaks are all very late with their farming this year; burning has nowhere commenced, and many houses have not yet started to fell. Various reasons are given for this delay, -pantang owing to deaths, of which these have been many lately, tuba-fishing and hunting expeditious, or just nadai ari. The Dyaks say that they have no money at all and certainly they are quite without such luxuries as cartridges, kerosine oil, tobacco and matches. Fines also are now always paid in kind, and it appears likely that Government will have to accept goods in lieu of door-tax next year.
Visitors. -Visitors to the station included Mr. W. F. Dick, Acting Resident, Third Division, and Mrs. Dick, Mr. and Mrs. C. E. Pascoe; Mr. H. C. Strong and the Rev. Father Staal from Tebekang.
Shipping. -Three motor schooners and three schooners entered and all cleared the port at the end of the month.
Trade. -One hundred and sixteen koyans raw sago, 24 piculs raw jelutong and 139 tins sago pearl were shipped to Kuching.
The trade return for the month and for comparison with that of the same month last year is as follows: -
Sibu Jottings.
Mr. and Mrs. Hammond and Anne left on transfer to Kuching. Their loss will lie felt both socially and in numbers as Mr. Hammond ‘s relief will not be stationed in Sibu. We wish them the best of luck except in the next Outstation vs. Kuching cricket match.
Football has been going strong; all the three schools in Sibu are being couched by Europeans. The R.C. Mission and the Malay Government School played the first school match which was drawn 1-1.
The Kwong Hwa School from Sadit who made up for lack of science with brawn wore beaten 2-0 by the Government Malay School.
Mrs. Hoover’s maypole dance and play was held early to the month also an exhibition of work done by the girls.
The Tiong Wah School gave two very good dramatic performances and large sums of money were collected for sufferers in China. It was rumoured Anna May Wong was present and sang a song. Perhaps the hit of the evening was brought off by six Malay scholars who sang “Good Night Ladies” in English.
The Talkies came but somehow did not catch on and very poor houses saw (and heard sometimes) the performances but those that did helped immensely by encouraging the artists with such cries as “cut it out Maurice and lets have a song” “Pass me the chilies” “I’s there any more mee” but perhaps that was a supper party on the roof garden.
The golf course is progressing and looks as though it will be possible to play a hole or two in a month or two.
Have you heard Matey sing if not you must when he comes to Kuching.
THE JOTTER.
Fourth Division News.
MIRI.
September, 1931.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports for September, 1931, by Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident: -
At the beginning of the month I was at Tatau, which place I visited from Bintulu. Glagat (Dyak) was tried for the murder of Lugat (Dyak) of the same house and a verdict of murder was brought in. Sentence of death was passed on Glagat subject to confirmation by the Supreme Court.
Tatau bazaar is in a very bad state. Nothing in the shops and no one has any ready cash. A very small proportion of the Dyak Tax had been paid in and arrangements were made with the District Officer to collect this in billian as owing to the state of the finances of the Tatau Bazaar, it is difficult for Dyaks to realise any ready cash for produce worked. It has been impressed on the Dyaks that cash should be paid to Government if possible.
The Dyaks petitioned that as regards tax they should be put on the same basis as the Rejang Dyaks. They were advised to petition His Highness the Rajah on His Highness’ next visit to the Division.
Messrs. Alltman and Youngberg of the Seventh Day Adventist Mission called on me and explained that they were settling in the Tatau to work amongst the Dyaks, not having received much encouragement from the Bintulu Dyaks. A site has been chosen for their Mission which is now being demarcated preliminary to the issue of a Mission Grant.
On my return to Bintulu Penghulu Jalin was warned as to his conduct. He is quite a good Penghulu but has been rather abusing his position in keeping shares of fines to himself. He was not too keen on travelling around his District. As a token that he understood the warning, he was ordered to place a pledge of three piculs with the Government.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. A. Macpherson has now visited all Dyaks in his district.
Abang Bojeng Native Officer has been transferred to Bintulu and Awang Abil ordered to Tatau to relieve him, with instructions to travel to know the people and gain their confidence.
Mr. A. Macpherson reported that a large number of Bintulus were returning to Government their titles to rubber gardens.
The Bintulu traders complained that their Kuching towkays were very hard on them as they only credited them with the value of goods sent without giving them further credit on fresh supplies.
I have never seen the Bazaars and Kampongs both at Bintulu and Tatau looking so clean, which reflects great credit on Mr. Macpherson and on his patience, especially amongst the kampong people, in instilling into them some pride.
I returned to Miri on the 6th by the Chinese boat “Chin,” there being no other convenient transport.
In the Miri Criminal Court the only case of importance was an appeal from the decision of the District Court where three Sibuti Chinese were sentenced to terms of imprisonment for being in possession of stolen property. Their appeal was upheld and from this case proceedings were instituted against Leong Shin, Plaintiff in the former case. Court Writer Ong and P.C. Komput for fabricating false evidence. This case was still subjudice at the end of the month.
There having been more cases where persons were way-laid and robbed, the Police have increased their night patrols and have been rounding up all persons hanging about the bazaar and kampongs with no visible means of subsistence. One Chinese was arrested with any amount of stolen property found on him. Since the Police have been active in these directions, this from of robbery appears to have abated.
The Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, have decided to lay a land pipe from Lutong to Kuala Belait which will give employment to about 400 Chinese.
His Highness the Rajah’s birthday was celebrated in Miri on Saturday 26th. At 7 a.m. the Sarawak Rangers and the Police paraded under the command of Mr. D. V. Murphy Assistant Supt. Police. I then inspected the Parade after which there was a march past in companies and close formation. The ground was in a very soggy state from continual previous rain for days before hand and so Mr. D. V. Murphy is to be congratulated on the smartness of the men in their movements. At the end of the Parade Long Service Decorations were presented to Bangun Tua Kampong of Bekam and Penghulu Ballan Deng Sebob Chief. The latter was granted his Decoration last year but this was the first suitable occasion that it could be presented.
From 9.30 a.m. until late in the evening a Native Regatta was held. This, the first of its nature in Miri, proved to be very successful and popular.
The Conservator of Forests, Mr. D. Calver visited Miri in connection with his annual inspection.
Mr. C. S. Griffiths, Superintendent of Lands arrived on 25th from the North and was still in the district at the end of the month.
BINTULU.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. A. Macpherson, reports: -
Court. -Fines amounting to $668.55 were imposed.
Prison. -The gang was employed on the general up-keep of the station. Prisoners numbered 15 at the end of the month.
P.W.D. -The lining of the pipe-line tunnel was completed. Owing to heavy rain a break in the pipeline occurred at foot of Bukit Silai, the bridge carryg in the line breaking up under pressure of high floods. Repairs have been carried out. The carpenter was employed on making extra jamban for Police and Clerks and on painting the bungalow. The Police Barracks at retail were practically rebuilt and the clerks quarters there are now being repaired.
Dairy Farm. -The herd numbered 52 head at the end of the month.
Visitors. -The Resident returned to Miri on 6th.
Sebauh. -I visited Sebauh on the 10th. A new Flagstaff has been erected and the tebassing of the Concession Road is proceeding. A mower has been engaged from 1st October.
Mosque. -Tuan Belal received injuries from a falling coconut palm front which he died on 12th.
Tatau. -I left for Tatau on 13th with Awang Abil Native Officer returning on the 28th. I will report on this trip elsewhere.
General. -A Dyak named Ijau who had escaped from Sibu Fort was traced, re-captured and sent to Sibu.
Medical. -A vaccinator arrived by s.s. Auby on 20th, and is proceeding with his duties.
Wireless. -Two mechanics and a carpenter arrived on 20th to erect a new Wireless mast. The job is still on hand. The two operators are taking alternate afternoons to learn Post Office work.
Tax. -On instructions from the Resident the Tatau Dyaks Tax will be paid in billian this year.
Money is practically non-existent in the Tatau bazaar.
Trade and Customs. -Trade statistics for the month were as follows: -
Rainfall. -The rainfall for the month amounted to 13’23 inches.
The District Officer, Mr. P. G. Carpenter, reports: -
Court. -A normal number of cases were dealt with by the Courts, a total of two hundred (200) writes being issued on which 19 were Criminal and 181 Civil. 166 suits were disposed of, these comprising 35 Criminal and 131 Civil. In the Criminal actions 32 convictions were obtained, while sums totalling $8,872 were involved in Civil cases. Fines amounted to $556 and fees in all matters to $369. The total Court Revenue was $1,106. $1,735 was received into Court Deposits and $1,885 was paid out. In the District Court Chong Tet Sam was sentenced to one year under Section 403 I.C.P., and Chong Voi and Ng Thong were each sentenced to one year under Section 309 I.P.C. In the
Magistrate’s Court the usual petty theft cases were brought forward, and a number of Police charges under the Vagrancy Order were also suitably dealt with. A few cases of contravention of Opium regulations resulted in the offenders being fined.
Health -The clearing work at Tanjong Lobang was nearly finished and the general appearance of the area is greatly enhanced. All drains have been regularly oiled and cleared, and the main ones are now fitted with a drip system of oiling placed at the head of the ditch. Likely mosquito breeding pools were sprayed. Eleven notices to abate nuisances were issued. A list of trades which should be licenced under by-law were submitted to the Resident for consideration at a Municipal meeting. It was decided to renovate and repair the fish and pork markets and the pig slaughter house under this year’s estimates, and the work was put in hand forthwith. Eight prosecutions were instituted by the
Department, and convictions were obtained in all cases. Twenty vaccinations were undertaken by the Sanitary Inspector.
Land. -No applications were received at the main Office. Twelve gardens were demarcated comprising 20 acres of coconuts and 8 1/2 acres of rubber. Two Tickets were issued. Assistant Inspector Ng Ah Chak proceeded on three weeks leave on the 1st. Assistant Inspector Jaini was away at Sibuti during the greater part of the month, but his work there has hardly started as yet.
Medical. -At the Government Dispensary 142 out-patients made 479 attendances for treatment. Four patients were transferred to the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited. Hospital. Of the 142 patients attended to, 100 were members of the Military and Police. Three N.A.B. injections were administered. The table of diseases treated shows nothing serious.
Monopolies. -Sales of tubes amounted to $9,867.80 and the total revenue including farm rents was $15,4000. With the present greatly reduced Chinese population in Miri a steady reduction in those figures may be anticipated. As result of inquiries from Kuching as to the abnormal number of tubes returned leaking from this station, a report has been forwarded to the controller regarding storage conditions in the opium strong-room.
Municipal. -Advices were received that a conservancy lorry similar to those in use in Kuching, has been ordered for the station. Tenders were invited for the building of a garage and bucket stole in connection with this. At a meeting held during the month it was learnt that the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, will be unable to assist in the sewage farm scheme. A special meeting was convened to consider estimates for 1932.
Outstations. -Mr. Morice visited Niah and Sibuti from the 16th to 22nd and settled all outstanding matters. At Niah the people were mostly still busy gathering nests. Andam and 104 Dyaks from the Second Division arrived at Niah during the month with the intention of settling there.
P.W.D. -Considerable difficulty was again experienced with a number of water maters. These seem to become jammed or otherwise deranged owing to the poor quality of the bazaar water which contains a thick deposit of brown slimy substance. On account of this the water revenue is again far below the expenditure to the Company, but it is hoped that spare parts will soon arrive. A few minor repairs were effected to buildings where necessary. A contract was signed for scraping and painting the Kuala Baram lighthouse. This work was nearly finished at the end of the month.
General. -Messrs. Reynolds and Blagg returned to Kuching in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 23rd. The Resident returned from Bintulu in m.l. Chin on the 6th. I was away in Kuching from 11th to 15th. On the 23rd a Harimau Dahan was shot at Pujut and sold to the Curator of the Museum who happened to be in Miri at the time. The 26th, being the anniversary of His Highness the Rajah’s birthday, was observed as a holiday. The Military and Police paraded on the padang and marched past the Resident who took the salute. After the parade two Long Service Decorations were awarded to Penghulu Balan Deng of Ulu Tinjar and Tua Kampong Bangun. On the nine day the first regatta to take place in Miri was held when boats from Dalat and Brunei were seen in competition for the first time.
BARAM.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
Court. -A charge of house trespass against Tian was dismissed but he was imprisoned for a further six weeks for non-payment of a previous Native Court fine.
Crime. -On my return from the Tinjar I was informed that Kelabit had amoked, killing one woman and wounding three men. It was stated that the culprit had been caught and that P. Balang Ratu was bringing him down. As no further news was received by 22nd, Galau was instructed to go up the Apoh to meet him.
Travelling. -I returned from the Tinjar on 15th with Mr. McLeod, D.C.F. and Mr. Banks, Curator. Mr. McLeod had walked from the Apoh to the Baram and had followed us up the Tinjar. He collected samples from local wood workers and made an estimate of the amount of timber already worked and still unsold. Mr. Banks and I spent one night on Mt. Dulit where the collectors were left for a week until our return. Five specimens of conifers were collected and sent to the Divisional Forest Officer for identification. The climb is difficult, there being several precipitous outcrops of rock to cross and I can well understand the upriver people not working damar at the top at present prices. It is interesting to note that the damar is all from the Agathis Alba tree which is also found in the Marudi Forest Reserve where it is reported useless for damar working.
I have intended walking from P. Balan Deng’s house to visit the Penans in the Nibong but unfortunately sprained my ankle and was unable to walk so sent Galau instead. I understand that these Penans have not been visited since 1925 but have now arranged for them to be visited regularly. Galau reports that there are altogether about 250 of them, living in houses and planting large areas of ubi kayu well as padi.
Datu Tuanku Haji Drahman accompanied me and I am glad to say kept perfectly fit the whole time. His advice was invaluable and his knowledge of the people in the Tinjar is amazing. This is the first time he has been upriver since 1927 but I hope it will not prove to be the last. Mr. McLeod and Mr. Banks left by the Gladys on 21st. On 24th, accompanied by Datu Tuanku Haji Drahman and P. Balan Deng, I left for Miri to attend the Parade and Regatta on 26th. P. Balan Deng receiving his Long Service Decoration. We returned on 28th.
Prisoners. -The prisoners averaging 24 men were engaged on the usual upkeep of the station.
P.W.D. -The Limbang Road bridges were satisfactorily completed during the month.
Medical. -The dresser accompanied me on my visit to the Tinjar. 55 out-patients were treated during the month, no in-patients wore admitted to hospital. Under the Professor Harrison Smith’s Fund 150 out-patients of which 135 were treated up-river. 120 N.A.B. injections of which 106 were given up-river.
Rainfall. -4’04 inches of rain fell on eight days.
Shipping. -M.L. Rentis arrived on 18th for duty here until the return of s.1. La Follette. S.S. Gladys made two trips during the month.
Trade. -Is very slack. Trade returns are as under: -
Rowing.
SINGAPORE B.C. VS. MIRI B.C.
His Highness the Tuan Muda received the following telegram from Mr. A. H. Noble, General Manager, Sarawak Oilfields, Limited: -
His Highness was pleased to send a telegram of congratulation to the Miri crew and their coach which ran as follows: -
23rd October, 1931.
Fifth Division News.
LIMBANG.
September, 1931.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports for September, 1931, by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident: -
Court. -Several cases were dealt with including three of theft and two of cheating, but none were of a very serious nature.
General. -An important and interesting function took place in Brunei, when on the 19th, the seventh anniversary of his accession to the throne, the sultan of Brunei, Ahmed Tajudin Akhazul Khairi Wadin, assumed his full powers. At the ceremony an announcement was made to the effect that His Highness the Rajah offered to surrender his land rights at Brooketon, which was very graciously replied to by His Highness the Sultan, who gratefully accepted the offer with the exception of the land on which His Highness the Rajah’s Bungalow was situated which he expressly wished His Highness would retain for all time.
Another interesting matter was also accomplished in that an important portion of the long disputed and indefinite frontier between the States of Sarawak and Brunei was agreed upon by the British Resident of Brunei and myself on behalf of our respective Governments, now leaving only a small portion of the frontier to the West which there should be no difficulty in delimiting if it should become necessary to do so in the future.
Abang Hamdan bin Abang Haji Sa’at arrived from Kuching to take over the duties of Native Officer from Datu Haji Moasili, who has since been appointed the Datu Hakim of Sarawak.
The party of Ulu Ai and Skrang Dyaks returned from their inspection of land in the Ulu Limbang, and reported favourably on a section between the Kuala Selidon and the Kuala Seratai which will accommodate 100 doors. This land has now been reserved for their occupation when they move in directly after their next harvest.
The Superintendent of Lands, Mr. C. C. Griffiths visited the Division to inspect the work of his Department, as also did Mr. W. G. Tait of the Wireless Department.
The 26th the Birthday of His Highness the Rajah was observed as a public holiday; in the morning, after the salute had been fired, a ceremony of presentation of Long Service Medals and Decorations was held, there was a large gathering to witness this including European visitors from Brunei.
P.W.D. -Prisoners averaging 18.01 were employed on maintenance and improvement of roads, and general repairs to buildings were carried out by the Station Carpenter.
Medical and Health. -The Medical Officer of Brunei paid his usual visit and reported well on the work of the Dresser-in-Charge.
Two patients were admitted to the Hospital and forty-nine out-patients were treated.
The rainfall amounted to 16’12 inches.
Trade and Shipping. -The engine of the m.l. Saripah was fitted with four new pistons, the original ones which had only been in use three years having developed minute cracks in the top. These faulty Pistons have since been sent to Messrs. Thornycroft for inspection and report.
LAWAS.
September, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe, reports: -
Court. -There were very few cases worthy of note during the month. Bilio Lajak was fined $25 and costs for breach of Buffaloes Regulations, Karim bin Abong fined $10 and goods confiscated for Breach of Customs Regulations, and Indi, a Tagal two months R.I. for disobedience of Lawful Authority.
Prisoners. -Prisoners averaged 17 for the month and were employed in the usual work of upkeep of Government grounds.
General. -The Resident and Mr. R. E. Edwards of the P.W.D., came over from Limbang to the district on the 1st of the month, paying a visit to Sundar and Trusan. From Trusan the party proceeded over-land to Lawas with the idea of considering the
reconstruction of the Siang Siang bridge and also to observe the progress of the Lawas-Trusan road. The Resident and Mr. Edwards returned to Limbang on the 2nd. Mr. W. Tait Superintendent of Telegraphs and Telephones paid a visit on the 6th and arrangements were made for the installation of a new Lister engine in place of the Weston outfit which had not been giving great satisfaction.
Mr. C. S. Griffiths Superintendent of Lands arrived on the 16th and left for Labuan on the 22nd.
Mr. C. J. Cook came up from Tagai on the 20th and spent the day of the 21st going to Siang Siang river with the idea of estimating the repair to the bridge. His report has been sent in under separate cover. On the 18th I left the Station for Brunei via Limbang in order to attend the ceremony of the proclamation of Sovereignty of the present Sultan, returning to the Station on the 20th.
Reports of frequent smuggling between Merapok and Sindumin, B.N.B., were sent to me by the Customs Official at the former station. On the 22nd I proceeded to Merapok to inquire into the matter but no tangible evidence was and the case was adjourned. On the 24th I proceeded to Limbang for the holiday on the Birthday of His Highness the Rajah, and was still away at the end of the month in order to await the arrival of His Highness the Tuan Muda.
Father Jansen paid a short visit to the station during the month.
A very heavy rainfall occurred on the night of the 24th of the month when 5’8 inches of rain were registered. The river rose up to the shop-houses and a considerable amount of damage was inflicted. The rise of water necessitated using a perhau from the Fort to the bazaar.
Health during the month was on the whole good although influenza was all too common.
Agriculture. -The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates. Limited, exported 51,201 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
Rainfall. -The following rainfall was recorded during the month: -
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
A Reply to “Interested.”
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
KUCHING,
3rd October, 1931.
SIR,
The question raised by your correspondent “Interested” would not seem to admit of a direct answer, that is to say such authorities as I have at hand, appear to give either Mohammedan or Muslim as a follower of the faith of Islam, (c.f. concise Oxford, 2nd Edition, 1929: Collin’s Printers’ and Authors’ Dictionary, 6th Edition, 1928, and the Article “Mohammad” in E.B. 14th Edition, 1930). In this connection the spelling of the Prophet’s name may be noticed. Fully vowelled it is written thus: -
hence “Muhammad” would seem to the closest Romanized equivalent.
Yours faithfully,
J.
One Shift Day.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching
DEAR SIR,
I have read with interest the letter from Harry Panas in the October number of the Gazette on the subject of office hours and am convinced that the unpleasant symptoms experienced by your correspondent in his swivel chair at 2 p.m. daily are caused by over indulgence in food at midday, and I am confident that the symptoms will succumb to a short course of the well known Scurvy treatment particulars of which may be obtained on application to the undersigned. All correspondence will be treated as strictly confidential.
Yours faithfully,
DAVID DINGIN,
Sejuk Street,
Kuching,
Agent for the Scurvy Institute.
[Harry Panas has been informed of this kind offer and replies as follows: -“I wish to protest, vehemently, that I am definitely free of this foul affliction, I bathe regularly once a day, and take for lunch beyond a little lettuce, a caviare sandwich and a glass of Hock.” -Ed.]
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
SIR,
The question raised by Harry Panas in a letter published by you last month was the subject of correspondence in the Gazette in 1911 since which date the matter has been frequently discussed without any general agreement.
One rides in the morning and prefers to commence work at a later hour than another who takes no early morning exercise. One has no breakfast and another no lunch, the former voting for an early start and the latter for a late start and a short interval at mid-day.
The old office hours of 8 to 11 and 1 to 4 were considered satisfactory when dejeuner at 11 a.m. was the principal meal of the day followed by an hour’s rest before offices reopened.
An improvement on these hours might be 8 to 12 and 2 to 4. Alternatively, if a good breakfast be made then 10 to 4 without a break or 9.30 to 4 with an interval of half-an-hour would probably be the most convenient hours for everyone including the general public for whom the hours proposed by Harry Panas would hardly be convenient.
The picture drawn by your correspondent of the native taking his ease during the heat of the day is, I am convinced, largely imaginative. Most natives in these hard times have to work for a living and a long siesta during the heat of the day is no part of thier usual programme.
Many Chinese rubber tappers now commerce work at 2 a.m. but this is not done in order to avoid the heat of the day but to lengthen the working hours.
On the whole I don’t think it can be argued that the occupants of swivel chairs in Government offices are overworked in comparison with other members of the community.
Yours faithfully,
N. EVERSWHAT.
[Harry Panas replies “Mr. Eversweat’s name alone shows that he is one of those people for whose benefit my appeal was made public. The fact that rubber tappers arise at 2 a.m. calls forth my deepest sympathy but I maintain that this assertion together with the allegation that Government Officers are not overworked, is beside the point. I consider that sufficient early morning exercise can be obtained by walking or riding or running to the office. Further sweating by Eversweat could be induced from 2 p.m. to 6.30 p.m. after office hours as suggested in my letter.” -Ed.].
Christmas Letter Telegrams.
The Editor, The Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
SIR.
I should be glad if you will allow me space to draw attention to the fact that special facilities are available for the despatch of Christmans Letter Telegrams conveying the seasons greetings. Details will be notified in the Sarawak Government Gazette.
Yours faithfully,
W.G. TAIT,
Acting Superintendent,
Telegraph & Telephones Department.
Anonymous Letter.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
BINTULU,
8th October, 1931.
DEAR SIR,
Further to your anonymous letter which appeared in your September issue of the Gazette, the writer would like to say a few words on the same question.
These anonymous letter writers are a queer crew. All of them are insane or verging on insanity. The medical experts declare that the most positive sign of approaching insanity is the desire to write anonymous letters. These offenders probably have an idea that they are perfectly sane and normal, but they are on their way to a mental break-down. This diagnosis rarely fails.
In many cases where writers of anonymous letters are discovered and rounded up it is possible to commit them to an asylum or a hospital. Few can pass the sanity test.
Two thirds of the patients in insane hospitals are confirmed letter writers. Their speech would not betray them but the moment they start to put their ideas on paper the instability of mind is manifest.
Personally, I think it the worst form of “Blackmailing.” In many cases the anonymous letter writer has some shadow of truth, I will admit that we allow ourselves to drift into some very embarrassing positions. (The writer refers to himself) If certain persons close to them learned of their escapades the cost would be great (The writer has received an anonymous letter) The poison pen epidemic is hardly one for the police. It belongs to the medical realm. If it were possible to put the population under the microscope these twisted brains could be easily discovered. Until then they remain the worst of social menaces.
My one hope is that the person that was responsible for the anonymous letter which I received, may look read and weep.
Yours very sincerely,
A BINTULU LETTER.
