VOL. LXI.
No. 935.
The Sarawak Gazette.
Price
KUCHING, Saturday, August 1st, 1931.
20 CENTS.
The Sarawak Gazette.	SATURDAY, AUGUST 1st, 1931.
Contents.
Local and Personal.
July.
The Administration Report for the State for 1930 was published during June, and has now been distributed.
It makes interesting reading, and records a year of gratifying progress in spite of adverse trade conditions.
Mr. Anderson’s arrival was the signal for one of the periodical general posts among administrative officers.
Mr. E. M. Woodward goes to Mukah as Acting District Officer, Mukah and Oya; Mr. N. E. Hughes goes to Oya as Acting Assistant District Officer; Mr. E. H. Elam goes to Lundu as Acting Assistant District Officer; and Mr. R. D. St. John Horton takes Mr. Hughes’ place in the Secretariat.
Mr. E. O. Bruce, who is to act as Resident, Second Division, during the absence of Mr. J. B. Archer, is expected to proceed to Simanggang about the end of the month.
Early on July 16th Mr. J. O. Gilbert arrived from Sarikei by the Chamois suffering from a bad attack of pneumonia.
Mr. Gilbert at present is making satisfactory progress.
Owing to the drop in the demand for turtle eggs, the Datus in Kuching have decided to close down one of the turtle islands in order to allow the turtles to breed.
On Sunday July 19th the Roman Catholic Mission celebrated their Grand Jubilee. Our heartiest congratulations to Monseigneur Dunn and all other members of the Mission whose efforts must surely constitute a record in long and arduous spells of labour under none too easy conditions. Monseigneur Dunn was among the first of the missionaries to join the Very Rev. Father Jackson, who instituted the Catholic Mission in Sarawak 50 years ago.
We all wish him long life and health to continue his work among us for many years.
No account of the Jubilee celebrations of the Roman Catholic Mission in Sarawak can be completed without a reference to the work of Father Haidegger who has been Rector of the Kuching District for a period of 48 years. Church, Convent, Boys’ and Girls’ Schools have been built by the Father and it is fitting that one of his last acts as Principal of Saint Joseph’s School was to enter a class of boys for the Cambridge Local Examinations-this being the first year the School has furnished candidates.
For many years the financial affairs of the Catholic Mission have been in his hands.
It is understood that Father Haidegger intends to reside at Labuan for a while at least after his retirement. He carries with him the best wishes of the very great number of Sarawak people who have come under his influence.
Ad Multos Annos!
In this connection the following extract from the Gazette of 50 years ago is of interest.
“H.H.S. Aline, Capt. Kirk, left for Sadong on the morning of the 3rd ultimo, returned on the 5th, left again on the 14th, for Sibu with Rev. Fathers C. Saleilles, Al. Gossens and Ed. Dunn, returned again on the 19th with the above-named gentlemen, and the Aline left again for Singapore on the 23rd with Mr. C. S. Pearse.” It is also nearly 50 years since Mr. O. F. Ricketts, our senior resident, joined the Sarawak Civil Service.
Mr. Ricketts was appointed a cadet on 6th October, 1881, and founded the Government Stations at Limbang, Lawas and Trusan. He has now been in retirement for 22 years and we congratulate him on his half century in the tropics.
The “War” on the Rejang front has now come to an end, and the troops and their officers have returned to headquarters. It was certainly most considerate of the enemy to surrender in good time for the Races.
Mr. N. E. Hughes has relinquished the editorship of the Gazette on his appointment at Oya. We congratulate him on the efficiency with which he has filled this office and trust he will not lay down his pen altogether when he becomes embedded in the sago jungles of the coast division.
We are glad to hear that Mrs. Horton, who has been very ill for some time, is now well on the way to recover.
It is reported from the Second Division, that the new Government Offices at Simanggang were opened officially at 8 a.m. on July 27th. A telegram was sent to His Highness the Rajah by the Resident expressing continued loyalty and good wishes on behalf of all classes in the Province. A copy of this message together with His Highness the Rajah’s reply will be found in another column.
It takes more than one swallow to make a Race meeting, but several outstation visitors had arrived in Kuching for this event during the month. Mr. Crossley arrived from Matu with his volcanic steed and the Resident Fourth Division, Mr. H. D. Aplin, Mrs. Aplin and Master Anthony Aplin returned from local leave at Fraser’s Hill by the Vyner Brooke on the 27th.
Other passengers on the Vyner Brooke included Surgeon Lieut. R. G. Dingwell, R.N. (of H.M.S. Herald), Mr. W. H. Heyt-man, Mr. F. E. Page, Mr. E. G. Walker of United Engineers and Mr. G. Farelly-Capt. C. P. Lowe, Commissioner of Public Works returned from a trip to British North Borneo on the Marudu on the 27th.
Mr. G. R. H. Arundell came down from Sibu suffering from trouble with his eyes.
He has gone to Singapore to have then seen to and we trust that he will return completely cured.
A case of smallpox has been reported in the Jail at Bau. So far there have been no other cases and it is hoped that the precau-tions taken will prevent any spread of the disease.
“Mirage” No. 11 has made its appearance and continues to improve. There are many interesting contributions and the editorial eye has penetrated to Alhambra (Wis. or III. -U.S. A. anyway) and has disclosed the heart-rending confessions of an exile returned from Miri to his native heath.
For the benefit of those who have not yet contributed to this excellent periodical, we give an extract in this number portraying the modest experiences of an oil hunter in darkest Borneo.
Confirmation of the Dayang Valerie.
We hear Dayang Valerie was confirmed on the 24th June by the Bishop of Willesden at a special service arranged by the Venerable Archdeacon Champion, at All Saints, Margarets Street after Evensong. The Archdeacon and the Reverend Mackay, Vicar of the parish assisted, Her Highness the Ranee, Dayang Elizabeth, Mr. and Mrs. Boult and Mrs. Champion were amongst those present.
OPENING OF NEW SIMANGGANG OFFICES.
The following message was sent by the Resident, Second Division to His Highness the Rajah.
His Highness the Rajah, Kuching.
SIMANGGANG,	27th July, 1931.
We the European and Native Officers Malay and; Dyak chiefs Government servants Chinese traders and representatives of all parts of Your Highness’ Second Division on the occasion of the opening of the new Government offices in Simanggang at eight o’clock this morning tender to Your Highness with very great respect our expression of loyalty and an assurance of the continuation of that close association between the peoples of the Division and Your Highness’ family which has ever been so evident in this province of Sarawak in the past.
J. B ARCHER,
Resident, Second Division.
His Highness the Rajah was pleased to reply as follows: -
Resident,
Simanggang.
KUCHING,
27th July, 1931.
I thank you for your expression of loyalty and good wishes and hope to-day’s ceremony will mark a new era in the prosperity of the Second Division.
C. V. BROOKE,
Rajah.
GRAND JUBILEE OF THE ROMAN CATHOLIC MISSION TO SARAWAK.
On 21st July. 1831, the first Roman Catholic Missionaries set foot in Sarawak. They were under the leadership of the Very Reverend Thomas Jackson and among the first to join Father Jackson shortly after was the Very Reverend Monseigneur Dunn, as we know him to-day.
On Sunday, 19th July, Monseigneur Dunn and all the members of this Mission were gathered together, a rare enough event in itself, to celebrate the Jubilee commemorating fifty good solid years of hard and most productive work. Many Kuching residents were present at the ceremony by kind invitation of the members of the Mission and had the pleasure of congratulating Monseigneur Dunn and many of their friends in the Mission on their splendid record of achievement.
Mr. F. G. Day made a very appropriate speech in proposing the toast of the Mission and announced that he was greatly honoured in being able to read out a letter from His Highness the Rajah to Monseigneur Dunn: His Highness’ letter ran as follows.
ASTANA,
18th July, 1931.
MY DEAR MONSEIGNEUR,
I regret that I am unable to be present at the fiftieth anniversary of the Mission held on Sunday. You have my heartiest good wishes and sincerest regard for this very important occasion. It is difficult to estimate the good that the Mission has done in Sarawak during this period of fifty years, but knowing as I do the sincerity and unostentations devotion to duty of the different members of the Mission, at headquarters and also in outstations and remoter parts of Sarawak territory, I can but congratulate you all on a very wonderful performance. After all good deeds speak for themselves and any further verbiage on my part is superfluous.
With all very best wishes, Dear Monseigneur,
Yours very sincerely, VYNER BROOKE.
Monseigneur Dunn replying to the toast expressed his thanks to His Highness the Rajah, to Mr. Day and all those present for their good wishes and commented on the great pleasure it had always given him to see the work of the Mission carried on amidst such a spirit of friendship and sympathy as had been extended toward their efforts in this country. We feel that everyone will agree that the words expressed in His Highness the Rajah’s letter embody the feelings of all those in this country who have come into contact with the members of this Mission. Their devotion to duty and rare self-denial of all but smallest forms of luxury are indeed truly marvelous.
A notable absentee was the Rev. Father Haldes of Sibu. Unfortunately, his second leave in nearly thirty years service happened to coincide with this memorable occasion.
We hope such wonderful self sacrifice will long continue to reap such rewards as are apparent on every hand to-day.
A Voyage from Penang to Kuching.
To one who is accustomed to travel on land only, a trip from Penang to Kuching, via Singapore, will give unbounded pleasure. It is recommended. however to make the voyage at any time from May to October, during which period the sea is very calm.
The day of our departure having arrived, we make all the preparation necessary for the voyage, and at about 5 p.m. we proceed to the wharf accompanied, as is natural, by relatives and friends who are anxious to wish us Bon voyage. Berthed alongside the wharf lies the vessel that is to convey us as far the capital of the Straits. It is one of the splendid steamers of the Straits Steamship Company. As she is scheduled to leave within a few minutes we bid our friends and relatives a hasty farewell, and scramble up the gangway to the deck, shortly after, the steamer blows her siren, and when the gangway has been removed, she slowly glides away from the wharf.
When she has reached deeper water, the vessel, speeds southwards. The waving handkerchiefs, the crowd, the wharf and the shipping in the harbour; gradually pass out of sight. We next cross three islets off the south coast, and after two or three hours sailing, only the blue hills of Penang which stand in bold relief against the sky are visible, but finally, these too become indistinct. Having had a last glimpse of the “Beauty Spot of Malaya” we shall naturally turn our attention to some other subjects. The sun, which but a few hours ago was an object of not uncommon interest to us, now holds our attention, for it is on the point of setting. There, at the distant horizon, we see it, no longer dazzlingly bright, but a huge red round mass. It seems exhausted after its days work, and is retiring to the ocean bed to rest and obtain fresh vigour for the morrow’s toil. As we watch it, it seems to sink slowly into the sea till, at last, there is nothing but a few streaks of light left to show the place where it has sunk.
Early the next morning we find our vessel entering the Klang River, and after a while we sight Port Swettenham. Compared to Georgetown it is but a gloomy and sleepy port, boasting of a railway station, several godowns, two or three streets and a few rows of houses. As the steamer is remaining in port for eight or nine hours, we deem it necessary to while away the time by taking a stroll round the place in the morning and by spending the afternoon in reading. There being ample time to make a railway or motor trip to Kuala Lumpur and back, most of the passengers eagerly seize this opportunity. At about 6 p.m. the steamer resumes her journey and we spend the second night on board more or less in the same way as the first.
The mainland, which looks like a thin white ribbon fringed by a row of coconut trees behind which rise blue mountains, attracts our attention in the morning. Very few hours have elapsed before we discern the low bills of Singapore a long distance away. Mid-day finds our vessel entering one of the most beautiful harbours of the world-that of renowned Singapore. On disembarking half-an-hour later we discover ourselves in one of the largest cities of the east.
However, we are able to spend only a few hours in Singapore, for at 5 p.m. we tranship on a Sarawak Steamship Company vessel which is due to leave very soon. We spend a day and two nights in the same manner as before, but we see little or nothing of land. At about 10 a.m. on the second day we see many tiny objects on the distant horizon. As time goes on and as our steamer draws nearer, we find that they are small islands, and further away, we also notice a great land-mass stretching as far as the eye can reach. This is the Eden of the Eastern Waves (Sarawak) and the sea containing the islets is the charming Datu Bay. To the right lies the splendid range of the Poe, overtopping the lower, but equally beautiful Gading (Ivory) Hills, while to the left soars the majestic Santubong, a solitary peak rising as an island from the sea. From these hills flow many streams which add to the beauty of the view. But the gems of the sea are the emerald isles that are scattered over the limpid surface of the bay, displaying either their beaches of glittering sand or their lovely foliage drooping to kiss the rippling waves. As we approach nearer, the scene is even more fascinating. There is no prettier spot than the mouth of the Sarawak River, on the right bank rises the splendid peak of the aforementioned Santubong about three thousand feet in height, clothed from its summit to its base with noble vegetation. At its foot, there is a broad beach of white sand fringed with graceful palms waving and trembling under the breath of the faintest breeze. It now needs but two more hours to reach the capital, and during the whole of that time all eyes on board are held spellbound by the beauty of nature’s treasurers. Here indeed is a country delightful to look upon, for it is nothing less than a vegetable paradise.
At noon, the town comes into view. If there has been any doubt about Sarawak before, it now vanishes into thin air at the sight before us. Kuching is a town much smaller than Singapore or Penang, nevertheless, it is about as busy as either of them. Its natural beauty, however, surpasses in grandeur that of the former if not of both. The most conspicuous buildings on the left bank of the river are the Fortress, which is situated on a very commanding position over the town and the Astana or the Rajah’s palace, while on the right spreads the town. As we step on terra firms, we find ourselves in the capital of Sarawak, and we thank the Almighty for having preserved us during a comfortable and interesting voyage.
ST. XAVIER’S ANNUAL,
Penang.
[A correspondent forwards us this article, the work of a Sarawak boy. which appeared in St. Xavier’s Annual, to the editors of which acknowledgements are due. -Ed.]
IN DARKEST BORNEO.
The following account of Perilous Pentetration into the wild Island of Borneo originally appeared in the “Alhambra Post Advocate.”
It gives a rough idea of the hazardous and romantic life of an oil man and his family recently returned from four years of glorious adventure in the jungle village of Miri.
THEY HAVE HEARD THE MYSTERY JUNGLE CALLS.
Home from the Island of Borneo with a king’s treasure!
Not diamonds nor rubies nor sapphires, but spears, knives, fighting shields, gaily colored native hats and coats and baskets, a collection of insects, including house flies as big as birds, flying lizards, and a great big brass gong whose brazen voice has for centuries rang through the jungle, calling together the savage fighting men.
The foregoing is just a brief description of the treasure brought to Alhambra from the courts of the kings of Java, Sumatra, Malay and Borneo by Herman F. Landgraf, well known Alhambra oil man who returned recently with his wife and daughter, Priscilla, and sons, John and Herman Jr. from a five-year business trip in the islands of the magical sea. To really appreciate the interesting curios that literally fill the Landgraf apartment on South Olive Avenue, one would have to spend many days listening to the colorful tales and legends the Landgrafs have to tell about each piece of the collection.
On the day before they were to sail Landgraf received orders to report at Miri in the British province of Sarawak. Borneo. With his wife and youngsters he set sail and found a home in the white colony of the island.
There for four years the Landgrafs lived. Four years of glorious adventure for his sons. His wife and daughter said they enjoyed their jungle home just as much. There one had dozens of servants they said, who washed dishes, prepared the food, cooling drinks, and even picked up your tennis balls.
HAPPY TO BE BACK.
“We are very glad to be home,” said Mrs. Landgraf, “but naturally we’re terribly spoiled with all the attention showered on us by the many servants. Priscilla and I had many interesting experiences and pleasant times with the ladies of the English colony but the boys really brought back the most interesting tales.”
John, 16 years old, and his brother Herman. 14, took many trips into the jungles where few white men and never a white toy had ever been. There they saw many unusual animals, insects, and snakes, wild boars, king cobras, giant pythons, flying foxes and lizards.
LIKE STORY BOOK.
“It was just like, living m story book land all the time.” said John. “We saw so many things that you wouldn’t believe. How would you like to have to swat house flies that are big as birds or go to sleep at night with a lot of lizards climbing up and down the walls in search of mosquitoes that were as big as bees?”
John and Herman both made a study of native habits and customs and can tell many interesting tales related to them by the old natives who sat around the fires outside the village at night and placed on queer musical instruments while far away in the jungle beat the steady bong, bong, bong, of the Dyak tribes engaged in festival dances or may be tuning up for a head-hunting expedition.
HEAD HUNTERS.
“Yeh. we saw a lot of head hunters and a lot of tough old warriors who had cut off many a head,” said Herman. “They were all very interesting. No, we weren’t a bit afraid of losing our own heads. It wasn’t considered an honor to take a boy’s head.”
The boys have many thrilling legends to tell about jungle battles and expeditions made against the islanders by Chinese pirates who still sail the sea in their mysterious junks. John is quite an artist and has a painting or two of the iron-roofed village that he and his folks called home for four years.
The elder Landgraf is planning to return to the Orient in January. The boys and Priscilla must stay in Alhambra and go to school, he says. But the wanderlust in the boyish hearts has been deeply disturbed, and it’s an even wager that the boys will follow in the footsteps of their dad, maybe not this year but soon. -Mirage.
[Mysterious Junk is the word. -Ed.]
Our Bintulu Letter.
It is with the greatest pleasure that I sit down at my Tripe writer and make the attempt at writing you.
What shall I tell you about Bintulu? Is there anything for me to tell? Certainly nothing of the sensational. Murders and suicide are no more and if they were they do not happen in Bintulu, the land of the Just Men.
This is the place where Edgar Wallace founded the book called the 4 Just men.
I do not know where he got the ether two as “Mac” and Bill Avery are the only ones here, but he may have taken some of their booze and seen double.
Business, Sir, is pretty awful but living in hopes is the Motto and Slogan. As long as we can find a bit of “W & S” why worry?
But that is not the point. What about “Robinson”? Poor “Robinson.” they must have a lot of money. Well, Mac and I have just paid them therefore it follows, that their position must be much stronger.
I hope to see you soon-No, not for a drink. I’m not drinking any more, as much, but no more.
Yours as B.4,
Your Bintulu
Co-despondent.
Musings from Simanggang.
There are seasons for everything. For instance the Spring, when girls came out in dimples, and boys came out in pimples. Lately Simanggang has passed through the begawai season.
Erudite readers, or those who have enough money to buy Wilkinson’s dictionary, will no doubt turn to page 561 of that monumental work. Any translation given there, however, will only confuse the would be begawai explorer. In short a begawai is a tight, a binge, a beano, a blind, a bust-where the sober minded get moderately lit up, the steady drinkers really blotto, and the genuine dipsomaniacs working on the Einstein theory wake up with the feeling that it is the morning before the day on which they started.
Especially do newcomers to the Country like attending a begawai. It is true that the guests are expected to bring with them, if not most, at least the more potent part of the liquor. In many ways the savages have the best of us in sound common sense.
It is almost impossible to mistake the house of one’s hosts indeed, for the last half hour, as one gropes one’s way through tangled undergrowth or slides down greasy hills the dull thump of gongs and other instruments of percussion has drummed in our ears. Louder and louder grows the noise as we emerge from the undergrowth and come in sight of the lighted house.
“Inside above the din and fray”
“We heard the loud musicians play”
“The Trues Liebers Hertz of Strauss.”
“Strange mechanical grotesques”
“Making fantastic arabesques;”
“Their shadows raced across the blind.”
The rest of the night is a haze of draught after draught of tuak back up by a pull at the stuff we call whisky now and again. Young Dyak bucks dance with feathered headdress and drawn parang. We danced too. So frantic were, the efforts of the Police Officer that he split his sarong in an awkward place. Venerable old Dyaks tramp for hours round and round the house, intoning a melancholy dirge and hitting the floor with the heels of the sticks. The pangs of nausea overcame the more bibulous at times-and the sounds of immoderate retching ring through the house. Just before the earliest streaks of dawn we fling ourselves on to our hard beds, whilst round and round us tramp the old men. As we were just slipping off into a sleep the moans of the dirge and the agony of the nauseated made a fit accompaniment to our crude couches.
A few minutes later, so it seemed, was the first glimmer of dawn. Past our recumbent forms hurried a procession intent only on reaching the edge of the verandah.
“Then down the long and silent streetl”
“The down, with silver sandled feet”
“Crept, like a frightened girl.”
The latest race in Simanggang is riding the bore-which really means sitting in a leaky boat for half-an-hour in a state of nervous distraction-one second of ecstasy (or real blue funk, according to the performer), and then five minutes in a swift running river hanging on to an overturned boat. Friendly Malays rescue us and right our boat and we paddle home in sodden garments and a fresh evening breeze. Chills, pneumonia, influenza and other possible results are warded off by the stuff that we call whisky nowadays, but which except for its price bears little relation to the real stuff of the happy days before the war.
A number of Malay children in Simanggang have organized a theatrical troupe. It is a most select Green Room Club too, and the chief performers are the coming society ladies and gentlemen of the town.
All Malay plays seem to us alike. There is the Princess who gets lost in the wood. There is the hero, a real cross-gartered Knight, generally two comic leads, a party of attendants on the hero, a villain and his gang, a petty Princeling, perhaps a comic policeman, a number of females who are apparently husbandless and wander round woods at night and a baby or two.
These little performers rely on a lot of fiddle, a noisy clown and a memory for singing innumerable pantuns to keep the play going.
It is best to affect not to hear quite all the clown’s quips-but then who is there old enough who does not remember Marie Lloyd!
The last scene is perhaps the most satisfactory one for the performers. The beauty chorus lines up and any susceptible young man on throwing a dollar, a cent, a brass ring, a stick of toffee or what not at the lady of his choice, has the satisfaction of listening to a solo from the lady in question all about the charms and peculiarities of the donor. As one may expect the warmth of feeling expressed by the singer is in proportion to the article thrown at her feet.
THE OPTIMISTIC FIDDLER.
Matters of Muslim Interest.
We publish below minutes of a meeting of the leaders of the Muslim Community in Kuching, presided over by the Datu Shahbandar. We also give an extract from the Singapore Free Press which shows that the views expressed by the Kuching Datus coincide with those of Dr. Ariff in his speech.
It is certainly reasonable that the amount of money spent, as a rule, on ceremonial by most Muslims should be curtailed to a minimum, at least during the present period of general trade depression.
COURT MALAYU, Kuching, 10th June, 1931.
Bahwa telah di-ada-kan suatu mashurat oleh yang barhormat Datu Shahbandar didalam Court Malayu Kuching kepada hari Juma’at 22 hari bulan May, 1931, dihadapan Datu Datu, Tua Tua Kampong serta ketua’au didalam Kampong.
Maka pada masa itu yang barhormat Datu Shahbandar sindiri manghuri-kan satu satu dari pada shor-nya ya’itu diatas tiga parkara dari pada adat yang biasa yang barkena’an dengan parkerja’an (kahwin, kamatian dan bergandang perempuan) yang dimaksud di-ubah-kan kerana telah di-dapatie sangat-lah mamberi kesusahan dan kebratan sarta mamberi marbahaya juga kerana dinasabah-kan dengan masa yang tarima’alom.
Maka parkara yang tarsebot diatas itu ada-lah dengan partujuan ubahan kepada satu satu-nya dengan jalan yang pindek sahaja, maka tiada sekali kali marusak-kan kahidupan atau mamberat-kan kapada tanggongan, ha-nya-lah semata semata handak mambaikikan jalan kkadidupan, diatas jimat dan charmat yang berat kepada rengan dan yang sukar kapada mudah, sa-nya malainkan mangekot sebagi-mana jalan-nya dengan masa-nya, maka hendak-lah di-majukan dengan pelajaran kanak kanak.
Maka akan partujuan ubahan-nya sudah-lah dibantangkan kahadapan rami sarta di-minta-kan fikiran kapada masing masing.
Maka pada tatkala mashurat itu tiada-lah dapat akan keputusan-nya yang tetap, kemudian diberilah tempoh kapada sekalian ahli mashurat didalam sedikit hari akan manchari fikiran-nya sarta di-kahandakikan jawapan dengan mamakay surat.
Kemudian pada 5 hari bulan June, 1931, maka dihubongkan pula akan mashurat yang tersebot itu kerana hendak manchari akan keputusan-nya yang tetap sarta di-siasat-kan kapada surat surat jawapan masing masing diatas satu satu ampunya fikiran-nya, maka nampak-nya banyak-lah orang yang mampakenan-kan ya’itu lebih dari separoh yang barsetuju kepada parubahan yang telah ma’alom.
Maka dengan jalan-nan yang demikian telah tetap-lah tarpakay akan semua-nya aturan itu.
Bah-kan mudahan-lah kira baroleh kemajuan sarta selamat dan sejahtra dkerna keluasan tujuan shor itu demikian-lah ada-nya.
DR. ARIFF’S LECTURE.
SPEND LESS ON WEDDINGS.
(By Our Muslim Correspondent.)
In the course of an interesting lecture, presided over by Capt. Syed Salleh Alsagoff, J.P. M.B.E., at the Penang Malay Association recently on “Malay Origin,” Dr. K. M. Ariff, J.P., appealed to the Malays to spend less on weddings, funerals, etc. He said that owing to the Muslims unnecessarily and uselessly spending large sums of money on such occasions they are much poorer now compared with some ten or fifteen years ago. He asked that the practice be stopped. Referring to education. Dr. Ariff said that as the Muslims were very backward in the matter of English education, he would ask that the idea of any interference with their religious views be removed from their minds and that better and higher education be given to their children and, if circumstances could permit, to send them abroad for higher studies.
Dr. Ariff has certainly done a great service to the Muslim community in trying to open their eyes to two subjects of very great importance to them, one economical and the other educational. It is quite true that the Muslims are very fond of spending large sums of money on marriage ceremonies, circumcisions and even on funerals. Not only the rich but the poor also follow this practice. When questioned they say they must “ikut adat,” (follow custom). Many a home of the not-so-well-to-do class has been wrecked and the principal bread-earner landed into serious financial difficulties owing to the folly of following the custom. People who spend lavishly and on a grand scale on such occasions are of course the rich but than they can afford to do so. There is no reason whatsoever why the middle class and the poor follow the practice of the rich when they are well aware they cannot afford to do so. In order to practice economy and above all, to spend as little as possible on funerals, marriage and other ceremonies, local Muslims, especially the middle class and the poor, should try to establish an Association on the same lines as the Better Living Society founded, I believe, in Negri Sembilan.
FILMING PROPHET’S TOMB.
The King of the Hedjaz has ordered a new propaganda film to be made dealing with the Prophet’s tomb in Mecca, the holy city of Islam, and the new development made there for the comfort of the pilgrims. The routes to Mecca will also be shown, with the new types of transport made available.
This occasion will be used to give a graphic survey of the rapid advance made by the King in improving the administration of Nejd and the Arabian Peninsula.
The film will be used by the King’s emissaries for propaganda purposes in the latest campaign in favour of Mecca. “Singapore Free Press.”
Future of Rubber.
The fact that the Dutch Colonial Minister has convened a meeting of rubber growers and that a subcommittee has been appointed to draw up an exhaustive report for submission to him may mean much or it may mean nothing, but it appears to have helped to lift some of the depression from the market which, though not disposed to be too optimistic, is nevertheless deeply interested. Apart from the more active trade demand, the better tone of the past week has been assisted by the healthier position in Malaya and the growing indications of definite decrease in estate output. The future of the industry depends to borne extent upon the duration and extent of the pruning. If the process is drastic, it seems clear that when the world demand for rubber recovers there will be something approaching a shortage. If it is not drastic, then what Mr. J. W. F. Rowe calls a veritable revolution in technique, from which the consumer may expect to gain much. Will be delayed and the menace to the European plantation system of the growth of native production may again become a serious factor Mr. Rowe, in a detailed study of the rubber industry prepared for the Royal Economic Society, points out that the difficulties of the past two years have brought European estate costs down to an un heard of level and placed the plantation system on a plane definitely superior to that of the native. Before 1929 it seemed quite conceivable that native rubber production might predominate. The natives had an enormous acreage, their costs, while the European estates were restricting, were relatively low, and their yields per acre relatively high. The last two years of low prices have reversed this position. The increased output of the European estates, following the abolition of restriction, itself reduced their overhead costs and the slump, following soon afterwards, forced economy and efficiency upon managements. As Mr. Rowe sees it, the European states system is now at least ten years ahead of the native, with every prospect of eventual supremacy-
if the inefficient European capacity is eliminated. “In time.” he says, “the native may follow where the European industry is leading the way, but he is at the moment at least ten years behind, and dropping further backwards every day, while if the advance of technique continues more and more rapidly, as is likely he may eventually give up the chase altogether.” The problem confronting the industry, in Mr. Rowe’s view is the speed with which this improved technique can be translated into effective practice. -China Express and Telegraph.
Eastern Fruits in London.
A consignment of mangosteens from Burma arrived in London in good condition last month, and Sir Atul Chatterjee, late High Commissioner for India in London, was moved to write to The Times and say that this marked “the beginning of a new Empire trade.” This was not the first experiment in shipping fruit from the Eastern tropics to Europe, the Dutch having accumulated quite a lot of data on the subject. Mangosteens enclosed in an airtight covering of latex were, if memory serves, sent from Java to Holland several years ago and were received in good condition, but the process was evidently not an economic one. Later experiments made in Java and Sumatra in the shipping of mangoes and pomelos were described in an article in the Malayan Agricultural Journal recently. Of the mangoes the writer said: “The percentage of saleable fruit unpacked differed greatly and probably depends on the amount of care given to picking and packing and on the length of the voyage. The financial results were not unsatisfactory and withsufficient experience a regular remunerative trade might be built up. The wholesale price in the London market is three pence each for the South African mangoes, and the first cost of the fruit should consequently exceed one penny each off the tree. The shipments of pomelos were very successful, this fruit keeping very well in cold storage and ripening well afterwards. Moreover, experiments at Amsterdam showed that the voyage in cold storge had not affected the valuable vitamin contents of the fruit. One must feel doubtful, however, about the possibility of competing with South Africa and the West Indies, and about the likelihood of the pomelo attracting some of the money which is now spent on grapefruit and pineapples. Mangoes and mangosteens from the East might have a better chance, but they could only command a very limited luxury trade. -Straits Times.
Wanted: A Malayan Film.
The film industry is restless; it has to be restless to keep pace with the public demand for entertainment. Just at present it seems to be lagging; there are not enough pictures of sufficient merit to “star” the programmes and there is talk of cutting the programmes down. The fact is the public are wearying of the deluge of “sex stuff” and the appeal of the “star” picture does not now last long enough to pay. Recently, there have been screened some very fine films of adventure in distant lands. A welcome relief from the usual Hollywood hotch-potch, they have taken so well that one wonders why the film magnates do so little towards developing this side of their business. The British Empire especially offers an unlimited field for real effort to provide a well-read public with what it wants. In this connection, Mr. M. Dermott O’Reilly, writing to “The Times,” suggests a film of Malaya. There, he says, the producer would find, in a country ideally suited for film-making, vast stretches of untamed jungle. and of native actors a choice of some 10 different races. Mr. Dermott O’Reilly’s advocacy of a film of, and taken in, Malaya certainly merits consideration. Even a modern “story” woven into the country’s romance of our own time, could be made enchanting and highly instructive. But. as Mr. F Knocker, another letter writer points out, there is ample material available in Malaya’s history since the Renaissance of great dramatic interest. The story or Sir Stamford Raffles alone should make a striking and epic theme, while the exploits of Captain James Lancaster (afterwards Sir James) and his fellow-countrymen in fighting for a foothold in the Malayan spice trade under the ban of Pope Alexander VI’s Papal Bull would surely supply enough legitimate thrills to satisfy the present craze for high tension drama. -China Express & Telegraph.
Local Leave for Cows.
The new dairy farm of the Singapore Cold Storage Company has been talked about so much by learned persons of one sort and another and by the newspapers that the public may be forgiven if it asks us to leave the farm alone for a while. The latest account of this enterprise is, however, the fullest and most detailed that has yet appeared, and it calls for a note in this column. It has been contributed to the July issue of the Malayan Agricultural Journal by Mr. T. D. Marsh, Assistant Agriculturist, who reminds us that this and the Government dairy farm at Serdang, Selangor, are “the only instances of established dairies of European stock situated under such intense tropical conditions.” The results which are being attained at Bukit Timah and Serdang, therefore, are important not only to Malaya but to the whole tropical world; if they prove that European cattle can be kept successfully in the lowland climate of Malaya, and if the Cold Storage Company further proves that the elaborate precautions required in such a climate and environment are not an insuperable obstacle to satisfactory profits, a considerable advance will have been made, in the provision of nutritious food for children, hospital patients and others in the tropics. Mr. Marsh though warmly complimentary of the Bukit Timah dairy, evidently thinks it too early to say positively that the venture is successful in the physical sense. In the past pure-bred cattle imported into this country have nearly always died after a varying length of time from certain fevers, and these fevers do seem to have been largely defeated both at Bukit Timah and Serdang, thanks to such precautions as bathing the cattle three times a day walking them through disinfectant liquids cleaning their hides with electric vacuum cleaners, and spraying the grass used for their bedding with an insecticide. No wonder we are asked to pay thirty cents a pint for milk from Serdang. But even of the attacks of disease-carrying parasites continue to be warded off, as there is good reason to expect, the question of how the cattle will stand the climate is still not fully answered. The Serdang herd has only been in existence eighteen months and the Cold Storage Company’s cattle arrived in October and November of last year. So far, they appear to be doing well, but even a two-legged importation from Great Britain, who is unable to spend his time placidly chewing and allowing attendants to bath him, manages to keep fairly fit for two or three years in this climate. The question is; will the Bukit Timah animals require local leave at a hill station? And will their progeny degenerate? We shall know the answers in a few years’ time. -Straits Times, July 18.
Mainly About Nothing.
Inspired by the appearance of the new Sibu Magazine “Flood Tide” we understand that several embryo authors have burst, into prose and the Printing Office have refused to publish the following manuscripts of would-be books.
Professor Dingleberry is once more to the fore. He has reported the presence of a specimen of the famous Siamese Swivel-footed Swimming Cat in Sarawak.
This feline fury in addition to its aquatic powers is capable of breaking into or out of any building tent or vessel and lives on curry and gula Malacca.
It travels with astonishing speed especially on the Sabbath when it is smitten with such religious fervour that it can travel two miles across difficult country, swim any large rivers in its path, and finally converge on the original point of departure-making a perfect closed traverse-all in the same time as it takes the ordinary common or garden human voice to trickle down a Telephone wire. It is believed in zoological circles that this 8th wonder of the next world has come here at the invitation of the department of Agriculture in order to check the ravages of the Giant African Snail.
This cat is only found as a rule in certain districts of Whatasilliar, Siam.
In these hard times it is perhaps foolhardy to poke fun at those in search of employment.
Nevertheless, intending applicants are warned that the following semi-biblical effusion did not obtain for its writer the coveted post of assistant lamp snuffer (Grade V) in the Municipality of Kam-pong Gelap. Negri Sapuloh.
SIR,
I am a Ceylon Tamil, please.
Being in the lurch apply for yon as for advertised post, per advertisement.
After that I can all the Government rolls, I wish to join a post with you please.
Johnny Rev. Mr. Ramaswami is my cousin now working with you I have a testimonial will produce you.
I beg to inform your honourable all our ancestors are as follows: -
Panchandaroa married Swaminatha gave birth to Siraramonya. Siraramonya married Toonya Ram gave birth to Ransurdas. Ransurdas married Ramakistuya gave birth to Ananthanatha gave birth to Alimuddi married Ramachaya gave birth to Sarsaparilla (so it appears) who married Vishonoo gave birth to servant Venkataswami Naika.
I am ready. I come at your earliest call. Consider please my humble qualification.
Hoping you on an early reply,
Your humble servant,
V. K. NAIKA.
If this gentleman’s genealogical table is correct there seems to be a bar sinister on the dapor side round about the days of Ananthanatha. This is perhaps the reason he did not get the job. One has to be so careful when engaging lamp snuffers.
We read in the home papers that a certain gentleman interested in the habits of cuckoos has heard fire of these bipeds calling simultaneously on a Golf Links near his home. He should attend a whist drive. No fewer than fifty specimens can be heard quite distinctly.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 60 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 22.] TUESDAY, 1st AUGUST, 1871. [Price 5 Cts.
ITEMS.
We hear a rumour which we fear is too well authenticated that the Schooner Courier lately the property of the Borneo Company has been lost on a reef on the Java coast. Besides a cargo of cattle, sheep and ponies, she had a thousand dollars in specie on board. Her present owner is Tambie Abdullah, and she is uninsured. The wreck has been sold by the Dutch. The crew and some of the cargo were saved.
The King of Siam is said to be anxious to extend the telegraph to his dominion. A line to Saigon or along the Coast and across the Malay Peninsular to Penang is suggested.
It is said to be under consideration at the Colonial Office to establish a Court of Appeal in the Straits’ Settlements. Sir Benson Maxwell is reported to be willing to return if he is appointed Judge. £4.000 a year is spoken of as the probable amount of salary attached.
LABUAN.
We print side by side a passage from a speech lately made by Mr. J. Pope Hennessy at Labuan, and the Consular report of the trade of our settlement for 1889 supplemented by our statement of its value for 1870. Facts always speak for themselves; and a study of statistics is usually held to be me safe way of arriving at a good opinion with regard to the trade and progress of a country. A visionary scheme does not generally stand the test of time and figures, as ours has done: -
“The policy promulgated thirty years ago by some enterprising and benevolent Englishmen, that the Dyaks could be civilized. and that Europeans could conduct the details of trade and administration in the rivers of Borneo has proved to be visionary.”
Address of His Excellency Governor Pope Hennessy to the Legislative Council of Labuan on opening the Session 10th June, 1871.
The commercial reports of Her Majesty’s Consuls in 1869-70 have just received an addition in a volume which contains the reports from Sarawak and Saigon. From the former place Mr. E. J. Marten, under date 11th May, 1870, announces a great increase in the trade of 1869 as compared with 1868. The exports in 1868 were £446,348. In 1869 they rose to £734,174. and in the same space of time the imports rose from £401,395 to £614,361. The Coast trade also increased in similar proportion and the outports did a steadily progressive trade with one another, and with Singapore and China. The Cinnabar mines worked by the Borneo Company are reported as fairly started, and the antimony mines as yielding good ore in fair quantities. -London and China Express.
N.B. -A reference to the Sarawak Gazette of 28th February, 1871, will shew that these figures represent dollars and not pounds sterling, and that they declare the amount of the foreign trade with England, Singapore and other Eastern ports, exclusive of const trade. The figures for 1870 are 1,404,241 dollars for Exports and 1,328,963 for Imports; shewing that the increase of trade, which we humbly conceive is also a sign of good administration, is still progressing.
The despatch from Bintulu reveals the fact that the trading difficulties raised by Brunean Pangerans have not disappeared; but that the people are beginning to think of acting for themselves in getting rid of the outrageous system of imposts and confiscations practised by the Sultan’s officials. The neighbourhood of our territory, where these things ate unknown, is a great temptation to some of the oppressed people on the Baram and adjacent rivers, to migrate bodily. Some political trouble might be the result of such a movement on their part, but unquestionably it would be for their own good to change their quarters.
Sarawak Library.
The following books have been purchased by the Committee: -
First Division News.
June, 1931.
Extracts from the First Divisional Reports for June, 1931, by Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division: -
Resident’s Court. -No criminal cases came before the Court during the month. Four civil claims the value of which amounted to $6,000 were dealt with.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
June. 1931.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports: -
District Court. -Twenty-five cases were heard. All were civil. The civil claims involved amounts totalling $7,064.25 for which fees collected amounted to $230.50.
Magistrate’s Court. -One hundred and two cases were heard, sixteen of which were criminal end eighty-six civil. Of the sixteen criminal cases, all were convictions. Fines imposed amounted to $118.50 and fees collected $33.50.
Police Court. -Twenty-two summary cases were brought before the Court. Twenty-one convictions and one acquittal were adjudged. A total amount of $55 was paid in fines.
Judicial. -There were no criminal cases of im-portance in the Court during the month. There was an interesting civil case, the Official Assignee versus Sim Ah Khin (f.). The Plaintiff was claiming a quantity of furniture for the estate of Kueh Ah Jee (Towkay Panjang) which defendant alleged had been transferred to her. After a long and interesting hearing a decision was entered for defendant and plaintiff gave notice of appeal.
Staff. -Abang Haji Zulaihi was appointed Native Officer, Class I to Samarahan during the month and left on a tour of inspection of the district on the 8th.
General. -The control of the Batu Kawa markets, nightsoil collection, assessment, etc., was transferred to the Municipal Department at the month end together with the relevant files and votes.
UPPER SARAWAK, BAU.
June, 1931.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. M. Wood-ward. reports: -
General. -The anniversary of the birthday of His Majesty the King on the 3rd instant was observed as a public holiday and the Government offices were closed on that day.
On the 5th instant eleven doors of Kampong Pedaum were destroyed by fire. An ex-gratia payment of $5 per door was paid to the eleven families concerned.
The Resident, First Division visited the station on the 21st and 26th instant and on the 27th instant His Highness the Rajah, Mr. and Ms. Hayward, Mr. and Mrs. Pitt-Hardacre, Miss Heywood, and Messrs. Hughes and Trechman arrived from Kuching as the guests of the Resident returning thither on the 29th instant. During his visit here His Highness the Rajah inspected the new gold mine at Siburan which is now being worked by the Bidi Gold Mining Company and expressed satisfaction at the progress made since the mine was opened last January. On the 28th instant some of the party visited the Bidi Caves. As a result of being recently repaired by the Government carpenters the ladlers leaning to the Caves were found to be in excellent condition.
Survey. -On the 30th instant the Assistant Superintendent of Surveys. Mr. D. L. Leach, arrived from Gunong Undan on the summit of which mountain he has erected a new trigonometrical station.
Telegraph and Telephone. -Owing to the reduction of staff it has been decided to close Bau Telephone Exchange between the hours of 7 p.m. and 7 a.m. in as from the 16th August, 1931, after which date the usual telephone service will be in operation during the day but at night the only existing direct trunk line from Kuching Telephone Exchange will be connected to the Bau Police Barracks and the trunk line from Kuching via the 7th mile Police Station and Siniawan Exchanges will be connected to the District Officer’s bungalow.	,	,	,
Gold Mining. -501.81 ounces of actual gold valued at $17,437.90 were obtained by the Bidi Gold Mining Company during the month of May, 1931. Royally on this gold amounted to $1,569.41. The daily average number of men employed by the Company during May was 194. It is satisfactory to note that the Company is doing so well.
Rainfall. -Highest recorded in 24 hours 1’04 inches; daily average ‘19 of an inch; total for month 5’79 inches.
LUNDU.
June, 1931.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. M. Woodward, reports: -
General. -On the 3rd instant I walked overland from Bau to Stungkul from whence the next day I proceeded by boat to Lundu where I met the Superintendent of Lands, Mr. C. S. Griffiths, and the Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Mr. N. Mace. The former had arranged to meet me at Lundu in order to investigate land affairs in that district.
Visitors to the station during the month were the Director of Agriculture, Mr. J. S. W. Bean, the Coconut Field Officer, Mr. Dare, the Assistant Treasurer. Mr. F. L Mansel, and the Right Reverend The Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak and Mrs. Danson.
The anniversary of the birthday of His Majesty the King on the 3rd instant was observed as a public holiday and the Government Offices were closed on that day.
Land. -Land affairs at the station were found to be in a deplorable state and as a result the issue of new titles has been temporarily suspended. It is considered that this procedure will inflict no hardship on the inhabitants few of whom, it is thought, are contemplating planting at the present time. Persons who hold no titles for gardens which have been surveyed are permitted to carry on for the time being without titles.
Agriculture. -It is reported that the padi crop is poor this year owing to the ravages of pests.
Simatan. -On the 8th instant Messrs. C. S. Griffiths and Mace proceeded by the overland route and by boat via Ulu Serayan to Simatan with a view to inspecting the land in this district which was reported to consist of gardens, open country and rolling hills and appeared to be admirably suited to cultivation.
SADONG.
June, 1931.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. J. J. Hill, reports: -
Court. -The Court work during the month has been very high and only one case calls for mention; Mit bin Brahim was sentenced to three months imprisonment for assault.
On the 28th instant a Malay miner working in the upper seam mine was crushed to death by a stone weighing nearly 2 cwt. falling on him in the main level. A verdict of accidental death was returned.
Medical. -A serious outbreak of influenza starred early in the month but owing to good work by the Dresser-in-Charge it was soon under control.
Land. -I inspected sites for the proposed Srian bazaar. The site finally selected is some two hundred yards from the true left hand bank of the Sadong River.
The site of Mringgu. -Bedup land dispute was visited and on my next visit upriver I propose to put in billian boundary posts.
The Tarat-Ris dispute was also visited and it would appear clear that the Ris Dyaks have over-stepped their boundary.
Agriculture. -On the 1st instant the Director of Agriculture, Mr. J. S. W. Bean and the Coconut Field Officer, Mr. G. St. Dare visited the station with regard to the Bugis Concession. They left on the 3rd for Nonok.
Travelling. -I left for Tebekang and district on the 18th and was still away at the end of the month.
General. -The 3rd being the anniversary of the birthday of H.M. King George, the offices were closed. His Highness the Rajah accompanied by the Resident, First Division, Mr. J. C. Swayne and the Superintendent of Surveys, Mr. N. A. Middleman, arrived off Sadong on the 10th in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna.
His Highness and party went round the Kampongs and New Small-holdings Road in the late afternoon. On the 11th His Highness sat in Court and granted numerous interviews. In the afternoon the Colliery was visited. His Highness and party left at 5.30 p.m. for Simanggang.
On the 18th Mr. J. K. Beasley returned to Kuching via the Simanggang Road.
Trade and Customs. -Comparative trade returns are as follow: -
During the month fourteen vessels entered and sixteen cleared the Port.
Native Affairs.
June, 1931.
Extracts from the Report of the Secretary for Native Affairs, Mr. P. M. Adams, for June, 1931: -
Mr. Ditmas was attached to the Department temporarily and made a tour of the serious kampongs and reports that with few exceptions there is no undue suffering owing to unemployment,
The collection of 5% on Mohamedan estates by the Native Officers was definitely abolished.
A scheme of registration of Mohamedan marriages was discussed with Tua Kampongs and approved. Mr. Arundell arrived from Kanowit with some Dyak Chiefs to discuss the recent Dyak disturbances in that district. His Highness the Rajah was prepared to concede most of their demands so there is no need for the Dyaks to continue their defiant altitude. It was later however found necessary to send Rangers to patrol the district.
The new Dyak passes are now ready for issue.
Abang Haji Zulaihi made a tour of the Samarahan district.
The Datus and Tua Kampongs were shown over H.M.S. Bridgewater and were very impressed.
Two Malay members of the board of visitors visited the Leper Camp to inquire into two cases of breach of camp discipline.
As it is impossible to find a market for all the Turtles eggs produced it has been decided to close down one of the Islands and allow the Turtles to breed.
A meeting was held at the land Dyak village of Skrak on the 28th at which Pengarah James was unanimously elected as the head chief of the Sentah district with the title of Ketua’an Orang Kaya.
Sadong Collieries Report.
June, 1931.
Extracts from the Sadong Collieries Report for June, 1931, by Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager: -
The output, export, local consumption. and coal stock figures for the month were as follows: -
His Highness the Rajah and party, consisting of Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division, and Mr. N. A. Middleman, Superintendent of Surveys, visited the mines on the 11th, when all matters concerning the policy, and progress of the department, were discussed.
A high percentage of the mining Kongsis were infected by an epidemic form of influenza, which had a lowering effect on the month’s production.
A working member of Mandor Dillah’s Kongsi, one Omar bin Sabid, Malay of Kampong Nanas was accidentally killed by a fall of stone from the roadside of the main upper seam level on the 27th. His partner, Elias, who was pushing a train with him along the level escaped unhurt.
The rainfall for the month was 3’97 inches.
Inter School Football.
Two match between St. Joseph’s School and St. Thomas’ played on the Padungan Ground on 10th June, resulted in a win for the latter. Score 2 goals to 1. St. Thomas’ School is therefore the holder of the Shield for the year. The original Shield, having been won for three consecutive years by St. Joseph’s School, remains in their possession.
Kuching Football League.
Although they have one more match to play, the Rangers have already made themselves safe to win the League, having lost only one match whilst all other teams have lost at least three.
The Runners Up will be decided in the Rangers-K.F.C. match on 8th August. If the K.F.C manage to win by a fair margin they have chance of becoming Runners Up, failing which the Rovers will occupy this position.
During the course of the League the Land & Survey and the T.T.C. & S. have each on one occasion failed to field a team and the points in each case have been awarded to their respective opponents.
The Land & Survey have been unlucky to lose all their matches. They have been severely handicapped throughout by the fact that their team is drawn from men whose duty calls them to all parts of the country and on many occasions they have experienced great difficulty in getting together a team.
A copy of the League table to date is given below.
Second Division News.
June, 1931.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Report, for June, 1931, by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident: -
His Highness the Rajah, who was accompanied by Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident First Division, and Mr. N. A. Middleman, Superintendent of Survey, arrived at Lingga in the morning of the 12th, and transferring to m.1. Betty reached Simanggang at 2.30 p.m. His Highness was received by myself and the Datu, and after inspecting the guard of honour furnished by the Police under the command of Assistant Sub-Inspector Awang Joini, His Highness met the rest of the European and Native Officers, a large number of Malay and Dyak chiefs, European unofficial, and leading Chinese.
The next day His Highness sat in open Court in Fort Alice where many Dyaks spoke to His Highness on matter, concerning themselves, and made the usual request. On the 14th His Highness paid private visit, to various persons and inspected the town.
His Highness left at day break on the 15th and reached Kuching the same afternoon. I accompanied His Highness back to Kuching and returned to Simanggang on the 19th.
Owing to reports I was obliged to call upon Penghulu Nyaiom of Sebuyow to resign his appointment. He is too old to be held responsible for various irregularities which have taken place His successor has not yet been appointed.
Mr. W. G. Tait was in Simanggang for a few days inspecting the Wireless station. Mr. O’Hara arrived during the month to do duty as Assistant Forest Officer in this Division.
During the whole month there has been friction between the traders and pepper gardeners in Engkilili. I went up there on the 30th and had a mass meeting but achieved few results. The matter has attained serious proportions, but obstinacy and hysteria on both sides prevent intelligent discussion.
The new Government office, at Simanggang are nearing completion and mechanics from Kuching finished the strong-room.
On the 20th Haji Ukah, the wife of Awang Sepudin, Native Officer, gave birth to a son. This is Datu Haji Dulrashid’s first grandchild.
In the Resident’s Court there was only one case, but I sat in the District Court on two occasions owing to a shortage of Magistrates.
Dyaks matters are still rather disturbed owing to the attitude of Asoon and his followers in the Third Division. A few Layar and Krian Dyaks have undoubtedly joined Asoon. It is possible, however, that their attitude is one of inquisitiveness rather than rebellious.
Preparations are being made for the next padi harvest.
Whilst was in Simanggang Mr. Middlemas inspected the Survey offices and noted the good work which Mr. Harnack has done.
On the 24th a detachment of Sarawak Rangers under the command of Company Sergeant Major Lallak arrived or temporary duty in the Division. This force was divided into three and sent up the Ulu Ai, Ulu Layar and Ulu Krian.
SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
Extract, from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hudden: -
There were three criminal charges in the District Court and civil claims amounting to $594.69.
In the Magistrate’s Court there were six criminal charges, civil claims amounted to $254.78.
Many people were effected by a mild form of influenza that is is apparently sweeping the country. In fact, for about one week, in Sebuyow no work was done at all. Every Government official was confined to his bed.
On the first of the month the Native Officer, Lingga reported that the Court House kitchen, had been burnt down It was. apparently, merely a matter of chance and the direction of the wind, that the Court House itself did not catch fire as well. A special vote has been granted and the erection of new kitchens is now in hand.
On the 8th Andrew Law, Stores and Monopolies clerk, Simanggang, absconded with a number of opium tubes and Government each farm rent that had just been paid in. He borrowed the Dresser’s bicycle-found later at Nyaksi-and made for N.E.I. territory by the Undup road. Extradition papers have been made out, but, so far, nothing has been heard of him.
On the 18th, the Dresser went up to Engkilili to investigate reports of a dysentery epidemic. He was away some days and unfortunately, during his absence, the Reverend A. W. Stenton met with a serious accident whilst visiting the Mission station up the Skrang. He fell off a log and fractured both ankle bones, and it was two days before he arrived in Simanggang. He went off to Kuching on the first tide in m.l. Elizabeth.
ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Officer-in-Charge. Mr. S. G. Hansom: -
I went up to Lubok Antu on the 24th instant returning on the 24th instant. There was one case only.
On the 26th instant a detachment of Sarawak Rangers, under Company Sergeant Major Lallak, arrived at Lubok Antu. These men have now proceeded up river, and are to be employed in preventing Dyaks travelling overland from the 3rd Division, and vice versa. I have arranged a system of guides, in order that I can keep in touch with these men.
During the month, I have called a succession of meetings between the Bazaar Towkays and representatives from the respective pepper garden areas, with a view to arriving at some agreement between them regarding the very large debts owing to the Towkays, under agreements to supply foodstuffs and provisions, which, when unpaid, are carried forward from year to year, with a high percentage of interest added, and which in some cases are assuming such large proportions, that there is very little hope of their reduction, unless the price of pepper rises considerably.
A standard price, based on Kuching market figures, with an agreed percentage added, has been agreed, for the sale of foodstuffs and commodities to the gardeners, but neither side are able to come to any agreement touching the accumulated debts of past years.
On the 30th instant the Resident, Second Division arrived per m.l. Anne, accompanied by Datu Abang Haji Dulrashid, and a final meeting was called, in which the Resident pointed out to both parties that the Government was unable to help them unless each side was prepared to accept a share of the depression caused by the fall in the price of pepper from previous years.
On the 25th instant Mr. K. E. Parker, Divisional Land Officer came up to Engkilili. Mr. Parker spent a few hours in the office and then returned to Simanggang per m.1. Anne.
The Gold Workers at Marup report that they have not had any striking results to date, but supplies of dynamite, etc., now having been obtained, they intend to commence blasting operations, which they hope will lead to more favourable results.
SARIBAS DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Acting District Officer. Mr. R. L. Daubeny: -
The following cases were heard during the month.
Jon, Jeni and Abang sentenced to two months’ imprisonment each for non-payment of fine $22.14. One assault case dismissed Lai Chuan vs. Ah Thiam, both parties being ordered to place pledges in Court of $50 each for security for six months. One theft case adjourned. A Chinese by name Soon Tak was convicted of being a Vagrant under Order V-I and temporarily detained. Various civil claims were heard.
The substations were visited from 19th to 21st instant.
A squad of Sarawak Rangers under Corporal Jenang arrived here on 24th instant and left for upriver Ulu Layar on 25th and 26th instant in two parties. Pengarah Isek, 2 Policemen and 10 local Dyaks accompanied them. They are to form patrols among houses on the bonier in order to prevent people entering and leaving the district.
New Post Office Savings Bank Accounts for the month amount to approximately $15,000.
KALAKA DISTRICT.
Extracts from the Report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. L. K. Morse: -
The only cases of importance settled in the Criminal Courts during the month were, Seo Fook Yong four months and $50 or three months under Section 323 I.P.C. and Section 8 part II Order No. A-2, 1931, respectively, and Sah, Dyak two months under Section 447 I.P.C.
Litigation in the Civil Courts was small, the only case of interest being the Ming Sin School vs. various subscribers, the claim being for subscriptions due.
During a quarrel about a debt, a Rimbas Dyak Ngindang by name, and a Chinese Seo Fook Yong, had a serious fight in the Ulu Babang. The Dyak got the worst of the argument and was severely hurt. The Chinese escaped taking with him the Dyak’s gun. Some Dyaks aided by Haji Sensussi, Tua Kampong, eventually succeeded in persuading the Chinese to give himself up. He was duly dealt with by the Court.
I visited Kabong and Roban from the 10th to the 12th instant checking the boos and cash at both Stations. Court was held at Kabong. I was pleased to see that the general appearance of the Roban station had improved. A prisoner has been placed there to assist the police in the upkeep of the Station.
Kabong was again visited on the 19th instant, and again on the 23rd.
A detachment of Rangers arrived by the s.1. Lucile, on the 24th instant. They left for the border on the 26th in charge of Awang Sepudin, Native Officer, I have ordered them to proceed to the Budu-Kabo district and attempt to stop all ingress and egress between the Divisions.
Mr. W. G. Tait, Superintendent of Telegraphs and Telephones, visited the station on the 12th instant. During his visit Mr. Tait arranged that Wireless Operators should visit the Offices daily for instructions in postal duties with the view of eventually taking over the work of that Department.
A new Telephone post about seventy feet long was obtained and erected on the true right hand bank of the Krian on the Debak line.
The pupils of the Government Malays School, Saratok at the end of the month numbered sixty-six. The School is to be known in future as Sekolah Abang Abdul Rahman.
The School at Kabong is to be known as Sekolah Abang Leman who of course is very well remembered.
An Inspector from the Education Department visited Saratok to inspect the Chinese School here.
Work on the Kampong roads continued during the month and the conversion of the Fort quarters into Offices was completed. The reconstruction of the No. 1 Police Barracks was still under way at the end of the month.
The m.l. One was out of commission from the 16th to the 29th.
Comparative trade returns for the month are appended: -
LAND OFFICE.
Extracts from the report of the Land Officer, Second Division. Mr. K. E. Parker: -
On the 3rd instant, as stated in my previous report, I returned from Maludam along with Assistant Land Inspector Mohamad Latiff.
This dispute has now been satisfactorily settled.
On the 13th instant in the course of a “hearing” granted by His Highness to Dyaks the questions of the issue of free land was raised.
In the light of His Highness’ statements this question was later raised by me to the Resident, Second Division. Orders were given to await further written instruction from Kuching.
During the month a complete list of Inspections not yet made, was compiled and arranged in groups convenient for examination. Thus collected together; outstanding work has a truly formidable appearance and dates back to 1928.
Work for the present however, is being hunted to the large number of 1931 applications still outstanding.
Fourth Division News.
May, 1931.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports for May, 1931, by Mr H. D. Aplin, Resident: -
Resident’s Court. -Beyond two appeal cases from the District Court Civil, no other cases call for special mention.
I visited Sibuti and Niah from 11th to 15th. I bicycled to Sibuti where the going was quite good along the sands to Tanjong Batu, but some difficulty was experienced in going round the cliffs as the tide was in. At both stations everyone was complaining of the hard times. Padi is very cheap but the Towkays, on orders from their head shops in Miri, are refusing to purchase in large quantities. This is all to the good. My time at both places was chiefly occupied in attending to claims on judgment summonses, but as most of the debtors are natives without property it is impossible to enforce payment of their debts. Creditors, who are now feeling the pinch, are partly to blame for this, since during good times they make no effort to collect their debts but rather encourage further advances as long as they are getting jungle produce in exchange.
In future regular monthly visits to these stations will be made by a Government Officer.
During the month the District Officer of Baram visited the Kelabits living in the ulu Medibit. He was to meet the Acting District Officer from Lawas and had permission to return via Limbang to discuss Kelabit affairs on the Limbang-Baram boundary with the Resident, Fifth Division. He has since reported to me that some of the Kelabits are well over on the Limbang side of the border and will therefore come under the Fifth Division for jurisdiction.
News was received from Sibu that 50 Dyaks from the Mapai, B. Rejang, had left across country without passes. It was suspected that their intention was to try and reach Miri with the idea of getting over to Johore. Bintulu and Baram were warned. The District Officer of Baram has since informed me that some Dyaks have been seen in the Muh ulu Baram and that P. Tama Wan Bayar and about 200 Kayans have gone off to investigate.
The band of the Sarawak Rangers arrived on 19th. Unfortunately, several members developed influenza soon after their arrival. This sickness is now very prevalent in Miri and the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited. Hospital is full of influenza cases.
On the 29th H.M.S. Bridgewater arrived to bunker at Lutong. She departed for B.N.B. the same day.
BINTULU.
May, 1931.
The Acting District Officer. Mr. A. Macpherson, reports: -
Court. -Fines amounting to $245.30 were imposed during the month.
Dairy Farm. -The herd numbered 49 head at the end of the month. Condition is good. One cow died.
Travelling. -I spent one night at Sebauh, dividing my time between looking for a suitable site for the Seventh Day Adventist Mission and the Foochow padi farms.
I went up-river again on 26th to visit Tubau and Sebauh natives, but was recalled on 29th to meet the Flying Boats, and had to abandon the trip. I arrived at Bintulu on night of 30th.
General. -The Foochows have not made a concerted effort to grow padi, only some 20 have really got going. The rest apparently prefer to carry on with what their vegetable gardens produce.
Trade and Customs. -The last cargo of the s.s. Auby was searched under personal supervision to see whether there were any attempts to evade Import Duty.
Rainfall. -The rainfall for the month amounted to 15’72.
BARAM.
May, 1931.
The District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
Court. -In the Magistrate’s Court Balu Lemat (f.) of Long Lobang was fined $50 for breach of Sibop custom thereby causing the house to brea up. The fine laid down is $100 but it was agreed by the Penghulus that as Defendant is not well-off the fine might be reduced.
Native Affairs. -Hassan, Government Agent, Long Lobang, Penghulu Tama Tiri and Penghulu Tingang Saong came down in connection with the Long Lobang case.
Travelling. -On 1st I returned from Long Lama having handed over the property deposited by the L. Palai Kayans as security for building a new house.
P.W.D. -The carpenter practically completed the new offices. A contract was signed for the upkeep of the Poyut Road at $26 per month. The grass on the new padang is coming up well and it should be well covered in two or three months.
Prisoners. -The prisoners averaging twenty-one men were engaged in the usual upkeep of the station.
Medical. -One hundred and five out-patients and five in-patients were treated during the month, all the in-patients being discharged during the month. Thirty-eight out-patients were treated under the Professor Harrison Smith Fund, thirty-six N.A.B. injections being given.
Rainfall. -4’13 inches of rain fell in 14 days.
MlRI.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports: -
Courts. -Court work was exceptionally light during the month.
There were four Coroner’s Views. And an Inquest on a Chinese woman who was found hanging in her house a verdict of suicide whilst of unsound mind was recorded.
No case calls for special comment.
Health. -Anti-malarial work at Tanjong Lobang was specially undertaken; but despite these efforts one European and one Malay were infected and were taken to hospital.
One case of chicken-pox was reported from the Kampong and quickly isolated.
New type belian dust bins were installed throughout the bazaar replacing and the old soft wood type which were highly unsatisfactory and expensive in upkeep.
Monopolies. -On the 8th I proceeded to Lutong to make inquiries as to how heavy opium smokers were able suddenly to give up smoking. The cause appeared to be that such smokers had heard a rumour that opium smokers at Lutong were to be given notice by the Company.
It was arranged that all sales of opium at Lutong would cease, and this was put into effect from 16th when Mr. Morice took over all stocks and books at that station.
Municipal. -Assessment of houses in Kampong China area, which has newly been acquired, was taken in hand and finished during the month. This will provide a little over $1,000 per year revenue.
Outstations. -These were visited by the Resident who, on his return, made arrangements that they be visited during a regular period every month to avoid congestion of Court work.
Prison. -Prisoners averaged daily 50.29 and were generally employed on their usual routine and in levelling at Tanjong Lobang.
Public Works. -A contract was signed and work started on a new block of Sikh Warders barracks. This was progressing well at the end of the month.
General. -The Sarawak Rangers Band arrived on the 19th and their performances have been enjoyed by all.
An inquiry was opened concerning certain charges against Forest Guard Jaya; but this was still adjourned at the end of the month.
