VOL. LXII.
No. 941.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Monday, February 1st, 1932.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette	MONDAY, FEBRUARY 1st, 1932.
Marriage.
HAYWOOD-TRECHMAN, On Saturday, 3rd December, 1931, at St. Thomas’ Cathedral, Kuching, the Rev. G. T. Shetliffe officiating, between Mr. Bertram Alfred Trechman, youngest son of Sir. and Mrs. A. F. Trechman of “Kiora” Stockton-on-Tees, and Amelia Sylvia, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. F. C. Haywood of “The Wade” Tillingham, Essex.
1931.
At the start of 1931 we looked forward optimistically to a general improvement in trade throughout the world. Here is 1932 and, as optimistically as ever, we look into the future still with the hope that things are so bad that they cannot get worse.
His Highness the Rajah left for England on the 10th August, His Highness the Tuan Muda arriving on the 17th August. Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee, the Dayangs Elizabeth and Valerie returned to Sarawak on the 28th December. This event marked the last appearance of the Band, the Sarawak Rangers, which in the interests of economy, was disbanded at the end of the year.
With regard to trade, it is difficult to contemplate the year 1931 without realising a sense of depression, and it is perhaps safe to say that during the year no one escaped its effects. In commenting on the year 1930 it was then remarked that it was during this year, that the full effects of the general depression in trade were first felt. It is perhaps sufficient to add that during the year 1931 this depression became more acute and its influence on the life and affairs of all, more pronounced, perhaps especially so to the native races of countries like Sarawak, coming as it did after some years of marked prosperity, now frequently referred to as a period of inflation. The year 1931 will be described universally as a year of difficulty and uncertainty.
Sarawak is naturally to a great extent dependent upon its resources in agriculture and jungle produce. In all commodities a further marking down in prices is to be recorded and, perhaps with the exception of pepper, all values are lower than they have been since the slump of 1921-1922. Towards the close of the year there was some recovery, but at the end of the year prices generally were still below those ruling during the previous year. This position is indicated by the following table of market quotations in respect of some of the principal commodities exported from Sarawak: -
We understand that it will probably be another month or more before the trade statistics of the State are ready for publication, but it is certain that there will be found to have been an all-round decrease in values. With exports the decrease in quantities have not been so marked, in some commodities the difference has been small and even a few, particularly pepper, are expected to show an increase in quantity. The articles which are expected to show the greatest decrease are cutch, due to the Island Trading Company having stopped working their Selalang factory throughout most of the year, tuba, owing to Messrs. MacDougall and Robertson having closed down, and sago flour, owing chiefly, it is thought, to the very low price and consequent unremunerative working that prevailed for a period of the year. Refined jelutong is expected to show a material drop, but raw jelutong may show a slight increase. Regarding imports, dutiable articles, especially the more expensive brands of tobaccos and cigarettes and spirituous liqueurs, and benzine, kerosene oil and matches are expected to show a substantial decrease. As a result of these greatly reduced values and smaller imports Customs revenue is expected to show a further decrease, estimated at $250,000, as compared with the previous year.
While signs were not wanting toward the close of the year that some improvement had started, and possibly a somewhat brighter outlook prevailed than earlier in the year regarding prospects of a revival in trade, it has to be admitted that the year closed on a dull tone, with everyone glad to see the last of it and hoping for better conditions in the year just starting. While Sarawak has suffered and the purchasing power of the native has been greatly reduced, it can still be said that Sarawak has not been as badly hit as many places.
At the end of August the price of rubber, one of Sarawak’s largest exports, touched a new low record-2 1/4 in London and 7 1/4 cents in Singapore.
The end of 1930 and the beginning of 1931 saw a large crop of engkabang or illipe-nuts come into bearing, but the price fell away to such an extent that it became hardly worth while collecting, and it is estimated that much more was left to rot than was collected and exported.
With the advent of a National Government in Great Britain, with an unprecedented majority and with the hope of a balanced budget, an impetus to trade and some recovery and general stabilising of prices was expected, but the end of the year came without much change being noticeable. Great Britain’s abandonment of the gold standard in September was probably a material factor in the trend toward slightly higher prices.
During the year work on the Malay Mosque in Kuching was started. It was originally intended to rebuild the Mosque entirely, but owing to lack of funds this was found impossible, so it was decided to renovate the old building. The work was started in May and was still unfinished by the end of the year. The building, when completed, will be most imposing, the old roof being replaced with a high dome.
Abang Haji Halil, Datu Imam, died in May after a long illness. Abang Haji Morshidi was appointed Datu Imam in his place, and Abang Haji Moasili of Limbang was appointed Datu Hakim.
With regard to public works, new construction on the Kuching-Simanggang road was confined to the section Sungei Sadong to Rasso Pass, a distance of approximately 5 1/2 miles. No permanent bridges or culverts have as yet been erected on this section. Considerable work has been done on the road between the 10th mile and Sungei Sadong; temporary bridges and culverts having been replaced by permanent structures and the general grading of the road greatly improved.
A new Malay College at Jawa Road No. 1, an imposing building with its playing fields and gardens, was opened. The new Police Station was completed and stands at the corner of the road opposite the Government Printing Office. New Government Offices were erected on the site of the old Police Station. A new wing was added to the General Hospital for European patients. At Simanggang, new Government Offices have been built, also a school and a bungalow as well as a new school at Kabong, whilst at Sibu a new Chinese school has been completed.
Earthwork in connection with the reconstruction of the Pending Road is in progress as relief work for our unemployed.
The activities of the Agricultural Department were directed largely with a view to encouraging the natives of the State to be self-supporting. Owing to the fall in price of rubber many small holders have had to abandon their gardens and turn to other means of obtaining a livelihood.
Thus the planting of padi has been greatly stimulated and throughout the State much larger areas are being cultivated under rice than in recent years. During the current year the whole of the Second Division has been traversed and all padi areas, both cultivated and potential, have been roughly mapped and reported on, as well as large blocks in the Third Division.
Four demonstration plots have been commenced in the First and Second Divisions, where padi is being grown under improved methods of cultivation.
As to pepper cultivation, the systematic inspection and registration of gardens is not yet completed, excepting in the Second Division.
The quality of pepper exported has improved to such an extent as to cause a special demand to spring up in foreign markets for “Sarawak Pepper.”
Systematic field work in the most important coconut belts has been successfully accomplished, and a vast improvement is noticeable.
Special areas have been reserved for coconuts, and in the Moyan District, an extensive Government drainage scheme has been carried out.
The Agricultural Station at the twelfth mile, Kuching, has attracted a number of visitors, and numerous inquiries were made for planting material, of which a very large quantity has been distributed throughout the State. This Station is bordered by the site of the New Government Dairy Farm, which runs from the Penrissen Road to the new Simanggang Road. The stock of the old Dairy Farm is to be transferred to the new site during 1932.
Local and Personal.
January.
His Highness the Tuan Muda arrived from Simanggang by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on 14th January, 1932. His Highness walked over-land from Sibu to Simanggang. An account of His Highness’ tour appears in our columns.
Her Highness the Ranee, accompanied by Dayangs Elizabeth and Valerie, left for Sibu by the H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on 29th January.
Mr. D. H. Daly, of the Sarawak Steamship Company, arrived in Kuching from Singapore on s.s. Vyner Brooke on 1st January. Mr. Daly has been to Hongkong on furlough.
We welcome back to Kuching Mr. and Mrs. B. A. Trechman who returned from Hongkong, where they have been spending their honeymoon. Both bride and bridegroom looked in the best of health in spite of the bad weather we understand they experienced during the voyage. By the same vessel returned Mr. P. H. Hayward who had been spending a short leave in Singapore.
Mrs. Middleman and daughter left for England via Singapore. By the same boat Mrs. Reynolds and children proceeded to East Africa via Singapore. Mr. L. N. Reynolds accompanied Mrs. Reynolds as far as Singapore, returning to Kuching on 22nd.
Mrs. Chater returned to Kuching in s.s. Darvel on 28th January. Mr. Chater was detained in Singapore on business and is expected to arrive by the next boat.
We have received the third birthday number of Mirage and strongly advise our readers to subscribe to this most interesting and amusing publication. It includes many absorbing articles and is brimful of photographs and other illustrations.
Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident, Fourth Division, paid a short visit to Kuching, returning to Miri per s.s. Margaret on 25th January.
Mr. E. V. Andreini passed through Kuching on his way to England on furlough, sailing by s.s. Vyner Brooke on 25th January.
The Office of the Secretary for Native Affairs has been removed from the Balleh to the old Chartered Bank premises situated near the District Office.
“Talkies” have started at the Globe Theatre, Khoo Hun Yeang Street. We have attended several performances which were very enjoyable and much appreciated. The acoustics of the theatre hall are not good but are being improved by various methods.
Extract from report by His Highness the Tuan Muda on the Sibu “Aum” concerning Dyak Custom and visit to the Upper Kanowit and Entabai districts.
In accordance with Your Highness’ instructions, I arrived at Sibu on the evening of the 30th December, 1931. The Resident. Third Division, Mr. C. D. Adams, the Secretary for Native Affairs, Mr. P. M. Adams, and the Travelling District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, came aboard the Maimuna to dine and notify me of the progress of arrangements.
Every Penghulu of the Third Division, except Penghulu Semada, who was sick, had come down, their number being 37 in all. There was also present a great majority of the heads of Dyak houses, even from outlying districts, and the policy of staging a regatta as an attraction for the Dyak proletariat was abundantly justified. Over 1000 Iban came from the Kanowit district alone, and the total number must have exceeded 4090.
I found the ground had been well prepared, as the Resident and those assisting him had devoted three whole days to this work, and had managed to complete the matter, much to my relief, save for the final ceremony.
It had been impressed on the Penghulus and Tuai Rumah that the rumours of Government interference with tribal usage were purely illusory: the trouble lay with the Dyaks themselves, who were at variance as to what constituted breaches of their own customs, so that Your Highness had summoned this aum at Sibu, in order that the matter might be thoroughly threshed out, and definite uniformity arrived at amongst Penghulus, Tuai, and anembiak throughout the Division.
A list had been drawn up of all controversial customs and penalties: each clause was separately debated with Penghulus and Tuai, and when concord had been achieved, these were sent away to announce the fact to their followers and to invite: any criticism or suggestions. On their return any I slight alteration that was considered expedient was incorporated in the final draft, which was then agreed upon by all to be binding for the future.
My official landing was made on the morning of the 31st December, when I went direct to the temporary bului erected for the purpose. Penghulus were on the dais, and Tuai Rumah in the body of the hall which was open on all sides, in order that all anembiak assembled in Sibu might be able to bear the final aum.
Penghulu Dalam opened the proceedings with a speech announcing that uniformity had been achieved, and the Resident then read out the clauses in detail, setting forth the agreed penalty for each offence. No voice was raised in dissent.
I then, in a very few words, announced that I was there as Your Highness’ agent, to inform them that this gathering was called in order to assist the Dyaks themselves to achieve uniformity with regard to their own customs, and that they were not to pay any further attention to rumours as to Government interference with ancient usage. They were all now in concord, and must follow out the procedure agreed upon, and not go off and change their minds again.
There were no “incidents” to mar the success of the meeting, and perfect urbanity prevailed amongst the different Dyak tribes represented; many of these being hereditary enemies whom it would have been folly to trust in close proximity, even ten years ago. This in spite of the fact that during this day, and the following one when the actual regatta was held, the weather was bad enough to put a severe, strain upon the most equable temperament. Torrential rain descended almost without intermission. The padang was flooded, and comparatively few can have had a dry stitch upon them during the whole of the time.
Meanwhile there was naturally a good deal of inquiry about probable procedure with regard to Asoon and his adherents. It was realized that he alone, is responsible for the rumours in the ulus, far distant from regular intercourse with Government, that old Dyak adats are being interfered with; and that for many months past he has been engaged in definite propaganda with the object of undermining Government authority in order to achieve his own ends.
Mr. Cutfield had recently made a visit to the disaffected district, and ascertained that the actual mischief was confined to comparatively few houses, but that many others in the neighbourhood were “sitting on the fence.” These were perfectly local, so long as their loyalty did not incur too great a strain, and expose them to attack by a maniac who had been sending out spears decorated with charred wood and spent cartridges, in order to impress upon the recipients what they had to fear from him if they should incur his displeasure. Asoon had also made advances (which were contemptuously rejected) to lending Penghulus in the Second Division to unite in assisting him to become the general leader and spokesman of the Dyaks through-out Sarawak.
Asoon refused to meet Mr. Cutfield on his trip through the district, as he has consistently refused to meet Government representatives. He vanishes during these visits, and then returns to renew his campaign of lies and terrorism. He has even broadcasted the ridiculous story that Government has never desired to hear what he has to say, and a meeting would be merely an excuse to catch and kill him.
After a flying visit to Kapit in the Maimuna with the Resident, Penghulu Temonggong Koh, and the Penghulus of the above-Kapit districts, where I took leave of the latter, I returned to Sibu, whence Mr. Cutfield and I started in the outboard motor launch Bujang Rimba on the morning of the 7th January for our cross-country trip.
About four hours saw us to the mouth of the Kanowit river, which had risen to such an extent that it was feared a further two days rain would result in the whole bazaar being swept into the Rejang. Here we picked up Abang Ahmat, Native Officer, Kanowit, and Pengarah Nylambong, who were to accompany us as far as the border of the Second Division.
(Before I left Sibu T. R. Gani of the Igan offered to make one of the party, on the grounds that if he did so, it would probably encourage Asoon, who is a connection of his, to meet me. It was impressed upon him and others, by the Resident, that I was not after Asoon, although if he did appear I would hear what he had to say and he would be immune from capture. The object of my trip, however, was purely to display the confidence of Government in the people of a district which had obtained the unmerited reputation of general disaffection owing to Asoon’s machinations. Therefore, as Gani had nothing to do with the district, his presence there was unnecessary.)
The night of the 7th was spent at Balaiong’s house, Nanga Machan, which we left the following morning at 7 a.m., having still a fierce current to contend with in the Kanowit, but on approaching the mouth of the Julau it was seen that this stream sent up and failed to return, was entirely responsible, its flood water was sweeping right across the Kanowit, banking it up above this point to an extent that made it practically motionless. Our progress thereafter was considerably faster, Bunyah’s house, Kerangan Manok, where we spent the night, being reached at 4 p.m.
Here we were met by the district Penghulu, Manggi. Both he and Bunya assured us of the loyalty of the local Dyak houses, but said that they themselves were afraid of Asoon, who had made it known that he would be waiting at Nanga Menus to air his grievances personally to me on our passage through the Entabai next day.
On the morning of the 9th we changed from the outboard into light temois. Mr. Cutfield went a few hundred yards ahead of me in a small open boat with Penghulu Nylambong as steersman and five other paddlers, in case of any signs of treachery after entering the Entabai.
Passing the point that Asoon cleared some six months ago, with the boast that it was there that he would offer resistance to any Government body attempting to interfere with him (and it was here, incidentally, that Mr. Cutfield, with a small unarmed party found it convenient to have their midday meal not long afterward), a halt was made at N. Munus at 5 p.m. and information received from the house there that Asoon was very ill in the next house up that tributary, so was unable to come to meet us. A message taken by Abang Ahmat that he was to come down immediately, produced him and his four brothers, after a local envoy had been
They were ordered to follow us to Penghulu Endo’s house, where, after the evening meal, Asoon was asked what he had to say.
It was no sick man who spoke. He had seated himself in the shadow of a pillar, so that his voice came out of the darkness, beginning, in a loud truculent tone, an exposition of the matters wherein Government was, in his opinion, at fault in the enforcement of penalties for breach of custom. He was then informed by Mr. Cutfield that this was no aum on customs: he was there to give an explanation of his own attitude during the past two years, if he cared to do so, and to be told that he must now, in any case, give himself up at Sibu on trial for sedition, or stand the consequences of refusal.
Asoon replied with a torrent of invective directed at Mr. Cutfield, amidst which it emerged that he would stand his trial if I would guarantee his being let off with a fine, however heavy, but otherwise matters were as before, and he would resist any action by Government with whatever force he could muster: he was not there to talk to Mr. Cutfield, but to me, as the Rajah’s representative.
Mr. Cutfield waited for him to finish, and then quietly gave him a ten minutes lecture on his behaviour and personality in general. He told him that he was merely a loud-mouthed braggart and a liar, who had been successful up to a point, but now even his fellow Dyaks whom he had originally deceived knew him for what he was. Asoon was, somewhat to my surprise, effectually silenced, and there were no murmurs of dissent from his brothers or from the representatives of the seven Entabai houses who had originally declared themselves as his adherents.
I wound up the proceedings by informing Asoon that he was now thoroughly discredited, and exhorted him to go to Sibu or to come with me to Kuching, as he must stand his trial, and the longer he stood out the worse it would be for him. I said that he had lied in saying that Government was in the habit of breaking its promises to Dyaks. If this were the case it would be a simple matter to have him taken there and then, but as I had promised that, if he came to meet me on my way through, he would not be captured, he was free to depart again until Government took such steps as were considered advisable. If he came up for trial, he would serve his sentence, and after it was over he could live in comfort again amidst his family: if he did not, he would he a hunted man, with every decent Dyak house closed against him. Even if he came down to see the Rajah, I felt certain that the latter would order him to stand trial, but, since he had spread the ridiculous lie that Government wished to seize and execute him, although he has, on this occasion, committed no murder, I would guarantee that any sentence he might receive would be one of imprisonment only.
I spoke in Malay and Abang Ahmat translated my remarks.
He left the house soon after daybreak the following morning, but his brothers and the heads of the seven previously disaffected houses remained behind long enough to tell the Abang that they were sick of him and his tactics and were quite ready to acknowledge their guilt and put themselves in the hands of Government. Whether they do so or not remains to be seen: in any case it is obvious that Mr. Cutfield’s lecture sank into the gathering.
All five brothers are men of outstanding personality, and each has had a good many heads to his credit, during the “good old days,” no particular squeamishness having been displayed in the manner of their collection.
It seems to me that Asoon thought he would probably be captured that evening, in spite of the promise that had been given, and intended to put up a fight first in the faint hope that some of his former friends might join in, since those watching from behind say that he had laid his gun in a handy position and had two small daggers struck in the back of his loin-cloth.
He might easily have turned tail instead of following us to P. Endu’s house, but by so doing he would have labelled himself as a coward in the eyes of the few adherents he may have left, and it is possible that his brothers had already been making pointed remarks earlier in the day on the discrepancy between his vaunted bravery and his unwillingness to keep his own appointment, at the mouth of the tributary, until he was fetched down.
The following day, 10th January, we started at 8 a.m. in light boats, but left them to walk the last six miles, in order to save time, to Chanang’s house, Ulu Pouk. arriving at 5 p.m.
On the, 11th we crossed the divisional border, a walk of 2 1/2 hours taking us to Rawing’s house, N. Penebak. Thence half an hour’s walk and 3 1/2 hours boating took us to Talap’s house, where we stayed the night.
Leaving on the 12th at 8 a.m., we proceeded down the Saribas river in easy stages, changing boats from house to house. Shortly after leaving Kana’s, at Batu Lintang, we met the Acting Resident, Second Division, Mr. E. O. Bruce, who was on his way up stream. Thinking that we had stayed the night with Rawing and would therefore be an extra day on the road, he had thoughtfully come equipped with provisions in case we might have run short.
The outboard motor Rita was waiting at Andieng’s house, Ensurai, and we reached Betong, where we stayed the night with the District Officer, Saritas, Mr. R. L. Daubeny, at 4.30, proceeding to Simanggang the following day.
Two incidents that occurred on the trip may be mentioned. In the Kanowit, just down stream of the Entabai mouth, an old woman signalled to my boat from the bank. On my drawing in to hear what she wanted, she presented me with a couple of eggs and said she had heard we were on our way through, and had come down to impress upon me the state of fear the women of the district live in owing to the proximity of Asoon, as no one knows when he may carry out the threats he is so fond of uttering.
At Chanang’s house, a neighbouring Tuai reported that one of his anembiak had lately joined Asoon. He had been fined by the Penghulu for a proven offence and taken this action in deliberate defiance of authority. Probably at the moment Asoon’s real following consists only of hotheads of this description who declare themselves on his side from motives of vanity, with a view to impressing the girls.
Certainly the general feeling is strongly pro-Government. Our reception everywhere was warmhearted and sincere, and if we had spent the night at every house which clamoured for us to do so, we should have been several weeks on the road.
Pengarah Nylambong was invaluable in haranguing the assemblies during the nightly aums as far as the Divisional bonier and, save on the one occasion, there was never a dissentient voice.
Pengarah Isek, and Penghulu Sujang, of the Saribas, accompanied us through from Sibu. They took no part, save that of listeners, until they arrived in their own division, when they came out strong in impressing upon their own people that they had seen for themselves the rumours of general disaffection in the Entabai and adjacent district are entirely without foundation.
Asoon is a relic of olden time, who would welcome a return of the unsettled conditions which preceded the organized suppression of head-hunting.
Few of his kidney are still extant, but it must be realized that such as there are constitute a nucleus of disaffection for any up-country Dyak who may labour under some imaginary grievance against Government, which perhaps he may be unable to air before an Administrative Officer for several months, except at the trouble and expense of a journey of many days duration.
The following extract from a recent report of Mr. Bowen Summers, Divisional Land Officer. Simanggang, clearly shows the difficulties that beset a Government which has to reconcile modern methods of administration with the consideration due to a loyal uneducated populace: -
“In every house visited. Land Routine, as much as possible was explained, such as the difference between Permit to Plant, Garden Registration Certificate, Application Slips, Occupation Tickets, etc.
“It is regrettable that they should have no little knowledge of this routine, and it appears that a more or less house-to-house campaign would greatly help to solve their difficulties, which arise through lack of understanding.”
Small pin-pricks, such as the court order of a substation clerk that a fine is due for non-payment of tax by a certain only dimly-comprehended calendar date, become serious wounds when discussed and debated in the absence of a European officer, who by a little good-natured banter on lack of energy in paddling would cause the trifling sum to be handed over amidst general hilarity, and would have the power, which the clerk has not, of remitting the fine if he were satisfied that a genuine effort had been made, but that delay was due to floods or other adverse circumstances.
The policy, approved by Your Highness, of erecting shelters at various places throughout the Third Division, where local Dyaks will assemble from time to time to meet a Travelling District Officer, has their warm approval, and might well be extended throughout the country if the Administrative Staff admitted of it. Unfortunately, pressure on the various centres, in the shape of correspondence, returns, litigation, etc., tends to drive most of the available Europeans to office routine.
I submit, with diffidence, the impression that Sarawak has perhaps gone too quickly in superseding the old rule-of-thumb methods by modern machinery, in a laudable effort to come into line with its more civilized neighbours, and that this policy is liable to cause a line of cleavage between Europeans and natives adjacent to Government stations on the one hand, and the really rural population on the other. This should be avoided even at the cost of some loss in apparent administrative efficiency. It is only by travelling and living amongst the people that officers of this Government can acquire such sympathy with their character and requirements as has hitherto succeeded in gaining and bolding their loyalty and affection.
Kuching Wedding.
The wedding took place on Saturday, 3rd Dec., 1931, at the Cathedral, Kuching, of Miss Sylvia Haywood and Mr. Bertram Trechman. The ceremony, which was held at the early, but cool hour of eight o’clock, was performed by the Rev. G. T. Shetliffe. Miss Tait was the bridesmaid, Mr. A. L. McLaine the best man and Mr. J. C. Swayne gave the bride away.
The bride was simply but charmingly dressed in a beige tussore suit with beige hat to match, and she wore a large spray of carnations. The bridesmaid wore a very becoming black and white flowered gorgette dress, with a black and white hat.
In spite of the early hour most of the Kuching ladies and a good many of the men attended the Church; but I think it may be said that the community flocked in full force to the subsequent reception. This was held on board the Vyner Brooke, by the courtesy of Captain Benfield of the Sarawak Steamship Company.
The health of the bride and bridegroom was drunk, the wedding cake sampled, and the happy couple looked radiant as their numerous friends filed up to congratulate them.
The Vyner Brooke sailed at 9 a.m. bearing Mr. and Mrs. Trechman off to Singapore whence they were to proceed to Hong Kong for their honeymoon.
We wish them every success and happiness in their future life.
Will Rogers.
Will Rogers appears to have passed across the face of Asia, leaving a trail of wisecracks in his wake. He let loose a lot of good ones here under the influence of Rotarian hospitality. Here are a few more culled from some of the brief 50 word daily messages for his syndicate of 400 American newspapers-to say nothing of Senator Borah, Chairman of the U.S. Foreign Relations Com-mittee, and the man with guts, to use Will’s own picturesque phraseology:
“I’ve decided it wasn’t Horace Greeley who advised young men to go west-it must have been a Japanese.
“The pound, yen and dollar have gone down, but nothing has sunk so low as diplomacy.
“If I was interested in trying to solve world problems, I would not have left the United States as we have sufficient at home.
“The Koreans are Japan’s “Chosen” people.
“Harbin was a failure because they only had enough cabarets to run me and the bald-headed American Consul till five o’clock and my train didn’t leave until 8 o’clock.
“On the way across the Pacific I saw a Scotch golf professional knock six balls away out into the ocean which leads me to believe the depression is about over.
“I am coming back to Japan some day and am going to bring Mrs. Rogers and show her the geishas That shows how old I am getting.
“I’ve seen more pictures of old Fuji-yama than I have of Al Capone and Aimee McPherson. -Singapore Free Press.
Silent Clogs.
The Topicist is in a position to announce this morning that the salvation of the rubber industry is not coming from America, or even from Mr. Parry Davis. It is coming from Lancashire, and the lassies of the County Paletine are going to do it. No longer will the cotton mills and dear old Bolton’s streets re-echo to the music of the wooden clog. The silent clog has arrived in Lancashire with rubber taking the place of iron on the soles. -Singapore Free Press.
Press News.
Professor Eliber Thomson, General Electrics wizard, has found a death lure for mosquitos that would be perfect if the female of the species were not more wary than the male. Discovery of a device that imitates the hum of the female mosquito hires millions of males to death, he says, but the female won’t give it a glance. And the sad part is the female is the one that stings. All that is now needed is for someone to tune a motor to sing in the barytone of a male mosquito, and the problem is solved.
Golf Stories.
Golf stories never seem to end and some of them are calculated to make the average fisherman green with envy. Following a report from Buluwayo of how a golfer’s ball teed up ready for the drive, was struck by a pulled ball from another fairway, comes a very much “taller” story from Australia. Mr. W. Lewis, a well-known local singer, was playing on the Mosman Club’s links, Sydney, and laid himself out to drive a screamer. The ball a promising smack to square leg-flew straight to where Mr. Jack Mitchell was standing with a ball in his hand. Mr. Lewis’ ball struck the ball in Mr. Mitchell’s band. When the latter had recovered from his astonishment and shock he found he was feverishly clutching Mr. Lewis’ ball while his own ball lay at his feet. If it had only been one of those new balls which start whistling when struck, and go on whistling until found, it might have struck up “Oh! What a Surprise.” -Straits Times, Jan. 5.
Lido Lunatics.
In the opinion of Dr. Toulous, the well-known mental specialist, drab every day clothes are the worst thing for neurasthenics and he therefore proposes to dress his patients in the gayest sort of Lido pyjamas. Mr. Paul Poiret, the famous dress designer, has been called in to advise on the best kind of clothes to be worn by lunatics, and the result is confidently expected to be the brightest asylum in France. This tends to confirm our suspicions about some of the Lido pyjamas and, their wearers so often seen nowadays. -Straits Times, Jan. 15.
Some Borneo Dogs.
Who ever heard of a dog called the Slithy Tove? Yet such a one existed in Borneo, a huge fellow resembling a mastiff whose devotion to his master was his one claim to distinction, for the Tove in other respects was nothing but a large and placid idiot. His master, to everyone’s sorrow, died and the dog passed into other hands but he cannot have survived his beloved master for long. Between them they made a colossal pair-B weighed something over 16 stone and the Tove was no light weight; I can see them now clambering across the gunwale of a native boat and nearly upsetting her, or barging into the crowded anteroom of the club, the Tove supremely indifferent to the fact that he was on forbidden ground, safe from ejection as long as his master was there. As time passed the Tove acquired one other distinction-he walked. I heard of this from a coloured gentleman whom I had told to come up and see me late one evening. He begged to be excused on the ground that having seen a ghost once on the road to my house he wasn’t risking another encounter. I pressed him to tell me of his experience, which he was quite ready to do. He had never known B and the Tove, yet he gave me a most accurate description of them both, the big Tuan in wide Malay “baju” and flapping Chinese trousers, a great dog following closely at his heels; the light from his bicycle had shown them quite clearly for a second or two and then they had vanished. Borneo is rather famed for its spooks and its people for seeing them, so the story did not surprise me and I liked to believe it true that that devoted couple were re-united and
free to take their walks abroad in their favourite haunts.
I don’t think I ever know a D.O. who didn’t possess a dog. Some fellows kept a regular pack of them, whose principal joys in life were to clear the garden of any chance visitor and hunt everything from the native dogs to the terrified fowls that scratched behind the Chinese shops, with always a wary eye on the look out for the Tuan and his troop of devils. Casualties occurred and were always promptly paid for before being handed over to the cook. One often had a “pensionaries” or two, the property of someone on leave, and these visitors too frequently caused one anxiety and distress by taking sick and dying whilst one’s own mongrels continued in the rudest of health. The wealthy and ambitious used sometimes to bring dogs out from home at vast expense, but the English-bred dog was not cut out for life in the East and most of the aristocrats fell early victims to the climate or to the ravages of the tick. I well remember seeing some beautiful Irish terriers, the pride of their master and the envy of his neighbours, petted, spoilt and fed regardless of cost, dragging themselves about on ever weakening logs. So it was with dogs that came up from Australia. At one time there was a positive craze for well bred dogs from “Down Under” and some one in Sydney was making a very good thing out of the latest Borneo fashion. Amongst others, a Dutch planter got a beautiful black greyhound bitch, and from her subsequent litter I became the proud owner of Slim Piet. Piet was as black as the ace of spades and. once weaned, grew like a beanstalk. As he grew he became more and more attached to me and unfriendly to strangers, especially to natives; he was enormous and a most terrifying fellow to a people unaccustomed to dogs of his size and colour. What trouble he would have eventually led me into I cannot say, but his career was cut short, as were those of all his brothers and sisters, none of whom ever grew to their full size and strength. I took poor old Piet on a long march across the plains of the West Coast only to find that I had taxed his strength too far.
The Dutchman from whom I had him also possessed an enormous bull terrier called Jack. We white men always got on well enough with Jack but woe betide the Chinese coolie who entered his master’s compound, and any passing “kerbau” was lucky to escape Jack’s notice; he loathed “kerbau” and nothing pleased him better than to get a good hold on to one of their hanging lips whilst the wretched animal pounded up the road trying to shake him off. An escapade that got Jack into serious trouble was his keeping an important Government official trembling under cover of a hibiscus bush for the best part of a wet night. The visitor, unable to sleep, had taken a cigarette out into the garden. In the house Jack was quite accustomed to white men dressing themselves up in native costume and wagged a, friendly salute to the “sarong” clad figure that passed across the verandah and out into the garden. It began to drizzle and big black clouds came sweeping across the sky-a figure with flapping “sarong” came hurrying across the lawn. “G-r-I-r-r,” said Jack from the shelter of the porch. “That’s all right, Jack old man, its only me,” only produced a rather more business-like growl from the porch. Sarongs next move forward was one too many and Jack really began to get nasty. The drizzle turned to heavy drops and the drops to a regular drencher; Sarong retreated to the only cover in sight, a hibiscus bush, whence he called loudly for his host but called in vain, for the master slept at the back of the house and the, sound of the rain alone was enough to drown those plaintive calls for help. He punctuated his appeals for help by cursings and cajolings of Cerberus who did no more than turn over in his sleep and growl a gentle warning. At last, soaked to the skin and shivering with cold the prisoner succeeded in rousing the household and Jack, once he saw his erstwhile enemy in company with his own master, was ready enough to fawn but all he got was. to his mind, a most undeserved thrashing.
Our police barracks in Jesselton were a happy home for dogs of all degree. No stranger was too ugly, too dirty or too ill-bred to be turned from the hospitable doors of one or other of the officers of the constabulary. When the troops paraded one generally saw the combined packs dashing in and out amongst the ranks, yelping at the noses of the fretting ponies or conducting a combined attack on some unfortunate passer-by.
The whole or part of each pack generally accompanied their master wherever he went, whether to the club, where they did their best to murder other peoples’ pets, or out to dinner, when they took complete possession of the house to which they had not been invited and arranged themselves in picturesque poses on their host’s chairs or sofas.
On the whole the D.O.’s dog had the best of things. He had a whole district in which to roam where it pleased his master to go. He spent long days on marches which provided all sorts of delicious and exciting episodes, not the least of which were endless and never wearying chases after the terrified herds of cattle that never failed to stampede at the sound of his fierce barkings. In the evenings there were always lots of delicious titbits from the camp table in addition to the huge plateful of rice and meat that so hungry a hunter made short work of. -Singapore Free Press.
The Lay of the Last Dragon.
In Borneo that mystery land where once I chanced to stray,
Down where the snakes and crocodiles and orang outangs play.
While the jungles deep appear to sleep, yet teem with seething life.
And a man takes home a head or two, as presents for the wife.
I chanced upon a group of four, seated about a board, With eyes so keen and furtive mien each scanned a secret board,
And the age old lore of all the east writ large on every face,
Although ‘twas hot I shivered, it was a fearsome place!.
They spoke both low and seldom, and in a tongue unknown
To me at least, I doubt not ‘twas some gibberish of their own
Or yet perchance they murmured incantations to some God,
In any case it made the general atmosphere more odd.
Soon! Soon! the tension grew space all faces showed the strain.
At last a lightning movement! What disaster in its train?
But one young “Mem” looked upward, her smile both broad and bland,
“Gee! That’s the stuff to give ‘em, Mah Jong-a limit hand!!.
PENDEK.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 55 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
1877.] TUESDAY, 16TH JAN., 1877. [Price 5 cents.
The year 1876 having ended we may record a few of the leading incidents which now pass into a part of our history. It has not been an eventful year nor a very prosperous one-but certain embryos have been laid which if fostered will turn to great account. The first and principal one is, the start agriculture has taken and which everyone seems eager to keep up. The influx of Chinese for this purpose and the stimulus and example such an extra and active population must give cannot be overrated. The returns of trade, although not yet made up, will not show much if any increase on 1875, and the revenue will show only an insignificant advance. The Farms for 1877 having been sold at an increase of 15 per cent will bring about a more marked result at the end of this year. Important changes were passed in the Supreme Council held in February for the collection of duties on primitive produces. These have been in force since the 1st of July and are working well without having the effect of crippling trade and activity. The tramway to the coal mine in Simunjan has been remade with permanent rails and a locomotive on which the Government has laid out 4,000. The mine now will export at the rate of from 3 to 600 tons a month and the saving in the carriage to the shipping wharf is computed at as one to ten. The new barrack, have been completed and roads have for the most part been metalled with slag the remnants of smelted antimony at Busu which lies in heaps of thousands of tons. It forms a hard surface which no amount of our traffic can wear through-and has the advantage of keeping down vegetation, therefore is economical. No perceptible increase has been made to the Town.
The Borneo Company are improving the appearance of the place by building handsome brick arched two-storied offices in the place of their former ruin.
The prices of trading produces of the country have lately risen, the consequence is that Gutta and India Rubber are being brought from the jungles in greater abundance.
The Paddy farms promise to be most productive, more so than for many years past. The Government made a rapid and successful expedition against the Katibas Dyaks in October which has had the effect of bringing those inhabitants to a state of submission-and this we hope and expect will be the last expedition for many years. The Resident of Batang Lupar writes in middle of December to say that there is not a single rebellious Dyak living in his district-and this may be said throughout the territory, although there may be some almost unknown wild tribes in the interior of Rejang some of whom live in trees and migrate and meander about as wild animals in search for food. The gradual encroachment of commerce will be the only means of improving their condition, namely by producing wants.
Our inland station ‘Balleh’ has now about 20 Chinese shops. The year 1876 has proved that this place will answer the ends of collecting interior trade for which it was first intended. The Dyak inhabitants at first showed hostile signs against such a central position being held by the government but lately they have submitted and are active in supporting improvements.
The Chinese gold workers both of Upper Sarawak and at Marup have had a far better year than formerly-their general system is to obtain gold by surface washing, but latterly some have taken to crushing quarts with hammers and are successful in getting a fair remuneration even by this slow method. A gentleman who had been employed in the Chindras mines had an opportunity of seeing the Upper Sarawak quarts reefs and pronounced them of far greater value than those at Chindras. At Marup, the surface washers obtained 90 bungkals of gold ($8,000) at one opening of their ‘parit.’ The plan is to have one water course or parit through which they wash the soil with the gold into a pond which they open or empty to collect the deposit once every 5 or 6 months; besides this, they have smaller parits which they open every month the latter are supposed to provide sufficient for their wants of livelihood-and the large one comes in for a profit. There are 200 men employed in the Marup kongsi and their gold fetches a higher price than any other owing to the dark colour of it.
A new road is being constructed from the Rock to the Quop, and materials are being collected for a new fort. The advance is slow but we may hope sure, and perhaps safer for being so.
Coal is in store at Finding for men-of-war, but none make their appearance. The last called in the month of June.
Sarawak Library.
Kindly presented by His Highness the Rajah: -
Kindly presented by Mr. R. J. S. Davis: -
Purchased by the Committee: -
First Division News.
RESIDENT’S OFFICE.
December, 1931.
Extracts from the Divisional Reports for December, 1931, by Mr. J. C. Swayne. Resident, First Division: -
Resident’s Court. -Four civil and one criminal cases came before the Court.
Chai Koon Eng alias Lee Ah Koo was convicted of house-breaking under Section 454 I.P.C. and sentenced to a term of imprisonment.
Their Highnesses the Rajah and Ranee with the Dayangs Elisabeth and Valerie returned from England on the 28th December, 1931, and held the usual reception at Astana on their arrival. The occasion was memorable from the fact that the Sarawak Rangers Band made its last official appearance.
The offices were closed during the Christmas holidays. I was absent at Sadong during the month on work connected with the closing of the mine.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
December, 1931.
The District Officer, Captain R. E. Le Sueur, reports: -
District Court. -Seventeen cases were heard, one of which was criminal and sixteen civil. A case was brought by Tan Tiang Hin against Neo Chong Hok for cheating, under I.P.C. Section 415, which was dismissed. The fees collected amounted to $4.25. The civil claims involved amounts totalling $3,139.50 for which fees collected amounted to $87.
Coroner’s Court. -Inquest into the death of Drahman bin Makol (Malay) reported killed by falling tree at Tanjong Bembam, Kuala Tebas, on 8th December, 1931, at 8.30 a.m. A verdict was returned of accidental death.
General. -Captain R. E. Le Sueur took over from Mr. J. G. Anderson as from 2nd December, 1931.
Mr. J. G. Anderson left for Sadong, where he has been appointed Acting District Officer, on the 3rd.
Government Offices were closed on 25th and 26th.
UPPER SARAWAK, BAU.
December, 1931.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports: -
District Court. -One criminal case was heard and discharged.
General. -Visitors to the station included The Principal Medical Officer, Dr. Marjoribanks, Dr. W. Hutchison and Mr. Leach.
I left the station on 14th proceeding on local leave and during my absence Captain R. E. Le Sueur, District Officer, Kuching, paid several visits to the station.
Work was continued during the month on the new Warders’ Quarters Contract, and drainage scheme behind the clerks’ quarters.
The Court Writer, Martin Chan, makes the following report on the affairs of the district during my absence: -
“Tua Kampong Ruai reports that a fire broke out on 18th December, 1931, at Kampong Podam, as a result of which three doors were burnt out. The origin of the fire is not known. By order of Captain R. E. Le Sueur an ex-gratia payment of $5 per door was granted.
“Two lunatics who had been causing a great disturbance in the bazaar were arrested, and detained in the Court house, and later sent down to Kuching for mental observation on the order of the Principal Medical Officer.”
I understand that weather conditions during the latter half of the month have been very severe, and considerable damage has resulted to the roads of the district in consequence.
Rainfall. -Highest recorded in 24 hours 1.89 inches; daily average .43 of an inch; total for month 13.49 inches.
Gold Mining. -684.94 ounces of actual gold were obtained by the Bidi Gold Mining Company for the month of November and 442.32 ounces for December.
LUNDU.
December, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer. Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
General. -On the 12th a police inspector arrived from Sambas en route to Telok Srabang to arrest a man named Yahya for theft. He returned on 18th empty handed, the escaped prisoner having returned to Dutch territory the day before. One Jong Cheong was put on remand on 13th pending inquiries from Sambas about him, but he escaped on the 14th. All districts were notified of his escape, but in spite of various people having seen him at Blungei and Jangkar, he has not yet been recaptured. A Chinese, Ah Hin, was fined by the Court for helping him and Pengarah Jawi of Jangkar severely reprimanded. The m.v. Lundu was replaced by the Hap Soon Ann at the beginning of the month. The advantages of the exchange are outbalanced by the fact that she takes more than 12 hours to reach Kuching, and that her engine usually breaks down en route. The m.v. Lundu towed her away from Tanjong Batu on the 7th where she was fast drifting onto the rocks. I returned from Kuching on the 13th. Simatan was visited by the Native Officer, Abang Zamhari; there were no matters of importance outstanding. The widening of loba Mangkok was completed. The Dyaks report the padi to be doing very well, on account of the continual rain, and a good harvest may be expected.
Courts. -In the District Court two Chinese were fined for smuggling tobacco into Sarawak and two fined for abetting same. P.C. Mahali was fined for gross neglect of duty and allowing a man on remand to escape Ah Hin was fined for aiding the escaped man. Fines amounted to $152.56 and fees collected to $49.75.
Police. -Corporal Samar was transferred back to Kuching on 19th.
Prison. -The prison gang, averaging five, were employed on the general upkeep of the station.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall for the month was 16 93 inches, the greatest fall in any one day being 3 62 inches.
Trade. -The total returns for the month and for comparison with those for the corresponding mouth last year were as follows: -
SADONG.
December, 1931.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports: -
Resident’s Court. -Khee Hang, mine coolie, was sentenced under R.I. Section 307 I.P.C. for attempting to kill his mandor Tai Kim with a knife. Tai Kim’s wound was not serious, although it appeared to be so at first, and he has recovered.
General. -I returned from Kuching on the 3rd after handing over the duties of the District Office, Kuching, to Captain R. E. Le Sueur.
The Resident visited the Station from the 18th to 21st and settled all Resident’s Court cases. The Resident also directed that Tuai Rumah Suboh and his men who were summoned some years ago for planting rubber in padi land, were to be allowed to keep the rubber as they had been given Occupation Tickets for the land.
The Resident also visited the Bugis Padi Concession at Sungei Apin with Mr. Dare and myself.
I visited Sebangan and Sungei Bulu and intended a visit to Jaie, but the state of the weather made this impracticable.
Prisons. -Prisoners averaged 18 and were chiefly engaged in clearing the new Kampong Saging-Mine Road which had become somewhat overgrown.
Land. -Inspectors were kept busy demarcating land.
Owing to pressure of office work I found it difficult to find time to travel round, except to places close at hand, and unless this can be done it is difficult to keep in touch with land affairs.
I held a meeting of Tua Kampong in re new lots being surveyed on the New Road (Kampong Saging to Mine). The soil on the lots is peaty and the Tua Kampong said that no one wished to take up this land.
As about 100 lots were to be demarcated, I considered this a waste of time and money, and arranged with the Survey Department to postpone demarcation indefinitely.
Rainfall. -26.77 inches for the month.
Medical. -No patients were admitted.
At the Dispensary 53 patients made 99 visits for treatment.
Twenty N.A.B. injections were given during the month.
Trade and Customs. -Comparative trade returns are as follows: -
Sadong Collieries Report.
December, 1931.
Extracts from the Sadong Collieries Report for December, 1931, by Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager: -
The output, export, local consumption, and coal stock figures for the month are as follows: -
It is arranged that all the coal stocks stored at the mine entrances shall be washed, screened, and transported by railway to the wharf by the end of January, 1932.
The middle portion of the coal dump, situate between No. 8 and No. 9 mine, was carried away by an enormous landslide, which was caused by a heavy rainstorm on the night of the 18th, when 6.94 inches of rain fell in 2 1/2 hours. This avalanche of liquid soil, shale, and boulders completely destroyed the unoccupied storekeeper’s bungalow, and buried the Main Railway Line for a distance exceeding one hundred yards.
The Resident, First Division, visited the mines on the 20th.
The Chinese miners and labourers were paid off on the 30th, and removed to the Simunjan bazaar. The shopkeepers also vacated the mine bazaar on the following day.
Quantities of rails, ropes, and stores were shipped to Government Stores, Kuching, and the work of dismantling is proceeding apace.
The rainfall for the mouth was 30.14 inches.
SARAWAK TURF CLUB.
PROVISIONAL PROGRAMME FOB THE SPRING
MEETING, 1932.
FIRST DAY, SATURDAY, 2ND APRIL, 1932.
RACE NO. 1
THE TUAN MUDA’S CUP.
Value $200. A piece of plate of the value of $100. Presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda with $100 added. Second to receive $76. Third $25.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 2
THE SAT0K STAKES.
Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 3
THE B.C.L. STAKES.
Value $200. $100 presented by The Borneo Company, Limited, with $100 added. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 4
SIMPANG TIGA STAKES.
Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 5
THE MATANG STAKES.
Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division H ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 6
THE PENDING STAKES.
Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 7
THE RANEE’S CUP.
Value $200. A piece of plate of the value of $100 presented by Tier Highness the Ranee with $100 added. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance 1 mile. Entrance Fee $10.
SECOND DAY, MONDAY, 4TH APRIL, 1932.
RACE NO. 1
THE SLUMP STAKES.
Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 2
THE COUNTRY STAKES.
Value $200 presented by the Turf Club. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE No. 3
THE SARAWAK STAKES.
Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 4
THE TURF CLUB STAKES.
Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division I ponies, Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 5
THE STATE SPRINT.
Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 6 THE TOWN STAKES.
Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division III ponies, Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 7
THE RAJAH’S CUP.
Value $250. A piece of plate value $150 presented by His Highness the Rajah with $100 added. Second to receive $80. Third $35.
A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance Race-course (about 1.1/3 Miles.) Entrance Fee $10. $5 refunded to non-acceptors. Handicap published on the Course. Post Entries allowed at $20 but no refund.
REGULATIONS.
Penalties. -Winners of any race at this Meeting after publication of weights shall carry a penalty of 7 lbs. for each race with a maximum of 11 stone 7 lbs.
Allowance. -Professional Jockeys who are Sarawak subjects and have never ridden more than two winners at any Meeting under Sarawak Turf Club Rules, may claim an allowance of 5 lbs.
Entries. -All nominations accompanied by Entrance Fees, description of ponies and declaration of colours to be made to the Honorary Secretary not later than noon March 12th, 1932.
Scratchings. -Owners scratching ponies before 5 p.m. on 1st April for first day, and 5 p.m. on 3rd April for 2nd day. will receive back half their entrance fees.
Handicaps. -For 1st Day will be posted on the Notice Board at the Sarawak Club at noon on 19th March and for the 2nd Day at noon on 3rd April.
Course will be open for training on 13th February at 5.30 a.m.
Ponies must run on the 1st Day to be eligible for entry in Races for 2nd Day.
Owners are requested to see that their syces and jockeys obtain necessary badge for entrance to Paddock.
Totalizators and Cash Sweeps as usual.
Prizes 20% reduction if under 5 entries.
Communications to be made to
P. M. ADAMS, Honorary Secretary, Sarawak Turf Club.
[Members are requested to apply to Hon. Secretary for necessary Badges or obtain them at the Grandstand.]
Owners are requested to note that handicaps will be posted on March 19th not 9th as stated in Provisional Programme which was circulated.
Sarawak Club.
GOLF.
The winner of the December Monthly Medal was Mr. R. J. S. Davies (5) with the excellent score of 4 up on bogey.
The details of Mr. Davies’s round are well worth recording as it equalled the course record and, but for a slip at the first hole, would have bettered it.
The total of 33, was made up as follows: -
The final was noteworthy. Played over 18 holes, Hayward and McLaine found, themselves in the comforting position of dormie 6 up. A magnificent finish was put in by their opponents however, who then won the 13th, 14th, and 15th holes, and perhaps a little unluckily, halved the 16th where the match ended.
The Resident, Fourth Division, Mr. Aplin, mentioned the other evening that the Miri folk were very keen to take us on at the golf game, and that they would like to send a team to Kuching.
The prospect of such a match between the two clubs is an attractive one and, should it materialize, our Miri friends are assured of a warm welcome.
Sarawak Union Club Tennis Tournament.
Under the auspices of the Sarawak Union Club, the 4th annual Open Tennis Championship Tournament in both Singles and Doubles was recently conducted by the Club. Two shields were kindly presented by Messrs. Wee Kheng Chiang and Lim Song Kee, the replicas of which were provided by the Club.
The Singles final was held on the 12th December between R. L. Moir and C. Kim Leong. There was no dull moment in the game as both players pot up a plucky fight. R. L. Moir was in his top form and was always accurate in his placing, while most of his shots were forceful ones.
There, was a fairly large gathering who witnessed the Doubles final, which took place on New Year’s Eve. Among those present were the Venerable The Archdeacon and Mrs. Champion, Miss Harkness and Reverend F. S. Hollis, the honorary secretary of the Club.
Before Mrs. Champion distributed the prizes to the winners and runners-up, the Honorary Deputy Secretary, Mr. Tan Kui Choon, in an opening speech, welcomed back into their midst their Vice-President The Archdeacon, and stated they were very glad to find The Archdeacon and Mrs. Champion in such splendid health after their holidays. He said it was a great pity that the tournament could not have been finished before the landas season owing to the delay in carrying out the heavy repairs of their Tennis Court in the drier mouths. The renovation of the Tenuis Court was effected under the personal supervision of Mr. Chua Teck Hak to whom all credit is due. However, in spite of the inclemency of the weather and the resultant irre-gularity of the fixtures, it was gratifying to see that there was no lack of enthusiasm among the competitors. The competition was keenly participated in by members of the various clubs and on the whole the standard of the game was remarkably good, and certainly better than on previous occasions.
Mr. Tan Kui Choon mentioned that Dr. P. T. A. Chette the honorary secretary for the tournament and the other members of the sub-committee, viz, Messrs. Wee Kheng Chiang, Lim Cheng Soon, Ho Hong Soon and Lim Ah Bee had done their work well, and he thanked them for their good management in running the competition so successfully.
In conclusion, he congratulated the winners and wished them continued success in the future.
The results of the tournament were as follows: -
Second Division News.
December, 1931.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports for December. 1931, by Mr. E. O. Bruce. Acting Resident: -
I returned from a short visit to Kuching on the 5th after having discussed several matters regarding Dyak affairs.
Penghulus Ramba and Kana visited Simanggang on the 7th, returning a few days later.
During the month there have been exceptional floods, with damage to standing crops, which will undoubtedly cause a certain amount of hardship to those whose harvest was a failure last year. This matter has been the subject of a separate interim report to the Secretary for Native Affairs, meanwhile the Agricultural Field Officer, Mr. Goodall, is assisting by visiting and collecting information to confirm alleged reports of “starvation,” which will enable me to deal with bona fide cases of real hardship, where property has already been pawned to purchase foodstuffs.
There continues to be a distinct tendency in the bazaars to refuse credit. There has been a small rise in the market price of raw sago, which is at present about the daily produce which can be worked by natives with any profit, but is mostly owned by Malays.
At the request of certain penghulus, notices have been issued forbidding the usual crowds of strangers from other Districts swarming into certain Dyak areas to collect fruit, as they cannot afford to offer them free board and lodging this season as is their usual custom. They hope to raise some ready cash by trading surplus fruit in the bazaars themselves, to augment their shortage of padi.
I visited the subsidized Chinese Pepper gardens in the Skrang on the 14th, with the Agricultural Field Officer. An improvement was noticed, and the urgent necessity of further consignments of prawn refuse, etc., is being dealt with.
On the 19th I inspected the Government Lay School, which appears to be well attended.
A small representative party of Penghulus from Kalaka, Saribas and Skrang were invited to the Sibu Regatta and Aum at New Year.
They left on the 20th in the charge of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Kalaka, Mr. Morse, via Kuching.
Pengiran Azit, Native Officer, was on the sick list for a week, but has since recovered from a mild attack of dysentery.
On the 24th Messrs. Daubeny and Hansom arrived from Belong and Engkilili to spend the Christmas vacation in Simanggang.
Government Offices were closed on Christmas and Boxing Day.
I left for Betong on the 27th overland, accompanied by the District Officer, in order to attend to appeal cases, and was still away at the end of the month.
SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas: -
General. -Numbers of Dyaks are reporting a shortage of food, many of them having to live on sago as their staple food.
A Dyak house, R. Baroh, Langas, was reported completely destroyed by fire through the carelessness of those left in the house, whilst the majority of the inhabitants were out farming.
Lingga. -I was still at Lingga on the 1st, continuing checking accounts. Orders were given for the Government buildings to be whitewashed and tarred. The following day I left Lingga by boat at 4.30 p.m. and proceeded up river, the night was spent at a Dyak house, Simanggang being reached the next morning.
Travelling. -I was away visiting Batang Ai, Ulu Undup and Daw, via Engkilili, from 9th to the 15th.
On the 19th, the week end was spent at R. Mang, Gran, by Mr. Barcroft and myself, Mr. Barcroft’s outboard motor being used. The house is one of nearly fifty doors and there are several other long houses, all very close, the total number of doors of these houses must be well over 100.
Education. -The school attendance for the month was 89.
Medical. -A total of 402 out-patients were treated during the month. A record of 95 N.A.B. injections were performed.
Total rainfall for the month was 21.54 inches.
Court. -In the District Court, there were only four criminal cases.
In the Magistrate’s Court, there were twenty-three cases, of which eleven criminal and twelve civil, and claims amounted to $253.03.
Total fines imposed during the month were $504.22 and fees collected $47.55.
Trade and Customs. -Trade returns for the month are as follows: -
SARIBAS DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of District Officer Mr. R. L. Daubeny: -
Court. -Court inquiry was held in re the death of a Dyak woman by name Lika (f.) and her newly-born child, as a result of which one Chang Shin was committed to trial before the Resident’s Court on a charge of murder.
In the Resident’s Court Chang Shin was, subject to confirmation by the Chief justice, sentenced for culpable homicide not amounting to murder under section 304 I.P.C. and for attempted suicide under section 309 I.P.C. Other cases call for no special comment.
Travelling. -I was away at Simanggang for Christmas from 24th-27th.
I returned from up river on 5th instant having visited the Spak and Layar district (see separate report). I was unable to visit the substations during the month. Abang Bunsu, Native Officer, made a visit to Spaoh and the Bangkit in reference to a dispute between Chinese and Dyaks in regard to land, and also was away up river in the Sungei Penurin for five days inquiring into the destruction by fire of Rumah Medang.
General. -The Acting Resident paid a visit to this station from 27th-31st in connection with various cases, including the murder case of Chang Shin. Mr. Morse arrived here on Friday 18th with the Kalaka representatives and left here on 19th by m.l. Butan, accompanied by Pengarah Isek, Penghulu Sujang, T.R. Igoh, Layar and T.R. Chaing, Spak, Saribas representatives and Penghulu Sait and one Tuai Ramah, Skrang representatives, who were all invited to attend the Regatta and conference at Sibu.
Mr. Summers, Land Officer, paid a visit to the station from 13th-20th instant in connection with Rubber garden assessment.
On Thursday a small local football competition was started, the final round being carried on into the New Year. In spite of continual rain a large gathering collected and I was surprised at the enthusiasm shown.
Trade: -
Shipping. -Six motor vessels entered and cleared during the month.
ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Officer in-Charge, Mr. S. G. Hansom: -
Court. -Litigation was normal, with no cases of any note.
Travelling. -Owing to the flooded state of the river, it was not possible to visit Lubok Antu during the mouth, by land or water, the paths being well under water.
On the 1st instant, Abang Sedek, Native Officer, was sent up the Lemanak, to inquire into several outstanding matters, when a number of warrants for nonpayment of fines were executed.
On the 22nd instant I accompanied Mr. G. M. Goodall, Divisional Agricultural Field Officer, on a visit to Penghulu Imong’s house at Kumpang, in connection with the local padi shortage.
I was in Simanggang for the Christmas Holidays.
General. -On the 3rd instant Penghulus Ramba and Kana were down, with Antas and Bangkang, arrested on a Kapit warrant, who were later escorted to Simanggang. News was later received that Antas and Bangkang had escaped from custody at Song, while en route for Kapit, and Abang Abu Tulip, Native Officer, was sent up river, on the 21th instant, in an attempt to find and arrest the two accused for the second time.
During the month, considerable and abnormal flooding has taken place, due to exceptionally heavy rain. Low-lying parts have been consistently under water, and roads in the main impassable.
It is feared that considerable damage must have resulted to local padi, much of which has been inundated for days on end, although it is at present impossible to, estimate the damage.
Trade Return: -
Rainfall—Rain fell on 19 days, when a total of 16.58 inches was recorded.
LAND OFFICE.
Extracts from the report of the Divisional Land Officer. Mr. B. Summers: -
On the 2nd instant Abang Omar, Assistant Land Inspector, proceeded to Lingga and Sebuyow, to examine the S.P.G. Mission Land at Banting, a garden boundary dispute at Lingga, and the Chinese Cemetery at Sebuyow, together with other gardens there.
On the 3rd Abang Hassan, Assistant Land Inspector, was transferred to Engkilili, thus increasing the staff there to two. This increase was necessary, as there are still numerous pepper gardens not yet examined in that district.
Revenue. -Revenue collected during November showed a slight increase over that collected during October.
Owing to the present shortage of padi. many natives apparently have not sufficient money to pay Garden Assessment.
Inspections of Gardens. -During November David Chulo, Assistant Land Inspector, was at Roban inspecting Chinese pepper gardens, which appear to be increasing in that district.
KALAKA DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. L. K. Morse: -
Judicial. -There were no cases of interest before the Court during the month under review.
General. -I returned from Kuching via Pusa on the 2nd instant end departed up river on the 6th instant for a quick tour round the villages on the boundary and returned to Saratok on the 14th. I have reported on this under separate cover.
On the 17th instant accompanied by Pengarah Nyalu, Pengarah Undom and followers I proceeded to Betong en route for Sibu at the invitation of the Resident, Third Division to attend the aum and Regatta. Penghulu Isek, Penghulus Sujang and Sait and followers joined the party at Belong and accompanied us to Kuching where we arrived on the 20th instant.
On the 22nd instant the whole party was granted an interview with His Highness the Tuan Muda and on the same day departed to Sibu.
Police. -Four men resigned under the new Police Regulations.
Education. -Drahman, Acting Inspector of Schools, Second Division, conducted the yearly examinations at Kabong and Saratok Government Schools.
Third Division News.
December, 1931.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports for December, 1931. by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident: -
General. -Divisional Land Officer. Mr. Pascoe, left for Kuching on 1st instant for duly, his place being taken by Mr. T. E. Parker.
Mr. Hudden arrived on 2nd to take over the affairs of Kapit District from Mr. Aikman, who was here awaiting to proceed on Home furlough, and sailed for Kuching on the 3rd. Mr. Hudden proceeded to Kapit on the 4th instant and took up his appointment as Acting Assistant District Officer.
The Squad of Rangers at Kapit was relieved during the month.
The Acting Commissioner of Police, Mr. Reynolds, arrived from Kuching on the 2nd instant, returning again on the 3rd. Matters concerning the new pay of the Sarawak Police were discussed.
Travelling District Officer Mr. Cutfield returned from visiting the Ngemah and Poi on the 7th. Nothing of importance was brought before him. He reports that the Ngemah Dyaks have no long houses and live scattered about the district in farm huts.
Messrs. Ritchie and Bateman arrived on the 16th with reference to matters concerning the Electrical Department and returned to Kuching the next day.
Messrs. Woodward, Hughes, Hudden, Gilbert and Crossley arrived for X’mas and the Dyak meeting. All Penghulus and several headmen from the Oya, Mukah and Balingian Districts arrived.
Secretary for Native Affairs, Mr. P. M. Adams, Acting Assistant District Officer, Saratok, Mr. Morse, and following Second Division Penghulus Pengarah Nyalu, Udom, Sujang, Isek and Sait arrived on the 23rd instant to attend the Dyak meeting.
On the 28th a meeting of all the Penghulus in the Division was held, and the Dyak Undang-Undang was discussed with the object of standardizing these for all districts in the Division. Having come to an agreement the Penghulus were ordered to hold a meeting with the headmen and report their decision on the following day.
His Highness the Tuan Muda arrived on the evening of the 30th and the results of the various meetings were communicated to him.
SIBU.
December, 1931.
The District Officer, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports: -
In the Coroner’s Court a verdict of death by misadventure was returned on the body of Wong Nee Moi (f.), who was found drowned.
General. -On the 26th the influx of Dyaks for the Regatta commenced, and continued throughout the succeeding days. Discussions were held with a view to the drafting of a new Undang-Undang for the Third Division Dyaks. This was successfully accomplished before the arrival of His Highness the Tuan Muda on the 30th.
On the 31st His Highness addressed the assembled Penghulus and Dyak headmen.
At the end of the month 39 men and N.C.O.’s were discharged from the Police at their own request, they being partly replaced by 20 ex-Rangers from Kuching.
KAPIT.
December, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hudden, reports: -
Police. -The new draft, in charge of Corporal Nomeng, arrived on the 5th, and the old squad of Sarawak Rangers departed the next day.
General. -I arrived in Sibu on the 2nd and discussed the affairs of this station with Mr. R. G. Aikman. On the 5th I arrived at Kapit and took over the station.
Mr. and Mrs. Hoover paid a living visit on the 10th in connection with a site for the Mission They were only able to spend a few hours as, owing to the high water, s.s. Angby was late in arriving and had to sail again almost immediately.
On the 16th Father O’Dyke arrived for a few days, amongst other things, to negotiate for an extra piece of land for the Mission at Nanga Kapit.
I proceeded to Sibu by s.s. Angby on the 23rd to attend the Dyak meeting and Christmas festivities and was still away at the end of month.
All the Penghulus, save Semada who is still seriously ill, and most of the headmen arrived about the 24th preparatory to proceeding to Sibu for the Dyak meeting and the Regatta.
Rainfall. -The rainfall for the month was 19.65 inches.
The Belaga rainfall for November was 14.05 inches.
SARIKEI, BINATANG AND REJANG.
December, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports: -
Trade and Customs. -The following are the trade returns for the month: -
OYA AND DALAT.
December, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports: -
Court. -Although there were few criminal cases, Court work was heavier than usual, there being many civil cases.
On December 5th the inquiry into the death of a Chinese hawker was concluded, the previous hearing being adjourned for further evidence to be collected in the Ulu Oya. A verdict of death from natural causes was returned.
P.W.D. -The groins at Oya and Dalat were completed, and so far appear to be satisfactory. Prison gangs were employed at both stations on general upkeep.
Prisons. -Discipline was good at Oya, and work proceeded well.
On 8th December, 1931, Ngu Chin Poh, a Foochow prisoner, escaped from Dalat jail; he was recaptured by Igan Dyaks.
On 24th December, 1931, nine prisoners were transferred from Dalat to Sibu, the special work for which they were brought to Dalat having been completed.
On my return from up river on 3rd December 1931, I brought down Jadan and Baring, both of whom had been arrested for non-payment of fine: a warrant had been out for Baring for a year, and Jadan had received a summons six months ago, but as usual with these Dyaks, he had taken no notice of it at all. Both men received sentences of imprisonment.
On 7th December, 1931, Wan Hussein, Native Officer, was sent up river to decide two jelutong disputes. He returned a week later and reported both cases settled.
General. -On 24th I proceeded to Sibu by m.l. Chamois to attend the Dyak meeting and the regatta. There were no European visitors to the station during the month.
Trade. -207 koyans raw sago, 116 piculs jelutong and to piculs para rubber were shipped to Kuching.
The trade returns for the month and for comparison with those of this same month last year were as follows: -
Christmas and New Year at Sibu.
A DAYAK INVASION.
Although the weather did its best to damp the festivities, Christmas week at Sibu managed to be just as cheery as ever. On Christmas Eve launches converged upon the Island from all directions, bringing outstation officers-European and Native-to headquarters; they came from the Lower Rejang, from Kapit and from the Igan, and astern of each vessel were long lines of boats bringing Dyaks by their hundreds to the aum which bad been arranged for 31st December. As each launch neared the wharf the boats cast off the tow-rope, and their crews, with a yell, paddled off to find an anchorage: those who were able to live in their boats were fortunate, since eventually there were not hundreds but thousands of Dyaks in the town, and bazaar accommodation was of necessity so limited that living conditions were apt to be cramped.
Christmas Eve saw a re-union in the club, and a bowls competition which was won by Mr. H. E. Cutfield. Later, there were carols (also in the bowling alley) and it was morning-or at any rate, the small hours-before the singers finally broke up and went to bed.
Christmas Day produced a number of curry-tiffins, and in the evening there was a dinner and a fancy dress dance at the Residency. The dinner, to which all Europeans were invited reflected the greatest credit on the ladies who were responsible for the organization, and the dance itself was literally a roaring success. The costumes were remarkable both for originality and ingenuity, and shewed what can be done, at a pinch, with the simplest of materials. Here again the ladies came to the rescue, (God bless ‘em!), and several harassed bachelors owed their glory largely to their aid. Perhaps the most effective costumes were those of Mr. Spurway as a Roman centurion (or was it Caligula, or even Bacchus?) and Mr. McGinn, who for the space of a night gave up his Hibernian pose to appear as a full-blooded Scot. We are still wondering where he got that glorious, that fantastic, incredible beard!
About half-way through the proceedings the revellers were assembled in the middle of the dance floor and a flash-light photograph was taken; the result rather resembled one of those groups of the eighteen-seventies or thereabouts, in which those of the subjects who are not seated or propping up pillars are reclining gracefully on the floor. Who says that we English take our pleasures sadly? A print of the above-mentioned photograph should prove a valuable tonic in these times of world-depression and gloom; copies can be had on application to Mr. W. F. Dick, and should be hung on the office wall just below the “DO IT NOW” sign.
MORE DAYAKS.
Boxing Day passed off peacefully, the prevailing calm being broken at intervals by the whoops and yells of boatloads of Dayaks, who seemed to arrive every few minutes. Everyone who was present will remember this as a Dayak Christmas, -for ten days the island was crowded with them, and the officers on whom fell the burden of organizing the aum had a lively time of it. It is a curious fact that the Dayak, a most independent and self-reliant gentleman in his own country, at once becomes as helpless as a child, if he thinks that there is any chance by this display of helplessness, to cause someone (preferably a European) to make a fuss of him. To listen to the hard-luck stories of most of the Dayaks made one think that they had never left their homes before, and that starvation was the least of the perils with which they were faced; it was not a little amusing to bear Dayaks whom one knew personally to be more than a match for even the shrewdest Chinese traders, complaining in pathetic tones that they were utterly lost in the turmoil of a great city like Sibu, and that unless they were looked after every minute of the day and kept well supplied with belanja, they would surely perish; and it was no less amusing after this confession. to see them go straight to the nearest gold or silversmith’s shop and buy up a good proportion of the stock without batting an eyelid! Oh well, Dayaks are not the only people who like a try-on.
Dayaks were everywhere, in the streets, in the shops, on the wharves, on the padangs, and of course in the Government offices, where the cry of minta belauja, Tuan, rose like the wailing of a great multitude, and their outstretched palms were thick as the spears of Senacherib. All of them were in their smartest clothes, and weird and wonderful was the display of Iban finery, ranging from the dirty white trousers and co-respondent shoes of the “civilized” Dayaks (great are the blessings of education), to the resplendent chawats and gorgeous woven jackets of the upriver people. Hats shewed a like diversity, the most popular being a red fez wrapped with a kind of cloth-of-gold in which were stuck artificial flowers; but there were also other varieties, notably the “donkey’s breakfast,” of which there were one or two fine examples, and a kind of Homburg of a poisonous green tint, worn in some cases athwartships, and not fore-and-aft. This latter style was most effective, and was indeed only rivalled by a Wolseley helmet of about 1887 vintage, which acted as a sort of extinguisher to a Dayak of venerable aspect, whose long grey hairs rather clashed with the martial aspect of his headgear.
Ornaments included the usual bead necklaces, silver chains and bangles, but the whole jaw of a honey-bear, embossed with gold and worn round the neck as a pendant, excited much favourable comment. Tiger-cat’s teeth, too, were prominent, but earrings were not as good as might have been expected; it needed the Kayans to provide really good specimens of this form of decoration, and no Kayans had come down.
On 27th, 28th and 29th December, preliminary meetings were held to prepare the materials and clear the way for the final aum besai on the 31st. These meetings were conducted by the Resident with the assistance of the Secretary for Native Affairs, and were attended by Administrative Officers, Native Officers and all Penghulus. It was decided to standardize the Dayak customs and fines throughout the Third Division and, after many hours of talk, this was at last accomplished, the assembled chiefs agreeing to a draft code.
VISIT OF HIS HIGHNESS THE TUAN MUDA.
On the evening of the 30th H.H.M.Y. Maimuna arrived with His Highness the Tuan Muda; His Highness did not go ashore but was met on board by the Resident and senior officers, whom His Highness entertained to dinner.
At 9 a.m. on the following day the Resident, Secretary for Native Affairs and Administrative Officers went on board the Maimuna to meet His Highness the Tuan Muda, who shortly afterwards landed, inspected a Guard of Honour drawn up in front of the flagstaff, and went to the building erected for the aum; here all Native Officers and Penghulus were waiting, together with crowds of headmen and onlookers. His Highness and the Government Officers having taken seats on the dais, the Penghulu Dalam made a speech in which he welcomed His Highness the Tuan Muda to Sibu and asked him to approve the new code of Dayak customs which have been drafted as a result of the previous meetings, and which had received the assent of nil the Penghulus of the Division. His Highness having replied in Dayak, Mr. C. D. Adams, the Resident, made a short speech explaining the purpose of the aum, and then read out the new Dayak adat section by section, stating that these were to be the accepted customs in future throughout the whole Division. On this occasion no less than thirty-two Europeans were present, something of a record for Sibu.
GREETING THE NEW YEAR.
His Highness the Tuan Muda dined at the Residency the same evening, afterwards going to the club, where the New Year was welcomed in the traditional manner. As soon as 1931 was safely dead, a game of bowls was organized in which His Highness took part: the fact that he sent down the first bail of 1932 was duly recorded on the scoreboard, and it is to be hoped that His Highness’ action will bring good luck to the alley by way of high averages and few “faces”; though there are those, of course, who are tortured by such chronic thirsts that they regard “faces”-on the part of other people-as the height of good luck, and half the fun of the game.
Persistent rain hindered the display of fireworks, but did not altogether spoil them, and in spite of the weather there was a large and appreciative audience, so the devoted band who risked life and limb to let off bombs and rockets knew that their courage was not altogether wasted.
SIBU REGATTA.
A UNIQUE SPECTACLE.
New Year’s Day at least had the grace to come in like a lamb, even if it did go out like a very wet and bedraggled lion. At any rate, the morning was as fine as one could wish, and allowed the first part of the regatta to be a great success. Indeed, given reasonable weather, it seems almost impossible for any regatta at Sibu not to be a success. There is an air of spontaneous enjoyment about these affairs that is irresistible, and which always makes things go with a swing. The racing too, provides a splendid spectacle; it is a fine sight to see half-a-dozen long boats with eighty paddlers or so in each come sweeping down river, paddles flashing in the sunlight, spray flying, the bodies of the rowers swinging in perfect time. Then there are the side shows, -the greasy pole, the coconut shies and various similar devices, all of which provoke immense hilarity; and the Dyak spectators in themselves provide a good measure of fun, a lol of it, perhaps, unconscious!
On this occasion, H.H.M.Y. Maimuna was used as a grand-stand, the fore part being set aside for Penghulus, who soon made short work of several bottles of “squareface” and grew very jovial in consequence. The river embankment was crowded with spectators, Chinese, Malay and Dyak, and Malay ladies were accommodated in huts built in front of the fort. It was a guy and colourful scene, and only one figure was missing, -that of the Rev. Father Halder, our one and only Apai, at present no doubt busy yodelling among the mountains of his native Tyrol. No Sibu function could ever really be complete without him and the absence of that well-known (and well-worn!) terai and that formidable beaver left a sense of something missing.
The resumption of the races after the luncheon interval was marred by tragedy, two Melanaus, one from Kampong Nangka and one from Kampong Tanam, Dalat, being drowned when a boat overturned and sank, while a third man died later on in hospital. As a sign of respect all further racing was stopped, and this most unfortunate accident east rather a shadow over the rest of the day.
True to its previous form, the weather changed about two o’clock, and it started to rain. Although we did not know it then, this rain was to continue, day and night, until January 4th! At any rate, it put an effective damper on the close of a delightful week’s festivities, among other things ruining the open air cinema. However, in spite of a continuous downpour there actually was an audience, and one which shewed its appreciation in no half-hearted manner, proving that the Dyak has few rivals as a film fun.
The morning of the 2nd was ushered in by driving rain, but all the same the races which had been held over from the previous day were rowed off, His Highness the Tuan Muda presenting the prizes. Then, still in driving rain, the general exodus commenced; with melancholy toots the Government launches cast off from the wharf, taking outstation officers back to the solitude from which they had emerged ten days previously. Shortly afterwards His Highness the Tuan Muda left in the Maimuna for Kanowit and Kapit, accompanied by the Resident, the Secretary for Native Affairs and Messrs. Hudden, Cutfield and Morse; and Sibu resumed its customary calm.
Sibu Regatta.
NEW YEAR’S DAY 1932.
A certain amount of rain is expected at this time of the year but the amount which fell before, during and after the festivities was almost phenomenal. The first part of the programme was carried through successfully. The weather which had been threatening broke during the last race before lunch and got rapidly worse.
The programme was closed on the previous day with a record of 151 entries for 10 races, excluding the Consolation Race. Actually many of these entries did not turn out on the day. This applies particularly to the race for the Batang Rejang Cup presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda. A free distribution of arrack just before going to the post rather demoralized the competitors. Out of 37 entries only 17 came under the starter’s orders.
On resuming racing after lunch a gloom was cast over proceedings by the loss of two of the crew from the “Sibu Pernakan” belonging to Abang Salleh T.K. of Kampong Nangka. Owing to rough water two out of four starters sank after getting about a mile of the course.
The Committee suspended the rest of the programme until early the following morning. Next morning it was raining, if possible, harder than ever. However, a few stalwarts turned out and two races were paddled off and the Consolation race abandoned.
The biggest surprise of the Regatta was sprung by the Police, who won the Departments’ Race quite unexpectedly, and being thought so little of that not a single ticket was taken on the Tote.
Penghulu Dalam took two Cups with his Lang Melayang, and Kirak of Kanowit also obliged with two very popular wins. Bawan Assan School won the Kuranda Cup. The physique of some of the members of the crews competing was remarkable.
His Highness the Tuan Muda very kindly presented the prizes after the completion of the programme the following morning. This opportunity is taken of thanking all those who rallied round and gave their assistance in divers ways.
RESULTS.
THE RESIDENT’S CUT.
Race No. 1. -Paddlers unlimited. Open to Dyaks only. No bedas allowed. First to receive a Cup presented by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident, Third Division, with $70 added. Second to receive $40. Distance, Lanang Sawmill to Kubu Wharf.
THE KURANDA CUP.
Race No 2. -15 Paddlers. Open to School-boys only. Any make of boat allowed. First to receive a Cup presented by Teo Teow Peng with $15 added. Second to receive $8 Distance, Pengkalan Haji Ani to Kubu Wharf.
THE STEAMSHIP CUP.
Race No. 3. -30 Paddlers. Open to any make of boat. First to receive a Cup presented by the Sarawak Steamship Company with $50 added. Second to receive $30. Distance, Bukit Lima to Kubu Wharf.
THE PENGHULUS’ CUP.
Race No 4. -15 Paddlers. Open to Dyaks only. The Penghulu must be in the boat himself during the race. No bedas allowed. First to receive a Cup presented by Messrs. W. F. Dick. E. V. Andreini and H. E. Cutfield with $30 added. The Second to receive $15. Distance, Pengkalan Haji Ani to Kubu Wharf.
THE DEPARTMENTAL STAKES.
Race No. 5. -8 Paddlers. Open to any Government Department Every paddler must have been on the paysheet of his respective Department since 31st July, 1931. No limit to entries. No bedas allowed. First to receive $24. The Second to receive $8. Distance, Waterworks to Kubu Wharf.
THE TUA-TUA KAMPONGS’ CUP.
Race No. 6. -15 Paddlers. Closed to Dyaks. Any make of boat allowed. The Tua Kampongs must be in the boat during the race. Paddlers must be bona fide anak-anak Kampong of the Tua Kampong in whose boat they paddle. First to receive a Cup with $30 added. The Second to receive $15. Distance, Pengkalan Haji Ani to Kubu Wharf.
THE BATANG REJANG CUP.
Race No. 7. -30 Paddlers. Open to Dyaks only. No bedas allowed. First to receive a Cup presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda with $50 added. The Second to receive $30. Distance, Bukit Lima to Kubu Wharf.
THE ENGKILO CUP.
Race No. 8. -Paddlers unlimited. Open to any make of boat. Closed to Dyaks First to receive a Cup with $70 added. Second to receive $40. Distance, Lanang Sawmill to Kubu Wharf.
BUKIT LIMA STAKES.
Race No 9. -15 Paddlers. Open to Dyaks only from the Upper Rejang above Kuala Kanowit including Kanowit and tributaries. Temois only. First to receive $30. The Second to receive $15. Distance, from Pengkalan Haji Ani to Kubu Wharf.
THE ISLAND CUP.
Race No. 10. -Paddlers unlimited. Open to any make of boat. First to receive a Cup presented by the Secretary for Native Affaire with $75 added. Second to receive $35. Distance, Lanang Sawmill to Kubu Wharf.
SIBU FOOTBALL COMPETITION 1931.
This eliminating competition was held in conjunction with the regatta and attracted ten entries. With the exception of the Sarikei team, all the participants were local teams, and fairly evenly matched. It was particularly pleasing to note that the Sibu Schools entered teams and, aided by systematic coaching on the part of various Government Officers, put up a most creditable display.
Owing to high waters persisting unduly, many of the matches were played on a perfect quagmire and in consequence good football was impossible.
The preliminary round found Lands and Customs drawn against Sarikei and Kampongs Ilir and Pulo against the combined Roman Catholic and Tiong Hua Schools. Both these matches were, played on a flooded ground which rendered kicking and foot-hold extremely precarious. The former match was evenly contested in the first half, Sarikei taking the lead just before half time from a well placed penalty kick. Play was practically confined to the Sarikei half of the field in the second half of the game, but their goal was rarely dangerously threatened, and Sarikei finally ran out winners by the only goal scored. Ping Loong was outstanding for the winners and was a good example of the value of energetic captaincy. The latter match was hotly contested in spite of the conditions underfoot. The combined schools set up pressure from the commencement, but the Kampong team gradually settled down and carried play to the other end only to miss an almost open goal. From the kick-off the Schools forwards went away and an infringement by the defence accorded them a penalty which was well converted. Half time arrived with the schools still clinging to their lead. The Kampongs re-arranged their men slightly on resumption of play, with beneficial effect. They now began to swing the ball better and two fast movements earned two excellent goals. The Schools team were now becoming fretful and disjointed and the Kampongs should have pressed their advantage. An unlikely looking solo effort ended in one of the Kampong’s full backs tripping within the area, and an equalizing goal was scored with only five minutes to go. A further solo effort again put the Kampong’s defence in difficulties and the inside right, following up brilliantly, scored the winning goal with a fast drive just on time. Needless to say the Chinese quota of the spectators cheered themselves hoarse.
The first match was extraordinary in that some of the men in the Police and Forests No. 1 had sons playing in the School side and play was more robust in this match than any other. The boys were much too nimble for their opponents and executed some pretty movements. The footwork in the initial half was exceptionally good and bore good testimony to the patience and time expended by their trainer. The beautifully clean kicking of the full backs was highly commented on, even by the supporters of the other side. However, both sides failed to find the net at the first encounter and the match was replayed the following evening. The boys apparently had an entirely new lease of life and romped home easy winners with a goal in each half.
The second match was very one-sided, the Schools wing halves entirely dominated the play and it became merely a question of how many goals the Schools wanted. And that number proved to be six.
The third match saw the Sarikei team in operation again. The Wireless were early off the mark and a surprise long shot found the Sarikei goalkeeper unprepared. Sarikei fought back gallantly and scored an equalizer. The second half opened with the Wireless still in the ascendancy and fast sprints by the inside left invariably tangled up the Sarikei defence. Two more goals were added in this half from these movements and time came with the Wireless and Medical leading by four goals to one.
The fourth match was witnessed by the largest crowd that had so far attended. The ground was somewhat soft in the centre but two days of moderate sunshine had improved the ground beyond recognition. The Administration won the toss and kicked off with the sun at their backs. A centre from the right was well held by the Administration goal-keeper, Hudden, but the clearance cannoned off an attacker into the net. This reverse was hardly due on the run of the play. From the kick off the Administration attacked hotly and good head work by Crossley was a feature. McGinn, however, spoilt the chance by lying off side and the danger was cleared. A free kick to the P.W.D. for hands some twenty yards out was converted with a fine high drive and shortly afterwards a snap goal from close quarters added another. Just before the half-time whistle a good shot by McGinn found the net. Upon resumption the Administration monopolized play, but shooting was wretched, and opportunities were simply frittered away. A penalty taken by Ah Thiam sailed harmlessly over the bar and the Administration retired well beaten.
The first of the Semi-finals was very evenly contested. It was a game that might have been won by either team almost to the last minute. As in their first match the Wireless went away with a rush and a long shot completely deceived the goalkeeper. The strong halves of the Schools maintained a mastery over the opposing forwards, but what few chances did come their way were eagerly snapped up. Razalie, the Wireless star forward, was working hard, but his shots were mostly hurried and wide of the mark. The Schools missed several opportunities, but not one so gilt-edged as when the ball lay a foot off the line and nobody on the tight side of the field near enough to tap the ball into the net. The second half saw end to end play but with neither goalkeeper unduly busy. Time came with the Wireless defending sturdily against a last minute effort on the part of the Schools.
The second Semi-final match produced some very fast football in the first half, and play, despite the score, was quite even. Misfortune dogged the schoolboys from the start, A foul against their goalkeeper was cleared from a bunch of players, only to see the ball drop at the feet of an opponent whose first time effort crasher under the bar and into the net. Shortly afterwards a dangerous tackle on the edge of the penalty area was pulled up, and a penalty ensued, the resultant shot being too good for the goalkeeper. Operating on the better half of the ground, the schoolboys failed to establish any cohesion and four more goals were scored against them in the second half.
The day of the final was bright and a huge crowd had assembled two hours before the kick off. His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by the Resident and Mrs. Adams, arrived shortly before the kick off. Mr. P. M. Adams, Secretary for Native Affairs, officiated as referee, assisted by Messrs. Hudden and Crossley as linesmen.
Play ruled even for the first quarter hour, and the P.W.D. goalkeeper earned much applause for his clever gathering of shots. The manner in which he went down to ground shots was worthy of a professional. He was, however, beaten when the ball came out of a mix-up to the feet of Razalie standing close in.
Shortly afterwards a run by the same player ended in a wide pass out to the wing which was recovered and centred off the line, to curve under the bar and drop behind the goalkeeper in a most miraculous manner. The full back was to blame for this reverse in not making any attempt to tackle the wing. Play was afterwards confined to the Wireless end of the field and their goal seemed to bear a charmed life. So hot was the pressure that all the forwards except one came back to help out. Half-time came with the score at two goals to nil in favour of the Wireless and Medical. Play continued even on resumption but the P.W.D. gradually began to dominate the play and only bad luck prevented them opening their score. One glorious drive from the left wing from a free kick passed the far post by a hair’s breath. The Wireless at length broke away on the left and an excellently judged pass went to the foot of the unmarked outside right who had little difficulty in beating the goalkeeper from that range. After this reverse the P.W.D. became disjointed, but despite the rain of shots poured in from all angles, the P.W.D. goalkeeper refused to be beaten again. Time came with the score standing at three goals to nil.
His Highness the Tuan Muda then presented the Cup and Medals after congratulating both teams on their sportsmanship and on the standard of football served up under such conditions. Three cheers were then called for His Highness and proceedings were drawn to a close.
Fifth Division News.
Limbang.
December, 1931.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports for December, 1931, by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident: -
Court. -There were an unusual number of cases but none of any special interest.
General. -On the 5th, I visited Trusan in connection with the murder of the Chinese Gardener Ong Tak. Ah Tong was again arraigned on the charge of murder, when a jury brought in an unanimous verdict of guilty. The Superintendent of Customs, Miri, Mr. G. A. C. Field, accompanied me. Sundar was also visited.
I returned via Brooketon where I was met by the British Resident of Brunei, Mr. T. F. Carey, and the final handing over to the State of Brunei of His Highness the Rajah’s territory, with the exception of the Bungalow and grounds, was made.
I visited Lawas from the 18th to 21st, and found all at that Station extremely satisfactory. A Regatta with land sports, the first to be organized in the Lawas River, was held on the 20th, and a very enjoyable day was spent. Rivalry between local crews and visitors from Brunei made the racing very keen.
Visitors during the month were Mr. Morgan, Geologist, Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, Messrs. E. Banks and W. S. B Buck from Kuching, J. B. Combe from Lawas to spend Christmas.
Mr. Louis Lew Jun, Court Writer of Lawas, was retired at the end of the year after twenty-two years of valuable service.
P.W.D. -Owing to unprecedented heavy rain, all work on the Brunei Road was stopped. Arrangements had been made to roll certain portions but this also had to be suspended.
Prisoners, averaging 12, were employed in cleaning the roads and drains around the station and removing landslides.
Medical and Health. -The Dresser-in-Charge, Mr. Hon Chon Thadd, reports that the health of the District was normal. Two patients were admitted to the Hospital for treatment, whilst sixty-four out-patients were treated in the Dispensary.
Rainfall amounted to 14.53 inches.
LAWAS.
December, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe, reports: -
Court. -With, the exception of the case His Highness the Rajah vs. Ah Tong (Cantonese) on a capital charge of murder, there have been no cases of note during the month.
Prison. -Prisoners averaged 17 for the month and were employed on upkeep of grounds and road construction across river. Health of the prison force was good throughout the month.
P.W.D. -Work on the bridges of the Trusan, Punang and Gaya roads was carried on until the end of the month; also the making of cement pipes for culverts. Owing to the extremely wet weather it has been found impossible to use the lorry to its full advantage.
General. -The Resident, Mr. F. H. Kortright, accompanied by Mr. G. A. C. Field, Superintendent of Customs, Fourth and Fifth Divisions, arrived at Sundar on the 4th and proceeded to Trusan; from there the Resident left for Brooketon whilst, Mr. Field and myself returned to Lawas, the former leaving for La on the 19th.
Sergeant Pengiran Omar was away for two days up the Ulu Lawas searching for unlicensed gnus which were reported to be held by Muruts in that vicinity.
On the 20th of the month a Regatta was held at Lawas, this event attracting a very large numbers of up-river natives, mainly Tagals and Muruts.
Eighteen Europeans were also present, amongst them being the British Resident of Brunei and Labuan.
Mr. Buck, who is on leave, accompanied by Mr. E. Banks, Curator Sarawak Museum, who is visiting the district with the intention of exploring the birds nests caves in the Ulu Meranok, arrived here on the 18th.
Agriculture. -The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Limited, exported 29,795 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
Rainfall. -The following rainfall was recorded during the month: -
