VOL. LXII.
No. 944.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Monday, May 2nd, 1932.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette
MONDAY, MAY 2nd, 1932.
Birth.
PITT-HARDACRE. -On April 16th at the General Hospital, Kuching, to Mr. and Mrs. C. Pitt-Hardacre, a son.
Local and Personal.
April.
His Highness the Tuan Muda returned to Kuching by the m.v. Marudu on April 11th.
Her Highness the Ranee, and the Dayangs Elizabeth and Valerie, left for home by the m.v. Marudu on April 23rd.
The Resident, Mr. J. C. Swayne, gave a farewell dance in honour of Her Highness on the previous Saturday. April 16th.
During the month Her Highness went for a short flight in the “Flying Carpet.” Her Highness has kindly written an account of her experience, which appears elsewhere in this number.
Her Highness the Ranee’s latest book, entitled “Heels of Pleasure” has just appeared, and may be purchased at Chop “Sim Tong Hin,” Carpenter Street, Kuching.
Miss Tait sailed for home on retirement by the s.s. Vyner Brooke on April 18th after nearly eighteen years’ service with the, Sarawak Government.
Mr. H. C. P. Adams, who is also retiring from the Service, left for Sibu on April 11th, whence he will sail direct to Singapore.
The “Flying Carpet,” owned by Mr. Halliburton, and piloted by Mr. Stevens, of “Hell’s Angels” fame, arrived over Kuching from Dutch Borneo on April 2nd. The plane eventually landed at Pending.
Messrs. Halliburton and Stevens, who have now been a year and a half on their slowest flight round the world, left for Sibu on April 7th.
Arrivals by the Vyner Brooke on April 4th were the Rev. Father V. Halder, Mr. and Mrs. J. P. Baird, all of whom have been on leave in Europe, and Mr. E. Sterling.
Captain and Mrs. C. D. Le Gross Clark returned from leave by the m.v. Marudu on April 11th, and Mr. and Mrs. E. Parnell from Singapore by the Vyner Brooke on April 15th.
The Spring Meeting of the Sarawak Turf Club took place on the 2nd and 4th April. A full account of the racing will be found on another page. The majority of Race week visitors returned to their various stations on April 15th.
The Cinema re-opened on April 12th, too late for the outstation visitors, having been closed for about ten days.
The Vyner Brooke, on April 15th, brought forty-three Japanese immigrants, who are taking up padi planting at Samarahan.
The April number of Mirage has now appeared, and is up to its usual high standard. We strongly advise any who do not yet subscribe to this excellent quarterly, to do so in future.
The Rt. Rev. N. R. Hudson, Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak, arrived in Jesselton on his first visit to Borneo on the 6th April with his Secretary Mr. I. M. Mills, and has been stopping at the Residency. The Bishop’s time has been fully occupied and has included a visit to Beaufort and Papar.
The Resident gave an At Home at the Jesselton Sports Club on the 9th to meet the Bishop, and a large number of guests were present in spite of the rain. The Asiatic members of the congregation held a reception on the evening of the 11th at which a welcome was given to the Bishop; the occasion also provided an opportunity to welcome the Rev. J. Paisley and to say farewell to the Rev. S. M. Collier who goes on furlough shortly.
The Bishop goes on to Kudat on the 14th, and expects to stop a week there before going on to Sandakan. -(B.N.B. Herald.)
Sarawak and Import Duties.
Before we turn from matters of commerce, it is worthy of note that the Financial Secretary to the Treasury (Major Elliott) gave an assurance in the House of Commons on Wednesday that the exemptions granted by the Import Duties Act to the Dominions and Colonies were being applied to Sarawak. -Straits Times.
The Flying Carpet.
Had I said to an Englishman, “Oh, how I’d simply love to fly!”, he would have replied, after five minutes of the heaviest cogitation, “Look here old thing, hadn’t you better think it over I mean to say it’s an awfully beastly responsibility for a chap, by jove it is.”
Not so America. I had hardly finished the sentence before Dick Halliburton had whisked out his note book and was “go-getting me into that plane.” “Fly.” He said. “Gee girl, that’s easy-Monday-stone steps-nine o’clock-we’ll take you up.”
I hadn’t time to protest-I hadn’t time to be alarmed-that’s America!
At nine o’clock I was on the stone steps. I couldn’t feel anything except that tremendous sinking you have when deep down in your soul you know you are partaking of forbidden fruit. Suppose something happened. But there, nothing would happen. Wasn’t I being piloted by one of the men who had taken part in “Hell’s Angels”?
The Americans were alarmingly cheerful that morning. The kind of cheerfulness your parents assume when as a child you are going to the dentist. Dick Halliburton would keep on photographing. I didn’t want to be photographed. I didn’t feel like a picture at all. If he could have taken an ex-ray impression of me it might have been different. It might have been interesting to see all my bones leaning together with fear.
We had an hour’s trip by launch to reach the plane which was anchored at Pending, and during that hour a few more grey hairs were added to my head. When we got to Pending Dick Halliburton would photograph again. I remarked grimly that I thought he had taken quite enough of me to identify the body!
My one consolation over the whole affair had been that at any rate I should have Dick Halliburton to cling to. Picture my embarrassment when I was pushed into a tiny seat in front of the pilot-alone!	Then we started. With a roar the Flying Carpet streaked through the dead low water-Faster-Faster, and I was just beginning to like it when we started to rise.
Do you know I didn’t mind it after all? That fearful anticipation had suddenly turned into a very pleasurable reality. When we were well up I liked it. As we headed for Kuching I loved it. No giddiness No sickness-Very little bumping-Kuch-ing was beautiful from above. The Astana looked like a mushroom on a fresh green slope. I saw all our Malay boys waving from the garden and I tried to wave hack, but the wind nearly tore my band from my wrist, and one of my rings blew right off my finger. I saw little white figures darting from the offices, and one figure, not so little, clambering onto the Dispensary roof. Then we started to turn.
How easily one uses the phrase “paralyzed” with fear. I know now what that means. There were two iron loops in front of me. and I crooked my fingers in those and shut my eyes and prayed. The more I prayed the more Moye Stephens went on turning. I was just contemplating dropping quietly out and getting it over, when we straightened again.
This time we went to the open sew. I felt really safe. We had our floats and the sea was like glass. The thing that struck me most in the scenic effect below was the entanglement of rivers threading in and out of the green jungle like little veins. How in the world these two Americans found Kuching through that maze of water I cannot imagine.
Then we started to come down. Moye said he would come down gradually so as not to hurt my ears. Coming down gradually meant turning and twisting like an eel. Once more that awful paralyzing fear.
Nevertheless, I loved it. And I want to do it again. As Moye and I clambered from the machine I asked him if those iron hoops were really meant for hanging onto.
“Oh that,” he replied, “is the Crash bar-So if you do crash you don’t get the engine in your stomach. Didn’t tell yon before,” he added. “Thought you mightn’t like it.”
And how right he was!
SILVIA OF SARAWAK.
Mount Kinabalu.
A LECTURE BY THE REV. JOSEPH CLEMENS.
On Saturday, 26th March, Mr. Joseph Clemens, late Chaplain of the United States Army, gave a descriptive lecture on Mount Kinabalu at the Jesselton Recreation Club. He, said that the climbing of the mountain presented no difficulties to one who in his youth had made it a common pastime to climb to the top of telephone poles and to balance himself thereon, but he warned visitors to the mountain not to attempt more than they were able to perform, especially if they were not physically fit. There is at least one foreign grave on the mountain side, and alcohol and opium were not of much use in mountain climbing.
Mountaineering cost a good deal of money, but he was fortunate in having a rich uncle, who paid him a pension. Uncle Sam had already benefited much by the scientific attainments of Mrs. Clemens, and the party were now working in the interests of the British Museum, and of Kew Gardens in England where the lecturer was born. Mr. Walter Gill was an accomplished woodsman and built “Jungle Lodge” out of logs in Canadian style at an elevation of about 5,000 feet. The Lodge was accessible from the bridle path. Mrs. Clemens had fires burning continually in the Lodge to keep the house dry and warm, but the smoke had the minor disadvantages of discolouring their white clothes and his own white whiskers.
The slopes of Mount Kinabalu could be very cold indeed because of the dampness in the air, and the lecturer exhibited to the great delight of his audience some steps of a pas de deux which he and his ladies performed in the Paka Cave in their dripping clothes on a wet afternoon when their carriers were still a long way behind. A jig of this kind would warm up any one.
Leeches were a nuisance, but the chickens round the Lodge gobbled them up and disposed of most of the unwelcome insects.
The local Dusuns were most kindly and neighbourly folk. Rice and vegetables of various kinds, including Irish potatoes, were plentiful. The native farmers could be seen burning off their fields a thousand feet below the Lodge. The Dusuns went in for farming by fire and were successful in this method.
The Dusun people insisted on the performance of certain rites before ascending the summit, and their priests who performed the ritual were as earnest and devout in their ceremony as any pious Christian and Mahommedan would be in his own devotion. At first the Dusun priests insisted on performing the usual sacrifices to propitiate the mountain spirits in the lecturer’s behalf, but they were broadminded enough not to insist on them in his case when he pointed out that he himself was also a priest, and that he could manage very well for himself, although he belonged to a different creed. They had proved to be quite reasonable about this and other things.
It is not every man that has eyes to see with and many people climbed the mountain with their eyes closed to the marvellous things around them. A black speck on the back of a leaf might be the rust which had cost millions of pounds worth of damage in pine forests, or the rust which even now was destroying our rice fields. There were little orchids which would go easily into a lady’s thimble. The microscope would show any student the beauties of the tiniest objects.
Climbers should wear cither hobnails or corrugated rubber shoes giving a grip upon the granite surface of the rocks. Outfits were largely a matter of individual choice. He himself considered the only real necessities were a canvas fly to cover the sleeping party, some blankets, a change of clothes and sufficient food. Four Dusun carriers earning fifty cents a day each would serve his own party of three consisting of two men and a lady, for an ascent, but there was a recent visitor who had required fifteen porters for his own baggage. Comforting utensils were an Army water bottle, which could be filled with water, screwed down lightly to allow the steam to escape and then thrown into a fire to heat up. One should take a couple of these to bed to keep oneself warm.
The climbing of some of the peaks required great care and no one but an experienced mountaineer could venture on the steeper cliffs. They were perpendicular in places and the ice made the ascent very slippery. Great gusts of wind blew when the morning sun heated the atmosphere and caused upward draughts of air. One of these blasts had carried his Stetson hat up like a balloonette and he lost sight of it floating in the air round one of the peaks. Not every climber had reached the top because the lecturer had seen the recording bottles left by some of the previous visitors hidden away in spots a long wav distant from the summit.
Mr. Clemens shook the rafters of the Club with a repetition of the great call which he shouted from the topmost peak and which awoke his wife sleeping in a fever half a mile way, and he concluded his lecture with a verse of a mountain song reminiscent of his climbing days in Europe.
In reply to questions the lecturer said that he knew of no level spaces suitable for tennis courts or a football field on the mountain, but one could not have everything. He had been a tennis player himself, but he thought that the glories of the mountain itself should suffice for visitors. There was a little lake on the summit.
Mr. T. J. H. Speedy who occupied the chair thanked the lecturer for a most vivid and interesting lecture and announced that Mr. Clemens would give a lecture on “Adaptation in Nature” at a later date. This subject said Mr. Clemens, would be more amusing than its title suggested. -British North Borneo Herald.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 52 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
1880.] WEDNESDAY, 31ST MAR., 1880. [Price 5 cents.
On the 9th February, an unusual arrival took place here in the form of twenty-six European sailors. These turned out to be the Captain and crew of the Liverpool ship Gwalia burthen 1,366 tons, Capt. Thomas Owens, which was wrecked about the 13th February. She struck a sunken rock not marked on the chart, about 7 miles from Carimata Island. An attempt was made to get the ship off but it was soon seen that she was too badly injured to make this possible, in fact, had she been got off, the ship would have gone down in deep water. In half an hour the Gwalia, which was laden with coals, filled. The Captain and crew stayed by the vessel until their water was nearly finished and then took to their boats on the 15th intending to make for the nearest part of Borneo; however on their way they fell in with the Barque Glory of, and bound for Bangkok, the captain of which took them on board; after some days of beating against a foul wind the provisions began to tall short, and the Glory steered in for the coast, and dropped the boats of the Gwalia, which she had taken on board, about 10 miles outside the Santubong entrance of the Sarawak river. They reached Kuching the same evening, and were put up at the “Rajah’s Arms.” Capt. Owens and his men left for Singapore, by the Rajah Brooke on the 9th. Before leaving they sent in a note expressing their sense of the kindness with which they had been treated, and regretting that they could only repay it by thanks.
First Division News.
RESIDENT’S OFFICE.
March, 1932.
Extracts from the Divisional Reports for March, 1932, by Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division: -
Resident’s Court. -Four civil and one criminal cases came before the Court during the month.
Chin Khin Choon, a cleric employed in the Government Electric Store, was sentenced to a term of imprisonment for criminal breach of trust. Accused gave notice of appeal.
General. -I proceeded to Lundu on the 8th in connection with a murder trial there and returned to Kuching on the 10th.
Government Offices were closed from 25th to 28th inclusive for the Easter Holidays.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
March, 1932.
The District Officer, Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, reports: -
District Court. -Eleven cases were heard, one of which was criminal and ten civil. A case was brought by the Conservator of Forest against Lee Ng (Kheh) for Breach of Older No. F-1 (Forest) 1927, section 11, paragraphs 5 and 14, and offering a bribe to public servant, section 214, I.P.C., and a conviction was obtained. Fines imposed amounted to $3 and fee collected $3. The Civil claims involved amounts totalling $1,834.43, for which fees collected amounted to $89.
Magistrate’s Court. -One hundred and ten cases were heard, thirteen of which were criminal and ninety-seven civil. Of the thirteen criminal cases, all were convictions. There were one case of assault, two contempt of Court, three breach of Municipal Bye-laws and seven other offences. Fines imposed amounted to $51 and fees collected $40. The civil claims involved amounts totalling $1,892.44, for which fees collected amounted to $368.33.
Police Court. -Eighteen summary cases were brought before the Court. Sixteen convictions and two acquittals were adjudged The principal charges were five of theft, one breach of Municipal By-laws, one breach of Customs and Shipping Regulations, and eleven other offences. A total amount of $21.50, was paid in fines. In addition twenty seven judgment summons cases were dealt with during the month.
Coroner’s Court. -There was one inquest and verdict as follows: -
Inquest on the body of Lee Ah Gong (Hokien) found hanging on Kotak No. 155 on 29/3/32.
Verdict. -Suicide by hanging while temporarily of unsound mind.
General. -On the 7th March, 1932. the District Officer, Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, returned from the Asun expedition, and took over the duties of the District Office from Mr. P. Murray-Scott, who was acting temporarily during his absence.
Mr. J. C. B. Fisher, Cadet, arrived from Europe on 25th March, 1932, and is doing duty in this office.
A number of Sea Dyaks who are living in the Samarahan area without authority have been ordered to return to their own country.
UPPER SARAWAK, BAU.
March, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports: -
Resident’s Court. -One criminal case was heard and resulted in a conviction.
District Court. -Six cases were heard, three of which were criminal cases and three civil. Of the three criminal cases all resulted in convictions.
Magistrate’s Court. -Sixteen cases were heard, thirteen of which were criminal cases and three civil. Of the thirteen criminal cases all resulted in convictions.
In addition two judgment summons were dealt with during the month.
Fines imposed amounted to $87.14. The civil claims involved amounts totalling $323.09, for which fees collected amounted to $37.
Judicial. -Notable cases during the month were: -
(1) Police vs. Choo Nyong Khee and Chai Nyap. The former was sentenced to one year’s imprisonment and fined $25 for voluntarily causing hurt by dangerous weapons or means under section 326 I.P.C., and the latter to six months’ imprisonment
and fined $25 for abetment of offence under section 326 I.P.C.; (2) State vs. Voon Nyong Soon who was fined $25 or in default two months’ for house-breaking by night under section 456 I.P.C.; and (3) State vs. Choo Ah Hong who was sentenced to one year’s imprisonment on two counts for theft of fowls under section 379 I.P.C. and recommended for deportation. He has three previous convictions for theft, two for opium offences and one for vagrancy.
General. -Visitors to the station included the Resident, First Division. Mr. J. C. Swayne, Mrs. R. E. Le Sueur, Major and Mrs. A. S. M. Winder, Messrs. Banks, Combe and Bateman.
All outbreak of fowl stealing occurred during the month, six cases being reported, and a Hylam, Ah Hong, was eventually arrested and the various thefts traced to him. This man effected his escape after a few days but was recaptured before the month end.
The electric light plant has had further additions of batteries and is now in excellent condition.
The trolley track to Bau Pengkalan has been opened up and stone put down, and it is now a road for lorries which will facilitate the getting of sand, of which much is needed for concrete work by the gold mining concerns.
A mould for 18-inch drains has been obtained from Kuching and both cylindrical and semi-cylindrical culverts can now be turned out. It is hoped to replace all wooden culverts on the roads with cement in the near future.
Two new gold mining companies have started work during the month, these being the Sarawak Gold Mining Syndicate, Limited, at Paku, and the Thai Then Gold Mining Syndicate near Bidi. This makes four concerns working gold in the district.
The production of the Bidi Mine for the month is the second highest figure ever obtained by them.
169.33 ounces of actual gold were obtained by the Bau Gold Mining Syndicate for the month of February, and 679.23 ounces were obtained by the Bau Gold Mining Company during the month.
Staff. -Dresser Chai Khoi was replaced by Paul Lan during the month, and an additional temporary clerk, John Khoo Siew Hian, was taken on.
Prisons. -At the end of the month the female prisoners numbered eleven and the male prisoners twenty-eight. Total thirty-nine.
A male prisoner. Choo Ah Hong, escaped on the 23rd whilst working at Pengkalan Bau and was recaptured on 31st.
Rainfall. -Highest recorded in 24 hours 1.75 inches; daily average .31 of an inch; total for month 9.83 inches.
LUNDU.
March, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
General. -Her Highness the Ranee and the Dayangs Elizabeth and Valerie visited the station on 26th, together with Mr. and Mrs. Calvert, Mr. Reid, Birt, McLaine and Davies.
In the morning Her Highness met the Malay and Dyak Chiefs and in the evening a small “main” was given on the padang which Her Highness attended. Many Dyaks came in from up country and celebrated the occasion with arrack till daylight. The H.H.M.Y. Maimuna sailed at 5 a.m. on Easter Sunday for Santubong.
The Resident arrived on the 8th and condemned Phang Ngee and Ng Puin to death for the murder of Ho Loi on January 4th. On 21st, however, both appealed, and the Chief Justice arrived on 30th when both appeals were heard and dismissed, but a recommendation to mercy was entered on behalf of Ng Phin. A third named Phang Kuoi still awaits trial.
On 4th Native Officer Abang Mustapha and Orang Kaya Jumat proceeded to Netherlands India territory to inquire about a man named Musa who was suspected of masquerading as a Dutch Official. The Native Officer of Sambas denied all knowledge of him, so a warrant was sent to Sadong where Musa was later arrested.
On the 4th an extraordinarily heavy rainstorm took place and the whole bazaar and Government area was flooded. Two small children narrowly escaped drowning and great damage was done to the bazaar road and the near-by pepper gardens. Fortunately, the Lundu bridge had just been repaired and withstood the force of the water, which rose 20feet in a few hours. The storm being entirely local, not much damage was done to the crops up river.
Court. -In the Supreme Court the appeals of Phang Ngee and Ng Phin against the sentence of death passed on them by the Resident’s Court on the 9th were dismissed, but Ng Phin’s sentence was later commuted to 15 years’ imprisonment. In the district Court, a Chinese named Ah see was fined $50 for illegally distilling arrack at Rambungan, and his wife was fined $25 for offering a bribe to the Tua Kampong in connection with her husband’s case. Musa bin Snin was sentenced to 1 year’s R.I. under I.P.C. 170 and to wear irons for three months.
In the Native Court, William anak Tana was fined 30 reals for soliciting women in the jungle. The Orang Kaya of the Slakon Dyaks said there was no custom about this and asked that defendant, having been found guilty, should be fined double that which would be imposed had he solicited in a house.
Police and Prison. -The prison gang, averaging 5.6, were employed in repairing the roads and bridges damaged by the heavy rain on 4th.
From the 9th onwards extra guards were put on the jail at night, there being two condemned men within.
Marine. -The Lundu Motor Ship Company continues to give every dissatisfaction, the La Palette disappearing to Balingian for a fortnight and no relief ship being run.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall for the month was 18.12 inches, the greatest in any one day being 6.59 inches.
Trade. -The total returns for the month and for comparison with those for the corresponding month of last year were at follows: -
SADONG.
March, 1932.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports: -
Court. -Five ex-Mine coolies (Foochow), who were planting padi under Government subsidy, attempted to abscond on 19/3/32, and having been caught were all sentenced to one month R. I. under an Order of 8th June, 1898 (absconding under advances). A recommendation was made by the Court that they should be repatriated on release as undesirable. Five other minor cases came before the Court for non-payment of fines, etc. Civil claims were practically nil.
Closing down of Sadong Coal Mines. -Mr. J. W. Evans, the Manager of the Mines, left Sadong on the 10th on retirement, having handed over all surplus mine stocks to me. These have been taken over on behalf of the Public Works Department, and lists of material, etc., were sent to them.
The mine accounts were audited by the Auditor, Mr. McLaine, and sent to Kuching.
Land. Land Inspectors made twenty-four inspections, and forty-eight titles were issued for 176 acres in all.
Prisons. -Prisoners averaged 16.4 end were employed chiefly on storing and lifting mine material and assisting the clerk in charge of listing the same, and in the usual routine work of the station.
Travelling. -I made a tour of outlying parts of the district, starting at Sebangan Kampong Tungkah on the 17th, where I inspected the house of Lee Ah Chang (who was ordered to remove some months ago) in re his claim of $250 for compensation. I found that a Malay had built the bouse for $30 and have reported fully on this matter elsewhere. From Tungkah I proceeded to Bintangor (R. Minggat), then up the Kapayang to Rumah Tawan at Ulu Kapayang (12 hours’ paddle). This is a little used stream and overgrown, as the Bintangor Dyaks use it only (or working jelutong and the Ulu Kapayang Dyaks can reach Simunjan quicker via Munggu Ayer, and the few houses in it have moved to Temiang which is closer to Simunjan. Staying two nights at Rumah Tawan I walked to Munggu Ayer and paddled to Sematong (Rumah Lapok) the same day; from there I walked across to Rumah Enga at the head of Dano Propok, reaching it after four hours walking on a good hilly path via Spau and Gunong Paujan, From Enga’s house I paddled down the lake to Ah
Bok’s house at its lower end (taking 1 1/2 hours).
The next day I paddled up the Stabu to Penghulu Ringkai’s house and, after staying the night, walked across to the Ulu Bari down to the Gedong river and up it to Balai Ringin (arriving at 2 p.m.); from there I walked to Orang Kaya Rapak’s house at Antadu (3 p.m.).
The next day I walked across to Sungei Merbo, visiting two houses on the way, and paddled down to the Gedong river again below Nanga Bari, where the launch was waiting. Staying that night at Gedong I arrived back in Simunjan on the 26th.
Some fifteen Dyak houses were visited and nothing of importance was brought up at any of them.
The padi harvest was not quite complete but appeared to be a large one.
The matter of quit rent was brought up at all houses, the majority of whom said they had no money to pay, especially on rubber which they are not tapping. They were informed that the reduction to fifty cents per acre was a concession in view of the low price of this crop and that they would not be pressed for payment until after the Harvest.
Owing to my not having received the Amendment to Order No. A -2 (Arms) until the day before I left on this tour (the 16th), I explained to those who had been doubled under the old time limit (January 31st) that the Amendment allowed them until
March 31st to pay gun tax, and that those who had been so doubled would not be required to pay for 1933.
An old woman was found in Rumah Minggat, Bintangor, secluded in a large wooden cage in the plabu. The Tuai Rumah stated she went mad once every three years and become so violent they had to lock her up. I talked to her and found her conversation most abnormal and ordered Minggat to bring her to Simunjan for her to be sent to Kuching Hospital.
Visitors to the Station were: -Mr. A. L. McLaine, Government Auditor, Captain A. W. G. Gibson, Harbour Master, Kuching, and Mr G. St. F. Dare of the Agricultural Department.
Rainfall. -Amounted to 23.4 inches.
Trade and Customs. -Comparative trade returns are as follows: -
During the month thirteen vessels entered and fourteen cleared the port.
Native Affairs.
March, 1932.
Extracts from the Report of the Secretary for Native Affairs, Mr. P. M. Adams: -
I returned from the punitive expedition against Asun and his followers in the Third Division on the eighth.
Their Highnesses the Rajah and Tuan Muda visited the mosque, the repairs to which have now been completed.
The filing of a petition for divorce against his wife by the Tuan Khatib caused a certain amount of resentment amongst some of the Malays, who talk of boycotting the new mosque.
A petition has been received from Kampong Bako Malays making certain allegations against the Tua Kampong; these are being investigated.
The annual examination for Government Officers was held from 21st to 25th when 20 candidates were examined.
This Department assisted the heirs of Lim Nya Chee (f.) in contesting her will in the Supreme Court. The case has been adjourned for consideration.
I regret to report the deaths of T.K. Brahim of Kampong No. 3 and T.K. Esip of Kampong Padungan.
Cambridge Local Examination.
The results of the Examination held last December at the local centre have come to hand this month.
The following candidates were successful: -
Out of a total of seventy-two passes (boys) for the Junior Examination at the centres in China, Mauritius. Sarawak and Seychelles, fourteen came from St. Thomas’ School, Sarawak.
The results on the whole were very satisfactory.
St. Thomas sent up nineteen candidates for the Junior of whom fourteen were successful. St. Mary’s School presented five of whom three passed.
In the Preliminary Examination out of a possible twenty-three St. Thomas’ School obtained twenty successes. St. Joseph’s out of fourteen entries had nine passes and St. Mary’s School who presented six candidates had five successes.
Notice.
The Sarawak Turf Club is still prepared to obtain racing ponies from B. N. Borneo and sell them to subscriber for $100 provided not lets than eight ponies are guaranteed by subscribers. Intending buyers are asked to notify the undersigned.
P. M. ADAMS,
Hon. Sec., S.T.C.
Sarawak Turf Club.
Anyone holding Ticket No. 250 for Race 4 Second Day Spring Meeting, 1932, Cash Sweep, should present same to Honorary Secretary before the expiration of six months from April 4th.
Sarawak Turf Club.
SPRING RACE MEETING.
RESULTS.
First Day.
Saturday, 2nd April, 1932.
(GOING FAIR.)
RACE 1. -2.30 p.m.
THE TUAN MUDA’S CUP. 6 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
Kim Mah led from Kismet, Flying Fox. and Ol’ Man River. Just before the road Flying Fox moved up to Kim Mah and Kismet dropped back. Halfway up the straight Kim Mah seemed to hold a slender chance but was forced to give Flying Fox best.
RACE 2. -3 p.m. THE SATOK STAKES. 5 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
Talisman, Water Polo, Pengarah and Workman got away in a bunch Azab sticking his toes in as usual was hopelessly left. September was lying back at the road, where Water Polo took command of the situation and raced home a length to spare from September, who made up a lot of ground and headed Talisman for second honours.
RACE 3. -3.30 p.m. THE B.C.L. STAKES. 6 furlongs.
DIVISION III.
A bunched field to the road after which Beaver came out on the stand-side and was never seriously troubled.
RACE 4. -4 p.m. SIMPANG TIGA STAKES. 3 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
Kim Mah jumped off in front and stayed there all the way home, Flying Fox was carrying a penalty of 7 lbs. and Akal accepted 5 lbs. overweight. Adil pulled up dead lame.
RACE 5. -4.30 p.m. THE MATANG STAKES. 4 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
Azab got off this time but rather slowly, but had caught up at the road. Coming into the straight Talisman got shut in and had pull into the middle of the Course. At this point Workman was going well and looked like a winner. He had faded out at the Ara Tree, and it seemed to lie between Water Polo and Talisman. But Azab had enough in reserve to just hang on to win from Talisman by a small margin and pay a large dividend.
RACE 6. -5 p.m. THE PENDING STAKES. 3 furlongs.
DIVISION III.
Beaver and Gruda got away together and the race was always between these two. Beaver led coming into the straight and won cleverly from Gruda.
RACE 7. -5.30 p.m. THE RANEE’S CUP. 1 Mile. OPEN TO ALL DIVISIONS.
Talisman was leading from Flying Fox, September and Akal at the five furlong mark. Soon after this Flying Fox went to the front and left everything standing winning as he liked.
Weather fine but going holding after continual rain.
Second Day.
Monday, 4th April, 1932.
(GOING HEAVY.)
RACE 1. -2.30 p.m. THE SLUMP STAKES. 5 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
Flying Fox and Akal got away together with Kim Mah starting slowly. At the three furlong mark Akal was still hanging on to Flying Fox but once in the straight the latter galloped away from him to win comfortably.
RACE 2. -3 p.m. THE COUNTRY STAKES. 6 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
Pengarah showed the way from Water Polo, September and Workman, with Azab starting slowly. At the road Pengarah and Water Polo dropped back, and September took the lead with Workman going nicely and Azab moving up from the back. At the, Ara Tree Workman was coming up well but failed to catch September by a neck.
RACE 3. -3.30 p.m. THE SARAWAK STAKES. 5 furlongs.
DIVISION III.
A bunch field to the road where Jorrocks held to the advantage of a slight lead from Beaver. This he hung on to in a close finish. Beaver twisted himself during the race and finished lame.
RACE 4. -4 p.m. THE TURF CLUB STAKES. 4 furlongs.
DIVISION I.
Kim Mah took the lead almost at once and won easily.
RACE 5. -4.30 p.m. THE STATE SPRINT. 3 furlongs.
DIVISION II.
A very level start except for Azab who dwelt as usual. After coming into the straight Water Polo was pulled right across the course on to the ditch, first of all interfering with Workman and later pushing Pengarah, who was coming np on the inside with a good winning chance, into the ditch and unseating his jockey. The Stewards took the matter up and after an inquiry Bakar was fined $10 and suspended for the rest of the Meeting. He was also cautioned that a repetition of such riding would mean warning off altogether.
RACE 6. -5 p.m. THE STRAITS CUP. 4 furlongs.
DIVISION III.
Jorrocks took the lead almost at once with Gruda the only danger but this challenge he staved off to win by half a length.
RACE 7. -5.30 p.m. THE RAJAH’S CUP. Round the Course (1 1/3 Miles.)
A HANDICAP FOR ALL DIVISIONS.
A level start from which Talisman showed in front at the Sekama gate. The field came into view again well strung out. Visibility was bad owing to dusk and rain. But Flying Fox was lying second to Talisman and at the four furlong mark came up to him and once in the straight drew away steadily to win without effort.
The going on the second day was some of the worst ever experienced of late.
Second Division News.
February, 1932.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports for February, 1932. by Mr. E. O. Bruce, Acting Resident: -
Chinese New Year was observed as a Public Holiday on the 6th and Hari Raya on the 9th, when Government Offices closed.
Instructions were received from Kuching to mobilize a force of ex-Rangers for duty in Third Division. I accompanied them to Lingga to supervise the mobilisation and embarkation by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna, which arrived on the 11th with His Highness the Tuan Muda, Mr. P. M. Adams, Secretary for Native Affairs, and Captain R. E. Le Sueur.
The vessel sailed at noon for Sibu and I accompanied His Highness the Tuan Muda the same afternoon to Simanggang. The following day the assembled Native Officers and Penghulus met His Highness, the object of whose friendly visit to the houses of Dyak Chiefs in the Ulu was discussed with great satisfaction. It is undoubtedly true that the previous news of His Highness’ visit already has, and will further relieve uneasiness amongst upriver Dyaks, where, as already reported, uncertainty exists as to the probable attitude of certain communities near the Divisional boundary, to the operations taking place in the Third Division to effect the arrest of the rebel Asun and his parties of followers.
In this connection His Highness, accompanied by Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft. Abang Abu Talip, Native Officer. O.K. Jaul and Penghulu Isek, together with a small patrol are including a visit to the headwaters of the Engkari river as part of the pre-arranged itinerary.
I accompanied them as far as Penghulu Imong’s house which was reached on the 13th, whence they continued their journey while I returned to Simanggang, arriving on the 15th.
During the month Pengiran Azit and Penghulu Sait, accompanied by a small party of police, have been patrolling the Ulu Skrang area and calming excitement occasioned by stone throwing at Janin’s house, as mentioned previously, which tends to increase.
On the 17th it was reported that one of the inmates of Janin’s house, a Memaloh Dyak named Luat, had been fatally speared while attempting to establish the identity of the offenders at night. The timely arrival of Pangiran Azit with his small party stopped a panic, while Mr. Daubeny, District Officer, Betong, effected a quick direct trip overland arriving the following day, with the result that calm was restored and arrangements made for an increase and redistribution of patrols.
On the 25th Penghulu Sait’s party were disturbed while asleep in a small house apparently by a member of the same band of lurkers, who made a stealthy attempt on the life of the person nearest the door, happening to be Penghulu Sait himself, who fortunately escaped with a very slight wound. The aggressor was seen to leap to the ground, and was immediately chased, but escaped in the dark. Any immediate aggressive action to capture these as yet unknown criminals, before the Asun affair is settled, would undoubtedly involve neighbouring streams, and develop into guerilla tactics which might prejudice operations in the Third Division nearby.
All efforts therefore have been directed towards pacifying the neighbourhood and preventing independent action by parties especially Memaloh Dyak visitors desirous of revenging themselves.
Abang Sidek, Native Officer, and Penghulu Suel were posted in the Ulu Lemanak while Abang Bunsu, Native Officer, and Penghulu Jabieng have been patrolling the Layar and Spak waters.
Pengarah Isek is unfortunately on the sick list with fever.
The Postmaster-General, Mr. K. H, Gillan, accompanied by Mr. W. Tait, Telegraph Department, visited Simanggang and discussed arrangements connected with the amalgamation of the Posts and Telegraphs Departments. They returned to Kuching on the 20th.
In the lower Saribas a Chinese hawker was murdered about the 27th probably for interfering with Malay womenfolk. The actual murderer has not yet been identified but the matter is being investigated.
His Highness the Tuan Muda and party arrived from Engkilili on the 29th, and several important matters were discussed.
Arrangements were made for His Highness’ return to Kuching on the 2nd proximo.
The immediate shortage of food, reported last month, has in most cases been relieved by the temporary steps which were instituted, and the start of the fruit season, combined with the recent harvesting in most districts. It is probably however, that there will be a shortage of paddi in many houses whose crops were destroyed by floods last month.
The proposal for the installation of telephone communication with Engkilili and beyond if possible has been submitted to Kuching, and preparatory work was undertaken with the clearing of the old footpath along the ridge of small hills between Sabu and Marup.
SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas: -
General. -On the 2nd I inspected part of the rentis of the proposed now road or telephone line from Simanggang to Engkilili. This rentis follows the top of the ridge of Bukit Rayah to Marup. It would be easy to put a telephone line along the rentis, but a road for motor traffic I consider could only be made at great expense, on the other hand a good dry path could be easily made.
Chinese New Year was celebrated by a dinner in the Simanggang Recreation Club.
On the 11th the Resident went to Lingga with ex-Rangers, who had been recruited, to go to Sibu in connection with the Asun affair.
The Acting Resident met His Highness the Tuan Muda who arrived in Simanggang the same evening.
On the 13th His Highness the Tuan Muda, accompanied by the Acting Resident and Mr. Barcroft, proceeded up river.
On the 25th whilst Penghulu Sait was sleeping in a small Dyak house in the Ulu Skrang an attempt was made on his life, a spear being thrust at him, it luckily only penetrated his shirt and bruised his ribs. The assailant managed to make good his escape in the dark.
Medical. -Chicken-pox was reported at Banting by Penghulu Angkun.
During the month 292 out-patients and 120 N.A.B. injections were attended to both at the Hospital and Engkilili, where 120 vaccinations were also performed.
Total rainfall for the month was 7.79 inches.
Prisons. -Prisoners were employed on the usual duties. One gang was employed constructing a road through a piece of land, which has been set aside for Chinese Paupers from behind the bazaar.
The harvesting of Government paddi was commenced by some of the prisoners on the 23rd.
Court. -Two cases were heard in the District Court, one of which was criminal and one civil, A case was brought by the State against Jee Phin for cheating, under section 417 I.P.C.
Twenty-six cases were heard in the Magistrate’s Court, ten of which were criminal and sixteen civil. Of the ten criminal cases five were convictions and five dismissed.
The civil claims involved amounts totalling $503.48. Fines imposed $95.88. and fees collected $90.35.
Trade and Customs: -
ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Officer in-Charge, Mr. S. G. Hansom: -
Court. -Ten criminal cases were heard in the Lower Courts and ten convictions were obtained.
Civil claims amounting to $2,60.5.94 were heard. Fines imposed amounted to $112.20. Court fees collected $54.75.
Forty-three Deeds were registered in Engkilili Court.
General. -Abang Abu Talip, Native Officer, returned to Engkilili from the Ulu Ai on the 4th instant, where he had been sent to make inquiries into several matters before the impending visit of His Highness the Tuan Muda to this District.
Abang Sidek, Native Officer, was sent up the Lemanak on the 15th instant with instructions to stay up river until recalled. His arrival in the Ulu Lemanak was timed to coincide with the arrival of His Highness and party in the Ulu Engkari.
I was in Simanggang from the 6th to 9th instant primarily in connection with arrangements for His Highness the Tuan Muda’s impending visit up river.
On the 13th instant His Highness the Tuan Muda arrived at Engkilili, accompanied by the Acting Resident, Mr. E. O. Bruce, who later returned to Simanggang, Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft. Abang Abu Talip, Orang Kaya Jaul, and 25 ex-Rangers.
His Highness and party returned to Engkilili on Sunday the 28th instant, after visiting the Engkari, Ulu Ai. Lobang Baya and Delok, and returned to Simanggang the following day by boat, after spending the night at Engkilili.
Applications have been received and approved, to build an extension of two shops in Engkilili bazaar, and the work is now well under way. Applications have also been received to rebuild three of the shops in the block which was destroyed by fire in 1930.
One obtains a general impression that the bazaar traders are well in funds after the year’s harvest, in spite of the many troubles in connection with the local pepper industry during the second half of last year, and the losses which they claim to have suffered.
Gold. -The Gold Prospecting Licence for the new “Kongsi” at Marup, was issued on the 22nd instant. Work is proceeding under the supervision of Hong Hoi Kee of Chop Hoi Kee, Kuching
Trade and Customs: -
Rainfall. -A total of 5.95 inches was recorded for February.
LANDS.
Extracts from the report of the Divisional Land Officer Mr. B. Summers: -
On the 10th instant myself, accompanied by one Inspector. proceeded to and divided up the new pauper reserve into fourteen lots of 1/4 acre each; this is a sufficient area for a small house to be built and for vegetables to be planted; swamp land in the close vicinity will be alienated at a later date.
Some difficulty is experienced in issuing Occupation Tickets to pepper planters before the “crop,” owing to their lack of funds; if the garden is being mortgaged, then the “Towkay” advances the sum required, but if the planter has no “Towkay” the difficulty arises through lack of funds.
On the 20th instant the Acting Resident informed the paupers, at present living behind the Simanggang bazaar, that they would be allowed one month in which to move to the new land alienated for them.
State Farming Land at Tanjong Apit. -On the 25th instant Abang Omar proceeded to Tanjong Apit to xamine State Farming Land, which is farmed by local Dyaks and Malays; this land is continually increasing in area owing to the river changing its course. Originally in 1917 this land was divided up by the Resident. Mr. Page-Turner, owing to the area increasing, whereas at the present time the area is again increasing and in the course of two or three years time will be fit for farming.
It is intended that all State Farming lands be examined and sketches made, so that proper record can be kept of same and also of those who farm there.
In the course of the next month one Assistant Land Inspector will be transferred from Betong to Simanggang, thereby increasing the staff to three; this transfer will accelerate the verification of garden boundaries after survey so as to increase the issue of Occupation Tickets.
SARIBAS DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the District Officer, Betong. Mr. R. L. Daubeny: -
Court. -An inquiry was held on 29th instant in re the murder of one Lim Chang Kei at Tanjong Assam, Saribas river, on the night of 25th instant at about the hour of 9 p.m. This inquiry was adjourned for further investigation.
Travelling. -From 6th to 11th instant I was away up the Ulu Layar visiting outlying districts. On 19th I left for Rumah Janen, S. Akop, Skrang, via S. Padeh and Pelepok, in order to investigate the stone throwing and spearing of one Luat by unknown marauders. I returned to Betong on 23rd via Simanggang. Separate reports on the above have duly been forwarded. On 26th I left for Pusa and Debak for a short visit and returned here again on 28th instant.
Penghulu Jabieng and L.C. Inang made a round trip up the Spak and down the Layar and reported everything quiet.
Abang Bunsu. Native Officer, whom I took with me to the S. Akop, returned down the Spak via N. Muman. He reported that Juti’s house had also had stones thrown at it but the inhabitants did not seem to be particularly worried.
General. -On Thursday night 25th a most brutal murder took place at Tanjong Assam, the deceased being one Lim Chang Koi, a boat trader from Spaoh. The matter is now being investigated but up to the present no trace of the assailants can be discovered.
On the 16th instant the Right Reverend Bishop of Labuan and Sarawak arrived from Kuching in the m.l. Santosa, accompanied by Reverend Bradshaw and Reverend Sparraw, the latter joins the Reverend W. Linton at St. Augustine’s Mission, Betong.
Trade: -
Shipping. -Eight motor vessels entered and cleared during the month.
KALAKA DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. L. K. Morse: -
Dyak Affairs. -Many Dyaks were down during the month to clear the telephone rentis. The opportunity was taken to hold an Aum.
Many questions came up and were satisfactorily settled.
General. -I walked over to Roban on the 22nd and returned to Saratok on the 26th.
Trade. -Trade and Shipping returns for the month are not yet hand.
Third Division News.
SIBU.
February, 1932.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports for February, 1932, by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident: -
General. -Travelling District Officer, Mr. Cutfield, visited Kanowit during the month and made final arrangements for the expedition against Asun.
Mr. Taylor, of the Government Workshop, arrived on the 9th instant in order to make the annual survey of all launches in the Division.
Left on the 12th instant for Binatang accompanied by the Travelling District Officer. Mr. Cutfield, and met Secretary Native Affairs Mr. P. M Adams, and District Officer, Kuching, Captain Le Sueur, with reservists. I left two-thirds of the force under the Travelling District Officer and Secretary Native Affairs to proceed overland to Entabai, and Captain Le Sueur left for Sibu and then for the Entabai via Kanowit on the 13th inst. We all were still away at the end of the month.
SIBU.
Mr. H. B. Crocker, for District Officer, reports: -
Cattle. -At the suggestion of the Director of Agriculture one bull, four calves, and six stots, were shipped from Kapit and sold to the local butchers. The price realized at auction was $301 which is a reasonable figure considering the general shortage of money, and the difficulty experienced by the butchers in collecting debts. The local price of beef is 45 cents a kati.
The offices were closed on the 6th, 8th, 9th and 24th for Chinese New Year, Hari Raya and H. H. the Ranee’s Birthday.
Their Highnesses the Ranee and Dayangs Elizabeth and Valerie, who visited this station on January 30th, were the guests of the Resident and Mrs. Adams, and returned to Kuching by H.H.M.Y. Maimunah on the 2nd.
The weather was unusually fine for the time of year and the ripening rice crops have benefited accordingly.
KAPIT.
Mr. D. C. Hudden, Acting Assistant District Officer, reports: -
Song. -The Native Officer, Abang Sleh, was away most of the month travelling in the Katibas and tributaries.
Constabulary. -There were several bad cases of fever and P. C. Buli was absent in Sibu Hospital for nearly three weeks. All the Beluga police have decided to become village policemen.
Dairy Farm. -The herd numbered thirty-nine at the end of the month. One stot was killed on the eve of “Hari Raya” and eleven head were shipped to Sibu for slaughter on the 27th, per P.W.D. motor tongkang Wullie.
Native Affairs. -Penghulus Atan and Manok Manchai were down during the month.
All the natives are now on their farms harvesting, and reports, so far, are quite satisfactory.
Native Officer Abang Abu Seman started on a visit to the Mujong on the 28th.
General. -Mr. J. L. Noakes, Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, with his party of Surveyors, etc., departed for Sibu on the 7th.
Some sort of epidemic broke out on the 12th resulting in the death of altogether five children, and the sickness of about twenty others. Dresser Suhaili visited the station in this connection.
A Foochow named Ling Noh Moh was brought in on the evening of the 4th with a severed artery in his right forearm. He was sent to Sibu by first boat and returned at the end of the month. Imagining that he had shot and killed a Kijang he picked it up by a fore leg, but the animal turned and pierced his arm.
All four boats were sent to Sibu on the 3rd per s.s Soon Ann for use in the Kanowit expedition.
The wireless broke down again on the 18th, occasioning a further visit by Mr. Webb.
Other visitors to the station during the month were Reverend Fathers Klerk and Williams (Jesselton), Brother Charles and Brother Leo, from the mouth of the Yong where they are building a chapel, and Messrs. Chaplin (Borneo Company, Ltd.) and Gifford (British-American Tobacco Company, Ltd., Singapore).
Rainfall. -Rainfall for the month was 12.15 inches. Belaga rainfall for January was 10.38 and for February 7.64 inches.
MUKAH AND OYA.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. E. M. Woodward, reports: -General. -The 1st January, New Year’s Day, was observed as a public holiday and the Government Offices were closed on that day.
The Mukah and Balingian Dyaks who attended the Dyak meeting and the Regatta at Sibu at the New Year returned home from Sibu during the early part of the month.
On the 8th instant Electrical Department and P.W.D. Stores were correctly handed over to clerks W. Chua Tamby and Alphousus Boo respectively by clerk Wee Ah Loo who resigned from Government service as from the 1st instant.
Bulan Puasa commenced at 6 p.m. on the 9th instant and a salute of six guns was fired at that hour.
During the month the number of days for which wages and boat hire are payable to coolies who carry mail, etc., on a return trip between Balingian and Mukah was fixed at not more than five days.
During the earlier part of the month the Foochows at Skoyan pleaded that they were out of work owing to the fact that their gardens had been flooded as a result of high water and the incessant rains experienced recently, and requested Government to give them employment. Accordingly, during the latter part of the month seven of these Foochows were employed in clearing that part of the “Kuala padang” which was not cleared by tax defaulters last year. The area to be cleared was about two-fifths of the “Kuala padang” and measured about ten acres, and the work of clearing is being done by these Foochows under contract. They worked hard and by the end of the month had completed about half their contract.
During the latter part of the month a slight food shortage was experienced owing to the late arrival from Kuching of m.s Kim Chin Soon, which was obliged to shelter for 13 days en route owing to rough seas. She left Kuching on the 12th instant and was weather-bound at Muaratebas for six days, and at Tanjong Jol for another seven days, eventually arriving here on the 24th instant, by which time much of the perishable cargo on board had gone rotten.
Visitors to the station during the month were the Very Reverend Father Epping, Rector, Roman Catholic Mission, Dalat, and the Reverend Fathers Buis and Van der Laar who had travelled from Kanowit via the Ulu Oya and Dalat. On the 30th instant the Very Reverend Father Anthony Mulder, Rector, R.C. Mission, Mukah, proceeded to Kuching via Sibu.
During the month the daily number of prisoners averaged 30.38. They were employed on the roads, ditches, transport of coal from the coal dump in Kampong Datu to the waterworks pump station, and on the general upkeep of the station.
Constabulary. -Constable No. 5 Mohamad bin Haji Rub was commended for prompt action and presence of mind in assisting in the recapture of prisoner Nordin, and two Government Mowers Semail and Pi-ee were paid pecuniary rewards also for assisting in the recapture.
During the month the fourteen ex-policemen who resigned from Government service on the 1st instant, since they did not wish to serve in the new Sarawak Constabulary, received bonuses, and salary in lieu of leave was also paid to those of them who were entitled to leave.
P.W.D. -A temporary wooden retaining wall, with earth filling behind, was constructed along the eroding river bank road between the end of the Main Bazaar and Kuala Penakup, pending the construction of groins along this stretch of the river bank.
Agriculture. -During the month the Dyak padi crop situated near the river level was reported to have been destroyed by floods, as a result of high water and the incessant rains experienced recently. This, if true, is most unfortunate since the local Dyak is poor and has bad a succession of poor padi harvests, and many as a result request Government support which in the circumstances will be difficult to refuse, but which owing to financial stringency will be still more difficult to give. The hill padi crops are, however, reported to be good and are said to be ripening rapidly as a result of a period of fine and sunny weather succeeding the recent rains, which have therefore been beneficial as well as destructive to the padi crops.
During the month the Foochows at Skoyan were given some Java Tobacco seeds to plant as an experiment.
Balingian. -On the 19th instant clerk Spencer Cheyne took over the duties of Court Writer, Balingian, from clerk F. M. Umpi who proceeded to Dalat to relieve clerk Munan as Court Writer of that station.
Rainfall. -Mukah rainfall figures for the month were as follows: -
Trade. -Mukah trade returns for the month, as compared to those for the corresponding month last year, were as follows: -
OYA AND DALAT.
Mr. N. E. Hughes, Acting Assistant District Officer, reports: -
Court. -Court work was normal during the month. No cases call for mention.
Damage done by recent storms to the boat-sheds at Oya and Dalat was made good, new posts and roofs being fitted where required.
Police. -Training was continued during the month, and fair progress resulted. On February 3rd three of the new police accompanied Wan Hussien, Native Officer, on an extended trip to the ulu Oya to learn upriver work.
Three recruits were discharged at the end of the month as unlikely to become efficient.
Prisons. -Prisoners were employed on the roads and the general upkeep of the station. Discipline was good.
Dalat. -The roads at Dalat are still in a bad condition owing to the recent floods, and it is difficult to know how to improve them. Surfaces of gravel, sand and cinders have all been tried in the past, but never seem to have survived the monsoon.
The station generally is much better kept now under the supervision of Corporal Mansor than it was previously, but the lack of a mower is noticeable. Permission to engage a mower has been applied for.
Dyaks. -All the Dyaks fined in January for illegal diving paid their fines during the month.
On February 15th news was received that Bantan, Indit and two others had escaped from Sibu Jail. P.C. Driss left next day to warn both Penghulus in case these Dyaks should make for the ulu Oya. He returned ten days later to report all well up river, except that the Dyaks are faced with a shortage of padi this year owing to much of their padi having been destroyed by the floods. There was no news of the escaped prisoners, but Tuai Rumah Chindang of Sungei Paku was warned to keep a careful look-out for them.
On February 29th a letter was received with the information that His Highness the Rajah had been pleased to appoint Tuai Rumah Chindang as Penghulu of Sungei Paku and tributaries. This appointment of a third Penghulu for the Oya District should prove of great assistance to Government, since Penghulu Chindang will control a large area on the Kanowit side of the Batang Oya through which runs the main ulu Oya-Kanowit road.
The Paku District has been much neglected in the post, since the houses are distributed among four separate rivers, and are rather inaccessible.
On February 15th Wan Hussien, Native Officer, and four police left for upriver with instructions to make an extended tour of the ulu Oya. Sungei Paku and tributaries, and in particular to investigate and report on the difficulties between Christian Dyaks and pagans at Rumah Palus.
General. -On Hari Raya the customary visits were paid and returned, and in the afternoon a display of Malay dancing took place in the bungalow grounds.
On Sunday, 13th February, a thanksgiving ceremony was held and Melanaus from all the down-river villages took part. All the fishing vessels were decorated and paraded slowly in procession from Boom Isut past Kampong Oya, then back to the mouth where they anchored. Temporary shelters had been erected on the beach in readiness and, after the Mosque Officials and local elders had offered prayers for the success and prosperity of the fishing fleet during the coming season, refreshments were served, and the afternoon was given over to main of various descriptions. It was a most picturesque and interesting ceremony, and reflected great credit on the organisers.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall recorded for the mouth was 6.41 inches.
Shipping. -Two motor schooners and throe schooners and one motor schooner and three schooners cleared.
Trade. -167 koyans raw sago, 150 piculs gutta jelutong and 14 piculs gutta para were shipped to Kuching.
The trade returns for the month and for comparison with those of the same month last year are as follows: -
MATU AND DARO.
January, 1932.
Mr. F. L. G. Crossley, Officer-in-Charge, reports: -	Court. -Owing to the absence of the Officer-in-Charge there were no cases in Court.
P.W.D. -At the beginning of the month prisoners were engaged in building a temporary bridge from the clerks’ quarters to the office, which was necessary owing to high water, the roads being flooded. The roads were badly damaged from the same cause. From the middle till the end of the month prisoners were engaged in whitewashing Government quarters.
Cattle. -Fire head of cattle died during the month in the Government Dairy Farm owing to the sickness brought on by the floods, which covered the meadow for a fortnight.
General. -The Officer-in-Charge was called to Sibu on the 23rd December, 1931, and had not returned at the end of the month. On the 3rd Assistant Wireless Operator John Ho arrived to take up his duties as assistant.
February, 1932.
General. -I returned to the district on the 12th, at the conclusion of a term of duly in the District Office, Sibu.
Court. -A large amount of accumulated work was cleared up during the month. No rises are worthy of mention. Fines amounted to $90.14 and fees to $58.25.
Administration. -A large petition was put in by the people of Kampong Bawang against T.R. Rasidi. Defalcations in connection with the Bawang Mosque accounts in 1922-1923 were alleged. The inquiry was adjourned for examination of Government accounts during this period.
Land and Agriculture. -During high tide a large amount of sago was felled. Consequently, the people were urged to open new sago land, and fifteen new application tickets were issued.
Practically all padi crops have been harvested. The yield is below average.
Travelling. -I was at Daro from the 23rd to the end of the month. Bruan was visited on the 19th.
P.W.D. -Bridges and culverts in Daro, severely damaged by recent floods, were repaired by prison labour. No contract for upkeep of roads in Daro is to be made this year, as prison labour will be utilized.
In Matu there was plenty of work in repairing damage to roads and the ornamental grounds, a result of the heavy floods.
Dairy Farm. -As the bungalow cattle-ground will be practically useless for a month or two, the herd is being transferred temporarily to Kuala Matu cattle-ground.
SARIKEI, BINATANG AND REJANG.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports: -
Fines and fees collected during the month were $159.
General. -On 13th instant H.H.M.Y. Maimuna arrived at Binatang together with Messrs. P. M. Adams and Capt. R. E. Le Sueur, in charge of a batch of ex-Rangers from the 2nd Division. The Resident and Mr. H. E. Cutfield joined the party later. A part of the force disembarked at Binatang, under Messrs. P. M. Adams and H. E. Cutfield, the Resident and Capt. R. E. Le Sueur returning to Sibu with the rest of the force. On Sunday 14th Messrs. P. M. Adams and H. E. Cutfield proceeded up the Binatang accompanied by the force and 15 Malays.
Celebrations of Chinese New Year were on a much smaller scale than usual on account of the shortage of money. Hari Raya was celebrated as usual by the Mohammedans. The Binatang Malaya held Hari Raya the previous day to those of Sarikei, maintaining that Monday was the correct day, and not on Tuesday as stated in the Government Almanac.
The padi harvest has started, and the Malays report a very fair crop. The Chinese crop is very good in certain districts, and again there are many reports of failure. The Dyaks say that they think in most cases there will be sufficient for their needs.
P.W.D. -Work is being carried out on the Nyelong Road, all by prison labour only, and after certain places have been made up, which were left owing to the growth of padi, it is hoped by the end of March that the extension from the Repok Road towards the Nyelong will be opened for about five miles.
Work is still in progress on the new Police Barracks which are nearing completion.
The posts for the new jail were completed during the month. Owing to the condition of the ground these had to be set in cement.
Trade and Customs. -At the end of February there was still a considerable amount of pepper in the bazaar, which the towkays are holding up for a better price.
The following are the trade returns for the month at Sarikei: -
Fourth Division News.
MIRI.
February, 1932.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports for February, 1932, by Mr. F. G. Carpenter, for Resident: -
The Offices were closed for the Chinese New Year and Hari Raya holidays from the 6th to 9th inclusive. The Chinese and Malays celebrated their respective holidays in a quieter spirit than formerly.
The principal head-men concerned in the collecting of birdsnests from the Niah caves were called up to discuss with Mr. Banks, Curator of the Museum, his suggestions to improve the methods of collecting and the yield. After a lengthy discussion the head-men agreed to give Mr. Bank’s suggestions a trial for say three years, and a local order has now been drafted controlling the collecting, and also reserving a certain area of jungle in the vicinity of the caves.
I was able to proceed to Bintulu by s.s. Margaret on the 21st, through the courtesy of the Steamship Company in allowing their boat to call off Bintulu mouth, and returned on the 26th by s.s. Auby. It is not often that one is able to make this connection.
Certain Foochows appealed against the decision of the Lower Court in respect of some land. The decision of the Lower Court, though upheld in the main, was slightly altered.
As the 24th was Her Highness the Ranee’s birthday, I took the opportunity of inspecting the waterworks dam. Considerable inconvenience may be caused in the future by falls of earth covering the pipe-line to a depth of several feet.
The Managers of the Bintulu and Sebauh Sawmills were had up Court and warned as to the payment of their timber royalties.
Nearly all the police who obtained their discharge at the end of the year from the Bintulu Force are now willing to obtain any work at any salary.
Abang Naga, pensioner, died on the 24th January. He joined the Service as a Second Native Officer, Bintulu, on 1st August, 1917, and retired on pension on 30th June, 1929, owing to a serious illness which left him unfitted to carry out his duties.
Messrs. Morice and Field proceeded to Bintulu on the 3rd. The former has been appointed to do duty there temporality to take charge of the district until the appointment of another officer. The latter went on inspection duty.
Messrs. Carpenter and Hanson were granted local leave from 5th to 9th inclusive to Kuching.
BINTULU.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. W. H. Morice, reports: -
Court. -Fines imposed for the month amounted to $210.94 Litigation was normal.
Prison. -The gang averaged nineteen at the end of the month and was employed on the general upkeep of the station.
Police. -Numbered fourteen including one N.C.O. at the end of the month. Two village constables resigned and three were engaged locally. P.C. Tair retired on pension after twenty-one years and five mouths valuable service.
P.W.D. -The pipe line is in good order. Tanks were cleaned. Water was laid on to one Kampong house. Minor repairs were done to the standpipes, owing to the brass nut in the taps being worn out and water running loose. Prisoners were engaged on extensive repairs to the Malay Court. As sanctioned by the Resident, a contract was made with Ting Pek Khee to supply labour for sawing the Government stock of timber at Tatau at fifteen cents per piece, size 1’x8’x 12’.
Trade and Customs. -The trade statistics for the month are as under: -
The principal exports during the month were as follows: -
Health. -The health of the station was good for the month. On the 17th I inspected the shophouses in the bazaar re the new latrines proposed by Mr. Andreini, I find these are not feasible as the fifteen feet depth required is impossible owing to the fact that at merely five feet depth the river comes in.
There were seventeen N.A.B. injections given during the month.
General. -I arrived with Mr. Field. Superintendent of Customs, Fourth and Fifth Divisions, on the 2nd of the month.
On the 6th we made an inspection of the Kedurong Lighthouse. It was found that this was badly in need of painting with red lead. This has been done.
On the 15th three natives of Pherto Princessa, Palawan, arrived with a letter of introduction from the Deputy Governor. They were on a fishing trip and have returned via British North Borneo.
On the 21st the Resident arrived here from Miri.
The Resident and myself paid a visit to the Dam on the 24th. Everything was in order.
On my arrival here I had the offices in the Kubu put upstairs again. This was done on the instructions of the Resident.
With regard to the back road in Kampong Seman, this is in a bad state of repair and badly needs raising. This had been partly done during Mr. Andreini’s time.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall for the month was 8.23 inches.
MIRI.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports: -
Courts. -A normal number of cases were disposed of during the month, and most were of a trivial nature, one hundred and twenty-three writs being issued, nineteen of which were in respect of criminal offences and one hundred cud-four of civil claims.
Health. -In preparation for the long awaited sewage scheme, all Government Clerks’ quarters ware filled with new type latrines. Only slight alterations were required to the existing type to bring them up to date.
The conservancy scheme was again postponed owing to delay in Singapore in forwarding the necessary water traps.
Under new licencing regulations fifteen notices to perform work were issued to the proprietors of eating shops.
Land. -One application was received for four acres of coconuts.
In Miri district ten gardens were demarcated, comprising nine acres of rubber and twenty-six of coconuts.
Assistant Inspector Jaini was still employed at Sibuti.
Medical. -At the Government Dispensary 118 outpatients mode 452 attendances for treatment. Seven cases were transferred to the Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., hospital for treatment.
Eight dentists, ten goldsmiths and five chemists renewed their licences for the current year.
Meteorological: -
Municipal. -The question of road lighting in the bazaar and kampong areas by Company electricity was considered by the Municipal Board, and it was unanimously decided to approach the Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., in this connection.
Should the Company be able and willing to accede to this request it is estimated that a considerable saving will be effected on present lighting expenditure, and very necessary lights which could not be installed previously, owing to expense, could be erected.
Prison. -Prisoners averaged thirty-eight and were employed in two gangs, one of which was on general upkeep at Tanjong Lobang, and the other on cleaning in the clerks’ compound. The health of the prisoners was good.
Public Works. -The Morris truck was completely overhauled in the Company garage after over two years of very hard running,
Further cases of consumers tampering with the mechanism of water meters were dealt with by the Court.
All bridges on the division of Kampongs Dagang and China were overhauled end strengthened to take the weight of the conservancy lorry.
A contract was drawn up for erecting a double garage for the conservancy and P.W.D. lorries. Work on this had started before the end of the month.
A small concrete ammunition store for the Police Department was built.
Three prosecutions for wasting water were brought by the department and convictions were obtained in each.
Staff. -Mr. W. H. C. C. Morice left for Bintulu on temporary duty on the 3rd.
Clerk Francis Liew arrived on the 3rd to take the place of Y. Junit who resigned as from the 29th.
General. -On the 5th I proceeded to Kuching on local leave, returning again on the 9th.
The Offices were closed from the 5th to the 10th owing to Hari Raya and Chinese New Year.
On the 18th Mr. Banks arrived from Baram, when he took the opportunity of discussing with the Resident and head-men of Niah better methods of collection of nests and preservation of fledglings. Resultant from these conversations a new notice has been published regarding procedure for the next three years, when the matter may again be opened and the experiment, if necessary, debated.
The Resident, accompanied by Mr. Banks, left for Bintulu on the 21st and returned on the 26th.
On the 24th I proceeded to Kuala Belait to discuss with the Assistant Resident of that District the question of a jelutong boundary between Brunei and Sarawak. A separate report has already been submitted of this.
BARAM.
The District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
Travelling. -On 2nd I accompanied Mr. Banks, Curator, to L. Laput on a visit to the birdsnest caves there. I returned on 4th, Mr. Banks remaining till 7th. On 10th Mr. Banks visited the caves in the Tutoh, returning on 16th. He left for Kuching via Miri on 18th. Galau and Wan Suror visited the local Dyaks during the month. Wan Taha visited the Mahommedan Bakongs at Beluru in connection with religious customs. On 29th Galau arrived from Linai to make arrangements for the forthcoming trip so the Kelabit country.
Prisoners. -The gang, averaging 21.7 men, were employed on the usual upkeep of the station and a fence round the new padang where it is proposed to graze sheep, thereby saving the expense of mowing.
P.W.D. -The carpenter was employed in caulking and repainting the long boat and in minor repairs to buildings.
Medical. -One hundred and three out-patients were treated during the month.
Professor Harrison Smith Fund. -Nineteen outpatients were treated and seventeen N.A.B. injections were given.
Rainfall. -4.53 inches of rain fell in seven days.
Agriculture. -Harvesting is in full swing and the crop promises to be excellent.
Shipping. -The s.s. Margaret made two trips during the month.
General. -Chinese New Year was celebrated very quietly this year, Hari Raya being quite gay by comparison. The usual salutes were fired and visits exchanged.
Trade. -Trade returns are as follows: -
Fifth Division News.
LIMBANG.
March, 1932.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports for March, 1932, by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident: -
Court. -There were a number of cases dealt with, the most important being two murder trials held at Lawas, in which Saran, Javanese, was arraigned for the brutal murder of his wife, and Rugu, Tagal, for the murder of a Tagal woman, Uni. In both cases the jury brought in a unanimous verdict of guilty and sentence of death was passed, subject to the confirmation of the Supreme Court.
A Kadayan, Tuah, was sentenced to three years’ R.I. on a charge of attempted murder, having mixed crushed glass with rice which it was intended his lately divorced wife should eat.
The mangled remains of the body of a man named Meta Bisayah were found floating in the river. An inquiry revealed that a boat in which he, with his grandchildren, was crossing the river, was capsized, and he was immediately seized by a crocodile, the children managing to swim to the bank to save themselves.
General. -Instructions were received by telegram for the immediate transfer of both Assistant Officers of the Division, the Acting Assistant District Officer of Lawas, J. R. Combe, and Cadet F. A. Moore, and they proceeded to Kuching via Labuan on the 16th.
Mr. J. O. Gilbert, who has been appointed Acting Assistant District Officer, Lawas, arrived by the s.s. Auby on the 30th, and assumed his duties at once.
A party of surveyors under the Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Mr. N. Mace, having completed certain work in the Division, returned to headquarters at the end of the month.
The principal tasks accomplished were the definition of the Limbang Bazaar Grants, a portion of the Inter-State Boundary, Brunei-Limbang, near Pandam, and a large number of pepper and rubber gardens.
Agriculture. -The pepper gardens at Panderuan were all inspected and, with the exception of one which had been badly neglected, looked very healthy. All the first batch of Government subsidized ones are in bearing, and a crop is expected in August or September.
The small hand power padi-husker supplied for the use of the pepper planters, not being used by them, has been installed in connection with the ice plant, and is power driven. Very satisfactory results have been obtained, in that, providing the padi is thoroughly dry, it produces over six gantangs per hour of clean husked rice.
Almost all padi has now been harvested and very satisfactory crops have been obtained.
P.W.D. -Prisoners, averaging 10.07, were mainly employed in metalling the Brunei road, but this work was handicapped by incessant rain which for days on end prevented the use of the lorry.
Good progress was made in raising the surface and coating with hard clay the section beyond Pandam, and there now only remains about two chains of this to be done.
Medical and Health—The Dresser-in-Charge, Mr. Hon Chon Thadd, reported that the health of the district was good, and no patients were admitted into hospital. Out-patients attended to numbered 49.
Dr. E. W. Martindell, the Medical Officer of Brunei, paid his usual monthly visit.
Rainfall amounted to 15.32 inches.
Trade and Shipping: -
Foreign exports include: -
Coasting Exports: -
LAWAS.
March, 1932.
The Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. O. Gilbert reports: -
Judicial. -There were seven criminal cases in the Magistrate’s Court and two in the Civil Court. There were also two Resident’s Court cases, namely His Highness the Rajah vs. Saran, Javanese, and Rugu, Tagal, both on capital charges of murder. In both cases the accused were convicted.
General. -On 30th I arrived at Lawas per s.s. Auby and took over the station from the Resident, Fifth Division, Mr. Combe having left on 16th in order to be in Kuching for examinations. The Resident, Fifth Division, returned to Limbang the next day per s.s. Auby.
On the 18th a message from Kuala Lawas reported the murder of a Tagal woman. A Tagal named Rugu was remanded on suspicion. On 29th the Resident, Fifth Division, arrived for the trial, and Rugu was found guilty and sentenced to death, subject to conformation by His Highness the Rajah. On 15th Resident, Fifth Division, also held the trial of Saran, Javanese, who was also sentenced to death, having been convicted of the murder of Gadong Suiol, a Murat woman.
P.W.D. -Work has been continued as usual on the main roads.
Prison. -Prisoners, averaging 15.40, were employed on upkeep of grounds and general maintenance of ornamental grounds.
Agriculture. -The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates Limited, exported 38,080 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
Rainfall. -The following rainfall was recorded during the month: -
Lawas 15.74 inches, Lawas Estates 12.52 inches and Trusan 9.02 inches.
