VOL. LXII.
No. 940.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Saturday, January 2nd, 1932.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette	SATURDAY, JANUARY 2nd, 1932.
Birth.
HAMMOND. -On December 16th, in Kuching, to Mrs. Hammond, wife of Mr. L S. Hammond, Survey Department, a son.
Local and Personal.
December.
His Highness the Rajah, Her Highness the Ranee and Dayangs Elizabeth, Valerie and Miss M. Goudie guest of their Highnesses arrived in Kuching on Monday, 28th by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna.
The old Government Mess, Rock Road ceases to exist as from 31st December, 1931.
Captain R. E. Le Sueur and Dr. Le Sueur, Mr. D. C. Hudden arrived in Kuching from Europe by s.s. Vyner Brooke on the 30th November. Captain R. E. Le Sueur has been appointed District Officer, Kuching. Dr. Le Sueur resumes her duties as Pathologist and Medical Officer.
Mr. D. C. Hudden has been appointed to act as Assistant District Officer, Kapit to which station he proceeded on the 1st instant.
Mr. F. G. Ritchie, Mr. E. G. Walker and Mr. B. H. Bateman of United Engineers Limited, Singapore, arrived by m.v. Marudu on 7th December, in connection with the taking over of the Power Stations at Kuching and Sibu. Mr. B. H Bateman takes charge of the Kuching Power Station as from the 1st January, 1932.
Archdeacon A. B. Champion accompanied by Mrs. Champion arrived from England on the 7th where they have been on furlough.
The s.s. Vyner Brooke arrived from Singapore on the 11th, by this vessel Mr. P. M. Adams, Secretary for Native Affairs, returned from sick leave.
Among other passengers was Mrs. Hannigan who is joining her husband Mr. A. Hannigan of Sime Darby and Company. This is Mrs. Hannigan’s first visit to this country and we extend her a hearty welcome.
Miss A. A. Olver of the S.P.G. Mission arrived by the s.s. Vyner Brooke on the 21st.
Per s.s. Darvel on December 25th, Mr. C. S. Griffiths, Superintendent of Lands, and Dr. W. Hutchison, Senior Assistant Medical Officer, left Kuching for England on seven months’ furlough.
The Rev. G. T. Shetliffe left Kuching for Australia via Ceylon on 14th December, we wish him bon voyage.
We welcome to Kuching Father Leo Barry of the Roman Catholic Mission who arrived per s.s. Darvel on the 14th.
His Excellency the Governor of British North Borneo accompanied by Mrs. Richards and two children passed through Jesselton on the 9th December on their returned from furlough.
Mr. J. G. Anderson left for Sadong on the 2nd where he has been appointed Acting District Officer.
Major B. Noble brother of Mr. A. H. Noble, Manager the Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., paid a visit to Kuching during the month. Major Noble left for England via Singapore on the s.s. Auby.
Mr. R. G. Aikman left for England on seven months’ furlough on the 5th per s.s. Darvel.
ARRIVAL OF HIS HIGHNESS THE RAJAH, HER HIGHNESS THE RANEE, AND THE DAYANGS ELIZABETH AND VALERIE.
His Highness the Rajah, Her Highness the Ranee, and the Dayangs Elizabeth and Valerie arrived in Kuching at 9.30 a.m. on Monday, the 28th December, 1931.
Their Highnesses arrived at Pending on the m.v. Marudu, where they were met by His Highness the Tuan Muda, and transhipped on to H.H.M.Y. Maimunah. As H.H.M.Y. Maimunah passed Fort Margherita, a salute of 21 guns was fired.
Their Highnesses were met on board by Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division, and Mr. A. A. Rennie, Treasurer of Sarawak, and were rowed to the Astana Pengkalan in the Siamese State barge, manned by a Police crew. Their Highnesses were met on the Astana Pengkalan by members of Supreme Council and Committee of Administration and proceeded to Astana where certain Senior Government Officers, heads of Departments, and leading members of the various communities were assembled.
Mr. J. C. Swayne welcomed their Highnesses back in a short speech and proposed their Highnesses health, which was drunk by all present.
We are sure our readers will join with us in echoing the Resident’s expressions of welcome, and sincerely hope that their Highnesses stay with us may be a long one.
We understand their Highnesses, who travelled to Singapore in the s.s. Chitral had a pleasant voyage out.
Obituary.
It is with great regret we record the death of Mr. Charles Fenwick which occurred in England on the 19th December.
Mr. Fenwick was taken seriously ill a few days prior to returning to Sarawak and the news of his death will come as a great shock to his many friends in Sarawak.
Mr. Fenwick was in his 46th year and first came to Sarawak in March, 1910, from the London Office of the Borneo Company, Limited.
He left Sarawak in March, 1915, to join His Majesty’s Forces and saw active Service until April, 1919, with the 9th Argyle and Sutherland Highlanders. He retired from the Army with the rank of Captain. He returned to the Kuching branch of the Borneo Company, Limited, in October, 1919, and became Manager on the retirement of Mr. J. M. Bryan in July, 1920. Mr. Fenwick was always to the fore in business and sport and was a very keen supporter of the Sarawak Turf Club of which he was one of the original founders. He was the owner of several well-known ponies. Our deepest sympathy is extended to Mrs. Fenwick and her children in their great loss.
CHINA FLOOD RELIEF FUND.
We are asked to state that the Chinese Community is raising subscriptions for the poor sufferers of the flood that took place in China recently. Anyone who wishes to subscribe towards this fund is requested to forward his subscription to the Honorary Treasurer, Mr. Chua Bak Hin, c/o. The Sarawak Chinese Banking Co., Ltd., Kuching.
St. Mary’s School Prize giving.
St. Mary’s School Annual Prize-giving was held on 18th December in the Sarawak Union, by kind permission of the members. Miss Tait very kindly distributed the prizes to the successful scholars.
The Archdeacon was in the chair, and among the visitors were, Mrs. Champion, Mrs. Boyde. Mrs. Forrest, Miss Harkness, The Rev. Fr. Hollis, Mr. Tan Sum Guan, and Mr. Kueh Choo Seng.
The proceedings were opened by the Archdeacon and then the Principal read the report for the year, in which occurred the following items of interest. The numbers of pupils in the school bad been slightly reduced owing to the trade depression, and it had been necessary to reduce the staff. The school had for the third time entered pupils for the Cambridge Local Examinations, and this December five girls sat for Junior and six for Preliminary. The results of the examinations last year had been most encouraging as out of the six girls who entered five had passed.
A great effort had been made during the year to raise money for a boarding house for the school and at present the Building Fund stood short of $10,000 of the amount required to put up a building even on a modified plan. His Highness the Rajah had kindly given $5,000 as a start to the fund and with local contributions and gifts from England about $21,000 had been collected. The girls of the school collected among themselves and had also by means of a concert raised over $800 and the Sale of Work produced about the same amount. It was hoped that work upon the building might be begun in 1932.
Miss Tait then gave the prizes to the winners and the proceedings concluded with a vote of thanks to Miss Tait for her kind presence and gracious speech.
Sarawak St. Andrew’s Society.
St Andrew’s night was celebrated this year in somewhat quieter fashion than of yore. In view of, the present hard times there was no dinner; but a dance was held, as usual, when between some thirty and forty persons attended.
The Club Ballroom was decorated with palms and other greenery-but it was not necessary as in former years to erect a stage to accommodate the band, for this year the place of the band was taken by a gramophone and two loud-speakers, which were a great success. Mr. Calver, the chieftain, was in his national dress but nothing could persuade him to give us an exhibition dance-perhaps it was because of his nearing home leave!!!
Eightsome reels, foursome reels-lancers and petronellas were performed, well, one can scarcely say with skill although there did not appear to be much lack of vigour.
All things considered the night was a great success and if the guests enjoyed themselves as much as the members, then we have no hesitation in saying that the 30th of November must have been one of the jolliest and most exhilarating nights of the year.
“INTERESTED.”
INTERNATIONAL FOOTBALL MATCH.
SCOTLAND vs. ENGLAND.
ST. ANDREW’S DAY, 1931.
The above teams tussled for the eighth time since, the institution of the yearly international on St. Andrew’s Day.
As usual England’s team on paper were far in a way the more formidable. But Scotland were not to be worried by such little matters as this. The national characteristics of Mr. Scot prevailed and all were out to make the best of a poor job. After a somewhat tough game Scotland was victorious having defeated their somewhat formidable opponents by 2-1.
The game as far as can be ascertained was enjoyed by players and spectators alike-but owing to the state of the ground it rather lacked the somewhat finer points of soccer. Shortly after the start Scotland broke away and forced a corner-and thanks to some clever heading by McLaine the kick was productive. Scotland continued to press for a short while but one of the English backs clearing well for his side forced an opening and play was then concentrated around the Scots goal mouth. After a somewhat stiff encounter England secured a free kick; the ball was placed, lapped back to Kelley, and that very able-bodied gentleman proceeded to try and push it through the net.
The game thus evened the score now stood at 1-1 a ding-dong battle, ensued in which very little real football was witnessed. The pace and the pitch were beginning to tell on some of the “has beens” and newcomers alike, but the eagerness continued until half time with Scott, Scotlands left back having held the fort almost single handed while Englands goalie also deserves mention.
The next half commenced and it rather looked as if England were going to do the pressing but Scott again came to the rescue and clearing in fine style, relieved the pressure-Moir got the ball and running strongly, got well up the field towards the right wing, then with a great kick just swung the ball in towards the goal mouth-the ball was tapped past the back by McLaine, was snapped up by Leach and slammed into the net.
England now decided to attack in earnest and the last ten minutes or so of the game, with the exception of an occasional break away on the part of Scotland was concentrated on Scotlands half of the ground.
On several occasions England seemed like scoring but never through any of her forwards and Kelley and Chater who were England’s backs had to play up and put in some good allots. Scott again excelled himself-and after a good, clean, hard game played with traditional keeness the whistle blew for the end.
Thus the result now stands: -
St. Andrew’s Day Golf.
England won the match handsomely, all credit to them. The Scots hadn’t really a leg of excuse to stand on, as the majority of their team showed themselves to be extraordinarily inept at what is reputedly their national game.
The following were the results of the “International” Golf Match decided by Singles and Foursomes, on Sunday, 29th November, 1931.
Taxpayer’s Lament.
The following was received recently by a business firm:
“Dear Sirs. -For the following reasons I am unable to send you the cheque for which you ask. I have been held up, held down, sandbagged, walked upon, sat upon, flattened out. and squeezed by the income tax, super tax, the tobacco tax, the beer tax, the spirits tax, the motor tax, and by every society, organisation and club that inventive mind of man can think of, to extract what I may or may not have in any possession for the red cross, black cross, and the double cross and every hospital in town and country.
WHY AM I HERE?
“The Government has governed my business till I don’t know who owns it. I am inspected, suspected, examined, informed, requited, and commanded; so that I don’t know who I am, where I am. or why I am bate at all.
“All that I know is that I am supposed to be an inexhaustible supply of money for every need, desire, or hope of the human race; and because I will not go out and beg, borrow or steal money to give away, I am cussed, discussed boycotted, talked to, talked about, lied to, lied about, held up, hung up, rung up, robbed and damn’ near ruined
“The only reason why I am clinging to life at all is to see what the hell is going to happen next.
“Yours faithfully,
“TAXPAYER.”
[Morning Post]
Modern Fairy Stories.
A FURTHER SELECTION OF MOTORISTS’ “YARNS”
[41279.]-Having enjoyed the fairy Stories collected by “N. E. S. A.” and “N. H. K.” [41211 and 41248], I send some remarks to which I have had to listen recently, together with my translations: -
1. Unless I have passengers, I never put up the hood, even in the roughest weather.
Translation. -Unless I have the assistance of at least two passengers, it is no good my thinking of putting up the hood.
2. I cannot understand why some people grumble at having to lubricate the chassis.
Translation. -I am aware of the existence of about fifty per cent, of the lubricating points on the chassis of my car.
3. I have now mastered the art of skidding corners.
Translation. -My tyres are now so worn that they skid on every bend.
4. The oil consumption is still negligible.
Translation. -The number of times I have troubled to examine the oil level is still negligible.
5. I should never change over to a saloon.
Translation. -I am still unable to reverse my tourer when the hood is up.
6. The local police always go out of their way to let me pass when they see the car.
Translation. -Having run over all the constabulary's toes in the neighbourhood in attempting to pull up, I find the local police always step back out of my way as far as possible.
7. I have decided to buy another new car at the Show.
Translation. -My insurance company has decided to abandon as a total loss the “baby” car with which I recently attempted to charge a steam wagon.
Blackheath, S.E.3. A. B. WATERFIELD.
[Autocar]
The Oui Oui Club.
Sir, -My letter to your paper of the 13th ult, with respect to the “Oui Oui Club” has brought me a letter from a well-known resident at Tunbridge Wells. This writer says: -
“I look forward to hearing some details of this Oui Oui Club, for at the moment I am writing a pamphlet in which the Oui! Oui! forms an important link in my chain of evidence on the question upon which I am considering.
“’Larousse pour tout’ -the French Dictionary, gives information on the subject. He says: There are two ways of looking at the matter. One way is that all ‘married people’ belong to the ‘Oui Oui Club,’ because ‘Le Grand Oui’ was what was called the great union as between man and wife.
“The secondary and more important aspect of ‘Oui Oui Club’ is that the ‘one’ sound is the nearest sound to the famous ‘Eolic Digamma,’ or various sound of Pau or ‘the speaker’ called ‘Faunus’ (root Fan, to say or speak). This, again is a little complicated. To trace ‘Le Grand Oui’ back and back one must refer to E-Sarra; then the Oscans of Italy; then the Langue O’ocs. Having done this, one will understand the ‘Oui Oui Club’!” I admit this is beyond me. -Yours,
EDWARD A. JOLLYE.
[And me too Ed.]
More Election Humour.
“Old Lady, to Presiding Officer: ‘I want to vote for Mr. MacDonald.’
“P.O.: ‘You can only vote for his representative here.’
“O.L.: ‘I don’t want no representative. I want to vote for MacDonald ‘isself.’
“P.O. (facetiously): ‘Then you’d better get an aeroplane and go to Seaham.’
“O.L.: ‘I don’t want to see ‘im. I want to vote for ‘im.’ (Exit indignantly without voting)” -Morning Post.
One heckler at Lord Beaverbrook’s Glasgow meeting said: “There are no unemployed in Russia.”
Lord Beaverbrook replied: “It is quite true. It is equally true that there are no unemployed in Barlinnie Prison, Glasgow.”
Here is a story from the Daily Herald: -
“The canvasser was concluding her talk. “ ‘Well, Mrs. Jones, I hope 1 can count on your husband supporting me?’ she said.
“ ‘Supporting you!’ replied Mrs. Jones ‘Why, 'e ain’t even supported me for the last five years!’”
Learn the Language.
M. REYNAUD’S SOLUTION OF INDO-CHINA PROBLEM.
Paris, Dec. 5.
M. Reynaud (the Colonial Minister) has returned from his visit to the East. He said his general impression was that the problem of Asia was aggravated, at present, by the crisis.
As regards the administration of Indo-China, he said he was going to demand that officials who, after two years, were unable to speak or understand the language of the country should be repatriated as useless. -Straits Times.
Whale Oil.
Regarding the heavy competition last year with whale oil against palm, coconut and other vegetable oils, it is interesting to note that, according to the Cape Town correspondent of the (London) Morning Post, this newcomer should be less aggressive during the coming season, as we are told: -
“A comparatively small fleet of whaling vessels will proceed to the Antarctic this season from Cape Town, which is now the centre of the world’s whaling industry. Only three companies will operate this year, the total fleet comprising seven factory ships and about forty whale-catcher ships. Last year the fleet consisted of forty-five large factory ships and more than 200 catchers-the largest whaling fleet ever assembled. The Norwegians decided not to participate this year owing to the whale-oil glut. At least one company has gone into liquidation.
“Hundreds of skilled whale fishers are now idle in Norway, and it is more than probable that when the big fleets again sail into the Antarctic next year the harpoon gunners, who made small fortunes in the past, will have to accept a lower rate. Indeed, this has already come into operation, and many of the gunners who have just sailed in the small fleet this year have signed on at only £3 15s. for each blue whale they shoot, as against £6 in the old days Even so, however, with a catch averaging 200 whales for each ship they will still be able to earn a sum for their seven months’ work far in excess of the average liner captain’s yearly pay.
“The three companies who are operating this year are mostly catering for the private requirements of various soap-making concerns, and it is expected that only about 50,000 tons of oil will be needed. This will mean the killing of approximately 3,000 whales-a small number when compared with the 40,000 that were slain last year. The reason for this terrific slaughter was that the Antarctic fields were comparatively new, and it was feared that the whales would soon vanish. Thanks to recent scientific expeditions, however, it is now known that the whales exist in large numbers all around the South Polar regions, and there is no fear of a shortage for many years to come. In future, therefore, it is likely that only sufficient oil to fulfil the world’s requirements will be taken in order to avoid over-production.”
Those words, “the reason of this terrific slaughter,” reminds one of the hopes advanced by the Vegetable Oil-Producer (without destroying life) that some international arrangement will be arrived at to regulate the massacre of the whales, especially during the breeding season or in certain waters, some say the tropical seas, where the whales go to have their offspring. Failing such measures it is reckoned that a few more seasons like the last will see the end of the whale, and hence of their competition with vegetable oils. -Tropical Life.
Off the Gold Standard-II.
BY HARTLEY WITHERS.
We have seen, from the article published in last week’s Spectator, what is meant by the fact that the pound has been pushed off the gold standard; it now remains to consider why this happened and where it has left us. Danger threatened the pound from abroad and at home. The threat from abroad was, originally and chiefly, due to events abroad, which were beyond the control either of our Government or of the Bank of England. It was the consequence of banking and financial difficulties, in Europe and especially in Germany and Austria, and their effect on London as an international banker, with whom foreigners place large sums and from whom they also borrow large sums. These difficulties in Europe were largely political in origin, for they began with the General Election in Germany last autumn, when there was a great increase in the strength of the two extreme parties, the Hitlerites and the Communists. This result alarmed the French, American and other money-lenders, who had placed funds in Germany and caused them to withdraw them; and also the Germans themselves, causing them to turn marks into foreign money; and so a run on Germany began, which was quickened last May by the discovery that the Credit-Anstalt, the most important bank in Austria, was in serious difficulties. This increased the general alarm, especially in America, where the banks were already weakened by the catastrophic fall in the prices of commodities and of securities, making it difficult for their customers to repay loans raised from them. At the same time, in many countries of the Continent and also in America the public’s mistrust of the banking position was making people take money out of the banks and hoard it; and so the Continental and American banks that had lent money to Germany had two reasons for calling it in-mistrust of the solvency of the German banks and fear of their own customers at home who were pulling money from them.
Germany’s position thus became terribly precarious. not owing to her own economic difficulties but because those who had lent her money were wanting it back in a hurry. It was largely a matter of funk, chiefly political in origin, on the part of her creditors. At the beginning of July a manifesto was issued by the German Government, which had lately announced cuts in expenditure amounting to £75 millions, stating, in effect, that Germany had done her best to meet the obligations of a lost War, that she was at the end of her tether, and must be relieved of the Reparations burden.
This frightened her creditors still more and the run continued; so much so that President Hoover, evidently alarmed concerning the probable effects on the American banks of a German breakdown, published on June 21st his scheme for a suspension for a year of Reparation and War Debt payments. The immediately beneficial effect on business sentiment of this relief was spoilt by the delay on the part of France in accepting the scheme. The run went on, and after a Conference of statesmen in London from July 20th to 23rd, the bankers of the countries that had lent money to Germany arranged what is called the “standstill pact,” by which the amounts owing to the various countries by Germany were not to be withdrawn for six months. Germany was thus given a short breathing-space; but in the meantime the Continental creditors who had caused her difficulties began to feel anxious about the position of London, which was known to have lent freely to Germany and to have refrained from embarrassing her by withdrawals, as other creditors had done. Since the sums lent by London to Germany were locked up by the “standstill pact,” London’s power to meet calls on her was to this extent weakened, and since the Continental banks were also weakened by the same reason and were still being pulled on by their customers for cash, they tried to strengthen themselves at London’s expense and started a run on London, taking over £30 millions out of the Bank of England in the last two weeks of July, most of which went to France. To meet this emergency the Bank of England raised credits of £50 millions, half from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and half from the Bank of France.
Then came the publication of the report of the Economy Committee-the May report as it is generally called from the name of its chairman-telling us that we should be short of balancing our Budget by £120 millions. Since this amount allowed for £50 millions of debt redemption, the way in which the statement was put was rather crude; it alarmed our foreign creditors still more, especially as it was used as a text on which to base political attacks implying that the Labour Government was rushing the country into bankruptcy and so on. These cries were taken at their face value abroad, and also at home, quickening a “flight from the pound.” which had been proceeding, on a small scale, ever since Mr. Snowden’s Budget of 1930, by laying the whole burden of fresh taxation on the large incomes and large estates, had produced an impression, also assisted by the criticisms of the Opposition Press, that he was deliberately penalizing capital So, as in Germany, the foreign run on England was complicated by a flight from the pound on the part of British investors, who turned pounds into foreign currencies.
And so, in order to save the pound from starting on a fall that might have ended in collapse owing to our unbalanced Budget, more money had to be borrowed abroad to meet the claims of our foreign creditors; and the French and American money-lenders would not lend unless we balanced our Budget and cut expenditure in a way that the then Government could not accept. And then we had a new National Government and Parliament was called together again to carry out economies required to satisfy the views of foreign money-lenders, who provided another £80 millions.
But though we had a National Government, there was still an Opposition that was highly critical, and its protests raised doubts abroad as to our power to hold the pound. Then there came the incident of objections by some of our sailors to cuts in their pay, and it also had a great effect on sentiment abroad. And so finally the continued run obliged us to suspend the obligation of the Bank of England to turn notes into gold and the pound sterling was left unanchored to the gold standard. By falling to a lower value in dollars and other moneys it at once (as shown last week) checks imports and stimulates exports and helps us to restore the favourable balance, in international payments, the loss of which had weakened our financial position.
Foreign creditors, by making this panic-stricken run on us, because we had refused to join in the stupid run on Germany, have obliged us to do what distinguished economists have long urged us to do-namely, let the pound go to a lower exchange value- If we had done it deliberately, we might have been accused of repudiating part of our debt to those who had left money on deposit with us. Acting under this compulsion we are free of this charge. And so our foreign creditors have not only obliged us to balance our Budget, but also to revalue the pound, and both of these measures will assist our return to financial strength, if we make the right use of them, and keep our heads, as we have shown every intention of doing. -The Spectator.
More Maugham.
Our old friend Mr. Somerset Maugham has done it again. His latest short story deals with Borneo, and mention is made of a place called Kandasan, in which we seem to recognise Sandakan. This is how the British dwellers in Borneo-Government officials as well as planters-are described through one of Mr. Maugham’s characters: “The men had come out to the colony as lads from second-rate schools, and life had taught them nothing. At fifty they had the outlook of fifth-form boys. They had never grown up. They indulged in vulgar horse-play. Most of them drank too much. They read nothing worth reading. Their ambition was to be like everybody else. Their highest praise was to say that a man was a damned good sort. If you were interested in the things of the spirit you were a prig. When they got together, at Christmas for instance, to have a good time, their chief desire was to get blind drunk. They were eaten up by envy of one another and devoured by petty jealousies. And the women, poor things, were obsessed by petty rivalries. They made a circle which was more provincial than any in the smallest town in England. They were prudish and spiteful.” Most of this the people of Borneo can manage to endure with a certain resignation. So, too, can the white population of Malaya if the description is to be taken as applying to these parts generally. We do not mind being provincial or lowbrow or uninterested in the things of the spirit. We can even endure that quite untrue gibe about drink. But second-rate schools! Come, come, Mr. Maugham, that’s a bit hard! -Straits Times, 14 Dec.
Non Assumpsit.
“To shoot at a vital part of a person who boasts he is bullet proof is attempted murder even though the offender believed he was bullet proof.” As a legal definition the above will appear curious to members of the profession unacquainted with the curious mentality of Eastern peoples, but it is a definition which has just been solemnly laid down by the Dika Court in Bangkok. One can imagine one of our leading judges waxing wroth over a defence in his court which pleaded that an accused had deliberately shot his uncle because he had boasted that he was bullet proof, being a pupil of a celebrated wizard. Justice in Siam, however, is no more blind than that in the Straits, where there is probably a more sophisticated realisation that bullets round are ordained to kill, and a misguided youth has five years to regret the soft headedness of his relative. -Singapore Free Press.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 60 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
No. 15. THURSDAY, 13 APRIL, 1871. Price 5 cents.
One of our correspondents has written a letter to the Gazette re-opening the old sore we complained of in an early number, viz., the exorbitant charges made in the Bazaar for articles of food, and the total want of a remedy which is likely to be effectual so long as the matter is left , for private persons to deal with in their own way. The proposal to meet the difficulty by imposing a Tariff by authority is hardly a satisfactory escape from it: for such a system would produce more discontent on the part of those who provide and sell articles of food than now exists on the part of those who buy from them.
If a strict Tariff were insisted on by Government, the Chinese would, in all probability, only produce enough food for their own consumption, and the law would then have either to acquiesce in our starvation or to enforce a system of penalties instead of the ordinary motives to cultivation and production. Probably the end which we desire viz, the reduction of prices to a reasonable rate would be most likely to be gained, could we start some combined movement among ourselves independently of any Government measure, which a grievance of this sort hardly seems to require. It might be feasible either to form a miniature company for the rearing of poultry, oxen. &c. here: or to agree to get some one Chinaman to supply all our houses at a cheaper rate than the present in consideration of our giving him our entire custom. In this way a Tariff might be imposed by ourselves, and the plan would have the advantage of not excluding a keen competition for the privilege of supplying us omniverous Europeans. If someone were energetic enough to propose a meeting to take this and other plans into consideration, and set about finding a Chinaman who would come to terms, we might see our way more clearly to checking the inroads which the high prices in the Bazaar make, as our correspondent complains, into a small income; and confining the extortionate shop keepers to a reasonable and fair profit.
We gather the following facts which arc interesting as shewing to what the evil has grown, from the letter sent to us. While poultry brought from the Sambas or Pontianak trading boats, can be obtained, as was lately the case here, at the rate of 12 capons for 6 dollars; the same capons when transferred to the Bazaar are sold at prices ranging from a dollar and a half to two dollars each. Fowls here in 1869, were sold for 20 cents each, in 1870 they fetched 38 to 40 cents: rice has risen from 10 cents per gantang in 1869 to 16 cents in 1870: cucumbers, formerly obtainable 3 for a cent and a half, are now worth a cent a piece: oysters have risen in price from 6 to 18 cents per katty: pork from 12 to 24 cents per katty: oil from 36 to 65 cents per gantang: fish is at more than double its price a year ago and other things are in proportion.
Sarawak Library.
The following books have been kindly presented by His Highness the Rajah: -
First Division News.
RESIDENT’S OFFICE.
November, 1931.
Extracts from the Divisional Reports for November, 1931. by Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division: -
Resident’s Court. -One criminal appeal and four civil cases came before the Court.
Lim Ho Soo, a Henghua fisherman, appealed against the conviction and sentence passed upon him by the District Court on 3rd when he was fined $150 for Breach of Shipping Regulations. He was, however, unsuccessful in his appeal.
Armistice Day on the 11th was observed as a public holiday and the offices were closed.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
November, 1931.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports: -
District Court. -Twenty-six cases were heard, four of which were criminal and twenty-two civil. Of the four criminal cases, all were convictions. There were two cases of Contempt of Court and two other offences.
Fines imposed amounted to $153 and fees collected $6.59 (Criminal matters).
The civil claims involved amounts totalling $6,206.78 for which fees collected amounted to $184.50.
Magistrate’s Court. -Ninety-four cases were heard, fourteen of which were criminal and eighty civil. Of the fourteen criminal cases, ten convictions and four acquittals were adjudged. There were seven cases of assault, six Contempt of Court and one other offence.
Fines imposed amounted to $62 and fees collected $17.75.
The civil claims involved amounts totalling $2,545.95 for which fees collected amounted to $302.42.
Police Court. -Twenty-seven summary cases were brought before the Court. All were convictions. The principal charges were three of theft, two of assault, two Contempt of Court and twenty other offences.
A total amount of $262.50 was paid in fines.
In addition 109 Judgment summons cases were dealt with during the month.
Court’s General. -Soo Ah See and Chee Ying See alias Chiong Seng Hiong were sentenced to six and four months respectively, for delivering as genuine, counterfeit coin which when first possessed did not know to be counterfeited, under I.P.C. Section 241; Choo Teng Cho to one month, for house-trespass, under I.P.C. Section 448; Tay Ah Hua alias Chung Jin to one month, for disobedience to quarantine rule by entering into the Leper Camp at 13th mile, under I.P.C. Section 271; Goh Hock Guan to one month, for assisting in disposal of stolen property, under I.P.C. Section 414; Jong Joo Siew and Choo Ah Ha to three and one months respectively, for non-payment of fines, under I.P.C. Section 64.
General. -I proceeded to Sadong on the 25th instant having received orders to take over that station from Mr. J. J. Hill. Mr. Hill duly handed over the affairs of the Sadong district to me on the 26th and I returned to Kuching with Mr. Hill on the 27th in order to settle various outstanding affairs in this office and to hand over this office to Captain R. E. Le Sueur who arrived on the 30th.
UPPER SARAWAK, BAU.
November, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports: -
District Court. -Two criminal cases were heard and both resulted in convictions.
Magistrate’s Court. -Fifty-five cases were heard, one of which was a criminal case and fifty-four civil. The one criminal case resulted in conviction.
In addition eight Judgment Summonses were dealt with during the month.
Fines imposed amounted to $1. The civil claims involved amounts totalling $363.21 for which fees collected amounted to $19.50.
Judicial. -The only notable case during the month was Abang Gapar vs. Metalli, who was sentenced to imprisonment under Section 324 I.P.C.
Rainfall. -Highest recorded in 24 hours 1.96 inches; daily average .51 of an inch; total for month 3.92 inches.
General. -Visitors to the station included the Principal Medical Officer, Dr. Marjoribanks, Mr. and Mrs. Pitt-Hardacre, Miss Haywood and Messrs. Trechman, Banks, Dare and Simpson.
Heavy rains have again been experienced resulting in damage to three main roads end one bridge from erosion. All however were in normal condition at the end of the month.
An election was held at Buso during the month on the ballot system and Bujang bin Kalang was elected and his appointment as Tua Kampong confirmed as from 1st December, 1931.
The 11th was observed as a Holiday. Offices were closed.
The Bungalow garage has been repaired and extended so as to take two cars.
Prisons. -Prisoners have been employed on anti-malarial work consisting of filling in swampy places, draining land, making drains and general up-keep of the station. The bazaar drains have been bricked from end to end now by prison labour and a considerable amount of filling and levelling has been done round the new warders’ quarters which are now ready for occupation.
At the end of the month the female prisoners numbered nineteen and the male prisoners sixty. Total seventy-nine.
Coroner’s Court. -I regret to have to report a fatal accident at Saburan works-an offshoot of the Bidi Gold Mining Syndicate. A coroner’s inquest was held on the body of Choo Liam, Kheh who was killed by the breaking of a gantry hurling four workers from a height of twenty-five feet. The deceased was crushed by a ten cwt. tip-truck and died on his way to the General Hospital. The Syndicate are paying compensation to deceased’s relatives. A verdict of death from misadventure was registered.
Another inquest was held on the body of Chong Cheong, Kheh of Siniawan who was found hanging in a Chinese cemetery. Verdict of suicide was entered.
Land. -A complaint was made by the Singhhi Dyaks to the effect that Chinese were encroaching the boundaries of their farming land and the question is still being looked into.
Police. -The new terms for police were communicated to the local forces and seven men have sent in their resignations.
Gold Mining. -630.81 ounces of actual gold were obtained by the Bidi Gold Mining Syndicate for the month of October, 1931.
SADONG.
November, 1931.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports: -
Court. -Very few cases, civil or criminal came before the Court and none were of great importance.
Hospital. -No patients were admitted.
At the Dispensary seventy-eight patients made 128 visits for treatment.
Agriculture. -Mr. Dare visited the Station in connection with the Bugis Padi Concession and other matters concerning his Department.
On the 23rd eight Bugis were reported to have absconded and so far nothing more has been heard of them.
Prisons. -Prisoners averaged 11 and were employed on usual routine work, upkeep of roads, grounds, etc.
On the 19th O. K. Suayang escaped from Tebekang prison and was recaptured on the 26th instant by O.K. Sabeh and sentenced to a further three months’ R.I. (Section 224).
General. -A public holiday was observed on 11th November, Armistice Day.
I arrived from Kuching on the 25th with instructions to take over the duties of this office from Mr. J. J. Hill.
Having taken over ns from the 26th I returned to Kuching on the 27th with Mr. J. J. Hill who proceeded on seven months’ furlough on the 28th.
I was still in Kuching al the end of the month for the purpose of handing over the affairs of the District Office, Kuching, to Captain R. E. Le Sueur.
Trade and Customs. -Comparative trade returns are as follows: -
During the month 39 vessels entered and 40 cleared the Port.
LUNDU.
November, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
General. -On 7th it was reported that three Chinese had been seen bringing tobacco from Dutch Borneo. The police were sent to investigate with the result that two of the offenders were arrested but one escaped and the tobacco was successfully hidden by accomplices. Sampadi was visited by the Probationary Native Officer. I went to Simatan on 15th via Blungei and Prigi, and next day sailed across to Telok Srabang. All timber working baa ceased there.
November 11th having been proclaimed a holiday the Government offices were closed.
All Exemption Tax has now been collected except from about fifteen persons. I proceeded to Kuching on 21st by m.v. Lundu and had not returned at the end of the month.
Court. -Fifteen cases of Breach of Forest Regulations were heard. One case of Breach of Arms Order was heard and the two defendants fined. An inquiry was held into the suspected case of smuggling tobacco from Dutch Borneo and the case was still adjourned at the end of the month.
Land. -Two land inspectors arrived on 5th and set about marking up gardens in the Stunggang and Skambal areas. Abu Bakar returned from Pasir 10th having marked up over 60 gardens. The Agriculture quarters were put in repair and the two new land inspectors moved in at the end of the month. More Demand notes were issued and the Quit Rent and extra charges were paid.
P.W.D. -The roof of the Fort was repaired and all bridges on the Skambal road were put in good repair.
Prison. -The prison gang averaging 10 were employed in cleaning the Sibomban and Skambal roads and in the general upkeep of the station.
Telegraphs. The wireless installation was in a weak condition most of the month but two mechanics arrived from Kuching and overhauled it thoroughly.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall for the month was 5.79 inches, the greatest fall in any one day being 2.40 inches.
Trade. -The total returns for the month and for comparison with those for the corresponding month last year were as follows: -
Sadong Collieries Report.
November, 1931.
Extracts from the Sadong Collieries Reports for November, 1931, by Mr. J. W. Evans, Manager: -
The output, export, local consumption, and coal stock figures for the month are as follows: -
Mine entrance stocks-308 tons-were washed, screened, and transported to the wharf during the month.
Coal stocks at the end of the month remained as follows: -
The lower workings of No. 8 mine had been completely stoped out and abandoned by the 24th.
The coolie lines of the abandoned upper seam mine, together with the tram, and pipe lines, were removed during the month.
Further progress was made with the re-opening of the Ngili stream, and the drainage of the grazing land at Pansy Valley.
Four head of cattle died during the month. Post-mortem examinations revealed a disease of the throat resembling calf diptheria.
Abnormally high tides were experienced during the new moon period, which caused considerable damage at the Coal Depot.
The rainfall for the mouth was 15.98 inches.
Second Division News.
November, 1931.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports for November, 1931, by Mr. E. O. Bruce, Acting Resident: -
On the 1st, the travelling District Officer from Sibu, Mr. Cutfield, arrived overland from the Ulu Kanowit, to visit the Acting Assistant District Officer, Saratok and discuss the Dyak affairs of their respective districts. He returned overland a day or two later.
The prevalence of dysentery appears to have abated, as a result of the Dresser Franklin’s tours of inspection. A few deaths only were reported.
I visited Engkilili on the 3rd and dealt with two appeal cases.
After discussion with the Divisional Land Officer, it was decided to call in all the old Pepper Registration Certificates, and replace them with proper Occupation Certificates-There is no shadow of doubt that many Chinese planters have been “juggling” with old certificate titles in order to accumulate possession of other abandoned pepper garden sites, thereby neutralizing Land Office records, and rendering litigation unnecessarily arduous and prolonged.
It was found necessary to transfer the Court Writer at Lingga whose carelessness has proved him unfitted for the post. In view of his inexperience, however, he is being given a three months trial on probation under the supervision of the Officer-in-Charge at Engkilili.
Offices were closed on Armistice Day, and the 2 minutes silence was observed at 11 a.m.
The new Kabong Government School building was completed by the Contractor, and is of the same design as that at Simanggang. At Lingga, and at Spaoh in the Saribas, the villagers have erected “Kajang” school houses, and applied for teachers. I am informed by the Director of Education however that owing to various reasons these cannot yet be recognised as Government Schools.
On the 12th I left for the Saribas District, visiting Pusa, Debak. Spaoh and Betong where several appeal cases were settled, mostly Dyak Land disputes.
The Government Auditor, Mr. A. L. McLaine, visited Lingga and Simanggang, returning on the 21st.
An application was received for the demarcation and reserve of a suitable hill in the vicinity of Roban station, Kalaka, for a future S.P.G. Mission site-however as it was not intended to enter into possession thereof for at least another two years, the area is being demarcated as a Government Reserve.
22.48 inches of rain was registered in Simanggang during the month, and there are reports of severe damage to padi owing to floods. This is unfortunate, as certain of these areas are already suffering from the crop failures last harvest. It appears that the “empangau” pest is inclined to increase, and accounts for seventy-five per cent of the trouble.
SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas: -
General. -I was away in Engkilili for five days from the 3rd hearing numerous District Court Civil cases.
On Armistice Day the two minutes silence was observed, and the Police paraded in front of the new offices.
Towards the end of the month, Skrang Dyaks started work on the Tisak to Betong road, repairs are carried out twice yearly, and it is to be hoped that better work will be done this time, than has been done in the past year or so. About half of the portion done by these Dyaks is a raised plank walk, which has been in very bad condition for some time.
Mr. G. M. Goodall. Assistant Forest Officer, visited the station on his way to and from Kuching.
Penghulus. -The following Penghulus visited the station during the month, Linang, Sait and Orang Kaya Jaul.
Lingga. -On the 2nd Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft returned from his visit to Sebuyow and Lingga District.
Tua Kampong Assan of Pulo Seduku died on the 15th. A new Tua Kampong will be elected to replace him.
On the 30th I proceeded to Lingga in order to check accounts, cash, opium, etc., and looked through the Probate Register and other books.
I was still away at the end of the month.
Medical. -The Dresser visited Engkilili from the 12th to the 23rd.
Marine. -On the 30th as m.l. Anne was leaving Lingga the engine broke down. The launch will be out of action until new parts arrive from Kuching.
Court. -In the Magistrate’s Court there were four criminal cases. T. R. Ebet of Slepong was fined under Section 334 I.P.C. There were 23 civil cases, and claims amounted to $402.07.
In the District Court there were three criminal cases dealt with, and Abdul Talip bin Man was sentenced under Section 469 I.P.C. There were three civil cases and claims amounted to $2,004.09.
Trade and Customs. -Trade returns for the month are as follows: -
ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Officer-in-Charge, Mr. S. G. Hansom: -
Court. -Three criminal cases were heard, none being of note. Two convictions were obtained.
Civil claims to the total value of $12,007.34 were heard.
Court fees collected $121.25.
Seventy-four Deeds (Promissory Note, Mortgage and Tranfer) were registered in Engkilili Court during the month.
Travelling. -Lubok Antu was visited from the 24th to the 28th instant. There was one criminal case in Court. During my visit, a clearance of the over-grown trees immediately behind and above the bazaar, was made, in order to let more light and air into this area.
Dyak padi planting in the neighbourhood of Lubok Antu is very late this year.
A large proportion of up-river Door Tax, still remains unpaid, and some difficulty is being experienced in collecting the Tax. many Dyaks professing themselves unable to pay.
On the 17th instant, I went up the Lemanak as far as Sungei Semanju, in order to visit Penghulu Suel, where one night was spent.
General. -On the 4th instant, the Acting Resident. Mr. E. O. Bruce, visited the station, accompanied by Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas and Mr. B. Summers, Divisional Land Officer. During the following three days, a number of District Court civil suits and two Appeals to the Resident’s Court, were heard. The Acting Resident returned to Simanggang on the 6th and Mr. Ditmas on the 8th.
The 11th instant Armistice Day, was observed as a Public Holiday.
The Government Dresser from Simanggang was here from the 13th to the 17th instant, when several investigations into reported bad cases of dysentery in local Dyak houses were made.
Land Office. -In response to Notices calling in the old type of Pepper Garden Registration Certificate, large numbers of Occupation Tickets (temporarily without demarcation, but recording the planter’s own declaration of the number of vines) have been issued, there has been exceptional activity in this Department during the month.
Prison. -Number of prisoners on 1st November, six. Number of prisoners on 30th November, five. Health and discipline was fair.
The sentence of Masri was increased one week for malingering.
Trade Returns. -
Rainfall. -Rainfall fell on 10 days and a total of 9.17 inches was registered.
SIMANGGANG.
Extracts from the report of the Officer-in-Charge, Police and Prison, Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft: -
1. Police. -
Personnel. -Divisional strength was up to authorised amount.
Drill and Training. -The present weekly average of Parades has been increased to ten; all ranks undergoing recruits training. Police school continued as usual.
Crime. -Several cases of petty theft were reported by Dyaks but it was found impossible to trace the offenders.
Sub-stations. -Reports from sub-stations were quite satisfactory. Two constables were transferred to Sebuyow to replace men brought to Head Quarters for training.
2. Prisons. -
General discipline showed a great improvement and health was satisfactory.
During the month prisoners were engaged on usual routine and Public Works Department work.
SIMANGGANG HOSPITAL.
Medical. -
A record of 339 out patients were treated during the month, and sixty N.A.B. injections were given at the hospital.
LAND OFFICE.
Extracts from the report of the Divisional Land Officer, Simanggang, Mr. B. Summers: -
On the 2nd instant the three Inspectors left office to examine applications at Bayai, Spatak, etc., in the Undup, each with sufficient work for a month.
On the 3rd instant I accompanied the Resident to Engkilili returning on the afternoon of the 6th.
Engkilili. -All Registers, etc., were examined, and corrections made where necessary.
It was noted that Assessment was still outstanding, but a mark decrease was shewn.
All examinations of land during October were checked with the Field book, also the plan of the Agricultural Experimental Garden; which has been re-examined and Land Department pegs planted, owing to Dyaks encroaching on part of this area.
The Chinese burial ground has been examined and approved, and is situated at Bukit Manggeris, half way between Engkilili and Lubok Tedong; this is the only piece of land available in the vicinity, all other suitable land being planted with pepper. A title will be issued shortly, also notices to the effect that burials ore strictly confined to the now piece of land, this is necessary to prevent further graves being “dotted” about everywhere, and on the side of most of the main path-ways.
On the 9th instant, preparations were made to proceed the following day for a short “trip” with the Assistant Superintendent of Surveys via Ulu Lingga to Lingga. to gain knowledge of the locality and number of gardens, etc
Summary of Walk from Simanggang, via Ulu Lingga to Lingga. Throughout this tour very few gardens were noticed along the route, with the exception of Chinese pepper gardens, and at Banting where the rubber gardens are near the houses.
The appearance of the padi, hill and swamp, promises a good harvest, which is badly needed, as there is a shortage now throughout the Ulu Lingga, in fact most houses visited, were buying, or will be shortly.
In every house visited, Land Routine. as much as possible was explained, such as, the difference between Permit to Plant, Garden Registration Certificates. Application slips, Occupation Tickets, etc., it is regrettable that they have so little knowledge of this routine, and it appears that a more or less house-to-house campaign would greatly help to solve their difficulties, which arise through lack of understanding.
Throughout, all rivers were high owing to recent rain, which made walking slow, the condition of the paths was fair.
Collections of Assessment throughout the Division for October, allow an increase over recent months, but there is still over $2,000 outstanding; the majority of this is at Betong, a large district, and practically all Rubber Gardena. Malays, evidently can pay, judging by collections at Kabong, which Kampong is known to be very poor.
SURVEY OFFICE.
Extracts from the report of the Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Simanggang, Mr. W. Harnack: -
Control Traverses. -Total 3,557 chains.
Garden Surveys. -(2nd Class) Total 207 chains.
Subtense Controls. -Along Rivers, 645 chains (approx).
P. Comp. Survey of Gardens. -Total 3,666 chains (266 lots).
P. Comp. Connections. -Total 963 chains.
P. Comp. Queries. -Measured 156 chains.
River Suurveys. -Total 5,492 chains.
SARIBAS DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of District Officer, Saribas, Mr. B. L. Daubeny: -
Three cases were heard by the Resident’s Court, two Civil and one Criminal all were duly disposed of with the exception of one civil case in connection with land which has to be demarcated before a decision can be given.
Prisons. -The prison gang have been employed on the usual routine work during the month.
Travelling. -I accompanied the Acting Resident, Second Division to Pusa and Debak in connection with outstanding appeal cases from 12th to 20th instant. I again visited those stations from 22nd to 24th instant in order to settle some further cases. On Sunday 29th I left for upriver for a visit to the Spak and Layar district.
Leaving Betong 7 a.m. on 29th November in the m.l. Rita accompanied by Abang Bunsu, Pengarah Isek and Lance Corporal Inang we reached Gensurai at 9 a.m. Here we changed into boats and finally reached Rumah Umpoh at Mupoh, Sungei Spak at 4 p.m. a night was spent here.
The next day we proceeded up the Sungei Spak by easy stages to Pengkalan Lesu arriving here at 4 p.m. where further progress by boats was impracticable owing to the low state of the water. We then started off overland and finally reached Mandal Chaing’s house, Kerapa, at dusk where we spent the night. The next morning we walked over the hills reaching Penghulu Unji’s house at the Ulu Spak about 10.30 am. The day and night were spent here. At 8 a.m. next morning we left for Jambu, Rumah Dempi (Ijok) which is between the Sungei Tipot and Sungei Layer, arriving there about 2 p.m. after a halt for food at Batu Pesok which is about two hours from Penghulu Unji’s house. The night was spent here and the next morning we descended from the hilly country across the “Layer” and over the Sungei Penyulok to Bakit’s house which we reached at 3 p.m. having stopped for a halt at Tinting Tembawai. From Bakit’s house the next morning we proceeded downriver (Layar) to Batu Lintang. The next day we returned to Betong arriving at 3 p.m. having left Batu Lintang at 7 a m.
In order to, save time the following houses, were made meeting points, Rumah Umpoh, Mandal Chaing, Penghulu Unji, Dempi and Bakit, the outlying houses sending in representatives. On my arrival at each of these houses I found many people collected and was thus able to explain various small matters to them and hear anything that they had to say.
The general complaint from all these houses, with the exception of the Rumah Bakit, was the lack of good farming land and resultant difficulties of gaining a livelihood. The upriver people as a whole are very badly off and quite apart from the lack of farming land are finding the greatest difficulty in obtaining kerosene oil, tobacco, matches and salt since their usual sources of obtaining these articles are closed by the fall in price of rubber and the fact that jungle produce is now hardly negotiable. With the exceptions of the Penyulok district the farming land upriver is very poor indeed, the ground being stony and even when left for 10 years or more does not produce jungle but thick undergrowth and stunted trees with the result that each year gets less and less fertile. As an example, I might mention that I passed through some land which I was told had been left untouched for 15 years and yet not a tree could be seen that was of more than about a feet in girth. Taking everything into consideration, together with the abnormally large area required per door each year to obtain sufficient padi, I would estimate that in another 10 years time or so there will be a very serious shortage, unless some move is made to get some of these people into other districts. A revival of trade will beneficial since many of them have rubber gardens, but the question of the shortage of land will still remain.
With regard to the recent trouble in the Third Division I duly explained to them the attitude of the Government but it appeared to me that they were far more concerned with their own difficulties than to worry about what was happening in the next division.
Penghulu Unji, I found was very ill and I fear that he will not last very much longer. I think that a substitute should be elected next year since he is now unable to walk or leave his house except by boat.
The general health of the people appears good and I was very struck by the number of children in each house.
I attach herewith a rough sketch map showing the route I took, houses visited and places stopped at, together with the various rivers.
General. -The Acting Resident Second Division visited this district from 12th to 20th instant in connection with a number of appeal cases. Various other matters were brought up during his visit.
On 4th instant Penghulu Unji arrived from Upriver with a letter from Mr. Cutfield in regard to a suggested Aum at Saratok in connection with Dyaks affairs, but owing to the delay in delivery here, no representatives from the “Layar” could attend as Mr. Cutfield had arrived at Saratok overland from Third Division before the letter reached me. Penghulu Sujang from the Rimbas proceeded to Saratok, and returned here on 6th instant to report and brought a letter from the Assistant District Officer, Saratok with minutes of the Aum, which were latter discussed by the Acting Resident, Acting Assistant District Officer, Saratok. and myself at Pusa.
Trade: -
Shipping. -Five motor vessels entered and cleared during the month.
KALAKA DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Officer, Saratok, Mr. L. K. Morse: -
Judicial. -No cases of importance came before the Court during the month.
P.W.D. -The painting of the water tank at Kabong was reported finished, but I have not yet inspected, it.
Education. -Fifty-two boys are on the roll of the Kabong School of which some thirty-nine are attending daily. An effort will be made to increase the attendance, at Saratok some forty-eight boys are attending while sixty-six names appear on the roll. The new Kabong School will be opened at the beginning of the new term.
Marine. -The m.l. One returned from Kuching having been thoroughly overhauled and repaired. All rotten timber has been replaced, the deck has been straightened with iron angle brackets and girders and the sheeting has been renewed.
Native Affairs. -Tax defaulters at Kabong were called out to repair the roads in lien of paying tax. The same procedure will be adopted at Saratok next month. Defaulters in the outlying Kampongs will also be called upon to work in lieu of tax.
Mr. H. E. Cutfield, Travelling District Officer, Sibu, accompanied by Abang Ahmad, Native Officer, Kanowit, Penghulu Nymbar, Julau, Penghulu Undu, Entabai, and Penghulu Manggi of Kanowit arrived, at Saratok from, the Julau on the 1st instant, earlier than expected, to discuss Dyak affairs, this matter has already been reported on. They left on the 4th instant for Sibu via the Julau. On the 12th instant I met the Acting Resident and the District Officer, Saribas at Pusa, to discuss Dyak affairs.
General. -Kabong was visited during the month and some minor cases settled. The accounts were checked as from the date of my last visit.
The death of Awang Rusli bin Awang Spudin, the young grandson of Datu Abang Haji Abdulrashid on the 12th instant is recorded with regret.
Third Division News.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports for November, 1931, by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident: -
Court. (Criminal). Tang Hee Yoo, Yu Ah Yeng, Ting King Lai vs. King Ng Siong. Section 324 I.P.C. An appeal against the decision of the District Court. Appeal dismissed and decision of District Court upheld.
His Highness the Rajah vs. Entili alias Klambu. Murder I.P.C. Section 302. Entili was found guilty and was sentenced to 7 years’ imprisonment as a result of the Magistrate’s recommendation for mercy made to the Supreme Court.
(Civil). There were three cases during the month, two of which were appeals from the Lower Courts. In both cases the decisions of the Lower Courts were upheld.
General. -I arrived on the 11th instant and took over from the Acting Resident, Mr. W. F. Dick on the 16th instant.
Mr. Dick took over from Acting District Officer, Mr. E. V. Andreini on the same date.
Mr. Andreini having been appointed to do duly at Bintulu left for that station via Kuching on the 19th instant.
Mr. R. G. Aikman arrived on the 30th instant from Kapit, he being on his way for home furlough.
Travelling District Officer. Me. H. E. Cutfield visited the Kanowit, Ngemah and Poi Districts.
Ex-Penghulu Janting was arrested for refusing to hand his gun, but on giving security of $100 that he would hand in same and move to Nanga Julau after harvest was released.
Armistice Day was observed on the 11th instant.
Tuan and Kaya appointed Penghulus of Igan and, Pasai subject to the approval His Highness the Tuan Muda in place of Sureng imprisoned.
Divisional Forest Officer, Mr. B. J. C. Spurway visited the Forest Reserve at Tanjong Blatok.
Acting Assistant District Officer, Oya. Mr. N. E. Hughes left for that station on the 2nd.
Agricultural. -Dyaks agreed to give Chinese 300 acres at Rantau Panjang for farming purposes.
SIBU.
November, 1931.
The District Officer, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports: -
Court. -Entili alias Klambu was committed to the Resident’s Court on a charge of murder. There have been numerous cases of petty theft before the Courts and also a number of assault cases. Fines and fees amounted to $613.78.
General. -A meeting of heads of houses from Igan and Pasai was held on 2nd and Tuai Rumah Tuan selected for post of new Penghulu for Igan and Tuai Rumah Kaya for Pasai. The experiment of having one chief for the two rivers having proved a failure.
A large smoke house at Lanang, near the Sawmill was burnt down early on the morning of 3rd instant.
On Armistice Day. 11th the two minutes silence was observed.
The Resident, Mr. C. D. Adams and Mrs. Adams arrived back from leave by m.s. Sri Mukah at 4.30 p.m. on the 11th.
I took over the District Office from Mr. E. V. Andreini on 16th instant. Mr. E. V. Andreini left by s.s. Gladys on 19th on transfer to Bintulu.
On 26th Penghulu Tuan reported that his house was burnt down on the morning of 23rd, as usual there were no men in the house when the fire broke out.
Mr. Kimpster of the Straits Steamship Co., arrived by Sri Mukah on 25th and took over from Mr. G. H. Daly. Mr. Daly of the Sarawak Steam ship Co., left by s.s. Angby on 28th.
SARIKEI, BINATANG AND REJANG.
November, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports: -
General. -Towards the end of last month, numerous complaints were received from Chinese in both Sarikei and Binatang Districts of theft of property by Dyaks. During this month these thefts have been traced to a gang of Dyaks, some Sarikei and some Binatang, who have been responsible, three have been convicted and two are still on remand, one is still at large, but since the splitting up of this gang no further complaints have been heard. Property stolen in Binatang would be brought to Sarikei and sold upriver and vice-versa.
On the 10th accompanied by Land Officer, Mr. K. E. Parker I proceeded to Sibu for Armistice Day celebrations and returned the next day.
Bantan, a Bawang Assan Dyak, one of Asoon’s confederates who had up to now eluded arrest, and on three occasions successfully resisted arrest, gave himself up at Sibu on Saturday 7th.
On 17th I proceeded upriver, with Native Officer Tuanku Mohamat, visiting the ulu Sarikei. Sungei Wak, Pakan, ulu Nyelong and Binatang Dyaks. there were many cases waiting to be settled. At Ajah’s house in the ulu Binatang all the remaining cases of people who were concerned in the recent interference in the ulu Binatang were settled, 12 Tuai Rumahs were fined ranging from one picul to five piculs. Everybody upriver seemed satisfied and contented. The Dyak padi looked exceptionally good, in spite of the late farming. I also went up Bukit Tabujang, the summit of which has been cleared, at the request of the Survey Department.
P.W.D. -Work is proceeding satisfactorily with the new Police Barracks.
Maintenance work on roads was as usual, on account of the incessant rains, the road has been cut up badly in certain places, and has had to be closed at times to motor traffic, during repairs.
The road is still progressing past Peninjau towards Nyelong. Prison labour only is being used.
Customs. -On account of the heavy rainfall, good colour pepper was obtained throughout the month. On the last shipment of the month over 100 fair average labels were issued.
MATU AND DARO.
November, 1931.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. F. L. G. Crossley, reports: -
Court. -There was an average number of cases during the month.
P.W.D. -Prisoners have been engaged on general upkeep work, at Daro it was necessary on two occasions to call out police and prisoners in the middle of the night to protect the offices from drifting logs. The exceptionally high tides were dashing these logs against the posts. Fortunately the danger was averted in time to prevent damage. Whitewashing of the Government buildings was commenced at Daro towards the end of the month.
Travelling. -I visited Kampong Bruit on the 4th, returning to Matu the following day.
I was in Daro from the 16th to the 27th, visiting Paloh on the 21st and 22nd. In the latter Kampong, the immediate felling of a number of dangerous trees was ordered.
Land. -The Divisional Land Officer. Mr. Pascoe, visited the District, from the 12th to the 16th in connection with cattle-land affairs. An order for immediate fencing was communicate to all owners in the Matu and Bruan area. Land Inspector Kisoon remained at Matu until the 25th, to demarcate a few gardens.
Reports from Bruit and Sirik foretell a disastrous padi harvest. The tides have been phenomenally high will, the result that salt water and driftwood have destroyed large areas of growing padi. At Bruit the harvest is estimated to produce fifty percent below average.
Staff. -Court Writer Ng Fong Seng at Daro was relieved on the 24th by Court Writer Goh Chong Seek.
KAPIT.
November, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. R. G. Aikman, reports: -
Court. -There were no cases of any importance.
Song. -Song was visited from 8th to 11th.
General. -Mr. L. D. Kennedy, Superintendent of Customs, Third Division, and Mr. J. W. Whiteside, Divisional Engineer, Third Division, arrived on the 5th and left again on the 8th.
Armistice Day was observed as a Public Holiday and the Government Offices closed.
Monseigneur E. Dunn paid a visit to the Gat returning on the 22nd and leaving for Sibu on the 24th.
Mr. J. L. Noakes, Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Third Division, arrived with a large staff on the 21st and has started on the work of surveying all existing gardens in this district.
Native Affairs. -Reports throughout the district indicate that padi crops are doing well and that there is every likelihood of a satisfactory harvest next year.
Native Officer, Abang Abu Seman visited the Dyaks in the Merirai and Balleh from the 18th to the 27th.
Penghulu Temonggong Koh visited the Katibas, Yong and Sut during the month.
Rainfall. -The rainfall for the month was 11.89 inches. The Belaga rainfall for October was 4.15 inches.
MUKAH AND OYA.
November, 1931.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. E. M. Woodward, reports: -
General. -The 13th anniversary Armistice Day on the 11th instant was observed as a public holiday and the Government Offices were closed.
Court. -During the month seven persons were sentenced to various terms of imprisonment in default of payment of fines.
As the Survey Department will be occupying the former Land Office here as an Office while they are working in this district next year, the Native Court was transferred from that building at the end of the month and now occupies one end of the Government Vernacular School, which is situated in Kampong Datu.
Travelling and Dyaks. -On the 7th instant, accompanied by Native Officers Abang Mus and Abang Suhaimi, I left Mukah for Balingian proceeding via Sungei Selangan overland to Nyandang’s (late Penghulu Andieng’s) house at Nanga Nimoh in the Ulu Balingian which is the last house in the Balingian river. I was met at Nyandang’s house by the Native Officer, Balingian, Awang Juli, and by Penghulu Banyui, and from thence proceeded down the Balingian River to Balingian where I arrived on the 14th instant.
I have now made a visit to almost all the important parts of the Mukah and Balingian districts and as a result am glad to be able to report that any discontent with Government which existed earlier this year amongst the Dyaks of the Mukah and Balingian as a result of the Asoon trouble in the Kanowit district has disappeared entirely. The Dyaks of these two districts now appear to be quite contented and loyal to Government though they are still complaining about the trade depression which has effected them adversely, as well as everyone else, and about their poverty and the continued high price of commodities such as salt, tobacco, etc., which they purchased from upriver hawkers. Attempts by the Dyaks to cultivate their own tobacco have apparently not met with much success.
During my visit the majority of the Dyaks were absent from their houses working on padi farms, but I informed all those I met about the proposed Regatta and Dyak Aum which will take place at Sibu at the New Year.
The Dyaks of the Balingian district have not been visited very often by a Government official in the past, and as a result the Native Officer, Balingian, Awang Juli, has been instructed to visit all Dyaks in the Balingian district once in every six months in future and to report to me any matters of importance in that district.
A rough census which has been taken shews that there are approximately 4,000 Dyaks living in the Mukah district and about 3,000 in the Balingian district making a total of approximately 7,000 Dyaks.
Prisons. -During the month the daily number of prisoners averaged 33. They were employed on the roads, ditches, and on the general upkeep of the station.
During the month the wiring of the Prison fences was completed by the Government carpenter, Merais.
Peh Ah Hock who was sentenced in 1920 to 15 years’ imprisonment for murder has been instructed to report himself and his intended movements to the nearest District Officer once in every month for the next two years (approximately) until 11th December. 1933, when his sentence of imprisonment would normally expire.
P.W.D. -The construction of a belian bridge over the Sungei Penakup on the new by-pass road above the Main Bazaar was nearly completed by the end of the month.
Telegraphs and Telephones. -On the 21st instant Mohamat Chi and Alli bin Slem took over the duties of wireless operators at Mukah from Chin Tamby.
During the month about 30 telephone posts between Sungei Petanak and Sungei Petian were removed further inland owing to the danger of their being knocked down by rough seas.
S.O.L. -At the rotary drill mentioned in my September report gas sand only was found at a depth of 120 feet, the oil sand being situated at about 170 feet below the surface.
When a depth of 120 feet was reached drilling operations at this place were abandoned in favour of a site situated a short distance further east where it is hoped that oil sand will be met at a depth of 150 feet below the surface.
Shipping. -The deep water channel at Mukah mouth which was marked out with channel marks in September last has now been abandoned in favour of a new deep water channel situated further east, which was marked out with channel marks at the end of the month.
This new deep water channel is approximately 100 yards in length by about 30 yards in breadth and from seaward runs almost due south towards the mouth of the Mukah River.
Balingian. -I arrived at this station via S. Selangau and the Ulu Balingian on the 14th instant and returned to Mukah on the 20th instant.
During my visit all Cash Books, Cash and Opium stock were cheeked and found correct.
Trade. -During the month the price of raw sago rose from 35 cents to 45 cents per passu and the price of raw jelutong from $4.50 to $5.50 per picul. It is gratifying to note that this rise in the price of these two commodities resulted in a slight improvement in trade.
The principal exports included: -
Raw sago 179 koyans; G. jelutong 300 piculs; P. rubber 8 piculs.
Rainfall. -Mukah rainfall figures for the month are as follows: -
OYA AND DALAT.
October, 1931.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports: -
Prisons. -Discipline at Oya improved during the month, but certain long-sentence Chinese from Sibu are still troublesome. Local prisoners, both Dyak and Melanau, give no trouble at all.
Prisoners at Oya were employed on the general upkeep of the station.
The Corporal was reprimanded and the Native Officer warned that stricter supervision must be exercised in future.
P.W.D. -At Dalat earth-filling was continued on the Court House padang around the base of the new flagstaff, prison labour being used. Erosion of the river banks both at Oya and Dalat is becoming serious, and poles and akar were collected during the month in order to build groins.
Erosion at the Kuala is very bad indeed, and it looks as though Kampong Kuala will soon float out to sea. The first heavy sea of the landas battered the pagar to pieces, and the coast fell in several fathoms in as many days. The shore at this point has receded more than 200 feet since the protective api-api trees were felled in 1923, and it is difficult to know what to do; as far as can be seen the only course is to plant several rows of api-api trees well inland, and trust that they will have grown sufficiently to act as a barrier by the time the sea reaches them.
Sungei Kut. -During the month the Divisional Engineer paid several visits to Sungei Kut and supervised the erection of two belian dams, one at each end. Inclined planes enable small boats to be dragged over them, and the dams, by maintaining a good level of water in the Kut, do much to facilitate the passage, though of course they prevent large boats from going through. It is hoped eventually to build two locks, and if this is done the natives would certainly benefit very considerably since they could take boats full of sago direct to Binatang. The progress of this scheme is being watched with great interest, and it is hoped that it will mature.
General. -Visitors to the station included the Acting Resident, Mr. W. F. Dick who passed through on his way to and from Mukah, Mr. and Mrs. B. J. C. Spurway and Master Spurway and the Rev. Father Anthony Mulder. The Rev. Father
Epping returned to Dalat on October 26th after an absence on sick leave of some three weeks.
On October 18th I succumbed to an attack of Malaria and proceeded to Sibu on 23rd for treatment, returning to Dalat on November 2nd.
A slight rise in the price of sago gave the industry a much needed fillip, and seemed to clear the traders up considerably. Two motor schooners, the Kim Chin Teck and Kim Chin Seng, both of which were chartered by the Dalat Towkays have now been held up at Oya by rough seas for nearly a month, and so far they show no signs of clearing.
Trade. -100 koyans raw sago and 39 piculs jelutong were shipped to Kuching.
The trade returns for the month and for comparison with those of the same month last year is as follows: -
November, 1931.
Court. -Court work was heavier during the month, though no cases call for mention. There was an increase in the number of Civil cases due probably to the recent improvement in the price of sago; Chinese traders are suing to recover debts which they had previously given up as hopeless.
On November 18th an inquest was held at Dalat into the death of a Chinese hawker who was brought down from upriver in a dying condition, and a verdict of death from natural causes was returned.
P.W.D. -At Oya prisoners were employed in building groins at intervals of five fathoms along the river-bank from the office to the boat shed; it is hoped that these groins may stop the erosion, which is becoming serious.
At Dalat, prisoners were employed in completing the earth-filling and turfing round the new flagstaff on the Fort padang, and in constructing groins similar to those at Oya.
At both stations gangs of prisoners were used to clear the roads and carry on the general upkeep of the station.
Police and Prisons. -Prison discipline at Oya improved on the appointment of a new mandor, but discipline at Dalai continues to be very bad.
As soon as the new jail is built at Oya, all Chinese prisoners will be transferred there, where they are subject to stricter supervision, and only local prisoners of proved good character will be allowed to go to Dalat.
Shipping. -On November 12th two motor schooners and three schooners cleared from Oya after being held up for one month and four days by rough weather. All these vessels were searched in the hope of finding some of the jewellery stolen from Capt. Lowe’s bungalow, but without result.
On November 28th m.v. Sri Merbo arrived bringing m.l. Nellie which had been to Kuching for repairs.
Land. -During the month I interviewed all quit rent defaulters in the district (except those from Medong) in an effort to collect some of the outstanding tax. Each man was interviewed in the presence of the Native Officer and his Tua Kampong, and examined regarding his circumstances and his ability to pay.
Dyaks. -On November 11th Penghulu Untol came to Oya and reported that Dyaks in the Ulu were splitting up into “langkaus” and neglecting their long houses. These langkaus, apparently, were not merely the ordinary “langkau umai” but were well-built houses where two or three doors were living together permanently. On November 21st I went upriver and found that this was the case; the Dyaks are well aware that this practice is strictly forbidden-I warned them about it myself during my last visit to the Ulu-but as usual with the Ulu Oya Dyaks no notice whatever had been taken of Government orders. All Dyaks were finally warned that this practice was to cease forthwith, and that the usual fine of one picul per door would be imposed on anyone disregarding this order. They were further told that whereas there was nothing to stop them living in huts during the three processes of padi-planting, they must return to their long-houses in between times; one or two of these houses were almost falling to pieces as a result of prolonged neglect.
On my return from the Ulu Oya I visited the Tamin and the Baoh and attended to all matters awaiting settlement. The Dyaks in this district are far more tractable than the Ulu Oya Dyaks, and give much less trouble.
During my trip upriver all tuai-tuai were informed about the Regatta and Dyak meeting to be held at Sibu at New Year; the purpose of the meeting was explained to them, and they were told that if they had any grievances, whatever their nature, they were to bring them up at the meeting.
Fourth Division News.
MIRI.
October, 1931.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports for October, 1931, by Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident: -
Court. -Leong Shin, P.C. Komput and Court Writer Ong all of Sibuti were sentenced to imprisonment under Courts Order section 193. The Supreme Court confirmed the sentence of death on Glagat (Dyak) which the District Officer, Bintulu, later reported had been carried out. The trial of Paso Aran (Kelabit) for murder was commenced but adjourned for further evidence.
General. -The Superintendent of Lands, Mr. C. S. Griffiths returned from Baram and then visited Niah and Sibuti accompanied by the District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter. He also visited Bintulu en route to Kuching.
The Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, have been very busy at Kuala Baram making preparations for laying their pipe line. They are continuing their road from the Kuala to Lutong so that it will be possible to motor from Miri to Kuala Baram without using the beach.
Very rough weather was experienced most of the month at sea and erosion has again started to take place on the Peninsula. It has gone so far now that Mr. Corson has had to evacuate his bungalow which was built by Mr. Miller-Hallet in 1924. The Melano fishing village is now very nearly exposed to the sea. Appearances are that the month of the river is reverting to its old position in which case there will be certain danger to the main-land. Erosion is still taking place at Brighton and the bank of the river is now at one place near the main road.
Owing to the activities of the Police in rounding up vagrants I am glad to report that no more cases have occurred of highway robberies. The force is now undergoing a course of musketry on the new range situated below Tanjong Lobang.
On the 26th I visited Baram which visit had been postponed from the previous week owing to rough seas, the Rentis being unable to leave Miri. There were several court Cases and the question of Kampar Dyaks was discussed with the District Officer and Penghulu Rhu. I have drafted some regulations to better control the movements of these Kampars which will be put before His Highness the Tuan Muda for approval.
It was considered that the Dyak district above the Fort was too large for effective control by the one Penghulu, Apai Uban, and so Nyaloi was appointed without pay subject to confirmation, as an extra Penghulu. He will be in charge of all the Dyaks on the right bank of the Baram river whilst Penghulu Apai Uban will control those on the other bank.
The Divisional Forest Officer visited Sibuti and interviewed the pepper planters regarding the payment of duty on their tuats. They are quite unable to pay at the present moment and so an agreement was made between them and the Government by which they have promised to pay when their vines are in bearing.
Mr. and Mrs. Sochon arrived on the 13th. Mr. Sochon has been appointed to this Station to take over from the Assistant Superintendent of Police, Miri, Mr. D. V. Murphy who goes on furlough in December.
November, 1931.
Joseph Chong a clerk at Bintulu was imprisoned for two years for breach of trust in respect of Government monies.
His Highness the Tuan Muda with Mr. A. A. Rennie, Treasurer of Sarawak arrived by Darvel on the 24th.
Several matters were discussed with His Highness who returned to Kuching by Marudu on the 27th.
His Highness was pleased to approve of stricter regulations regarding Kampar Dyaks working in the Baram district.
Owing to the erosion on the Peninsula Mr. T. Corson had to evacuate his bungalow which was pulled down. As a temporary expedient one of the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, bungalows has been rented.
The Assistant Resident of Brunei at Kuala Belait reported the Sarawak subjects were tapping jelutong in Brunei territory without licenses. The Divisional Forest Officer, Mr. Corson and myself went to Belait to discuss this matter, with satisfactory results. The boundary marks between the two States from the Coast to the Pagalayan are now very clearly defined but I gather that jelutong workers have not understood that this was a boundary and have confused it with the several Company marks. However there should be now no further excuse for working over the border.
Arrack and Gambling farm tenders for next year were opened and show a decrease of $4,192.25 per mensem for the Division. The two Bintulu farms only show very slight increases.
Owing to certain friction between the two Chinese Schools and what appeared to be an attempt to cause trouble between the Kheh and Cantonese races, the principals and masters of the Schools were had up before me and warned as to their future conduct.
November 11th was observed as a Public Holiday and the usual two minutes silence was observed.
Very good reports are received of the healthy state of the Kadayan padi.
Mr. E. V. Andreini has been appointed District Officer, Bintulu and reported that he had taken over that District as from 23rd vice Mr. Macpherson who proceeded on furlough by the Marudu leaving Miri on 27th. Mr. D. V. Murphy Assistant Superintendent of Police, Miri was also a passenger by this boat on furlough. Mr. Whiteside Divisional Engineer made a visit of inspection.
BARAM.
October, 1931.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
Court. -In the Resident’s Court Criminal the case His Highness the Rajah vs. Pasu Aran charged with murder was adjourned for further witnesses.
Crime. -Galau, Native Officer, arrived with the Kelabits on 1st. An inquiry was held and Pasu Aran was committed for trial on a charge of wilful murder.
Native Affairs. -Kayan Penghulu Oyong Jok was brought before the Resident who warned him that unless he takes more trouble and settles his cases properly it will be necessary to appoint a new Penghulu. It was considered advisable to appoint a new Dyak Penghulu to look after the Dyaks on the true right bank of the Baram, Penghulu Apai Uban who has moved to the Lelak doing the left bank and the Tinjar. Nyaloi of Sungei Babi was selected subject to confirmation by His Highness.
Penghulu Rhu visited the station during the Resident’s stay to discuss Dyak affairs.
Kelabit Penghulus Lupong Bala and Balang Ratu were down for the Kelabit murder case.
Travelling. -Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resilient, Fourth Division visited the station from 26th to 30th. Accompanied by Mr. C. S. Griffiths, Superintendent of Lands, I returned from Long Lama on the 1st. Mr. Griffiths left for Miri on the 3rd.
Mr. Hanson, Divisional Treasurer, and Dr. W. Hutchison, Chief Assistant Medical Officer, arrived by s.s. Gladys on 17th. Dr. Hutchison returned to Kuching by the Gladys on 19th, Mr. Hanson staying till 22nd.
Wan Taha, Native Officer, left for Long Arah on 18th to fetch P.C. Ajang and T. Tipong Apong in connection with the Kelabit murder cases. He returned on 23rd.
Prisoners. -The prisoners averaging 27 men were engaged on the general upkeep of the station.
P.W.D. -A contract was signed for the construction of bridges on the road through the Foochow Colony at a cost of $50.
Land. -Mr. C. S. Griffiths, Superintendent of Lands, visited the station from 29th September to 3rd October, spending one night at Long Lama. Steps are being taken to enforce payment of quit rent with satisfactory results. It is worthy of note that not a single person took advantage of the opportunity to pay by monthly instalments.
Medical. -Owing to the absence of the dresser upriver, no figures are yet available.
Shipping. -S.S. Gladys made two trips during the month, calling at Bakong to load jelutong on one occasion.
M.L. Rentis was held up in Miri by rough weather after taking Mr. Griffiths to Niah and Sibuti and was unable to return until 18th.
Rainfall. -2.63 inches of rain fell in 15 days.
Trade. -Was slightly better due to the rise in price of rubber and jelutong. Fair quantities of damar were brought down from up-river.
Trade returns are as follows: -
November, 1931.
Travelling. -Galpu left for the Kelabit Country on 1st to make further investigations and to collect witnesses in the case His Highness the Rajah vs. Pasu Aran. The Dresser was also sent to attend to the two wounded men. They were still away at the end of the month having been held up by floods.
Accompanied by Wan Taha I left for the Tru on 12th walking over to L. Toyut on 16th. Next day Wan Taha returned to the Tru en route for L. Lama to open the birds’ nests caves while I went on to L. Miri, whence I was recalled by express message from Baram and leaving L. Miri on 17th at 5.49 p.m., I reached Miri at 3.40 p.m. next day with Datu Tuanku Haji Drahman who was very ill and was admitted to hospital on arrival. I returned from Miri on 29th.
On 19th Wan Ahmat Native Officer left for L. Lama to accompany Wan Taha to L. Akah to Lio Matu for the Penan meetings. It had been arranged that Wan Suror should leave the same day to visit the Dyaks in the Bakong but in the absence of the Tuanku in Miri his visit had to be cancelled.
Native Affairs. -The Dyaks at S. Bong in the Tru were ordered to place pledges of $50 per door in the Fort at L. Lama, pledges to be forfeited by those who do not build immediately after the harvest. Gana, T.R. at ulu Tru was ordered to complete his house after the harvest.
The L. Suku house at L. Toyut is nearing completion. These people have pledges deposited in the Fort.
P.T. Long Pingan, Lirong Penghulu, came down during the month bringing wood to Bakong.
Prisoners. -The prisoners averaging 28 men were engaged on the usual routine work of the station. Prison Mandor I.umut left at his own request at the end of the month.
P.W.D. -The contractor was still engaged on the bridges on the road through the Foochow Colony.
Land. -Some progress was made in the collection of outstanding Land Rents though there still remains a balance of over $700 outstanding.
Medical. -October-169 Out-patients were treated during the month and 20 N.A.B. injections were given under the Professor Harrison Smith Fund. In November 146 N.A.B. injections were given upriver.
Shipping. -S.S. Gladys made one trip only during the month.
Trade. -The rise in price of jelutong has resulted in more business than usual of late in the bazaar. Trade returns are as follows: -
BINTULU.
October, 1931.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. A. Macpherson, reports: -
Courts. -Fines amounting to $483.68 were imposed.
Prison. -The gang was employed on the general upkeep of the station. Prisoners numbered 11 et the end of the month. Glagat was executed at dawn on 13th instant.
P.W.D. -The pipe line is in good order. Tanks were cleaned. Repairs to clerk’s Quarters Tatau are still in hand. The Carpenter made a temporary house for Abang Bojeng, Native Officer.
Dairy Farm. -The herd numbered 52 at the end of the month.
Visitors. -Mr. Murphy spent nights of 5th and 6th, and Mr. C. S. Griffiths the nights of 18th and 19th in the station.
Travelling. -I visited Sebauh and Tubau from 21st to 24th, an ordinary routine visit.
Staff. -The Court Writer, Sebauh was arrested on 21st and detained for embezzlement. Clerk, Lik Huang has relieved him at Sebauh.
Native Affairs. -Leng was elected T.K. for Orang Kebulu Jelalong vice Agau deceased. Dudut as Tuan Belal vice Matsah deceased and Sanai Layar T.K. vice Datu Haji Abdullah. All appointments are awaiting confirmation by Resident.
Awang Samsudin, Native Officer, Belaga, arrived at Tubau to consult with Native Officer there and has since returned.
Wireless. -Operator Thomas Baring-Gould took over from Kipli on 12th.
Trade and Customs. -Trade statistics for the month were as follows: -
The principal exports during the month are as under: -
Rainfall. -The rainfall for the month amounted to 10.92 inches.
November, 1931.
The District Officer, Mr. E. V. Andreini, reports: -
Administration, etc. -I took over from Mr. Macpherson on the 23rd. He left for home furlough on the same day by s.s. Auby.
Awang Abil, Native Officer replaced Abang Bojeng at Tatau the latter coming to Bintulu as 2nd Native Officer.
Previous to his transfer Awang Abil visited the Ulu Pendan and mapped out Government Birdsnests Caves.
Oh Choo Jin, Court Writer, Tatau, returned from leave and resumed his duties.
The Divisional Treasurer visited the district on duty from 1st to 11th.
Court. -Joseph Chong, Court Writer, Sebauh, was committed for trial under section 408 and sentenced at the Resident’s Court, Miri.
Fines amounting to $458.38 were imposed during the month.
Agriculture. -Inspector, Matnoon returned from upriver with useful information and stated he had many demands for rat poison and other help from Farmers. Seeds were ordered from Kuching for several people.
He reported Dyak and Chinese padi to be making good progress but that much of the Milano crop had been destroyed by rats.
The cattle head was in good condition and numbered 54 at end of month.
P.W.D. -A new filter was fixed to the Pipe Line. Water was laid on to one bazaar shop house and to a Native Officer’s house.
Repairs to Clerks Quarters at Tatau were completed.
The carpenter was employed on painting the bungalow and on minor repairs to Government buildings.
Shipping. -The m.l. Joan towed in a Chinese bandong that was in serious difficulties on the bar in a rough sea on the 1st. The Juragan Awang is to be commended for his efficient handling of the rescue. There was heavy rain and rough seas for the first half of the month and very calm towards the end. The Auby made her usual trips and got good cargoes.
Trade and Customs. -Trade statistics for the month were as follows: -
The principles exports during the month as under: -
Post and Telegraphs. -Wireless Operators Kiat Seong and Osman relieved Pozy and Bakari during the month. The Operators underwent training in Postal work in view of the coming amalgamation.
Prisons. -The gang numbered 14 at the end of the month and were employed on general upkeep of the station.
Rainfall. -The rainfall for the month amounted to 19.80 inches.
Miri.
October, 1931.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports: -	Courts. -Two hundred and nineteen writs were issued of which 33 were in the Criminal and 186 in the Civil Courts.
Health. -At Tanjong Lobang the stumping contract was finished and the contractor paid off. This area now requires levelling. Regular spraying of likely mosquito breeding places was under-taken; but somehow the number of mosquitos does not seem to diminish, probably because of the heavy rains experienced recently.
Four vaccinations were undertaken by the Sanitary Inspector. On the 1st Ah Say, Assistant Bazaar Inspector was given three months’ notice to terminate his services under the retrenchment scheme.
Land. -Assistant Land Inspector Jaini spent most of the month at Sibuti where he should be busily occupied for some months to come. Three new applications were received for 14 1/2 acres of coconuts. Thirty demarcations were made, these being for 54 1/2 acres of coconuts and 56 1/2 acres for rubber. Thirty-two Occupation Tickets were issued.
Medical. -At the Government Dispensary 166 out-patients made 610 attendances for treatment. Eight patients were sent to the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited. Hospital, and eight N.A.B. injections were given.
Meteorological: -
Outstations. -These were twice visited during the month. On the 7th accompanied by Mr. C. S. Griffiths I left in the m.l. Rentis for Niah where the Land Books were inspected and certain instructions given to the Court Writer. Opportunity was also taken for visiting the caves.
The Native Officer, Awang Hitam, expressed keenness on planting padi with the irrigation method and the assistance of some friends from British North Borneo.
He was told to convene a meeting of the elders, to find out if they were unanimous in this view.
On the 10th we proceeded to Sibuti, Mr. Griffiths going by the overland route, and on the 12th, we returned to Miri. Both substations were very well kept, reflecting credit on the Court Writer.
Prisons. -The daily average was 50 and health was generally good. The Gang was employed at Tanjong Lobang.
Public Works. -The Peninsular bungalow occupied by Mr. Corson became unsafe owing to rapid erosion made by the sea during the severe weather, and it was decided to have this house pulled down and stacked. A few minor repairs and alterations were made to various other quarters. A contract was signed for asphalting a part of the road at Tanjong Lobang, but little work was one on this owing to inclement weather. Water wastage again came in for investigation and it is pleasing to note a big reduction.
Staff. -Mr. W. L. P. Sochon, Assistant Superintendent of Police, was transferred to this Division from Kuching and arrived on the 13th.
General. -Mr. C. S. Griffiths, Superintendent of Lands, arrived from Baram on the 3rd. Other visitors included Mr. and Mrs. F. H. Kortright from Limbang and Dr. W. Hutchison from Kuching. On the 26th the Resident and Mrs. H. D. Aplin visited Baram, returning again on the 30th. On the 22nd a four-oared boat race between Miri and Singapore resulted in an easy win for the former. On the 23rd Messrs. Morice and Corson proceeded to Niah and Sibuti and Mr. McLeod to Suai.
November, 1931.
Courts. -Work was very light throughout the month, only 173 writs being issued. Of these, 50 were in the Criminal and 128 in the Civil divisions. One hundred and twenty-four suits were disposed of comprising 28 Criminal and 96 Civil. In Criminal cases 23 convictions wore obtained.
Claims in Civil matters amounted to $3,753, while fines and fees totalled $210 and $190 respectively. The Court revenue was $485. The sum of $1,584 was paid into and $1,698 was disbursed from Court Deposits.
The only case calling for special mention was one in which Nam Siak was fined $50 in the Magistrate’s Court under Sections 269 and 291.
Health. -The contractor started clearing undergrowth in the surrounding jungle at Tanjong Lobang, and this work had progressed very satisfactorily by the end of month.
Arrangements were made and notices issued for the erection of bucket system latrines throughout the Municipal area.
It was decided to erect two public latrines in the bazaar.
A sample of water from a kampong well was sent to the Medical authorities for examination. This was found to be unfit for drinking and the well was closed,
There have been many deaths recently of very young children from dysentery, and it is feared that more of these wells may also be contaminated.
Fifteen vaccinations wore undertaken by the Sanitary Inspector,
Land. -Quit Rent collection is still in arrears, and steps are being taken to rectify this as far as possible.
Seventeen now applications for land wore received, these being for fifteen acres of coconuts, sixty-one of pepper and five of vegetables.
Six gardens were demarcated in the Miri area comprising throe acres of coconuts, six of pepper and 5 1/2 of rubber.
Assistant Inspector Jaini was away at Sibuti throughout the month.
Medical. -At the Government dispensary 155 out-patients made 623 attendances for treatment. Nine patients were transferred to the Sarawak Oilfields, Ltd., hospital. Four N.A.B. injections were administered.
Meteorological. -
Monopolies. -To prevent sweating of stored opium, certain ventilation or the strong-room and godown has been arranged by Mr. Whiteside. This work will be put in hand as early as possible.
Municipal. -A conservancy lorry of the type used in Kuching arrived during the early part of the mouth.
The question of sewage disposal received special attention and the matter is nearly settled. Only a few details remain to be discussed and an early start is anticipated for the scheme. The site for the plant will be at Pujut where a double building will be erected, half of which will be built and used by the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited.
The second half-yearly assessment list was revised.
Outstations. -Mr. W. C. Morice visited Niah and, Sibuti from the 16th to the 20th and reported that there was very little work in either station owing to the people being mostly away on their farms.
At Sibuti Assistant Land Inspector Jaini has instructions to survey every garden in the district whether held under permit or occupation ticket.
Prison. -Prisoners averaged 47 daily and were generally employed in improving the Tanjong Lobang compound.
Health was excellent there being only 15 cases of sickness.
Public Works. -Extensive repairs and improvements were begun on the pig slaughter house, pork market, and fish market, and good progress was made on each of these buildings. The fish market is to have sloping glazed tiles and running water and should prove much more hygienic and attractive than hitherto. An improvement to the pork market will be concrete slabs replacing the wooden ones formerly in use.
The old Marino Barracks, which had remained unoccupied for along period owing to their dilapidated condition, were demolished.
European bungalow No. 5 was demolished and staked it having become unsafe because of erosion on the sea shore.
A few minor repairs were effected to various building. The contract for asphalting part of the Tanjong Lobang road was hold up owing to inclement weather.
General. -Mr. Murphy proceeded to Kuching on the 6th for a few days.
Mr. W. V. Hanson, Divisional Treasurer, was away at Bintulu from the 1st to 11th checking accounts.
The 11th being Armistice Day was observed as a holiday.
His Highness the Tuan Muda accompanied by Mr. A. A. Rennie arrived for a short visit on the 24th returning to Kuching again on the 27th.
Mr. Whiteside, Divisional Engineer, Third and Fourth Divisions visited the station from the 21th to 29th in connection with various matters concerning Public Works.
Other visitors to the station included Mr. F. H. Pollard and Mr. A. Macpherson, the latter passing through en route to England on furlough.
Fifth Division News.
LIMBANG.
November, 1931.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports for November, 1931, by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident: -
Court. -There were very few cases and none of any importance.
General. -On the 4th, a brutal murder was reported at Trusan when one Ong Tak, a Chinese Gardener, was found decapitated in his hut, whilst his head was found on a path some distance outside obviously having been placed there by the murderer and probably with a view to diverting suspicions of the crime to a Murat house. Suspicions fell on one Ah Tong, who shared the deceased’s Garden, and he was arrested and eventually charged with the crime. In the course of evidence produced, blood stains on two parangs and clothing of the accused were certified by both the Lawas and Limbang Dressers and mainly on the strength of this the Jury could not do otherwise than return a verdict of guilty, but however, the judgement was reserved until the exhibits had been examined by a qualified Pathologist.
I visited Trusan in connection with the above trial, and from there went to Lawas via Sundar and Awat Awat.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe, has introduced the first motor car into Lawas, and it is now possible to proceed five miles on the Trusan Road; and when the whole length, some fourteen miles is made possible for motor traffic, it will greatly facilitate the administration of that District.
Visitors to the Station were Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton, who came overland from Miri, Mr. Bruce Porter from Batu Apoi, and Mr. E. Parnell, who came from Kuching in connection with affairs of the Sarawak Steamship Co.
Mr. C. H. Southwell of the Borneo Evangelical Mission left for Australia on furlough.
Mr. A. F. Moore, Cadet, left on a visit upriver and to return via the Panderuan and was still away at the end of the month.
P.W.D. -Owing the exceptional amount of rain during the month, little progress was made on the Brunei Road extension, but nevertheless it is hoped that a through connection will be made by the end of the year.
The Trojan Lorry was sent to Lawas to work on the Lawas-Trusan Road, transporting materials for bridges and culverts,
Medical and Health. -Owing to the Medical Officer of Brunei, Dr. Winchester leaving on home furlough before his relief had arrived, the usual monthly visit of inspection was not paid.
The Dresser-in-Charge reports the general health of the District good, only one patient was admitted to the Hospital and fifty-five patients were treated in the Dispensary.
The rainfall amounted to 16.28 inches.
Trade and Shipping: -
November, 1931.
Court. -The following cases call for mention at Lawas; Daraut, Brunei Malay sentenced under Undang Undang section 50, Rasimon and Narsom (f.) Javanese Undang-Undang section 51, Osman bin Lamit, Brunei Malay fined $15 and costs for Breach of Customs Regulations.
At Trusan Lim Ah Hai was sentenced under section 324 I.P.C. and Dullah bin Bakar for Contempt of Court.
A very brutal murder took place at Trusan on the 4th of the month when Ong Tak a local Chinaman was decapitated in his own house, the head being found some 15 yards from the house.
Resident Court. -His Highness the Rajah vs. Ah Tong for suspected murder of the above case was held on the 14th the case being adjourned for Medical evidence as to possible blood stains found on parang belonging to accused.
Prisoners. -Averaged 19 at Lawas and 10 at Trusan.
At Lawas the prisoners were mainly employed in felling and draining the road up to the Lawas Estate with the view of making it passable for a car.
P.W.D. -Construction of bridges and culverts along the Trusan road was the main work during the month, the Contractor Wong Kiau under taking the work at 40 cents a foot.
Conveying the timber and cement pipes to the required localities was very slow work, but this has been greatly relieved by the assistance of the Resident in lending the station the Trojan lorry from Limbang. Buffalo are also employed in dragging the timber. It is unfortunate that owing to the abnormally wet weather the lorry is not being put to its full advantage, although it is not necessary to emphasise its utility in the station. A permanent lorry at Lawas would be a great asset.
Bridges along the Punang road are also being renewed the former bridges being discarded and replaced by those of 8 feet.
General. -The Resident and Mrs. Kortright paid a visit to District from the 12th to 16th visiting Trusan, Sundar and Lawas.
Some excitement was caused on the 6th of the month when the first car made its appearance in Lawas. Again owing to the wet weather the car has not been put to its full advantage although I have driven it out to very nearly the 5th mile along the Trusan road, where owing to the absence of bridges it is not possible to proceed further.
Trusan, Sundar and Merapok were all visited during the month; I also proceeded to Limbang on the 7th in order to discuss the murder case at Trusan.
Agriculture. -The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Ltd, exported 47,373 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
Rainfall. -The following rainfall was recorded during the month.
Air Mail Fees.
The Postmaster-General informs us that he has received information from the Secretary for Postal Affairs, Straits Settlements and Federated Malay States to the effect that the air mail fees indicated in the article published in the December issue of the Sarawak Gazette have been revised as from December the 2nd.
The new rates are as follows: -
