VOL. LXII.
No. 947.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Monday, August 1st, 1932.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette
MONDAY, AUGUST 1st, 1932.
Marriages.
MACBRYAN-COLLINS. The marriage of Eva Irene, only daughter of Mr. and Mrs. John Collins, of Collinsville, Mount Bryan, South Australia, and Gerard T. M. MacBryan, third son of Mr. H. C. MacBryan, of Kingsdown House, Box, Wiltshire. England, and the late Mrs. MacBryan, was celebrated at the Methodist Church, Ballarst, Victoria, on 25th May, 1932.
CORSON-BENGTSSON. At Kuching, Sarawak, on the 4th July, 1932, Thomas Corson, B.Sc., Forest Department, elder son of Mr. and Mrs. Win. Corson, 11 Eyre Crescent, Edinburgh, to Phyllis Margaret only daughter of Mr. and Mrs. E. H. P. Bengtsson of “Roseneath,” Kuching and Sandringham Road, West Hartlepool.
Engagement.
The engagement is announced between Robert Gordon Aikman, Sarawak Civil Service, only son of Dr. and Mrs. Matthew Aikman, of Plymouth, Devonshire, and Doris Kathleen, elder daughter of Mr. and Mrs. W. H. Cook, of London House, Knaphill, Woking, Survey.
Local and Personal.
July.
Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division accompanied by Mr. R. Boulter, C. M. G., His Majesty’s Trade Commissioner at Singapore, and Captain C. P. Lowe, left for Singapore on the 4th July by s.s. Vyner Brooke. Mr J. C. Swayne returned to Kuching on the 11th by this same vessel.
We understand that the six new racing ponies from British North Borneo are due to arrive in Kuching on the 6th August.
Mr. B. J. C. Spurway, accompanied by Mrs. Spurway and Master Spurway, arrived in Kuching on 1st July.
On 4th July, Mr. T. Corson of the Forest Department was married to Miss P. M. Bengtsson, daughter of Mr. E. H. P. Bengtsson of the Government Workshop. After the ceremony a reception took place at No. 1, The Hill, the residence of the bride’s parents. The bride and bridegroom left by the s.s. Vyner Brooke the same day for Brastagi, via Singapore, where we understand the honeymoon is to be spent. We take this opportunity of wishing them both long life and prosperity.
It is reported that. Mr. Ennion, Deputy Governor of Parkhurst, Isle of Wight, has recently become the possessor of a second daughter. Mr. Ennion served formerly in the Sarawak Police Department. We tender Mr. and Mrs. Ennion our hearty congratulations.
Most enjoyable performances were given by children of the Min Teck School on the nights of 15th, 16th and 17th July. The large temporary building erected near the Government Printing Office was thronged throughout each performance. We congratulate all concerned in the carrying out of the excellent performances.
We are informed that Mr. Harley Clarke, dentist, of Singapore, will be visiting Kuching in September next, during race week.
Presents of old clothes would he appreciated by poor inmates in the Leper Camp. Parcels should be addressed c/o The Chief Health Officer, Sarawak.
S.S. Marudu arrived from Singapore on 18th July, bringing Messrs. T. H. Harrisson, E. A. A. Shackleton and P. W. Richardson of the Oxford Expedition. These three gentlemen, accompanied by Mr. E. Banks, Curator, Sarawak Museum, left for Baram by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on 19th. Capt. C. P. Lowe and Mr. K. D. Thomas also arrived by the s.s. Marudu.
We welcome back to Kuching Dr. and Mrs. W. Hutchison, of the Medical Department, who arrived by s.s. Kudat on the 25th from home furlough.
Thanks to the generosity of His Highness the Rajah it has been possible to open a golf course across river. This new golf course will prove of great benefit to those living in the new residential area.
On the 4th July the new course was formally opened by His Highness the Tuan Muda, who drove the first ball, in the presence of a number of keen golfers.
Sarawak Wedding.
At Kuching on July 4th the marriage took place between Mr. Thomas Corson, B.Sc., Sarawak Forestry Department, elder son of Mr. and Mrs. Win. Corson, 11 Eyre Crescent. Edinburgh, and Miss Phyllis Margaret Bengtsson, only daughter of Mr. and Mrs. E. H. P. Bengtsson of “Roseneath,” Kuching, and Sandringham Road, West Hartlepool, and also only granddaughter of the late Mr. Mons. Bengtsson the well-known shipchandler of West Hartlepool and Brunby, Sweden. The ceremony was performed by the Resident, First Division, Mr. J. C. Swayne.
The bride looked very charming in a dress of ivory satin and ring velvet and a turban cup of ivory satin to match. She carried a bouquet of pink and white roses. Her only ornament was a crystal pendant the gift of the Dayang Anne.
The Maid of Honour was Miss Elizabeth Christie, who wore a dress of floral georgette with hat to match. She carried a bouquet of pink roses.
Mr. B. J. C. Spurway of the Forestry Department was best man.
His Highness the Tuan Muda and the Dayang Anne were amongst the many guests who attended a reception given by the parents of the bride of “Roseneath,” after the ceremony.
Mr. and Mrs. Corson sailed for Singapore in s.s. Vyner Brooke in the afternoon. The honeymoon is to be spent at Brastagi.
Colonial Service and Matrimony.
The Governor of Uganda may not wholly endorse the famous dictum that wives are an impediment to great enterprises, but he thinks that marriage handicaps junior administrative officers in the performance of their duties, more especially the duty of travelling freely in their districts and acquainting themselves with native languages and customs. His Excellency said so in a speech upon which the Colonial Secretary has now been questioned. The reply was that there are no restrictions on the marriage of colonial officials in general-indeed, Sir P. Cunliffe Lister declared that he certainly did not wish to discourage officials from marrying and having their wives with them in the Colonies “so far as practical considerations allow.” It is to be hoped, however, that the junior administrative officers in Uganda will not interpret this as a direct encouragement of early marriages because what the Governor said appears to be practical common sense. -Truth.
Leeward Islands.
Financial Report. -The Report of Sir Sidney Armitage-Smith on his investigations of the finances of the Leeward Islands and St. Lucia has been submitted to Parliament. He reports that, apart from isolated cases, he does not find any justification for the view that officials are generally too numerous or over-paid, or that the Budget could be balanced by reductions in salaries. He recommends substantial economies in the Judicial and Legal Departments, and a considerable number of minor economies. He proposes to increase the income tax in Antigua, St. Kitts and Dominica; and increases also in motor licences. He strongly recommends the provision forthwith of a uniform Customs tariff on all imports except alcohol. -Crown Colonist.
The Malay’s Coconuts.
Life among the coconut palms of Malaya’s west coast may look idyllic when glimpsed from a speeding car, but actually it has considerable drawbacks. An inquiry which has been made into the conditions prevailing in the Jeram reservation in the Kuala Selangor district shows that out of 1,367 Malay smallholders thirty per cent, are free of debt, forty per cent, are in debt but are free of forward contracts, and thirty per cent, are both in debt and have sold their crop forward at very disadvantageous prices. What these figures mean in terms of domestic comfort we learn from the Malayan Agricultural Journal, which states that a good six-acre holding, the owner of which is free of debt and forward contracts, will yield an income of about $17.50, and a less prolific holding of the same size, the owner of which is in debt and receiving one cent per nut from the person to whom he has sold forward, will yield only about $3.50 a month. And that means living on very short commons! It has been established, thanks to the thorough study which is now being made of the Malayan coconut industry, that if the Malay growers want better prices they must prepare their copra themselves, instead of selling the nuts to middlemen manufacturers. Accordingly, an important experiment has been carried out by officers of the Department of Agriculture and the Co-Operative Department. A Javanese grower, owning twenty acres of coconuts, has been persuaded to build a kiln of approved design and has been taught how to manufacture copra of good quality. As a result, he is not only getting a better price for his own product but is buying his neighbours’ nuts at higher prices than the local middlemen can offer. What is more, this experiment has survived competition and intimidation by the middlemen. -Straits Times.
“Buy Empire Timbers.”
THE REAL REASON WHY THIS PATRIOTIC SLOGAN FAILS TO CATCH ON.
By R. R. RIVERS.
Again the festive season is with us, and once more the Editor, in that “Peace-on-earth. good-will-towards-men” spirit is taking the risk of letting me run loose in his columns.
The outstanding feature of the past year has been the formation of a United Empire Party, with the object of fostering trade between this country and her dominions. But despite the existence of this Home-Groan Party, as it is known in the trade, there are still no signs of feverish activity in the market of Empire timber, and the old inertia remains.
From this it might be inferred that those engaged in the timber trade are surely lacking in patriotism. On the contrary, if timber merchants can sell British timber at a greater profit than foreign wood they will sell it. Nor must it be thought that wood consumers generally are not patriotic, and have no desire to use British timber. If they can buy British timber cheaper than foreign wood, they will buy it. Neither must you assume that “Chips” (technical name for carpenter, and no connection with fish)-see Allnuts’ Hoxton Dictionary. 5s. net-is a less patriotic fellow than his brother workers in other trades, and refuses to work Empire timber.
Why, then, is the demand for Empire timber not greater?
To remove any wrong impression which (no doubt, the iron and other metal merchants will pounce upon with secret glee) I may have created of those in one of the greatest and oldest trades in the world-timber-I will at once say that economics, or profit and loss, have, nothing whatever to do with the question.
No! The matter is far deeper; and to find out the real reason for this half-hearted, lukewarm, “afraid-to-try-it” spirit in which British timber is usually approached, one has to delve far into the depths of human psychology. To do this there is no better place than in a London timber yard.
Seeing that everyone at some time in his or her life must make use of a piece of timber, from the old lady who requires a piece of “planking” to make a perch for a canary cage, to the builder who wants a “few sticks” of 8in. x 8in., about 24 feet long, to shore up a building, it is in the timber yard that one encounters every type of humanity. From this vantage point I have closely studied the matter of Empire timber, and have come to the conclusion that its greatest drawback lies in the NAMES given to the different woods! (Sensation. Gasp for breath at this point.) Let us look at them:
They get worse as you go down the list. Those above are few of the woods bearing the most simple names. To type some of the others would require a person possessing two left hands, a disordered mind, and a specially constructed typewriter. Could you expect any material to be a “bestseller” with such a handicap? No wonder His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales said our salesmen needed more culture!
Certainly our salesmen will need more culture to cope with Empire timber and, as will be seen on glancing at the names of the woods, the elocution of the City merchants will have to improve, too. (This could be done by spending a day in a timber yard and listening to the staff, paying special attention when a 6-ton lorry load of stuff arrives unexpectedly about ten minutes before closing time.) Also, and this is a more difficult matter, the consumer will need culturing.
This true that everyone uses timber, but it seems to have been forgotten that, generally, only the better-class people enter a timber yard and, owing to their high mentality, some are easily offended. More than one merchant, I hear, has lost customers in an attempt to sell Empire wood, which makes one reflect on the old question; “What’s in a name?” This may seem incredible to those who are timber merchants on paper; they who sell timber by the mere issue of a dock order, as distinct from we tough blokes, who actually handle the stuff and bear the full force of the consumer’s epithets in the yard. Therefore a few instances which have come under my personal notice may enlighten them and, by dragging the matter into the limelight of publicity, may have the effect of inducing the Empire Marketing Board to take immediate action.
Example I.
A few days ago a builder’s representative, complete with cap and muffler, entered the yard whistling -as is their wont-and asked for a “six foot o’ free by four yaller deal.” The young salesman (who had just sent off his subscription to the United Empire Party) replied with a veracity which drew forth admiration from an importer’s traveller who happened to be in the yard at the time: “We can supply you with yellow deal, but would prefer you to take a piece of Ana-, Anom-, Adam-, one minute, I have forgotten the name,” and off he ran into the office to find it out. Anamomilla was what he meant. But while he was gone the builder’s representative said: “Blimey, wot’s up wi’ ‘im? I can’t ‘ang about ‘ere all die. I’ll git it somewhere else.” And out of the yard he went. Thus we lost a good sale.
Example II.
This customer was an antique furniture maker by trade-one of the old school: square bowler hat and seam down the outside of trousers, reminding one of Old Hoppus. Strongly against horse-racing and beer money. Being a regular customer he walked straight down the yard, instead of entering the office, and as he approached one could see a wave of self-sacrifice pass over the faces of the porters in pleasant anticipation of some hard work for nothing. He wanted a board of American walnut. Now it happened to be the day of the Cesarewitch, and as the governor was standing about the yard all the salesmen were awake. One of them sprang forward and, trying to be witty though natural in front of the governor, said to the customer: “I can put you on a good thing for to-day, sir. Quondong! Far better than American walnut.” The customer turned and walked out of the yard. Later he wrote saying he was sorry to find we combined a tipster’s business with that of timber, and that, on principle, he could deal with us no more. Thus ended the second lesson.
The enormous difficulty yard keepers have in inducing the consumer to try new woods, even when the latter possess quite ordinary names, is common knowledge; but to expect them to sell woods with such diabolical descriptions as those given to most of the Empire variety is like expecting a foreman to admit that it was his mistake and not that of the porters. Apart, from yard keepers, there are other respectable members of the trade on whom the nomenclature of Empire timbers falls equally hard.
Example III.
This example is reported from a saw mill. It appears that one of the firm’s regular customers for sawdust was, strangely enough, a sausage manufacturer, and I am told that he himself used to come to the mill about twice a week to select the dust he required-usually of American ash or walnut. On his latest visit one of the young sawyers, with commendable patriotism, approached him and said: “Sir, would you like to try some of this dust? It’s Chuglam!” “Chuglam!” repeated the customer. “Chuglam! No thanks; I only make the ordinary sausage-” He stopped suddenly, went very red, looked hard at the sawyer and left the mill hurriedly-never to return. I admit it is an exceptional case; but the fact remains that the mill lost a good customer through trying to do the Empire “a good turn,” as they say in the highest charing circles.
In order to make certain I was not prejudiced in the matter I sought the opinion of the trade over a wide section, from the porter to the importer, and, with one exception, all were agreed that Empire woods should be rechristened with names one could utter in front of one’s family without blushing. The exception was one of those City chaps who splash ink on dock orders-documents such as those on which the names of the ship and port are written in a way which makes the hieroglyphics on Cleopatra’s Needle look dead easy to decipher. He chuckled when I mentioned the names of a few Empire woods. “Splendid! Just think, my boy, what a mess we can make on a dock order with such lovely names!” he exclaimed. “When you yard men ask for all the best lengths in a parcel we must get our own back somehow I think the names are luscious,” he went on. “Gumbar Ogugu!! Rimu!!! Obobonekhui!!!! Ekhimi!!!!! Oh! Do please tell me more”; and here he doubled up with glee. I didn’t stop to argue with him. He was a silly fellow. Besides, my lunch was poured out. -Timber Trades Journal.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazetteb 48 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
1884.] FRIDAY, 1st AUGUST, 1884. [Price 10 cents.
A PAPER read by Sir Frederick A. Weld. K.C.M.G., Governor of the Straits Settlements, before the Royal Colonial Insitute, appears in the Straits Times of the 16th ultimo. This paper will have been read with special attention, not only for its graphic description of the Straits Settlements, but, more especially for the excellent remarks upon the system by which natives in these parts should be governed, on principles acceptable to both the Government and its rayats. Thu opinion of so high an authority on this subject is well worthy of note.
It is, unfortunately, a too common opinion that what is good for the white man must necessarily be as equally good for his darker and less civilized brother, losing sight of the fact of the vast difference in customs, character and religion. In effecting this idea and introducing laws, unintelligible and necessarily odious to the majority, a want of toleration and respect of religion, old customs and prejudices intervene, cunning a lack of confidence and trust in the Government on the part of the people.
Natives are impressionable and suspicious, but under considerate and firm management are by no means un-reasonable. They admit the superiority of their white rulers and under a corrective regime can be prevailed on, instead of being forced, to relinquish actual objectionable customs. Complete confidence must first be won and this can only be done by securing the co-operation of the chiefs, or, in other words, by ruling through the natives.
We insert a few extracts from Sir Fred. Weld’s paper illustrative of the advantages of this policy, a policy which in this country has stood the test of time for so many years: -
“I am not one of those doctrinaire statesmen who believe that what is good for Englishmen in an English, community is good for all races, at all times, and under all circumstances. Personal government is, so far as I am competent to offer an opinion, a necessity for Asiatics; it is the outcome of their religious systems, of their habits of thought, and of long centuries of custom. In municipal elections it is inconceivable how little interest, is taken by even rich Asiatics. In Malacca, a large town, only last year I had to name a councilor to the municipality, which has wide powers of taxation and administration, because ten electors out of a large body could not be got, together to elect one. Nevertheless, I do believe that, under an improved system, which we have adopted in the protected Native States, we may obtain very useful co-operation from chiefs and village headmen, by availing ourselves of the germs of organisation which exist in their own habits and customs, more especially amongst the Malays. We have too long neglected this natural bond between the Government and the governed in the colony, and my earnest attention has been directed to the subject; but within the colony proper there have been difficulties in the way, arising out of the great admixture of races, the dying out of old Malay tradition, the division of the Chinese race into tribes speaking different languages, and their secret societies; and also the paucity of European officers fitted to carry out such a policy and to gain the confidence of the native races.”
“The State Councils pass regulations or laws, and estimates, subject to the Governor’s assent, their members debate freely, and, I must add, waste no time in talk or recriminations, but speak straight to the point, and the native chiefs take a large share, and a real share, in the administration They pay great deference to the suggestions of the Resident, for they are convinced that we understand government better than they do, and fully appreciate the benefits they have received and are receiving from our rule. But it would be a great mistake to suppose that this deference is a slavish or unreasoning deference on their part, or that on ours their feelings and reasonable wishes are not carefully studied.”
OLD SARAWAK. (Continued).
“No legal technicalities exist end the simplicity of the system is a very great boon to the people, as is the absence of technicalities in the administration of justice; our cumbrous and costly systems give an undue advantage to the rich over the poor, and are not suited to the people, who are naturally litigious and corrupt. I think the Dutch legal system in Java is preferable on the whole, to ours. In dealing with natives time and patience is a great element of success; it is everything to make them understand our intentions and objects, and that, above all, we are firm and inflexibly just. I am strongly opposed to pure annexation. I am satisfied that if the Protected States had been annexed, their progress would have been much less rapid, and that for many reasons, which time will not allow me to dilute upon, the condition of the people is better under the present system. Moreover, to annex our Protected States would, under present, circumstances, be a breach of faith and it is faith in our honour and trust in our good government that induce all Malay races to put implicit confidence in us. Moreover the residential system, and even such a modification of it as I am able now to apply to the little Independent State in the heart of the country, gives us all we want and suits the natives best, so long as we have the right sort of administrators: but I cannot conceal from myself that all depends upon administration and upon individuals. It is personal government with all its advantages, and also its obvious dangers. Still I have yet to learn that any country, still less any Asiatic country, has been successfully governed by cut-and-dried codes or constitutional theories that have not grown up racy of the soil and out of the heart and life of the people of the country. I know no native race that are more naturally imbued with what we expressively call the feelings of gentlemen, or more easy to deal with if they are properly understood and treated with respect. They are hospital and courteous, but ready to resent an insult.”
Sarawak Library.
Kindly presented by His Highness the Rajah: -
Purchased by the Committee: -
Duplicate novels have been exchanged for the following: -
First Division News.
RESIDENT’S OFFICE.
June, 1932.
Extracts from the Divisional Reports by Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division: -
In the Resident’s Court, Kuching, Omar bin Mat was sentenced to a term of imprisonment for cheating under section 4211, I.P.C. At Bau, three cases were heard, one being a case of murder. The trial took place on 23rd when Tonggat anak Dium, a Land Dyak of Stinggang, was convicted under section 302. I.P.C. for the murder of another Dyak named Ngireh and sentenced to death, subject to confirmation of the Supreme Court. The accused has since appealed against the sentence.
The 3rd, H. M. King George’s birthday, was observed as a public holiday and the offices were closed.
His Highness the Tuan Muda and Dayang Anne left for Baram on the 23rd and returned on the 28th. Among the visitors to Kuching during the month were Mr. R. Boulter. C.M.G., His Majesty’s Commissioner for Trade, who has completed a tour of British Borneo, and Miss Pollard who has been paying a visit to the Fourth Division.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
June, 1932.
The District Officer, Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, reports: -
Coroner’s Court. -An inquest was held on the body of one, Ah Hak, found in Sungei Rembas, Samarahan, on I7th June, 1932. From the evidence it would appear that a particularly ghastly crime had been committed. A verdict was returned of murder by person or persons unknown. It is to be hoped that the Police will be successful in bringing to justice those concerned.
UPPER SARAWAK, BAU.
May, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports: -
Gold Mining. -Four new gold mining concerns have been granted Exclusive Prospecting Licences during the month.
409 and 127.25 ounces of actual gold were obtained by The Bidi Gold Mining Company and The Bau Gold Mining Syndicate respectively for the month of April, 1932.
Public Works. -The Seniawan bridge had been entirely reconstructed, straightened and widened during the month, and other bridges rebuilt. Work has continued on the. new roads round Bau Court and whitewashing of Government buildings completed. The Seniawan road cutting has been finished and has added greatly to the safety of the road at tins point.
General. -I left for the annual trip up the Left-Hand Branch on the 12th to collect tax, spending five days at the Pengkalan Ampat Rest House and returning to headquarters on 20th. The Secretary for Native Affairs, Mr. P. M. Adams, accompanied me up river, visiting Dyak kampong on the way and making a trip to Kampong Keding.
Mr. Adams left for Kuching on the 18th.
The district was quiet and appears to have had a good harvest.
June, 1932.
Judicial. -The only notable case during the month was His Highness the Rajah versus Tonggat anak Dium (Land Dyak), who was convicted under section 302, I.P.C., for the murder of a compatriot by name Ngireh. Accused has appealed against the conviction
General. -Visitors to the station included the Resident, First Division, Mr. J. C. Swayne, the Principal Medical Officer, Dr. Marjoribanks, with Dr. Webster of Miri, Capt. and Mrs. LeGros Clark, Messrs. Pascoe, Edwards, Banks, Dare, Leach, Bates, Davis, Bomphrey, and Mr. J. Scott of Sibu Laut.
The bridge at Kranji has been demolished and is being rebuilt. A temporary bridge has been erected to deal with Kuching traffic.
Gold Mining. -Seventeen General Prospecting Licences were issued. Five applications for Exclusive Prospecting Licences and one for a Mining Lease were received during the month.
398.13 and 124.9 ounces of actual gold were obtained by The Bidi Gold Mining Company and The Bau Gold Mining Syndicate respectively for the month of May, 1932, and 297.12 was obtained by The Tai Ton Mining Syndicate for the month of June, 1932.
LUNDU.
June, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
General. -I returned from one month’s local leave on 14th and found everything in order in the station. On 24th the Orang Kaya Pasir reported that there was smallpox in Kampong Arok on the Netherlands India-Sarawak frontier. A dresser arrived on 25th and vaccinated over 600people. As yet there have been no cases discovered in Sarawak territory. All passes to Sambas have been stopped and nobody allowed to enter from there.
Chinese Affairs.
June, 1932.
Extracts from the Report of The Secretary for Chinese Affairs, Mr. C. D. Le Gros Clark: -
The Secretary for Chinese Affairs toured Upper Sarawak, including visits of inspection to some of the gold workings.
The facilities existing for obtaining gold in small quantities have offered a living to hundreds of Chinese who would otherwise be unemployed. As a result, Chinese centres in Upper Sarawak show a comparative prosperity, while the larger organized kongsis seem to be very sanguine about their prospects.
SARAWAK TURF CLUB.
PROVISIONAL PROGRAMME FOR THE AUTUMN
MEETING, 1932.
FIRST DAY, SATURDAY, 24TH SEPTEMBER, 1932.
RACE NO. 1
THE TUAN MUDA’S CUP.
Value $250. A piece of plate of the value of $100. Presented by His Highness the Tuan Muda with SI56 added Second to receive $100. Third, $25.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 2
THE SATOK STAKES.
Value S250. Second to receive $100. Third $25.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 3
THE B.C.L. STAKES.
Value $200. $50 presented by The Borneo Company, Limited, with $150 added. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 4
SIMPANG TIGA STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $25.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 3 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 5
THE MATANG STAKES.
Value S250. Second to receive $100. Third $25.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 6
THE PENDING STAKES.
Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 8 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE No. 7
THE RANEE’S CUP.
Value $250. A piece of plate of the value of $100 presented by Her Highness the Ranee with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $25.
A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance 1 mile. Entrance Fee $10.
SECOND DAY, MONDAY, 26TH SEPTEMBER, 1932.
RACE No. 1
THE SLUMP STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $25.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 2
THE COUNTRY STAKES.
Value $250 presented by the Turf Club. Second to receive $100. Third $25.
A handicap for Division II ponies. Distance 6 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 3
THE SARAWAK STAKES.
Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division TH ponies. Distance 5 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 4
THE TURF CLUB STAKES.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $25.
A handicap for Division I ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 5
THE STATE SPRINT.
Value $250. Second to receive $100. Third $25.
A handicap for Division II ponies, furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 6
THE TOWN STAKES.
Value $200. Second to receive $75. Third $25.
A handicap for Division III ponies. Distance 4 furlongs. Entrance Fee $10.
RACE NO. 7
THE RAJAH’S CUP.
Value $300. A piece of plate value $150 presented by His Highness the Rajah with $150 added. Second to receive $100. Third $35.
A handicap for ponies of any Division. Distance Race-course (about 1.1/3 Miles.) Entrance Fee $10. $5 refunded to non-acceptors. Handicap published on the Course. Post Entries allowed at $20 but no refund.
REGULATIONS.
Penalties. -Winners of any race at this Meeting after publication of weights shall carry a penalty of 7 lbs. for each race with a maximum of 11 stone 7 lbs.
Allowance. -Professional Jockeys who are Sarawak subjects and have never ridden more than two winners at any Meeting under Sarawak Turf Club Rules, may claim an allowance of 5 lbs.
Entries. -All nominations, accompanied by Entrance Fees, description of ponies, and declaration of colours, to be made to the Honorary Secretary not later than noon, September, 3rd 1932.
Scratchings. -Owners scratching ponies before 5 p.m. on September 23rd for first day, and 5 p.m. on September 25th for second day, will receive back half their entrance fees.
Handicaps. -For First Day will be posted on the Notice Board at the Sarawak Club at noon on September 10th, and for the Second Day at noon on September 25th.
Course. -Will be open for training on 13th August, at 5.30 a.m.
Ponies. -Must run on the First Day to be eligible for entry in Races for Second Day.
Owners. -Are requested to see that their syces and jockeys obtain necessary badge for entrance to Paddock.
Totalizators and Cash Sweeps as usual.
Prizes 20% reduction if under 5 entries.
Communications to be made to
P. M. ADAMS,
Honorary Secretary, Sarawak Turf Club.
[Members are requested to apply to Hon. Secretary for necessary Badges or obtain them at the Grandstand.]
Second Division News.
June, 1932.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports by Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident: -
Mr. G. St. F. Dare of the Agricultural Department proceeded to Lubok Tedong on the 1st and took over the Experimental Garden and other affairs connected with that Department. He returned to Simanggang the next day, accompanied by Mr. G. M. Goodall, who relinquishes his appointment of Agricultural Field Officer, Second Division, on being transferred to the Third Division. Both these Officers sailed for Kuching on the 3rd.
Mr. R. E. Le Sueur also left for Kuching on the same day, having terminated his appointment of District Officer, Simanggang.
Penghulu Sambau, of the Delok, and Tuai Rumah Ranggau, of Nanga Mepi, were allowed to proceed to Kuching during the month in order to see His Highness the Tuan Muda.
On the 8th Abang Abu Talip arrived in Simanggang unexpectedly, bringing with him Kana, the Penghulu Pertolongan, whom he had with much difficulty persuaded to come to Simanggang. He was sent to Kuching in charge of Abang Abu Talip on the 10th and returned on the 13th. This Penghulu, who has of a certainty belied his title, was fined two pikuls by His Highness the Tuan Muda, whilst fourteen other Ulu Ai Dyaks were fined one pikul each in their absence.
Many Penghulus were in Simanggang during the month, including ex-Penghulu Renang, who is very infirm
It was reported during the month that Jantieng’s house of ten doors, near Penghulu Linang, had been destroyed by fire on the 29th May.
Pangeran Lum, Tua Kampong of Stumbin, died on the 10th, and Pangeran Haji Segah has been appointed in his place, subject to His Highness the Tuan Muda’s approval.
The dispute between Malays and Dyaks at Maludam has started again and Abang Abu Talip, Native Officer, spent some time there trying to settle the matter. It seems that the Dyaks are at fault, and next season such “land grabbing” tactics will be stopped.
The Acting Commissioner of Police, Mr. L. N. Reynolds, and Mr. Hannigan, arrived on the 17th and visited the chief Constabulary centres in the Division with a view to reorganization. I understand that their report was favourable.
Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft walked to Betong and back over the road opposite Fort Alice, and has arranged to repair the Tisak part next month.
Mr. T. Corson, Acting Conservator of Forests, was in the Division during the month, and Messrs. L. K. Morse, J. H. Combe, and S. G. Hansom, all paid visits to Simanggang at various times in order to discuss official matters.
Penghulu Entri of the Seblak, Roban, applied for permission to go to Netherlands Indies territory for a few days, in order to study methods of padi farming there. He did so, and tells me that he was much impressed by the system of irrigation practised near Majang. Netherlands Indies, and he brought back plans which he wishes to adopt in his own country.
Haji Bol Hassan, accompanied by Drahman, Inspector of Schools, Second Division, made a round of the Government Malay Schools in the Division, and Government prizes were presented by myself at Sekolah Abang Aing (Simanggang), and by Haji Bol Hassan at Sekolah Tuanku Bagus (Sebuyow), Sekolah Abang Leman (Kabong), and Sekolah Abang Abdur Rahman (Saratok). There were at the end of the month 294 boys and girls on the roll, but since then more have joined. It is noticeable that there is not a single Government Malay school in the Saribas District, the former schools at Betong and Spaoh having been closed some years ago owing to the difficulty of inducing any of the parents to send their children.
Mr. Albert Munson, of the Seventh Day Adventist Mission, arrived unexpectedly on the 26th and left again on the 30th, after visiting Engkilili.
SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
June, 1932.
The Cadet Officer, Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, reports: -
Very little of interest occurred during the month. On the 20th, accompanied by Mr. Fisher, I left for a visit to the Undup. I was pleasantly surprised by the condition of the path which was, apart from a small portion by Nyakai, well cleared and drained. Mr. Fisher came as far as Penghulu Lambai’s house and then returned to Simanggang. I visited Sungei Entebar, Wong Pupoh, from thence across to Sungei Reboh, picking up the main path to the Ulu Undup.
The poor condition of the Undup harvest has been in my opinion, greatly exaggerated, and apart from one or two houses there should be little real distress, Rumah Muti, which had a bad harvest, has already started to clear the land at Gunoug Imong and thus hope to get an early crop.
Of the many pepper gardens I inspected very few appeared badly diseased, although the slipshod work of the Dyak gardeners will not produce any good crops. Most owners requested extra time in which to pay their quit rent.
The Officer-in-Charge of Constabulary and Prisons, Mr. J. C. B. Fisher, reports: -
On the 3rd of the month Haji Zaidell arrived to take over his duties as Assistant Sub-Inspector in the place of Awang Joini, who has been transferred to Kuching.
ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
June, 1932.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. S. G. Hansom, reports: -
Penghulu Kana, who had been called down from the Ulu some time ago in connection with irregularities during the Asun affair, appeared in Engkilili on the 7th instant, having been brought down by Abang Abu Tulip, Native Officer.
Messrs. Corson and Mace visited Engkilili on the 9th instant, and I returned with Mr. Corson to Simanggang later in the day, leaving Mr. Mace at Engkilili where he is engaged in survey work.
I returned to Engkilili on the 12th instant, accompanied by Mr. B. Summers, Land Officer. Second Division. Mr. Summers spent four days at Engkilili, during which time he took the opportunity of proceeding to Marup for the purpose of inspecting the gold workings, where the initial work of blasting is nearly completed.
On the 19th instant, Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident, Second Division, visited the station, accompanied by Mr. L. N. Reynolds, Acting Commissioner of Constabulary, and Mr. Hannigan.
SARIBAS DISTRICT.
June, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R, Combe, reports: -
The Dyaks from the Paku, Layar, Padeh and Spak came down during the month and cleared the Simanggang road. The planks in the vicinity of Pengkalan Jongkong are badly in need of repair, and I understand the Skrang Dyaks are doing this work in the immediate future.
The Betong Malays all complained they have not enough farming land this year; the fault is chiefly their own. as in bygone days they gave or sold the land to the Dyaks and are now too lazy to fell further jungle for their own use, merely coveting land which has already been cleared but is now in other hands. Inquiries are being made as to the possibility of their using the land down river, and I see no reason why this should not answer.
Messrs. Hannigan and Reynolds, Acting Commissioner of Constabulary, visited the District from 20th to the 22nd, when various Constabulary matters were gone into.
Trade. -
KALAKA DISTRICT.
June, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. L. K. Morse, reports: -
The Acting Commissioner and Mr. Hannigan inspected the Constabulary in this district during the month, and discussed several matters relating to the force.
Haji Bol Hassan, together with Abdul Drahman, Inspector of Schools, visited the district during the month and conducted the annual examinations in the Government Schools.
LAND OFFICE.
June, 1932.
The Land Officer, Mr. B. Summers, reports: -
On the 12th instant, I proceeded to Engkilili with Mr. Hansom, returning to Simanggang on the 17th.
The ground at Marup prospected for gold was visited. It appears that the mining syndicate is expending a large sum of money there in preparation, both on labour, and blasting operations through the rock for a watercourse. From information, they are expected to dig for gold very shortly.
Throughout the Division the examination of pepper gardens is being concentrated on as much as possible, especially in the Engkilili, and Undup Districts, also Roban. Little difficulty is experienced in issuing Pepper Occupation Tickets to Dyaks, provided the gardens are in bearing, but they dislike paying praemia on newly-planted gardens.
SURVEY DEPARTMENT,
June, 1932.
The Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Mr. N. Mace, reports: -
The Experimental Garden at Lubok Tedong, Engkilili, was surveyed this month.
Gardens at Sungei Merab, Sebuyow, and Bukit Selanjan, were demarcated, and those at Po-ai, Klauh, Maludam, and some at Sebuyow, were controlled. The river from Kranji to Lingga was surveyed by substense. Gardens at Sungei Entebar, Ulu Undup, were put on the sheets.
I made visits to Engkilili and to Sebuyow by way of Po-ai, Selaujan, Silantek, and the Sungei Mintu. The latter journey took seven days, comprising about ninety miles walking and fourteen hours by boat.
Next month demarcation will be carried into Silantek. The theodolite work on the coast is being pushed ahead before the landas arrives. Two theodolite parties are working steadily along the foot of the Klingkang, controlling garden surveys.
Third Division News.
May, 1932.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident: -
Court. -There were six criminal cases in the Resident’s Court; five concerning Secret Society, and one causing grievous hurt, section 325 of the I.P.C. All the accused were convicted and sentenced to various terms of imprisonment. There were no civil cases.
General. -S.L. Chamois returned on the 3rd instant from annual docking in Kuching.
Mr. Linton, of the Sarawak Constabulary, arrived on the 3rd instant with a new supply of arms, and returned to Kuching on the 5th.
Land consisting of 265 acres was purchased from Igan Dyaks for padi planting by Chinese.
On the 20th instant Penghulu Endu arrived from the Entabai and reported having met Brandi, son of Asun who states that Asun is visiting the Entabai at end of month.
Acting Assistant District Officer, Kapit, Mr. Hudden, returned from visiting Belaga on the 21st instant. He proceeded hare on the 26th instant with Penghulu Oyong Abun to discuss upriver affairs, returning to Kapit on the 30th instant.
June, 1932.
General. -The 3rd instant being His Majesty the King’s Birthday the offices were closed.
On the 7th instant, Acting Postmaster-General, Mr. Tait, and Agricultural Field Officer, Mr. Goodall, arrived. The former returning on the 9th instant while the latter has been appointed for duty in this Division.
On the 7th instant Divisional Medical Officer Dr. Hutchison, and Land Officer, Sarikei, Binatang and Rejang, Mr. K. E. Parker, left to visit Belawai, Rejang, the former returning on the 14th instant.
Travelling District Officer, Mr. Cutfield, visited Kanowit from the 6th to 8th instant.
On the night of the 9th instant a fire occurred in the bazaar at 21, Channel Road.
Superintendent of Post and Telegraphs, Mr. Harding, arrived on the 12th instant and visited Kanowit, Kapit, Matu, Binatang. and Rejang Stations, returning again to Kuching on 30th instant.
Officer-in-Charge, Mr. Pegler, Matu and Daro, was I ordered to proceed to Paloh to investigate reports of Japanese, fishing inside the three-mile limit, but up to the end of the month no report had been received.
SIBU.
May, 1932.
The District Officer, Mr. H. E. Cutfield, reports: -
Courts. -There were few cases in the District and Magistrate’s Courts that call for special mention. A preliminary inquiry was held into the death of a Henghua who died from the result of a blow on the head from a blunt instrument. Two Henghuas were arrested and charged under section 304 I.P.C., and remanded for trial in Resident’s Court where they were duly dealt with.
General. -Mr. Le Gros Clark, Secretary for Chinese Affairs, who arrived at the end of last month in connection with a Secret Society case, returned to Kuching on 5th instant.
Other visitors to the station were Mr. and Mrs. Calvert, Mr. Linton and the Chief Justice, Stirling Boyd and Mrs. Boyd, the latter arriving on the last day of the month.
A short visit to Kanowit was paid during the month when outstanding cases were settled.
Mr. D. C. Hudden, Assistant District Officer, Kapit, paid a visit to the station towards the end of the month to interview the Resident on various upriver affairs.
Tuesday 24th being Proclamation Day the offices were closed.
June, 1932.
Courts. -A further inquiry was held regarding the serious wounding of a Dyak above Sibu. An orang Tanjong from Kampong Nangka was charged and is to be brought before the Resident’s Court charged with attempted murder. No other cases call for mention.
General. -The Chief Justice and Mrs. Boyd returned to Kuching on 2nd instant.
Mr. Moore and Inspector of Police, Abang Adeng. went to Kanowit on 4th to inquire into the murder of a Chinese opposite Poi and the wounding of one other, returning again on the 5th instant.
Further investigation was required, however, and I left for Kanowit on the 6th, returning on the 8th instant. Two Dyaks were arrested who admitted committing the murder.
On the 10th instant a fire broke out at No. 21, Channel Road at 8.15 p.m. The fire was in the back premises adjoining the shop and originated from the charcoal fire of a tobacco-smoking business. The fire was extinguished by about 9.30 p.m. The damage actually done was slight but might have had serious results.
On 15th I accompanied Mr. Crocker to Kanowit where two Resident’s Court cases were heard. Kayan and Bantin were sentenced to death for the murder of two Chinese opposite Nanga Poi. The other case was a robbery from the Kanowit Gambling Farm at night, when $5,000 was reported to have been taken. About $600 of this money has been recovered. A gang was apparently responsible for this affair, five men have been arrested.
On 21st Mr. Crocker was taken seriously ill and was despatched by s.l. Chamois for Kuching in charge of Dr. Hutchison.
MUKAH.
May, 1932.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. E. M. Woodward, reports: -
General. -Proclamation Day on the 24th instant was observed as a public holiday and the Government offices were closed.
Penghulus Gagat, Umpoh and Selan visited the station during the month. The two former Penghulus who are from the Batang Mukah reported fair padi harvests. Penghulu Selan of the Penipah stated that there had been a good harvest in his district.
Other visitors to the station during the month were Messrs. W. Johnson (S.O.L. Geologist), J. Hunter (S.O.L. Surveyor), who proceeded to Hong Kong via Miri on short leave, L. Gifford of the British American Tobacco Company, and Hsu Yau Tang, Government Inspector of Chinese Schools.
The Very Revd. the Mother General, accompanied by the Revd. Mother Sebastian from Kuching, also paid a visit to the R.C. Convent, Mukah, during the month.
Travelling. -On the 9th instant, accompanied by the Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Third Division, Mr. J. L. Noakes, Revd. Father Anthony Mulder, Assistant Land Inspector Austin Druce and two surveyors I visited Kampongs Tellian Laut, Tellian Tengah, Tellian Ulu and Petanak.
The regulations relating to the survey of gardens and those governing sago lands were explained to the Tua Kampong and to all those present, who were also harangued on these subjects on terms similar to those used on my visit to the upriver kampongs last month. In order to dispel any suspicion or distrust of the policy of Government which might exist with regard to the new survey and sago land regulations, it was also explained that no back quit rent for previous years would be payable on any native-owned sago gardens now, or in the future. This was necessary as it appeared that some native owners of sago lands were afraid that when their gardens had been surveyed, they would be charged back rent for a number of years, in which case it would pay them not to declare their gardens now, and keep quiet as they have done in the past, so avoiding payment of all rent on their gardens. This idea has, however, been dispelled.
All Tua Tua Kampong and native owners of gardens which are still unsurveyed are now conversant with the new survey and sago land regulations, and there should be no excuse on the part of any person for contravening these regulations.
The Revd. Father Luppes accompanied the party as far as Kampong Tellian Ulu and returned by the same route, while the remainder of the party walked overland to the Waterworks Pumping Station and from there boated down to Kampong Petanak.
Surveys. -During the month the survey of gardens situated in the vicinity of Kampong Tellian Tengah, Sungei Ubong and Kampong Petanak was carried out.
Electricity. -The Divisional Electrical Engineer, Mr. H. C. Strong, visited the station from the 24th to the 27th instant.
Balingian. -Accompanied by the Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Third Division, Mr. J. L. Noakes, I arrived at Balingian by m.l. Leonora on the 14th instant.
In order to obtain some information respecting the number and type of gardens in the Balingian district Mr. Noakes and myself ascended the Balingian river by m.l. Leonora as far as Sungei Arip the following day. It was ascertained that near Kuala Balingian there are scattered coconut and rubber gardens, that in the vicinity of Balingian itself there are a fair quantity of sago lands and that further upriver rubber gardens occur again.
On the 16th instant m.l. Leonora conveyed Mr. Noakes back to Mukah and proceeded to Oya the same day. On the 17th instant the Acting District Officer, Oya and Dalat, Mr. N. E. Hughes, proceeded to the Ulu Oya returning to Oya the following day.
The Native Officer, Balingian, Awang Juli, visited the Ulu Balingian, Sungei Pelagau, Sungei Arip and Sungei Bawan during the month and settled most outstanding cases and collected a number of fines. He reported that the padi harvest up the tributaries of the Balingian River was good but that the crop situated near the main river was poor since the greater part of it had been destroyed by floods in January.
Trade. -Owing to competition from Binatang and Bintulu the price of raw sago rose from twenty cents to thirty-six cents per passau during the month, which improved matters slightly.
Mukah trade returns for the month as compared to those for the corresponding month last year are as follows: -
The principal exports included: -
June, 1932.
General. -The anniversary of the birthday of His Majesty the King on the 3rd instant was observed as a public holiday and the Government offices were closed.
Surveys. -During the month the survey of gardens was carried on in the Bedanga, Tellian, S. Papa, Petanak area. Approximately 703 gardens were surveyed during the month. Work is progressing satisfactorily and with little obstruction from garden owners, which is borne out by the fact that out of a total of about 1,628 gardens surveyed up to 30th June, there have been only three convictions of garden owners for contravention of survey regulations.
Rainfall. -Mukah rainfall figures for the month were as follows: -
Trade. -During the month the price of raw sago averaged twenty-seven cents per passu, which is a decrease of nine cents on the average price per passu last month.
Mukah trade returns for the month as compared to those for the corresponding month last year are as follows: -
The principal exports included: -
It is pleasing to note a considerable increase in trade as compared to 1931.
OYA AND DALAT.
May, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports: -
General. -I regret to report the death on May 17th of Hussein bin Slutan, Tuan Bilal, Oya. This Tuan Bilal, who died very suddenly, was deservedly popular, and his loss will be felt throughout the district.
The fishing season is now in full swing, all barongs bringing in large catches. Fish has been so plentiful that there has almost been a glut, bazaar prices for first quality fresh fish being very low.
Sarawak Constabulary. -Local training continued on the usual lines. Three police, who had not previously been to the Ulu, accompanied me up river from the 17th to the 28th instant and received a general training in upriver work.
Kampong Bungan. -I spent the night of May 12th at Sungei Kut and paid a visit to Kampong Bungan on the following day.
Dyaks. -On the 17th I left for upriver to pay a rapid visit to the Batang Oya and Ulu Oya. In the course of this visit the new Third Division Regulations were explained to all Penghulus.
Three houses in the Lower Oya asked to be let off door-tax this year on account of the total destruction of their padi-crops by the January floods. These floods were the worst in living memory; the river in some places rose 40 feet, and stood two or three feet above the tuai of houses built high on the bank, the inmates living in the padong together with their pigs and fowls. The Dyaks in these houses complain that they have no padi at all, and no money with which to buy food, yet they are too lazy to work the belian that stands at their very doorsteps. They were told that in order to help them. Government would buy belian aytaps at $25 a laksa; it was pointed out that one laksa per house, would not only settle all tax but would leave them with ten or fifteen dollars for blanja in addition, yet the bare suggestion that they should turn to and work for a few days was met by the usual cry of nadai ari. This complaint that they have no time to work is the more ridiculous seeing that there has been no harvest this year, and consequently they have had nothing to do for the past two months.
The Tamin people, as usual, have had an excellent crop of padi. These Dyaks take a great deal of trouble over their farms, and as a result are deservedly prosperous. I passed one large hill farm which was completely enclosed by a strong and well-made fence to keep out pigs and deer.
On the 22nd I reached Rumah Penghulu Chendang in S. Paku. At Nanga Paku I met the Reverend Father Buis, of the Kanowit Mission, who was returning to Kanowit after a stay in the Ulu Oya.
Padi crops in the Paku area are reasonably good. The appointment of Tuai Rumah Chendang as Penghulu has been well received everywhere; he is an intelligent and energetic man who should do well.
On the 24th I reached Nanga Susut, where Penghulu Untol’s people are building a new house of 22 doors which promises to be the best in the river. Eight doors of non-Catholic Dyaks who recently established themselves separately under T.R. Gasieng asked to be allowed to move further up river and join on to Rumah Lumbok. Permission to do this was refused pending a general aum on the matter, which will be held during next visit.
Affairs in the Ulu were everywhere in order, and the Dyaks, though rather hard hit by the poor harvests, are quiet. Both ex-penghulu Medan and T.R. Unya came own from their farms to meet me on my way down river, and were friendly and cheerful. The Dyaks, though late with their taxes, make no difficulty about paying, and the general attitude towards Government of the Ulu Dyaks is noticeably more friendly than it was last year. This may be attributed largely to the good effects of the Sibu Aum, and also to the fact that a Native Officer and police have been making regular rounds up river.
On the 27th I left for down river. We stopped for a meal at a Melanau house above S. Narub, then spent the night in the temuai drifting down river, in order to ensure reaching Dalat on the 28th. On the morning of the 28th we reached Lebassau, arriving at Dalat on the same afternoon.
Trade. -Early in the month the Dalat sago traders began to be seriously worried about competition in S. Kut, where Lim Chui Seng of Binatang has erected a godown and is capturing a lot of the trade. A meeting was held, and on the 6th the leading Dalat Chinese came to me to say that they had decided to ask whether Government would consider prohibiting all sago trade in the Kut, since if Lim Chui Seng were allowed to continue the Dalat traders would soon be ruined.
The Dalat traders’ case is that owing to the difference in shipping costs between S. Kut and Binatang, and Dalat and Kuching, Lim Chui Seng will always be able to offer a slightly higher price per passau for raw sago than they can, therefore since he has now built a godown at S. Kut it will only to a question of time before the Dalat traders are driven out of business altogether.
On the other hand, this competition is perfectly fair and is an excellent thing for the natives, who are now assured of a fair price for their sago. This was not always the case formerly, and it is generally considered that the Dalat traders have invited this competition by their conduct in the past. The opinion in the district is that the Kuching-Dalat sago ring have had things their own way for long enough, and I agree with this point of view. Certainly they are by no means free from the suspicion of having rigged prices for their own ends, and this competition, of which they now complain, would probably never have arisen had they given the natives a fair deal in the first place.
The Dalat traders say that they must always be compelled to buy at 2 or 3 cents a pasu below the price Lim Chui Seng can offer; this may be so, but last March raw sago was selling for 30 cents per pasu in Dalat and 42 cents at S. Kut, and this large difference in price cannot be due entirely to difference in freight charges. With a difference of only two or three cents per pasu it is not worth the natives’ while to spend time and trouble dragging heavy boats through the Kut, and they will sell in the bazaar; a difference of 12 cents, though, is another matter, and differences even larger than this have been reported.
It is significant that as soon as the competition grew serious the Dalat price rose to almost the same figure as the S. Kut price, and in my opinion if the Dalat traders get together they can combat the Kut competition without Government interference. In spite of gloomy prophecies on the part of the Dalat traders, motor schooners seem to cull just as often as before, though I was told on the 6th that they would stop altogether after that date.
The Dalat traders were advised to prepare a petition to the Resident, Third Division, stating their case, but at the same time they wore informed that I considered it most unlikely that Government would suppress a perfectly fair trading venture and thereby place in their hands what amounted to a monopoly of the sago trade of the district. The petition was received towards the end of the month, and has been forwarded to Sibu with a separate report.
Trade Returns. -341 koyans of raw sago, 101 piculs of gutta jelutong and 14 piculs of para rubber were shipped to Kuching and Binatang during the month.
June, 1932.
Dyaks. —On the 18th I left for up river, intending to visit the Tamin and Baoh areas. I arrived at Nanga Tamin the following evening, but the water was so low that it was impossible to ascend the Tamin; I therefore proceeded up the main river to Rumah Tabor, arriving there on the evening of the 20th. The weather broke that morning, and it rained heavily all day, yet the level of the river was not much affected.
On 21st I walked from Rumah Tabor to Penghulu Dagang. The Penghulu had assembled all Tamin Tuan in his house and several cases were ready for hearing. Affairs in the Tamin were in good order, as they almost always are; Penghulu Dagang seems to have real authority in his district, and he knows how to use it.
Owing to low water it. was not possible to go further up the Tamin, but this did not matter since Penghulu Dagang had notified the upriver people of my visit, and all Dyaks to be interviewed in connection with fines came down.
The Tamin people are much better Dyaks than those in the main river. Their houses are clean and well-built, and they themselves are friendly and hospitable and have never given any trouble to Government. In the past they did very well by working jelutong and belian, and though they are feeling the pinch now, there is no grumbling about paying taxes. It is interesting to note that they make most excellent lampit mats, this as far as I know being an unusual accomplishment among Dyaks. These mats are of better quality than any I have seen from Baram, yet the Dyaks, although I have repeatedly assured them that there is a steady market for this type of mat, refuse to make any for sale, raising the customary cry of nadai ari. This is a pity, since the proceeds would be wealth to them in their present straitened circumstances.
On the 23rd I went down the Tamin to Rumah Kasang, then walked to Rumah Janggu, Sungei Jijeh. The houses in the Baoh area are scattered over a number of small streams and are therefore best reached by walking, yet even so I had to miss out three houses owing to lack of time. All tuai, however, were interviewed.
From Rumah Sudok I walked to Rumah Melintang, Sungei Jijeh, where I spent the night. The following day I went by boat to Rumah Mambuas, Nanga Tamin, then on to Rumah Chendang in the main river. I spent the night of the 27th at Kampong Medong and arrived at Dalat the next day.
Trade. -Two hundred and twenty-six koyans of raw sago and six piculs of rubber (para) were shipped to Kuching and Binatang during the month.
KAPIT.
May, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hudden, reports: -
Belaga. -This station was visited during the month and a report on the state of affairs there has already been forwarded.
Native Affairs. -Penghulus Oyong Abun and Manok Manchal were down during the month.
On the 1st, a party of about twelve Dyaks, believed to be from the Poi, were reported to have passed the Fort in the early hours of the morning, and were seen paddling hard up the Balleh. They refused to stop when met and it was rumoured, of course, that they were on the war-path, Penghulu Temonggong Koh, who was in Kapit, was sent up by outboard motor to bring them back, but they managed to avoid him. Later, having apparently taken alarm, they were reported to have returned to the Poi, and I understand have been dealt with in Sibu.
Owing to reports from Baram that parties of Dyaks were wandering in the headwaters of the Silat and Tinjar, Penghulu Jugah, with fifteen followers, was sent up to investigate and round up any Dyaks found in that area. I am informed that there are Dyaks from this district there, also many from the Bintulu district.
Due to the lack of employment elsewhere, the number of Dyaks working in the Ulu Rejang has increased to a comparatively large figure, and it has become necessary to make an attempt at confining them to certain streams, so that they will no longer disturb the Punans and other inland tribes. Penghulu Ansi has been sent up with this object in view and it is hoped that by the time I visit Belaga again in August, the Punans will have returned to their usual hunting grounds.
Native Officer Awang Samsudin came down with me from Belaga and returned to his station at end of month.
Native Officer Abang Abu Seman started on a visit to the Balleh and Menyong on the 31st.
General. -The Resident and Commissioner of Trade and Customs, accompanied by Mrs. Adams, Mrs. Culvert, Mrs. Kidd and child, paid a short visit on the 25th, in s.s. Angby, in connection with customs and wharfage reserves. I accompanied them to Sibu, returning to this station on the 31st, together with the Divisional Land Officer.
I was away visiting Belaga from the 2nd to the 21st, accompanied by Native Officer Abang Abdulgapor.
Other visitors to the station during the month were, Monseigneur E. Dunn, Father W. J, van Odyk, Father J. van de Laar, and Mr. G. H. Daly.
June, 1932.
The Court Writer, Mr. Law Ah Kui, reports: -
General. -Clerk G. M. Win arrived from Sibu on the 8th to take the place of Joseph Chin Siong now at Song.
Awang Samsudin, Native Officer, Belaga, returned on the 1st. Abang Abu Seman paid a visit to the Balleh and Menyong on the 1st to the 11th.
Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hudden, left for Sut on the 15th, accompanied by Native Officer, Abang Aboi, and returned on the night of the 24th. He proceeded to Katibas immediately, accompanied by Native Officer Abang Abu Seman, and was still away at the end of the month.
The Acting Commissioner of Sarawak Constabulary and Mr. Hannigan paid a short visit of inspection to the Kapit police detachment on the 29th, returning to Sibu on the 30th.
The rainfall for the month was 5.60 inches. Belaga rainfall for May was 11.97 inches and for June 6.48 inches.
MATU AND DARO.
May, 1932.
The Officer-in-Charge, Mr. G. F. J. Pegler, reports: -
General. -In the early hours of the morning of the 12th instant a house in Kampong Ska-an was completely destroyed by fire. It was fortunate that there was no heavy breeze as if there had been the houses in the Kampong, owing to their proximity to one another, would have been in serious danger.
SARIKEI, BINATANG AND REJANG.
June, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. F. L. G. Crossley, reports: -
Travelling. -I left Sarikei on the 11th to visit the Dyaks in the Ulus Sarikei, Wak, Pakan and Pedanum. Reports on the padi crop were uniformly encouraging in these rivers. I returned via Binatang on the 18th.
Binatang was visited four times during the month.
Rejang and Selalang were visited from the 25th to 27th.
Chinese. -Arrangements were made in conjunction with the Divisional Engineer, and sixty unemployed were given work on the 4th, increasing on the 6th to one hundred and fifty. They were employed in three gangs, one on upkeep work, one on extending the Peninjau road towards the Nyelong, and the third on grading and making up the Repok road on the north side of the Sungei Sarikei.
On the 25th twenty unemployed were started on rentis work from Sungei Bakong in the Ulu Binatang, to the Nyelong, to join up with the Peninjau road from Sarikei. A few days later the number was increased to eighty, and work was started on making the road from Simpang Tiga, on the Binatang road, to Ulu Bakong.
Native Affairs. -Dyaks wishing to move to Bintulu District were informed that they must move to the Pelagus.
The Manager of the Island Trading Co., Selalang, Mr. Lamplough, reports that the Rejang and Selalang Malays employed by the Company had declared a strike unless they were paid at the same rates as ruled during boom times. Negotiations proving unsuccessful. Chinese labour was engaged and the work of collecting bark is now being done by Foochows. The foolishness of the Malays in throwing up this employment cannot be overstressed.
P.W.D. -Work on the new godown proceeded during the month. A contract for a large rain-water tank for the police barracks was let out, and good progress made by the contractor.
Prisoners were employed on upkeep work, and on demolition of the old police barracks.
Travelling. -Binatang and Belawai were visited during the month. I made a short trip round the Ulus Pauh and Sarik, in company with Mr. K. E. Parker, Land Officer, from the 23rd to the 25th.
Approximately 2 1/2 miles of road was constructed from Simpang Tiga, Binatang. on the Sarikei-Binatang rentis, unemployment labour being utilized. Work proceeded slowly from the Sarikei end.
Health. -A mild outbreak of modified smallpox in Sarikei was reported by the Dresser-in-Charge. There were eleven cases in all, five of whom had recovered by the end of the month. The Divisional Medical Officer, Dr. Hutchison, visited Sarikei in this connection on the 7th, visiting other stations in the district and returning to Sibu on the 14th. All affected houses were promptly put under quarantine, pending the construction of an isolation camp, the camp was completed during the month, and all patients transferred on the 28th. It would appear that the outbreak has now been checked. Four hundred and ninety-three people were vaccinated during the month.
General. -I was in Sibu from the 3rd to the 6th. Dyak affairs were discussed with the Resident, Third Division.
Visitors to the district included Messrs. T. E. Parker and Harding, and Dr. A. D. Hutchison.
Trade and Customs. -Statistics for the month are as follows: -
Miri Regatta, 1932.
A Regatta will be held on His Highness the Rajah’s birthday, Monday, 26th September, 1932, in the Miri River.
There will be races for: -
There will also be duck catching, walking the greasy pole, and barrel racing for children.
Eight cups have been promised and it is hoped io distribute about $1,000 in prizes.
A totalizator will be run and there will be a sweepstake on the Champion Cup Race.
Baram Regatta, 1932.
Baram Regatta, successfully revived in 1929, was held again this year on May 23rd. His Highness the Tuan Muda was the guest of Honour, and the European party included Mrs. Carpenter, Mrs. Webster, Mr. and Mrs. Hamilton from Bakong, Mr. and Mrs. T. A. S. Hamilton, Father Jansen, Messrs. Holl, Banks and Weigall.
The races began at 7 a m., the principal event of the morning being the race by long boats with unlimited crews over a 4 1/2 mile course for His Highness the Tuan Muda’s Cup. Nineteen competitors got off in a flying start and a really good race was won in a boat manned by the Kampong Malays, who defeated the Murik boat-last year’s winners by a bare six feet, but little more than this distance having separated these two boats over most of the course. Other races followed and thanks to an astonishing organization were all over by lunch time.
Land sports, organized by the clerks, were well carried out in the afternoon, the principal event being a tug-of-war between Dyaks and Kayans with Kenyahs; each side dug themselves in, counted their opponents half a dozen times, abandoned all tactics, advice or pretences in skill and pulled with all their vigour, the Dyaks losing two successive pulls without extending their opponents.
In the evening Kayans and Kenyahs danced on the padang the accompaniment of a most melodious sapi, played by a local and at times temperamental Chrysler, and toasted each other amid loud drinking songs.
During the evening His Highness the Tuan Muda received the Challenge Cup from Tama Jalong-the last holder-and presented it to this year’s winner.
By no means the least enjoyable feature of this successful day was the “Empire” dinner provided by Mr. and Mrs. Pollard, everything from the gin, the port and the brandy to the salt and the cigarettes being produce of the Baram River. -(Contributed).
Fifth Division News.
LIMBANG.
May, 1932.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident: -
General. -Mr. L. Maynard, the Consul-General for U.S.A., accompanied by Mrs. Maynard, paid a short visit on the 15th, and The Right Reverend the Bishop of Sarawak and Labuan, accompanied by Mr. I. M. Mills, Private Secretary, on the 23rd. Other visitors on official matters were Messrs. C. Hannigan and L. N. Reynolds of the Constabulary, Mr. A. L. McLaine, Auditor, Mr. G. A. C. Field, Customs, and Mr. W. G. Tait of Posts and Telegraphs.
On the 1st Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas left on a visit to the Ulu, and returned on the 24th, having reached Tama Kuling’s house in the Sungei Medibit, and called at all the other important houses on his way up river.
A number of Tagals from Merapok, Lawas, applied to be allowed to move into the Sungei Lubai. Some empty land was inspected by ex-Sergeant Jaya, and on his report, a portion down river was allocated to them.
Rainfall amounted to 11.60 inches.
June, 1932.
General. -At Sundar the usual dispute as to the rights to plant padi in Buffaloe Alaman arose and was settled by a ruling that this was allowed provided no permanent fences were erected around the area alienated for padi.
The Auditor, Mr. A. L. McLaine. completed his duties at Limbang and accompanied me as far as Trusan, where he commenced work in that district.
I walked from Trusan to Lawas, and am pleased to report that some excellent work is being done on the road under the supervision of the Acting Assistant, District Officer, Mr. J. O. Gilbert. If the Siang Siang bridge could be reconstructed, the administration of that district would be very advantageously simplified.
The British Resident of Brunei paid a visit, coming over by car for the first time. The trip to the termination of the road at Sungei Kabun taking 45 minutes each way. As mentioned in my last report the last two miles at the Brunei end still require a considerable amount of cutting and filling, but in spite of this the road is very satisfactory.
Other visitors were Mr. Morgan, Geologist, Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, who is working in the Pandernan area, the Divisional Forest Officer, Mr. D. S. McLeod. Mr. L. S. Gifford, of the British American Tobacco Company, and Mr. L. Gilbert on an unofficial visit.
Some excellent upriver work was done by ex-Sergeant Jaya in obtaining a settlement of the dispute over a house at Tanah Merah, and in defining the boundaries between these Dyaks, Muruts and Tabuns, and the Dyaks now moving in from the Second Division. The first batch, some nine doors of these latter under T. R. Gani, arrived on the m.v. Kim Chin Seng, which they chartered from Kuching, and at once made preparations to move up to their allocated land, which is situated between the Kuala Selidon and the Kuala Seratai.
On the 29th, Dresser Mr. K. K. Chakravarty arrived from Kuching to relieve Dresser Mr. Hon Chon Thadd, who is retiring after 18 years in Government Service.
Dr. Martindell, Medical Officer of Brunei, paid his usual visit of inspection.
Rainfall amounted to 6.48 inches.
Trade and Shipping: -
LAWAS.
June, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports: -
General. -On the 6th instant the Resident, Fifth Division, arrived at Sundar, together with Mr. McLaine, the Government Auditor.
On the 7th the Resident, with Acting Assistant District Officer, returned to Lawas.
Mr. Thomson, Assistant on the Lawas Estate, was transferred to Batu Apoi in Brunei to manage that estate. Mr. Porter proceeding to Europe on leave.
P.W.D. Local. -Work was continued on the Trusan road at 9th mile. Several contracts were given out for grading Bukit Rendungai, maintenance was as usual.
Agriculture. -The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Ltd., exported 25,586 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
Rainfall. -The following rainfall was recorded during the month: -
