VOL. LXII.
No. 943.
The Sarawak Gazette
Price
KUCHING, Friday, April 1st, 1932.
20 CENTS.
Contents.
The Sarawak Gazette
FRIDAY, APRIL 1st, 1932.
Local and Personal.
March.
His Highness the Rajah, accompanied by Mr. A. A. Rennie, left for England per s.s. Darvel, via Singapore, on 19th March. We wish His Highness bon voyage and a speedy return.
By this same vessel His Highness the Tuan Muda left for Singapore on a short holiday.
Her Highness the Ranee, accompanied by the Dayangs Elizabeth, Valerie and party, left for Santubong per H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on Friday, 25th March, for the Easter week end.
The President, The Chartered Company of British North Borneo, Major-General Sir Neill Malcolm, K.C.B., D.S.O., arrived at Jesselton by the m.v. Marudu on the 2nd March.
We much regret two errors which occurred in this column of our last issue.
Firstly Dayang Leonora should read Dayang Elizabeth, secondly Mr. Forrest, Manager of the Chartered Bank, is not leaving Sarawak on retirement, but merely on furlough. We tender our apologies for our error.
Mr. J. B. Archer, Resident, Second Division, returned from leave by m.v. Marudu on 21st March. Mr. Archer left for Simanggang on 24th March.
By this same vessel Mr. J. C. B. Fisher arrived. Mr. Fisher has recently joined the Sarawak Civil Service and is temporarily attached for duty in the District Office, Kuching.
Major A. S. M. Winder, R.A.M.C., and Mrs. Winder arrived in Kuching on 25th March by s.s. Vyner Brooke. Major and Mrs. Winder are the guests of Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division.
A number of Outstation Officers arrived in Kuching during the month to sit for the annual Malay and Law examinations.
His Highness the Rajah’s Regiment, the Sarawak Ranger’s, has been disbanded as from 29th February. The Regimental Colours are being deposited in Astana.
The Sarawak Police have been re-constituted and will be known in future as the Sarawak Constabulary.
Last month an Expedition, led by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident, Third Division, accompanied by Messrs. P. M. Adams, H. E. Cutfield and Captain R. E. Le Sueur, was carried out in the upper Kanowit district, against a Dyak named Asun and his followers, who had persistently defied Government for the last two years. The Expeditionary Force returned to Sibu on March 5th. An account of this Expedition appears in our columns.
Sadong Colliery was closed down as from 9th March. We understand that Mr. J. W. Evans is retiring on pension and intends returning to England shortly.
Mr. B. J. C. Spurway, Mrs. Spurway and son arrived from Sibu on 18th March on local leave.
Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident, Third Division, and Mrs. Adams arrived from Sibu on 29th March to attend the race meeting, to be held on the 2nd and 4th April.
Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident, Fourth Division, accompanied by Mrs. Aplin and son, left Singapore by s.s. Sarpedon on March 23rd on furlough.
Extracts from a report by His Highness the Tuan Muda on a visit to the Ulus Entabai and Batang Lupar, and the Delok district, Third Division.
I left Kuching on the Maimuna with Mr. P. M. Adams and Captain R. E. Le Sueur at daybreak on the morning of the 11th February, 1932, arriving at Lingga at 1 p.m. Here Mr. E. O. Bruce, Acting Resident, Second Division, was waiting with the force of reservists which had been collected for the operations in the Second Division. These were speedily embarked on the Maimuna and left for Binatang in charge of Mr. Adams and Captain Le Sueur the same afternoon.
Mr. Bruce and I left Lingga in the Anne at 5 p.m., towing boats containing the 20 reservists who were to accompany me up-country. We arrived at Simanggang at 9 p.m.
That night and the next were spent at Simanggang.
On the 13th February we started up-country. My party consisted of Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, Abang Abutalip, Pengarah Isek, Orang Kaya Jaul, 20 reservists, and Corporal Drahman, of the Simanggang Police. Mr. Bruce accompanied us as far as Penghulu Imong’s house.
The time-table of our movements until our return to Simanggang is as follows: -
There had been a strange scare at Rumah Janing in Sungei Akup, ulu Skrang. for the last month or two owing to a few strange Dyaks throwing stones onto the roof at night, and being undiscernible when searched for in the daytime. Before we left Simanggang Penghulu Said was sent thither with five reservists to endeavour to clear up this matter.
In accordance with Your Highness’ instructions, the information had been broadcast, throughout the Division, that my visit was to be a purely peaceful and friendly one; that operations were being undertaken in the Third Division for the capture of Asoon, who had for long past been engaged in a seditious campaign against Government, but that was no affair of the Batang Lupar or its tributaries; that the Penghulus and Tuai Rumah had promised that their anembiak would take no active part in this matter, and all that Government asked them to do was to keep quiet and give no assistance to fugitives; and that I was taking along a few reservists purely on account of the threats that had been made by Asoon against certain houses on the Batang Lupar side of the border to raid them if they refused to support him in the case of Government attempting his capture.
At Engkilili (13.2.32) we were met by Mr. S. G. Hansom and Abang Sidek, also by Penghulu Kana, who had come down from the ulu ostensibly for stores, and possibly in search of information as to the strength of the force I was bringing up river, and as to our intentions.
Mr. Bruce impressed upon him that mine was purely a friendly visit, and he professed himself not only satisfied, but pleased at the prospect of seeing us later on.
It was arranged that Mr. Hansom should send Abang Sidek up to the ulu Lemanak, where, if necessary, he could act as a connecting link between my party, in the ulu Engkari, and Penghulu Said in the Akup. There is a Dyak track between the ulus Skrang, Lemanak, and Engkari, of about a day’s quick travelling, and it was thought possible, though doubtful, that Asoon might be at the bottom of the Akup scare.
At Penghulu Imong’s house we had news that Labang, Kana’s cousin, had also passed down stream for Engkilili in quest of scores (and information).
We here heard for the first time that a rumour had come from up river to the effect that I was bringing an army of 700 men to seize all the guns in the district and capture and imprison all Penghulus and Tuai Rumah.
(14/2/32.) The walk from Imong’s to Lobok Antu is an easy one, though hot and shadeless. We stopped for a half hour’s chat at Rumah Ngang (Bulo). Lobok Antu was tastefully decorated for our arrival with palm arches; and a long corridor, composed of Dyak cloths stretched across bamboo supports, led up to the Fort.
Mr. Barcroft spent the afternoon in going into divers matters with Abang Omar, Court Writer Abang Rosali, and various Dyaks.
A general invitation was issued for the evening, when in the presence of Penghulus Imong and Ringgit I gave a general account of the objects of my mission to a large assembly of Tuai and anembiak from neighbouring houses.
We left Lobok Antu (14.2.32) in lighter boats, and after paddling and poling all day. arrived at Rumah Lajang, Kerangan Mong, near the month of the Engkari. The usual nightly berandau was held in the house, and both Lajang and Ranggan, Tuai Rumah of Nanga Mepi, who had come there to meet us, spoke sensibly and sincerely about the Asoon affair. Runggan extended to us a cordial invitation to visit his house on our way back.
Here we also heard that interested parties had given the information that my visit was one of hostile intent. It was evident that up to now there were no sympathisers with Asoon. All had been, as was the case in this house, strongly pro-Government.
On entering the Engkari river (16.2.32) the atmosphere seemed completely different. Women who happened to be in small boats, or on the river bank, bolted when we appeared.
We made a midday halt at the kerangan below Ruumah Nyamboug, whose inhabitants came down to talk to us. They said that many in this river had hidden their valuables in expectation of our intended attack.
The same story was heard, later, in Penghulu Nanang’s house. He was obviously uneasy, though he and his house seemed friendly enough. His bearing was that of a somewhat weak man, who knew of happenings, of which he disapproved, but had no power to stop and dared not report.
A long day’s poling (17.2.32) brought us to Saran’s house, Nanga Terebuoi. This is the farthest house in the Engkari, and is about three hours poling above where any should exist.
A tree was marked with shot-holes as the upriver boundary-mark by Datu Haji Boassan over twenty years ago in the presence of Saran’s father, Muntai, the then Tuai Ramah. On Muntai’s death, some five years ago, the house was moved up river, without permission, and this has never been reported to Government. Since the move, ill-luck and bad dreams have caused them to relinquish the building then made, and they are now preparing another. Meanwhile they are lodged in two temporary bouses, of about 12 and 8 doors, situated almost facing each other on opposite banks of the river, at Nanga Terebuoi.
We occupied the left-bank house, and there held nightly meetings Saran’s altitude was shifty and suspicions, though he, and all his people, professed to be delighted at our visit, and were strong in their protestations of loyalty to Government.
During our five days’ stay there, we had information from reliable Dyaks who had accompanied us from down river, and kept their ears open-that more than a dozen youths from this house had left to join up with Asoon just before our arrival, but had come back, owing to bad dreams-that three of Asoon’s actual followers were in the opposite part of the house when we arrived, to obtain provisions-that they had waited a day to see what we looked like doing, before leaving to join him again-and that the whole house was definitely pro- Asoon and anti-Government.
Mr. Barcroft and I found a walk up the hill above the house through old padi land with jungle at the top, where we went the first three days for exercise and in search of pig or kijang, accompanied by inmates of the house. On the 20th strong representations were made by Pengarah Isek and Orang Kaya Jaul to Mr. Barcroft (maybe after consultation with the Abang) that they had reasons to believe that amongst our hosts were such as were quite capable of doing some mischief from ambush, and then bolting back again across river. The occurrence, when discovered, would merely be put down to stray followers of Asoon, who might, without then knowledge, be in the neighbourhood.
Saran made no secret of the fact that his house had a farming langka up river; our down river informants declared that this was a bolt-hole for Asoon’s family. It seemed established, but with insufficient evidence to take action, that the whole river above Nanga Tutong is a hostile area, whence Asoon has received provisions and had expected active assistance in resisting Go-vernment forces.
Abang Abutalip made two attempts to go op river “fishing” with his brother and one or two of the household, taking a couple of Dyaks from down river, but the further he went, the more, disinclined he found these of the household to proceed.
His third scouting venture was made on the 21st, and met with more success. He reached the farming hut referred to. It may be what it purports to be, but was apparently more like an 8-roomed house, with ample stores of rice and necessaries.
After inspecting this, he managed to push on upstream as far as the mouth of Sungei Jela. This was obscured by timber which had fallen so as to form a screen. Saran’s men said that this was purely accidental, which again may or may not be the case. (Later news from Sibu has reported the existence of an actual house there).
This matter was being discussed on a kerangan, when the Abang’s down-river friends became uneasy at the sight of a bad omen-bird, and, with the others, refused to proceed further upstream, as was his desire. The same evening, after their return, a similar bird was seen to fly three times round our house.
According to our time-table, there was no object to be gamed by staying any longer, since we were not concerned with the Third Division operations, but had merely timed our visit to restrain Engkari hot-heads from running over there whilst the actual raid on the Nanga Munus was taking place, and the time fixed for this was now past.
We therefore started down river on the 22nd. Our programme was to walk overland from Nanga Tutong, half-way down the Engkari, to Penghulu Kana’s house in the Batang Ai.
It was now considered inadvisable to do this, since, it was evident that if the feeling in many of the ulus was the same as was evinced in that of the Engkari, Asoon’s force must be a far bigger one than had been anticipated. There were strong rumours that his, line of retreat would be towards the Lobang Bayer, whither we should be also heading. Our movements must be known to them, and our small party would be completely at, the mercy of a few determined men posted at strategic points along the track which in two places runs over steep hills that must literally be surmounted on all fours. We therefore decided to complete the journey by water.
Rumah Timbang, Nanga Telaus, was reached in the evening, and here the old friendly atmosphere was once more evident.
On the 23rd we proceeded to Penghulu Kana’s house, Nanga Empipit, arriving in the early afternoon. A splendid reception was accorded to us, a number of girls with gongs being assembled at the landing stage to lead us up to the house, where guns were fired on our approach. Our reception was cordial in the extreme.
It was here that we had thought a good deal of opposition might be encountered at the evening aum. Kana, apart from his past record as a bitter and remarkably courageous enemy of Government in the old days, is an irascible despot in the ulu. He enjoys the prestige throughout the country, of a man who has survived seven simultaneous, Snider bullet wounds, whilst leading a forlorn hope in a river action against Government, when his fleet had deserted him and fled. He will remain a legendary ulu Dyak hero after he is dead. He has on various occasions since his appointment been at loggerheads with authority, and, although there is no tangible proof, it is doubtful if his activities amongst those whom he influences are not directed chiefly towards his own aggrandisement as a bulwark against undue Government “interference” in ulu Dyak affairs.
We therefore made a special effort to impress upon the very huge assembly in this house that although we had no doubts as to their loyalty, at the moment wo knew that they were vacillating, and liable to be influenced by rumours originated by interested parties with the object of causing sedition. They were not to heed anything they might hear that did not come through some Government representative. Penghulus Kana and
Ramba had promised the Resident that their anembiak would stand aloof from the Asoon affair, which was purely a matter of the Third Division, and we had simply come on a friendly visit to support them in this counsel. The few soldiers I had brought had not come with any hostile intent, as had been rumoured but quite the contrary. Asoon had threatened various houses in these ulus with vengeance unless they turned out to help him fight against Government in his resistance of arrest. These Balaus under their chief, Orang Kaya Jaul, were a tanda that Government was prepared to support those who were loyal to them. It was folly to talk of resisting Government, which did not consist of mortal individuals, but was something in the nature of the sea, wave following upon wave, so that eventually any opposition thereto, even if temporarily successful, must be submerged. The matter of Asoon was as yet a little affair, but if various hotheads got mixed up in it, it might become a big one, necessitating drastic treatment, in which case it was almost inevitable that innocent people would also suffer.
Kana replied in a friendly tone. He said that he had no intention of resisting Government, whatever action they might take, and even if his house were burnt he would realize the futility of opposition and sit beneath it with folded arms, merely conscious of his humiliation; that he had urged his anembiak not to get mixed up in this affair, and only hoped that if one or two should disregard his warning, he would not be held responsible. He asked Government to let him know of any definite spots where trouble might be brewing in order that he should issue a general warning that these were out of bounds until matters settled down again; if Government had to send an army through the Batang Ai he hoped it would not consist of more than 50 or 100 men, or the friendly houses would suffer.
The next night at Penghulu Ramba’s was a somewhat different story. The Penghulu was admirably hospitable and friendly personally, but drank somewhat plentifully of tuak during the afternoon, and let himself go during the evening session. The gist of his remarks was that Government was entirely out of sympathy with the ulu Dyaks, and had very little use for them. Penghulus and anembiak alike received scant courtesy and impatient treatment at the hands of clerks and
Tuans when they took long journeys to Government stations in connection with taxation and other matters. These journeys were often entirely fruitless, and had to be repeated. I had alluded to Asoon as a madman; it is not he who is mad, but Tuans so and so and so and so who pay no heed to grievances of ulu Dyaks when put forward in a legitimate manner: Asoon had merely tried to voice these grievances on their behalf, and so was now in trouble.
I waited until he had finished, and then told him quietly that it was of no use talking in this strain. His very words showed his ignorance of the subject to which he alluded; Asoon had been told repeatedly to come down to Sibu to air any grievances he might have, but had simply disappeared whenever any Government representative came near his house; I myself had met him and told him that if he stood his trial for sedition and could refute the charges brought against him he would go free, and that I would pledge my own life that his story that Government wished to catch him and have him shot was without foundation, if he himself did really believe this-as up to the date of our meeting he had not been guilty of armed resistance to authority.
Ramba then calmed down, and the rest of the sitting, though protracted and argumentative, was passed in a friendly fashion.
Ramba pointed to his tikar, which was laid beside my mattress, saying that I could rest in peace as he would he sleeping there. His brother subsequently told Mr. Barcroft that he hoped I would not be annoyed at the way he had spoken, as he was excitable and tackless, but his heart, as regards Government, was really in the right place. It was considerably after midnight when I lay down, and Mr. Barcroft, who nightly held a further conclave after my retirement to clear up any misunderstandings, did not get to bed for several hours after. Even then sleep was impossible except in snatches, since the whole of the ruai was dotted with excited groups chattering over matters which had come up for discussion till long past dawn.
Ramba’s house had over a dozen new shields prominently displayed on the tanju, and here, as in the Engkari and elsewhere, it was noticeable that all spears and parangs were bright and sharp instead of being in their usual uncared for state.
The remainder of the trip was uneventful, save in a physical sense-as when a boatful of the Balau reservists, tired of the unaccustomed poling they had been enduring for so many days, and almost delirious with delight at again taking to their beloved paddles, shot the main fall of the Iba cataract at full speed, instead of seeking one of the less turbulent waterways at the side, as is the custom of those who know the river and have no particular reason for committing suicide. Shrieks of excitement of the crew and the roar of water drowned the warning cries of those who had preceded them, and were waiting below in comparatively calm water. The boat, owing to the tremendous impetus imparted by the paddles and current, seemed to leap the head of the cataract on an even keel, and to crash horizontally into the foam about half-way down, when only the fore-part was visible; the rest being obscured by plumes of spray. Fortunately, the water now pouring into the stern prevented the bow from dipping. She skidded down, stern under, into a lucky eddy which swept her towards some submerged boulders which some of the more daring of those below had already reached by swimming across the river from rock to rock. It was some time before they, assisted by the crew, who had by now jumped out and were waist-high in the current, managed to maneuver her into a place of comparative safety, and for several minutes it seemed that the effort was hopeless and must end with the loss of the craft and rifles it contained, and perhaps of life amongst those attempting the salvage.
The Delok was peaceful in the extreme Penghulu Baroh was delightfully courteous, but is too old and infirm for active work, and himself asks that he should be retired on pension. Penghulu Sambau is a man of the world whose ideas are a couple of generations removed from those of the ulu Ai. He understands the difficulties of Government, and regards them with sympathy and without suspicion.
We had to leave all our boats and stores, except for a couple of days supply, at the foot of Nanga Jelia falls in the Delok, which are impassable, except on foot by a scramble of about half an hour along the right bank and then by fording the river at the head of the falls to the other side. Here the stream is wide and the current swift.
The foot-hold is not too bad until the last part where the water is thigh-high and a half-jump has to be made over a gap between two rather narrow rock ledges which are not easily discernible. My guide, from Mumin’s house above the falls, here gripped me firmly by the wrist and held it at arm’s length above his head, which made it extremely improbable that I should be able to recover my balance if a foot should slip. However, as it was his business to retrieve me if this occurred, and he probably thought that salvage would be more easily effected if he put it out of my power to struggle, I felt that it would be injudicious and ungracious to query his method of procedure.
Baroh’s house (Nanga Sumpa) is about 2 1/2 hours paddle above the falls; Sambau’s house (Nanga Jugam) an easy 3 hours walk further on.
From Sambau’s to Nanga Mepi (27.2.32) was the only really uncomfortable day we had during the whole trip.
We decided to leave the Delok district by the Sungei Meniang exit into the Batang Ai, its mouth being considerably below that of the Delok, so Mr. Barcroft, Abang Abutalip and I set out with only two or three of our following, the remainder being sent back to return the way we had come, in order that they might pick up boats and stores and meet us at Rumah Ranggau in the evening.
The day started with a stiff walk of some 4 1/2 hours over ground resembling the teeth of a gigantic saw. It was through old padi fields, shadeless under a hot sun, and so slippery under foot that one was constantly skidding backwards on the up-grades, and sitting down involuntarily during the descents.
We reached Pengkalan Betong about midday, and after an hour’s halt left in a couple of small open boats provided by the adjacent house.
At 2.15 we issued from the Nanga Meniang into the main river and were there met by a heavy squall, A cold wind, driving against the current, created a popple that washed constantly over the sides of the boats, assisting the soaking the rain was giving us, and necessitating continuous bailing.
We arrived at Pengkalan Nanga Mepi at 4.15 and at Ranggau’s house after some twenty minutes walk thence.
Here we found the rest of our party already ensconced, and the hearty and honest welcome of Ranggau and his household was such as to dispel immediately any sensations of chill, discomfort or fatigue.
Regarding general matters discussed, it is extremely difficult to deal with people who say that Government is continually transgressing Dyak adat, when tribal customs vary so widely in different districts, and each tribe considers that its own is the only right one. For instance, in the case of mali,, the marriage of first cousins is no offence in Saribas, Skrang or Kalaka, but is punishable by fine with Undups and Balaus. This is all very well with tribes who are in a settled state near some Government station, but with an Ulu Ai who moves to another district and infringes some different local custom there it leads to constant friction.
The matter of umang was referred to at all of our gatherings. It seems established that it is a very real disgrace to be an umang.
These are not only widows as I had thought. They may be married couples too old to do any work and without children to support them; they may be half-wits. Whatever they are, they are kept alive by the community, and if driven out of their houses, Government would be faced with a novel problem in the shape of Dyak paupers. Therefore, it seems unfair that the houses should club together to pay tax for them. Their so-called “doors” are often only miserable shelters at the end of the tanju; even if a real “door” it only contains such old mats and bare necessities of life as are contributed by kindly neighbours.
When things are more settled the matter of observance of Government boundaries in this Division should be definitely tackled. The outstanding example is Saran’s house in the ulu Engkari. Ramba’s house in the ulu Batang Ai, is below the Nanga Mujong mark, but he is farming above it, and I could not ascertain if this had been definitely forbidden or not. He says not!
On a cursory inspection, I could not see why the Nanga Mujong had been made the boundary, as the waterfall above it is the point which would present considerable difficulties to any force operating in that area. It seemed to me that if a rentis were cut across this at right angles to the river, and above it no house or farms should be allowed, the same purpose as the Nanga Mujong mark would be served, but the matter needs careful consideration and study on the spot.
The Lobang Bayer is rumoured to be a very queer place. It is likely that Asoon, or any other malcontent who is “wanted” would find a cordial welcome there.
The matter of Autas was threshed out at Ramba’s house, and it was promised that he would be sent, in charge of two of Bongkong’s household, to meet us at Lobok Antu on our way down. This promise has not been kept. I fear this man’s escape from custody, and return to shelter in a hostile area in an inaccessible spot, has gravely exacerbated the already unsatisfactory situation in the Lobang Bayer. It is extremely irritating for Penghulu Ramba, who incurred the resentment of his neighbours for arresting a man with whom (for some reason) they were in sympathy, and delivering him over to Government to no purpose, and this escape is obviously regarded in that neighbourhood as a definite triumph over authority.
I think communications in the Batang Lupar are badly in need of improvement. To my mind, a telephone at least (and preferably a track on which a motor bicycle could be used) between Lobok Antu, Engkilili and Simanggang is an urgent necessity.
The tongkat system down this river, necessitated by present conditions, has to be used to an extent that is unfair on intervening houses, with the inevitable result that Government messages are merely regarded as a nuisance which has to be endured.
Regarding complaints of scant courtesy and impatience, it is of course difficult for the Ulu Ai to understand that if he comes down for a chat about, his concerns, there can be any reason why anyone should be other than glad to spare him an hour or two. However, I think it is perhaps sometimes forgotten in the press of office or other work, that too sudden a dismissal will rankle with these people as it does with a child, and a careless word or two down river may have effects when debated in the ulu, that were never anticipated at the moment of their utterance.
It seems to me that a “travelling officer” is quite as necessary in the Second Division as in the Third, and that there should be a place at Nanga Mepi or Nanga Telaus where an occasional week or ten days would be devoted to the affairs of the neigh-bourhood.
Personally, I should prefer to see one at Nanga Mepi, say, where affairs of the Delok. Engkari, etc., would be dealt with, and one a bit further up, where the ulu Batang Ai would congregate, since I think this would be a more harmonious arrangement in view of the not very good feeling existing between those above the Delok and some of those below it, but that is a matter for discussion.
I was sorry to find that in some (as yet not many) houses it seems to have become a settled custom to beg for gin, cartridges, old coats-or, in fact, anything that may be available This is not a natural vice amongst these people, and should not be allowed to develop through heedless generosity on the part of individuals. Government should offer facilities for the distribution of sufficient quantities of tobacco to be consumed on the spot during deliberations, and there is no particular harm in visitors making a small present of, say, a bar of soap, out of stores, to the hostess in return for the use of her bilek for cooking and meals, but procedure that tends to moral deterioration should be discountenanced, however blameless the motive.
Oxford University Exploration Club.
His Highness the Rajah has been pleased to sanction a visit of the Oxford University Exploration Club to Sarawak this year.
Under the Presidency of Colonel John Buchan, the well-known novelist, and fully authorized by the University of Oxford, members of this club have already paid successful visits to Greenland, British Guiana and Lapland, where they have studied the local Fauna and Flora, and in visiting Sarawak with a similar object in view the club have admittedly chosen as rich a field as may be found for such work.
Undergraduate and post-graduate members take it in turns to go on these annual Expeditions, their main aim being the study of Ecology, a branch of modern biologicals understood by laymen. Briefly Ecology is the study of the relation of animals and plants to their environment, food supplies, enemies, life histories, breeding cycles and reactions to seasonal and other climatic changes. The importance of this study to agriculture in the assistance it gives to the tracing and combating of plant and insect pests is such that large numbers of Ecologists are scattered throughout the Colonial Empire engaged in this pursuit. The particular object of the Expedition in question is to study, for future application, the main principles underlying Animal and Plant Ecology, and to give practical experience and training to a number of young men who may carry on these investigations in the future.
Backed by the Royal Society, the University of Oxford the Royal Geographical Society, the Royal Botanic Gardens and the Percy Sladen Fund the club is on a sound financial basis and can afford to send out, Photographers, Entomologists, Botanists and Ornithologists to the number of about ten-these will be assisted by officers of the Forest and Survey departments lent by the Sarawak Government. Arriving about the end of July the party proposes to proceed to Mount Dulit, a range some 4-5,000 feet in height up the Tinjar River in the Baram District, there to make as complete a faunal survey of the mountain as possible. For this purpose it plans to make two camps, one at the foot and one at the summit of the mountain, and it is understood that its aim is not only to collect new and rare specimens, but also to discover why some species flourish at high altitudes and others at low, why some are rare and others common, some nocturnal and some diurnal, the achievement of which object together with the demarcation of the faunal zones on the mountain, will require a prolonged and detailed study of one particular area rather than a more superficial examination of large tracts of country.
Mount Dulit was chosen for its accessibility. Three or four days by out-board motor boat are all that is required to take one to the foot of the mountain and from there it is but half a day’s climb, up some most unpleasant ladders, to the top. Had the party, coming in the strength it is and during the months of August and September, chosen such a place as Mount Mulu for their objective coolie hire would have presented a grave problem, since at that season the native population must be busy about its farms if it is to harvest next year, but Mount Dulit should present little difficulty in this repsect. It is understood that the personnel of the Expedition has not yet been decided, but the Sarawak Government has promised the assistance of its Administrative officers in the Fourth Division and of representatives from the Forest, Survey and Museum Departments.
It has recently been announced that an American Expedition, financed by a number of American Museums, will also take the field. This expedition is known aa the “Carpelan East Indies Expedition” and is due to arrive in Borneo on 3rd April. One of their objects is “the discovery of new territories and waters in central Borneo,” and we await their coming with expectant interest.
Entabai Expedition.
It having been decided that the attitude adopted by Asun and his Dyak followers in the Entabai district had become impossible, a force was collected to effect their arrest, but failing this to lay waste their crops and property in order to demonstrate that Government would stand no more nonsense from those who rebelled against its authority.
On February 12th 140 ex-Rangers were embarked in H.H.M.Y. Maimuna at Lingga for Binatang and Sibu. Two-thirds of this force landed at Binatang where, having divided, proceeded overland to Julau and Entabai by two different routes. The writer and Mr. Cutfield were in charge of the respective parties.
The balance of the original force accompanied the Resident to Kuala Entabai, and later proceeded to Slepong in Ulu Kanowit under Capt. Le Sueur. Asun having been reported to be in Ulu Munus, the forces would thus be approaching him by three different routes.
The Resident made a large camp at Kuala Entabai and sent Tuai Rumah Bunya, who although a friend of Asun is not hostile to Government, to inform the rebels that Government meant business this time and to try and convince them that they could avoid all trouble by surrendering themselves to the Resident. The situation could then be fully discussed before everyone, and provided full security was given for fines imposed last year, and all guns handed in, Government would withdraw its forces. In the meantime, all the columns were ordered to march through without committing any hostile acts and to try and gather in everyone to attend the hoped-for meeting at Kuala Entabai.
By the time the forces arrived in Entabai district it was evident that none of the rebels were likely to attend the meeting. Bunya returned saying that he had met Asun himself in the jungle near his farm in Ulu Munus, and that he was very threatening and refused to discuss matters. Capt. Le Sueur’s force met a party of six rebels, one of whom is said to have been Asun himself. They refused to parley and ran away but the Government force was restrained from firing.
Asun had already burnt his own house thus declaring that a state of war existed between himself and Government. Since the meeting at Kuala Entabai would not take place, the Resident moved up to Munus, and joined the writer there. Mr. Cutfield proceeded to Ulu Kanowit as there was a rumour that Asun’s womenfolk were in hiding at Lium. On the way to Ulu Munus two of the rebels were seen but no offensive action was taken.
The local Dyaks though professing loyalty to Government, pretended to be ignorant of Asun’s whereabouts or the jungle paths in the Munus district. It would seem that they were so afraid of incurring Asun’s displeasure that they were unwilling to assist Government. Eventually they were forced to guide our force to Asun’s farm, which the troops laid waste. Whilst here, small parties went out to search for paths and tracks of the rebels. Later on, after being threatened, certain local Dyaks gave information that Asun and his followers had re-built a farm hut belonging to one Apoh, in Ulu Kakup, at the foot of Stulak mountain. They were, however, annoyingly vague about the path and distance. The Resident split up his force, he himself taking the direct route, and the writer going via Slepong with the intention of getting behind the rebels so as to cut off their retreat to Stulak. Had we known the distances and paths this might have been successfully accomplished, but as it was, the route taken by the Resident was only one-third of the distance of that taken by my force. The Resident twice encountered the rebels who opened a heavy fire on his force wounding five men. The Government force returned the fire, one of the rebels being killed. This man was identified as a Second Division Dyak. After the second attack in very thick jungle at about 4 p.m., the Resident decided to camp for the night, to give my force time to move into the desired position. He was not aware at the time that his camp was only about a quarter of a mile from Apoh’s farm. My force, after a forced march, did not reach the farm until next morning at half past eight, only to find that the rebels had burnt their huts and fled to Stulak the previous evening. The damage done to the huts was repaired and the wounded attended to. Mr. Cutfield arrived in the afternoon, having drawn a blank in Ulu Kanowit, but had heard about the rebel headquarters in Ulu Kakup. The next day we advanced up Stulak, which was ideal ground to defend. The rebel rearguard was present all the time but afraid to attack us though they had made all preparations to do so. By midday we had arrived at the summit and proceeded across a long ridge about 1,500 feet high which runs right into the Second Division in the Ulu Skrang. It was evident that the rebels were making for Engkari or Batang Ai, and by signs seen, their womenfolk had been evacuated three or four days before. It was thought unwise to follow them as it would probably stir up the Second Division Dyaks and start further trouble on a large scale. His Highness the Tuan Muda was known to be in the Ulu Engkari with 20 ex- Rangers in order to act as a check on these people joining Asun. We camped on the ridge and returned to Apoh’s farm next day, and laid waste the crops.
That night two of the enemy fired into the camp slightly wounding one man. The following day I took a force up to Sungei Atoi in Ulu Entabai and destroyed the farm, padi store, and confiscated property belonging to one Undi who had joined Asun. It was thought that some of the rebels might have run in this direction but none were seen. On the way back we arrested a boy named Radin, a son-in-law of Apoh, who had been with the rebels. From him we obtained some valuable information. In the meantime padi farms, houses and rubber trees belonging to Asun and his brothers in various places were destroyed.
Asun’s force, which mainly consisted of Batang Ai Dyaks, numbered about sixty men.
During my trip to Sungei Atoi, the Resident and Mr. Cutfield having finished destroying Apoh’s padi, burnt the camp and returned to Kuala Entabai via Kuala Kakup. On their way down the Kakup two shots were fired from the rear doing no damage.
One boat of the Resident’s force and one of mine were upset in the rapids owing to disobedience of the ex-Rangers. Four rifles and bandoliers were lost. These, however, have since been recovered by Mr. Cutfield.
Further inquiries made it plain that Bunya had spent a night with Asun on Apoh’s farm, which proves that his first story was a deliberate lie, and that he gave Asun all the necessary information as to how to avoid capture and kept Government in the dark concerning the rebels’ stronghold.
On March 4th the Resident, Capt. Le Sueur and myself, accompanied by most of the troops, returned to Sibu, via Kanowit, leaving Mr. Cutfield with a small force to patrol the district and round up any rebels who may have returned to their homes, and also various Tuai who had given false information.
Sibu was reached on March 5th and Kuching on the 7th.
Later news has been received that Mr. Cutfield succeeded in arresting two of Asun’s brothers, together with their families, and finally rounded up 64 persons including woman and children who had returned from Engkari to Munus.
Asun is thus left somewhere in the vicinity of Lanja mountain with only two or three followers. Rumour has it that the Batang Ai people are not very pleased with him, seeing that one of their people was killed and another is missing, whilst Asun and his brothers took no part in the actual fighting. If this is true Asun will soon be starved into surrender, in any case his reputation as a brave warrior and a menace to the district has received a grave set-back and he is not likely to be received with open arms in the Entabai.
The presence of His Highness the Tuan Muda in Engkari undoubtedly attributed greatly to the success of the general campaign. There are still three or four supporters from the Julau side who are reported to have returned home, but Mr. Cutfield will be able to collect them without much trouble.
Although the ex-Rangers behaved very well under fire it was evident that special training in jungle warfare should be practised. It is suggested that the new Constabulary should bear this in mind.
It is obvious that for a long time to come Dyaks should not be allowed to purchase guns or ammunition in any part of the State except under very exceptional circumstances. From information received it appears that Dyak coolies at Miri obtain supplies, which they send in comparatively large quantities to their relations in the 3rd and 2nd Divisions.
News was received on Wednesday, 25th March, that Asun has sent in a message that he wishes to surrender. A small party, headed by T. R. Gani, has gone up river to bring him in.
Shocking.
A Borneo contemporary tells a really shocking story of things which happen there. It seems that a bachelor gent wanting some new fishing tackle ordered a three-inch brass rod. The parcel duly arrived but on being opened contained-a pink silk brassiere with rosebuds complete. The Bachelor, let us hope, was a man of sufficient resource to lay the thing by in lavender until that happy day when he might he on terms with some lady friendly enough to utilise it as tribute of affection. But what the lady did with the brass tube is beyond the wit of man to suggest. -Singapore Free Press.
New Year Novels.
Among the earliest novels of the New Year are books by established favourites and by authors, who are new, or comparatively newcomers to fiction, but of whom more should be heard. Among those, who make their debut with the New Year special praise must be given to Miss Dorothy Cunynghame whose first novel Summer’s Lease (Hutchinson. 7s. 6d.) has a quiet sincerity and an understanding of character which will at once attract the reader. Her book is the story of an ordinary woman to whom life was not too kind. Widowed, she marries again for safety’s sake, and is compelled to live her life in a seaside town which affords Miss Cunynghame an opportunity for some Shrewdly drawn character sketches. The end may not be thrilling, but it rings true, and the reader will put down Miss Cunynghame’s book with the conviction that she is a writer who understands life. -Public Opinion.
Seventy Cents a Day.
The interview with an unemployed planter which was published in the Sunday Times and the Straits Times was the most remarkable story that has yet come to light during the Great Slump. If anyone had said five years ago that it was possible for a European to live on seventy cents a day in Malaya (including food and rent) and maintain his self-respect, he would have been thought to be mad. To-day it is being done-by three British planters who by sharing a house and other living expenses are managing to live at the rate of twenty dollars a month each. All honour to them! Desperate times demand desperate remedies, and a thousand dollars will go a long way at that rate of spending. There is much discussion nowadays as to whether an “axed” European ought to seek his fortune at Home or stay in this country. In the long run it seems almost certain that the former would be the better course. All the indications are that Malava is going to be a poor country for European employment in the future. The days of highly profitable investment are gone and how many firms are paying their European staffs on a basis which will permit of retirement to a temperate country at fifty-five? In the meantime, however, until we can see more clearly how the new tariff policy of Great Britain is going to affect employment at Home and until the world as a whole shows sign of emerging from the economic morass, there is much to be said for an “axed” European staying in this country, where food and housing are cheap and warmth costs nothing. What the “kongsi” system can do to eke out savings our three gallant planters have shown in no unconvincing manner. -Straits Times.
Federal Fertility.
“Those who may have unpleasant or critical views about the Federal capital,” writes a Kuala Lumpur contemporary, “cannot deny the fact that Kuala Lumpur has one of the largest maternity establishments in the world.” Having pondered a long time as to what we ought to reply, we think it best to leave it at that On second thoughts perhaps we ought to chide our contemporary gently for having gone so far as to say that “great credit goes to those concerned who, through keen devotion to duty have helped to attain such excellent results.” -Straits Times.
OLD SARAWAK.
From the Sarawak Gazette 53 Years Ago.
THE SARAWAK GAZETTE
1879.] THURSDAY, 16TH JAN., 1879. [Price cents.
There is no doubt, that, social gatherings like that of the New Year must do a great deal towards cementing the good feeling which exists in Sarawak amongst all classes. Any strangers could not fail to be struck with this, were they eye-witnesses to what took place here, on New Year’s Day. First, at the table in the Court House where European, Chinese, and Malays sat down to breakfast and joined heartily together in drinking the health’s of the Rajah and Ranee; then, at the river side where all seemed to enter so enthusiastically into the racing; and again in the manner in which they entered into the sports of the day.
Great excitement prevailed in the afternoon in consequence of a rumour that some athletic Europeans were going to walk the greasy boom for a wager; about 3 o’clock this rash band appeared on the lighter, headed by a man of considerable weight and importance who stepped valiantly on to the boom and boldly launched forth like a true ‘man of Devon’ only to measure his length in the river with such a splash as to cause the lighter to rock, and endanger the swamping of all the small craft in the vicinity. Nothing daunted, his ardor not being cooled by one immersion, up he clambered for another attempt, followed by a similar disaster.
A very fat Hadji fired with emulation was now seen to doff his turban, mount the lighter and dash towards the prize with such determination that his heels flew up and down he came on his back on the boom, causing the goose at the end to fly about six feel in the air. Whilst he was floundering in the water, and excitement was at its highest, a burst of merriment told of some new disaster. We soon discovered the cause to be the swamping of a boat containing two European spectators. We leave our readers to imagine the indignation of one of these gentlemen (who by the way was got up in faultless attire) who had the presence of mind to remove his eye glass in a quiet and dignified manner, take his gold watch from his pocket, and hold it high above his head as he gracefully sank into the river, being seized by the back of the neck by an importunate fortman who would insist in saving his life, in spite of his very forcible remonstrances; fortunately no serious consequences followed this untoward accident. These incidents are merely mentioned to shew the good feeling which prevailed, and the hearty manner in which all joined in the amusements of the day.
First Division News.
RESIDENT’S OFFICE.
January, 1932.
Extracts from the Divisional Reports for January, 1932, by Mr. J. C. Swayne, Resident, First Division: -
The first of January, New Year’s Day, was observed as a holiday and the Government offices closed. In view of the trade conditions no regatta was held, the first time this has been abandoned for a very long period.
His Highness the Tuan Muda returned to Kuching on the 14th after attending a large meeting of Dyak Chiefs at Sibu. His Highness came overland via Simanggang.
Messrs. Aplin and Andreini arrived from Bintulu on the 25th and the latter was allowed to proceed on furlough on the grounds of ill-health.
Resident’s Court. -Three civil cases were dealt with during the month. A charge of house-breaking by night against four persons was adjourned for further evidence.
A visit was paid to Lundu in connection with a case of murder.
February, 1932.
Resident’s Court. -Five criminal and two civil cases came before the Court.
A case of assault resulting in grievous hurt was sent down from Pudong and tried on the 13th when the accused, Soo Kee Hang, a prisoner undergoing four years’ imprisonment for attempted murder, was sentenced to an additional imprisonment of one year. A recommendation was made for his deportation on release.
There were two cases of housebreaking, one being adjourned from last month, in which all the accused were convicted and sentenced to terms of imprisonment.
General. -A visit was paid to Ban during the month. The usual public holidays were observed on Chinese New Year Day, Hari Raya, and the birthday of H. H. the Ranee, and Government Offices were closed.
DISTRICT OFFICE.
January, 1932.
The District Officer, Mr. R. E. Le Sueur, reports: -
District Court. -Thirteen cases were heard, four of which were criminal and nine civil. Of the four criminal cases, three convictions and one acquittal were adjudged. There were one case of attempted murder and three other offences. Fines imposed amounted to $7 and fees collected $5. The civil claims involved amounts totalling $2,220.06 for which fees collected amounted to $153.
Magistrate’s Court. -Seventy-eight cases were heard two of which were criminal and seventy-six civil. Of the two criminal cases, both were convictions. Fines imposed amounted to $8 and fees collected $4.50. The civil claims involved amounts totalling $1,342.56. for which fees collected amounted to $193.39.
Police Court. -Twenty-nine summary cases were brought before the Court. Twenty-eight convictions and one acquittal were adjudged. The principal charges were twelve of theft, two of cheating, one house-breaking by night, four breach of Municipal By-laws and ten other offences. A total amount of $140 was paid in fines. In addition forty-four judgment summons cases were dealt with during the month.
Coroner’s Court. -Four inquests were held.
February, 1932.
Mr. P. Murray-Scott, for District Officer, reports: -
District Court. -Seven cases were heard, three of which were criminal and four civil. Of the three criminal cases, all were convictions. There were one case of criminal intimidation, one of cheating and one other offence.
General. -The District Officer, Captain R. E. Le Sueur, left for the Third Division on the 11th and was still away at the end of the month. Nothing of importance occurred during the month.
UPPER SARAWAK, BAU.
January, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. W. S. B. Buck, reports: -
District Court. -One criminal case was heard and resulted in a conviction.
Magistrate’s Court. -Six civil cases were heard, and in addition three judgment summons were dealt with, during the month.
The civil claims involved amounts totalling $66.45 for which fees collected amounted to $5.
Judicial. -No cases of importance came before the Court during the month.
General. -I returned from local leave on 10th instant and look over the affairs of the district from Capt. R. E. Le Sueur on the following day.
Visitors to the station included the Principal Medical Officer, Dr. Marjoribanks, and Mr. Leach who is completing trigonometrical work in the district.
Owing to the heavy rains it was found necessary to close down various main roads in the district to motor traffic early in the month, and on the 18th all roads were closed until the month end. A couple of days fine weather at this juncture enabled the roads to be used over the Chinese New Year and Hari Raya
Heavy floods have also been experienced, the main Kuching road being under five feet of water in five places between Ban and Seniawan.
I regret to have to report a heavy increase in house-breaking, gang robbery, and allied crimes in the district, upon which subject I have already rendered a report. A reward of $100 has been offered for information leading to the conviction of persons so employed, but so far without result.
Owing to subsidence and erosion of the river bank at Seniawan the slaughter-house and pork market are in danger of collapse. The necessary measures are being taken to effect quick repairs.
Prisons. -At the end of the month the female prisoners numbered ten and male prisoners twenty,
Gold Mining. -299.66 minces of actual gold were obtained by the Bidi Gold Mining Company during the month.
Rainfall. -Highest recorded in 24 hours 3.61 inches; daily average .82 of an inch; total for month 25.52 inches.
February, 1932.
District Court. -Two cases were heard, one of which was a criminal case and one civil. The one criminal case resulted in conviction.
Magistrate’s Court. -Eighteen cases were heard, five of which were criminal cases and thirteen civil. Of the five criminal cases all resulted in convictions.
In addition three judgment summons were dealt with during the month.
General. -Visitors to the station included Messrs. Hannigan, Reynolds, Reid, D. H. Hampshire and W. H. Martin.
Offices were closed for Chinese New Year, Hari Raya and the birthday of Her Highness the Ranee.
A large number of Dyaks have been down to pay gun tax, over 1,000 licences being renewed.
Gold Mining. -389.43 ounces of actual gold were obtained by the Bidi Gold Mining Company during the month.
LUNDU.
January, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. E. H. Elam, reports: -
General. -On 4th a Chinese named Ho Loi was murdered at his house in his rubber garden near Kampong Kadaong. An inquiry was held and two Chinese, Phang Ngee and Ng Phin, were charged with murder. A third man named, Liew Choon, was called as a witness, but absconded. It appears that this man was the leader of the party. As yet he has not been arrested. The motive seems to have been hatred of deceased and robbery. Deceased has one son aged ten, and Government have taken over the estate, which is quite considerable, on his behalf.
The Resident arrived on 27th and settled all important matters. The Malay Community were given permission to erect a new mosque.
The advisability of Sea Dyaks being allowed to settle in the Semunsam district was discussed and it was decided that it was best to keep them out, especially as that area is stocked with very valuable timber.
The Resident heard various complaints against Tua Kampong Buassim of Simatan, who in turn thought he had been harshly treated. The Resident adjourned the hearing for further discussion with the Secretary tor Native Affairs, to whom the Tua Kampong had complained during the month.
The padis at Simpadi and at Telok Srabang is ready for harvesting, but in other places it is rather backward, and pests are reported to be getting at it round Lundu and Temalan.
Courts. -In the Resident’s Court two Chinese were charged with murder and the case was adjourned to the end of the month.
The various exhibits produced during the trial were taken to Kuching for a medical examination.
Forest. -The Forest Office was closed at the end of last month, Keng Kai the Forest clerk being transferred to Kuching. The boatman’s services were also dispensed with.
Police. -Five police and one corporal were stationed at Lundu during the month, one of the Simatan men being recalled to Lundu on 5th. Simatan has one policeman.
Prison. -The average number of prisoners was 8, and they were employed in clearing behind the Native Officer’s house up to the Government rubber garden.
Rainfall. -The rainfall has been very heavy during the month, there being only four days on which there was no rain. Much damage has been done to the roads in consequence.
The total fall for the month was 24.85 inches, and the greatest in any one day 2.50 inches.
Trade. -The sea has been rough during the month and shipping was greatly delayed.
The total returns for the month and for comparison with those for the corresponding month last year were as follows: -
February, 1932.
General.—On 3rd one Phang Kuoi was arrested and put on remand for suspected complicity in the murder of Ho Loi last January.
The Offices were closed for Chinese New Year, Hari Raya and also on Monday 8th and again for H. H. the Ranee’s birthday.
There was very little rain during the month with the result that the padi is ripening very satisfactorily, except at Pasir where the abnormal rains of last month destroyed most of the crops.
S.L. Lucile was sent from Kuching on 27th with supplies of rice and kerosene oil, as the bazaar supplies had run short.
Land. -During the last week of the month a start was made of issuing new Occupation Tickets and cancelling all old ones. In all 167 titles were issued, chiefly to Dyaks at Pasir and Malays at Stunggang. The Survey maps are invaluable and with their help the work is going on very satisfactorily. In all there are about 3,000 titles to be cancelled.
P.W.D.—The old Government wharf was pulled down and a new billian one erected.
Rainfall. -The total rainfall for the month was 6.62 inches, the greatest fall in any one day being 1.50 inch.
Trade. -The total returns for the month and for comparison with those for the corresponding month of last year were its follows: -
SADONG.
January, 1932.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. J. G. Anderson, reports: -
Court. -A preliminary inquiry was held on an assault made by prisoner Soo Kee Hang on Mine Mandor Tai Kim. This is the second time this man has attacked Tai Kim, apparently (or no other reason than that he was labouring under a delusion that the mandor owes him money, which is not so. Soo Kee Hang made this second attack while Tai Kim was passing a place where he and other prisoners were cutting grass with parangs. Accused, having been arrested, was remanded for Resident’s Court trial.
There were no other cases worthy of special mention.
Closing down of Sadong Coal Mine. -These Mines closed officially as from the 1st of the month and lists of all labour employed were submitted by the Manager, Mr. J. W. Evans Chinese Mandors and casual labourers amounted to just over two hundred coolies, and these were all examined and chiefly classed as (a) unemployable, and sent to Kuching with free passages; (b) Those who said they had work and went to Kuching at their own expense; (c) Those with local employment, gardens or houses, etc, who are remaining in Sadong; (d) Those taking up padi planting lots at Tanjong Pansi under Government relief scheme.
There were disposed, numerically, as follows: -
Of those in list (d) (Padi Scheme), nine are Khehs and thirteen Foochows. They have been housed on their land, given rations (bi-monthly), seeds for padi, and vegetables and implements for the work, which will consist mainly of planting a half acre of padi per man and vegetables. The land they have been allotted is very suitable for wet padi and is well supplied with water from streams which flow into it. The Khehs have done very well, and have planted up their nurseries and a good area of vegetables. The Foochows are obstinate and not hard working, but there is hope they may improve. If not their rations will cease. They have all been working since the 9th.
The hospital at the mines was dismantled, and the building hitherto used as forest quarters in Simunjan fitted up as a dispensary.
All opium sales and stocks held at mines were transferred to this office.
Matters connected with the Wireless Station, payment of pensions to ex-mine employees, etc., were also dealt with in this office at the end of the month.
Forestry. -A quantity of Gaharu Mengkaras (Incense wood) was found on Gunong Lebor (Ampungan), and F.R. Abang Daud reports at least forty-eight trees of this timber there. It is valuable if of good quality, the Forest royalty being $35 per picul. A Brunei Malay has made tentative suggestions for working it but as yet it is not clear who is backing him.
Medical and Health. -The Principal Medical Officer, Dr. Marjoribanks, visited the station from the 5th to the 7th, and arranged for transfer of the dispensary from the mine to the main station. The Principal Medical Officer also arranged with me for the work of bazaar conservancy and dispensary assistance tobe done by prisoners, thus effecting a saving of $S0 per month in pay to coolies. This arrangement takes effect from the 31st of the month under review.
Land. -Several ex-mine coolies and mandors who are married to Dyak women have been applying for pepper and padi land.
I have warned them chat living in Dyak houses is not allowed, and fined one Chinese for doing so, but I see no objection to allowing them land near Dyaks, provided the Dyaks do not object, and the Chinese do not interfere with the Dyaks.
Twenty-eight titles to land were granted for eighty-nine acres in all, seventeen applications for land were dealt with and thirteen land examinations were made.
The stationing of an European Land Officer in this district for a short while would be beneficial, as some idea of the suitability or otherwise of land for alienation would then be known. There is more land work, I consider, than any other to be done here. Natives of the country were informed they, would only be charged maximum 50 cents per acre for the present. This concession has induced several Dyaks to continue with rubber gardens they wished to give up.
Prisons. -Prisoners averaged 15 and were employed on cleaning out the drains on the Mine road, which was flooded, above the point up to which the contractor works, and usual routine labour.
P.W.D. and Municipal. -A contract was signed with Choo Joon for cleaning ditches for $35.50 per month instead of $40 paid to the previous contractor whose work was unsatisfactory.
Bong Ngau, lamp-lighter, was given notice to stop work at end of February. The work will be done by Bujang, the pipe-fitter, in addition to his other duties.
Surveys. -Mr. Baron relieved Mr. Mace on the 9th as Assistant Superintendent of Surveys.
Rainfall. -Was very heavy (33.16 inches) and the grounds near the station were continually under water.
Trade and Customs. -Comparative trade returns are as follows: -
During the month twenty-six vessels entered and twenty-eight cleared the port.
February, 1932.
Court. -Very few cases. Civil or Criminal, came before the Court, and none were of great importance.
Closing Down of Sadong Coal Mines. -Remaining dumps of coal at wharf and at mines continued to be shipped to Kuching, together with certain dismantled plant and building material. This was almost complete by end of month.
Ex-Mine Coolies Paddi Scheme. -The Kheh section of these paddi lots was being worked well, all lots (1/2 acre) were ready for planting from nurseries, the seedlings in which, however, were suffering from attack by pests. About 1/2 acre of vegetables have been planted up by each man in addition and there is some hope that these Khehs may become self supporting in a few months.
It is hoped to hand over control of the lots to the Agricultural Department, as they are the best qualified to look after the planter’s interests now that the scheme is under way.
Forestry. -A man named Eman, a Malay, has already started working Gahru Mengkaras (Incense Wood) on Gunong Lebor and he has arranged to transport the wood to Kuching once every two months.
Rainfall. -Amounted to 5 inches.
General. -I visited Srian and Tebekang on the 3rd and 4th. No cases came up for hearing at either place.
I visited Kuching on the 5th, going via the Simanggang Road, and received instructions to assist temporarily in the District Office, Kuching, and the Secretariat for Native Affairs during the absence of Captain Le Sueur and Mr. P. M. Adams from Kuching.
I returned to Sadong via Srian on the 26th and the Court Writer had nothing to report.
Sadong Collieries Report.
February, 1932.
Extracts from the Sadong Collieries Report for February, by Mr, J. W. Evans, Manager: -
The output, export, local consumption, and coal stock figures for the mouth are as follows: -
Coal stocks and materials had been shipped away by the morning of March 11th.
The Wireless Station was taken down and dismantled on March 10th. The Auditor and his staff had also completed the examination of the accounts on the same date.
The District Officer has taken charge of all the materials, and buildings remaining on the mine area, and at the Simunjan Coal Depot.
The total rainfall for February was 10.45 inches.
Traffic Regulations.
SPRING RACE MEETING, 1932.
1. After the hour of 11 a.m. on 2nd and 4th April, 1932, all Motor Vehicles must proceed to the Race-course via Padungan or Ban Hok Road only, and up to the hour of 7 p.m. on these days, must return by the Sekama Road only.
Exceptions: -
1. His Highness the Rajah’s Cars.
2. The Resident, First Division.
3. The Principal Medical Officer.
4. The Honorary Secretary. Sarawak Turf Club.
5. In cases of extreme urgency permission may be obtained on the course for other cars to return via Ban Hok Road.
2. After depositing passengers at the Grandstand, vehicles will line up on the extreme left-hand side of the Grandstand road, one behind the other, and within three yards of each other, facing away from the Grandstand.
3. Rickshaws and Bicycles may proceed to the Race-course at any time, and by any road, and must park on the Bandstand plot. They will not be allowed to remain on any part of the road leading to the Grandstand or roads leading to the Race-course.
4. All vehicles must move to their parking grounds without delay, as directed by the Police.
WARNING: -
5. The driver of any vehicle: -
(a) endeavouring to turn in Grandstand road
(b) stopping to pick up passengers in Grandstand road
will be prosecuted for causing an obstruction.
Second Division News.
January, 1932.
Extracts from the Second Divisional Reports for January, 1932, by Mr. E. O. Bruce, Acting Resident: -
Offices were closed on the New Year’s Day which was observed as a public holiday.
A notification from the Land Office, Kuching, temporarily authorized the collection of a flat rate for quit rent of fifty cents only per acre on any land held under title, and natives evinced great satisfaction. There is no doubt that many of them have been experiencing hardship recently on account of abnormal floods which continued during the month, noticeably in the lower Batang Ai and Seblak districts.
The Agricultural Field Officer, Mr. G. M Goodall, continued his tours of inspection to collect reformation regarding food and paddi shortage.
Temporary local regulations were issued with a view to easing cases of immediate food shortage.
On the 12th I visited Betong in order to meet His Highness the Tuan Muda, who arrived from Kanowit overland and continued his journey the next day to Simanggang where several important matters were discussed.
Native Officers and Penghulus were present and their inquiries regarding Dyak affairs in the Ulu Kanowit, Third Division, were answered by His Highness, who proposes to visit the Ulu Ai Dyak Chiefs in the near future. This information was received by all with great satisfaction.
His Highness the Tuan Muda left Simanggang for Kuching, accompanied by Mr. H. E. Cutfield, Travelling District Officer, Sibu, on the 14th.
It will be of inestimable assistance to the administration of this Division when the Divisional Survey parties have been able to complete their work, especially between the Ulu Ai and the boundary with Third Division.
Supplies in the bazaars at Simanggang, Betong, and Saratok began to run out on account of bad weather holding up shipping transport with Kuching. A timely lull, however, averted a serious situation.
Towards the end of the month there was an increase of absurd rumours amongst upriver Dyaks in the Division, which were dispelled as effectively as possible. Nevertheless there is surreptitious interest in the Asun affair being shown by certain Second Division areas near the Ulu Ai border, and any information which I have been able to obtain has been passed on to the Resident, Third Division.
A site, adjoining the Sabu road, was cleared and demarcated preparatory to the transfer of Chinese vagrants from their colony of dilapidated huts in the vicinity of the Simanggang bazaar back lanes, which will be evacuated next month.
On the 30th, Penghulu Ramba, Ulu Ai, in accordance with his promise, sent a special messenger to inform me that he had heard news of the return to Lobang Baya of Antas and Bangkang (f) who, after previous arrest in December, escaped from Song before obtaining security for his fines there, as ordered.
On the 31st further reports were received from Rumah Janin in the Sungei Apok, Ulu Skrang to the effect that a small party of unknown lurkers continued to intimidate the whole house by continuous stone throwing at and into the house throughout each night. In spite of the institution of search parties during daylight, and guards at night, there is no clue as to the identity of these offenders or their motive.
This matter and others have been the subject of a separate report.
SIMANGGANG DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Acting District Officer, Mr. W. P. N. L. Ditmas: -
General. -Heavy and continuous rain ushered in the New Year, causing the river to rise and create much damage to paddi, planted near the river banks, in many places large landslides occurred on roads and river banks.
Rough seas, prevented any ships from leaving Kuching for Simanggang, the result being a food shortage in the bazaar. A shortage of rice, kerosene oil and tobacco was reported. Luckily before things became serious the ships arrived. The shopkeepers in this bazaar only obtain supplies necessary for a few days at a time; few have sufficient for a weak.
Lingga. -Mr. J. C. H. Barcroft, accompanied by Mr. W. Harnack, visited Lingga and Sebuyow, proceeding to Lingga on the 7th and returning on the 12th.
The Resident ordered that a narrow rentis should be cleared from the Undup to Engkilili, for a proposed new road or telephone rentis to Engkilili. Arrangements have been made to make a rentis to follow the old path, which had been abandoned for many years.
The route is from Bukit Brayun at the end of the Brayun road, direct along a ridge of hills to Marup road, from there along the Marup road, to Engkilili.
Trade and Customs: -
ENGKILILI DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Officer-in-Charge, Engkilili, Mr. S. G. Hansom: -
General. -The Acting Resident, Second Division, visited the station from the 6th to the 7th instant.
Abang Abu Talip, Native Officer, returned from the Ulu Ai on the 9th instant, where he had been sent to inquire about two Dyaks, Antas and Bangkang (f.), who had escaped from custody at Song, Third Division. No news was forthcoming at that time, but information was later received from Penghulu Ramba, that the two accused had returned to Lobang Baya, whence they will be arrested.
A representative of the new (proposed) gold working “kongsi,” at Marup, arrived from Kuching on the 8th instant. The land for which they are seeking a Prospecting Licence, was demarcated by the land Office. As soon as it is possible to ascertain that no claims are likely to be made later by Dyaks, whose paddi land is alleged to have been involved, a recommendation for the issue of a licence will be made. It is understood that the new Marup Kongsi will absorb the small band of Chinese, who have been prospecting for gold at Marup since the middle of last year.
Travelling. -I visited Lubok Antu from the 11th to 16th instant. There were no cases in Court. An attempt to travel there by outboard motor, resulted in reaching half way only, as there is insufficient depth of water, and krangan becomes too frequent. The use of an outboard, would however, save time, in that the journey to Lubok Antu, which frequently takes two days when the river is high, can be accomplished in a day or less.
On the 26th instant I started up river for the Engkari, accompanied by Abang Abu Talip, Native Officer, in order to visit Penghulu Nanang at Engkari, and to inform Dyaks of the probable visit of His Highness the Tuan Muda to the Ulu Ai. Dyaks expressed great satisfaction at the news.
I returned to Engkilili on the 30th instant.
Conditions up river appear to be normal, and the shortage of paddi not marked. Dyaks, when asked, invariably state that they are short of paddi, but one gathers that this is said rather on principle, from a spirit of optimism.
LAND OFFICE.
Extracts from the report of the Divisional Land Officer, Mr. B. Summers: -
During the month an ex-Ranger applied for a small portion of Government land, consisting of about 30 acres, to farm at Tanjong Bijat. This land is usually farmed by various people every other year and one Tuai Rumah was given the power to divide same into equal lots; since the first application, others have been made, by persons who state they have not sufficient paddi land, in the Balau district, the majority have too much land, not distributed proportionately, with the consequence that some persons suffer; wild that by allowing a portion to one person, others who are equally short will ask. This leads to the point where it seems necessary that it be ascertained, either by a Land Officer or Agricultural Officer, how much land these houses farm, and whether individual houses are in want, directly the harvest is finished, it is proposed to examine State Farming land in the Balau district, as old plans of these areas do not show sufficient details.
On the 25th Latiff proceeded to examine all fruit trees reverted to the State in the Batang Ai, Skrang, Undup and at Dor. This was necessary owing to certain individuals asking for fruit, and if given permission, taking more than their share; it is suggested by the Resident that these trees be auctioned at a later date.
SARIBAS DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the District Officer, Mr. R. L. Daubeny: -
General. -His Highness the Tuan Muda accompanied by Mr. Cutfield, Travelling District Officer. Sibu, arrived here from up river en route for Simanggang and Kuching on the evening of 12th instant and left for Simanggang overland the next morning at 6 a.m.
His Highness, after being received by the Government Staff, Betong, was pleased to inspect the bazaars and Chinese Schools, and later in the evening attended a Nativity play performed by the St. Augustine’s Mission. The Acting Resident, Second Division, arrived here on 11th instant to meet His Highness.
I very much regret to report death of Penghulu Unji of Spak on the 16th instant. He has been suffering for some years from an internal complaint. Penghulu Unji during his term as Penghulu has always been most faithful and loyal to Government. One Medang his son-in-law has been appointed temporary substitute until a new Penghulu is appointed.
KALAKA DISTRICT.
Extracts from the report of the Acting Assistant District Office., Mr. L. K. Morse: -
General. -I returned from Sibu on the 9th instant. Very heavy rain and severe floods occurred at Roban at the beginning of the month. The bazaar, kampong and Government compound being flooded out, the water rose to a height of two feet above the Fort floor, some eight or nine feet above the record.
The telephone to Saratok failed at this critical time and it was not until the 4th January, 1932, that news reached Saratok. Food supplies were at once sent round by m.l. One.
The Malays and Government Staff were forced to take refuge on some hills about half a mile from the Fort, while the Chinese were marooned in the upper floors of the bazaar shops. The floods had completely subsided by 8th January, 1932.
Penghulu Entree informs me that the greater part of the crops in the Seblak and Roban rivers have been destroyed and that a food shortage is probable in the future.
Rice and tobacco shortages were experienced at various times during the month owing to boats being held up by the bad weather. An urgently required supply of kerosene oil and benzine consigned to the Government here was held up by the Shipping authorities Kuching owing to overloading of boats.
Third Division News.
SIBU.
January, 1932.
Extracts from the Third Divisional Reports for January, 1932, by Mr. C. D. Adams, Resident: -
Court. -No cases came before the Court during the month.
General. -A Regatta was held on the 1st instant and was attended by a large crowd consisting of all races.
His Highness the Tuan Muda proceeded to Kapit on the 2nd instant by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna, accompanied by the Secretary for Native Affairs, Mr. P. M. Adams, the Acting Assistant District Officer, Kapit, Mr. D. C. Hudden, myself, and all the upriver Penghulus. Travelling District Officer. Mr. H. E. Cutfield, and Acting Assistant District Officer, Saratok, Mr. L. K. Morse, disembarked at Kanowit with many penghulus of that district. Kapit was reached on the 3rd instant. A meeting was held in the Fort of Dyaks, Malays and Chinese, but nothing of importance occurred. On the 4th instant we returned down river, calling at Tanah Estates concession. His Highness the Tuan Muda was then conducted round the estate by the Manager, Mr. Kidd. Sibu was reached in the evening.
On the 6th instant His Highness the Tuan Muda interviewed the principal Malays and Chinese, and also inspected the bazaar and hospital.
On the 7th instant His Highness the Tuan Muda and Travelling District Officer Mr. Cutfield, left by m.l. Young Harry to Kanowit, then by outboard motor Bujang Rimba to Bunya’s house below the Entabai, and then overland to Simanggang via Betong.
On the 13th instant Messrs. F. L. Mansel and G. F. Chaplin arrived, the former on short leave before taking over the Treasury, and the latter for Messrs. The Borneo Company, Limited.
Mr. Mansel took over the Treasury from Mr. D. O. C. McGinn on the 27th instant, the latter sailing for Kuching on the 28th instant.
Mr. Wright, of Messrs. Gammon (Malaya), Limited, arrived in connection with Sarikei Wharf.
Her Highness the Ranee, and Dayangs Elizabeth and Valerie, arrived by H.H.M.Y. Maimuna on the 29th instant, and were still here at end of month.
Many rumours were received concerning Asun during the month, but none had any confirmation and the situation remained as before.
I regret to report the death of Penghulu Semada of the Balleh, who has been in failing health for some time past.
Officer-in-Charge, Matu, Mr. F. L. G. Crossley, did duty here for the District Officer, Mr. W. F. Dick, who has been on the sick list during the mouth.
The Dyak Undang-Undang was completed during the month and sent to Kuching for printing before distribution amongst Penghulus.
SIBU.
January, 1932.
The District Officer, Sibu, Mr. W. F. Dick, reports: -
Court. -The only case calling for mention was one in which two Foochows were sentenced under section 324 I.P.C. One of the defendants was found in possession of a knuckle duster. Fines and fees amounted to $456.69.
General. -A Regatta was held on the 1st instant, but unfortunately the proceedings were marred by a fatal accident, when a racing boat capsized and two of the crew drowned.
His Highness the Tuan Muda proceeded to Kapit on the 2nd instant, accompanied by the Resident, Mr. C. D. Adams, and the Secretary for Native Affairs, Mr. P. M. Adams, and returned on the 4th instant.
Mr. F. L. Mansel arrived on the 13th instant and proceeded to Kapit on local leave before taking over the Divisional Treasury from Mr. D. O’C. McGinn. Mr. McGinn left on the 28th instant for Kuching.
There has been a very noticeable decline in the number of cases brought before the Courts during the month. The increase in summons fees is probably partly responsible for the state of affairs, and the approach of the harvesting season a contributory cause.
OYA AND DALAT.
January, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. N. E. Hughes, reports: -
General. -The month was distinguished chiefly for execrable weather. It started to rain on New Year’s Day and continued without ceasing day or night until the 4th; as a result of this, the Oya river rose and Dalat was completely flooded, the water at one time standing ankle deep inside the jail. When the water eventually subsided the whole station was left with a top-layer of soft mud several inches deep. The roads are still impassable, and the padangs are marshes.
Reports from up river say that the floods did considerable damage to the padi crop in the lower Oya. The floods at Dalat were the worst since 1918, the water reaching to within a foot of the 1918 level. Until about the 25th a strong north-east gale blew steadily, bringing bursts of rain at frequent intervals.
I returned to Dalat with Mr. E. M. Woodward, Acting District Officer, Mukah and Oya, on the 2nd Mr. Woodward left for Mukah on the 4th.
Visitors to the station included the Rev. Fathers Buis and Van de Laar, who came to Dalat from Kanowit via he Bunau, Paku and Ulu Oya. and the Rev. Mother Ignatius, Superior General of the Sisters of the Third Order of St. Francis.
Police. -The new police are making good progress, and drill at Oya, under the superintendence of P.C. Tapa, is already surprisingly good. Drill at Dalat was hindered by the floods, since even when they subsided the grounds were in such a state that drill outside was impossible. Instruction, however, was carried on in the office, when opportunity allowed.
Prisons. -Prisoners were employed on the upkeep of the station, and on repairing the damage done to roads by the bad weather. Discipline was good.
P.W.D. -The jail fence was completed during the month at a total all-in cost of about $200.
Erosion at the Kuala is still troublesome, but on the advice of the natives the shore at the crucial point was trimmed to a gentle slope; this, since it does away with overhanging edges, certainly seems to have a good effect, and subsequent rough seas have done less damage then previously. The work was carried out by the kampong people.
The roads at Oya were much damaged by constant heavy rain, and were repaired temporarily where possible. Extensive repairs will be carried out in the dry season.
The Government wharves both at Oya and Dalat were badly damaged by the floods, and will have to be taken down and re-erected again as soon as the weather becomes normal. The groins at Or a and Dalai stood up to the floods well.
Lands. -All field work at Dalat was held up for most of the month by the floods. The Land Inspectors continued their plotting, and helped the clerks in the office. Some work in connection with estates was carried out at Oya.
Thirty-seven summonses for non-payment of quit rent were dealt with during the month. Since the majority of those summoned were Melanaus who are entirely dependent on their rubber gardens for support, the prospects of recovering this money are not very bright. At the same time, over 140 quit rent defaulters were interviewed during November and December, so the balance of tax outstanding is not so bad as might have been expected.
Staff. -Charles Law, Court Writer, Dalat, left for Sibu on 2nd January on his retirement from Government Service. His place was taken by F. M. Umpi who arrived at Dalat from Balingian on 31st January.
The post of Liko Native Officer was abolished as from 1st January, 1932. Alek bin Ikok, the holder, reverts to Tua Kampong, Tanam.
Wan Hussein, Native Officer, was employed at Dalat all the month since the weather was too bad for upriver travelling.
Shipping. -Two motor schooners and three schooners entered, but they were unable to clear until the end of the month.
Trade. -The trade returns for the month and tor comparison with those of the same month last year are as follows: -
KAPIT.
January, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. D. C. Hudden, reports: -
Court. -There was only one criminal charge during the month, a case of assault, section 352, I.P.C.
Civil claims amounted to $60.60.
Sony. -Abang Sleh, Native Officer, proceeded up the Katibas on the 28th, ostensibly on ordinary Government work, to be at hand in the event of anyone showing any inclination to stray into the Kanowit and interfere with the proposed expedition.
The Court Writer reports that the new Government boat-shed is now completed.
Constabulary. -Two members of the old Kapit police were transferred to Song, temporarily, to do duty as village policemen.
Dairy Farm. -The herd numbered fifty-three at the end of the month.
Native Affairs. -I very much regret to report the death of Penghulu Semada, son of Penghulu Temonggong Koh, on the 17th.
Penghulu Grinang has been granted leave and has gone to Limbang to shoot rhinoceros.
Abang Abu Seman, Native Officer, visited the Gat during the mouth and, amongst other things, attempted to collect some of the outstanding door-tax for last year.
On the 30th. a Dyak girl, aged about seventeen, was brought in with a slashed ear. She was bandaged up and sent down to Sibu Hospital for treatment. The wound was inflicted by another woman, and was apparently the result of a jealous quarrel.
General. -His Highness the Tuan Muda visited the station on the 3rd, staying one night. His Highness was accompanied by the Resident, Third Division, Mr. C. D. Adams, and by the Secretary for Native Affairs, Mr. P. M Adams.
Accompanied by Abang Abdulgapar, Native Officer, I visited the Dyaks in the Pelagus, and paid a short visit to Fort Vyner, Gat. I had intended visiting the Sut, but was recalled until after the Kanowit expedition.
I hear that Brothers Charles and Leo have arrived at N. Yong to erect a chapel there.
One of the Survey Department staff contracted chickenpox at the beginning of the month, but he was isolated immediately, and no other cases have been reported.
The wireless was out of order for some days, and the transmitter had to be sent to Sibu for repairs, Mr. Webb paid a short visit of inspection, bringing an additional operator, Tio Heng Jing.
Other visitors to the station during the month were Father W. J. Van Odijk, Messrs. Kimpster, Mansel and Daly.
SARIKEI, BINATANG AND REJANG.
January, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. O. Gilbert, reports: -
General. -On the 2nd Land Officer Mr. K. E. Parker and myself returned from Sibu after the Christmas and New Year celebrations.
On the 15th the divisional Medical Officer. Dr. A. D. Hutchison, visited Sarikei, Binatang and Rejang, returning to Sibu on the 17th instant.
On the 26th Mr. Wright, of Messrs. Gammons (Malaya), Limited. visited Sarikei in connection with alterations to the Government cement wharf.
During the month it rained incessantly, thus making all outside work very difficult.
The padi was looking very good at the, end of the month, and harvesting should begin towards the end of February.
P.W.D. -Maintenance work was carried out on the roads, prison labour only being used. The prison gang on the Peninjau extension is still working, and is now in the region of Sungei Gedong.
The new police barracks are nearly completed, except that it has been decided to enlarge the kitchen and bathrooms. The building is a wooden structure on brick pillars, and looks substantial.
Trade and Customs. -There is still a considerable amount of pepper in the bazaar, but this is being held up on account of what they consider only a temporary drop in the price. Other exports were as usual. The following are the trade returns for the month at Sarikei.
MUKAH AND OYA.
December, 1931.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. E. M. Woodward, reports: -
General. -On the 22nd instant I left for Sibu for Christmas and New Year, in order to attend the Dyak Aum and the Regatta, and was still away at the end of the month.
Datu Awang Udin, Native Officers Abang Mus and Awang Juli, together with six penghulus, sixteen Tuai Rumah and ten other Dyaks from the Mukah and Balingian districts also attended the Aum and Regatta at Sibu. Native Officer Haji Bahaudin and Abang Suhaimi attended the Regatta at Sibu on New Year’s Day.
Christmas Day and Boxing Day on the 25th and 26th instants were observed as public holidays and the Government offices were closed.
Visitors to the station during the month were the Acting Assistant District Officer, Oya and Dalat, Mr. N. E. Hughes, the Rev Father Bunck from Dalat, and Mr. Sumner, S.O.L. geologist, who called in his return from Miri to his camp in the Penipah District.
Police. -Twelve out of seventeen men of the Mukah detachment, and two out of three men of Balingian detachment, resigned from Government Service on the 31st instant, since they did not wish to serve in the Sarawak Constabulary as from 1st January, 1932.
Twenty-eight applications to join the Sarawak Constabulary to fill the twelve Mukah vacancies, and two applications to fill the two Balingian vacancies had been received by the end of the month. On the 31st instant twelve new recruits were temporarily engaged at Mukah to take the place of those policemen who resigned from the Mukah detachment on that date, but a definite selection from all Mukah and Balingian applicants had not been made by the end of the month.
Prison. -During the month the daily number of prisoners averaged 36. They were employed on the roads, ditches and on the general upkeep of the station.
P.W.D. -During the month the roads between Mukah and Judan were cleared and the bridges on those roads repaired. The construction of two bridges over the Sungei Penakup and another small stream on the now by-pass roads above the main bazaar was completed during the month. The old rood running along the river bank between the main bazaar and Kuala Penakup was eroded a good deal during the month owing to high water. It is proposed in the near future to commence constructing permanent groins of belian along the river bank at intervals of 100 feet, each groin projecting into the river about 25 feet, from above the main bazaar as far as the mosque in order to prevent further erosion along this stretch of the river bank, and in the hope that the bank will make.
During the month I visited the waterworks pump station near Kampong Petanak, and found that the pump engine boiler foundations had sunk about one inch in one place, and that the building was not in a very good state of repair. It is not proposed to do anything about the matter just at present since it is probable that a crude oil pumping engine to replace the present engine will be installed in 1932, which will afford a good opportunity of repairing both the foundations of the building and the building itself.
Forests. -Forest Clerk Chang Ah Siew relieved Forest Clerk Claver Boo on the 31st instant, on which date Forest Rangers Usop also relieved Forest Ranger Drahman Sanai, who retired from Government Service at the end of the year after 22 years’ service with the Government.
It was reported on the 1st instant that the rentis work of the Sungei Bawan Jelutong Reserve near Balingian had been completed.
The big swamp which stretches approximately from the Sungei Penipah to the Balingian river is said to contain a large number of jelutong trees which, owing to the swamp, are practically inaccessible.
Telegraphs. -During the month the Mukah wireless masts were jodelited, and one of the masts was found to be in a rotten condition which will probably necessitate its replacement by a new mast in the near future.
Education. -During the month examinations in Standards I, II and III were held for the boys attending the Government Vernacular School and an average of approximately 53% of passes was obtained by the boys in these three standards.
Shipping. -On the 9th instant m.l. Leonora left Oya under tow of m.v. Sri Merbo for annual docking in Kuching, after being held up at Oya for nearly a month waiting for m.v. Sri Merbo to tow her to Kuching.
On the 16th instant m.s. Kim Chin Soon was unable to enter Mukah mouth owing to rough seas and was obliged to shelter for about five days at Balingian before proceeding to Mukah on the 21st instant.
Seas were very rough throughout the month.
Balingian. -On the 1st instant F. M. Umpi, clerk, took over the duties of Court Writer, Balingian, from F. Ansin who retired from Government Service on pension on the 31st instant after over 29 years’ service with the Government. On the 4th instant Ng Fong Seng, clerk, assumed the duties of assistant clerk at Balingian.
Rainfall. -Mukah rainfall figures for the month were as follows: -
Trade. -A sudden and somewhat surprising and inexplicable rise in the price of sago flow, special, on the 21st instant from $3.50 to $5.25 per picul, and from $3.40 to $5.15 per picul for fair (i.e. rise of $1.75 per picul), according to Singapore quotations on that date, created a good deal of excitement amongst the Chinese traders and Melanau sago workers in the district. There was, however, no corresponding rise at the time either here or in Kuching in the price of raw sago, which averaged approximately 50 cents per passu during the month. The price of sago flour, special, later dropped from $5.25 to $3.20 per picul, and that of fair from $5.15 to $3.10 per picul. The price of raw jelutong averaged $4.50 per picul during the month.
The principal exports included: -
Raw sago 329 koyans; G. jelutong 332 piculs; G. jangkar 50 piculs.
Fourth Division News.
MIRI.
January, 1932.
Extracts from the Fourth Divisional Reports for January, 1932, by Mr. H. D. Aplin, Resident: -
On the occasion of a visit of the Assistant Resident of Belait, Brunei. I again took the opportunity of discussing the question of the boundary between Sarawak and Brunei, from the Coast to the Pagalayan, for jelutong workers. It was decided that, unless the survey working rentis was cut a long distance from the actual border, this rentis should form the boundary for jelutong workers. The matter has been referred to the Superintendent of Surveys. Kuching, asking for a copy of a plan showing the position of the rentis with that of the actual border.
The Assistant Resident also agreed not to allow Sarawak Dyaks over the border unless accompanied by a Pass. This is necessary owing to stricter regulations relating to Kampar Dyaks in the Baram, who, instead of returning to their countries may attempt to make for Belait.
Reports received from the Miri and Baram districts show that there are prospects of a good padi harvest this year.
Forty-five Kheh and Teochew Chinese have made applications for land along the Riam road for pepper planting. These are likely to be increased to a hundred. Soil is reported as being excellent for pepper planting with the further advantage of being on a main road from Miri.
There is a certain demand for Semambu canes, and some Chinese are dealing in these at Miri and K. Baram, giving employment to a few Malays.
An arrangement was made with the Miri Chinese Chamber of Commerce by which they agree to stand security in the future for all Chinese immigrants to Miri. The procedure will be, that anyone wishing to import labour must make representations to this Chamber before being granted a permit from the Immigration Office.
On 15th I received news by telegram from Bintulu that Mr. E. V. Andreini, District Officer, was seriously ill. I proceeded there by s.s. Auby on 16th. As I considered his condition serious, I wired for the H.H.M.Y. Maimuna which arrived on 18th, and we reached Kuching on 19th. I returned to Miri by s.s. Darvel on 26th.
Messrs. Morice and Banks returned from the Sibuti and Niah districts on 28th. Mr. Banks had been investigating the white birdsnests caves, and reported that he also investigated those in the ulu Suai. He left for Baram on the 29th on the same work. It will be interesting to have his report and suggestions.
Mr. J. Bowie of the Sarawak Oilfields, Limited, I proceeded to Kuching on 29th at the request of the Government, to advise on a proposed Dairy Farm scheme.
MIRI.
The District Officer, Mr. F. G. Carpenter, reports: -
Court. -In the District Court two Chinese ware sentenced under sections 379 and 417 respectively. The Magistrate’s Court disposed of an unusual number of charges under the Opium Order.
Health. -Anti-malarial work at Tanjong Lobang was continued, when additional concrete drains were added to the bungalow compound. The water tank at bungalow No. 2 was also cleaned out and fitted with gauze, as it was found that mosquitoes were breeding therein.
Three vaccinations were undertaken by the Sanitary Inspector. Three prosecutions were instituted by the department, all of which resulted in convictions.
During the month one case of whooping cough was detected at Tanjong Lobang, and one each of chicken-pox and measles in the kampong area. These were all quickly isolated and no further infections were reported.
Land. -Six new applications were received for fourteen acres of coconuts, two of fruit and three of rubber. These were all demarcated and Occupation Tickets issued.
The two Assistant Land Inspectors were still employed as previously.
Medical. -At the Government Dispensary 135 outpatients made 415 attendances for treatment, six cases being transferred to the hospital of Sarawak Oilfields, Limited.
Three N A.B. injections were administered.
Of the 135 cases treated, sixty-seven were from the police, and twenty-eight from the prison department.
The table of diseases treated shews nothing of a serious nature.
Rainfall. -10.12 inches.
Municipal. -The sewage disposal plant at Pujut made slow progress owing to lack of transport facilities from the Company. It should, however, be ready for use by 1st March, which was the date decided upon for bringing it into operation.
Improvements to the fish market were also mostly held up until the arrival of tiles for replacing the bad ones complained of previously.
In connection with the conservancy lorry, a driver was engaged as from 1st March.
At a meeting of the Board held during the month conservancy fees were decided upon, and also the installation of water and lighting to the various markets and slaughter-houses.
The usual January rush of hawker’s licence renewals was not quite so marked this year, and a large decrease of these is recorded, only about 450 having been issued altogether.
A few tea-shops and eating-houses applied for licences under the new Municipal Order, but these were withheld pending compliance of the owners with health regulations.
A substantially reduced contract for street lighting was entered into with the old contractor.
Outstations. -These were visited by Mr. Morice, from 17th to 28th. when he was accompanied by Mr. Banks, who spent his time at Niah and Suai in order to acquire first-hand knowledge of how the birdsnest industry is conducted in these districts.
Mr. Banks hopes to be able to make suggestions for the preservation and increase of this trade through eradicating needless mortality among the fledglings, and through better methods of removing nests with less destruction than occurs at present.
Prison. -Prisoners averaged forty-one daily, and were divided into two gangs, one of which was employed at Tanjong Lobang, and the other, on general cleaning duties in and around the clerks’ compound.
On the 14th a Dyak named Nyalambai escaped and has not yet been recaptured.
Public Works. -A strong wind on the night of the 3rd blew down the timber shed. This has not been replaced and the timber is now stacked in a different manner.
Further water wastage was detected from the main barracks and, to prevent this, the cement baths were fitted with float valves, and the two stand-pipes with automatically closing valves. The occupiers of the barracks, whether Dyak or Malay, seem to be adept at tampering with any kind of device fitted to their water supply.
Staff. -Dresser Domingo and Assistant Sanitary Inspector Marican arrived on the 19th for duty here, the former relieving D. Suhaili who returned to Kuching on the 29th.
Court Peon Smail was dismissed on the 23rd and ex-P.C. Abdul Rajak was engaged on the 25th in his stead.
General. -The 1st was observed as a public holiday.
On the 6th Mr. Gates, Assistant Resident, Kuala Belait, arrived to discuss the Sarawak Brunei boundary with the Resident. Mr. Gates returned to Kuala Belait on the following day.
The Business Names Registration Order was brought into force as from the 1st, and some fifty firms had registered before the end of the month.
On the 16th the Resident proceeded to Kuching, via Bintulu, returning again on the 26th.
Mr. Banks arrived from Limbang on the 16th and proceeded to Niah with Mr. Morice on the following day.
BARAM.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. F. H. Pollard, reports: -
Court. -Sabtu bin Munggo was sentenced on a charge of criminal breach of trust, section 406, and Ili, and a local Dyak, for theft of jelutong, Bantin, a Kampar Dyak. was sentenced for continued contempt of Government Regulations and will be sent home on release.
Travelling. -Native Officer Wan Suror returned from the ulu Bakong on 7th. On 29th Mr. E. Banks, Curator, Sarawak Museum, arrived on a visit of inspection to the birdsnest caves in the district.
Penghulu Apai Uban and Penghulu Nyaloi visited the station in connection with cases.
Prisoners. -The prisoners, averaging twenty-four men, were employed on the usual upkeep of the station.
P.W.D. -The carpenter was employed on sundry repair work. The road in front of Kampong Dagang has been eroding rapidly of late, and is beyond repair. There is, however, a road at the back of the kampong giving access to the houses, so a new road on the river bank is not necessary.
Agriculture. -Harvesting has started and good reports come in from everywhere except L. Terbangan in the Akah, where the crop is very poor.
Medical. -One hundred and fifty-one out-patients were treated during the month. Under the Professor Harrison Smith Fund thirty-eight out-patients were treated and thirty-six N.A.B. injections were given. One Kelabit in-patient was transferred to Miri for treatment.
Rainfall. -2.58 inches of rain fell in 13 days.
Shipping. -The S.S. Margaret made one trip during the month.
Trade. -Trade returns are as follows: -
BINTULU.
January, 1932.
The Acting District Officer, Mr. A. Macpherson, reports: -
Prisons. -The gang numbered seventeen at the end of the month and was employed on the general upkeep of the station. The health of prisoners was good.
Police. -One N.C.O. and four men from Miri have joined the Constabulary under the new scheme. Two local Malays were temporarily engaged to do duty as village constables at Tatau and six men from the old force were re-engaged in that capacity,
P. W.D. -Repairs were made to the following buildings at Sebauh: -
1. Fort (extension for verandah)
2. Clerks jelatong and shed.
The pipe line is in good order. Tanks were cleaned and water was laid on to two bazaar houses.
A contract of $250 was made to raise the road at the back of the bazaar, which was impassable at high tide.
Agriculture. -The new Inspector, Lim Lian Seng, arrived from Kuching per s.s. Auby on the 30th.
On the 19th five heifers were shipped to the Agricultural Department, Kuching.
Court. -Court work was light during the month, there being three Magistrate’s Court criminal cases, resulting in two convictions and one acquittal, and three Magistrates’ Court civil cases. Claims amounted to $69.16.
Fifth Division News.
LIMBANG.
February, 1932.
Extracts from the Fifth Divisional Reports for February, 1932, by Mr. F. H. Kortright, Resident: -
Court. -In Limbang there were an unusual number of cases dealt with but none which calls for special mention. At Lawas a very brutal murder was reported, when a Murat woman was found in an isolated part of the Lawas Estates Rubber Garden with her skull fractured in two places, and various other marks on her body. One
Saran, a Javanese, with whom the woman had been living, was arrested, and in due course will be charged with the crime. Another serious case was brought before the Lawas Court when a Kadayan, named Tua, was proved guilty of wilfully mixing powdered glass with rice which his lately divorced wife was intended to eat.
General. -Chinese New Year day and Hari Raya were observed as public holidays as also was the 8th when an extra day was kindly granted by His Highness the Rajah, and the 24th Her Highness the Ranee’s birthday.
LAWAS.
February, 1932.
The Acting Assistant District Officer, Mr. J. R. Combe, reports: -
Court. -On the 27th the Resident paid a visit to the station in order to try the case of His Highness the Rajah vs. Tua for attempted murder.
General. -I returned to Lawas on the 26th after seven weeks’ vacation leave. Owing to everybody being away harvesting padi all was quiet at Lawas, Trusan and Sundar. I am thankful to be able to report a bumper padi crop this year, an abnormal amount having been planted by Malays and Muruts alike.
Father Jansen visited the station on the 1st of the month returning to Labuan on the 4th.
Mr. Mace, Assistant Superintendent of Surveys, Fifth Division, passed through the station on the 12th on his return to Limbang from Trusan and Sundar.
Agriculture. -The Lawas (Sarawak) Rubber Estates, Limited, exported 26,880 lbs. of dry rubber during the month.
CORRESPONDENCE.
[The Editor is not responsible for the opinions of Correspondents.]
Tiger.
The Editor,
Sarawak Gazette,
Kuching.
SIR,
Considerable excitement was caused by the arrival of a local steamer amidst 3 loud cheers and subsequent cries of “Tiger.” On inquiry by the Local Rabies Board no signs of the beasts were observed and the L.R.B. concluded that at least one of them had disembarked. We understand they are organizing a Poison Bait Drive against it under cover of destroying members of the lesser Cannidae and Felixidae.
Yours faithfully,
LECHOR.
[The Editor is not responsible for the authenticity or otherwise of above.]
Dutch Air Mail and Imperial Airways Service.
Intimation has been received from the Secretary for Postal affairs, Straits Settlements and Federated Malay States, that commencing with the mail to be closed at Penang on Friday evening the 4th March for connection at Alor Star with the homeward bound aircraft of the Dutch Air Mail Service, correspondence for the Sudan, Belgian Congo, Kenya, Uganda, Tanganyika, Northern and Southern Rhodesia and South Africa will be despatched to connect at Cairo with the Imperial Airways Service operating between London and Cape Town.
The conditions governing despatch by the Dutch Air Mail of correspondence to Siam, Burma, India, etc , will apply generally to air mail correspondence for places in Africa.
The air mail fees, which are additional to the usual postal charges, and the manner in which correspondence is to be superscribed is shewn hereunder: -
By the courtesy of the Straits Settlements and Federated Malay states Postal Authorities arrangements have been made to include correspondence from Sarawak in the mails in question.
